ANALPSIS ANELPHTH, The Fastening of St. PETRRS FETTERS. By SEVEN Links, or
Propositions. OR, The Efficacy and Extent of the Solemn League and Covenant
asserted and vindicated, against The Doubts and Scruples of Dr. John Gauden's
Anonymous Questionist. St. Peter's Bonds not only loosed, but annihilated by Mr.
John Russell, Attested by John Gauden, D. D. The League Illegal, falsely
fathered on Dr. Daniel Featley: AND THE Reasons of the University of Oxford for
not taking (now pleaded to discharge the obligation of) the Solemn League and
Covenant. By Zech. Crofton, Minister of the Gospel at S. Botolphs Algate,
LONDON.

Jer. 34.15. Ye were now turned, and had don right in my sight, and ye had made
a Covenant before me in the House which is called by my Name.

Ver. 16. But ye turned, and polluted my Name.

Ver. 18, 20. I will give the men that have transgressed my Covenant, which
have not performed the words of the Covenant which they made before me, I will
even give them into the hand of their enemies.

Error cui non resistitur approbatur, and veritas quae non defenditur
opprimitur; negligere quippe cum possis deturbare perversos, nihil est aliud
quam fovere, nec caret scrupulo societatis occultae qui manifesto facinori cum
potest desinit obviate. Innocent. London, Printed for Ralph Smith, at the sign
of the Bible in Cornhill, near the Royal Exchange. 1160.

The Epistle to the READER.
Courteous Reader,
I Am not insensible that the subject matter of these papers, and the season of
their publication, may expose them and their Author to the censure of the
Committee of Discretion; which if they do, I cannot but let thee know, this
will not be the first time I have fallen under their correction: For, such was
my loyalty to the Kings Majesty in His late unjust exile, and the cogency of
the Covenant on my conscience, that my preached Sermons, and printed Papers,
were very frequently under the examination of this Committee, constituted not
only of my envious enemies, (desirous to discover in me a rashness which might
prove my ruin) but also my trembling friends, and timorous brethren in the
Ministry, who thought any who stepped before them in duty, thrust themselves into
present danger; and yet no judgment could pass against me save only this, The
state of affairs might have made him more politic; but that it is truth he
spoke, and a Ministers duty to speak, it could never be denied.

I presume, men to whom I am in any measure known, will not judge me such a
fool as not to discern the current of the times, countenance of the Court,
clamors of the Country, contradictions of rising persons in the Church and
Commonwealth to what is herein asserted; the compliance and connivance of many
my brethren in the Ministry under the same Oath herein vindicated; and the
cooled courage of the first Composers, earnest Instigators, and zealous
Promoters of the Solemn League and Covenant: and that in dissenting from them,
and opposing my private apprehensions to their more prudent affections, I must
needs expose my self to the reproach of singularity, inconsiderate heat,
peevishness of spirit, and contract on my self the frowns of men in power, and
frettings of my complying brethren, and fellow-confederates, and fail the
expectations of my own preferment, which my courage and constancy for His
Majesty's just interest in the worst of oppressing times, and utmost of
opposition (wherein many who now vilify the Covenant, durst not speak, nay did
basely comply and promise, to be true and faithful to the Commonwealth of
England, as it was then established without a King and House of Lords) had
heightened in both my friends and foes; against which, when I reason with flesh
and blood, and consult a proud heart within, and numerous family without me, I
find sufficient Arguments (according to the dictates of nature) to determine
folly against my self; but I hope I have not so learned Christ.

True piety does suggest and convince me, that wisdom toward God, is folly to
the world; and the Watchmans prudence is to proclaim an approaching evil,
whilst at a distance, capable of diversion, and escape; and that the most wise
of Gods Ministers in all ages, judged it their duty to oppose Gods Word to men's
prevailing lust, and present propensity unto wickedness: Elijah-like to stand
alone, and speak the mind of God, when for so doing they may be branded as the
troublers of Israel, when indeed their sin, not the preachers speech, does
cause the commotion; with Micaiah to denounce the danger of Ahabs design,
though 400 Prophets encourage it, and King, and the Court incline to it: and
with Jeremiah, to say to the King, Keep thy Oath, and thou shall be delivered,
when Princes and Prophets persuade the breach thereof, and himself must down
into the Dungeon as a preacher of sedition: Few men will deny, that Roger Bacon
in his plain preaching to King Henry 3. that if he did not remove his malignant
counselors, Peter Bishop of Winchester, and Peter de Rivallis, he could never
be at quiet, played a wiser part than did the Bishop, who, to please the Kings
humor, preached up the Kings prerogative to such a pitch, as brought himself
under an Anathema, from which he was forced to appeal to Rome for relief: And
all good Protestants will conclude Cranmer was much wiser in alone withstanding
King, Council Parliament, Lords temporal and spiritual, in the case of K. Henry
8. his six Popish Articles, than in that Court-compliance, which caused that
doleful complaint in the midst of the fire, This my unworthy right hand.

Magnanimity is a virtue not the least necessary to a man, but most necessary
to a Christian, and most of all to a Minister, who should like his Steeple
stand in all storms (raised under, and by the variations of human affairs) and
not like the Weather cock turn with every wind. I am ashamed to think with what
vigor some asserted the Obligation of the Covenant in reference to Religion,
when the civil part thereof was clouded and broken; and now would vindicate the
civil part thereof, whilst Religion is specially concerned: Like wise Archers,
level at the mark because of spectators observation, but resolve to shoot fair
and far off; whilst others wholly couch it, are ready to cast it off, or by
false glosses, and frivolous interpretations evade it, and study how to charm
others into the same silence, I had almost said sin.

It is worth remembrance, that Religion and its Reformation never was, nor must
now be expected, to be the result of an ordinary measure of resolution: It is
needless to recite the boldness of the Apostles and Primitive Fathers against
the contradiction of the Pagans; Alexander and Athanasius that (...) against
the Arrian Empire in promoting and defending the true Religion: or Wickliff,
Hus, and Luther, and others, in the first reformation; and the conflicts of
Englands Non-conformists against the remainders of corruption, and Romish
Relics in our Church, unto a Solemn Covenant for their extirpation.

Zeal, courage, and constancy suit not any act so well as the asserting the
Obligation of a Sacred Oath, to which King and Kingdom are the subjects, and of
which God is Object and Avenger: so that in hanc arenam descendere, to enter a
controversy in defense thereof is pro aris and focis certare, to fight for God
and our Country, that the one be not dishonored, or the other destroyed by
perjury. Dr. Sanderson notes courage as a necessary Bar to the swearing of a
forced Oath; De juram. prael. 4. Sect. 14. page 123.
I am sure it is much more such to the breaking of it when sworn; he makes it
essential to piety, Viro forti, id est pio, pius enim esse nequit qui non est
fortis. To him I must needs subscribe, whilst Solomon seems to have been his
Dictator, The righteous are bold as a Lion, but the sluggard cries, There is a
Lion in the way; and fools wait wind and weather to the losing seed-time and
harvest. I deny not wisdom to watch and wait opportunity of action, but that
general distaste, and dissent, direct contradiction, or declared inhibition of
some, lukewarm declention of others, danger and difficulty unto an
improbability of effect, should demurre to a positive duty (such as is
ministerial exaction of the Oath of God) is plain folly, and to divert it is
praedominate iniquity: ob dubia quae se offerunt nemo a been faciendo cessare
debeat, is a Divine rule, most fit for Divines to practice in religious
discharges. Cicero de Officiis. lib. 3. p. 404
Regulus is no little renouned for his fidelity to his forced Oath, Cum
vigilando necabatur, erat in meliore causa quam si domi senex captivus perjurus
and consularis remanisset; And methinks the dying profession of Mr.
Christopher Love, Speech on the Scaffold.
in reference to this very Covenant, I had rather die a Covenant-keeper than
live a Covenant-breaker, should yet have some influence on London-Ministers.

Let men count me fool and firebrand, or what they please, my record is above,
and witness is on high. I must tell thee, as no persuasion of my friends,
threats of foes, loss of estate, danger of liberty, declension of brethren,
could constrain my silence in the civil part of the Covenant which concerned
Caesar; so I cannot but speak unto the religious part of it, which concerns
God and his Church, the things therein sworn to be extirpated, being generally
evil; and the best (viz.) Answer to the Remonstrant. p. 30, 31.
Episcopacy (which Smectymnus tells us [In its best and primitive institution
was of diabolical occasion, and mere humane, not Apostolical prescription; a
remedy uneffectual to its designed end, and only became a stirrup to
Antichrist;] which I hope none of them will be persuaded to hold) is only good
in that particular which is common to other Governments; and not divine, or
necessary, but within human power to be discharged or continued. And in
conscience of its obligation, I have this once and again put pen to paper,
whereby, if I may do God and his Church, the King and Kingdom, any service, I
shall be glad, like unto Alexanders soldier, to be found in the fashion of a
fool; being resolved, in the discharge of duty, to seek dignity according to
old Strato's direction, by turning my back on the rising Sun; and withstand S.
Peter's temporizing (to the stumbling of the weak, and strengthening of the
wicked) unto his very face; for he will be found worthy to be blamed. Let men's
spirits be composed, the case of conscience be heartily discussed, the bond of
the Covenant be by right and religious reason discharged, none shall more
cheerfully submit than my self; but if the Covenant be slighted as of no use,
by Jesuitical Sophisms made void, by violence violated, or by false glosses and
interpretations evaded; faithfulness unto it, and the zeal of a Minister
(bound to speak in Gods Name, that his anger may be silent) and love and
loyalty to King and Kingdom (studious of what may profit more than please) will
constrain an outcry, and constant call, Oh regard the Covenant, the Solemn
League and Covenant!

The degrees of reformation obtained, before this Covenant was made, were
matter of joy to the Church, and ground of praise to God, but not of content
and full satisfaction, whilst higher degrees were desirable, and to be pursued;
and though we now should obtain another step to what we then had, but yet, not
only short of, but inconsistent with the degree covenanted or sworn; I deny it
not to be materially good, yet cannot but judge it to be a formal evil. I fear
a breach of the Covenant, unless we can find a medium between perjury and
nonperformance (quoad captum) of the thing sworn to God. I can cheerfully
embrace every degree of good, but not triumph in that good which falls short of
engagement unto God; Reformation is not more joyous, than the retrogradation
thereof is grievous to a serious spirit; that the child stick in the birth is
dangerous, but its return into the womb is so apparent an hazard to mother and
child, it admits no moderation in midwife or assistants, but provokes earnest
and utmost diligence for delivery. I tremble to think what may yet become of
the Reformed Churches, if Englands reformation after so long and sad a travel
be returned backward, and that against the strength of a Solemn League and
Covenant. I pray God we be not courted into the Cassandrian accommodation, into
which Englands Prelates could not cudgel us. It bodes no good, when sacred
Oaths are conceived to be Court-complements, State-stratagems to be once used
to effect a present design, and so laid aside to be no more regarded; or like
riders knots, with which men at pleasure play fast and lose.

I am not so rigorous as to extort the sense of an Oath beyond what its genuine
construction will bear: nor can I allow a signification more laxe than the
scope, Grammatical exposition, and Logical resolution of the words will admit.
Some wits can find, or rather fancy starting-holes in the strictest and
pl^^^^est bonds, Proteus-like, turning any thing into any shape, thereby
thinking to speak the weakness of an Oath, they show themselves notoriously
wicked.

-- Mill add catenas,
Effugiet tamen haec sceleratus vincula Proteus.
Hor. lib. 2. Satyr. 3.
But the words of this Covenant are plain and clear to every common capacity;
and in no part more clear than in that under present controversy (viz.) Refo
mation of Religion, wherein the Word of God is made the lanthorn to direct our
course; and best Reformed Churches our lanched boighs to detect our dangers in
every time of Doubt: In the evils to be removed, that which might occasion the
greatest doubt, is made most plain by the description of the object and
denomination of the act. The Object is expressed by a term Prelacy, though
general in its signification, yet by long and common appropriation, as obvious
to vulgar capacity to denote a special kind of government in the Church, as
tyranny in reference to the Commonwealth: Yet it is restrained by a more
particular denomination Hierarchy, holy government by the order of holy high
Priesthood (as some do fancy) and specifical description by its enumerated
substantial parts, Archbishops, Bishops, Deans, Deans and Chapters, in which it
formally existed; and separable adjuncts, Commissaries, Chancellors, and other
Officers depending thereupon; so that these not in sensu composito (that the
removal of any one Officer might suffice) but complexo, the Government
conaining all or any of these, is the object sworn against, appears to every
unprejudiced Reader: and so it squares with the Act expressed by the most
significant word which could be devised, viz. Extirpate; which certainly every
ordinary reader knows to amount unto more than mutation, (by dismembring some
separable adjuncts thereupon dependent, as Commissaries or Chancellors, or by
limitation and regulation, which yet makes the Bishops holy hands essential to
all acts of confirmation of Catechumenists, or Ordination of Ministers, or
Jurisdiction in the Church, though there be never so many grave, learned, and
pious Presbyters and Pastors: a few of whom may be his Lordships Council,
without any intrinsecal authority in themselves and without him; whilst all men
know to extirpate signifies, una cum stirpe evellere, to pluck up by the very
root. In this point if the words of the Oath were not sufficiently clear, and
the Lawyers rule, Lex currit cum praxi, may point us to a Comment. The Petition
opposed by the Bishop Hall.
Remonstrant, defended by Smectymnuus, presented to the Parliament, the
debates, many speeches and resolves in the Houses which preceded and produced
the advice of the Assembly of Divines, Ordinances of Parliament, and Oath of
His most Sacred Majesty as King of Great Britain, in pursuit of the Covenant
which ensued upon the swearing the same, has written this sense in such
legible Characters, that all may run and read it. And although I would not
require any thing more, I can take nothing less (because God allows no
abatements in an Oath) than what has been sworn, though it should appear good
and profitable, but not necessary, necessitate precepti divini.

However others may flagge and faulter, or fall off from the Covenant, I must
tell the assertors of the Presbyterial Government, that if they have no
conscience, they are hedged into the observance of it on the account of Credit:
Reasons of the present judgment of the University of Oxford, concerning the
Solemn League and Covenant. Sect. 7 p. 21.
for the University of Oxford (as with them combined to their reproach) from
the Jesuits and Sectaries, has charged it to be their property, to swear one
thing in their words, and in their own sense to mean another; to invent Oaths
and Covenants for the Kingdom, dispense with them when they please; swear and
forswear, as the wind turns, like a godly Presbyter: which if any of them
will dare to verify, they shall give me leave to mourn alone for their
iniquity: for (by Gods grace) my soul shall not enter into the secrets of an
Art so sinful and shameful before God and men; but study that Rule, Be wise as
Serpents, but innocent as Doves.

Courteous Reader, I have held thee too long in the threshold; I shall stay
thee no longer save to tell thee, if in any thing I seem indiscreet, it is in
venturing something of Answer to the Reasons of the University of Oxford (which
every simple Anti-covenanter, and scurrilous Pamphleter (not able by the least
Casuistical consideration to discharge the Covenant) do revive, and run into as
the Gordian knot, never to be loosed; and to which my Antagonist Dr. Gauden
(beaten out of his own Divinity) does retreat as to his impregnable Castle of
confidence) which may indeed savor something of arrogance, in any single
opponent, by whose over-matched weakness the cause may suffer: Give me leave
to tell thee, the dread hereof has smothered in silence what is now drawn out
by the reputation of unansvverable Reasons they have received amongst the
enemies of the Covenant. I cannot live by an implicit faith, but in a case of
conscience must examine the considerations of the most learned Society. General
Councils are more authoritative and authentic than any single University; yet
they have erred, and their errors have been detected by single persons. And how
foolish soever I may seem, I have so much wit as to know, Timidi and ignavi
nunquam erigent Trophaeum, Honor attends not Dastards. And again, Trophaeum
far me a forti viro pulchrum est; sin autem and vincar, vinci a tali nullum
est probrum. It is an honor to Scanderbeg to beat, not any shame to be beaten
by the numerous Turks: If I be vanquished by their more learned pens, it can be
to me no disgrace, nor to truth any great damage, whilst my being over-poured
in so good a cause, will engage more able men, (who have any zeal for, or
conscience of the Oath of God which lies on us, our King, and Kingdom) to
appear for the relief and defense thereof: In expectation of which, I cast my
self on thy candor and ingenuity,

Zach. Crofton.

ANALPSIS ANELPHTH; The Fastening of St Peter's Fetters. OR, The Solemn League
and Covenant, and its Conscience-binding Power Asserted and Vindicated, etc. in
an Epistle to the Right Worshipful Sir Lawrence Bromfield Knight, and Colonel
in LONDON.
The PREFACE.
Right Worshipful,
IF (without suspicion of blasphemy and irreverence toward Sacred men and
Sacred writ) I may pursue Dr. John Gauden's Metaphor, I cannot but tell you,
men's profane neglect and contempt of the Covenant did not a little perplex me;
but that Solemn and Sacred Oaths should be deemed St. Peter's Bonds; and that
Protestant Divines (dreaming of an Apostolical Priority) should by Popish
Arguments attempt his Release to the Re-establishment of the Papatum alterius
mundi (as it was, is, and must be owned) of Episcopacy in Lawn sleeves,
exercising Paternal Authority over their brethren, as the peoples Dr. John
Ganden's Analysis of the Covenant. p. 17.
equals and inferiors, because in black coats, did much more afflict my spirit.

Sir, in sense hereof, I did send out my Analepsis after the Doctors Analysis;
and made bold to withstand St. Peter to his face, for he was to be blamed, and
indeed condemned (as (...).
the word in Gal. 2.11. does signify) and brought him back to prison (it must
be so esteemed) with silence harkening for his joyful songs under Christ his
Masters yoke; and in those holy Stocks: and resolved submissively to wait on
God, to perfect the peace and purity of his Church in England, and plead the
quarrel of the Covenant; but the Grating Files of some (more willing than able
to dismiss my prisoner) have disturbed my rest.

Truly, Sir, I love St. Peter better in Bonds than in the Popes Lordly Chair,
and was never yet reputed a Sceptick, and therefore cannot now brook to have my
Analepsis outrun, and derided with an (...), a scornful escape from my due and
diligent pursuit; and therefore must once more make bold, under your
Worshipful name, 1 Samuel 18.23.
to send this Ahimaaz after Cushi, though on the same errand; whereunto I am no
little encouraged, for that the Book so called.
Doubts and Scruples concerning the taking the Solemn League and Covenant,
which are by the Doctor (my Antagonist) and his Nephew Nobody, commended to my
consideration, has done me the honor to couple you with me; and you the
honor as to tell the world, you abide as steadfast in the Covenant as they
found you in their first assaults.

Noble Colonel, I will not fear to be (in my place) your Second, under so holy
an Ensign as is the Solemn League and Covenant; nor once doubt your courage in
so good a cause, which I wish may appear in Common Council, not
Champian-Fields: For Sir,

-- Tutius est contendere verbis,
Quam pugnare manu --
Sanctified words uttered from a sound mind, may subdue profaneness, and
settle His Majesty's Throne in Righteousness, and no way disturb the peace of
these too long distracted Nations: rather than which, I desire never to put pen
to paper.

Sir, Since my answer to Dr. Gaudens Sense and Solution of the Covenant, many
Pamphlets have started into the world, to raise a dust, and make a noise in the
streets, that the Vulgar may think something may be said against the Covenant;
but when they come to be considered, they appear like the Apples of Sodom, or
outcries of affrighted women, who cry, Stop, stop, Hold, hold; but cannot
stretch one hand whereby to hold or stay the pursuit.

The first of thse was John Rowland, A Rejoinder to Mr. Rowland's Reply.
a right Sir John Suckling in his pretended Reply to the Anonymous Answer to
the Doctor, wherein, more like a Sir John Country Curate than Rector of
Footscray in Kent, he answers all matters of moment as to fact or notion, as
if to a Quis fuit hic sepultus in his Churchyard, with I know not, I cannot
tell, I have not read, I have not the Book, and the like; meriting to himself
Ignoramus Motto, Per verbum Nescio Resolvitur omnis question. Yet he gives Mr.
Crofton (the meanest dwarf, but) in his monstrous eye the Goliath of the
Covenanters, a most capital Confutation: Like a well-skill'd pick-pocket,
writing his name in such Capital Letters, that men may run and read, and
sucklings stand still and gaze at them: but throughout his whole Book medieth
not with him or his Answer, and therefore my Rejoinder to his Reply must be tht
of Sir Thomas Moor to the silly Friar,

Tu been cavisti ne te ulla occidere possit
Litera; nam tota est litera nulla tibi.
Thou take good care the Letter kill thee not,
Thy skill is such thou know not B from Bot.
But yet in fine, by a Hocus-Pocus Postscript, he conjured Mr. Crofton into a
Synonimy with Anonymus, and profoundly concluded, Answer one, answer all.

The next was a paper of the like stamp, Mr. Russel's pischarge discharged.
but more immediately directed unto me, yet not to any thing of my Arguments;
This was, The Solemn League and Covenant discharged, by John Russel of
Chinkford in Essex: This man pretends not only to loosen, but to annihilate
St. Peter's bonds; and for his strength and skill, was attested by John Gauden
D. D. and yet he medleth not with one of those Arguments he pretends to
discharge, but starts a new notion; which, because it so well pleased the
Doctor, shall (though not worth it) come in its place to be considered: I owe
this man thanks for his good opinion of the modesty and perfection of my
answer, In his Epistle.
which he says, was only defective in point of memory, for that I did not
remember the Kings concessions which were voted a ground of peace, were with
continuance of Episcopacy; but by his leave I remembered it, though my Argument
led not to repeat it; and though he seem to forget, I remember the Concessions
were to suspend Episcopacy, and the Liturgy, and admit Presbytery and the
Directory for three years. To him I say then,

Turpe est doctori, cum culpa redarguit ipsum. And wish him, He so calls it
himself in p. 8.
who so minds my memory, to look well to his Intellectuals: For, the last qualm
of sadness made him half mad, to rage and rave, That Mr. Crofton had urged the
Ligne de saint in France as the President of the Covenant, who only rescued
the Covenant from the odium of that comparison cast upon it by the Doctor, and
that, by the same Argument which himself grants, (viz.) That though the Ligne
de saint were sinful in the matter, yet it was lawful enough in the abstracted
form of it. And here also he rampantly braggeth, that he could produce an
hundred precedents to square with the conditions of the times when the Covenant
was taken; which, considering the Religion professed, the Kingdoms
confederated, the Reformation pursued, the Authority directing it, and the
like; if he find ten of his hundred I will go to Bedlam, on condition he lie
there till wise men discern the parallel. The common outcry of others is, The
like time was never seen; but this was to ease his mind, as himself professes.

The third was the Spurious League Illegal, The Bastardy of the League Illegal.
falsely fathered on Dr. Daniel Featly, by the dignity of his name to deceive
the world; but the feature of it is every way unlike a man so acute and Logical
as was this Doctor, as is evident in its arguing idem per idem, in the 8 and
11th Arguments, generals from particulars, Argument 8. page 26. its
Contradiction to the Doctor, who, in his Epistle to the Parliament, prefixed to
his Dipper Dipped, denominateth the two Houses Beauty and Bonds, and owns the
Commors as Legislators, the Lords as Executors, and determined their War, A
repairing the Temple with their Swords in their hands: whom this Book
(pretending to be written the same year with that Epistle) denies to be any
Lawful Authority, and denominateth fomenters of that unnatural civil War; nay,
it is contradictory to it self, affirming, No people may make a Covenant in any
case without the Kings consent, in page 15. Arg. 3. and yet affirms, that in
sundry cases a people may covenant not only without, but against the consent
and command of the King, Page 20.
unto which I might add an heap of Nonsense observable in it, as, That the
Covenant is not a virtue, for Aristotle says, Virtus est habitus Electivus,
page 26. This piece looking asquint at me, is loaded with such railing
language, that it seems to have come from beneath, and must be owned as Dr.
Featly's Ghost, raised by the circle of his Executors fancy, to clear his way
to preferment; it gives us arguments by number, not by weight; the force of any
of them is in the Oxford-Reasons (that fountain that feeds, and Fort that
guards all exceptions against the Covenant) and shall in its place be
considered.

The fourth and last Pamphlet no less ridiculous than the rest, The doubts and
scruples concerning the Covenant weighed.
as scarce having a grain of true Religion, or a scruple of a Right Reason, is
the doubts and scruples against taking the Solemn League and Covenant,
published by an aliquis Nemo, a man in the Moon, and so like to be resolved by
Nuper Nunquam; but this is ushered into the world at its Being reprinted.
new birth by the learned Epistle of Dr. John Gauden, and is offered to the
consideration of Sir Lawrence Bromfield, and Mr. Zachary Crofton; and so makes
the Exchange ring, and streets roar with Dr. Gauden's Reply to Mr. Croftons
Answer about the Covenant, and so calls for regard, which otherwise was as fit
ware for the Tobacco-shops as any the rest.

Truly, Sir, I could not read this Epistle without astonishment, for that
instead of those clear, pregnant, and constant beams of right reason, and true
Religion, which shines with the brightness and stability of Divine and Human
Laws; and might be the pillars of this truth, firm support of duty, sure bounds
of obedience, and safe repose of conscience, which he promised in his Analysis,
and I demanded in my Analepsis; he does idem iisdem verbis asserere, affirm the
same thing without distinction, in the same terms without variation, or other
demonstration; only, (as having obtained his fancied paternal authority) he
does something more Magisterially prescribe the performing of the Covenant
against Schism (which he would have us take on his word to de Presbytery, to
which Doctor Usher would have reduced Episcopacy) and Superstition, before we
consider its obligation against Episcopacy; and in a grave passion, brandeth
the Covenant (himself has sworn) with the Epithet of a lawless unnational
Covenant, and stigmatizeth the exactors thereof as covetous crafty men, engaged
in the sacrilegious depredations of the Church, and unstable souls: Which
cannot be found in me: My 8 l. per annum will not more acquit me from the one,
than my Sequestration for adhereing to the Covenant, will acquit me from the
other. But he adds, Or silly souls, and such an one I may be, yet will play
the fool in glorying in such godly simplicity. In this heat he charge all
Civillians and Casuists with foolish and fanatic Superstition, as well as mad
and violent Schism, in teaching men to avoid what is good, honest, just, and
lawful, because of a supposed and confessed abuse thereof: Not so much as
favoring Hezekiah, who demolished the brazen Serpent; nor Paul in his
resolution, never to eat flesh in his future diet. We may be assured he will
never be so superstitious or schismatical, as to cut off his right hand, or
pluck out his right eye, (which are good, honest, just, lawful members) in
case they offend him, though the Lord Christ himself has so directed.

But, Sir, with what face think you can Dr. Gauden again urge against the
Covenant the defect of Authority, its sad effects, the obscurity, ambiguity,
and seeming discrepancy of the Covenant, for the discharge of its obligation,
whilst he has been fully and soberly answered as to these things, and has
made no Reply? How is it that he presses forward his Episcopacy without
distinction? and yet I have told him there is Papal Episcopacy to be
extirpated, and a Presbyterial Presidency (pointed unto them by the Primate of
Armagh) to be advanced. Knows he not, qui been distinguit been docet? Or does
he disdain to take truth from so mean an hand? He is a Minister, so am I,
though my poor estate, numerous family, or want of the Kings grace, will not
allow me to write D. D.

But seriously, Sir, though Popish do, methinks Protestant Bishops should not
disdain a Reformation in a Luthers hand: Let him then consult Dr. Sanderson De
Juramento, and if he square with, or I differ from his Divinity, let him be
humm'd, and me be hist, and contra. I believe he would not have us think him so
ambitious of his Episcopal See (to which some say he is promoted) as for it to
break his Covenant, and brow-beat his brethren, and rage against the Oath of
God with a non amote -- and being demanded a reason, can say no more than Non
possum dicere quare. Sure he is not so stout a Sophister as to pass the
premises, and stand to the denial of the conclusion. If he have attained to a
Papal-Episcopal-Chair, I hope he will not pretend to the Infallibility of it,
and bind our faith on his ipse dixit. Verily, Sir, I cannot but say to the
Doctor, concerning his Analysis and this Epistle, as Erasmus to Faber of Vienna,

Mente cares, si res agitur tibi seria; rursus
Front cares, si sic ludis, amice Faber.
Whether he be proudly mad, or foolishly pertinacious, I will not judge, but
must yet call on him to remember the Covenant, and consider from whence he is
fallen, and repent. He had need to run to the common Refuge, the Oxford
Reasons; but it is well if they prove not a broken Reed, more to wound than
defend him.

Sir, notwithstanding these and the like Squibs and Crackers flung out against
the Solemn League and Covenant, to make profane men sport, and expose it to
vulgar scorn more than satisfy conscience, the Covenant keeps the field in its
full force and vigor, and St. Peter's bonds abide. I shall not therefore waste
time and paper to trace their follies, and tire my Reader with an answer to
words without weight; but in the pursuit of (the edification of souls) the end
of my Ministerial Writing, as well as Preaching, Fasten St. Peter's Fetters, and
secure my Prisoner by a Chain made of those Seven Links or Propositions, which,
being cleared and confirmed, will extend the influence, and enforce the
obligation of the Covenant, against that profane opposition which is made unto
it, (viz.)

1. The asserting of the Solemn League and Covenant, and its obliging force, is
a duty indispensably incumbent on every man in his place; but especially on the
Ministers of the Gospel.

2. The irregularities in first making the Covenant will not discharge its
obligation, now it is made and sworn.

3. The matter sworn in the Solemn League and Covenant is just and lawful, to
be maintained and pursued.

4. The form and manner of making the Solemn League and Covenant was good and
allowable.

5. The Ambiguities and Contradictions of the words in the Solemn League are
imagined, and not real.

6. The Covenant in its quality, and for its obligation, is public and
National, as well as private and personal.

7. The Solemn League and Covenant is in the nature of it permanently binding,
and no way to be absolved or discharged.

Of these then particularly, and in their order. And first of the first of them.

Sectio Prima. Proposition. The asserting of the Solemn League and Covenant,
and its obliging force, is a duty indispensably incumbent on every man in his
place, but especially on the Ministers of the Gospel.
WHilst we consider this Proposition, and frame this Link of our Chain, we must
take the Covenant in its abstracted form, as it is a Solemn Compact confirmed
by an Oath, in which God is witness, or party, or both. And at present take it
for granted, that the matter of it is true, just, and lawful; which yet will
hereafter in its appointed place be discussed.

And as such, I say the asserting of the Covenant, and its obliging force, unto
the exacting of performance, and rebuke of negative or positive breach of it,
in not doing, or in doing contrary to what is covenanted, is a duty
indispensably incumbent on all men in their places, (viz.) in their public or
private capacities, wherein they are to express themselves, and expect others
to be acted (as men and Christians) by the dictates and directions of
conscience; in order whereunto, the Covenants in which they bind themselves
each to other, or jointly to God, as well as divine counsel, must be their
compass, to guide their course past dangers and destruction.

Conform hereunto was the commendable carriage of Gyth the younger brother, but
faithful Counselor to Harold King of England, who considering the state of the
Quarrel between him and William Conqueror, gave the King this warning, Cambd.
Brit, p. 149, 150.
In case you have made promise to William of the Kingdom, withdraw thy person
out of the Battle; for surely, all thy forces shall not secure thee against
God, and thy own conscience, who will require punishment for breach of faith
and promise.

Every man is, in charity, bound to be an Angel to an unmindful Jacob, in point
of his vow to God, and Monitor to his backsliding brother; but it especially
belongs to Gospel Ministers, who being Gods Watchmen against sin, and his
peoples Remembrancers unto duty, are not only by common Charity, but also by
special Office, bound to give warning against approaching evil, contracting
guilt, and impending judgments of God; Ezekiel. 3.16, 17, 18, 19, 20, 33.7, 8, 9,
and that as they will acquit themselves from the blood of those immortal
souls, who slip into, and perish by their sin. On this account the word of the
Lord comes unto his Prophets, with a Say unto them, Thus says the Lord, I
will give the men which have transgressed my Covenant, which have not performed
my Covenant, even the Princes of Judah, and the Princes of Jerusalem, and
Zedekiah the King, into the hand of their en^mies, Jer. 34.18, 19, 20, 21, etc.
And therefore the censure of being contentious, or danger of being cast into
prison as seditious, and losing all their comforts, must not deter the
Ministers of God from coming to the King, and crying out in the Name of the
Lord, Shall he break the Covenant and be delivered, shall he do such things and
prosper, and escape? Ezekiel. 17.15. for in case of silence the sin will be on
their heads, and the stones in the street will cry out.

This is a principle so common and clear, The duty urged from piety toward God.
that none professing Reason or Religion dare deny it; and the reason of it is
written in such legible Characters, that all may run and read it, (viz.) The
Covenant is an Oath, the highest appeal to God, who must not, will not be
mocked, or made a witness to His own dishonor, but will punish the breach
thereof as a most heinous sin. Therefore the Ministers of God (standing in his
stead) must with all zeal exact the accomplishment of it, as the practice of
piety dependant on such a piece of worship: Remembering God has strictly
charged, That if a man vow a vow, and bind his soul, he shall not break his
word, he shall do according to all that proceeds out of his mouth, Numbers
30.2. So that in piety to God the Covenant must be kept, and its obligation be
asserted.

Loyalty to the King is no little swasive to this duty; 2. Loyalty to the King.
for that leads to all fidelity in discharges and prevention of every thing
destructive and dishonorable to his Majesty; Perjury (most odious to God and
man) is abominable in any, and most conspicuous in a Prince. Who can without
dread remember the fierceness of Gods fury against Zedekiah for breaking the
Oath, into which he was forced by the straitest Siege? Or, observe the Odium
that abides on Albert the Emperor, Almerick King of Jerusalem, Vladislaus King
of Hungary, and the Christian-Princes, for breaking their Covenants with the
Turk? and the obloquy indelible which lies on Eugenius and Silvester Popes,
and Julian Cardinal of S. Angelo, and the Order of Templars, for abetting and
advising (by the same Arguments urged against our Covenant) the breach thereof?
Can any true Englishman, and Liege Subject, without horror call to mind the
perjury of King Harold, which let in William Conqueror to our Land? and how
King John was made odious, and deserted by this outcry, Withdraw your selves
from a perjured King, and not in sense thereof be stirred up with zeal to
assert the Covenant? which broken, will load with shame, and subject to the
displeasure of that God who can destroy both us and our King, so happily
restored to each other.

True Loyalty is no less studious to establish the Kings Throne in
Righteousness, than obsequious to the Royal expressions of His Pleasure: Yet to
such as center Loyalty in the last, I would advise that they would seriously
consider, That howsoever His late Majesty of Honorable Memory (for the
conscience of his Oath) was acted by the misapprehension of the Covenant to
interdict it; yet he was more sensible of its obliging force when taken, than
to attempt the discharge thereof; and therefore in His Solitudes He advises
His Subjects unto the Keeping of the Covenant in all honest and just ways, The
contemplation on the Covenant.
as thinking the chief end of the Covenant in many the takers intention, was to
preserve Religion in purity, and the Kingdom in peace. And as one under the awe
of the Oath of God, charge His most Sacred Majesty that now is, That if God
bring Him to His own on hard corditions, He should be careful to perform what
he should promise. And His most Sacred Majesty, as a most obedient Son to a
Father so piously prudent, having Himself sworn the Solemn League and Covenant,
and the establishment of it in all his Dominions, by His Royal Declaration of
August 16. 1650. from Dumfirmling, professes Himself deeply humbled for His
Fathers opposition to the Covenant; and that on full persuasion of the justice
and equity of all the Articles thereof, He had sworn and subscribed the Solemn
Leagne and Covenant of the three Kingdoms; and that he was fully resolved (in
the Lords strength) to adhere thereunto, and to the utmost of his power, in His
place and station, really, constantly, and sincerely, to prosecute all the ends
thereof, all the days of His life. And by His Royal Command does conjure all
His loving Subjects who have stood against the So-Solemn League and Covenant,
and work of Reformation, to lay down their enmity, protesting to have no
enemies to Him but the enemies to the Covenant; nor friends to Him but friends
to the Covenant. So that if Loyalty consist in a conformity to the Kings mind,
(as most Courtiers considering what may please, not what may profit, place it)
the respect due to the memory of His late, and the dread we owe to His now
Majesty, must animate, and engage the asserting of the Covenant, and its obling
force? For no faithful Subject will dare to fancy, that either the one or the
other, designed by these and the like expressions to mock God and the world.

The love of our Country, 3. The love of our Country.
and our own interest therein involved, is not the least spur unto this duty:
For such is the deep dye of perjury, that it polluteth the Land, and places it
under the most direful of Divine plagues. The Heathen detest the breach of
Oaths and Covenants, as that which drives out of humane Society, and
destroys men and their posterity by most heavy plagues. Juvenal telling us of
the sad miseties which befell Glaucus Epicydes, for the purpose of breaking his
Oath, which yet passed not into act, concludes,

Has patitur poenas, peccandi sola voluntas. And Herodotus hereupon observing
the improbable, impossible miseries, which did overtake and subvert the very
house and stock of the perjured, concludes,

At juramento quaedam est sine nomine proles,
Trunca manus, Trunca pedes; tamen impetus magno
Advenit; at que omnem vastat stirpemque domumque.
An unknown strength from Oath there does proceed,
Without running pace, or hands to do the deed,
Subverts the house, and makes the stock to bleed.
Historians observe perjury to have lien at the root of the Holy War, that it
could never prosper; our own Chronicles conclude, breach of Covenant brought in
the Conqueror, and the Barons Wars; and the Scriptures witness the three years
wasting Famine in Israel to have been the fruit of Saul's well meant breach of
Covenant with Gibeon, only expiated by the extirpation of his Family. So that
love to our Country, and our selves, as like to be sharers in its calamity,
which can only be prevented by paying the vows we made to God, must quicken
all men, especially Ministers, to cry, and cry aloud, Remember, regard the
Solemn League and Covenant.

Unto these considerations the Covenant it self adds no little strength, 4.
By the Bond of the Covenant it self.
whilst we have sworn not to suffer our selves directly or indirectly, by
whatsoever combination, persuasion, or terror to be withdrawn from it; nor to
give up our selves to a detestable neutrality, and indifferency, but in our
places and callings to maintain it, and assist such as enter into it; whereunto
the asserting of the Covenant, and its obliging force, is not the least
serviceable, nor most out of our capacity; it being all the places of the
Ministry will allow them to do.

These things considered, as I cannot but commend and rejoice in the assertion
and exaction of the Solemn League and Covenant as to the Civil part of it
concerning our King and Kingdom, which was expressed by the Secluded Members of
the long Parliament, and by the Minislers of London, and other Counties in
their Pulpits, and public testimonies to the Solemn League and Covenant,
Printed with their names subscribed, provoking their people to cleave to the
Covenant; so I cannot but admire at their present silence, as to the Religious
part of it, which concerns God, His Church, and Worship: But I am much more
amazed to see eminent Divines, who have sworn it, not only to slight the
Covenant, but to strain their wits, parts, and learning, by false Glosses and
foolish Arguments, to make it void, and discharge its obligation, and to make
up their defect of reason and Religion, by railing at, and in reproach of such,
who in conscience of duty assert its obligation, counting them troublers of
Englands peace, spirits of contradiction, acted by malice, as does Featly in
his Preface to his League illegal, or silly unstable souls, (standing still,
whilst these run away) urging the Covenant on private interests of profit,
revenge, envy, and ambition, and the like, as Dr. Gauden in his Epistle to the
Doubts and Scruples, etc. I would pray these men to tell me in cold blood, and
on serious thoughts, supposing, as I said before, the Covenant to be a just,
public, sacred, and lawful Oath, whether they think any that have zeal for
God, loyalty to the King, and love to their Country, can see Superstition acted
to that height, as to make the Papists smile at the return of that similitude
to their worship of which they were wont to boast; and not barely an Episcopacy
restored, but that very specifical Prelacy covenanted against (in most express
terms) advanced, whereby the Covenant is not only contemned, but openly
contradicted, and yet be silent and not plead the Covenant? Or again, Is duty a
proper turbulency? If only such by accident, must not Gods Ministers contend
against sin, to prevent Gods contending by His plagues against the Land?

But, Sir, to conclude this Section, I would pray that our Master Builders, in
the re-edifying of their holy Fabric, (greatly delapsed and decayed) would
vouchsafe to cast their thoughts upon an Observation made by an Author (who
cannot but be) acceptable to them (viz.) Mr. Thomas Fuller Prebendary of Sarum,
who in his Holy War, casting up the causes of that sad Catastrophe of so
hopeful and honorable an undertaking, reduces the summa totalis to
superstition and perjury (usual concomitants) and on the last he thus glosseth:

How could safety it self save this people, Fullers Holy War, lib 5, c. 11.
p. 248.
and bless this project, so blackly blasted with perjury? (how then should
their Watchmen be silent?) a sin so repugnant with moral honesty, so injurious
to the peace and quiet of the world, so odious in it self, so scandalous to all
men, to break a League when confirmed by Oath, (the strongest bond of
conscience, the end of particular strife, the Soldier of public peace, the
assurance of amity betwixt diverse Nations; made here below, but enrolled in his
High Court, whose glorious Name does sign it) a sin so heinous, that God cannot
but most severely punish it. David asks, Who shall dwell in thy holy hill?
and answers himself, He that swears to his neighbor and disappoineth him
not, though to his own hindrance. No wonder then, though the Christians had no
longer abiding in the holy Hill of Palestine, driving that Trade wherewith none
ever yet thrived, the breaking of promises, wherewith one may for a while
fairly spread his train, but will melt his feathers soon after; the Fabric
must needs come tumbling down, whose foundation is laid in perjury. Surely,
Sir, such as affectionately believe this doctrine, cannot but passionately
apply it, to cry aloud, and not spare, Remember the Covenant. I grow, Sir, not
a little suspicious, that the last stratagem of the Propogators of the
Catholic Cause, is by their Jesuitical Sophistry to strike England into the
guilt of perjury; and then to blaspheme our Religion, and deride our Nation, as
did Agesilaus the Grecian Captain in his answer to Tissaphernes the Persian,
breaking the League he had made with him, I give you no small thanks, for that
by your perjury you have made the gods angry with the Persians, and favorable
to the Grecians.

Sectio Secunda. Second Propos. The irregularities in the first making the
Covenant, will not discharge its obligation now it is made and sworn.
Whilst we consent unto the common conclusion of the Canonists, That
Juramentum non est vinculum iniquitatis, An Oath must not be the bond of
iniquity, and commend to all men their counsel, as indeed a duty, In malis
promissis rescinde fidem, In promises of evil make no conscience to keep, nay,
make confcience to break your faith. Yet we must consider, and warily
distinguish between the rem juratam, and actum jurandi, the act of swearing,
and the matter sworn: For in respect of the last of these, the Rule is to be
understood, and the obligation to performance does thereon depend: Such is the
reverence of an Oath to all men, Heathen or Christian, that rashness and
irregularities in obtaining and actually passing the Oath, would never be
admitted as sufficient to discharge its force.

The Rule of the Schoolmen received by all Casuists and Civilians, must here
be observed, Tho. Aquin, par. 22 ae quaest. 89. Art. 9.
Juramentum promissorium non potest dispensari secundum se, sed tantum ratione
materiae indebitae: A promissory Oath cannot be discharged by any reason, but
the unlawful matter of it. And hereupon it is agreed on by all Divines, That
the ground on which an Oath shall lose its force must be intrinsecal of the
body, substance, and matter of the Oath; not extrinsecal, and accessory to the
Oath. It must be the sinfulness of the thing, and matter sworn, not the
circumstances conversant about the act of swearing, which may be sinful, and
must be shunned, Scnderson de Juramento.
but avail not to discharge the Oath when taken. Well does the Oxford Professor
distinguish, and tell us, They are two several questions to be distinctly
resolved according to the condition into which a man is cast: The one is an hoc
vel illudi juramentum sit licitum, whether the Oath be lawful? And the other an
Juramentum hoc vel illud obligat, whether the Oath do bind? For that Oath may
be unlawfully sworn, which must everlastingly bind when sworn. That sin is to
be avoided in entering into a Covenant or Oath, which may be repented of without
retraction of the Oath when sworn: The Name of God too many times is (though it
ought not to be) taken in vain by rash swearing, yet must not be blasphemed by
forswearing.

An Oath is an obligation so sacred and permanent, that many conditions are
required unto a regular acting of it. At first it should be the act of a
deliberate, not distempered mind; not the effect of a distressed condition;
clearly propounded, and rationally received, not obtained by fraud, nor imposed
by force: But where, in any, or all these, and the l ke, there is a defect, and
disorder, or miscarriage, that men with Jeptha rashly swear such a general
Oath, as may rob them of the dearest of their delights when it comes to
performance: Or with Zedekiah be besieged by Wars without, and Tumults
within; to covenant, and confirm by Oath, conditions dishonorable and
burdensome: Or with Joshua and the Princes of Israel to the Gibeonites, swear
beyond their intention, and almost the import of their expressions, there being
an apparent fallacy in the foundation, and procuring cause of the contract; yet
in these and many the like cases the rule is most certainly to be admitted,
Quod fieri non debuit, factum valet, these things ought not to have been done,
but being done, do bind the conscience.

I wonder how men can press this Rule in case of Baptism by Women, or Children,
and Lay-persons, (in whom I humbly conceive it cannot hold) and not regard it
in an Oath, whose nature is such as administreth a Reason for this Rule, and
makes it necessary.

Many instances in story might be given to amplify this position, but (lest I
should seem to leave the Road without Reason) I shall only offer the example
of the Covenant with the Gibeonites for the clearness of its demonstration
commonly produced by all Casuists in this very case. Grotius out of Ambrose
noting the surreptitious fraudulent obtainment thereof, Gnotius de Jure belli
and pacis, lib. 2. cap. 13. p. 220.
does note, Decepti erant a Gabaonitis a regione longinqua se venire
fingentibus; Josua tamen pacem quam dederat revocandam non cenfuit; quia
formata erat sacramenti Religione, ne, dum alienam perfidiam arguit, suamfide n
solveret. The Translation of which I shall offer by a reverend Bishop (most
acceptable to our Anti-covenanters) who charge this deceit to have been the
just effect of their sinful neglect to consult the Oracles of God; and says,
Josh. Hall Bishop of Norwich.
Halls Contemp. p 918.
The facility of Israel led them into a League and Oath for the safety of the
Gibeonites; and now, within three days, their neighborhood and dece t. Joshua
might have taken advantage of their own words to dissolve this League, and have
said, Ye are come from a far Country, these Cities are near; these are not
therefore the people to whom we engaged by our promise or oath: and Israel had
put in a direct Caveat of their vicinity; so that it might seem questionable
whether Joshua needed to hold himself bound to this Oath; yet dare not Joshua
and the Princes trust to shifts for the eluding of this Oath, but must
faithfully perform what they had rashly promised. Joshua's heart was clear from
any intention of a League with a Canaanite; he gave his Oath to these disguised
strangers, yet he durst neither Repeal it himself, neither do I hear him sue to
Eleazer the High Priest to dispense with it; but takes himself tied to the
strict words of his Oath, not to his own purpose: his tongue had bound his
heart and hands, so as neither might stir; lest, whilst he was curious of
fulfilling the Will of God, he should violate the Oath of God.

But, Sir, how dissonant to these dictates of this Reverend Father are those
sons of the Church? who strive for a Bishopric by sinful casting off the
Covenant on a protended inadvertency in swearing it at first, and putting on it
a sense agreeable to their purpose, which is repugnant to the plain and express
Letter of the Covenant in the point of Episcopacy; correcting their infirmity
graviori peccato, with a more grievous impiety, mending rash swearing by plain
perjury, and after a sober admonition and refutation pertinaciously retain
their resolution, by publishing the very same pleas for breach of Covenant, and
braving it to the world with a bold asserting, Dr. Gaudens Epistle to the
doubts and scruples about taking the Covenant.
No sacred Oath or Promise can bind the soul of man from its just freedom,
which is rational, civil, moral, legal, and religious; nor can it be bound to
execute or fulfill any such, when it is willingly, or by inadvertency, or
malice, formally engaged by them, but not really to them. I wish, Sir, that
this Doctor would attend Doctor Halls Divinity with as much diligence, as he
seems to me to affect his Dialect.

What a preposterous and immethodical course do the Divines of our time take to
discharge the obligation of the Covenant, by scandalizing the same with the
irregularities which attended the first taking of it? That many miscarriages
occasioned by the commotion and turbulency of those martial days, (in which it
was digested and propounded to the people) did accompany the Covenant when
tendered and first taken, I can easily consent; but not so great as they seem in
the multiplyidg-glass (of passion and prejudice) by which they are now
suggested, much less were they so great as to discharge the bond of it. I
confess the Covenant ought not to have been the effect of Scottish
importunities, or English compliances, nor to have been brought forth by the
midwifry of tumults, and engaged enraged Armies, parties, and factions; nor its
convictions and persuasions to have been by sequestrations and imprisonments,
as Dr. Gauden in his Analysis suggesteth; but I (on grounds urged in my
Analepsis) cannot yield it was; yet grant it, will these things avail to the
discharge of its binding force, and make it void? Nothing less.

Nay, League in the Illegal.
Sir, should I consent and subscribe unto the verity of the Arguments urged by
Dr. Featley his Ghost, and admit (what I shall hereafter deny) 1. The supposed
Solecism and mistaken order of the words in the Covenant. 2. The supposed end
and aim of the Contrivers of the Covenant. 3. The wants of authority in the
Imposers. 4. The ambiguity and seeming contradictions of many expressions. 5.
That many took it not in Truth, Righteousness, and Judgment. 6. That it wants
warrant in Scripture, and is only bottomed on the basis of Natural Policy. 7.
That it is derogatory to Englands honor. 8. Taken without important cause, and
urgent necessity; and so was faulty in these and the like circumstances, which
call for Repentance in Imposers and Takers; yet it must be a Solecism in
Divinity to awake this book, and send abroad these exceptions against the Act
of making and swearing the Covenant, in hope that a review of them may make us
repent and be wise, and to confirm men (the Apostates) in their (aversion,
pretended) conversion from he Covenant, and draw others from it by the strength
of conviction. I will grant his Maxim, Deliberandum est diu quod statuendum
est semel. And though I believe the determination of the Covenant was on due
advice) yet we will consent unto him to repent and confess these mistakes: But
I must tell his Majesty's Chaplain, that Dr. Saunderson will not upon all this
give us leave to cast off the Covenant, but constrains our consciences to
revive it. Juramentum de re non illicita, sit aliunde illicitum, Sanderson de
juramento, prael. 2 a. p. 55.
ex aliquo externo defectu, and propter aliquam indebitam circumstantiam
respectu actus jurandi, possit obligare jurantem, ad implendum quod promisit.
An Oath lawful in the matter, unlawful in external, undue circumstances in the
act of swearing, binds to accomplishment.

This, Sir, has the more influence upon me, because it is Oxford Divinity,
conceived to be read on the occasion of this Covenant. We confess with
Augustine, David juravit temere, sed non implevit majori pietate. David swear
rashly, but with piety repented and retracted, because the matter, self-revenge
in Nabal's ruin was wicked: Which is not our case, when the matter of the
Covenant appears to be manifest sin, we must retract it; till then we will
repent rashness, unadvisednesse in the act, but retain its obligation, lest we
patch up sin by sin.

Now I deal with His Majesty's Chaplain, may I, Sir, make bold to whisper
another notion of Divinity in his ear; he may have occasion and opportunity to
use it: Sir, it is this, That a Peoples imposing on their Prince, and binding
him to terms, and bringing him under an Oath, not only for themselves, but all
their fellow subjects: in all or any the Kings Dominion, (for which act the
Scots are much censured, and could I have advised, should have been more
innocent) savours something of disorder, tumult, irregularity, and vulgar
violence. And yet Grotius determines (the matter being lawful) it obliges the
Prince so sworn; because God is invocated, and the King was voluntarily
subjected. Though he doubt the power of Co-action of a Princes performance by
men, yet he affirms the obligation before God: Crotius de jure belli and pacis.
l. 2. c. 14. p. 233.
His conclusion is this on the discussion of the Question, Dicimus ergo, ex
promisso and contractu regis, quem cum subditis iniit, nasci veram ac propriam
obligationem, quae jus det subditis: The promise or Covenant into which the
King shall enter with his subjects does engender a true and proper obligation,
and conser on the Subjects a right whereon to demand performance. I will not
justify all past actions, but can scarce refrain from adding to the Letany,
From contrary Coronation-Oaths, good Lord deliver us.

Lastly, How far wide do they shoot, who direct the private doubts and
particular scruples of private persons or societies, against the taking the
Solemn League and Covenant, to discharge its obligation? Men print, and
re-print the Oxford Reasons, and make a great noise with them in the world; and
yet they are meet private reasons, professedly relating to their own refusal of
the Covenant; and they never tell us whether they or any of the persons
concerned, received satisfaction to their reasons, Not to judge the consciences
of others, but to clear our selves before God and the world, from all suspicion
of obstinacy. Oxford Reasons, Pref. p. 1.
and after submitted to the taking of the Covenant; nor is it considered the
Reasons do profess an Apology, and pray a personal excuse of themselves from
the Act, but do not so much as pretend to acquit the bond of the Covenant to
such as had taken it. Now granting that these Reasons might have that force
that the Authors of them could not without sin conform to the Act of taking the
Covenant, yet they be of no force at all to weaken or dissolve its bond.

Let me therefore say, Sir, to these who offer to your and my consideration
their doubts and scruples against taking the Covenant, and scatter abroad
papers of this nature, that they manifest their malice and profane enmity
against the Covenant, by subjecting it to vulgar scorn, and laying open their
own nakedness, as if it were the nakedness of the Covenant, and run away
railing against the Covenant as of no force or obligation, as void and null, on
a mere Petitio principii, base-begging the question, and taking it for granted,
That what makes the act of swearing sinful, makes the Oath void. And supposing
a weight (which is very little) in their exceptions to words, method, form,
order of the Covenant, and the imposing it on the people; which might have kept
some men from swearing, to be sufficient to discharge all that are sworn. If
they will indeed batter the Covenant, they should pierce into the body of it,
and prove the matter of it unlawful; and then will I also shake off the
Covenant for ever. Till then, I answer in the Negative to my own enquiry in
Saint Peter's bonds abide, page 13. to make the worst of it a tumultuous
Assembly come before us with Sword and Scepter, say they are a Parliament, and
have lawful, constant, and complete Authority; and therefore will put an Oath
and Covenant upon us: And silly, inconsiderate we, are not so well-skill'd in
Politics, or acquainted with the Constitutions of our Country, to detect their
fallacy; but think all Authority is within those walls, and obedience must be
yielded to what is there commanded; and so we are beguiled into the Oath: nor
are we so hardy as to endure their violence, but by fear are forced into the
Covenant; is it therefore void? for we have opened our mouths unto the Lord,
and cannot go back.

Sectio Tertia. Proposition 3. The matter sworn in the Solemn League and
Covenant, is just and lawful to be maintained and pursued.
THat we may discover the lawfulness of the matter of this Covenant, we must
observe, that in respect thereof it is partly Assertory, and partly Promissory.

Assertory in the Preface of it, viz. We Noblemen, Barons, The Assertory part
of the Covenant.
Knights, Gentlemen, Citizens, Burgesses, Ministers of the Gospel, and Commons
of all sorts, in the Kingdoms of England Scotland, and Ireland; by the
providence of God, living under one King, and being of one reformed Religion,
having before our eyes the glory of God, and advancement of the Kingdom of our
Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, the honor and happiness of the Kings Majesty,
and His Posterity, and the true public Liberty, Safety, and Peace of the
Kingdoms, wherein every ones private condition is included; and calling to mind
the treacherous plots, conspiracies, attempts, and practices of the enemies of
God against the true religion, and professors thereof in all places, especially
in these three Kingdoms ever since the reformation, and how much their rage,
power, and presumption are of late, and at this time, increased and exercised;
whereof the deplorable estate of the Church and Kingdom of Ireland, the
distressed estate of the Church and Kingdom of England, and the dangerous
estate of the Church and Kingdom of Scotland, are present and public
testimonies: We have now at last (after other means of Supplication,
Remonstrance, Protestation, and Sufferings) for preservation of our selves and
our Religion from utter ruin and destruction, according to the commendable
practice of these Kingdoms in former times, and the example of the people of
God in other Nations, after mature deliberation, resolved and determined to
enter into a mutual and Solemn League and Covenant, wherein we all subscribe,
and each one of us for himself, with our hands lifted up to the most High God,
do swear.

Though this Preface may seem and be said to be no part of the Covenant, yet it
being a Solemn profession of the grounds and reasons on which the Covenant was
made, and was declared in the very Act of swearing the Covenant, by all that
swore it, we shall own it as a part thereof.

The Covenant is further assertory in the Conclusion, (viz.) And because these
Kingdoms are guilty of many sins and provocations against God and His Son
Jesus Christ, as it is manifest by our present distresses and dangers, the
fruits thereof. We profess and declare before God and the world, our unfeigned
desire to be humbled for our own sin, and for the sins of these Kingdoms,
especially that we have not as we ought valued the inestimable benefit of the
Gospel, that we have not labored for the purity and power thereof; and that we
have not endeavored to receive Christ in our hearts, and to walk worthy of Him
in our lives, which are the causes of other sins and transgressions so much
abounding among us. And our true and unfeigned purpose, desire, and endeavor
for our selves, and all others under our power and charge, both in public and
in private, in all duties we owe to God and man, to amend our lives; and each
one to go before another in a real Reformation, that the Lord may turn away His
wrath and heavy indignation, and establish these Churches and Kingdoms in truth
and peace. And this Covenant we make in the presence of Almighty God the
searcher of all hearts, with a true intention to perform the same, as we shall
answer at the great day, when the secrets of all hearts shall be disclosed.
Most humbly beseeching the Lord to strengthen us by His Holy Spirit for this
end, and to bless our desires and proceedings with such success, as may be
deliverance and safety to his people, and encouragement to other Christian
Churches, groaning under, or in danger of the Yoke of Antichristian tyranny,
to join in the same or like Association and Covenant, to the glory of God, and
enlargement of the Kingdom of Jesus Christ, and the peace and tranquillity of
Christian Kingdoms and Commonwealths.

The Covenant is promissory in the six Articles thereof.

Concerning the assertory part of the Covenant it must be noted, That although
it should have been unlawful, because untrue in the grounds or reasons
pretendedly inducing to it, and so hypocritical and fallacious in the humility,
zeal, and resolution in the Conclusion protested; whereby the takers in
deceiving others may have deceived their own souls, and bound themselves under
a certain expectation of the wrath of that God of truth and jealousy, who has
been called as a Witness of such wickedness: Falsehood in the Preface bars not
the obligation of the promise.
Yet this fallacy will not discharge the obligation of the Covenant: For an
Oath binds according to expression, not the takers reserved intention: And
therefore Grotius tells us, That if a man in his assertory Oath do (...),
swear falsely, this will be no warrant for his (...), for not performing what he
promised; and concludes, Siquis volens jurare obligare se noluerit, non eo
minus obligatur. None but Jesuits will say that a man swearing, Grotius de
jure belli and pacis. l. 2. p. 218.
and in the act purposing not to bind his soul, (and thereof make a secret
appeal to God) is free, and not bound by his Oath: For this is expressly against
the nature of an Oath, whose obligation is inseparable from its Act. Saunders.
de Iuramento lec. 5. p. 160.
And therefore the same Author says, Siquis deliberato protulerit verba
jurantia, animo tamen non jurandi obligatur. And this is no other than Oxford
Divinity, Siquis ex aliqua dolosa intention velit putari jurasse, habebit apud
ipsum omnem obligandi effectum; a man is bound by the action of swearing even
beyond and contrary to his own intention. And this is evident in Joshua and his
Oath with the Gibeonites, obtained by fraud, and founded in falsehood, against
which they had entered an express Caveat, it being far from his intention to
make a League with a Canaanite; yet he and all Israel were bound by it, as in
the former Proposition it has been cleared.

But why do I stand to establish the obligation of the promissory part of the
Covenant, against the falsehood of the assertory part of it, whilst no such
falsehood appears? As for the Conclusive protest, it lies out of human
cognizance, and is only obvious to the Searcher of hearts: And to me he must
be strangely blinded by passion or prejudice, that sees, and subscribeth not
to every part of the Preface as true; yet some there are, who, (though they
could not speak out) are willing to suggest a lie chargeable on the same; and
therefore the Covenant must be in this point vindicated against their
exceptions, pretended doubts and scruples urged against the taking of the
Covenant: Give me leave a little to weigh them.

The first I shall take notice of, The Assertory part of the Covenant
vindicated.
is, the Anonymus Doubts and Scruples recommended to the world by Dr. Gauden,
and offered Sir, to your and my consideration; and his Quarrel (I should say
Scruple) is against the Title of the Covenant, which is certainly no part of
it; which he thus frames.

I have not met with any Declaration to assure us, Exception of Doubts and
Scruples.
that Commissioners of each Kingdom respectively, and especially of Ireland,
have been chosen and assembled together, had power, or did agree upon this
League and Covenant; without which, or some such equivalent proceedings, we
cannot possibly know that it was the joint consent, resolution, and desires of
the three Kingdoms to enter into such a League, etc.

Scruples, he sure was of a very tender conscience, that must be satisfied in
the very Title and Denomination of the Covenant, and cannot do his own duty, or
a just act, enjoined him by the Superiors of the Kingdom, of which he is a
member and subject, until he be assured that all to whom it may extend do
desire and consent thereunto.

2. There might be such a declaration though he met not with it. Must private
persons suspend required duties, until they meet with Declarations of the
regular agitation of State affairs? Must all the arcana imperii which relate to
other Kingdoms, be opened before the Subject give his faith to keep the
conditions concluded by their Governors?

3. Did he meet with any Declaration which told him, Ireland was in a general
Rebellion against the Crown of England, to which it had been subjugated, and
was wholly dependent on the English interest for its rescue and reduction? And
must England stay its Covenant till Irelands Rebels send Commissioners and
consent? Or, may they not without their consent covenant for the good of their
vassal Kingdom, which they must again recover by force?

4. But the Title of the Covenant gives no ground for this Doubt; for though it
be entitled, A Covenant for the peace and safety of the three Kingdoms of
England, Scotland, and Ireland, yet is it not entitled, A Solemn League and
Covenant of the three Kingdoms? And I hope they may be the Objects, who are not
Authors or Abettors of an Oath: And if they be offended for our intention and
endeavors of good to them, let them bear it; Charity will not always stay for
the consent or desire of its object.

His next scruple is like unto this, occasioned by those words, Second
exception out of Doubts and Scruples.
Of one Religion, which he doubts the Irish Papists, open Rebels, against whom
it was made, and Popish party in England, and Independents may not be of one
Religion; yet by the seventh Instruction it is to be proffered to all
inhabitants.

proffered to the Irish Papists.

2. Because proffered, is it therefore taken? The words are professed by them
that take the Covenant; may it not be a test and note of discrimination for
discovery of the Popish party, which lay lurking among us, and none as Papists;
or indeed as Independents could take the Covenant?

3. May not the majority denominate the whole? The Protestant Religion is the
only one Religion owned and professed in these Nations; nor does he deny the
Independents to be professors of it.

Sir, must not Dr. Gauden commend his discretion in commending to the world
such perplexing Scruples as have not a Scruple of Reason in them? and shall not
I appear as wise to spend time to consider them (if of weight) after the
Covenant has been taken? but he affirms them as agreeable to the
Oxford-Reasons, which is a just Chius ad Choum, Harp and Harrow; yet hereby he
puts us on the consideration of them which have passed thus long unanswered,
partly for the dread of their name, no private person being a fit Antagonist,
or proper Casuist to sesolve the Doubts of an University; and partly for that
they were presented Apologetically, as private grounds of dissatisfaction, and
for excuse from the Act required, not as interdictions or condemnation of other
men's Act, as themselves profess; much less as Arguments for absolution from the
bond of the Covenant, now it has bin generally taken by Prince and People; to
which end they are now reprinted, and by every foolish Pamphlet are anew
urged; and therefore necessitate the consideration of their weight, which (I
confess) I, in reference to their name, was willing to decline, but by the
worth of truth, and weight of the Oath of God upon our Land, am (though a
private, obscure, and unfit person) constrained thereunto.

Subsectio secunda.
Their exceptions to the Preface of the Covenant makes no positive charge, yet
suggesteth sundry falsehoods therein asserted, which they witness they could not
acknowledge: As,

First, 1 Exception by Oxford Reason.
They were not able to say, that the rage, power and presumption of the enemies
of God (in the sense there intended) is at this time increased.

To which, Sir, I should have then answered,

1. Their ability to say it is of little moment, nor could we well judge it:
for whether they were under any natural, wilful, violent, or judicial
incapacity, is not our part to determine: Others were able to say it: and if
these reverend Fathers and Students did know it, though they were not able to
say it, it was for us sufficient. And therefore may I be bold further to enquire

2. Whether they were able to read the whole Sentence expressing the sense (Of
the enemies of God, whose rage, power, and presumption was at this time
increased) here intended: and calling to mind the treacherous and bloody plots,
conspiracies, attempts, and practices of the enemies of God, against the true
Religion, and Professors thereof in all places, especially in these three
Kingdoms, ever sinte the Reformation of Religion, and how much their rage,
power, and presumption are of late, and at this time increased: whereof the
deplorable estate of the Church and Kingdom of Ireland, the distressed estate
of the Church and Kingdom of England, and the dangerous estate of the Church
and Kingdom of Scotland, are present and public testimonies. Are not these
full expressions of the sense in which the enemies of God, whose ra^^ power,
and presumption were increased, are to be understood? And is it rational or
religious to enquire after, and suspend a duty on jealousy of a sense
intended, when we have the sense plainly expressed? Is not this repugnant to
the end of Speech (the Interpreter of the mind?

3. Were the Masters, Scholars, and other Members and Officers of the
University of Oxford, such strangers in the Protestant Israel, as not to know
the Papists, and Popishly affected, were enemies of God, against true Religion,
and the Professors thereof in all places? Or so unacquainted at home, as not to
know their plots, conspiracies, attempts, and practices, were especially
against these three Kingdoms, (the most public and potent professors of true
Religion) ever since the Reformation? Had they no notion of the Rebellions
against King Edward the sixth? Of the Treasons, Plots, Conspiracies, Roaring
Bulls, and Raging Spanish Armado against Queen Elizabeth? Of the
Gunpowder-Treason and other plots against King James? Of the College of
Propagators of the Catholic cause erected in Rome, under the Government of
Cardinal Barbarin, and designed against these Kingdoms? Or of the grand Plot
agitated by Con, or Cuneus, the Popes Nuncio in England, discovered by Andreas
ab Habernefield, first to Sir William Boswel His Majesty's Resident in
Flanders, and by him unto Laud late Archbishop of Canterbury, and since fully
cleared and laid open by Mr. William Prynn in his Romes Masterpiece, published
in 1643. four years before their reasons, and might have been profitable to
their eyesight?

4. Did not this learned University judge it to be an high increase of their
Rage, Power, and Presumption, to distribute their Jesuits into such several
Orders, as should be capable in any place or profession to propagate their
plots? To press upon the late King and Archbishop for a public profession of
union with Rome? To boast openly of Englands returning to Popery? To tender a
Cardinals Hat to the late Archbishop? To poison our Fountains the Universities,
and our very people with Arminian and Popish doctrines publicly preached and
printed, and Popish pictures publicly sold, and bound up with our Testaments
and Bibles? To provoke the High Commission cruelties, and Puritans discontents?
To plot a plain Popish Service Book (with very little variation o^ from the
Mass Book) and procure it to be by force and violence imposed on the Church and
Kingdom of Scotland, to the raising Mutinies, and stirring up the Bellum
Episcopale, with pretense to yoke them, and intention to destroy the King and
Protestant cause? To rebel openly in Ireland, and with rage and cruelty to
murder and massacre the Protestants? To divide between King and Parliament in
England, and possess themselves of his Majesty's Garrisons and Armies, as under
their command? To abet, advise, and effect the most barbarous murder of his
late Majesty, and our since confusions? All which, and many the like, to have
been the achievements and accomplishments of these enemies of God to true
Religion. He that is in any measure observant of our affairs, can run and read.
And are not these expressions of rage, power, and presumption? let right reason
judge.

2. Oxford Reasons, second exception.
They cannot truly affirm, that they had used or given consent to any
supplication or remonstrance to the purposes therein expressed.

To this, Sir, consider,

That although they cannot affirm it, yet others can do it in truth, and with
joy.

2. What are the purposes therein expressed? (not as before intended) shall we
judge it from the Preface? It is the glory of God, and the advancement of the
Kingdom of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, the honor and happiness of the
Kings Majesty, and His Posterity, the public liberty, peace, and safety of the
Kingdoms, wherein every ones private condition is included. For the End is the
Argument which is urged to enforce the constancy to the Covenant; and in
Article the sixth it is expressed to be the glory of God, good of the Kingdoms,
and the honor of the King; and these are the only purposes expressed in these
particular acts propounded for the production of them, and shall we be so
uncharitable, as to think the Gentlemen of Oxford to have been so void of piety
toward God, love to their Country, or loyalty toward their King, as not to
have used or given consent to Supplication or Remonstrance to these purposes
therein expressed? Must we think them so speechless, as not to pray to God, nor
speak to men for the effecting of these purposes expressed? No! I will rather
presume them modest, and not willing to publish their piety and zeal to good
purposes: or passionately prejudiced against some one expedient propounded to
the effecting of these purposes expressed, and thereby acted to confound the
purpose and pursuing means: But,

3. Had not the University of Oxford Representees in Parliament? If they did
not sit, were they violently excluded? Or, did they give their No to the
Supplications or Remonstrances to the purposes expressed in the Covenant? and
if they did, were not these Supplications and Remonstrances carried by the
Majority of Votes? And is not the Negative so swallowed therein, that all
persons and bodies corporate through the Nation, did thereunto consent? When we
find Oxford excepted, we will say they could not truly affirm, they gave
consent.

But 3dly, Oxford Reasons third exception
they did not conceive the entering into such a League and Covenant, to be a
lawful, proper, and probable means to preserve our selves and our Religion from
ruin and destruction.

To this, Sir, we must enquire into the conceit of these Gentlemen, and desire
to know whether it relate unto the quality of the Covenant, or the act of
Covenanting? The particle Such, seems to carry it to the quality of the
Covenant, in respect of the matter covenanted; which afterward is particularly
and in its proper place excepted against: But the words of the Covenant
suggested by this exception to be false, do relate unto the act of covenanting,
as we have now at last for the preservation of our Religion, determined to
enter into a (not such a) mutual and Solemn League and Covenant: And the place
of this exception is in the beginning of their exceptions unto the Preface,
which may be said to be no part of the Covenant, and therefore admits not an
exception to the quality of such a Covenant: Moreover the next exception puts
it out of doubt, that these words relate to the act of Covenanting, in which
they profess they find not in our Histories any footsteps of a sworn Covenant
on any occasion whatsoever. So that it seems to be the Act of covenanting by
Oath, which they cannot conceive to be a lawful, proper, and probable means to
preserve Religion from ruin: Surely then Sir, the weather was very misty about
Oxford, and made their minds very muddy, that they could not conceive entering
into Covenants, and Solemn Leagues, dictated by the light of nature, and
directed by the Law of God, pursued and practiced by all Nations, (and by
Israel in the cases of their Religion,) as the utmost of humane policy, and
highest of security to their privileges endangered, as a method detecting
concealed enmity, debarring fraud, expressing affection, engaging conscience,
and animating resolution, to be a lawful, proper, and probable means of
security. If it be good and safe as to our Civil, I hope it is no less probable
in our Religious concernments. If Sir, I had been to deal with one single
student, I must have told him, That he started this exception more like a
Sophistical Disputant, than a conscientious Dubitant.

Fourthly, They could not believe the entering into this Covenant to be
according to the commendable practice of these Kingdoms, 4th Exception in the
Oxford Reasons.
or the example of Gods people in other Nations: for that they found not the
least footstep in our Histories of a sworn Covenant ever entered into by the
people of this Kingdom upon any occasion whatsoever; nor could they readily
remember any commendable example of the like done in any other Nation, but are
rather told by the Defenders of the Covenant, that the world never saw the like
before.

Whither Sir, Oxford, so much unacquainted with Histories, as neither to find
in our own, or other Histories, a commendable example of Entering into Covenant:
I may not mind them of the Covenant made by the Nobles and people of Scotland
among themselves, and with Queen Elizabeth of England, under and against the
Papal might, executed by the then Queen Regent; nor of the Netherlands
confederacy and Covenant: These will not seem commendable in their sight now,
though so judged when England became their protection, and encouraged, nay,
defended them in them.

Let me therefore enquire whether they knew Israel to have been Gods people of
another Nation, and that they entered into Covenant in the time of the Judges,
in the days of Joash, Josiah, Hezekiak, and Nehemiah, in times of danger and
defection in their Civil and Religious concernments; And was their practice
commendable?

2. Did our Gentlemen of Oxford never find any footsteps in our Histories
concerning the Barons of Stamford, Anno 1225. assembled not only without, but
against the Kings consent, and covenanted each with other to demand the
restitution of their Liberties; whereupon a Parliament was holden at
Northampton to give them satisfaction? And again, did they never find in our
Histories, how in Anno 1258. they Assembled at Oxford, agreed on Articles, viz.
The confirmation of the Charter de Foresta. 2. The establishing of a Lord Chief
Justice, who might judge them by Law. 3. The driving Aliens and Strangers out
of England, and the like; and that they confederated by Oath, and gave their
hands and mutual faith one to the other, Matthew. Paris Hist. Aug. p. 940, 941,
952, 653.
that they would not desist to prosecute their purpose for loss of money or
Lands, nor love, nor hate, no nor yet for life of them, or theirs, till they
had cleared England of Strangers, and procured laudable Laws: And under this
Covenant they brought the Kings Brother, Richard King of Romans, and Earl of
Cornwall, and caused him to swear upon the Holy Gospels this formal Covenant:

Hear all men that I Richard Earl of Cornwall, swear upon the Holy Gosples, to
be faithful and forward with you, to Reform the Kingdom of England, hitherto
by the counsel of wicked men so much deformed; and I will be an effectual
coadjutor, to expel the Rebels and troublers out of the same: Both these our
Histories say, were in the time, and without the consent of King Henry the 3d.
Not to trouble our Reader with the like in the time of King John, King Richard
the 2d, and other Princes; I must desire the Gentlemen of Oxford to tell us,
whether these were not people of England? and these be not visible footmarks of
some Covenant of the people of England on some occasion? And if they shall
question whether they be commendable examples, let them please to observe the
commendable Epethite our Historian gives upon the last of these Covenanters,
calling them Angliae Republicae Zelatores: But, the defenders of the Covenant
told them, that the world never saw the like before: I but, they did not tell
them, that there are no footsteps of any Covenant made on any occasion
whatsoever: And if they had, were the Masters and Students in Oxford resolved
into such an implicit Faith, as to believe an Enemy? But I wonder these
Masters of Reason had so little Reason, as to conclude a general, from the
concession of a special: Their Margent explaineth the concession of the
defenders of the Covenant in these terms, Such an Oath for matter, persons,
and other circumstances, the like has not been in any Age or Oath we read of
in Sacred or humane Stories. Know they not that there is a vast difference
between the general form of an Oath or Covenant, and those special
Qualifications which may circumstance it? and that a dissimilitude in the last,
will not conclude that there never was a Sworn Covenant on any occasion? but
sit verbum sat sapienti.

Thus Sir, notwithstanding these learned Suggestions of the falsehood of the
Preface, and in it of the assertory part of the Covenant, it yet continues
lawful, because true; and is our encouragement and assurance, that the
promissory part will be answerable: For as in rational conclusions, so I hope
in Religious resolutions we shall find a veris vera sequuntur.

Subsectio Tertia.
The promissory part of the Covenant, is in these six Articles.

I.
THat we shall sincerely, Containing exceptions to the first Article of the
Covenant.
really, and constantly, through the Grace of God, endeavor in our several
places and callings, the preservation of the Reformed Religion in the Church of
Scotland, in Doctrine, Worship, Discipline and Government, against our common
Enemies; The Reformation of Religion in the Kingdoms of England and Ireland in
Doctrine, Worship, Discipline and Government, according to the Word of God, and
the example of the best reformed Churches: And shall endeavor to bring the
Churches of God in the three Kingdoms, to the nearest conjunction and
uniformity in Religion Confession of Faith, Form of Church Government,
Directory for Worship and Catechizing; That we and our posterity after us, may
as Brethren live in Faith and Love, and the Lord may delight to dwell in the
midst of us.

II.
That we shall in like manner, without respect of persons, endeavor the
extirpation of Popery, Prelacy (that is, Church Government by Archbishops,
Bishops, their Chancellors and Commissaries, Deans, Deans and Chapters,
Archdeacons, and all other Ecclesiastical Officers depending on that Hierarchy)
Superstition, Heresy, Schism, Profaneness, and whatsoever shall be found to
be contrary to sound Doctrine, and the power of Godliness; lest we partake in
other men's sins, and thereby be in danger to receive of their plagues, and that
the Lord may be one, and his Name one in the three Kingdoms.

III.
We shall with the same sincerity, reallity and constancy, in our several
Vocations, endeavor with our estates and lives, mutually to preserve the Rights
and Privileges of the Parliaments, and the Liberties of the Kingdoms, and to
preserve and defend the Kings Majesty's person and authority (in the
preservation and defense of the true Religion, and Liberties of the Kingdoms)
that the world may bear witness with our Consciences of our Loyalty, and that
we have no thoughts or intentions to diminish His Majesty's just power and
greatness.

IV.
We shall also with all faithfulness endeavrr the discovery of all such as have
been, or shall be Incendiaries, Malignants, or evil Instruments, by hindering
the Reformation of Religion, dividing the King from His people; or one of the
Kingdoms from another, or making any faction or parties amongst the people,
contrary to this League and Covenant, that they may be brought to public
trial, and receive condign punishment; as the degree of their offenses shall
require or deserve, or the supreme Judicatories of both Kingdoms respectively,
or others having power from them for that effect, shall judge convenient.

V.
And whereas the happiness of a blessed Peace between these Kingdoms, denied in
former times to our progenitors, is by the good providence of God granted unto
us, and has been lately concluded and settled by both Parliaments: we shall
each one of us, according to our place and interest, endeavor that they may
remain conjoined in a firm Peace and Union to all posterity: And that Justice
may be done upon the wilful opposers thereof, in manner expressed in the
precedent Articles.

VI.
We shall also according to our places and callings in this common cause of
Religion, Liberty and Peace of the Kingdom, assist and defend all those that
enter into this League and Covenant, in the maintaining and pursuing thereof,
and shall not suffer our selves directly or indirectly by whatsoever
combination, persuasion or terror, to be divided and withdrawn from this
blessed Union and Conjunction, whether to make defection to the contrary part,
or to give our selves to a detestable indifferency or neutrality in this cause,
which so much concerns the glory of God, the good of the Kingdoms, and the
honor of the King; but shall all the days of our lives zealously and
constantly continue therein, against all lets and impediments whatsoever; and
what we are not able our selves to suppress or overcome, we shall reveal, and
make known, that it may be timely prevented or removed; All which we shall do
as in the sight of God.

When I consider the matter of these several promises to have been propounded
by a Parliament, on advice had with an Assembly of Grave, Learned, and
Judicions Divines, who were to discover sin, and make men to discern between
good and evil; I cannot but retain a strong conjecture, that it is all good and
lawful: And when I consider His late Majesty's dissatisfaction expressed in His
Contemplations, to be more in respect of the manner than the matter, my
conjecture is much confirmed: And when I observe His most Sacred Majesty at His
late Coronation, to have by Solemn Oath testified His allowance and approbation
of the Solemn League and Covenant; and by His Royal Declaration from
Dumfirmling, to have professed, That on mature deliberation, and being fully
satisfied of the lawfulness and equity of the Solemn League and Covenant, and
every the Articles thereof, Himself had sworn it; and conjureth all his
Subjects to lay aside their opposition to it. Loyalty leads my conjecture unto
a conclusion: For such serious scrutiny by so sage and conscientious persons,
and that under the afflicting hand of that God (who will not be mocked) could
not but have described the sinfulness of the matter if it be found: But when I
weigh the particulars promised, and find them to be the Preservation of
Religion, and Reformation wherein it is corrupted, and removal of what is
thereunto obstructive, as to the religious part of it, and the preservation of
the Kings Prerogative, and peoples liberty, and Nations unity, and removal of
the enemies thereof, as to the civil part of it; my conclusion is established;
and I find it so far from unlawful, that it binds us not to any thing, which
in the nature of it, is not on us a positive duty, though not bound by this
most Sacred Bond; and so far is this Covenant from a repugnancie to our
baptismal Covenant, as our Dr. has suggested in his Page 12.
Analysis; that as I have in my Page 22.
Analepsis, noted, It is no hard matter to resolve it into the three heads of
our baptismal promise taught by our Church: For, if I must believe the Articles
of the Creed, I must preserve sound Doctrine, and reform to my power what is
corrupt: If I must keep Gods Commandments, I must pursue pure worship, and
Religion toward God; and Loyalty, Love, and unity toward men: And if I must
renounce the Devil and all his works, I must extirpate Popery, and Papal
Prelacy, Superstition, Heresy, Schism, will all incendiaries, and evil
instruments, hinderers of Reformation. And now I shall pray Dr. Gauden will
show us wherein this Covenant is so vastly different from the Covenant made in
Baptism; Yet I shall consider once more the matter of the Covenant by those
Rules which resolve the matter of an Oath unlawful; and if it be therein
chargeable, I shall consent to the discharge of this Holy Bond.

An Oath is (in reference to the matter of it) determined unlawful, when it is
unnecessary, and about trifles; and that is the profaning of an Oath; yet,
will abide a question, whether it do not bind?

But I presume, none will be so childish, as to say or think the Purity of
Religion, Honor and Authority of the King, Privileges of Parliament, Liberty
of the Subject, and Unity of the Kingdom, are trifles; than which, no matters
can be more weighty and needful to us, as men or Christians: Nor is it of any
force to say, These were secured by Laws and Profession of a lawful and
Religious King; whilst these did not expel the spirit of jealousy, the matter
was of that weight, as to render an Oath and Covenant necessary.

Secondly, An Oath is unlawful when the matter of it is impossible; for ad
impossible Nemo teneatur; whether the impossibility be in the nature of the
thing, or action conversant about it; but our Solemn League and Covenant is
free from any appearance of impossibility in the nature of the things
covenanted: I hope the Reformation of Religion, and preservation of humane
order, peace, and unity, will be owned as possibilities beyond the Learning of
an Ass: Scruples and Doubts about taking the Covenant. p. 7. 8.
Very little ground is there for that Scruple which is urged by our Drs.
Anonymous friend, That Extirpation is the immediate work of God in the heart;
as if it were no way a humane Act within men's power, in reference to the
exercise and profession a principle or practice in the Kingdom.

Nor is there any impossibility chargeable on the Act, which is all along
limited unto an endeavor according to our several places and callings: which
might methinks have satisfied the same Questionists; that, though Banishment or
Death be extirpating Acts, yet they might be out of his place and calling, and
other Acts did to him particularly belong.

Let it here be noted, that though the Law were (as some suppose) against
something sworn in this Covenant, yet this puts not a moral impossibility upon
the same; for that a National Oath is the most full and authentic Repeal and
discharge of former Laws, or the thing sworn may be effected by a meek and
humble endeavor in our places and callings, to have that Law voided, and
repealed.

And as to what impossibility did seem to lie upon the extirpation of some
things in this Covenant sworn to be extirpated by reason of the Coronation Oath
of His late conscientious Majesty, it was greater in appearance than in
reality: For, the Oath of a Prince may be vacated by the impossibility put on
it by the contrary Oath of the people, though tumultuously sworn, as it was in
the rescue of Jonathan from King Saul's Oath: 1 Samuel 14.46.
I justify not, nay, I pray God prevent the insurrection of the natural
against the political power; but I cannot but take notice that God sometimes
suffers it, and produces his own will by it: as in this case, and in the
casting off Samuel, and changing the government; and amongst us (Horresco
referens,) in suffering the madness of the people to prevail against His late
Majesty, not only to the contradiction of His Oath, but cutting off His Royal
person, and so clearing the impossibility that did appear between this
Covenant, and his Coronation Oath: and in bringing His Majesty that now is,
under the same Sacred Bonds, to endeavor in His Royal place and calling to
effect the same things: And in this case it is to be remembered, that the
impossibility being removed, the Oaih becomes obliging, and the act sworn, a
duty.

Let such as pretend an impossibility on any part of the Covenant, because of
the prevalency of men, affection of the people, countenance of Authority, and
the like, learn to distinguish between the effect and endeavor; there may be
an impossibility of effect, and yet impossibility of endeavor; and D.
Saunderson concludes, that the thing once sworn, the covenanter must endeavor
to make the affect possible: Indeed we have in the Covenant sworn with very
much Caution, not to effect, but in our places and balling to endeavor; but
this must not be by a wish for purity; and then welcome corruption; a consent
to Reformation, and then compliance in Superstition; a faint refusal, and then
free reception of the estate to be extirpated: No, it must be a stout and
strenuous endeavor with all force and fervor, as Dr. Saunderson in this case
well notes; Obligat hoc genus Juramenti non ad effectum, quem supponimus esse
impossibilem; Saunderson de Juram. praelect. 3. Sect. 4. p. 64.
sed ad conatam quamdiu superat spes ulla; Imo quo plures, and majores
objiciuntur difficultates, eo obnixius conondum and for tioribus animis
obnitendam. I wish, Sir, that our soft Covenanters, Speedy compliants, and
Temporizing Turn-Coats, would seriously study this lesson.

Thirdly, An Oath is in respect of the matter unlawful, when it is impious, and
expressly against Gods Word and Command; being so in it self, and nature of the
thing; and then the Rule must be admitted; Pacta quae turpem causam continent
non sunt observanda; And Oath must be the Bond of iniquity.

Here Sir, be pleased to observe, that though I could not consant to the Drs.
opposition of Truth, Justice, Reason, Religion, and duty to God or man, as
Iron, Adamantine bonds unto the weak Withs and Cords of an Oath, which is
directly contrary to the nature thereof; yet I acknowledge in them such power
as no Oath can bind against: If he or any will assume and make good the
assumption, That the matter of the Covenant is of its self and own nature
contrary to Truth, Justice, Reason, Religion, or duty to God and man; I will
admit the sequel, and conclude it does not oblige: But I have yet found none
that have herein charged it; some indeed oppose to some part of the Covenant,
an Apostolical tradition, but no divine institution or direction to any part
thereof.

The unlawfulness which I find charged on the matter of the Covenant, is
usually accidental in some circumstances conversant about the Act, more than
the matter sw rne, and has been produced as a just bar to the taking of the
Covenant, but is in vain now produced to break its bonds laid upon us, as I
have before noted. I easily grant that the Oath which is not sworn in truth,
in Justice, and in judgment, is very profanely sworn; yet affirm, it may be
strongly binding; and so hereupon I might discharge this Section as running
into the former; but because simple men seem startled by that unlawfulness of
matter in the Covenant: which is suggested in the Oxford Reasons, for their
non-confederacy with the rest of the Nation, and do commonly produce them as
the present only plea, to discharge the Oath of God; I shall make bold to weigh
the same, and see what more strength is in their Scruples as to the matter
promised, than was in reference to the matter asserted; and whether an
intelligent Casuist would not have easily resolved their doubts, and enlarged
their consciences.

Subsectio quarta.
The Master, Scholars, and other Officers and Members of the University of
Oxford, in their Apology for not taking the Covenant, urge their Reasons
against the same as unlawful not, in the matter it self simply considered, but
by accident, in respect of some circumstances attending themselves; and
discapacitating them unto the Act, and they offer their exceptions unto the
Articles severally and distinctly.

Unto the first Article they except against the Preservation of the Reformed
Religion of the Church of Scotland in Doctrine, Oxford Reasons Sect. 3. page 4.
and Worship. Discipline, and Government; and then against the Reformation of
England in those particulars.

Unto the first they tell us, 1 Except.
They are not satisfied how they can in judgment swear to endeavor to preserve
the Religion of another Kingdom.

To which I answer in General, it is but reason they suspend the Act until
they can swear in judgment; though such as have rashly in ignorance profaned
the Oath by swearing it, must in sense of its Sacred Obligation inform their
judgments, that they may perform it, and not cast it off: but what hinders
their judgment in this required Act?

They urge four obstructive reasons: As

First, As it did not conc rn them to have very much, 1 Reason of this
exception.
so they profess they had very little understanding thereof.

In which reason it is to be noted,

1. They had some understanding of the Doctrine, Worship, Discipline, and
Government of the Church of Scotland; and that little might so far enlighten
their judgment, as lawfully to swear the preservation thereof: I presume many
Citizens have little and but general notion of the Liberties they swear to
preserve, yet are judged to swear in judgment.

2. I wonder an University, and Protestant University, conversing in all Books,
(and I must imagine) meeting with the two Books of the Discipline of the Church
of Scotland, their Confession of Faith, and Form of Worship. entertaining
Schoolmen and Bishops, thence fled, by reason of the same; and openly oppugning
and disputing against the same, should profess they had thereof little
understanding; but it may be they minded not to study these things.

3. Some understanding in the Religion of another Kingdom was necessary to them
as Christians and Protestants, by virtue of the Communion of the Church; and
some as an University, and Protestant School of Learning, where the true
Religion of the Reformed Churches was to be defended, duobts dissolved, and
errors oppugned and contradicted; and some was necessary, to them as Subjects,
required to swear the preservation thereof for the injunction could not but
provoke an enquiry after the matter to be preserved: I wonder therefore how
these men could profess it did not concern them to have much, who (if I mistake
not) ought to know as much as all the Nation besides: but from what they know,
they add the next Reason, (viz.)

In three of the four specified particulars; (viz.) Worship, 2 Reason of this
exception.
Discipline, and Government, it is much worse; and in the fourth, that of
Doctrine, not at all better than our own to be reformed.

I wonder Sir, what account of the Doctrine, Worship, Discipline, and
Government of the Church of Scotland was by the occurrences of those unhappy
times, brought unto the knowledge of the University of Oxford? I hope they were
more wise and just than to take it from Mr. John Maxwel, pretended Bishop of
Ross, (a man excommunicated by the Church, and censured by the State of that
Kingdom, a professed Enemy, and enraged Delinquent, cursing his very Judges)
whom I find about that time at Oxford, writing his Issachars Burden, (a most
railing, reproachful discovery of the Discipline of the Church of Scotland:)
and the rather, for that the heat of expectation and ostentation of many (in
reference to that book) was cooled by a providential fire which seized on the
Printing House, and burned the Copies ready to be published the next day, as
Mr. Baylie in his Vindication of the Government of that Church (which these
Gentlmen might have met with) does testify.

Yet Sir, had these men of reading regarded what more sober and impartial men
have said and written, they would have had another Character of this Church: I
may not mind them of the Apology to the Doctors of Oxford, in the time of King
James, preferring the Doctrine, Worship, Discipline, and Government of
Scotland, before that of England, or of their Philadelphian purity, Bright man
on Apocalypse. 3.
who did not only keep the Doctrine of Salvation pure and free from corruption,
but does also deliver it in writing, and exercise in practice that sincere
manner of government, whereby men are made pertakers of Salvation mentioned by
Mr. Brightman our Countreyman; they will possibly tell us, these were
Seperatists to whom Scotland is no friend) or Puritans: Yet methinks Magnum hoc
Dei munus quod una and religionem puram and (...) doctrinae, viz. retinendae
vinculum in Scotiam intulistis. Sic obsecro and obtesto haec duo simul rebinet,
ut uno amisso alterum diu permanere non posse semper memineritis Beza Epist. 79.
Beza may call for a little audience and respect from this Learned Assembly:
and he told us long since, This is the great gift of God, that you have brought
into Scotland together pure Religion, and good order, which is the bond to hold
fast the Doctrine; and I heartily pray and beseech you for Gods sake hold fast
these two together, and always remember, that if one be lost, the other cannot
long remain: And no less venerable, I presume, is the Corpus Confession, the
Harmony of Confessions of all the reformed Churches; and yet therein they have
an account of the Church of Scotland, which might render it more acceptable,
and worthy to be preserved. For thus it is reported by the Collector, who much
rejoiced in the providence that brought their Confession into his hand: Est
illud ecclesiae Scoticanae privilegium rarum prae multis, in quo etiam Nomen
apud exteros suit celebre, quod circiter aut nos plus minus 54. sine Schismate
nedum Haeresi, unitatem cum puritate doctrinae prevaverit and retinuerit; hujus
unitatis adminiculum ex Dei misericordia maximum fuit quod paulatim cum
doctrina, Christi and Apostolorum Disciplina sicut ex verbo Dei praescripta
est, una suit recepta, and quam proxime fieri potuit secundum eam totum
ecclesiae regimen fuit administratum. D^t Dominus Deus pro immensa sua bonitate
Regiae Majestati, omnibusque Ecclesiarum gubernatoribus, ut ex Dei verbo illam
unitatem and Doctrinae puritatem perpetuo conservat. Corpus Confess. p. 6.
It is the rare privilege of the Church of Scotlaod before many, in which
respect her name is famous even among strangers, that about the space of fifty
and four years without Schism, yea or Heresy, she has holden fast unity,
with purity of Doctrine; the greatest help of this unity by the mercy of God
was, that with the Doctrine, the Discipline of Christ and his Apostles, as it
is prescribed in the Word of God, was by little and little together received,
and according to that Discipline so near as might be, the whole government of
the Church was disposed; the Lord God of his infinite goodness grant unto the
Kings Majesty, and to all the Rulers of the Church, that according to the Word
of God they may perpetually keep that unity, and the purity of Doctrine.

Unto these might be added the testimony of Arundel, Hutton, and Matthews,
three English Archbishops, approving the order of the Church of Scotland; and
the joy of King James professed in the Assembly 1590. That He was born to be a
King of the sincerest Church in the world: All which might have brought to
their knowledge a better account: but they looked not so far back, but take
it up by occurrents of those unhappy times; in which I fear Scotland was not
more full of perplexities, than Oxford of passion and prejudice.

3. But in what particulars are the Doctrine, Worship Discipline, and
Government, much worse than that of England? They should specify these bad
things; for generalia non pungunt; I confess in a Notion of Philosophy, or
question in Divinity, the Say so of a University is of some Authority; but of
none in the case of an accusation which must be particularly charged and
plainly proved, if Englands Doctrine be doudtful and defective in respect of
its clearness and certainty, or sophisticated by the obtruded fancies and terms
of private men, as Mr. Prynn has plainly charged in his Epistle to the late
King, prefixed to his Quench-coal, and as the Ministers of sundry Counties in
their Reasons for Reformation have suggested; and Mr. Ham^lton in his modest
answer to Dr. Peirson, has clearly demonstrated, it will be found as much
better than the Doctrine of the Church of Sco land, as its Worship, Discipline,
and Government, is worse than that of England: And I hope, if the one be as
good; though nothing better than the other, there can be no great Scruple, to
swear to endeavor the preservation of it: 3 Reason of this exception referred
to the fifth Section of this Treatise 4th Reason of this exception.
But to proceed,

Their third Reason is a supposed contradiction in this first Article of the
Covenant. This shall be considered under another Head.

The fourth Reason why they could not swear the preservation of the Religion in
Scotland, is this, Wherein we already find some things, to our thinking,
tending toward Superstition and Schism, which call for Reformation.

Here Sir, they seem to specify what in the 2d reason they had suggested in
general terms: But let it be observed,

1. That they find not in the Church of Scotland any formal Superstition or
Schism, but at the most something tending toward them. I imagine many Oxford
Masters will not willingly admit a Reformation, or be denied a preservation of
many things apparently tending toward Popery, bua not Popery it self.

2. The things they find, do but to their thinking, tend toward Superstition
or Shisme; but they have no certainty of it; Must conjecture stand against the
Covenant and conclusions of others? Methinks Superstition and Schism should be
so well known to the Scholars of Oxford, that they might be able to conclude
what things tend thereunto.

3. What are the things they find in the Church of Scotland which tend (in
their thinking) to Superstition and Schism? They point us unto the Margin, and
there we find (viz.) in accounting Bishops Antichristian, and indifferent
Ceremonies unlawful; this they refer to Superstition: And (viz.) in making
their Discipline ad Government a mark of the true Church, and the setting up
thereof the erecting of the Throne of Jesus Christ; and this they refer to
Schism. Sure Sir, they were in a great strait, that made a shift to specify
these sad corruptions; but yet they do not tell us, where they find these laid
down as the Doctrines of the Church of Scotland; whether in their Confession,
or form of Discipline; Whilst in their Confession of Faith they give unto
general Assemblies authority about Ceremonies, Corpus Confessi. Conf. Scot.
Art. 20. p. 120, 121.
I cannot think they deem indifferent Ceremonies unlawful; nor do I find that
they (as England has done) do any where make their Discipline a part of their
faith; that so they might damn Bishops as Antichristian; I find indeed, Artic.
8. p. 118.
that they make Discipline rightly administered as is prescribed in the Word of
God, the note of a true Church; but they do not appropriate it to their
Discipline and Government, as these learned men would have us read it. I know
indeed, that the Scotch Divines do account English Bishops Antichristian, and
English, Popish Ceremonies unlawful; but they deny them to be indifferent; but
these are specials, and far from the generals charged on them; nor can these
specials be condemned in them, until Catherwoods Al^are Damascenum, and Mr.
Gillespies Dispute against the English-Popish Ceremonies, (which have passed
with much approbation through all the Reformed Churches, and I presume, missed
not Oxford) be fully answered.

4. But wherein lies the tendency of these principles to Superstition and
Schism, that these learned men think of? As to their nature they are negative
and exclusive; and I deem a denial of any of Gods appointments to be
profaneness not superstition. I am apt to think Superstition to be a positive
innovation and erection of some new matter and action into the worship of God
on man's mere will and invention, without Gods institution, I remember Mr. Blake
denies the baptizing of Bells, or the Horse in Huntingtonshire, to be
Superstition, and damns it as a profane misapplication of Gods Ordinance: How
then the exclusion, neglect, or profane esteem of Bishops and Ceremonies can
tend to Superstition, I confess I see not. Think you Sir, the Learned men of
Oxford did deem Bishops and indifferent Ceremonies to be such immediate
institutions and essential parts of Divine worship, that they think a profane
contempt of them might tend (by exclusion thereof,) to make way for some
innovation in their room; then I also will think they tend toward
Superstition, but must think they are not indifferent:

I wish Sir, they have not mistaken the Scotch notion of a true Church, Gent.
2da. c. 2. col. 109.
which is opposed as well to a corrupt, as falsely constituted Church; the
Magdeburgences do so oppose it in the very same case, Vera enim ecclesia, etc.
For, a true Church, as it retains pure Doctrine, so also it keep; simplicity of
Ceremonies; but an hypocritical Church for the most part, changes the
Ceremones instituted by God, and multiplieth to its own traditions. And Bishop
Halls Vere and vera Ecclesia, is no stranger at Oxford, and if then Scotland
(concluding her Government to be according to the Word of God) should say, De
specie, It is the sign of a true (that is, a pure) Church best Reformed,
because the erecting of the Throne of Christ, does it not tend more to provoke
Reformation of Churches truly constituted but not completed, than to stir up
Schism? For they do ot, nor ever did deny communion with Churches herein
defective, and under maladministration of Discipline and Government.

Subsectio quinta.
We see Sir, very little ground to stumble at the preservation of the Doctrine,
Worship, Discipline, and Government of the Church of Scotland; let us try the
strength of their exceptions against the endeavor of the Reformation of these
in the Kingdom of England: And to this they tell us,

They are not satisfied how they can swear to endeavor the Reformation of
Religion in Doctrine, Oxford exceptions to Reformation of England.
Worship, Discipline, and Government; which without making a change therein,
cannot be done. For this they urge three grounds or reasons, which seem to be
of weight.

The first whereof, 1 Reason for this exception.
is,

Without giving manifest scandal to the Papist and Seperatist, By

Yielding the cause, which our godly Bishops, and Martyrs, and all our learned
Divines (ever since the Reformation) have both by their Writings and
Sufferings, maintained; who have justified against them both the Religion
established in the Church of England, to be agreeable to the Word of God.

2. Justifying the Papists reproach and scorn We know not where to stay, what
is our Religion, and that it is a Parliamentary Religion.

3. A tacit acknowledgement, that there is something both in Doctrine and
Worship (whereunto their conformity has been required) not agreeable to the
Word of God, and so justifying the recusancy of the one, and separation of the
other.

4. An employed Confession that the laws and punishments of Papists for not
joining in that form of Worship, which our selves (as well as they) do not
approve of, were unjust.

A very fair and specious exception! To which, Sir, I say,

1. That it is well, Scandal is at length become an Argument of any force: Had
it been regarded when rightly pleaded by the Nonconformists (enemies to
separation, as well as Popery) there might not have been a Solemn League and
Covenant to constrain its plea in a case wherein (under correction) it seems to
have lost its force: For if, Sir, we have through ignorance practiced, or
wilfulness persisted in any sinful Superstitious course, concerning which we
have been admonished by some, and declined by others, and yet being armed with
power did constrain a compliance with us, so that a Recession from the same
must be our shame, and their scandal to whom we would not hearken; I hope we
must not, for fear thereof, go on in sin, and refuse so much as to endeavor a
Reformation: If in this case scandal had been of any force, how, or when had
Protestant Religion been effected by such who had burned for Heretics, all
that were but suspected of inclining to it? Were not the Papists then as much
and more scanda^ized as now? Is Scandal of any more force in the following
degrees of Reformation, than in the first act thereof? Though it is a stop to
sin, and stay of violence in imposing things indifferent, must it be of any
strength to bar duty in the endeavors of Reformation? I believe, Sir,
professors of Physic and Surgery, will not consent ill humors to go
unpurged, or festred, incurable members uncut off, because some will be
scandalized, that their advice was not sooner minded, and others at the past,
real, and now-seeming cruelty acted by the present change.

2. It is to me strange, to see Papists and Separatists conjoined as objects of
the same scandal: I am sure the reason and ground must be directly contrary;
Continuance of corruption to the one; and Removal thereof to the other; the
Separatist is offended that there were so many Popish Ceremonies retained, and
that so long, when by him too rigidly resisted: The Papist that there were so
few, and likely to be gone so soon: But I presume, they are supposed in aliquo
tertio convenire, to agree in some other capacity; The things are now to be
Reformed; for non-observance of which they were both afflicted; and then Sir,

3. The Scandal seems to be a mere fancy springing from a fallacy in these
words, The Religion established in the Church of England; which these serious
Casuists (with reverence may I note it) do to me seem sophistically to
understand in a sense different from the words of the Covenant, which are
these, The Reformation of Religion in the Kingdom of England in Doctrine,
Worship, Discipline, and Government.

It must therefore be observed, that Religion as it denotes the matter,
sabstantial parts, and essential form of divine Worship, is different from the
Circumstances, Ord r, and Ceremonies annexed thereunto, and only as appendants
thereof deemed Religious, which are conversant about, and separable from
Religion, liable to alteration as the prudence of men does direct; and none but
ignorant Idiots will deem the change of them a charge of Religion; for these
are different in the Reformed Churches, whom yet, (I hope) the Universitie of
Oxford will own to be of the same Protestant Religion with the Church of
England, agreeing in the same faith, though not subscribing the same formal
individual Articles; administering the same worship, though not in the same
order, and with the same Ceremonies.

Again Sir, we must distinguish between what is established, and what is
exercised in the Kingdom of England: Though we do not justify, nay, believe a
necessity of Reformation in many particulars in the Doctrine, Worship,
Discipline, and Government established; yet we know in all these particulars,
many gross and absurd corruptions brought in, and continued by a strong hand,
were exercised in the Kingdom of England; and that in reference to all these
particulars: 1. For Doctrine, as that auricular confession and penance was
necessary and profitable for Christian men, and in Christ's Church; That
Christians must have Altars, and bow to them as toward Gods mercy-seat, and
the place of Christ his real presence on earth: That Jesus Christ and his
passion are offered up as a Sacrifice in the Sacrament of the Altar: That
Crucifixes, Images, and Pictures of Christ, God, and Saints, may be lawfully
and profitably used and set up in Churches: That the Pope or Papacy is not
Antichrist: That there are Canonical hours of prayer which ought to be
observed: That Churches, Altars, Chalices, and Churchyards, ought to be
consecrated: That men had free will of themselves to believe and repent: That
men might totally and finally fall from grace: That Sunday is no Sabbath: That
Bishops have a Superiority of Order and Jurisdiction above other Ministers, and
that by Divine Right. Nor can there be a true Church, where there are not such
Bishops: These and many such like (it is well known) were publicly preached by
Mountague, Cozens, Pocklington, Shelford, Dowe, Reeves, Adams, and others, and
the Preachers defended even in the University from censure for them; nay, these
were Printed in several Books of the same Authors, licensed and allowed by the
Archbishop and his Chaplains, and many of them asserted in the visitation
Articles of some Bishops, and yet were not established in the Church of
England. As in Doctrine, so in worship, many corruptions were innovated and
exercised: As, Bowing at the Name of Jesus: The turning Communion-Tables into
Altars, or Altarwise, and Railing them in, furnishing them with Candlesticks
and Tapers: Tying the Gospel, the blessing, and other parts of the public
service to that place enclosed, and bowing to these Altars: The making
Crucifixes and Canopies, pictures of God, Christ, the Holy Ghost, Virgin Mary,
and other Saints in our Church-windows: Consecration of Churches, Fonts, Bells,
and the like: All which, and many such, were first innovated to the Chapel at
Lambeth, and ferried over to White Hall, and so transmitted to all Cathedral,
and almost all Parish Churches; and yet were not established by Law, though
enforced by the corruption of Discipline in the Visitation Articles of Bishop
Wren, Bishop Mountague, Bishop Peircy, Bishop Lindsey, and Bishop Skinner, and
others in their several Diocesses; and by the silencing, suspension,
excommunication, and imprisonment, and High Commission vexation of Mr. Chauncey
Vicar, and Mr. Parker, an Inhabitant of Ware, Mr. Burros of Colchester, and
many others: Nor was Government any more pure, if we consider how it was
exercised in the High Commission, and Star Chamber, with all rigor, cruelty,
and injustice; and in Visitations, Citations, Probate of Wills, Letters of
Administration and Excommunication in the name, and under the Seal of the
Bishops themselves, never authorized thereunto: All which were evidently
needful to be reformed, as having been so publicly exercised, and potently
defended, and might well enforce a covenanted endeavor to reform Religion in
the Kingdom of England.

I well know, Sir, that the change of Religion makes a great sound in the
world, especially if established: I cannot be insensible of the noise made by
it against our first Reformation, and must expect the Echo to follow all after
acts and degrees thereof, for all changes are scandalous, and many very
dangerous: If therefore these Masters and Scholars of Oxford could rationally
conceive the Covenant to bind them to endeavor a change of Religion in the
substance, matter, and essential parts and form thereof; then I must confess
their exception is very important; for we cannot deny that our Bishops,
Martyrs, and Learned Divines, have by Suffering and Writing testified it to
have been agreeable to the Word of God: And that to resolve that into the power
and pleasure of a Parliament (who may direct and authorize the profession, but
not prescribe the matter or form) were to make it a Parliamentary Religion; and
the change thereof must needs condemn our Laws, and the punishment of Papists
not joining with us as unjust, and so justify Papist and Separatist; the one
in his recusancy, and the other in his separation.

But, Sir, when I consider the Religion of Scotland to be preserved as the
concomitant and provocation, the Word of God to be the Rule; and the best
reformed Churches (professing the same substantial Religion, though differing
in administration and order) propounded as the pattern; I see not how right
reason can render any such sense of it; and the rather, for that Reformation,
not alteration of Religion, is the formal act which presupposes the
continuation of the subject about which it is conversant.

But, Sir, if they (as they needs must) by Religion understand the order and
annexed Ceremonies appendant to Religion, whether established, as was the Cross
in Baptism, holiness of days, and order of the Liturgy, and the like; or only
exercised and enforced by Prelates power and countenance, as the corruptions
before mentioned; then we must say their exception is of no weight, not the
reason any thing worth; for this change can be no such scandal, as is
conceived; for we deny them to have been testified by our Bishops, Martyrs, and
learned men, by any Sufferings or Writings (until of late by the persons and
such like before mentioned) as agreeable to the Word of God; and must put them
to the proof of it; we think we are able to produce Tindal, Latimer, Hooper,
Ridley, Farrar, and many other Martyrs, by laying down their Bishoprics, and
other contests and sufferings to have testified against them, and Mr.
Cartwright, Baines, and many Devonshire, Cornwall, and Lincolnshire Ministers,
and others, ever since the Reformation by Writing, Petition, Remonstrance,
Apology, and Sufferings to have testified against not only the corruptions
exercised (against which our Jewel, Fulk, Whitaker, Archbishop Parker, Dr.
Ward, Dr. Brownrigge, Dr. Bancroft, and all sound and learned Divines, not
devoted to return to Rome, have written) but even the very Order and Ceremonies
established, as being not agreeable to the Word of God: And if these learned
Gentlemen had pleased to observe the Visitation and high Commission
proceedings, they might have found Prynn, Burton, Bastwick Layton, Workman,
Langley, Hind, Nichols, Ball, and many others (known learned men) who were
silenced, suspended, imprisoned, stigmatized: and in much Sufferings testified,
these appendants to our Religion, whether established or exercised, to be no
way agreeable to the Word of God; and I know not whom they can meant on as a
Martyr for them, unless it be Lawde the late Archbishop, the grand Innovator of
our Church.

2. If therefore our Religion be by Papists or Prelates reproached as a
Parliamentary Religion, we will rejoice in our reproach, and bless God we had a
Parliament that had zeal to improve their power about those things that were
properly subject thereunto.

3. Nor can this Reformation justify the recusancy of the Papists, because
these things never became a Reason for their recusancy, further than they
occasioned their obduracy by assuring their hopes of Englands return to them:
Nor the Separation of the Separatists, for that the corruptions established,
were never made such essential parts of worship, as to make a sufficient ground
for separation. Witness Cartwrights defense of the Church service.
The Masters and Scholars of Oxford cannot have been so little observant, as
not to know that the sober, zealous Non-conformists who groaned under the
burden of these corruptions, and for this Reformation were grieved by, and
greatly contended against the Mr. Geree his Vindiciae ecclesiae Anglicanae,
showing necessity of reformation, not Separation. And Mr. Balls two Books
against Mr. Cann.
Separation, as that which was without sufficient ground; yet like Jesus Christ
their Master, kept Communion with a Church, whose Doctrine and Worship was very
much in need of Reformation, and taught men so to do: granting, There was
something in the Doctrine and Worship of the Church of England not agreeable to
the Word of God, and yet not enough to lay a ground for separation.

4. Much less does this endeavor judge the Law against, and punishment of
Papists as unjust, which never had these pieces of Religion for their ground or
reason.

You see, Sir, that the first ground of these learned men's dissatisfaction, as
to the covenanted endeavor of Reformation of Religion in England, in Doctrine,
Worship, Discipline, and Government, is clearly groundless, supposing a change,
and suggesting a scandal not to be rupposed: Let us try the strength of their
second reason for this exception: And that is,

They could not covenant this Reformation without wrong to themselves, 2 Reason
for this exception
their consciences, reputation, and estates, in bearing false witness against
themselves, and sundry other ways swearing to endeavor to reform that as
corrupt and vicious, which they had by their personal subscription approved as
agreeable to the Word of God, and for which they had not been condemned of
their own hearts, nor convinced by their brethren that therein they did amiss.

2. Which they are in conscience persuaded, were not against the Word of God as
they stand established by law.

3. Which they believe to be in sundry respects much better, more agreeable to
the Word of God, and pactice of the Catholic Church, than that to be preserved
in Scotland.

4. To which all Clerks admitted to any Benefice, are required to assent.

To these reasons, Sir, I should have answered.

1. Credit is indeed a matter of concerment, and Reputation is to be regarded,
and our Estate by all just, prudent means duly preserved; but they are not
equivalent to the purity of Gospel administrations, nor must be admitted bars
to duy, or stays from the endeavor of a necessary Reformation when called for.

2. We are at a loss to understand their terms; the establishment by Law is not
expressed in the Covenant; and many corruptions we have noted, were exercised,
not established: The endeavor of a Reformation of them (though not them only)
was, and is required; and it is very doubtful how or where to find and prove an
establishment by law, to which they so much cleave; yet I hope the defect in
proof thereof, will be no just demurre to the endeavor of a Reformation of
what is really vicious and corrupt, whether established, or only exercised.

We must also entreat a comment on these words, the practice of the Catholic
Church. It is well known, that Rome does engross and monopolize this Epithet:
nor can the Worship, Doctrine, and Discipline of the Church of England admit it
to be predicated of any so well as that; for all reformed Churches do in their
practice differ (and I presume it will be hard to prove the agreement of the
Primitive Churches) in these particulars, which were first derived from
Apostate Rome, and have ever since continued as the dregs of their Catholic
practices, not more to the grief of the Reformed Churches abroad, and
Non-conformists at home, then joy and exultation of the Children of that
Church, as a plain evidence of their continued possession, and encouragement to
expect and endeavor a full recovery of England into her bosom: But as to their
Argument;

3 The Doctrine, Worship, Discipline, and Government might be vicious and
corrupt, notwithstanding their apprehension and assent to the contrary, or the
subscription of others required by the Law. We well know, that the Reformation
of the Church in England, was begun on more Henry the 8th his discontent at the
Pope.
Political than pious principles; which did easily consent to a retaining of
what (was justly discharged in other Rerormed Churches, embracing the
administration of the Gospel in its simplicity; for the sake of its naked self)
might consist with those Public ends which did provoke it; and Policy being
the principle predominant in the first, has strugled against piety unto this
last act, and is not yet mastered; and I presume, the Scholars and Masters of
Oxford will not plead an immunity from policy, passion, and prejudice, when
they are to pass judgment against their credits, reputation, and estates; as in
the case of this Covenant, they apprehend they were to do; and that these
prirciples will provoke us to yield our own, and exact from others an assent to
things as agreeable to the Word of God, which in themselves are vicious and
corrupt, no serious man or Christian can or will deny: It is well if we find
this Reason stated under a more cautious, vigilant, and pious frame of spirit.

4. But I must confess, I wonder not so much to hear these Gentlemen to profess
They had by their personal subscription approved the Doctrine, Worship,
Discipline, and Government of the Church of England as agreeable to the Word of
God; (which might be an act of rashness, an effect of ignorance, an event of
some distressed condition, or distemper of mind, fear of losing, or hope of
gaining preferment,) as to hear them say, That this was enjoined by law to
them, and all that were admitted to benefices: That the Doctrine of the Church
was to be assented unto, I grant is by Law established; but the assent to
Worship, Discipline, and Government, I observe, not to be enjoined by any full
and formal Law: I find indeed, something relating to Discipline in the ordering
of Deacons and Priests, Bishops and Archbishops, and the Churches power about
traditions, and Rites, or Ceremonies, inserted into the 39. Articles? but how,
or by what Law they are established, 13. Eliz 12.
I know not: The Statute requiring Ministers assent, does not specify the
Articles particulary; and the general Note whereby to know them laid down in
the Statute, is this, Articles of Religion which ONLY concern the Confession of
the true Christian Faith and Doctrine of the Sacraments: This particle ONLY,
is, in my judgment, exclusive to Discipline and Government; and how these came
into the Articles, I know not: only I find the Epistle to His late Majesty,
before the A Book supposed to have be on written by Mr. William Frynn.
Quench-Coal, to charge corruption and forgery to have been acted about these
Articles, and earnestly implores justice against the Forgers and Obtruders
thereof; and until the Legality of the Canons of 1603. and sense thereof be
clearly asserted, and fully vindicated from the Necessity for Reformation. p.
56, 57, 58, 59.
exceptions which are urged against them we must be at a loss for their
establishment; for if the King had not authority by virtue of the Statute
pretended, or the matter of them be repugnant to standing Statutes, as is
suggested, the establishment of Worship, Discipline, and Government by law,
must abide very doubtful; but the University of Oxford might make a Law unto
themselves, to which these Gentlemen might refer: But

5. Whether established or exercised, I think it very strange to see these
learned men on serious thoughts to profess their own hearts did not condemn
them, nor had their brethren convinced their judgments they had done amiss, by
their personal subscription to approve the Doctrine, Worship, Discipline, and
Government of the Church of England to be agreeable to the Word of GOD, but
that thereof they were still persuaded.

Sir, what effect had been wrought on their consciences, I cannot tell: I will
hope they were not seared, or shut up by a resolution of non-perswasion to the
contrary; yet had I been amongst them (with submission) I must have
expostulated with them, and enquire,

Whether they had not subscribed to the use of the Common Prayer, and form in
the said Book prescribed in public prayer, Enjoined to be subscribed by every
Minister before he be ordained, in Canons of 1603. Ca. 36.
and NONE OTHER. Did none of these Masters publicly pray in St Maryes in
Oxford, and other Churches, before and after their Sermons? Were not such
prayers public prayer? Did they at such times use the Common Prayer? If not,
did not their consciences mind them of their subscribed promise solemnly made
in entering on so holy a calling? Are not NONE OTHER, words as fully exclusive
of their own forms extemporary or premeditate, as can be expressed? Admit we
this Common Prayer to be lawful, yea necessary, is not this exclusive
subscription a plain limitation of the Spirit, rejection of the gift of prayer,
and robbing the Church of Ministerial parts unto prayer, as well as preaching
to the edification thereof? Did Christ, when he prescribed the most perfect
prayer, tie his Disciples to use that and None other? Can any
rationally-religious man, subscribe this promise, and approve it to be
agreeable to the Word of God, and stand persuaded it is not contrary thereunto?

Secondly, Is it agreeable to the Word of God to affix a sentence of man's
conception and framing to divine service, and denominate it a Sentence of
Scripture? In the Rubric of the Common Prayer, the Priest is appointed to read
one of these sentences of Scripture which follow: The very first of which is,
At what time soever a sinner repents him of his sin from the bottom of his
heart, I will put all his wickedness out of my remembrance, says the Lord;
the which is referred in the Margin (as are the following sentences to their
places) unto Ezekiel. 18.21, As is Dr. Boys in his Exposition of the Liturgy. p.
1.
22 (to say nothing of the effect, though accidental of this supposed
Scripture) how many have been deceived, really believing it to be a Sentence of
Scripture, when it is not found in all the Bible? Methinks these men should
have observed how our late Masters had corrected this gross and obvious fault
in the Scotch Liturgy, before they had thus confidently told the world, They
were persuaded there is nothing in the worship of England, which is not
agreeable to the Word of God.

Thirdly, In the Worship of England much of Canonical Scripture is omitted,
and never to be read (a fault complained of by the first Compilers of the
Common Prayer Book) and much of the Ap crypha, Vide. The Preface of it.
vain, false, and ridiculous, is appointed to be publicly read; the great
Bible-Translation of the Psalms, is thrust out, The titles of the Psalms. Psa.
72. Psa. 14. Psa. 105.28.
and a most corrupt Translation of them, omitting some whole sentences, adding
whole verses; and falsely translating many places and Texts, is affixed unto the
Common Prayer Book, and made part of it: Some part of Scripture is dignified
above other parts thereof; the Gospel must be honored with the standing up of
the people, the Epistle (no way different in the matter, Christ crucified, but
only in the name and manner of Revelation from the Gospel) is slighted: Will
the Gentlemen of Oxford say this is agreeable to the Word of God? They must
prove it; for we shall not believe them; and the rather for that this gross
abuse is palliated by this false profession in the Preface to this Book, That
nothing is ordained to be read, but the pure Word of God, the holy Scriptures,
or that which is evidently grounded thereupon; Vide. The Anatomy of the
Service Book. p. 18.
and the rather, for that we find the Common Prayer Book condemned (in respect
of these particulars) by Dr. Spark, no mean Son of the Church.

Fourthly, Will these Masters and Scholars stand persuaded, that the
extraordinary Solemn Worship appointed by the Common Prayer Book unto holy
days and their Eves, is agreeable to the Word of God, wherein every particular
holy day has its distinct and particular Collects, Epistles, and Gospels, as
its Solemn Service appointed: not to insist on the supposed influence of that
reputed sanctity on the Six or Seven days following, directing the same
service to be impertinently continued; as in the Feast of the Nativity, Easter,
Whitsuntide, Ascension, and others; nor the unwaerrantable pre-eminence given
to some parts of Scripture above others; or the irrational denomination of some
Prophetical and Historical portions of Scripture Epistles; all which are well
urged by many Non-conformists. I would enquire, what part of Sacred Writ stamps
Sanctity on Wednesday and Friday, more than the other four days of the week,
and sets them into a parity with Sunday (to retain their Dialect) that the same
more Solemn service shall be read on those days, as on that day? By what
Scripture-wa^^ mediate or immediate, are other days, besides the Lords day,
made holy, or sanctified in honor of the Saints, so as in their nature to
interdict men's labor in their lawful calling, engage men to the exercises of
Religion as often as they return, and become Subjects of that Solemn Service,
which may not on other days be offered unto God? Is not a Religious owning,
and observation of some time, as (not appointed by the God of our time, whose
sole Prerogative it is to make it) Solemn and Holy time, to be Religiously
employed, a plain and formal Superstition repugnant to Gospel-Rules? Gal. 4.10.
Coloss. 2.16. I am not ignorant that some holy days have been of ancient and
universal observation in the Church, and have laid claim to Apostolical
tradition, and occasioned much controversy in the Church; but I stand
unsatisfied in their institution: I deny not the just authority of the Church
or Christian Magistrate over our time; but I think there is a vast difference
between time as the subject, and as the adjunct of Religion; God only can make
it the first; humane authority may appoint holy Fasting, and holy Feasting
(those transient acts of Worship dependant on, and subservient unto Gods
dispensations of providence to his people) and so may determine (the second)
time (like the days of Purim) as a necessary adjunct to those acts of Worship;
but to make holy days Subjects of Solemn, Sacred service, I have not seen any
Commission that does authorize the Church thereunto: Eminent Saints call for
the esteem of the Church, but the keeping of them in a Calendar, and appointing
them their several holy days, sets them a pitch too high, and shows the Church
partial, respecters of persons, having some in admiration, and slighting others
no less deserving; or subjects here unto an intolerable burden, by
necessitating every day to be Holy: The Nativity; Circumcission, Passion,
Resurrection, and Ascension of our Lord and Savior, are all mysteries or
matters of reverence, esteem, and admiration to the Church, to be duly and
distinctly considered; yet (under correction of better judgments) the several
holy days appointed to the memorial of them, is in my thoughts no less
irrational than irreligious: I say irrational; because though some of them be
great Mysteries, yet they are not simply and in themselves mercies to the
Church, but as they relate unto, and center in the work of M^^^ ^edemption, to
which they do relate as several distinct act^^^ that complete and individual
Blessing or Mercy; and right reason does direct commemoration of all the parts
in the mercies by them perfected and completed. Irreligious it seems to me, as
without any divine Warrant, nay redundant to Gods own institution, who has
appointed the first day of the week as the day for the commemoration of the
worlds Restitution by man's Redemption: If this be the cause of the change of
the Sabbath (as we have been commonly taught) does it not supersede the
appointment of the Church? God does not mediately, what he does immediately; or
by Commission, what is done in his own person I well know, some in their
Contests for Holy Days make the Sabbath changeable at the Churches pleasure;
and if these several acts of Redemption be commemorated in their distinct
holy days, I see not how we can avoid a return to the Jews Sabbath; for the
fourth command must needs be moral; and this method takes away the reason of
the alteration of the day. Now Sir if the holy days, the foundation, be
Superstitious, sure Oxford will not say the superstructure, or Solemn, Special
service, is agreeable to the Word of God!

Fifthly, Again Sir, will the Masters and Scholars of Oxford say, the very
order and method of the Common Prayer is agreeable to the Word of God? How do
they ground their persuasion concerning the Versicles, Popular Responds,
Intermixtures, Abbreviations, Abruptions, and stops, and present postings on
again, with a Let us pray, wenn nothing but prayer is in hand, that they are
agreeable to the Word of God? So do the very Papists, Antiphonae, responsoria,
versiculi and ejusmodi minuta; non videntur necessaria; impediunt enim cursum
piae and utilis lectionis. Spalat. l. 17. c. 12. Art. 96. Versiculos,
responsoria and capitula omittere ideirco visum est, quoniam legentes saepe
morentur. Card. Quignonius.
I observe the first Compilers of this Book, to leave a blot on this method, by
taking away many Verses, Responds, Anthems, and the like, which did interrupt
the duty of reading the Scriptures together, and that for this very reason, but
a quatenus ad omne valet consequentia: The number is not only to be abated, but
all things of this nature, obstructive to, and inconsistent with the Solemn,
and serious, entire performance of any particular Act or Duty of Religion,
ought to be abolished: Does the Word of God allow mute service, or private
devotion in the public Assembly? What warrant is there in the public service
of the Church for a silent space of time, that the secret prayers of the people
may be sent to heaven, as is directed at the Ordination and Consecration of
Priests and Bishops? The reason therein declared, is, That Jesus Christ prayed
all night, before He sent out His Disciples; and the Church of Antioch prayed,
when they sent out Paul and Barnabas; but they do not tell us whether Christ
were in an Assembly when he prayed alone; or whether the Church of Antioch had
a silent pace in which they secretly prayed; nor whether the prayer of the one
or of the other, were mental, or vocal; but I observe it was joined with
Fasting, in which our order agrees not, whilst any Sunday or Holy Day, and a
short space thereof will be an opportunity sufficient for such a work.

What Text of either Old or New Testament, allots to the people other portion
of public prayer, save to say Amen? 1 Cor. 14.15.
In respect of which prayer is prescribed to be in a known tongue to their
understanding, How shall we make the peoples vocal responds, salutation,
supplication for mercies, deprecation of miseries, merely and only recited by
the Ministers, agreeable to the Word of God? Exposition of the Liturgy. p. 40.
Must it be by the salutation of Boaz and his Reapers? or Mary and Elizabeth,
to which Dr. Boys refers it? it must then be proved, that Boaz was in the
public Assembly, and cele' rating divine service; and so for Mary and
Elizabeth; and that it was not a civil complement, expressed in Religious words
on an occasional meeting each with other, as becomes Christian friends; and
that such pieces of civil respect witnesssing reciprocal affection, are parts
of Solemn Worship to pass between the Pastor and People in the celebration
thereof.

I shall not deny sighs, and short ejaculations, to be ardent expressions of
the mind and affection, and find acceptance with God; but question the
suitableness thereof to standing, solemn, and public Worship. I yield to Dr.
Boys, that the Publican did affectionately dart out his Lord be merciful to me
a sinner! and the Woman of Canaan, her Have mercy on me, O Lord! and blind
Bartimeus, O Son of David, take pity on me! But (by his leave) I must say these
were personal, not public; occasional, not fixed, ordinary Worship;
extemporary on the occasion; not premeditated, much less prescribed; nay I will
grant what he says Augustine Reports of the Christians in Egypt, and which
History mentions of other Churches: Yea, I could be easily convinced, that in
the very first Age of the Gospel, many Christians did in the Assembly utter
their short expressions, and darting prayers; preces raptim quodammodo
ejaculatas: But yet it would be noted they were ejaculations personal,
expressed in a sacred rapture, on the sudden ebolition of the Spirit, which
without doubt wrought in prayer, as in Prophecy and in Psalms, the heat
whereof required the Apostles restriction and regulation, 1 Cor. 14.
affection leading into confusion; and so can be no warrant for such
premeditated, ejaculative expressions, to be prescribed in set and public
prayer, wherein all things by a Rule restraining this very method under the
fervency of the Spirit, Let all things be done decently and in order, are to be
regulated; that therefore might be admitted and exercised in the Church, and
acceptable to God, in private, and personally expressed, or on the immediate
ebolition, or boiling up of the Spirit, and in the heat of affection, in the
infancy of the Church, which will not be so in the public and prescribed
prayers of the Church in her Adult estate, in which she must appear more
serious and composed; and so will not render this Order of Worship agreeable to
the Word.

Sixthly, Will the Masters and Scholars of Oxford say that the Rites and
Ceremonies annexed to the Worship of God, are agreeable to the Word of God,
viz. The Cross in Baptism, Surplice in divine service, supposed to be
established? Or those since pressed; as, the Bowing at the Name of Jesus:
Turning Tables into Altars, and Bowing to them, and placing on them
Candlesticks and Tapers: The Consecration of Churches, and the like; though I
should (which I confess I cannot) admit what is pretended in the Preface to the
Common Prayer Book, that they are apt to stir up the dull mind of man to the
remembrance of his duty to God by some notable and special signification,
whereby he might be edified; yet I must enquire by what authority are they
appointed? the highest pretended is the Church; and I see no Commission the
Church has to appoint such things: If I mistake not, the power of the Church
is declarative, executive, and Ministerial, not judicial and magisterial: She
may publish the matter, and prescribe the Order of Gods Worship; but not
constitute or ordain new matter, though never so much tending to edification,
against which she is expressly barred by the 2d. Commandment. And if she has
power to continue our Ceremonies because significant; why, or how shall those
be excluded, which are more ancient and significant? Such as were the baptizing
for the Dead, putting Cream and Honey into the mouth of the baptized;
insufflation, and spitting at the Devil and the World; and coming to baptism in
a white Garment which was left behind (and profitably produced as a pledge
against Elpidophorus, when Apostatized from the Faith in which he had been
baptized) and many such like, Tertul Coron. mil. pa. 449. Contra Marcion. lib.
7. p. 155.
which Tertullian mentions as used in the Church, in the Year of our Lord 62.
in the times of the Apostles, than which, the use of the Cross cannot be more
ancient, nor is it indeed so ancient: If then the Church have not a power to
ordain them, on what basis do all our Ceremonies stand, save that profane
Maxim, No Ceremonies, no Bishop? Before it be determined that these Ceremonies
are agreeable to the Word of God, I wish it may be determined, whether the
appointment and Religious exercise of matter significant (and so in it self
tending to edification) not instituted by Jesus Christ, be not the very
formality of Superstition?

Seventhly, and Lastly, Is it agreeable to the Word of God, in ordination to
divide the work of the Ministry? and give authority to apply one of the
Sacraments, and not the other? to baptize, but not administer the Lords Supper
otherwise than as Assistant to him who has ministerial power of consecration,
as it is done in the Ordering of Deacons? Again, is it agreeable to the Word,
to denominate Gospel Ministers Priests (which properly relate to a Sacrifice
and Altar?) If so, why did our late Masters altar the Title into Presbyters in
the Scotch Liturgy? It is agreeable to the Word, that the Ministers of Jesus
Christ swear, or Solemnly promise obedience unto their fellow Ministers, under
the notion of an ordinary and Chief Minister? It is reason they keep order, and
be subject to the Assembly; but parity of Office and Authority, admits not of
obedience. Is it agreeable to the Word, that Bishops swear, or Solemnly
promise obedience unto the Archbishops? If so, why not Archbishops to Cardinals
or Patriarchs, and they to the Pope? Is it because the Sea bounds our Papacy?
Is it in the form of ordination agreeable to the Word, that the Bishop
ordaining, do Magisterially repeat the words of Jesus Christ who had a power
and did effect it, (viz.) Receive thou the Holy Ghost; Whose sins thou do
forgive, they are forgiven, and whose sins thou do retain, they are retained?
as actually giving the Holy Ghost as a qualification for that Office, and after
this to give authority of administration with a Take thou authority to preach
the Word of God, and to minister the Holy Sacraments. Is it agreeable to the
Word of God, by a special, Solemn, and Religious act, to Consecrate unto a
degree convenient and only necessary for the method and Order of an Assembly?
as if it were (and indeed however others think, by reason of the variation of
the word, I believe it was intended to be) an actual Ordination to a distinct
Office of Ministry in the Church, like the Chief Priesthood among the Jews? I
am at a loss in Civil or Religious Policy, to find a warrant for so Sacred a
form in an advancement to a degree, yet I will not deny the formalities of the
Chair; Is it agreeable to the Word of God, that excommunication (the last and
greatest of Censures) do proceed without admonition? and be inflicted ipso
facto, before obstinacy the proper and only ground of it be detected, much
less convicted? and that so dreadful a Censure be denounced on the
non-observance of Rites and Ceremonies declared indifferent, and other light
and frivolous occasions? nay, on the very discharge of duty? As, suppose an
exercise in a Market Town, Canons of 1603. Can. 72.
or a Fast kept in the Parish Church on the occasion of some special exigency
of that Parish; or by a Minister in a private family, whose domestic
concernments may call for the house and family to mourn apart, and entreat the
assistance of their special particular friends in prayer; and yet in all these
cases it is directed in the Canons made by the Convocation in London, of which
the Bishop of London sat President, Anno 1603.

Sir, these things, and such like, in the Worship, Discipline, and Government
of the Church of England, are obvious; and have been often urged as needing
Reformation; and as Reasons Apologizing for the Non-subscription of the Sober,
Learned, and Pious Non-conformists, ever since the Reformation, as by Mr.
Thomas Cartwright, the Ministers of Devonshire and Cornwall, the Ministers
within the Diocese of Lincoln, and many others, whose Printed Books could not
but have been seen by (at least some of) the Masters and Scholars of Oxford;
and might have convinced their judgments, that they had done amiss by their
personal subscription to approve that all things in the four specified
particulars, were agreeable to the Word of God.

Sixthly, Their confidence that all things in these four specified particulars,
are agreeable to the Word of God, and need no Reformation, may well engage them
to conclude, that they are much better than those of Scotland, which they wear
to swear to preserve: For, the Doctrine, Worship, Discipline, and Government,
in the Church of Scotland, differs in all the particulars mentioned, and so
must needs be dissonant, if these be AGREEABLE TO THE WORD OF GOD: Yet Sir,
methinks the good grounds on which they thought so, might (for their clearer
Apology, and satisfaction of other souls called to swear the same Covenant)
have been specified and declared; the rather, for that they seemed to be in a
strait when they pointed unto the accounting of Bishops Antichristian, and
indifferent Ceremonies unlawful; the making their Discipline the mark of a true
Church, and the setting up thereof the erecting of the Throne of Christ, as
things tending toward Superstition and Schism, and the worst things in the
Church of Scotland, which called for Reformation, rather than Preservation.

Lastly, the Hazard of their estates does seem indeed to be their great
stumbling block in their way to the Covenant: All Clerks are by the Laws yet
in force, required to give their assent unto what by this Covenant is required
to be reformed, and that on pain of losing their Benefice: Which Sir, we shall
admit (though it would admit a dispute in reference to many, if not all the
particulars mentioned;) yet how should this demurre to the taking of the
Covenant? Because the Law requires our assent, it will not therefore follow,
they need not reformation, nor it is not lawful for us to endeavor their
reformation: Many men have assented to the Law, who could never give the assent
required by the Law; and by suffering, showed that the Law is their burden,
binding them to suffer, whilst it requires what they in truth and good
Conscience cannot yield: But must good men continue under this burden, and take
no care to ease themselves? Is it a sin for men to covenant in their places to
endeavor the removal of a burdensome Law? Or might not the Reformation
covenanted, be so endeavored?

Nay Sir, on the consideration of the whole Reason, can such endeavor be any
wrong to men's consciences, reputation, or estate? and then there is no strength
in this 2d. Reason of Oxford against the covenanting such an endeavor. But we
proceed to their 3d. Reason of this Exception.

The third Reason on which the Masters, 3d. Reason of this exception.
Scholars, etc. of Oxford stand dissatisfied concerning the Covenant, or
Reformation of England in Doctrine, Worship, Discipline and Government, is
indeed the most weighty and considerable, if but clearly proved: and it is,

Their manifest danger of perjury; the Covenant in this point seeming directly
contrary to the former Solemn Protestation: (I presume they mean that of May 5.
1641.) which they had sworn neither for hope or fear, or other respect ever to
relinquish: or the Oath of Supremacy, which according to the Laws of this
Realm, and the Statutes of this University, they had sworn.

Unto this Reason I easily grant, that contradictory Oaths do run the soul on
manifest perjury; and if the first were lawful, the last must needs be sinful,
neither to be sworn at first, nor obliging at last, if it be sworn.

2. But the contradiction must be manifest and clear; not seeming, and
conjectural, which may spring by passion and prejudice, to the fancy of such as
are willing to suppose it, (as all things look yellow to Jaundies eyes) and is
not in reality such to impartial Readers. It seems this contradiction between
this Covenant and those Oaths, was, to the men of Oxford. but seeming, though
to their best understandings (in their then capacity I presume) and it must
pass into a certainty, before it, discharge the bond to such as are under it,
though seeming so to be, might suspend the act of them to whom it so seemed.

3. But let us see wherein seems this contradiction: It is well if it amount
not to as much as the Scotch Notions before specified, which seemed to tend to
Superstition and Schism.

First then of the contradiction to their protestation, which I imagine can be
no other but that of May 5. 1641. and so far as it concerns Religion, runs
thus, I A. B. do in the presence of Almighty God, vow and protest to maintain
and defend as far as lawfully I may with my life, power, and estate, the
true, Reformed, Protestant Religion expressed in the doctrine of the Church of
England, against all Popery, and Popish Innovations within this Realm, contrary
to the same Doctrine.

The Solemn League and Covenant in the Article under consideration, runs
thus; That we shall sincerely, really, and constantly, through the grace of
God, endeavor, in our several places and callings, the Reformation of Religion
in the Kingdom of England, in Doctrine, Worship, Discipline, and Government,
according to the Word of God, and example of the best reformed Churches.

Contraria contrariis juxta opposita magis elucescunt. Let any impartial eye
read these two Oaths thus opposed, and show me wherein seem the contradiction
to lie: They may indeed seem different in their sound and manner of expression,
but Oxford well knows, that all diversa, are not opposita, all difference
amounts not to a contradiction; diversa and opposita aeque dissentanea sunt,
sed non aeque dissentiunt; they differ indeed, but not with the same
difference: I wish that on second thoughts they will please to tell us whether
the difference be Re, or Ratione only; the same thing being protested in the
first (though not in the same words, and after the manner) which was covenanted
in the last: But they specify the contradiction; (viz.) The Doctrine they
vowed to maintain by the name of the true Protestant Religion, expressed in the
Doctrine of the Church of England, they took to be the same now to be reformed
and altered.

But Sir, were they not, in taking it so to be, much mistaken? The Covenant
binds to Reform Doctrine in the Kingdom of England; was there no such Doctrine
openly divulged in the Court Sermons and Printed books of Mountague, Reive,
Heylen, Dowe, Cozens, Pocklington, and others before mentioned? In Mountague,
Apello ad Caesarem: originum Ecclesiasticorum, 2 parts: Anti-diatribae:
Pocklingtons Sunday no Sabbath; Altar Christianum: Heylens Coal from the
Altar; History of the Sabbath: Sales his introduction to a devout life:
Shelfords five Treatises: Dowe against Mr. Burton: Cozens his hours of Prayer:
and many other licensed books publicly sold in the Kingdom; and in the
Visitation Articles of Bishop Mountague, Bishop Pierce, and Bishop Wren (on
which many good men were vexed;) which was distinct, and different, (if I may
not say) expressly contrary to the Protestant Religion expressed in the Doctrine
of the Church of England: And did not these need Reformation? And is it not the
duty of every good Subject and Protestant in maintenance of this Religion, to
endeavor a Reformation, alteration, and total expunction of such Doctrine, and
so to Covenant? And then Sir, where is the contradiction? In this sense the
Protestation and Covenant do plainly coincidere, and agree in one and the same
thing.

But, Sir, let us allow them their sense, That the Doctrine protested to be
maintained, is the same covenanted to be reformed: Are Maintenance and
Reformation incompetible? is there not a possbility of some adjuncts unto the
substance of the Doctrine of the Church of England expressing the true Reformed
Protestant Religion, and seperable without the destruction thereof? Or may not
the Doctrine of the Church of England be reformed as to the scant, general,
dubious, and difficult manner of expression, and yet the matter thereof be
maintained and defended? Are those Articles which concern the Government of the
Church, and Consecration of the Bishops and Archbishops, of the essence and
formality of the true Reformed, Protestant Religion? Will not the assertion
thereof tend more to Schism, than Scotlands supposed making their Discipline
and Government the mark of a true Church? As denying the Reformed Churches
beyond the Sea to have attained to the true Reformed, Protestant Religion,
which yet they handed over to us?

But what reason had these Gentlemen of Oxford to understand the Doctrine of
the Church of England in such a latitude? when the sense of it is limited by
them who were then known to be Legislators (and a power sufficient to prescribe
an Oath, unto which themselves subjected) and were the best expositors thereof
(viz.) the House of Commons who thus declared:

Whereas some doubts have been raised concerning the meaning of these words
[The true Reformed, Protestant Religion, expressed in the Doctrine of the
Church of England, against all Popery, and Popish innovations within this Realm
contrary to the same Doctrine] This House does declare, that by these words,
was, and is meant only the public Doctrine professed in the said Church, so
far as it is opposite to Popery and Popish innovations: And that the said words
are not to be extended to the maintaining of any form of Worship, Discipline,
and Government, nor of any the Rites and Ceremonies of the said Church of
England.

By which these Gentlemen might have understood,

1. The Realm, and Church of England, were two different Subjects; the one
professing Doctrine in the other, wherein also there was Doctrine tending to
Popery and Popish Innovation.

2. There were in the Doctrines professed by the Church of England some
adjuncts of Rites, Ceremonies, Government, or some special order of Worship,
which might need Reformation, and were not viewed to be maintained.

So that according to this sense of them who prescribed both, there is more of
consistency, than contradiction between the Protestation and Solemn League and
Covenant: So that the manifest perjury they feared, has not so much as a
seeming ground.

And as for the supposed contradiction of this Branch of the Covenant unto the
Oath of Supremacy, it will on examination vanish as an apparition, a thing
which so seemed, but cannot be so proved: For if they will not hiss me out of
their Schools, I will grant them their Proposition in the Oath, and assumption
in the Statute by them quoted; and yet find a way to avoid the conclusion,
because a mere non sequitur on their premises; and this, if they will have the
Argument logically resolved, by denying the consequence of their major
Proposition; for I will grant unto them, that the Oath of Supremacy does bind
us to our power, to assist and defend all Jurisdictions, Privileges,
Preheminences, and Authorities, granted and belonging to the Kings Highness,
his heirs and successors, or united and annexed unto the Imperial Crown of this
Realm: And assume with them, That the King had the whole power and Authority
for Reformation, Order, and Correction, of all manner of Errors, Heresies,
Schisms, etc. and yet deny the sequel, viz. That we may not endeavor in our
places and callings to reform Religion. For the defense of the Kings power is
no way repugnant with the duty of our particular capacity. I hope a Minister
may by his preaching, or a Divine by his disputation in the Schools, endeavor
the correction and Reformation of Error and Heresy, Schism or Superstition,
and yet not entrench on his Majesty's Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction, and so
interfer with their Oath of Supremacy? Yea, in reference to judicial and
authoritative Correction and Reformation (which we will suppose can only be
done by the King) men's endeavor may be in their places and callings by Counsel,
Proposal, Remonstrance, Petition, Supplication, and the like, to procure His
Majesty's consent, and authority, to reform Religion in the Kingdom of England,
in Doctrine, Worship, Discipline, and Government; and then Sir, where is the
Contradiction?

Yet Sir, if I were to dispute with a single (though Senior) Sophister of
Oxford, I would deny both Propositions; the major, as to its sequel or
consequence, as before; and the assumption, as that which the Statute does not
prove, viz. The whole power of Spiritual or Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction for
Correction and Reformation, is annexed to the King, and Imperial Crown of this
Realm: For the power by that Statute, is special and particular, not general
and universal; as themselves have cited it, is, (viz.) such Jurisdictions,
Privileges, Superiorities, and Preheminences, Spiritual or Ecclesiastical, as
by any, etc. (and as the Statute proceeds) Spiritual or Ecclesiastical power or
authority, has heretofore been or may lawfully be exercised or used for
Visitation of any Ecclesiastical State, or Persons, and for Reformation, etc.
So that the power given to the King, is such a powor as Bishops, Cardinals, or
Popes had used; not such as Parliaments (who ever retained a Jurisdicton in
themselves over both Church and Crown) enjoyed and exercised: This power was
purely executive, not Legislative; over persons and particular Societies, not
over the Kingdom and whole Realm: I presume, the Gentlemen of Oxford were not
ignoront of the power and Legislative Authority which the Parliaments of
England ever held over their Bishops, and the Spiritual or Ecclesiastical
estate of this Land, tying them in all their administrations of Discipline, and
Government, to the Customs and Statutes of this Realm, as they may read at
large in the Statute of the Submission of the Clergy, 25. Hen. 8.19. wherein
they confess, many of their Canons and Constitutions be repugnant to the Laws
and Statutes of this Realm, whereby they did not only Restrain the
exorbitancies, and from time to time Reform the abuses of the Church, but also
extend the Prerogative and Jurisdiction of the King, as in that Statute, 1
Elizab. and Limit, Restrain, and Repeal it: (as in the case of this individual,
specifical power granted in the words of the Statute quoted) by the Statute 17
Caroli entitled, An Act for repeal of a branch of a Statute 10 Elizab.
concerning Commissioners for causes Ecclesiastical; which clause repealed, is
part of this very recited Paragraph, and immediately annexed unto, and
dependent on this very grant of power and authority: Nor are these Masters and
Scholars of Oxford insensible, that there is a vast difference between
Executive and Legislative power and authority; and that as no Ecclesiastical
persons did ever enjoy (however the Pope and his Bishops did contend for it) so
no King of England did ever pretend, or lay claim unto the Legislative power
further than allowed by Act of Parliaments, who were ever Dictators of a
general Reformation in the Land, Church, and Kingdom; as at this time in the
Reformation covenanted: Nor can they be ignorant, that it is very bad Logic,
from such Jurisdictions, and Specifical, Executive Authority, to infer, that
the whole power of Reformation is so in the King, that the Parliament may not
propose, or the people covenant in their places and callings to endeavor a
Reformation; but they must clash with the Kings Prerogative, and contradict the
particular Supremacy they have granted and bounded themselves to defend.

And now Sir, I must desire to know (whilst the Oath affords not the
Proposition, nor the words of the Statute the assumption) how they will do to
establish the Conclusion, and clear their manifest perjury from premises which,
on trial, prove but seemingly contrary, and really consistent with the Oaths
they had before sworn?

We see, Sir, notwithstanding the dissatisfactions of the Masters and Scholars
of Oxford, the first Article of the Solemn League and Covenant contains in it
nothing but what is good and lawful; nay, so just, that in it self it is a
duty, and therefore may be sworn; and their serious exceptions will scarce
suffice to Apologize their refusal, which could not be Religiously refused by
such as desire purity of Religion, and uniformity in the Church, whilst the
Word of God is propounded as the Rule, and the best reformed Churches as the
pattern of this Reformation covenanted; and will not any thing avail, to acquit
the obligation where it is laid, affording sufficient ground to establish the
judgment of him that swear, without any apparent reason of scandal or hazard
to Reputation, Estate, or Conscience; the perjury supposed to be manifest,
appearing at best to be but seeming; and that on a fancied Contrariety, that
amounts only to a difference in the manner, not matter of the opposed Oaths.

Subsectio Sexta.
Reformation cannot proceed without a removal of what is repugnant and
obstructive thereunto: Considers the 2d. Article of the Solemn League and
Covenant.
the second Article of the Covenant, does therefore bind us to the extirpation
of certain evils: we must then consider in the next place, the justice and
lawfulness thereof, and the weighty exceptions made against it.

In this Article we are to consider the Act covenanted, An endeavor of
extirpation; and the matter about which that Act is conversant, viz. Popery,
Prelacy, Error, Heresy, Schism, Superstition, and Profaness.

As to the Act, it is not objected against by any, save Dr. Gaudens Nephew. No
Body, who in his new born Doubts and Scruples (midwiv'd into the world by the
Drs. Epistle) would suppose himself by an endeavor of Extirpation, to be sworn
into Gods Throne, whose only and immediate Act it is to extirpate the lusts,
and principles of these impieties out of the heart of man; or mounted into the
Magistrates Chair, who only may by Bonds or Banishment, or Mulct, or Death,
extirpate the open exercise, and public profession of those evils, and the
promoters of them; as if Extirpation were no way a humane Act, or within the
capacity of private men, though not to effect, yet by Moral Persuasion,
Rational Discourse, Scripture Conviction, Submissive Petition, and the like, so
much as to endeavor it with sincerity, reality and constancy; the very recital
of this reception is a sufficient confutation, and resolution that folly, or
some melancholy fancy, more than conscience did start this doubt, and stand
perplexed at this Scruple without a grain of Reason.

And as to the matter covenanted to be endeavored to be extirpated, none that
are seemingly Protestants, and religious, will make question of Popery, Error,
Heresy, Schism, Superstition, and Profaness, or whatsoever is contrary to
sound Doctrine, or the power of godliness: these are such spreading Weeds,
disgraceful to the Church (Christ his Garden) and destructive to the principles
and practices of all Religion, that almost all men will appear the foremost in
an endeavor to extirpate them; and on this account Dr. Gauden in his late
Epistle to the Doubts and Scruples, would divert our endeavor for extirpation
of the Prelacy, Covenanted against, by directing the same unto Schism and
Superstition: But, Sir, by his leave, as we cannot own him as our Master, to be
at his pleasure, appointed our work further than our own prudence will guide
us; so we must tell him, that every Plant which our heavenly Father has not
planted, must be rooted out; that some weeds are more visible and spreading
than others; and as they need more speed and diligence, so they call for more
strength and labor to remove them, being deeply rooted by their long
continuance; and therefore the extirpation of them must be plied with
endeavor, whilst the Earth is loose, and they unsettled; and it is more than
probable, that many of the others, if not all, may come up with this one, which
either occasioneth Schism, or by its shade defends Superstition and
Profanesse, if I may not say Popery: But stay, Sir, the Masters and Scholars of
Oxford do pluck me by the Ears, and tell me I am mistaken, if I deem Prelacy a
weed, which is undoubtedly the fairest flower in the Garden of Christ his
Church, according to whose language I find Dr. Featley's Ghost Canting in his
League illegal; but Sir,

I shall desire to let them know that Prelacy in its general and genuine
acceptance, is undoubtedly a very fair flower, and far from being weeded up;
Oxford Exception by a general term fallacious.
and therefore in the Solemn Leagus and Covenant it is specified, and a
particular kind of Prelacy sprung up, and over-spreading the Church of England,
is Covenanted to be extirpated: I shall be willing to give the honor of this
restriction and specification to the speech of Dr. Daniel Featley, occasioned
by the over-hot pressing of some (truly zealous for Reformation of what was
amiss) that Prelacy in general (it having by appropriation to one kind
obtained a vulgar evil acceptance) should be extirpated; only I cannoc acquit
his acute Executor from the dishonor of misapplying his Uncles speech, (when
dead) as speaking against that which it had effected; (viz.) and express
mention of the species, and particular kind of Prelacy to be extirpated; that
is, the Government by Archbishops, Bishops, their Chancellors and Commissaries,
Deans, Deans and Chapters, Archdeacons, and all other Ecclesiastical Officers
depending on that Hierarchy; whereby the general term Prelacy is limited and
restrained; so that I shall expect their exceptions to lie against the
extirpation of this species and kind of Prelacy, unto which the Covenant does
bind us; for we well know, dolosus versatur in generalibus, Crafty men do
deceive the vulgar by an Outcry of extirpation of things in their general
nature good, but in this or that special kind evil; I shall therefore
especially consider the exceptions of the Masters and Scholars of Oxford
against this second Article, so far as it relates to the Prelacy therein
specified to be extirpated; as those on which I observe others depend, from
which others have derived theirs, and to which on all occasion they do retreat
as to their impregnable Fortress.

They therefore in the fourth Section of their Reasons, for not swearing the
Solemn League and Covenant, Page 7.
do deface their exception with an expression of their affection to that
Government to be extirpated, and first present us with this fair Encomium of
it; viz.

That Ancient form of Church Government under which our Religion was at first
so orderly, Oxford Commendation of Prelacy considered.
without violence or tumult, and so happily reformed; and has since so long
flourished with truth and peace, to the honor and happiness of our own, and
envy and admiration of other Nations: But Sir, good wine needs no bush; it is
well if the Arguments be as cogent to the mind, as this glorious description of
Englands Church Government is captivating to the affections; I hope Sir,
serious Casuists in stating their Scruples, do not set a luster on the object
by glorious Epithites o engage the admiration of the vulgar: But Sir,

1. Antiquity may be no Argument of its glory, verity, or goodness; these
learned men know this is the loud and common cry of Pagans for their Idolatry;
and Papists for their Superstition and Papacy which will in point of Age appear
the Elder Brother to Englands Prelacy: Pope Gregory being before Austin the
Monk, the first Archbishop of Canterbury; and yet is not owned as any addition
to their glory, or demonstration of their verity; for as true Religion is first
received, so it is after corruption reformed by the Redeemed from the vain
Conversation received by tradition from their fathers.

2. Order is indeed very amiable in any Act; but what they mean by the orderly
proceeding of the first Reformation, I know not; sure I am that the precedence
of the Laity unto the Clergy in a work of this nature in which they should have
been Dictators, was more just than regular: And when I consider the first step
of Reformation in the expulsion of the Popes Supremacy (supported by all the
Bishops unto a praemunire) to have sprung in Henery the eighth, from discontent
at the Popes dealing in the business of Queen Katharine, rather than conscience
of its sinfulness; to have been steered by policy, not piety; to stand
consistent with a retention, and fiery inforcement of Popish Doctrine and
Worship, unto the persecution and burning of Tyndal, Lambert, and others; and
imposing of the six Articles (in which I must confess Cranmer quit himself like
a faithful Bishop, but others I find not opposing) And when I observe the Line
which first ruled in Henery the eighth his days, to be retained and runthrough
the Reformation of King Edward the sixth, and was too much regarded in the time
of Queen Elizabeth (who both acted from a more pious principle, had but their
Counselors captivated their policy, and the little knowledge of those
reforming days given them to see, and set up in its luster and power, the
square and right Rule of Reformation) I cannot but say Gods power is much more
manifest in the first Reformation of England, than was man's order; and yet what
order was, History witnesses to have been, though under, yet without, yea,
against the Bishops; Fox, Acts and Monuments, p. 959.
The hundred and eighteen thousand eight hundred and forty pounds paid by the
Bishops of the two Provinces, Canterbury and York, for their pardon from the
praemunire, does proclaim their opposition at the first. The thirty persons
chosen out of the Parliament to consider and conclude Articles of Religion, and
Cranmer and Ridleys Politic plea against pious Prince Edward the sixth, for
the Mass of his Sister Mary, and the afterconclusions in their Convocations, do
not speak much of forwardness at the last, whilst in the one, or in the other,
they went not any faster; than driven by the Kings injunctions.

3. No marvel that they who could not see in this Reformation any disorder,
could not hear any noise of tumults attend it, and yet if I mistake not, the
Tarratantara-murmur of the Lincolnshire and Yorkshire men in their rebellious
holy pilgrimage, headed by Dr. Makeree, denominated Captain Cobbler, and abetted
by many of the Clergy; not that I find resisted or quieted by any Episcopal
influence in the time of Henry the eighth; and the like insurrections of
Suffolk, Yorkshire, Oxfordshire, Devon-shire, Cornwall, and other Counties,
against the Reformation by King Edward the sixth, does signify unto me that
the Reformation was not at first more preposterouss than violent and
tumultuous, though not in the Authors, yet in the opposition and reluctance of
its subjects, occasioning this note to be left upon it,

Tantae molis erat Romanum evertere sedem. Yet I must not by reason of the one
or other, deny it to have been happy; but I desire freely to acknowledge that
this Reformed Religion in the degree attained, has since happily flourished
unto the honor of our own, and envy of other Nations; only I see not wherein
this Government (the extirpation of which is Covenanted to be endeavored) did
either occasion, or add unto the happiness and honor thereof; I am sure it is
noted by others; and were I the first observe of it, I durst undertake to make
it good, That Religion had sparkled and flourished with more honor and
happiness, in an higher degree of Reformation, than it yet does, if not
retarded, and sometimes retrogaded by Englands Episcopal Prelates, who have
made it so much pompous unto sense, and the Worlds admiration, but so little
powerful to the spirit: But, Sir, I love not to recriminate, or reproach things
or persons; I shall therefore pass this applause of our late Prelacy, with this
Request, That the Masters and Scholars of Oxford, or any other, will please to
tell us what there is in this Government, so special and peculiar for its
efficacy, to the order and quiet of Reformation, that may not be sound in
another Form of Government; for that only is of the essence, and so must be the
Emphasis of this Episcopacy.

Subsectio Septima.
The apprehension of the worth of this Government, had, Sir, its full influence
on the affections of these learned men; they therefore profess themselves.

1. Affected with grief and amazement to see it endeavored to be extirpated
without any reasons offered to their understanding, for which it should be
thought necessary or expedient so to do.

2. Ranked with Popery, Superstition, Heresy and Profaness.

3. Intimated to be some way or other contrary to sound Doctrine, or the power
of godliness.

Unto all this I shall say in brief:

1. That if the constant struglings of this Government, Their grounds of
affection and amazement at Extirparion of Prelacy examined.
with the Civil power and encroachment, on the Royal Authority in all Ages
having not kept its bounds, but hy exercising absolute independent Authority in
their own Names, and under their own Seals, in a Legislative Declaration of
what is Treason; and by an Imperial power to prescribe Oaths to be sworn, as
in the Canons of 1640. the Bishops of both Provinces did presume to do; if its
innovation, defense and propagation of erroneous Doctrines and Superstition; if
its suppression of Truth, and true Religion, by silencing, suspending faithful
Preachers; if its violence, irregularity and injustice in High Commission
Censures, banishing, imprisoning, confiscating, stigmatizing, and
excommunicating of the best of men for mere trifles, things indifferent, so
judged by themselves) at the least; nay, many times for opposing profaness and
superstition; yea, for performing their duties in praying and preaching; and
the like evils which did attend it, though (I should say) but accidentally, by
the corruption of Montague, Laud, Wren, Pierce, and their Companions, be
written in such sensible Acts, and legible Characters, that England might feel,
and the World read them; I think there need not be much of Reason offered to
show, not only the expediency, but necessity of extirpation of a Government,
though in it self good, yet capable of such enormities, unless it be of an
immediate and undoubted divine right.

But, Sir, Had not Oxford their numbers in Parliament? and did they not trust
them with their understandings? or must a Parliament offer Reasons of the
necessity and expediency of every Act they impose on the Subject, before the
Subject yield obedience? and yet the Vote of the House of Commons past the
10th. of June, 1641. viz. That this Government has been found by long
experience to be a great impediment to the perfect reformation and growth of
Religion, and very prejudicial to the Civil State; together with the learned
Speeches of many Members in the House, printed; to offer Reason without, as
well as within doors, might have laid something before the judgments of these
Gentlemen. I presume, Sir, the Subjects obedience must not (in the judgment of
this University) be suspended until the Reasons of State producing the
resolution be known to, and and apprehended by every person and society.

2. If this Prelacy judged thus evil; were but contemporary with Popery,
Superstition, Heresy, Schism and Profaneness; though we should presume it
good, I hope it may be ranked amongst its fellows, and taken upon suspicion, it
may be a grief, but no wrong to stay an honest man found in company with
Thieves; when he has cleared himself, justice will let him go.

But Sir, if this Prelatical Government be in the formality of it, a plain and
clear Papacy, as the deriving it from Rome, and its standing on no basis but
the constitutions of the Church when Popish, and institution of the Pope, not
Christ or any Christian Magistrate, nor General Assembly of the Ministers of
the Church of God in this Kingdom; the owning of Anselme Archbishop of
Canterbury, Papam alterius mundi, the content all Papists find in the same,
(could they but continue it in dependence on Rome, for Consecration and
Investiture, pure circumstances, not of the essence of the Government;) and
principally its springing from the same principles, standing on the same Basis,
the indulgence of Princes, and being supported by the selfsame Arguments and
Authorities which are urged by Bellarmine, and the Council of Trent, History of
the Council of Trent, Edit. 3. p. 589, 590. to p. 616.
for the defense of the Papacy (in all which respects it must needs appear,
that the difference between an universal Metropolitan or Diocesan Bishop, is in
degrees and limits, not in kind; for is there not the same reason for
Archbishops over Bishops, to receive their Oath of Obedience, as for Juridical
Bishops over Presbyters; and so the same for Cardinals over Archbishops, and
Popes over Cardinals?) do suggest it to be; and if it were the Footstool or
Stirrup of the Papacy, as Salmasius does at large demonstrate in his Apparatus
ad Papatum; and as Beza does affirm, when he tells us, Episcopi Papam
pepererunt. Beza. Epist. 79. I hope it can be no great wrong to rank it with
Popery, which might be its proper name, though through use of a larger
signification.

And if, Sir, its Rule whereby to square it, and Reason of sustentation be that
which is not more openly Canted by some, then indeed generally practiced;
(viz.) No Ceremonies, no Bishop, whereby the Cross in Baptism, the Altar, the
Surplice, and other matters innovated into the worship of God, the use of which
(how edifying soever to the Church of God) is a formal Superstition; it cannot
be much abused to call Superstition its companion.

And if it have been found to indulge Heresy, by publishing and printing cum
priveligio, all Heretical Notions, and silencing the Pulpit, and stopping the
Press from all possibility of Confutation; or if by innovation of Superstition
into worship, and obtrusion of Error in Doctrine on the souls of men, it has
provoked Schism, I hope there is no great cause of complaint for putting these
together with it.

And if it have been approved a protection and promotion of Revels,
Church-ales, Clerks-ales, The seventy two Ministers of Somersetshire in their
unanimous consent to the continuance of Revels, Church-ales, etc.
Sports and Pastimes on the Lords day; so that its Deans and Chapters, or other
College and Conventions, have proved like unto Bishop Pierce his Septuagint in
their Agreement against Justice Richardson's order for suppressing of these and
the like profaness, certified in a letter to the late Archbishop, dated the
fifth of November, 1633. and suppressing all Ministers that refuse to stir up
such licentiousness, as did the visitations of the Archbishop of Canterbury,
Bishop Pierce, and others; it sure can be no great wrong to rank it with
profaness, and intimate it to have in it some contrariety to the power of
godliness; to which (whatever some few, very few, Bishops might do) the
current of Episcopacy did never yield much countenance, or speak much amity.
Sir, in these and the like respects, the extirpation hereof must be endeavored
by all that will not partake of other men's sins; and I must be free to tell
them, that in their Parallel case propounded (which yet will not square) the
alteration, yea, extirpation of the Civil Government of the City, capable of
such proximity unto Treason, Murder, Advltery, Theft, Cousenage, and the like,
would be by all ingenuous men judged both just and reasonable; but I insist too
long in abatement of their affection, who offer Arguments by which they were
persuaded to adhere unto their object; let us therefore weigh them severally.

Subsectio Octava.
This Preface being past, they proceed to the Reasons why they cannot Covenant
an endeavor to extirpate Prelacy; that is to say, The Government by
Archbishops, Bishops, their Chancellours, or Commissaries, Deans, Deans and
Chapters, Archdeacons and all other Ecclesiastical Officers depending on that
Hierarchy: And they propound five Reasons; two relate unto the Government, the
third and fifth unto their own capacity, and the fourth unto the estate of the
Church; according to this order I shall consider them: And,

1. Oxford first and second exception to the extirpation of Prelacy.
They tell us, They are not satisfied how they can with a good conscience swear
to extirpate Episcopal Government, which say they, we think to be, if not Jure
Divino, in the strictest sense by express command, yet of Apostolical
institution; that is to say, was established in the Churches by the Apostles,
according to the mind, and after the example of their Master, Jesus Christ; and
that by virtue of their ordinary power and authority derived from him, as
deputed by him Governors of his Church.

Or at least that Episcopal Aristocracy may lay a more just title and claim to
a Divine Institution, than Papal Monarchy, Presbyterial Democracy, and
Independants by particular Congregations, or gathered Churches.

2. We are assured by the undoubted testimony of Ancient Records, and later
History, that this Form of Government has been continued with such an
universal, uninterrupted, unquestioned succession in all the Churches, and in
all Kingdoms that have been called Christian, for fifteen hundred years
together; that there never was in all that time any considerable opposition
against it; that of Aerius was the greatest, which grew from discontent, and
gained him the reputation of an Heretic.

From which antiquity to depart, they fear by this extirpation to give
advantage to the Papists by contempt of antiquity; and should diminish the
Authority due to the consentient judgment and practice of the universal
Church, etc.

Sir, this is a very fair and specious exception; for Divine Institution, and
ancient universal practice are very strong bars against any Oath; and strong
conjecture of the one, and certain assurance of the other, do forcibly
supersede any man's acting to the contrary; yet Sir,

I wonder that these learned men do but think of a Divine Institution, and yet
are assured of ancient universal practice, uninterrupted for fifteen hundred
year; methinks the last should rather have remained doubtful; for conscience
can only be satisfied in the certainty of the former: A think so in a Divine
Warrant, is both sinful and dangerous; and I think the universal uniterrupted
practice of the Church for fifteen hundred years might well run back unto the
times of our Lord and Savior, and at least the Acts of his Apostles; and the
Sacred, as well as Ecclesiastical Story, might make mention of this Government,
and so create an undeniable certainty; for the one, is a very uncertain ground
of assurance without the other: But stay Sir, I forgot the year in which these
learned men wrote, it was 1647. and so indeed one hundred and forty years might
return before Episcopal Government appeared in the World; and yet they may by
ancient Records, and later Histories, find the practice of it fifteen hundred
years; but this will more weaken, than strengthen the Divine Right; for without
doubt, the most primitive and pure estate of the Church was in the first one
hundred and forty years.

2. Their Argument loses its force, by the ambiguity of their terms; for I am
Sir, at the same loss with them, for the Ratio formalis objecti, Saint Peter's
Bonds abide. p. 2, 3.
the thing to be extirpated, as in my last with Dr. Gauden. They tell us of an
Episcopal Government, and an Episcopal Aristocracy, but do not describe it; it
is no marvel that the Popes Legates should interdict the dispute in the Council
of Trent, History of the Council of Trent, Edit. 3. p. 591, 592.
concerning the Divine Right of Episcopal Superiority, or direct it into such
general and uncertain debates, that there might be of it no determination; but,
Sir, I think it very strange that a Protestant University, professedly seeking
satisfaction to their conscience, should so sophistically by general terms of
an uncertain acceptance, maintain to themselves doubts to which they desire
resolution. They well know Episcopal Government may denominate the Government
Communi Concilio Presbyterorum, by all Ministers in the Church, who are the
very true undoubted Scripture-Bishops; unto which, or whom there may be ordinis
causa, for method sake, a Superintendent Moderator or Chairman; and this
Episcopal Government is undoubtedly of Divine Institution, and ancient
practice, prescribed by the Holy Ghost, and propounded in the sacred story of
the Acts of the Apostles, Chap. 20.28. where, as in other Scriptures, Bishops
and Presbyters are terms synonimous, denominating persons invested with the
same Office and Authority, and enjoying the same qualifications, and by common
consent ruling the Church of Christ; and then, Sir, we must tell them this is
not to be endeavored to be extirpated, nor does the Covenant so propound it;
which if it do, I consent to reject it.

But if by Episcopal Government, they mean that special Form and Frame of
Government wherein one person is advanced into a distinct order of Ministry
above other Ministers, and is invested with Prince-like power over them,
enjoying an Authority peculiar to him, eonomine, as Bishop, of sole Ordination
and Jurisdiction, unto whom all other his Fellow-Ministers are Subjects, and
must swear to him obedience, who must have a Council denominated, Deans,
Deacons, Prebends, Chapters, and the like, over and among whom he sits as Lord;
and yet over him acknowledges a more superior order under the title of
Archbishop, to whom he owes and swears obedience; and in this superior
order, and lordly manner, he rules all Pastors, and People, sometimes by
himself, sometimes by his Chancellor or Comissary, his Surrogates, Deans, and
Archdeacons, with all Officers of State and Power within such prefixed bounds
and limits, which is called his peculiar Diocese; and either they must mean
this, or mistake the meaning of the Covenant; which yet does very plainly
describe the Prelacy to be extirpated, to be a Government by Archbishops,
Bishops, their Chancellours, Commissaries, Deans, etc. And then, Sir, I must
deny, not that they think (for I must believe the profession of their thought,
though I think it strange) but that there is any good ground for such thoughts:
and the opinion of an University, will not without good demonstration in this
point, beget such thoughts in me, That the Apostles by virtue of their ordinary
power and authority derived from Christ, and deputed Governors of his Church,
did ever establish this Episcopal Government; or that it was according to the
mind, and after the example of Jesus Christ, who himself did never exercise a
Pompous and Princely power over his Disciples; but conversed with them as his
Peers and Equals; and gave them in charge that they should not affect
Superiority one over another, or Princely power over Gods Heritage.

I must put these Masters and Scholars of Oxford, to prove by plain and
pregnant Scripture, That the Office of the Ministry may in Ordination be
divided, and only some part of it be thereby committed; so as that the Deacons
may preach and baptize, but not consecrate the Lords Supper.

That there are more orders of the Ministry than one, the Bishop or Presbyter,
or more Officers in the Church, than Elders and Deacons, appointed by Christ or
his Apostles by their Apostolical Authority, who have only described their
qualification, and directed the Ordination of these two, and no more. That the
Presbyter (in whom is required the same qualification; to whom is to be yielded
the same obedience, subjection and respest; who receives the same Ordination,
and is charged with the same duty, and invested with the same power of feeding
and governing the Church of God, with the Bishop, and none other) is an order
distinct from and subject to the Bishop, so to be ruled by him, and not to
exercise his Office, but by the Bishops License, and at his pleasure; and that
the Presbyter is bound to swear obedience to the Bishop as his Ordinary.

That certain particular Priests or Deacons should by Papal constitution and
Princely indulgence without the counsel and common suffrages of the College of
Presbyters, bespeaking their conset, or consent of the common people, The force
of Prelacy covenanted against.
be constituted a College or Cathedral Council to the Bishop, to advise with
him, and rule under him, by the name of Deans, Deans and Chapters, Archdeacon
and Prebends, to Elect the Bishop in vacancy, and hold Courts, constitute
Canons, and exercise all Jurisdiction over all Churches and Ministers, not
being so much as chosen by them, or having their consent, much less commission
so to do.

That any one Minister or Bishop does stand charged with all the Congregations
and Pastors of them in one County, or many Counties making one Diocese; and be
by virtue of office bound to the inspection, and pastoral Correction and
Government of them; and that the several Bishops of a Kingdom be themselves
subject to one Metropolitan Church and Archbishop, to whom they shall swear
obedience, and shall be subject to be by him overseen, ordered and corrected;
sure if the Word of God conclude such superiority over the Church in one
Kingdom, it will conclude a Catholic superiority over the universal Church;
and advance the Pope as warrantably above the Archbishops, as the Archbishops
are above the Bishops, and the Bishops above the Presbyters; for these are not
differences of kind, but of degree; nor is there pleaded for Divine Right, or
Apostolical Institution of the one in the Church of England, what is not
pleaded for the other by the Fathers of the Council of Trent; and by Bellarmine
that Cardinal Popes Champion; Bellarm. de Clericis. lib. 1.5. cap. 14.
and who can deny a quatenus ad omne, etc?

Lastly, That Bishops and Ministers of the Gospel may exercise their Office and
Function by Vicegerents and Deputies, Commissaries or Chancellours; or that by
any Apostolical direction they may, and have authority to Commissionate any
such; or that the determination and disposal of Civil Affairs, Matters of
Marriage, and Administrations, belong to them; that they must by themselves, or
joining unto themselves, Professors and Students of the Civil Law, keep Courts,
on which Proctors, Apparitros, and the like are dependent; and so judicially
rule and govern in these cases.

This is the Form of Government these learned Casuists must think, is, if not
of Divine Right by immediate precept from God, yet established by the Apostles,
according to the mind, and after the example of their Master, Jesus Christ, and
that by virtue of their power and authority, as deputed Governors of the
Church; or otherwise their thoughts are very vain and impertinent; for not an
Episcopal Government wherein all the Bishops, Ministers of the Church within
any City, Country or Kingdom, invested with equal authority and dignity, being
all of the same Order, do by common Council govern the Church; but this
specifical Prelacy, presuming it self to be an Hierarchy, or holy Government,
and chief Priesthood, not to be gain-sayed without high profaness; or
with-stood and destroyed without sacrilege, formally existing in Archbishops,
super our Princes to Bishops; Bishops, Sovereign Lords to all Ministers or
Presbyters; and enjoying the standing Cathedral Council, and subordinate
Judges, Deans, Archdeacons, Deans and Chapter, and transmitting their power,
and Episcopal authority to Chancellours and Commissaries; and so ruling with
all state, and pompous attendants; not only men's profession of Religion, but
their propriety of civil enjoyments, is Covenanted to be extirpated. I hope
Sir, that these serious men would not cozen their own Consciences, and cheat
the World; by their observation the Covenant would bind us against Episcopacy
and Bishops in general; and not take notice how it is limited to one particular
kind; and then Sir, I must be free to tell them, That the Divine Right, or
Apostolical Institution of this Episcopal Government, is but a think so, of no
more value than a dream; for I not only think, but am sure, the libraries of
learning, in all that famous Univesity, will never lay us down this Form of
Government in the Church of Ephesus, (though I should grant Timothy to be a
Bishop therein) Antioch, Philippi, Creet, or the seven Churches of Asia
(supposing their Angels to have been Bishops) in all which I deny not a
Government by Bishops, and those made by the Holy Ghost; to whom I will presume
to think, had I then lived, and been invested with that Ministerial authority I
now by Gods grace enjoy, poor, simple I, might have stood up as a Peer, or at
least Bishop Suffragan; and if they give not some Scripture instance, I think
Ecclesiastical story will never prove the Apostles established this Form of
Government in the Church; or at least, not by their Apostolical power and
authority, as deputed by Christ governors of the Church; and I am sure, not
after the example, nor according to the mind of Jesus Christ their Master; it
being directly inconsistent with the quality of this Kingdom, and dictated
parity of his Ministers.

Sir (with Reverence may I speak it) I think it had been very suitable to the
learning and gravity of this learned Assembly, to have laid down in this case
of conscience, some clear Reasons for their conjecture of this Divine Right,
and Apostolical Institution and Establishment: And the rather, for that Pope
Nicholas has affirmed, Omnes sive Patriarchae cujuslibet apicem, sive
Metropolean primatus, aut Episcopatuum Cathedras vel Eccl siarum, sive
cujuscunque ordinis dignitatem, instituit Romana Ecclesia: That Rome appointed
all Ecclesiastical Dignities of Bishops, Archbishops, Deans, Archdeacons,
etc. And Pope Apud Gratian. Did. 22. cap. 1.
Lucius and Clement, with whom agrees Peter Lombard, and our own Historians,
That King Lucius instituted three Arch-bishopricks, and Distinct 80. lib. 4.
dif. 24. Brit Hist. lib. 4. page 126. Polichro. lib. 4. c. 16. fol. 163. Pagets
Christianography. Fox says 28. chief Priests, called Flammens; Acts and
Monuments. p. 96. Fol. 59, 60.
twenty five Bishoprics in the room and stead of the three Archflamens, and
twenty five flamens: And that Devotus, the Bishop of Winchester, falling into
the seat of the flamen thereof, had all the possessions within twelve Miles
cmopass, containing thirty two Villages, conferred on him and his Clergy: And
the Archbishops, Bishops and Clergy of England, in their Institution of a
Christian man, dedicated to Henry the eighth, have told all the World, It is
out of all doubt, that there is no mention made, neither in the Scripture,
neither in the Writings of any authentical Doctor, or Auctor of the Church
being within the time of the Apostles; that Christ did ever make or institute
any distinction or difference to be in the pre-eminence of Power, Order, or
Jurisdiction between the Apostles themselves, or between the Bishops
themselves; but that they were all equal in power, authority, and jurisdiction;
and that there is now, and since the time of the Apostles, such difference
among the Bishops, it was devised by the ancient Fathers of the primitive
Church, for the conservation of good order and unity of the Catholic Church;
and that either by the consent and authority, or else by the permission and
suffering of the Prince, and civil power for the time ruling, the said Fathers
considering the infinite multitude of Christians so greatly increased, taking
examples from the Old Testament, thought it expedient to make degrees among
Bishops, and to limit their several Diocesses, bounds of Jurisdiction and
Power: And then, Sir, this Form of Government will seem to be more Jewish,
Papal, Paganish, or at best political and civil, than Apostolical; the last of
which, the Statutes of our Kingdom do declare it to be, affirming that the
Archbishops, Bishops, Archdeacons, and other Ecclesiastical persons have no
manner of Jurisdiction Ecclesiastical, 26. Hen 8. cap. 26.31. Henr. 8. cap. 9,
10.37 Hen 8 cap. 17. 1. Ed. 6 cap. 2, 1, 5, 8. Eliz, c. 1.
but by, under, and from the Kings Royal Majesty; and Patrick Adamson,
Archbishop of Saint Andrews in Scotland, Anno 1591. in his Recantation at the
Synod at Fife, professed sincerely, ex animo, That Bishops and Ministers are by
the Word of God equal, and the Hierarchy or Superiority of the Bishops, nullo
nititur verbi fundamento: And I think it had been but Reason some satisfactory
answer had been given to Gersom Bucer his Dissertationes de Gubernatione
Ecclesiae; Didoclavius his Altar Damascenum; Cartwright's Exceptions; Paul
Bains his Diocesan Trial, Smectymnus; and especially Mr. William Pryns public
and positive Challenge, in the unbishoping of Timothy and Titus, which I think
will be ad Grecas Calendas, before they think so of an University had been
published as a stumbling Block to the peoples swearing of the Solemn League and
Covenant, when thereunto called by Parliament.

But it may be, Sir, I run too fast; methinks their think so of Divine Right
and Apostolical establishment, is asserted very faintly; and therefore it is
restrained and limited with an Episcopal Aristocracy, has a fairer pretension,
and may lay a juster title and claim to a Divine Institution, than Papal
Monarchy, Presbyterian Democracy or Independent: Yet I must say, fair
pretension, and comparative claims are very weak props against Parliamentary
Resolves, and the power of an Oath; it must be plain and undeniable Divine
Right must stand against them.

But what is that they call Episcopal Aristocracy; Are not these learned men
mistaken in their terms? has not Englands Episcopacy been ever deemed a
Monarchy? and of the same kind, but lower degree with Papacy! How can it be
conformable to the Government of the Nation, which these very men tell us, is
Merum Imperium, an Empire, Monarchy p. 11? and establish that Maxim, no Bishop
no King, if it be an Aristocracy! Whoever deemed Presbytery a Democracy? Or on
what colorable ground can it be so deemed? does not this Form fix the
Government in the seniores and illustrior pars populi: The Officers of the
Church ordering all, and ruling the whole Church, excluding the Congregation
from all Acts of Government: save a showing their just exception to any Order,
Office, or Censure? If Presbytery be a Democracy, what can Independency be
judged? I find these learned men by the nicety of this distinction, at a loss
for its name, as well they might, and so I shall leave it, and suppose a
willingness in the University of Oxford to assent to Doctor Whitakers Thesis,
That Regimen Ecclesiae non est Monarchicum, nec Aristocraticum, nec
Democraticum, sed Democratica Monarchica Aristocratica; That the Government of
the Church is a Formal Aristocracy, qualified with something of Monarchy, which
he means not to be the superiority of Prelates, and Democracy; by which is not
meant the ruling power of the people; let but this learned Doctor explain
himself, and Mr. Thomas Cartwright expound, nay, translate his words; and we
shall find a Government which will lay a very fair claim unto a Divine Right,
Si velimus Christum ipsum respiscere, fuit semper Ecclesiae Regimen
Monarchicum; Whitak. oper. Tom. 2. de Romans Pont. Quest. 12. de Origin. Eccles.
Cartwrights first Reply to Whitakers gift. page. 35
si Ecclesiae Presbyteros, qui in Doctrina and Disciplina suas parts agebant
Aristocratioun; si totum corpus Ecclesiae quatenus in Electione Episcoporum and
Presbyterorum, suffragia ferebat; ita tamen ut (...), semper Presbyteris
servatur Democraticum; which Cartwright thus renders, The Church is governed
with that kind of Government, the Philosophers have affirmed to be the best;
for in respect of Christ the head (not his Vicar or Superiority of single
Prelates) it is a Monarchy; in respect of the Ancients and Pastors that govern
in common; (all the Presbytery) with like Authority among themselves (not a
Superiority over them) it is an Aristocracy; and in respect the people are not
excluded, but have their interest (unto exception) in Church Matters, it is a
Democracy: If then these men will take down the towering power of Prelates, and
turn their Magisterial Throne into a Ministerial Chair; and bring into the
Cathedral Council of Deans and Chapters, all the Presbyters, and let these
lofty persons stand amongst their Fellows, till by common consent, for common
order one of them be set in the Chair to gather Suffrages, regulate the
Assembly, declare their sentence, and see to the execution of their Decrees,
and summon them together, they shall constitute a Government, which I think
will not only fairly pretend unto, but plainly appear to have an Apostolical
Institution and Establishment; and there are very many, both ancient and
modern Authors of my opinion; and then we need no more dispute the matter of
extirpation of Prelacy; for in this sense the Covenant will rather establish it.

Their think so of Divine Right turns into an assurance of universal
uninterrupted succession of this Form of Government in all Kingdoms that have
been called Christian, for fifteen hundred years together, without any
considerable opposition, save that of Aerius, which sprang from discontent, and
gained him the reputation of an Heretic.

This is, Sir, the old, only, and usual guard of Prelacy; I will not deny
Antiquity its due Reverence, though I put not on it, The Antiquity of Englands
Prelacy observed.
nor consent unto it an authority equal with, or as the Papists Idolize it,
above the Scriptures. I confess in matters of Fact, it may give a clearer
conviction, than direction, and assert things past done, rather than that they
should be done and continue.

It is well if their certain assurance in matter of Fact, be any better
bottomed, than their think so, in point of Divine Right. I know not what might
be their undoubted testimony of ancient Records, and later Histories, for they
mention none; and therein their faith must be unto themselves; but by such
Ancient or Modern Histories as I have observed, it is very difficult to find
this Form of Government (which must relate unto that to be extirpated by the
Covenant, or else it is vain) to have been either universal, or uninterrupted
in all Kingdoms that have been called Christian, for half fifteen hundred
years; for if they account backward from the time of their writing, they will
find a violent interruption, and indeed extirpation of this Form of Government
by Christian the King of Denmark, in the year 1537. as contrary to Christ his
Institution; and then they will lose more then one of their fifteen hundred
years without interruption, and that in a Kingdom called Christian; and this
Sir was to sense, whatever it was to reason, a more considerable opposition
than that of Aerius; not to mention the interruptions and extirpation in
Scotland; which I presume may be to them of little weight, that people in their
eye scarce appearing Christian.

And if they will account forward, from the Nativity of our Lord, their fifteen
hundred years of universal, uninterrupted, Episcopal Government by
Archbishops, Bishops, Deans, Deans and Chapters, will rise very heavily; for
let it be considered, that the division and distribution of Churches into
Parishes and Diocesses, came not into the world for more than two hundred and
sixty years; Polid. Virg. Invent. l. 4. c. 9.
and until that time, small Towns and Villages had their Bishops, and all
Bishops were before and after that chosen by the people, not by their Princes;
and so long there could be no Metropolitan, Archiepiscopi vero su Hibernia
nulli fuerunt; sed tantum se invicem Episcopi consecrabant donec Johannes
Papyrio Romanae sedis legatus ad venit. Hic 4. Pallia in Hiberniam portavit.
Archiepiscopal seat, nor Cathedral Episcopal Diocese. And will they give an
Irish man leave to tell them, that Saint Patrick sent into Ireland by Eleuth
rius, more than two hundred years after Christ, did consecrate as many Bishops,
as he did constitute Churches in that Kingdom, three hundred and sixty five of
each? and that from his time, to the coming in of Johannes Papyrio, the Popes
Legate, Anno 1152. Girald. Cambr. Topograph. Hiber. destinct. 3. cap. 17. Vid.
The Religion professed by the Ancient Irish in an Epistle to the late Primate
Usher, by Sir Christopher Sipthorpe, Knight, page 58.
there were no Arch-bishopricks in that Kingdom, and yet it was called
Christian; and if the instance may not offend them, I would mind them, that
Bishop Usher, the late Primate of Armagh, in his Treatise, De Primordiis
Ecclesiarum Britannicarum, page 800. does affirm out of John Major, De Gestis
Scotorum, That in ancient times, the Scots were instructed in the Christian
Faith by the Priests and Monks, and had no Bishops, before the coming of
Palladius, into their Country; and after that Palladius made Bishops, they had
no Diocese, until Malcolme, the third King of Scotland; but every Bishop did
exercise his Episcopal Function wherever he came; who cites also John Fordon,
Scotichronicon. lib. 3. cap. 8. on the same account; so that then we shall not
find this Form of Government by Diocesan Bishops, Cathedral Churches, and by
Archbishops, to have been received in some Kingdoms half fifteen hundred
years; and what then becomes of the assurance of these learned men?

Moreover, though the opposition of Aerius seem in their eye on inconsiderable
one, yet it is such as stated a principle, which being once admittee (as it
cannot be denied) and obtained but liberty to be improved to the direction of
the Government to be practiced, will subvert the foundation, and pull down the
superiority of Archbishops, Bishop, Deans, and the like; for if all Ministers,
Presbyters and Bishops be of the same order, office and authority; we cannot
but infer, Who are ye that advance your selves in the house of God, and Lord it
over your Brethren, and Gods heritage? and notwithstanding that this principle
be clouded by the occasion on which it was divulged by him, the man's
discontent; we must say that Discontent is a better Dictator than Judge; and
God knows how to make men's grudges grind out the knowledge of his truth, mind
and will; I hope it will be deemed but a poor defense of the Popes Supreamacy
in England, to say that King Henry the eighth in a discontented humor did cast
it off, and was for it excommunicated; and here the Reason is the same; a great
noise is made, and advantage taken, that Aerius was reputed an Heretic, for
affirming the parity of Presbyters with Bishops; and yet Sir, it would be well
noted by whom, and by what authority he was branded as an Heretic; it was not
by any Council, or Primitive Fathers; but by one only man, Epiphanius, though
to be Reverenced in the Church; yet by this administers little cause of regard:
I think many in Oxford will be loath to have Arminian notions (more opposite to
the grace of God, than Aerius notions to good order) publicly damned as
Heresy, which yet were condemned by the Synod of Dort; and though that were
not a general Council, it wins more Authority than the censure of Epiphanius;
Saint Augustine therefore repeating the opinion of Aerius, as recited by
Epiphanius, does more modestly denominate it Proprium Dogma; August. de
haeresibus cap. 53.
and others repeating the Heresies of Aerius, make no mention of this among
them; nor indeed was there Reason, if in the Council of Trent, Michael of
Medina were deservedly chidden, for saying, History of the Council of Trent, p.
591.
Hierom and Austin fell into the Heresy of Aerius, and affirmed the degree of
a Bishop, was no greater than the degree of a Priest: I hope that is not
Heresy in Aerius, which is Orthodox in Austin, Jerome, and others; truly Sir I
think the ingenuity of the Masters and Scholars of Oxford, might have led them
to have considered, and indeed publicly contradicted, Collected by Mr. William
Prynne, as an Appendix to his unbishoping Timothy and Titus.
the Catalogue of testimonies in all Ages, evidencing Bishops and Presbyters to
be one equal, and the same in Jurisdiction, Dignity, Order and Degree; whereby
in five several squadrons, Christ and his Apostles, Ignatius, Policarpus,
Anacletus, Justin Martyr, and many of the ancient Fathers; Peter Lombard,
Gratian, Hugo Cardinalis, and many other Canonists and Schoolmen; the
Waldenses, Alphonsus, Castro, Gersomus Bucer, and a multitude of Foreign
Divines and Churches; our own, Sedulus, Anselme, Beda, Occham, Fulk, Juel,
Reynolds, Whitaker, and almost who not, in every place and age, are produced,
as thinking the same thing, which in A^rius is called Heresy; for certainly so
general a consent to a conclusion so weighty, is a very considerable opposition
directly repugnant to their confidence of an universal uninterrupted exercise
of this Form of Government; for now had Epiphanius more warrantably, and on
better grounds called this an Heresy, I should not much regard it; nor will
their assurance of this Argument avail, to establish this kind of Prelacy, or
to anticipate the promise on Oath of a due endeavor to extirpate it.

We see, Sir, there is nothing of weight in the Government, either on the
supposed Apostolical Institution, or ancient universal uninterrupted practice,
that could bar from taking, much less bind unto the breaking of this second
Article of the Solemn League and Covenant; let us consider what is in the state
of the Church of England, Oxford fourth exception to the second Article of the
Covenant.
which may bind the perpetuation of this Government, or be of force to bar the
extirpation thereof; and that in their fourth exception to this Article,
wherein they tell us;

In respect of the Church of England, they cannot swear to extirpate this
Government, for three Reasons.

1. The Inconveniences which attend all change in Government; and in this is
like to be great, it being deeply rooted in the Laws, and of strong influence
on the Civil State.

2. Repugnant to the Declaration of the Commons-in Parliament.

3. And a striking at the foundation of this Famous Church of England.

Unto all which I cannot but briefly say, That the two first seem in my
thoughts very little to respect the Church; for the alteration which might
ensue in the Civil State, might consist with, and conduce unto the being, and
well-being of the Church; and the declared purposes of the House of Commons
might be contradicted without any great reflection on the Church.

2. Jealousies of inconvenient effects, must not intercept a duty; These
effects may be accidental, the duty positive; and it is the prudence of
Legislators to foresee, and prepare against such incoveniences, as may happen
on the alteration of Laws, and Forms of Government; I question how far the
care thereof lies on private persons or societies; And if these jealousies
were of weight for continuation of Episcopacy now, why not at the destruction
of Monasteries and Abbeys, and exclusion of the Popes Supremacy? (which was the
root, to which Prelacy is but a Branch since continued) in conjunction with,
and influence on the Civil State; by Magna Charta, the grant of the glorious
King Saint Edward, and most of the ancient Laws from which this Government
does at this day draw its sap and strength.

3. The Delaration of Parliament pleaded as a Bar to this extirpation, does
offer Reasons for its alterations, which I think are of weight; (viz.) its
strenuous study and endeavor to effect a conjunction between Papists and
Protestants in Doctrine, Discipline and Worship, being before agreed in
judgment: its Tyrannical imposing a Liturgy in Scotland, and enforcing it
after an happy pacification by his late Serene Majesty, with the Bellum
Episcopale; its violence and cruelty to Religion, and Religious men, in the
Star Chamber, and High Commission Courts; and what themselves observe, its
influence on the Civil State, which made this Prelacy odious in all Ages, and
was a very likely provocation to its extirpation in England, as in Denmark; and
if they will but please to consider, that sinful superiority over the Ministers
of the Gospel, which is the anima animans, very form of it, and cannot be
capable of any remedy, but by its ruin; all which having been published in
print, by many Petitions to, Speeches in, and Declarations from the Parliament,
might have offered Reasons for the extirpation to counterpoise, nay, weigh down
all feared inconveniences which might arise, had these learned men pleased to
have observed them; so that if the House of Commons did any way declare the
continuance of it, it was from their indulgence and willingness by all fair
means, if possible, to regulate it, rather than any merit of the Government it
self.

4. But the supposed repugnancy of this branch of the Covenant, unto the
Declaration of the House of Commons, is not to me so visible; these Gentlemen
refer us unto the Remonstrance of December the fifth, 1641. and tell us, That
the House of Commons Remonstrated, that it was far from their purpose or
desire, to abolish the Church Government, but rather that all the Members of
the Church of England should be regulated by such Rules of Order and
Discipline, as are established by Parliament: Which words, by the variation of
the character I imagined, to be the words of the Remonstrance, but on search,
and second reading of the Remonstrance, I find no such sentence in the same;
some parts of the sentence in the Remonstrance, themselves have transcribed in
the Margin, and it is this, They infuse into the people, that we mean to
abolish all Church Government; which Text will not justify or allow their
inference; for it proclaims not the Parliaments purpose, but Malignants policy;
not that it was far from their purpose or desire to extirpate this kind of
Government; but that the malice of their enemies did infuse they would abolish
all Government: Surely Sir, prejudice was very prevalent in these learned men
of Oxford, which made them read instead of a complaint of grievance, a
Declaration of purpose; and from the complaints of a general charge, to intend
to abolish all Government, to infer a purpose of preservation of this
specifical Government, as if all Government were included in it; had they
pleased to have read the whole sentence, they would have seen that the words
were much more general, abolish all Government, and leave every man to his own
fancy, for the service and worship of God; which they might not do, and yet
extirpate the Prelacy, and late Episcopal Government of England; no marvel that
this mistake makes them imagine, and insert into the Reason, a rather that all
the Members should be regulated, etc. which desire is not therein expressed,
but only a profession of their knowledge That His Majesty was under God
entrusted with the Ecclesiastical Law, to regulate all the Members of the
Church of England by such Rules of Order and Discipline, as are established by
Parliament: I think Sir, a profession of his Majesty's Prerogative, is vastly
different from a Parliamentary proportioning of the Prelates pre-eminence; and
the Kings Supremacy may be acknowledged, when the Bishops are degraded, and set
among their proper Peers: And now Sir, this repugnancy between the Covenanted
extirpation, and Parliaments purpose of perpetuation, appears a think so, of
like nature with the Apostolical Institution of this Episcopacy; and it would
be enquired whether it be more malignity to suggest to the people a purpose in
the Parliament by them never declared, and so make them obnoxious to the charge
of self-contradiction, or infuse into the people the verity and plainness of
their meaning, not to abolish all Government, but to extirpate this kind, which
through the whole Remonstrance they had declared to be so oppressive and
dangerous; if they will evade the influence, compass and danger of the fourth
Article of this Covenant in the first case, I dare secure them from it in
reference to the second.

5. But the main thing which concerns the Church of England, is her
foundation; which if it be removed, what shall the Righteous do? And these
serious Casuists do tell us, That the holy Church of England was founded in the
state of Prelacy, within the Realm of England, and they proved it by the Law;
(for Gospel without doubt they had none to prove it, that laying the Prophets
and Apostles for the foundation, and Christ (an enemy to Prelacy) the corner
stone) and in their Margin they cite the Statute of Carlisle, 25. Ed. 1. Recited
25. Ed 3. on which they profess, They dare not by extirpation of Prelacy,
strike at the foundation of the Church, which they are bound to uphold.

Truly Sir, their care of the Church, and its foundation is commendable; but
how comes it to pass that this Form of Government must be made the foundation
of the Church, without any danger of Schism by them, to whom Scotlands making
their Discipline and Government the mark of a true Church, did seem so much
tending to Schism? Must the Government of England be a fundamental point of
Religion, the very esse of the Church? and may not Scotland make her Government
a note of distinction? Turpe est doctori, etc. Sir, we cannot deny the proofs
cited, and declaring the holy Church of England to be founded in the estate of
Prelacy; but I cannot but stand amazed to find men making Apologies,
propounding doubts, professing a serious desire to have conscience satisfied;
so much to content themselves, and cozen their Readers with plain fallacies;
such Sophisme as better beseems the Logic, than Divinity Schools; and common
Halls, than the Regent house.

Two things are to be explained. What they mean by holy Church? and what
foundation this is, to which the Statutes relate?

These learned men well know, that by holy Church, in the acceptance of that
Age, and of those very Acts, the Statute of Edward the first at Carlisle, and
the Statute of Edward the third, was meant the Pompous, Popish Ecclesiastical
State, whereof Abbeys and Priories were no small Members, as in Magna Charta,
and other Grants of Kings, which had then such influence on the Civil State, as
that no Act of Parliament could bind, or be deemed valid, without the ratifying
censure of holy Church, whose manner was by her authority, to curse all that
should not keep such Laws as were agreed; I wish the Masters and Scholars
would speak out, and tell us, whether they think they are bound to uphold this
holy Church? or that the Church of Christ may not, yea, do not subsist in
England, now holy Church is driven out; the Church simply Christian, is very
different from the pompous popish, holy Church.

Again Sir, the foundation mentioned in these Statutes, is suitable to the
Fabric, Fox, his Acts and Monuments. p. 22.
holy Churches; viz. the temporal endowments whereby she was made so pompous;
the Lands, Manors, and large Revenues given by the King, or Nobles of the
Land, as the question occasioning the same, does plainly evidence, which was,
Whether the exactions of the first fruits of Churches and Abbeys, and all
Benefices in England, and the profit of vacancies by Pope Clement, were just?
and as the very words and scope of the Statute of 25. Edward 3d. does plainly
declare; providing for the advousance, and disposal of all Benefices, and the
profits thereof, in manner as the founders, that is, first donors had
established; and so the Prelacy, in which it was founded, is an Independency as
to Rome, and a sole Power and Prerogative which England had free, and within
her self, in respect of which, in the very words of the Statutes themselves, it
is said, The Bishop of Rome usurping the Seigniores of such Possessions and
Benefices, does give and grant the same to Aliens, which did not, and Cardinals
which might not dwell in England; as if he had been Patron or Advowe of the said
Benefices, as he was not of right after the Law of England; so that this
Prelacy is purely Political, and the foundation more profitable than pious;
could these learned men be so absurd, as to make the very being of the Church
to stand on such a foundation? were there not Churches of Christ before
Patrons, Possessons and Presentations? and may they not be when these large
endowments are taken away from the places to which they are affixed? This
Prelacy will determine the Church of England by the fall of Monasteries to have
been shaken in the foundation; and by virtue of this Political Prelacy, the
Kings of England have given the possessions of Bishoprics to their
Chancellours, Treasurers, Secretaries, Kinsmen, mere Lay-persons for increase
of their means, Pryns Catalogue of Testimonies for the parity of Presbyters and
Bishops, p. 16, 17, 18.
and have kept the Episcopal and Archiepiscopal Seas void, for 2, 3, 4, 5, 6,
7, 10, 15, 20. and sometimes 30. years together; by what loadstone do these
learned men think the holy Church did subsist, when her Prelates her foundation
in their sense was wanting? or can they make us believe Denmark or Scotland
have lost, or the Reformed Churches never had the being of a Church of Christ,
because they never had or have expelled their Episcopal Prelacy? Ecclesiastical
Prelacy (like the Petrae and Rupes, as in the time of King Henery the third)
have ever been such swelling foundations to the Church, and in the State, that
they have constrained the Kings and Parliament of England, as of all other
Nations, in all Ages, to exercise an high Prelacy over them by strict Laws and
severe exactions to keep them within their bounds; and at last to Covenant the
extirpation thereof; wherein the Oxford Reasons would make us believe, we not
only pull an old house about our ears, but destroy the very Church; if we have
not wit enough to see how they would cosen us by the Law of man, instead of the
Law of God, and a false gloss on fair words.

Having found so little weight in what is urged from the Government by
Episcopacy, of the estate of the Church of England, we shall not expect much in
what is incumbent upon themselves, against their Covenanting to endeavor to
extirpate this kind of Government; yet that little we shall consider, and it
relates unto their personal capacities in their third exception, or more
public Obigations in their fifth exception.

In reference to their personal capacities, they say, They are not satisfied
how it can stand with justice, ingenuity or humanity, to require the
extirpation of this Government, Oxford Reasons third exception against
extirpation of Prelacy.
unless it had been proved unlawful; what Sir, if it had been proved
inexpedient? it would have been consistent with Saint Paul's Justice, Humanity
and Ingenuity; for to him, All things might be lawful, but were not expedient,
was a Rule; but their Reasons might restrain these learned men, and they are
five in number.

1. They had by subscribing the 39. Articles testified their approbation of
that government. 2. Received orders from their hands. 3. Petitioned the
continuance thereof. 4. Htld their Livelihood under such titles, and in the
exercise of that Government, or some part thereof. 5. Had sworn as Members of
such societies to preserve the immunities, liberties and profits of the same.
Unto all which I shall say very briefly:

1 It is worth their enquity, whether they subscribed the 39. Articles
judiciously and judicially, and so gave their approbation to this Government;
we grant, that in the 39. Articles commonly published, there is one (viz.) the
36. which relates to the Book of Consecration of Bishops and Archbishops,
etc. But that it affirms that Book to contain in it nothing contrary to the
Word of God; I find not, in either the Latin or English Copy of these Articles
which I have seen; these learned men sure read these Articles with the
Parliaments Remonstrance before mentioned, and so misread them both; but
suppose the Article had so affirmed; it had laid no bar to the alteration, or
extirpation of this Government; for it might be (as indeed all our Stattues do
suggest) a mere Political, Civil constitution, and so (though an Adiaphoron)
not contrary any more than consonant to the Word of God, and alterable at the
pleasure of Englands Parliaments: and then Sir with whatever judgment these
Gentlemen subscribed this Article, I am sure there is not much in pleading it
as a Bar to the duty enjoined by Parliament.

Yet I must confess I am not satisfied that the Books of ordering Priests and
Deacons, and Consecration of Bishops and Archbishops, did contain in them
nothing contrary to the Word of God; for I not believe, nor is it evident to me
by Holy Scripture, or ancient Authors, that from the Apostles times there has
been these orders of Ministers in Christ's Church, Bishops, Priests and Deacons;
for I find no Priests in the new Testament; and conceive Presbyters and Bishops
to be no more than different denominations of the same order; and make not
different orders any more than Pastors, Teachers, Stewards, Angels, Stars, and
the like; and if there were these orders, yet it is I think contrary to the
Word of God, to add a fourth, Archbishops; and if they be not an order, how
come they to have the same consecration with Bishops (a contended for order of
the Ministry) and how come Bishops to swear unto them obedience? neither the
one, nor the other is common to a gradual pre-eminence; the Speaker of the
Parliament, or Lord Chief Justice, has no such like Solemnity.

I question whether the word will allow an Ordination to some part of the
Ministry, and give Authority to apply one Sacrament or Seal of the Covenant,
and not the other; nor am I clear the Deacons Office does at all consist in
Ministry of Word and Baptism; and assistance at the Communion, the Scripture
specially points them to the poor, and to serve Tables.

I question whether mute service in a public solemn Assembly be not contrary
to the Word of God; where all, as well prayer as preaching ought to tend to
Edification.

I question whether a Magisterial and Authoritative giving the Holy Ghost
(peculiar to Christ, who did it in reality) be not contrary to the Word of God?
or according to the words of the Article, Superstitious and ungodly.

And whether Ministers swearing Caronical obedience to the Bishop, or Bishops
to the Archbishops, be not plainly Papal and ungodly?

If these learned men considered, and were convinced of the consonancy of
these, and the like things with the Word, I hope they subscribed this Article
judiciously? yet I must enquire how judicially? I imagine the Satute of Queen
Elizabeth will nos be produced as their warrant for subscription to this
Article; for the Articles thereby enjoined, 13. Eliz. 13.
do only concern the confession of the true Christian Faith, and Doctrine of
the Sacraments; and this particle only; is exclusive to Discipline and
Government, which by the whole current of our Laws are concluded to be
Political in their nature, and only Ecclesiastical ratione objecti, and at the
pleasure of the Magistrate; and therefore could not be made an Article of the
true Christian Faith; I hope such as leave this Article out of their Creed,
shall not be shut out of the Christian Church.

Now Sir; were there any force in this exception to the Covenant, I would
advise that subscription to be taken into second thoughts; yet it is as
ponderous as the next.

They received Orders from their hands, and should ill requite them for laying
their hands on them, to lay to their hands to root them up, and cannot tell for
what.

That they should root them up who had laid their hands on them, was not
required; they might continue Men, Ministers; it is like better Christians, and
more painful Preachers, when they were not Bishops; I hope Prelates and Prelacy
were not inseparable; that the one must be ruined in the removal of the other;
and our question is of the thing, not person; in which degradation was the
worst they could do them; who had they been affected with the dream of Richard
Havering Archbishop of Dublin, The Annals of Ireland in Cambd. Britan page 169.
That a certain Monster, heavier than the whole World, stood eminently aloft
upon his breast, from the weight whereof he chose rather to be delivered, than
alone to have all the goods of the World; when he waked, he thought this was
nothing but the Bishopric of Dublin, and so forthwith renounced it. Or had
they enjoyed the Spirit of Antoninus, Elected Archbishop of Florence, who
refused (on fear of hazarding his salvation) to accept it; and when thundered
into it by the counsel of his friends, frowns of the Magistrates, and the Popes
Bull, kept only eight persons, no stately furniture in his house, no Coach and
Horses, and kept his usual method of devotion in his Family, saying, They
should do him a special favor to thrust him fram his Bishopric, wherein he
continued with very great Regret. They would acknowledge a kindness done unto
them; and yet were it an unkindness, these Gentlemen were acquitted from the
ingratitude; they have petitioned their continuance, and were not able to
withstand the pleasure of their Superiors, on whose pleasure their whole
enjoyments did depend; nor had they been without Parallel (if not a plea of
Justice) For the Archbishops, and Bishops of England ( Rochester excepted) in
the time of Henry the eighth, had voluntarily (without the command of the King
or Parliament) sworn to root up the Pope (the Apex of this Episcopacy) from
whom they had received their Palls, Properties, Power; Fox his Acts and
Monuments. p. 564. 565 566, 567.
I had almost said Papacy.

Their third Reason I pass as an expression of their affection, only wishing it
may have its dependence on right Reason; yet confess petitioning is every man's
liberty.

And for the fourth and fifth.

That they held their livelyhoods by such titles, and were sworn to preserve
the immunities, liberties, and profits of the same.

I only say they held them at the pleasure of the Parliament, whose power is
over the enjoyments of all persons, and public (much more particular)
societies, against whose Laws, no Domestic Laws or Oaths could bind; and so
their plea in this, amounts to no more than what might be said for the
Monasteries and Abbeys, (which I presume they will not say were wickedly
demolished) unless they prove Archbishops, Bishops, Deans, Deans and Chapters,
to be built on a better foundation, which I would not advise them to seek in
the Statute of Carlisle, repeated in the 25. Edw. 3 d. in which they are
conjoined.

Their fifth exception is,

In respect of their Obligation by Oath and Duty to the King, Oxford Reasons,
fifth Exception to the 2d. Article of the Covenant.
and therein their dissatisfaction does arise from the Oath of Supremacy;
Coronation Oath;


The benefit this Government brings unto the Kings Honor and Estate;

The ^greeableness of this Government to the Civil Constitution of the Kingdom.

Unto which I answer briefly,

That the Oath of Supremacy does acknowledge the King to be the only Supreme
Governor in all Ecclesiastical Causes, and over all Ecclesiastical persons;
and that by the Oath of Supremacy, and the protestation of the fifth of May,
they and we were bound to maintain the Kings Honor and Estate, and
Jurisdiction, we freely grant; but in swearing to endeavor the extirpation of
this Government by Archbishops, Bishops, etc. I see not the danger of
disloyalty or injury to the King, or double perjury to our selves, or
contradiction to the Parliaments declared and professed knowledge, that the
King is entrusted with the Ecclesiastical Laws as well as Temporal; and
therefore wish the nature of the Kings Supremacy may be well considered.

That the King is Supreme Head and Governor of the Subjects, distributively or
particularly considered, no sober man will deny; or that he is the Supreme and
Topmost Branch and Apex of all that Honor, Power and Authority, with which the
Collective Body of the Nation, the three Estates in Parliament Assembled (in
respect of which the Lords and Commons, Methodiet Majestatis causa, apply
themselves unto Him under the Title of Our Sovereign Lord) no Regular man will
deny; and that he is Supreme in all Exhibition and administration of Justice;
so that the Judges are by and from Him, and in His Name and Authority; and so
all Submission, Honor and Acquiescency in Judicial Proceedings is to Him, no
good Statist or Civilian will deny; and that He is Supreme Head and Governor
in things Spiritual and Ecclesiastical (Ratione objecti, or circa Ecclesiam)
the Executive Administration about, not in the Church, within His Dominions, in
opposition to all Papal and Foreign Power, no Freeborn Subject, Good
Christian, or Protestant will deny; but that He is so Supreme, as to have in
Himself sole Legislation to the Church in things Political, but belonging to
the Church; such as is the public National profession of Christian Faith, in
such a Form and Method of Articles; such a National uniform and public method
and order of worship, and such a National Discipline and Government of all the
Churches within His Realm; so as that the People in Parliament Assembled, may
not debate, consult, conclude concerning them; and sedente Parliam^^to, put in
execution by present supersedeas of former Acts, and by present Votes and
Orders of Restriction and Regulation, as in other Affairs of the Nation, I
think no Loyal Subject, Wise Politician, Good Statesman, or True-born
Englishman will affirm; for that the Supremacy of the King is affixed by the
power of Parliament; and in all Writs of Summons they are called to consult the
ardent Affairs of the Church, no less than of the Civil State; and the thirty
nine Articles, Form of Common Prayer, and the Government of the Church, lay
claim to Acts of Parliament for their Civil Sanction; and the Parliament in the
Remonstrance of December, 1641. owned and cited by these learned men, do
declare the King entrusted with the Ecclesiastical Law; to regulate all the
Members of the Church of England by such Rules of Order and Discipline as are
established by Parliament; and the very Statute enjoining the Oath of
Supremacy, and the Admonition of Queen Elizabeth, in Her Injunctions appointed
by Statute to be the Exposition thereof, does oppose the King to the Pope, and
That is to say, under God to have the Sove aignty and Rule over all manner of
persons, born within her Majesty's Dominions or Countries, of what Estate
soever, Ecclesiastical or Temporal, as no Foreign power shall, or ought to
have any superiority over them. Admon. Enacted to expound the Oath of
Supremacy, quinto Elizab. primo.
Foreign power, not to the Parliament; and makes Him the executor of all
Jurisdiction, Superiority and Preheminences by any Ecclesiastical power or
authority which heretofore has been, and may be lawfully exercised; which was
always directed by power of the Parliament of England: And I remember the Lord
Chief Baron Bridgeman, in his late learned Speech, concerning the Kings
Supremacy unto the late condemned Traitors at the Old Baily, did declare the
King to be Supreme, that is, beyond the Coercive power of His people; but not
to have the Legislative power in His own Breast, so as to Rule at His own Will;
and the known Estate of England is to be Ruled (and the Coronation Oath binds
the King accordingly) in all Ecclesiastical and Civil Affairs by such Laws,
quas populus elegerit, as the people shall choose; so that His Majesty's
Supremacy is not denied, when His Prerogative amplified by the Statute of 1
Elizabethae, Ca. 1. is contracted and abridged by the Statute of Caroli, 17. Or
when the Parliament do see good by their Votes, Resolves, Orders, or imposed
Oaths, to alter or extirpate the Government which the King was empowred to
execute and administer; His Supremacy being purely executive, and that subject
to the Legislation of Parliament; upon which account the Peoples Oath of
maintaining the Honor, Estate, and Jurisdiction of the King, may be voided as
to this and that particular mode and thing; and yet the Parliament not take
upon them to absolve the People from that obedience they owe under God unto the
King; nor is the limitation of the exercise of Supremacy, as to this or that
particular, and in this or that species inconsistent with, or destructive to
the Kings Supremacy rightly understood.

And on these Considerations let it be observed that the Kings Coronation Oath
to grant, keep, and confirm the Laws, Customs, and Franchises granted to the
Clergy, by the glorious King Saint Edward; and preserve to the Bishops their
Churches all Canonical privileges, etc. which these learned men do cite, is
limited unto the Laws of the Land, which the People in Parliament assembled
shall choose; according to which the King is bound to Rule; for otherwise this
Coronation Oath will not only bind the perpetuation of this Government by
Prelacy; but also to the Restitution of the Abbeys and Monasteries demolished,
and the Popes Supremacy expelled; all which were granted to the Clergy by the
glorious King St. Edward.

2. But admit we these learned men the sense they seem to put upon the Kings
Supremacy; methinks the modest expressions of the Covenant might have
anticipated this exception, it only binding us within our places and callings
(which might be by humble advice and supplication to the King, by virtue of His
Supreme Authority to effect it) to endeavor the extirpation of this Prelacy;
that is, the Government by Archbishops, Bishops, Deans, Deans and Chapters,
and the like; but such was their affection to it, that they could not desire;
nay, they could not but beg of God that he would not suffer the King to assent
thereunto, which affection we must not think to abate, until their judgments
be better informed.

3. As to the benefit which did redound to the Crown by the Collation of
Bishoprics and Deanaries, by their first fruits, and yearly tenths, and
profits in vacancies, though some question the Kings propriety, not in respect
of the Law of the Land, but of the Law of God; I shall not insist on that; only
say, That the constant enjoyment of the full possessions of them, will make a
much greater revenue, and maintain to the King a greater Honor and Estate,
than the first fruits, tenths and profits of vacancies, although such vacancies
as the Kings of England have by virtue of this Argument continued for the space
of 5, 10, 15, 20. or sometimes thirty years together, taking the profits to
themselves, or bestowing them on their attendants; and undoubtedly there is the
same capacity to extirpate the whole Government, as some Episcopal Seas; and to
enlarge the Revenues of the Crown by the Reversion of all the profits of the
Government, and the abolishment thereof, as to continue so long vacancies;
moreover, I would desire to know what is in this Argument more prevalent for
Archbishops, Bishops, and their Cathedral Churches, than for Abbots and Priors
their Monasteries and houses.

4. As to the agreeableness of this Government in the Church to the Civil
constitution of the Kingdom; I only say that I question whether the Lord
Christ, who declared his Kingdom not to be of this World, will allow, or do
appoint the Governments of the World to be the square of Government in his
Church; and I confess I can hardly reconcile it to his Regal Power, and
Faithful Administration in his House; and I must have a better Comment on the
Text than I have yet met withal, if it be not prohibited in these terms: The
Princes of the Gentiles exercise dominion over them, and they are great, and
exercise authority upon them, but it shall not be so among you; but whosoever
will be great among you, let him be your M nister; and whosoever will be Chief
among you, let him be your servant, Matthew. 20.25.29, 27. Mark 10.42, 43, 44.
Luke 22.23, 24. The sense whereof made Pope Gregory write himself Servus
Servorum Dei; Whitehead, and others, refuse, Coverdalle, and many others
decline their Bishoprics, as having in them aliquid commune eum Antichristo; I
think the Clown his question to the Bishop of Cullen, were worth considering,
What will become of the Bishops, when the Dukes be damned?

Yet the agreeableness of Prelacy with Englands ill Government, has not been
so obvious to others, as these Gentlemen suppose; the vigilant eye, and strong
hand, wherewith in all Ages it has been restrained; these Petrae, and Rupes
Winchester and Rivallo in the time of King Henry the 3d. were judged very
dangerous, when they constrained a Covenant without and against the Kings
consent, to remove them as evil Counselors. Matthew Paris our old Historian,
notes Bishops to have ever been the Make-bates between the King and People,
screwing up the Kings Prerogative beyond thee onstitutions of the Kingdom, and
liberties, yea, safety of the Subjects; and charge all the Wars, Broiles,
Mischiefs and Evils of the Barons Wars, to have sprung from, and been acted by
the Bishops: And when ngKi Philip lay on his deathbed, He charged His son, If
He would Rule by his Nobles, He must keep his Bishops low.

The premuniries by which they have ever been awed, and their late High
Commission, authorizing them to act any appellation, provocation, privilege,
exemption, proclamation, law, statute, whatsoever notwithstanding; and their
bold Usurpation in their own name and authorities, and under their own seals to
issue forth Process, Excommunications, Censures, and other Judgments, and
their Imperial Canons in 1640. do bespeak them prejudicial to the Civil
Government and Constitution of the Kingdom; and I think a private society
should with very much of modesty affirm the agreeableness of this Government,
after the Parliament on mature deliberation and debate, as most proper Judges,
Vote of the 10th of June
had voted this Government to have been found by long experience very
prejudicial to the Civil State of these Kingdoms.

Now, Sir, as to the so often Canted Aphorism of King James, No Bishop, No
King; with which the Prelates and their Priests do too much strive to rivet
their Government unto the Crown; I must be free to say, that it is more
politic than pious and of no more warrant or authority, than the Spaniards one
universal Emperor, and one Pope, or universal Bishop; and when the Scots loyal
adherence to, and advancement of His most Sacred Majesty, unto the Ruin of
their Kingdom, Loss of their lives and Estates, Exile and Imprisonment of their
Nobles, and Conquest of their Land; together with the uncessant struglings of
the Covenant Interest, under Sequestration, Imprisonments, Banishments, and
death of many; not ceasing till they had (by Gods blessing) effected the Happy
and Honorable Restitution of King and Kingdom, be well considered, I hope
these learned Masters and Scholars of Oxford will see some proceedings that may
at least weaken their belief in this political Maxim.

We have seen, Sir, the strength of these learned exceptions unto the second
Article of the Covenant, the great eyesore of our Age; and find little or
nothing therein, to charge the matter thereof with falsehood or injustice? but
that notwithstanding the grudging of proud and profane men, it stands in this
respect established; they have herein been long, and constrained me to stay too
long in consideration of what they urge: but as they, so I shall be more brief
and contracted in their following exceptions, wherein they suggest many to be
great ones, but profess to take up with few, which we must needs imagine not to
be of the least weight.

Unto the third Article they except nothing as to the matter of the promise,
Subjectio quinta. Oxford Reasons, Exceptions to the 3d. Article of the
Covenant. Sectio quinta. p. 12, 13, 14.
only they stumble at those words relating to the defense and preservation of
the Kings Majesty, Person and Authority, in the preservation and defense of the
true Religion, and liberties of the Kingdom; which they conceive to be a
limitation of our absolute duty, by a condition not allowable.

Though some endeavor to justify these words, as a condition put upon our
duty by the power of Parliament, who may limit the Prerogative of the King, as
well as extend it, and think it will abide a Dispute, I am not of their
opinion; for I do profess my self convinced that our allegiance, and so the
preservation of the Kings Person and Authority is an absolute duty founded in
the Relation, without Regard to the Quality Piety or Impiety of the Person; who
is bound also to His duty, but not on the condition of the Subj cts duty; both
King and People owe a Reciprocal duty each to other, and are bound to God to
perform it; but the duty of the one is no limiting condition to the other; and
therefore in all those contests for the Covenant in behalf of the King, which
not only I, but other Ministers have undergone in the opposition of the late
sinful Engagement; Vid. The Exercitation concerning usurped powers. Vindication
of the Oath of Allegiance by the same Author. Lancashire and Cheshire Plea for
non-subscribers to the late Engagement.
These words have been understood to be a predication of the capacity in which
the Kingdom, Parliament and People then were, under the opposition of
Malignants, who divided the King from the People; and so the meaning of it is
thus, We being in the preservation and defense of the true Religion, and
liberties of the Kingdoms, shall endeavor to preserve the Kings Majesty's
Person and Authority. I wish therefore that it may be observed, That the words
fall into a plain parenthesis; and the sentence is entire without them, and
they are fixed at the end of the Obligation, which relates unto the Rights and
Privileges of Parliament, and liberties of the Subject, as well as the
preservation of the King, and yet these cannot be limited; and this sense is
not only consonant to principles of right Reason and true Religion, but also
the Declaration of the Parliament in their then proceedings; and the scope of
this Covenant, and this very Article, which closes with a most Solemn Appeal
to the World, to bear witness of our loyalty, and that we have no thoughts to
diminish His Majesty's just power and greatness; and I hope these serious
Casuists will grant, that where the words of an Oath, seemingly doubtful, may,
they must be understood in a good and just sense; and then their exceptions to
such a limitation in the Covenant, do vanish with the Hypothesis on which they
are built and inferred.

Unto the fourth Article of the Covenant, these Masters and Scholars of Oxford
do suggest something in Politics, which sounds as strangely in my ears, as
their past Divinity; indeed they determine it not, but only desire it may be
considered,

1. Whether this Article lay not a necessity on the son to accuse his father,
and pursue him to destruction, in case he should be an Incendiary, Malignant,
or evil Instrument, as is in this Article described, which they conceive to be
contrary to Religion, Nature and Humanity?

2. Whether the swearing this Article, do not open a ready way to children and
husbands that are sick of their fathers and w ves, by appeaching them of
Malignancy, the letter to effectuate their unlawful intentions and designs?

To these I should have only desired it may be considered,

1. Whether all penal Statutes in point of Treason and Felony, open not as
ready a way for children and husbands to be rid of their fathers and wives? and
the danger of concealment be not a very fair Apology for the same; are they
therefore contrary to Religion, Nature and Humanity? Have they never heard of
such wickedness? know they not that there is an impossibility of fence against
malicious accusations mischievously managed? Must therefore these Statutes be
voided as wicked, and the like be prevented for time to come?

2. Did not these learned men take the Oath of Allegiance? and therein swear,
That they will to the best of their endeavor disclose and make known unto His
Majesty, His Heirs and Successors, all Treasons, and Traiterous Conspiracies
which they should know or hear of, to be against Him, or any of Them: May
natural affection interdict this duty? or are natural Relations exempt from
this discovery? may not mischievous men find open a ready way to appeal such as
stand between them and their desires? or did these Gentlemen's learning and
loyalty lead them to conclude the Oath of Allegiance is against Religion,
Nature and Humanity?

3. May one time make contrary to Religion, Nature and Humanity, that kind of
promise, which at another time, may be consistent therewithal? These Gentlemen
pleaded the protestation of the 5th. of May, 1641. as a bar to the swearing
this Covenant, and tell us often they swear that, and therein they swear in
this Form of words; To my power, and as far as lawfully I may, I will oppose,
and by all good means endeavor to bring to condign punishment all such as
shall either by force, practice, counsels or conspiracies, or otherwise, do any
thing to the contrary of any thing in this present protestation contained: will
they please to tell us whether these words be not as directly contrary to the
fourth, as the foregoing promise of this protestation was unto the first
Article of this Covenant? or does not this Protestation lay as great necessity,
and give as fair an occasion for the son to accuse the Father, and pursue him
to destruction; and so appear as much against Religion, Nature and Humanity, as
does the Solemn League and Covenant?

4. I should have prayed the judgment of these learned men on that Law
prescribed by Moses to Israel, in Deuteronomy. 13.6, 7. 8, 9, 10. If thy brother, the
son of thy Mother, or thy son, or thy daughter, or the wife of thy bosom, or
thy friend which is as thine own soul, entice thee secretly, saying, Let us go
and serve other gods, etc. thou shall not consent unto him, nor hearken unto
him, neither shall thine eye pity him, neither shall thou spare, neither shall
thou conceal him; but thou shall surely kill him; thine hand shall be first
upon him to put him to death; and afterward the hand of all the people, etc.
and all Israel shall hear and fear, and shall do no mere so wickedly; did not
this Law bind to the same act? give the same occasion? lay the same necessity
which is laid by this Article of the Covenant? And was it contrary to Religion,
Nature and Humanity?

Did these Gentlemen think we; expect to be preferred by this notion of Policy?
or if they suggested this exception by a spirit of Prelacy, will it not bespeak
that Government prejudicial to the Civil State, which condemns Conventicles
in acts of piety, but admits Families, the Subjects houses, the places and
natural affection, to be the protection of Treasonable, Seditious Conspiracies?

But they add against this Article, that it binds to suffering punishment by
an arbitrary power, without Law or Merit, contrary to the liberty of the
Subject declared for by the House of Commons. Let us, Sir, but read the words
of the Covenant, and that will evidence a contradiction to the Parliaments
Declaration, of the same nature with those we have before observed; the words
are these, That they may be brought to public Trial, and receive condign
punishment, as the degree of their offenses shall deserve, or the Supreme
Judicatories of both Kingdoms respectively, or others having power from them
for that effect, shall judge convenient: If Sir, condign punishment on public
Trial, according to the degree of the offense, be without law or merit, and
Judicatory, Supreme Judicatory, be Arbitrary; High Courts of Justice, and their
proceedings will be Just and Regular, and the liberty of the Subject; for I
think them to be more Opposites, than the Protestation and Solemn League and
Covenant.

Unto the fifth Article of this Covenant, Oxford Exceptions to the fifth
Article of the Covenant.
they profess a readiness to confederate, but they pretend to a double Remora.

1. They do not see the happiness of such a blessed peace between the three
Kingdoms, Ireland being at War within it self.

To which I should have said no more than this:

Gentlemen, where are your eyes, and what obstructs your sight? when you swear
the Protestation, you swear, By all just and honorable ways to endeavor to
preserve the union and peace of the three Kingdoms, of England, Scotland and
Ireland. Was not Ireland then at War within it self? Or have you forgotten that
it was so? or is not the Peace now concluded by both Parliaments, and confirmed
by this Covenant, a greater happiness of settlement than was then obtained!
Sure some strong passion acted these learned men, to make Mountains against the
Covenant, what were Mole-hills wssen they swore the Protestation.

But their second Remora is, That no peace can be firm and well-grounded, which
is not bottomed on justice, whose proper and adequate act, is jus suum cuique,
unless the respective Authority, Power and Liberty of King, Parliament and
Subject be preserved full and entire.

To this I should say no more then this; Specify the defect of this Covenant,
as to these particulars; for I cannot read or understand, if they be not all
secured by the same; Suggestions without plain Demonstration, do proclaim
jealousy and prejudice; but make no Argument or good Apology against required
duty.

Unto the sixth and last Article, Oxford Exceptions to the sixth Article of the
Covenant.
being an Obligation of adherence to this Covenant against all opposition; they
say no more then what must be expected, that until they be satisfied in the
Premises stated in the foregoing Articles of the Covenant, they could not su
scribe to this Conclusion; which we must needs admit them, hoping that a more
cool and serious survey of the Covenant, and second thoughts on their
Exceptions thereunto, may satisfy their consciences, and lead them to bewail
their unhappiness in throwing such stumbling blocks before their weak Brethren,
under the Name and Authority of a Famous and Learned University; and for their
groundless dissent and refusal of an enjoyed duty, relating to the Honor of
God, Reformation and defenct of Religion, Honor and Happiness of the King,
Peace and Safety of the Kingdoms, in a Solemn League and Covenant; which, Sir,
we find, notwithstanding these so much admired Exceptions, approves it self
lawful, in respect of the matter therein sworn to be preserved or pursued; and
will the better stand under all defects and miscarriages in point of manner and
form of making it; which is the next thing to be considered.

Sectio quarta. Proposition 4. The Form and Manner of making the Solemn Leagne
and Covenant, was good and allowable.
IN the Consideration of this Position, I intend not to consider the Form
constituting it an Oath, which is evident, and known to all, to have been a
Solemn Calling to God to witness, and avenge the violation or neglect thereof;
in respect of which its obligation is established, against whatever defects and
miscarriages did attend the agitation thereof; from which nevertheless I would
desire it (as much may) be acquitted; for it is pity so good matter should be
blemished by the circumstances which attended it.

Nor shall I insist on an Historical Narration of the public Assemblies, in
which it was taken; the Solemnity thereof in respect of the quality of persons;
the Parliament, both Lords and Commons; the Commissioners of Scotland, the
Assembly of Divines, making the first Assembly that entered into it; nor the
Order by Solemn Humiliation and Prayer, and serious Instruction and Exhortation
which attended it; nor the universal alacrity, joy and content of the most
serious in England and Scotland, which accompained this first Act of making the
Covenant; nor the after particular Solemnities, both for number, quality, and
disposition of persons, and religious composed order, in which it was taken in
the City of London, the several Counties and Congregations of England, then
which I may boldly say, no public Act ever passed by and among the people of
England, more solemnly, or more religiously; which though it be now darkened and
despised, does set a luster on this Covenant to abide under the greatest
contempt and reproach cast upon it; and will most strongly bind in the presence
of God and men.

But my intentions are to defend those actions as good, I do not say necessary
and allowable, which were, and might be done without any sin, or any
debilitation of the Covenant, against which I find the Exceptions of the
Enemies to the Covenant most strongly bent, that thereby they might represent
it vile, if not render it void; and these are either,

1. The order of the words.

2. Nature of the thing.

3. Authority which enjoined it.

4. Or the action and gesture of the body used in the swearing of this Covenant.

All which I humbly conceive will be found such, as might well suit so solemn
an Act, as is a National Covenant; yet I find some late opposition thereunto,
and in special, by the Oxford Reasons, and the League Illegal; I shall briefly
try their strength.

1. Sir, As to the order of the words, I find Dr. 1. The order of the words
vindicated against Dr. Featliey League Illegal Page 14.
Featlies ghost in the League Illegal, like some hellish fury, representing the
Dr. to have been a man so haughtily devoted to the punctilio's of order and
honor, as not to brook, or keep his hands from tearing a List, Catalogue or
Register wherein they who were below him, should be ranked above, and named
before him; in sense whereof he thus breaths against the Covenant; Not to take
advantage of the preposterous order in setting down the parts of this Covenant,
wherein he that runs, may read a double Solecism; for in it the Church of
Scotland precedeth the Church of England; and the Liberty of the Subject is set
before the Royal Prerogative, and Imperial Dignity of the Prince.

Sir, admit we this; Is it not an high crime? and bespeaks it not a sober
serious spirit in Dr. Featly, a Member of the Assembly of Divines (who by a
motion might have had this order inverted, as easily as he obtained to have
Prelacy specified in the second Article of the Covenant after it was past) to
pick a quarrel in the order of the words? although we deny not, That such a
sacred and venerable evidence of fidelity is the Covenant, that matter, manner,
phrase and order ought to have (as I presume they were) been maturely advised;
yea, I wish line and period, word and syllable (which might be the Printers
Errata) had been so scanned, that a captious Momus might not find a Colon or
Comma, at which he might boggle and please his humor; yet it is but a poor
advantage from the punctilio's of order and honor to argue against matters of
moment, duties and exercises of Religion; and by misplaced words to make an
Oath or Solemn League illegal; I, but do I not run too fast? he tells us he
will not take the advantage; an honest man is indeed as good as his word; but I
cannot trust him; for his ninth Argument, This Covenant is derogatory to the
Honor of the Church and Kingdom of England, Page 28.
is thus proved; The Church of Scotland, is set before the Church of England. I
like not that man's grace, that with the same breath will remit and retort an
indiscretion; yet Sir, I cannot but enquire whether the preferring of the
pompous gay-cloath'd Church of England before the poor Church of Scotland, look
not like a species of that impious partiality, condemned by the Apostle James,
Chap. 2.1, 2, 3, 4, 5. Can we think this Dr. had the faith of our Lord Jesus
Christ in respect of persons, or was acted by such a spirit of contradiction?
No, this language was spoken after he was dead.

2. But these Solecisms are not to me so obvious; I stand still, and cannot
read them; though I read the Covenant with all observation and regard; yet I
confess I find the Church of Scotland set before the Church of England; and the
liberty of the Subject, before the Prerogative of the King; but they are
propounded with Relation to different Acts; the Reformed Religion of Scotland
to be preserved; of England to be Reformed; I hope it is no Solecisme to put
the factum before the fieri; and to swear the preservation of good acquired,
before an endeavor to obtain the same, or better; or to prefix the pattern, to
what is to be thereunto confirmed; when this Authors second thoughts had
observed this salvo to his suggested Page 29.
Solecisme, he grudges that Scotland should be propounded as a pattern of
Reformation to England; for which he had little Reason, if venerable Beda speak
true, in that he reports, That Mira divinae factum constat dispensatione
pietatis, quod gens illa quae noverat scientiam divinae cognitionis, libenter
and sine invidia populo Anglorum communicare curavit. Bed. Eccl. His. Genesis Ang.
l. 5. c. 23.
that Nation did at first communicate the Science of Divine knowledge, without
grudge or envy unto the people of England; I hope it is no Solecisme to
propound them as a pattern of Reformation, who have first obtained it; and from
whom Christianity it self was at first to us transmitted.

The second supposed Solecisme, is no more visible than this first; for if the
liberty of the people be the end and excellency of the Prerogative of the King,
as all wise Statists and Politicians do affirm; he sure will admit to be the
first in intention and endeavor, although the last in execution and enjoyment;
and the rather, for that it is so directed and dictated by the Maxim of His
late glorious Majesty, declared at the passing of the Petition of Right, The
peoples liberty strengthens the Kings Prerogative, and the Kings Prerogative is
to defend the peopl^^ liberty. I am sure more serious and public Statesmen
than he or I shall ever make, have judged it a Solecisme in Parliaments, to
support the Kings Prerogative by supply of moneys, before the oppressions and
burdens of the people have been relieved, and their liberties secured; and I
believe I could prove that this is not the first Covenant made in England,
preferring the Peoples liberty before the Kings Prerogative, without which the
King may Tyrannize over slaves, not Rule over free-ment; which last is, and
will be His greatest honor.

The second thing in respect of which the Covenant is blemished and reproached
as to the manner of making it, 2. The nature and name of the Covenant
vindicated. Oxford Reasons Sect. 2. page 3.
relates unto the nature thereof; and the name is the noration of its nature,
and it is called a Solemn League and Covenant, against which the Masters and
Scholars of Oxford do except, stumbling at the name Covenant; they were learned
men, and must a little stand on the propriety of words; they therefore except
against this denomination, because imposed with a penalty, which imposition say
they, is repugnant to the nature of a Covenant, which being a contract,
implies a voluntary mutual consent of the contracters, whereunto men are to be
induced by persuasion, not compelled by power; pactum est duorum pluriumve in
idem placitum consensus.

To this Sir I grant, that a Covenant in the strict acceptance of it, must be
an agreement by mutual consent; yet I must enquire of these learned men whether
the Magisterial imposing of absolute duty, or actions otherwise indifferent, by
Superiors upon their Inferiors, and that under a penalty, may not be called a
Covenant? What think they of that injunction to Mankind in Adam, Of the Tree of
good and evil thou stalt not eat; for in the day thou eatest thereof, thou
shall die the death; we read not of any stipulation in Adam: And Divines tell
us it was neither necessary nor proper, he being bound to accept the conditions
his Creator would put upon him; I am sure this is generally judged a Covenant,
and that we commonly call the Covenant of Works.

Again, In the Primitive Times of the Church, adult persons did answer certain
queftions propounded, as bredis? credo; abrenuncias? abrenuncio; 1 Pet. 3.21.
Beza in Loc.
to which the Apostle Peter is though to refer his (...)? which Beza renders,
Stipulatio b^nae conscientiae apud Deum, and from this order Tertullian
concludes: Anima non lavatione sed responsione sancitur. Do these learned men
(as the Anabaptists) think the Covenant of Grace is not passed between God, and
the Infants of believing Parents in their Baptism, who are not capable of such
consent and stipulation, but were dedicated by the Authority and Interest of
the Parent; and are accepted by the extent of the Covenant? or is confirmation
an essential part of the Sacrament, and necessary supplement of Baptism? I
find a like case in Scripture called a Covenant, Genesis 17.13. My Covenant shall
be in your flesh; the stipulation of Godfathers and Godmothers will not relieve
the case, unless they be deputed by the Infants, though they were (which does
not appear) commissioned by the Lord; so that some Covenants are imposed, and
pass withour mutual consent.

2. May not an agreement between two different Nations, passed by the mutual
consent of the Princes, or Body Politic, be for further security sake, imposed
by the Authority of each Nation on the individual Subjects thereof, and that
under a penalty? which may be a good persuasion against their peevishness and
pertinacy, who by their private interest may obstruct the more general and
public good; and yet be properly denominated a Covenant; as suppose between
England and Spain, which the Merchants of both are bound to keep; and I see no
cause why they may not be compelled to swear; I hope the case will not differ
between Scotland and England, who are distinct Nations, though under the same
King; it is Sir no hard matter to make this the case of the Covenant.

But these learned men do except against the Authority enjoining the Covenant,
3. The Authority imposing the Covenant Vindicated.
which is the third particular, in the manner of making the Covenant, supposed
to be miscarried; and herein Dr. Featlie's Ghost does follow them, but so very
weakly, and with such palpable contradiction, that I shall not spend time and
paper in observing the same; but specially take notice of what is urged by the
Oxford Reasons from which he borrows his strength.

Here, Sir, I shall desire it may be noted, that I do not affirm the authority
to be full and complete, but to have been lawful and sufficient to impose an
Oath, and thereby bind the people (wherein notwithstanding they should have
been defective and fallacious, yet this will not discharge the obligation laid,
as I have in my Analepsis, page 13. and before in Page 23.21.
this Tract observed) against it, therefore as such I shall endeavor to weigh
the Exceptions.

The first whereof is, Oxford Reasons. Sect. 2. page 3.
That this imposing of this Oath was contrary to the liberty of the Subject,
expressed in the Petition of Right, to which liberty the imposition of a new
Oath, other than is established by Act of Parliament, is thereby declared
contrary.

Unto this, Sir, I say, I cannot but observe what strength of prejudice acted
these learned men in making to themselves these Doubts and Reasons against the
Covenant; which leads them almost throughout their Book to infer generals from
specials; as I have before noted in our Arguments, so in this; the words
themselves do quote out of the Petition of Right, are these, Whereas many of
them have had an Oath administered unto them not warrantable by the Laws and
Statutes of this Realm, they do humbly pray that no man hereafter be compelled
to take such an Oath; according to which words, it appears to be some special
Oath that was complained of, and unto which the relative does refer; the which,
if they would please to observe, the connection of the words will be found to
have been a particular and specifical Oath; the words in the Plaint run thus,
Petition of Right.
By means whereof Your People have been in diverse places assembled, and
required to lend certain moneys unto Your Majesty, and of them, upon their
refusal so to do, have had an Oath administered unto them, not warrantable by
the Laws and Statutes of this Realm; so that it appears to have been an Oath of
discovery of their Estate, upon refusal to lend moneys, or some Oath ex
officio, unto self-accusation, beyond the Statute of the 25th. Henry the third,
which is in this point complained of, as violated; and the prayer of that
Petition does no less specify this Oath by the Relative SVCH, which refers
unto the quality of the Oath complained against; so does also the concatenation
of the prayer, which proportionally to the Plaint, is, That no man be compelled
to make gift or loan, etc. or be called to make answer, or take such Oath; so
that this was an Oath to make answer unto the damage of a man's own Estate,
Life, or Liberty, which is repugnant to Nature, and herein aggravated, as not
warrantable by the Laws and Statutes of this Realm; a more full description
whereof, these Gentlemen might have received in the Statute 17. Caroli,
concerning Commissioners for Causes Ecclesiastical. Now Sir, from this special
to argue against all Oaths that pass not by Act of Parliament, is a plain non
seuquitur, and unjust inference; the Companies in London, or it may be some
Colleges in Oxford, are constituted by the Kings Charter or Patent, and the
Master and Wardens of the one, or President and Fellows of the other; give an
Oath to all that become Members thereof, and expect to participate in their
privileges; will these learned men say, that these Oaths not imposed or
prescribed by Act of Parliament, were contrary to the Petition of Right, which
never complained of, or prayed against such Oaths? I do not think these men
would have had us to think that the Oath and Caetera, enjoined in the Canons of
1640. was against the Petition of Right, which certainly would bespeak the
Bishops something prejudicial to the Civil State, and yet it was never passed
by Act of Parliament. Moreover, these learned men subscribed, and swear to the
Protestation of May, 1641. they did not sure then think that submitting to
swear that Oath, they did violate, or betray the liberties of the people,
expressed in the Petition of Right; they should do well to tell us by what Act
(I do not say Authority) of Parliament it was established? I humbly conceive
that there is a vast difference between an Oath of exaction, self-discovery, or
accusation, which is wicked in its nature, and more wicked, when without
warrant from the Law; and an Oath for establishment of public and general
good, imposed by the Authority, though not established by Act of Parliament; it
is not the simple taking an Oath without consent of Parliament; but the taking
such an Oath, as may impeach the persons, or endanger the Estates of the
Subject, which was the Peoples grievances; not is it the formality of an Act,
but the full consent of the people in Parliament, makes an Oath lawful, and
preserves their liberties in the imposing of it.

But these Masters and Scholars of Oxford fear, Ibid.
by owning this Covenant, they should own a power in the imposers thereof, then
for ought that appears to them, has been challenged in former times, or can
consist with their former Protestation (if rightly understood (in sundry the
most material Branches of it.

Unto this Sir, I must say, that I know not what did appear to them to have
been the power of the imposers, and challenged in former times; only unto me,
and many others, it did appear not to he the mere natural Power of the People
preposterously, and in a tumultuous manner assembled, who yet do appear to have
a power to impose on themselves an Oath; and to whom I find Sovereignty it self
(to speak it with due Reverence) in some measure subjected, and its obligation
superseded; if not made void, clearly barred from execution; if but by the
impossibility put thereon, as it was in the case of Jonathans Rescue; which I
shall only report in the words of Bishop Hall, Saul has sworn Jonathans death,
the people contrarily swear his preservation, Halls Contem. p. 1038.
his Kingdom was not so absolute (yet more absolute than Englands) that he
could run away with so unmerciful a justice, their Oath, which savoured of
disobedience, prevailed against his Oath, which savoured of too much cruelty;
and so long as his heart was not false to his Oath, he could not be sorry
Jonathan should live: I do not in any case justify the preposterous and
tumultuous Assemblings and Assumptions of the People, whereby they lay on
themselves Bonds which must not be broken, and cannot well without much
difficulty be kept; yet I cannot but observe many times whereby, the Vox
populi, is Vox Dei; as in the very change of the Government of Israel, on which
Dr. Hall Notes It was Gods ancient purp se to raise up a King to his People;
Page 10.24.
how does he take occasion to do it by the unruly desires of Israel; but
(blessed be God) this was not the case of the Covenant; the imposers did not
assemble on their own heads, and by violence and disorder assume unto
themselves an unusual power.

The power imposing this Covenant, was a Parliament, the Collective Body of the
Kingdom; Duly Summoned, Regularly Elected and returned; Rightly Constituted,
and Readily Embraced by King and Kingdom, and animated with more than ordinary
Parliamentary power, by the Bill for their continuance against all Casualties,
so as not to be Prorogued, Adjourned, or Dissolved, without their own consent:
And can any True-born English man (in any measure acquainted with the
constitution of this Kingdom, or the Authority of the High Court of Parliament)
deny these to be a just and lawful Authority to resolve, order, and enjoin,
yea, and execute their Resolves, Orders and Injunctions, during the being of
their power; though not to establish Laws to be executed, when they were
dissolved and gone.

Sir, I cannot without sad thoughts, remember the unhappy difference between
His late Majesty, and the late long Parliament; which occasioned the unhappy
opposition of the Peoples Liberty, and the Kings Prerogative; as I cannot but
wish they had been acted so conjunctly, that they might have seemed to vulgar
apprehension to have been but one; so I cannot but judge it prudence that a
period be put to the dispute thereof, upon the now Happy Reunion of his most
Sacred Majesty, and these too long distracted Kingdoms; I am clearly of
opinion with Aristotle, that Prince of Politians, Aristot. Polit. lib. 5. c.
10, 11.
That Regal Government is best established, where the Princes and People do
participate of it; and that Theopompus the Spartan, in transmitting some of his
Prerogative to his Ephori Princes, might well maintain the increase of his
Dominion, whilst he made it longer by making it less: I think therefore that
the wisest men, and best Subjects, will rather think, then assert, a
Prerogative in the King above His Parliament; and I for my part should be
content to find in the Parliament a sufficient power to impose an Oath on the
Subject, without the Kings consent, rather than to assert their Superiority
unto Him, in all points and particulars: And when Sir I consider the power,
even over and against their King in the Princes, and the Collective Body of the
People Recorded in Scripture, as in making War, Josh. 22. Judge. 20. Changing
the Government. 1 Samuel 8. Choosing and establishing, not only their first, but
succeeding Kings, though immediately appointed, and sometimes anointed by God,
as in the case of David, Solomon, and Rehoboam, and others, in removing from
the King Favorites and Counselors; as David was against the mind of Achish
the King, dismissed by the Princes of the Philistines, 1 Samuel 29. in
restraining the Kings purpose of destruction, confirmed by an Oath once and
again, as in the case of Jonathan; or of protection, as in the case of Jeremiah
the Prophet, concerning whom Zedekiah the King said, He is in your hands, the
King is not he that can do any thing against you, Jer. 38.5. In these and the
like cases, Josephus tells us, Joseph. Antiq. Jud. lib. 4. cap. 18.
the King might not do any thing without, or against the sentence of the Senate
or Congregation: Methinks a divine defense may be well made for the power of
the Parliament in this case acted and admitted; though without, and against the
consent of the King.

And when I consider what is Dogmatically asserted by Politicians, and no mean
Lawyers, in reference to the power of general Councils and Conventions of
Kingdoms in general, Fox, Acts and Monuments. p. 616.
as of Englands Parliaments in particular, as in the Council of Basil against
the Pope, the whole Realm has more Authority than the King. The same asserted
by Marius Salamonius, who by many Arguments does defend it, De principatu. lib.
1. p. 17, 18.
he was a Roman Lawyer and Philosopher; Hollingshead and Vowel in their
Description of England, declare concerning the Parliament, That this Court has
the most high and absolute power of the Realm; and that not only without, but
against the King, by it offenders are punished, and corrupt Religion reformed
or disannulled, and that whatever the people of Rome might do centuriatis,
comitiis, or tribunitiis; Vot. 1. cap. 1. p. 173.
which I am sure was to impose an Oath, the same is, and may be done by
Parliament; unto which may be added what is spoken to the same effect, and
almost in the same words, by Sir Thomas Smith, Secretary of State to King
Edward the sixth, and Queen Elizabeth, and a Doctor of the Law, in his
Commonwealth of England; and Horn, an Eminent Lawyer in Edward the first his
Reign, in his Mirror of Justice, cap. 1. p. 7, 8, 9. and Fortescue, Lord
Chancellor to Henry the sixth, in his Book de Laud. Leg. Angl. cap. 9. and
Bracton, quoted by these learned men, who certainly affirms more than they can
approve, Rex habet Superiorem Deum, item legem, per quam factus est Rex; item
curiaem suam (viz.) Comites and Barons, etc. Et ideo si Rex fuerit sine fraeno
debent ei fraenum imponere; and above all, the Sovereign Powers of Parliaments
judiciously defended in our very case, by that profound Lawyer, Mr. William
Prynne, approved no less Loyal to, and Zealous for the Kings Prerogative, than
Loving to the Peoples Liberties. I see not how we can avoid this Conclusion,
That the Votes, Orders, and Ordinances of the Lords and Commons in Parliament,
even without or against the Kings personal command, is to be obeyed and
observed.

Lastly, When I observe the Transactions of Parliament in the times of
Vortiger, Sigebert, Ofred, Beornerde, Edwin, and Edgar, and other Saxon Kings,
Deo dictante and annuente populo; the power of Parliaments in the times of King
John, King Henry the third, Richard the second, and other Kings of England
refusing to assemble at the Kings Call, assembling without the Kings Writ,
establishing Laws, correcting Vice and Misdemeanour, executing Justice, and
entering into Oaths and Covenants, without and against the Kings consent; and
when I observe in all Parliaments a power of regulating the Kings Court and
Council; of restraining, limiting, and enlarging the Kings power of
Jurisdiction and Prerogative; nay, of making void or valid a Title unto the
Succession to the Crown, as in the times of Henry the eighth, in case of his
many marriages; and that during the Session of Parliament, all Laws are under
covert at their feet, to be by them established or destroyed, and are by any
Vote or Order superseded, before a formal Repeal; and that in all Ages, and on
all sides, it is confessed, and cannot be denied, that the authority of
Parliament is exercised in all Votes, Orders and Ordinances of the two Houses,
unto the decision of present controversies, upon Appeal from other Courts of
Judicatory, wherein they can, and may authorize Examinations on Oath, and make
a final judgment, unto the ease and relief of the Subject, not otherwhere
relievable; unto the enforcement of any Act to be at present done and executed
for the good of the Kingdom, or any particular persons or society thereof,
without so much as desiring the Kings consent and concurrence; and if this
power should be denied, what could the freuqency of Parliaments, provided for
by the old Law of King Alfred, and after by the Statutes of 4. Ed. 3.4.36. Edw.
140. twice, or at least once every year, on this very ground, that the people
might receive right by holy judgment (such was the judgment of Parliament
deemed) and that the mischiefs and grievances which daily happen, might be
redressed if need be; on which account Proclamation was wont to be made in the
open Palace, before the breaking up of Parliament, Whether there be any that
have delivered a Petition to the Parliament, and not received answer thereunto?
And this power removed, what will avail the Triennial Parliaments conceded by
His late Majesty, or of what benefit was the continuation of this late long
Parliament, against all Casualties whatsoever that might fall out to dissolve
them? Can it be rationally imagined, that their being should be continued and
secured, to sit within those Walls in Council and Debate, without any power to
order or execute the Emergent Affairs of the Nation? These things well
considered, I s y, I see not how the imposing an Oath can be an assuming, or
the people swearing, an acknowledging of a greater power than has in former
times been challenged. If these Gentlemen will consult our own Histories in the
cases before touched, they will find a power much greater, not only challenged,
but assumed and exercised; the which the season, and present state of Affair do
forbid me to recite, in hopes that there will be no need to rip up our wounds
newly healed; and these generals may, I hope, sufficiently justify the
sufficiency of that authority which brought us into Covenant.

But these learned men suggest an inconsistency of this power with their former
Protestation in sundry material Branches: Methinks, Sir, they should have
specified those Branches, and the rather, because material and many. The
Protestation contains not many Branches; and those few seem to be fully conform
to this Covenant in all the particulars; and wherein they have supposed a
contrariety, we have before evidenced only a dissonancy at the most; and that
Ratione, not Re, in the manner of expression, not the thing sworn: they then
protested to preserve the power and privileges of Parliament, and should not
covenant any more, nay, scarce so much in this Oath; for they herein promise to
preserve the Rights and Privileges, which is something softer than power; and
I wonder they that then saw a power to be preserved, could not now see a right:
I will only enquire whether they thought the Parliament had a power to impose
that Oath, and not a right to impose this? There was no Act of Parliament, nor
Assent of the King to that; I observe the King in His Messages to the Houses,
does note it to be their own Protestation, as if He had no hand in it, nor
consent unto it; and if by power they should mean natural strength, not
political authority, it has been urged by many as their grievance, and by
these Gentlemen themselves in the foregoing Exceptions, that they had too much
of that: It is the unhappiness of a scrupulous conscience to run it self on
contradiction in actions, as well as assertions; to swear as lawfully called at
one time, but not to dare to swear an Oath containing the same matter, though
called by the same authority another time.

But that which was the greatest doubt with these learned men, was, Page ibid.
and 4.
the King by His Proclamation, October. 9.19. Carol. had expressly forbidden the
entering into this Covenant, it being in His power to make void the same.

That such an Interdict had been published by His late Majesty, we cannot deny;
League Illegal. p. 16.
but not as Dr. Featly his ghost supposes, on pain of Treason; for no
Proclamation of the Kings of England did claim the formality of a Law, so far
as to fasten Treason on the non-observance of what is thereby enjoined.

2. I am not satisfied how regularly His Majesty did issue forth the said
Proclamation; which is not usually done, but by the advice of His Council, who
are veiled by the Session of Parliament; and all Proclamations then usually run
by the Advice of the Lords and Commons in Parliament assembled; and if at any
time the Lords and Commons, or either of them during their Sessions, give out
Orders, not only relating to the Estate they represent, but to any others, the
Subjects of this Realm; it has not been usual for the King, by the Authority
of His Proclamation, to thwart, oppose, and void them; and in a case of this
nature, a good observer may find, the Parliament have judged the Kings
opposing, or taking notice of any thing by them debated or ordered, before it
is regularly propounded to Him by themselves, to have been a breach of
privilege, and so to have been acknowledged, and as such retracted by His late
Majesty; the little pleasure I have in the story, forbids instances, hoping
general hints may answer the learned and sober.

3. Nor am I convinced that it was in His power by the equity of the Law, Numb.
32. (they mean 30.2.) to annull and make void the Covenant; for admitting the
equity of that Law by Analogy to reach us, I hope no adult child shall on
observation of irregularities in the Government of a Family, be barred from
vowing in his place and calling, to his power and capacity sincerely, really,
and constantly to endeavor the Reformation thereof; viz. Quenquam qui gaudet
usu rationis ita plene sub alterius potestate esse quin ut sit quantum ad
aliqua saltem sui juris, is Dr. Sanderson's Rule; though the effect may, yet
the lawful endeavor cannot be out of the child's reach; De Turam.
if the child or wife swear nothing but positive duty, or what is within their
power, and so limit their vow; I hope the Superiors interdiction, will favor
more of passionate mistake, than strength to avoid the vow.

Yet I must confess I am not clear, that the equity of that Law will reach our
case, I was ever willing to yield His Majesty the Reverence due to a Political
Parent; but in this case of conscience wherein He is abstracted from, and
opposed unto the Parliament, I find a defect which makes me fear the simile
will not square; and though I can own Him as a Parent to be by Him corrected
and disposed, yet methinks the Parental power is placed in others, at least
conjunct with Him (viz.) the Parliament; I am sure Legislation is Paternal
power, and Execution more proper to the other Parent; and that the Lords and
Commons have a share, if not the greatest share, in Legislation, no true
Englishman, nay, no ordinary Politician, can or will deny; when I observe the
King sworn to Rule according to the Laws, quas populas clegerit, which the
people shall choose, and the Writ for their Election to require that they be
furnished, and have plenam and sufficientem potestatem pro se and communitate,
etc. ad faciendum and consentiendum his quae tunc and ibidem de communi in
consilidicti Regni nostri contigerint ordinari ita quod pro defectu potestatis
hujusmodi, etc. dicta negotia infecta non remaneant: Paternal Authority, power
to consent and make Laws in the great Affairs of the Kingdom, as the Family;
and when I observe Politicians and Lawyers, even Englishmen, generally to
conclude the forma informans, form animating the Law to be the consent or
choice of the people; whence Marius Salamonius, that great Lawyer, defining the
Law, says, it is, Expressa Civium Conventio; and makes this the Reason of
their obligation, Ligatur populus legibus suis, De principatu. lib. 1. p. 35,
36. Instin. Cod. 1. Tit. 17. Lex. 8.
quasi pactis conventis, quae verae sunt leges; whence Theodosius the Emperor,
writing to the Senate of Rome, does declare consensus universorum, to be the
formality of those Laws that he would establish; to which our Hollingshead, and
Sir Thomas Smith before mentioned, does fully assent and concur, as likewise
Fortescue, who makes the King to be as the Minister in Marriage, who may
establish and declare it; but the consent of parties gives it being; and the
common Dialect of our own Statutes being, the Assent of the Lords and Commons,
and Authority of Parliament, which no less frequency than the Assent of the
King; and that the contriving, debating, fully forming, by frequent reading,
serious consideration, and full disputes, is the peculiar work of the two
Houses; whilst a Ministerial Declaration (though in a Dialect, and form of
Majesty) is the proper and only work of a King, though I deny not a Parental
power and Prerogative to the King; I cannot but judge it more than probable,
that the proper Paternal power is in the Parliament, or at the least in the
three Estates; and then, Sir, we are under this unhappy question, Whether to
obey father or mother, when they falling out, command different, nay, contrary
things? this I confess is not more the distraction, than the confusion of the
Family; yet certainly in such an unhappy chance, prudent and rational children,
must, and will cleave to the principal legislative party, who has a confessed
authority and power to extend or restrain, augment or diminish the Prerogative
and Ministerial power of the other, bound to act according to their
appointments.

Sir, Dr. Gaudens Appeal to the Oxford Reasons, has led me to this Discourse,
and unwilling distinction; but my prayer is, and hence-forward shall be, that
England may honor father and mother, and know no difference; for the Case is
now altered, and this Argument is of no force; as I thought I had sufficiently
hinted in my last; for His late Majesty forbade the Act, but never assumed an
Authority to void the Obligation; and His most Sacred Majesty by His own
subjection to it, Declaration for it, and Oath to endeavor the Establishment
thereof, has (as is before noted) made it valid; and I hope such as call Him
Father, will weigh the equity of this Law, Numb. 30.2. and not only acknowledge
their brethren bound by it, but themselves become subject to the same bond,
which had before a lawful and sufficient, but now has a complete and perfect
Auhority.

4. 4. The gesture in making the Covenant, vindicated.
The fourth and last particular in the manner of making the Solemn League and
Covenant, is, The action or gesture of the body used in the swearing thereof to
declare the assent of the mind; by which profane spirits do endeavor to
reproach it, for that it was not sworn after the ordinary manner used among us,
by laying the hand on the Bible, but by lifting up the hand toward heaven.
Amongst those who have of late appeared against the Covenant, I find none
speaking against this gesture, League Illegal p. 21.
save only Dr. Featlies ghost, who (like it self, more scurrilously than
seriously) pretends to Answer one Text of Scripture, which he supposes to be
the only one for defense of this gesture, Rev. 10.15. The Angel lifted up his
hand and swear, etc. Unto which he says, That might be a fit gesture for an
Angel menacing a fatal doom to the world; which yet may not be thought so fit a
gesture for men entering into an holy League for the preservation of two
Kingdoms; If they can, as the Angel, stand upon the earth and the sea at the
same time: let them imitate the Angels in lifting up their hands when they make
their Covenant; Howsoever, I think it a fitter gesture, in taking this Oath,
than after the usual manner to lay the hand on the Bible; for this Oath and
Covenant has no ground or foundation at all in that Book; and the lifting up
of the hand, very well expresses the purport of the Covenant, which is a
lifting up their hands against the Lords Anointed and his Church.

The very transcription of this is a sufficient confutation: Who can read it,
and not run and read a most malicious heart venting it self by a most weak
head! Sounds not this Argument like Dr. Featley? Sure his Executor thought his
name enough to make acceptable the dullest notions could drop from his own
brain.

I shall desire it may be considered.

1. No particular gesture is necessary and appointed of God to be used by men
in making Oaths and Covenants; and therefore men have chosen what gesture of
the body to them seemed good to declare the assent of the mind; as Abraham and
Jacob, the putting the hand under the hallow of the thigh; our Country
ordinarily uses the laying the hand on the Bible, and kissing the Book; but
other Countries, the holding up of the right hand. May not the Magistrate,
prescribing an Oath, prescribe what gesture seems him good? They must needs be
eager bent, who will fight with a shadow.

2. Is the lifting up of the hand a gesture peculiar to an Angel? only used in
menacing, and when he stands on sea and land at the same time? Did this man
never read nor hear it used in other places of Scripture? and on other
occasions? or was it the vehemence or verity of the threatening, and doom
denounced, which was witnessed by it? What thinks he of Abraham in Genesis 14.22.
I have lift up my hand to God, I will not take any thing that is thine? He was
no Angel, nor threatening any judgment, nor did he stand on sea and land at the
same time: Or, what thinks he of Ezekiel. 20.5. I lifted up my hand unto the seed
of the House of Jacob? God was not an Angel; nor then menacing any fatal doom,
but promising the greatest blessings which Israel could enjoy, If he had
pleased to consult any Expositors on these or the like Texts, he should find,
that the lifting up of the hand, was the usual gesture in swearing any Oaths
and Covenants: He would make the World believe, the Covenanters were in an hard
strait to find an instance of this gesture in Scripture; and therefore they
fly to the Angel in the Revelation.

3. Has the Solemn League and Covenant no ground or foundation in Scripture?
Suppose the matter of it be no more than he here suggesteth, (viz.) The
preservation of two Nations; has this no ground in Scripture? Did he never
read therein of two Nations joined in one Covenant, for the good one of
another? But further, has the preservation of the true Reformed Religion, and
reformation, according to the Word of God, no foundation in Scripture; are
there no Historical Relations of Covenants of this matter? has the
preservation of the Kings Honor and Happiness, no ground or foundation in
Scripture? has unity and uniformity in Religion, no ground in Scripture, and
are not these the matter of the Covenant? Can any thing but horrid impudence,
say, It was not fit for them to lay their hands on the Bible, for this Covenant
has no ground or foundation in that Book? This Author might have well
forborne this charge, who himself concedes, that punctilio in the manner of
making this Covenant, which many and himself would deny to have ground in
Scripture, (viz.) the making it without the Kings consent: For he grants, that
a Covenant to remove a scandal, League Illegal p. 20.
and fulfill the express command of God, may be made not only without, but
against the consent of the Prince. If this Covenant fall not under one of
these, nay both these qualifications, I have lost my reason.

4. With what face can this fury say the purport of this Covenant was the
lifting up of their hands against the Lords Anointed and his Church, whilst its
professed inscription, is, A Solemn League and Covenant for Reformation and
Defense of Religion, the Honor and Happiness of the King: Answerable whereunto
are the grounds inducing to make it: Having before our eyes the advancement of
the Kingdom of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, the Honor and Happiness of
the Kings Majesty and His Posterity; and accordingly promises the preservation
and reformation of Religion according to the Word of God, and to preserve and
defend the Kings Majesty's Person and Authority; that the world may bear
witness with our consciences, that we have no thoughts or intentions to
diminish His Majesty's just Power and Greatness: Whatever may have been the
practices of some wicked men, who swear this Covenant, it is as clear as the
Sun, That the lifting up of the hand for the good of the Church, Honor and
Safety of the Lords Anointed, was the purport of the Covenant it self: And the
violent rejection of the Covenant, as an Almanac out of date before the horrid
violence done unto His late Majesty, is a manifest testimony of it; together
with the protest of the covenanted Secluded Members of Parliament, and of the
Ministers of London, against those perjurious proceedings: As likewise, the
public testimonies of the Ministers of the Gospel to the Solemn League and
Covenant, of almost all the Counties in England, do declare it: and the
divastation and captivity of Scotland, the Sequestrations, Imprisonments, and
death of many in England; and contests with all zeal, faithfulness, and
constancy, against all difficulties and dangers, unto the very effecting of the
Happy Return of His most Sacred Majesty, and that in conscience of this very
Covenant, do loudly sound it through the world, if the same malice do not
deafen the ear in hearing the comment, that darkened the eye in reading the Text.

Now, Sir, I must tell him, the lifting up of the hand might be a most proper
gesture to the taking of this Covenant, not only as a gesture usual in
swearing, and expedient, because expeditious in an Oath universally sworn by
whole Assemblies, but as a sign of special suit and earnest supplication for
divine grace and assistance, Lam. 2.19. Of Solemn adoration and worship of God;
praising his goodness that had inclined the heart of the Governors of his
people, to bring them into such a Covenant; Neh. 8.6. Or of joy and alacrity in
so Sacred a Bond unto such absolute duties tending to the honor of God,
happiness of the King, and safety of true Religion, Ps. 119.48. And in these
respects it is a gesture no less suitable to men than Angels; and the standing
on earth, not sea and earth at the same time, performing a duty, and promising
things required in Scripture, and praying mercies and blessings, not menacing a
fatal doom: Yet I will not deny that it imprecated Gods direful judgments to
fall on the heads of such as should violate this Solemn League and Covenant;
which our eyes have seen accomplished on such as slighted its obligation in the
Civil part thereof: And I cannot but tremble, to think what must needs attend
such as not only slight, but set against, and violently break through these
holy bonds in that part which immediately concerns God and true Religion;
whilst we see the very manner of making this Covenant is no less justifiable,
than the matter therein sworn; and being seriously considered, will not avail
to reproach, much less to discharge the Solemn League and Covenant.

Sectio Quinta. Fifth Prop. The Ambiguities and Contradictions in the words of
the Solemn League and Covenant, are imagined, not real.
SO Sacred is the nature of an Oath, and so strict the obligation thereof, that
I freely confess simplicity of expression, and sincerity of intention, should
continually attend it; and ambiguous or contradictory terms do destroy the very
nature thereof, deceive men, and blaspheme God, in making him the Witness of a
fallacy; yet these ambiguities and contradictions must be real, and in the very
words of the Covenant, not in the fancy or imagination of such as in prejudice
do decline the Oath, nor in the intention of him that swears, not willing to
be bound; for if the words be clear and plain in their proper signification, or
vulgar acceptance, the apprehension of the confederates, or the due drift and
scope of the Oath, the Oath obliges, De juram. prael. 6. Sect. 22.11. p. 173,
195.
and must be carefully observed, as Dr, Sanderson, Grotius, and many others in
this case do teach.

Some there are who charge the Solemn League and Covenant with ambiguities and
contradiction in its terms, and therefore have declined to swear it: these
(having had a care to their passion and prejudice) I cannot but commend,
confessing that whilst they but seem such to their imagination, they might well
be a remora to their act of swearing, and spur unto the study of the Oath to be
sworn; but others plead them as an Argument to make void the Oath; and such
had need to see that there is no possibility of understanding the terms in a
sound sense, and making them to agree among themselves, lest they be found
Students unto perjury: Forasmuch as the last have recourse unto the first, let
us consider what seemed to the one, and are since alleged by the other, to be
ambiguous and contradictory, that the one may be justified, and the other
acquitted if found real, or both condemned if found imagined. 1. Ambiguity.
Oxford Reasons Sect. 6 p. 17. League Illegal. p. 27.


The ambiguities that are urged are these:

1. Those words in the first Article of the Covenant, the common enemies, the
Masters and Scholars of Oxford do charge with ambiguity, but assign no cause or
reason for the same, and Dr. Featley his ghost following their exception,
enquireth, whether by common enemies are meant the world, the flesh, or the
devil, enemies to all true Religion; or Papists, and Independents, enemies to
the Discipline of the Scotch Church.

Unto this exception, Sir, I answer:

The words common enemies, are words in their own nature and signification,
plain and clear to be understood; nor do I know them to be darkened by any
variety of acceptance; they are indeed relative terms to be specified, or
particularly assigned by their objects, things, or persons, so that the Kingdom
of England, or professors of true Religion, being annexed to common enemies, as
objects of that enmity, does make its sense plain and obvious to every
capacity: If then common enemies had been mentioned in the Covenant without an
object assigned, it might have been an individuum vagum, and so ambiguous as
not to be understood: But they are not left so general; for they are limited
with this possessive, our: The words run thus, The preservation of the Reformed
Religion of the Church of Scotland, in doctrine, worship, discipline and
government, against OUR COMMON enemies: This Relative OUR, does limit and
expl^in COMMON ENEMIES; and if they will consider the antecedent, which can be
no other than the Noblemen, Barons, Knights, Gentlemen, Citizens, Burgesses,
and Commons of all sorts, etc. living under one King, being of one reformed
religion, having before our eyes, etc. and men described by these and the like
qualities, and in special, by one that is fully exegetical to these terms in
the Preface of the Covenant, and discharge all imaginable ambiguity in them,
(viz.) Calling to mind the treacherous and bloody plots, and conspiracies,
attempts and practices of the enemies of God against the true religion and
professors thereof in all places, but especially in these three Kingdoms, ever
since the reformation, they will find, that an ordinary Grammarian would easily
read this Riddle, and tell them, common enemies, limited by this possessive
OUR, must mean the enemies of England, Scotland, and Ireland, as living under
one King, in the profession of one reformed Religion; wherein some had made a
progress to be preserved, others were in pursuit of a greater degree of
reformation; but all opposed by the plots, conspiracies, etc. of known enemies
to true religion, especially the professors thereof in these three Kingdoms:
Now whilst this enmity was not seen by the Masters and Scholars of Oxford, it
is no wonder if they imagined an ambiguity in these words, Common Enemies; and
Dr. Featley his Ghost might hereby have assured himself, that both the flesh,
the world, and the devil, are enemies to all true religion, and so to
reformation, and Papists professed enemies to the reformed Religion, were here
intended; and Independents (though scarcely then known by that name) by their
enmity to the discipline and government of Scotland parts of the true reformed
Religion, might be accidentally accounted into the number of the Common
enemies, so far as the qualifications before mentioned in reference to the
antecedent objects of this common enmity, will include them: And so Sir, the
words can be of no very dark or doubtful construction to the one, or to the
other, there being no real ambiguity in them.

2. The next words charged with Ambiguity, The second Ambiguity charged on the
Covenant.
are in the same Article the best Reformed Churches, concerning which the
Masters and Scholars of Oxford enquire which they be? but (by their leave) that
is not necessary to be resolved in or before the taking of the Covenant; yet
the words are of a plain and clear construction, making this sense obvious to
the meanest capacity, in endeavoring the Reformation of the Church of England,
the Word of God shall be our Rule; and (forasmuch as many Churches are
reformed, some more and better, some worse and less) the best Reformed Churches
shall be our pattern; so that the Covenant asserts not which are the best
reformed Churches, but binds the Covenanter to the observation of whatever
Church shall appear, and be found the best Reformed, as the example to which he
shall endeavor England may be conformed.

The next words imagined to be so ambiguous as to impede the swearing the
Covenant in judgment, are in the second Article, The third Ambiguity charged
on the Covenant. League Illegal p. 27.
and profoundly stated by Dr. Featley's Ghost, who enquires, what is meant by
Church Government, by Archbishops, Bishops, Deans, etc. as if it were not so
particularly specified, that every ordinary capacity may run and read it, if he
know any thing of the late Hierarchy in this Church: Dr. Gauden has appeared
no less willing to suppose and suggest the same Ambiguities, in his Analysis;
to which I have before Answered in my Analepsis; and he that has but half an
eye cannot but see, that the very and whole frame of Government, by
Archdeacons, Prebends, Chapters, Deans, Bishops, and Archbishops, (whereby
all Government which belongs to Presbyters in Common, was engrossed; by a few
pretended Ministers to Cathedral Churches; and a Superiority of Office and
Order above Presbyters, not ordained by God, or consented to by themselves, was
exercised) is utterly to be abolished; the which is so clearly expressed, that
it can admit of no evasive Salvoes.

The next Ambiguity is imagined by the Masters and Scholars of Oxford, to be in
the fourth Article, in the word Malignants; The Fourth Ambiguity charged on the
Covenant.
and they enquire who are to be accounted Malignants, as if it were left in its
latitude, to be understood by every man's private fancy; whilst it is expressly
limited and explained in the Article it self; such as have been, or shall be
Malignants, by hindering Reformation of Religion, dividing the King from his
people, or one Kingdom from another; so that the Malignity predicated, is
described and specified by the formality of it; but those learned men know not
how far the hindering Reformation of Religion may be extended. To which I say,
it matters not unto the discovery of a Malignant, for they will not deny both
these to admit majus and minus; if Reformation be hindered, it is Malignity,
which is in degree more or less, according to the measure of that obstruction
which is made.

Again, they know not what are meant by the Supreme Judicatories of both
Kingdoms; sure they will not pretend to ignorance in the signification; they
know well what a Judicatory is, and wherein Supreme, almost every Englishman
knows the sense of these Roman terms. I believe their doubt was, which be the
Supreme Judicatories; and the words can be construed no otherwise, than to
mean, those to which the other Courts of Judgment are subject, and from which
there is no appeal; if they please to ask Lawyers, I presume, they will tell
them, it is the Parliament: yet this is not necessary to be known, to the
expounding of the words of the Covenant.

These are, Oxford Reasons sect. 6. p. 17, 18.
Sir, the ambiguous terms; which in the judgment of these learned men are of a
dark and doubtful construction, whether really and in themselves, let rational
men judge: others they do stick at, but profess the use men have made thereof
does occasion it; they well know false glosses, male interpretations, and a
strained sense may by wicked men be put on the plainest text; yet it does not
lose its genuine and proper signification; especially in an Oath; wherein some
men are willing to wrest it with rigor, beyond its scope: others, to writh
themselves out of its just obligation. I shall be free to tell them, that no
Rules of right Reason, will justify the rigorous sense put on the third
Article, in the Case of the King, by Mr. Challoner, though in a speech in
Parliament; nor the Laxe sense, put on the second Article, in the Case of
Prelacy, by Dr. John Gauden, though unto the Loosing of St. Peter's bonds: nor
will the words of the Covenant warrant the one or the other. But such
ambiguities are made according to men's wills, minds, fancies and lusts, not
found in the words, which are clear and plain to every common capacity.

These supposed ambiguities are not more visible to have been imagined, without
any real ground in the words of the Covenant, than the suggested contradictions
in it self; the learned men of Oxford do charge the Covenant to be an Oath, in
which one part is contradictory to another; but with Reverence may I tell them,
one part is confined to their breasts, or to such to whom they show it; Oxford
Reasons. sect. 6. p. 16.
for it goes not abroad with the Covenant; as will appear in the very naming
of their supposed suggested contradictions, which are these.

1. To preserve, as it is, without change, 1. Contradiction charged on the
Covenant.
and yet to reform and alter, and not to preserve one and the same Reformed
Religion.

In what Articles of the Covenant this contradiction lies, they do not tell
us, nor can I see it: the Reformed Religion in Scotland is to be preserved, and
Reformation of Religion in England endeavored: Are these opposites and
contraries? were there not Doctrins, Worship, Discipline and Government in
England, which were no part of the Reformed Religion? and cannot these be
altered and abolished, whilst that is preserved? where then is the
contradiction?

2. Absolutely, and without exception to preserve, 2 Contradiction charged on
the Covenant.
and yet upon supposition to extirpate the self-same thing (viz.) the present
Religion of the Church of Scotland.

I want, Sir, their eyes to read this contradiction; the first part, to
preserve, is legible in the Covenant: but, to extirpate the present Religion in
the Church of Scotland, I read not; Oh, but they tell us, it is on a
supposition; but I suppose, that supposition must be expressed in plain terms
in the Covenant, to make a contradictory part thereof.

The Extirpation covenanted relates to Popery, Prelacy, Error, Heresy,
Schism, etc. which of those can we suppose the present Religion of Scotland to
be? they will bring good Compurgators for every of them; I know the University
did suppose, Reason. sect. 4 p. 4.
there were some things in the Church of Scotland, which to their thinking did
tend to schism and superstition: yet they dare not charge it, do but suppose
it; and that not to be, but tend toward superstition and schism: and they do
not affirm them neither to be the Religion of Scotland: such supposed
extirpation may suppose a contradiction, justly deserving to be charged to be a
suppositum non supponendum.

Their next Contradiction is as clear a supposition as this: 3. Contradiction
charged on the Covenant.
to reform Church Government in England and Ireland, according to the Word of
God, and yet to extirpate that we are persuaded is according to the Word of
God: here it is visible, the contradiction is between the Covenant and their
persuasion; not one part against another part of it self; how well-grounded
their persuasion is, we have before enquired; I shall therefore only tell them,
it is not fair play to beg the question, and on their own persuasion, to
arraign the Covenant, as an Oath contradictory to it self, yet

The next is of the very same nature, 4. Contradiction charged on the Covenant.
to extirpate heresy, schisms, and profaneness, and yet to extirpate the
Government, we conceive, the want of which is the chief cause of all evils, and
the restoring and continuance of which, the proper and effectual remedy. Sure,
Sir, this conceit never sprung from the Book of Sports, or Bishop Pierce his
Somersetshire Septuagint on Revels and Church-Ales, which are more clearly
contradictory than the Covenant.

The last is of the same nature: and a supposition in their own breast, 5.
Contradiction charged on the Covenant.
to preserve the Liberties of the People: and yet submit to the imposition of
this Covenant not established by Law; yet imposed by just and sufficient
Authority: but in what words of the Covenant lies this contradiction? I hope
it is no loss of the Liberty of the Kingdom, to swear, that we will preserve
the Liberties thereof; Who ever requires us so to do? for the swearing of an
absolute duty, is but a poor acknowledgment of Authority.

We must, Sir, see more dark and doubtful expressions, and plain and clear
contradictory terms in the Solemn League and Covenant, before we can judge it
really ambiguous or contradictory; or conceive men's clamours to spring from any
thing more, than their own passionate fancies, and prejudicate opinions, whose
lusts lead them to wish it were such, as they cannot charge it to be.

Sectio sexta. Proposition 6. The Solemn League and Covenant, for its quality,
and in Respect of its obligation, is Public and National, as well as Private
and Personal.
SIR, Dr. Gauden in his attempt to loosen St. Peter's bonds, (as he judges the
Covenant to be) was willing to render the Covenant to be in reference to the
matter thereof; a Religious Bond declaring a sense of duty to God, the King,
the Church, their Country, and the Reformed Religion, Page 14.
to make men more strictly sensible of the sacred, and civil obligations
respectively due unto them, that so they might be more ready to discharge them
in their places and callings; and hereby he does establish the obligation
thereof; which, he not finding any way to avoid, does endeavor to limit, and
contract into a narrow Room and Compass; supposing the subjects thereof to be
few, very few, and those private men in their private capacity, and so
denominates it a Religious Bond which private men, and some party only of the
Nations spontaneously took upon themselves, in sense whereof he accommodates
his solution of the Covenant unto private capacities endeavoring to absolve
them by a power which, he says, is in themselves: or to quiet them with a
suggestion of impossibility to accomplish their particular promises against the
purpose, and current of the Nation: how judiciously he has managed the same, I
have already showed in my St. Peter's bonds Abide, wherein, I did among other
things, suggest my apprehension of the Covenant, Page 21.
in respect of the extent of its obligation, to be Public and National; I
expected something to have been said by the Dr. against that suggestion; and
the grounds from which it did arise, but find none; only in the Doubts and
Scruples handed into the world by his Epistle, and offered to your, and my
consideration; he does adhere to his own notion of the nature and private
personal obligation of the Covenant, not urging one Reason for it, or
answering any thing urged against it; how ingenuously this is done by a
Casuist, (that presumed to release from the obligation of sacred bonds) let the
world judge: I am therefore constrained to speak out, and more plainly to
assert what I was desirous only to hint, and generally suggest; hoping thereby
to have produced some serious discourse, which might have acquitted our Nation,
or have affected them with the Oath of God which abides upon them.

When Sir, I say, the Solemn League and Covenant is Public and National, I
intend by it that which Civilians and Casuists do ordinarily call Real, and as
they oppose it unto private or personal, because it rests not in any
individual persons, or particular private number thereof; who may soon perish,
and so the obligation pass away with them, or be over-powred, and so put into
an impossbility of doing what they had sworn: (as was Saul in the case of
Jonathans Rescue; and the men that confederated against Paul) the breach
whereof subjects only those individual persons unto the guilt or punishment of
perjury, in non-effecting, or endeavoring the thing covenanted: but abides
fixed in things and capacities, which continue and abide under all mutation of
persons, and so pass upon all persons whatsoever, in all after ages, ad
infinitum (if the Covenant be not limited) who shall succeed into those things,
places, or capacities; and so bind all persons therein concerned, whether
invested, or represented by, and so involved in the same, unto the sincere,
faithful, diligent, and constant performnance and pursuit of what is therein
promis d: and in denial, or defect thereof, subjects them unto the guilt and
punishment of perjury, so that the generations who never personally swear the
Covenant, succeeding into the capacities of their Progenitors, are bound unto
the performance of the Oath, and shall be punished many hundreds of years after
it was made, and (it may be) some years after it was violated, in case of the
breach of it: for so long as the public capacity continues, the persons which
succeed into it, succeed also into the obligation which lies upon it, and the
variation of persons voideth not the Oath: such is the Oath of any body of
people, whether a City or Nation, wherein the public faith of that body
Politic is engaged, and must be maintained.

First, Whether it be done by the universality of the people themselves, Ubi
semel decretum erit omnibus, id etiam quibus ante displicuerit pro bono atque
utili foedere defendendam. Live. lib. 32.
in which all singulars are supposed to confederate: though some few may not
complie, yet those few are included in, and bound by the universalitie
according to that Rule; Vbi universi, ibi and singuli, nam singuli congregati
vel in summa reputati facitunt universes: The universality is made up of the
singular persons: so in a Corporation or County, the Universality choose Members
of Parliament, or Magistrates confederate, ^acta Civium publicis consiliis
habita eos obligabunt qui aliter senserunt. Grot. bell. and pa. p. 516.
though some singular persons be not present nor vote in the Negative, and so
personally consent, yet a repolitically obliged.

2. Or whether it be done by the collective body of the People who represent
them, in their names, and at their appointment, not transacting all affairs as
did the Senate of Rome, in reference to which Salust notes, Senatus uti
poterat decrevit, suo atque populi injusso nullum potuisse foedus fieri; the
Senate decreed, for if they or the people had gainsaid it, there could be no
Covenant; and in this Collective body though there may be many dissenters; yet
by the Oath and Act of the majority themselves, and they whom in that capacity
they represent, are bound; according to that rule, Coetus quilibet non minus
quam persona singularis jus habet se olbigande, p r se aut per majorem sui
partem. Thus was Israel bound by the Oath of the Princes passed unto the
Gibeonites, so that although the people knowing it, muttered and murmured
against the Oath, no one durst offer violence unto a Gibeonite; and when Saul
in a well meant zeal did presume to do it, the Faith of Israel was violated and
avenged by a Famine in the time of David an innocent person, until expiated by
the hanging Saul's sons three hundred years after the Oath was made, and when
many generations who consented not unto it, had returned.

3. Or, Whether it be done by any single person, as the King, but in the name
and on the account of the Kingdom; so that as King of such a Kingdom, he makes
the Oath or Covenant, and so obliges the faith of the Kingdom, and so the
people are included in it; and the Covenant does not become personal, according
to that Rule, At si cum rege contractum sit non statim personale erit censendum
foedus; plerumque persona pactum inseritur non ut personale pactum fiat, sed ut
demonstretur cum quo pactum factum est. If the Covenant be made with the King,
it is not therefore personal, for a person may be inserted to show with whom
the Covenant is made; as a Covenant is passed by the King of England, to
declare England is bound, as it was in the case of the Rrman Empire; Imperator
foedus percussit, videtur populus percussisse Romauus and foedere continetur.
The Emperor swear, the people were included in the Covenant, and such also was
the Oath passed by Zedekiah the King of Israel, unto the King of Babylon, which
bound Israel to performance, and brought them under the guilt and punishment of
the breach thereof.

Sir, An Oath or Covenant is best discovered by the enquiry and caution made,
and given by Justin in the case of the tributary Cities which had obtained
terms of the Medes before the Empire was to them transferred, Spectandum an in
conventione fidem Medorum elegissent. Whether they had engaged the faith of the
Medes; and if the Covenant were so sworn in a public and National capacity,
that the faith of the Nation were engaged; all persons and all ages, so long as
it continues a Nation, are obliged by it, and must carefully perform it; or
expect to plunge themselves under the guilt and punishment of perjury: the Oath
Regal being founded in sua natura, a subjectum permanens, a subject which
cease not, however it succeeds unto, and is administered by different
persons, so that in this case, as in the case of the holy wars, it was
generally granted: every League with Christians, did bind Christians who did
not personally confederate, because the faith of the Christians was engaged; so
every Covenant of England, engaging the faith of England, does bind all
present, and future people in England, whilst England abides a Nation, and
cannot be avoided, though obtained by fraud, as that of the Gibeonites; or by
force, as that of Zedekiah, which we have before noted; nor will it avail any
thing, as to their excuse, or apology, for not preserving and pursuing the
things promised in the Covenant; to plead I took it not, or my Father indeed
took it, but the Generation is dead and gone who swear it, unless they can
divide themselves from the Nation, and bury the Nation in the Tombs of their
Progenitors; nay, though there should be a mutation of the form of the
Government, and Administration thereof; yet if it abide a Nation, its National
Oath will bind according to the Reason Grotius lays us down, De jure bell. ex
par. lib. 2. cap. 16. pa. 256
Etiamsi status Civitatis in Regnum mutetur; manebit foedus, quia manet idem
Corpus, etsi mutato capite; the same body politic does yet continue: unto
such as suppose the death of persons to make void the Covenant, I would tell
them what Livie said in the case of the Romans, they swear when P. Valerius was
Consul, they would assemble at the command of the Consul he being dead, L.
Quintius was made Consul, and called the Assembly, they begin to cavil and
question whether they are bound by their Oath, he being dead to whom they made
it. Et nondum haec quae nunc tenet seculum, negligentia Deum venerat; nec
interpretandi sibi quisque jus jurandum; and leges aptas faciebant, sed suos
potius mores ad ea accommodabant; This negligence of God has not long
possessed this Christian world, that men should make unto themselves the
interpretation, or rules of obligation of an Oath; unto which they should
rather square their conversation, whilst if it be a real, public, and
National Oath, the persons swearing, and sworn unto, may pass away; and yet
(as in the case of the Gibeonites) the obligation pass to all posterity.

Sir, I am sufficiently convinced that if private men, and individual persons
who have sworn the Covenant, will make conscience of the Oath of God upon them;
there can be no probability of a return, and re-stablishment within the
compass of this age, of the evils we have sworn to extirpate, they being
locked under a moral impossibility of readmission or continuance, by that
public Parliamentary capacity into which many, who have sworn the Covenant,
are at this time resolved; and in which they cannot but know themselves bound
to endeavor in their places, and callings, with all sincerity, reality, and
constancy to extirpate the same, and for that others, and those not a few, as
Ministers of the Gospel, are bound to the same in their capacity. I am sure the
Ministerial rebukes, and confutations of the one, and public Parliamentary
debates of the other, will lay a very great remora unto their return: and his
most Sacred Majesty (to speak it with due dread) being in his place bound from
his Royal assent thereunto, I presume will not only aw from proposing to him
any Laws that may restore any of them, but put an absolute moral impossibility
on the present passing of any Law to that purpose.

Yet, Sir, when I observe many carnal Politicians, careless Preachers Court
Divines, and temporising Covenanters, suggesting a nullity on the Covenant, and
speaking out, that it is void, and non-obliging, by the reason of the paucity,
(which they suppose not to be a fourth part of the Nation) who swear it, or at
least, unto such as never took it, which may not only be many persons now
living, but the whole Generation since springing up; or that the Power and
Authority of the Nation (whom they do not a little provoke thereunto) may by
their public Edict make it void; I see it to be a plain case of conscience,
and necessary to be resolved, whether the Solemn League and Covenant be
private, and personal only, binding individuals, or real, public and
National, binding the power, and body politic of the Nation.

And, Sir, on second thoughts, and a serious surveigh of the Solemn League and
Covenant, I cannot but observe, and see clearly, that first the matter therein
Covenanted, is public and national, relating to the Kingdom under its Civil,
Religious, and reformed consideration, or capacity, being the reformation and
defense of Religion under a national profession, and the honor and happiness
of the King, privileges of Parliament, and liberties of the Subjects, and the
like concernments, no way proper for personal, and individual, private Oaths.

2. These matters, and this form of security to them, were consul ed, agitated,
debated, determined, concluded, and agreed unto, by two distinct Nations;
agreeing in the general capacities which did relate unto the matter thereof:
and that in their most public capacities, and by the indisputable, most full,
and formal collective bodies of both Kingdoms, the Parliament, though
defective, in that part which was most necessary to establish a Law, then
indent a Covenant, which did most eminently consist in the consent of the
people, and body of the Nations.

3. The terms showing the capacity in which it was sworn, are general and
National, as in the very words of the Preface, We Noblemen, Barons, Knights,
Gentlemen, Citizens, Burgesses, Ministers of the Gospel, and Commons of all
sorts of the Kingdom of England, etc. by the providence of God living under
one King, and being of one reformed Religion, so that all ranks and orders of
men, however dignified, or distinguished among themselves, yet united in this
public capacity, the subjects of one King and of one reformed Religion, and in
that union universally swear the Covenant.

4. The end and scope of this Covenant was Real, National, and Public, and
only Personal, in relation thereunto: as is evident by the professed grounds
thereof, as having before our eyes the true public liberty, peace and safety
of the Kingdoms (wherein every ones private condition is included) a sense of
the deplorable, distressed and dangerous estate in which the Kingdoms then
were; and by the ends propounded almost in every Article thereof which relate
to the Kingdoms, and our Posterity, and cannot be secured, if the Oath be not
National, as in Article the First, that we, and our Posterity after us, may as
Brethren, live in faith and love, in Article the Second, that the Lord may be
one, and his Name one in the three Kingdoms, In Article the Third, that the two
Kingdoms of England and Scotland, may remain conjoined in a firm peace, and
union to all Posterity. And by the Sixth Article, it is declared to contain in
it a cause which much concerned the good of the Kingdoms; and in the conclusion
thereof, is a profession of sense, and sorrow for the sin of these Kingdoms,
distinct from our own sins, the which do loudly proclaim the scope, and intent
thereof to have been National and public.

5. This Covenant was sworn by the Nation, or Kingdom,

1. Collectively, by the body of the Nations, regularly assembled and
constituted, in the most full, and complete Assembly, that could, and ever did
represent the same, in all acts and ag^tations truly Real and National, viz.
The Parliament consisting of Lords and Commons, and that in their public
capacity as a Parliament, the House of Commons Assembled in their House, and in
the formality of the body of the Nation, with their speaker before them, went
unto St. Margarets Church in Westminster, and there with the greatest solemnity
imaginable, Ordinance of Feb. 5. 1643.
did as the representative body of the Kingdom, swear this Covenant; which as a
further testimony that it was a National Covenant, they caused to be printed
with their names subscribed, and to be hanged up in all Churches, and in their
own House, as a compass whereby (in conformity to right Reason and Religion) to
steer their then debates, and to dictate to all that should succeed into that
place, and capacity, what obligation did before God lie upon the body of this
Nation.

2. It was universally sworn by the people of this Kingdom, solemnly Assembled
in their particular places of convention, all over the Kingdom; all manner of
persons from eighteen years old and upward, and that, not at their own will and
giddy humor, but at the Command and by the Authority of Parliament, Vid.
ordinance enjoining the taking of the Covenant.
who in their place, and in the behalf of this Nation, having judged it a fit
and excellent means to acquire the favor of God toward the three Kingdoms,
did order it to be universally sworn: and certainly whosoever will but well
weigh the directions given, and duly executed in the tendering of the Covenant,
in all Counties, and Parishes, by every individual Minister to every individual
Congregation, and taken by all persons, religious, military, or civil, enforced
with arguments which might convince conscience in the ingenuous, or constrain
the act from the peevish or perverse; and accompained with the greatest
extention concomitant imaginable; he cannot but see a much more then the fourth
part of the Nation did swear the Covenant. If the several Rolls, within the
several Parishes, and Precincts of this Kingdom, in which the several Names of
such as did swear the Solemn League and Covenant were engrossed, may be
produced; It will be found notwithstanding the many singulars, who may now
renounce and say they did not take the Covenant, it was sworn by the
universality of the Nation. And I hope we who have ever been judged a free
people, tied by no bonds but such as we lay upon our selves, may be allowed to
bind our selves by an Oath; De jure bell. ex par. 256.
and so make it Real and National, according to that Rule, and Reason of
Grotius: Si quidem populo liberto actum sit, dubium non est quin quod
promittitur sui natura reale sit.

3. The solemn League and Covenant has been ratified, and rendered National, by
his most sacred Majesty, unto all such who apprehend the constitution of this
Nation to be merum imperium, an absolute Monarchy, wherein the King has
supremam protestatem, and whose professed loyalty leads them to subject
themselves to all manner his Majesty's concessions, and conclusions, and that
by a series of multiplied acts, as his Majesty's agreement with the Scots at
Breda, where he graciously condescended to his Subjects, by Solemn Oath to
publish and testify his approbation of the solemn League and Covenant; and at
his first arrival into Scotland, was pleased to subject unto the same bond in
which his Subjects were engaged, and to swear the same solemn League and
Covenant: And again at his royal Coronation at Scoon in Scotland, on the first
of January 1651. was Graciously pleased over and above the ordinary, and solemn
Oath, peculiarly belonging to him as King of Scotland, in his most public
capacity, The History of Charles the second 75, 76, 77.
to swear the solemn League and Covenant, and this Oath, in behalf of himself
and his successors.

I Charles King of great Britain France and Ireland, do assure and declare by
my solemn Oath in the presence of the Almighty God, my allowance and
approbation of the National Covenant, and of the solemn League and Covenant
above-written, and faithfully oblige my self to prosecute the ends thereof in
my station and calling, and that I for my self and successors, shall consent
and agree to all Acts and Ordinances enjoining the National Covenant, the
solemn League and Covenant, and fully establish Presbyterial Government, the
Directory for worship, Confession of Faith, and Catechism, in the Kingdom of
Scotland; as they are approved by the General Assemblies of this Kirk and
Kingdom; and that I shall give my Royal assent to Acts and Ordinances of this
Parliament, passed or to be passed, enjoining the same in my other dominions,
and that I shall observe these in mine own practice and family, and never make
opposition to any of those, or endeavor any change thereof.

In this Oath, it is worth observation that the Royal assent is given unto the
solemn League and Covenant and Directory for worship, Confession of Faith and
Catechism, and Presbyterial Government, as things done in pursuit thereof. 2.
That the Royal assent is declared unto, and assured to be given in formality
unto Acts and Ordinances of this Parliament (supposed to be then in being) in
his other dominions passed by them, for the Covenant and other things of
Religion specified. 3. That this he was pleased to do as King of Great Britain,
France, and Ireland, his most Royal and public capacity, and that for himself
and his successors: upon these considerations I could be glad to receive the
judgment of the learned in the Law, whether the Royal assent any way, or by any
expressions or Act publicly made known, be not sufficient to make an Act of
Parliament a perfect and complete Law; the equity of the statute of 33. Henry
the third 21. Rendering the Kings assent under his seal expressed, to be as
valid and effectual to all intents in Law, as if he had been personally
present; does suggest a ground for this enquiry: for I conceive an assent by
solemn Oath, to be a more Real Royal political presence than the
transubstantiation, or his Real Presence under his Seal: but that I may keep
within my sphere, I presume none will deny this to be Jure civili and divino,
before God and men an establishment of the Solemn League and Covenant, to
oblige the Subject: and the rather, if it be observed that it was done
deliberately, Declaration from Dunfirling Aug. 16. 1650.
and so professed and enforced by a most pious Declaration of His Royal
pleasure, conjuring the enmity against the Covenant conceived in any His
Subjects in any His Dominions to cease: His Majesty being resolved to have no
friends but the friends of the Covenant: Grotius lays us down two cases,
wherein the Act of the King does bind His Subjects; they both square with this
our case in reference to the Covenant, the one Contractus Regentium obligat
subditos si probabilem habeant rationem, if the Covenant carry a probable
reason, let such as plead His Majesty had no probable way to come to His right,
and be enjoyed by His Subjects, but by yielding to the Covenant; (which God
indeed has used as the principal means to that effect now graciously
accomplished) tell us, whether it was a most probable reason of good to the
Nation. The other case was this, Grotius de jur. bell. and pa. lib. 2. cap. 14.
235.
si adsit, and populus ipse vult obligari quo casu, sui juris esse inceperit,
and successores, ut populi capita, obligabuntur: nam quid populus liber
contraxisset, obligaretur is qui postea regnum plenissimo jure acciperet, where
the people are willing to be bound; of which in our case let the agitations of
both Parliaments in both Kingdoms witness.

It will, Sir, nothing relieve this Act of His Majesty, to plead, It was below
His Royal Prerogative to Covenant with His own Subjects; had it been with an
enemy, we admit and confess we were bound by His Act, but by His Royal Power He
may absolve Himself from so vile an Obligation made to His Subjects,: In this
c^se I must indeed confess, His Royal Prerogative may privilege His Majesty
from a coaction unto performance of what He has sworn; the state of Subjects
leaving them void of power to compel: but jure civili, and divino, He is bound
to performance, and the Subject may by humble supplication pray and demand
performance of the Covenant, for the condescension voluntary has left an
obligation on the conscience before God and the world: So Grotius tells us,
Dicimus ex promisso and contracta Regis quam cum subditis iniit, Grotius de
jur. belli and pa. l. c. 14. p. 233.
nasci veram ac propriam obligationem, quae jus det ipsis subditis; the Oath of
a King covenanting with his Subjects, has God for its witness, and he is more
eminently engaged to avenge it, because there is no humane power that may do it.

Nor is it of any more force to plead that His Majesty was in an exiled estate,
and not in the possession of the Kingdom, and therefore could not as King make
any Covenant for or against his people: Unto this Plea the Answer is obvious,
and it is and must be acknowledged no case or place can destroy his Royal
capacity, for it abides, and the alteration of his seat of residence will not
render his Family an individuum vagum, as Lucan notes of the Roman Senate; Non
unquam perdidit or do mutato sua jura loco; and Grotius has ruled this case,
Lib. 2. cap. 16. p. 257.
and concludes the same, Cum rege initum foedus manet etiamsi Rex idem aut
successora subditis sit pulsus; jus enim Regni penes ipsum manet, utcunque
possessionem amiserit. I hope there is jure civili, the same right and power to
give, as to receive, and then let the King be where he will, his Covenant binds
for or against his Subjects, and to the sworn form of Worship and Discipline
in His Family.

Nor is it of any more strength or advantage, to say, His Majesty was under
force, and thorough the straits of His condition, did condescend to such
unworthy terms, which He cannot with honor make good: The which so much as
once to suggest to the World, is an high disservice, and reproach unto His
Majesty, lessening His Royal Reputation, and the apprehension of Piety, amongst
His Religious Subjects. If Doctor Sanderson's notion be right Divinity, as
certainly it is, Pius esse nequit qui non est fortis, He cannot be godly who is
cowardly; and his esteem amongst men by the rule of the Heathen Poet.

Justum ac tenacem propositi virum
Non civium ardor prava jubentium,
Non vultus instantis tyranni
Mente quatit solida. Horace lib. 3. ode. 3.

Serious men will stoutly withstand the importunities of impudence, and the
exactions of furious Tyrants: And I say, it cannot avail unto the least voiding
of the Covenant, the matter whereof is found just, lawful, and possible, for
all Casuists have concluded Juramentum metu extortum, does bind; And the
Heathen have amplified the force of an Oath; by Regulus his return to his
Enemies to be slain when he had been forced to make it; on which Cicero
asserteth, Temporibus illis jusjurandum valebat; Sanderson de juram. prael. 5.
Sect. 15. p. 126.
then Oaths were binding: And Doctor Sanderson has concluded, that an Oath
made not only on light fear, but a just and grievous fear, Qualis est metus
captivitatis, amissionis omnium bonorum, inmiae, cruciatus, and quod est (...)
ipsius mortis, of imprisonment, loss of goods, yea most dreadful loss of life
(which all men must confess to be a most strait condition) yet it binds unto
performance, for which he Renders many Reasons, among which these two are of
weight in our case: Videtur non posse honest recusari quod fuit prudenter
electum.
he chose what then seemed best, and so it was an Act of will, and Quod ob
certum finem promissum est a promittente debet praestaripostquam consecutas est
suum finem.
he received the end proposed as the condition of his entering into that
Covenant: Moreover, as I have before noted, Zedekiah was besieged into the Oath
made with the King of Babylon, with the greatest force and fury imaginable, yet
the Prophet was not afraid to cry to the King, Shall he break the Covenant, and
be delivered? and both King and people perished by that breach of Covenant.

Sir, I cannot without sad thoughts reflect on their sin and horrid wickedness,
by whom his most Sacred Majesty was reduced into those straits of condition,
nor shall I acquit them of indiscretion and overmuch boldness, who being
subjects, could dare to take the advantage of a strait condition to put such
terms on Majesty; yet I dare not but adore the providence of God, (who brings
good out of evil; and makes the rage of men to work unto his praise, and many
times, by ways to us preposterous, effects his own holy purpose) that did
bring his most Sacred Majesty by these straits into this Sacred Bond, which, it
is more than probable, in an estate of liberty he had never subjected to; and
being now sworn, they cannot, they must not be slighted or violated: but I hope
his Majesty shall never want a good Angel to be his Monitor to pay the vows he
made to God in the day of his distress.

Now, Sir, I say, when I have considered the Covenant under these public
considerations, and find such palpable engagements made by the people of
England, as a Kingdom, and Political Body, professing the Reformed Religion; I
cannot but adhere to my former conjecture, that it looks something like a
National Obligation; nay, the confluence of public assent and authority, by
the people collectively and distributively considered; and the access of Royal
assent and concurrence (the defect of which rendered it at first less
acceptable to many) leads my conjecture unto a full conclusion, that it is a
public National Covenant, binding all the persons of this Nation (that swear,
or swear not personally) and our posterity after us, in their particular
places; and all that shall succeed into the public places, and politic
capacities of this Kingdom, to preserve and pursue the things therein promised,
so long as it remains a Kingdom, under one King, and in the profession of one
Reformed Religion; which I pray and hope will be, till Jesus Christ shall come
to judgment. Give me leave, Sir, to enforce this, with what I observed to be
asserted by the Lord Chief Baron in his learned Speech unto the late condemned
Traitors at the Old Baily, You were bound to bear Allegiance to your King; yea,
though you may not have taken the Oath of Allegiance your selves, yet you were
bound by the Recognition of King James and His Posterity, made at His first
coming to the Crown of this Realm, by the whole Parliament, being the whole
collective body of the Kingdom: Certainly they then and their posterities must
needs be bound, who themselves have universally by the appointment and
authority of such who were entrusted for them, engaged the Faith of the Nation;
though it had been sufficient, if the Parliament in that public capacity had
only done it; for I say still, I see not how they can give away our Estates; or
take pardons in the name, and to the security of the Nation; if they may not in
our name make Oaths, Promises, and Covenants to bind us and our succeeding
Governors and Posterities; in sense whereof, I cannot but desire all that wish
well to England, to consider the Covenant, the Solemn League and Covenant; for,
Sir, as it was no little support and satisfaction to my spirit, under the late
contempt and horrid violations of the Covenant, to observe they were the
preposterous Acts of Self-created Powers, and Usurpers on the Peoples consent,
as well as His Majesty's Crown; and therefore could not involve the Nation in
the guilt of their perjury, which our eyes have seen to fall upon their own
heads; so it is now the greatest perplexity in my jealousy, that the Covenant
is like to be slighted, if not contradicted; that the Nation is in danger to be
plunged under the guilt, and made liable to the punishment thereof, by that
Just God, who will certainly avenge the quarrel of the Covenant; which God
forbid! God forbid! I say again, God forbid!

To conclude, Sir, this Section, lest you or any others should think, this
quality of the Solemn League and Covenant, as Public and National, to be my
own notion, and private particular fancy; give me leave to tell you and them, I
can produce more than 600. Ministers (most of whom are yet living) in the
Kingdom of England, who under their hands have testified their apprehensions
thereof, under the same notion. Such as will please to take a strict view of
this Cloud of Witnesses, may at their leisure survey the Public Testimonies to
the Truths of Jesus Christ, and to the Solemn League and Covenant; and they
shall find the same attested by the names of 52 Ministers of London; 41 in the
County Palatine of Lancaster; 59 in the County Palatine of Chester; 41
Ministers in the West Riding of the County of York; who in their Title Page,
and throughout their Testimony, do denominate it the National Covenant; 39 in
the County of Norfolk; 82 in the County of Wilts; 36 in the County of Stafford;
69 in the County of Somerset; (which I presume may make a better Septuagint
than Bishop Pierces Certificants of this County, for Revels, Clerks-ales, and
Church-ales on the Lord's Day, though they want three of the number) 68 in the
County of Northampton; 71 in the County of Essex: 43 in the County of Warwick;
62 in the County of Gloucester; 57 in the County of Salop; and 73 in the County
of Devon; who give their testimony, and call it the Solemn League and Covenant
of the three Kingdoms; and in the sense of the National Obligation, they give
this testimony, and thus plead, We find the Covenant is antiquated and
banished, as intended to be of force, during the time of our intestine Wars;
we confess we are amazed at this quirk; we pray the Wars may cease for ever
(which yet there is fear may too soon be recalled by God, Page 27.
for this treacherous dealing in his Covenant) but we believe no honest
understanding heart can be persuaded the Covenant was intended as a Truce made
with God for three or four years; but we shall labor to stop this Gap with
some few strong stakes, cut out of the Covenant; and so passing through the
several Articles of the Covenant, they advise, those terms may be viewed
constantly, Page 28, 29.
all the days of our life, our posterity, the Lord may dwell in the midst of
us, and good of the Kingdoms; whereupon they conclude, these are not for a few
years, but for ever, and affectionately cry out to the Nation, Oh England, turn
not Harlot, break not Covenant with thy God; and the Lord keep England from
this Covenant Breaking, and his vengeance from his people: Unto this, give me
leave to add this passage out of the Testimony of the Yorkshire Ministers; It
cannot be unknown to the Churches abroad, Page 8.
that all the three Kingdoms stand engaged by virtue of a Solemn League and
Covenant, sworn with hands lifted up to the most High God, sincerely, really
and constantly, by the grace of God, to endeavor, in our several places, the
Reformation of Religion in the Kingdoms of England and Ireland, in Doctrine,
Worship, Discipline and Government, according to the Word of God, and example
of the best Reformed Churches. I shall, Sir, add but one more, and it is that
in which we have all the rest (theirs being little else but a concurrence with
this) and that is the Testimony of the Ministers of our own City of London, and
they profess thus, Page 26.
In order to the Reformation and Defense of Religion within these three
Kingdoms, we shall never forget how solemnly and cheerfully the Sacred League
and Covenant was sworn, with hands lifted up to the most High God; wherein the
three Kingdoms stand engaged jointly and severally, etc. Yet we cannot but
observe, to the great grief of our heart, that this Solemn Covenant of God has
been, and is daily neglected, slighted, vilified, reproached and opposed, even
by too many who have entered into it; and endeavors have been used wholly to
evade it, and render it useless; and that it has been manifestly violated, to
the dishonor of God, to the prejudice of a real Reformation, the sadning of
the hearts of Gods people, and pulling down his dreadful judgments upon us, and
upon the whole Kingdom. Sir, I will say no more; Page 28.
but I pray God London Ministers may retain, or recover their first love; and
Englands Watchmen may remember the loud Alarums they have sometimes sounded,
and the grounds thereof.

Sectio semptima. Prop. 7. The Obligation of the Solemn League and Covenant is
permanent and abiding, never by any humane act or power to be absolved or
discharged.
SIR, By the permanency of the Obligation of the Covenant, we mean, the
continuance of its Bond on the mind and consciences of men; so that the
Subjects thereof are, and for ever will be bound to pursue and perform the
things and matters therein promised; nor is it in the power of any man, or
humane authority, to release, acquit, or discharge them from the same; but that
when, and howsoever the Solemn League and Covenant is slighted, laid aside, or
violated, by any the Subjects thereof, they shall be liable unto the guilt and
punishment of perjury in the breach thereof.

This permanency of obligation, and impossibility of discharge, does spring
from a double cause.

1. The nature of an Oath, which is a solemn and serious Appeal to, and
invocation of God, as Witness and Avenger of the thing sworn, and sincerity of
the Subject swearing; so as in case of dissimulation, falsehood, or
nonperformance of the thing covenanted, we shall be liable unto the guilt and
punishment of perjury, to be inflicted by the God who judges righteously.

And 2ly. From the Manner and Form of the Covenant, which is absolute, and
without a condition, which might at any time fail, and so cause a Cessation of
the Bond of the Covenant thereupon dependent; and is expressly exclusive to
all manner of discharge or release, by any humane Act or Power whatsoever, by
an express protest, That this Covenant we make in the presence of Almighty God,
the Searcher of all hearts, with a true intention to perform the same, as we
shall answer at that great day, when the secrets of all hearts shall be
disclosed; and by a peculiar provision, That we shall never suffer our selves
directly or indirectly, by whatsoever combination, persuasion or terror, to be
divided or withdrawn from this blessed union and conjunction, whether to make
defection to the contrary part, or to give up our selves to a detestable
neutrality in this cause, which so much concerns the Glory of God, Good of
the Kingdoms, and Honor of the King, but shall all the days of our lives
zealously and constantly continue therein: So that the matter of this Covenant
being, as I have before asserted, good and lawful, because just and possible;
if there were in the World any power or persons (entrusted with that divine
Prerogative) to discharge the Obligation of an Oath; we could not receive it,
because it is actually and expressly disclaimed. We, Sir, live amongst
Protestants who by their very profession do protest against all Papal
Dispensations, and Jesuitical Commutation, thereupon dependent; and therefore I
need not stand to make any defense in this cause against the same, which would
be to suggest some Protestant Divines to be so Popishly affected, as to have
recourse to Rome, for relief against St. Peter's Restraint: I presume, Sir,
Englands Bishops would not be reputed Popish; and other ways to discharge the
Obligation of the Covenant, we have none, save the release of Superiors, which
always must be in such cases and manner, as are peculiar unto them, and proper
to their cognizance.

I am not insensible; that some suppose to themselves, and suggest to others a
nullity, or non-obliging force of the Covenant, by reason that His late Majesty
(of glorious Memory) did interdict the Act; concerning which it is necessary to
be enquired, Whether by the Light of Nature, Law of Nations, or Rule of
Scripture, the Prince, the Political Parent, have such full complete Parental
Authority over His Kingdom collectively or distributively considered, as by His
interdict to make void the Oath they put upon themselves? 2. Whether the
Parliaments of England, both, or either House, can order, determine, direct,
and by Parliamentary Authority, enforce a present execution of those
Determinations and Orders directed to the Subject (as we know is, and
ordinarily has been practiced) without the consent of the King? And whether
the people are not subject to the same, as being Parliamentary Authority,
before they formally pass into Laws or Acts, to be established Rules, when
their being a Parliament cease? And so whether an Act done, Sedente
Parliamento, at their Appointment, and by their present Order, being in its own
nature permanent and abiding, never to be discharged (as is the Obligation of
an Oath) be not valid, though it never pass into a Formal Act of Parliament,
and standing Statute? 3. Whether an extraordinary and unusual Proclamation of
the King, against the Determinations of both Houses of Parliament, be
(according to the constitutions of this Kingdom) a full and formal supersedeas
to any act required to be done by the authority of the Parliament then sitting?
4. Whether his late Majesty in his Proclamation of the 9th. of October. 19.
Carol. did by his Royal Authority declare void and null the Obligation which
should be laid on any of his people against his consent? Or by his Parental
care only admonish his Subjects of its evil, and the danger he conceived in
it, and so warn a forbearance of it? For Parental Admonition, and Authoritative
Annulling Inhibition, are distinct Acts; and the last was in this case
necessary, because the Collective Body of the Kingdom had sworn this Covenant
on the 25th. of September before. 5. Whether the Kings after-assent, and
admonition unto a right understanding, and Religious keeping of the Covenant,
do not establish it, and make its obligation unavoidable? And whether after the
interdiction of the Act, his Majesty's Declaration, That as things now stand
good, men shall least offend God and Me, by keeping their Covenant by honest
and lawful ways, since I have the Charity to believe, the chief end of the
Covenant in such men's intention, was to preserve Religion in purity, and the
Kingdoms in peace; Be not a subsequent allowance suitable to the equity of that
Law in Numb. 30. and sufficient to make the Covenant valid, and an
indispensable vow? 6. Whether an endeavor in our places and callings be not so
far sui Juris to the Subject, that it may be safely sworn, without the consent
of the Sovereign, and shall bind the conscience, notwithstanding His declared
dissent thereunto? Lastly, Whether the Approbation of His most Gracious Majesty
that now is, unto the Solemn League and Covenant, and the Assent unto the
Ordinances of Parliament enjoining the same, declared by Solemn Oath and
Public Declaration, be not a full, complete, and formal Authority, supplying
all supposed defect, and fastening its obligation by a full Theological, if not
formally Political Act of Parliament? And so has varied the case, and all
fancy of the non-obligation of the Covenant, occasioned by the unhappy dispute
concerning the Authority conversant about it? When, Sir, these enquiries are
seriously, and on solid Reasons resolved in the Negative, we shall confess,
there may be some doubt of a discharge of the Obligation of the Covenant; and
until then, it lies on our consciences, and must be carefully regarded and
performed, lest the judgments of God come upon us, and we fall under the guilt
of perjury.

Now, Sir, the matter of the Covenant being just and possible; the Authority
establishing it full and sufficient; and dispensation from the Obligation of an
Oath concluded to be a Popish Vanity; what can hinder our conclusion, that the
Obligation of the Solemn League and Covenant is permanent, never to be
discharged? Yet Sir,

Dr John Gauden, notwithstanding his ill success in loosing St. Peter's Bonds,
has made an Essay for his full release, though not immediately by himself (who
can say no more then what he said at first, and therefore says it over again
in his Epistle to the Doubts and Scruples before noted) yet by his profound
allowance, and judicious testimony to the discourse of Mr. John Russel of
Chinkford in Essex; the which is made authentic and acceptable to the world as
good Casuistical Divinity, and a clear resolution of this case of conscience,
by this stamp on the Title page, Attested by John Gauden D. D. So that, Sir, I
should be dis-respective to my Antagonist, if I make not a little stay, to
consider what is said by his learned Chaplain; though I must confess it is so
simple and shattered a discourse, it is not worth reading, much less the least
of Answer: but I remember my promise at the beginning, That I would weigh what
he could allege to void the Covenant, which is his aim and professed end; and
therefore his Title page affirms, The Solemn League and Covenant discharged;
or, St. Peter's Bonds not only loosed but annihilated. An honorable design, an
high undertaking, an hard enterprise, to release the conscience from the bond
of an Oath! It is well if the attempt give us not cause to see Fronti nulla
fides, and that the Title is stuffed with proud swelling words of vanity; yet
he applies himself to the work with some agility, as if accustomed to evade
holy Bonds, and with ease to resolve the most weighty cases of consciences, I
will not say by a nimble profaneness to break Religious Prisons; and therefore
in page 2 of his Book, he states the question, and tells us:

I shall grant by way of supposition (we will be content with such a grant) all
that the most rigid Covenanters can desire of me, excepting one point; I shall
suppose the same to be imposed by complete and lawful Authority; to be no ways
defective in circumstances; to be clear and free from ambiguity; to be perfect
in the form; to be sound and lawful in the matter; to be pious in the end; fair
in the manner of imposing; that there was no fraud or violence used; but that
all men took it with due deliberation and free consent, by all which means it
became a very strong Bond and Obligation upon the consciences of men.

Sir, This is, I confess, a very fair grant; if notwithstanding all this, he
can discharge the Covenant, by my consent he shall never more be brought into
durance; but what is that one point he denies to grant us?

It is this, That the Solemn League and Covenant is such a Bond on the
consciences of men, that it cannot be released by any humane act or power. And
in opposition thereto he affirms, That the same specifical power, or an
higher than that which imposed this Vow upon us, may release us from the same
either tacitly or expressly.

This, Sir, is easily affirmed with confidence, but so simply and slenderly
proved, that the Doctor has showed us little of judgment in his attestation to
this work, as in his own Analysis, and must needs make men observe his desire
of Release is so fervent, as to allow and approve any thing that does but
pretend to discharge the Covenant.

The first onset in order to the proof of what is affirmed, is by a kind of
Preface with relation to the Ordinance, enjoining the taking of the Covenant,
which he supposes laid aside, and not enlivened into an Act; and therefore he
takes it to be dead in Law, and shall hold himself free from the Bond of the
same: But, Sir, it will abide a Dispute (against a stouter Politician than I
judge Mr. Russel to be) whether His Majesty's assent testified by public Oath
and Declaration, to the Ordinance for taking the Covenant, have not enlivened
it into an Act.

2. The Ordinance may be dead in Law, and yet the Oath enjoined by it alive in
conscience; for the one has done its work in laying that obligation which now
abides, works, will work, and cannot be hindered; and then nothing but
ignorance of the nature of an Oath, can lead a man to argue the Ordinance which
brought me under it is dead. Ergo, I hold my self thenceforward free from the
Bond of the same. If St. Peter leap out at such Loop-holes, he will be locked
under heavy judgments: Is the Prisoner released, because the Warrant is of no
more force, than to bring him into Prison, and secure the Jaylour for keeping
him therein?

Having past this Preface, he proceeds to his Argumentative part, and makes a
great pudder about the power of Superiors over their Subjects in private,
particular and promissory Oaths; and with the instance of Abraham and his
servant, in the case of taking a wife unto Isaac; wherein, I shall grant unto
him, that in all particular promissory Oaths, grounded on condition, it is in
the power of confederates, whether Superiors or Equals, to relax the
Obligation, by not exacting the performance; only I would tell him he is
mistaken in his instance of Abraham and his Servant; for the Oath of the
fervant was not released by any act of Authority in Abraham; but if it had been
released, it had been by an impossibility of affecting the matter; and
therefore the servants quaery on the peradventure the woman will not be willing
to follow me into this Land, was not a supplicate for an Authoritative Release;
but a scrutiny into the Extent of the Oath; how far he was herein bound? which
is plain by the quaery it self, Must I needs bring thy son again into the Land
from whence thou came? On which Paraeus notes, that this was in the servant,
Paraeus in Genesis 24.5.
Prudentia singularis, ne juret nisi de possibili; and therefore I must tell
him, that I do not believe the father or husband, who may establish the Vow of
the Wife or Child, can afterward make it void again; and because he may be
unwilling to learn of me, I would commend Dr. Sanderson to be his Tutor, he
will teach him one Lesson which confuteth his whole Argument he would have
managed, and the Notion on which he does bottom it; Superiorem si expresso
consensu suo, sive Antecedente, sive subsequente, promissionem subditi semel
confirmaverit, De Juram. Praelect. septima. sect. sexta. p. 223.
non posse eandem irritam facere, aut obligationem ejus tollere.

By this position, concerning particular, private, promissory Oaths, he
pretends to pave his way to the grand question in hand, and as by by Rules in
Military Discipline to make his approach at a reasonable distance, and make
good his first ground, on which he stands so sure, that he advances not one
step higher; but as if at work in A rude and rough pavement in Cheshire, done
in the night, as tradition says, by the Devil, who could not leave it till
done.
Wakefield Pavement, or hurried about by some Fairy Dance, he traceth to and
fro at all uncertainty, but is still found in the same place unto the end of
his Book; one while he can find no public Covenants whereto to compare ours,
which is of no moment; let him make good his Position by Demonstrative Reason,
we will admit our Covenant to become the first public President. Another while
he keeps a stir about the nature of the Covenant, which he will needs have to
be in the Form of it, a civil and human Creature, subject to infirmity, to be
taken away by men, and that it is an Oath, though the Heathen did ever make
Juramentum and Religio to be synonimous in public Contracts, because an Oath
was a most eminent Act of Religion; at length he stumbles out his notion and
fancy in a Parable; and pursues that, forgetting Theologia Parabolica non est
Argumentativa, that Parables prove nothing; but proving it to be versatilis
materia, ut huc illuc trahi imo and duci possint, pliable to any wild and quick
fancy, he endeavors to bend it to his purpose; but so very dully, that he
cannot but lose his end. He tells us that an Oath is a bringing a Trial into
Gods Court, wherein the Imposers are the Plantiffs, the Covenanter, or him who
swears, is the Defendant, and God is the Judge; the which makes as good
Music as Asinus ad Lyram; all that I read, did ever make, not the swearing,
but the exaction of the performance of an Oath, to be the Suit in Gods Court;
and the Oath or Covenant to be the cause and ground on which the Suit is
brought; and God as well as man to be the Plantiff, and a Party, as well as a
Judge in every Oath, by reason whereof the Oath can never be discharged,
because no man can release Gods Right and Interest in an Oath: De Juram Praei.
sept. Sect. 4. page 214.
So Dr. Saunderson does expressly teach, In Juramento promissorio non tantum
proximo fit obligatio sed and Deo; praesumptio igitur non ferenda esset, si
terra and cinis assumeret potestatem tollendi obligationem qua homo obligatur
Deo; which quite overthrows his drift and aim, which is, That if men will not
exact the Oath, or be content that it be not performed, God the Witness and
Avenger, or Judge of it, is tied up; and he will not expect it, or punish for
the neglect of it: But Gods thoughts are not men's thoughts; he that swears
binds his soul unto the Lord, and must perform the thing that comes out of his
mouth.

When his dull Genius had made a dark discovery of this nature of an Oath, he
pretends to resolve an Objection, That when the Covenant was administered, the
Trial was finished (he means founded, for the Suit was not commenced till
performance be exacted) and a Bond was put upon the consciences of men by the
immediate hand of God; and therefore we say no human power can take off this
Bond.

Unto this he gives a most profound Answer, which thwarts and overthrows the
whole scope of his Book, and makes it appear he is rolling Sysiphus stone,
which still returns upon him, and renews his labor; his Answer is, I say so
too, what would you have more? Nothing, for it is enough; yet we must be
directed how to think of him, I would not have you think that I have been
studying all this while to attribute a Pope-like power to my superiors, to
dispense with the bond of an Oath that is already put upon my conscience. No
indeed, I rather think he is studying how to loosen a pair of tyring Irons.

But has he no hole to creep out at, and evade his Answer, but thus expressly
overthrow his own design? yes! When what was sworn is performed, we are
freemen, unless the Superior gets us into a new Bond. That is very true, but
what does he infer? This is all that I expect, that the higher powers will not
renew the Oath and Covenant, and then that business is at an end. But I doubt,
Sir, he reckoned without his Host; Has he performed what he promised in the
Covenant? it was thought to be work for all the days of his life; he is sure a
quick Merchant; or is he not rather so bad a Play Master, that he will not
perform any thing further then he is constrained, by being haled to prison?
like a Bankrupt, he dreams forbearance is an acquittance; and is ready to begin
a new score of Covenants, if any man be so mad as to trust him; if he can be
secured from any new Bond, his conscience will never make him pay the old; he
had need to be quickened, or otherwise he is resolved to be discharged: But I
believe second thoughts will make him to see, he had need to pay for the old,
before he be trusted for new; when he dreams the Trial is ended, the Suit is
but beginning; what though the Higher Power never renew the Covenant, will that
cancel the Bond given to God? if he agree not with his Adversary quickly, he
will be cast into prison; verily he must not come thence, till he have paid the
utmost Mite; nor will it make a Plea to the least mitigation of damages, to
say, Lord, My Superiors did never require me to renew the Covenant! His
Majesty is like to have Loyal Subjects at Chinkeford, where they are taught,
that their Allegiance being once performed, if the King do not cause them daily
to renew the Oath of Allegiance, they are free to turn Rebels and Traitors, for
any thing they had sworn before: This is an Essex -- much cheaper, and more
easily to be had than a Popes Bull; if I be not by the imposer exacted and
required to perform, I am ipso facto, released; he shall never want Clients,
that can make such Releases; yet you must note, this he manageth with most
earnestness and seriousness, as reaching the very mystery and depth of the
Covenant.

But, Sir, he has Salvo's for his Distinction; and Reasons for his Assertion;
What is pious, good and lawful in the Covenant, does still bind per vim
Praecepti, but not per vim Juramenti; and if he perform not the contents or
intents of the same, he is guilty of disobedience, but not of perjury. What a
dull Buzzard am I? How have I spent my time, that never learned this Notion in
Divinity before? I had once a Tutour commended to me by Dr. Chapel, and he
makes me believe, the soul might at the same time be under a double Bond to the
same Act; the single tie of the goodness and lawfulness of the Act, and the
Cords of an Oath or Covenant, and that the last was the strictest Bond; he
tortured my conscience with the thoughts of a complicated sin, in not doing a
duty sworn to be done, and the guilt of both, disobedience and perjury. I must
sure leave him, and take unto Mr Russel, attested by Dr. Gauden, he teaches a
smoother way to Hell. for where we are under a Duty, and an Oath to do it, in
not doing it I shall be but damned for the least sin, the disobedience, not the
perjury.

2. It was never yet denied, that in a promissory Oath between private persons,
be to whom the promise was made, if he will release, he may release; if he had
for never directed us to read ever; this had been an intelligent observation;
for it has ever been denied, that any man could release the Oath, Dr.
Saunderson denies it, and Grotius denies it, and I deny it; and therefore
they distinguish between the Ralaxation of the matter of the promise, which is
to them sui Juris, and the Release of the Oath, which is Gods proper interest;
I may remit my profit or benefit, and yet not release an Oath; by his leave
Sir, I do again deny, That Abraham did release his servant; that which he
dreams of to be a Release, was part of the very Indenture of the Covenant or
Oath, that the servant might see the matter of it in its Extent; but spare me
Sir, what is all this to the purpose? it is to be proved that the Solemn League
and Covenant is such a promissory Oath; it was indeed agreed, concluded, and
consented unto by two Nations; but yet it is not a reciprocal promise each unto
other, that they may at any time relax each to other the whole, or any part of
the conditions thereof; but is a joint Oath or Vow to God, by mutual Agreement
put on the Kingdoms of England and Scotland; and then to follow his fancy, God,
and God only, is the Plantiff, and no Higher Powers of either Kingdom, but they
as Members of the Kingdoms are Defendants; whom God impleads to perform what
they are bound to do. His promise was to prove the Covenant to be of the nature
of a promissory Oath, which might be released, and this I expected; but I would
have him take time enough to do it in, I will expect his Resolution at
Doomsday, when the Trial shall be undoubtedly ended, and the Judge will openly
declare his sentence against all who have broken, or shall break the Covenant,
though not renewed at the command of the Higher Powers.

This Gentleman tells the World, That Mr. Crofton wonders at Dr. Gaudens
Logic, in arguing the evil of it, from the unblest effects and consequences of
the Covenant; And I think Sir he had Reason; for Event was never judged a Rule
of Equity; but the unblest effects reflected on the Covenant, did only
accompany it, not sprung from it, as its proper brood, and natural issue by it
procreated, Shall wicked men's reluctance to piety and order, or perfidy and
contempt of the Oath of God create evil effects, accidental sequels to the
Covenant, and it be condemned? Sir, this man is sure half an Arminian, and
thinks Gods command to Adam to have been the cause of man's Fall: Is he not
rather half an heathen, that in all Tumults, Earthquakes, and Plagues of God
upon them, would cry out, Christianos ad Leones, as if they were the cause of
all? Let any of them specify that evil in the Covenant, which has a natural
tendency unto these unblest, or let him speak out, cursed effects; and I will
damn it as an accursed thing: But Sir, Mr. Crofton did not so much wonder at
the Drs. Logic in this Argument, as at his little Reason or Religion in giving
his Attestation to such an Irrational, Atheological, Wild and Wicked Discourse
as this is; whilst he fears the Covenanter is righteous overmuch; I would
advise him to consider whether the next words do not suit his spirit, as proper
for his medition; Eccles. 7.71.
Be not overmuch wicked, neither be thou foolish; why should thou dye
before thy time? For Sir, if I can judge, his words are the language of a Fool,
and his Arguments the Reasons of wickedness, and such a Release of the
Obligation of the Solemn League and Covenant, must needs hasten his ruin.

CONCLUSION.
Honored Sir,
I Will trouble you no further, but leave these Positions unto your serious
Consideration; I have propounded them by way of Antithesis, desirous to weigh
what could be said against them; I am Sir so sensible of the weight of an Oath,
the dread of Perjury, especially on a Kingdom, that I could not see this
Nations tendency thereunto in silence; if Sir, I have any judgment in Christian
Rules of safety; one of the first debates in order to the establishment of this
Kingdom, and Restoration of this Church, should be how far we are under, and
obliged by the Solemn League and Covenant. I would not advance it above, nor
set it against Scripture; but must be bold to say, our Oaths (being of matter
consonant to Scripture) are ready Dictators (as well as Spurs) unto our Duty;
and (in things merely humane, morally good, though not necessary) the compass
which should steer our course; I must confess I cannot but be grieved to see
some Transactions amongst us, unto a contempt, nay, contradiction of the
Covenant; might but my poor weak papers provoke more able and serious Casuists
in good earnest, as before God, and in the dread of an Oath, to state, and (by
right Religious Reason) to resolve this case of conscience; though in the
Negative I had obtained my desire, and (if I know my own heart) none shall be
more ready then my self (when convinced) to fall down and worship, and confess
God is in them of a truth. I must Sir, beg your pardon wherein I appear too
tedious; the weight of the Argument, the number and worth of the Antagonists,
speak something in Apology for me. Sir, I commend you to the guidance of Gods
Holy Spirit, and pray that you may be kept faithful and blameless, unto the
coming of our Lord Jesus, Christ.

FINIS.

