A Copy of Lieutenant General Crumwels Letter, Read in the House of Commons.
And other Letters Of a great and BLOODY FIGHT near PRESTON. THE Scots Army
totally Defeated by Lieutenant General Crumwell. With the particulars of the
Fight, on Thursday, Friday, and Saturday last.

2500 Scots slain, 2000 Taken prisoners, 300 Officers killed and taken. 400 Horse
taken. 4000 Fire Arms. 2000 Other Arms. 30 Colors. 8 Barrels of Gunpowder.
4 Cart load of Ammunition 500 Cattl retaken and restored 5000 l. worth of goods
retake^ Diverse papers concerning Prince Charles, and diverse in London. Duke
Hambleton fled to Wygan and Langdale to Carlisle. 15000 Scots, and English
Cavaliers, killed, taken, dispersed, fled


August 21. 1648.
THese being true Copies, are thought fit to be Printed and published for the
satisfaction of the whole Kingdom, one of them signed

August ye 22 OLIVER CRUMWELL.



Printed by Robert Ibbitson, in Smithfield, near the Queenes-head Tavern, 1648.

A Copy of Lieutenant General CRUMVVELLS LETTER
Gentlemen,
IT has pleased God, this day, to show a great mercy to this poor kingdom,
by making the Army successful against the common Enemy. We lay the last night
at Mr. Sherburns, of Stamerhurst, about 9 miles from Preston, which was within
three miles of the Scots quarters, we advanced this morning betime toward
Preston, with a desire to engage the Enemy, and by that time our forlorn had
engaged the enemy, we were about four miles from Preston, and thereupon we
advanced with the whole Army; and the Enemy being drawn out upon a Moore
betwixt us and the Town, the Armies on both sides engaged, and after a very
sharp dispute, continuing for three or four hours, it pleased God to enable
us to give the Enemy a defeat, which I hope we shall improve by Gods
assistance, to their utter ruin, and in this service your Countrymen have not
the least share, which we cannot express by particular, having not time to
take an accounts of the slain, and the prisoners, but we can assure you we have
many prisoners, and many of those of quality, and many slain, and the Army
disipated. A principal part whereof (with Duke Hambleton) is on the South side
of Ribb, and Darwentbridge, and we lying with the greatest part of the Army
close to them nothing hindering engageing of that part of the Enemies Army but
the night; It will be our care that they shall not pass over any Ford beneath
the Bridge, to go Northward, nor to come over betwixt us and Whaley, we
understand that three Companies of Col. General Ashton are at Whalley, we have
7 Troops of Horse and Dragoons, that we believe all at or near Cl^thero. This
night I have sent order expressly to them to march to Whalley, to join with
those Companies that you shall improve of your Country Forces, toward the ruin
of those enemies: you perceive by this how things stand, by this means the
enemy is broken, most of the Horse being gone Northward, and we having sent a
considerable party at the very heels of them, and the Enemy having lost almost
all their Ammunition, and near 4000 Arms, so that the greatest part of the
Foot are naked: Therefore in order to this work we desire you to raise your
County, and to improve those forces for the total ruin of the enemy, which
way soever they go. And if you shall accordingly do your part, doubt not of
their total ruin. We thought fit to speed this unto you, to the end you may
not be troubled if they shall march toward you, but improve your interest
aforesaid. And that you may give glory to God for this unspeakable mercy from

Preston 17 August 1648. Your humble Servant OLIVER CRVMWELL.

Noble Sir,
LIeutenant General Crumwell sent a Letter to the Committee here, a copy
whereof you will receive enclosed; we had also other Letters from other
Officers, which gives us advertisements of a glorious victory obtained against
the Scots, and English Cavaliers. Lieutenant General Crumwell having fallen
down with his Army (after conjunction with Collonell Genesis Lambert) out of
Yorkshire, by Clithero, toward the Scots: upon Thursday last engaged with
them near to Preston. He has given them a very great rout, taken 4000 Arms,
most of their Ammunition, many prisoners, whereof diverse of quality, and is
still in pursuit, adding every hour to the number of the slain, and
prisoners, and of diverse of the Scots that are dispiersed in 6, 8, or 10 in a
company, the Country people rise and knock them in the head, where they meet
with them; and Lieutenant General Crumwells horse are at the very heels of
the Scots horse, that are fled Northwards; the rest of their horse, and body of
foot (which escaped by reason of the night) being ill armed, quartered with
Duke Hambleton, between Wygon and Preston, being about 8 or 9000. The
Lieutenant Generals Army went toward Preston to wait on them, I hope they
will have their fatal blow, for their perfideousnesse, to be an example to
Generations to come hereafter. We have had the Country hereabouts in Arms this
week, and hope to prevent the Scots passage this way. Cheshire also, I doubt
not but will be in readiness to stop them about Warrington. Another party is
about Whaley, in Blackburn Hundred.

Sir, I beseech you, if any show themselves so little lovers of England, as to
speak or move for a cessation, to oppose it: Let us not add the further guilt
of blood of friends, upon our selves.

Yesterday being Friday, Lieutenant Genrall Crumwell having killed and taken
diverse of the Scots, dispersed their body several ways, The greatest part of
them fled toward Warrington, and our Forces still pursuing them; diverse of the
Country Forces being joined to assist Lieutenant General Crumwell. Some of the
Scots were last night at Lansford on Cheshire side, our Army is at their heels:
The greatest execution yesterday was about Standish Moore, where diverse were
killed and taken, and amongst them many considerable men, both Scatch and
English, Duke Hambleton was last night in Wygan.

This morning they are at them again, fresh prisoners brought in hourly, and
Arms in abundance. The poor Country people being over joyed at this great
deliverance, wherein the Lord has been wonderfully seen, in delivering us from
this faithless insulting cruel people.

Manchester the 19 of August, 1648 A List of the great Victory obtained by
Lieutenant General Crumwell, in the great defeat given to the Scots Army, on
Thursday, Friday, and Saturday, August 17, 18, 19. 1648.
2500 slain, 2000 taken prisoners, 300 Officers killd and taken 400 Horse
taken, 4000 fire arms taken, 2000 arms more taken, 30 Colors taken, 8
Barrels of powder, 4 cart load of Ammunition, Duke Hamilton fled into Wigan and
there beset. Sir Marmaduke Langdale fled toward Carlisle, and pursued by Li.
Ge. Crumwels horse. 500 cattle retaken that they had plundered from the
Country. 5000 l. worth of goods restored, that the Scots were sending into
Scotland. Diverse papers taken of overtures with Pr. Charles, and with some
about London. 15000 killed, taken, dispersed, and fled.


FINIS.

