A Word in due season: OR, SOME HARVEST MEDITATIONS WITH A Warning from the
Lord God to all People in ENGLAND, to leave off their wicked and foolish
Customs in their Harvest, before the anger of the Lord be kindled against them,
and there be no Remedy.
BEhold the Eye of the Lord has passed through the Earth, and has beholden
the abominations of the people, and their customs, which are altogether vain,
and his hand is lifted up against them, to cut them off from the Earth, and woe
to them that withstand him, for them will the Lord God visit in his
displeasure, and rebuke in his anger; therefore be warned all ye Inhabitants of
the Earth, and while ye have time, learn Wisdom, and depart from vanity before
ye be consumed through your gainsaying.

Upon the 29. of the 4th. Month, the Word of the Lord came unto me saying,
Behold, the many abominations of this people in the time of their Harvest, and
although my light has shined to have let them see them, yet they have rejected
the counsel thereof; and although my faithful witness in them has reproved,
yet they have not regarded it; and although I have smitten them with Mildew and
with blasting, yet they have not laid it to heart, but have persisted in the
foolish customs of their forefathers, and have hated to be reformed, neither
have they feared me, says the Lord, but daily do they grieve my holy spirit
with their iniquities:

Therefore once more let them be warned of the vanities and abominations of
their Harvest in particular, that they may return, and learn to fear before me,
lest I smite their fruitful fields with barrenness, and their goodly crops with
withering, and their children with cleanness of teeth in all their borders,
etc. Am. 4. 6, 9, 10

And now this is that which the Lord God has put into my heart to warn all ye
Husbandmen and Farmers, that in the time of Harvest when ye are taking in the
fruit and the increase of your Fields, and the issue of your labor, that ye
mind the fear of God, that it may keep you in the remembrance of him from
whence every good gift comes, that so it may be good to you, and ye may
receive it with humility and thankfulness; and none to murmr because it is no
more, nor none to glory because it is so much, but all to be contented, and to
mind that which lets you see and feel the blessing, that ye might be kept in
the worthy walking, and know it to be multiplied unto you, and let your joy be
in that the light has shined upon you, and let that be the joy of your
Harvest, Esaias 9. 3.

And remember that the portion of the poor be not gathered, but consider the
Lord has regarded their need; neither be churlish nor bitter to them, but let
them have their portion without diminishing, Levit. 19. 9. And when thou
reapest the harvest of thy land, thou shall not wholly reap the corners of thy
field, [mark] neither shall thou gather the gleannings of thy Harvest, it is
for the poor, and for the stranger. Lay this to heart ye rich men, lest ye eat
of the portion of the poor, and the hand of the Lord be turned against ye
through their cry, Job. 34. 28. For the Lord will maintain the right of the
poor, Psalm. 140. 12.

And take heed of inordinate feasting, spending the Creation upon the lust,
making provision for the flesh, which is contrary to the Christians Example;
but let your moderation appear in this also; For the reward of the glutton
shall be poverty, Prove. 23. 21. And mind the Witness of God, that that may
order and guide you into that which is convenient, and may stop the excess,
that whatsoever is done, may be done to the praise and glory of God, as
becomes Christians.

And let none be over-covetous of drinking, neither in the time of your labor,
nor at any other time; for that hurts the creature, and destroys the health,
and has overcome the life of many, when they have been strengthened by the
Lord to labor, then they have hurt themselves with their inordinate drinking,
and so abusing the gift of God, it has been taken from them; but let all mind
God's fear, that ye may feel through that which is outward, to that which is
within, namely, the thirst of the soul, which that which is outward will not
satisfy; that so ye may be brought to wait to know that manifested within,
which is Drink indeed, Joh. 6. 55. which cleanses from the pollutions that is
in the world through lust, and satisfies the soul.

And let that abominable custom of shouting in the fields, or elsewhere, be
left off, which is derived from generation to generation, from the Heathen, and
from the Papists; and while this be left, leave off calling your selves
Christians, or Protestants; for even this thing, namely your crying of that
which you call your Leargees, is a shame to the very Name of Christians to be
found amongst them, and renders you but foolish ignorant people, who sports
your selves with your own breath, like the Heathen who knows not the Lord that
gave it; such as was the Moabites, whom the Lord's anger was kindled against,
until he threatened to cut off the Vintage of Moab, and their shouting should
no more be heard in their Vineyards, because the treaders should tread out no
Wine in their Presses, Esaias 16. 9, 10. And so will the Lord do by you except ye
repent and turn from the folly of your ways; for he is not changed, neither is
there respect of persons with him; therefore let this be no more named amongst
you who call your selves Christians.

And let all your corrupt and vain Harvest-Songs be left off, your Night-work,
which lifts up the evil spirit in man, but oppresses the just, and keeps
from the true joy in the pure spirit, where the Song of Praises is sung unto
God for all his benefits, with acceptance; for in this also is there great
abomination committed in the Land, and the Lord's Spirit has been grieved
therewith; sometime ye are spending your precious time (which should be for the
resting of the creature in) singing of filthy and abominable Songs, tending to
the subverting and removing of modesty and chastity from off the face of the
Earth; and it may be the same night, and in the same mind will ye take some of
the words of the holy Scripture, it may be of David's Psalms, or some other of
the Psalms, and then in your wicked manner of doubling, and vain repetitions,
will sing them, which is far from singing to the praise and glory of God, or
with Grace in your hearts, but to the great abuse of the Scripture, and to the
dishonor of the Name of the Lord; and be assured you shall not be holden
guiltless that take God's Name in vain, although in the time of your Harvest;
but your Songs shall be turned as the howling of Moab in the day when the Lord
visited him.

But all mind the light of the Lord Jesus Christ within, that ye may know it
lifted up upon you, which makes glad the hearts of the righteous, yea more glad
then the joy of the ungodly when their Corn and Wine is increased, Psalm. 4. 6,
7.

And let that wicked and abominable Custom of making Lords and Ladies amongst
you in the Harvest-Field, be left off for ever, which is a shame to your
profession, and renders you to be like the Gentiles, who had Lords many amongst
them, but knew not the Christians one Lord; this ought not to be any more
mentioned, but ought to be denied as a foolish and unchristian custom, tending
to nothing but to exalt the pride of man's heart, and begetting into emulation
and strife; this also is vanity and vexation of spirit.

And let none of you who are strong, boast and glory in your strength over him
that is weaker, nor seek to hurt him by thy strength, but mind the Lord your
Maker, and remember your ability to be of him, and not your own, and so to be
used in his fear, without vain glory.

And all you that have much of the Earth in your hands, and many hired
servants, see that ye stand in the Power and Wisdom of God, ruling over that
part in them all, that would lead into rudeness and profaneness, being good
examples in your places, and giving them that which is due for their
encouragement, not oppressing them in Work nor in Wages; but all mind the truth
of God, the equal witness between you, which secretly calls for righteousness
toward all men, and Equity as ye would have from all men, that so the Lord may
make your Land as a fruitful Field, and may multiply a blessing upon you, both
within and without.

Thus have I cleared my conscience in the sight of God, and have singly given
my Testimony against these abominations which have been acted in this Nation in
Harvest time, in love to your souls, and in obedience to the Lord; and whether
ye will hear or forbear, ye shall know that ye were warned by a Friend to your
souls, and a Lover of the Truth, which was before the customs of the Heathens
were (and therefore plead not Antiquity in these things) and one that desires
this Nation might walk in the light of the Lord, and be saved from the reproach
of the Heathen; whose outward Name is

Stephen Crisp.


