THE DECLARATION Of the Lord Governor CROMWELL CONCERNING The Citizens of
LONDON, YORK, LINCOLN, GLOVCESTER, BRISTOLL,


AND All other Cities, Corporations, and Market Towns, within the Territories
of England, and Dominion of Wales, and his Vow and Protestation touching the
aforesaid places, and the people of England, upon his crossing the Irish Seas
with one hundred Sail of Ships.

ALSO, Prince Charles His Letter to the said Lord Governor Cromwell, and his
Desires and Propositions for PEACE.

Perused and examined, and appointed to be printed and published without
interruption or molestation.

London, Printed for G. Oreton. Aug. 23. 1649.

THE DECLARATION Of the Lord Governor CROMWELL TO The Citisens of London, York,
Lincoln, Gloucester, Bristoll, and all other Cities, Corporations, and
Market Towns, within the Territories of England, and Dominion of WALES.
WHereas the Lord has brought his People our of the House of Bondage, and by
his Almighty arm made more visible his evident demonstrations in owning of his
Cause, for the asserting and recovery of the just Rights and Liberties of the
people of this Nation, with the establishment of Truth and Righteousness, and
suppression and removal of tyranny, and all the effects of it. And seriously
considering the great mercies, and miracles of victory and deliverances which
has accompanied us even from the hand of our merciful God, since our first
engagement with the common enemy, cannot I hope, be so far out of either the
sense or memory of any good Patriot as to need a capitulation or rehearfall, he
has made us to triumph over our enemies, and wherein they dealt proudly, he
was above them, giving them leave often times to swell their waves, that he might
set them limits, and say unto them, hitherto shall you come, and no further. In
consideration of all which, his Lordship the Lord Governor Cromwell, has
declared a manifestation of his high and extraordinary sense of so many signal
blessings from time to time which has bin showered down upon the Armies in
England; and to the end, that his omnipotent hand and divine Sword of
protection may still be present with them, his Lordship (together with all his
Officers and Soldiers) has earnestly besought the Lord by prayer, for a
further blessing upon them, in the great and present Work of Ireland, and that
he will still be pleased to stand by them in the defense of his Cause, and to
give them spirits of courage and magnanimity, to fight his Battle under the
Banner of Jesus Christ, to the honor and glory of his great Name, and the
peace and tranquillity of all those who lie under the insupportable burden of
affliction in England and Ireland. And that it may appear to the Word, his pure
and spotless integrity to the Wealepublque of this Nation, his Lordship
further declared the reality of his present engagement against the
bloodthirsty Irish, and if it please God to crown his endeavors with expected
happy success, all his poor Countrymen under oppression shall find the fruits
thereof.

Protesting, That no means shall be (by him) left unassayed, that may prove
isntrumental for the propagation and advancement of free Trade and Commerce to
the City of London, and all other Cities, Corporations, Markettowns, and Cinque
Ports whatsoever, within the Territories of England, and Dominion of Wales.

His Lordship after some further Conference with the Officers of the Army, and
Gentlemen of the Country, soon hasted aboard, where (with a pleasant Gale of
Wind) he hoysted Sail, and in few hours came within sight of the Irish Cliffs,
where the raging Billows seemed turbulent, but soon became calm, and (as we
hea^) many of our ships are safely arrived in the Bay, the Report being
frequent, that the Lord Governor, and many of his Sons of Mars, are landed in
triumph at the City of Dublin.

Such a Fleet (consisting of above one hundred Sail) has not been seen on the
Irish Neptune these many years, who on a fair Sunshine day appeared to each
man's Eye like a great Wood, surrounded with many pleasant Hills and Dales.

Some report the Marquess of Ormond to be fallen down near Dublin with an Army
of 15000 Horse and Foot, to prevent the landing of the English forces; the
truth whereof I shall at present wave, it seeming very incredulons, by reason
that the Lord Inchiquin swells in envy against the Marquess, for his late
misdemeanors and neglect, and as some affirm, has sent a Challenge to him, to
dispute revenge in the field.

Bewmorris 19. Aug. 1649.
SIR,
BY an Express yesterday from the Lord Governor Cromwell, we hear, that he is
got safely into the Harbor at Dublin, and has landed two or three Regiments
of the foot, the horse being also craning out of the ships as fast as possible
they can: its said, that his Lordship (at his landing) were entertained with a
great volley from the great Guns in the City. And a little before his presence
Col. Jones sent forth a party of horse and foot to take in Droghedah; who upon
summoning thereof, the Lord Moor returned a very peremptory answer, and
disputed the place with great resolutenesse and gallantry, insomuch, that many
many of them were slain upon the place; but at last, the conflict grew so hot
and sharp, that the enemy began to article and at last obtained conditions to
march away with sword and pistol, upon the surrender of the town with all the
Ordnance, Arms and Ammunition. This action cost us not very dear, our loss
being esteemed about 70, whereof 30 slain, the rest wounded; of the enemies
about 200.

We hear that the Lord Inchiquin has randezvou'd in Muster about 4000 horse
and foot, who sending a Letter to Genesis Oneal, to know whether he would covenant
for the declared King of Scotland, etc. received answer, that he would not
engage against the Parl. of England: whereupon he advanced with his horse and
foot, fell upon them in their quarters, dissipated part of the foot, killed
many, and took diverse prisoners, forcing the rest to the Bogs and Woods, in
which conflict, they give out, that above 1000 fell under the power of their
sword.

During which action, Sir Charles Coot lay not idle in Londonderry, but
opportunely foreseeing his advantage, sallyed out, and fell upon Sir Charles
Stuarts quarters, killed many, took diverse prisoners, and raised the siege,
with the loss of 40 men.

The news is confirmed from Dublin, Ormond has paid dear for his bowzing,
Taff, Preston, and he being met together, thought they could destroy the Parl
power, by drinking healths to their destruction, when its in so many words a
Bull, whereas Lieu. Genesis Jones came soberly upon them, and made them run
several ways: It Is said, that in their have they fell upon Ballyshanon, have
taken it, and are rallyed, being about twelve thousand within twelve miles of
Dublin and fallen to their old way of disputing passes: which when lost, they
run to the next: they increase by the coming of forces to them, and say, if
they recover not their reputation before Michaelmas, they shall not keep Ireland
from a total reducement within a year.

Bristol 18. Aug. 1649. By Letters from the Hague thus: since the late blow
given to Ormond by Lieut. Genesis Jones, we hear that they are rebodying about
Kilkeny and Munster, and that in the said Engagement thirteen thousand of the
Princes forces escaped, who are gathering together, and randezvouzing in
several places; but the raising of the siege, and defeating that potent power
is joyfully rescented by many.

It is likewise reported, that the Princes retinue lately sat in Council,
whose result was, That new propositions should be sent to the Parl. of
Scotland, viz. 1 That his declared Majesty would wive his assent, for the
settling of Religion, according to the solemn League and Covenans.

2 That he would wholly apply his Ear to the Council and Advice of the Estates
conveened, provided, that respect might be had to the tender Consciences of
those who have adhered to or assisted him.

But this will hardly be; for he must either become a perfect Covenanter, or
else a despised Prince.

Many of the Royal party have caused proclamation to be made for Charles the
II, for the raising of Volunteers, but few appears in that engagement,

Hague 9. Augusti, 1649.

From whence other Letters make mention, That the Prince (by advice of his
Council) has sent a Message to the Marquess of Ormond, and the Lord
Inchiquin, desiring them to compose all dis^erences, to knit their hearts in
brotherly love and affection, and unanimously to unite in all their counsels
and consultations, for the propagation and advancement of their present Design
and Engargement. There is some rumor of an enclosed Letter, directed to the
Lord Lieutenant Cromwell, from Prince Charles; the contents whereof, are said
to be for a speedy composure and reconciliation of all difference, and for the
settling of peace both in Church and State, etc.



FINIS.

