THE DECLARATION Of Lieutenant General CROMWELL CONCERNING The Citizens of
LONDON, and their high and strange expressions against the Army; with his
Protestation touching the said City, and his Resolution concerning the Northern
Expedition.

Presented to the view of all His Majesty's loyal and faithful Subjects
within the Kingdom of England and Dominion of Wales.

ALSO, The Votes and Resolutions of both Houses of Parliament, concorning the
Kings Majesty's Letter for a Personal Treaty, and their concurrence to his
Majesty's Desires, for the Scots to join in the said Treaty, and to have such
servants are needful to attend His Royal Person.

Likewise, the recalling of their former Votes, concerning the KING, and
appointing five of the House of Peers, and ten of the House of Commons to treat
with his Majesty in the Isle of Wight.

Together with strange and terrible News from Colchester, and the Scottish
Army.

Printed for R. W. and are to be sold near Temple Bar, 1648.

Lieutenant General CROMWELL HIS DECLARATION Concerning The City of London,
and the whole Kingdom in general, declaring his full Resolution and
Intentions touching the said City.
Whereas I should long since have acquainted you of the many favors we
received from the City of Bristol, by the mediation of Mr. Peter's, when we lay
before Pembrook, they affording us not only a great supply of Beer, but linen
for our wounded and sick soldiers, a mercy seasonable and necessary, and at
this present sensibly felt; yet in this very poor condition, we can do no more
but acknowledge it with thankful hearts to God, and by promising to hazard
our lives in a farther adventure for them, and the Kingdom in this our
Northern expedition, much enabled and encouraged by the benefit and remembrance
of those former favors, together with the supply of 2500 pare of shoes from
Northampton, and the like quantity of stockings from the city of Coventry, and
our joy is, that God has cleared up our way by the appearance of his
providence in his former assistances, and believe it, Sir, as long as we have
life, we shall keep to first principles, though a poor naked despised party,
and die by the sides of our faithful Officers, in the owning of that only,
which God and reason allows, as for those against whom we now march, it is our
opinion, they if Victors, will put no difference between Cavaliers,
Presbyterians, and Independents, but we trust, he that has hitherto gone along
with us, will assist us in this enterprise, to blunt some what the edge of
their delights, and that they shall reap as thos^ before them, of that stamp,
both old and new, will not English men consider of whom it is said they are the
best servants but the worst Masters in the world we grieve for that famous City
of London, over whom we never desired to insult, nor marched we through with
any such intent, but to let them and the world see and understand, how false
their reports were concerning our endeavors to come up and plunder them, but
let them know their destruction (if they perish) will be of themselves, not us.

And not withstanding all their high and strange expressions against us, who
have been isntrumental of more good to them, then to all the Kingdom, and
received the least from them, yet we profess our selves their servants in the
work in hand: and for you noble Citizens of Bristol you have had wonderful
experiences and deliverances, do do not lose them; we appoint no Government to
you nor this Kingdom, we shall stoop, we hope as low as the lowest and look no
other way upon our selves, and take no other notice of the workings of
providence, then as instruments used by the eternal, since our new modelling,
for subduing those who have and would inslave both soul and body to their wills,
not Gods and reasons: and so many of us as shall out live these troubles, you
shall see will be willing to resign all kind of power and trust, when such an
agreement or settlement is made, as may put us in capacity to live under the
worst of shades, free from tyranny and persecution.

The votes and resolutions of the House of Peers for his Majesty's liberty.
On Wednesday last, the Lords at a conferrence communicated to the Commons
their votes or resolutions upon the Kings Letter to them, which were to this
effect. 1. That the 4 Votes formerly made by both houses be null, viz. That no
address be made for future to his Majesty. 2. That none be received from him.
3. That none make any address to him without leave. 4. That it shall be high
treason so to do. 5. That the Instructions given to Col. Hamond to this end be
recalled. In the affirmative the vote. 1. That his Majesty have come to him all
such as are necessary for carrying on the on his part. That he have such
servants as are need full to attend his person. 3. That the Treaty be at
Newport. 4. That the Parl. invite the Scots to send some Commissioners to the
treaty, and that they come at the time agreed. 5. That the King's Maj. may also
invite the Scots to the said treaty to treat on the propositions at Hampton
court, wherein they concurred. 6. That the number of Lords to treat be five and
that the Commons name ten: that his Maj. have as much liberty as he had at
Hampton court, lastly, that all possible expedition be made herein, this being
apprehended most necessary, to settle a good Peace.



SIR,
SInce my last of the 9 instant, here has happened little action till Sunday and
Monday last; at which time they made several Sallies both upon the Suffolk
Forces and the Lord Generals. Genesis Lucas and the L. of Loughborow, with a party
of Horse and Firelocks made an attempt against the Guards near the Almshouses,
our Horse Guard charged them, and made an intervale through their whole Body,
who upon their wheeling about, five piece of Ordnance were fired from the walls
upon them, which killed two or three; then both parties bodied, and after a
gallant charge by both Parties, the Colchesterians retreat, our men pursues,
and in the pursuit killed 7. and took 9. prisoners, with the loss of 5 men.

C. Lunsford with another party sallyed out at Buttolphs Gate, who fell upon
our Out-guards with great fury, doing some execution, and took about 17.
prisoners, but by the gallantry of Col. Barkstead and a party of foot, they
were repulsed, their prisoners released, and Col. Lunsford and his party
totally routed, and pursued to the very Gates and Sally ports, leaving diverse
of his men in a most deplorable and gasping condition.

Most of the Salliers which engaged in this action were Kentish-men, who fought
with abundance of courage and resolution, and maintained their ground to
push-a-pike, goring and mangling some of our horse, vowing revenge upon us, for
our late conquest in Kent, but in this action and retreat they felt one hand
more heavier then both, above twenty of them being slain in this short dispute
and conflict: since which time, they have declared, that they will fight it out
to the last man, and maintain their Works with the last drop of blood, the
shavers and others in the town, having also vowed the like resolution,
protesting to sacrifice their lives with them, against the Army, and all others
that shall adhere to them.

They have sunk several places under the Walls, and near the Gates, who by
countermining have blowd up one of our Mines, which has somewhat retarded the
work of storming, yet we have four more almost finished and ready to spring,
and the better to faciliate the work of storming, are raising of Batteries, and
bringing our Trenches nearer the works, which we have accomplished with little
loss: the Besieged calls over the walls to our men, saying, That they desire
to exchange some tokens with in the town, and to welcome them over the walls
with the messengers of Mars; and indeed, we are in a readiness to satisfy
their longing desires, the Council of war having resolved that approaches be
made round the town in order to a storm: And thereupon his Excellency with a
General Council of war consisting of all the Officers of Sussex and Essex,
as well as those of the Army, debate high in relation to Colchester, endeavoring
to make short work of a long siege, the reason and inducements being these, 1.
The Enemy having com for 20. days, 2. Their soldiers well satisfied with
horseflesh. 3. No want of fresh water, besides much wine and fruit. 4. The
City design much ripened, and may be speedily put in execution. 5. The success
in the North uncertain, and the Princes landing may prove prejudicial, all
which are motives to cause a storm.

Colchester Aug. 16. 9. at night.
SIR,
Diverse of the Scots forces are come into this county, (...) are quartered near
Lancaster, they drive all the cows Oxen, and sheep they meet withal toward
Scotland, an^ leave not any movables unshifted away, to the very po^hooks
there being few Artists in Scotland, they take chi^dren from their Parents, and
put them to redeem them, an^ some have redeemed their children four times over;
an^ when no redemption money could be had, they have kille^ the children: If it
be asked why they carry not children into Scotland, the answer is, there is no
need of them ther^ There is one observation which has a great emphesis wit^
it. They ask people if they have taken the Covenant, if the^ answer they have,
they plunder them of all as enemies t^ the King; if they have not taken it,
they are plundered as S^ctaries and Cavaliers: so that their oppressions are
most i^sufferable.

Preston Aug. 14. 1648.
FINIS.

