Crete Wonders foretold BY Her crete Prophet of Wales, which shall
cer(...)ainly happen this present year 1647. by strange fires, and crete
waters, by spirits and Tivills appearing in many places of it is Kingdom,
especially in and about te Cities of London and Westminster, and the effects
that will follow thereupon.

Also her Kings coming home to her Crete Counsel.

portrait of the great prophet of Wales

Jan. 2d Printed with her free consent and leave, to be published and sold to
her teere Pretren of England, with all her plood and heart. 1647. 1646

Wonders foretold by her Welsh Prophet.
HER needs not foretell tat her cood King Charles is at distance from her crete
Lords in Parliament, and her crete House of Commons, mark you tat now: for to
her crete creefe all her whole contrymen of Whales, ^^d Pretren of England,
know tat well enough already; her does therefore ^ay to Cot Almighty, tat her
cood King may return in peace to her crete Coun^^ll again: but for all tat
her can tell a crete many more strange wonders tat will ^^rtainly fall out it is
present year.

1 Her dus foresee, tat a crete many widows when tey have puried cood husbands
^^t did pie them prave fine Pever hats, silk Crowns and Peticoats with silfer
lace, ^^d allow them a crete deal of gold and silfer to spend a gossipping, and
all such ^^e thing, what they would have, and they are left in debt 209.l. to
the Tailors, 63.l. to the Drapers, 19.l. to the Butchers, 17.l. to the
Comfit-makers, 11.l. 6.s. ^.d. to the Crocers, 13.l. 6.s. 5.d. ob. for silk
stocking, 7.l. 3.s. 2.d. ob. q. for, ^irdles, Cloves, knots and Ribbon, 101.l.
3.s 4.d. to the Doctors, and Proctors ^f the Civilian Law, etc. and are feign
to sequester, and afterward wear their ^^d cown a Sundays, it is a crete
forerunner of rain, and that many crete show^^s of tears shall fall from their
cloudy eyes.

2 Tat many young callants tat has teir dear fathers dead it is year, and all
the ^eanes left them to spend will be very merry, and like so many students of
the ^^ack art, tey will raise Angels, out of the golden mine, which teir
fathers left them (...) fly like Gold-finches, and glittering sparks up and
down all place where they, ^^me, and cause sack and clarret to rain in
Tavernes till the clouds of teir pa^^imony be all spent.

3. There shall also crete inflammations of Lightning it is happen year about the
^ortune in Colding-Lane, if the players can get leave to act the tragedies of
Do^^our Faustus in which Tempest shall be seen shag-haired Tivills, run
roaring with squibs in teir mouths, while drums make thunder in the riring
house and the twelve penny hireling make artificial lights in her heavens.

4 Tere shall a crete tarknesse happen among many of her dear countrymen of
Whales, as also of her pretren of England, when they shall sit at the Tavern
or Alehouse till tei be so blind tat tey cannot see day light.

5 Tat a crete many Citizens wives, and many bauds and whores, and lasses of
^ll sorts, tat in teir younger taies painted teir faces to look beautiful to
please teir Paramour, shall now forsake teir Venetian tinctures, and walk under
so crete heat as shall transform their beuty to an old withered face.

6 Tat there shall also it is present year be many crete fires in many parts of
t^^ City of London (mark you tat now) for her does fery well understand tat te^
will be many hot fires in Pick-hatch, Turnbull-steet, the Myneries,
Coven-Garde^ te Strand, Holborne, and poth te Friars, and other such religious
places, whe^^ Venus Nuns are cloystered, and Tom Tod and his fellow
flesh-dressers do (...) quench those inflammations, many a three chind baud,
dry fisted punk, and bis^^ handed pander, shall have all their hair burnt off
with the heat thereof.

7 Tere will once in a month or tereabouts (in te Old-Bailey) be many cr^^^
fires which shall burn many whose hands are touched with te heat of it; (...)
glad shall tey be too tat tey escape with teir lives, for all te purning, mark
y^^ me tere now, so tat is not to be passed by, put to be taken notice of still.

8 Tat many trunkards shall be much troupled with the terrible heart-burnin^
with trinking stale beer, and fehement hot inflammations at teir stomachs
tr^^king hot water, so tat many of them shall not dare to go to bed without a
Th^^rundell pot of six shilings beer to stand by them all night, for fear
their throats (...) set on fire before te next morning.

9 Tat many a prodigal younger brother shall have many casualities of ill
success befall them, and shall plunge themselves into so great a deluge, tat
many o^ them shall not be able to reach nearer to te shore, ten te two Counter
Islands o^ Woodstreet and te Poultrey.

10 Tat many giddy heads shall have so many fiery sparks of fantastical
h^mours fall upon them as shall set on fire teir brains, and burn up all teir
wit.

11 Tat most of te students belonging to te City Colleges, (I mean both t^
prodigious Counters) shall have such fiery red faces, tat tey cannot put a cup
of ^ipitato to teir snouts, put tere shall be seen such an extraordinary heat
to clow from them, tat tey shall make it fery hiss again, as if tere were a
cad of burning steel flung into the pot, but because I do truly love tem, I
will be teir Esculapius, and prescribe this medicine following, viz.

12 Let them every morning take a spoonful of Aqua fortis, rather Aqua Regis,
as much oleum Origanum, and mingle it with a little Mercury sublimate, the^
take a piece of the coursest hair cloth, and dip it in this liquour, and so
every morning till their noses be well, wet them with this medicine, and it
will do all the Counter Kites as much good as the world can desire, for it
stands io crete reason it should cure them, for one heat always drives out
another, why else do Cooks tat purne teir fingers hold them to the fire, put tat
te creater heat should expel te lesser, or why do footmen in te hottest
weather after tey have run a race trinke so much Vsquebah, and Rosa solis but
tat it frights away the other.

13 Tat tere shall be day and night continual fires in Fleet Street, te
Strand, and any other places both in and about te City, but especially in
tobacco-shops, so ^^t tere shall scarce a man come in, whose nose shall not
smoke with it.

14 Tat many tat ride up Holborne shall be set upon at Tiburne, and lose both
^eir lives, and and be stripped of all tey have tere by Gregory and his company.

15 Tat many maids where te Cavaliers come shall trust tem with teir
maiden^eads, who will carry it quite away and leave tem nothing but a --

16 Tat if knick knock go on thus among her contrymen and her friends of
^ngland and of Whales, tere will be a crete deal of blood shed.

17 Tat when tese troubles (tat makes us tat we know not what to do) are past
and ^one, ten tere will be peace, and truly her will be fery clad of it; for
her did never ^elight to shed blood in all her life, no nor to be in such
dangers her self (mark you that now) her never see such doings before. O by
Saint Taffie her was almost be^hit for fear, when her did run away from te
fight at Edgehill, for te Cavaliers did ^^ill her dear pretren in good
earnest. Bounce, bounce, bounce went te Cannon and te Gunne, and then came
scurvy bullets among us, and down fall one here, and another tere, and tied:
then te Cavaliers came upon us with teir naked swords, and pole axes, and run
some through, and cut others in pieces. O it makes her tremble to think of it,
te blood was all about her contrymen tat lay tead: was not tat a pitiful
fight? well, her did swear never to go fight again, and was ^ery clad to get
away, and truly her dus not dissemble to tell you, tat her desires peace.

18 Tat if any thing be lost amongst a company of servants, and they shall
afterward use the trick of the sive and the sheares, they shall thereby find
tat which tey have lost, and know who stole it after he tat had it restore it
them again.

19 Tat it is present year whosoever shall be troubled with te tooth ache, Ague,
Cramp, or a Fever, or any other disease whatsoever, if they wear a writing in
teir bosom till the Physician cure them, tey shall ten be whole.

20 Whosoever takes good heed of te hind most lock in te nap of his neck till
his wife be buried, shall be sure to know when he shall be a widower.

21 Whosoever looks upon a dial tat goes true, may with a ring and a silfer
peaker (if he understand te figures of te dial) easily tell what a clock it is.

22 It Is year will be fery unfortunate to those who have at any time a Hare
cross them in te high way, when they are alone, because tey have never a dog
with them to catch her, or if tey shall first catch her, as my brother Taffie
did, let her go again.

23 When any one has any yellow speckles on te nails of her hands, is broug^^
to te bar, and accused of Purglary, treason or murder, and by te Jewry fou^^
guilty, he is in crete tanger to tie within a short time after.

24 When te left cheek purns, at te same time, tat one friend vindicates te
fo^^ of another, then does tat chek purn at the same time he is well spoken of,
but when her is cursed and railed on, then does it purn when it is ill spoken
of.

25 When a man's nose bleeds to clear his head, and to empty his veins of
(...) ploud, ploud, it is a token tat her shall be better in health thereby,
but when it blee^^ so much tat he cannot stop it till his body be out of temper
thereby, it is a sign (...) will be worse in health after it.

26 If any man stumble in a morning as soon as he goes out of doors, it is
(...) forerunner of ill luck, if he break his nose or hurt himself.

27 If any man that is a batcheliour walking in te field chance to find a fou^
leaved grass, he shall be sure to be married tat year, if his sweet heart and
(...) can agree, and so shall it happen to any man tat finds te like.

29 It is not good to put on a new suit on Childermas day, except he can te^
where to have of his own, neither is it cood to pare ones nails when ^^y a^^
like to lose a cood dinner for teir labor: nor to begin tat on tat day, for
which tey shall repent te next day after.

29 It is ill luck for a man to be drowsy, tat has cot store of business to
to^ of crete concernment, for then his business shall fery probably be either
neglected, or at te least much slighted.

30 It is ill luck to find a bag of money when it proves counterfeit, or is
challenged, or taken away by te true owners tereof, or lost again.

31 It is ill luck to lose a hose-carter, especially if it be a cood one, for
then recharges will be creter to buy another.

32 It is a fery unfortunate thing for a man early in te morning, to meet with
an ill favored man, or woman tat wait purposely to do us a mischief, and are
ready armed for it, especially when a man is unprovided for his own tefence: so
it is also (...) meet a rough footed hound, if she fly upon him, and shit upon
his clothes, for ^hen he must be troubled to make them clean; so it is also to
meet a shag-haired ^og, if he bite a man by te leg, and send him to te surgeons
to ket it cured.

33 If where crickets use to a rotten house they go away on a sudden, by reason
of te ruins of te chimney, it is a sign tat some body in te house will be in
danger of death if tey stay (without mending te house) to let te house fall
down upon teir heads.

34 Who ever dreams of eggs or fire, he shall hear of anger, if his wife
chance to break his head.

35 To tream of te Tivell is cood luck, if a man treby take heed of him ever
^er.

36 To tream of gold is cood luck, if te next morning a man receive good store,
(...) it is ill to tream of silfer, and can keep never a penny.

37 If a man be born in te day time it is unforrunate, I mean to prison, for
prison ^n unfortunate place.

38 If a child be born with a caul on te hand, it shall be fery fortunate, if
it ne^ live to want.

39 When te palm of te right hand itches, it is a sign tat man would willingly
^^^eive money, if any man will bring it.

40 It is a crete sign of ill luck, when rats know a man's clothes, for he must
^^er be feign to buy new, or wear them patched, both which will cost money.

41 It is naught for a man to give a pair of knives to her sweetheart, to cut
away ^e, except her marry her after, for her will never pay her for them, nor
restore ^^m again.

42 It is ill luck to have te salt-seller to fall towads one at meat, when a
special (...) is eating, for whilst he is taking up te salt tat he spilt, te
rest of te company are (...) to beguile him of his share.

43 When te pot falls next to a man it is cood luck if he be try, and wants
on^^ cup to trink in.

44 When a candle burns blue, in her house whose wife is a shrew, there is no
^^^stion, but tat tere is a spirit tat uses te house.

45 When te cat washes her face over her ears, it is a sign of wet, if she
scratch (...) one, from whose bloody eyes shall issue forth tears.

46 It is ill luck for a horse to stumble on the high way, if te rider cannot
scarce ^at all.

47 When an apprentices nose (who loves a cup of sack) does itch, it is a sign
tat either trink wine when te glass is at his mouth, or kiss a fool when his
mistress ^raceth him.

48 It is an ill sign to be melancholy, for seldom any one is so, put one
cross ^^other prings them to it.

49 It Is year te chiefest nourishment which te shry Tivels shall feed upon, (I
mean ^oaring boys, tat like te Salamander always live in te fire) will be
smoke, and (...) spirits will be most resident in tobacco shops, hot water
shops, taverns, brothel ^^erns, and such places, if tey be not conjured down by
some everlasting con^^le, or new elected beadle tat resires to be known in his
office, or rather some ^^^^ice of Peace to charm them in te small circumference
of the Compter.

50 Te fine mercurian fingered cut purse spirits will often appear in
play houses, cockpits, prises, and such like fertile places, except Porridge or
Pulman cha^^ them under the gallows.

51 Te watery spirit will be refident about te French or Irish coasts, except
letter of mart pring them as far as Saint Thomas a watrings, or Wapping, and
(...) sink them.

52 Lastly, tere shall be many earthly Tivills arise in many parts of te
Kingdom which shall most appear in Scriveners shops, teir office, or at teir
paper houses ^ both te compters, except tey be laid by a privy seal to borrow
money of the^ or a sub paena ou of the exchequer for extortion.

Besides tese Tivills, her does foresee many more in te City her shall seldom
(...) into Turnbull street, put tere shall be a three chin baud or whore,
sitting in an ^^ning enticing young men to sin. Her shall seldom go into
Cheapside, Lumberstr^^^ te Strand or Feetstreet, put you shall see some spirits
in te likness of Goldsmit^^ Merchants, and Silk-mens wives, wearing most
prodigious horns on teir he^^ like a half moon, te emblem of change and
mutability. Her cannot walk into Hou^^^ditch, charter-house-lane, put spirits
will appear, standing at te most of those do^^ in te likeness of griping
Brokers. Put of all spirits tat are likely to appear it is ye^ in te City those
tat stand before both te Compters do appear most horrible, a^^ fearful to all
her countrymen tat are in debt. I intended to have foretold at la^^^ some
other thing which do here follow in brief, fiz. Trunkards shall often tre^^ tat
tey are in te bottom of cellars carousing and drinking healths, Lawyers sh^^^
tream of Angels and talk of demurres, habeas corpus, etc. the Physicians wi^^
treame of a crete plague, and talk of pills, vomits, etc. The cut purse and
catc^poles of Michaelmas Term, and every one of tat teir love, like te player
tat h^^^ had his brains beat out with a cork of a bottle of Ale, and as he was
speaking i^ hit at him because he spoke it so scurvily.

Many other wonders will happen, which her is forced at it is time to omit to
(...) you of, and terefore her do now conclude and bid farewell to all her
dear country men, friends and pretren.

FINIS.

