blazon or coat of arms
By the Protector. A DECLARATION Of His HIGHNESS with the Advice of the Council,
in order to the Securing the PEACE of this COMMONWEALTH.
HIs Highness the Lord Protector, upon advice with His Council, finding it
necessary for the Reasons and upon the Grounds expressed in His late
Declaration, to use all good means to secure the Peace of the Nation, and
prevent future troubles within the same, Has thought fit to Publish and
Declare, and by and with the Consent of His Council, does Publish, Order and
Declare, That no person or persons whatsoever in England or Wales, whose
Estates have been Sequestered for Delinquency, or who were actually in Arms for
the late King against the then Parliament, or for harles Stuart his Son, or have
adhered to, abetted, or assisted the Forces raised against the said Parliament,
do, from and after the first day of December 1655. buy, use, or keep in his or
their house, or houses, or elsewhere, any Arms offensive or defensive, upon
pain that every person and persons so offending shall forfeit and lose such
Arms, and be otherwise proceeded against according to the Orders of His
Highness and the Council, for securing the peace of the Commonwealth. And His
Highness by the advice of his Council, does also Publish, Declare and Order
that no person or persons aforesaid do* from and after the first day of January
1655. keep in their houses or Families, as Chaplains or Schoolmasters, for the
education of their children, any sequestered or ejected M^nister, Fellow of a
College, or Schoolmaster, nor permit any of their children to be taught by
such, upon pain of being proceeded against in such sort as the said Orders do
direct in such cases. And that no person, who has been sequestered or ejected
out of any Benefice, College, or School for Delinquency, or scandal, shall,
from and after the said first day of January, keep any School, either public
or private, nor any person who after that time shall be ejected for the causes
aforesaid.

And that no person, who for Delinquency or Scandal has been Sequestered, or
Ejeted, shall, from and after the first day of January aforesaid, Preach in any
public place, or at any private meeting of any other persons then those of his
own family, nor shall administer Baptism, or the Lords Supper, or Marry any
persons, or use the Book of Common Prayer, or the forms of prayer therein
contained, upon pain that every person, so offending in any the premises,
shall be proceeded against as by the said Orders is provided and directed. And
to the end all persons concerned may take notice hereof, and avoid the danger
of any the said penalties, His Highness does Charge and Command all Sheriffs
within their respective Counties, Cities and Towns, to cause this Declaration
to be Proclaimed and Published. Nevertheless His Highness does Declare, That
toward such of the said persons as have, since their Ejection or
Sequestration, given, or shall hereafter give, a real testimony of their
Godliness* and good affection to the present Government, so much tenderness
shall be used as may consist with the safety and good of this Nation.

Given at Whitehall this 24. of November, 1655.
Printed and Published by His Highness special Commandment.

London, Printed by Henry Hills and John Field, Printers to His Highness, 1655.


