A DECLARATION OF HIS HIGHNESS The Lord Protector AND THE PARLIAMENT OF THE
Commonwealth of England, Scotland, and Ireland, for a Day of Solemn Fasting and
Humiliation in the Three Nations.

depiction of the state arms of the Commonwealth (1649-60) consisting of the
cross of St. George (patron saint of England) and the Irish harp

Tuesday the 23th of September, 1656.
ORdered by the Parliament, That this Declaration be forthwith Printed and
Published.

Hen: Scobell, Clerk of the Parliament.



London, Printed by Henry Hills, and John Field, Printers to His Highness, the
Lord Protector. 1656.

A Declaration of His Highness the Lord Protector and the Parliament of the
Commonwealth of England, Scotland and Ireland, for a day of solemn Fasting and
Humiliation in the three Nations.
SVch have been the outgoings of our God for his people in this our
generation, that none as men, but must say, It is Mavelous in our eyes: And
none as Christians, but must cry out; It is the Lords doing, he has always
been a ready help in time of need, and never did his poor servants seek his
face in vain, neither did he ever lend a deaf ear to the voice of their
weepings. Who can utter the mighty Acts of the Lord? who can show forth all his
praises? But Israel does not know, my people does not consider, for in the
midst of such unequalled and signal mercies, how great has been, and is our
ingratitude and unfruitfulness? Verily such, that nothing can be greater, but
that inexhausted mercy, which hitherto has not consumed us. Should the Lord
say unto us, as once he did unto Ephraim, Ephraim is joined unto Idols, let him
alone. That heavy sentence would be but our desert. As insensibility is our
crime, so it might be too justly made our punishment; for who has been melted
by mercies, who has been broken by judgment? Ah sinful Nation! a people laden
with iniquity, a seed of evil doers, children that are corrupters, they have
forsaken the Lord, they have provoked the holy one of Israel to anger, they are
gone away backward: why should ye be stricken any more? ye will revolt more and
more. As these sad words do Characterize us as fully as they did those of Juda
to whom they were first spoken; so if that sad Denuntiation should also be our
Doom, we could not yet but acknowledge; the Lord is righteous in all his ways,
and holy in all his works. How deeply have we grieved our good God, in not
mourning as we ought, even as one that mourns for his firstborn, for that
ignorance, profaneness and barrenness that is so ripe amongst us, even under
such rich means of knowledge, reformation and grace, in not being sensible
under, nor making a sanctified use of, those Rebukes we have of late received;
But rather charging such miscarriages upon Instruments, chiefly, if not only,
when every Individual has helped to fill up the measure of those sins after
which such Judgments were to follow.

In not improving mercies so fully as might have been, to his glory, from whom
alone they were received.

In the sad neglect and want of Activity, Resolution and Integrity, in
Magistrates and others empowered therein, for the punishment and suppression of
vice and crying Enormities.

In the abominable Blasphemies vented and spread of late through the apostasy
of, and the abuse of liberty by, many professing Religion.

In that little love and tenderness which is even amongst professors themselves
toward one another, who whilst they contend for things disputable, lose that
which is certain, even Charity, which is the bond of perfectness, and without
which they become as sounding Brass, or a tinckling Cimball: To love one
another is Christ's new Commandment, nay, the very Badge of his Disciples. By
this shall all men know that you are my Disciples, if you have love one to
another, in allowing difference in forms, more power to divide Christians, then
Agreements in fundamentals has to unite them, one of the dangerousest and
fruitfullest seed that has been sown by the envious one.

In not being truly sensible, that though the Lord in the depths of his
wisdom and righteous Judgment, has for some years last past been
overturning several Authorities in these Nations, and has as it were been
pouring them out from vessel to vessel: He has yet been pleased ever since his
people publicly contended for his Truths, still to set up Rulers, who have
allowed them the free exercise and profession of them.

In that Atheistical and Lukewarm Spirit, too commonly amongst us, whereby not
only the form but power of godliness is reproached, and accounted as a vile
thing, but also too many have fallen from their first love, and others
Laodicean like, esteem themselves rich and to have need of nothing, whilst
indeed they are wretched, and miserable, and poor, and blind, and naked, sins
which are the highlier aggravated, by being committed in Countries where the
Glorious light of the Gospel shines clearest.

In being more dissatisfied that we have not obtained all we aimed at, then
thankful that we have obtained so much, as through mercy we now enjoy.

All which, with other the grievous sins of these three Nations, call aloud
upon all the good people in them, to lie Low in the sight of our offended God,
and by prayer and humiliation; (a way which in our deepest distresses, we have
found both our duty and comfort to tread in) to seek to appease his wrath; And
that he will for his own Names sake be pleased, to remove whatever accursed
thing there is amongst us, and that as he is our God, so we may be his people.

That he will infatuate the Counsels, and defeat the Designs, of all those that
labor to exalt themselves, against the interest of his Son and his People.

That he will be pleased in a most especial manner to vouchsafe his presence
to those who are entrusted with the mannagement of the affairs of these
Nations:

That as he is the mighty Councellor in himself, so also that he would appear
such experimentally unto them.

That he would in all things spirit them to the work unto which they are
called, And give them unity amongst themselves, even the best Unity, That of
the Spirit, In the best Bond, That of Peace; That as they are a people
abounding in Mercies, so they may abound in Returns.

And that at last through the unwearied goodness of our God, these three
Nations, after such memorable revolutions, may be settled upon the sure
foundations of Truth, Mercy and Peace, and his people henceforth, being
delivered from their Enemies, may serve him without fear, in Holiness, and
Righteousness, before him all the days of their lives.

It is therefore declared by his Highness the Lord Protector, and the
Parliament of the Commonwealth of England, Scotland and Ireland, That for the
end and purposes aforesaid, They do appoint Thursday being the thirtieth day of
October next, for a day of solemn humiliation and seeking the face of God,
through the Mediation of Christ, in all places within England, Scotland and
Ireland, And do therefore hereby incite, and encourage all such whose hearts
God shall persuade and make sensible of their duty, and of the Commonwealths
present condition; that the day aforesaid be set apart by them for the purposes
aforesaid. And all persons whatsoever, are hereby enjoined and required, to
abstain from the works of their ordinary calling, and from any recreations, or
other things against the fitting and due observation of that day. And all
Faires and Markets are hereby prohibited to be kept upon that day, but may be
proclaimed to be kept upon the day next ensuing. And all Officers of Justice
are hereby required to cause due observation to be had hereof, And the
Ministers and Preachers of the respective Parishes and Congregations, are to
take notice hereof: For which end, It is Ordered, That Copies of this
Declaration be Printed, and sent into the several parts of the three Nations,
that the same may be published accordingly.

Tuesday the 23th of September, 1656.
ORdered by the Parliament, That this Declaration be forthwith Printed and
Published.

Hen: Scobel, Clerk of the Parliament.


