A LETTER Sent to the General Assembly OF THE KIRK of SCOTLAND:

BY Oliver Cromwell Lord General of the ARMY of the Commonwealth of ENGLAND
now in SCOTLAND etc.

Aug. 9 LONDON Printed for Hanna Allen at the sign of the Crown in
Popes-head-Alley, MDCL

TO THE General Assembly of the KIRK of SCOTLAND: OR, In case of their not
Sitting, To the Commissioners of the KIRK of SCOTLAND.
SIRS,
YOur Answer to the Declaration of the Army we have seen; Some godly Ministers
with us, did at Barwicke compose this reply, which I thought fit to send you.
That you or we, in these great transactions, answer the will and mind of God:
it is only from his grace and mercy to us, and therefore having said (as in our
papers) we commit the issue thereof to him who disposes all things; assuring
you that we have light and comfort increasing upon us day by day, and are
persuaded, that before it be long, the Lord will manifest his good pleasure, so
that all shall see him, and his people shall say, This is the Lords work, and
it is mavelous in our eyes: This is the day that the Lord has made, we will
be glad and rejoice therein

Only give me leave to say in a word, you take upon you to judge us in the
things of our God, though you know us not; though in the things we have said
unto you (in that which is entitled the Armies Declaration) we have spoken our
hearts, as in the sight of the Lord who has tried us* and by your hard and
subtle words you have begotten prejudice in those who do too much (in matters
of conscience, wherein every soul is to answer for it self to God) depend
upon you, so that some have already followed you to the breathing out of their
souls, others continue still in the way wherein they are lead by you (we fear)
to their own ruin: and no marvel, if you deal thus with us, when indeed you
can find in your hearts to conceal the papers we have sent you, from your own
people, who might see and understand the bowels of our affections to them,
especially such among them as fear the Lord. Send as many of your papers as you
please amongst ours, they have free passage, I fear them not; what is of God
in them would it might be embraced and received.

One of them lately sent, directed to the under Officers and Soldiers in the
English Army, has begotten from them this enclosed Answer, which they desired
me to send you, not a crafty politic one, but a plain simple spiritual one;
such as it is God knows, and God also will in due time make manifest, and do
we multiply these things as men? or do we them for the Lord Christ and his
peoples sakes?

Indeed we are not, through the grace of God, afraid of your numbers, nor
confident in our selves We could (I pray God you do not think we boast) meet
your Army, or what you have to bring against us. We have given (humbly we speak
it before our God, in whom all our hope is some proof, that thoughts of that
kind prevail not upon us. The Lord has not hid his face from us since our
approach so near unto you, your own guilt is too much for you to bear, bring
not upon your selves the blood of Innocent men, deceived with pretenses of King
and Covenant, from whose eyes you hide a better knowledge I am persuaded that
diverse of you, who lead the people have labored to build your selves in these
things, wherein you have censured others and established your selves upon the
Word of God. Is it therefore infallibly agreeable to the Word of God all that
you say?

I beseech you in the bowels of Christ, think it possible you may be mistaken:
Precept may be upon Precept, Line may be upon line, and yet the Word of the
Lord may be to some a word of Judgment, that they may fall backward and be
broken, and be snared, and be taken: There may be a spiritual fulness, which
the world may call drunkenness as in the second of the Acts; there may be as
well a carnal confidence, upon mis-understood, and mis-applyed Precepts, which
may be called Spiritual Drunkenness, There may be a Covenant made with Death
and Hell, (I will not say yours was so) but judge if such things have a
politic aim, to avoid the overflowing scourge, or to accomplish worldly
interests, and if therein we have confederated with wicked and carnal men, and
have respect, or otherwise drawn in to associate with us, whither this be a
Covenant of God and spiritual bethink your selves, we hope we do. I pray you
read the 28th of Esaiah from the 5th, to the 15th. and do not scorn to know
that it is the Spirit that quickens and gives life, and the Lord give you and
us understanding to do that which is well-pleasing in his sight, committing you
to the Grace of God I rest,

Your humble Servant, O. CROMWELL.
Muscleborough 3 Aug. 1650.
FINIS.

