blazon or coat of arms
By the Lord Protector. A PROCLAMATION Of the PEACE made between this
COMMONWEALTH, and that of the United Provinces of the Netherlands.
HIs Highness the Lord Protector of the Commonwealth of England, Scotland and
Ireland, considering how necessary it is, not only to preserve Peace and quiet
at home, but, as far as in him lies, to live in Amity and Friendship with His
Neighbors, Has, by the Blessing of God, with the advice of His Council, made
and concluded a Peace, Union and Confederation to continue for ever, between
this Commonwealth of the one part, and that of the United Provinces of the Low
Countries of the other part, their Lands Countries, Cities, Towns, Dominions,
Territories, Places and People, by Sea, Land, Fresh waters and elsewhere; By
the which Peace it is Agreed that all Enmity, Hostility, Discord and War
between the said Commonwealths, their People and Subjects shall cease, and all
injuries and wrongs whatsoever don since the 13 / 28 of May one thousand six
hundred fifty two, shall cease, and be forgotten, except such depredations as
shall be committed by either side in these Seas after twelve days, from the
date of these presents, and in all other places on this side the Cape of St.
Vincent, after six weeks; And from thence, within the M^diterranian Sea, and to
the Aequinoctial Line, after ten weeks, and beyond the Aequinoctial Line, after
the space of eight Months, or immediately after sufficient notice of the said
Peace given in those places. And that the People and Inhabitants of each party
respectively, of what condition or quality soever they be shall treat each
other with love and Friendship, and may freely and securely come into, and pass
through each others Countries, Towns, Villages and Precincts, and there stay
and abide, and from thence depart again at their pleasure, without any
hinderance and molestation, and likewise trade and have commerce, and generally
do, use, and exercise all other things (observing the Laws and Customs of each
place respectively) as freely, fully and securely as they might have done in
time of Peace. Whereof all persons whatsoever in these nations of England,
Scotland, and Ireland are to take notice, and conform themselves accordingly.

Given at White Hall this 26. April, 1654. O. P.

Printed and Published by his Highness special Commandment.

London, Printed by William du-Gard and Henry Hills, Printers to his Highness
the Lord Protector, 1654.


