THE ORDINARY, A Comedy, Written by WILLIAM CARTWRIGHT, M. A. Chapter Chapter Oxon.

LONDON, Printed for Humphrey Moseley, and are to be sold at his shop at the
Sign of the Princes Arms in St PAVLS Churchyard. 1651.

The PROLOGUE.
'TWould wrong our Author to bespeake your Ears;
Your Persons he adores, but Judgment fears:
For where you please but to dislike, he shall
Be Atheist thought, that worships not his Fall.
Next to not marking, it is his hope that you
Who can so ably judge, can pardon too.
His Conversation will not yet supply
Follies enough to make a Comedy;
He cannot write by the Poll; nor Act we here
Scenes, which perhaps you should see lived elsewhere;
No guilty line traduceth any; all
We now present is but conjecturall;
It Is a mere guess: Those then will be too blame,
Who make that Person, which he meant but Name.
That web of Manners which the Stage requires,
That mass of Humors which Poetique Fires
Take in, and boil, and purge, and try, and then
With sublimated follies cheat those men
That first did vent them, are not yet his Art,
But as drowned Islands, or the World's fifth Part
Lie undiscovered; and he only knows
Enough to make himself ridiculous.
Think then, if here you find naught can delight,
He has not yet seen Vice enough to Write.
Dramatis Personae.
Accomplices in the Ordinary. Hearsay -- An Intelligencer. Slicer -- A
Lieutenant. Meanewell, Littleworth disguised, a decayed Knights Son.
Shape -- A Cheater. Sir Tho. Bitefigg -- A covetous Knight Simon Credulous --
A Citizen. Andrew -- his Son, Suter to Mrs Jane. Robert Moth -- An Antiquary.
Gamesters. Caster. Have-at-all. --
Clubbers at the Ordinary. Rimewell -- A Poet. Bag-shot. -- A decayed Clerk.
Sir Christopher -- A Curate. Vicar Catchmey. -- A Cathedral Singingman.
Mrs Jane -- Daughter to Sir Thomas. Priscilla -- Her Maid. Joane Pot-lucke --
A Vintners Widow. Shopkeeper. Surgeon. Officers. Servants.
The Scene, LONDON.

ACT. I. SCEN. I.
Hearesay, Slicer, Shape, Meanewell. Hear. We Are made my Boys, we are made; me
thinks I am
Growing into a thing that will be worshipped.

Slic. I shall sleep one day in my Chain, and Skarlet
At Spittle-Sermon.

Shap. Were not my wit such
I Would put out moneys of being Mayor.
But O this brain of mine! that is it that will
Bar me the City Honor.

Hear. We Are cried up
Of The sudden for the sole Tutors of the Age.

Shap. Esteemed discreet, sage, trainers up of youth.

Hear. Our house becomes a place of Visit now.

Slic. In my poor judgment it is as good my Lady
Should venture to commit her eldest son
To us, as to the Inns of Court: he will be
Undone here only with less Ceremony.

Hear. Speak for our credit my brave man of War.
What Meane-well, why so lumpish?

Mean. Pray y' be quiet.

Hear. Thou look as if thou plott'st the calling in
Of The Declaration, or the Abolishing
Of The Common Prayers; cheer up; say something for us.

Mean. Pray vex me not.

Slic. These foolish puling sighs
Are good for nothing, but to endanger Buttons.
Take heart of grace man.

Mean. Fie you are troublesome.

Hear. Nay fare you well then Sir.

[Ex. Hea. Sli. Sha. Mean. My Father still
Runs in my mind, meets all my thoughts, and does
Mingle himself in all my Cogitations,
Thus to see eager villains drag along
Him, unto whom they crouch'd; to see him haled,
That never knew what compulsion was, but when
His virtues did incite him to good deeds,
And keep my sword dry -- O unequal Nature!
Why was I made so patient as to view,
And not so strong as to redeem? why should I
Dare to behold, and yet not dare to rescue?
Had I been destitute of weapons, yet
Armed with the only name of Son, I might
Have outdone wonder. Naked Piety
Dares more than Fury well-appointed* Blood
Being never better sacrificed, than when
It flows to him that gave it. But alas,
The envy of my Fortune did allow
That only, which she could not take away,
Compassion; that which was not in those savage,
And knowing Beasts; those Engines of the Law,
The even kill as uncontrolled, as that.
How do I grieve, when I consider from
What hands he suffered! hands that do excuse
The indulgent Prison; shackles being here
A kind of Rescue. Young man it is not well
To see thy aged Father thus confined,
Good, good old man; alas thou 'rt dead to me,
Dead to the world, and only living to
That which is more than death, thy misery:
The Grave could be a comfort: And shall I --
O would this Soul of mine -- But Death's the wish
Of him that fears; he is lazy that would dye.
I Will live and see that thing of wealth, that worm
Bred out of splendid mucke; that Citizen
Like his own sullied Wares thrown by into
Some unregarded corner, and my Piety
Shall be as famous as his Avarice;
His Son whom we have in our Tuition
Shall be the Subject of my good Revenge;
I Will count my self no child, till I have done
Something that's worth that name: my Brain shall be
Busy in his undoing; and I will
Plot ruin with Religion; his disgrace
Shall be my Zeales contrivement; and when this
Shall style me Son again, I hope 'twill be
Counted not wrong, but Duty. When that time
Shall give my Actions growth, I will cast off
This brood of Vipers: and will show that I
Do hate the Poison, which I meanet' apply.

Exit. ACT. I. SCEN. II.
Mrs Potlucke Pot. NOw help good Heaven! it is such an uncouth thing
To be a widow out of Term-time -- I
Do feel such aguish Qualmes, and dumps and fits,
And shakings still an end -- I lately was
A wife I do confess, but yet I had
No husband: he (alas) was dead to me
Even when he lived unto the world; I was
A widow whiles he breathed; his death did only
Make others know so much. But yet --

[Enter Hear. Hear. How now?
So melancholy sweet?

Pot. How could I choose
Being thou were not here? the time is come,
Thou Wilt be as good unto me as thy word?

Hear. Nay, hang me if I er'e recant. You Will take me
Both wind and limb at the venture, will you not?

Pot. Ay good Chuck, every inch of thee, she were
No true woman that would not.

Hear. I must tell you
One thing, and yet I Am loath.

Pot. I am thy Rib,
Thou must keep nothing from thy Rib, good Chuck;
Thy yoak-fellow must know all thy secrets.

Hear. Why then I Will tell you sweet.

[He whispers her Pot. Heaven defend!

Hear. It Is true.

Pot. Now God forbid; and would you offer
TO undo a widdow-woman so? I had
As leive the old Vintner were alive again.

Hear. I was not born with it I confess; but lying
In Turkey for Intelligence, the great Turk,
Somewhat suspicious of me, lest I might
Entice some of the Seraglio, did command
I should be forthwith cut.

Pot. A heathen deed
It was: none but an Infidel could have
The heart to do it.

Hear. Now you know the worst
That you must trust to, come lets to the Church.

Pot. Good Mr Hearsay, Nature never intended
One woman should be joined to another.
The holy blessing of all wedlock was
T'encrease and multiply, as Mr Christopher
Did well observe last Sabbath. I Will not do
Any thing against Gods word. I do release you
Of all your promises, and that it may not
Be said you lost by loving me, take this.
Perhaps I may get you a contribution
Of The women of the Parish, as I did
The broken-bellied-man the other day.

Hear. Seeing you needs will cast me off* let me
Entreat this one thing of you that you would not
Make me your Table-talk, at the next Gossiping.

Exit. [En. Slic. Pot. Indeed I pity thee poor thing, or rather
I pity thee poor nothing. Good Lieutenant
How do thou? Thou art mindful of thy Promise?

Slic. What else my jolly wench?

Pot. Good sweet Lieutenant
Give me but leave to ask one Question of you,
Art thou entire and sound in all thy limbs?

Slic. To tell the very truth, ere now I Have had
A spice of the Pox, or so; but now I am sound
As any Bell (Hem) wast not shrill my Girl, ha?

Pot. I do not ask thee about these diseases;
My question is whether thou'st all thy parts.

Slic. Faith I have lost a joint or two; as none
Of our Profession come off whole, unless
The General, and some sneaks.

Pot. My meaning is
Whether that something is not wanting that
Should write thee husband.

Slic. Never fear that my wench;
Do think the King would send me to the wars
Without I had my weapons? Eunuchs are not
Men of imploiment in these days; his Majesty
Has newly put me on a piece of service;
And if I e're come off (which I do fear
I shall not, the danger is so great) brave Widow
We Will to it and get Commanders.

Potl. If you can
Leave me, I can leave you: there are other men
That will not refuse a Fortune when it is proffered.

Slic. Well, I must to his Majesty, think on it;
So fare thee well. Thine to his very Death,
That is a Month or two perhaps, D. Slicer.

[Ex. En. Sha. Potl. Kind Master Shape, you are exceeding welcome.
Here has bin Mr Hearsay, and Lieutenant

Slicer: You may guess at their business, but
I hope you think me faithful.

Sh. I believe
The memory of your Husbands ashes, which
Scarce yet are cold, extinguisheth all flames
That tend to kindling any Love-fire: It Is
A virtue in you, which I must admire
That only you amongst so many should
Be the sole Turtle of the Age.

Potl. I do
Bear him in memory I confess; but when
I do remember what your promise was
When he lay sick, it does take something from
The bitterness of Sorrow. Woman was
Not made to be alone still.

Sh. Tender things
At seventeen may use that plea; but you
Are now arrived at Matron: these young sparks
Are raked up, I presume, in sager Embers.

Potl. Nay don't abuse her that must be your Wife;
You might have pity, and not come with your nicknames,
And call me Turtle: have I deserved this?

Sh. If that you once hold merits, I have done;
I Am glad I know what is your Religion.

Potl. What Is my Religion? it is well known there has
Been no Religion in my house ever since
My Husband died.

Ent. Slic. Hearsay. Hear. How now sweet Shape? so close
Alone w' your Widow.

Sh. Sirs dare you believe it?
This thing, whose prayer it has been these ten
Years, that she may obtain the second tooth,
And the third hair, now dotes on me, on me
That do refuse all that are past sixteen.

Slic. Why faith this was her suit to me just now.

Hear. I had the first on it then. A Coachman, or
A Groom were fitter far for her.

Slic. You do
Honor her too much to think she deserves
A thing that can lust moderately, give her
The sorrel Stallion in my Lords long stable.

Sha. Or the same colored Brother, which is worse.

Potl. Why Gentlemen --

Hear. Foh, foh! she has let fly.

Potl. Do y' think I have no more manners than so?

Sha. Nay faith I can excuse her for that: But
I must confess she spoke, which is all one.

Slic. Her breath would rout an Army, sooner than
That of a Cannon.

Hear. It would lay a Devil
Sooner than all Trithemius charms.

Sha. Hark how
It blusters in her nosthrils like a wind
In a foul Chimney.

Potl. Out you base companions,
You stinking Swabbers.

Hear. For her gate, that is such,
As if her nose did strive t'outrun her heels.

Sha. She Is just six yards behind, when that appears;
It saves an Usher Madam.

Pot. You are all
Most foul-mouthed knaves to use a woman thus.

Sli. Your playster'd face does drop against moist weather.

Sha. Fie, how you writh it; now it looks just like
A ruffled boot.

Slic. Or an oyld paper Lanthorn.

Hear. Her nose the candle in the midst of it.

Sha. How bright it flames? Put out your nose good Lady
Your burn daylight.

Pot. Come up you lousy Raskals.

Hear. Not upon you for a Kingdom good Joane,
The great Turk, Joane -- the great Turk.

Slic. Kiss him Chuck,
Kiss him Chuck opened mouthed and be revenged.

Pot. Hang you base cheating Varlet.

Slic. Don't you see
December in her face?

Sha. Sure the Surveyer
Of the highways will have to do with her
For not keeping her countenance passable.

Hear. There lies a hoare frost on her head, and yet
A constant thaw in her nose.

Sha. She Is like a piece
Of firewood, dropping at one end, and yet
Burning in the midst.

Slic. O that endeavoring face!
When will your costivenesse have done good Madam?

Hear. Do you not hear her Guts already squeake
Like Kitstrings?

Slic. They must come to that within
This two or three years; by that time she will be
True perfect Cat: They practice before hand.

Pot. I can endure no longer, though I should
Throw off my womanhood.

Hear. No need, that is done
Already: nothing left thee, that may style thee
Woman but Lust, and Tongue; no flesh but what
The vices of the sex exact, to keep them
In heart.

Sha. Thou art so lean and out of case
That 'twere absurd to call thee Devil incarnate.

Slic. Thou Art a dry Devil troubled with the lust
Of that thou have not, flesh.

Pot. Rogue, Rascal, Villain,
I Will show your cheating tricks I faith: all shall
Be now laid open. Have I suffered you
Thus long in my house, and never demanded yet
One penny rent, for this? I Will have it all,
By this good blessed light I will.

Hear. You may
If that you please undo your self, you may.
I will not strive to hinder you. There is
Something contriving for you, which may be
Perhaps yet brought about, a Match or so;
A proper fellow; it is a trifle, that;
A thing you care not for I know. Have I
Plotted to take you off from these to match you
In better sort, and am used thus? As for
The Rent you ask, here take it, take your money;
Fill, choke your gaping throat. But if as yet
You are not deaf to counsel, let me tell you
It had been better that you never had took
It may stop some proceedings.

Pot. Mr Hearsay,
You know you may have even my heart out of
My belly (as they say) if you will but take
The pains to reach it out; I am sometimes
Peevish I do confess; here take your money.

Hear. No.

Potl. Good Sir.

Hear. No, keep it and hoord it up.
My purse is no safe place for it.

Potl. Let me
Request you that you would be pleased to take it.

Hear. Alas 'twould only trouble me; I can
As willingly go light, as be your Treasurer.

Potl. Good Mr Slicer speak to him to take it,
Sweet Mr Shape, join with him.

Slic. Nay, be once
O'rerul'd by a woman.

Sha. Come, come, you shall take it.

Potl. Nay Faith you shall; here put it up good Sir.

Hear. Upon entreaty I Am content for once;
But make no Custom often; you do presume
Upon my easy foolishness; it is that
Makes you so bold: were it another man
He never would have to do with you. But mark me,
If ever I find you in this mood again,
I Will dash your hopes of Marriage for ever.

Ex. all but Hear. ACT. I. SCEN. 3.
To him, Meanewell, Andrew. And. GOd save you Tutors both.

Mean. Fie Andrew, fie;
What kiss your hand? you smell, not complement.

Hear. Besides, you come too near when you salute.
Your breath may be discovered; and you give
Advantage unto him you thus accoast
To shake you by the hand, which often does
Endanger the whole arm. Your Gallant's like
The Crystal glass, brittle; rude handling crackes him.
To be saluted so were to be wounded.
His parts would fall asunder like unto
Spilt Quicksilver; an Ear, an Eye, a Nose
Would drop like Summer fruit from shaken Trees.

Mean. For the same reason I Would not have you dance.
Some Courtiers, I confess, do use it; but
They are the sounder sort, those foolish ones
That have a care of health, which you shall not
If you will be ruled by me. The hazard's great,
It Is an adventure, an exploit, a piece
Of service for a Gentleman to caper.

Hear. A Gallant's like a Leg of Mutton, boiled
By a Spanish Cook; take him but by the one End
And shake him, all the flesh falls from the bones,
And leaves them bare immediately.

And. I would
Not be a leg of Mutton here.

Hear. I saw
In France a Monsieur, only in the Cutting
Of one cross Caper, Rise a man, and come
Down, to the amazement of the standers by,
A true extemporary Skeleton;
And was strait read on.

And. Sure this man,
Good Tutor, was quite rotten.

Mean. See how you
Betray your breeding now! quite rotten! it is
Rottenness perhaps in Footmen, or in Yeomen,
It Is tenderness in Gentlemen; They are
A little over-boyl'd, or so.

Hear. He is
A Churl, a Hind, that is wholesome; some raw thing
That never was at London: One in whom
The Clown is too predominant. Refined
People feel Naples in their bodies; and
An Ach in the bones at Sixteen, passes now
For high dissent; it argues a great birth.
Low bloods are never worthy such infection.

An. Ay, but my Father bid me I should live honest,
And say my Prayers, that he did.

Hear. If that
You cannot sleep at any time, we do
Allow you to begin your Prayers, that so
A slumber may seize on you.

Mean. But as for
Your living honost, 'twere to take away
A trade in the Commonwealth; the Surgeons
Benefit would go down: you may go on
In foolish chastity, eat only Sallads,
Walk an unskilful thing, and be to learn
Something the first night of your wife; but that is
To marry out of fashion.

An. Here Is no Proofs,
No Doctrines, nor no Uses. Tutor I
Would fain learn some Religion.

Hear. Religion?
Yes to become a Martyr, and be pictured
With a long Labell out of your mouth, like those
In Foxes Book; just like a Jugler drawing
Ribband out of his throat.

An. I must be gone.

Mean. Obedience is the first step unto science;
Stay and be wise.

An. Indeed I dare not stay
The Glyster works you sent to purge gross humors.

[Ex. Mean. Being you will not take your Lecture out
Good morrow to y' good Andrew. This soft fool
Must swim in's Fathers wealth. It is a curse
That Fortune justly makes the City's lot,
The young Fool spends what e're the old Knave got.

Ex. Mean. ACT. I. SCEN. IV.
To Hearsay, enter Slicer and Credulous. Hear. SIr let me tell you this is not
the least
Of things wherein your wisdom shows it self,
In that you have placed your Son in this good sort.

Cred. Nay nay, let me alone to give him breeding;
I did not hold the University*
Fit for the training up of such a Spirit.

Slic. The University? 't had been the only way
TO have took him off his courage, and his metal,
He had returned as Slaves do from the Galleys,
A naked shorn thing with a thin dockt top,
Learnedly cut into a Logic mode.

Hear. A private Oath given him at first Entrance
Had sworn him Pilgrim unto Conventicles;
Engaged him to the hate of all, but what
Pleases the stubborn froward Elect.

Slic. But we
Following another Model do allow
Freedom and courage, cherish and maintain
High noble thoughts --

Hear. Set nature free, and are
Chemists of manners --

Sli. Do instruct of States --

Hear. And Wars: there is one, look on him --

Slic. Do but view
That searching Head --

Hear. The very soul of Battle,
True steel.

Slic. H' has been an Agent some few years
(A score or so) for Princes, and as yet
Does not write forty.

Hear. I confess I can
Discover the Entrails of a State perhaps,
Lay open a Kingdoms Paunches, show the bowels
And inwards of a Seigniory or two;
But for your deeds of Valor, there is one,
Although I speak it to his face, that can
Write a Geography by his own Conquests.
H' has fought o'r Strabo, Ptolomy and Stafford;
Traveled as far in arms, as Lithgoe naked.
Born weapons whither Coriat durst not
Carry a shirt or shoes. Jack Mandevil
Never saild so far as he has steerd by Land;
Using his Colors both for mast and sail.

Cred. I Would thought h' had been Leiutenant.

Hear. That Is all one.

Slic. I Have worn some Leather out abroad; let out
A heathen Soul or two; fed this good sword
With the black blood of Pagan Christians;
Converted a few Infidels with it.
But let that pass. That man of peace there has
Been trusted with Kings Breasts --

Hear. His name is heard
Like Thunder, and that mere word, Slicer, has
Sufficed unto victory.

Slic. He Is close,
Reserved, locked up. The secrets of the King
Of Tartary, of China, and some other
Counsels of moment have been so long kept
In's body without vent, that every morning
Before he covers them with some warm thing
Or other you may smell 'em very strongly;
Distinguish each of them by several sents --

Hear. A grove of Pikes are rushes to him, hail
More frights you, than a shower of Bullets him --

Slic. The Dutch come up like broken beer; the Irish
Savor of Usquebaugh; the Spanish they
Smell like unto perfume at first, but then
After a while end in a fatal steame --

Hear. One Drum's his Table, the other is his Music.
His Sword's his Knife, his Colors are his Napkins*
Carves nourishing Horse, as he is used to do
The hostile Paguim, or we venison: Eats
Gunpowder with his meat instead of Pepper,
Then drinks o'r all his Bandeleers, and fights --

Slic. Secrets are ranked and ordered in his belly,
Just like Tobacco leaves laid in a sweat.
Here lies a row of Indian secrets, then
Something of 's own on them; on that another
Of China Counsels, covered with a lidd
Of New Foundland discoveries; next, a bed
Of Russia Policies, on them a lay
Of Prester-Johnion whispers --

Hear. Slights a tempest;
Counts lightning but a giving fire, and thunder
The loud report when heaven has discharged.
H' has with his breath supplied a breach.
When he is once fixed no Engine can remove him.

Slic. 'Twould be a Policy worth hatching, to
Have him dissected, if 'twere not too cruel.
All states would lie as open as his bowels.
Turkey in's bloody Liver; Italy
Be found in's reins; Spain busy in his Stomach;
Venice would float in's Bladder; Holland sail
Up and down all his veins; Bavaria lie
Close in some little gut, and Ragioni
Di Stato generally reek in all.

Cred. I see my Son's too happy; he is born
To be some man of Action, some Engine
For the overthrow of Kingdoms.

Hear. Troth he may
Divert the Torrent of the Turkish rule
Into some other Tract; damme up the stream
Of that vast headlong Monarchy, if that
He want not means to compass his intents.

Cred. The Turkish Monarchy's a thing too big
For him to manage; he may make perhaps
The Governor of some new little Island,
And there plant Faith and Zeal: But for the present
M'ambition's only to contrive a Match
Between Sir Thomas Bite-figg's only Daughter,
And (if I may so call him now) my Son;
'Twill raise his Fortunes somewhat.

Slic. We have got
One that will do more good with his tongue that way
Than that uxorious shower that came from Heaven,
But you must oil it first.

Cred. I understand you
Greaze him i'th'fist you mean: there is just ten Pieces,
It Is but an earnest: If he bring't about,
I Will make those then a hundred.

Hear. Think it done.

Ex. Cred. and Ent. Sh. Mean. ACT. I. SCEN. V.
Hearsay, Slicer, Meanewell, Shape. OUr life methinks is but the same with
others;
To cousen, and be cozened, makes the Age.
The Prey and Feeder are that Civil thing
That Sager heads call Body Politic.
Here is the only difference; others cheat
By statute, but we do it upon no grounds.
The fraud's the same in both, there only wants
Allowance to our way: the Commonwealth
Has not declared her self as yet for us;
Wherefore our Policy must be our Charter.
Mea. Well managed Knav'ry is but one degree
Below plain Honesty.

Slic. Give me villainy
That Is circumspect, and well advised, that does
Color at least for goodness. If the Cloak
And Mantle were pulled off from things, 'twould be
As hard to meet an honest Action as
A liberal Alderman, or a Court Nun.

Hear. Knowing then how we must direct our steps,
Let us chalk out our paths; you, Shape, know yours.

Sha. Where ever I light on Fortune, my Commission
Will hold to take her up: I Will ease my silken
Friends of that idle luggage, we call Money.

Hear. For my good toothlesse Countess, let us try
To win that old Emerit thing, that like
An Image in a German clock, does move,
Not walk, I mean that rotten Antiquary.

Mean. Hee'i surely love her, 'cause she looks like some
Old ruined piece, that was five Ages backward.

Hear. To the great Vestry wit, the Livery brain,
My Common Council Pate, that does determine
A City business with his gloves on's head,
We must apply good hope of wealth and means.

Slic. That griping Knight Sir Thomas must be called
With the same lure: he knows to a crum how much
Loss is in twenty dozen of Bread, between
That which is broke by the hand, and that is cut.
Which way best keeps his Candles, bran or straw.
What tallow's lost in putting of 'm out
By spittle, what by foot, what by the puff,
What by the holding downwards, and what by
The extinguisher; which week will longest be
In lighting, which spend fastest; he must hear
Nothing but Moyties, and Lives, and Farms,
Coppies, and Tenures* he is deaf to the rest.

Mean. I Will speak the language of the wealthy to him.
My mouth shall swill with Bags, Revenues, Fees,
Estates, Reversions, Incomes, and assurance.
He Is in the Gin already, for his Daughter
She Will be an easy purchase.

Hear. I do hope
We shall grow famous; have all sorts repair
As duly to us, as the barren Wives
Of aged Citizens do to St Antholins.
Come let us take our Quarters: we may come
To be some great Officers in time,
And with a reverend Magisterial frown,
Pass sentence on those faults that are our own.

Ex Om. ACT. II. SCENE I.
Have-at-all, Slicer, Hearsay, having rescued him in a Quarrel. Have: It Is
destined, I Will be valiant, I am sure
I shall be beaten with more credit then,
Than now I do escape. Lieutenant have
Bethought thy self as yet? have any way
To make my Sword fetch blood?

Slic. You never yet
Did kill your man then?

Have. No.

Hear. Nor get your Wench
With child I warrant?

Have. O Sir.

Slic. You're not quite
Free of the Gentry till you have marrd one man
And made another: when one fury has
Cried quit with the other, and your Lust repaired
What Anger has destroyed, the Titles yours,
Till then you do but stand for it.

Have. Pox! who'd be
That vile scorned Name, that stuffs all Court-gate Bills?
Lieutenant thou may teach me valor yet.

Slic. Teach thee? I will inspire thee man. I Will make
Thy name become a terror, and to say
That Have-at-all is coming, shall make room
As when the Bears are in Procession.
Hark hither Franks --

They consult. Hear. That Is good, but --

Slic. How think now?

Hear. Nay he will pay you large -- lie.

[aloud Hear. Pay, what else?

Hear. Make him believe the Citizen's his Guest.
The Citizen that he is his.

Slic. Concluded;
Would you fight fair or conquer by a spell?

Have. I do not care for Witchcraft; I would have
My strength rely meerlie upon it self.

Slic. There is a way that I never showed it yet,
But to one Spaniard, and 'twas wondrous happy.

Have. Think me a second Spaniard worthy Sir.

Slic. Then listen. The design is by a dinner;
An easy way you will say, I Will say a true;
Hunger may break stone walls, it never hurts men.
Your cleanly feeder is your man of valor.
What makes the Peasant grovel in his muck,
Humbling his crooked soul, but that he eats
Bread just in color like it? Courage never
Vouchsafed to dwell a minute, where a sullen
Pair of brown loaves darkened the durty Table;
Shadows of bread, not bread. You never knew
A solemn Son of Bagpudding and Pottage
Make a Commander; or a Tripe-eater
Become a Tyrant: he is the Kingdoms arm
That can feed large, and choicely.

Have. If that be
The way, I Will eat my self into courage,
And will devour valor enough quickly.

Slic. It Is not the casual eating of those meats,
That does procure those Spirits, but the order,
And manner of the meal; the ranking of
The dishes, that does all; else he that has
The greatest range would be the hardest man.
Those goodly Juments of the Guard would fight
(As they eat Beef) after six stone a day;
The Spit would nourish great Attempts: my Lord
Would lead a Troop, as well as now a Masque;
And force the Enemies sword with as much ease
As his Mistrisses Bodkin: Gallants would
Owe valor to their Ordinaries, and fight
After a crown a meal.

Have. I do conceive
The Art is all in all. If that you will give
A bill of your directions, I Will account
My self obliged unto you for my safety.

Slic. Take it then thus. All must be Souldier-like;
No dish but must present Artilery.
Some military instrument in each.
Imprimis six or seven yards of Tripe
Displayed instead of the Ensign.

Have. Why, you said,
Tripe-eaters never made Tyrants.

Slic. Peace Sir, Learners
Must be attentive and believe. Do y' think
We Will eat this? it is but for formalitie;
Item a Collar of good large fat Brawn
Served for a Drum, waited upon by two
Fair long black Puddings lying by for drumsticks;
Item a well grown Lamprey for a Fife;
Next some good curious Marchpanes made into
The form of Trumpets: Then in order shall
Follow the Officers. The Captain first
Shall be presented in a warlike Cock,
Swiming in whitebroth* as he is wont in blood;
The Sergeant Major he may bustle in
The shape of some large Turkey; For my self,
Who am Leiutenant, I Am content there be
A Bustard only; let the Corporal
Come sweating in a Breast of Mutton, stuffed
With Pudding, or strut in some aged Carpe,
Either does serve I think. As for Perdues
Some choice Sous'd-fish brought couchant in a dish
Among some fennel, or some other grass,
Shows how they lie in the field. The Soldier then
May be thus ranked. The common one Chicken,
Duck, Rabbet, Pidgeon. For the more Gentile,
Snipe, Woodcock, Partridge, Pheasant, Quail will serve.

Hear. Bravely contrived.

Slic. That weapons be not wanting
We Will have a dozen of bones well charged with marrow
For Ordnance, Muskets, Petronels, Petarrs;
Twelve yards of Sausage by instead of Match;
And Caveari then prepared for wildfire.

Hea Rare Rogue! how I do love him now me thinks.

Slic. Next we will have true fat, eatable old Pikes;
Then a fresh Turbut brought in for a Buckler,
With a long Spitchcock for the sword adjoined;
We Will bring the ancient weapons into play.

Have. Most rare by heaven.

Slic. Peaches, Apricocks,
And Malecotoons, with other choiser Plums
Will serve for large sized Bullets; then a dish
Or two of Pease for small ones. I could now
Tell you of Pepper in the stead of Powder,
But that it is not in fashion amongst us Gallants;
If this might all stand upon Drum heads, 'twould
Work somewhat better.

Have. Will It so? then we will have 'em
From every ward in the City.

Slic. No I Am loath
To put you to such charge: for once, a long
Table shall serve the turn; it is no great matter.
The main thing's still behind: we must have there
Some Fort to scale; a venison pastie does it:
You may have other Pies instead of outworks;
Some Sconces would not be amiss, I think.
When this is all prepared, and when we see
The Table look like a pitched Battle, then
We Will give the word, Fall too, slash, kill, and spoil;
Destruction, rapine, violence, spare none.

Hear. Thou have forgotten Wine, Lieutenant, wine.

Slic. Then to avoid the gross absurdity
Of a dry Battle, cause there must some blood
Be spilt (on the enemies side I mean) you may
Have there a Rundlet of brisk Claret, and
As much of Aligant, the same quantity
Of Tent would not be wanting, it is a wine
Most like to blood. Some shall bleed fainter colors,
As Sack, and White wine. Some that have the itch
(As there are Tailors still in every Army)
Shall run with Renish, that has Brimstone in it.
When this is done fight boldly; write your self
The tenth or 'leventh Worthy, which you please,
Your choice is free.

Have. I Will be the gaming Worthy;
My word shall be Twice twelve; I think the dice
Never mounted any upon horseback yet.

Sl. We Will bring your friends and ours to this large dinner:
It works the better eaten before witness.
Beware you say it is yours: Confession is
One step to weakness, private Conscience is
A Theater to valor. Let Us be close.
Old Credulous, and his Son, and Mr Caster
Shall all be there.

Have. But then they will grow valiant
All at my charge.

Slic. Never fear't; th'unknowing man
Eats only Flesh, the understanding Valor;
His ignorance in the mystery keeps him coward:
To him it is but a Meal; to you it is virtue.
It shall be kept here.

Have. No fitter place; there is
An old rich Clutchfist Knight, Sir Thomas Bitefig,
Invite him too; perhaps I may have luck,
And break his Purse yet open for one hundred.
A Usurer is somewhat exorable
When he is full: He never lends money empty.

Slic. Discreet, and wisely done; I was about
TO have prompted it.

Hear. Stout Mr Haveatall
Lets be sworn Brothers.

Have. Pox! thou fear I Will beat thee
After I Have eaten. Do thou think I Will offer't?
By my next meal I will not: nay I do love
My friends how ever: I do but think how I
Shall bastinado o'r the Ordinaries.
Armed with my sword, Battoone and foot I Will walk
To give each rank its due. No one shall escape,
But he I win off.

Hear. You shall have at least
Some twenty warrants served upon you straight;
The trunck-hose Justices will try all means
To bind you to the Peace, but that your strength
Shall not be bound by any.

Slic. Surgeons will
Pray for your health and happiness, you may
Bring 'em to be your Tributaries, if
You but deny to fight a while.

Have. My teeth
Are on an edge till I do eat; now will
I cousen all men without opposition.
I feel my strength increase with very thought on it.
Sword, sword, thou shall grow fat; and thou Battoon
Hold out I prithee, when my labor's done,
I Will plant thee in the Tower-yard, and there
Watered with wine thou shall revive, and spring
In spite of Nature with fresh succulent boughs,
Which shall supply the Commonwealth with Cudgels.
Thou I first meet after this meal I do
Pronounce unhappy shadow; happy yet
In that thou wilt fall by me. Some men I will
Speak into Carcass, Some I Will look to death,
Others I Will breath to dust, none shall hold back
This fatal Arm: The Templers shall not dare
T'attempt a rescue; no mild words shall bury
My splitted spitchcock'd --

Slic. Oliv'd, hasht --

Hear. Dried, powdered.

Have. Roasted fury.

Exeunt. ACT. II. SCEN. II.
Meanwell, Moth. Mean. IF what I speak prove falss, then stigmatize me.

Mo. I nas not what you mean; Depardieux you
Snyb mine old years, Sans fail I wene you bin
A Jangler, and a Golierdis.

Mean. I swear
By these two Janus heads you had of us,
And your own too, as reverend as these,
There is one loves you that you think not on.

Mot. And be, none pleasaunce is me ylaft,
This white top writes my much years, I wis
My fire yreken is in Ashen cold,
I can no whit of daliance: If I kissen
These thick stark bristles of mine beard will pricken
Ylike the skin of Hownd-fish. Sikerly
What wends against the grains is lytherly.

Mean. Me thinks you are strong enough and very lusty,
Fit to get heirs; among your other pieces
Of age and time, let one young face be seen
May call you Father.

Mo. Wholesome counsel! but
The world is now full Tykel sykerly;
It Is hard to find a Damosel unwenned;
They being all Coltish and full of Ragery,
And full of gergon as is a flecken Pie.
Who so with them makes that bond anon
Which men do clypen spousaile, or wedlock,
Saint Idiot is his Lord I wis.

Mean. This is
No tender and wanton thing, she is a stayed
And settled widow, one who will be a Nurse
Unto you in your latter days.

Mo. A Norice
Some dele ystept in age! so mote I gone
This goes aright, how highteth she say you?

Mean. Mrs Joane Potluck, Vintner Potluck's widow.

Mo. Joane Potluck Spinster. Lore me o thing mere
Alouten, what time began she brendle thus?

Mean. On Thursday morning last.

Mo. Y' blessed Thursday,
Ycliped so from Thor the Saxons God.
Ah benedicite I might soothly said,
Mine mouth has itched all this livelong day
All night me met eke, that I was at Kirk;
My heart began quapp full often. Dan Cupido
Sure sent thylke sweven to mine head.

Mean. You shall
Know more if you will walk in.

Exit Meanwel, Mo. Wend you before me,
Cembeth thy self, and pyketh now thy self;
Sleeketh thy self; make cheer much Digne good Robert:
I do arret thou shall acquainted bin
With Nymphs and Fawny, and Hamadryades;
And yeke the sisterne nine Pierides
That were transmued into Birds, nemp'd Pyes,
Metamorphosers, wat well what I mean.
It Is is as Jollie now as fish in Seine.

Exeunt. ACT. II. SCEN. III.
Hearsay, Caster, Shape. Hear. CAn I lie hid no where securely from
The throng, and press of men? must every place
Become a Theater, where I seek shelter?
And solitudes become markets, 'cause I Am there?
Good Sir, I know your tricks: you would entrap;
This is your snare, not your request.

Sha. Take heed,
He Is noised about for a deep searching head:
I Will pawn my life it is a trick.

Hear. Leave off these Ginnes,
You do not do it handsomely; you think
You Have met with fools I warrant.

Sha. On my life
A spy, a mere informer.

Cast. As I hope
For fortunes, my intentions are most fair.

Sha. A Gamesters Oath: he has some reservation.

Hear. Yet did I think you true --

Cast. By all that is good,
You do me wrong to think, that I Would wrong you.

Hear. When I lay Agent last in new Atlantis
I met with what you now desire, a strange
New way of winning, but yet very sure.
Were not the danger great I Would --

Cast. Do you think
I will betray my self, or you, whom I
Esteem above my self? I have as yet
One hundred left; some part of which --

Sha. Faith Sir,
These times require advice; if it should come
Unto the Councels ear once, he might be
Sent into other Kingdoms, to win up
Moneys for the relief of the State, and so
Be as it were an honest kind of Exile.

Cast. If I do ever discover may I want
Money to pay my Ordinary, may I
At my last stake (when there is nothing else
To lose the game) throw Ames Ace thrice together.
I Will give you forty pound in hand --

Hear. I may
Show you the virtue of 't, though not the thing;
I love my Country very well. Your high
And low men are but trifles: your poyz'd Dye
That Is ballasted with Quicksilver or Gold
Is gross to this --

Sha. Profer him more I say.

Cast. Here Is fifty --

Hear. For the bristle Dye it is
Not worth that hand that guides it; toies fit only
For Clerks to win poor Costermongers ware with.

Sha. You do not come on well.

Cast. Here Is threescore --

Hear. Then
Your hollowed thumb joined with your wriggled box,
The slur, and such like are not to be talked of;
They Are open to the eye. For Cards you may
Without the help of any secret word,
Or a false hand, without the cut or shuffle,
Or the packt trick, have what you will your self;
There Is none to contradict you.

Cast. If you please
But to instruct me here is fourscore pound.

Hear. Do y' think it is money I esteem? I can
Command each Term, by Art as much as will
Furnish a Navy. Had you but five pound
Left you in all the world, I Would undertake
Within one fortnight you should see five thousand.
Not that I covet any of your dross,
But that the power of this Art may be
More demonstrably evident, leave in
My hands all but some smaller sum to set,
Something to stake at first.

Sha. He Will tell you all
If you but seem to trust him.

Cast. Here I Will lay
Down in your hands all but this little portion,
Which I reserve for a Foundation.

Hear. Being you are confident of me, and I
Presume your lips are sealed up to silence,
Take that, which I did never yet discover;
So help you Fortune, me Philosophy.
(I must entreat your absence Mr Shape.)
Exit Shape. I do presume you know the strength and power
That lies in Phancie.

Cast. Strange things are done by it.

Hear. It works upon that which is not as yet.
The little Aethiop Infant had not been
Black in his Cradle, had he not been first
Black in the Mothers strong Imagination.
It Is thought the hairie Child that is shown about
Came by the Mothers thinking on the Picture
Of Saint John Baptist in his Camels Coat.
See we not Beasts conceive, as they do fancy
The present colors placed before their Eyes?
We owe pyed Colts unto the varied horsecloth;
And the white Partridge to the neighboring snow.
Fancy can save or kill; it has clos' up
VVounds when the Balsam could not, and without
The aid of salves; to think has been a cure.
For VVitchcraft then, thats's all done by the force
Of mere Imagination. That which can
Alter the course of Nature, I presume
You Will grant shall bear more rule in petty hazzards.

Cast. It must, it must, good Sir I pray go on.

Hea. Now the strong'st fancies still are found to dwell
In the most simple; they being easiest won
To the most firm belief, who understand not
Who it is they do believe. If they think 'twill
Be so, it will be so; they do command,
And check the course of Fortune; they may stop
Thunder, and make it stand, as if arrested,
In its mid journey: If that such a one
Shall think you will win, you must win; it is a due
That nature paies those men in recompense
Of her deficiency, that what ever they think
Shall come to pass. But now the hardest will be
To find out one that is capable of thinking.

Cast. I know you can produce an Instrument
To work this your design by. Let me owe you
The whole and entire courtesy.

Hear. I Have one
Committed to my custody but lately,
The powerfull'st that way, I ever found yet;
He will but think he shall b' abused in such
A Company, and he is abused; he will
Imagine only that he shall be cheated,
And he is cheated: All still comes to pass.
He Is but one pin above a Natural: But --

Cast. We Will purchase him; I Will take up for it; old Simon
Shall have my Farm outright now: what is a piece
Of durty Earth to me? a clod? a turf?

Hear. Because I see your freer nature's such,
As does deserve supplies, I Will do my best
To win him or a while into your service.

Cast. If I should strive to pay you thanks, I should
But undervalue this great courtesy.
Sir, give me leave to think and worship. Stay;
First will I beggar all the Gentlemen
That do keep Terms; then build with what I win.
Next I Will undo all gaming Citizens,
And purchase upon that: the Foreman shall
Want of his wonted opportunities,
Old Thomas shall keep home I warrant him.
I will ascend to the Groom Porters next.
Fly higher Games, and make my mincing Knights
Walk musing in their knotty Freeze abroad;
For they shall have no home. There shall not be
That pleasure that I Will baulk: I Will run o'r Nature;
And when I Have ransacked her, I Will weary Art;
My means I Am sure will reach it. Let me see
'Twill yearly be -- By Heaven I know not what --

Hear. Never think to sum it, it is impossible;
You shall never know what Angels, Pieces, Pounds,
These names of want and beggary mean; your tongue
Shall utter naught but millions: you shall measure,
Not count your moneys; your revenews shall
Be proud and insolent, and unruly;
They shall increase above your conquered spendings
In spite of their excess; your care shall be
Only to tame your riches, and to make them
Grow sober, and obedient to your use.

Cast. I Will send some forty thousand unto Paul's;
Build a Cathedral next in Banbury;
Give Organs to each Parish in the Kingdom;
And so root out the unmusicall Elect.
I Will pay all Soldiers whom their Captains will not;
Raise a new Hospital for those maimed People
That have been hurt in gaming; Then build up
All Colleges, that Ruin has demolished,
Or, interruption left unperfect.

Hear. 'Twil
Never be done I think, unless you do it.
Provide the wealthiest Gamesters, there is but one
Thing that can do us wrong, Discovery.
You have no enemy, but frailty.

Cast. Night
And silence are loud names, compared with me.

Hear. I see the tide of Fortune rolling in
Without resistance. Go, be close, and happy.

Exeunt. ACT. II. SCEN. IV.
Andrew, Meanwell. And. Upon my Conscience now he cheated me;
I could have never lost it else so strangely.

Mean. What is a paltry cloak to a man of worth?
It barred men only of the sight of your body:
Your handsomnesse will now appear the better.

And. He was as like our Mr Shape, as could be;
But that he had a patch upon his Cheek,
And a black beard, I should have sworn 'twere he:
It was some body in his clothes I Am sure.

Mean. Some cunning Cheater upon my life won
His cloak and suit too.

And. There it is for certain.
Pies take him, does he play for cloaks still? Surely
He has a Fly only to win good clothes.

[Enter Sha. Sha. The Pox and Plague take all ill fortune! this
The second time that he has cheated me:
My very best suit that I had!

And. How now?
What lost your cloak, and suit? A jest I vow;
I vow a pretty jest: 'odsnigs I guessed so;
I saw him have it on; it made him look as like you,
As like you -- It Is a Rogue, a mere Decoy.

Sha. A Rogue, a mere Decoy? and yet like me?

And. Nay hold, I mean he is a Rogue, when that
He has his own clothes on. D'y' think that I
Would call him so, when he is in your suit?

Sha. No more of that good Andrew, as you love me
Keep in your wit.

And. Speak Tutor, do I use
To quarrel? speak good Tutor.

Mean. That wit Andrew
Of yours will be the undoing of you, if
You use't no better.

And. Faith I thought I might
Have broke a witty jest upon him, being
I Have lost my cloak.

Mean. True, but he has lost his too:
And then you know that is not lawful wit.

[Enter Hear. Hear. Here Is Mr Credulous, and old Sir Thomas,
They have some business with you.

Mean. Bring 'em in.

Sha My business lies not here Sirs, fare you well.

[Ex. A. For Gods sake don't you tell old Sim on it now.

[Sh. ACT II. SCEN. V.
To them, Sir Thomas Bitefig, Credulous. Mea. GOd save you good Sir Thomas.

Sr Tho. Save you Sir.

Mean. You Are welcome Mr Credulous.

Cred. Come hither;
Whither do you steal now? what? where is your cloak?

And. Going to foiles even now, I put it off.

Mea. To tell you truth he has lost it at Doublets.

Cred. With what a lie you would flap me in the mouth?
Thou have the readiest invention
To put off any thing -- thou had it from
Thy mother I Will be sworn; 'tnere came from me.

Mean. Peace as you love your self; if that the Knight
Should once perceive that he were given to gaming,
'Twould make him break the match off presently.

Cred. Sr Thomas here is my Son; he may be yours,
If you please to accept him.

And. Father don't
Give me away for this: try me once more.

Sr Tho. I like his person well enough, if that
You Will make him an Estate convenient.

Mean. He has more in him Sir than he can show;
He has one fault, he is something covetous.

Sr Tho. Mary a very commendable fault.

Cred. He is descended of no great high blood:
He has a House, although he came of none.
His Grandfather was a good Livery man,
Paid scot and lot, old Timothy Credulous
My Father, though I say it that should not.

Sr Tho. I don't regard this thing, that you call blood:
It Is a mere name, a sound.

Mean. Your Worship speaks
Just like your self; me thinks he is noble,
That Is truly rich: men may talk much of Lines,
Of Arms, of Blood, of Race, of Pedigree,
Houses, Descents, and Families; they are
But empty noise God knows, the idle breath
Of that puff nothing Honor; Formal words,
Fit for the tongues of men that never knew yet
What Stem, what Gentry, nay, what virtue lies
In great Revenues.

Sr Tho. Well and pithy said,
You may work on my Daughter, and prevail,
For that young stripling: It Is a foolish wench,
An unexperienced Girl, she would like to have been
Caught by Sir Robert Littleworths Son, if that
I had not banished him my house: a youth
Honest enough I think, but that he is poor;
Born to more Name than Fortune.

Cred. He is safe
For ever wooing. I have laid his Father
Out of harm's way; there is picking meat for him:
And God knows where he is gone; he has not been
Seen this long while; he is sure turned vagabond;
No sight of him since the Arrest of his Father.
Andrew address your self too good Sir Thomas.

And. 'Slid Father you're the strangest man -- I will not.

Cre. As God shall mend me you are the proudest thing --
Thou can not complement, but in Caparisons.

And. What Is that to you? I Would fain say something yet;
But that I cannot my losses do so vex me.

Cred. Come think not on it my Boy, I Will furnish thee.

And. Sir, though --

Cred. Nay, to it I say; help him Sir, help him.

And. Sir, though without my cloak at this time --
To morrow I shall have one -- give me leave
Barely to say -- I am your servant Sir --
In hose and doublet.

Cred. I Will do what you told me.

Hear. Take heed: if that you do it he will guess you are given
To idle spendings, and so cross the match.
I will invite him as to my self.

Cred. Do so.

Hear. Sir Thomas, if you will please so far to grace us,
As be a guest to morrow here, we shall
Study hereafter to deserve the favor.

Sr Tho. Although I do not use to eat at Ord'naries,
Yet to accept your courtesy, good friends,
I Will break my wonted custom.

Hear. You shall have it
With a free heart.

Sr Tho. If I thought otherwise,
I do assure you, I Would not venture hither.

Exeunt. ACT. III. SCENE I.
Moth. Moth. HArrow alas! I swelt here as I go;
Brenning in fire of little Cupido.
I no where hoart yfeele, but on mine head.
Huh. huh, huh, so; ycapred very well.
I am thine Leeke, thou Chaucer eloquent;
Mine head is white, but o mine tail is green.
This is the Palyes where mine Lady wendeth
Saint Francis, and Saint Benedight,
Bless this house from wicked wight,
From the Nightmare and the Goblin,
That is hight good fellow Robin.
Keep it from all evil Spirits,
Fayries, Weezels, Rats and Ferrets,
From Curfew time
To the next prime.
Come forth mine Duck, mine Bryd, mine honycomb.
Come forth mine Cinnamon.

Enter Mrs Potluck. Pot. Who is it that calls?

Mo. A Knight most Gent.

Pot. What is your pleasure Sir?

Mo. Thou art mine pleasure, by dame Venus brent;
So fresh thou art, and therewith so lycand.

Pot. Alas! I am not any flickering thing:
I cannot boast of that slight-fading gift
You men call beauty; all my handsomnesse
Is my good breeding, and my honesty.
I could plant red, where you now yellow see;
But painting shows an harlot.

Moth. Harlot, so
Called from one Harlotha Concubine
To deignous Wilhelme, hight the Conqueror.

Pot. Were he ten Williams, and ten Conquerors
I Would have him know it, I scorn to be his Harlot.
I never yet did take presse-money to
Serve under any one.

Moth. Then take it now.
Werme kiss! Thine lips ytaste like marrow milk;
Me thinks that fresh butter runs on them.
I grant well now, I do enduren woe,
As sharp as does the Titius in Hell,
Whose stomach fowls do tyren ever more,
That highten Vultures, as do tellen Clerks.

Pot. You Have spoke my meaning, though I do not know
What it is you said. Now see the fortune on it;
We do know one another Souls already;
The other must needs follow. Where Is your dwelling?

Mo. Yclose by Aldersgate there dwells one
Wights clypen Robert Moth; now Aldersgate
Is hotten so from one that Aldrich hight;
Or else of Elders, that is, ancient men;
Or else of Aldern trees which growden there;
Or else as Heralds say, from Aluredus:
But whence so ever this Yate ycalled is
There dwells Robert Moth thine Paramour.

Pot. Can you be constant unto me as I
Can be to you?

Moth. By Woden God of Saxons,
From whence comes Wensday, that is Wodensday,
Truth is a thing that ever I will keep,
Unto thylke in which I creep into
My Sepulcher; I Will be as faithful to thee,
As Chaunticleere to Madam Partelot.

Pot. Here then I give away my heart to you,
As true a heart as ever widow gave.

Moth. I Robert Moth, this tenth of our King
Give to thee Joan Potluck my biggest crumpe Ring*
And with it my Carcass entire I bequeathen
Under my foot to Hell, above my head to heaven:
And to witness that this is sooth,
I bite thy red lip with my tooth.

Pot. Though for a while our bodies now must part,
I hope they will be joined hereafter.

Moth. O!
And must we part? alas, and must we so?
Sin it may be no bet, now gang in peace.
Ex. Potluck Though soft into mine bed I gin to sink
To sleep long as I Am wont to done, yet all
Will be for naught; I may well lig and wink,
But sleep shall there none in this heart ysink.

Exit ACT. III. SCEN. II.
Credulous, and Shape dogging him. Cred. SO now the Morgage is mine own
outright;
I swear by the faith of my Body now
It is a pretty thing, of my corporal Oath
A very pretty thing. Besides the house,
Orchards, and Gardens: some two hundred Acres
Of Land that bears as good Country corn,
For Country corn, as may be.

Shap. As I Would have it.

Cr. How now good friend! where do thou live? do thou
Know Caster's Farm?

Shap. Yes Sir; I fear it is gone:
Sure Caster's Farm is cast away.

Cred. A jest!
Good troth a good one of a Country one;
I see there is wit there too. Then thou do know it.

Shap. I am afraid I shall not know it long;
I shall lose my acquaintance.

Cred. 'Snigs another!
A very perilous head, a dangerous brain.

Sha. God bless my Master, and the Devil take
Some body else.

Cred. Um! that is not quite so good
As the other two; that some body else is me:
(Now you shall see how he will abuse me here
To mine own face) why some Body else good Brother?

Sha. The rich gout rot his bones; an hungry, old,
Hard griping Citizen, that only feeds
On Heyrs and Orphans goods, they say must have it:
One that never had the wisdom to be honest;
And's therefore Knave, 'cause it is the easier Art.
I know he has not given half the worth on it.
It Is a mere cheat.

Cred. 'Slid Brother thou have paid him
To the utmost, though he has not paid thy Master.
Now is my wit up too: this Land I see
Will make men thrive in the brain.

Sha. Would he were here,
Who ever he be, I Would give him somewhat more
Into the bargain: a base thin-jaw'd sneaksbill
Thus to work Gallants out of all. It grieves me
That my poor Tenement too goes into the sale.

Cred. What have I done? now wit deliver me.
If he know I am he, he will cut my throat;
I never shall enjoy it: sure it was
Your Masters seeking friend; he would never else
Have had to do with it; he that bought it is
A very honest man; and if you please him
Will deal with you. I may speak a word
In your behalf: 'twont be the worse for you.

Sha. I Am going Sir unto him; do you know
Where I may find him?

Cred. What if I am he?

Sha. I am afraid he is not half so honest
As you do seem.

Cred. Faith I Am the same; I tried
What metal thou wast made of: I perceive
Thou will not flinch for the wetting; thou may be
My Bailiff there perhaps.

Sha. And 't please your Worship.

Cred. So now the case is altered.

Sha. I do know
It was my Masters seeking, you would never
Have had to do with 't else. He sent me to you
For the last hundred pound, by the same token,
That you invited him to the eating house.

Cred. (O this simplicity! he does not know
Yet what an Ordnary means.) I was now coming
To have paid it in.

Shap. I Will save your Worship that
Labor an't please you: let me now begin
My Bayliffeship.

Cred. 'Snigs wiser yet than so.
Where is thy Master?

Shap. Sir, my Master's here
I thank my stars; but Mr Caster is
At an Horse-race some ten miles off.

Cred. Why then
I Will stay till he returns; 'twill be by dinner.

Sha. Your best way's now to send it; if by chance
The race go on his side, your Worship may
Fail of your purchase.

Cred. 'Snigs and that is considerable.
Here, here, make haste with it; but ever thou go
Tell me, is it a pretty thing?

Sha. OF my corporal Oath,
A very pretty thing: besides the house
Orchards, and Gardens, Some two hundred Acres
Of Land that bears as good Country Corn,
God give you luck on it.

Cred. Right as I did say,
Even word by word. But prithee stay a little;
What Meadow ground's there? Pasture in proportion?

Sha. As you would wish Sir; I Am in haste.

Cred. Nay Bayliffe
But one word more, and I have done; what place
Is there to dry wet linen in?

Sha. O twenty
To hang up clothes, or any thing you please.
Your Worship cannot want line-room. God be wi' you.

Cred. But this once and --

Sha. I must be gone -- The Race.

[Exit Shape. Cred. Little think thee how diligent thou art
To little purpose. 'Snigs I pity him;
What haste he makes to cheat himself! poor fool!
Now I am safe the wretch must pardon me
For his poor Tenement; all is mine. I Will sow
One ground or other every month with Pease:
And so I will have green ones all the year.
These Yeomen have no Policy i'th'world.

Exit. ACT III. SCEN. III
Priscilla, Meanwell. Pris. PRay y' entertain your self a while, until
I give my Mistress notice of your presence.
I Would leave a book with you, but that I see
You are a Gentleman: perhaps you will find
Some pretty stories in the hangings there.

Mean. Thank you sweetheart.

Prisc. (A very proper man)
If It lie in me to do you any pleasure,
Pray you Sir use me, you shall find me ready.

[E. Pr. Me. I make no doubt of that: these Implements,
These chamber Properties are such ripe things,
They Will fall with the least touch. From twelve to twenty
They think that others are to sue to them;
When once they have past these limits, they make bold
I cannot say to woo, that is something modest,
But ask downright themselves.

Ent. Mrs Jane. Jan. Leave us Priscilla,
And wait without awhile.

Mean. Fair Mistres pardon
The boldness of a stranger, who uncivilly
Thus interrupts your better thoughts.

Jan. May I
Demand your business.

Mean. Under favor thus.
Not to use farther circumstance fair Virgin,
(And yet less fair 'cause Virgin) you are one
That are the thought, the care, the aim, the strife,
I should not err if I should say the madness
Of all young men; all sighs, all folded Arms,
All o'r-cast looks, all broken sleeps are owed
Only to you.

Jan. I Am sorry I should be
A trouble unto any: if I could
Afford the remedy as well as now
I do your grief, assure your self that cure
Shall be the birth of my next Action.

Mean. That cure is my request. If that this were
Mine own suit, I had used no circumstance.
Young Master Credulous a proper man
(For sure he shall be rich) one whom the whole
List of our City-Virgins dote on -- you
Conceive the rest I know.

Jan. Alas, what ailes him?
I Will not be slack to do him any good.

Mean. It Is in your power. He is very much
If you will know it -- But sure you will not grant
If I should tell you --

Jan. If you thus presume
That I am hard, you only ask denial:
Your expectations crossed except you fail.

Mean. If you will know it then, he is in love.

Jan. I pity him indeed poor heart: with whom?

Mean. Even with your beauteous self.

Jan. It Is not well done
To scoff one never did injure you.

Mean. I vow
By all that is good, by your fair self, I am
As tender of you as that blessed one is
Who ever he be that loves you most. If I
In any case abuse you, let me be
More miserable than Little-worth.

Jan. Is he become expression? is his Fate
The period of ill wishes? sure he never
Deserved so ill from you.

Mean. I don't reflect
Upon his ruined Fortunes, but your coldness.
And sure I may call him unhappy, whom
You do neglect.

Jan. That man, where ere he be,
Is happier than your self; and were he here,
You should see him received and your self scorned.

Mean. I do not think so Lady; sure you would
Make more of me than so. I Will bring the man,
And so confute you.

Jan. It may be I might
Love you the better something for that Office,
If he might enter here.

Mean. Nay I could tell
You Had cast him off: alas you need not hide it,
I have it from himself.

Jan. Does he think so?
Could I but see him --

Mean. If his sight can bring
But the least joy unto you (as perhaps
You Will take some pleasure in his misery)
You shall enjoy it.

Jan. I do fear you promise
Only to raise my hopes a while, and then
To triumph in their Ruin.

Mean. That you may
See how my breast and tongue agree, I Will leave
This Ring with you till I return again.

Jan. My Littleworth! fool that I was: could I
Not all this while perceive 'twas thee? why did thou
Defer my joy thus long by suffering me
To stand in the Cloud?

Mean. Alas! I ghess'd I Would been
Infectious to thee now; that thou would look
On a disease more mildly than on me:
For Poverty is counted a contagion.

Jan. I call this kiss to witness (which I wish
If I prove false may be the last to me
Which friends pay dying friends) I never will be
Others than thine.

Mean. I like the vow so well,
That the same way I Will seal my promise too.
If I prove not as thou (that is most constant)
May this kiss be, that I may wish it worse,
Than that which is due to departing souls*
The last that I shall take from thee. I am
Sen there, but yet unknown to them that send me,
To be another Spokes-man. The man is
That foolish Son of Mr Credulous:
Thou must pretend some liking* 'twas thy Father
Granted me this access to win thee for him;
Be thou no way averse. 'T shall be my care
So to bring things about, that thou shall be
Mine by consent in spite of misery.

Jan. Be secret, and Love prosper thy design.

Ex. Jan. Mean. Happy that man that meets such faithfulness.
I did not think it had been in the Sex.
I know not now what is misery. Peace: my Fair
[Musick Is hallowing the Lute with her blessed touch.

A Song within.
1.
COme, o come, I brook no stay:
He does not love that can delay*
See how the stealing Night
Has blotted out the Light,
And Tapers do supply the Day.
2.
To be chaste is to be old,
And that foolish Girl that is cold
Is fourscore at fifteen:
Desires do write us green,
And looser flames our youth unfold.


Mean. 'T cannot be her, her voice was never profaned
With such immodest numbers.

3.
See the first Taper's almost gone,
Thy flame like that will straight be none;
And I as it expire
Not able to hold fire.
She loses time that lies alone.
Mean. It Is the breath
Of something troubled with Virginity.

4.
O let us cherish then these Powr's
Whiles we yet may call them ours:
Then we best spend our time,
When no dull zealous Chime,
But sprightfull kisses strike the Hours.
Mean. What do thou mean?

[Enter Priscilla. Pris. Only to please you Sir.

Mean. Sweetest of things was it thou? In Faith I guessed
'Twould be no others melody but yours.
There have been many of your sex much given
Unto this kind of music.

Pris. Sappho was
Excellent at it: but Amphion he
He was the man that out-did all; it is said
Of him, that he could draw stones with the sound
Of his sweet strings. I Would willingly arrive
At some perfection in the Quality.

Mean. I do acknowledge your desires most prone.
This for your trouble.

Pri. I am not mercenary,
Your acceptance is reward enough.

Mean. You have it then.

Pris. Beauty go with you Sir.

[Exeunt several ways. ACT. III. SCEN. IV.
Credulous, Hearsay, Slicer, to them Sir Thomas Bitefig, Haveatall, Caster, as
to the Ordinary. Cred. YOur welcome friends, as I may say --

Hear. You do forget.

Cred. -- That am a guest as well as you.

Slic. Most noble sons of Fortune, and of Valor,
You grace us with your presence: you must pardon
Our small provision.

Hear. No variety here
But you most noble guests, whose gracious looks
Must make a dish or two become a feast.

Have. I Will be as free as 'twere mine own.

Cast. Who thinks
On any thing that borders upon sadness
May he never know what is mirth, but when others
Laugh at his sullen wrinkles.

Have. We will raise
A noise enough to wake an Alderman,
Or a cast Captain, when the reckoning is
About to pay.

Cre. Hang thinking, 'snigs I Will be
As merry as a Pismire; come let us in.

Slic. Let Us march in order military Sirs.

Ha. That Is well remembered most complete Lieutenant

Ex. as to the Ordnary. ACT III. SCEN. V.
Rime-well, Bagshot, Vicar Catchmey, Sir Christopher. Rim. COme my most noble
order of the club.
'Cause none will else, let us make much of our selves.
His letter may procure a Dinner yet.

Bag. Cheer up Sir Kit, thou lookst too spiritually:
see too much of the Tith-pig in thee.

Chapter I Am not so happy: Kit's as hungry now
As a besieged City, and as dry
As a Dutch Commentator. This vile world
Never thinks of Qualities: good truth I think
'T has much to answer for. Thy Poetry
Rimewell, and thy voice Vicar Catchmey, and
Thy Law too Bagshot is contemned: it is pity
Professions should be slighted thus. The day
Will come perhaps, when that the Commonwealth
May need such men as we. There was a time
When Cobblers were made Churchmen, and those black'd
Smutch'd Creatures thrust into white Surplisses,
Looked like so many Magpies, and did speak
Just as they, by rote. But now the Land
Surfets forsooth. Poor Laborers in Divinity
Cannot earn their groat a day, unless it be
Reading of the Christian burial for the dead:
When they even for that reason truly thank
God for thus taking this their Brother to him.

Catch. Something profane Sir Christopher.

Chri. When I
Level my larger thoughts unto the Basis
Of thy deep shallowness, am I profane?
Henceforth I Will speak, or rather not speak, for
I will speak darkly.

Catch. There Is one comfort then
You will be brief.

Chri. My briefness is prolix;
Thy mind is bodily, thy soul corporeal;
And all thy subtle faculties are not subtle,
Thy subtilty is dullness. I am strong.
I will not be conceived by such Mechanics.

Rhyme. I do conceive you though Sir Christopher,
My Muse does sometimes take the selfsame flight.

Chri. Pauci, pauci ques aequus amavit.
But Quadragessimall wits, and fancies lean
As ember weeks (which therefore I call lean,
Because they are fat) these I do doom unto
A knowing ignorance; he that is conceived
By such is not conceived; sense is nonsense
If understood by them. I Am strong again.

Rhyme. You err most Orthodoxly sweet Sir Kit.

Chri. I love that though I hate it: and I have
A kind of disagreeing consent to it.
I Am strong, I Am strong again. Let Us keep these two
In desperate hope of understanding us.
Ridles, and Clouds are very lights of speech:
I Will veil my careless anxious thoughts, as 'twere
In a perspicuous cloud, that I may
Whisper in a loud voice, and even be filent
When I do utter words; words did I call them?
My words shall be no words, my voice no voice;
My noise no noise, my very language silence.
I Am strong, I Am strong: good Sir you understand not.

Bag. Nor do desire; it is merely froth, and barme,
The yest that makes your thin small Sermons work.

Chri. Thou hold'st thy peace most vocally. Again.

Catch. I hate this Bilke.

Chri. Thou love 'cause thou do hate.
Thy injuries are Courtesies. Strong again.

Cat. Good Sampson use not this your Asses jaw bone.

Chri. Thou'st got my love by losing it; that earnest
Jest has regained my soul. Sampson was strong;
He killed a thousand with an Asses-jawbone.
Ent. a Serve. as passing by And so will I. 'st, 'st -- good friend d'y'hear?
Here is a letter friend to Mr Meanwell.

Bag. Any Reversions yet? nothing transmiss'd?

Rhyme. No gleanings James? no Trencher Analects?

Ser. Parley a little with your stomachs Sirs.

Catch. There Is nothing so ridiculous as the hungry:
A fasting man is a good jest at any time.

Ser. There is a Gentleman without, that willed me
To ask if you will admit of him among you,
He cannot endure to be in good company.

Catc. You Are merry James; yes by all means good James;
Admit quoth he? what else? pray y'send him in.
[Ex. Se. Let Us be resolved to fail out, now then he
Shall have the glory to compose the Quarrel,
By a good dozen of pacificall Beer.

Rhyme. Bag. Agreed, agreed.

Chri. My Coat allows no Quarrel.

Rhyme. The Color bears't if you will venture the stuff,
The tenderness of it I do confess
Some what denies a grapling.

Chri. I will try,
Perhaps my Spirit will suggest some anger.

[Ent. And. An. Save you boon sparks: will it please you to admit me?

Chri. Your Worship graceth us in condescending
To level thus your presence humble Sir.

And. What may I call your name most reverend Sir?

Bag. His name's Sir Kit.

Chri. My name is not so short,
It Is a trissyliable, an't please your Worship:
But vulgar tongues have made bold to profane it
With the short sound of that unhallowed Idol
They call a Kit. Boy learn more reverence.

Bag. Yes, to my Betters.

And. Nay friends, do not quarrel.

Chri. It is the holy cause, and I must quarrel.
Thou Son of Parchment, got between the Standish
And the stiff Buckram bag: thou that may call
The Pen thy Father, and the ink thy Mother,
The sand thy Brother, and the wax thy Sister,
And the good Pillory thy Cousen removed,
I say learn reverence to thy Betters.

Bag. Set up an hour-glasse; he will go on until
The last sand make his Period.

Chri. It Is my custom,
I do approve the Calumny: the words
I do acknowledge, but not the disgrace.
Thou vile ingrosser of unchristian deeds.

Bag. Good Israel Inspiration hold your tongue;
It makes far better Music, when you Nose
Sternolds, or Wisdoms Meeter.

Catch. By your leave
You fall on me now Brother.

Rim. It Is my cause,
You are too forward Brother Catchm.

Catch. I
Too forward?

Rim. Yes I say you are too forward
By the length of your London measure Beard.

Catch. Thou never could entreat that respite yet
Of thy dishonesty as to get one hair
To testify thy Age.

Bag. I Am beardlesse too;
I hope you think not so of me?

Chri. Yes verily,
Not one hairs difference 'twixt you both.

Rim. Thou violent Cushion-thumper, hold thy tongue,
The Furies dwell in it.

Catch. Peace good Sir Kit.

Chri. Sir Kit again? Thou art a Lopez; when
One of thy legs rots off (which will be shortly)
Thou Wilt bear about a Quire of wicked Paper,
Defiled with sanctified Rithmes,
And Idols in the frontisepiece: that I
May speak to thy capacity, thou wilt be
A Balladmonger.

Catch. I shall live to see thee
Stand in a Playhouse door with thy long box,
Thy half-crown Library, and cry small Books.
By a good godly Sermon Gentlemen --
A judgment shown upon a Knot of Drunkards --
A pill to purge out Popery -- The life
And death of Katherin Stubs --

Chri. Thou will visit windows;
Me thinks I hear thee with thy begging tone
About the break of day waking the Brethren
Out of their morning Revelations.

And. Brave sport In Faith.

Rhyme. Pray y'good Sir reconcile them.
If that some Justice be in the Ordinary now
He Will bind them to the peace for troubling him.

Bag. Why should he not good Sir, it is his office,

An. Now it is of this side; o for a pair of Cudgels!

Rhyme. Peace Inkhorn, there is no music in thy tongue.

Catc. Thou and thy Rhyme lie both; the tongue of man
Is born to music naturally.

Rhyme. Thou thing,
Thy belly looks like to some strutting hill,
O'r shadowed with thy rough beard like a wood.

Chri. Or like a larger Jug, that some men call
A Bellarmine, but we a Conscience;
Whereon the lewder hand of Pagan workman
Over the proud ambitious head has carved
An Idol large with beard Episcopal,
Making the Vessel look like Tyrant Eglon.

Catch. Profane again Sir Christopher I take it.

Chri. Must I be strong again? thou humane beast,
Who'rt only eloquent when thou say nothing,
And appear'st handsome while thou hid'st thy self,
I Am holy 'cause profane.

And. Courageous Raskals,
Brave Spirits, Soldiers in their days I warrant.

Bag. Born in the field I do assure your Worship:
This Quarrelling is meant and drink to them.

Rhyme. Thou lie. Bag. Nay then I do defy thee thus.

[ Ba. draws his Inkhorn and Ri. catches off Sr Chr. hat and spectacles.]
Rhyme. And thus I am prepared to answer thee.

Chapter For the good Sts. sake part them; I am blind,
If that my Spectacles should once miscarry.

Rhyme. Caytiff, this holy instrument shall quail thee.

Bag. And this shall send thee to thy cousen furies.

Chri. I feel a film come o'r mine eyes already,
I must look out an Animal conductive,
I mean a Dog.

And. Pray y'beat not out his eyes in
Another hands.

Chri. Most strongly urged.

Catch. Your words
Are merely wind. James ho! what James! some beer.
They Are mastive Dogs, they will not be parted Sir,
Without good store of Liquor.

[Ent. Serve. with beer. And. I will souce them.

Ser. Drink to 'em Sir, if that you will have 'em quiet.

An. Is that the way? here is to you my friends; a whole one.

Ba. Were It not for that good Gentleman thou would smoke for it.

Ri. Had I not vowed some reverence to his presence.
Thou had been nothing.

Bag. Before Mars I was dry:
This valor's thirsty: fill to my Antagonist.

Rhyme. No, mine own dish will serve: I Am singular.
Few vessels still do well; I carry this
To drink my beer, while others drink their sack.
I am abstemious Rimewel: I hate wine
Since I spoke treason last in the Celler. Here
Give me thy hand, thou child of fervency.
Did thou mistrust thy spectacles?
It was no anger, 'twas a Rapture merely.

Chris. Drink, and excuse it after. James your help.
Come Man of voice keep time while that I drink.
This moisture shall dry up all injuries,
Which I Will remember only to forget;
And so hereafter, which I Am wont to call
The future now, I Will love thee stubbornly.
Your beer is like my words, strong, stinging gear.

Catch. Here little Lawyer, let us be friends hereafter;
I love this reconcilement with my heart.

And. It Is the best deed that ever I did: O my conscience
I shall make a good Justice of the Peace,
There had been bloodshed, if I had not stickled.

Ser. More blood been spilt I warrant than beer now.

And. That Inkhorn is a deadly dangerous weapon:
It has undone one quarter of the Kingdom.

Chris. Men should forgive; but thou art far, yea far
From it O Bagshot; you are in love with hate;
Bless me! I see the Fiend still in his looks;
He is not reconcilable with drink;
He Will never love truly, till he eat with me.
The nature of his Spirit asks meat:
He has a Woolf in's breast; food must appease him.

And. Cold meat will do it, will it not?

Rim. Any thing --
That may employ the teeth.

And. Go James provide;
You are not merry yet.

Catch. To satisfy you
In that point, we will sing a Song of his.

And. Let Us have it; I love these Ballads hugeously.

The Song.

1. Catch. THen our Music is in prime,
When our teeth keep triple time;
Hungry Notes are fit for Knels:
May lankenes be
No Quest to me.
The Bagpipe sounds, when that it swells.
Chor. May lankenes, etc.

2. Bagsh. A Mooting Night brings wholesome smiles,
When John an Oaks, and John a Styles,
Do greaze the Lawyers Satin.
A Reading-Day
Frights French away,
The Benchers dare speak Latin.
Chor. A Reading, etc.

3. Rim. He that is full does Verse compose;
Hunger deals in sullen Prose:
Take notice and discard her.
The empty Spit
Never cherished Wit.
Minerva loves the Larder.
Chor. The empty Spit, etc.

4. Chr. First to break Fast, then to dine,
Is to conquer Bellarmine:
Distinctions then are budding.
Old Sutcliffs Wit
Did never hit,
But after his Bag-pudding.
Chor. Old Sutcliffs Wit, etc.

And. Most admirable; a good eating Song.

Chri. Let us walk in, and practice it; my Bowels
Yern till I am in charity with all.

And. A Christian resolution good Sr Christopher.

Ex. ACT. III. SCEN. VI.
Meanwell with a letter in his hand, Hearsay, Slicer. Mea. SWeet Sir I am most
passionately yours,
[Mean. reads. To serve you all the ways I can. Priscilla.
Very well Penned of a young Chambermaid,
I do conceive your meaning sweet Priscilla:
You see I have the happy fortune on it;
A night for nothing, and entreated too.

Slic. Thou do not know how I do love thee; let me
Make use of this, thou wilt have the like occasion.

Hea. Thou art the fawningst fellow Slicer -- Meanwel Hark here.

Mean. For Gods sake be contented Sirs;
I Am flesh and blood as well as you. Lieutenant,
Think on your Suburb Beauties; sweet Intelligencer,
I will by no means bar you of your Lady.
Your sin I assure you will be honorable.

[Exit Mean. Slic. Pox o'your liquorous lips; if that she don't
After this sealing forty weeks deliver
Something unto thee as thy act and deed,
Say I cannot Prophecy.

Hear. If I don't serve him
A trick he thinks not of --

Slic. Did mark how he
Did apply himself to the Knight all dinner?
I am afraid he plays the cunning Factor,
And in another name woes for himself.

Hear. Let it go on; let it work something farther
It Is almost ripe enough to crush; he has not
Crept high enough as yet to be sensible
Of any fall.

Slic. Now is the time or never.
This night you know he and his Doxie meet;
Let me alone to give them their goodmorrow.
If that we carry things but one week longer
Without discovery, farewell London then;
The world's our own. He never deserves to thrive
That does not venture for it. Wealth's then sweet
When bought with hazard. Fate this Law has set;
The fool inherits, but the wise must get.

ACT. IV. SCEN. I.
Credulous, Hearsay, Slicer. Cred. MY Name's not Tribulation,
Nor holy Ananias:
I was baptized in fashion,
Our Vicar did hold Bias.

Hear. What, how now Mr Credulous? so merry?

Cred. Come let us be mad; by yea and nay my Son
Shall have the Turkish Monarchy; he shall
Have it directly: the twelve Companies
Shall be his Kickshaws.

Hear. Bashaws Sir you mean.

Cred. Well Sir, what if I do? Andrew the great Turk!
I would I were a pepper corn if that
It sounds not well: do not?

Slic. Yes, very well.

Cred. I Will make it elle: Great Andrew Mahomet,
Imperious Andrew Mahomet Credulous,
Tell me which name sounds best.

Hear. That Is as you speak 'em.

Cred. Oatemeleman Andrew, Andrew Oatmeleman.

Hear. Ottoman Sir you mean.

Cred. Yes Ottoman.
Then Mrs Jane, Sir Thomas Bitefiggs Daughter,
That may be the she Great Turk, if she please me.

Sli. The Sign of the half Moon that hangs at your door,
Is not for naught.

Cred. That Is the Turks Arms they say;
The Empire's destined to our house directly.
Hang Shop-books, give's some Wine, hay for a noise
Of Fiddlers now.

Hear. The Great Turk loves no Music.

Cred. Does he not so? nor I. I Will light Tobacco
With my Sum-totals; my Debt-books shall sole
Pyes at young Andrew's Wedding: cry you mercy;
I would say Gentlemen the Great Turks Wedding.
My Deeds shall be sliced out in Tailors Measures;
They all employed in making Mrs Mahomet
New Gowns against the time; hang durty wealth.

Sl. What should the Great Turks father do with wealth?

Cred. 'Snigs I would fain now hear
Some fighting News.

[Ent. Cast. Slic. There Is one will furnish you I warrant you.

Cast. Pox! -- Plague! -- Hell! -- Death! --
Damned luck! -- this it is! --
The Devil take all Fortunes: never man
Came off so* quite and clean defunct by Heaven --
Not a piece left.

Cred. What all your Ord'nance lost?

Cast. But one to bear, and lose it! all the world
Was sure against me.

Cred. 'Snigs how many fell?

Cast. He threw twice twelve.

Cred. By'r Lady a shrewd many.

Cast. The Devil sure was in his hand I think.

Cred. Nay, if the Devil was against you, then --

Cast. But one for to be hit in all the time --
And that too safe enough to any ones thinking;
'T stood on eleven.

Cred. 'Slid a mighty slaughter;
But did he stand upon elev'n at once?

Cast. The Plague take all impertinencies, peace.

Cred. These Soldiers are so choleric there is
No dealing with 'em; then they have lost the day.

Cast. 'Twas ten to one by Heaven all the while.

Cred. And yet all killed at last? hard fortune faith.
What news from Bruxels? or the Hague? d' y' hear
Ought of the Turks designs?

Cast. I Will make thee news
For the Coranti Dotard.

Cred. Ay, the Coranti,
What does that say?

Cast. O hell! thou foolish thing
Keep in that tongue of thine, or --

Slic. Good now peace,
He Is very furious when he is moved.

Hear. This 'twas.
You must be ventring without your Fancy-man.

Cred. What Officer's that Fancy-man, Lieutenant?
Some great Commander sure.

Cast. Pox! let it go;
I Will win't again: 'twas but the Relics of
An idle hundred.

Cred. 'Snigs and well remembered.
You did receive the hundred that I sent you
To the Race this morning by your man, my Bayliffe?

Cast. Take him away, his wine speaks in him now.

Cred. Godsnigs the Farm is mine, and must be so.

Slic. Debate these things another time, good friends.
Enter Haveatall. Come, come, have Patience. Od's my life away.
There Is Mr Haveatall is mad; he will spit you,
If he but know you are a Usurer.

Cre. A plot, a plot to take away my life and Farm.

[Ex. Have. Fight as I live with any one. Lieutenant
Do not come near me now, nor yet thou Caster;
It works, before Mars it works; I Will take my walk,
And if I do find any one by Jove --

En. Haveatall. Cast. What Is he fox'd too? some drunken Planet raigns
And works upon the world; Provide my fancy
God Noble Patron: I Will win soberly,
I itch till I have beggard all the City.

Exit Cast. Hea. Till that you have undone your self you mean. En.

Mo. Ey save you both: for derne love sayen soothly Mo.
Where is thylk amebly, Francklin, cleped Meanwel?

Hear. He Is gone abroad.

Mo. Lere me whylk way he wended.

Slic. He is gone o'r the fields.

Hear. To the Knights house.

Mo. Why laugh you every dele? so mote I gone,
This goes not aright; I dread some Covin.

Exit Moth Slic. Now will he meet with Haveatall; there'll be
A Combat worthy Chronicle. Let Us go
And see how this grave motion will bestir him.

Exeunt. ACT IV. SCEN. II.
Haveatall, after a while Moth, Slicer and Hearsay watching. Ha. What, no man
yet march by? who ever comes next
I Will give him onerap more for making me
Stay here so long.
Enter Moth. So so here h'is; how shall
I do to know where he be a Gentleman,
Or Yeoman or Serving-man? I think
I Would best suppose him all, and beat him through
Every degree, and so I shall not wrong him.
What? who goes there?

Moth. Waes heal thou gentle Knight.

Have. Waes heal thou gentle Knight? speak what art thou?
Speak quickly do: Villain know thou not me?

Moth Now by my troath I know not your Name;
Whider I shall call you my Lord Dan John,
Or Dan Thomas, or Dan Robert, or Dan Albon:
I vow to God thou have a full fair chine;
Upon my faith art some Officer.

Have. Have you the pox Sir? speak.

Moth. No.

Have. No? nor yet
An ach in your Bones!

Moth. No.

Have. No? why then you are
No Gentleman; Lieutenant Slicer says so.
This cudgel then serves turn.

Moth. You will not foyn?

Have. I will not foyn, but I will beat you Sir.

Moth. Why intermete of what thou have to done;
So leteth me alone, 't shall be thy best.

Have. I fancied you a beating; you must have it.
You shall not say but I will show you favor.
Choose where you will be hacked with my sword,
Or bruised by my Batton.

Moth. Dre not thy true,
And paynant Morglay out of Shete. Lo thus
Eftsoons Sir Knight, I greet thee lowting low.

Have. Done lower yet.

Moth. Rueth on my gray hairs.

Have. Yet lower: so, then thus I do bestride thee.

Moth. Tubal the son of Lamech did yfind
Music by knocking Hammers upon Anviles;
Let go thine blows, thylke Art is no complete.

Have. Do thou make me a Smith thou Rogue? a Tubal?

Moth. Harrow alas! flet England, flet England:
Dead is Edmond.

Have. Take that for history.
O brave Lieutenant now thy dinner works.

Mo. I nis not Edmond Ironside God wot.

Ha. More provocation yet? I Will seal thy lips.

Mo. A twenty Devil way! So did the Saxon
Upon thylke plain of Sarum, done to death
By treachery, the Lords of merry England
Nem esur Saxes.

Have. Villain do abuse me
In unbaptized language? do not answer;
[Moth entreats by signs. If that thou do, by Jove I Will strangle thee.
Do you make mouths you Rascal thus at me?
You're at dumb Service now: why, this is more
Unsufferable than your old patched gibberish;
This silence is abuse. I Will send thee to
The Place of it, where thou shall meet with Oswald,
Vortigern, Harold, Hengist, Horsey, Knute,
Alared, Edgar, and Cunobeline.
[Slic. Hear. step in. Thus, thus I sheath my Sword.

Slic. Redoubled Knight
Enough, it is thy foe does vanquished lie
Now at thy mercy, mercy notwithstand,
For he is one the truest Knight alive,
Though conquered now he lie on lowly ground.

Ha. Thou ow'st thy life to my Lieutenant, Caitife.
Breath and be thankful.

Mo. I reche not thine yeft;
Maugre thine head, algate I suffer none,
I am-thine lefe, thine dear, mine Potluck Jone.

Exeunt. ACT. IV. SCEN. III.
Andrew, Priscilla. And. FAirest of things -- tralucent creature -- Hang me
If I do know what is next.

Pris. This meant to me?

And. Fairest of things -- tralucent creature -- rather
Obscured Deity -- It Is gone again.
Lady will you eat a piece of Gingerbread?

Pris. You might have better manners than to scoff
One of my breeding.

An. Hark; indad I love you.

Pris. Alas!

An. I vow I burn in love, as does
A penny Faggot.

Pris. Hey ho!

An. And I shall
Blaze out Sir reverence if ye do not quench me.

Pris. Indeed now?

An. Though I say it that should not say it,
I am affected toward you strangely.

Pris. Now who'd have thought it?

An. There Is a thing each night
Comes to my Bedshead and cries Matrimony,
Matrimony Andrew.

Pris. God forbid.

An. It is
Some Spirit that would join us.

Pri. Goodly, goodly.

An. Then do I shake all over.

Pris. Does it so?

An. Then shake again.

Pris. I pray you now.

and. Then cry
(...) of things -- tralucent creature -- rather
Obscured Deity, sweet Mrs Jane,
I come I come.

Prisc. Sweet Sir you are deceived:
I Am but her woeman; here she comes her self.

[En. Mrs Ja. And. Now as my Father says, I would I were
A Cucumber if I know what to do.

Jan. Why how now Pris? who is that that uses you
So lovingly?

And. Fairest of things -- it is one
Tralucent Creature -- it is -- Ay that it is
One --

Pris. That would willingly run out of doors,
If that he had but Law enough.

And. I say --

Jan. Nay ben't afraid: here is none shall do you harm.

An. It Is one that brought his Pigs to the wrong market.
You keep your woman here so fine, that I
Had like to have made a proper business on it
Before I was aware. If any thing
Do prove amiss, indeed-law you shall be
The Father on it. But know tralucent Creature
I am come off entire, and now am yours
Whole, Andrew Creaulous, your servants servant.

Jan. Methinks you contradict your self: how can you
Be wholly mine, and yet my servants servant?

And. I do but complement in that (I see
Downright's the best way here) if thou can love
I can love too. Law thee there now. I Am rich.

Jan. I use not to look after riches; it is
The person that I aim at.

And. That is me;
I Am proper, handsome fair, clean-limb'd: I Am rich.

Jan. I must have one that can direct and guide me;
A Guardian rather than a Husband; for
I Am foolish yet.

An. Now see the luck on it Lady
So am I too In Faith.

Jan. And who ever has me
Will find me to be one of those things which
His care must first reform.

An. Do not doubt that;
I have a head for Reformation:
This noddle here shall do it. I am rich.

Jane. Riches create no love; I fear you mean
To take me for formality only,
As some staid piece of housholdstuff perhaps
Fit to be seen among other ornaments:
Or at the best I shall be counted but
A name of dignity; not entertained
For love but State; one of your train, a thing
Took to wipe off suspicion from some fairer
To whom you have vowed Homage.

An. Do not think
I Have any Plots or Projects in my Head,
I will do any thing for thee that thou
Can name or think on.

Pris. Pray you try him Mistress,
By my Virginity I think he will flinch.

And. By my Virginity (which is as good
As yours I Am sure) by my Virginity
If that we men have any such thing (as
We men have such a thing) I do believe
I will not flinch. Alas! you don't know Andrew.

Jan. Can you obtain but so much respite from
Your other Soverains service, as to keep
Your Eye from gazing on her for a while?

An. If I do look on any woman, nay,
If I do cast a sheeps eye upon any
But your sweet self, may I lose one of mine:
Marry I Will keep the other howsoe'r.

Jane. I know not how I may believe you; you will
Swear you never cast a glance on any, when
Your eye has baited at each face you met.

An. Blind me good now: being you mistrust, I will
Be blinded with this handkercheife; you shall
See that I love you now. So, let me have
But any reasonable thing to lead me home,
I do not care though 't be a Dog, so that
He knows the way, or has the wit to enquire it.

Jane. That care Sir shall be mine.

[Ex. Jane, and Pris. An. I doubt not, but
I shall be in the Chronicle for this,
Or in a Balled else. This handkercheif
Shall be hung up in the Parish Church instead
Of a great silken flag to fan my grave:
With my Arms in it, portrayed in good blew thread
With this word underneath: This, this was he
That shut his eyes because he would not see.
Hold who comes there?

[Ent. Mean. Shape. Mean. One Sir to lead you home.

An. Who? Tutor Meanwell?

Sha. Yes I do commit you
Shape counterfeits Mrs Janes voice. Unto your trusty friend, If you perform
This vow we may --

An. I Will say your sentence out,
Be man and wife.

Sha. If you will do something else
That I Will propose.

An. Pray make your own conditions.

Sha. You Will promise me you will not be jealous of me?

An. Do what you will I Will trust you.

Sha. never hire
Any to tempt me?

An. By this light (I would say
By this darkness) I never will.

Sha. Nor mark
On whom I laugh? --

An. No.

Sha. Nor suspect My smiles,
My nods, my winks? --

An. No, no.

Sha. Nor yet keep count
From any Gallants visit?

An. I Will never reckon;
You shall do what you will.

Sha. You Will never set
Great Chests and Forms against my Chamber Door,
Nor pin my smock unto your shirt a nights,
For fear I should slip from you ere you wake?

An. As I do hope for Day I will not.

Sha. Give me
Some small pledge from you to assure your love;
If that you yet prove false, I may have something
To witness your inconstancy. I Will take
This little Ruby: this small blushing stone
From your fair finger.

An. Take it Sweet: there is
A Diamond in my Bandstring, if you have
A mind to that I pray make use often too.

Sha. In troth a stone of luster, I assure you
It darts a pretty light, a veget spark;
It seems an Eye upon your Breast.

An. Nay take it,
For loves sake take it then; leave nothing that
Looks like an Eye about me.

Sha. My good Andrew,
'Cause of thy resolution, I Will perform
This office for thee. Take my word for it, this
Shall never betray thee.

Ex. Shape. An. Farewell honest Jany,
I cannot see to thank thee my sweet Jany.
Tutor, your hand good Tutor, lead me wisely.

Mea. Take comfort man; I have good news for thee:
Thine eyes shall be thine own before next morning.

Exeunt. ACT IV. SCEN. IV.
Shape, Surgeon, Mercer. Sha. He Is a good friend of mine, and I presume
Upon your secrecy.

Chi. O Sir -- the Deed
By which it came was not more close. D'y'think
I would undo me self by twitting? 'twere
To bring the Gallants all about mine Ears,
And make me mine own Patient. I Am faithful,
And secret, though a Barber.

Sha. Nay, but hear me;
He Is very modest: 'twas his first attempt
Procured him this infirmity; he will
Be bashful I am sure, and will not be known
Of any such thing at the first; you must
Be sure to put him to it.

Chi. Let me alone,
He knows not yet the world I do perceive.
It is as common now with Gentlemen,
As it is to follow fashion; only here
Lies the difference, that they keep in this
A little longer. I shall have so much
Upon your word Sir?

Sha. If you do perform
The cure by that time (twenty pieces Sir.)
You are content?

Mer. Yes Sir.

Chi. It shall be done
Ex. Shape. According to your own prescription.
Sit down I pray you Sir, this Gentleman
Is a good friend of yours.

Mer. Indeed he is
A very honest man as any one
Can wish to deal with verily.

Chi. Beleeve't
He loves you very well.

Mer. I am most ready
To do him any service truly; pray you
Good Brother don't delay me, I Am in haste.

Chi. Indeed, and truly, verily good Brother;
How could these milk-sop words ever get him company
That could procure the Pox? where do you feel
You grief most trouble you?

Mer. I Am very well.
What mean you Brother?

Chi. Nay, be not so modest;
It Is no such heinous fault, as that you should
Seek thus to hide it: mere ill fortune only --

Mer. Surely you do forget your self.

Chi. Come, come,
He told me you would be shamefaced; you must be
Wary hereafter.

Mer. (I do perceive
He is a little mad indeed; the Gentleman
Told me so much just as I came along)
Yes, yes, I Will be wary, I Will take heed,
Come pray y' dispatch me.

Chi. So, I like you now.
It is the custom of most Gentlemen
Not to confess until they feel their bones
Begin to admonish 'em.

Mer. You are in the right:
Good friend make haste; I Have very urgent business.

Chi. Not rashly neither; Is your Gristle sound?
Me thinks it is very firm as yet to the touch.
You fear no danger there as yet Sir, do you?

Mer. No, I Will assure you. (He must have his humor;
I see he is not to be crossed.)

Chi. When did you
Feel the first grudging on it? it is not broke out
In any place?

Mer. No, no: I pray y' dispatch me.

Chi. These things desire deliberation;
Care is required.

Mer. Good Brother go t'your Chest.

Chi. How can I know what Medicines to apply,
If that you tell me not where lies your grief?

Mer. Nay good now let me go.

Chi. I must not Sir,
Nor will not truly: trust me you will wish
You had confessed and suffered me in time,
When you shall come to dry burnt Racks of Mutton,
The Siren, and the Tub.

Mer. So now enough;
Pray fetch me what you promised.

Chi. Are you wild,
Or mad? I do protest I never did meet
A Gentleman of such perverseness yet.
I find you just as I was told you should.

Mer. I lose the taking, by my swear, of taking
As much, whiles that I am receiving this.

Chi. I will not hinder you, if that you do
Prefer your gain before your health.

Mer. Well then
I pray you tell it out; we Tradesmen are not
Masters of our own time.

Chi. What would you have?

Mer. What would I have? as if you did not know;
Come come leave jesting now at last good Brother.

Chi. I am in earnest Sir.

Mer. Why, I would have
My money Sir, the twenty pieces that
The Gentleman did give you order now
To pay me for the Velvet, that he bought
This morning of me.

Chi. O! the Gentleman --

Mer. You should not make a laughing stock good Brother
Of one that wrongs you not; I do profess
I will not be fubb'd ensure your self.

Chi. The Gentleman!
Oh! oh! the Gentleman! is this the cure
I should perform? truly I dare not venture
Upon such de sperate Maladies.

Mer. You are
But merrily disposed?

Chi. Indeed they are
Too high for my small Quality; verily
Perhaps good Brother you might perish under
Mine hands truly; I do profess I am not
Any of your bold Mountebanks in this.

Mer. You're still disposed --

Chi. To laugh at you good Brother.
Gulled by my swear, by my swear gulled; he told me
You had a small infirmity upon you,
A grief of youth, or two; and that I should
Have twenty pieces for the cure. He asked you
If that you were content, you answered yes.
I was in hope I Would gained a Patient more;
Your best way is to make haste after him.

Mer. Now could I beat my self for a wise fool
That I was, thus to trust him.

Exit. Chi. B'w'y' Brother.
Before God a good one. O! the Gentleman.

Ex laughing. ACT. IV. SCEN. V.
Rimewell, Bagshot, Catchmey, Sir Christopher; A Song at a window;
congratulating (as they think) Mr Meanwels Marriage. 1
Whiles early light springs from the skies,
A fairer from your Bride does rise;
A brighter Day does thence appear,
And make a second morning there:
Her blush does shed
All o'r the bed,
Clean shamefaced beams
That spread in streams,
And purple round the modest air.
2
I will not tell what shreeks, and cries,
What Angry Dishes, and what ties,
What pretty oaths then newly born
The listening Taper heard there sworn:
Whiles froward she
Most peevishly
Did yielding fight
To keep o'r night
What she would have profer'd you ere morn.
3
Fair, we know, maids do refuse
To grant what they do come to lose.
Intend a Conquest you that wed;
They would be chastely ravished.
Not any kiss
From Mrs Pris,
If that you do
Persuade and woe.
Know pleasure's by extorting fed.
4
O may her arms wax black and blew
Only by hard encircling you:
May she round about you twine
Like the easy twisting Vine;
And whiles you sip
From her full lip
Pleasures as new
As morning Dew,
Let those soft Ties your hearts combine.
Sing. God give you joy Mr Meanwell. God give your Worship good morrow.

Rim. Come let us be going.

Chr. Hold, a blow I Will have,
One jerk at the times, wrapped in a benediction
Of The Spouses teeming, and I Will go with you.

A Song.
NOw thou our future Brother,
That shall make this Spouse a Mother,
Spring up, and Dod's blessing on it.
Show thy little sorrel Pate
And prove regenerate
Before thou be brought to the Font.
May the Parish Surplice be
Cut in pieces quite for thee,
To wrap thy soft body about;
So 'twill better service do
Reformed thus into
The state of an Orthodox Clout.
When thou shall leave the Cradle,
And shall begin to waddle,
And trudge in thy little Apron;
May thou conceive a grace
Of half an hours space,
And rejoice in thy Friday Capon.
For an error that is the Flocks
Name Mr Paul, but urge St Knoxe;
And at every reformed Dinner,
Let cheese come in, and preaching,
And by that third Course teaching,
Confirm an unsatisfi'd Sinner.
Thence grow up to hate a Ring,
And defy an offering:
And learn to sing what others say.
Let Christ-tide be thy fast,
And lent thy good repast:
And regard not an Holy day.


Enter Constable and Assistants. Con. Lay hold on them; lay hold on them I say:
I Will hamper them.

Cat. Hell take your headlong zeal;
You must be jerking at the times forsooth.
I am afraid the times will escape, and we
The men of them shall suffer now the scourge.

Con. Let none escape.

Chri. 'Twas godliness verily:
It was a Hymn I warbled.

Con. Thou do lie,
It was no Hymn, it was a Song. Is this
Your filthy Rendevow? you shall be taught
Another tune.

Chr. I do beseech you show
Merciful cruelty, and as 'twere a kind
Of pitiful hard heartedness. I Am strong.

They bring in Andrew, and Priscilla. Con. I Am glad you told me so, I will
provide
Your Ward accordingly. Drag 'em out both.

An. Let me but send to the Ordinary.

Pri. You shall not,
The Ordinary has sent to you: No Bail,
I will take none. I Will suffer no such sneaks
As you, to offend this way. It does belong
T'your Betters Sir.

An. Here Is a sufficient Man
I do assure you, take my word for that.

Con. This staff was made to knock down sin. I Will look
There shall be no Advowtry in my Ward
But what is honest. I Will see Justice done
As long as I Am in office. Come along.

Exeunt. ACT. V. SCENE I.
Sir Thomas Bitefig as sick, Jane. Sr Tho. NOw that I have made even Girl, with
Heaven.
Though I am past the worst, and I perceive
My dinner only grieved me, yet 'cause Life's
Frail, and uncertain, let me counsel thee,
It Is good to be before hand still. First then
I charge thee lend no money; next serve God;
If ever thou have Children teach 'em thrift;
They Will learn Religion fast enough themselves.
Nay, do not weep but hearken. When Heaven shall
Please to call in this Weary Soul of mine,
Ben't idle in expense about my Burial;

Buy me a shroud, any old sheet will serve
To cloth corruption; I can rot without
Fine linen; it is but to enrich the Grave,
And adorn stench, no reverence to the dead,
To make 'em crumble more luxuriously.
One Torch will be sufficient to direct
The footsteps of my Bearers. If there be
Any so kind as to accompany
My body to the Earth, let them not want
For entertainment, prithee see they have
A sprig of Rosemary dipped in common water,
To smell to as they walk along the streets.
Eatings and drinkings are no obsequies.
Raise no oppressing Pile to load my Ashes;
But if thou'l needs b' at charges of a Tomb,
Five or six foot of common stone engraved
With a good hopeful word, or else a couple
Of capital letters filled up with pitch,
Such as I set upon my Sheep, will serve;
State is not meet for those that dwell in dust.
Mourn as thou please for me, plainness shows
True grief: I give thee leave to do it for
Two or three years, if that thou shall think fit.
'Twill save expense in clothes. And so now be
My blessing on thee, and my means hereafter.

Jan. I hope Heaven will not deal so rigidly
With me, as to preserve me to the unmelcome
Performance of these sad injunctions.

ACT V. SCEN. II.
To them Meanwell. Mean. GOod health unto you Sir.

Sr Tho. I have the more
By reason of the care you took in sending
A Confessor unto me.

Mean. I? a Confessor?
Sure there is some design, some trick or other
Put on you by those men, who never sleep
Unless they have cheated on that Day.

Sir Tho. I hope
You do mean your Partners my good friends?

Mean. They never deserve the name of friends, they do
Covet, not love. If any came from them,
It was some Vulture in a holy habit,
Who did intend your Carcass, nor your safety;
Indeed I know not often, I Have all this while
Appeared another to you than I am.
Discloseth himself. Perhaps you know me now. I Am he whom you
Pleased to forbid your house, whom Mr Credulous
Takes leave to style lost man, and Vagabond.

Sr Tho. That I forbad you Sir my house was only
In care to my Daughter, not in hate to you.

Mean. That I frequented it without your leave,
Was both in love to you, and to your Daughter;
That I have all this while lived thus disguised,
Was only to avert the snare from you,
Not to entrap you; that you might not be
Blinded by those, who like to venomous Beasts,
Have only sight to poison; that you might not
Ruin your Daughter in a complement.

Sir Tho. This may b' your plot, and this discovery
Feigned only to secure your own designs:
For 't cannot sink into me that they durst
Make mirth of my repentance, and abuse
My last devotion with a Scene of Laughter.

Mean. They dare beyond your thought. When parted this
Your Confessor?

Sr Tho. You could not choose but meet him,
He is scarce yet at home.

Mean. If that you dare
But venture with me home, I Will almost promise
I Will make it plain they have put a trick upon you.

Sr Tho. Though every step were so much toward my grave
I Would tread them o'r with comfort that I might
Discover this religious villainy.

Exeunt. ACT V. SCEN. III.
Hearsay, Slicer, and Shape in his Confessors habit. Hear. COme my good Vulture
speak what prey? what mirth?

Slic. What income my dear holiness? what sport?

Sha. Give me the Chair; imagine me the Knight
(When I sit down,) and (when I stand) the Confessor.
As he is thus acting, Meanwell and Sir Thomas discover themselves above. Thus
I come in peace to thy soul good Son,
(It Is you must give it Father; I am ill,
I Am very ill; sit only now for Heaven.
My Soul would fain be flying, were it not for
A Sin or two that clogs her.) But for a sin
Or two that clogs her? take heed, don't so near
Your last deliverance play the Sophister
With Heaven. A sin or two? why, I Have heard say
You're wont to skrew your wretched Tenants up
To the utmost farthing, and then stand upon
The third Rent Capon. Then he answers me
In the small dolfull tune of a Country wench
Examined by the Official, for the mischance
Of a great belly caught at a Whitsonale;
(I could not help it.) Then it is your costome
When you invite, to think your meat laid out,
You write your Beef disburs'd, are wont to call
For the return of 't just, as for a debt;
(True.) That two Chimneys never yet smok'd at once
In all your Buildings; (All most true.) That you
Are wont to keep an untouched Capon, till
Corruption makes it able to walk out
And visit the Barn Door again: I could
Say much more, but I Would rather have you
Come so much nearer pardon, as t'accuse
Your self by your own mouth.

Slic. How grave the Rogue was?

Sha. (I Will do 't as strictly as mine Enemy.)

Sir Tho. I cannot hold; I Will break in as I am,
And take my vengeance whiles my furie's hot.

Mean. Repress it Sir a while; h' has but begun.

Sha. Then thus he dralls it out. (I do confess
I Have been addicted to frugality.)
Son do not mince; pray call it Covetousness.
( Imprimis It has ever been my custom
To ride beyond an Inn to save my horse meat.
Item, When once I had done so, and found
No entertainment, I beguild the children
Of their parched pease, my Man being left to that
We make the emblem of mortality:)
What? grass you mean? (or sweet Hay which you please.)

Hear. Me thinks this 's truly coming to a Reckoning,
He does account for's sins with Item so.

Sha. ( Item I Have often bought a Cheapside Custard,
And so refreshed my soul under my Cloak,
As I did walk the streets.) Cloaking of sins,
Although they be but eating sins, I do
Pronounce most dangerous. (I find this so,
I Would almost lost mine Eyes by it being justled.)

Slic. O thou rich soul of Roguery.

Shap. (Moreover
I once sung Psalms with Servants where I lodged,
And took part with 'em in their lovely Relics;
Truly my soul did lust, they were Temptations.)
What sing that you might eat? It is the sin
O'th'Brethren Son; but that their Relics are
Whole widows houses.

Hear. O thou preaching Devil!

Sha. ( Item I entered into a Chandlers shop,
And eat my bread in secret, whiles my man
Fed on the wholesome steem of Candle sewet.
Item, which grieves me most, I did make bold
With the Black Puddings of my needy Tailor;
Satan was strong, they did provoke me much.)

Sr Tho. Wretch that I was to trust my bosom to
One so exactly bad, that if the book
Of all men's lives lay open to his view
Would meet no sin unpracticed by himself.
I will rush in.

Mean. Good Sir keep close a while,

Sha. I see no tears, no penetentiall tears.
(Alas! I cannot weep, mine Eyes are Pumice.
But Alms I hope may yet redeem.) Alms given
In a large manner Son. (Will Not fifty pounds
Wipe off my score?) If doubled't may do something.
(Can I be saved no cheaper? take this then
And pray for me.) With that I thus dismissed him.
Blessed Son, for now I dare pronounce thee blessed,
Being thou'st powered thus out thy soul -- The wolf!
The wolf! 'sfoot peace, we are in the noose:
We are betrayed, yon's Meanwell and the Knight --
Truly he is as good a man as any
I ever yet confessed -- don't look that way --
A very honest charitable man,
Full of sincerity, and true devotion.

Sr Tho. Patience it self would now turn furious,
Let Us for some Officers.

Ex. Sir Tho. and Mean. Sha. Discovered all!
Religion is unluckie to me.

Hear. Man!
Perfidious man! there is no trust in thee!

Slic. I never liked this Meanwell; I did always
See treachery writ in's forehead: I well hoped
H'ad been in Prison with his wench.

Sha. leave railing.
Along with me. There is left one way more;
The Cat may yet perhaps light on all four.

Exeunt. ACT. V. SCEN. IV.
Sir Thomas Bitefig, Meanwell, Constable, Watchmen. Sir Tho. What gone? upon
my life they did mistrust.

Mean. They are so beaten that they smell an Officer,
As Crows do Powder.

Sr Tho. Watchman call you forth
The Mistress of the house, Imprimis, for
Ex. Officer. They have their lurking hole near hand most certain.

Enter Moth, and Potluck as Man and Wife. Mo. Denuncio vobis gaudium magnum,
Robertus de Tinea electus est in sedem Hospitalem,
Et assumit sibi nomen Galfridi.
Joy comes to our house. I Robert Moth am
Chesen into thylk Hospital seat*
Thylk Basin of Jone Potluck, Vintners Widow*
And do transmue my name to Giffery.
New foysons been ygraced with new Titles.
Come buss.

Pot. Fie! Mr Giffery I swear
You make m' ashamed before all this Company.

Sir Tho. Sir, if you be the Master of this house,
You Have harbor'd here a company of cheating Villains,
Which we are come to apprehend.

Pot. Pray y' look,
Search every Corner, here is no cheats. I Am sure
The house was clear before your Worship entered.

Con. Make fast the Doors for fear they do escape.
Let Us in and ferret out these cheating Rakehels.

As the Watchmen go in and out about the Rooms Hearsay, Slicer, and Shape
mingle themselves with 'em, being accounted Watchmen, and so pass without
discovery. Enter 1. Watchman, and Hearsay. 1 Watch. It Is very certain they are
not in the house.

Sr Tho. They had no time to get away.

Hear. Why then,
It may be being they are such cunning Fellows,
They have the trick of going invisible.

Enter 2* Watchman, and Slicer. 2 Watch. There Is no place left unsearch'd but
Pots and Mouseholes.

Slic. They Are either gone or in the House that is certain.

2 Watchm. That cannot be; the Doors were shut I Am sure,
And so they could not get out; the Rooms then are
All searched, and so they cannot be within.

Slic. I Will lay my neck to a farthing, then they are vanished.

Hear. Sunk like the Queen, they will rise at Queenhive sure.

Enter Constable, and other Watchmen, and Shape among 'em, bringing in
Credulous, and Caster. Sha. Most certain these are two of them: for this*
Old Knave, I Will take my Oath that he is one.

Con. Confess, confess, where are your other Comrads?

Cre. I am as honest as the skin that is
Between thy Brows?

Con. What skin between my Brows?
What skin thou knave? I am a Christian;
And what is more, a Constable; what skin?

Sr Tho. You are mistaken friends.

Con. I cry you mercy.

Sha. The Constable may call you any thing
In the Kings name upon suspicion.

Sr Tho. We Are cheated friends; these men of the Ordnary
Have gulled us all this while, and now are gone.

Cast. I am undon. Never let me live if that
I did not think the would gull me, I perceive
Fancy does much; see how it is come to pass.

Cred. Where is my Son God bless him? where is Andrew?
Pray God they have not taken him along;
He has a perilous wit to be a cheat;
He Would quickly come to be his Majesty's Taker.

Con. I took one Andrew Credulous this morning
In dishonest Adultery with a Trull.
And if he be your Son he is in Prison.

Cred. Their villainy of my life. Now as I am
A Freeman and a Grocer, I had rather
Have found forty pounds; I pray go fetch him.

Ex. officer. Sr Tho. I Am sorry that your Son takes these lewd courses;
He is not fit to make a Husband of.

Cre. Do not condemn before you hear. I Will warrant
Though he be guilty yet he is innocent.

Enter Have at all. Mo. Hent him, for dern love Hent him; I done drad
His Visage foul, yfrounct with glowing eyn.

Have. I come to excuse my ruder usage of you.
I was in drink when that I did it: 'twas
The Plot of those base Knaves, I hear are gone,
To teach me valor by the strength of Wine;
Naming that courage which was only fury.
It was not wilfully.

Mo. I do not reche
One bean for all. This Buss is a blive guerdon.
Hence Carlishnesse yferre. It Is a sooth saw,
Had I but venged all mine herme,
Mine Cloak had not been furred half so werme.

Enter Officers with Andrew, Priscilla, and the four that were taken at the
Window singing. Cre. Now Sir you shall hear all. Come Andrew tell me,
How camst thou hither?

An. Truly Mr Meanwel
Told me that I should meet with Mrs Jane,
And there I found her Chambermaid.

Cre. D'y' see?
Your Chambermaid Sir Thomas; out you whore.

An. Take heed what you say Father, she is my wife.

Cre. I would you are in thy grave, then 'twere the better
Fortune of the two.

Pris. Indeed this reverend Man
Joined us in the Prison.

Chr. Marriage is a Bond,
So no place fitter to perform it in.

Sr Tho. Send for my Daughter hither, we will know all.
What are you Sir?

Chr. A workman in the Clergy.

Con. Yes, this is one I took at the Window singing,
With these three other vagrant Fellows here.

Chri. I was in body there, but not in mind,
So that my sin is but inchoately perfect,
And I though in a fault did not offend,
And that for three reasons. First, I did yield
Only a kind of unwilling consent.
Secondly, I was drawn as 'twere by their
Impulsive gentleness. Mark Sir I Am strong.
Thirdly, I deemed it not a womans-shambles:
Fourthly and lastly, that I sung was only
An holy wish. Once more Beloved.

Sr Tho. Peace!
You Have said enough already. How came you
To sing beneath the Window?

Rhyme. Mr Hearsay
Told us that Mr Meanwell was new married,
And thought it good that we should gratify him,
And show our selves to him in a Festennine.

Cre. That Rascal Meanwel was the cause of all,
I would I had him here.

Sr Tho. Why? this is he,
Sr Robert Littleworth his Son, he has
Disclosed their vilanies; he is no cheat.

Mean. God save you Mr Credulous; you have
Forgotten me perhaps, I Am somewhat changed,
You see your lost man's found; your Vagabond
Appears at last.

Cre. Go, you are a gibing scab:
Leave off your flouting; you're a beardless Boy;
I am a Father of Children.

Mean. And your Son
Will be so shortly, if he has not ill luck.
To vex you more, that hundred pounds you sent
To Mr Caster, Shape in the habit of
A Country fellow gulled you of.

Cred. That Rascal;
Thou shewst thy wit to abuse an old man thus.
As God shall mend me I will hamper thee.
Thou'st been disguised here all this while, thou have;
Would I were braid in mine own mortar, if
I do not call the in Question the next Term
For counterfeiting of the Kings Subjects.
Come away from him Sirrah, come along.

Ex. Cred. And. Prisc. Mean. There Is a Trunk they have left behind; I have
Seized it for you; so that you will be no loser.

Sir Tho. If you can find a way whereby I may
Reward this courtesy of yours, I shall
Confess my self engaged doubly to you,
Both for the benefit and its requital.

Ent. Jane. Mean. The appearance of your Daughter here suggests
Something to ask, which yet my thoughts call boldness.

Sir Tho. Can she suggest yet any good, that is
So expert grown in this flesh Brokery?

Mean. O do not blot that Innocence with suspicion,
Who never came so near a blemish yet,
As to b' accused. To quit you of such thoughts
I did receive a tempting letter from
That Strumpet that is gone out (as sin is bold
To try even where no hope is) I made promise,
But to secure my self, and withal sound
The affections of young Credulous unto
Your virtuous Daughter, told him he should meet her
Where I agreed to meet her Chambermaid.
The blame must all be mine.

Sr Tho. It Is her deliverance.
She has escaped two Plagues, a lustful fool.

Mean. I dare not challenge her I do confess,
As a reward due to my service, and
If you deny her me, assure your self
I Will never draw her from obedience:
I will not love her to procure her ruin,
And make m' affection prove her Enemy.

Sr Tho. You speak most honestly, I never did
Think ill of your intents, but always gave
A testimony to your life as large
As were your merits. But your fortunes are
Unequal, there is the want.

Mean. What Is there defective
Love shall supply: True, Mr Credulous
Is a rich man, but yet wants that which makes
His riches useful, free discretion.
He may be something in the Eye of the World;
But let a knowing man that can distinguish
Between Possessions, and good parts, but view him,
And prize impartially, he will be rated
Only as Chests, and Caskets, just according
To what he holds. I value him, as I
Would an Exchequer, or a Magazine.
He is not virtuous, but well stored, a thing
Rather well victuall'd then well qualified.
And if you please to cast your Eye on me,
Some moneys will call back my Fathers Lands
Out of his lime-twig fingers, and I shall
Come forth as gay as he.

Sr Tho. I Will strive no longer
For fear I seem to oppose felicity.
If she will give her consent you are one.

Jan. It is
The voice of Angels to me: I had thought
Nothing in all the store of nature could
Have added to that love, wherewith I do
Reverence that name, my Father, till that you
Spoke this.

Sir Tho. I know your former Loves; grow up
Into an aged pair, yet still seem young.
May you stand fresh, as in your Pictures still,
And only have the reverence of the Aged.
I thank you for your pains Mr Constable,
You may dismiss your Watch now.

Sha. A pox on it!
That after all this never a man to carry
To Prison? must poor Tradesmen be brought out
And no body clapped up?

Mean. That you may not want
Employment, friends take this I pray and drink it?

Sli. Sir, when you are cheated next we are your servants --

Ex. all but Shape, Hear, Slic. ACT V. SCEN. V.
Shape, Slicer, Hearsay. Sha. Lie thou there Watchman; how the knave that is
looked for
May often lurck under the Officer!
Invention I applaud thee.

Hear. London air
Me thinks begins to be too hot for us.

Slic. There is no longer tarrying here, let us swear
Fidelity to one another, and
So resolve for New England.

Hear. It Is but getting
A little Pigeon-hole reformed Ruff --

Slic. Forcing our Beards into th'Orthodox bent --

Sha. Nosing a little Treason against the King;
Bark something at the Bishops, and we shall
Be easily received.

Hear. No fitter Place.
They are good silly People; Souls that will
Be cheated without trouble: One eye is
Put out with Zeal, the other with Ignorance,
And yet they think they are Eagles.

Sha. We are made
Just fit for that Meridian: no good work's
Allowed there; Faith, Faith is that they call for,
And we will bring it 'em.

Slic. What Language speak they?

Hear. English, and now and then a Root or two
Of Hebrew, which we will learn of some Dutch Skipper
That goes along with us this Voyage; Now
We want but a good Wind, the Brethrens sighs
Must fill our sails. For what old England will not
Afford, New England will. You shall hear of us
By the next Ship that comes for Proselytes.
Each soil is not the good man's Country only;
Nor is the lot his to be still at home:
We Will claim a share, and prove that Nature gave
This Boon, as to the good, so to the knave.

Exeunt. The EPILOGUE.
Shap. WE have escaped the Law, but yet do fear
Something that is harder answered, your sharp Ear.
O for a present slight now to beguile
That, and deceive you but of one good smile!
It Is that must free us; the Author dares not look
For that good fortune to be saved by's Book.
To leave this blessed soil is no great woe;
Our griefe's in leaving you, that make it so.
For if you shall call in those Beams you lent,
'Twould even at Home create a Banishment.

FINIS.

