A LETTER From the Lord General CROMWELL, Dated September the Fourth, 1651.

To the Right Honorable William Lenthal Esquire; Speaker of the Parliament of the
Commonwealth of ENGLAND.

Touching the taking of the City of WORCESTER; AND The total Routing of the
Enemies Army.

Saturday, September 6. 1651.
Resolved by the Parliament, September, 1651. be Printed, together with the
Order made yesterday for a Thanksgiving on the next Lords Day, and read,
together with the said Order.

Hen: Scobell, Cleric. Parliamenti.



London, Printed by John Field, Printer to the Parliament of England. 1651.

For the Right Honorable William Lenthal Esquire; Speaker of the Parliament of the
Commonwealth of England.
SIR,
I Am not able yet to give you an exact Account of the great things the Lord
has wrought for this Commonwealth, and for his People, and yet I am unwilling
to be silent, but according to my Duty shall represent it to you as it comes to
hand: This Battle was fought with various Successes for some hours, but still
hopeful on your part, and in the end became an Absolute Victory, and so full an
one as proved a total Defeat and Ruin of the Enemies Army, a Possession of the
Town, (our men entering at the Enemies heels, and fighting with them in the
streets with very great Courage) and of all their Baggage and Artillery; what
the Slain are I can give you no Account, because we have not taken an exact
View, but they are very many, and must needs be so, because the Dispute was
long and very near at hand, and often at Push of Pike, and from one defense to
another; there are about Six or seven thousand prisoners taken here, and many
Officers and Noblemen of very great quality, Duke Hamilton, the Earl of Rothes,
and diverse other Noblemen, I hear the Earl of Loutherdail, many Officers of
great quality, and some that will be fit subjects of your Justice: We have sent
very considerable Parties after the Flying Enemy; I hear they have taken
considerable numbers of Prisoners, and are very close in the Pursuit: Indeed I
hear the Country rises upon them every where, and I believe the Forces that
lay through Providence at Bewdley, and in Shropshire and Staffordshire, and
those with Colonel Lilburn, were in a Condition as if this had been foreseen,
to intercept what should return. A more particular Account then this will be
prepared for you as we are able: I heard they had not many more then a Thousand
Horse in their Body that fled, I believe you have near Four thousand Forces
following and interposing between them and home: Their Army was about Sixteen
thousand strong, and fought ours on Worcester side of Severn almost with their
whole, whilst we had engaged half our Army on the other side but with parties
of theirs; In deed it was a stiff business, yet I do not think we have lost Two
hundred men: Your new raised Forces did perform singular good Service, for
which they deserve a very high estimation and acknowledgement, as also for
their willingness thereunto, forasmuch as the same has added so much to the
reputation of your Affairs; they are all dispatched home again, which I hope
will be much for the ease and satisfaction of the Country, which is a great
Fruit of the Success. The Dimensions of this Mercy are above my thoughts, it is
for ought I know a Crowning Mercy; surely if it be not, such a one we shall
have. If this provoke those that are concerned in it to Thankfulness, and the
Parliament to do the will of him who has done his will for it and for the
Nation, whose good pleasure it is to establish the Nation and the change of the
Government, by making the people so willing to the Defense thereof, and so
signally to bless the Endeavors of your Servants in this late great Work. I am
bold humbly to beg, That all thoughts may tend to the promoting of his Honor,
who has wrought so great Salvation; and that the Fatness of these continued
Mercies may not occasion Pride and Wantonness as formerly the like has done to
a chosen Nation; but that the Fear of the Lord, even for his Mercies, may keep
an Authority and a People so prospered and blessed, and witnessed unto, Humble
and Faithful, and that Justice and Righteousness, Mercy and Truth may flow from
you as a thankful Return to our gracious God; this shall be the Prayer of

SIR, Your most humble and obedient Servant, O. Cromwell.
Worcester 4. September 1651. Your Officers behaved themselves with much Honor
in this Service, and the Person who is the Bearer hereof, was equal in the
performance of his Duty to most that served you that day.



Friday, September 5. 1651.
THe Parliament being very sensible of the wonderful and seasonable Mercies God
has been pleased to vouchsafe unto this Nation, by his great Blessing upon
their Army near Worcester, in Routing the Army of Scots on Wednesday last, As
is expressed in a Letter from the Lord General to the Speaker of the
Parliament, herewith Printed, and intending to set apart a day of Solemn
Thanksgiving unto God, to be observed through this Commonwealth; Do in the mean
time Order, That the Ministers in all Churches and Congregations within the
late Lines of Communication and weekly Bills of Mortality, on the next Lords
day, give Public Thanks to Almighty God for this great Mercy; And that the
Lord Major of the City of London, Do take care that timely notice be given to
the said Ministers for that purpose; and that the said Ministers do then read
the said Letter.

Saturday, September 6. 1651.
Resolved by the Parliament, Lord General, Dated the Fourth of September, 1651.
be Printed, together with the Order made yesterday for a Thanksgiving on the
next Lords day, and read, together with the said Order.

Hen: Scobell, Cler. Parl.

FINIS.

