THE OVERTHROW OF THE Scottish Army: Or a Letter sent from Lieutenant General
CROMWELL to the Committee of Lancashire sitting at MANCHESTER, showing the
utter Routing of the Scottish Forces.

HEB DDIEV HEB DDIM
seal

LONDON, Printed for JOHN BELLAMY; 1648.

THE OVERTHROW OF THE SCOTTISH ARMY.
To the Committee of Lancashire, sitting at MANCHESTER.
Gentlemen,
IT has pleased God this day to show a great mercy to this poor Kingdom, by
making the Army successful against the common Enemy. We lay last night at Mr.
Sherbournes of Stonihurst, about Nine miles from Preston, which was within
Three miles of the Scots Quarters,; we advanced betime the next morning toward
Preston with a desire to engage the enemy, and by that time our Forlorn Hope
had engaged the Enemy, we were about Four miles from Preston, and thereupon
we advanced with the whole Army, and the Enemy being drawn out upon a Moore,
betwixt us and the Town, the Armies on both sides engaged, and after a very
sharp bout continuing for three or four hours, it pleased God to enable us
to give the Enemy a Defeat, which I hope we shall improve by Gods Assistance to
their utter ruin. And in this Service your Countrymen had not the least
share; we cannot be particular, having not time to take an account of the
slain or Prisoners, but we can assure you, we have many Prisoners, and many of
those of quality, and many slain, and the Army dissipated; a Principal whereof
with Duke Hambleton is on the South side of Rible and Darwent Bridges and we
lying with the greatest part of the Army close to them, nothing hindering the
ruin of that part of the Enemies Army, but the night; it will be our care
that they shall not pass over any Ford beneath the Bridge to go Northwards,
nor to come over betwixt us and Whaley. We understand that three Companies of
Colonel General Ashtons are at Whaly, we have seven troops of Horse and
Dragoons, that we believe lie at or near Clytherow this night; I have sent
Orders expressly to them to march to Whaley, to join with those Companies that
you shall improve of your Country Forces toward the ruin of this Enemy; you
perceive by this how things stand, to wit, the Enemy is broken, most of the
Horse being gone Northwards, and we having sent a considerable party in the
very heels of them; and the Enemy having lost almost all his Ammunition, and
near 4000 Arms: so that the greatest part of their Foot is naked. And therefore
in order to this work, we desire you to raise your Country, and improve your
Forces for the total ruin of that Enemy which way soever they go; and that
you shall accordingly do your part, doubt not of their ruin: We thought to
speed this unto you, to the end you may not be troubled if they shall march to
you, but improve your interest as aforesaid; and that you may give glory to God
for this unspeakable mercy.

August 17. 1648. From your very humble Servants, Oliver Cromwell, Ralph Ashton.

Mr. Winstanley,
SInce the sealing up of my Letter, we have more good news come in to us.
Yesterday upon Standish-moor they had a hot dispute, many slain and taken: some
report at both fights near four thousand slain; they came running through
Wigan in a bleeding condition; the Enemy is running through Warington, some
skirmishing is still amongst them at Goose-green, and Ashton: we are sending
out more Forces toward Wigan to help to beat the running Army, and catch them
as they go: This day is a glorious day in Lancashire; if you were in our
County, you would rejoice to see what a refreshing gale is come amongst us. I
rest, Yours

Henry Mollineux.
We see it made good, That when Gods people are brought low by their
oppressors, the Lord raises them up.



FINIS.

