A LETTER FROM THE LORD GENERAL, Dated the One and twentieth day of July, TO
THE Right Honorable William Lenthal Esquire; Speaker of the Parliament of the
Commonwealth of ENGLAND. Showing the great Mercies of Almighty God in the late
Success given to the Parliaments Forces in SCOTLAND, Against the Enemy there.

Friday, the 25 of July. 1651.
ORdered by the Parliament, That this Letter be forthwith Printed and
Published.

Hen: Scobell, Cleric. Parliamenti.



London, Printed by John Field, Printer to the Parliament of England. 1651.

Friday the 25 of July. 1651. A LETTER FROM THE Lord General, Dated the One and
twentieth of July, 1651 was this day Read; viz. FOR THE Right Honorable William
Lenthal Esquire; Speaker of the Parliament of the Commonwealth of England.
SIR,
AFter our waiting upon the Lord, and not knowing what course to take for
indeed we know nothing but what God pleases to teach us) of his great mercy,
we were directed to send a Party to get us a Landing by our Boats, whilst we
marched toward Glascow. On Thursday morning last Col. Overton with about
Fourteen hundred Foot, and some Horse and Dragoons, landed at the North Ferry
in Fife: We with the Army lying near to the Enemy (a small River parted us and
them) and we having Consultations to attempt the Enemy within his
Fortifications; but the Lord was not pleased to give way to that Counsel,
purposing a better way for us.

The Major General marched on Thursday night with two Regiments of Horse, and
two Regiments of Foot, for better securing the Place, and to attempt upon the
Enemy as opportunity should serve: He getting over, and finding a considerable
Body of the Enemy there (who would probably have beaten our men from the place,
if he had not come) drew out and fought them, He being two Regiments of Horse,
and about Four hundred of Horse and Dragoons more, and three Regiments of Foot;
the Enemy five Regiments of Foot, and about four or five Regiments of Horse;
they came to a close Charge, and in the end totally Routed the Enemy, Have
taken about Forty or fifty Colors, killed near Two thousand, some say more;
have taken Sir John Brown (their Major General, who commanded in chief) and
other Colonels and considerable Officers killed and taken, and about Five or
Six hundred Prisoners. The Enemy is removed from their Ground with their whole
Army, but whether we certainly know not.

This is an unspeakable Mercy, I trust the Lord will follow it until he has
perfected Peace and Truth: We can truly say, we were gone as far as we could in
our Counsel and Action, and we did say one to another, We know not what to do.
Wherefore it is Sealed upon our Hearts, That this as all the rest, is from the
Lords goodness, and not from man. I hope it becomes me to pray, That we may
walk humbly and selfdenyingly before the Lord, and believingly also, That you
whom we serve (as the Authority over us, may do the Work committed to you, with
Uprightness and Faithfulness, and thoroughly as to the Lord, That you may not
suffer any thing to remain, that offends the eyes of his Jealousy, That common
wealth may more and more be sought, and Justice done impartially. For the Eyes
of the Lord run too and fro, and as he finds out his Enemies here, to be
avenged on them; so will he not spare them for whom he does good, if by his
loving kindness they become not good. I shall take the humble boldness to
represent this Engagement of David's in the 119. Psalm, the 134 Verse, Deliver
me from the oppression of man, so will I keep thy Precepts. I take leave and
rest

Sir Your most humble Servant O. Cromwell.
Lithgow, July 21. 1651.
THe Carriage of the Major General, as in all other things, so in this, is
worthy of your taking notice of; as also Colonel Okey, Colonel Overton, Colonel
Daniel, Colonel West, Colonel Lidcot, Colonel Syber, and the rest of the
Officers.

Friday, the 25th of July, 1651.
ORdered by the Parliament, That upon the next Lords day the Ministers in all
the Congregations, within the City of London and late Lines of Communication,
and weekly Bills of Mortality, do render Thanks to Almighty God for his
wonderful Mercy in the great success given to the Parliaments Forces in
Scotland, against the Enemy there, upon the last Lords day, being the 20th day
of July instant, and implore the continuance of Gods blessing upon the
Proceedings of the Forces of this Commonwealth there, and the perfecting of his
own Work to his Praise.

ORdered by the Parliament, That this Order be forthwith Printed and Published;
And that the Lord Major of the City of London, and the Sheriffs of Middlesex
and Surrey respectively, do take care that timely notice hereof be given to the
several Ministers accordingly.

Hen: Scobell, Cleric. Parliamenti.

FINIS.

