NOVEMBER.
THOU Sun that shed'st the Days, look down and see
A Month more shining by Events, than thee;
Departed Saints and Souls signed it before, 1. Day, is All Saints.

But now the living sign it more.
Persons and Actions meet, All meant for Joy, 2. All Souls.

But some build up, and some destroy.
Bate us That Ushering Curse, so dearly known,
And then the Month is All our Own.
So, at the first, Darkness was thrown about
The unshapen Earth, and Light was th^nce struck out.
Draw the first Curtain, and the Scene is then 3. Day, The Assembling of the
unhappy Parli^ment.

A Triple State of Culled and Trusted men:
Men in whose hands 'twas once to have given us more
Then our Bold Fathers Askd before:
Who, had they used their Prince's Grace, had got
What no Arms could, and Theirs will not.
What more then Witchcraft did our Blessing Curse,
And made the Cure make Evils worse?
It Is the Third D^y; throw in the Blackest Stone,
Mark it for Cursed, and let it stand Alone.
BUT hold! speak gentler things! This Fourth was seen 4. Day, The Birth of
the Princess MARY.

The softest Image of our Beauteous Queen.
Bring me a Lamb, not used to Elder Food,
That has as yet more Milk then Blood,
That to the Honor of this Early Bride
(Like Thetis joynd to Peleus side,)
Some Tender Thing may fall; though nore can be
So White, so Tender, as is She.
Whiles we at home our Little Turfe debate,
She spreads our Glories to another State.
NEXT view a Tr^^son of the worst Intent, 5. Day, Our Delivery from the Papists
conspiracy.

Had not our Own done more then Strangers meant;
Religion is the Thing both sides pretend,
But either to a different End:
They, out of Zeal, labor to rear their own,
These, out of Zeal, to pull All down.
Bless Us from These, as Them! But yet compare
Those in the Vault, These in the Chair,
Though the just Lot of unsuccessefull sin
Fix their's Without, you will find worse Heads Within.
BUT hark! What Thunder's that? and who those men
Flying toward Heaven, but falling down again? 12. Day, The Kings Victory at
Brainford.

Whose those Black Corpse cast on the Guilty Shore?
It Is sin, that swimmes to its own Door.
It Is the Third scourge of Rebels, which allowed
Our Army, like the Prophets Cloud
Did from an Handful rise, U^till at last
Their Sky was by it Overcast.
But (as Snakes Hiss after the have lost their Sting)
The Traitor called This, Treachery in the King.
Away, and view the Graces and the Hours 16. Day. The Birth of our gracious Q.
MARY.

Hovering aloof, and dropping mingled Flowers
Upon a Cradle, where an Infant lay
More Grace, more Good^sse then were they;
Thrice did they destine Her to pass the seas
(Love made Her Thrice to pass with ease)
To raise a strength of Princes first, and then
To raise Another streng^h of Men.
Most Fruitful Queen! we boast Both Gif^s, And thus
The Day was meant to You, the Joy to Us.
Next to this Mother stands a Virgin Queen,
Courting and Courted wheresoever seen; 17. Day, The beginning of Q. Elizabeth's
Reign.

The Peoples Love first from Her Troubles grew;
Her Reign then made That Love her Due.
That Comely Order, which did then adorn
Both Fabrics, now by Facion's torn;
That Form, by her allowed, of Common Prayer
Is styled vain Beating of the Air.
How do they H^nour, how forsake Her Crown!
Her Times are still Cried up, but Practiced Down.
Reach last, the Whitest Stone the World yet knew,
White as the soul, to whom the Day is due. 19. Day, The Birth of our gracious
King CHARLES.

Son of the Peaceful James, how is he blessed
With All His Blessings, but His Rest!
Though undeserved Times call All His Powers,
And Troubles season Other Hour's,
Let this Day flow to Him as void of Care,
As Feasts to Gods, and Poets are:
The Wish is Just, O Heavens! As our strife
Has added to His Cares, add Ye to His Life.
And now, since His Large Heart with Hers is met,
Whose Day the stars on purpose near His set.
NOVEMBER shall to me for ever shine,
Red in its Ink, Redder in Wine.
And since the Third (which almost has made shift
TO Absolve the Treason of the Fifth)
Cannot be well Remembered, or Forgot
By Loyal Hearts, as if 'twere not;
The Last extreme, against the First we will bring:
That gave us Many Tyrants, This a KING.

