A Most Learned, Conscientious, and Devout-Exercise; held forth the last
Lord's Day, at Sir PETER TEMPLES, in Lincolnes-Inne-Fields; BY LIEUT-GENERALL
CRUMWELL. As it was faithfully taken in Characters BY AARON GUERDON.

LONDON, Printed in the year 1649.

ROMANS 13.1. Let every Soul be Subject unto the Higher Powers; for there is no
Power but of God; the Powers that be, are Ordained of God.


DEARLY Beloved Brethren, and Sisters: It is true, this text is a Malignant
one; the wicked and ungodly have abused it very frequently, but (thanks be to
God) it was to their own Ruin; yet their abuse shall not hinder us from
making a right use of it. Every thing is Subject to be abused, be it never so
holy or good: the men of God, the Creatures of God; all are subject to injuries
and abuse; the Counsel of State, the Parliament, the Army, the General have,
been and daily are abused; nay even my self have not escaped the violence of
those Seducers whose tongues are sharper then a two-edged sword; my very face
and nose are weekly malign'd and scandalized by those scribbling Mercuries,
Elencticus and Pragmaticus; insomuch that were it possible, they would raise a
Faction in my forehead, and make mutinies amongst my very teeth. It Is true I
have a hot liver, and that's the cause my face and nose are red; for my valor
lies in my liver, not in my heart, as other men's (never any man could say my
heart was stout) indeed the Generals lies there, and that is the reason his
face is pale. You all know I never was a drunkard, although when I was at the
lowest I had Beer enough (for you know I had near relation to a Beere-Brewer)
and I had always money to buy Wine with, if I pleased; so that I might have
been a drunked if I would; yet you know I am a temperate sober man, else I had
never been so good a Soldier. But what is it the Malignants will not abuse,
who let not to abuse themselves? I Will warrant you they would abuse our very
wives too if they durst; and I fear some of them do -- you know what I mean --
but no more of that at present.

My Text you see is Scripture and Scripture must be believed next to our
Diviner Revelations, be it what it will, but the Malignants they would
interpret it one way, and we (the Saints) interpret it another: now let any
body judge, whether they or we are to be believed: whether (I say) those
ungodly Cavaliers that fought to uphold Tyranny and Antichrist, or we that in
the uprightness of our hearts fought for Liberty and Freedom, and for
Establishing the Kingdom of King Jesus: surely Beloved, it is we that are in
the Right of it, I think none of you will deny it.

But now that I spoke of Kings, the main question is, whether by Higher Powers,
are meant Kings, or the Commoners? Truly (Beloved) it is a very great question
amongst those that say they are learned: But I think verily they make more
stir about it then needs; for may not every body that can read observe that
Paul speaks in the plural number, the Higher Powers; now had he meant
subjection to a King, he would have said, Let every Soul be subject to the
Higher Power, that is if he had meant one man, but by this you see he
intended more then one (for he bids us be subject to the Higher Powers) that
is the Council of State, the house of Commons and the Army. I hope I have
cleared this Point: So now then I will come closer to the words themselves, and
show you* truly and plainly (without any gaudy Rhetorique) what they signify
unto us, that you be not deceived: and I tell you this is not to be done by
every Spirit, but only by such who are more then ordinarily endowed with the
Spirit of Di^cerning: I confess there are many good men and women amongst you,
that intend well, and speak well, and understand well, but yet cannot
apprehend well all things that lurk in Scripture Language, for lack of a
sufficient measure of the Spirit: they must be inwardly called thereuneo, or
else they are subject to errors and misconstructions.

Well then! you see who are fittest to interpret, and I presume you believe God
has abundantly supplied me; I do not boast of it, but I speak it to his
glory that has vouchsafed to take up his Lodging in so vile, contemptible,
unswept, unwashed, ungarnished a Room as is this unworthy Cottage of mine. But
It was his will, and I am thankful for it.

Now the Words offer themselves very naturally, they are plain, not difficult,
but prostrate their sense in most perspicuous manner.

For first (Beloved) by these words Let every Soul etc. we may understand
that every one of us have Souls; whence I raise this Doctrine, that it is an
ungodly, irreligious, profane and Idle Tenent amongst the wicked to think or
say that Women have no Souls. Mark (my Beloved) to think or say etc. for
there are many now adays that think, and will not speak what they think, and
others that speak, and will not think what they speak. But we are, none such
-- Dear Sisters it is a great abase to your honorable Sex -- And now truly I
will turn to you only, for you have been our daily and nightly comforters;
indeed la ye have! you have raised our drooping Spirits, though never so much
dej^cted; you have got us stomachs when we had none, and furnished us with
flesh on all occasions; we never found you unwilling, or unready to help us,
when we were the farthest from home. Believe it when I lay before Pembro^ke
Castle my Landlady where I quartered (who had once been a Malignant, and then
but newly crept into the state of grace) she (I say) had a good Soul within
her, she was brimme full of the Spirit, and yet she was very handsome; which
is strange, for seldom we find a perfection without an imperfection; commonly
Women that are fair without, are either false or foul within; but to me she
was neither. And yet I do not speak this to condemn beauty, for it is of
singular comfort and good use, and those that be fair may be true and good:
but this is secundum majus and minus (as the Logitians cant) some are better
then other some (that is the English of the Lataine) and indeed I have found
great difference in Women. Then again when I came in Yorkshire, I met with
Mrs. Lambert (the espoused of that honorable and valiant Saint M. G. Lambert)
she (I say) is a Woman, not very fair I confess, but of as large a Soul,
and as full of the Spirit as any I ever yet met with: I profess I never knew a
woman more endowed with those Heavenly blessings of love, meekness,
gentleness, patience and long suffering; nay even with all things that may
speak her every way deserving the name of a Saint: And yet I say she was not
very beauteous or comely, for she is something foggy and Sunburned (which is
strange in that cold Country) But what Nature had denied her of Ornament
without, I found she had within her a soul, a devout sweet foul; and God
knows I loved her for it.

Thus we find then both by Scripture and experience, that all of us have
souls, men and women. But then again (beloved) some have good souls and some
have bad; Mrs. Lambert has a good soul, and no doubt, nay (I know) many of
you that be here are (and have) good souls within you: the Cavalieres and
their Queanes are the bad souls, they serve and are subject to bad and ungodly
men (men did I call them?) nay Devils that would devoute us, and drink
themselves drunk with the blood of the Saints.

By this then it is evident who have, and who are the good Souls; Whence I
raise this Doctrine, or rather point of Faith. That we are not to believe, or
account any to have, or to be Souls, but those that are of the Family of
Saints (I would have said Love, but that it is a particular Sect, something
differing from Ours.

Come on then, Let every Soul be Subject, etc. Whereby by we see all Souls,
good and bad, are bound to be Subject. All-Soules College in Oxford must be
Subject to the Visitors, All-Soules day, though a superstitious holyday and
strictly kept by the Papists) must be subject to labor and toil: Your Souls
(Brethren and Sisters) must be subject to persuasion, to love, familiarity and
friendship, to all things that may increase or elevate the Spirit; to kindle
and take fire (like Tindar) upon every spark and glace of our affections; O my
dear Brethren and Sisters, Love, it is the fullfilling of the Law, what need
we more then? It covers a multitude of sins; Lo you there! It hides all our
Infirmities: had one of us loved another, these differences and blood shed had
never happend. But some will object and say; There is a Lust as well as Love;
and sometimes Lust is falsely termed Love. I tell you beloved, these nice and
critical distinctions are things that once had like to have undone us: Lust is
nothing but a desire of any thing, and if (my Beloved) we desire to enjoy one
another, God forbid but we should help and comfort each other, and lay out
our selves as far, and freely as may be, to Assist each other in the free
embraces of the Spirit. The Laws of Reason and Nature require it of us.

But let us look yet a little further: Let every Soul be subject to the
higher-Powers, etc. What those Higher-Powers are, I have told you before, they
are the Counsel of State, the house of Commons, and the Army; and God forbid
but all men should obey them: that is, that the People be subject to the
Counsel of State, the Counsel of State to the house of Commons, they to the
Army, the Army to the General, and the General to me; to me (I say) who
have Plotted, Advised, Counseled and Fought for both you and them these seven
years; and now at last purchased your freedom and liberty. Dear brethren
and sisters, I speak it not in ostentation, but with thankfulness and glory
to him who made me so useful an Instrument in this blessed work of
Reformation. For (beloved) it was I that jugled the late King into the Isle of
Wight, It was I dissolved the Treaty, It was I that seized upon and hurried him
to Hurst Castle, It was I that set Petitions a foot throughout the Kingdom
against the Personal Treaty, and for bringing the King, and other Capital
offenders to Justice, It was I that contrived with the help of my son Ireton)
the large Remonstrance of the Army, It was I that prescribed the erecting of
the high Court of Justice, and which brought the King to his Trial: In a word,
it was I that cut often his head, and with it all the shackles and setters of the
Norman slavery and bondage, It was I that cut off the heads of Hamilton, Capell
and Holland, It was I that surpised the Levellers at Burford, and in
Northamptonshire, It was I that broke their Design, destroyed Thomason etc.
dispersed and appeased the rest, and which have healed the late distempers of
the Army, whereby the Land is now restored to this blessed Peace, Tranquillity
and Plenty* and therefore (I say) I may justly and without ambition style my
self the Author of all the Kingdoms present and future Happiness.

It is true (Beloved) the General is a stout and valiant man, and he has
great appearance of God in him; but fitter far to be passive then active in
the Affairs of State, he is fitter for a Charge then a Council: and the
truth is (as I may tell you under the Rose) he wants brains to do any thing
of moment. But indeed this I may say for him, he is a man does not seek
himself, I never found him wilful, but willing allwaies to submit to better
judgments then his own. For when Sedgwick (that fast and loose Priest) of
Covent Garden, upon the Kings Trial; had writ to his Lady, to advise him to
remit the Execution of that just Sentence, and to wash his hands of his death;
he (honest man) presently acquainted me with the business and showed me the
Arguments given to persuade him against it; and freely referred all to my
judgment: and the 28. of January (being the Lords day) at night I went to him
in Queene-street attended with two Troops of my own Regiment, to remove the
scruples he made upon that Rascally Priests Letter, or to secure him by force
in case he had contracted more, and would not be satisfied. But he (good
man) gave me thanks for my pains and told me I had fully resolved him. All
this (beloved) I speak in honor of the man; but truly he is too great to be
so good as we must have a General (for you know he is a Lord) and unless
he be a Lord and no Gentleman, as I fear he will not acknowledge himself,
he is not for our turns; the rather for that he is easily seduced (I have
experience of him) and led away by every wind of doctrine, by mere apparences
and shadows of Reason -- Truly (beloved) I think my self and my son Ireton
may prove of greater use to the Re-publique then any other; and if we be but
once the acknowledged Governors thereof by the People, we believe we shall
answer their expectations to a hairs breadth; which if ever we be, then
beloved it is I and my son who are the Higher Powers meant in my Text, to
whom subjection is commanded: For (as I told you before) it cannot be to one
single man, it must be to two, or more; and truly, if the people shall think
us (as we think our selves) worthy of that trust, we shall discharge it
faithfully, and study to merit it at their hands: but mistake me not, I do
not mean by merit as the Papists do, that is, to deserve it at (their hands
for the good works we have done; no no, we will acknowledge it to be
merely out of the free grace and mercy of the people; for when we have done
all we can for them, we confess we are but unprofitable servants.

I thank them they have made me General for Ireland, and you know I am upon
the point of going thither, in great hopes of reducing those Rebellious
Traitors to our obedience. But then (beloved) so many of you as go along with
me, must be mindful of my text; that is, you must be Subject to me and my
Lieutenant General. Whenever we bid you go, you must run; when we bid
you Storm, you must do it, though it be against nothing but stone-walls: you
owe us your lives and your limbs, and all that you have; whenever we demand
them you ought to surrender, and that freely, not grumbling, for you must
submit to the Higher Powers etc.

The verity is, this expedition against Ireland is like to prove a very hard
task, unless I can in policy engage Owen Roe, if not join with Jones, Munk
and Coote, yet to keep off at a distance with Ormond: I am (beloved) about it,
and I shall do my endeavor too, to set Inchequeene and him at variance: and
yet at that very instant will I loose no opportunity to re-obliege him to the
Parliament; for you all know what Inchequeene is -- I have him -- I will not
say how -- But it is very probable an Act of Indemnity tied in the strings of a
5000.l. bag may work a miracle. For he (good man) is but misguided, he
stands not upon such punctilioes of honor as Ormond does -- In truth (beloved)
this Ormond is a shrewd fellow, and (were he not one of the wicked) a man
highly deserving; not so much for his knowledge and experience in Military
Affairs, (which yet may challenge some proportion of honor) as for his
diligence and faithfulness in the trust committed to him (valor I will not
allow him any; it is only desperateness, and that he wants not, but) remember
we not how politiquely he carried himself in the business of Dublin, after
we subdued the Common-Enemie here the first time? How dexterously he avoided
the Messages and Commands of the late King (which we extorted from him) for
the surrender of that City? How shamefully he baffled our Commissioners which
were sent to Treat with him about it, at what distance he kept them, still
urging the Captivity of the King to excuse his disobedience; and how often, and
on what sleevelesse Errands he sent them back to re enforce their
Instructions; whilst all that while he was underhand endeavoring to know the
King Pleasure, by the hands of his own Messenger? -- And when he was
satisfied with the Reality of the Kings Desires, and Condition; how notably he
truck'd with us for his own security and satisfaction? -- Nay more, when he
stood upon the receipt of some thousands before he would surrender; you shall
hear how he there served us -- For notwithstanding that I caused the
parliament by their letters volutarily to assure him the full double of the sum
he demanded, upon condition he would quit the Kings (and declare for our)
Interest; and that hereunto he had returned a fine silver-tongu'd Response in
answer to the parliament, and had thereupon returned him the authority of the
parliament to Indempnifie him and his Followers for all things said or done in
relation to the English or Irish Wars, and 4000.l. in recompense for his
losses; with this additionall assurance; that he should soon after the
surrender be re-invested* with full power and government of Dublin by
Commission from the Parliament; yet no sooner was Dublin delivered to us (upon
the Kings letters) and his Pasport sent him, but in contempt of all our fair
and civil proffers, he transports himself for France, abruptly waving both
our proffers and protection. -- This Beloved, I instance not to justify him in
his Rebellious courses against the Nation (those I will use my utmost to
destroy him for, but) to let you see how gloriously, even a wicked and ungodly
man (as this Ormond is) appears in the Eyes of the World, who but approves
himself true to his trust, that scorns to be corrupted with gold, and
continues so to the last; whereunto (Beloved) you are all of you enjoyed by the
words of my Text -- Be subject to the Higher Powers etc.

Nor will I let to acknowledge him less formidable then faithful; for
doubtless he has gone very near to parcify all Interests, and picked out of
them a numerous Army, over whom he has placed good Officers (good said I?) I
do not mean (beloved) Godly Officers (for they are all of them Papists or
Popishly aff^cted) but tried soldiers; such as will not easily turn their
backs of an Enemy -- I must ingenuously confess too, they have a great
strength by Sea, and a number of wilful Fellows for Mariners, who are in
great heart by reason of the many, and great Prizes they have taken from our
Merchants, and so forth; but what of all this? shall were therefore be
discouraged? God forbid* the more numerous the Enemy is, the greater shall be
the victory over them; the more difficult the work is, the more our honor;
the fuller their pockets are the worse they will fight: you know by experience
the plunder of Leicester gave us the victory at Naseby; there you saw the
Cavaliers choose rather to leave their King to His shifts, then shift from
behind themtheir Cloake-bags -- Believe it (Brethren) we shall meet with
many advantages against them -- Rupert himself (I know) will do us some good,
though it be but in Crossing of Proverbs: and hear I but once that Culpepper
or Hyde is there, -- doubt it not, all is own -- I cannot recount a Tithe of
them. But this I am sure, the honest Citizens have feasted us to good purpose,
for upon that occasion, we had their Promise to advance moneys a fresh for
Ireland -- Sans Nombre on Mensure (that is French beloved) the English whereof
is, without Weight or Measure) -- Verily they are of a stiff-necked
generation, become very tractable, and obedient servants: of a turbulent and
mutinous, an exceeding meek and humble People.

And indeed (my Beloved) it was no small work we had, to subdue those
Malignant Spirits of the City, considering how aud^ciously they once withstood
our Authority, and despised our Government; how peremptorily they Petitioned
for Personall-Treaty with the King, and sent their Servants into Colchester,
Surrey and Kent, to enforce us thereunto: how bitterly they inveighed and
railed against the honorable Proceedings of the Parliament and Army: How
largely they contributed to bring in a foreign Nation to Invade us, whilst
yet they denied us the payment of our Arreares, or to continue the necessary
Taxes, or Excise, for our future maintenance, who had preserved them and their
Families from the Rapine and Cruelty of a Barbarous Enemy. but (beloved
Brethren) I mean not to rip up old Matters: Let is suffice, that being thus
warned by their mishap, you fall not into the like sin of Disobedience to
higher Powers; there being no Powers but of God, the Powers that be being
ordained of God.

Object. But it may be some here may object and say; how shall we be secured,
in your absence, from the malicious Plotts and contrivances of the
Presbyterians, Malignants and Levellers: Since we cannot but expect they will
be Complotting our Ruin, especially Lilburne and the rest with him in
durance, whose Spirits can never be quelled but by a Crumwell, they being so
implacable and desperate?

Answ. Truly Beloved, you that do, do very well to make these doubts; I like
these doubting Christians above all Christians, provided they be not jealous:
and yet (my beloved) a Man or Woman may be jealous without Cause, as that holy
Man of God, Major-Generall Lambert is of his Wife, which truly proceeds not so
much out of any corruption in Judgment, as Manners; yet the Man was well Bred,
though not educated so well as we are in the South: But as to this point, you
shall hear how careful I have been to provide for your safety, and the Peace
of the Nation, in my Absence. For supposing that Lilburne and his Faction, and
the rest of our Enemies (as God knows we have too many) will strive to
alienate the Hearts of the People from me, and to usurp^ the Rule and Dominion
to themselves, if a convenient strength, and some one or other were not left,
fitted with Policy and Courage to restrain them; I have taken care that my
son Ireton shall stay amongst you, and that my Corrivall, (noble Lambert)
shall go in his stead, as my Lievetenant-Generall into Ireland: And my Son
(you all know) wants no Spirit (if he did, he should never have married my
Daughter, that you may well think) As for his Policy, I suppose you have as
little reason to doubt of it, as I have of his Fidelity: The large
Remonstrance, renders him (as I take it) very clean handed and subtle; and
with him I Will see a sufficient strength both of Horse and Foot be left, which
(together with the City-forces which we have engaged, and are ascertained will
stick to us; the General (so popular and valiant a Man) staying here also to
oversee them) shall (I warrant you) suppress all insurrections and tumults
whatsoever. However I have given such Order to my Son Ireton concerning
Lilburne and the rest, that if ever hereafter he observe him, or them, to
stir up the People to Sedition, or scribble any thing (as formerly) against
Our lawful Proceedings; that forth with he shall execute Justice upon them:
And I think (dear Brethren) you will judge it but necessary, since neither
our Mercy, nor the sense they have of the uprightness of our Cause will invite
them to forbear bespattering the Innocent Robes of this Infant-State.

And now (Beloved) as we must not conceal any thing from one another, I shall
make bold to requite your ingenuitie by the instancing one other doubt, with a
danger at the end of it; which although it may startle you at the first sight,
yet be of good courage, be faithful and strong; it admits of an easy
solution. And that is the Accord of the Scots with their new-King -- Truly I
must confess my Designs were never till now so diverted and confounded; for I
must tell you, I have Reverenced that short, but pithiy Precept of my father
Machiavell [Divide and Impera] so long as I could keep them at odds amongst
themselves, I feared not but order them as I pleased. But now it is too true,
that both the Parliament and Priests of that Kingdom, have attainted Argyle of
high Treason [That is, for holding the hands of the Scots until we Executed
that Exemplary piece of Justice on the King.] And that therefore they intend to
cut his head off; which if they do, then (Beloved) they destroy our only
friend in that Kingdom, and the differences on foot there must needs expire
with his breath; which being once done, they will have nothing left to do, but
vye Authority with us, and threaten a second Invasion. For you must understand
the Scots are a Warlike People, and that there is nothing will make them sooner
Rebel, then Idleness and Peace; so that if this be so, we shall be sure to
have them amongst us -- Now beloved, to preserve our selves against them in
this great Garrison of our English Commonwealth: It is for our safety that we
quit those out houses of Ireland; and if they were burnt it matters not, so we
maintain but what we have already in possession. To which end I have
resolved, that if they cut off the head of Argyle or otherwise disable him to
prosecute our Interest there, that then I will wave the War of Ireland, and
keeping the fore-doore of this Nation close shut, bend all Powers to defend the
Back door against that perfidious Nation. And this (I conceive to be the
surest way: provided I can but make choice of able and Trusty men to secure the
Ports, Towns, and Inland Garrisons without Revolts or Treachery -- And this
will be easily done, considering the men and moneys we have at our pleasure
-- I tell you brethren, our thousand shall slay their ten thousands, and in a
short space make the a miserable little People, and at length root them out
from off the face of the Earth and possess us of their lands, for an
Inheritance to us and our Generations for ever.

But I have strayed too far from my Text; I will now come to the remaining
words thereof, and so conclude -- For there are no Powers but of God etc. the
Council of State, the House of Commons, the Council of War, and the High
Court of Justice (when it was) were all Powers of God; and the following words
of my Text give you the Reason. For the Powers that be are Ordained of God:
Be they Just or Unjust, they are all of God, God ordained them; and so he did
that Tyrannical Power of the late King, an those Belly-Gods the Bishops, to
punish us for our Infirmities. But now that be has graciously removed those
Powers, he has Ordained ours to Preserve, Cherrish, Elevate, Comfort and
Delight the Saints and to Rule and Govern the Land, in Sincerity and in Truth;
to distribute Justice equally and Impartially according to His Will -- But the
times is spent, and I must be marching -- I desire therefore (my dear
brethren and sisters) that you daily pour out your Prayers and Supplications
for us, and for our success against the wicked and ungodly, that are risen up
against us: and that you cease not to comfort one another with mutual
Embraces, and Spiritual kisses, to delight and sweeten your passage through
this veil of misery; And that you take especial care to strengthen and
corroborate your selves with Capon and Cock-broth, that I may find Oil in your
Lamps at my Return,

FINIS.

