AN Offspring of MERCY, Issuing out of the Womb of CRUELTY.

OR, A Passion SERMON, PREACHED AT Christs-Church in Oxford,

By that late Renowned Ornament of the University, William Cartwright.

ACTS. 2. 36. Let all the House of Israel know assuredly, that God has made
that same Jesus whom ye have crucified, both Lord and Christ. LONDON, Printed
by A. M. and are to be sold by John Brown at the gilded Acorn in
Pauls-Church-yard, 1652.

THE PUBLISHER TO THE Ingenuous Reader.
READER,
THe best description I can make of Oxfords Cartwright will be but as an heap
of noisome dirt before the Gates of the Stately Nonesuch; My silence then as
to this great Subject may be excusable, but my offer to characterize him will
be unexpiable: besides it will be as needless to discourse to the major part
of men, and Scholars in this Land, of the admirable qualifications of W. C. as
laboriously to inform the People, that England was once governed by Kings, and
that Government is now dismissed; I may add that the most comprehensive and
sifting headpieces will find it an hard task to produce an Adequate
description of the Author, wherein he shall neither be undervalued nor
idolized; For my own part I would not offer to detain thee for a single moment
(by the interposition of these gross lines) from the immediate Survey of this
critical piece; were it not to assure thee that it is no bastard Posthume,
because its printed according to a Copy written with the Authors own hand;
Read one pause, and then (I believe) thou will have no more power to leave off
till thou have through read him, then he that runs down an hill has to stop
himself till he come to the bottom; However I am sure that upon a serious and
candid view of the whole, thou will freely declare that this Child is very
like his Father,

William Cartwr

An Offspring of MERCY Issuing out of the Womb of CRUELTY.
ACTS 2. 23. Him, being delivered by the determinate counsel and
foreknowledge of God, ye have taken, and by wicked hands have crucified and
slain.
THe words present unto us St Peter's charging the Jews with our Saviors death:
You may therefore observe in them,

First, The Patient or Person put to death, together with his quality implied
in this word (Him) by its relation to the precedent verse, Jesus of Nazareth, a
man approved of God among you, by miracles, wonders, and signs, which God did
by him.

Secondly, The Agents or Contrivers of his death; and these of two sorts,

1. The supernatural Agent, God, together with his manner of operation, a
thing of providence in these words, Being delivered by the determinate counsel
and foreknowledge of God.

2. The inferior Agents the Jews, together with their manner of operation, A
thing of malice in these words, Ye have taken, and by wicked hands have
crucified and slain.

So now, if you will consider, the Patient as God and man, but united; the
Agents God and Man, but separated; they and their operations so disposed, that
one answers the other: for God there, man here; for delivering there, taking
and crucifying and slaying here: And for determinate counsel and
foreknowledge there, wicked hands here.

I begin with the Patient, and his quality implied, Jesus of Nazereth, etc.

1. The Patient and his quality. The guilt of the world was now such, that for
its original and propriety as it came from us, and was ours, none but a man
ought to make satisfaction: and for its object and bound, as it was immense
against the immense, none but a God could: because the nature in which this
infinite offense was, was of it self finite, and so bore no proportion to that
immensity of Majesty which it injured. He therefore that was to make the
satisfaction, had a necessity laid upon him to be both God and Man. As man
only, his sufferings were unprofitable; for he that has need of a Mediator
himself, how could he perform the office of one to himself and others? As God
only, his sufferings were impossible; for he that has nothing to suffer in,
how can he suffer? Both natures therefore met, or rather the God of nature took
our nature into himself, that he might both suffer by the flesh he assumed, and
give a price to these sufferings by the Divinity which assumed it. And of this
that he was both God and man, his life and death sufficiently convinced the
Jews: For they were both such, as if he, that was himself the truth, had came
to bear witness of it. That he was God, appeared by his miracles: he was Man,
by his sufferings, Operatus, ut fortis; passus ut infirmus: August. de Pass.
Sermon. 1. They saw the power of the Son of God combined and twisted with the
infirmities of the Son of man: One part privileged and guarded by miracles,
the other unsheltred and liable to injuries: He changed the course of nature by
his actions, and confessed the weakness of it in his passion. To have done so,
and suffered so, the Apostle thinks here demonstration enough to leave the Jews
inexcusable of this slaughter. As for doing of miracles his power was such,
that when he said, Come forth, the grave could no longer hold her dead; Death
it self grew impotent, and never suffered him to call twice. When he said,
receive thy sight, or be ye opened, immediately the veil flew from the eyes, and
the bars fell from the ears; with the word the blind saw the man that
wrought the cure, and with the word the de^^ heard the tongue that made him
hear; I do not say, that all miracles prove the author a God, for I know some
are reserved for the demonstration of Antichrist, that man of sin. But the
miracles of our Savior were all of that stamp, that if we consider either the
actions themselves, or his manner of doing them, they must needs show a
personal presence of the Deity, and a grace beyond that of Adoption, A grace
of union with the father. For the miracles themselves, they were such deeds as
were both deeds and signs; wonders, in which the wonder was the least; wonders,
that clouded the marvel with the mystery; wonders, that showed more then was
conceived, and hid more then they showed. He knew what they said, and what they
said not, and answered them when as yet they had but made the question in their
hearts. To go further, His works were such, devils obeyed him, not out of will
that they desired to do so, But out of Impotence that they could not do
otherwise: they tried to resist, and found themselves unable; legions of them
doubted him, and legions when they had doubted him confessed him, and did the
office of Apostles without Apostles minds. But if you will not believe but the
same works may be done by a limited power, yet certainly they cannot the same
way: His manner of doing them must evidence him the Son of God however. Those
who work with depandance, and in another power, use to invoke some higher then
themselves, and adjure by a name mightier then their own: But Christ as one
himself sufficing to himself, made his own name, the conveyance of his power,
and tbought it no robbery to be equal with God. We read often in the Gospel,
that Virtue went out of him, Mar. 5. 30 Luke 6. 19.
So that he received not another power, but used his own: An Argument of his
Divinity, so forcible, that he himself who did the works, appealed from himself
to his works, John 10. 38. Etiamsi mihi non creditis* operibus credit, though
ye believe not me, believe the works. But to show his Divinity only by
miracles, was not enough. Sic debuit per miracula Deitatem ostendere, Leo Sermon.
de pass.
ut crederetur veritas humanitatis ipsius: he was to show his Divinity so, as
that his humanity might be believed too. And this he did by many, but chiefly
by that greatest miracle of all, his showing that he who did these miracles
could die, and that so great power of God could come wrapped up in so much
infirmity of the flesh. You may now think, that one who labored thus by
doctrine and miracles to bring the Nation of the Jews to salvation; who, not
content with ordinary and each days innocence, lived at that rate of
perfection, that he reckoned less good among ill, and thought nothing enough
where there is room for more. One that brought in Religion as the best policy
of Kingdoms; and that preached high virtues, but practiced higher, still
conquering the hardness of his precept, by the seconding it with a more hard
example.

You may certainly, I say, think that the Jews would have demanded this man of
miracles, this man himself a miracle greater then those he did, for their King
to go in and out before them. But Qui vident, videre nolunt, though he was
approved among them by miracles, and they themselves also knew it, they accused
him of Treason, and the common cry ran, We have no King but Caesar. Let me a^k
you (O ye perversest of Nations) Did Angels appear at the birth of Caesar? Was
Glory to God on high, on Earth peace, good will toward men, sung by them when
he came into the world? Was Caesar the glory of Israel, and a Horn of salvation
to his people? But (alas) not to take him into the throne was not so great an
ignominy: To prefer a Robber, a Murderer before him, this was the Dregs of
Scorn: Away with this man, and release unto us Barrabas. And again, Not Luke
23. 18, 21.
him but Barabas. What spirit of contempt is here? It runs not thus, Away with
Jesus, and not Jesus; But away with this man, and not him: They account him so
vile, that (as their superstition was not to name the thing they held
execrable) they endeavored to abolish his memory before his person. But what
Barabbas? O ye seeing who see not! One that fed your multitudes? Not one that
robbed them of that which should have fed them. What Barabbas? One that cured
your blind, or healed your halt and lame? no, one whose violences maimed them,
and by the frequency of his injury occasionally encreast the number perhaps of
those miracles that Jesus wrought. Did he use or deserve the whip? Did Barrabas
purge the Temple of thieves, or make it their Den? Did he cast out Devils, or
do Acts by the instigation of the Prince of them? A wicked generation they were
to ask a sign, but more wicked Matt. 12. 39.
not to believe when they had so many given them. Nor are they so quietly and
civilly impious as not to believe; that they go on to despite the Author of
Miracles, by tempting him to do one upon himself. If thou art the Son of God,
come down from the Cross: Why the very condition forbids the inference; He
therefore will not come down because he is the Son of God, and came to obey his
Father, by whom he was delivered, which calls me from the Patient to the
superior Agent, God, with his manner of Operation, A thing of Providence,
Delivering by determinate counsel and foreknowledge, the second thing to be
spoken of, Him, being delivered by the determinate counsel and foreknowledge
of God.

Secondly, Superior Agent and his operation.

Had not God from the beginning decreed the passion of his Son Jesus, our
redemption had been a thing of rashness, altogether unworthy either the
performance or acceptance of a Deity; And chance being more eminent then care
and love in the salvation of mankind, the death of our Savior had been a riot
rather then a sacrifice. As the devils craft projected and brought about our
slavery by the labors and anxiety of malice; So the wisdom of God was to
exclude fortune from the business of our redemption, by the counsel and
contrivance of love. By the subtlety of the Destroyer, the sting of sin entering
into one wounded the world; and the infection of the person spread it self in
equal wideness with the nature. By the wisdom then of the preserver, the
righteousness of one was to justify the world, and the merits of that person
to extend themselves to the utmost skirts of nature too. The Passion therefore
of one Christ, was purposely projected, so numerous, that not a single lamb was
offered but the herd of the world, that mankind rather then one man suffered,
and so the Kingdom of that Prince of darkness was dissolved; Dissolved indeed
occasionally by that which raised it, sin. Death destroyed death, and iniquity
loosed the bands of iniquity, and the works of that malicious one overthrew
themselves. And to this stratagem was there not required the foreknowledge,
and counsel, and determination of the Deity?

The Schools have found out 3. ways by which the father is said to have
delivered his Son.

1. Praeordinando ejus passionem ex Aquin. p. 3. q. 47. Ar. 3
sua voluntate; by preordaining his passion from his eternal will, and this is
that (...), Phil. 2. 8.
that determinate counsel and foreknowledge of God in the Text. And according
to this they say, his thirst upon the Cross was not of nature but decree,
preordained from everlasting, not casual or emergent for the time.

2. Inspirando ei voluntatem patiendi, by inspiring him with a willingness to
suffer, and hence it is that the Apostle says he became (...), obedient to the
death, even the death of the Cross. And this his thirst when he was stretched
upon it, was not to fulfill any desire but that of our redemption.

3. Non protegendo eum a passione, by not protecting him from his sufferings,
but wholly exposing him to the bitterness of them: Insomuch that he who was
one with the father, complained of the fathers dereliction, and that (...) in
the Text, the being given and delivered up into wicked hands.

But was not the Sons love the less in that his father thus gave him up?

It had been so indeed* had he not given up himsell too, (...) not himself as
'twere been of counsel against himself, and conspired to his own delivery: His
fathers will was so much his, as that I may say, his father only did not
forsake him, but he himself also in a manner forsook himself, for his
willingness to die was such, that his Isa. 53. 11
Passion which Isaiah calls his Bruising and the Travel of his Soul; he himself
calls but a Baptism, (...) Luke 12. 30.
(...). He came to his death as to a holy dipping or washing, something that
would consecrate him; and to all his sufferings as to so many Ceremonies of
honor. There are indeed passages in Scripture that seem to express a drawing
back of our Savior, and a kind of reluctance of that great Sacrifice: But if
we more warily consider them, they show only a large and handsome fear of the
danger, not any close or dishonorable desire to avoid the encounter. In Saint
Matthew it is said (...), he began to be sorrowful and heavy; words Mat. 26. 37.
that express a greatness and weight of the danger, with a just apprehension
of it; Not any dejection of spirit, but a solemn grief, and sad oppression of
it, such as is eminent in afflicted fortitude. In Saint Mark it is said (...),
he Chapter 14. v. 33.
began to be sore amazed, a word that intimates astonishment, and standing
aghast at the danger, not through any failing of courage, but through a serious
manage of it; he had a generous horror of the cup that was to be drunk of, a
noble and allowable amazement, as when natures affection flies back from the
face and presence of the evil, but reason corrects it, and thrusts on to the
heat and business, and trade or the danger. These his few deliveries of
himself, this from their intended stoning, and that from their plotted
precipitation of him, were not so much declinings of sufferings, as
reservations of himself to this kind of suffering: And this very expiring in
this at last, not John 19. 30.
of necessity but choice, for it is said then He bowed the head and gave up the
ghost; not bowing because he had given it up already, but bowing because he now
would: None of the most innocent Saints that had sleep most at command, so
slumbred when he would, as Christ dyed when he would: He expected that hour
which could not compel him when it came, and he resigned his life not to the
law of humane nature (which Socinus unadvisedly affirms) but to that deliberate
and definite constitution of eternal order: so that His fathers foreknowledge
and counsel asserted his death from casualty: His own obedience in laying his
life down, exempted it from necessity; His expectation of suffering freed it
from immaturity: And his manner of suffering, not how nor when they would? but
how and when himself would, vindicated it from the conquest of malice. And thus
he was that most absolute sacrifice, fore-known, decreed, obedient, fitted, and
himself his own Priest: We see hence God foresaw, and from Eternity decreed the
passion of his Son, as being the author of all good: But the sins of those
that were the Executors of it, he foresaw only without decreeing, as being the
Author of no evil: which will somewhat appear in our consideration

of The Inferior Agents, the Jews. Their manner of Operation, a thing of
malice, taking and by wicked hands crucifying and slaying. The last thing to be
spoken of, Him being delivered, etc.

And if delivered by the determinate counsel of God, how could he not be
taken? or how taken by wicked hands? what the Almighty foresees, is it not
because he foresees? And what is because he foresees, is it not good? These
Questions (I must confess) are certainties in things natural, but vain doubts
only in moral. For that necessity of unavoidable being from the foresight of
God, binds not in morality, because man is a free and master-creature: A Lord
of himself and others, and comes not out with a yoke upon his neck, as the rest
of the universe, his Servants do.

The things of nature God foresees as the object of his knowledge, and the
effects of i^ too: but the actions of men he foresees, not as the effects but
the objects only. Or if you will thus. The foreknowledge of God causes things
not simply to be, but to be as he foreknows them. He then making the Agent
contingent, foresees his actions contingent, and so is a cause that they are
not necessary. We may not then say, because by the foreknowledge and counsel
of God Christ took flesh, that what was fore-known might be done, that God by
that foreknowledge and counsel caused it to be done; or because God knew that
the Jews would apprehend our Savior, that he armed them to apprehend him. The
will to die, and the slaying of him that would die, were too much enemies to
come from the same inspiration. Each Leo Sermon. 16. on Pass.
action is stamped good or bad, from the intent and root from which it springs:
God delivered Jesus out of Love, the Jews took him and slew him out of Envy.
There the integrity of the design made his death a sacrifice; Here the blemish
made it a murder: thence came a Savor of life unto life, hence of death unto
death. But whence there that chain of order? Whence such aeconomy and method in
their sin? Why, though God be the Author of no sin, he is yet the orderer
of all: who squared not the sins of his enemies to the sufferings of his Son;
but the sufferings of his Son to the sins of his enemies? And so extracting
good of bad, when bad was, used this malice of the Jews; and as a Physician who
is not the Author of that poison which he imploys, made a restorative of those
who had made themselves a Generation of vipers. And this is that Sermon. 11. on
Pass.
which Leo says, While they were intent to serve themselves, by wickedness
they ministered to one whom they thought not of: God according to Saint
Augustines observation, fullfilling his own good purposes, by the purposes of
men that are not good. But I consider, that God has trusted us with his
Commandments, and not with the order of the Universe, and that our own
endeavouvs are therefore to be looked a ter by us, and the unsearchablenesse of
his charge to be left to himself. 'Twas not then out of obedience (which cannot
be but with knowledge of the rule, which was here secret) but out of malice
that the Jews took our Savior; and Saint Peter here justly charge that whole
Nation with it, they being all guilty (as Calvin states it) either by action,
or consent, or silence in the cause of that righteous one. There were Gentiles
('it is true) in the plot as well as Jews, but the Gentiles did not know him, the
Jews did: The Gentiles had no Law nor Scripture: The Jews pretended to know and
search both: The Jews were inexcusable because they knew what they did; the
Gentiles were so far excusable that Christ himself seemed to pray for them as
for a people not knowing what themselves did. The imputation therefore of the
Death is the Jews by excellence: And our Saviors sufferings were in this the
greater, that they were from such a people.

For if we consider the whole Nation, what were they? The slaves of the Romans
then, and the refuse of the world ever; A people (as at this day) hating all,
and hated of all: A Nation that God chose (as himself intimates) not for any
worth or bravery of spirit, but that he might glorify himself in the vile
things of the earth, and show his strength in weakness: no comfort then to our
Savior from the Author of his passion, nor the fall any way ennobled by the
hand from whence it came: He had that utmost of misfortune in death, not to
find an honorable enemy, Their behavior then was viler then their persons.
The Religious and heavy malice of the Priests and Elders, the solemn and severe
impiety of the Scribes and Pharisees, seriously advising that no tumult may
disturb the feast. You may think this was from the very chair of Religion: The
Court indeed pretended devotion, but served a most impious design. This fear of
tumult in the solemnity (as is observed by one of the Fathers) was not that the
people might not sin, but that they might not save him: They feared not
Profanation, but a rescue. These were wicked intentions I am sure, what must
the hands then be that executed them? why stand a while, and observe, and then
conclude.

Jesus taken (if he may be said taken who came into their hands) is hurried
from place to place, posted from Judge to Judge, put over from torment to
torment, from the Garden to Annas, from Annas to Caiphas, from Caiphas to
Pilate, from Pilate to Herod, from Herod to Pilate again; Cruelty walking the
circle, and impiety (if ever) now treading the ring. His apprehending joined to
his Agony, his accusation to his apprehending, and his condemnation to that:
Then his condemnation received by irrision, irrision by stripes, stripes by
crowning with thorns. ('It Is not to be told with the same continuation that he
suffered it) Then carrying his Cross, extension, nayling, lifting up, and
after all this business, and tumult of motion, his rest only upon the Cross.
A rest indeed, such as wity cruelty, when it imploys and tasks invention to
serve it, would at last give: A rest, by which torment ceased not but was
continued; A rest that detained the soul only to make it part with more
torture; the struggling Spirit escaping by parcels, as water out of a narrow
mouthed vessel, the man dying not once, but long. And were not these wicked
hands? But there is yet something behind to make even the Cross more
infamous, more a Cross; They crucified him (as it is generally observed) In
medio terrae, in the very center and navell of the earth; In medio populi, in
the middle channel of floods of people; In medio malefactorum, between
thieves, as the more thief; In an infamous place, on high, without garments, in
the force of day, that nothing could be hidden: Lastly, at the Feast of their
Passover, those Nundinae Religiosae, those public Wakes of Religion, and
general Mart of Sacrificing, were not these, if any, wicked hands? wicked
indeed to the utmost if you consider only the Action; But if the intention, the
book of Infamy wants a name to brand them. For they did this to despite the
Lord of life, and to grieve his Spirit who was to seal them to the day of
redemption.

And now after these hands, Is this he that is more beautiful then all the
Sons of men? This that goodly person that whosoever looked on, blessed the Womb
that bare him, and the paps that gave him suck? This that face that the Angels
cannot look on, and yet will not look off? yes, I add to this, their malice
has augmented that beauty. Quae dabo magis ex horrido Seneca.
speciosa, Miseries consecrate worthy countenances, and make that which entire
was our pleasure, broken become our worship. Perdiderunt tot mala, they lost
all their injuries: That their sponge swelled with gall and vinegar, did (as
that froward Painters sponge) perfect that work they thought to spoil. For when
he had drunk, He said, Consummatum est It is finished: and so by a largeness of
charity freely breathing out his saving spirit into the world, revived the
nations dead in trespasses. Here me thinks I see the Cross set up as the bound
and pillar of the Law; and hear God himself saying, Hitherto shall thou come
and no further, and here shall thy killing letter it self die.

Thus was it his determinate counsel, that the Old Testament should be
swallowed up in the New, that all those Ceremonies of sacrifice should be
buried in that immaculate sacrifice that he himself delivered, and that the
Sepulcher of Moses so long hid from the world, should be found at last in our
Savior Christ. Thus did the Sun of Righteousness set with more grace and
sweetness, then either he did rise or run his course with, and enlightening his
thorns in so many pointed Rays, of that his greatest work, His death made
glories and circles of luster for all the rest of his actions: Thus when the
Jews by divine foreknowledge had brought the Deity to that despicablenesse,
that they occasioned those miracles, That He should be impleaded and condemned
who is Judge of all; He laden with curses, that scatters blessings as
Sunne-beams over the face of the world; That health it self languisht, and the
very impassible suffered. God (who is wont to take his rise where men stop) was
pleased to strike miracles out of these, greater then these. For behold, An
Offspring of Mercy, issuing out of the womb of Cruelty; A bundle of new
miracles as far beyond the former, as they are opposite to them; A
condemnation that absolves us; A curse that blesses us; A sickness that
recovers us; and a death it self that quickens us; So much was his love
stronger then death, who Heb. 5. 8, 9.
though He were a Son, yet learned he obedience by the things he suffered; and
being made perfect he became the Author of eternal salvation to all them that
obey him.

Among which number, O Lord, write our names, for his sake who this day
suffered to blot out that handwriting that was against us.

Amen.

