A LETTER From the Right Honorable, The Lord Lieutenant of Ireland, Concerning
the Surrender of the TOWN of ROSS, AND The Artillery, Arms and Ammunition
there.

Together with The several Transactions between the Lord Lieutenant and the
Governor in order thereunto: And the ARTICLES for the Surrender thereof.

Die Veneris, 16 Novembr. 1649.

ORdered by the Parliament, That these Letters, Transactions and Articles be
forthwith printed and published.

Hen: Scobell, Cleric. Parliamenti.

London, Printed by John Field for Edward Husband, Printer to the Parliament of
England. 1649.

For the Honorable, WILLIAM LENTHAL Esquire Speaker of the PARLIAMENT of ENGLAND.
SIR,
SInce my last from Wexford, we marched to Ross, a walled Town, situate upon
the Barrow, a Port Town, up to which a Ship of seven or eight hundred Tun may
come. We came before it upon Wednesday the Seventeenth instant, with three
pieces of Canon: That evening I sent a Summons; Major General Taaff being
Governor, refused to admit my Trumpet into the Town, but took the Summons in,
returning me no answer. I did hear, that near One thousand Foot had been put
into this place, some few days before my coming to it; the next day was spent
in making preparations for our Battery; and in our view there were boated over
from the other side of the River, of English, Scots and Irish, Fifteen hundred
more, Ormond, Castlehaven, and the Lord of Ardes, being on the other side of
the Water to cause it to be done. That night we planted our Battery, which
begun to play very early the next Morning: The Governor immediately sent forth
an Answer to my Summons, Copies of all which I make bold herewith to trouble
you; the rather, because you may see how God pulls down proud stomachs: He
desired Commissioners might Treat, and that in the mean time there might be a
ceasing of acts of Hostility on both sides, which I refused, sending in word,
That if he would march away with Arms, Bag and Baggage, and give me Hostages
for performance, he should. Indeed he might have done it without my leave, by
the advantage of the River. He insisted upon having the Canon with him, which I
would not yield unto, but required the leaving the Artillery and Ammunition;
which he was content to do, and marched away, leaving the great Artillery, and
the Ammunition in the Stores, to me. When they marched away, at least Five
hundred English (many of them of the Munster Forces) came to us: Ormond is at
Kilkenny, Inchiquin in Munster, Henry O Neal, Owen Roe's Son, is come up to
Kilkenny, with near Two thousand Foot and Horse, with whom and Ormond there is
now a perfect Conjunction: So that now I trust some angry friends will think it
high time to take off their jealousy from those to whom they ought exercise
more charity. The Rendition of this Garrison was a seasonable Mercy, as giving
us an opportunity toward Munster, and is for the present a very good
Refreshment to our men. We are able to say nothing to all this, but that the
Lord is still pleased to own a company of poor worthless Creatures; for which
we desire his Name may be magnified, and the hearts of all concerned may be
provoked to walk worthy of such continued Favors. This is the earnest desire of

Your most humble Servant.
Ross, October. 25. 1649. Colonel Horton is lately dead of the Country Disease,
leaving a Son behind him: He was a person of great Integrity and Courage; his
former Services, especially that of the last Summer, I hope will be had in
remembrance.



For the Commander in Chief in Ross.
SIR,
SInce my coming into Ireland, I have this witness for my self, That I have
endeavored to avoid effusion of blood, having been before no place, to which
such terms have not been first sent, as might have turned to the good and
preservation of those to whom they were offered. This being my principle, That
the people and place where I come may not suffer, except through their own
wilfulness. To the end I may observe the like course with this place, and the
people therein, I do hereby summon you to deliver the Town of Ross into my
hands to the use of the Parliament of England: Expecting your speedy Answer, I
rest,

Your Servant, O. CROMWELL.
October 17. 1649.
For General Cromwell, or in his absence, To the Commander in Chief of the Army
now encamped before Ross.
SIR,
I Received a Summons from you the first day you appeared before this place,
which should have been answered ere now, had not other occasions interrupted
me; and although I am now in far better condition to defend this place, then I
have been at that time, yet am I upon the consideration offered in your
Summons, content to entertain a Treaty, and to receive from you those
Conditions that may be safe and honorable for me to accept of; which if you
listen to, I desire that Pledges of both sides may be sent for performance of
such Articles as shall be agreed upon, and that all acts of Hostility may cease
of both sides, and each Party keep within their distance. To this your
immediate Resolution is expected by,

Sir, Your Servant, LUCAS TAAFF.
Ross, 19 October, 1649.
For the Governor in Ross.
SIR,
IF you like to march away with those under your Command, with their Arms, Bag
and Baggage, and with Drums and Colors, and shall deliver up the Town to me, I
shall give caution to perform these Conditions, expecting the like from you; As
to the Inhabitants, they shall be permitted to live peaceably, free from the
injury and violence of the Soldier: If you like hereof, you can tell how to let
me know your mind, notwithstanding my refusal of a Cessation; by these you
will see the reality of my intentions to save blood, and to preserve that place
from ruin. I rest,

Your Servant, O. CROMWELL.
19 October, 1649.
For General Cromwell.
SIR,
THere wants but little of what I would propose, which is, That such Townsmen
as have a desire to part, may have liberty within a convenient time to carry
away themselves and goods, and Liberty of Conscience to such as shall stay, and
that I may carry away such Artillery and Ammunition as I have in my command; if
you be inclined to this, I will send, upon your Honor or safe Conduct, an
Officer to conclude with you: To which your immediate Answer is expected by,

Sir, Your Servant, LUCAS TAAFF.
Ross, 19 October. 1649.
For the Governor in Ross.
SIR,
TO what I formerly offered, I shall make good; As for your carrying away any
Artillery or Ammunition that you brought not in with you, or has not come to
you since you had the command of that place, I must deny you that, expecting
you leave it as you found it: For that which you mention concerning liberty of
conscience, I meddle not with any man's conscience; But if by liberty of
conscience, you mean a liberty to exercise the Mass, I judge it best to use
plain dealing, and to let you know, Where the Parliament of England have power,
that will not be allowed of: As for such of the Townsmen who desire to depart,
and to carry away themselves and goods (as you express) I engage my self they
shall have three months time so to do: And in the mean time shall be preserved
from violence in their persons and goods, as others under the obedience of the
Parliament: If you accept of this offer, I engage my Honor for a punctual
performance hereof. I rest,

Your Servant, O. CROMWELL.
October 19. 1649.
For General Cromwell.
SIR,
I Am content to yield up this Place upon the terms offered in your last and
first Letter, and if you please to send your safe Conduct, to such as I shall
employ to perfect those Conditions, I shall on receipt thereof send them to
you, in the interval to cease from all acts of Hostility, and that all parties
keep their own ground, until matters receive a full end; and so remains,

Sir, Your Servant, Lucas Taaff.
Ross, 19 October. 1649.
For the Governor in Ross.
SIR,
YOu have my Hand and Honor engaged to perform what I offered in my first and
last Letters, which I shall inviolable observe: I expect you send me
immediately four persons of such quality as may be Hostages for your
performance (for whom you have this safe Conduct enclosed, into which you may
insert their names) without which I shall not cease acts of Hostility: If any
thing happen by your delay to your prejudice, it will not be my fault; those
you send may see the Conditions perfected, whilst I forbear acts of Hostility:
I expect you forbear all actings within. I rest,

Your Servant, O. CROMWELL.
October. 19. 1649.
Articles concluded and agreed upon, by and between the Right Honorable the
Lord Lieutenant of Ireland of the one part, and the Governor of Ross of the
other part, this 19 of October, 1649.
I. IT is concluded and agreed, That the Governor of Ross, with all under his
Command, may march unto Kilkenny or Loghlen Bridge, with their Arms, Bag and
Baggage, Drums beating, Colors flying, Bullet in mouth, Bandeliers full of
Powder, and Match lighted at both ends; provided they march thither in three
days, and that no acts of Hostility be committed during the said time.

II. It is concluded and agreed, That such Townsmen as desire to depart, and to
carry away themselves and their goods, shall have three months time so to do;
and in the mean time shall be preserved from violence in their persons and
goods, as others under the obedience of the Parliament; and that a Convoy be
sent with them to secure them in their journeys.

III. It is concluded and agreed, That the Inhabitants shall be permitted to
live peaceably, and enjoy their goods and estates free from the injury and
violence of the Soldier.

IV. In consideration whereof, The Governor of Ross is to surrender into my
hands the Town of Ross, Artillery, Arms, Ammunition, and other Utensils of War
that are therein, by three of the clock this present day, except such as were
brought in by the said Governor, or such as came in since he had the Command
thereof; and by two of the clock, to permit the Lord Lieutenant to put Three
hundred men into the Blockhouse, Gate House near the breach, and the White
Tower near the same.

V. For the performance of the Articles on the said Governors part, He is to
deliver four such Hostages as I shall approve of.

James Craford. Thomas Geynau. Ma: Lynch. Matthew. Dormer.
I do approve of and confirm these Articles. LUCAS TAAFF.

FINIS.

