A LETTER Sent from Lieutenant General CROMWELL TO The Marquis of Argyle, and
General Lesley, and his Protestation concerning the Scottish Forces, under the
Command of Genesis Monro; and the marching of the English Army into that kingdom
under the conduct of the said Lieuten. General Cromwell, and Colonel General
Lambert. Also, the Resolution of the said Genesis Monro, touching Lieut. Genesis
Cromwels entering into Scotland, and a great Victory obtained by him; with the
number killed and taken prisoners. Likewise, the Declaration of the said Lieut.
General Cromwell, to his Army, and his Directions to every Colonel,
concerning their proceedings against MONRO.

COmmanded to be published throughout the Army, by every Captain of each
respective Troop or Company. Signed,

O. CRUMWELL.



Printed for C.VV. and are to be sold at the Royal Exchange in Cornhill. 1648.

THE DECLARATION Of Lieutenant General CROMWELL TO The Kings Majesty's Subjects
within the two Kingdoms of England and Scotland, concerning his marching into
that kingdom with his Army, and his proceedings therein.
Whereas we are marching with the Parliaments Army into the kingdom of
Scotland, in pursuanoe of the remaining part of the Enemy, who lately invaded
the kingdom of England, and for recovery of the Carrisons of Berwick and
Carlisle, These are to declare, that if any Officer or Soldier under my
command, shall take or demand any money, or shall violently take any horses,
goods, or victual, without order, or shall abuse the people in any sort, it
shall be tried by a Council of War; and the said person so offending, shall be
punished according to the Articles of War, made for the government of the Army
in the kingdom of England, which is death. Each Colonel, or other chief
Officer in every Regiment, is to transcribe the Copy of this, and to cause the
same to be delivered to each Captain of his Regiment, and every said Captain of
each respective Troop and Company, is to publish the same to his Troop or
Company, and to take a strict course that nothing be done contrary hereunto.

Given under my hand this 20. of Septem. 1648. O. CROMWELL.

SIR,
Major Genesis Lambert is marched into Scotland with 8. Regiments of horse and
foot, Lieu. Gen Cromwell will suddenly follow: upon the conjunction of both
Bodies the Army will amount to 9000 horse and foot, Lanerick and Monro are
about 8000. the Marq. of Argyle not above 5000, most of them foot, and young
soldiers, and so no way able to deal with Monro, whose army consists (for the
greatest part) of old soulders, and men of resolute spirits.

But Col. Genesis Lambert is joined with General Lesly, and the English has
alarmed them at Sterling bridge, the Munroians having possession thereof, a
place of great advantage, and by which they do hold much the greater part of
Scotland at their devotion Genesis Lesleys (which stands for the Parliament of
England) quarters six miles on this side Monro, who before the English had
crossed Tweed, sent a Herald to Monro, requiring a Treaty, in which was agreed,
That the said Monro and his Irish forces should depart the said kingdom, and
have an Act of Indemnity for himself and his Army.

But like a good honest Turk, contrary to Faith, under pretense of sending a
Guard to secure the aforesaid Bridge, advanced over and fell upon the Marquis
of Argyle, killed and took seven hundred of his men, and forced the rest to a
retreat.

The Lieutenant General is upon his march toward them, and a sudden
engagement is expected. Monro gives out that he is resolved to fight him: he
has summoned in most of the Inhabitants in those parts, and cut off many
Bridges, declining fighting with the English.

Col. Bright and Scoutmaster General Row are sent to the Marq. of Argyle to
consult about assisting them, and what way will be best therein. The Governor
of Barwick has returned answer to the Lieut. Gen: Summons, That he received
the Government thereof from the kingdom of Scotland, and upon their Directions
would deliver it to any. By the next I doubt not but to give you an account of
the surrender thereof, and remain

Hadding upon Tweed, 24 Sept, 1648. Yours, etc.

Other Letters say as follows:

We hear that Col. Genesis Lambert has admission into that Kingdom, being sent
for by the General Assembly, and others, to treat upon the affairs of both
Kingdoms to remove all differences and jealousies, and to have a mutual
conrespondency between the subjects of both Nation.

The Scots cannot endure to hear of the name of Crumwell, but says, That if
ever he invades that Nation they will rise as one man against him: this is only
the faying of the vanting Leards, who by experience has felt the heavy hand of
the Lieutenant General, and his noble Heroes.

Monro is joined with the Earl of Lanerick, and lies East of Edinburgh.

The further proceedings of the Treaty.
Whereas the Lords and Commons assembled in Parliament, have been necessitated
to make and prosecute a war in their just and lawful defense; and thereupon
Oaths, Declaration, and proclamations have been made against them, and their
Ordinances and proceedings, and against others for adhering unto them, and for
executing offices, places, and charges by authority derived from them; and
Judgments, Inditements, Outlaries, Attainders, and Inquisitions, for the
causes aforesaid, have been had and made against some of the Members of the
Houses of parliament, and other his Majesty's good Subjects, and Grants have
been made of their Lands and Goods.

Be it therefore declared, and hereby enacted, by the Kings Majesty, and by the
Lords and Commons assembled in Parliament, and by Authority of the same,

That all Oaths, Declarations, and Proclamations heretofore had or made against
both or either of the Houses of Parliament, or any the Members of either of
them, for the causes aforesaid, or against their Orninances or proceedings, or
against any for adhering unto them, or for doing or executing any office,
place, or charge, by any Authority derived from the said Houses, or either of
them, And all Judgments, Inditements, Outlaries, Attainders, Inquisitions and
Grants thereupon made, and all other proceedings for any the causes aforesaid,
had, made, done or executed, or to be had made done or executed, whether the
same be done by the King or any Judges, Justices, Sheriffs, Ministers or any
others, are void and of no effect, and are contrary to and against the Laws of
this Realm.

And be it further Enacted and hereby Declared by the Authority aforesaid, That
all Judges, Justices of the peace, Mayors, Sheriffs, Constables, and other
Officers and Ministers shall take notice hereof, and are hereby prohibited and
discharged in all time to come from awarding any Writ, process, oa Summons,
and from pronouncing or executing any Judgment, Sentence or Decree, or any way
proceeding against, or molesting any of the said Members of the two Houses of
Parliament, or against any of the Subjects of this Kingdom, for any the causes
aforesaid.

But his Majesty desires the Parliament to declare, that this be not binding
unto him, until all is agreed upon, that is, when he has satisfaction to what
he shall propound: as well as the Parliament to what they desire. To which the
Commons have concurred, and assented to his Majesty's Desire.

Liet. Genesis Cromnell having received a message from the Marq. of Argyle, sent
by the Lord Lowden, desiring the assistance of the English Army against Monro:
he immediately calls a Council of War, the results whereof was to give them
assistance: and sent a Letter to the said Marq intimating, that he would be
ready to join with him against Monro, desiring nothing more then the subduing
of all such as are enemies to peace and truth; assuring them that in his
in-come he will deny himself and his soldiers that which he would take in
England, and that the enemy once subdued, and the English towns delivered or
gained, he will return: And desires that the Letter he now sends may be kept as
a testimony against him and those under his Command, if they do not, as a brand
of their hypocrisy for ever. This Letter was

Signed, O. CROMWELL.

FINIS.

