A LETTER From the Lord General Cromwell, Concerning the Rendition of the Castle
of Edinburgh To his Excellency on ARTICLES.

Together with the Passages between His Excellency and the Governor in order
hereunto, and the ARTICLES upon which the same were Surrendered, and a List of
the Ordnance and Ammunition therein.

Die Martis, 31 Decembr. 1650.
ORdered by the Parliament, That the Letter sent from the General from
Edinburgh, dated the 24. December. 1650. Together with the several Papers therein
enclosed; together with the Articles for the Rendition of the Castle of
Edinburgh; and the List of the Ordnance and Ammunition taken there, be
forthwith printed and published.

Hen: Scobell, Cleric. Parliamenti.

London, Printed by Edward Husband and John Field, Printers to the Parliament
of England, 1650.

SIR,
IT has pleased God to cause the Castle of Edinburgh to be surrendered into our
hands this day about Eleven a clock: I thought fit to give you such account
thereof as I could, and the shortness of time would permit. I sent a Summons to
the Castle upon the Twelfth instant, which occasioned several exchanges of
Returns and Replies; which for their unusualness I also thought fit humbly to
present to you. Indeed the Mercy is very great and seasonable. I think I need
say little of the strength of the place, which if it had not come as it did,
would have cost very much Blood to have attained, if at all to be attained, and
did tie up your Army to that inconvenience, that little or nothing could have
been attempted whilst this was in Design, or little fruit had of any thing
brought into your power by your Army hitherto without it. I must needs say, not
any skill or wisdom of ours, but the good hand of God has given you this
place. I believe all Scotland has not in it so much Brass Ordnance as this
place. I send you here enclosed a List thereof, and of the Arms and Ammunition,
so well as they could be taken on a sudden. Not having more at present to
trouble you with, I take leave, and rest,

Edinburgh, the 24 of December. 1650. Sir, Your most humble Servant, O. Cromwell.

A Copy of the Summons to the Governor of Edinburgh Castle.
SIR,
WE being now resolved (by Gods assistance) to make use of such means as he
has put into our hands toward the reducing of Edinburgh Castle, I thought fit
to send you this Summons. What the grounds of our relation to the Glory of God,
and the common Interest of his people, we have often expressed in our Papers
tendered to public view; To which though credit has not been given by men,
yet the Lord has been pleased to bear a gracious and favorable Testimony; and
has not only kept us constant to our Professions, and in our Affections to
such as fear the Lord in this Nation, but has unmasked others of their
Pretenses, as appears by the present Transactions at St. Johnstons. Let the
Lord dispose your Resolutions as seems good to him; my sense of Duty presses
me for the end aforesaid, and to avoid the effusion of more Blood, to Demand
the rendering or this place to me upon fit Conditions. To which expecting your
Answer this day, I rest,

Edinburgh the 12 December. 1650. Sir, Your Servant, O. Cromwell.

For the Governor of Edinburgh Castle, these.
My Lord,
I Am entrusted by the Estates of Scotland with this place; and being sworn not
to deliver it to any without their Warrant, I have no power to dispose thereof
by my self. I do therefore desire the space of Ten days, wherein I may
conveniently acquaint the said Estates, and receive their Answer, and for this
effect your safe Conduct for the employed in the Message: Upon the receipt of
their Answer, you shall have the resolute Answer of

Edinburgh Castle, the 12 of December. 1650. My Lord, Your most humble Servant,
VV. Dundas.

SIR,
IT concerns not me to know your Obligations to those that trust you: I make no
question the Apprehensions you have of your Abilities to resist those
Impressions which shall be made upon you, are the natural and equitable Rules
of all Men's Judgments and Consciences in your condition, except you had taken
an Oath beyond a possibility, I leave that to your consideration, and shall not
seek to contest with your Thoughts; only I think it may become me to let you
know, you may have honorable Terms for your self, and those with you; and both
your self, and the Soldiers, have satisfaction to all your reasonable Desires;
and those that have other Employments, Liberty and Protection in the exercise
of them. But to deal plainly with you, I will not give liberty to you to
consult your Committee of Estates, because I hear, those that are honest
amongst them enjoy not satisfaction, and the rest are now discovered to seek
another Interest then they have formerly pretended to: And if you desire to be
informed of this, you may by them you dare trust at a nearer distance then
Saint Johnstons. Expecting your present Answer, I rest

Edinburgh, 12 Decembr. 1650. Sir, Your Servant O. C.

For the Governor of Edinburgh Castle, these.
My Lord,
IT much concerns me to consider my Obligations, to be found faithful in the
Trust committed to me; and therefore in the fear of the living God, and of his
great Name, called upon in the accepting of my Trust, I do again press the
Liberty of acquainting the Estates, the time is but short, and I do expect it
as answerable to your profession of Affection to those that fear the Lord; in
the mean time I am willing to bear Information of late proceedings from such as
he dare trust, who is

Edinburgh Castle, the 13 Decembr. 1650. My Lord, Your humble Servant VV.
Dundas.

SIR,
BEcause of your strict and solemn Admiration of me in the Fear and Name of the
Living God, that I give you time to send to the Committee of Estates, to whom
you undertook the keeping of this place, under the Obligation of an Oath, as
you affirm. I cannot but hope, that it is your Conscience and not Policy,
carrying you to that Desire: The granting of which, if it be prejudicial to our
Affairs, I am as much obliged in Conscience not to do, as you can pretend cause
for your Conscience sake to desire it. Now considering our merciful and wise
God binds not his people to Actions so cross one to another, but that our
bands may be as I am persuaded they are, through our mistakes and darkness, not
only in the Question about the surrendering of this Castle, but also in all
the present Differences, I have so much reason to believe that by a Conference
you may be so well satisfied in point of Fact of your States (to whom you say
you are obliged) carrying on an Interest destructive and contrary to what they
professed when they committed that Trust to you, having made to depart from
them many honest men through fear of their own Safety, and making way for the
Reception of professed Malignants, both in their Parliament and Army; but also
may have laid before you such grounds of our Ends and Aims, to the preservation
of the Interest of honest men in Scotland as well as England, as will (if God
vouchsafe to appear in them) give your Conscience satisfaction. Which if you
refuse, I hope you will not have cause to say, That we are unmindful of the
great Name of the Lord, which you have mentioned; nor that we are wanting to
Answer our Professions of Affection to those that fear the Lord. I am willing
to cease Hostility for some hours or convenient time, to so good an end as
Information of Judgment and Satisfaction of Conscience, although I may not
give Liberty for the time desired, to send to the Committee of Estates, and at
all stay the prosecution of my attempt. Expecting your sudden Answer, I rest

Edinburgh, the 13 Dec. 1650. Sir, Your Servant O. C.

My Lord,
WHat I pressed in my last proceeded from Conscience, and not from Policy; and
I conceived, That the few days desired, could not be of such prejudice to your
Affairs, as to bar the desired expression of professed affection toward those
that fear the Lord. And I expected, That a small delay of our own Affairs
should not have preponderate the satisfaction of a desire pressed in so serious
and solemn a manner for satisfying Conscience. But if you will needs persist in
denial, I shall desire to hear the Information of late proceedings from such as
I dare trust, and have had occasion to know the certainty of things; such I
hope you will permit to come along at the first convenience, and during that
time all acts of Hostility, and prosecution of Attempts be forborne on both
sides, I am,

Edinburgh Castle the 14 of Dec. 1650. My Lord, Your humble Servant, VV. Dundas.

SIR,
YOu will give me leave to be sensible of Delays out of Conscience of Duty. If
you please to name any you would speak with now in Town, they shall have
liberty to come and speak with you for one hour, if they will; provided you
send presently. I expect there be no loss of time. I rest,

December. 14. 1650. Your Servant, O. C.

To the Governor of Edinburgh Castle, these.
SIR,
HAving acquainted the Gentlemen with your desire to speak with them, and they
making some difficulty of it, have desired me to send you this enclosed. I rest,

December. 14. 1650. Your Servant, O. C.
Right Honorable,
WE now hearing that you was desirous to speak with us, for your information of
the posture of Affairs, we would be glad, and we think you make no doubt of it,
to be refreshing or useful to you in any thing; but the matter is of so high
concernment, especially since it may be you will learn somewhat upon our
information, in managing that important Trust put upon you, that we dare not
take upon us to meddle. Ye may therefore do as ye find your selves clear, and
in capacity, and the Lord be with you. We are

Edinburgh, 14 Dec. 1650. Sir, Your Honors humble Servants, M. Jaffray. Mr. Jo:
Custaires.

To the Right Honorable, the Governor of Edinburgh Castle, these.


My Lord,
I Expressed that Conscience which you pretended to be your Motive that did
induce you to Summon this House, before you did attempt any thing against it,
should also have moved you to have expected my Answer to your demand of the
House, which I could not out of Conscience suddenly give, without mature
Deliberation, it being a business of such high Importance, you having refused
that little time which I did demand, to the effect I might receive the Commands
of them that did entrust me with this place; and yet not daring to fulfill your
desire, I do demand such a competent time as may be condescended upon betwixt
us; within which, if no relief come, I shall surrender this place upon such
honorable Conditions as can be agreed upon by Capitulation: And during which
time, all acts of Hostility, and prosecution of Attempts on both sides may be
forborne. I am

Edinburgh Castle, the 18 Decembr. 1650. My Lord, Your humble Servant VV.
Dundas.

SIR,
ALl that I have to say is shortly this, That if you will send out
Commissioners by Eleven a Clock this Night, thoroughly Instructed and Authorized
to Treat and Conclude, you may have Terms honorable and safe to you; and those
whose Interests are concerned in the things that are with you, I shall give a
safe conduct to such whose names you shall send within the time limited, and
order to forbear shooting at their coming forth, and going in: To this I expect
your Answer within one hour, and rest

Edinburgh 18 Decembr. 1650. Sir, Your Servant O. C.

For the Governor of Edinburgh Castle, these.
My Lord,
I Have thought upon their two Gentlemen, whose names are here mentioned, to
wit, Major Andrew Abernathy, and Captain Robert Henderson, whom I purpose to
send out instructed, in order to the carrying on of the Capitulation; therefore
expects a safe Conduct for them with this Bearer. I rest

Edinburgh Castle the 18 Decembr. 1650. My Lord, Your humble Servant VV. Dundas.

SIR,
I Have here enclosed, sent you a safe conduct for the coming forth and return
of the Gentlemen you desire, and have appointed and authorized Colonel Monk,
and Lieutenant Colonel White, to meet with your Commissioners at the House in
the safe conduct mentioned, there to Treat and conclude of the Capitulation on
my part. I rest

Edinburgh 18 Decembr. 1650. Sir Your Servant O. C.

For the Governor of Edinburgh Castle, these.
YOu are on sight hereof to suffer Major Andrew Abernathy and Captain Robert
Henderson, to come forth of Edinburgh Castle to the House of Master (...)
Wallace in Edinburgh, and to return back into the said Castle, without any
trouble or molestation.

Given under my hand the 18 of December. 1650.
To all Officers and Soldiers under my command.


YOu are hereby authorized and fully enabled as Commissioners on my behalf, to
Treat with and conclude upon such Articles as to you shall seem meet with the
Commissioners appointed by Dundas Esquire, now Governor of the Castle of
Edinburgh, for the surrender of the same. And what Agreement you shall make
herein, I do by these Presents promise to ratify, and make good.

Given under my Hand and Seal, this 18 of December. 1650. O. C.

To Colonel Monk, and Lieutenant Colonel White.
December 19. 1650. Articles Treated of, Concluded and Agreed upon by Major
Andrew Abernathy and Captain Robert Henderson, on the one part, on the behalf
of Walter Dundas Esquire Governor of the Castle of Edinburgh; And by Colonel George
Monk and Lieutenant Colonel Francis White, on the other part, on the behalf of
His Excellency the Lord General Cromwell, For the Rendition of the said Castle,
according to the Articles ensuing:
I. THat the Castle of Edinburgh, with the Canon, Arms, Ammunition, Magazine,
and Furniture of War, Except what shall be excepted in the ensuing Articles, be
rendered to his Excellency the Lord General Cromwell, or whom he shall appoint,
on Tuesday next, being the Four and twentieth of this present December, by
Twelve of the clock, without wilful spoil or embezlement.

II. That the public Registers, public Movables, private Evidences and
Writs, be transported to Fife or Sterling; and that Wagons and Ships may be
provided for the transporting of them.

III. That for all the Goods in the Castle belonging to any person whatsoever,
an Edict may be proclaimed to the people about Edinburgh, To come own and
receive their own; and if any be at a far distance or dead, a place may be
provided in the Town of Edinburgh for keeping the same until they be owned; and
after owning, may have liberty to carry them where they please.

IV. That all persons whatsoever, not belonging to the Garrison, as Men, Women
and children, may have liberty to go whither they will without trouble, and
there have the free execise of their callings and employments, with safety both
of themselves and goods.

V. That the Governor of the said Castle, and all Military Officers, Commanders
and Soldiers, of whatsoever condition, none excepted, may depart without any
molestation, with their Arms and Baggage, with Drum beating, Colors flying,
Matches lighted at both ends, and Ball in their Mouths, as they usually are
wont to march, and all their Goods, with a free conduct to Brant-Island in
Fife; or if any of the aforesaid persons desire to transport themselves or
goods any where else for their greater convenience, it may be with freedom
granted.

VI. That all Officers and Soldiers, as well sick as hurt, shall have free
liberty to remain in Edinburgh till they recover, and to enjoy the benefit of
these Articles

VII. That a number of Horses and Wagons, as many as the Governor shall need
for his own particular use, as also for the Officers and Soldiers, shall be
lent them for the carrying of the foresaid Baggage to the aforesaid places.

VIII. That Captain Lieutenant Colonel Lerr, Lieutenant Stratten, Thomas Binney
Gunner, and Patrick Summeral Gunner, be sent to his Excellency the Lord General
Cromwell this present Thursday by Twelve of the clock, for Hostages for the
performance of the fore-written Articles; And that the General shall keep
Sentinels about the Castle under the Rock.

I do approve, ratify and confirm the Articles above-writ^en, W. DUNDAS. And.
Abirnethy. R. Henderson.

A List of the Ordnance, etc. in the Castle.
Brass Pieces.

5 French Canons, or Canons of 7. 9 Dutch half Canon or 24l ders. 2 Culverings.
2 Demi-Culverings. 2 Minion. 3 3l ders. 2 Falcons. 28 Brass Drakes, called
Monkeys.

Iron Guns.

The great Iron Murderer called Muckle Megg. 4 Iron Ordnance. 10 Iron Drakes
called Monkeys.

2 P^^ards.

About 7 or 8000 Arms Between 3 and Fourscore Barrels of Powder. Great store of
Canon shot.

FINIS.

