Lieutenant General Cromwell's LETTER Concerning The Total Routing OF THE SCOTS
ARMY, The taking of Four thousand Arms, and almost all their Ammunition.

WITH Another Letter written from Manchester to Sir Ralph Ashton, a Member of
the Honorable House of Commons, concerning the said Victory.

ORdered by the Commons assembled in Parliament, That these Letters be
forthwith printed and published.

H: Elsynge, Cler. Parl. D. Com.



London, Printed for Edward Husband, Printer to the Honorable House of Commons,
August 22. 1648.

To the Right Worshipful, and his most approved kind friend, Sir Ralph Ashton
Baronet, a Member of the House of COMMONS.
SIR,
I Have sent you here enclosed a Copy of a Letter, written by Lieutenant
General Cromwell from Preston, to the Committee sitting at Manchester, whereby
you may perceive what salvation God has wrought for this poor County, which
not above a week ago in the judgment of many, nay of most men, was given up
for lost, but God has made man's extremity to be his opportunity, in saving a
people designed by cruel men to ruin and destruction: I shall say no more of
it, because I suppose you will have full and ample Intelligence from other
hands, only I wish we may not be too much elevated by successes, or too much
dejected or cast down in a low estate, but that we may so improve both mercies
and judgments, that now at last through the various changes and chances which
have happened, such use may be made of all Dispensations and Providence of God,
that the Church of England may flourish in Doctrine and Discipline, and all
Interests may enjoy their just and undoubted Rights in reference to the common
good of the Nation, which shall be the constant prayer of him who desires to
subscribe himself,

Sir, Your most humble Servant, W. L.
Manchester this 19. of August, 1648.
Gentlemen,
IT has pleased God this day to show his great power, known by making the Army
successful against the common Enemy: we lay the last night at Mr. Sherburns at
Stonihurst, nine miles from Preston, which was within three miles of the Scots
quarters; we advanced betimes next morning toward Preston, with a desire to
engage the Enemy, and by that time our Forlorn had engaged the Enemy, we were
about four miles from Preston: and thereupon we advanced with the whole Army;
and the Enemy being drawn out upon a Moor betwixt us and the Town, the Armies
on both sides engaged, and after a very sharp Dispute continuing for three or
four hours, it pleased God to enable us to give them a Defeat; which I hope we
shall improve by Gods assistance, to their utter ruin; and in this service
your countrymen had not the least share: we cannot be particular, having not
time to take account of the slain and prisoners; but we can assure you we have
many prisoners, and those of quality, and many slain, and the Army so
dissipated, the principal part whereof with Duke Hamilton, is on the Southside
Ribble and Darwain-bridge, and we lying with the greatest part of the Army
close to them, nothing hindering the ruin of that part of the Enemies Army but
the night; it will be our care that they shall not pass over any Ford beneath
the bridge to go Northward, or to come betwixt us and VVhalley; we understand
Col: Gen: Ashtons are at VVhalley: we have seven troops of Horse and Dragoons
that we believe lie at or near Clithero, this night I have sent Orders expressly
to them to march to VVhalley to join to those companies, that so we may
endeavor the ruin of this Enemy. You perceive by this Letter how things stand,
that the Enemy is broken, and most of their Horses being gone Northward, and we
having sent a considerable party at the very heels of them, and the Enemy
having lost almost all his Ammunition, and near Four thousand Arms, so that the
greatest part of the Foot are naked; and therefore in order to the perfecting
of this work, we desire you to raise your county, and improve your Forces to
the total ruin of that Enemy which way soever they go, and that you shall
accordingly do your part, doubt not of their total ruin. We thought fit to
speed this to you, to the end you may not be troubled if they shall march to
you, but improve your interest as aforesaid, that you may give glory to God for
his unspeakable mercy. This is all for present from

Your very humble Servant, Oliver Cromwell.
August 17. 1648. For the Honorable Committee of Lancashire, sitting at
Manchester. I desire the Commander of those Forces to open this Letter, if it
come not to their hands.



FINIS.

