A LETTER FROM The Lord Lieutenant of Ireland, To the Honorable William Lenthal
Esquire Speaker of the Parliament of England:

Giving an Account of the Proceedings of the Army there under his Lordships
Command; and several Transactions between his Lordship and the Governor of
Wexford.

Together with a Relation of the Taking in of WEXFORD, With the Fort, Haven and
Shipping there; and of several other Garrisons of the Enemy.

As also the Propositions tendered for the Rendition of Wexford: And a Copy of a
Censure, under the hand of Nicholas Bishop of Fernes, against Talbot who dyed a
Protestant.

ORdered by the Parliament, That these Letters and Transactions be forthwith
printed and published.

Hen: Scobell, Cleric. Parliamenti.



London, Printed by John Field for Edward Husband, Printer to the Parliament of
England. 1649.

Die Martis, xxx. Octobr. 1649.
ORdered by the Parliament, That it be referred to the Lord Major of the City
of London, to take care to disperse the said Letters and Transactions to all
the Ministers within London and the Liberties, who are required respectively to
Read the same in their respective Congregations on Thursday next, and to take
notice of this great and wonderful Mercy, in giving in the Fort and Town of
Wexford, together with the Haven there, and the Shipping in it, as an addition
unto the former Mercies, for which that day was set apart, and to return all
humble Thanks to Almighty God for the same.

Hen: Scobell, Cleric. Parliamenti.

For the Honorable William Lenthal Esquire, Speaker of the Parliament of
England.
SIR,
THe Army marched from Dublin about the 23 of September, into the County of
Wicklo, where the enemy had a garrison about 14 miles from Dublin called
Killingkerick, which they quitting, a Company of the Army was put therein. From
thence the Army marched through almost a desolated Country, until it came to a
passage over the River Doro, about a mile above the Castle of Arcklo, which was
the first Seat and Honor of the Marquis of Ormonds family, which he had
strongly fortified, but was upon the approach of the Army quitted, wherein we
left another company of foot. From thence the Army marched toward Wexford,
where in the way was a strong and large Castle, at a Town called Limrick, the
ancient Seat of the Esmonds, where the enemy had a strong garrison, which they
burnt and quitted the day before our coming thither. From thence we marched
toward Ferns, an Episcopal Seat, where was a Castle, to which I sent Colonel
Reynolds with a party to summon it, which accordingly he did, and it was
surrendered to him; where we having put a company, advanced the Army to a
passage over the River Slane, which runs down to Wexford, and that night
marched into the fields of a Village called Eniscorfy, belonging to Master
Robert Wallop, where was a strong Castle very well manned and provided for by
the enemy, and close under it in a very fair house belonging to the same worthy
Person, A Monastery of Franciscan Friars, the considerables in all Ireland,
they run away the night before we came; we summoned the Castle, and they
refused to yield at the first, but upon better consideration, they were willing
to deliver the place to us, which accordingly they did, leaving their great
Guns, Arms, Ammunition, and provisions behind them. Upon Monday the first of
October, we came before Wexford, into which the enemy had put a garrison
consisting of their Army, this Town having until then been so confident of
their own strength, as that they would not at any time suffer a garrison to be
imposed upon them; The commander that brought in those forces was Colonel David
Synnot, who took upon him the command of the place, to whom I sent a summons, a
Copy whereof is this enclosed, between whom and me there passed Answers and
Replies; Copies whereof these also are. Whilst these Papers were passing
between us, I sent the Lieut. General with a party of dragoons, horse and foot,
to endeavor to reduce their Fort, which lay at the mouth of their Harbor, about
ten miles distant from us, to which he sent a Troop of dragoons, but the enemy
quit their Fort, leaving behind them about seven great Guns, betook themselves
by the help of their boat to a frigot of 12 Guns, lying in the Harbor, within
Canon-shot of the Fort: The dragoons possessed the Fort, and some Seamen
belonging to your Fleet, coming happily in at the same time, they bent their
Guns at the Frigot, and she immediately yielded to mercy, both her self, the
soldiers that had been in the Fort, and the Seamen that manned her: And whilst
our men were in her, the Town not knowing what had happened, sent another small
Vessel to her, which our men also took: The Governor of the Town having
obtained from me a safe conduct for the four persons mentioned in one of the
Papers, to come and treat with me about the surrender of the Town, I expected
they should have done so; but in stead thereof, the Earl of Castlehaven brought
to their relief on the Northside of the River, about five hundred foot, which
occasioned their refusal to send out any to treat, and caused me to revoke my
safe conduct, not thinking it fit to leave it for them to make use of it when
they pleased; our Canon being landed, and we having removed all our quarters to
the South-east end of the Town, next the Castle, it was generally agreed that
we should bend the whole strength of our Artillery upon the Castle, being
persuaded that if we got the Castle, the Town would easily follow. Upon
Thursday the 11. instant (our Batteries being finished the night before) we
began to play betimes in the morning, and having spent near a hundred shot, the
Governors stomach came down, and he sent to me to give leave for four persons
entrusted by him, to come unto me and offer terms of surrender, which I
condescending to, two field Officers, with an Alderman of the Town, and the
Captain of the Castle, brought out the Propositions enclosed, which for their
abominableness, manifesting also the impudency of the men, I thought fit to
present to your view, together with my answer, which indeed had no effect; for
whilst I was preparing of it, studying to preserve the Town from plunder, that
it might be of the more use to you and your Army, The Captain who was one of
the Commissioners being fairly treated, yielded up the Castle to us: upon the
top of which our men no sooner appeared, but the enemy quitted the walls of the
Town, which our men perceiving, ran violently upon the Town with their ladders
and stormed it: And when they were come into the Market place, the enemy making
a stiff resistance, our forces brake them, and then put all to the sword that
came in their way: Two Boatfuls of the Enemy attempting to escape, being
overprest with numbers, sunk, whereby were drowned near Three hundred of them:
I believe in all there was lost of the Enemy not many less then two thousand,
and I believe not Twenty of yours killed, from first to last of the Siege. And
indeed, it has not without cause been deeply set upon our hearts, that we
intending better to this place, then so great a ruin, hoping the Town might be
of more use to you and your Army; yet God would not have it so, but by an
unexpected Providence, in his Righteous Justice, brought a just Judgment upon
them, causing them to become a prey to the Soldier, who in their Pyracies had
made preys of so many families, and made with their bloods to answer the
cruelties which they had exercised upon the lives of diverse poor Protestants;
two of which I have been lately acquainted with: About seven or eight-score
poor Protestants were by them put into an old Vessel, which being as some say
bulged by them, the Vessel sunk, and they were all presently drowned in the
Harbor: The other was thus, They put diverse poor Protestants into a Chapel,
which since they have used for a Mass house, and in which one or more of their
Priests were now killed, where they were famished to death.

The Soldier got a very good Booty in this place, and had they not had
opportunity to carry their goods over the River, whilst we besieged it, it
would have been much more. I could have wished for their own good, and the good
of the Garrison, they had been more moderate. Some things which were not easily
portable, we hope we shall make use of to your behoof: There are great
quantities of Iron, Hides, Tallow, Salt, Pipe, and Barrel Staves, which are
under Commissioners hands to be secured. We believe there are near a hundred
Canon in the Fort, and elsewhere in and about the Town: Here is likewise some
very good shipping; here are three Vessels, one of them of thirty four Guns,
which a weeks time would fit to Sea; there is another of about 20 Guns, very
near ready likewise; and one other frigot of 20 Guns, upon the stocks, made for
sailing, which is built up to the uppermost Deck, for her handsomness sake I
have appointed the workmen to finish her, here being materials to do it, if you
or the Council of State shall approve thereof. The Friggot also taken by the
Fort, is a most excellent Vessel for sailing, besides diverse other Ships and
Vessels in the Harbor. This Town is now so in your power, that the former
Inhabitants I believe scarce one in twenty can challenge any propriety in their
houses, most of them are run away, and many of them killed in this service; and
it were to be wished, that an honest people would come and plant here, where
are very good houses, and other Accommodations fitted to their hands, and may
by your favor be made of encouragement to them; as also a seat of good trade,
both inward and outward, and of mavelous great advantage in the point of the
Herring and other fishing. The Town is pleasantly seated, and strong, having a
Rampert of Earth within the Wall, near fifteen foot thick. Thus it has pleased
God to give into your hands this other Mercy, for which, as for all, we pray
God may have all the glory: Indeed your instruments are poor, and weak, and can
do nothing but through Believing, and that is the gift of God also. I humbly
take leave, and rest,

Your most humble Servant, O. CROMWELL.
Wexford, October. 4. 1649. A day or two before our Battery was planted, Ormond,
the Earl of Castlehaven, the Lord of Ardes and Clanneboys were on the other
side of the water, with about One thousand eight hundred Horse, One thousand
five hundred Foot, and offered to put in four or five hundred Foot more into
the Town, which the Town refusing, he marched away in all haste: I sent the
Lieutenant General after him, with about One thousand four hundred Horse, but
the Enemy made from him.



For the Commnnder in Chief within the Town of Wexford.
SIR,
HAving brought the Army belonging to the Parliament of England before this
place, to reduce it to its due obedience, to the end effusion of blood may be
prevented, and the Town and Counrty about it preserved from ruin, I thought
fit to Summon you to deliver the same to me, to the use of the State of
England: By this offer I hope it will clearly appear where the guilt will lie,
if innocent persons should come to suffer with the nocent. I expect your speedy
Answer, and rest,

Sir, Your Servant, O. Cromwell.
October 3. 1649.
For the Lord General Cromwell.
SIR,
I Have received your Letters of Summons for the delivery up of this Town into
your hands, which stands not with my Honor to do of my self, neither will I
take it upon me, without the advice of the rest of the Officers and Major of
this Corporation, this Town being of so great consequence to all Ireland, whom
I will call together and confer with, and return my resolution unto you to
morrow by Twelve of the Clock; in the mean time, if you be so pleased, I am
content to forbear all acts of Hostility, so you permit no approach to be made:
Expecting your Answer in that particular, I remain,

My Lord, Your Lordships Servant, Da: Sinnot.

For the Lord General Cromwell.
SIR,
I Have advised with the Major and Officers as I promised, and thereupon am
content that four whom I shall employ, may have a Conference and Treaty with
four of yours, to see if any Agreement and understanding may be begot between
us: To this purpose, I desire you to send mine a safe conduct, as I do hereby
promise to send unto yours, when you send me their names; and I pray that the
meeting may be had to morrow at Eight of the clock in the forenoon, that they
may have sufficient time to confer and debate together, and determine and
compose the matter; and that the meeting and place may be agreed upon, and the
safe conducts mutually sent for the said Meeting this afternoon: Expecting your
Answer hereto, I rest,

My Lord, Your Servant, Da: Sinnot.
Wexford, 4 October. 1649. Send me the names of your Agents, their qualities
and degrees.

Those I fix upon are Major James Birn, Major Theobald Dillon, Alderman
Nicholas Cheevers, Mr. William Stafford.



To the Commander in Chief in Wexford.
SIR,
HAving summoned you to deliver the Town of Wexford into my hands, I might well
expect the delivery thereof, and not a formal Treaty, which is seldom granted,
but where the things stand upon a more equal foot; If therefore your self or
the Town have any desires to offer, upon which you will surrender the place to
me, I shall be able to judge of the reasonableness of them, when they are made
known to me: To which end, if you shall think fit to send the persons named in
your last, entrusted by your self and the Town, by whom I may understand your
desires, I shall give you a speedy and fitting answer; And I do hereby engage
my self, that they shall return in safety to you. I expect your answer hereunto
within an hour, and rest,

Your Servant, O. C.
October. 4. 1649.
For the Lord General Cromwell.
SIR,
I Have returned you a civil answer, to the best of my judgment, and thereby I
find you undervalue me and this place so much, as you think to have it
surrendered without capitulation or honorable terms, as appears by your hours
limitation in your last. Sir, had I never a man in this Town, but the Townsmen
and the Artillery here planted, I should conceive my self in a very befitting
condition, to make Honorable Conditions; and having a considerable Party with
them in the place, I am resolved to dye honorably, or make such Conditions as
may secure my Honor and Life in the eyes of my own Party; to which reasonable
terms if you hearken not, or give me time to send my Agents, till eight of the
clock in the forenoon to morrow with my Propositions, with a further safe
Conduct, I leave you to your better judgment, and my self to the assistance of
the Almighty: And so conclude,

Your Servant, Da. Sinnot.
Wexford, 4. October. 1649.
For the Lord General Cromwell.
My Lord, Even as I was ready to send out my Agents unto you, the Lord General
of the Horse came hither with a relief, unto whom I communicated the
proceedings between your Lordship and me, and delivered him the Propositions I
intended to dispatch unto your Lordship, who has desired a small time to
consider of them, and to speed them unto me, which my Lord I could not deny, he
having a Commanding power over me; pray my Lord believe that I do not do this
to trifle out time, but for his present content; and if I find any long delay
in his Lordships returning them back unto me, I will proceed of my self
according to my first intention, to which I beseech your Lordship give credit
at the request,

My Lord, of your Lordships ready Servant, Da: Sinnot.
Wexford, 5 October. 1649.
To the Commander in Chief in Wexford.
SIr, You might have spared your trouble in the account you give me of your
Transaction with the Lord General of your Horse, and of your Resolution in case
he answer not your expectation in point of time; These are your own
concernments, and it behooves you to improve, and the relief you mention, to
your best advantage; All that I have to say, is to desire you to take notice,
that I do hereby revoke my safe Conduct from the persons mentioned therein;
when you shall see cause to Treat, you may send for another. I rest,

Sir, Your Servant, O. C.
October. 6. 1649.
For the Lord General Cromwell.
SIr, my Propositions being now prepared, I am ready to send my Agents with
them unto you, and for their safe return: I pray you to send a safe conduct by
the bearer unto me, in hope an Honotable Agreement may thereupon arise between
your Lordship and

My Lord, Your Lordships Servant, Da: Sinnot.
Wexford, 5 October. 1649.
For the Lord General Cromwell.
SIr, In performance of my last, I desire your Lordship to send me a safe
conduct for Major Theobald Dillon, Major James Birn, Alderman Nicholas Chevers,
and Captain James Stafford, whom I will send to your Lordship, instructed with
my desires; and so I rest,

My Lord, Your Servant, Da: Sinnot.
Wexford, 11 October. 1649.
For the Lord General Cromwell..
SIr, the safe conduct being left you, and never coming to my hands, through
the ignoranee of the Messenger: I pray you to send it me by the bearer, and I
will send forth the persons on receipt thereof, who are ready for that purpose:
So I rest,

My Lord, Your Lordships Servant, Da: Sinnot.
Wexford 11 October. 1649.
The Propositions of Col: David Sinnot, Governor of the Town and Castle of
Wexford, for and on the behalf of the Officers and Soldiers, and Inhabitants in
the said Town and Castle, unto General Cromwell.
IMprimis, That all and every the Inhabitants of the said Town, from time to
time, and at all times hereafter, shall have free and uninterrupted liberty,
publicly to use, exercise and profess the Roman Catholic Religion, without
restriction, mulct or penalty, Any Law or Statute to the contrary
notwithstanding.

II. That the regular and secular Roman Catholic Clergy, now possessed of the
Churches, Church Livings, Monasteries, Religious Houses and Chapels in the
said Town, and in the Suburbs and Franchises thereof, and their successors,
shall have, hold and enjoy to them and their Successors for ever, the said
Churches, Church Livings, Monasteries, Religious Houses and Chapels, and shall
teach and preach in them publicly, without any molestation, Any Law or
Statute to the contrary notwithstanding.

III. That Nicholas now Lord Bishop of Ferns, and his Successors, shall use and
exercise such Jurisdiction over the Catholics of his Diocese, as since his
consecration hitherto he used.

IV. That all the Officers and Soldiers, of what quality or degree soever in
the said Town and Castle, and such of the Inhabitants as are so pleased, shall
march with flying Colors, and be conveyed safe with their Lives, Artillery,
Ordnance, Ammunition, Arms, Goods of all sorts, Horses, Moneys, and what else
belongs to them, to the Town of Ross, and there be left safe, with their own
party, allowing each Muskettier toward their march, a pound of powder, four
yards of match, and twelve brace of Bullets, and a strong Convoy to be sent
with the said Soldiers, within four and twenty hours after the yielding up of
the said Town.

V. That such of the Inhabitants of the said Town, as will desire to leave the
same at any time hereafter, shall have free liberty to carry away out of the
said Town, all their Frigots, Artillery, Arms, Powder, Bullets, Match, Corn,
Malt, and other provision, which they have for their defense and sustenance,
and all their goods and Chattels, of what quality or condition soever, without
any manner of disturbance whatsoever, and have Passes, and safe Conducts, and
Convoys, for their lives and said goods to Ross, or where else they shall think
fit.

VI. That the Major, Bailiffs, Freeburgesses and Commons of the said Town, may
have, hold and enjoy the said Town and Suburbs, their Commons, their
Franchises, and their Liberties and Immunities which hitherto they enjoyed; and
that the Major, Bailiffs and Freeburgesses, may have the Government of the said
Town, as hitherto they enjoyed the same from the Realm of England, and that
they may have no other Government, they adhering to the State of England, and
observing their Orders, and the Orders of their Governors in this Realm for the
time being.

VII. That all and every the Burgesses and Inhabitants, either Native or
Stranger of the said Town, who shall continue their ahode therein, or come to
live there within three Months, and their heirs, shall have, hold and enjoy,
All and singular their several Castles, Messuages, Houses, Lands, Tenements and
Hereditaments within the Land of Ireland, and all their goods and Chattels, of
what nature, quality or condition soever, to them and their heirs, to their own
several uses for ever, without molestation.

VIII. That such Burgess or Burgesses, or other Inhabitant of he said Town, as
shall at any time hereafter he desirous to leave the said Town, shall have free
leave to dispose of their Real and Personal Estates respectively, to their best
advantage; and further, have full liberty and a safe Conduct respectively to go
into England, or elsewhere, according to their several pleasures, who shall
desire to depart the same.

IX. That all and singular the Inhabitants of the said Town, either Native or
Stranger from time to time, and at all times hereafter, shall have, reap and
enjoy the full Liberty of Freeborn English Subjects, without the least
incapacity or restriction therein; and that all the Freemen of the said Town,
from time to time, shall be as Free in all the Seaports, Cities and Towns in
England, as the Freemen of all and every the said Cities and Towns; and all
and every the Freemen of the said Cities and Towns, to be as Free in the said
Town of Wexford, as the Freemen there of, for their greater encouragement to
Trade and Commerce together of all hands.

X. That no memory remain of any Hostility or distance which was hitherto
between the said Town and Castle of the one part, and the Parliament or State
of England of the other part, but that all act and acts, transgressions,
offenses, depradations, and other Crimes of what nature or quality soever, be
they ever so transcendent, attempted, or done, or supposed to be attempted or
done, by the Inhabitants of the said Town, or any other heretofore or at
present adhering to the said Town, either Native or Stranger, and every of
them, shall pass in Oblivion, without chastisement, challenge, recompense,
demand, or questioning, for them or any of them, now or at any time hereafter.

THe Body of Francis Talbot, who dyed an obstinate Heretic, and finally
therein impenitent, is to be Buried in Paenam Haereseos and finalis
Impenitentiae nec non in terrorem aliorum, with only one Candle at the Grave,
at nine of the clock by night, without a Bell in the Church or Street, without
Priest, Cross, Book or Prayer; the place of his Burial is to be in the Ale of
St. Mary's Churchyard, nearest to the Garden of the Parsonage: All which
concerning the said Burial, we have ordered to be done with the advice of men
learned in Divinity; and who shall exceed this manner of the said Francis his
Burial, is to incur Church Censures: No Wax, Taper, or Candle, or Torch is to
be used.

Nicholaus Episcopus Fernensis.
Given at the Friars Monastery, the last of December, 1646.
FINIS.

