blazon or coat of arms
A DECLARATION Of His Highness, with the advice of His Council, inviting the
people of this Commonwealth to a Day of Solemn Fasting and Humiliation.
WHen We call to mind, together with the repeated loving kindnesses of God to
his People in these Nations, the late rebukes We have received, the Tares of
Division that have been sown by the envious one, and the growth they have had,
through his Subtilty, amongst Us, the abominable blasphemies vented, and
spreading of late, through the Apostasy of, and the abuse of liberty by, many
professing Religion, the continued Series of Difficulties We have been, and are
exercised under, by the secret and open practices of those, that, bearing evil
will unto Sion, have Balaam-like attempted all ways to frustrate Our hopes and
endeavors of such a Settlement and Reformation as has been so long contended
for; as also the weight of the work of this Generation.

We have thought it a duty becoming Us, not only Our Selves to lie low before
the Lord, and to have recourse to him by Prayer and Humiliation* but also to
call upon, and invite, all the People of God in these Nations to join with Us
in Solemn and Earnest Supplications to the Throne of Grace (a way wherein We
have often experimented the good presence of God) That the Lord will be pleased
truly to humble Us and the Nation under his righteous hand, that We may be
every one searching out the plague of his own heart, and turn unfeignedly from
the evil of Our ways, that notwithstanding all Our provocations, the Lord may
be pleased to return and smile upon Us.

That he will disappoint the Designs of those that labor to lift themselves up
against the interest of Christ and his People.

That he will rebuke the aforesaid evils, and give his people to know the
things that belong to their Peace, that so We may with one heart and shoulder
serve the Lord both Theirs and Ours.

That his presence may be with those that are more especially engaged in, and
entrusted with the great Affairs of the Nation, by a Spirit of Counsel and
Wisdom to enable them faithfully to discharge their weighty Trust, and that
they may bear some proportion of serviceableness to the great Works, Designs
and Promises of God concerning the Kingdom of his Son, our blessed Lord, in
these later times, and may be used as Instruments in his hand for the
continuance and increase of the Reformation, and the Security and Settlement of
these Nations.

Upon these and such like grounds, We have appointed Thursday the sixth day of
December next, to be set apart for a day of Public Humiliation. And the
Ministers of the several Congregations are to give notice hereof on the Lords
day next before the said sixth day of December.

Given at Whitehall this 21. day of November 1655.
Printed and Published by His Highness special Commandment.

London, Printed by Henry Hills and John Field, Printers to His Highness, 1655.


