A LETTER FROM The Lord General Cromwell FROM DUNBAR; CONTAINING A true Relation
of the Proceedings OF THE Parliament Army Under his Command in SCOTLAND; And
the Success God was pleased to give them against the Scots Army, in a Battle at
Dunbar the 3 of September. 1650.

Together with a LIST of the Scottish Officers then taken.

Die Martis, 10. September. 1650.

ORdered by the Parliament, That the Lord Generals Letter, and the List of
names therewith sent, be forthwith Printed and Published.

Hen: Scobell, Cleric. Parliamenti.

London, Printed by Edward Husband and John Field, Printers to the Parliament
of England. 1650.

For the Honorable, William Lenthal Esquire, Speaker of the Parliament of
England.
SIR,
I Hope it is not ill taken, that I make no more frequent Addresses to the
Parliament; things that are of trouble in point of Provision for your Army, and
of ordinary direction, I have, as I could, often presented to the Council of
State, together with such Occurrences as have happened; who I am sure, as they
have not been wanting in their extraordinary care, and provision for us, so
neither what they judge fit and necessary, to represent the same to you; and
this I thought to be a sufficient discharge or my duty on that behalf.

It has now pleased God to bestow a mercy upon you, worthy your knowledge, and
of the utmost praise and thanks of all that fear and love his Name; yea, the
Mercy is far above all praise, which, that you may the better perceive, I shall
take the boldness to tender unto you some circumstances accompanying this great
Business, which will manifest the greatness and seasonableness of this Mercy:
We having tried what we could to engage the enemy three or four miles West of
Edinburgh, that proving ineffectual, and our victual failing, we marched
toward our Ships for a recruit of our want; the enemy did not at all trouble
us in our Rear, but marched the direct way toward Edinburgh, and partly in the
night and morning, slips through his whole Army, and Quarters himself in a
posture easy to interpose between us and our victual; but the Lord made him
lose the opportunity, and the morning proving exceeding wet and dark, we
recovered by that time it was light into a ground where they could not hinder
us from our victual; which was a high act of the Lords Providence to us. We
being come into the said ground, the Enemy marched into the grounds we were
last upon, having no mind either to strive to interpose between us and our
victual, or to fight, being indeed upon this lock, Hoping that the sickness of
your Army would render their work more easy by the gaining of time; whereupon
we marched to Muscleburgh to victual, and to ship away our sick men, where we
sent aboard near Five hundred sick and wounded Soldiers: And upon serious
consideration, finding our weakness so to increase, and the Enemy lying upon
his advantages; at a General Council it was thought fit to march to Dunbar, and
there to fortify the Town, which we thought, if any thing, would provoke them
to engage; as also that the having of a Garrison there, would furnish us with
accommodation for our sick men, would be a place for a good Magazin (which we
exceedingly wanted) being put to depend upon the uncertainty of weather for
landing Provisions, which many times cannot be done, though the Being of the
whole Army lay upon it; all the Coasts from Leith to Berwick not having one
good Harbor, as also to lie more conveniently to receive our recruits of Horse
and Foot from Berwick. Having these considerations, upon Saturday the thirtieth
of August, we marched from Muscleburgh to Heddington, where by that time we had
got the Van-Brigade of our Horse, and our Foot and Train into their Quarters,
the Enemy was marched with that exceeding expedition, that they fell upon the
Rere-Forlorn of our Horse, and put it in some disorder; and indeed, had like to
have engaged our Rere-Brigade of Horse with their whole Army, had not the Lord
by his Providence: put a cloud over the Moon, thereby giving us opportunity to
draw off those Horse to the rest of the Army, which accordingly was done
without any loss, save of three or four of our aforementioned Forlorn, wherein
the Enemy (as we believe) received more loss. The Army being put into a
reasonable secure posture, toward midnight the Enemy attempted our Quarters on
the Westend of Heddington, but (through the goodness of God) we repulsed them.
The next morning we drew into an open field, on the Southside of Heddington, we
not judging it safe for us to draw to the Enemy upon his own ground, he being
prepossessed thereof, but rather drew back to give him way to come to us, if he
had so thought fit. And having waited about the space of four or five hours, to
see if he would come to us; and not finding any inclination in the Enemy so to
do, we resolved to go according to our first intendment to Dunbar: By that time
we had marched three or four miles, we saw some Bodies of the Enemies Horse
draw out of their Quarters; and by that time our Carriages were gotten near
Dunbar, their whole Army was upon their march after us; and indeed, our drawing
back in this manner, with the addition of three new Regiments added to them, did
much heighten their Confidence, if not Presumption and Arrogance. The Enemy
that night, we perceived, gathered toward the Hills, laboring to make a
perfect interposition between us and Berwick; and having in this posture a
great advantage, through his better knowledge of the Country, which he effected
by sending a considerable Party to the strait Pass at Copperspeth, where ten
men to hinder, are better then forty to make their way: And truly this was an
exigent to us, wherewith the Enemy reproached us with that condition the
Parliaments Army was in, when it made its hard conditions with the King in
Cornwall; by some Reports that have come to us, they had disposed of us, and of
their business, in sufficient revenge and wrath toward our persons, and had
swallowed up the poor Interest of England, believing that their Army and their
King would have marched to London without any interruption; it being told us,
we know not how truly, by a prisoner we took the night before the fight, That
their King was very suddenly to come amongst them with those English they
allowed to be about him; but in what they were thus lifted up, the Lord was
above them.

The Enemy lying in the posture before mentioned, having those advantages, we
lay very near him, being sensible of our disadvantage, having some weakness of
flesh, but yet consolation and support from the Lord himself to our poor weak
Faith, wherein I believe not a few amongst us shared, That because of their
Numbers, because of their Advantages, because of their Confidence, because of
our Weakness, because of our Strait, we were in the Mount, and in the Mount the
Lord would be seen, and that he would find out a way of Deliverance and
Salvation for us; and indeed, we had our Consolations and our Hopes. Upon
Monday Evening the Enemy whose numbers were very great, as we hear about Six
thousand Horse, and Sixteen thousand Foot, at least: Ours drawn down, as to
sound men, to about Seven thousand five hundred Foot, and Three thousand five
hundred Horse; the Enemy drew down to their Right Wing about two Thirds of
their Left Wing of Horse, to the Right Wing shogging also their Foot and Train
much to the Right, causing their Right Wing of Horse to edge down toward the
Sea. We could not well imagine, but that the Enemy intended to attempt upon us,
or to place themselves in a more exact condition of interposition: Major
General and my self coming to the Earl of Roxboroughs House, and observing this
posture, I told him, I thought it did give us an opportunity and advantage to
attempt upon the Enemy; to which he immediately replied, That he had thought to
have said the same thing to me; so that it pleased the Lord to set this
apprehension upon both of our hearts at the same instant; we called for Colonel
Monk, and showed him the thing; and coming to our Quarter at night, and
demonstrating our apprehensions to some of the Colonels, they also cheerfully
concurred; we resolved therefore to put our business into this posture, That
six Regiments of Horse, and three Regiments and an half of Foot, should march
in the Van, and that the Major General, the Lieutenant General of the Horse,
and the Commissary General and Colonel Monk, to command the Brigade of Foot,
should lead on the business; And that Colonel Prides Brigade, Colonel Overtons
Brigade, and the remaining two Regiments of Horse, should bring up the Canon
and Rere; the time of falling on to be by break of day, but through some delays
it proved not to be so till six a clock in the morning: The Enemies word was
The Covenant, which it had been for diverse days; ours (The Lord of Hosts) The
Major General, Lieutenant General Fleetwood, and Commissary General Whaley, and
Colonel Twisletons, gave the Onset, the Enemy being in very good posture to
receive them, having the advantage of their Canon and Foot against our Horse;
before our Foot could come up, the enemy made a gallant resistance, and there
was a very hot dispute at swords point between our Horse and theirs: Our first
Foot, after they had discharged their duty, being overpowered with the Enemy,
received some repulse, which they soon recovered; but my own Regiment, under
the Command of Lieutenant Colonel Goff, and my Major White, did come seasonably
in, and at the push of Pike did repel the stoutest Regiment the Enemy had
there, merely with the courage the Lord was pleased to give, which proved a
great amazement to the residue of their Foot: This being the first Action
between the Foot, the Horse in the mean time did with a great deal of courage
and spirit, beat back all opposition, charging through the Bodies of the
Enemies Horse and their Foot, who were after the first repulse given, made by
the Lord of Hosts as stubble to their swords. Indeed, I believe I may speak it
without partiality, both your Chief Commanders, and others in their several
places* and Soldiers also, were acted with as much courage, as ever has been
seen in any Action since this War: I know they look not to be named, and
therefore I forbear particulars. The best of the Enemies Horse and Foot being
broken through and through in less then an hours dispute, their whole Army
being put into confusion, it became a total Rout, our men having the chase and
execution of them near eight miles; we believe that upon the place and near
about it, were about Three thousand slain, Prisoners taken or their Officers
you have this enclosed List; of private Soldiers near Ten thousand, the whole
Baggage and Train taken, wherein was good store of Match, Powder and Bullet,
all their Artillery great and small, Thirty Guns; we are confident they have
left behind them not less then Fifteen thousand Arms: I have already brought
in to me near Two hundred Colors, which I herewith send you; what Officers of
quality of theirs are killed, we yet cannot learn: But yet surely diverse are,
and many men of quality are mortally wounded, as Colonel Lumsdel, the Lord
Liberton, and others; and that which is no small addition, I do not believe we
have lost twenty men, not one Commissioned Officer slain that I hear of, save
one Cornet, and Major Rooksby since dead of his wounds, and not many mortally
wounded, Colonel Whaley only cut in the Hand-wrist, and his Horse twice shot
and killed under him, but he well, recovered another Horse, and went on in the
Chase: Thus you have the prospect of one of the most signal mercies God has
done for England and his People this War. And now may it please you to give me
the leave of a few Words, It is easy to say, the Lord has done this, it would
do you good to see and hear our poor Foot go up and down making their boast of
God; but Sir, It is in your hands, and by these eminent mercies, God puts it
more into your hands to give glory to him, to improve your Power and his
Blessings to his praise; we that serve you, beg of you, not to own us, but God
alone; we pray you own his people more and more, for they are the Chariots and
Horsemen of Israel; disown your selves, but own your Authority and improve it,
to curb the proud and the insolent, such as would disturb the tranquillity of
England, though under what specious pretenses soever; relieve the oppressed,
hear the groans of poor Prisoners in England: Be pleased to reform the abuses
of all Professions, and if there be any one that makes many poor to make a few
rich, that suits not a Commonwealth. If he that strengthens your Servants to
Fight, pleases to give you hearts to set upon these things in order to his
glory, and the glory of your Commonwealth, besides the benefit England shall
feel thereby, you shall shine forth to other Nations, who shall emulate the
glory of such a pattern, and through the power of God turn into the like. These
are our desires, and that you may have liberty and opportunity to do these
things and not be hindered, we have been and shall be (by Gods assistance)
willing to venture our lives, and not desire you should be precipitated by
importunities from your care of Safety and Preservation; but that the doing of
these good things may have their place amongst those which concern well being,
and so be wrought in their time and order. Since we came in Scotland, it has
been our desire and longing to have avoided blood in this business, by reason
that God has a people here fearing his Name, though deceived; and to that end
have we offered much love unto such in the bowels of Christ; and concerning the
truth of our hearts therein, have we appealed unto the Lord. The Ministers of
Scotland have hindered the Passage of these things to the hearts of those to
whom we intended them; and now we hear, that not only the deceived people, but
some of the Ministers are also fallen in this Battle. This is the great hand of
the Lord, and worthy of the consideration of all those, who taking into their
hands the Instruments of a foolish Shepherd, to wit, meddling with worldly
policies, and mixtures of earthly power, to set up that which they call the
Kingdom of Christ, which is neither it, nor if it were it, would such means be
found effectual to that end, and neglect, or trust not to the Word of God, the
Sword of the Spirit, which is alone powerful and able for the setting up of
that Kingdom, and when trusted to, will be found effectually able to that end,
and will also do it. This is humbly offered for their sakes, who having lately
too much turned aside, that they might return again to Preach Jesus Christ,
according to the simplicity of the Gospel, and then no doubt they will discern
and find your protection and encouragement, beseeching you to pardon this
length, I humbly take leave, and rest,

Sir, Your most humble Servant, O. CROMWELL.
Dunbar, Septembr. 4. 1650.
A List of such Prisoners taken at the Fight.
SIr James Lomsden Lieut. Genesis of Foot.
Colonels.
Col: Sir Will: Douglas Col: Will: Lomsden. Colonel Gurdon.
Lieutenant Colonels.
Lieut: Col. Wallis. Lieut: Col. Lesley. Lieut: Col. Murray. Lieut: Colonel
Henry Malvin. L: Col. Arthur Forbis. Lieut: Colonel Francis Wanhap, of Horse.
Lieut: Col. Dunbarre. Lieut: Col. Hamilton. Lieut: Col. Crawford. Lieu: Col:
Ingles. Lieut: Colonel John Montgomery. James Bickerton Adjutant Genesis of Horse.
Majors.
Henry Carmihil, of Foot. James Granster, of Horse. George Moat, of Foot. Will:
Scringer, of Foot. Jo: Steward, of Foot. George Forbes, Reformado. Moor. Oagle.
Freesle.
Captains of Foot:
James Sterlyn. Francis Agnue. Sibbald. Alex. Monpreff George Holliburton Tho:
Brown William Murray James Scot William Rudderford
Captains of Foot.
James Macularoy Hugh Montgomery James Aken George Smith John Macclellan Robert
Mackellum Hugh Madole George Pringle Robert Scot Alexander Wood Robert Hamilton
Tho: Gray Robert Adamson Beton.
Captains of Horse and Foot.
Robert Duncan Robert Maccaulla Walter Scot Matthew Creshton James Steward
William Douglas Walter Lesley Will: Manhop, of Horse James Borthick David Murray
Captains of Horse.
John Murray William Burton James Camil William Bresbon, of Horse. William
Daurlmple Charles Kerkpatrick. Nicholas Lawson. Robert Rudderford John Car
Dundass Ogleby Gourdon Bonner. Lieut: Bruise, Lieutenant of Horse.
Cornets of Horse.
William Cunningham James Maxwel James Denham James Magil Walter Steward John
Hay Anthony Macdoer John Brown
Cornets of Horse.
Alex. Michil John Collerwood George Winderum.
Captains Lieut: of Horse and Foot.
John Monnergain William Emery William Blayer Robert Anderson Roger Holden
Robert Wood
Lieutenants of Foot.
James Cunningham James Blackwood Patrick Macknab Henry Cunningham Lancelot Car
John Macknight John Heume John Gourdon George Cunningham James Wear Henry
Eston William Gun Nicholas Coston
Lieut: of Foot.
Alexander Steward Arthur Steward William Petre Norman Lesley William Bailey
William Gladston Robert Hamberton Geo: Mackburney Robert Straughan Richard
Allen James Mackbey George Bisset James Nichols Thomas Mennis William Sinnis
John Car Alexander Car James Twede Philip Leich James Armer James Sayers John
Mere Andrew Pennere Patrick Baily John Camil
Lieut: of Foot.
John Rich John Steward John Camil Allen Osborn William Knocks John Wilson
Thomas Anderson Walter Wanhap Patrick Holliburton Lancelot Car William Engley
Thomas Car Alexander Gourdon Andrew Haily Samuel Gourdon Lancaster Forguson
Robert Rankin Cha: Coleman John Lewson Andrew Guiler George Patterson Thomas
Hutchen John Ennis John Sken John Hunter
Lieut: of Foot.
John Mackdoughal Andrew Drumon George Lesley George Moat Francis Scot William
Elliot Alexander Ciff John Denguit.
Quartermasters of Horse.
Tho: Richman. William Forbis.
Ensigns.
Kilpatrick Walter Macdoughel William Sinclare George Jack Hartley Gadley
William Carnecuse Thomas Wallis James Rolston Andrew Mine James Bennet John
Linsey Andrew Hanna Thomas Pringle Robert Hamilton James Delop John Gray James
Edward Collin Camel Heatly Robert Roy. Gilbert Harral James Musket William
Sample Robert Ogleby Robert Williamson William Lesley Ersby Shields Robert
Haborn William Scot Ja: Edminston Robert Lawson James Neicen Andrew Barthick
George Elphenstou John Fairdise Henry White Andrew Dunalson David Camide John
Camil Cornelius Engles Duncan Camil Patrick Canburn William Mannord Robert Craw
George Calley James Rudderford Walter Scot Walter Steward Robert Heume James
Forquer James Macknath Henry Ackman John Wayer John Brown William Chapman John
Macuo Alexander Spence John Black Thomas Thompson Robert Friar John Tompson
John Dixon George Smith Alexander Johnston William Egger David Grant George
Gayler John Wallis John Kemmen Thomas Enderson James Brewse William Maclan John
Carmihil William Watson William Anderson James Dunbar James Elderwood Henry Roy
Thomas Boyd. David Reed.
FINIS

