A LETTER From the Lord General CROMWELL, Touching the Great Victory obtained
near WORCESTER: SUPERSCRIBED For the Right Honorable William Lenthal Esquire;
Speaker of the Parliament of the Commonwealth of England. Together with an
Order of Parliament for observing a Thanksgiving to Almighty God for the same.

Friday, September 5. 1651.
ORdered by the Parliament, That this Order, and Letter from the Lord General
to the Speaker of the Parliament, Dated this Third of September, 1651. be
forthwith Printed and Published.

Hen: Scobell, Cleric. Parliamenti.



London, Printed by John Field, Printer to the Parliament of England. 1651.

For the Right Honorable WILLIAM LENTHAL Esquire; Speaker of the Parliament of the
Commonwealth of England.
SIR,
BEing so weary and scarce able to write, yet I thought it my duty to let you
know thus much, That upon this day being the Third of September, (remarkable
for a mercy vouchsafed to your Forces on this day twelve month in Scotland) we
built a Bridge of Boats over Severn, between it and Tame, about half a Mile
from Worcester; and another over Tame within Pistol shot of our other Bridge:
Lieutenant General Fleetwood and Major General Dean marched from Vpton on the
Southwest side of Severn up to Poyick, a Town which was a Pass the Enemy kept;
we passed over some Horse and Foot, and were in Conjunction with the Lieutenant
General's Forces, we beat the Enemy from Hedge to Hedge, till we beat him into
Worcester: the Enemy then drew all his Forces on the other side the Town, all
but what he lost, and made a very considerable Fight with us for three hours
space, but in the end we beat him totally, and pursued him up to his Royal Fort
which we took, and indeed have beaten his whole Army: when we took the Fort we
turned his own Guns upon him; the Enemy has had great loss, and certainly is
scattered and run several ways, we are in pursuit of him, and have laid Forces
in several places, that we hope will gather him up: Indeed this has been a
very glorious Mercy, and as stiff a Contest for four or five hours as ever I
have seen; both your old Forces and those new raised, have behaved themselves
with very great courage, and he that made them come out, made them willing to
fight for you; the Lord God Almighty frame our hearts to real Thankfulness for
this which is alone his doing. I hope I shall within a day or two give you a
more perfect Account, In the mean time I hope you will pardon,

SIR, Your most humble Servant, O. Cromwell.
Near Worcester, September 3. 1651. 10 at night.
Friday, September 5. 1651.
THe Parliament being very sensible of the wonderful and seasonable Mercies God
has been pleased to vouchsafe unto this Nation, by his great Blessing upon
their Army near Worcester, in Routing the Army of Scots on Wednesday last, As
is expressed in a Letter from the Lord General to the Speaker of the
Parliament, herewith Printed, and intending to set apart a day of Solemn
Thanksgiving unto God, to be observed through this Commonwealth; Do in the mean
time Order, That the Ministers in all Churches and Congregations within the
late Lines of Communication and weekly Bills of Mortality, on the next Lords
day, give Public Thanks to Almighty God for this great Mercy; And that the
Lord Major of this City of London, Do take care that timely notice be given to
the said Ministers for that purpose; and that the said Ministers do then read
the said Letter.

Friday, September 5. 1651.
ORdered by the Parliament, That this Order, and the Letter from the Lord
General to the Speaker of the Parliament, Dated this Third of September, 1651.
be forthwith Printed and Published.

Hen: Scobell, Cler. Parl.

FINIS.

