Unparalleled VARIETIES: Or, the Matchless Actions and Passions OF MANKIND.
Displayed in near Four Hundred Notable Instances and Examples. Discovering the
Transcendent Effects; I. Of Love, Friendship, and Gratitude. II. Of
Magnanimity, Courage, and Fidelity. III. Of Chastity, Temperance, and Humility.
And on the contrary the Tremendous Consequences, IV. Of Hatred, Revenge, and
Ingratitude. V. Of Cowardice, Barbarity, and Treachery. VI. Of Unchastity,
Intemperance, and Ambition.


Imbellished with Proper Figures.

By R. B. Author of the History of the Wars of Eng. etc. Remarks of London,
etc. Wonderful Prodigies, etc. Admirable Curiosities in England, etc.
Extraordinary Adventures of famous Men, and Surprising Miracles of Nature and
Art, in the Heavens, Earth and Sea, etc.

London, Printed for Nath. Crouch, at his Shop at the Sign of the Bell in the
Poultry. 1683.

depiction of the slaying of Julius Caesar Unparaleld Varieties
Julius Caesar Slain in the Senate by Brutus, Cassius and others. Page. 15.


London Printed for Nath: Crouch.

TO THE READER.
IT is an usual saying, that Variety Delights, but especially in History, and
more it may be in this Age than in any other before, wherein a great many seem
to scorn the dull heavy humor of their Ancestors, as they please to call it,
(and therefore have not patience to read large Histories) admiring their own
briskness, Ingenuity, and Wit, though much of it is altogether invisible but
only to themselves, and their own vain imaginations; However since the light
French Airiness is now so modish, it may not be thought improper so far to
comply therewith, as to present the Reader with this brief Compendium out of
many great Volumes of abundance of short delightful Relations, and Instances
upon various Subjects, which may prevent both tediousness and charge, and may
likewise furnish the mind with apt matter both for Discourse and Instruction;
in brief here they may, as in a Glass, discover the excellent rewards of
Virtue, and the dreadful punishments of Vice in all Ages of the world, and
thereby be persuaded to follow, and practice the one, that they may escape the
unavoydable consequences of the other; and if it have this admirable effect, I
shall then reckon my time and pains well employed in writing of it, neither
will the Reader repent of his in the Reading thereof.

R. B.

CHAP. I. The Transcendent Effects of Love, Friendship, and Gratitude,
discovered in several Memorable Examples.
LOve and Friendship are the chief Bonds of Humane Society, without which
Mankind would be Wolves, and destrovers of each other; I shall therefore give
some instances of the extraordinary Effects thereof in all Ages, and that in
the most large acceptance of it; as of the Passion of Love between different
Sexes, the disquiets whereof have sometimes made deep impressions upon diverse
Persons, of the singular Love of some Husbands to their Wives, and Wives to
their Husbands; of the Indulgence, and great Love of some Parents to their
Children; and the reverence and Love of Children to their Parents; of the
extraordinary Love of Brethren, and of many Servants to their Masters; of the
signal Love of some Persons to Religion and Truth, and their hatred of Flattery
and Falsehood; the Love of several to Peace, Justice, and to their Country,
together with the choicest instances of the most entire Friendship, and the
grateful dispositions of some Persons, and what returns they have made of the
benefits received; these shall be the particulars of this first Chapter,
wherein the variety of the Relations, cannot but administer some profit, as
well as delight, since they are collected from Authors of undoubted Authority
and Credit; I shall therefore proceed in order, and first as to Humane Love, or
that strictly called the Passion of Love.

I. Eginardus was Secretary of State to Charlemaign, Emperor, and King of
France, and having placed his depiction of the Emperor of Germany's daughter
carrying her lover The Emp. of Ger. Daughter caryes her Lover on her back to
prevent Discovery Page.1.
Affections much higher than his Condition admitted, made love to one of his
Daughters, who seeing this Man of a brave Spirit, and a grace suitable, thought
him not too low for her whom merit had so eminently raised above his Birth; she
affected him, and gave him free access to her Person, so far as to suffer him
to have recourse unto her, to laugh, and sport in her Chamber on the Evenings,
which ought to have been kept as a Sanctuary where Relicts are preserved; It
happened on a Winters night, that Eginardus ever hastening his Approaches, and
being negligent in his returns, had too much slackned his departure, in the
mean time a ^ow had fallen, which troubled them both; for when he thought to go
forth, he feared to be known by his feet, and the Lady was unwilling that such
prints of steps should be found at her door; they being much perplexed, Love
which takes the Diadem of Majesty from Queens, made her to do an Act for a
Lover, very unusual for the Daughter of one of the greatest Men upon Earth, she
took the Gentleman upon her shoulders, and carried him all the length of the
Court to his Chamber, he never setting foot to ground, that so the next day no
impression might be seen of his footing; it fell out that Charlemaign watched
at his Study this night, and hearing a noise, opened the Window, and perceived
this pretty prank, at which he could not tell whether he were best to be angry,
or to laugh; the next day in a great Assembly of Lords, and in the presence of
his Daughter, and Eginardus, he asked what punishment that Servant might seem
worthy of, who made use of a Kings Daughter, as of a Mule, and caused himself
to be carried on her Shoulders in the midst of Winter, through Night, Snow, and
all the sharpness of the Seasons; Every one gave his opinion, and not one but
condemned that insolent man to death; the Princess, and Secretary changed
color, thinking nothing remained for them, but to be flead alive; but the
Emperor looking on his Secretary with a smooth brow, said, Eginardus, had
thou loved the Princess my Daughter, thou ought to have come to her Father,
the disposer of her Liberty, thou art worthy of death, and I give thee two
lives at this present, take thy fair Portress in Marriage, fear God, and love
one another; these Lovers thought they were in an instant drawn out of the
depth of Hell to enjoy the greatest happiness in the World. Causins Holy Court.
Tom. 2.

II. Pyramus, a young Man of Babylon, was exceedingly in love with Thisbe, the
Daughter of one that lived the very next House to his Father, nor was he less
beloved by her; both Parents had discerned it, and for some Reasons kept them
both up so straightly, that they were not suffered so much as to speak to one
another, at last they found opportunity of discourse through the Chink of a
Wall betwixt them, and appointed to meet together in a certain place without
the City, Thisbe came first to the place appointed, but being terrified by a
Lioness which passed by, she fled into a Cave near thereabouts, and in her
flight had lost her Veil, which the Lioness tumbled to and fro with her bloody
Mouth, and so left it; soon after Pyramus came also to the same place, and
there finding the Vail which she used to wear, all bloody, he overhastily
concluded, that she was torn in pieces by some wild Beast, and therefore slew
himself with his own Sword under a Mulberry Tree, which was the place of their
mutual agreement; Thisbe, when she thought the Lioness was gone past, left her
Cave, with an earnest desire to meet her Lover, but finding him slain, overcome
with grief and desire, she fell upon the same Sword, and died with him.
Zuinglius. p. 461.

III. Eurialus Count of Augusta, was a young man of extraordinary beauty, and
during the stay of the Emperor, Sigismund, King of Bohemia, and Hungary, at
Sienna, he cast his Eye upon Lucretia a Virgin of that place, and at first
sight fell vehemently in love with her; the Virgin also, whom in respect of her
admirable form, they called commonly the second Venus, was no less surprised
than himself at the same instant; in a short time they became better
acquainted, but at the Emperors removal thence to Rome, when Eurialus was
compelled to leave his Lady behind him, she was not able to endure his absence,
but died under the impatience of it; Eurialus at the hearing of her death,
though he was somewhat supported by the counsels, and consolations of his
Friends, and thereby persuaded to live, yet from the time of her death, to the
last day of his life, he was never known to laugh. Donatus Hist. Medit.

IV. Gobrias a Captain, when he had espied Rodanthe, a fair Captive Maid, he
fell upon his knees before Mystilus the General, with tears, vows, and all the
Rhetoric he could; and by the Scars he had formerly received, the good
services he had done, or whatsoever else was dear unto him, he besought his
General that he might have the fair Prisoner to his Wife, as a reward of his
Valor; moreover he would forgive him all his Arrears, I ask, said he, no part
of the booty, no other thing, but Rodanthe to be my Wife; and when he could not
compass her by fair means, he fell to Treachery, force, and Villainy, and at
last set his life at stake, to accomplish his desire. Burtons Melancholy, part.
3.

V. Plutarch says it was a custom remaining to his days, that Wives would wish
so to be beloved of their Husbands, as Pieria was by Phrygius; this wish had
its rise from the following History; of those Jonians that planted themselves
in Miletum, some raised Sedition against the Sons of Neleus, and seated
themselves in Myo; these received diverse injuries from the Mil sians, who made
war upon them for going away from them, but not so severely, as to exclude all
commerce, so that upon some Festivals the Women had liberty to come from Myo to
Miletum; Pythes was one of the Revolters, and understanding that a Feast was to
be kept in Miletum to Diana, he sent his Wife and Daughter Pieria to obtain
leave that he might be present at it; now of all the Sons of Neleus, Phrygius
was the most powerful, he being inflamed with the love of Peria, thought of
nothing more than of doing something that might be acceptable to her, and when
she told him, that nothing could be more grateful to her, than to procure her
liberty of coming often to Miletum, in the Company of many Virgins, he
understood by that Speech, that Peace was desired, and Friendship sought with
the Milesians; he therefore concluded the War; and thence was it that the names
of these two Lovers were so dear to both People. Plutarch de virtute Mulier. p.
531.

VI. There was amongst the Grecians a Company of Soldiers, consisting of three
hundred, that was called, The Holy Band, erected by Gorgidas, and chosen out of
such as heartily loved one another, whereby it came to pass, that they could
never be broken, nor overcome, for their love, and hearty affection would not
suffer them to forsake one another, whatsoever danger happened; but at the
Battle of Cheronaea they were all slain, after the fight, King Philip taking
view of the dead bodies, he stood still in that place, where all these three
hundred men lay slain, thrust through with Pikes on their Breasts, whereat he
much wondered, and being told that it was the Lovers Band, he sell a weeping,
saying, Woe be to them that think these men did, or suffered any dishonest
thing; Plutarch, in Pelopida.

VII. Leander was a young Man of Abidos, and was deeply in love with Hero, a
beautiful Virgin of Sestos, these two Towns were opposite to each other, and
the narrow Sea of the Hellespont lay betwixt them. Leander used diverse nights
to swim over the Hellespont to his Love, while she held up a Torch from a
Tower, to be his direction in the night; but though this practice continued
long, yet at length Leander adventuring to perform the same one night when the
Sea was rough, and the waves high, was unfortunately drowned; his dead body was
cast up at Seslos, where Hero from her Tower beheld it; but she not being able
to outlive so great a loss, cast her self headlong from the top of it into the
Sea, and there perished. Innumerable are the instances of the Effects both
Tragical, and Comical, proceeding from this Humane Love, and every week almost
produces some extraordinary Accidents proceeding therefrom; let us therefore
next relate some remarkable examples of Conjugal Love between Husbands and
Wives.

VIII. One of the Neapolitans ('it is pity his name as well as his Country, is
not remembered, says Mr. Burton,) being busily employed in a Field near the
Sea, and his Wife at some distance from him, the Woman was seized upon by some
Turkish Pirates, who came on shore to prey upon all they could find; upon his
return not finding his Wife, and perceiving a Ship that lay at Anchor not far
off, conjecturing the matter as it was, he threw himself into the Sea, and swam
up to the Ship, then calling to the Captain, he told him, he was come to follow
his Wife; he feared not the Barbarism of the Enemies of the Christian Faith,
nor the miseries those Slaves endure that are thrust into places where they
must ^g at the Oar, his Love overcame all these; the M^ors were full of
admiration at the carriage of the man, for they had seen some of his
Countrymen, rather choose death than to endure so hard a loss of their Liber^y,
and at their return they told the whole of this story to the King of Tunis, who
moved with the Relation of so great a Love gave him and his Wife their freedom,
and the Man was made by his command one of the Soldiers of his Liseguard.
Burtons Melancholy, Part 3.

IX. Philip King of France, Surnamed The Good, the first Author of that
greatness, whereunto the House of Burgundy did arrive, was about twenty three
years of Age, when his Father John Duke of Burgundy was slain by the villainy,
and perfidiousness of Charles the Dauphin; being informed of that unwelcome
news, full of grief and anger as he was, he hasted into the Chamber of his
Wife, who was the Dauphins Sister, O said he, my Michalea thy Brother, has
murdered my Father; She who was a true Lover of her Husband, straight broke
forth into tears, and cries, and fearing, not without reason, that this
accident would prove the occasion of a breach, she lamented, as one that
refused all comfort, though her Husband used all kind of loving words to cheer
up her Spirits; Thou shall be no less dear to me, said he, for this fault,
which, though near related, is yet none of thine, and therefore take courage,
and comfort thyself in an Husband that will be faithful, and constant to thee
for ever; He performed what he said, he lived with her three years, treating
her always with his accustomed love, and the same respects; and although the
very sight of her did daily renew the memory of that wicked act of her Brother,
and though which is more, she was Barren, a sufficient cause of divorce among
Princes, yet he would not that any thing but death should dissolve the
Matrimonial Bond that was betwixt them. Lipsius Monitor. lib. 2.

X. Darius the last King of the Persians, supposing that his Wife Statira was
slain by Alexander, filled all the Camp with Lamentations, and Outcries; O
Alexander, said he, Whom of thy Relations have I put to death, that thou
should thus retaliate my severities, thou have hated me without any
provocation on my part, but suppose thou have Justice on thy side, should
thou manage the War against Women? Thus he bewailed the supposed death of his
Wife, but as soon as he heard she was not only preserved alive, but also
treated by Alexander with the highest Honor, he then beseeched Heaven to
render Alexander fortunate in all things, though he was his Enemy. Plutarch. in
vit. Alex.

XI. Gratianus the Roman Emperor, was so great and known a Lover of his Wife,
that his Enemies had hereby an occasion ministered to them to ensnare his life,
which was on this manner; Maximus the Usurper, caused a report to be spread,
that the Empress with certain Troops was come to see her Husband, and to go
with him into Italy, and sent a Messenger with counterfeit Letters to the
Emperor, to give him advice thereof; after this, he sent one of his most subtle
Captains, with order that he should put himself into an Horselitter with some
chosen Soldiers, and go to meet the Emperor, pretending himself to be the
Empress, and so to surprise, and kill him; the cunning Captain performed his
business, for at Lions in France, the Emperor came forth to meet his Wife, and
coming to the Horselitter, he was taken and killed. Imperial Hist, p. 344.

XII. Meleager challenged to himself the chief glory, and honor of slaying the
Caledorian Boar, but this being denied him, he sat in his Chamber so angry,
and discontented, that when the Enemy (who were the Curetes) were assaulting
the City where he lived, he would not stir out to lend his Citizens the least
of his assistance; the Elders, Magistrates, the chief of the City, and the
Priests came to him with their humble supplications, but he would not move;
they propounded a great reward, he despised at once both it and them; his
Father Oenaeus came to him, and embracing his knees, endeavored to make him
relent, but all in vain; his Mother came, and tried all ways, but was refused;
his Sisters, and his most familiar Friends were sent to him, and begged he
would not forsake them in their last extremity; but neither this way was his
fierce mind to be wrought upon; in the mean time the Enemy had broken into the
City, and then came his Wife, called Cleopatra, trembling; O my dearest Love,
said she, help us, or we are lost; the Enemy is already entered; the Hero was
moved with this voice alone, and roused himself at the apprehension of the
danger of his beloved Wife; he armed himself, went forth, and left not, till he
had repulsed the Enemy, and put the City into its wonted safety, and security.
Camerarius Hist. Medit. Cent. 1.

XIII. Titus Gracchus loved his Wife Cornelia with that fervency, that when two
Snakes were by chance found in his House, and that the Soothsayers had
pronounced that they should not suffer them both to escape, but that one of
them should be killed, affirming also that if the Male was let go, Cornelia
should die first; on the other side that Gracchus should first expire, if the
Female were let go, Dismiss then the Female said he, that so Cornelia may
survive me who am at this time the Elder; It so fell out that he died soon
after, leaving behind him many Sons, so entirely beloved by the Mother, and the
memory of her Husband, so dear to her, that she refused the proffered Marriage
with Ptolomy King of Egypt; It seems the buried Ashes of her Husband lay so
cold at her heart, that the splendour of a Diadem and all the pomp of a rich,
and proffered Kingdom, were not able so to warm it, as to make it capable of
receiving the impression of a new Love. Valerius Maximus, lib. 4.

XIV. Caligula the Emperor had Caesonia to Wife, and though she was not of
remarkable beauty, nor of a just, but declining Age; though by another Husband
she was already the Mother of three Daughters, yet being one both of Prodigious
Luxury, and Lasciviousness, he loved her with that ardency, and constancy, that
he often showed her to the Soldiers riding by him in her Armor, and to his
Friends even naked. The day she was brought to Bed, he made her his Wife,
professing that he was at once her Husband, and the Father of a Child by her;
the Child, which was named Julia Drusilla, was by his order carried about to
all the Temples of the Gods; at last he laid it down in the lap of Minerva, and
commended the Child to her Education, and Instruction, nor did he conclude the
Child to be his, by any more certain sign than this, that even in her Infancy
she had a cruelty so natural, that she would fly upon the Faces and Eyes of
such Children as played with her, with her fingers, and nails. Suetonius Hist.

XV. M. Plautius, by the Command of the Senate of Rome, was to bring back a
Navy of sixty Ships of the Confederates into Asia; he put ashore at Tarentum,
and thither had Orestilla his Wife followed him, and there overcome with a
Disease, she departed this life. Plautius having ordered all things for the
celebration of the Funeral, she was laid upon the Pile to be burnt, as the
Roman manner was; the last Offices to be performed, were to anoint the dead
body, and to give it a valedictory, or farewell kiss, but betwixt these, the
grieved Husband fell upon his own Sword, and died; his Friends took him up in
his Gown and Shoes, as he was, and laying his Body by that of his Wives, burnt
them both together; the Sepulcher of these Two is yet to be seen at Tarentum,
and is called, The Tomb of the Two Lovers. Valor. Max. lib. 4.

XVI. And though the Female be the weaker Sex, yet such has been the fidelity,
and incredible strength of affection in some, that they have oft-times
performed as great things as the most generous Men; they have despised death in
the most dreadful shapes, and all sorts of difficulties (by an invincible Love
to their Hushands) in the greatest extremity. Of which Histories are not
silent; for we r^ad, that Eumenes burying the dead that had fallen in the
Battle of Gabine against Antigonus, amongst others, there was found the Body of
Ceteas, the Captain of those Troops that had come out of India; this man had
two Wives, who accompanied him in the Wars, one which he had newly married, and
an other whom he had married some years before, but both of them bore an entire
love to him, for whereas the Laws of India require, that one Wife shall be
burnt with her dead Husband, both these offered themselves to death, and strove
with that ambition, as if it had been some glorious prize they sought after;
before such Captains as were appointed their Judges, the younger Wife pleaded,
That the other was with Child, and that therefore she could not have the
benefit of that Law; The elder alleged, That whereas she was before the other
in years, it was also fit that she should be before her in Honor, since it was
customary in other things that the Elder should have place; The Judges, when
they understood by Midwives, that the Elder was with Child, passed Judgment
that the younger should be burnt, which done, she that had lost the cause
departed, rending her Diadem, and tearing her Hair, as if some grievous
calamity had befallen her; the other full of Joy at her Victory, went to the
Funeral Fire, magnificently dressed up by her Friends, and led along by her
Kindred, as if to her Wedding; they all the way singing Hymns in her Praises.
When she drew near the fire, taking off her Ornaments, she delivered them to
her Friends and Servants, as tokens of Remembrance; they were a multitude of
Rings, with variety of precious Stones, Chains, and Stars of Gold, etc. This
done, she was by her Brother placed upon the combustible matter by the side of
her Husband, and after the Army had thrice compassed the Funeral Pile, fire was
put to it, and she without a word of complaint, finished her life in thell
ames. Diod Siculus, lib. 9.

XVII. Arria, the Wife of Cecinna Paetus, understanding that her Husband was
condemned to die, and that he was permitted to choose what manner of death liked
him best, she went to him, and having exhorted him to depart this life
courageously, and bidding him farewell, gave her self a stab into the Breast,
with a Knife she had hid for that purpose under her Clothes; then drawing the
Knife out of the wound, and reaching it to Paetus; she said, The wound I have
made, Paetus, smarts not; but that only which thou art about to give thy self.
Camer. Spare hours. Whereupon Martial has an Epigram to this purpose.

When Arria to her Husband gave the Knife,
Which made the wound, whereby she lost her life,
This wound, dear Paetus, grieves me not, quoth she,
But that which thou must give thyself, grieves me.
XVIII. The Prince of the Province of Fingo, in the Kingdom of Japan in the
East Indies, hearing that a Gentleman of the Country had a very beautiful Woman
to his Wife, got him dispatched; and having sent for the Widow some days after
her Husbands death, acquainted her with his desires; she told him she had much
reason to think her self happy in being honored with the Friendship of so
great a Prince, yet she was resolved to bite off her Tongue, and murder her
self, if he offered her any violence; but if he would grant her the favor to
spend one month in bewailing her Husband and then give her liberty to make an
entertainment for the Relations of the Deceased to take her leave of them, he
should find how much she was his Servant, and how far she would comply with his
affections; it was easily granted, a very great Dinner was provided, whither
came all the Kindred of the deceased; the Gentlewoman perceiving the Prince
began to be warm in his Wine, in hopes of enjoying her promise; she desired
liberty to withdraw into an adjoining Gallery to take the Air, but as soon as
she was come into it, she cast her self headlong down in the presence of the
Prince, and all her dead Husbands relations, and so put an end to her life.
Mandelsloes Travels.

XIX. In the Reign of the Emperor Vespasian, there was a Rebellion in France,
the chief Leader of which was Julius Sabinus; they being reduced, the Captain
was sought after to be punished, but he had hid himself in a Vault, or Cave,
which was the Monument of his Grandfather; he caused a report to be spread of
his death, as if he had voluntarily poisoned himself, and the better to
persuade men of the truth of it, he caused his House to be set on fire, as if
his body had therein been burnt; he had a Wife, whose name was Eponina, she
knew nothing of his safety, but bewailed his death, and would not be comforted;
there were only two of his freed men, who were privy to it, they pitying their
Lady, who was determined to die, and in order thereunto had abstained from all
manner of meat for three days together, thereupon they declared her purpose to
her Husband, and besought him to save her that loved him so well; it was
granted, and she was told that her Sabinus lived; she came to him, where they
lived with secrecy, and undiscovered for the space of nine years together, she
conceived, and brought forth Children in that solitary Mansion; at last the
place of their abode came to be known, they were taken, and brought to Rome,
where Vespasian commanded they should be stain; Eponina producing, and showing
her Children; Behold O Caesar, said she, these I have brought forth, and
brought up in a Monument, that thou might have more suppliants for our
Lives. O cruel Vespasian, that could not be moved with such words as these;
well, they were both led to death, and Eponina joyfully died with her Husband,
who had been before buried with him for so many years together. Lipsius
Monitor. lib. 2.

XX. Portia the Daughter of Cato, and Wise of Marcus Brutus, when she
conjectured by the fleepless, and disturbed nights of her Husband, that he had
conceived some great thing in his mind, and concealed it from her in suspicion
of her weakness; she to give her Husband an instance of her Constancy and
Secrecy, made her self a deep wound in her Thigh with a Razor; upon which there
followed a stream of blood, weakness; and a Fever. When Brutus came home, sad
at so unexpected an accident, and all being withdrawn, Sit down Husband said
she, I have something serious to discourse with you; when I married you, I came
to your House as a Wife, not as a Mistress, or Whore, nor only as a Companion
of your Bed, and Board, but of all prosperous and adverse things; I am Cato 's
Daughter, and reckon you that I am of that blood, what then, do I complain of
you? Not at all, if I look at other matters, Conjugal Solemnities, good will,
and this external love; but I look higher, and would have your Friendship also,
and that is the only grief of my mind which torments me, that you have my
fidelity in suspicion, for wherefore should you dissemble; do I not perceive
the care you are in? Thae there is some secret, and great enterprise you are in
agitation about? Why do you conceal it from me? If I can lend you no
assistance, expect some comfort at least from me; for as to my secrecy I am
able to engage; consider not the rest of my Sex; I say again, that I am the
Daughter of Cato, and I add thereunto that I am the Wife of Brutus, either
nature, being from such a Father, or Conversation with such a Husband, will
render me constant and invincible against all that is to be feared; why do I
multiply words, I my self have made experiment of my self, and see this wound
which of my own accord I have given my self, that I might know whether I could
undergo with Courage any grief and torments, I now fully believe that I am able
to bear them, to despise them, and I, my Brutus, can die with, and for my
Husband; if therefore you are about any thing that is just and honorable, and
worthy of us both, conceal it no longer, Brutus admiring the greatness of her
mind, and surprised with the discovery of such great affection, lifting up his
hands for joy, burst out into these expressions, O all ye Powers above, said
he, be ye favorable, and propitious to my desires, and make me a Husband that
is worthy of Portia; then he recited in order to her the Conspiracy for killing
Julius Caesar in the Senate House, and who were concerned therein; wherewith
she was so far from being affrighted, or dissuading him from it, that she
encouraged him to proceed; but the day on which they were to perform the
Enterprise, she being in fear for Brutus, swooned away, and was scarcely
recovered by him; at the last Brutus being overcome, and slain at Philippi, she
determined to die, and when her Friends, who were ever with her to prevent it,
deprived her of the opportunity and means, she at last snatched the burning
Coals with her Hands out of the fire, and thrusting them into her mouth, she
kept them there till she was choked. Of this Conspiracy against Caesar, for
the Readers better understanding it, I shall make a brief digression. Marcus
Brutus (faith Plutarch) was descended from Junius Brutus, as great an enemy to
Kings as he was to Tyrants; he was well beloved by Caesar, so that he gave
order for his safety at the Battle of Pharsalia as for his own Son; he moved
nothing but what was honest and rational, so grave and constant he was; he
carried what he moved, so resolved was he; after Caesar had past the Rulicon
contrary to the Decree of the Senate, and had so overpowered them, that he was
chosen perpetual Dictator, and had thereby taken away the liberty of the
Commonwealth, Brutus, Cassius and some others conspired against him; Brutus
hated the Tyranny, and Cassius the Tyrant; Brutus was incensed against Caesar's
Empire by his Ancestors Enterprise against Kings, and the Peoples expectation
from him, for under their Images they writ, O that Brutus were a^ve; and before
his face when he was Praetor, they said, Brutus is asleep. Cassius first
sounded Brutus, who said, He would die, or Caesar should not be King; Cassius
replied, Rome will not suffer thee to die; they look for Plays and Pastimes
from other Praetors hands, but they expect Liberty at thine; then they
proceeded in their Design, and though many ill Omens might have hindered Caesar
from going to the Senate that day, yet he resolved to go on; and being sat,
Cimber one of the Conspirators, seems to Petition Caesar, and the rest seconded
him, kissing Caesar's hand, and then all falling upon him at once, they stabbed
him with twenty three wounds, who when he saw Brutus, cried out, what, and thou
my Son? and so gave up the Ghost. Brutus would have satisfied the other
Senators, but they fled; the other Conspirators would have killed Mark Anthony,
but Brutus refused it, because he said he was a Person principled for Liberty,
though engaged to the Tyrant. At first the multitude abhorred, and were amazed
at the Fact, but afterward they applauded it, when they saw that neither power
nor spoil was the design, but honest Liberty, yea, the Senate entertained,
secured, honored and employed them in several Provinces, particularly Brutus
in Creet: who committed two Faults; first, in saving Anthony their close Enemy,
and next in publishing Caesar's popular will, and solemnizing his Funeral, at
which Anthony, by his Speech, and showing Caesar's bloody Garments, enraged the
multitude so far, that Brutus and his Friends retired to Athens, for fear of
Gaesars Soldiers, and there got as many Romans together, as he could prevail
upon, with whom he resolved to try his Fortune, affirming, That he would either
die, or live with Liberty, and rid his Country of Bondage by Battle, or himself
by death; Here Cassius met him with more Forces, and as they were about to pass
their Army toward Rome, an horrible Spectacle is said to appear to Brutus; for
in the dead of the night, when the Moon shined not very bright, and all the
Army was in silence, a black Image of an huge and horrid Body appeared to
Brutus, standing silent by him, his Candle being almost out, and he sitting
musing about the issue of the War, Brutus with an equal constancy both of mind
and countenance, said, What Man or God art thou? The Spirit answered, I am thy
evil Genius, and thou shall see me again at Philippi; Brutus courageously
replied, I will see thee there then; so the Spirit disappeared, but as he had
said, appeared to him again in those Fields of Philippi, where Brutus and
Cassius soon after lost a great Battle against Anthony and Octavius, and their
Army being utterly routed, Brutus passed the following melancholy night with
some few others in the Woods and Rocks, where the same Spectre appeared again
to him, and vanished without speaking a word; he then recollecting the loss of
his Friends, pitying his Country more than himself, and applauding his own
virtue more then his Enemies Conquest, did what he looked upon to be neither
offensive to Heaven, nor unworthy of a Man, for like Cato his Father in Law,
his Friends refusing to do it, he killed himself with his own Sword. Plutarchs
Lives. Of this great Person, hear what our incomparable Cowley sings.

I.
EXcellent Brutus, of all Humane Race
The best, till Nature was improved by Grace.
Till men above themselves, faith raised more
Than Reasou above Beasts before.
Virtue was thy life's center, and from thence
Did silently, and constantly dispense
The gentle vigorous influence,
To all the wide and fair circumference.
And all the parts upon it leaned so easily,
Obeyed the mighty force so willingly,
That none could discord, or disorder see
In all their Contrariety.
Each had his Motion natural and free;
And the whole no more moved than the whole World could be.
II.
From thy strict rule some think that thoudidst swerve,
(Mistaken honest Men) in Caesar's blood;
What Mercy could the Tyrants life deserve,
From him who killed Himself rather than serve?
The Heroic Exaltations of Good,
Are so far from Understood.
We count them Vice; alas our sight's so ill,
That things which swiftest move, seem to stand still.
We look not upon Virtue in her height,
On her supreme Idea, brave and bright,
In the Original Light;
But as her Beams reflected pass,
Through her own Nature, or ill Customs Glass.
And it is no wonder so,
If with dejected Eye,
In standing Pools we seek the Sky.
That Stars so high above, should seem to us below.
III.
Can we stand by and see
Our Mother robbed, and bound, and ravished be,
Yet not to her assistance stir,
Pleased with the Strength and Beauty of the Ravisher?
Or shall we fear to kill him, if before
The Canceled name of Friend he bore?
Ungrateful Brutus do they call?
Ungrateful Caesar who could Rome inthrall!
An Act more barbarous, and unnatural,
(In the exact Balance of true Virtue tried)
Than his Successor Nero 's Parricide!
There Is naught but Brutus could deserve,
That all men else should wish to serve,
And Caesar's usurpt place to him should proffer;
None can defer't but be who would refuse the offer.
IV.
Ill Fate assumed a Body thee to affright,
And wrapped it self in the terrors of the Night,
I Will meet thee at Philippi, said the Spright,
I Will meet thee there, said Thou,
With such a voice, and such a brow,
As put the trembling Ghost to sudden flight,
It vanished as a Tapers Light,
Goes out when Spirits appear in sight;
One would have thought 't had heard the morning Crow.
Or seen her well appointed Star,
Come marching up the Eastern Hill afar.
Nor durst it in Philippi's Field appear.
But unseen attacqued thee there.
Had it presumed in any shape thee to oppose,
Thou would have forced it back upon thy Foes;
Or slain't like Caesar, though it be
A Conqueror, and a Monarch mightier far than He.
V.
What joy can humane things to us afford,
When we see perish thus by odd events,
Ill men, and wretched Accidents?
The best Cause, and the best Man that ever drew a Sword.
When we see
The false Octavius, and wild Anthony,
Godlike Brutus, conquer thee?
What can we say but thine own Tragic Word,
That Virtue, which had worshipped been by thee,
As the most solid Good, and greatest Deity,
By this fatal proof became
An Idol only, and a Name?
Hold noble Brutus, and restrain
The bold voice of thy generous Disdain;
These mighty Gulphs are yet
Too deep for all thy Judgment, and thy Wit.
The Time's set forth already, which shall quell
Stiff Reason, when it offers to Rebel.
Which these great Secrets shall unseal,
And new Philosophies reveal.
A few years more, so soon had thou not died,
Would have confounded Humane Virtues pride,
And showed thee a God Crucified.
XXI. Conradus the Third, Emperor of Germany, besieged Guelphus Duke of
Bavaria, in the City of Wensburg in Germany; the Women perceiving that the Town
could not possibly hold out long, petitioned the Emperor that they might depart
only with so much as each of them could carry on their backs; which the Emperor
condescended to; expecting they would have laden themselves with Silver and
Gold; but they all came forth with every one her Husband on her back, whereat
the Emperor was so moved, that he wept, received the Duke into his favor, gave
all the men their Lives, and extolled the Women with deserved Praises. Bodin
relates, that the Duke Laurence Medicis was restored to his health by the only
reading this story, when he had long in vain expected it from the endeavors of
his Physicians. Camerarius spare hours, p. 228.

XXII. Thus far as to excellent fruits of Conjugal Love; and yet we shall find
that Paternal, or Fatherly Indulgence has equalled, if not excelled them; for
that natural affection which we bear toward them that proceed from us, we have
in common with other Creatures, the Poet has expressed it to be in the nature
of the most cruel of all other Beasts.

-- The Tiger which most thirsts for blood,
Seeing her self robbed of her tender brood;
Lies down lamenting in her Scythian Den,
And licks the prints where her lost Whelps had lain.
Yet this affection reigns with greater power in the Souls of some than others,
and the effects of it have been such, as cannot but detain us with some
pleasure in the perusal of them. In 1541. Eckius Raschacius a German Captain,
was at the Siege of Buda, whose Son, a valiant young Gentleman being got out of
the Army without his Fathers knowledge, carried himself so valiantly in a
skirmish against the Turks in the sight of his Father, and the whole German
Army, that he was highly commended of all men, and especially of his Father,
who yet knew him not; and after a gallant fight, before he could clear himself,
and make a retreat, he was encompassed by his Enemies, and valiantly defending
himself for some time, was at last unhappily slain; Raschacius exceedingly
moved for the death of so brave a man, but ignorant how near it concerned
himself, turning about to the other Commanders, said; This gallant Gentleman,
whatsoever he be, is worthy of everlasting commendations, and to be most
honorably buried of any Person in the whole Army; as the rest of the Captains
were with the like compassion approving his Speech, the dead body of the
unfortunate Son being rescued, was presented to the miserable Father, which
caused all that were there to shed Tears, but such a sudden and inward passion
of grief surprised the aged sorrowful Father, and struck so to his heart, that
after he had stood a while speechless, with his Eyes set in his head, he
suddenly fell down dead. Turkish History.

XXIII. Mahomet the second, Emperor of the Turks, was no sooner possessed of
his Fathers Throne, but like a young Tyrant, forgetring the Laws of Nature, he
presently in Person himself was about to have murdered with his own hands his
youngest Brother, then but eighteen months old, begotten on the fair Daughter
of Sponderbeius; which unnatural part, Moses one of his Bassas, and a man
greatly in his favor, perceiving, requested him not to imbrue his own Royal
hands in the blood of his Brother, but rather to commit the execution thereof
to some other, which thing Mahomet commanded him, the Author of that Counsel,
forthwith to do; so Moses taking the Child from the Nurse, strangled it, with
pouring water down the throat thereof. The young Lady understanding the death
of her Child, as a Woman whom fury had made past fear, came and in her rage
reviled the Tyrant to his very face, shamefully upbraiding him for his inhumane
cruelty; when Mahomet to appease her fury, requested her to be content, for
that it stood with the policy of his State, and willed her for her better
contentment to ask whatsoever she pleased, and she should forthwith have it;
but she desiring nothing more, but in some sort to be revenged, desired to have
Moses the Executioner of her Son, delivered unto her bound, which when she had
obtained, she presently struck him into the Breast with a Knite, crying in vain
upon his unthankful Master for help, and proceeding in her cruel execution, cut
an hole in his right side, and by piecemeal cut out his Liver, and cast it to
the Dogs to eat, to that extremity did she resent the death of her beloved Son.
Knowls Turkish Hist.

XXIV. Aegeus stood upon an high Rock, whence he might see a great way upon the
Sea, in expectation of the return of his Son Theseus from Creet, having made
him promise at his departure, That if all things went well with him, at his
return his Ship should be set forth with Sails and streamers of a white color,
to express the Joyfulness of his return. The old man after his long watching,
at last did discern the Ship making homewards, but it seems they had forgot to
advance the white Colors as they had promised; when therefore Aegeus saw
nothing but black, concluding that his Son had miscarried in his journey, and
was dead, not able to endure the grief he had conceived thereof, he threw
himself into the Sea, from the top of the Rock whereon he stood, and so died,
Langii Polyanth. p. 848.

XXV. Solon was a Person famous throughout all Greece, as having given Laws to
the Athenians; he being in his Travels, came to Miletum to converse with
Thales, one of the wise men of Greece, these two walking together upon the
Marketplace, one comes to Solon, and tells him, That his Son was dead; being
afflicted with this unexpected, as well as unwelcome news, he fell to tearing
of his beard, hair, and cloths, and fowling of his face in the dust;
immediately a great confluence of People came about him, whom he entertained
with howlings, and tears; when he had lain long on the ground, and delivered
himself up to all manner of expressions of grief, unworthy the Person he
sustained, so renowned for gravity and wisdom, Thales bid him be of good
courage, for the whole of the Relation was but a contrivance of his, who by
this experiment had desired to try whether it was convenient for a wise man to
marry, and have Children, as Solon had persuaded him to do; but that now he was
sufficiently satisfied it was no way necessary, seeing he perceived that the
loss of a Child might occasion a Person famous for wisdom to discover all the
signs of a madman. Sabel. Exercit. lib. 3.

XXVI. Charles the Great, was so great a lover of his Sons and Daughters, that
he never dined, and supt without them; he went no whither upon any Journey, but
he took them along with him, and when he was asked, why he did not marry his
Daughters, and send his Children abroad to see the world, his reply was, That
he was not able to bear their absence. Zuinglius Theat. vol. 1.

XXVII. Artobarzanes resigned the Kingdom of Cappadocia to his Son in the
presence of Pompey the Great; the Father had ascended the Tribunal of Pompey,
and was invited to sit with him in the Royal Seat, but as soon as he observed
his Son to sit with the Secretary in a lower place than his Fortune deserved,
he could not endure to see him placed below himself, but descending from his
Seat, he placed the Diadem upon his Sons Head and bid him go, and sit in that
place from whence he was newly risen; at these words, tears fell from the Eyes
of the young man, his body trembled, the Diadem fell from his Head, nor could
he endure to go thither where he was commanded; and which is almost beyond all
credit, he was glad who gave up his Crown, and he was sorrowful to whom it was
given; nor had this glorious strife come to any end, unless Pompeys Authority
had joined itself to the Fathers will, for he pronounced the Son a King,
commanded him to take the Diadem, and compelled him to sit with him in the
Throne. Valor. Maxim. p. 152.

XXVIII. Socrates was one day surprised by Alcibiades, childishly sporting with
his Son Lamprochus, and when he was sufficiently derided by Alcibiades upon
that account; You have not, said he, such reason as you imagine* to laugh so
profusely at a Father playing with his Child, seeing you know nothing of that
affection which Parents have for their Children; contain your self then till
you come to be a Father your self when perhaps you will be found as ridiculous
as I now seem to be. Lang. Polyan p. 847.

XXX. Agesilaus was above measure indulgent to his Children, and the Spartans
reproached him, that for the love of his Son Archidamus, he had concerned
himself so far as to hinder a just Judgment, and by his intercession for the
Malefactors had involved the City in the guilt of being injurious to Greece; he
used also at home to ride upon an Hobbyhorse with his little Children, and
being once by a Friend of his found so doing, He entreated him not to discover
that act of his to any man, till such time as he himself was become the Father
of Children. Plutarchs Lives.

XXXI. And though it may be we may not find so many instances in History, of
the Love, Reverence, and Piety of Children to their Parents, yet we read of
some in all Ages, who have this way entitled themselves to the promise of God,
and have thereby had a kind of earnest given them of being worthy and
prosperous Persons, as may be seen in diverse of the following Examples. Marcus
Coriolanus having well deserved of the Commonwealth of Rome, was yet unjustly
condemned, whereupon he fled to the Volsci, at that time in Arms against Rome,
and being made their chief Commander, he presently rendered himself very
formidable to the Romans; Ambassadors were sent to appease him, but to no
purpose, the Priests met him with entreaties in their Pontifical Vestments, but
were also returned without effect; the Senate was astonished, the People
trembled, as well the Men as the Women, bewailing the destruction that now was
sure to fall upon them. Then Volumnia the Mother of Coriolanus, taking Volumnia
his Wife along with her, and also his Children, went to the Camp of the Volsci,
whom as soon as the Son saw, being one that was an entire lover of his Mother,
he made have to embrace her; she angrily said, First, let me know before I
suffer myself to be embraced by you, whether I am come to a Son or an Enemy,
and whether I am a Captive, or a Mother in your Camp? Much more she added after
this manner with tears in her Eyes; he moved with the tears of his Mother, Wife
and Children, embracing his Mother, You have conquered, says he, and my
Country has overcome my just anger, being prevailed upon by the entreaties of
her, in whose Womb I was conceived. And so he freed the Roman Fields, and the
Romans themselves from the sight and fear of those Enemies he had led against
them. Plutarchs Lives. p. 230.

XXXII. There happened in Italy (sath Causin) as it often happens, a great
irruption of Mount Aetna, nowcalled Mount Gibel, it murmurs, burns, belches up
flames, and throws out its fiery Entrails, making all the world to fly from it;
it happened then, that in this violent, and horrible breach of flames, every
one flying, and carrying away what they had most precious with them. Two Sons,
the one called Anapias, the other Amphinomus, careful of the wealth and goods
of their Houses, reflected on their Father and Mother, both very old, who could
not save themselves from the Fire by flight, and where shall we, said they,
find a more precious Treasure than those who begat us? The one took up his
Father on his Shoulders, the other his Mother, and so made passage through the
flames; it is an admirable thing (says my Author) that Almighty God, in
consideration of this Piety, though Pagans did a miracle, for the Monuments of
all Antiquity witness, that the devouring flames, stayed at this spectacle, and
the fire wasting, and broiling all about them, the way only through which these
two Sons passed was tapestried with fresh verdure and greenness, and called
afterward by Posterity, The Field of the Pious, in memory of this Accident.
Causins Holy Court. Tom 1.

XXXIII. There were three Brothers, whoupon the death of the King their Father,
fell out amongst themselves about the Succession in the Kingdom, at last they
agreed to stand to the judgment, and determination of a Neighbor King, to whom
they fully referred the matter; he therefore commanded the dead body of the
Father to be fetched out of his Monument, and ordered, that each of them should
shoot an Arrow at his heart, and he that hit it, or came the nearest to it,
should succeed; the Elder shot first, and his Arrow past through the Throat of
his Father; the second Brother shot his Father into the Breast, but yet missed
the heart, the youngest detesting this wickedness, I had rather, said he, yield
all to my Brothers, and utterly resign up all my pretenses to the Kingdom, than
to treat the body of my Father with this Contumely; this saying of his
considered, the King passed Sentence, That he alone was worthy of the Kingdom,
as having given evidence how much he excelled his Brothers in Virtue, by the
Piety he had showed to the dead body of his Father. Leon. Theat. p. 278.

XXXIV. A Roman Praetor or Judge had sentenced to death a Woman of good birth
for a Capital Crime, and had delivered her over to the Triumvir to be killed in
Prison; the Jailer that received her, moved with compassion, did not presently
strangle her, but permitted her Daughter to come often to her, being first
diligently searched, lest she should convey in any sustenance to her, the
Jailer expecting that she should die of Famine; when therefore diverse days had
passed, wondering within himself what it might be that might occasion her to
live so long, he one day set himself to observe her Daughter with greater
curiosity, and then discovered how with the milk in her Breasts, she allayed
the Famine of her Mother; the news of this strange spectacle of the Daughter,
suckling her Mother, was by him carried to the Triumvir, and from him to the
Praetor, who brought the cause to the Judgment of the Consul, who pardoned the
Woman as to the Sentence of death passed upon her, and to preserve the memory
of that act, where her Prison stood, they caused an Altar to be erected to
Piety. Plinys Not. Hist.

XXXV. When the City of Troy was taken, the Greeks did, as became gallant men;
for, pitying the misfortune of their Captives, they caused it to be proclaimed,
that every free Citizen had liberty to take along with him any one thing that
he desired; Aeneas therefore neglecting all other things, carried out with him
his Household Gods; the Greeks delighted with the Piety of the man, gave him a
further permission to carry out with him any other thing from his House,
whereupon he took upon his shoulders his Father, who was grown old and
decrepit, and carried him forth; the Grecians were extremely affected with this
fight, and deed of his, and thereupon gave him all that was his own,
confessing, that nature itself would not suffer them to be enemies, but Friends
to such as preserved so great Piety toward Heaven, and so great a Reverence to
their Parents. Aelian Var. Hist.

XXXVI. Otho the second Emperor of Germany, had a Son named Luitolphus, a
valiant and haughty young man, who taking offense at his Fathers second
Marriage, rebelled against him, being assisted by many considerable Persons;
hereupon Otho raised a great Army to suppress them, but Luitolphus not finding
himself able to encounter his Father in the Field, betook himself to the City
of Mentz, where his Father besieged him for the space of threescore days, and
severely battered the City, which yet was as valiantly defended against him;
but at last the Besieged made a motion for Peace, whereupon a Truce was
granted; during which, Luitolphus and his Partizan found an opportunity in the
night to leave Mentz, and betake himself to Ratisbone; the Emperor without one
days delay, followed them to Ratisbone, which was better fortified, and
provided than Mentz, and so the Siege was more difficult and doubtful, and in
the Assaults and Sallies, many brave men perished on each side; yet soon after
Luitolphus sued to his Father for Peace and Pardon, which the Emperor at
length, by the mediation of some Prelates limited to a certain time, wherein
his Sons faults, and offenses should be examined, and a Treaty should be held
to conclude all matters; upon which Luitolphus surrendered the City, and
absented himself from his Fathers presence, till he saw the issue; but before
the time prefixed was expired, the Emperor being hunting, Luitolphus having
been convinced, and really sensible of his Fault, without any security from his
Father, came before him in the Fields bare-headed, and barefooted and kneeling
at his Fathers feet, wept; the Father being amazed at this strange, and
unexpected rencounter, stood still, and the Son at last recovering his Spirits,
entreated him to have compassion on him, acknowledging his faults, and offenses
to have been very great, and rather deserving a thousand deaths, than any
pardon, but being heartily sorry for the same, he like the Prodigal Son,
presented himself before his Father, who had also a Father in Heaven, by whom
he hoped to be forgiven; and if he would please to grant him his life, he would
assure him to be ever after a Loyal and Obedient Son, who lived, and would
continually live in a constant forrow for what was past, and if he intended to
deal otherwise with him, he yet desired him to remember, That he was his own
flesh, and blood, and that though the offense were only his, yet the just
Father must needs bear a part of the punishment inflicted upon the guilty Son,
but that in showing mercy, no inconvenience could ensue; and that if he should
be inexorable, he should lose the most Obedient Son that ever Father had;
having ended these, and many other words to the same effect, he with great
humility prostrated himself upon the Earth, expecting his Fathers Sentence,
either of Life or Death; this struck so great an impression into the Emperors
heart, to hear, and see his Son show such humility, and to shed so many tears,
that he could not forbear to do the like; and commanding him to arise from the
ground, with joy mixed with tears, both from himself, and his Attendants, he
immediately pardoned him, and restored him to his Grace, and Fatherly love, and
to the same Offices and Dignities he had before, and from thence forward the
Son continued constant in that Loyalty and Duty which he owed to his Father,
and Sovereign Lord, so long as they lived together. Imperial. Hist. p. 423.

XXXVII. A Son of the Lord Montpensier, an Italian, going to Puzzuolo to visit
the Sepulcher of his Father, was so overcharged with Passion, that after he had
washed all the parts of his Monument with his lamentable Tears, he fainted, and
fell down dead upon the Sepulcher of his Father. Guichardine Ital. Hist. p. 261.

XXXVIII. Decimus; Emperor of Rome, had a purpose, and earnest desire to set
the Crown upon the head of his Son Decius, out he utterly refused it, saying, I
fear lest being made an Emperor, I should forget that I am a Son, I had rather
be no Emperor, and a dutiful Son, than an Emperor, and such a Son as has
forsaken his due obedience; let then my Father bear the Rule, and let this be
my Empire to obey with all humility whatsoever he shall command me; By this
means the Solemnity was put off, and the young Man was not Crowned, unless you
will say, that his signal Piety toward his Parent, was a more glorious Crown
to him, than that which consisted of Gold and Jewels. Valor. Maxim. lib. 4.

XXXIX. In the Civil Wars of Rome, between Augustus, and Mark Anthony, as it
often falls out, that Fathers, and Sons, and Brothers and Brothers take
contrary part, so in that last Battle at Actium, where Augustus was Conqueror,
when the Prisoners, as the Custom is, were counted up, Metellus was brought to
Octavianus, whose face, tho much changed by anxiety and imprisonment, was known
by Metellus his Son, who had been on the contrary part; withtears therefore he
runs into the embraces of his Father, and then turning to Augustus; This thy
Enemy, said he, has deserved death, but I am worthy of some reward for the
service I have done thee; I therefore beseech thee instead of that which is
owing me, that thou would preserve this man, and cause me to be killed in his
stead; Augustus moved with this piety, though a great Enemy, gave to the Son
the life of the Father. Lonic. Theat. 273.

XL. Demetrius the King of Asia, and Macedonia, was taken Prisoner in Battle by
Seleucus King of Syria; after which Antigonus his Son was the quiet possessour
of his Kingdom, yet did he change the Royal Purple into a mourning habit, and
in continual tears sent abroad his Ambassadors to the Neighboring Kings, that
they would interpose in his Fathers behalf for the obtaining of his Liberty; he
also sent to Seleucus, and promised him the Kingdom, and himself as an hostage
and security, if he would free his Father from Prison; after he knew that his
Father was dead, he set forth a great Navy, and went out to receive the body of
the deceased, which by Seleucus was sent toward Macedonia; he received it with
such mournful Solemnity, and so many tears, as turned all men into wonder and
compassion, Antigonus stood in the Poop of a great Ship built for that purpose,
clothed in black, bewailing his dead Father; the Ashes were enclosed in a
golden Urn, over which he stood, a continual, and disconsolate Spectator; he
caused to be sung the Virtues, and Noble Achievements of the deceased Prince,
with voices formed to Piety and Lamentation; the Rowers also in the Galleys, so
ordered the strokes of their Oars, that they kept time with the mournful voices
of the others; in this manner the Navy came near to Corinth, so that the Rocks
and Shores themselves seemed to be moved to mourning. Plutarchs Lives. Thus far
of Paternal, and Filial Love, let us proceed to that between Brethren.

XLI. It is usually counted rare to see Brothers live together in mutual love
and agreement with each other, and it is likewise commonly observed; that their
Animosities have been managed with greater rancour and bitterness, than if they
had been the greatest Strangers; on the other side where this Fraternal Love
has rightly seated it self in the Soul, it has appeared as real and vigorous as
any other sort of Love whatsoever; of which there want not very remarkable
Instances. In the year 1585. the Portugal Ship, called St. Jago, was cast away
upon the Shallows near St. Lawrence, and toward the Coast of Mosambique; here
it was that diverse Persons had leapt into the great Boat to save their lives,
and finding that it was overburdened, they chose a Captain, whom they swore to
obey, who caused them to cast Lots, and such as the Lot fell upon to be cast
overboard; there was one of those that in Portugal are called New Christians,
who being allotted to be cast overboard into the Sea, had a younger Brother in
the same Boat, that suddenly rose up, and desired the Captain that he would
pardon, and make free his Brother, and let him supply his place; saying, My
Brother is elder, and of better knowledge in the World than I, and therefore
more fit to live in the World, and to help my Sisters and Friends in their
need, so that Thad rather die for him, than live without him; at which request
they saved the elder Brother, and threw the younger at his own desire into the
Sea, who swum at least six hours after the Boat; and though they held up their
hands with naked Swords, willing him that he should not once come to touch the
Boat; yet laying hold thereon, and having his hand half cut in two, he would
not let go, so that in the end, they were constrained to take him in again;
both these Brethren I knew (says my Author) and have been in company with
them. Linschotens Voyages. p. 147.

XLII. When the Emperor Augustus had taken Adiatoriges, a Prince of Cappadocia,
together with his Wife and Children in War, and had led them to Rome in
Triumph, he gave order that the Father, and the elder of the Brothers should be
slain. The designed Ministers of this Execution were come to the place of
restraint, to this unfortunate Family, and there inquiring which of the
Brethren was the eldest, there arose a vehement and earnest contention between
the two young Princes, each of them affirming himself to be the Elder, that by
his death he might preserve the life of the other; when they had long continued
in this pious Emulation, the Mother at last, not without difficulty, persuaded
her Son Dyetentus, that he would permit his younger Brother to die in his
stead, as hoping that by him she might be more probably maintained. Augustus
was at length certified of this great example of Brotherly love, and not only
lamented that act of his severity, but gave an honorable support to the
Mother, and her surviving Son. Heywoods Hist. Women.

XLIII. Heliodorus the Britain, had afterward the Surname of Pius upon this
occasion; the People provoked with the Cruelty, and Avarice of Archigallus, had
deposed him, and raised Heliodorus to the Throne of his Brother; one time when
the King went on hunting, he accidentally met with his Brother Archigallus in a
Wood, whose altered visage, and ragged cloths, gave sufficient evidence of his
afflicted condition; as soon as the King knew him, though he was not ignorant
how he had sought his Restoration both by force and fraud, yet he lovingly
embraced him, and caused him privately to be conveyed into the City. The King
pretended he was sick, and giving forth that he would dispose of the Affairs of
the Realm by his last Will and Testament, he called his Nobles together, he
then signified that he would confer in private with each of them singly, and as
every man entered into his Chamber, he caused him to be laid hold on,
threatening him with death, if he would not consent to the sparing of his
Brother, and that he should resign the Throne and Kingdom to him, having by
this means gained an universal assent, he then opened the business in the
presence of them altogether, so that Archigallus was restored to the Kingdom,
and he dying in few years, Heliodorus succeeded him with equal Justice and
Glory. Fulgosus Examples, p. 634.

XLIV. There was a Soldier in the Camp of Pompeius, who in the War with
Sertorius, perceiving a Soldier on the other side to press hard upon him, he
sought with him hand to hand, and having slain him, he went about to strip him
of his Arms, which when he had done, he found it was his Brother, who had
fallen under him, whereupon having a long time cursed his unhappy Fate, he
carried his dead Brother into the Camp, and having covered the Body with a
precious Garment, he laid the Corpse upon the Funeral Pile, and put fire to it;
which done, he immediately drew the same Sword wherewith he had slain his
Brother, and thrust it into his own Breast, and so falling prostrate upon the
dead Body of his Brother, they were both burned together. Valerius Maximus, p.
146.

XLV. There was a report (though a false one) that Eumenes King of Asia, was
slain by the fraud of Perseus, upon the news whereof, his Brother Attalus
seized upon the Crown, and married the Wife of his Brother, but being informed
of Eumenes his return, he went forth to meet him, not without apprehensions of
fear, in regard of what he had done in his absence; Eumenes made no show of his
displeasure, only whispered him in the Ear; That before he married another Man's
Wife, he should besure her Husband was dead. This was all, and not long after
dying, though by his Wife he had a Son of his own, yet he left the Kingdom to
his Brother, together with the Queen his Wife. Attalus on the other side, that
he might not be surpassed in Brotherly love, though he had many Children by his
own Wife, yet he educated that Son she had by Eumenes, to the hope of the
Kingdom, and when he came of sufficient Age, freely resigned up all to him, and
lived a private life many years after. Burtons Melancholy. p. 564.

XLVI. Darius King of Persia, being extremely provoked by Crimes of an
extraordinary nature, had pronounced Sentence of death upon Ithaphernes, his
Children, and the whole Family of them at once; the Wife of Ithaphernes went to
the Kings Palace, and there all in tears, was so loud in her mournful
Lamentations, that her cries coming to the Kings Ear, moved him in such manner
to compassion, that the King sent her word, That with her own, he gave her the
life of any single Person whom she would make choice of among the condemned;
the Woman begged the life of her Brother; Darius wondered that she should rather
ask his life; than that of her Husband, or any of her Children; and therefore
asked her the reason; who replied, That since her Father was dead, she could
never hope for a Brother more, if she should lose this, but that her self being
but young as yet, might hope for another Husband, and other Children; Darius
was moved with this answer, and being inclined to Brotherly love, as well as
prudence, he gave her also the life of her eldest Son. Heywoods Hist. Women.

XLVII. Tiberius being at Ticinum, and hearing that his Brother Drusus lay sick
in Germany, he immediately put himself on an hasty Journey to give him a visit;
he passed the Alps, and the Rhine, and changing his Horse night and day, he
traveled outright two hundred miles with only one Person in his Company as his
Guide; Drusus though at that time laboring for life, being informed of his
coming, commanded his Legions with their Ensigns to march out, and meet him,
and to salute him by the Title of Imperator, or Emperor; he ordered a
Praetorial Tent to be erected for him on the right hand of his own, and gave
him the Confular, and Imperial name; at the same time yielding this honor to
his Brother, and his Body to death. Valerius Maximus, p. 146.

XLVIII. Great was the love of Timolaeon the Corinthian to his Brother, for
when in a Battle with the Argives, he saw his Brother fall down dead with the
wounds he had received, he leaped over the dead body of his Brother, and with
his Shield he protected the body as it lay; and though in this enterprise he
was sore wounded himself, yet would he not retreat into any place of safety,
till such time as he had seen the dead body of his Brother carried off from the
Field. Fulgosus lib. 5.

XLIX. Neither has the extraordinary Love of Servants toward their Masters,
wanted great Examples, some of whom have discovered eminent Fidelity, and
Virtue, so that Fortune may seem to have treated them injuriously, not to allot
them as great advantages as their Masters they lived under; for we read, that
the Servant of Vrbinius Panopion, knowing that the Soldiers commissioned to
kill his Master, were come to his House at Reatina, changed cloths with him,
and having put his Masters Ring upon his Finger, he sent him out at a postern
door, but went himself to the Chamber, and threw himself upon the Bed, where he
was slain in his Masters stead; Panopion by this means escaped; and afterward
when the times would permit it, erected a Noble Monument, with a due
inscription in memory of the true Fidelity of so good a Servant. Lipsius
Monitor, p. 332.

L. The Hungarians had conspired against Sigismund, King of Hungary and
Bohemia, but the Plot being discovered, the principal persons were all taken,
brought to Buda, and there beheaded; Stephanus Contius was the chief of these
Conspirators, who having thereupon lost his Head, Chioka his Esquire lamented
the death of his Lord with such outcries, that the King took notice of him, and
said unto him, I am now become thy Lord and Master, and it is in my power to do
thee much more good than can be expected from that headless Trunk; To whom the
young man replied; I will never be the Servant of a Bohemian Hog, I had rather
be torn into a thousand pieces, than to desert a Master of so great Magnanimity
as all the Bohemians together are not able to equal. And thereupon he
voluntarily laid down his Head on the block, and had it severed from his
Shoulders, that he might no longer survive his Master. Zuinglius Theat. p. 215.

LI. Grimoaldus, Duke of Benevento, was invited by Gondibert King of the
Lombards to assist him against Partharis his Brother; he came accordingly, and
having thrown out the one, he slew the other Brother he came to defend, and so
made himself King of Lombardy, and when he knew that Partharis was retreated to
Calanus Duke of Bavaria, he wrought so, that he was expelled from thence;
Partharis not knowing whither to betake himself in safety, comes as a
suppliant, and commits himself to the faith of Grimoaldus, but he observing
that numbers of his Subjects flocked daily to visit him, and fearing lest by
the favor of the People he should some time or other recover the Kingdom, not
regarding his Oath, he resolved to make him away, and that he might perform it
with less noise and tumult, he intended first to make him drunk, and then send
his Guards to cut his Throat, while he lay buried in Wine and sleep. This
Counsel of his was not so privately carried, but that it came to the ear of
Partharis, he therefore commands his Cup Bearer to give him Water constantly
instead of Wine, lest his troubled head should prove unmindful of the danger he
was in, nor could he abstain altogether from drinking, lest Grimoaldus his
Spies should discover that he had intimation of his Intentions; the better
therefore to color the matter, after large drinking he caused himself to be
carried by his Servants into his Chamber, as if to sleep out his debauch; there
he consults with Hunulphus his most faithful Servant, who thought it not safe
to go forth, since the Servants of Grimoaldus stood watching at the Gate; but
in regard necessity compelled, and that there was no other way of escape, he
orders it thus, he covers his Head and Shoulders with the skin of a Bear, which
was there by chance, after the manner of a Country Clown, and lays upon his
back a Mattress, as if he was a Porter, to carry it away, and then with good
blows of a Cudgel drove him out of the Chamber; by this Contrivance he passed
unknown through the Guards, and accompanied with one Servant, got safe into
France; about midnight the Guards came to kill Partharis, but were opposed by
Hunulphus, who besought them not to disturb the rest of his Master now
sleeping, but to suffer him to sleep out the large drinking he had that night;
twice they were thus put back, but the third time they broke by force into the
Chamber, and not finding Partharis, whom they had determined to kill, they
inquire of Hunulphus what was become of him, who told them plainly he was fled,
and confessed that himself was the contriver of his flight; Grimoaldus admiring
his fidelity, who to save his Master, had cast himself into such manifest
danger of his life, freed him from that punishment, that all cried he was
worthy of, and with many promises allured him that from thenceforth he would
change Masters, and serve him with the like fidelity as he had done the former.
Dinoth. Memorab. p. 301.

LII. There was a Citizen of Rome condemned by the Sentence of the Triumvirate,
who for fear of his life fled, and hid himself in a Cave of the Earth; one of
his Servants observed the approach of them that came to murder him, and having
thereupon advised him to retire to the lowest, and most secret part of the
Cave, he himself put on his Masters Gown, pretending to the Pursuers, that he
was the Person they sought after, being desirous to save the life of his
Patron, with the loss of his own; but one of his fellow Servants betrayed him
in this officious Design, so that the Master was fetched out of his hiding
place and slain, when this was known to the People of Rome, they would not be
satisfied, till the betrayer of his Master was Crucified, and he that attempted
to save him, was set at liberty. Dinoth. p. 293.

LIII. The Tyrians having maintained long Wars against the Persians were much
weakened thereby, which occasioned their slaves, being many in number, to rise
against their Masters, whom they put all to the Sword, together with their
Children, and then seized upon their Houses, together with their Wives, whom
they Married; only one of these slaves being more merciful than the rest,
spared his Master Straton, and his Son, and hid them; the slaves having thus
got possession of all, consulted together to choose a King, and concluded that
he who could first discern the Sun at his rising, should be King, whereupon the
forementioned slave consulted with his Master about the business, who advised
him, when others looked into the East, that he should look into the West, for
which he was well scoffed at by his Companions; but presently he espied the
Sunbeams shining upon the high Towers and Chimnies in the City, and so
challenged the Kingdom; his Companions would needs know who taught him his wit,
at last he told them, whereupon fetching out old Straton, they gave him not
only his life, but elected him their King, who having once been a Master, and
free born, they thought was fittest to rule all the rest that were slaves.
Justin. Hist. lib. 18.

LIVE. Menenius was in the number of those that were condemned by the
Triumvirate, and when a Servant of his perceived that his Masters House was
enclosed with a company of Soldiers that came to kill him, he caused himself to
be put into a Litter, wherein his Master used to be carried, and ordered some
of his fellow Servants to carry him forth in it; the Soldiers supposing that it
was Menenius himself, slew him there; whereupon looking no farther, his Master
clothed in a Servants habit, had the means and opportunity to escape into
Italy. Fulgosus Ex. lib. 8.

LV. These are the instances of such Servants, as no consideration whatsoever
could move to disloyalty, or infidelity toward their Masters; such examples as
these are few and rare, whereas the world is full of those of the contrary, of
which I shall conclude with one instance, of a Servant who was not altogether
of so virtuous an humor as the aforenamed. Lewis the Twelfth of France, going
to Bayon, lay in a Village called Espernon, near Bordeaux; now upon the great
Road between these two places, the Bailiff had built a very noble House; the
King thought it very strange that in a Country so bare and barren as that was,
and amongst Downs and Sands that would bear nothing, the Bailiff should build
so fine a House, and at Supper was speaking of it to the Chamberlain of his
Household; who made answer, that the Bailiff was a rich man, which the King not
knowing how to believe, considering the wretched Country his House was seated
in, he immediately sent for him, and said unto him these words, Come on
Bailiff, and tell me why you did not build your fine House in some place where
the Country was good and fruitful; Sir, answered the Bailiff, I was born in
this Country, and find it very good for me; are you so rich, said the King, as
they tell me you are; I am not poor, replied the other, I have, blessed be God,
wherewithal to live; the King then asked him how it was possible he should grow
so rich in so pitiful a barren Country; why, very easily, replied the Bailiff;
tell me which way then said the King, marry Sir, replied the other, because I
have ever had more care to do my own business than that of my Masters, or my
Neighbors; the Devil refuse me, said the King, (for that was always his Oath)
thy reason is very good for doing so, and rising betimes, thou could not
choose but thrive. Montluc. Comment.

LVI. Great has been the love and strictness of some Persons in their
Religion, as well Christians as Heathens, and their Reverence and regard toward
it, and it had been highly commendable in the last, had their Devotions been
better directed; in the mean time they shame us by being more zealous in their
Superstition, than we are in the true Religion. In the Reign of Honorius the
Emperor, by the perfidiousness of Stilicon, Alaricus King of the Goths, was
brought into Italy with a mighty Army, who set upon the City of Rome itself,
and took it; and though he was a Man of blood, both by nature and custom, yet
such a Reverence had he to Religion, that before he would permit his Soldiers
the plunder of the City, by sound of Trumpet he caused his Edict to be
proclaimed, That as well the Goods as Lives of all those should be safe, that
had retreated into any of the Churches which were consecrated to the Apostles.
Monsieur Heraults Discourses. p. 120.

LVII. Pansanias the King of Sparta, and at that time the General of all
Greece, in that famous Battle of Platea, where all the Grecian safety was
disputed, when the Enemy drew on, and provoked him, he restrained, and kept in
his Soldiers, till such time as the Gods being consulted by Sacrifice, had
given encouragement to begin the Fight; this was somewhat long in the
performance, so that in the mean time the Enemy interpreting this delay as an
effect of fear, began to press hard upon him, so that many of the Greeks fell,
yet would he not suffer in this extremity a single Javelin to be thrown against
them, but multiplying the Sacrifices, he at last lift up his hands to Heaven,
and prayed, That if the Fates had determined that the Graecians should not
overcome, yet at least it might please Heaven that they might not die
unrevenged, nor without performing some famous and memorable exploit upon their
Enemies; He was heard, and straight the bowels of the Sacrifice promised him
success; he marched out, and obtained the Victory; but what a Soul was that?
how fixed and earnest in the Holy Rites of his Country? that chose rather to be
butchered and slain, than to draw a Sword, while the Gods seemed unwilling.
Herodotus Hist.

LVIII. The Egyptians worshipped Dogs, the Indian Rat, the Cat, Hawk, Wolf,
and Crocodile, as their Gods, and observed them with that kind of Religion and
Veneration, that if any man whatsoever knowingly, or otherwise killed any of
these, it was death to him without mercy; as a Roman Citizen found to his cost
in the time of Diodorus Siculus, who writes it, and avouches himself to be a
Spectator and witness of what follows; at such a time, says he, as Ptolomeus,
whom the Romans afterward restored to the Kingdom, was first of all styled the
Associate and Friend of the Senate, and People of Rome, there was a public
Rejoicing, and a mighty concourse of People; it happened that in a great crowd,
amongst others there were some Romans, and with them a Soldier, who by chance,
and not willingly had killed a Cat, upon which there was presently a great cry,
and a sudden fury and tumult arose; to pacify which, neither the ignorance of
the miserable wretch, nor any Reverence of the Roman Name, no not the command
of the King himself, who had sent the chiefest of his Nobles to appease it,
none of all these availed the poor man, but that he was immediately pulled in
pieces by a thousand hands, so that nothing of him was left either to bury, or
to burn; so far had their Superstition, and Reverence, even for such a
ridiculous Worship, transported these barbarous Souls. Lipsius Monitor. p. 10.

LIX. When Antiochus had besieged Jerusalem, at such time as the Feast of
Tabernacles was to be celebrated, and the People of that City had besought him
for a Truce of seven days, that they might securely attend upon that Solemnity,
he not only granted, but faithfully performed it, and likewise caused a Bull
with gilded Horns, together with Incense and Perfumes, and diverse Vessels of
Gold to be conveyed to the Gates, and delivered into the hands of the Priests,
and desired they might be offered unto God; the Jews were so exceedingly moved
with this unexpected Benignity, that they yielded themselves, and all that they
had to Antiochus. Lipsius Monit. p. 9.

LX. When Jerusalem was besieged by Pompey the Great, upon the day of their
Sabbath, though the Jews saw the Romans busied in their preparations against
them, and were ready to assault them, though they had advanced their Ensigns
upon their Walls, though they had entered the City, and slew indifferently all
they met, yet did this People make no resistance, but performed their usual
Sacrifice as in time of Peace, and upon no account could be drawn to violate
the rest of their Sabbath, though for the preservation of their Lives and
Estates. Josephus Hist. p. 567.

LXI. Pontius Pilate being sent by Tiberius to be Governor over the Jews,
caused in the night time the Statue of Caesar to be brought into Jerusalem
covered, which thing within 3 days after caused a great Tumult among the Jews,
for they who beheld it, were astonished, and moved, as though now the Law of
their Country were profaned, for they hold it not lawful for any Picture or
Image to be brought into the City; at their Lamentation who were in the City,
there were gathered together a great multitude out of the Fields adjoining, and
they went presently to Pilate then at Caesarea, beseeching him earnestly that
the Images might be taken away out of Jerusalem, and that the Law of their
Country might remain inviolate, and when Pilate denied their Suit, they
prostrated themselves before his House, and there remained lying upon their
Faces for five days and nights, never moving; afterward Pilate sitting in his
Tribunal, was very careful to call the Jews together before him, as if he would
have there given them an answer, when upon the sudden a Company of Armed
Soldiers, according to appointment, compassed the Jews about with a Tripple
Rank; the Jews were hereat amazed, seeing that which they expected not, then
Pilate told them, That unless they would receive the Images of Caesar, he would
kill them all, and to that end made a sign to the Soldiers to draw their
Swords; the Jews, as though they agreed thereto, fell all down at once, and
offered their naked Necks to the stroke of the Sword, crying out, That they
would rather lose their lives, than suffer their Religion to be profaned; then
Pilate admiring their constancy, and the strictness of that People in their
Religion, presently commanded the Statues to be taken out of the City of
Jerusalem. Josephus Hist. lib. 2.

LXII. When King Etheldred, and his Brother Alfred had encountered the Danes a
whole day, being parted by the night* early the next morning the Battle was
re^wed, and Alfred being in fight with the Danes, sent to his Brother to make
all possible speed to help him, but he being in his Tent at his Devotions,
refused to come till he had ended; having finished, he entered the Battle,
relieved the staggering Host, and had a glorious Victory over his Enemies.
Malnsburys Chronicle, p. 23.

LXIII. Fulco Earl of Anjou in his old age, minding the welfare of his Soul,
according to the Religion of those days went on Pilgrimage to Jerusalem, and
having bound his Servants by Oath to do what he should require, was by them
drawn naked to Christ's Sepulcher; the Pagans looking on, while one drew him
with a wooden yoke put about his neck, the other whipped him on the naked back,
he in the mean time saying, Receive O Lord a miserable Perjured and Runaway
Servant, vouchsafe to receive my Soul O Lord Christ. Malmsoury, p. 23.

LXIV. When the Duke of Saxony made great Preparations for War against a Pious
and devout Bishop of Magdenburg, the Bishop not regarding his defense, applied
himself to his Episcopal Function in the visiting, and well governing of his
Church; and when it was told him that the Duke was in his march against him, he
replied; I will take care of the Reformation of my Churches, and leave unto God
the care of my safety, the Duke had a Spy in the City, who hearing of this
answer of the Bishops, gave his Master a speedy account thereof; the Duke
having received this Information, did thereupon dismiss his Army, and left off
his expedition, saying, He would not fight against him, who had God to fight
for him. Chetwind Hist. Collect. p. 442.

LXV. Bishop Ridley offering to Preach before the Lady Mary (afterward Queen
Mary) and receiving a repulse, was brought by Sir Thomas Wharton, her Servant
into the Dining Room, and desired to drink, which when he had done, he paused a
while, looking very sadly, and suddenly broke forth into these words; Surely I
have done amiss; why so? quoth the Knight; because I have drank (says he) in
that place where Gods Word being offered, has been refused; whereas if I had
remembered my duty, I should have departed immediately, and shaken off the dust
from my Shoes for a testmony against this House. These words were by this
Bishop spoken with so much zeal and fervency, that some of the hearers
afterward affirmed that the Hair on their Heads stood upright at them. Clarks
Examp. 2 Vol. p. 762.

LXVI. The veracity likewise of some Persons, and their great love to Truth,
and hatred of Flattery and Falsehood, has been very remarkable; The Emperor
Constantius had besieged Beneventum, when Romualdus the Duke thereof,
dispatched Geswaldus privately to Grimoaldus, the King of Lombardy, the Dukes
Father, to desire him to come with an Army to the assistance of his Son, which
he obtained, and was sent away before by Grimoaldus, to let his Son know, that
he was coming with some Troops to his Aid; but in his return, by misfortune he
fell amongst the Enemies, who being informed of the Auxiliary Forces that were
upon their march were in hope to have Beneventum yielded to them before their
arrival, if they could make Romualdus to despair of being relieved; to this
purpose they ordered Geswaldus to speak to them what they bid him, and led him
to the Walls, but when he came thither, he declared the whole truth to the
Besieged, and gave them to understand, that ere long Grimoaldus would be with
them with a considerable Army; this cost Geswaldus his life, and the
Imperialists raised their Siege the next day after. Fulgosus Ex. p. 425.

LXVII. The Duke of Ossuna as he passed by Barcelona, having got leave of his
Majesty to release some Slaves, he went aboard the Cape Gally, and passing
through the benches of Slaves, he asked diverse of them what their offenses
were, every one excused himself, one saying, That he was put in out of malice,
another by bribery of the Judge, but all of them unjustly; among the rest there
was one little sturdy black Fellow, and the Duke asking him what he was in for,
Sir, said he, I cannot deny but I am justly put in here, for I wanted Money,
and so took a Purse hard by Tarragona, to keep me from starving; The Duke with
a little staff he had in his Hand, gave him two or three blows upon the
shoulders, saying, You Rogue what do you do among so many honest innocent men,
get you gone out of their Company. So he was freed, and the rest remained
there, still to tug at the Oar; Howels Letters. p. 32.

LXVIII. When I lived at Vtricht (says Mr. Peachman) the reply of that valiant
Gentleman Colonel Edmonds, was much spoken of, there came a Country man of his
out of Scotland, who desiring to be entertained by him, told him, That my Lord
his Father, and such Knights and Gentlemen, his Cosen and Kinsmen were in good
health; Colonel Edmonds turning to his Friends then by, Gentlemen, says he,
believe not one word he says, my Father is but a poor Baker in Edinburgh, and
works hard for his living, whom this Knave would make a Lord, to curry favor
with me, and make you believe I am a great man born, when there is no such
matter. Peachmans Complete Gentleman, p. 5.

LXVIX. It is said of Augustus Caesar, that after a long inquiry into all the
parts of his Empire; he found but one man who was accounted never to have told
a Lie, for which cause he was judged to be capable and worthy to be the chief
Sacrificer in the Temple. Cornelius Nepos remembers of Titus Pomponius Atticus,
a Knight of Rome, and familiar Friend to Tully, that he was never known to
speak an untruth, neither but with great impatience to hear one related; his
uprightness was so remarkable, that not only private men made suit to him, that
they might commit their whole Estate to his Trust, but even the Senate
themselves besought him, that he would take the management of diverse Offices
into his Charge. Heraclides in his History of the Abbot Idur, speaks of him as
a Person extremely devoted to truth, and gives him this threefold commendation,
That he was never known to tell a Lie, that he was never heard to speak ill of
any man, and lastly, that he used not to speak at all, but when necessity
required. Xenocrates the Philosopher was known to be a man of that Fidelity and
Truth in speaking, that whereas no man's Testimony might be taken in any cause,
but upon Oath; yet the Athenians, among whom he lived, gave to him alone this
privilege, That his Evidence should be lawful and good without swearing.
Laert. Vit. Philos.

LXX. One who was designed for an Agent and Ambassador, waited upon the
knowing and experienced Lord Wentworth for some direction in his Conduct and
Carriage, to whom he thus delivered himself, To secure your self, and serve
your Country, you must at all times, and upon alloccasions speak Truth, for,
says he, you will never be believed, and by this means your speaking Truth
will both secure your self, if you be questioned, and put those you deal with
to a great loss, who will still act contrary to what you declare in all their
inquiries and undertakings. Albertus the Popish Archbishop of Mentz, reading by
chance in the Bible, one of his Council coming in, asked him, what his Highness
did with that Book? The Archbishop answered; I know not what this Book is, but
I am sure that all which is written therein is quite against us. Luther Coll.
p. 11.

LXXI. When Aristobulus the Historian presented to Alexander the Great, a Book
that he had writ of his Glorious Archievements, wherein he had flatteringly
made him greater than he was; Alexander after he had read the Book, threw it
into the River Hydaspis, and told the Author, That it were a good deed to throw
him in after it, the same Prince did also chase a certain Philosopher out of
his presence, because he had long lived with him, and yet never reproved him
for any of his Vices and Faults. Maximilian the first, Emperor of Germany,
though he might be desirous to be famous to Posterity for his Noble Actions and
Achievements, yet he was very averse, and afraid to be praised to his face;
when therefore on a time diverse eloquent and learned men did highly extol him
with mighty praises in their Panegyricks, he commanded Cuspinianus to return
them an answer extempore, and withal, take heed, said he, that you praise me
not, for a man's own Praises from his own mouth carry but an evil savor with
them; It is written of our Henry 5. that he had something of Caesar in him,
which Alexander the Great had not, that he would not be drunk; and something of
Alexander the Great, that Caesar had not, that he would not be flattered.
Cambdens Remains, p. 228.

LXXII. Pambo came to a learned man, and desired him to teach him some Psalm,
who began to read unto him the 39th Psalm, and the first verse, I said I will
look to my ways, that I not offend with my Tongue; Pambo shut the Book, and
took his leave, saying, he would go learn that point, and having absented
himself for some months, he was demanded by his Teacher when he would go
forward, he answered, That he had not yet learned his old Lesson, to speak in
such a manner as not to offend with his Tongue. Sueton. Hist.

LXXIII. Some men have been also famous for being great Lovers, and Promoters
of Peace, for though the frantic world has generally made Darlings of such as
have been clad in Steel, the destroyers of Cities, the suckers of Humane blood,
and such as have imprinted the deepest scars upon the Face of the Universe,
though these are the men it has Crowned with Laurels, advanced to Thrones, and
flattered with the misbecoming Titles of Hero's and Gods, while the Sons of
Peace are remitted to the cold entertainment of their own Virtues, yet there
have ever been some who have found so many Heavenly Beauties in the face of
Peace, that they have been contented to love that sweet Virgin for her self,
and to court her without the consideration of any Additional Dowry. For we
read, that Otho the Emperor, when he saw that he must either lay down the
Empire, or else maintain himself in the possession thereof by the blood and
slaughter of a number of Citizens, he determined with himself to die a
voluntary death; and when his Friends and Soldiers desired him, that he would
not so soon begin to despair of the event of the War, he replied, That his life
to him, was not of that value as to occasion a Civil War for the defense of it;
who can choose but admire that such a Spirit as this should be found in an
Heathen Prince, and he too not above thirty years of Age. Erasmus Apotheg.

LXXIV. The Inhabitants of the Islands of Borneo not far from the Molucca's in
the East Indies, live in such detestation of War, and are so great lovers of
Peace, that they hold their King in no other Veneration than that of a God, so
long as he studies to preserve them in Peace; but if he discover inclinations
to War, they never leave till he is fallen in Battle under the Arms of his
Enemies; so soon as he is slain, they set upon the Enemy with all imaginable
fierceness, as men that fight for their Liberty, and for such a King as will be
a great lover of Peace; nor was there ever any King known amongst them that was
the persuader, or Author of a War, but he was deserted by them, and suffered to
fall under the Sword of the Enemy. Dinoth. Memor. p. 76.

LXXV. Constantius the Emperor observing such differences among the Fathers of
the Church, called the Council of Nice, at which also himself was present; at
this time diverse little Books were brought to him, containing their mutual
complaints and accusations of each other, all which he received as one that
intended to read, and take cognizance of them all; but when he found he had
received as many as were intended to be offered, he bound them up in one
bundle, and protesting, That he had not so much as looked into any one of them,
he burnt them all in the sight of the Fathers, giving them moreover a serious
exhortation to Peace, and a cordial agreement among themselves. Chetwinds Hist.
Coll. p. 42.

LXXVI. It is reported of Julius Caesar to his great commendation, that after
the defeat of Pompey the Great, he had in his custody a Castle, wherein he
found diverse Letters, written by most of the Nobles of Rome under their own
hands, which gave sufficient evidence to condemn them, but he burnt them all,
that no Monument might remain of a future Grudge, and that no man might be
driven to extremities, or to break the Peace through any apprehensions, that he
lived suspected, or should therefore be hated. Rogers Pen. Citizen. p. 70.

LXXVII. James King of Arragon, was a great Enemy to Contentions, and
Contentious Lawyers, insomuch as having heard many complaints against Semenus
Rada, a great Lawyer, who by his Quirks and Wiles had been injurious, as well
as troublesome to many, he banished him his Kingdom, as a man that was not to
be endured to live in a place, to the Peace of which he was so great an Enemy.
Clarks Mirror. p. 343. At Fez in Africa, they have neither Lawyers nor
Advocates, but if there be any Controversy amongst them, both Parties,
Plaintiff, and Defendant come before the chief Judge, and all at once, without
any further appeals, or pitiful delays the cause is heard and ended. Burtons
Melancholy. Servius Sulpitius was an Heathen Lawyer, but an excellent Person;
it is said of him, that he respected Equity and Peace in all that he did, and
always sought rather to compose differences; than to multiply Suits in Law.
Clarks Examples, p. 344.

LXXVIII. It is noted of Phocion a most excellent Captain of the Athenians,
that although for his military ability and success, he was chosen forty and
five times General of their Armies by universal approbation, yet he himself did
ever persuade them to Peace. Flutarchs Lives. I read of the Sister of Edward
the Third, King of England (says Mr. Trenchfield) who was Married to David
King of Scots, that she was familiarly called, Jane make peace, both for her
earnest and successful endeavors therein. Trenchfield Hist. Inproved. p. 67.
Sertorius the more he prospered and prevailed in his Wars in Spain, the more
importunate he was with Metellus and Pompey (the Roman Generals that came
against him) that laying down arms, they would give him leave to live in peace,
and to return into Italy again, professing he preferred a private life there,
before the Government of many Cities. Plutarch. Vit. Sert.

LXXIX. The lovers of Justice, and impartial Administrators thereof have been
likewise famous in all Ages, and the Persons hereafter mentioned were great
lovers, and observers of this excellent virtue, which is of so much advantage
to mankind. Herkenbald, a Man mighty, noble, and famous, had no respect of
Persons in Judgment, but condemned and punished with as great severity the
rich, and his own Kindred, as the poor, and those whom he knew least in the
world; being once very sick, and keeping his Bed, he heard a great bustle in a
Chamber, next to that wherein he lay, and withal a Woman crying, and shrieking
out; he inquired of his Servants what the matter was; but they all concealed
the Truth from him; at last one of his Pages being severely threatened by him,
and told that he would cause his Eyes to be pulled out of his head, if he did
not tell him plainly what all that stir was, told him in few words, My Lord,
said he, your Nephew has ravished a Maid, and that was the noise you heard;
The Fact being examined, and plainly proved, Herkenbald condemned his dear
Nephew to be hanged, till he should be dead, but the Officer who had the charge
to execute the Sentence, seeming as if he had been very willing, and forward to
do it, went presently, and gave the young man notice of all that had passed,
wishing him to keep out of the way awhile, and some few hours after, he comes
again to his sick Lord, and affirms contrary to truth, that he had put his
sentence in Execution, and that the young man was dead; about five days after
the young Gentleman thinking his Uncle had forgotten all, came, and peeped in
at his Chamber door; the Uncle having espied him, calls him by his name, and
with fair words inticeth him to his Beds head, till he was within his reach,
and then suddenly catching him by the locks with the left hand, and pulling him
forcibly to him with his right hand, he gave him such a ready blow into the
Throat with a Knife, that he died instantly; so great was the love that this
Nobleman bore to Justice. Camerarius Meditat. p 468.

LXXX. Sir John Markham was Knighted by King Edward the Fourth, and by him made
Lord Chief Justice of the Kings Bench; at which time one Sir Thomas Cook, late
Lord Mayor of London, and Knight of the Bath, a man of a great Estate, was
agreed upon to be accused of High Treason, and a Commission issued out to try
him in Guildhall. The King himself, by private instructions to the Judge,
appeared so far in the cause, that Cook though he was never so innocent, must
be found guilty, and if the Law were too short, the Judge must stretch it to
the Kings purpose. The fault they laid to his charge, was for lending Moneys to
Queen Margaret, Wife to King Henry the sixth, the proof was the confession of
one Hawkins, who was racked in the Tower; Sir Thomas Cook pleaded that Hawkins
came indeed to request him to lend a Thousand Marks upon good security, but
that understanding who it was for, he had sent him away with a refusal. The
Judge declared that this proof reached not to a charge of High Treason, and
that Misprision of Treason was the highest it could amount to, and intimated to
the Jury to be tender in matter of life, and discharging good consciences, upon
which they found it accordingly only Misprision; for which the Judge was turned
out of his Place, and lived privately the rest of his days, and gloried in
this, That though the King could make him no Judge, yet he could not make him
no upright Judge. Fullers H. State. p. 263.

LXXXI. Charles the bold Duke of Burgundy, and Earl of Flanders, had a Nobleman
in special favor with him, to whom he had committed the Government of a Town
in Zealand, where living in a great deal of ease, he fell in love with a Woman
of a beautiful body, and a mind and manners no whit inferior; he passed and
repassed by her door; and soon after grew bolder, entered into discourse with
her, discovers his passion, and beseeches a compassionate resentment of it; he
makes large promises, and uses all the ways by which he hoped to gain her; but
all in vain, her Chastity was proof against all the batteries he could make;
falling therefore into despair, he studies to compass his design by Villainy; he
was, as we said, a Governor, and Duke Charles was busied in War, he causes
therefore the Husband of his Mistress to be accused of Treachery, and forthwith
commits him to Prison, to the end that by Fears or Threats he might draw her to
his pleasure, or at least rid himself of her Husband, the only Rival with him
in his Loves; the Woman, as one that loved her Husband, goes to the Prison, and
thence to the Governor to entreat for him; and if she was able, to obtain his
Liberty, Do thou come O my Dear, to entreat me, said the Governor, you are
certainly ignorant of the command you have over me; render me only a mutual
affection, and I am ready to restore you your Husband, for we are both under a
restraint, he is my Prisoner, and I am yours; ah, how easily may you give
liberty to us both, why do you refuse? As a Lover I beseech you, and as you
tender my life; as the Governor I ask you, and as you tender the life of your
Husband; both are at stake, and if I must perish, I will not fall alone; The
Woman blushed at what she heard, and withal being in fear for her Husband,
trembled, and looked pale; he perceiving she was moved, and supposing that some
force should be used to her modesty, and being alone, he throws her on the Bed,
and enjoys the Fruit which will shortly prove bitter to them both; the Woman
departed confounded, and all in Tears, thinking of nothing but revenge; for he
having obtained his desire, and hoping hereafter freely to enjoy her, took care
that her Husband, who was his Rival, should be beheaded in the Jayl, and then
ordered the Body to be put in a Coffin ready for burial; this done, he sent for
her, and in a jesting manner, What, said he, do you seek for your Husband, you
shall have him, and so pointing to the Prison, you shall find him there, take
him alone with you; the Woman suspecting nothing, went thither, where she sees
her murdered Husband, and is astonished, she falls upon the dead Corpse, and
having long lamented over it, she returns to the Governor with a fierce
countenance, and spoke thus, It is true, said she, you have restored me my
Husband, I owe you thanks for the favor, and will pay you; he endeavors to
pacify and appease her, but in vain; for hastening home, she calls her most
faithful Friends about her, to whom she recounts all that had passed; they all
agree that she should make her case known to the Duke, who amongst other his
excellent Virtues, was a great lover of Justice; to him she went, was heard,
and scarce believed; the Duke was angered and grieved that any of his Subjects,
and in his Dominions should presume so far, he commands her to withdraw into
the next Room, till he sent for the Governor, who by chance was then at Court;
being come, Do you, said the Duke, know this Woman? the man changed color; Do
you know, added he, the complaints she makes of you? They are sad ones, and
such as I would not they should be true; he trembles, faulters in his Speech,
says and unsays; but being urged home, he confesses all, frees the Woman from
any fault, and casting himself at the Dukes feet, said, he placed all his
refuge, and comfort in the grace and mercy of his Prince, and that he might the
better obtain it, he offered to make amends for his unlawful Lust by a lawful
Marriage of the Person whom he had injured. The Duke, as if he seemed to
incline to what he had said, and pretending to be somewhat milder, You Woman,
said he, since it is gone thus far, are you willing to have this man for your
Husband; she refuses, but fearing the Dukes displeasure, and being told by the
Courtiers that he was Noble, Rich, and in favor with his Prince, being
overcome, at last she yields; the Duke causes them both to join hands, and the
Marriage to be lawfully made, which being done, You Mr. Bridegroom, said he,
you must now grant me this, that if you die first without Children of your
Body, that then this Wise of yours shall be the Heir of all that you have; he
willingly consented; it is writ down by a Notary, and witness put to it; this
done, the Duke turning to the Woman, Tell me, said he, is there now enough done
for your satisfaction; there is, said she; but there is not to mine, said he;
and sending the Woman away, he commanded the Governor to be led away to that
very Prison in which the Husband was slain, and being beheaded, to be laid in a
Coffin headless as he was; after which he sent the Woman thither, who was
ignorant of what had passed, who being affrighted with this second unthought of
misfortune of two Husbands almost at one and the same time, lost by one and the
same punishment, fell speedily sick, and in a short time died, having gained
this only by her last Marriage, that she left her Children by her former
Husband, very rich, by the addition of this new, and great Inheritance. Lipsius
Monitor. p. 240.

LXXXII. King Lewis the Eleventh of France, minding to cajole the Court of
Parliament at Paris, if they should refuse to publish certain new ordinances by
him made; the Masters of that Court understanding the drift, went all to the
King in their Robes, the King asked them what they would have, Sir, answered
the President or Speaker, we are come with a full purpose to lose our lives
every one of us, rather than we will suffer that by our connivance any unjust
ordinance should take place; The King amazed at this answer of the President,
and at the constancy of the Parliament, gave them gracious entertainment, and
commanded that the Edicts which he would have had published, should be
cancelled in his presence, swearing, That from thence forward he would never
make an Edict that should not be just and equitable. Camerarius Medit. p. 472.

LXXXIII. Mahomet the Second Emperor of the Turks, had a Son called Mustapha,
whom he had designed to succeed him in the Empire, who was otherwise a good
Prince, but much subject to Lust; the young Prince was fallen in love with the
Wife of Achmet Bassa, a Woman of excellent beauty; he had long endeavored to
prevail with her by all sorts of allurements, but this way not succeeding, he
resolved to obtain his will by surprise; and having gained knowledge of the
time when the Woman went to bath her self, as the Turks often do, he soon
followed her with a few of his retinue, and there seized her naked as she was,
and in despite of all the resistance she could make, had his will upon her; she
tells her Husband, he tells the Emperor, and desires Justice; the Emperor at
first seemed to take small notice of it, and soon after, though he had other
Resolutions within himself, yet he rated the Bassa with sharp language; What,
says he, do thou think it handsome to complain thus grievously of my Son?
Know thou not that both thy self, and this Wife of thine are my Slaves, and
accordingly at my dispose? If therefore my Son has embraced her; and followed
the inclinations of his mind, he has but embraced a Slave of mine, and having
my approbation, he has committed no fault at all; think of this, and go thy
way, and leave the rest to my self; This he said in defense of his absolute
Empire, but being unsatisfied in his mind, and vexed at the thing, he first
sends for his Son, examines him touching the Fact, and he having confessed it,
he dismissed him with outrageous Language, and threatenings; three days after,
when paternal love to his Son, and Justice had striven in his Breast, love to
Justice having gained the Superiority and Victory; he commanded his Mutes to
strangle his Son Mustapha with a Bowstring, that by his death he might make
amends to injured, and violated Chastity. Turkish Hist. p. 411.

LXXXIV. King Henry the second of France, commanded that an Italian Lacky
should be put into Prison, without telling why; whereupon the Judges set him at
liberty, having first delivered their opinion to the King; who again commanded,
that he should be put to death, having as he said, taken him faulty in a foul
and heinous Crime, which he would not have to be divulged; yet the Judges for
all this would not condemn him, but set open the Prison doors to let him go
forth; it is true, that the King caused him to be taken afterward, and thrown
into the River Seine, and drowned without any form of Law, to avoid Tumult, but
the Judges would not condemn a Person where no proof was made that he was
guilty; Camerarius Medit. p. 472.

LXXXV. Otho the first Emperor of Germany, being upon a Military expedition, a
Woman threw her self at his feet, beseeching a just revenge according to the
Laws, upon a Person who had committed a Rape upon her; the Emperor being in
have, referred the hearing of the cause till his return, But who then, replied
the Woman, shall recall unto your Majesty's mind the horrid injury that has
been done to me? The Emperor looking up to a Church there by, This Church,
says he, shall be a witness betwixt me and thee, that I will do thee Justice;
and so dismissing her, he with his retinue set forward; at his return, seeing
the Church, he called to mind the Complaint, and caused the Woman to be
summoned before him, who at her appearance thus bespake him, Dread Sovereign,
the man of whom I heretofore complained, is now my Husband, I have since had a
Child by him, and have forgiven him the injury; not so, said the Emperor, by
the head of Otho he shall suffer for it, for a collusion among your selves does
not make void the Laws; And so he caused his head to be struck off. Lonic.
Theat. p. 475.

LXXXVI. Chabot was Admiral to King Francis the first of France, a man most
nobly descended, of great Valor, and in high favor with his Prince; but as in
other men the Passion of love grows cold, and wears out by time; so the Kings
affection being changed toward the Admiral, had charged him with some Offenses
which he had formerly committed. The Admiral presuming upon the great good
Services he had done the King in Piemont, and in the defense of Marseilles
against the Emperor, gave the King other language than became him, and desired
nothing so much as a public Trial; hereupon the King gave commission to the
Chancellor Poyet as President, and other Judges, upon an information of the
Kings Advocate, to question the Admirals life, the Chancellor being an
ambitious man, and of a large conscience, hoping to please the King, wrought so
cunningly upon some of the Judges, threatened others so severely, and drew in
the rest with fair promises, that though nothing could be proved against the
Admiral worthy of the Kings displeasure, yet the Chancellor subscribed, and got
others to subscribe to the forfeiture of his Estate, Offices, and Liberty,
though not able to prevail against his Life. But the King hating Falsehood, and
though to any that should bewail the Admirals Calamity, it might have been
answered, that he was tried according to his own desire, by the Laws of his
Country, and the Judges of Parliament, yet, I say, the King made his Justice
surmount his other Passions, and gave back the Admiral his Honor, his Offices,
his Estate, his Liberty; and caused the wicked Poyet his Chancellor to be
Indicted, Arraigned, Degraded, and Condemned Rawleighs Hist. World. p. 471.

LXXXVII, Totilas King of the Goths, was complained to by a Calabrian, that one
of his Lifeguard had ravished his Daughter; upon which the accused was
immediately sent to Prison, the King resolving to punish him as the Fact
deserved; but the Soldiers came about him, desiring that their Fellow-Soldier,
a man of known Valor, might be delivered back to them. Upon which Totilas
sharply reproved them. What would you have? said he; know you not that without
Justice neither any Civil nor Military Government is able to subsist; do not
you remember what slaughters and Calamities the Nation of the Goths underwent
through the injustice of Theodahadas? I am now your King, and in the
maintenance of Justice we have regained our ancient Fortune and Glory; would
you now lose all for the sake of one Villain? Look to your selves ye Soldiers,
but for my part I proclaim it aloud (being careless of what shall happen
thereupon) that I will not suffer it; and if you are resolved to do so, then
first strike at me, behold a Body and a Breast ready for your stroke; The
Soldiers were so moved at this Speech, that they deserted their Client; the
King sent for the man from Prison, condemned him to death, and gave his Estate
to the injured and violated Woman Lipsius Monit. p. 250.

LXXXVIII. In the Reign of King James. 1612. June 25. the Lord Sanquer a
Nobleman of Scotland, having upon private revenge, suborned Robert Carlisle to
murder John Turner a Fencing Master, thought by his greatness to have carried
it off; but the King respecting nothing so much as Justice, would not suffer
Nobility to be a shelter to Villainy, but according to the Law, upon June 29.
the said Lord Sanquer having been Arraigned and Condemned by the name of John
Creighton, Esquire, was executed before Westminster Hall Gate, where he died
very penitent. Bakers Chronicle, p. 464.

LXXXIX. The Chronicle of Alexandria, relates an admirable passage of
Theodorick King of the Romans; Juvenilis a Widow, made her complaint, that a
Suit of hers in Court was drawn out for the space of 3 years, which might have
been dispatched in few days. The King demanded who were her Judges, she named
them, they were sent unto, and commanded to give all the speedy expedition that
was possible to this Woman's Cause, which they did, and in two days determined
it to her good liking; which done, Theodorick called them again; they supposing
it had been to applaud their excellent Justice now done, hastened thither full
of joy, being come, the King asked of them, How comes it to pass you have
performed that in two days, which had not been done in three years? They
answered, the recommendation of your Majesty made us finish it; How, replies
the King, when I put you into Office, did I not consign all Pleas, and
proceedings to you, and particularly those of Widows? You deserve death so to
have spun out a business in length three years space, which required but two
days dispatch; and that instant he commanded the heads of all the Judges to be
struck off. Causins Holy Court, p. 90.

XC. In the Reign of the Emperor Constantius, Acindinus the Prefect of
Antioch, had a certain Person under custody for a pound of Gold to be paid into
the Exchequer, threatening him, That in case he paid it not by a certain day, he
should aie the death. The man knew not where to have it, and now the fatal day
drew near; he had a beautiful Wife, to whom a rich man in the City sent word,
that for a nights lodging he would pay in the Gold. She acquaints her Husband,
who for the safety of his life readily gave her leave; she renders her self up
to the rich man, who at her departure, gave her only a pound of Earth tied up
in a bag, instead of the promised Gold; she enraged at her injury, together
with this cheat added thereto, complains to the Prefect, and declares to him
the truth of the whole matter, who finding that his Threats of her Husband had
brought her to these extremities, pronounced Sentence on this manner, The pound
of Gold shall be paid out of the goods of Acindinus, (which was himself) the
Prisoner shall be free, and the Woman shall be put into the possession of that
Land from whence she received Earth instead of Gold Lonic. Theat. p. 476.

XCI. The Emperor Leo Armenus, going out of his Palace; was informed by a mean
Person, that a Senator had ravished his Wife, and that he had complained of his
injury to the Prefect or Judge, but as yet could have no redress. The Emperor
commanded that both the Prefect and the Senator should be sent for, and wait
his return in his Palace, together with their accuser; being come back, he
examined the matter, and finding it true as the man had represented, he
displaced the Prefect from his Office, for his negligence, and punished the
Crime of the Senator with death. Lipsius Monitor. p. 250.

XCII. King Turquin being banished Rome for the rape of Lucretia, Brutus, and
Collatinus Husband to Lucretia, were chosen Consuls, and in the time of their
Consulship, Tarquins Agents had corrupted two of the most ancient Families in
Rome, the Aquilians who were Nephews to Collatine, and the Vitellians who were
allied to Brutus, and two of his Sons were drawn into this Treason by them; the
Conspiracy being at last discovered, the Consuls met in the public place, and
sent for the Conspirators, and there before all the People discovered the
Treason; the People being much amazed, hung down their heads, only some few of
them, thinking to gratify Brutus moved that they might be banished; but Brutus
calling his Sons by Name, asked them what they could answer for themselves, and
when being confounded, they held their peace, he said to the Sergeants, They
are in your hands, do Justice; then did the Sergeants tear off their cloths,
bound their hands, and whipped them with Rods; which sad spectacle moved the
People to pity, so that they turned away their faces; but the Father never
looked off, nor changed his severe countenance, till at last they were laid
flat on the ground, and had their heads struck off, then did Brutus depart, and
left the Execution of the rest to his Fellow Consul, but Collatine showed more
favor to his Kindred, being solicited thereto by his Wife, and their
Relations; Valerius a Nobleman of Rome, seeing this partiality, exclaimed
against him for it, saying, That Brutus spared not his own Sons, but Collatine
to please a few Women, was about to let manifest Traitors to their Country
escape; Hereupon the People called for Brutus again, who being returned to his
Seat, spoke thus, For mine own Children, I judged them, and saw the Law
executed upon them; but for these others, I leave them freely to the Judgment
of the People; whereupon they all cried out, Execution, Execution, and
accordingly their heads were presently struck off. Plutarchs Lives.

XCIII. The love of Queen Elizabeth to her People in general, and her tender
care over the poor and oppressed in particular, was admirable, and
incomparable. Fler Ears were always open to their Complaints, and her Hands
stretched forth to receive their Petitions; her manner was always to recommend
their Causes to her Council and Judges, whom she used thus to charge, Have a
care of my People, you have my Place; do you to them what I ought to do; they
are my People, yet every one oppresses them, and spoileth them without mercy;
They cannot help themselves, nor revenge their own quarrel, see to them; I pray
you see to them; for they are my charge, them therefore I charge you with, even
as God has committed them to me; I care not for my self; my life is not dear
unto me; my care is for my people; if you knew the care I have for them, you
might easily discern that I take no great Joy in wearing a Crown. Clarks
Mirror. p. 370.

XCIV. An English Merchant had sold a great quantity of Cloth to one of the
Turks, the next year when the Merchant came again, the Turk told him, That he
was mistaken in the measure of his Cloth, and that there was so much
over-measure, as came to fifteen pounds more, and that he had put it into a
bag, that it might be ready against he came next; the Merchant told him, that
he had got enough by him, and said, much good may it do you; the Turk replied,
Sir, take it, or else I will otherwise dispose of it, for it is none of mine.

XCV. When Sysamnes one of the chiefest of the Persian Judges, had given an
unjust Judgment, Cambyses the King, caused him to be flead alive, and his skin
to be hung over the Judgment Seat, and having bestowed the Office of the dead
Father upon Otanes the Son, he willed him to remember, That the same partiality
and injustice would deserve the same punishment. Rawleigh's Hist. World. p. 37.

XCVI. Neither ought we to forget, nor conceal the names of those who have
discovered such a signal Love to their Country, that they have not valued to
redeem the lives of their Countrymen, and Fellow Citizens at the price of their
own; of which the following relations are very considerable instances. The Town
of Calice, during the Reign of Philip de Valois of France, being brought to
those streights; that now there was no more hope left, either of Succors, or
Victuals, John Lord of Vienna, who there commanded for the King, began to treat
about the surrender of it, desiring, only that they might give it up with the
safety of their Lives and goods; which conditions being offered to Edward the
Third, King of England, who by the space of eleven months had straightly besieged
it; he being exceedingly enraged that so small a Town should alone stand out
against him so long, and withal calling to mind, that they had often galled his
Subjects by Sea, he was so far from accepting their Petition, that contrariwise
he resolved to put them all to the Sword, had he not been diverted from that
Resolution by some grave Counselors then about him, who told him, That for
having been faithful, and Loyal Subjects to their Sovereign, they deserved not
to be so sharply dealt with; Whereupon King Edward changed his first parpose
into some more clemency, promising to receive them to mercy upon condition,
That six of the principle Townsmen, should present him the Keys of the Town
bare-headed, and barefooted, and with Halters about their Necks, and to leave
their lives to his mercy; Hereof the Governor having notice, he presently goes
into the Marketplace, commanding the Bell to be tolled for assembling the
People, who being met, he acquainted them with the Articles which he had
received touching the yielding up of the Town, and the assurance, of their
lives, which could not be granted, but with the death of six of the Chief of
them; with this news they were exceedingly cast down, and perplexed, when on a
sudden there rises up one of their own Company called Stephen Petre, one of the
richest, and most sufficient Men of the Town, who thus spoke aloud to the
Governor, Sir, I thank God for the Goods he has bestowed upon me but more
that he has given me this present opportunity to make it known, that I prize
the lives of my Countrymen and Fellow-Citizens above my own; At the hearing of
which Speech, and sight of his forwardness, one John Daire, and four others
after him, made the like offers, not without abundance of Prayers and Tears
from the common People, who saw them so freely, and readily sacrifice their
Lives for the public good; and instantly without more ado, they address
themselves to the King of England with the Keys of the Town, with no other
apprehension but to be put to death, to which, though they held themselves
assured thereof, they went as cheerfully as if they had been going to a
Wedding, yet it pleased God to turn the heart of the English King, and at the
request of the Queen, and some of the Lords, they were all sent back again safe
and sound. Daniels Hist. Engl. p. 240.

XCVII. When Charles the Seventh, King of France, marched toward Naples, they
of the City of Florence set open their Gates to him, as supposing they should
thereupon receive the less damage by him in their City and Territories
adjoining; but the King being entered with his Army, demanded the Government of
the City, and a sum of Money to secure their Liberties and Estates; in this
strait, four of the principal Citizens were apppointed to transact and manage
this affair with the Kings Ministers; amongst these was Petre Caponis, who
having heard the rigorous terms of their composition recited and read by the
Kings principal Secretary, he was so moved, that in the sight and presence of
the King, he snatched the Paper out of his hands, and tore it in pieces, crying
out, Now sound you your Trumpets, and we will ring our Bells; Charles
astonished at the resolution of the man, desisted from his design, and
thereupon it became a Proverb, Gallum (a Cock or a Frenchman) a Capo victum
fuisse, The French Cock was overcome by a Capon. Zuinglius Theat. p. 256.

XCVIII. The Tartars in their invasion of China; were prosperous on all sides,
and had set themselves down before the Walls of the renowned and vast City of
Hunchen, the Metropolis of the Province of Chekiang, where the Emperor Lovangus
was enclosed; Lovangus his Soldiers refused to fight till they had received
their Arrears, which yet at this time he was not able to pay them; it was upon
this occasion that his heart not able to bear such a desolation of the City and
Subjects as he foresaw, he gave such an illustrious example of his humanity and
tenderness to his People, as Europe scarce ever saw, for he mounted upon the
City Walls, and calling to the Tartarian General, upon his Knees he begged the
life of his People, Spare not me, said he, I shall willingly be a Sacrifice for
my Subjects. And having said this, he presently went out to the Tartars Army,
and was by them taken, by which means this noble City was preserved, though
with the destruction of the mutinous Army, for the Tartars caused the City to
shut the Gates against them, till they had cut in pieces all that were without,
and then entered triumphantly into it, not using any force or violence to any.
Martinius Hist. China. p. 281.

XCIX. In the year 393. from the building of Rome, whether by an Earthquake, or
other means it is uncertain, but the Forum, or Marketplace of Rome was opened,
and almost half of it was fallen in to a very strange depth, great quantities
of Earth were thrown into it, but in vain, for it could not be filled up; the
Soothsayers therefore were consulted with, who pronounced, That the Romans
should devote unto that place whatsoever it was, wherein they most excelled;
Then Martius Curtius, a Person of admirable valor, affirming, That the Romans
had nothing besides Arms and Virtue wherein they excelled, he devoted, and gave
up his own life for the safety of his Country, and so armed on Horseback, and
his Horse well accoutred, he rode into the gaping Gulf, which soon after closed
itself upon him. Livys Hist. p. 122.

C. When the Graecians of Doris sought counsel from the Oracle for their
success in the Wars against the Athenians, it was answered, That then
undoubtedly they should prevail, and become Lords of that State, when they
could obtain any victory against them, and yet preserve the A thenian King
living; Codrus the then King of Athens by some intelligence being informed of
this answer, withdrew himself from his own Forces, and putting on the habit of
a common Soldier, he entered the Camp of the Dorians, and killing the first he
encountered, was himself forthwith cut in pieces, falling a willing sacrifice to
preserve the liberty of his Country. Rawleigh's Hist. World. p. 420.

CI. Cleomenes King of Sparta, being distressed by his Enemy Antigonus King of
Macedon, sent to Ptolomy King of Egypt for help, who promised it upon
condition to have his Mother and Child in pledge of his Fidelity, Cleomenes was
a long time ashamed to acquaint his Mother with these conditions, and though he
went oftentimes on purpose to let her understand it, yet when he came, he had
not the heart to discover it to her; which she suspecting, asked his Friends if
her Son had not something to say to her, whereupon he told her the business;
when she heard it, she laughing, said, How comes it to pass thou have concealed
it so long, come, come, put me straight into a Ship, and send me whither thou will, that this body of mine may do some good unto my Country, before crooked
Age consume it without profit; Cratisiclea, for so was her name, being ready to
depart, took Cleomenes into the Temple of Neptune, embracing and kissing him,
and perceiving that his heart yearned for sorrow of her departure, O King of
Sparta, said she, let no man for shame see when we come out of the Temple, that
we have wept and dishonored Sparta; whilst she was with Ptolomy, the Achaians
sought to make peace with Cleomenes, but he durst not, because of his pledges
which were with King Ptolomy, which she hearing of writ to him, That he should
not spare to do any thing that might conduce to the honor and safety of his
Country, though without the consent of King Ptolomy for fear of an old Woman,
and a young Boy, Plutarchs Lives.

CII. Darius the Son of Hystaspis had sent Ambassadors to Sparta to demand of
them Earth and Water, as a token of their Subjection to him, who were so
enraged thereat, that they took the Ambassadors, and cast some of them
headlong into a Dangeon, others into Pits, and bid them take from thence the
Earth and Water they came for; after which they had no prosperous Sacrifices,
and having for a long time endured great calamities, they at last met in a full
Assembly, wherein it was proposed, whether any would die, or venture their
lives for the good of Sparta; upon which Sperthies, and Balis, who were of
birth, and equal Estate with the best, freely offered themselves to undergo
such punishment as Xerxes the Son of Darius, who then reigned, should inflict
for the death of his Ambassadors. The Spartans sent them away as Persons
hastening toward their death, being come to Susa, they they were admitted into
the presence of Xerxes, where first they refused to adore him, and then told
him, That the Spartans had sent them to suffer death in lieu of those
Ambassadors whom they had put to death at Sparta, Xerxes replied, That he
would not do as the Spartans had done, who by killing Ambassadors, had
confounded the Laws of all Nations, that therefore he would not do what he had
upbraided them with, nor would he by their death absolve the Spartans from
their guilt. Herodotus lib. 7.

CIII. A Spartan Woman had five Sons in a Battle; which was fought near unto
that City, and seeing one that came out of the Fight, she asked him how affairs
went; All your five Sons are stain, said he; Unhappy wretch, replied the Woman,
I ask thee not of their Concerns, but of that of my Country; as to that all is
well, said the Soldier, then said she, let them mourn that are miserable; for
my part I esteem my self happy in the prosperity of my Country. Plutarchs Lives.

CIV. Sylla being overcome by Marius in a Battle, commanded all the Citizens of
Praeneste to be slain, excepting one only who was his intimate Friend; but he
hearing the bloody Sentence pronounced against, the rest, stepped forth, and
said; That he scorned to live by his favor, who was the destroyer of his
Country; and so went forth amongst the rest which were slain. Fulgoszlib. 5.

CV. Having thus discovered the effects of love in the extensive acceptance
thereof, I shall next proceed to relate some of the choicest instances of the
most entire Friendship, and because saithful Friends may seem in this Age to be
gone on Pilgrimage (as Bishop M^rton says) we must therefore be content to
borrow. Presidents from the Histories of former Ages. Titus Voluminous, a
Gentleman of Rome, was the friend of Marcus Lucullus; who was slain by the
command of Mark Anthory because he had followed the Party of Brutus and
Cassius, and though he had a sufficient time to provide for himself by flight,
yet he remained by the body of his dead Friend, and lamented him with such
abundance of sighs and tears, that particular notice was taken of him by the
Officers; they therefore dragged him to Anthony, unto whose sight and presence
he was no sooner come, but Command me Sir, said he, to be forthwith carried to
the body of Lucullus, and to be thereslain, for I ought not to survive him,
since I was the only Person who persuaded him to take that unfortunate side; He
easily prevailed with Antonius to grant his request, he was therefore led to
the place he desired, where when he came, he kissed the right hand of Luculius,
took up his head that was cut off, and put it into his Bosom, and then
stretched out his own neck to receive the blow of the Executioner. Valor.
Maxim. lib. 4.

CVI. Cambyses King of Persia, making War against the Egyptians, overthrew
them in a great Battle, and took the Royal City, and therein the King
Psammenitus, and all his Family and Nobles after which, he kept him Prisoner in
the Suburbs, and then caused the Daughters of the Nobility, and among them the
Kings Daughter clothed in ragged Apparel to fetch water in Tankards from the
River, which when their Parents saw, they all broke forth into grievous
weeping, only. Psammenitus, with his Eyes fixed upon the ground, showed no sign
of sorrow. Then did Cambyses cause the Noblemens. Sons, and amongst them the
Son of Psammenitus to be led to execution, tied together by the Necks with
Ropes, and Bridles put into their mouths, hereupon their Parents again broke
forth into grievous Lamentations; only Psammenitus stood quiet as before; but
presently after, seeing an old man, his intimate Friend, begging in the
Streets, he broke forth into grievous Lamentations, which Cambyses observing,
sent to him to know what was the reason, that he when he saw his Daughter so
abused, and his Son led to death, he mourned not, but now when he saw this poor
man that was no kin to him begging, he made such heavy moan. To whom
Psammenitus answered. My Domestic evils were greater than that I could express
my sorrow for them, but the calamity of my Friend deserves my tears, for that
now in his old age from an high estate, he is brought to such extreme poverty.
Herodotus Hist.

CVII. I think (says Mr. Hakewell) that no former Histories of the Graecians
or Romans can afford such another example of constant and faithful Friendship
as that betwixt Barbadicus, and Trivisanus, two Gentlemen of Venice, in memory
whereof there is a large inscription in Latin in that City, allowed by
Authority in 1627. This example was held so strange, that several learned men
have published Narratives thereof, one of which take as follows. Nicholas
Barbadicus, and M. Trivisanus, two Patricians of Venice, of great reputation in
respect of their own Virtues, the splendour of their Families, and the
Dignities, and Offices they had honorably born in the Commonwealth; these two
illustrious Persons from their Youth had contracted a Friendship with each
other, a solid, and most entire one it was, carried on all along with the
performance of mutual good Offices, and kindness; at last it happened, that
Trivisanus through extraordinary domestic expenses, charges in Journies,
indulgence in such pleasures as are common with the more generous sort of
youth, and also by reason of some losses he had sustained, and other casualties
of Humane life, was reduced to a condition most unworthy of his birth and
blood; his debts being grown greater than his Fortunes, he was forsaken even by
his own Brethren, yet then was he received into the House of his only Friend
Barbadicus, who was a very noble and rich Person, and had before lent him four
thousand Ducats gratis; which debt he forgave him as soon as he entered his
House, he also paid for him two thousand more, which he had contracted with
others, and after this, by an extraordinary and irrevocable act of his own, he
made him Overseer, and Administrator of all his Goods moveable and immovable,
in such manner that he might dispose of them at his pleasure; nor was
Barbadicus satisfied with this, but that he might provide for the benefit of
his Friend, he leaves it in his Will, that though he had a Wife and Brother,
yet Trivisanus should be his sole Executor, that he should have the whole power
of disposing his Daughters in Marriage, nor should he at any time be compelled
to render an Account of his Trust, or of any thing pertaining to that Estate;
he also bequeathed him a Legacy as large as his Estate would permit, without
apparent prejudice to the Fortunes of his Children; Barbadicus was moved to do
all this, because he perceived Trivisanus, as soon as he had entered his House,
by a singular modesty of mind, of a prodigal of his own Estate, became sparing
of another, and from that moment had left off all Gaming, and other such
pleasures of youth, he had also betaken himself to the company and converse of
learned and wise men, and by addicting himself to the perusal and study of the
best Authors, had showed him, that he would answer his liberality with
sincerity, uprightness, and unblameable fidelity, which fidelity Barbadicus had
often before, and also since this liberality of his experienced in him his
beloved and most constant Friend, when he alone defenced the life and honor of
Barbadicus in his greatest streights, and worst dangers, as well open as
concealed, so that he openly professed to owe the safety of them both to
Trivisanus; the whole City knows how he supported the innocence of his Friend
in the salfe and devilish Calumnies that were raised upon him, and would not
desert him in the worst of his Fortunes, though he was slandered for taking his
part; while he did this, he not only interrupted the course of his preferments
to the chiefest places of Honor in his Country, into which to the amazement of
all men, he was in a most hopeful way; but he also forfeited and lost all those
opportunities. It is also well known to all men, that he contracted great and
dangerous Enmities with some that had been aforetime his Companions, upon the
sole score of this Friend of his; he despised all that extrinsick honor which
depends upon the opinion of the brutish multitude, and at the last exposed his
own life to frequent, and manifest hazards, as he would also yet do in any such
occasion as should require it, and whereas Trivisanus has lived and is yet
alive, and through the incomparable expression of a grateful mind in
Barbadicus, he lives with great splendor, and in great Authority. He is
merciful to the afflicted, courteous to his Friends, and is especially a most
worthy Patron of all those that are virtuous; he is honorably esteemed by the
Daughters of his Friend, in such manner, as if he were their own Father; he is
also cheerfully received by his Wife, and truly honored by her as her Brother
as well because she is not ignorant of his merits in respect of her Husband, as
also for his excellent temper, and such other uncommon qualities, as render him
worthy of the love and admiration of all men. Hakewils Apology. p. 439.

CVIII. Damon and Pythias had betwixt them so firm a Friendship that when
Dyonisius the Tyrant of Syracuse had resolved the death of one of them, and
that he only besought he might have liberty to go home to set his affairs in
order; the other doubted not to be surety in the mean time to the Tyrant for
his return the Tyrant granted it, wondering what this new and strange accident
would come to in the event, a day had passed, and he came not, then all began
to condemn the rashness of the surety, but he told them, he doubted not of the
constancy of his Friend, at the same hour as was agreed by Dionisius, came he
that was condemned, thereby freeing the other; The Tyrant admiring the courage
and fidelity of them both, remittted and forgave their punishment, and
entreated that he himself might be admitted as a third Person into the Society
of so admirable a Friendship, Clarks Mirror. p. 226.

CIX. Great was the confidence which Trajan the Emperor had in his friend
Surra, it was told him one morning that Surra had conspired against him, he in
the evening of the same day uninvited, went to his House, attended only by two
Persons, he stayed, and supped with him, would needs be trimmed by his Barber,
consulted his Physician about a disease in his Eyes, and caused him to look
upon them; that night he was again told of the Conspiracy, he smiling said; he
had that day made Trial of the matter, and that if Surra had any evil design,
he had put himself into his power; so that remaining without suspicion of his
Friendship, not long after he made him Tribune, and the custom being to deliver
a naked Sword to the Tribune, he gave him one, saying, I give you this to
defend me if I rule well, if otherwise, to kill me. Fulgosus lib. 4.

CX. Lucilius was one of the Friends of Brutus, and a good man, who when Brutus
was overthrown at Philippi, perceiving a Troop of the Barbarians, who being
careless in the pursuit of others, were with all speed following hard after
Brutus, he resolved to take off their eagerness with the hazard of his own
life, and being left somewhat behind, he told them, that he was Brutus; they
gave the more credit to him, because he desired to be presented to Anthony, who
with great joy hastens to meet them, as many others did, to see Brutus, some
pitying his misfortune, others thinking him unworthy of Glory, that for desire
of life he would suffer himself to be made a prey to the Barbaria^s, when they
drew nigh, Anthony, made a halt, as doubting in what manner he should receive
Brutus, but Lucilius being brought before him, with an undaunted mind spoke
thus; No man, Antonius, has taken Marcus Brutus, nor shall ever any Enemy take
him, the Gods are more just than to permit fortune to trample upon so much
virtue; he will be found to be alive, or at least dead in such manner as is
worthy of him; but it is I that have imposed upon your Soldiers, and I am here
ready to undergo all the severity I shall be adjudged to for it. All that were
present were aftonished; Antonius turning to them that had brought him, You are
displeased Fellow Soldiers, said he, because you supppose you are deceived, but
make account with your selves, that you have met with a more precious prize
than that which you sought after, for whilst you sought for an Enemy, you have
brought me a Friend; I am not resolved what I should do with Brutus alive, but
I had rather obtain such Friends than Enemies; Having so said, he embraced
Lucilius, and then committed him to one of his Familiars, and afterward found
him upon all occasions as firm and faithful to himself, as he had been to
Brutus. Plutarchs Lives 1007.

CXI. One Menippus relates in Lucian, how that one day seeing a man comely, and
of eminent condition, passing along in a Goach with a Woman extremely
unhandsome, he was much amazed, and said, he could not understand, why a man of
prime Quality, and so brave a presence, should be seen to stir abroad in the
company of a Monster; hereupon one that followed the Coach, overhearing him,
said, Sir, you seem to wonder at what you now see, but if I tell you the causes
and circumstances thereof, you will much more admire; know this Gentleman whom
you see in the Coach, is called Zenothemis, and horn in the City of Marseilles,
where he heretofore contracted a firm amity and Friendship with a Neighbor of
his named Menecrates, who was at this time one of the chief men of the City, as
well in Wealth as Dignities; but as all things in the world are exposed to the
inconstancy of Fortune, it happened that as it is thought, having given a false
Senten^e, he was degraded of Honor, and all his Goods were confiscated; every
man avoided him as a Monster in this change of Fortune, but Zenothemis his good
Friend, as if he had loved miseries, not men, more esteemed him in his
adversity, than he had done in prosperity, and bringing him to his House,
showed him huge Treasures, conjured him to share them with him, since such were
the Laws of Friendship; the other weeping for Joy to see himself thus
entertained in such sharp necessities, said he was not so apprehensive of the
want of worldly wealth; as of the burden he had in a Daughter ripe for
Marriage, and willing enough, but blemished with deformities. She was, says
the History, but half a Woman, a body misshapen, limping, and blear-eyed, a Face
disfigured, and besides she had the falling sickness, with horrible
Convulsions. Nevertheless this noble heart said unto him, Trouble not your self
about the Marriage of your Daughter, for I will be her Husband, the other
astonished at such goodness, God forbid, said he, that I should lay such a
burden upon you; No, no, replied the other, she shall be mine; and instantly
he married her, making great Feasts at the Nuptial, being married, he honors
her with much regard, and makes it his glory to show her in the best company,
as a Trophy of his Friendship. In the end she brought him a Son, who restored
his Grandfather to his Estate, and was the Honor of his Family. Gausins Holy
Court. p. 47.

CXII. Eudamidas the Corinthian, had Araeteus the Corinthian, and Charixenus
the Sycionian, for his Friends, they were both rich, whereas he was exceeding
poor, he departing this life, left a Will, ridiculous perhaps to some, wherein
was thus written; I Eudamidas give, and bequeath to Araeteus, my Mother to be
kept and fostered in her old Age, as also my Daughter to Charixenus, to be
Married with a Dowry as great as he can afford, but if any thing in the mean
time happen to fall out to any of these men, my Will is that the other shall
perform that which he should have done, had he lived. This Testament being
read, they who knew the poverty of Eudamidas, but not his Friendship with these
men, accounted it all as mere jest and sport, no man that was present, but
departed laughing at the Legacies which Araeteus, and Charixenus were to
receive; but these Executors, as soon as they heard it came, presently
acknowledging and ratifying what was commanded in the Will; Charixenus died
within five days after; Araeteus his excellent Successor took upon him both the
one, and the others charge, kept the Mother of Eudamidas, and as soon as might
be he disposed of his Daughter in Marriage, and of five Talents which his
Estate amounted to, he gave two of them as a Portion with his own Daughter, and
two more with the Daughter of his Friend, and would needs have their Nuptials
solemnized in one and the same day. Lonic. Theat. p. 425.

CXIII. Alexander the Great was so true a lover of Ephestion, that in his
lifetime he had him always near him, made him acquainted with the nearest,
and weightiest of his secrets, and when he was dead, bewailed him with abundant
Tears; he hanged up Glaucus his Phyfician for being absent when he took that
which hastened his end; in token of heavy mourning, he caused the Battlements
of the City Walls to be plucked down, and the Manes of Mules and Horses to be
cut off, he bestowed ten thousand Talents on his Funeral, and that he might not
want Attendants to wait upon him in the other world, he in superstitious
Cruelty, caused some Thousands of men to be slain; even the whole Cassean
Nation at once. Elian. Var. Hist. lib. 7.

CXIV. At Rome, says Camerarius, there are to be seen these Verses engraven
about an Urn, or Tombstone.

Vrna brevis geminum, quamvis tenet ista cadaver,
Attamen in Coelo, Spiritus Vnus adest;
Viximus Vnanimes Luciusque and Flavius, idem,
Sensus, amor, studium, vita duobus erat.
Though both our Ashes this Urn does enclose,
Yet as one Soul in Heaven we repose,
Lucius and Flavius living, had one mind,
One Will, one Love, and to one Course inclined.
CXV. Lastly, Let us give some examples of the grateful disposition of diverse
Persons. Gratitude is justly held to be the Mother of all other Virtues, seeing
from this one Fountain many other streams do flow, as Reverence, and due
respect to Masters and Governors; Friendship among Men, Love to our Country,
Piety to our Parents, and Religion toward God; as therefore the Ungrateful are
every where hated, as being suspected to be guilty of every other Vice; so on
the contrary, Grateful Persons are esteemed of all men, as having by their
Gratitude put in security as it were, that they are not without some measure of
every other Virtue.

CXVI. There was a Merchant in Florence, whose name was Francis Frescobald, of
a Noble Family, and liberal mind, who through a prosperous success in his
Affairs, was grown up to an abundance of wealth; while he was at Florence, a
young man presented himself to him, asking him an Alms for Gods sake;
Frescobald beheld the ragged stripling, and in despite of his tatters, reading
in his countenance some significations of Virtue, was moved with pity, and
demanded his Country and name, I am, said he, of England, my name is Thomas
Cromwell, my Father (meaning his Father in Law) is a poor man, a Clothshearer,
I am strayed from my Country, and am now come into Italy with the French Army,
who were overthrown at Gatylion, where I was Page to a Foot Soldler, odrrying
after him his Pike and Burganet; Frescobald partly in pity of his condition,
and partly in love to the English Nation, amongst whom he had received some
Civilities, took him into his House, made him his Guest, and at his departure
gave him a Horse, new Apparel, and sixteen Ducats of Gold in his Purse;
Cromwell giving him hearty thanks, returned into his Country, where in process
of time he became in such favor with King Henry the Eighth, that he raised him
to the dignity of Lord High Chancellor of England; In the mean time Fresbobald
by several great losses was become poor, but remembering that some English
Merchants owed him fifteen thousand Ducats, he came to London to seek after
it, not thinking of what had passed betwixt Cromwell and him; but traveling
earnestly about his business, he accidentally met with the Lord Chancellor as
he was riding to Court; as soon as the Lord Cromwell saw him, he thought he
should be the Merchant of Florence, of whose liberality he had tasted in times
past, immediately he alights, embraces him, and with a broken voice scarce
refraining from Tears, he demanded if he were not Francis Frescobald the
Florentine; yes Sir, said he, and your humble Servant; my Servant, said
Cromwell, no, as you have not been my Servant in times past, so will I not now
account you any other than my great, and especial Friend, assuring you, that I
have just reason to be sorry, that you knowing what I am (or at least what I
should be) yet would not let me understand your arrival in this Country; had I
known it, I would have certainly paid part of that debt which I confess I owe
you, but thanks be to God that I have yet time; Well Sir, in conclusion you are
heartily welcome, but having now weighty affairs in my Princes Cause, you must
excuse me that I can stay no longer with you; therefore at this time I take my
leave, desiring you with the faithful mind of a Friend, that you forget not to
dine with me this day at my House; Frescoblad wonders who this Lord should be,
at last after some pause, he remembers him to be the same whom he had relieved
at Florence, he therefore repairs to his House not a little rejoiced, and
walking in the outward Court, attended his return; the Lord Cromwell came soon
after, and was no sooner dismounted, but he again embraced him with so friendly
a countenance, as the Lord Admiral, and other Nobles then in his company much
wondered at; he turning back, and holding Frescobald by the hand, Do you not
wonder my Lords, said he, that I seem so glad to see this man, this is he by
whose means I have attained to my present Degree; and therewith related all
that had passed betwixt them; then holding him still by the hand, he led him to
the room where he dined, and seated him next to himself; the Lords being
departed, he desired to know what occasion had brought him to London;
Frescobald in few words truly opened his case to him; to which Cromwell
returned; Things that are already past Mr. Frescobald, can by no power or
policy of Man be recalled, yet is not your sorrow so peculiar to your self, but
that by the bond of mutual love, I am able to bear a part therein, whereby in
this your distress you may receive some Consolation; it is fit I should repay
some part of that debt wherein I stand bound to you, as it is the part of a
thankful man to do, and I further promise you upon the word of a true Friend,
that during this life, and state of mine, I will not fail to do for you in any
thing wherein my Authority may prevail; Then taking him by the hand, he led him
into a Chamber, and commanding all to depart, he locked the door; then opening
a Chest, he first took out sixteen Ducats, and delivering them to Frescobald,
My Friend, said he, here is your Money you lent me at my departure from
Florence, here are ten more bestowed upon mine Apparel, with ten more you
disbursed for the Horse I rode upon, but considering you are a Merchant, it
does not seem honest to me to return your Money without some consideration for
the long detaining of it, take you therefore these four Bags, in every of which
is four hundred Ducats to receive and enjoy from the hand of your assured
Friend; The modesty of Frescobald would have refused them, but Cromwell forced
them upon him; this done, he caused him to give him the names of all his
Debtors, and the Sums they owed; the List he delivered to one of his Servants
and charged him to find out the men, if they were within any part of the
Kingdom, and strictly to charge them to make payment within fifteen days, or
else to abide the hazard of his displeasure; the Servant so well performed the
command of his Master, that in a very short time the whole Sum was paid in;
during all this time, Frescobald lodged in the Lord Chancellors House, who gave
him the entertainment he deserved; and oft-times persuaded him to continue in
England, offering to lend him sixty Thousand Ducats for four years, if he
would stay, and make his Bank in London, but he desired to return into his own
Country, which he did with the great favor of the Lord Cromwell, and there
richly arrived, but he enjoyed his wealth but a short time, for the first year
after his return he died. Clarks Lives. p. 42.

CXVII. Not many years since in the Kingdom of Naples, a young Merchant named
Oliverio, fell desperately in love with the Countess of Castelnovo, and laid
siege to her Chastity for a good while, and the Count going to his Country
House, and taking his Countess and Family along with him, the Marquess being
still more inflamed, goes into the Country one day hard by, a Hawking, and lets
fly his Hawk into Count Castlenovo's Garden, where it chanced that he and his
Countess were walking; the Marquess made bold to follow his Hawk. and the Count
with very high Civilities did welcome him, and caused a Banquet to be presently
provided, where he and his Lady entertained him; when he was gone, the Count
began to commend him, telling his Wife, That he was one of the most hopeful
Noblemen, and of the most excellent accomplishments of any in the whole Kingdom
of Naples, These praises made such an impression in the Countess, that a little
while after he gained her consent; so the time and place for their pleasure
being appointed, he was conveyed by a private way into her Chamber, where she
being in Bed, and he undressing himself to go to her, she told him, That he was
beholding to the Count her Husband for this favor, for she never heard him
speak so much in the commendation of any man, as he had of him; Is it so, said
the Marquess? then I should be the greatest Villain in the world if I should
abuse so noble a Friend; And such was his Gratitude, that he put on his Doublet
again, and departed, but with much civility, in the very height and heat of
Lust, though he had as commodious a juncture of time, as his heart could
desire. Howels Hist. Naples. p. 61.

CXVIII. On the Townhouse of Geneva, upon a Marble Table, is written in
Letters of Gold this grateful inscription: Post Tenebras Lux, quam Anno Dom.
1535. profligata Romana Antichristi Tyrannide, etc. After Darkness Light,
whereas Anno Dom. 1535. The Roman Tyranny of Antichrist was ejected, his
Superstition abolished, the Holy Religion of Christ restored here in its proper
purity, the Church by the singular goodness of God put-into better Order, the
Enemy overcome and put to flight, and the City itself by a remarkable miracle
did then obtain its former Liberty and Fredom; The Senate and People of Geneva
have caused this Monument in perpetual memory thereof to be made and erected in
this place, as also to leave a Testimony of their Thankfulness to God and
Posterity. Clarks Mirror. p. 236.

CXIX. Sir William Fitzwilliams the Elder, being a Merchant-Taylor, and Servant
sometime to Cardinal Woolsey, was chosen Alderman of Broadstreet Ward in
London. 1506. Going afterward to dwell at Milton in Northamptonshire, after
the Fall of the Cardinal his former Master, he gave him kind entertainment
there at his House in the Country; for which being called before the King and
demanded how he durst entertain so great an Enemy to the State, his answer was,
That he had not contemptuously nor wilfully done it, but only because he had
been his Master, and partly the means of his greatest Fortunes. The King was
extremely well pleased with this answer, saying, That himself had sew such
Servants, and then immediately Knighted him, and afterward made him one of his
Privy Council. Fullers Worthies. p. 298.

CXX. Rodericus Davalus was Lieutenant General of the Horse in Spain, 423. who
together with some others was accused of High Treason, for writing Letters to
Josephus King of the Moors, as one that had intended to have betrayed his
Country into their hands; diverse Copies of these Letters were produced, and the
whole affair debated at the Council Table, in the Crime of his Master was
involved Nunnius Ferrerius, born at Corduba, and Steward of Davalus his House;
but he stoutly desending himself and his Master, ceased not till he had showed
that the Letters were counterfeit, and that the Author of them was Johannes
Garsias, of which he was convicted and condemned. He got himself clear of, but
the other great Persons were condemned to per petual banishment; here Ferrerius
to support his Master in his wants, sold all those Goods of his which he had
got in the fervice of his Master, and having thereby made up the Sum of Eight
Thousand Crowns, he disposed it into Wicker Bottles, loaded an Ass with it, and
caused his own Son in mean Apparel to drive the Ass, and sent it all privately
to his Master Davalus. A Person certainly well worthy of being remembered by
that illustrious Nation, and in his Posterity too, in case any of them are in
being. Lipsius Monit. lib. 2.

CXXI. Thrioses was one of the Eunuchs to Statira, Wife to Darius, and taken at
the same time with her by Alexander the Great; when she was dead in Travail, he
stole out of the Camp, and went to Darius, informing him of the death of his
Wife, and perceiving that he resented not her death so passionately, as he
feared that her Chastity, together with her Sisters, and Daughter had been
violated by Alexander, Thriotes with horrible Oaths vindicated the Chastity of
Alexander; Then Darius turning to his Friends with his hands lift up to Heaven;
O ye Gods of my Country, said he, and Presidents of Kingdoms. I beseech you in
the first place, that the for tune of Persia may recover its former Grandeur,
and that I may leave it in the same splendour I received it, and that I may
render unto Alexander all that he has performed in my adversity unto my
dearest Pledges; but if that fatal time be come, wherein Heaven has decreed a
Revolution upon us, and that the Kingdom of Persia must be overthrown, then I
beg of you that no other among mortal men besides Alexander, may sit in the
Throne of Cyrus. Q. Curtius. lib. 4.

CXXII. Agrippa being accused by Eutyches his Coachman, of some words against
the Emperor Tiberius, was by his order seized, and put to the Chain before the
Palace Gate, with other Criminals brought thither; it was hot weather, and
Agrippa was extreme thirsty, seeing therefore Thaumastus, a Servant of
Caligula's pass by with a Pitcher of water, he called him, and entreated that
he might drink, which the other presented with great willingness when he had
drank, Assure thyself, said Agripoa, I will one day pay thee well for this
glass of water thou have given me, and if I get out of this Captivity I will
make thee great; Tiberius died soon after, and Agrippa was freed by the favor
of Caligula, and by the same favor was made King of Judea; then did he
remember Thaumastus, rewarding him with the place of the Controller of his
House, such power has a small kindness, if done to a grateful and generous
Soul. Joseph. Antiq lib. 18.

CXXIII. Darius the Son of Hystaspis, being one of the Guard to Cambyses, in
his expedition against Egypt, was then of no extraordinary condition, who
seeing Syloson, the Brother of Polycrates, walking in the Market place of
Memphis in a glittering Cloak, he went to him, and as one taken with the
Garment, desired to buy it of him; Syloson perceiving he was very desirous of
it, told him he would not sell it him for any Money, but said he, I will give it
you on this condition, that you never part with it to any other; Darius
received it upon this condition. In process of time Cambyses being dead, and
the Magi being overcome by the seven Princes, Darius was made King. Syloson
hearing this, comes to Susa, and sat in the entrance of the Palace, saying,
That he was one who deserved well of the King; This was told to Darius, who
wondering who it was, he should be obliged to, commanded he should be admitted;
Syloson was asked by an Interpreter who he was, and what he had done for the
King, he tells the matter about the Cloak, and says, he was the Person who gave
it; O thou most generous among men said Darius, art thou he then, who when I
had no power gave me that, which though small in it self, was yet as
acceptable to me then, as greater things would be to me now? Know I will reward
thee with such a huge quantity of Gold and Silver, that it shall never repent
thee thou wast liberal to Darius, the Son of Hystaspes; O King, said Syloson,
give me neither Gold nor Silver, but when thou have freed my Country of Samos,
which is now held by a Servant of my dead Brother Polycrates, give me that
without slaughter or plunder; Darius hearing this, sent an Army under the
Conduct of Otanes, one of the seven Princes of Persia, commanding him that he
should do for Syloson what he desired. Valor. Maxim. lib. 5.

CXXIV. The only Daughter of Peter Martyr, through the Riot and Prodigality of
her debauched Husband being brought to extreme poverty; the Senate of Zurich,
out of a grateful remembrance of her Fathers worth, supported her with a
bountiful maintenance so long as she lived. Fullers Holy State. p. 86.

CHAP. II. The Transcendent Effects of Magnanimity, Courage, and Fidelity,
discovered in several Remarkable Instances.
HAving thus displayed the Effects of Love, Friendship, and Gratitude let us
now consider of three other excellent accomplishments, namely Magnanimity,
Gourage and Fidelity, of which we may find many rare Examples in Histories; for
some Persons have within them a Spirit so daring and courageous, that the sear,
no, nor the presence of the greatest danger or disaster whatsoever is not able
to shake their Constancy, wherein sometimes they have proved as successful, as
others who have managed their Counsels with the greatest care and conduct they
are able.

I. Henry Earl of Holsatia, Surnamed Iron, because of his strength, being got
into great favor with Edward the Third, King of England, by reason of his
valor was envied by the Courtiers; whereupon they one day in the absence of
the King, counseled the Queen, that forasmuch as the Earl was preserred before
all the English Nobility, she would make Trial whether he was so Nobly born, as
he gave out, by causing a Lion to be let loose upon him, saying, That the Lion
would not so much as tou^h Henry, if he was Noble indeed. They got leave of the
Queen to make this Trial upon the Earl* He was used to rise before day, and to
walk in the outward Court of the Castle, to take the fresh Air of the morning.
The Lion was let loose in the night, and the Earl having a Nightgown depiction
of a Polonian soldier overcoming a lion A Polonian Soldier encounters and
overcomes a Lion. Page. ^8^
depiction of Amurath, Emperor of the Turks, being killed by a Christian
soldier Amurath Emp Turks Killed by Cobelitz a Christian Soldier Page. 88
on cast over his shirt, with his Girdle and Sword, coming down Stairs into the
Court, met there with the Lion, bristling his hair, and roaring; he nothing
astonished, said with a slout voice, stand, stand you Dog; at these words the
Lion couched at his feet, to the great amazement of the Courtiers, who looked
out of their holes to behold the issue of this business; the Earl laid hold of
the Lion, and shut him within his Cage, he likewise left his Nightcap upon the
Lions back, and so came forth, without so much as looking behind him. Now, said
the Earl; calling to them that looked out of the Windows, let him amongst you
all that stands most upon his Pedigree, go and fetch my Nightcap; but they
being ashamed, withdrew themselves. Camerar. Med. p. 118.

II. In the Court of Matthias King of Hungary, there was a Polonian Soldier in
the Kings pay, who boasted much of his Valor, and who in a Bravado would often
challenge the Hungarians to wrestle or skirmish with Sword or Pike, wherein he
had always the better. One day as he stood by a great Iron Cage, in which a
Lion was kept, the greatest, and fiercest that had been seen of a long time, he
began to say to those that were in his Company, Which of you dares to take a
piece of flesh out of this Lions mouth when he is angry; none daring to
undertake it, You shall see, added the Polonian, the proof of my speech. All
that day following the Lion had not any meat given him, the next day they threw
him the four Quarters of a Sheep; the Lion begins to grunt, to couch down at
his Prey, and to eat greedily; herewith the Polonian enters his Gage, and
locking the Lion betwixt his Legs, gives him a blow with his Fist upon the Jaw,
crying, Hah you Dog, give me the flesh; The Lion amazed at such a bold voice,
let go his hold, showing no other countenance, but casting his Eye after the
Polonian, who carried the flesh away. Oamer. p. 118.

III. In the Reign of Tham, King of China, there was a Colao, an Officer not
unlike our Duke, who having been Tutor to the King, was very powerful with him;
and to preserve himself in his Grace and Favor, studied more to speak what
would please the King, than to tell him, the truth for the good of his Estate:
The Chinese forbore not to speak of it amongst themselves, and to tax the
flattery of this Coloa: One time some Captains of the Guard were discoursing
this point at the Palace, when one of them being a little warmed with the
discourse, secretly withdrew himself, went into the Hall where the King was,
and kneeling down upon his knees before him, the King asked what he would have;
Leave, said he, to cut off the Head of a flattering Subject. And who is that,
said the King? Such a one that stands there, replied the other. The King in a
rage. What, said he, against my Master, dare thou to propound this, and in my
presence too? Take him away, and strike off his Head. When they began to lay
hands on him, he caught hold of a wooden Ballester; and as there were many
pulling of him, and he holding with a great deal of strength, it brake. By this
time the Kings heat was over, he commands they should let him go, and gave
order that the Ballester should be mended, and that they should not make a new
one, that it might remain as a witness of the Fact* and a memorial of a Subject
that was not afraid to advise his King what he ought to do. Hist. China. p. 109.

IV. Alexander the Great being in Cilicia was seized with a violent disease, so
that when all other Physicians despaired of his Health, Philip the Acarnanian
brought him a Potion, and told him, if he hoped to live he must take that.
Alexander had newly received Letters from Parmenio, one of his Generals,
wherein he advised him to repose no trust in Philip, for he was bribed by
Darius to destroy him, with a mighty sum of Gold; Alexander held the Letters
in one hand, and took the Potion in the other, and having drank it off, he
showed Philip the contents of them, who though incensed at the slander cast
upon him, yet advised Alexander to confide in his Art, and indeed he recovered
him. Plutarch's Lives. p. 675.

V. Charles the Fifth Emperor of Germany, had his Forces and Camp at
Ingolstadt, and was obmpassed about with an huge number of confederated
Enemies, yet would he not fight; whether because some Forces he expected were
not yet come, or that he foresaw a safe and unbloudy Victory; in the mean time
the Enemy, who abounded with great Guns, thundered among his Tents in such a
manner, that Six Thousand great shot were numbered in one day, so that the Tents
were every where bored through, yea, the Emperors own Tent escaped not the
fury of the Guns, Men were killed at his back, on each side of him, and yet the
Emperor changed not his place, no nor his carriage, nor his countenance; and
when his Friends entreated him that he would spare himself, and all them in
him, he smiling, bid them be of good courage, For no Emperor was ever killed
with a great Gun. These things are short in the Relation, but so mighty to
consider of, as to deserve the memory and applause of Ages to come; The like
Constancy and Gravity in all his Actions and Behavior, accompanied him
throughout his whole Life. Lipsius Monit. p. 110.

VI. A Dutch Seaman being condemned to death, his punishment was changed, and
he was ordered to be left at St. Hellen's Island: This unhappy Person
representing to himself the horror of that uninhabited place, fell upon a
resolution to attempt the strangest action that ever was heard of: There had
that day been buried in the same Island an Officer of the Ship, the Seaman took
up the Body out of the Coffin, and having made a kind of Rudder of the upper
board, ventured himself to Sea in it; It happened fortunately to him to be so
great a calm, that the Ship lay immovable within a League and half of the
Island; His companions seeing so strange a Boat float upon the Waters, imagined
they saw a Spirit, and were not a little startled at the Resolution of the man,
who durst hazard himself upon that Element in three boards slightly nailed
together, though he had no confidence, of finding or being received by those
who had so lately sentered him to death; accordingly it was put to the Question
whether he should be received or not; some would have the Sentence put in
Execution, but at last Mercy prevailed, and he was taken aboard, and came
afterward to Holland; where he lived in the Town of Horn, and related to many
how miraculously God had delivered him. Mandelslo's Travels, p. 280.

VII. Phocion the Athenian was a man that stood with immovable courage against
the multitude, the Nobles, Fortune, and Death itself; there was once an Oracle
recited at Athens, That there was amongst them one single man that ever
dissented from the agreeing Opinions of all the rest; All the People were
enraged, and enquired after that man, Now pray (said Phocion) leave off your
enquiry, I am the man you seek for; for not one thing of all that you do, did
ever please me. Lipsius Monit. p. 96.

VIII. Some Men have been likewise very famous for Fortitude, and personal
Valor, among whom, Charles the Fifth Emperor aforementioned, is very renowned
in History, who was so active from his Youth, as few Princes can parallel him:
For he made Nine Journeys into Germany, Seven into Italy, Ten to Flanders, Four
to France, Two to England, and two expeditions into Africa: He made Eight
Voyages on the Mediterranean Sea, and Three on the Ocean; what a multitude of
valiant Achievements did he perform in these Expeditions! He sent away Solomon
the great Turk weeping from before the Walls of Vienna, and so stopped that
huge torrent of destraction that was like to have overwhelmed all Germany, and
soon after the rest of Christendom: He made Barbarossa that formidable Pyrate,
and his Dragon, the Admiral Gallion wherein he sailed, to fly before him: What
notable Conquests were those of Goletta and Tunis, where the Roman Eagles had
not flown since the time of Scipio and Hannibal; and had not the Emulations of
some Christian Princes found him work at home, and diverted him, probably he
had conquered and civilized all Barbary. In Europe he took the Duke of Cleve,
with all his Towns and Territories: He quelled the Duke of Saxony, the head of
the Lutheran party: He imprisoned the Duke of Millain: He subdued and plundered
Rome: He tamed the mutinous City of Gaunt, where he first breathed Air, and had
been rockt in his Cradle: He pierced the very heart of France, forcing that
King to fly to the Great Turk for help against him, whom he afterward took
Prisoner, even on that day upon which he was born; yet touching this Action, as
he himself confessed, though Charles had more of Fortune, yet K. Francis had
got as much of Glory considering all circumstances, being taken with a naked
Sword in his hand, and amidst a throng of fighting Enemies all about him,
weltting in blood; colors flying, and victory fluttering on both sides with
doubtful wings: The full discovery of the New World was made in his time, with
the Mines of Peru: In fine, he had such a continual Tide of good success, that
it seems as if that Age was designed for his Glory; He fought Twenty pitched
Battles and made above Three Hundred Seiges; nor did he know what a repulse
was, but only at Algier, Marseilles and Mite. Howels Hist. Naples.

IX. Godfrey of Bullion was brought up in that School of valor, the Court of
Henry the Fourth, Emperor. Whilst he lived there, an intricate suit in Law
happened between him and another Prince about the title to some Land; and
because the Judges could not untie the knot, it was concluded the two Princes
should cut it asunder with their Swords in a single combat; Godfrey declined
the Fight as much as in him lay, as conceiving any private Title for Land, not
ground enough for a Duel. Notwithstanding he yielded to the Tyranny of Custom,
and after the manner of that Country entered the Lists; when at the first
encounter his Sword brake, but he struck his Adversary down with the Hilt, yet
saved his Life, and gained his own Inheritance. Another parallel Act of his
valor was, when being Standard bearer to the Emperor, he with the Imperial
Ensign killed Rodulphus the King of Saxony in single fight, and fed the Eagle
on the bowels of that Arch-Traitor. Fullers Hol. War. p. 44.

X. In the Reign of King William the Conqueror, a private Norwegian Soldier,
himself alone upon a Bridge, resisted the whole Army of the English, slew forty
of them, and maintained the place for diverse hours together, till one getting
under the Bridge found means to thrust up a Spear into his Body, and so killed
him. Bakers Chronicle. p. 45.

XI. Alexander the Great had besieged a City of the Oxydracae, and resolving to
carry it by storm, had broke in at a Gate, and forced the Enemy to fly into the
Castle; here while the rest of the Macedonians were busied in undermining the
Walls, he not enduring delay, caught up a Ladder, and rearing it against the
wall, and holding his shield over his head, began to mount it, all which he
performed with that celerity, that before the Guard of the place had observed
it, he had gained the top; the Enemy durst not approach to deal with him hand
to hand, but at a distance threw Javelins and Darts at him, in such number that
he was much oppressed by them; the Macedonians endeavored to mount upon two
Ladders they had advanced, but their number and weight that ascended, caused
them to break under them; then was Alexander left destitute of any assistance,
but scorning to retire by the way that he came, armed as he was, he leaped into
the midst of his Enemies, and made a bold and courageous resistance; on his
right hand he had a Tree that grew near the wall, and on the left the wall
itself to keep him from being inviroroned, and there he fought it with the
stoutest of them; many a blow he received upon his Helmet and Shield; at last
he had a wound under the Pap with an Arrow, with the pain of which he was
struck to the ground; then the Indian that had given him the wound, carelessly
approaching too near him to strike him as he lay, received Alexanders Sword
into his Bowels, and tumbled down by his side. The King catching hold of a
Bough that hung downward, again recovered his standing, and then began to
challenge the best of them to the Fight; in this posture he was found by
Peucestes, who by this time had got over the wall, and after him a multitude of
others, by which means the Castle was taken, and most of them put to the Sword.
Justin. Hist. lib. 12.

XII. Sir Robert Knowls was born but of mean Parentage, in the County of
Chester, yet for his valiant behavior, was advanced from a common Soldier in
the French Wars under King Edward the Third, to be a great Commander, and being
sent General of an Army into France, in despite of all their power, he drove
all the People before him like so many Sheep; destroying Towns, Castles, and
Cities, in such a manner and number, that long after in memory of this Act,
their sharp Points, and Gable ends of overthrown Houses, and Minsters, were
called Knowls his Miters; after which, intending to make himself as much
beloved of his Country, as he was feared of Foreign Nations, he built the
goodly fair Bridge of Rochester, over the River of Medway, with a Chapel, and
a Chancery at the East end thereof. He founded also a College with an Hospital
adjoining thereto, in the Town of Pontfract in Yorkshire. He likewise built an
Hospital in the City of Rome for the entertainment of English Travelers, and
Pilgrims, which since is turned into a Seminary for our English Fugitives; he
died at his Manor of Scone-Thorp in Norfolk, in 1407. Clarks Mirror. p. 217.

XIII. In a dangerous battle against the Danes, at a place called Longcarty,
the Scots beginning to retreat, there was living hard by one Hay, a man of
exceeding strength, and of an excellent Courage, who suddenly caught up an Ox
Yoke, and together with his Sons, flew into the Battle, and so valiantly, and
fortunately behaved himself, that what by frighting the Enemy, and encouraging
his Friends, he reinforced the Scots, who were ready to shrink and fly, and
obtained for them a great and glorious Victory. The King, with the States of
the Kingdom ascribed the Victory, and their own safety to his Valor, and
Prowess; whereupon in that very place the most fruitful grounds were assigned
to him, and to his Heirs for ever, who in testimony hereof have set over their
Coat a Yoke for their Crest. Camb. Britt.

XIV. Gunhilda the Daughter of King Canutus, was Married to the Emperor Henry
the Third, who being accused of Adultery, and none sound to defend her cause,
at last an English Page, a mere Boy, and Dwarf, who for the littleness of his
stature, was generally, and jestingly surnamed Mimecan, this Champion
adventured to maintain her innocence against a mighty Giantlike Combatant, who
in the fight at one blow cutting the sinews of his Adversaries Legs, with
another felled him to the ground, and then with his Sword taking his Head from
his Sholders, he redeemed both the Empresses life and Honor. Bakers Chronicle.
p. 17.

XV. In a bloody Fight between Amurath the Third, Emperor of the Turks, and
Lazarus Despot of Servia, many thousands fell on both sides; but in conclusion
the Turks had the Victory, and the Despot was slain; Amurath, after that great
Victory, with some few others of his chief Captains, taking a view of the dead
bodies, which without number lay on heaps on the Field like Mountains, a
Christian Soldier sore wounded, and all gore blood seeing him, in a staggering
manner, arose as if it had been from death out of a heap of slain men, and
making toward him, for want of strength, fell down many times by the way as he
came, as if he had been a drunken man; at length drawing nigh to him, when they
that guarded the Kings Person, would have stayed him, he was by Amurath himself
commanded to come nearer, supposing that he would have craved his life of him.
This magnanimous half dead Christian pressing nearer to him, as if he would for
honor sake have kissed his feet, suddenly stabbed him in the bottom of his
Belly, with a short dagger which he had under his Coat, of which wound that
great King and Conqueror presently died; the name of this man was Miles
Cobeletz, who shortly after was hewn in pieces. Turk. Hist.

XVI. King William the Second called Rufus, being reconciled to his Brother
Robert, he assisted him to recover the Fort of Mount St. Michael, which their
Brother Henry did forcibly hold in Normandy; during which Siege, straggling one
time alone upon the shore, he was set upon by three Horsemen, who assaulted him
so fiercely, that they drove him from his Saddle, and his Saddle from his
Horse, but he catching up his Saddle, and withal drawing out his Sword,
defended himself till rescue came, and being afterward blamed for being so
obstinate to defend his Saddle, It would have angered me, said he, to the very
heart, that the Knaves should have bragged they had won the Saddle from me.
Bakers Chron. p. 50.

XVII. George Castriot, or Scanderbeg, Prince of Epirus, was inspired with such
a Spirit of valor by God, in defending his Country from the barbarous Turks,
that in fighting against them for very eagerness of Spirit, his blood would
usually burst out of his lips, and he struck with such violence, that he clave
many of them asunder from the head to the middle, and usually he cut off an Arm
with Armor on, at one blow, and with his own hands he slew above two Thousand
of them at several times; he was such a mirror of Manhood, and so terrible to
the Turks, that nine years after his death, as they passed through Lyssa, where
his body lay buried, they dug up his bones with great devotion reckoning it
some part of their happiness, if they might but see, or touch the same; and
such as could get any part thereof, were it never so little, caused the same to
be set, some in Silver, some in Gold to hang about their Necks, thinking that
it would animate their Spirits with extraordinary vigor and courage. Clarks
Mirror. p. 225.

XVIII. The Athenians under the command of Militiades, had charged the Army of
Darius at Marathon, so ^ome, that they were enforced to run away to their Navy,
at which time one Cynigyrus an Athenian, showed incomparable Valor, for being
in pursuit of the Persians to their Ships, when some of them were putting off
from the Shore, he caught hold of one of the Ships with his right hand, holding
it till his hand was cut off; then did he lay hold of it with his left hand,
till that also was cut off, and yet then he catched hold of it with his Teeth,
nor did he leave, till such time as the fleeting breath had withdrawn itself
from his body, and thereby disappointed the resolute intentions of his mind.
Justin. Hist. lib. 2.

XIX. The Romans being ready to join Battle with the Albanes, that they might
avoid bloodshed, they agreed, that the Victory should be determined, three
against three; now there were in each Camp three Brethren, born at one birth,
of equal years, who were to be the Champions. The three Horatii for the Romans,
and the three Curiatii for the Albanes; after a doubtful conflict, two of the
Horatii being slain, the third pretending fear, ran away, and thereby drew his
Adversaries asunder, who by reason of their wounds could not run with equal
speed; which being perceived by him, he turned back, and slew them one by one
in single fight, before they could join together, whereby the Victory fell to
the Romans. Rawleigh's Hist. World.

XX. Great was the Courage of the Hollanders in the year 1570. when Haerlem was
besieged by the Duke of Alva's Army. At this time the Citizens revived the
ancient invention of Carrier Pigeons, and a while before they were blocked up,
they sent to the Prince of Oranges Fleet, and to the nearest Towns of their own
Party, some of these Pigeons, which afterward being dispatched away when
necessity required, with Letters fastened under their Wings, remembering their
several Masters Houses, they flew back to Haerlem, whereby they received
intelligence; yet nothing was more admirable than the Townsmens valor, who
notwithstanding they had lost three great Armies that came to relieve them, and
had hardly any shelter within their, Walls; which were shot through in ten
thousand three hundred and sixty places, yet would they not hear of any Treaty
or Conditions; and when the Garrrison was brought to a small number, both day
and night upon the Walls, they so performed the duties of many, that if at any
time the Spaniards did but chance to appear never so little above their
Trenches, they were in a moment taken off with Musket Bullets, and those shot
as for a Wager, from many parts at once; lastly, though they were enforced by
Famine to eat Mice, old Shoes, and every nasty thing, yet they lost not their
courage, resolving to sally out, and rather to die fighting, than by yielding
to mercy, to have their Throats cut like Beasts, which they had accordingly
done, but that as they marched out of the Port, their Wives and Children with
pitiful shrieks and embraces, stayed them; yet when they had yielded to mercy,
that cruel Don Frederick, Son to the Duke of Alva, put to the Sword, hanged,
and drowned nine hundred Soldiers, and four hundred of the principal Townsmen,
which sad Spectacle continued many days. Strada Wars of the Low Countries.

XXI. Upon April 20. 1656. Blake performed a most noble Exploit at the Canaries
to the honor of the English Nation, not inferior to any Naval Achievement of
the ancient Greeks or Romans, of which the following Relation, written by an
Eyewitness, gives an account. We were on Monday by break of day in the Offin
of Sancta Cruz on the Isle of Tenariff, and as soon as it was light, we
perceived by a signal from one of their Frigates abroad, that the Spanish
West India Fleet was in the Bay; whereupon after a short conference how to
order the Attempt, and Prayers, we fell in among them, and by eight a clock
were all at an Anchor, some under the Castle and Forts, and others by their
Ships sides, as we could place our selves to keep clear of one another, and
best annoy the Enemy; the Spaniards had there five or six Gallions, whereof
were the Admiral, and Vice Admiral with their Standards and Flags aloft, and
other considerable Ships to the number of sixteen, some having Goods from the
Indies, still aboard them, others had taken in Goods and Provisions to carry
back thither again, most of them were furnished with brass Ordnance, and their
whole complement of Seamen and Soldiers were aboard; they were all close moared
along the shore, which lies like an half Moon, defended as far as the Ships rid
by the Castle, and surrounded besides with six or seven Forts, and with almost
a continued line of Musketeers, and great shot, as the ground between
admitted, by which many of our men were slain, so that we resolved to make
quick work, and in four hours time their men were beaten out, and all their
Ships put ashore, except the Admiral, and Vice Admiral, who made the most
considerable resistance; about two a clock the Vice Admiral was set on fire,
and the Admiral by some happy shot, or other accident, was suddenly blown up,
having, as we perceived just before, many men on board her; by the evening all
the rest of the sixteen were fired; except two, which sunk down right, and had
little but their Masts appearing above Water; after which our Ships, by the
blessing of Heaven, got safe off, for though some riding near the shore; were
sorely maimed, and did require to be warped off, others when we came to weigh
Anchor, drove with the wind, which all the while did blow right into the Bay,
and one of our best Frigates struck; though the enemy in the mean time supplied
fresh men into the Forts, for those we had killed, and beaten out in the heat
of the action, and continually plied upon us from thence, and also from the
Castle, till about seven a Clock at night; yet notwithstanding all these
disadvantages, every Ship and Vessel belonging to our Fleet, got clear off,
neither had we above fifty men killed in this service, and one hundred and
twenty wounded, and the damage to our Ships so small, that in two days we
repaired them indifferently well for our present security, which we had no
sooner done, but the wind turned to the South West, which is not usual in those
Islands, and brought us in a short time to our former station: about a year
before this, General Blake coming before Tunis, demanded reparation for the
Losses sustained from the Turkish Pirates, and being answered with scorn by the
Dey, or King of Tunis, who in a Bravado bid him look upon his Castles of
Golleta, and Ferino, which defended the Town; Blake entered upon a valiant and
resolute Attempt, for he came boldly to Anchor with the Admiral, Vice Admiral,
and Rere-Admiral, within Musket shot of the Castle, though the shore was
planted all along with great Guns, and never left till he had fired nine
gallant Ships in the Port of Ferino, they being all that were there, and at
length came off with great glory and renown, and little loss of his own side.
Bakers Chronicle. p, 681.

XXII. Epaminondas with his Thebans, having given the Spartans a great
overthrow at Leuctra, went presently to Lacedemon, and made an attempt upon the
City itself, at which time a valiant young man of Lacedemon, called Isadas,
being neither defended with Armor nor Apparel, but being stark naked, and his
body anointed with Oil, with his Sword in his hand, did wonders both in the
judgment of his Citizens, and of his very Enemies, of whom he slew all that he
met, and yet never received any wound himself, and after the fight was ended,
the Senate crowned him as a reward of his Valor, and then fined him a thousand
Drams for exposing himself to such danger, without his Armor; this
Epaminondas in another Battle that he fought against the Lacedaemonians, and
Arcadians, was sorely wounded with a Dart, and being carried into his Tent,
after the Battle was ended, the Chirurgions coming to him, told him, that when
the Dart was drawn forth of his body, he must needs die; whereupon he called
his Esquire to him, and asked him if he had not lost his Shield, he told him
no, and withal showed it to him; then he asked him if his Army had got the
Victory, they told him yea; Then, said he, it is now time for me to leave my
life; and so bid them pull out the Dart, whereupon his Friends cried out
grievously, and one of them said to him, O Epaminondas, thou die without
Children, to whom he answered, No truly, for I shall leave two Daughters behind
me, that is, my two great Victories at Leuctra, and this of Mantinea, and so
the Dart being plucked out, he gave up the Ghost. Plutarchs Lives.

XXIII. Neither ought we to forget that immovable Christian Constancy, and
Courage which has appeared in some pious, and resolved Souls, for the true
Faith and Religion in all Ages, of which Historians are not silent. The Emperor
Trajan returning from the Parthian War, when he came to Antioch, he commanded a
gratulatory Sacrifice to be made to the Heathen Gods for his good success, at
which Ignatius was required to be present, but he even before Trajans face did
justly, and truly reprove his Idolatry, for which cause he was delivered to ten
Soldiers, by them to be carried to Rome, there to be cast to the wild Beasts;
concerning which, himself thus writes; From Syria, till I came to Rome, I had a
battle with Beasts, as well by Sea as by Land, night and day, being bound among
ten Leopards (so he called those ten Soldiers) who the more kindness they
received from me, the more cruel they were unto me; but now through exercise I
am well acquainted with their injuries, and am taught every day more, and more,
to bear the Cross of Christ; would to God I were once come to the Beasts that
are prepared for me, and I wish that they may fall upon me with all their
violence; whom also I will provoke without delay to devour me, and not to
abstain from me, as they have from many before me. Pardon me I pray you, I know
how much this will turn to my advantage, I am Gods Corn, and when the wild
Beasts have ground me with their Teeth, I shall be his Whitebread; now I begin
to be a Disciple of my Master Christ, I neither regard things visible; nor
invisible, so I may gain Christ, let the fire, the Cross, the breaking of my
Bones, quartering of my Members, crushing of all my Body, yea, and all the
Torments that the Devil and Man can invent, fall upon me so I may enjoy my Lord
Jesus Christ.

This Ignatius saw Christ in the flesh, being about 12 years old, when he was
Crucified, and it is recorded that when he was a Child, our Savior would take
him up in his Arms, and show him to his Disciples, it may be he was one of
those little Children that were brought to Christ, that he should touch them,
or that little Child whom Jesus took, and set in the midst of his Disciples, to
teach them Humility; he saw Christ after his Resurrection, as himself writes in
one of his Epistles, Ego vero and post Resurrectionem, etc. Truly I did see him
after his Resurrection in the flesh, and do believe that it is he, etc. He used
to say, There is nothing better than the peace of a good conscience; that good
and wicked men are like true and counterfeit money, the one seems good, and is
not, the other both seems and is good; that the Lions Teeth are but like a
Mill, which though it bruiseth yet wastes not the good Wheat, only prepares,
and fits it to be made pure Bread; let me, says he, be broken by them, so I
may be made pure Manchet for Heaven; his usual saying was, My Love is
Crucified, meaning either Christ the object of his Love, or that his affections
were crucified to the world, he suffered Martyrdom in the eleventh year of
Trajan at Rome. 111. Acts and Mon. Vol. 1.

XXIV. Polycarpus being brought before the Proconsul Herod, he told him that he
had wild Beasts to devour him, unless he recanted; Bring them forth, said
Polycarp, for I have determined with my self not to repent, nor to turn from
the better to worse; it is more fit for you to turn from evil to that which is
just and good, I will said the Proconsul, tame thee with fire, since thou so
little regardest wild Beasts. You threaten me, said Polycarp, with Fire, which
lasts but for anhour, and is quickly quenched; but are ignorant of the
everlasting Fire at the day of Judgment; and of those endless Torments which
are reserved for the wicked; but why make you all these delays? Appoint me to
what death you please, I am ready to undergo it; When he was again urged to
reproach our Blessed Savior, Polycarp answered, Fourscore and six years have I
served Christ, neither has he offended me in any thing, and how then can I
revile my King, that has thus kept me; when they brought him to the Fire, they
would have nailed him to the stake, Nay, said he, let me alone as I am, for he
that has given me strength to come to this Fire, will also give me patience to
persevere therein without your fastening me with Nails, Acts and Mon. Vol. 1.

XXV. Dyonisius the Areopagite, being brought before Sisimus the Prefect,
because he refused to Worship their Idol Gods, was beaten with many and cruel
blows, and threatened to be beheaded; to which he answered, You worship such
Gods as will perish like dung upon the Earth, but as for me, come life, come
death, I will worship none but the God of Heaven and Earth. Acts and Mon. Vol.
1.

XXVI. St. Origin, when he was but seventeen years old, his Father being
carried to Prison, had such a fervent mind to suffer Martyrdom with him that he
would have thrust himself into the Persecutors hands, had it not been for his
Mother, who in the night time privately stole away his Cloths, and his very
shirt also; whereupon more for shame to be seen naked, than for fear of death,
he was forced to stay at home; yet he writ thus to his Father, Pray Sir, be
sure you do not change your Resolution for my sake. Clarks Mar.

XXVII. Valence the Emperor, being an Arrian, sent Messengers to St. Basil, to
persuade him to embrace that Heresy, they gave him good words, and promised him
great Preferment, if he would do it; but he answered, Alas Sir, these Speeches
are fitter to catch little Children that look after such things, than such as
me, who being taught, and instructed by the Holy Scriptures, had rather suffer
a thousand deaths, than that one syllable, or tittle of Gods Word should be
altered; the Governor being in a rage, threatened him with confiscation of his
Goods, Torments, Banishment and Death; Basil replied, He need not fear
Confiscation, that had nothing to lose; nor Banishment, to whom Heaven only is
a Country; nor Torments, when his Body may be dashed in pieces by one blow; nor
Death, which is the only way to set him at liberty, and I wish it would fall
out so well on my side, that I might lay down this Carcass of mine in the
Quarrel of Jesus Christ, and in the defense of his Truth. The Prefect told him
that he was mad; I wish, said he, that I may be for ever thus mad. Clarks
Examples.

XXVIII. The same Emperor Valence coming to the City of Edessa, perceived that
the Christians did keep their Assemblies in the Fields, for their Churches were
pulled down and demolished, whereat he was so enraged, that he gave the
President Methodius a box on the Ear for suffering such their Meetings,
commanding him to take a Band of Soldiers, and to scourge with Rods, and knock
down with Clubs as many as he should find of them; this his order being
proclaimed, there was a Christian Woman, who with a Child in her Arms, ran with
all speed toward the place, and was got amongst the ranks of those Soldiers
that were sent out against the Christians, and being by them asked whither she
went, and what she would have? she told them, That she made such have, lest she
and her little Infant should come too late to be partakers of the Crown of
Christ amongst the rest of those that were to suffer; When the Emp. heard this,
he was confounded, desisted from his enterprise, and turned all his fury
against the Priests and Clergy. Wanly Hist. Man. p. 214.

XXIX. St. Chrysostom stoutly rebuked the Empress Eudoxia for her Covetousness,
telling her, That she would be called a second Jezabel, and when she sent him a
threatening Message, Go* tell her, said he, I fear nothing but Sin; and when she
confederating with his other Enemies had procured his banishment, as he went
out of the City, he said, None of these things trouble me, for I said before
within my self, if the Queen will, let her banish me, the Earth is the Lords,
and the fullness thereof; if she will; let her saw me asunder, the Prophet
Isaiah was so used; if she will, let her cast me into the Sea, I will remember
Jonah; If she will, let her cast me into a burning fiery Furnace, or to the
wild Beasts, the three Children, and Daniel were so dealt with; If she will,
let her stone me, or cut off my head; I have St. Stephen, and John the Baptist
for my blessed Companions; If she will, let her take away all my goods and
substance naked came I out of my Mothers Womb, and naked shall I return
thither, again; He was so beloved, that on a time when he was like to be
silenced, the people cried out, we had better want the shining of the Sun, then
the Preaching of Chrysostom Clarks Lives. p. 78.

XXX. In the persecution of the Church under the Arrian Vandals, who committed
all manner of Cruelties upon the true Christians, there were a great number
condemned to be burnt in a Ship, to which they were accompanied by a multitude
of their Brethren, being led like innocent Lambs to the Sacrifice, and looking
upon their weighty Chains and Irons, wherewith they were loaded, as rare Jewels
and Ornaments, they went with all cheerfulness and alacrity to the place of
Execution, even as though they had gone to a Banquet, singing praises, with one
voice unto the Almighty, as they went along the Streets, saying; This is our
desired day more joyful to us then any Festival, behold now is the accepted
time, now is the day of Salvation, when for the faith of our Lord God we suffer
death, that we may not lose the Garment of Faith and Glory; The People likewise
with one voice cried out, Fear not O Servants of God, neither dread the Threats
of your Enemies, die for Christ, who died for us, that he might redeem us with
the price of his saving blood. Amongst them was a little Boy, to whom a subtle
Seducer said, why hastest thou my pretty Boy unto death, let them go, they are
mad, take my Counsel, and thou shall not only have life, but great advancement
in the Kings Court; to whom the Lad answered, You shall not get me from the
fellowship of these Holy Men who bred me up, and with whom I have lived in the
fear of God, and with whom I desire to die, and with whom I trust I shall
obtain the Glory to come, and so being all put into the Ship, they were burnt
together. Clarks Martyr.

XXXI. Among others who were terribly tormented, they tortured Women, and
especially Gentlewomen stark naked, openly, without all shame, and particularly
a young Lady called Dyonisia, whom they saw bolder, and more beautiful than the
rest, they first commanded her to be stripped stark naked, and made ready for
the Cudgels, who spoke stoutly to them, saying, I am assured of the love of
God, vex me how you will, only my Womanhood disclose you not; But they with the
greater rage set her naked upon an high place for a public spectacle; then did
they whip her, till the streams of blood, did flow all over her body, whereupon
she boldly said, Ye Ministers of Satan, that which you do for my reproach, is
to me an honor. And beholding her only Son that was young and tender, and
seemed fearful of Torments, checking him with a Motherly Authority, she so
encouraged him, that he became more constant than before, to whom in the midst
of his terrible Torments she said, Remember O my Child that we are Baptized in
the name of the Holy Trinity, let us not lose the Garment of our Salvation,
lest it be said, cast them into utter darkness, where is weeping, and wailing,
and gnashing of Teeth; for that pain is to be dreaded that never ends; and
that life to be desired, that always lasts, The Youth was so encouraged
hereby, that he persevered patient in all his sufferings, till in the midst of
his Torments he gave up the Ghost, and many by this Ladies Exhortations and
Example, were converted to Christianity, and animated in their sufferings; Not
long after Cyrillus the Arrian Bishop of Carthage, stirred up Hunrick the
Tyrant against the Christians, telling him, That he could never expect to enjoy
his Kingdom in peace, so long as he suffered any of them to live, hereupon he
sent for seven eminent Christians to Carthage, whom he first assaulted with
flattery, and large promises of Honor, Riches, etc. if they would embrace his
Faith; but these Servants of Christ rejected all his offers, crying out, One
Lord, one Faith, one Baptism; saying also, do with our Bodies what you please,
torment them at your will, it is better for us to suffer these momentary pains,
than to endure everlasting Torments. Before this, Hunrick sent his
Commissioners to impose the following Oath upon them under the utmost penalty,
You shall swear that after the death of our Lord the King, his Son Hilderick
shall succeed him in the Kingdom, whereupon some cried out, we are all
Christians, and hold the Apostolical, and only True Faith, and seeing further
into the subtlety of this Oath, refused it, other well meaning men offered to
take it; whereupon they were divided asunder, and committed to custody, the
names of both Parties, and of what Cities they were, being taken in writing,
and soon after the King sent them this Message; As for you that would have
taken the Oath, because you, contrary to the rule of the Gospel, which says,
swear not at all, would have sworr, the Kings Will is, that you shall never see
your Churches, nor Houses more, but be banished into the Wilderness, and there
shall till the ground; But to the refusers of the Oath he said, Because you
desire not the Reign of our Lord the Kings Son, you shall therefore be
immediately sent away to the Isle of Corse, there to hew Timber for the Ships.
Clarks Martyr.

XXXII. In the eighth Primitive Persecution under Valerianus, Sixtus Bishop of
Rome, with his six Deacons, were accused for being Christians, whereupon being
brought to the place of Execution, they were all beheaded, St. Lawrence also
another Deacon following Sixtus as he went to Execution, complained that he
might not suffer with him, but that he was secluded as the Son from the Father;
to whom the Bishop answered, That within three days he should follow him,
bidding him in the mean time to go home, and if he had any Treasures, to
distribute them among the Poor; the Judge hearing mention of Treasures,
supposing that Lawrence had great store in his Custody, commanded him to bring
the same to him; Lawrence craved three days respite, promising then to declare
where the Treasure might be had; in the mean time he caused a great number of
poor Christians to be gathered together, and when the day of his answer was
come, the Persecutor strictly charged him to make good his promise; but valiant
Lawrence stretching out his Arms over the poor, said, These are the precious
Treasures of the Church, these are the Treasures indeed; in which Christ has
his Mansion; But O what Tongue is able to express the fury and madness of the
Tyrants Heart! how he stamped, stared, raved like one out of his wits, his Eyes
glowed like Fire, his Mouth foamed like a Boar, he grindeth his Teeth like an
Hell-hound, and then he bellows out; Kindle the fire, make no spare of Wood,
has this Villain deluded the Emperor? Away with him, whip him with Scourges,
jerk him with Rods, buffet him with Fists, brain him with Clubs; what does the
Traitor jest with the Emperor? Pinch him with fiery Tongs, gird him with
burning Plates, bring out the strongest Chains and Pireforks, and the grate of
Iron, set it on the fire, bind the Rebel hand and foot, and when the grate is
red hot, on with him, roast him, broyl him, toss him turn him, upon pain of our
high displeasure do every man his Office, O ye Tormentors; Immediately his
command was obeyed, and after many cruel Tortures, this meek Lamb was laid, I
will not say upon a Bed of fiery Iron, but on a soft down Bed, so mightily did
God work for his Servant, and so miraculously did he temper this Element of
Fire, that it was not a Bed of consuming pain, but of nourishing rest unto
Lawrence, so that the Emperor, and not Lawrence seemed to be tormented, the one
broyling in the flesh, the other burning in his heart; when this Triumphant
Martyr had been pressed down with Fire-forks for a great while in the mighty
Spirit of God he spoke thus to the Tyrant.

This side is now roasted enough,
Turn up O Tyrant Great;
And try whether roasted or raw,
Thou think it is better meat.
By the courageous Confession of this worthy and valiant Deacon, a Roman
Soldier was converted to the same Faith, and desired to be Baptized, whereupon
he was called before the Judge, Scourged, and afterward be headed. Acts and Mon.

XXXIII. In the Arrian Persecution in Africa, there was one Saturus a Nobleman,
eminent for Piety, whom the Tyrant much labored to withdraw from the Christian
Profession; but he refusing, the King told him, that if he presently consented
not, he should forfeit his House, his Lands, his Goods, and his Honors, that
his Children and Servants should be sold, and his Wife should be given to his
Camel-driver, or one of the basest of his Slaves; but when threats prevailed
not, he was cast into Prison; and when his Lady heard her doom, she went to her
Husband as he was praying, with her Garments rent, and her hair disheveled, her
Children at her heels, and a sucking Infant in her Arms, and falling down at
her Husbands feet, she took him about the Knees, saying, Have compassion. O my
sweetest, of me thy poor Wife, and of these thy Children, look upon them, let
them not be made Slaves, let not me be yoaked in so base a Marriage; consider
that what thou art required to do, thou do it not willingly, but art
constrained thereunto, and therefore it will not be laid to thy charge; But
this valiant Soldier of Christ answered her in the words of Job, Thou speak
like a foolish Woman, thou actest the Devils part; If thou truly lovedst thy
Husband, thou would never seek to draw him to sin, that may separate him from
Christ, and expose him to the second death; know assuredly that I am resolved,
as my Savior Christ commands me, to forsake Wife, Children, House, Lands, etc.
that so I may enjoy him, and be his Disciple. And accordingly he was despoiled
of all, and turned out a begging, yea, all Persons were forbid to harbor or
relieve him. Acts and Monum. Vol. 1.

XXXIV. St. Jerome discovered his Christian Resolution by this Speech, If, said
he, my Father stood weeping on his knees before me, and my Mother hanging on my
neck behind, and all my Brethren, Sisters, Children, Kindred, and Kinsfolks
howling on every side to retain me in a sinful life, I would fling my Mother to
the ground, despise all my Kindred, run over my Father, and tread him under my
feet, that I might run to Christ when he calls me; After his Condemnation by
the cruel Papists, he said, I after my death will leave a remorse in your
Consciences, and a Nail in your hearts, and I here cite you all to answer to me
before the high and just Judge within an hundred years; when he was brought
forth to Execution, they prepared a great and long paper, painted about with
red Devils, which when he beheld, throwing away his Hood, he put on this Miter
upon his head, saying, Our L. Jesus Christ when he suffered death for me, the
most wretched Sinner did wear a Crown of Thorns upon his head, and I for his
sake will willingly wear this Cap; As he went to his suffering, he sang some
Hyms, and coming to the place of Execution, he was bound to the stake, and so
fire was set to him, which he endured with admirable valor; for standing at
the stake bound, and the Executioner kindling the fire behind him, he bid him
kindle it before his face, For, said he, if I had been afraid of it, I had not
come to this place, having had so many opportunities offered me to escape it;
The whole City of Constance admired his Christian Courage, and Resolution. At
his giving up the Ghost he said, Hanc animam in flammis offero, Christ, tibi.
This Soul of mine in flames of fire,
O Christ I offer thee.


XXXV. Many Christians being assembled together in a Church Maximinus the
Tyrant, Emp commanded it to be surrounded with armed Men, and set on fire, but
first proclaimed, that whosoever desired life should come forth, and worship
the Idols, whereupon one stepping up into a Window, answered in the name of all
the rest; We are all Christians, and will do service to none but the true God;
Upon which speech the fire was kindled, and there were burnt many Thousands of
Men, Women, and Children. In Thebaide so many Christians were slain, that the
Swords of the Tormentors grew blunt, and they were so tired, that they were
fain to sit down, and rest them while others took their places, and yet the
Martyrs were no whit discouraged, but to the last gasp sung Psalms of Praise
unto God. Acts and Mon. Vol. 1.

XXXVI. Theodosius the Great, a Christian Emperor, having in Egypt abolished
their Heathenish Sacrifice and Worship, upon pain of Confiscation and death;
the People fearing that the omission of their accustomed Superstitions, would
make the River Nilus (which they honored as a God) keep in his streams, and
not water the Land as formerly, they thereupon began to mutiny; whereupon the
President writ to the Emperor, beseeching him for once to gratify the People,
by conniving at their Superstition, to whom he Heroically answered; That it was
better to continue faithful and constant to God, than to prefer the over
flowing of Nilus, and the fertility of the Earth before Piety and Godliness;
and that he had rather Nilus should never overflow, than that they should make
it rise by Sacrifices and Enchantments. Sozomen.

XXXVII. Benevolus was offered preferment by Justina the Empress, an Arrian, if
he would be an instrument of some vile service, What says he, do you promise
me an higher place for a reward of Iniquity, nay take this away, that I have
already with all my heart, so that I may keep a good conscience. And thereupon
he threw his Girdle at her feet, which was the Ensign of his Honor. Acts and
Mon. Vol. 1.

XXXVIII. It is said of Luther, that he alone opposed all the world; he used to
say; Let me be counted proud or passionate, so I be not found guilty of sinful
silence, when the cause of God suffers. Madness in this case is better than
mildness; Moderation here is mere sottishness, yea, it is much worse. He being
cited by an Herald of Arms to appear before the Coun. at Worms, many of his
Friends persuaded him not to adventure himself to such a present danger, to
whom he answered, That he was resolved, and certainly determined to enter into
Worms, in the name of our Lord Jesus Christ, although he knew that there were
as many Devils to resist him, as there were Tiles to cover the Houses in
Worms. His Christian Courage was extraordinary, and therefore when Melancthon
knowing the rage of the Papists, and the Emperors threats to subvert the
Gospel, was much troubled at it, and gave himself wholly up to grief, sighs,
and tears, Luther writ thus to him, In private conflicts I am weak, and you are
strong; but in public conflicts you are found weak, and I strong^r; because I
am assured that our cause is just and true; if we fall, Christ the Lord and
Ruler of the world falls with us; and suppose he fall, I had rather fall with
Christ, than stand with Caesar, I extremely dislike your excessive cares, with
which you say you are almost consumed, that these reign so much in your heart,
it is not from the greatness of your dangers, but from the greatness of your
incredulity; if the cause be bad, let us recant it, and fly back, if it be
good, why do we make God a Liar, who has made us these great promises, cast
thy care upon the Lord, etc. Be of good comfort, I have overcome the world. If
Christ be the Conqueror of the world; why should we fear it, as if it would
overcome us? A man would fetch such sentences as these upon his knees from Rome
to Jerusalem; be not afraid, be courageous and cheerful, sollicitous for
nothing; the Lord is at hand to help us. When King Henry the Eighth of England
had writ bitterly against Luther; Let the Henry's, says he, the Bishops, the
Turk, and the Devil himself do what they can, we are Children of the Kingdom,
worshipping, and waiting for that Savior, whom they, and such as they spit
upon and crucify; Erasmus writes thus, If says he, Luther commending the Kings
good intention, had proceeded by strong Arguments without violating Kingly
Majesty in my judgment he had taken a better course for the defense of his
cause, for what made Luther use these words in his Book, come hither my Lord
Henry, and I will teach you; to this Luther replies, If any man, says he, be
offended at my sharpness against the King, let him know that in that Book I
deal with senseless Monsters, who contemned my best and most modest writings,
and by my Humility and Modesty were more hardened in their Errors; Besides I
abstained from bitterness and Lies, with which the Kings Book was stuffed,
neither is it any wonder if I contemn and bite an earthly King, when as he
feared not at all in his writings to blaspheme the King of Heaven, and to
profane his Truth with virulent Lies. When Luther came to die, the Will which
he made concerning his Wife and Child, was as follows; O Lord God, I thank
thee, that thou would have me live a poor and indigent Person upon Earth, I
have neither House nor Land, nor Possessions, nor Money to leave, thou Lord
have given me Wife and Children, them Lord I give back to thee, nourish,
instruct, and keep them; O thou Father of Orphans, and Judge of the Widows, do
to them as thou have done to me. When he was ready to die, Justus Jonas, and
Caelius said to him, O Reverend Father, do you die in the constant confession
of the Doctrine of Christ, which you have hitherto Preached; to which he
answered, Yea, which was the last word he spoke; He made this verse some time
before his death;

Pestis eram vivus, moriens ero mors tua Papa.
I living stopped Romes breath.
And dead will be Romes death.
One says of him, that Luther a poor Friar should be able to stand against the
Pope, was a great Miracle; that he should prevail against the Pope was a
greater; and after all, to die in peace was the greatest of all. Clarks Mirror.

XXXIX. Mr. Woodman a Martyr in Queen Mary's Reign, speaks thus of himself;
When I have been in Prison wearing Bolts and Shackles, sometimes lying upon the
bare ground, sometimes sitting in the Stocks, some times bound with Cords, that
all my Body has been swollen, and I like to have been overcome with pain;
sometimes forced to lie about in the Woods, and Fields, wandering too and fro;
sometimes brought before the Justices, Sheriffs, Lords, Doctors, and Bishops;
sometimes called Dog, Devil, Heretic, Whoremonger, Traitor, Thief, Deceiver,
etc. yea, and they that did eat of my Bread, and should have been most my
Friends by Nature, have betrayed me, yet for all this, I praise my Lord God
that has separated me from my Mothers Womb; all this that has happened to me,
has been easy, light, and most delightful, and more joyful Treasure than ever
I possessed. Acts and Mon.

XL. Archbishop Cranmer by the wily subtilties, and large promises of the
Papists, was drawn to subscribe to a Recantation, yet afterward by Gods great
mercy he recovered again; and when he was at the stake, and the fire kindled
about him, he stretched out his right hand wherewith he had subscribed, and
held it so steadfastly, and unmoveably in the flame (saving that he once wiped
his face with it) that all men saw his hand burned, before the fire touched his
Body, he also being replenished by the Holy Spirit, did abide his burning with
such constancy and stedfastness, that always standing in the place, his body
moved no more than the stake to which he was bound. Acts and Mon.

XLI. Henry Prince of Saxony, when his Brother George sent to him, that if he
would forsake his Faith, and turn Papist, he would leave him his Heir, but he
made him this Answer, Rather than I will do so, and deny my Savior Jesus
Christ, I and my Kate, each of us with a staff in our hands, will beg our bread
out of his Countries, Luth. Colloq. p. 248.

XLII. Mr. James Bainham being at the stake, in the midst of the burning fire,
his Legs and Arms being half consumed, spoke thus to the standers by, O ye
Papists, behold you look for Miracles, and here now you may see one; for in
this fire I feel no more pain than if I were in a Bed of Down, and it is to me
as a Bed of Roses. Acts and Mon.

XLIII. The Earl of Morton a Religious and Prudent man, who was sometimes
Regent in Scotland in King James his Minority, when the King had taken the
Government into his own hand, was falsely accused, and unjustly condemned by his
crafty and malicious adversaries; the morning before he suffered, Mr Lawson,
and two or three other Ministers of Edinburgh came to visit him, asking him how
he had rested that night? To whom he answered, That of a long time he had not
slept more soundly, now I am, said he, at the end of my Troubles. Some nights
before my Trial I was thinking what to answer for my self, and that kept me
from sleep, but this night I had no such thoughts. When he came to the
Scaffold, he exhorted the People to continue in the profession of the true
Religion, and to maintain it to the utmost of their power, entreating them to
assist him in their Prayers to God; then going courageously to the block, he
laid down his head, and cried aloud, Into thy hand O Lord I commit my Spirit,
Lord Jesus receive my Soul. Which words he repeated, till his head was severed
from his Shoulders. A. B. Spotswood. Hist. Scotland. p. 314.

XLIV. The Lord Henry Otto being condemned at Prague for the Protestant
Religion, at the place of Execution he said, I was lately troubled, but now I
feel a wonderful refreshing in my heart; And lifting up his hands to Heaven, he
added, I give thee thanks O most merciful Savior, who have been pleased to
fill me with so much comfort, O now I fear death no longer, I shall die with
Joy. About the same time two Dutchmen were taken at Prague, and accused by some
Monks of Lutheranism, for which they were condemned to be burnt; as they went
to the place of Execution, such gracious words proceeded out of their mouths as
drew Tears from the Spectators Eyes; when they came to the stake, they
exceedingly encouraged each other, one of them saying, Since our Lord Christ
has suffered such grievous things for us, let us cheerfully suffer for him,
and rejoice that we have found so much favor with him, that we are accounted
worthy to die for the Word of God; The other said; In the day of my Marriage I
found not so much inward Joy as I now do; When the fire was put to them; they
said with a loud voice, Lord Jesus thou in thy sufferings did pray for thine
Enemies, therefore we also do the like. Clarks Martyrol. p. 177.

XLV. In the year 1555. there was one Algerius a Student of Padua in Italy, a
young man of excellent Learning; who having attained to the knowledge of the
Truth, ceased not by instruction and example to teach others; for which he was
accused of Heresy to the Pope, by whose command he was cast into Prison at
Venice, where he lay long, and during that time he wrote an excellent Letter to
the afflicted Protestants, wherein among many other divine expressions, he thus
writes; I cannot but impart unto you some portion of my Delectations, and Joys
which I feel and find; I have found Honey in the intrails of a Lion, who will
believe that in this dark Dungeon I should find a Paradise of Pleasure? For in
the place of sorrow and death dwells Tranquillity, and hope of life, in an
infernal Cave I have joy of Soul, where others weep, I rejoice; where others
tremble, there I find strength and boldness; all these things the sweet hand of
the Almighty does minister unto me; behold he that was once far from me, whom I
could scarce feel before, I now see apparently; whom I once saw afar off, I
behold now near at hand; whom once I hungered for, he now approaches, and
reaches his hand to me. He does comfort me, and fills me with gladness; he
drives away all sorrow, and strengthens, incourages, heals, refreshes, and
advances me; O how good is the Lord? who suffers not his Servants to be tempted
above their strength; O how easy and sweet is this yoke! Learn therefore how
amiable, and merciful the Lord is, who visits his Servants in temptation, and
disdains, not to keep them company in such vile and stinking Dungeons. And in
conclusion he subscribes his Letter, From the delectable Orchard of the Leonine
Prison. Clarks Martyr. p. 270.

XLVI. Henry Voes, and John Esch, who had been sometimes Augustine Friars,
being converted, they were condemned for the Protestant Religion, for which
they gave thanks to God their Heavenly Father, who of his great goodness had
delivered them from the false and abominable Religion, making them Priests to
himself, and receiving them to himself as a Sacrifice of a sweet savor; they
went joyfully to the place of execution, protesting that they died for the
glory of God, and the Doctrine of the Gospel, as true Christians, and that it
was the day which they had long desired; they joyfully embraced the stake, and
endured patiently the Torments of the fire; singing Psalms, and rehearsing the
Creed in Testimony of their Faith, when the fire was kindled at their Feet, one
of them said, Methinks you do strew Roses under my feet. Clarks Martyr. p. 279.

XLVII. Peter Spengler a pious and learned Minister in Germany, being condemned
to death, as he was going to Execution said, I shall be an acceptable Sacrifice
to my Savior Jesus Christ, who has given me a quiet conscience, as knowing my
self innocent from the Crimes objected against me; as for my death it is all
one to me whether I die thus or no, for if you had let me alone, I must shortly
have forsaken this skin, which already scarcely hangs to my Bones; I know that
I am a mortal, and corruptible Worm, I have long desired my last day, and have
often prayed that I might be delivered out of this mortal body to be joined to my
Savior Jesus Christ. Another Godly Martyr in that Country feeling the violence
of the flames, said, O what a small pain is this, if compared with the Glory to
come? One Audebert a French Protestant, being condemned to be burnt; when she
was brought forth to Execution, and had a Rope put about her, she called it her
Wedding Girdle, wherewith she would be Married unto Christ, and being to be
burned upon a Saturday, she said; On a Saturday I was first Married, and on a
Saturday I shall be Married again; She much rejoiced when she was put into the
Dung-cart, and showed such patience and constancy in the fire, as made all the
Spectators to wonder at it. Clarks Martyr. p. 320.

XLVIII. Mr. John Rogers, the first Martyr in Queen Mary's days, the Lords day
before his death, drank to Mr. Hooper, who lay in a Chamber beneath him,
bidding the Messenger to commend him to him, and tell him, That there was never
little Fellow would better stick to a Man than he would to him, supposing that
they should be both burned together, though it fell out otherwise. Clarks
Martyr. p. 489.

XLIX. Mr. Lawrence Saunders, whilst he was in Prison, writ thus to his Wife. I
am merry, and trust through Gods mercy I shall be merry in spite of all the
Devils in Hell. Riches I have none to endow you with, but the Treasure of
tasting how sweet Christ is to hungry Consciences, whereof I do thank my Christ
I feel my part, this I bequeath unto you, and to the rest of my beloved in
Christ. And again, Oh what worthy thanks can be given to our gracious God, for
his unmeasurable mercies so powerfully poured out upon us; and I most unworthy
wretch cannot but bewail my great Ingratitude toward so gracious a God, and so
loving a Father; I beseech you all as for my other sins, so especially for my
sins of unthankfulness to crave pardon for me in your earnest prayers; to
number Gods mercies in particular, were to number the drops of Water in the
Sea, the Sands on the shore, and the Stars in Heaven; O my dear Wife and
Friends, rejoice with me, I say rejoice with Thanksgiving, for this my present
promotion, in that I am made worthy to magnify my God, not only in my life, by
my slow mouth, and uncircumcised lips, bearing witness to his Truth, but also
by my blood to seal the same, to the glory of my God, and to the confirming of
his True Church, I do profess to you that the comforts of my sweet Christ do
drive from me the fears of death. Clarks Martyr. p. 509.

L. When Dr. Rowland Tailor was brought before Stephen Gardener Lord
Chancellor, he said to him, Art thou come thou Villain? How dare thou look me
in the face for shame? Know thou not who I am? To whom Dr. Tailor answered
with Courage; How dare you for shame look any Christian man in the face, seeing
you have forsaken the Truth, denied our Savior Christ, and his Word, and done
contrary to your Oath and Writing? And if I should be afraid of your Lordly
looks, why fear you not God the Lord of us all; As he was going to Hadly to be
burnt, when he came within two miles of it, he desired to alight, and when he
was down, he leapt, and fetched a frisk or two, saying, God be praised I am now
almost at my home, and have not above two styles to go over, and then I am even
at my Fathers House. Clarks Martyr. p. 509.

LI. Bishop Ridly in a Letter to Mr. Bradford writes thus, Sir, blessed be God,
notwithstanding our hard restraint, and the evil report raised of us, we are
merry in God, and all our care is, and by Gods Grace shall be, to please and
serve him, from whom we expect after these temporary, and momentary miseries,
to have eternal joy, and perpetual felicity, with Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob,
etc. The night before he suffered, he said, Though my breakfast will be
somewhat sharp and painful, yet I am sure my supper shall be more pleasant and
sweet. Clarks Martyr. p. 521.

LII. Mr. Bradford said, I thank God more for this Prison, and dark Dungeon,
than for any Pardon; yea than for any pleasure that ever I had; for in it I
find God my most sweet God always, He also told a friend that lay with him in
the same Bed in Prison, that even in the time of his Examination before Stephen
Gardener, he was wonderfully comforted, not only in Spirit, but also in Body;
for he received a certain Taste of the Holy Communion of Saints, whilst a most
pleasant refreshing did issue from every part of the Body to the seat and place
of the Heart, and from thence to all the parts again. Clar. Mar. p. 94.

LIII. Bishop Latimer being brought before the Privy Council, was there
entertained with many scoffs and scorns, and from thence was sent Prisoner to
the Tower, where God gave him such a valiant Spirit, that he did not only bear
the terribleness of his Imprisonment with admirable patience, but he derided,
and laughed to scorn all the doings and threats of his Enemies. Ibid. p. 528.

LIVE. Mr. John Philpot having lain for some time in the Bishop of Londons
Cole-house, the Bishop sent for him, and among other questions, asked him why
they were so merry in Prison? Singing, says he, and rejoicing in your
naughtiness, as the Prophet speaks, whereas you should rather lament and be
sad; Mr. Philpot answered, My Lord, the mirth that we make, is but in singing
certain Psalms, as we are commanded by St. Paul, to rejoice in the Lord,
singing together Hymns, and Psalms; for we are in a dark, comfortless place,
and therefore we thus sollace our selves; I trust therefore your Lordship will
not be angry, seeing the Apostle says, If any be of an upright heart, let him
sing Psalms. And we to declare that we are of an upright mind to God, though we
are in misery, yet refresh our selves with such singing; After some other
discourse, says he, I was carried back to my Lords Cole-house, where I with my
six Fellow Prisoners do rouse together in the straw as cheerfully I thank God,
as others do in the Beds of Down. And in a Letter to a Friend he thus writes;
Commend me to Mr. Elsing and his Wife, and thank him for providing me some ease
in my Prison, and tell him, that though my Lords Cole-house is very black, yet
it is more to be desired of the Faithful than the Queens Palace; the World
wonders how we can be so merry under such extreme miseries, but our God is
Omnipotent, who turns misery into felicity; believe me, there is no such joy in
the world as the People of God have under the Cross of Christ; I speak by
experience, and therefore believe me, and fear nothing that the world can do
unto you, for when they imprison our Bodies, they set our Souls at liberty to
converse with God, when they cast us down, they lift us up; when they kill us,
then do they send us to everlasting life; what greater glory can there be then
to be made conformable to our Head Christ; and this is done by Affliction, O
good God, what am I, upon whom thou should bestow so great a mercy? This is
the way, though it be narrow, which is full of the Peace of God and leads to
eternal bliss; oh how my heart leapeth for Joy, that I am so near the
apprehension thereof, God forgive me my unthankfulness, and unworthiness of so
great Glory; I have so much Joy, that though I be in a place of darkness and
mourning, yet I cannot lament; but both night and day am so full of Joy, as I
never was so merry before, the Lords name be praised for ever; our Enemies do
fret, fume, and gnash their Teeth at it; O pray instantly that this Joy may
never be taken from us, for it passes all the delights in this world, this is
the peace of God that passes all understanding; this peace the more his chosen
are afflicted, the more they feel it, and therefore cannot fail neither for
fire nor water. Ibid. p. 534.

LV. Thus the Lion of the Tribe of Juda puts into his Servants his own Spirit,
from whence proceeds their transcendent zeal and courage for the Truth; from
this Spirit it was that John Rabeck a French Protestant, being required to
pronounce Jesu Maria, and to join them together in one Prayer, answered, That
if his Tongue should but offer to pronounce those words at their bidding,
himself would bite it asunder with his Teeth. Another Martyr said, If every
hair of my head were a man, I would suffer death in the Opinion, and Faith I am
now in; This Spirit was in St. Athanasius, Ambrose, Favel, and that noble Army
of Martyrs; one of them told the Persecutors, That they might pluck the Heart
out of his Body, but could never pluck the Truth out of his Heart; another
said, That the Heavens should sooner fall than he would turn, a third said, Can
I die but once for Christ? Thus did they undervalue life, and despise death,
through that Divine Valor wherewith they were inspired, though death in itself
is the King of Terrors, and very dreadful to man naturally, as by the
following Example is demonstrated, with which I shall conclude this particular.

LVI. A Christian King in Hungary being on a time very sad, his Brother a Jolly
Courtier, would needs know of him what ailed him, O Brother said he, I have
been a great sinner against God, and I know not how to die, nor to appear
before God in Judgment. These, said his Brother, are melancholy thoughts, and
withal made a jest at them; the King replied nothing for the present; but the
custom of the Country was, that if the Executioner came, and sounded a Trumpet
before any man's door, he was presently to be led to Execution; the King in the
dead time of the night, sends the Hangman to sound his Trumpet before his
Brothers door, who hearing it, and seeing the Messenger of Death, flies pale,
and trembling, into his Brothers presence, beseeching him to tell him wherein
he had offended; O Brother, replied the King, you have never offended me; and
is the sight of my Executioner so dreadful, and shall not I that have greatly,
and grievously offended God, fear to be brought before the Judgment Seat of
Christ. Clarks Mirror. p. 138.

LVII. Thus far we have seen the excellent effects of Natural and Christian
Magnanimity, Courage and Faithfulness; there is yet another sort of Fidelity,
which is exceeding Praiseworthy, which is the Faithfulness of some men to
their Engagements; and the Trust reposed in them; the Syrians were looked upon
as men of no Faith, and not fit to be trusted by any man, and that besides
their curiosity in keeping their Gardens, they had scarce any thing in them
that was commendable. The Greeks also labored under this imputation, as being
as false as they were Luxurious and Voluptuous; It is strange, that those who
were so covetous after all other kinds of improvement and knowledge, should in
the mean time neglect that, which sets a fuller value upon man, than a thousand
other accomplishments, namely his fidelity to his Promise and Trust.

LVIII. Ferdinand the first King of Spain, left three Sons behind him,
Sanctius, Alphonsus, and Garcius, amongst whom he had also divided his
Kingdoms; but they lived not long in mutual Peace, for soon after the death of
their Father, Sanctius, who was of a fierce, and violent disposition, made War
upon his Brother Alphonsus, overcame, and took him Prisoner, and thrust him
into a Monastery; constrained Religion lasts not long, and therefore he
privately deserted his Cloister, and in company only of one Earl, he fled for
protection to Almenon King of Toledo, who was a Moor, and an Enemy to the
others Religion; but there had been Friendship and Peace betwixt him, and
Ferdinand the Father of this distressed Prince, and upon this account he chose
to commit himself unto his Faith, and was cheerfully received by him; he had
not been long with him, when in the presence of the King, the hair of this
Prince was observed to stand up an end, in such manner, that being several
times stroked down by the hand, they still continued in their upright posture.
The M^orish Sooth sayers interpreted this to be a Prodigy of ill signification,
and told the King, that this was the man that should be advanced to the Throne
of Toledo, and thereupon persuaded to put him to death; the King would not do
it, but preferred his Faith given, to the fear he might apprehend, and thought
it sufficient to make him swear, that during his life he should not invade his
Kingdom; a while after King Sanctius was slain by Conspirators at Zamora, and
his Sister Vratta being well affected to this her Brother, sent him a
Messenger, with Letters to invite him to the Kingdom, advising him by some
craft, with all speed to quit the Country of the Barbarians where he was;
Alphonsus bearing a grateful mind, would not relinquish his Patron in this
manner, but coming to Almenon, acquainted him with the matter; And now, said
he, noble Prince, complete your Royal Favors toward me, by sending me to my
Kingdom, that as hitherto I have had my life, so I may now also receive my
Scepter by your generosity; The King embraced him, and wished him all
happiness, But, said he, you had lost both Crown and life if with an ungrateful
mind you had fled without my knowledge; For I knew of the death of Sanctius,
and I silently waited what course you would take, and had disposed upon the
way, such as I should have returned you back from your flight, had it been
attempted. But no more of this, all I shall require of you is, that during your
life you shall be a true Friend to me and my elder Son Hissemus. And so sent
him away with Money, and an honorable retinue; this Alphonsus did afterward
take the City, and Kingdom of Toledo, but it was after the death of Almenon and
his Son. Lipsius Mon p. 321.

LIX. Antaff King of some part of Ireland, warring against King Ethelstan,
disguised himself like an Harper, and came into Ethelstans Tent, whence being
gone, a Soldier that knew him, discovered it to the King, who being offended
with the Soldier for not declaring it sooner, the Soldier made this answer; I
once served Antaff under his pay as a Soldier, and gave him the same Faith I
now give you, if then I should betray him, what trust could your Grace repose
in my Truth; let him therefore die, but not by my Treachery, and let your care
remove your Royal self from danger, remove your Tent from the place where it
stands, lest at unawares he set upon you. Which the King did, and the Bishop
pitching in the same place, was that night with all his Retinue slain by
Antaff, hoping to have surprised the King, and believing he had slain him,
because he himself knew his Tent stood in that place. Speeds Chrocle, p. 381.

LX. Henry, King of Arragon and Sicily, was deceased, and left John his Son, a
Child of twenty two months of Age, behind him, entrusted to the care and
fidelity of Ferdinand, the Brother of the deceased King, and Uncle to the
Infant; he was a man of great virtue and merit, and therefore the Eyes of the
Nobles and People were upon him, and not only in private discourses, but in the
public Assembly, he had the general voice, and mutual consent to be chosen
King of Arragon, but he was still deaf to these proffers, alleging the right
of his Infant Nephew, and the custom of the Country, which they were bound the
rather to maintain, by how much the weaker the young Prince was to do it; yet
he could not prevail, though the Assembly was adjourned for that time; they met
again in hopes that having time to consider of it, he would now accept it, who
being not ignorant of their purpose, had caused the little Child to be clothed
in Royal Robes, and having hid him under his Garment, went and sat in the
Assembly; then Paralus, Master of the Horse, by common consent did again ask
him, Whom O Ferdinand is it your pleasure to have declared our King? He with a
severe look and voice replied, Whom but John the Son of my Brother? and withal
took forth the Child from under his Robe, and lifting him up upon his
Shoulders, cried out, God save King John, and commanding the Banners to be
displayed, cast himself first to the ground before him and then all the rest
moved by his example did the like. Camer. Horae Subs. p. 154.

LXI. John the first K. of France was overthrown in Battle, and made Prisoner
by Edw. the Black Prince, and afterward brought over into England; Here he
remained four years, and was then suffered to return into France, upon certain
conditions, which if he could make his Subjects submit to, he should be free,
if otherwise, he gave his faith to return; he could not prevail to make them
accept of the hard Terms that were offered, whereupon he returned into England,
surrendered himself up, and there died. Fulgosus ex. p. 44.

LXII. Flectius a Nobleman, was made Governor of the City, and Castle of
Conimbria in Portugal, by King Sanctius, 1243. This Sanctius was too much
swayed by his Wife Mencia, and over-addicted to some Court Minions and
Favorites, by reason of which, there was a Conspiracy of the Nobles against
him, and the matter was so far gone, that they had got leave of Pope Innocent
to translate the Government of the Kingdom to Alphonsus the Brother of
Sanctius; hereupon followed a War, the minds of most men were alienated from
their natural Prince, but Flectius was still constant, enduring the Siege and
Arms of Alphonsus, and the whole Nation, nor could he any way be persuaded,
till he heard that Sanctius was dead in banishment at Toletum; for whom now
should he fight, or preserve his Faith? they advised him therefore to follow
Fortune, and to yield himself, and not change a just Praise, for the Title of a
Desperado and a Madman; Flectius heard, but believed them not, he therefore
begged leave of Alphonsus, that he himself might go to Toletum, and satisfy
himself. It was granted, and he there found that the King was indeed dead and
buried, and therefore that he might as well be free in his own conscience, as
in the opinion of men; he opened the Sepulcher, and with sighs, and tears, he
delivers the very Keys of Conimbria into the Kings hands, with these words; As
long, O King, as I did judge thee to be alive, I endured all extremities; I fed
upon Skins and Leather, and quenched my thirst with Urine; I repressed, or
quieted the minds of the Citizens that were inclining to Sedition, and
whatsoever could be expected from a faithful Man, and one sworn to thy
interest, that I performed, and persisted in, only one thing remains, that
having delivered the Keys of the City to thine own hands, I may return freed of
my Oath, and to tell the Citizens their King is dead, God send thee well in
another, and a better Kingdom. This said, he departed, acknowledged Alphonsus
for his lawful Prince, and was ever after faithful to him. Lipsius Monit. p.
324.

LXIII. King John had made Hubert Burgh, Governor of Dover Castle, and when
King Lewis of France came to take the Town, and found it difficult to be
overcome by force, he sent to Hubert, whose Brother Thomas he had taken
Prisoner a little before, that unless he would surrender the Castle, he should
presently see his Brother Thomas put to death with exquisite Torments before
his Eyes; but this Threatening moved not Hubert at all, who more regarded his
own Loyalty than his Brothers life; then Prince Lewis sent again, offering him
a great sum of Money, neither did this move him, but he kept his Loyalty as
faithfully, and inexpugnably as he did his Castle. Bakers Chron. p. 110.

LXIV. Sanctius King of Castile, had taken Tariffa from the Moors, but was
doubtful of keeping it, by reason both of the Neithborhood of the Enemy, and
the great cost it would put him to, there was with him at that time Alphonsus
Guzman, a noble and rich Person, a great Man both in Peace and War; he of his
own accord offered to take the care of it, and to be at part of the charge
himself, and the King in the mean time might attend other affairs. A while
after the Kings Brother John revolted to the Moors, and with some Forces of
their's, suddenly sat down before Tariffa; the Besieged feared him not, but
relied upon their own, and their Governors valor, only one thing unhappily
fell out, the Son, and only Son of Alphonsus was unfortunately taken by the
Enemy in the Fields, him they showed before the Walls, and threatened to put him
to a cruel death, unless they speedily yielded the Town; the hearts of all men
were moved, only that of Alphonsus, who cried with a loud voice, that had they
a hundred of his Sons in their power, he should not thereupon depart from his
Faith and Loyalty; and says he, Since you are so thirsty for blood, there is a
Sword for you; throwing his own Sword over the Wall to them; away he went, and
prepared himself to go to Dinner, when upon the sudden there was a confused
noise, and cry that recalled him; he again repairs to the Wall, and asking the
reason of their amazement, they told him, That his Son had been put to death
with barbarous. Cruelty; Was that it then, replied he? I thought the City had
been taken by the Enemy. And so with his former unconcernedness, and
tranquillity, he returned again to his Wife, and his Dinner; the Enemies
astonished at the greatness of his Spirit, departed the Siege, without any
further attempt upon the place. Lipsius.

LXV. Boges the Persian was besieged in his City Etona, by Cimon, General of
the Athenians, and when he was offered safely to depart into Asia, upon
delivery of the City, he constantly refused it, lest he should be thought
unfaithful to his Prince; being therefore resolved, he bore all the
inconveniences of a Siege, till his Provisions being now almost utterly spent,
and seeing there was no way to break forth, he made a great fire, and cast
himself, and his whole Family into the flames of it, concluding he had not
sufficiently acquitted himself of his Trust to his Prince, unless he also laid
down his life for his Cause. Herodot. p. 417.

LXVI. Liamgzus, the Conductor of the Rebel Thieves, had seized the Empire of
China, taken the Metropolis Peking, and upon the death of the Emperor, had
seated himself in the Imperial Throne; he displaced, and imprisoned what great
Officers he pleased; amongst the rest, was one Us, a venerable Person, whose
Son Vsangueius led the Army of China, in the confines of Leatung, against the
Tartars; the Tyrant threatened this old man with a cruel death, if by his
Fatherly power he did not reduce him with his whole Army to the acknowledgment
of his Power, promising great rewards to them both, if he should prevail,
wherefore the poor old man writ thus to his Son; Know my Son, that the Emperor
Zunchinus, and the whole Family of Taimingus are perished; the Heavens have
cast the Fortune of it upon Licungzus, we must observe the times, and by making
a virtue of necessity; avoid his Tyranny, and experience his liberality; he
promises to thee a Royal Dignity, if with the Army you submit to his Dominion,
and acknowledge him as Emperor, my life depends upon thy Answer, consider what
thou owe to him that gave thee life. To which his Son Vsanguineus returned
this answer; He that is not faithful to his Sovereign, will never be so to me,
and if you forget your duty and fidelity to your Emperor, no man will blame me,
if I forget my duty and obedience to such a Father, I will rather die, than
serve a Thief; And immediately he sent an Ambassador to call in the aid of the
Tartars, to subdue this Usurper of the Empire. Hist. China. p. 277.

CHAP. III. The Transcendent Effects of Chastity, Temperance, and Humility;
discovered in diverse notable Histories.
THere is no Vice whatever that is easy to overcome; but that of the Lust of
the Flesh seems to have a peculiar difficulty in the Conquest of it, as being
born with us, and which accompanies us all along from the Cradle to the Tomb
for the most part; having so firmly fixed its roots within us, that not one of
manyis able to prevail against it; by how much the more strong therefore the
Enemy is, and the more intimate and familiar he is with us, the more noble is
the Victory, and the Conquest more glorious, which yet some in all Ages have
attained, as may appear by the following instances.

I. Scipio had taken the City of New Carthage, where besides the rest of the
Spoil, there were found a number of Boys and Girls, the Children of the
Nobility; amongst the rest, one Virgin was brought and presented to Scipio,
whose mavelous beauty had attracted the Eyes of all men whithersoever she
went; it was supposed this would be no unacceptable Present to the young
General, but he as soon as he looked upon her, said only thus; I would accept,
and enjoy this Virgin, were I a private Person, and not in such command as I
am, for the Commonwealth keeps my mind sufficiently employed, yet I receive her
as a kind pledge to be by me restored, and returned where reason and humanity
shall persuade; Thereupon he asked the young Lady of what Country she was, what
her Birth was, and who her Parents; by whom he understood, that she was a
Princess, and contracted to Lucius a young Prince of her Nation; the General
therefore sent both for him and her Parents, and when come, setting the Virgin
Lady by him, he spoke thus to her Spouse; As soon as this Virgin was by my
Soldiers brought and presented unto me, I did willingly behold the excellency
of her form, and I praised the other accomplishments of her body and mind, for
nature has not brought us forth blind, and altogether ignorant of such things;
love can reach even this breast of mine, but then it must be an honest one, and
such as the time, and my affairs will permit, though therefore she is mine by
the right of War, I am not desirous in the midst of Arms to be concerned in
such matters, nor perhaps is it comely to detain from a valiant Person, one
that is already contracted to him; I have learnt thus much from her, and have
therefore sent for you, that I might see you, and that I (Heaven is my witness)
a chaste Man, might deliver this chaste Virgin to you; she has lived with me
with that caution and reservedness, as if she had been with her own Parents;
nor was it a Gift worthy either of my self or thee, if either force, or private
fraud had been any diminution to her Virtue, receive her inviolate, and enjoy
her, nor will we have any other recompense besides thy self, that is, to have a
cordial respect to Scipio and the Romans; The young Prince was astonished for
joy, the Parents fell down at the feet of Scipio, and laying there a
considerable sum of Gold, offered it as her ransom; but he bid the young Prince
take it as part of her Dowry from himself, above that which her Parents should
give; thus did he overcome at once his Lust, and his Covetousness, and by this
one Noble Act of his, drew a great part of Spain to the side of the Romans,
they striving with eagerness to be subject to a Person of so much Virtue.
Valor. Maxim. p. 133.

II. St. Jerome gives a relation of a young man of invincible courage, who when
by all sorts of threatenings, he was not to be frighted into Idolatry, and the
Worship of the Heathen Gods, his Enemies resolved upon another course; they
brought him into a Garden flowing with all manner of sensual pleasures and
delights, there they laid him in a Bed of Down, safely inwrapped in a Net of
Silk amongst the Lilies and Roses, with the delicious murmur of the Rivulets,
and the sweet whistling of the winds amongst the leaves, and then all departed,
there was then immediately sent unto him a young, and most beautiful Strumpet,
who used all the abominable tricks of her impure Art, and whorish Villainies to
draw him to her desire; the Youth now fearing that he should be conquered with
Folly, who had triumphed over fury, resolutely bit off a piece of his own
Tongue with his Teeth, spitting it in the face of the Whore, and so by the
smart of his wound, extinguished the rebellion of his flesh. Burtons
Melancholy. p. 451.

III. Euphrasia a Virgin, being seized by a Soldier, and perceiving her self
reduced to that condition, that neither her strongest resistance, nor tears
could any longer defend her Chastity from an armed and hold Ravisher, she bids
him forbear, and that she would redeem at a valuable rate what she could not
obtain by all her entreaties; she tells him, that she was skilled in Magic,
and that she knew of a certain Ointment, with which, if he once anointed his
Body, he should be proof either against Sword or Dart, and that she would
impart this depiction of a man preserving his religion and chastity A Young Man
Strangly Preserves His Religion and Chastily. Page. 122.
depiction of Joan, Queen of Naples, hanging her husband, King Andrew Joan ye
Lascivious Q. of Naples hangs her husband K Andrew Page. 158
secret to him, which to that day she had kept private, upon this condition,
that he would solemnly swear from henceforth not to offer any injury to her
Virgin Modesty; the Soldier touched with the ambition of Military Glory, swore
readily to do what she desired, she left him a while, and having melted some
Wax, and other Ingredients, she anointed her neck and shoulders sufficiently
with it, then coming to the young man, she said; That you may understand that I
have not dealt deceitfully with you, I will extort a belief from you at the
hazard of my own Person; Come Soldier, and with the utmost force you are able,
strike with your Sword upon this neck of mine, that I have so well secured with
this Medicament, and thou shall soon be convinced how safe I have rendered my
self with this Artifice; He whose Lust was almost extinguished by the servent
desire he had to make Trial, drew out his Sword, and with force enough, let
drive at the place the Virgin had designed him, the Sword entered so far into
her Throat, that with one and the same blow he cut off his hopes of enjoying
the Virgin, and her fears of losing her Virginity. Strada Prolus. Acad. p. 117.

IV. Sophronia Romana, when she could no longer put off the importunity of the
Prince Decius, who had before obtained the consent of her Husband, desired some
short time of retirement before she resigned up her self to him, and then with
a Dagger which she had closely conveyed into her Garments, she stabled her
self to death; of which Act, hear what the Poet says. The Chaste Sophronia knows
not how to escape,
The inevitable danger of a Rape,
Cruel Sophronia draws her hasty Knife;
And would relieve her Chastity with Life.
Doubtful Sophronia knows not what to do,
She cannot keep the one, and the other too,
Sophronia's in a strait; one Eye is fixed
O'th Seventh Commandment, the other on the Sixth.
To what extremes is poor Sophronia driven.
Is not Sophronia left at Six and Seven?
Again, Sophronia chooses rather to commit
Self-murder than by violence to submit.
Her ventured Honor to the injurious Trust
Of the Eye sparkl^ng Tyrants furious Lust;
What means Sophronia? Dare her Conscience frame
To act a sin, but to prevent a shame?


V. Timoclea was a Lady of Thebes, and at the taking of it, was forcibly
ravished by a Thracian Prince, and she revenged the injury after this manner;
dissembling the extreme hatred which she bore to the Ravisher, she told him,
she knew a place wherein much Treasure, and store of Gold was concealed; she
led him to an out place belonging to the House, where there was a deep Well;
and while the overcovetous Thracian leaned over too look into it, she tripped
up his Heels, and sent him to the bottom of it, with a quantity of stones after
him to hinder his Resurrection from thence for ever to the world; being
afterward brought before Alexander the Great, and charged with the death of
this Captain of his, she confessed the Fact, and when he asked who she was. I
am, said she, the Sister of that Theagines who died fighting valiantly against
thy Father in the Fields of Chaeronea, the generous Prince hearing her resolute
answer, freely dismissed her without punishment. Plutarchs Lives. p. 670.

VI. There was a Maid called Lucia, who lived a Virgin among many others, and
whose exquisite beauty was sought unto with vehement solicitation by a
powerful Lord, who having Command and Authority in his hands, sent Messengers
to seize on this innocent Lamb, and whilst they were at the Gate, threatening to
kill her, and set all on fire, if this poor Creature was not delivered into
their hands; the Virgin came forth, What is it, said she, you demand? I beseech
you tell me whether there be any thing in my Power to purchase your Lord and
Masters Love? Yes, answered they in a flouting manner, your Eyes have gained
him, nor can he ever have any rest till he enjoy them; Well go then, said she,
only suffer me to go to my Chamber, and I will give satisfaction in this point;
The poor Virgin seeing her self between the Hammer and the Anvil, she spoke to
her Eyes, and said, How my Eyes are you then guilty? I know the reservedness
and simplicity of your glances; nor have I in that kind any remorse of
Conscience; but howsoever it be, you appear to me not innocent enough, since
you have kindled fire in the heart of a man, whose hatred I have always more
esteemed than his love; quench with your blood the flames you have raised?
Whereupon with a hand piously cruel, she dug out her Eyes, and sent the torn
Relics, imbrued in her blood to him that sought her, adding, Behold what you
love; he seized with horror and astonishment, hastened to hide himself in a
Monastery, where he remained the rest of his days. Causins Holy Court. p. 106.

VII. When King Demetrius was at Athens, there was a young Boy of so lovely a
Countenance, that he was commonly called, Democles the Fair, whom Demetrius
sent for, and courted with fair speeches, large promises, and great gifts, and
at other times he sought to terrify him with Threats, and all that he might
gain the abominable use of his Body; but the chaste Lad was proof against all
these, and to avoid the importunity of the King, he resorted not to the public
places of exercise, or to the Baths with his Companions as before, but used to
wash himself in private and alone, Demetrius was informed of it, and finding
his time, rushed in upon him, being alone; the Boy perceiving he could not now
avoid the lust of this Royal Ravisher, had such extreme horror at the
apprehension of it, that he snatched off the cover of the Caldron where the
water was boiling and leaping into it, soon choked himself, choosing rather to
die, than to outlive the violation of his Chastity Plut. Lives. p. 377.

VIII. Cyrus had taken Captive the Wife of Tigranes, Son to the King of
Armenia, and then asked him at what price he would redeem his Wife? At the
price of my life, said he, rather than she should live in servitude, Cyrus well
pleased at that answer, gave liberty to his Wife, her Father, and the rest of
the Captives, and when amongst them there was great discourse of the Virtues of
Cyrus, some also extolling the complete shape of his Body; And, said Tigranes
to his Wife, did he not seem to thee very beautiful; Really said she, I did not
look upon him; Upon whom then, said he? Upon him, replied she, that said he
would redeem my Captivity at the price of his life. Burtons Melan. p. 563.

IX. Zenophon writes of Cyrus, that when Pantheae a most beautiful Lady was
taken Captive by him, and was now about to be brought into his presence, he
expressly forbid it, lest he should violate his own and her chastity, though but
with his Eyes; and when Araspes, one of his familiar Friends, persuaded him to
go to her Tent, and confer with her, alleging, That she was of incomparable
excellency, and a Lady worthy of a Kings Eye; Upon that account, replied he,
there is the greater reason that I should forbear, for should I now make her a
visit while I am at leisure, she may peradventure, so order the matter, as to
occasion my return to her when I have very much business. Lipsius Mon. p. 369.

X. Acciolin a Tyrant of Padua in Italy, in 1253. surprised by Treason a little
Neighbor City, called Bassian, at which surprizal Blanch Rubea was taken with
her Sword in her hand, her Husband having been slain, fighting valiantly, she
was disarmed, and dragged by violence before the Tyrant, who extremely taken
with her beauty, labored both by promises and threatenings to corrupt her chaste
mind, but finding the fortress not to be overcome this way, he resolved to
carry it by plain force; but Blanch made shift by some pretense to rid her
self out of his hands; and recovering a Window, threw her self from thence
headlong to the ground, where she lay weltring in her own blood; she was taken
up half dead, carried to a Bed, and carefully looked after; when some days were
passed over, and she was perfectly recovered, she was again brought before
Acciolin, where she still continued in her chaste resolution, but the shameless
Villain caused her to be bound, and held so fast by certain Grooms, the
furtherers of his Debaucheries, that notwithstanding all the resistance she
could possibly make, he defiled the Body of this excellent Lady; a mortal grief
seized upon her for this execrable outrage, yet having dissembled it some few
days, she gained leave of her Friends to see the body of her Husband, being
then all putrified; at her desire the Tombstone was lifted up, and Blanch
discovering the body, suddenly fell down upon it, drawing after her the stay
that held up the stone, by the fall whereof her head was so bruised, and
crushed, that death soon followed, and she was laid in the same Tomb with her
beloved Husband. Camer. Medit. p. 224.

XI. Under this head may be likewise comprehended that Modesty and
Shamesacedness that is in the nature of some Men, and Women, which is generally
an argument of a Soul ingenuously and virtuously inclined, as we may collect
from the following Examples, and we may also pity those whose Fate had been
kinder, if their Faces had not been altogether so tender. Maximilian the first,
Emperor of Germany, forbid expressly, that his naked body should be seen after
he was dead; he was the Modestest of all Mortals, none of his Servants ever saw
him obey the necessities of nature, nor but few Physicians his Urine. Camer.
Medit. p. 160.

XII. The Milesian Virgins were in time past taken with a strange distemper, of
which the cause could not then be found out, for all of them had a desire to
die, and a furious longing to strangle themselves; many finished their days
this way in private; neither the Tears, nor Prayers of their Parents, nor the
consolation of their Friends prevailed any thing; but being more subtle and
witty than those who were set to watch them, they daily thus died by their own
hands; it was therefore thought, that this dreadful thing came to pass by the
express will of Heaven, and was therefore greater than could be provided
against by humane industry; till at last, according to the advice of a wise
Man, the Council published this Proclamation; That every Virgin which from
henceforth should lay violent hands upon her self, should, dead as she was, be
carried stark naked along the Market place; by which means they were not only
restrained from killing themselves, but also their desire of dying was utterly
extinguished, a strange thing, that those who trembled not at death, which is
the most formidable of all things, should yet, (through an innate Modesty) not
be able to conceive in their minds, much less endure a wrong and reproach to
that modesty, though dead. Causins Holy Court. p. 42.

XIII. A young Gentlewoman of Japan in the East Indies, being on her knees at
the end of the Table, waiting on her Master in the apartment of the Women, and
overreaching her self to take a Flaggon that stood a little too far from her,
she chanced to break wind backwards, which she was so much ashamed of, that
putting her Garment over her head, she would by no means show her face
afterward, but with an enraged violence, taking one of her Nipples of her
Breasts into her mouth, she bit it off with such fury, that she died in the
place. Mandelsloes Travels. p. 190.

XIV. In the same Country, 1639. there was a great Lord, who having had an
exact search made for all the young handsome Damsels in his Province to be
disposed into his Ladies Service, amongst the rest, there was one brought, whom
he was so taken with, that he made her his Concubine; she was the Daughter of a
poor Soldiers Widow, who hoping to make some advantage to her self by her
Daughters Fortune, wrote her a large Letter, wherein she expressed her
necessitous condition, and how she was forced to sue to her for relief; while
the Daughter was reading this Letter, her Lord comes into the room, and she
being ashamed to discover her Mothers poverty, endeavors to hide the Letter
from him, yet could she not convey it away so, but that he perceived it; the
disorder he observed in her countenance, made him suspect something of design,
so that he pressed her to show him the Letter, but the more importunate he was,
the more unwilling was she to satisfy him; and perceiving there was no way to
avoid it, she thrust it into her mouth so hastily, that thinking to swall wit
down, it choked her; this so incensed the Lord, that he immediately commanded
her Throat to be cut, whereby they only discovered the Mothers Poverty, and the
Daughters Innocence; he was so moved thereat, that he could not forbear
expressing it by Tears, and it being not in his power to make any other
demonstration of his affection to the deceased, he sent for the Mother, who was
maintained (says my Author) amongst his other Ladies at the time we spoke of,
with all imaginable respect. Mandelsloes Travels. p. 190.

XV. King Henry the sixth of England, was so modest, that when in a Christmas a
show of Women was presented before him, with their naked Breasts laid out, he
presently departed, saying, Fie, fie, for shame, forsooth you are to blame.
Bakers Chron. p. 287.

XVI. A grave and learned Minister, and ordinary Preacher at Alcmar in Holland,
one day as he walked in the Fields for his recreation, was suddenly taken with
a lask or looseness, and thereupon compelled to retire to the next Ditch; but
being surprised at unawares by some Gentlewomen of his Parish wandering that
way, he was so abashed, that he did never after show his head in public, or
come into the Pulpit, but pined away with Melancholy; Burtons Melanch. p. 92.

XVII. Marcus Scaurus was termed, The delight and glory of his Country; He at
such time as he heard the Cimorians beat the Romans at the River Athesis, and
that his Son, who was a Roman Soldier, was flying toward the City, sent his Son
word, That he should much more willingly meet with his Bones after he had been
killed in sight, than to see him guilty of such horrible Cowardice, as to fly,
and therefore that if he had any kind of Modesty remaining in him, degenerate
Son as he was, he should shun the sight of his displeased Father, for the
memory of his own youth did admonish him what a kind of Son Marcus Scaurus
should esteem of, or despise Upon this news from the Father, the Sons modesty
was such, that not presuming to show himself in his sight, he was constrained
to be more valiant against himself than the Enemy, and slew himself with his
own Sword. Val. Maxim. p. 154.

XVIII. Temperance and Sobriety is likewise a very commendable virtue, whether
in meat, drink, or other things; and therefore when one of the Spartans was
asked, why his Countrymen did use to eat and drink so very sparingly, he
answered, It is because we had rather consult for others, than that others
should do so for us; Sharply implying, that Luxurious, and Intemperate men were
utterly indisposed, and unfit for Council, and that Temperance and Sobriety do
usually produce most wholesome advice; indeed as all other virtues are obscured
by the want of this, so both the body and mind are wonderfully improved by it.

XIX. When Pausanias had overcome Mardonius in Battle, and beheld the splendid
Utensils, and Vessels of Gold and Silver belonging to the Barbarian, he
commanded the Bakers and Cooks to prepare him such a Supper as they used for
Mardonius; which when they had done, and Pausanias had viewed the Beds of Gold
and Silver, the Tables, Dishes, and other magnificent preparations to his
amazement; he then ordered his Servants to prepare him such a Supper as was
usual in Sparta, which was a course Treat with black Broth and the like; when
they had done it, and the difference appeared to be very strange, he then sent
for the Grecian Commanders, and showed them both Suppers, and laughing, said,
O ye Greeks, I have called you together for this purpose, that I might show you
the madness of the Median General; who when he lived such a life as this, must
needs come to invade us who eat after this homely and mean manner. Came. Med. p.
365.

XX. Augustus Caesar, the Master of the World, was a Person of a very sparing
Diet, and as abstemious in his drinking, he would feed of course Bread, and
small Fishes, Cheese made of Cows Milk, green Eggs, and the like; he drank but a
small quantity at once, and but thrice at one Supper, his Supper consisted
generally of three, and when he desired to exceed, but of six Dishes, he
delighted most in Rhetian Wine, yet seldom drank in the day time, but instead
of drink, he took a sop of Bread in cold water or a slice of Cucumber, or a
young Lettice head, or else some new gathered sharp and tart Apples, that had a
kind of Winish Liquor in them; thus lived this great Person after a fashion,
that some Cobblers and Botchers, would almost be loath to be obliged unto.
Sueton. Hist. p. 102.

XXI. Alphonsus the elder King of Sicily, had suddenly drawn out his Forces to
oppose the passage of Jacobus Candolus over the River Vulturnus; he had forced
his Troops back again, but being necessitated to stay there all day with his
Army unrefreshed, a Soldier toward evening brought him a piece of Bread, a
Radish, and a piece of Cheese, a mighty present at that time; but Alphonsus
commending the Soldiers liberality, refused his offer, and said, It was not
seemly for him to feast, while his Army fasted. Fulgosus Exercit. p. 501.

XXII. Cato the younger, marching with his Army through the hot Sands of Lybia,
when by the burning heats of the Sun, and their own labor, they were pressed
with an immoderate thirst, a Soldier brought him his Helmet full of water,
which with much difficulty he had found, that he might quench his thirst with
it; but Cato poured out the water in the sight of all his Army, and seeing he
had not enough for them all, he would not taste it alone; by this example of his
Temperance and Tollerance, he taught his Soldiers the better to endure their
hardship. Diodor. Siculus.

XXIII. The Thracians as they lived in a Country that abounded with all things,
especially with good Wine, so they were a People somewhat too much addicted to
Luxury; now when Agesilaus marched with his Army through their Country, the
Thracians in honor of him, sent him a present of Meal, Geese, Cakes made of
Honey, and diverse other things of great price, together with Junkets, and
variety of sweetmea^s; of all these, Agesilaus only accepted of the Meal,
commanding that all the rest should be carried back again by those who had
brought them; but when they importuned him with earnest entreaties, that he
would be pleased to accept them; he commanded that all those things should be
distributed, and divided among the Helotes, that is, a sort of Slaves belonging
to the Lacedaemonians; and when some asked him the reason of that Action of his,
he told them, That such kind of delicates were unseemly for Men who were
addicted to the study of Virtue and Valor, and that those things which
ensnared servile natures and dispositions should be kept far off from Men of
Freedom and liberal Education. Langi^ Polyanthea. p. 460.

XXIV. The Kings of India used to dry the Bodies of their Ancestors, which
done, they caused them to be hung up at the roof of their Palace in precious
Cords; they adorned them with Gold and Jewels of all sorts, and so preserved
them with a care and reverence little short of veneration itself; of the like
ridiculous superstition are they guilty who make over-careful and costly
provisions for these bodies of theirs, which will ere long be breathless, and
stinking Carkases; they are usually Souls of an over-delicate, and voluptuous
constitution and temper, that are so delighted with this kind of Luxury,
whereas the most worthy men, and Persons of the greatest improvements by reason
and experience, have expressed such a Moderation and Temperance herein, as may
almost seem a kind of carelessness, and neglect of themselves.

XXV. Rodulphus Emperor of Germany, did not at all differ from a private Person
in his habit, and being at Mentz, he walked outone morning alone; the Air was
cold and piercing, and therefore having observed a fire in a Bakers shop, he
boldly went in, and began to warm himself; but the Woman of the House, judging
of him only by his Apparel, after she had treated him with a more than
sufficiency of ill language, began so to threaten him with scalding water, that
he was constrained to depart: nor was he thus meanly accoutred upon ordinary
days, but even in that great solemnity, when Ottacarus the King of Bohemia
being overcome, was received by him to pay him homage upon his knees; the King
of Bohemia came with a gallant and splendid retinue, his Attendants, and their
Horses shone with Jewels, Gold and Silk, and when the Emperor was advised by
his Nobles to appear in his Imperial Robes, No, said he, the King of Bohemia
has often laughed at my Grey-Coat, and now my Grey-Coat shall laugh at him.
Lipsius Monit. p. 357.

XXVI. There is now to be seen in the Chamber of Accounts of Lewis the
Eleventh, King of France, in 1461. Two shillings for Fustian to new sleeve His
Majesty's old Doublet, and three half pence for liquor to grease his Boots; I
choose rather to call it his Frugality than Covetousness, in as much as no man
was more liberal of his Coin when occasion required, as Philip Convines, who
writ his History, and was also of his Council does frequently witness. Clarks
Mirror. p. 232.

XXVII. Mr. Herbert relates, that at the Reception of the English Lord
Ambassador in the Court of Persia, the Potshaw, or Emperor of Persia, Abbas,
sat upon two or three white silken shags, and though he was more beloved at
home, more famous abroad, and more formidable to his Enemies than any of his
Predecessors, yet he was seen at that time in a plain red Callico Coat, quilted
with Cotton; as if he should have said, we might see his Dignity consisted in
his parts and prudence, and that he did not endeavor to steal respect by
borrowed colors, or rich Imbroideries. His Turbant was white and large, his
wast was girded with a thong of Leather, and his Courtiers were but ordinarily
attired. Herberts Travels. p. 170.

XXVIII. Alexander the Great, in his Habit and Apparel, differed very little
from a private person, and when one day after much labor and sweat, he was
about to bath himself in the River Cydnus, he undressed himself in the sight of
his Army, esteeming it a piece of Gallantry to show that he was content with
such apparel as was cheap, and easily procurable; as he was marching through
some deserts in Persia, himself and his Army were in great streights for want
of water, and one of his Soldiers having two of his Sons ready to die for
Thirst, fearched about, and at last found a little water, with which he filled
a leather Bottle, and so was running with it to his Sons; but by the way
meeting Alexander, he filled out the water in a dish, and offered it to him,
Alexander asked him whither he was carrying it? The man told him, To his Sons
who were ready to die with Thirst; but, said he, Pray Sir do you drink it, for
if my Sons die, I can get more: but if you die, we shall not have such another
King; Alexander hearing this, gave him the water again, and bid him carry it to
his Sons; at another time being in the like streights in the Deserts of Arabia,
some of his Soldiers by chance found some muddy water, wherewith one of them
fi^ing his Helmet, ran with it to Alexander; who took it, and thanked him for
his diligence, but poured the water upon the ground, though he was exceeding
thirsty, faying, If I alone should drink, it would make my Soldiers languish,
and accordingly they seeing his Temperance, encouraged themselves by his
Example, and marched forward. Quintus Curtius.

XXIX. Charles the fifth, Emperor of Germany, was very frugal, especially once,
being to make a Royal entrance into the City of Millain; there was great
preparation for his entertainment, the Houses and Streets were beautified and
adorned; the Citizens dressed in their richest Ornaments, and a golden Canopy
was prepared to be carried over his head, and great expectation there was to
see a great and glorious Emperor; but when he entered the City, he came in a
plain black cloth Cloak with an old Hat on his Head, so that they who saw him,
not believing their Eyes, asked which was he, laughing at themselves for being
so deceived in their expectations. Clarks Mirror. p. 233.

XXX. Mr. Hollingsheld writes, that he knew an old Man, who told of the former
times in England, and affirmed, that if the Master of the House had a Matriss,
a Flock-bed, and a sack of Chaff to rest his head on, he thought himself as
well lodged as the Lord of the Town. For ordinarily they lay upon straw Pallets
covered with Canvass, and a round log of Wood under their heads instead of a
Bolster, saying, that soft Pillows were fit only for Women in Childbed, and in
a good Farmers House, it was rare to find four pieces of Pewter; and it was
counted a great matter that a Farmer should show five shillings, or a Noble
together in Silver. Clarks Mirror. p. 1.

XXXI. Let us next remark the Affability, and Humility of several Persons, and
certainly the greatest Examples of Courtesy and Humility have been found
amongst them that have been truly Great, and of the best merit, according to
the advice of the Comedian.

When Fortune does us most caress,
And higher still advance;
Then should we most our selves suppress,
As subject unto chance.
XXXII. Elizabeth was the Daughter of the King of Hungary, and was Married to
Lewis Earl of Thuringia, yet in the midst of Riches and abundance, she affected
Poverty, and Humility, sometimes when she remained at home with her Maids, she
put on her meanest Apparel, saying, That she would never use any of her
Ornament whatsoever, if it would please the good and merciful God to put her
into such a condition, wherein she might freely dispose of her self, and live
according to her own inclin^tion. When she went to Church, her manner was to
place her self amongst the poorer sort of Women; after the Death of her
Husband, she undertook a Pilgrimage, according to the Superstition of those
times, wherein she gave to the poor and necessitous all that came to her hands
to dispose of; she built an Hospital, wherein she made her self an Attendant
upon the sick and poor, and when by her Father she was recalled into Hungary,
she refused to go, preferring this manner of life before the enjoyment of a
Kingdom. Zuinglius Theat. p. 85.

XXXIII. Trajan the Emperor, was a Person of such rare Affability, and
Humility, that when his Soldiers were wounded in any Battle, he himself would
go from Tent to Tent, to visit, and take care of them, and when Swaths and
other Cloths were wanting to bind up their Wounds, he did not spare his own
linen, but tore them in pieces to make things necessary for the wounds of his
Soldiers, and being reproved for his too much familiarity with his Subjects, he
answered, That he desired to be such an Emperor to his Subjects, as he would
wish, if he himself were a private man. Imper. Hist. p. 144.

XXXIV. Upon the death of Pope Paul the Third, the Cardinals being divided
about the Election, the Imperial party, which was the greatest, gave their Vote
for Cardinal Pool, an Englishman, which being told him, he disabled himself,
and wished them to choose one that might be most for the Glory of God, and the
good of the Church; upon this stop, some that were no Friends to Pool, and
perhaps expected the place themselves, if he were put off, laid many things to
his charge, and amongst others, that he was not without suspicion of
Lutheranisme, nor without blemish of Incontinence; but he cleared himself so
handsomely, that he was now more importuned to take the place than before, and
therefore one night, the Cardinals came to him being in Bed, and told him they
came to adore him, which is a circumstance of the new Popes Honor, but he
being awakened out of his sleep, and acquainted with it, made answer, That this
was not a work of darkness, and therefore required them to forbear till next
day, and then to do as God should put it into their minds; but the Italian
Cardinals attributing this his Humility to a kind of stupidity and sloth in
Pool, looked no more after him, but the next day chose Cardinal Montanus Pope,
who was afterward named Julius the Third. I have read of many that would have
been Popes, but could not; I write this man one that could have been Pope, but
would not. Loyd's State Worthies.

XXXV. Among other Virtues of the Lord Cromwell aforementioned, his Humility
was admirable, of which, the following Relation is one instance. On a time as
he was riding in his Coach with Archbishop Cranmer through Cheapside, he there
espied a poor Woman of Hounsloe, to whom he was indebted for certain old
Reckonings, to the value of forty shillings, he caused her to be called unto
him, where questioning with her what her name was, and where she lived, and
withal asking her whether he was not somewhat indebted to her, she said, yes,
but she never durst call upon him for it, though now she stood in great need of
it; He thereupon presently sent her to his House with one of his men, and when
he came from the Court, he did not only discharge his debt, but gave her an
yearly pension of four pound, and a Livery every year after, so long as she
lived. Clarks Lives. p. 21.

XXXVI. In the Reign of Theodosius the Emperor there happened a great tumult in
Thessalonica, a rich and, populous City of Macedonia, amongst the People
against the Magistrates and Governors under the Emperor, and their Fury grew so
great, that they slew them, which when Theodosius understood, he was so
incensed against them, that he caused his Soldiers to put ten thousand of the
common people to death, making no difference between the guilty and innocent;
St. Ambrose hearing of it, when the Emperor came to Church, as his manner was,
Ambrose set himself at the Church door, and that his Repentance might be as
public as his Offense, he told the Emperor, That he should not enter there,
making a learned Oration to him, wherein he opened his fault, and then
Excommunicated him; all which the Emperor heard with great patience, and
returning to his Palace, he continued there eight months before he was
Absolved, at the end whereof he said to one about him, Truly I will go and see
what Penance my Pastor will lay upon me for mine offense; and so he went to
the Church door, where St. Ambrose was, and entreated him to absolve him; But
what Repentance have you showed, said the Bishop, for so heinous an Offense?
And with what Salve have you healed so mortal a wound? You, said the Emperor,
are to instruct, and show me what I am to do, and you shall see I will
accomplish what you shall prescribe; The Bishop seeing the Emp. Mildness and
Humility, and judging it sufficient penance, that he had been so long
Excommunicated, courteously replied, Your Penance Theodosius shall be this,
that seeing in your hasty fury you committed such an horrid Murder, you shall
presently establish a Law, that no man whom you shall adjudge to die, shall be
executed within thirty days after you have pronounced the Sentence; at the end
of which time, you shall either ratify, or disannul your Sentence, as you shall
see cause. The Emperor immediately caused this Law to be written, and
proclaimed, which he ever after observed, and whereof much good ensued; and so
being absolved, he came into the Church, prayed, and received the Sacrament,
and ever after loved St. Ambrose very dearly, and used his Council in many
matters, and for his Companies sake, he continued in Millain the remainder of
his life. Clarks Lives. p. 20.

XXXVII. It is reported by Gualter Mapes, an old Historian of ours, who lived
four hundred years since, that King Edward the first of England, and Leoline
Prince of Wales, being at an interview at, or near Aust upon Severn in
Glocestershire, and the Prince being sent for, but refusing to come, the King
would needs go over to him; which Leoline perceiving, went up to the Arms in
water, and laying hold on the Kings Boat, would have carried the King out upon
his Sholders, adding, That his Humility and Wisdom had triumphed over his pride
and folly; and thereupon was reconciled to him, and did his homage. Burtons
Melanch. p. 307.

XXXVIII. After what manner Humility and Compassion does sometimes meet with
unexpected rewards, methinks is prettily represented by Vrsinus Velius in the
following Verses.

A Fisher angling in a Brook,
With a strong line, and baited Hook!
When he for his wished Prey did pull.
It happened he brought up a Skull,
Of one before drowned; which impressed
A Pious Motion in his Breast,
Thinks he, since I such leisure have,
Upon it I Will bestow a Grave,
For what did unto it befall,
May chance to any of us all.
He takes it, wraps it in his Coat,
And bears it to a place remote,
To bury it, and then digs deep,
Because the Earth it safe should keep.
And lo! in digging he espies,
Where a great heap of Treasure lies.
For Heaven does never prove ingrate,
To such as are Commiserate.
XXXIX. Alphonsus the most noble King of Arragon, Naples, and Sicily, as he
passed through Campania, lighted by accident upon a Muleteer, whose Mule
overladen with Corn, stuck in the Mire, nor was he able with all his strength
to deliver her thence; the Muleteer beseeched all that passed by to help him
but in vain; at last the King himself dismounts from his Horse, and was so good
an help to the poor man, that he freed his Beast; when he knew it was the King,
falling on his knees, he begged his pardon, the King with courteous words
dismissed him; this may seem a thing of small moment, yet hereby several People
of Campania became reconciled to the King. This same Prince being informed by
his Viceroy at Naples, that in his absence one of those two mighty Ships which
he had built, and which seemed like Mountains, by the negligence of the Seamen,
had taken fire, and was burnt down; he told the Messenger, That he well knew
that Ship, though great and magnificent, would yet after some years be
corrupted, or perish by some, accident or other, and that therefore the
Viceroy, if he were wise, would bear that misfortune with an equal mind, as he
himself did. By this may be discovered the humility, and patience likewise of
this great Personage, which are both very excellent Accomplishments, but
especially when they have been improved so far, as to repress our rising
Passions in the midst of injurious Provocations, and under great losses, and
injuries received, in bearing patiently reproofs from Inferiors, and likewise
in supporting men in the midst of the most exquisite torments and hardships, of
all which we have diverse instances in History, and shall relate some of each
particular.

XXXIX. Philip, King of Macedon, had one Nicanor, that went about railing
against him, whereupon his Courtiers, persuaded him to punish him severely for
it, to whom Philip answered, Nicanor is none of the worst of my Subjects, I
must rather therefore observe and see whether I have not committed any evil
whereby I have given him cause to speak so evil of me; And making serious
inquiry, he found, that there was a certain poor man, who had deserved well of
him, to whom he had never given a reward, whereupon he made him large
satisfaction, and the poor man did every where extol his goodness and bounty;
then said Philip to his Attendants, You see my Friends, it is in our own power
either to be spoken well or ill of. The Peleponesians, who had received many
and great favors from King Philip, yet hated him, spoke evil of him, and when
he came to the Olympic Games, hissed at him, whereupon his Friends stirred him
up to revenge, but he mildly answered them, saying, If they do thus when I do
them good, what would they do, if I should do them hurt. At another time the
Athenians sending Ambassadors to request some favors of him, he entertained
them courteously, and granted their requests, asking them if there were any
thing else wherein he might gratify the Athenians, to which one of them
answered, Yes truly, if thou will hang thy self This exceedingly enraged
Philips Courtiers; but he without being moved, sent them away courteously, only
bidding them tell the Athenians, That they who spoke such things, were far
weaker than those who could hear, and bear them patiently. He used to say, That
he was beholding to the Athenian Orators, who by their reproaches made him
better, whilst he was forced by his Actions to confute their slanders, and make
them Liars. As King Philip besieged the City of Methon, and was walking about
to view the Walls, one shot an Arrow at him from thence; whereby he put out his
right Eye, which yet he took so patiently, that when the Citizens a few days
after sent out to treat with him about the surrender, he gave them honorable
terms, and after they had put the City into his hands, took no revenge on them
for the loss of his Eye. In one Battle having taken a considerable number of
Prisoners, he was himself in Person to see them sold; as he sat in his Chair,
his Cloths were turned up, or tucked up higher than was decent or seemly, when
one of the Prisoners, who was upon sale, cried out unto him; Good my Lord, I
beseech you parden me, and suffer me not to be sold amongst the rest, for I am
a Friend of yours, and so I was to your Father before you; I pray thee, good
Fellow, said Prilip, whence grew this great Friendship betwixt us; and how
comes it about? Sir, said the Prisoner, I would gladly give you an account of
that privately in your Ear; Then Philip commanded he should be brought unto
him, who thus whispered in his Ear; Sir, I pray you let down your Maritle a
little lower before, for sitting thus in the posture as you do, you discover
that which is not meet to be seen; hereupon Philip spoke aloud to his Officers,
Let this man, said he, he set at liberty, for in truth he is one of our good
Friends, and wishes us well, though I either knew it not before, or at least
had forgotten it. A poor old Woman came to him one time, and desired him to
take notice of her Cause, and when she had often interrupted him with her
clamours in this manner, the King at last told her; he was not at leisure to
hear her, No, said she, be not then at leisure to be King; Philip for some time
considered of the Speech, and presently he heard both her and others, that came
with complaints to him. Plutarchs Morals.

XL. Pyrrhus King of Epirus, was advised to put an idle Fellow out of the City,
who spoke nothing but evil against him; he replied, It Is better to keep him
here still, speaking evil of us but to a few, but if we drive him away, he will
speak evil of us every where; At another time several young men were brought to
him, who in their drink spoke very vilely, and basely of him, Pyrrhus asked
them whether the Complaint were true or not? It is true, said one of them, if
it please your Grace, and had not our Wine failed us, we had spoken a great
deal more, Pyrrhus laughing at this answer, dismissed them without punishment.
Plutarchs Lives.

XLI. Antigonus the Successor of Alexander the Great, lay long sick of a
lingering disease, and afterward when he was recovered and well again, We have
gotten no harm, said he, by this sickness, for it has taught me not to be so
proud by putting me in mind that I am but a mortal man. Antigonus once in
Winter time was driven to incamp in a place destitute of all provisions
necessary for the life of man, by occasion whereof, certain Soldiers not
knowing that he was so nigh unto them, spoke very presumptuously of him, and
reviled him to purpose; but he opening the Cloth or Curtain of his Pavillion
with his walking Staff, If, said he, you go not farther off to rail at me; I
will make you to repent it, and so withdrew himself. Plutarchs Morals.

XLII. King Robert was one of the greatest Kings of France, on a time he
surprised a Rogue, who had cut away half of his Cloak furred with Ermines, to
whom, yet so taken, and in an Act so insufferably presumptuous, he did no
further evil, but only said mildly to him, Save thy self, and leave the rest of
my Cloak for another who may have need of it. Causins H. Cour.

XLIII. Casimer King of Poland, intending to divert himself, called a Knight,
one of his Domestic Servants to him, inviting him to play with him at Dice;
they did so, and Fortune was favorable one while to one, and then to the
other, so that having spent much time in gaining little upon each other, and it
being grown far in the night, it was agreed to set the whole sum in controversy
upon one single cast of the Dice, Casimer proved the more fortunate, and drew
all the money to him; the Knight displeased, and incensed at his bad fortune, in
the heat of his impatience falls upon the King, and with his fist strikes him
over the mouth, It is a capital Crime for the Servant to strike his Lord, and
the same also his Prince; but though all present were enraged at this
unsufferable action, yet he escaped by the benefit of the night, though not so,
but that he was seized in the morning, brought back, and set in the presence of
Casimer to receive his Sentence; he having well weighed the matter, brake into
this wise Speech, My Friends, this man is less guilty than my self, nay,
whatever is ill done, is on my part; Heat, and sudden Passion, which sometimes
oversways even wise men, did transport him, and moved both his mind, and hand
to do as he did. But why did I give the cause? Why unmindful of my place, and
dignity, did I play with him as my equal; And therefore, says he to the Knight,
take not only my Pardon, but my Thanks too, for by a profitable correction thou
have taught me, that hereafter I should do nothing which is unworthy of a
Prince, but retain my self in the just limits of decency and gravity; Having
said this, he freely dismissed him. Lipsius Monit.

XLIV. Frederick was made Bishop of Vtricht, and at the Feast, the Emperor
Lodovicus Pius sitting at his right hand, admonished him, that being mindful of
the profession he had newly taken upon him, he would deal justly, and as in the
sight of God, in the way of his vocation, without respect of Persons; Your
Majesty gives me good advice, said the Bishop, but will you please to tell me,
whether I had best begin with this Fish upon my Trencher, at the Head or the
Tail? At the head, said the Emperor, for that is the more Noble part; Then Sir,
said the Bishop, in the first place, do you renounce that Incestuous Marriage
you have contracted with Judith; the Emperor took this reprehension so well,
that he dismissed her accordingly. Polybius, p. 223.

XLV. Alexander the Great having taken a famous Pyrate, and being about to
condemn him to death, asked him, Why do thou trouble the Seas? And why said
he, do thou trouble the whole world? I with one ship seek my Adventures, and
therefore am called a Pyrate, thou with a great Army warrest against Nations,
and therefore art called an Emperor; so that there is no difference betwixt us,
but in the name. Alexander was so well pleased with this his freedom of Speech,
that in consideration of what he had said, he dismissed him, without inflicting
any punishment upon him. Chetwind. Hist. Collect.

XLVI. There came a young man to Rome, who in the opinion of all men,
exceedingly resembled Augustus Caesar the Emperor, whereof he being informed,
sent for him; being in presence, he asked him, if his Mother had never been at
Rome; the Stranger answered, No, but his Father had; the Emperor took patiently
this sharp reply, and sent him away without harm. Polythron. p. 147.

XLVII. Marcus Antonius Pius, the Emperor, used to take well the free and merry
Jests of his Friends, even such as seemed to be uttered with too great a
freedom and liberty; coming once to the House of Omulus his Friend, and
beholding there at his entrance diverse Pillars of Porphry, he inquired whence
they were brought? Omulus told him, That it became him that set his foot into
another man's House, to be both deaf and dumb; He meant he should not be curious
and inquisitive. The Emperor was delighted with this freedom, so far was he
from resenting it in such a manner as some others would have done. Wanly Hist.
Man. p. 204.

XLVIII. Such has been the invincible patience of some men, that the incredible
strength of their minds has not only prevailed over the weakness of their
flesh, but reduced it to a temper capable of enduring as much as if it had been
of Brass, or something, that if possible is yet more insensible. Of such a
temper Janus Auceps, a wicked Person seemed to be, who dwelt in a lone house by
the highway side without the Eastgate of the City of Copenhagen in Denmark;
this man in the night had murdered diverse Persons, and knocked them on the head
with an Ax, at last he was discovered, taken, and condemned to a terrible
death; he was drawn upon a sledge through the City, he had pieces of flesh
plucked off from his Body with burning Pincers; his Legs and Arms were broken,
his Tongue was pulled out of his Mouth, thongs of his skin were cut out of his
back, his breast was opened by the speedy hand of the Executioner, his heart
was pulled out, and thrown at his face; all this the stout-hearted man bore
with an invincible courage; and when his heart lay panting by his side; in the
midst of such torments as he yet underwent, he moved his head, and looked upon
the Bystanders with a frowning aspect, and seemed with curiosity to
contemplate his own heart, till such time as his Head was cut off. Bartholin.
Anat.

XLIX. William Collingborn Esquire being condemned for making this Rhyme on King
Richard the Third, The Cat, the Rat, and Lovel the Dog,
Rule all England under a Hog;
Alluding to Catesby, Ratcliff, and Lovel, the three great Favorites of
Richard, in whose arms there was pictured a Hog; the poor Gentleman was put to
a most cruel death, for being hanged, and cut down alive, his bowels ripped out,
and cast into the fire, when the Executioner put his hand into the bulk of his
body, to pull out his heart, he said, Lord Jesus! yet more trouble, and so died
to the great sorrow of much people. Fabians Chro. p. 519.

L. When we were come within sight of Buda in Hungary (says Busbequius) there
came by the command of the Turkish Bassa some of his Family to meet us with
diverse great Officers; but in the first place a Troop of young men on
Horseback, made us turn our Eyes to them, because of the Novelty of their
Equipage, which was thus; upon their bare heads, most of which were shaven,
they had cut a long line in the skin, in which wound they had stuck Feathers of
all kinds, and they were dewed with drops of blood, yet dissembling the pain,
they rid with as much mirth and cheerfulness, as if they had been void of all
sense; just before me, there walked some on foot, one of these went with his
naked arms on his side, in each of which he carried a Knife, which he had
thrust through his Arms, just above the Elbow; another walked naked from his
Navel upward, with the skin of both his Loins, so cut above and below, that he
carried a Club, which stuck therein, as if it had hung at his Girdle, another
had fastened a Horseshoe with diverse nails upon the crown of his Head, but that
was done a long while, the nails being so grown in the flesh, that the Shoe was
made fast; in this pomp we entered Buda, and were brought into the Bassa's
Palace, in the Court of which stood these generous contemners of Pain; as I
chanced to cast my Eye that way, What think you of these men, said the Bassa;
Well enough, said I, but that they use their flesh in such a manner as I would
not use my Cloths, being desirous to keep them whole; The Bassa smiled at this
answer, and dismissed us. Busbequius Epist. p. 226.

LI. There is a notable example of tolerance, which happened in our times, in a
certain Burgundian, who was the Murderer of the Prince of Orange; this man,
though he was scourged with rods of Iron; though his flesh was torn off with
red hot, and burning Pincers, yet he gave not so much as a single sigh or
groan, nay, further, when part of a broken Scaffold fell upon the head of one
that stood by as a Spectator, this burned Villain in the midst of all his
Torments laughed at the Accident; although not long before, the same man had
wept when he saw the curls of his hair cut off Wanly Hist. Man, p. 206.

LII. It was also an Example of great patience in this kind, which Strabo
mentions in his Geography, that Zarmonochaga, the Ambassador from the Indian
King, having finished his negotiation with Augustus Caesar, according to his
own mind, and having sent an account thereof to his Master, because he would
have no further trouble for the remaining part of his life (after the manner of
the Indians) he burnt himself alive, preserving all the while the countenance
of a man that smiled. Fulgosus Ex. p. 348.

LIII. Most eminent was the example of Hieronimus Olgiatus, a Citizen of
Millain, who was one of those four that did assassinate Galeacius Sforza, Duke
of Millain; being taken, he was thrust into Prison, and put to bitter Tortures;
now although he was not above two and twenty years of Age, and of such a
delicacy and softness in his habit of body, that was more like to that of a
Virgin than a man; though he was never accustomed to the bearing of Arms, by
which it is usual for men to acquire vigor and strength; yet being fastened to
that Rope upon which he was tormented, he seemed as if he sat upon some
Tribunal, and free from any expression of grief, with a clear voice, and an
undaunted mind, he commended the Exploit of himself, and his Companions; nor
did he ever show the least sign of Repentance; in the times of the
intermissions of his Torments, both in Prose and Verse, he celebrated the
Praises of his Confederates; being at last brought to the place of Execution,
beholding Carolus and Francion two of his Associates, to stand as if they were
almost dead for fear; he exhorted them to be courageous, and requested the
Executioners that they would begin with him, that his Fellow Sufferers might
learn patience by his Example; being therefore laid naked, and at full length
upon the Hurdle, and his Feet and Arms fast bound down to it, when others that
stood by, were terrified with the show and horror of that death that was
prepared for him, he with specious words, and assured voice, extolled the
gallantry of their Action, and appeared unconcerned with that cruel kind of
death he was speedily to undergo; yea, when by the Executioners knife he was
cut from the shoulder to the middle of the breast, he neither changed his
Countenance, nor his voice, but with a Prayer to God (...) ended his life.
Fulgo. Ex. p. 365.

CHAP. IV. The Tremendous Consequences of Hatred, Revenge, and Ingratitude:
Displayed in many memorable Histories.
HItherto we have discovered only the light side of the Cloud, by showing the
extraordinary effects of Love, Friendship, Magnanimity, Courage, Fidelity,
Chastity, Temperance, and Humility; Let us now consider a little the dark side
thereof, by giving an account of the dreadful consequences of the contrary
Vices, that is, Hatred, Revenge, and Ingratitude, which three will suffice to
give some considerable instances in this Chapter, wherein I shall observe the
same method as in the former, and therefore shall insist, first, of the extreme
Hatred in some Persons toward others; for as amongst the kinds of living
Creatures, there are certain Enmities and Dissentions, whereof there is no
apparent reason to be given; as of that betwixt the Spider and the Serpent, the
Ant and Weasel, and the like; so amongst Men, implacable Hatreds are conceived
many times upon undiscernible, but most times upon unjustifiable grounds.

I. When Sigismund, Marquess of Brandenburg, had obtained the Kingdom of
Hungary, in right of his Wife, it then appeared what a mortal hatred there was
betwixt the Hungarians and Bohemians, for when Sigismund commanded Stephanus
Konth (and with him twenty more Hungarian Knights) to be taken, and brought him
in Chains, as Persons that had delivered the obedience they owed him; not one
of all those would name or honor him in the least as their King; and before
either they or their Servants would change their minds, they were desirous to
lose their heads. Pulgosus p. 1189.

2. Timon the Athenian, had the Surname of Manhater, he was once very rich, but
through his liberality, and overgreat bounty, he was reduced to extreme
poverty; in which condition he had large experience of the malice and
ingratitude of such as he had formerly been helpful to; he therefore fell into
a vehement hatred of all mankind, he was glad of their misfortunes, and
promoted the Ruin of all men as far as he might with his own safety; when the
People in honor of Alcibiades, attended on him home, as they used, when he had
obtained a Cause; Timon would not, as he was wont to others, turn aside out of
the way, but would meet him on purpose, and use to say to him, Go on my Son,
and prosper, for thou shall one day plague all these People with some signal
Calamity, which accordingly happened some years after; he built him an House in
the Fields, that he might shun the converse of men; he admitted to him only one
Apemantus, a Person much of his own humor, and he saying to him; Is not this a
fine Supper? It would, said he, be much better if thou were absent; This Timon
gave order his Sepulcher should be placed behind a Dunghill, and this to be his
Epitaph.

Hic sumpost vitam miseramque inopemque sepultus.
Nomen non quaeras Dii te Lector male perdant.
Here now I lie after my wretched fall,
Ask not my Name, the Gods confound you all.
III. Hyppolitus was also of the same Complexion, as he expresses himself in
Euripides, and Seneca; if you will have a taste of his language, that in Seneca
sounds to this purpose; -- I hate, stie, curse, detest them all,
Cail't Reason, Nature, Madness, as you please,
In a true Hatred of them there is some ease,
First shall the water kindly dwell with fire,
Dread Gulphs shall be the Mariners desire,
Out of the West shall be the break of day;
And cruel Wolves with tender Lamb-skins play,
Before a Woman gain my conquered mind,
To quit this hatred, and to grow more kind.


IV. Gualter Earl of Brenne, had married the eldest Daughter of Tancred King of
Sicily, and as Heir of the Kingdom, went out with four hundred Horse, to take
possession thereof; by the help of these, and a mavelous felicity, he had
recovered a great part of it; but at the last he was overcome, and taken
Prisoner by Theobaldus Germanus, at the City Sarna; upon the third day after,
the Conqueror offered him his liberty, and restoration to his Kingdom, upon
condition he would confirm to Theobaldus what he was possessed of therein, but
he, in an unconceivable hatred to him that had made him his Prisoner, replied,
That he should ever scorn to receive these, or greater offers from so base a
hand as his; Theobaldus had reason to resent this affront, and therefore told
him, He would make him repent his so great insolence; at which Gualter inflamed
with a greater fury, tore his Cloths, and broke the swathings and ligatures of
his wounds, crying out, That he would live no longer, since he was fallen into
the hands of such a man that treated him with Threats; upon which he tore open
his wounds, and thrust his own hands into his Bowels; and after that,
resolvedly refusing all food, and ways of cure, he forcibly drove out his
furious Soul from his Body, and left only one Daughter behind him, who might
have been happier, had she not had a Beast to her Father. Fulgosus. p. 1182.

V. Who can sufficiently declare the mighty hatred which Pope Boniface the
Eighth bore toward the Gibelline Faction? It is the custom that upon
Ash Wednesday, the Pope sprinkles some Ashes upon the heads of the chief
Prelates of the Church, and at the doing of it, used to say, Remember thou art
Ashes, and that into Ashes thou shall return; When therefore the forementioned
Pope came to perform this to Porchetus Spinola, Archbishop of Genoa and
suspected him to be a favourer of the Gibellines, he cast the Ashes not on his
head, but into his Eyes, and perversely changed the use of the former words
into these, Remember thou art a Gibelline, and that with the Gibellines thou
shall return into Ashes. B. Reynolds on the Passions.

VI. Calvin was so odious to the Papists, that they would not name him, hence
in their Spanish Expurgatory Index. p. 204. they give this direction, Let the
name of Calvin be suppressed and instead of it put, Studiosus quidam, a certain
Student, or Scholar; and one of their Proselites went from Mentz to Rome, to
change his Christian name of Calvinus into the adopted name of Baronius.
Chetwinds Collect. p. 90.

VII. This passion of Hatred, Malice, Anger, Wrath, and Envy is a very
dangerous disease wherever it prevails, and like the mischievous evil Spirit
in the Gospel, it casts us into all kind of dangers, and frequently hurries us
into the Chambers of Death itself; The Sarmatian Ambassadors cast themselves at
the Feet of Valentinian the first, Emperor of Rome, imploring Peace; he
observing the meanness of their Apparel, demanded if all their Nation were such
as they; who replied, It was their Custom to send to him such as were the most
Noble, and best accoutred amongst them; Upon hearing which, he in a rage cried
out, It was his mi^fortune, that while he reigned, such a base and sordid
Nation as theirs, could not be content with their own bounds and limits; and
then as one struck with a Dart, he lost both his voice and strength, and in a
deadly sweat fell down to the Earth; he was taken up, and carried into his
Chamber, where he was seized with a violent hickup, and gnashing of Teeth, of
which he soon after died in the 55th year of his Age. Zuinglius.

VIII. In 1418. Wenceslaus King of Bohemia, being highly incensed against his
Cup Bearer, for that knowing of a Tumult raised by the Hussites in Prague,
under Zisea their Leader, he had concealed it, drew his Dagger with intention
to stab him; but the Nobles who attended, laying hands on the King, took away
his Dagger, that he might not pollute his Royal hands with the blood of his
Servant; while he was thus in their hands, the King through extreme Anger, fell
into an Apoplexy, whereof he died in few days. Donatus Hist. p. 188.

IX. Matthias Corvinus, King of Hungary, being spent with the pains of the
Gout, and taken with the Palsy in both his legs, lay at Vienna, and on
Palm Sunday inquiring for some fresh Figs of Italy for the second course,
finding that they were already eaten up by the Courtiers, he fell into such a
rage, as brought him into a Fever, whereof he died the day following.
Zuinglius.

X. Charles the sixth, King of France, being highly displeased with the Duke of
Britain, upon some suspicions of him, was so bent upon Revenge, that unmindful
of all other things, his Passion suffered him not to eat or sleep; he would not
hear the Dukes Ambassadors that came to declare his Innocence; but in the
midst of Summer he set forth out of the City with his Forces, about high noon
in a hot sultry day with a light Hat upon his Head, contrary to the advice of
his Commanders and Physicians; he leaped upon his Horse, and bid them follow
him that loved him; he had scarce gone a mile from the City, when his mind was
disturbed, and distracted, and he in a fury drew his Sword, slew some, and
wounded others that attended him, till such time as being weary, and spent with
thus laying about him, he fell from his Horse; he was taken up, and carried
back in the Arms of Men into the City for dead; where after many days, when at
first he neither knew himself nor any about him, he began by degrees to
recover, but his mind was not so well restored, but that he had sometimes some
symptoms of a Relapse; and at several intervals discovered his distemper, so
that the Government of the Kingdom was committed to his Uncles. Zuinglius.

XI. Marcus Sabinus came to live at Rome, at such time as Numa Pompilius was
elected King thereof; when Numa was dead, he hoped to be chosen by the People
to succeed him; but finding that Hostilius was preferred before him, he resented
the matter with that passion and indignation, that his life growing irksome
unto him, he laid violent hands upon himself, and so went discontented out of
the world; of what strange fury was this man possessed? what flames, what
ruins, what slaughter, and bloodshed of the Roman People can we imagine could
satisfy the anger and revenge of this man? who when he was able to do nothing
against the People of Rome, proceeded so sharply, and so bitterly against
himself, as to resolve not to live at all; because, according to his mind he
might not live a King. Fulgosus.

XII. Amurath the second Emperor of the Turks, having long besieged the City of
Croia in Hungary, and assaulted it in vain, and being no way able, either by
force or flattery to bring the valiant Scanderbeg to Terms of submission and
agreement, and being angry that his Presents and Propositions were refused, he
resolved to make a terrible assault upon Croia from all Quarters, but this by
the Courage of the Christian Soldiers, proving a greater loss to him than any
before, not being able to behold the endless slaughter of his men, he gave over
the assault, and returned into his Camp, as if he had been a man half frantic,
or distracted of his Wits, and there sat down in his Tent all that day, full
of melancholy passions, sometimes violently plucking his hoary beard, and white
locks, complaining of his hard and disastrous Fortune, that he had lived so
long to see those days of disgrace, wherein all his former glory, and
triumphant Victories were obscured by this one base Town; his Bassa's, and
grave Counselors by long discourses sought to comfort him, but dark and heavy
conceits had so overwhelmed the melancholy old Tyrant, that nothing could
content his enraged mind, or revive his dying Spirits; so that the little
remainder of natural heat, which was left in his aged Body, was now oppressed,
and almost extinguished, and he became sick for pure anger and grief; and
feeling his sickness daily to increase, so that he could no longer live, lying
upon a Pallet in his Pavilion, he sadly complained to his Bassa's, That the
Destinies had blemished all the former course of his life with such an obscure
death, that he who had so often resisted the fury of the Hungarians, and almost
brought to naught the Pride of the Graecians, together with their Name, should
now be enforced to give up the Ghost under the walls of an obscure Castle, and
that in the sight of his contemptible Enemy; shortly after he became
speechless, and striving with the pangs of death half a day, he then expired,
in 1450. Turkish Hist. p. 330.

XIII. To proceed in the method of the former part, let us next consider that
unnatural hatred which has been found among the nearest Relations, and first,
of the Hatred of Husbands to their Wives; for there are some brutish, and evil
natured men, who by pretenses of Generosity, Love and Virtue inveagle the
hearts of poor innocent Virgins, till they are become the Masters of their
Fortunes and Honor, which done, death itself is more desirable than that
bitterness and indignity they are wont to treat them with.

XIV. Periander the Corinthian, in a high fit of passion trod his Wife under
foot, and although she was at that time with Child with a Boy, yet he never
desisted from his injurious treatment of her, till such time as he had killed
her upon the place; afterward when he was come to himself, and was sensible
that what he had done, was through the false Accusations of his Concubines, he
caused them all to be burnt alive, and banished his Son out of his Kingdom,
upon no other occasion, but that he lamented the death of his Mother with Tears
and Outcries. Wanly Hist Man. p. 372.

XV. Amalasuntha had Married Theodabitus, and thereby made him her Husband, and
the King of the Goths at the same time, but upon this Condition, That he should
take an Oath that he would rest contented with the Title of a King, and leave
all matters of Government to her sole dispose; But no sooner was he accepted as
King, but he forgot his Wife and Benefactress, he recalled her Enemies from
Banishment, and put many of her Friends and Relations to death; he banished her
into an Island, and set a strong Guard upon her; at last he thought himself not
sufficiently safe, so long as Amalasuntha was alive, and thereupon he
dispatched several of his wicked Instruments to the place of her Exile, with
order to put her to death, who finding her in a Bath, gave her no further time,
but strangled her there. Zuinglius Theat.

XVI. Mrs. Joyce Lewis being questioned for her professing the Protestant
Religion in Queen Mary's Reign, was cited to appear before the Bishop of
Coventry and Lichfield, who after Examination, gave her a months time to
consider of it, taking a Bond of her Husband at the months end to bring her
thither again; when the time was near expired, many Friends advised him rather
to forfeit his Bonds, than to cast her into the fire; but he churlishly
answered, That he would lose nothing for her sake; and so delivering her up,
she was condemned, and burned. Clarks Martyr. p. 191.

XVII. Arsinoe the Widow of Lysimachus, was afterward Married to her own
Brother Ptolomy (according to the Custom of that Country) she received him into
her City Cassandrea; but he presently seizing upon the Castle, there he slew
her two Sons which he had by Lysimachus, one being sixteen years old, and the
other but three, and in their Mothers Arms; at which, she rending her Cloths,
and tearing her hair; was by his Command halled out of the Gates of the City,
with two Servants only to attend her, and sent into banishment to the Isle of
Samothracia; but shortly after, this barbarous Wretch was overthrown in a
Battle against the Gauls, and himself being taken, was by them torn in pieces.
A. B. Vshers Annals.

XVIII. Some Wives have likewise been unnatural in their hatred to their
Husbands, and have deported themselves so ill toward them, that they have not
only tormented the Lives, but hastened the death of their too indulgent
Husbands. We read that Alborinus, King of the Lumbards, having slain the King
of the Gepidae, made a drinking Cup of his Skull, Rosamond the Daughter of that
King he had taken to Wife, and being one day very merry at Verona, he forced
her to drink out of that detested Cup; which she so stomached, that she
promised Helmichild a Courtier, that if he would aid her in killing the King,
she would give him both her self, and the Kingdom of Lumbardy. This he
consented to, and performed, after which, they were both so hated, that they
were constrained to fly to Ravenna, unto the protection of Longinus, who
persuaded her to dispatch Helmichild out of the way, and to take him for her
Husband, to which she willingly agreed. Helmichild coming out of the Bath,
called for drink, and she gave him a strong poison; when he had drunk half of
it, and found by the strong operation how the matter went, he compelled her to
drink the rest, and so both died together. Heylin Cosmog. p. 64.

XIX. Among those who were persecuted, and miserably imprisoned for the
Profession of the Protestant Religion in the Reign of Queen Mary, there was one
John Fetty, a Religious Man, living in Clerkenwell in London, who was
complained of to the Parson of the Parish by his own Wife, because he came not
to Church, nor would partake of their Idolatrous Services; whereupon the Parson
caused the Constables to apprehend him, but it pleased God that his unnatural
Wife immediately fell mad upon it, and the Constables were so far moved with
pity, that they let him go home to look to his Wife and Children, who otherwise
were like to perish; this good man forgetting this unkind, and wicked Act of
his Wife, was very careful of her, and so cherished, and provided for her that
through Gods mercy she was well amended, and in about three weeks recovered her
wits again, yet such was the power of the Devil in this wicked and malicious
woman's heart, that so soon as she was recovered, not regarding her Husbands
kindness, she again accused him, whereby he was apprehended, and cast into
Lollards Tower, where he was put into the tormenting stocks with a dish of
water, and a stone in it set by him, to show what favor he should receive at
their hands. There he lay for many days, sometimes hanging by one leg and one
arm, and sometimes by another, and at other times by both. At last one of his
Children of about eight or nine years old came to the Bishops House, to see if
he could get leave to speak with his Father, and one of the Bishops Chaplains
meeting with the Boy, asked him, what he looked for? The Child answered, That
he came to see his Father who was in Lollards Tower; why said the Priest, thy
Father is an Heretic; the Boy being of a bold and quick Spirit, and well
educated by his Father, answered, My Father is no Heretic but you are an
Heretic, for you have Balaams Mark on you. With that the Priest took him by
the hand, and led him into the Bishops House, where amongst them, they stripped
the Child naked and cruelly whipped him till he was all over gore blood; then
Cluny the Bishops Sumner, putting on his shirt, and carrying his Coat on his
arm, led him to the Prison with the blood dropping at his heels to his Father.
At his coming in the Boy fell on his knees, and craved his Fathers blessing;
the Father being full of grief to see his Child thus cruelly dealt with, said,
Alas William who has done this? The Boy answered, As I was coming to see you,
a Priest with Balaams Mark took me into the Bishops House where I have been
thus used. Hereupon Cluny violently plucked him from his Father, and carried
him back to the Bishops House where they kept him three days; and then bloody
Bonner intending to appease the poor man for the usage of his Child, sent for
him out of Lollards Tower to his Chamber; whilst this John Fetty, was standing
there with the Bishop, he spied a great pair of black Beads, hanging by his Bed
and thereupon said to him, My Lord I think the Hangman is not far off, for the
Halter, pointing, to the Beads, is here already; this much enraged the Bishop,
yet Fetty spying also a Crucifix standing in the Window said, My Lord what is
that; the Bishop answered, It was Christ; was he handled, said Fetty, so
cruelly as he is here pictured, Yes, said Bonner, that he was; and even so
cruelly, said Fetty, do you handle such as come before you, for you are to Gods
People even as Caiaphas was to Christ; the Bishop was so enraged at this that
he swore he would burn him, or else spend all that he had to his Gown, yet
afterward bethinking himself of the danger that the Child was in by reason of
their cruel usage of him, he discharged him, bidding him go home, and take his
Child with him, which he accordingly did, with an heavy heart for his poor Boy
who within fourteen days after dyed. Book Martyrs, vol. 3.

20. Joan Grandchild to Robert King of Naples by Charles his Son succeeded his
Grand Father in the Kingdom of Naples and Sicily. 1343. A woman of a beautiful
body, and rare indowments of nature, she was first Married to her Cosen
Andrew, a Prince of Royal Extraction, and of a sweet and loving disposition;
but he being not able to satisfy her wantonness, she kept company with lewd
Persons, at last she grew weary of him, complaining of his insufficiency; and
caused him to be hung and strangled upon a beam in the nightime in the City
of Aversa, and then threw out his body into a Garden, where it lay some days
unburied; It is said that this Andrew on a day coming into the Queens Chamber,
and finding her twisting a thick string of Silk and Silver, demanded of her for
what purpose she made it, she answered, To hang you in; which he then little
believed, the rather because those who intend such mischief, use not to speak
of it before hand, but it seems she was as good as her word. Fullers H. state.
p. 348.

21. Bithricus King of the West Saxons Married Ethelburga, Daughter of Offa
King of Mercia, by whom after he had reigned seventeen years, he was poisoned,
and buried at Warham; upon which occasion it was ordained by the nobles, that
from thenceforth the Kings Wives should not be called Queens nor be suffered to
sit with them in place of Estate; this Ethelburga fled into France with
infinite Treasure, where offering a mighty Sum of her Gold to Charles King of
France, he put her to her choice, whether she would have him or his Son to her
Husband, she chose the Son by reason, as she said, That he was the youngest;
then said Charles, had thou chosen me thou should have had my Son, but now
thoushalt neither have him nor me; and then sent her into a Monastery to be
made a Nun where she continued an Abbess for some years, but afterward being
found to have committed Adultery with a Layman, she was cast out of the
Monastery, and ended her life in poverty and much misery; Stows Chronicle. p.
77.

22. When Alexander the great had determined to invade the Dacae, where he knew
Spitamenes was, who not only had revolted himself, but had also drawn diverse
others into the society of his Rebellion, and had at sometimes overthrown some
of Alexanders Captains, there fell out one thing Remarkable; the Wife of
Spitamenes upon whom he extremely doted, when by her Feminine Flatteries she
was not able to persuade her Husband to make trial of the victors Clemency, and
to endeavor to appease Alexander, whom he could not avoid nor escape, she set
upon her husband, when being intoxicated with wine he lay fast a sleep, and
drawing a sword that she had concealed under her Garments, she cut off his head
delivering it to a Servant who was accessory thereunto, and with him only in
her Company, as she was, with her Garments besprinkled with his blood, she went
directly to Alexanders Camp, and sent word that there was one there, to inform
him of something that he was concerned to know from her; when she was admitted
she desired the Servant might come in; who showed the head of Spitamenes, to
those that searched what he carried wrapped up in his Garment, when the King knew
this, though he looked upon it as a considerable peace of service to him, that
a Renegado and a Traitor was dispatched, yet had he a horror of the fact, that
she should ensnare his life, who had well deserved at her hands, who was her
husband, and Parent of the Children that they had betwixt them; and therefore
considering the wickedness of the Fact, overweighed any pretended merit from
himself he sent her word, That she should forthwith depart his Camp, lest she
should infect the Greeks with the Barbarity of her Example. Wanly Hist. Man. p.
374.

XXIII. Fulvius understanding that he was condemned by the Triumviri, betook
himself to his Wife, hoping to be hid, and some way kept private by her in this
time of his extremity; he might the rather expect her fidelity in this thing,
because that of a slave he had made her a Freewoman, and received her to his
Bed; but he found a deadly Enemy instead of a Friend, for she suspecting that
he was in love with another Woman, did her self accuse, and discover him to the
Triumviri, by whose order he died in a miserable manner. Fulgosus Exercit. p.
609.

XXIV. The noble Pittacus, so famous for his Valor, and as much renowned for
his Wisdom and Justice, feasted upon a time certain of his Friends, who were
strangers; his Wife coming in at the midst of Dinner, being angry at something
else, overthrew the Table, and tumbled down all the Provision under foot; now
when his Guests were wonderfully dismayed, and abashed thereat; Pittacus
undisturbed at the matter, turned to them and said; There is not one of us all
but he has his Cross, and one thing or other wherewith to exercise his
patience, and for my own part this is the only thing that checketh my felicity,
for were it not for this shrew my Wife, I were the happiest man in the world;
So that of me, these verses may be verified; This Man, who while he walks the
Street,
Or public place is happy thought,
No sooner sets in House his Feet,
But woe is him, and not for naught,
His Wife him rules, and that is a spite,
She scolds, she fights from noon to night.


Here likewise what Mr. Francis Quarles says of this matter, describing a
loving Husband and Wife. They were so one, that none could justly say,
Which of them ruled, or whether did obey;
He ruled, because she would obey; yet she,
In so obeying, ruled as well as he.
What liked him best, it need no other cause
To like her too, but only his Applause.
But on the contrary. Ill thrives that hapless Family that shows
A Cock that is silent, and a Hen that Crows;
I know not which live more unnatural Lives,
Obeying Husbands, or Commanding Wives.


XXV. We are next to consider the rigorous severity of some Parents to their
Children, and what unnatural hatred others have showed toward them, for though
every thing is carried on by a natural instinct to preserve itself in its own
being, and the Monsters of the Sea draw out the Breast, and give suck to their
young Ones; yet the Extraordinary severities of some Parents to their Children,
may assure us that there are greater Monsters upon the Land, then are to be
found in the bottom of the Deep; and if some of these may extenuate their
Inhumanities by I know not what virtues or pretenses, yet the barbarities of
the rest must be wholly imputable to their savage Nature, and the bloodiness of
their disposition.

XXVI. Artaxerxes King of Persia, had fifty Sons by his several Concubines, one
called Darius, he made King in his own lifetime, contrary to the Custom of
that Nation, who having solicited his Father to give him Aspatia his beautiful
Concubine, and being denied by him, he stirred up all the rest of his Brothers
to join with him in a Conspiracy against the old King, it was not carried so
privately, but that the design came to Artaxerxes ear, who so incensed thereat,
that casting off all Humanity, as well as Fatherly affection, not contented
with Prisons or Exile, he caused them all at once to be put to death; and thus
by his own hand, he brought a woeful desolation into his House, which was so
lately replenished by so numerous an Offspring. Sabel. Exem. p. 132.

XXVII. Ptolomy Phiscon having fetched his eldest Son out of Cyrene, he put him
to death, lest the Alexandrians should set him up King against him; whereupon
the People plucked down his Statue, and his Images. And Ptolomy supposing that
this was done by the instigation of his Sister, and Wife Cleopatra; and not
well knowing how to be revenged any other way, he commanded his Son Memphitis
(who was an ingenious and hopeful Child, and whom he had by her) to be slain
before his Eyes, and cutting off his head, hands, and feet, put them into a
Chest close covered with a Soldiers Coat, and gave it to one of his Servants to
carry it to Alexandria, and to present it to Cleopatra, at the Festival of her
Nativity, when she was in the height of her Jollity; this was a sad and
grievous Spectacle, not to the Queen only, but to the whole City, and it struck
such a damp upon their merry meeting, that the Court on a sudden was overcast
with a general sadness; and the Nobles turning their Festival into a Funeral
showed the mangled Limbs to the People, to let them see what themselves were to
expect from their King, who had thus murdered his own Child. A. B. Vshers
Annal. p. 494.

28. In the reign of Queen Mary, there was one Julius Palmer a Religious man,
and afterward a Martyr for the Protestant Profession who being driven from the
Town of Redding in Barkshire where he taught School, went to Evesham where his
Mother dwelt, hoping to obtain a Legacy which his Father had left him in her
hands, his Mother hearing before hand what was the occasion of his coming; when
upon his knees he asked her Blessing, she said, Thou shall have Christ's curse
and mine wherever thou go; He being amazed at this heavy greeting, paused
a while, and then said; Oh Mother your curse you may give me, which God knows I
never deserved, but Gods curse you cannot give me, for he has already blessed
me; Nay, said she, thou wentest out of Gods blessing, when thou wast banished
out of Oxford for an Heretic, and now for the like knavery art driven out of
reading; Alas Mother, said he, you are misinformed, I resigned my places of
mine own accord, and Heretic I am none, for I stand not stubbornly against any
truth, but defend it to my power, well said she I am sure thou do not believe
as thy Father did, and as I do, nor as our Forefathers did; but as thou art
taught by the new Law in King Edwards days which is damnable Heresy; indeed
said he, I do so believe, but it is not Heresy, but the truth, and not new, but
as ancient as Christ and his Apostles; well, said she, get thee out of my house
and sight, and never take me for thy Mother more; as for money, I have none for
thee, thy Father bequeathed no Legacies to Heretics; Faggots I have to burn
thee, and more thou gettest not at my hands; Mr. Palmer for her cursings,
returned blessings and Prayers for her, and so weeping abundantly, he departed
from her; this so mollified her hard heart, that she threw an Angel after him
saying, Take that to keep thee a true man. Book Martyrs vol 3.

29. Doctor Otho Melander reports this horrible Parricide to be Committed in
the year 1568. at a place called Albidos in Saxony; there lived, says he, a
Father who had two Sons, the one he brought up to Husbandry, the other in
Merchandise, both very obedient, dutiful and thriving the Merchant traded to
Lubeck, where in few years he got a very fair Estate, and falling sick even in
the chief of his trade, he made his will wherein he bequeathed to his Brother,
about five hundred pound, and to his Father ten, and some few hours after he
had settled his Estate, he died; but before his death, he sent to his Brother to
come in Person, and receive those Legacies; the Father not knowing how things
were disposed of, dispatched away his other Son with all possible speed to
Lubeck, being more coverous after what his Son had left him, then sorrowful for
his death though he were a youngman of great expectation; the surviving Son,
who was the younger, arrived at the City, and having first deplored the death
of his Brother, he takes a Copy of the will, and receives all the money to a
penny; and with this new stock, he joyfully returns into his own Country, where
at his first arrival he was gladly welcomed by his Father and Mother, who were
overjoyed to behold the bags he had brought, but when by the reading of the
will they saw how the money was disposed, and that so little came to their
share, they first began bitterly to curse the dead Son, and then barbarously to
rail on the living; outfacing him that he had changed the will, by altering the
old and forging a new one; which the innocent youth denying, and excusing
himself, by telling them, that the Original was upon record, and by that they
might be fully satisfied; yet all would give them no satisfaction till very
weariness made them give over their heavy Cursings; then the Son offered them
the whole to dispose freely of it at their pleasure, which they very churlishly
refused, and bid him take all, and the Devil give him good with it; which drew
tears from the Sons Passionate Eyes, who after asking their blessing which they
denied, he parted very sadly from them; he was no sooner departed from them,
but they wickedly contrived to get this money by murdering him that very night;
and when he was innocently asleep in his bed, they both set furiously and
violently upon him stabbing him with daggers into the breast; so that with the
Agony of the wounds he opened his Eyes, and espying both his Parents with their
hands imbrued in his blood, he with a loud exclamation uttered these words, or
to the same purpose, O Gold, to what do thou not compel mankind? What villainy
do thou not persuade them to act? for thou causest Parents to sheath their
weapons into their own bowels, even those of their own Children; these dying
Speeches were uttered with such a doleful and shrill voice that they were heard
by the neighbors, who starting out of their beds, and breaking open the doors
found them in the very act, before the body was cold, for which they were
apprehended, and laid in Prison, Fettered with heavy Chains. After their
condemnation for this horrid fact, the morning before the time appointed for
Execution, the Father strangled himself, and the Mother was carried by the
Devil out of the Dungeon in the Prison, and her body was found dead in a
stinking ditch with her neck broken asunder. Beards Theater p. 72.

XXX. In 1620 There was a young Gentleman whose name was Duncomb that fell in
love with a Gentlewoman to whom he vowed his heart, and promised Marriage, but
her fortune not answering his Fathers humor, he threatened to disinherit him if
he married her, and the better to alienate him from her, he sent him as a
Soldier in the Earl of Oxfords Regiment into Germany; hoping that time and
absence might wear out those Impressions that his present fancy had fixed upon
him, charging him at his departure never to think of her more, lest with the
thoughts of her he lost him for ever. The young man being now long absent from
her, and having his heart full with the remembrance of her, could not contain
himself, but let her know that no threats or anger of Parents should ever blot
her memory out of his thoughts which he illustrated with many expressions of
love and affection; but the careless young man, writing at the same time to his
Father superscribed his Fathers Letter to his Mistress, wherein he renounced
her, and his Mistrisses Letter to his Father wherein he admired her; the Father
swollen with rage and anger against his Son, sent him a bitter Letter back again,
full of threats; and whether that or the shame for his mistake (that she should
see he renounced her whom he professed to Love) did overcome his reason is not
known; but he hereupon killed himself to the great grief of all the English
there; and by this example Parents may see what it is to be too rigid to their
Children, for it was not the young man's hand, but the old man's hard heart that
killed him, Hist. Great Brit. p. 140.

XXXI. There was a Peasant, a Macedonian by Nation, named Rachoses, who being
the Father of seven Sons, perceived the youngest of them played the little
Libertine, and unbridled Colt; he endeavored to reclaim him by fair words and
reasons, but finding him to reject all manner of good Counsel, he bound his
hands behind him, carried him before a Magistrate, accused him, and required
that he might be proceeded against as an Enemy to Nature. The Judges who would
not discontent this incensed Father, nor hazard the life of this young man,
sent them both to the King, which at that time was Artaxerxes. The Father went
thither with a resolution to seek his Sons death, where pleading before the
King with much earnestness, and many forcible reasons, Artaxerxes stood amazed
at his Courage; But how can you my Friend, said he, endure to see your Son die
before your face? he being a Gardener by Trade, As willingly, said he, as I
would pluck away Leaves from a rank Lettice, and not hurt the root. The King
threatened the Son with death, if his Carriage were not better, and perceiving
the old man's zeal to Justice, of a Gardener, made him a Judge. Causins H.
Court. p. 112.

XXXII. Epaminondas the Theban, being General against the Lacedaemonians, it
fell out that he was called to Thebes, upon the Election of Magistrates; at his
departure, he commits the care, and government of the Army to his Son
Stesimbrotus, with a severe charge that he should not fight till his return.
The Lacedaemonians, that they might allure the young man to fight, reproach him
with dishonor, and Cowardice, he impatient of these Contumelies, contrary to
the commands of his Father, ingages in a Battle wherein he obtained a signal
Victory; The Father returning to the Camp, adorns the Head of his Son with a
Crown of Triumph, and afterward commanded the Executioner to take it off from
his Shoulders as a violator of Military Discipline. Plutarch.

XXXIII. Philip the Second, King of Spain, out of an unnatural, and bloody
zeal, suffered his eldest Son Don Carlos to be murdered by the Fathers of the
Hellish Inquisition, because he favored the Protestant Religion, which when
the Pope heard of, he abusively applied that Text of Scripture to him, He
spared not his own Son, but delivered him up for us all. Acts and Monum.

XXXIV. One of the Sons of Pyrrhus, King of Epyrus, being but a Boy, asked his
Father one day to which of his Sons he would leave his Kingdom, to whom Pyrrhus
answered, To him that has the sharpest Sword; an answer not much unlike that
Tragical Curse of Oedipus toward his Children.

Let them (for me) divide
Both Goods, and Rents, and Lands,
With glittering Swords, and bloody blows,
By force of mighty hands.
XXXV. In the year 1551. at a Town called Weidenhasten in Germany, Nov. 20. A
cruel Mother inspired by the Devil, shut up all her doors, and began to murder
her four Children in this manner; she snatched up a sharp Ax, and first set upon
her eldest Son, being but eight years old, searching him out with a Candle
behind an Hogshead where he had hid himself, and immediately, notwithstanding
his lamentable Prayers and Complaints, clove his Head in two pieces, and
chopped off both his Arms; next she killed her Daughter of five years old in
the same manner; another little Boy of three years, seeing his Mothers madness,
hid itself, (poor innocent) behind the Gate, whom as soon as this Tiger espied,
she drew out by the hair of the head into the floor, and there cut off his
Head; the youngest lay crying in the Cradle but half a year old, him she
without all compassion plucked out, and murdered in the same manner; these
Murders being committed, this Devil incarnate, (for surely no Humanity was left
in her) to take punishment of her self for the same, cut her own Throat; and
tho she lived nine days after, and confessing her horrid Crimes, died with
abundance of Tears, and great repentance, yet we see how it pleased God to arm
her own hands against her self, as the fittest Executioner of Vengeance. Beards
Theat. p. 225.

XXXVI. Fausta, the Wife of Constantine the Great, fell in love with
Constantine her Son in Law, whom when she could not persuade unto her Lust; she
accused unto the Emperor, as if he had solicited her Chastity, for which this
innocent young man was condemned, and put to death; but the truth being
afterward discovered, Constantine ordered her to be put into an hot Bath, and
suffered her not to come forth, till the heat had choked her, revenging upon
her own head her Sons death, and her own Unchastity. Idem. p. 225.

XXXVII. Robert de Beliasme, delighted much in Cruelty, an Example whereof he
showed on his own Son, who being but a Child, and playing with him, the Father
for a Pastime, put his Thumbs into the Child's Eyes, and crushed out the Balls
thereof. Speeds Chronicle. p. 448.

XXXVIII. Next, as to undutiful, and unnatural Children to their Parents, it is
certain that six hundred years from the building of Rome, the Name, or Crime of
Parricide, or killer of their Parents, was not so much as known amongst them;
Paulus Maleolus was the first (says Livy) amongst the Romans, who was known to
have killed his Mother, and who underwent the punishment instituted by the
Ancients in that case, they ordained that the Parricide should be first
scourged till the blood came, and then sown up in a Sack, together with a Cock,
a Dog, a Viper, and an Ape, and so thrown headlong into the bottom of the Sea;
but notwithstanding the severity of this Law, and those of other Nations,
against a Crime of this nature, there are too many instances of unnatural
Children, as in part will appear by what follows.

XXXVIII. There was a young Duke of Gelders, named Adolph, who took his Father
Duke Arnold, one night as he was going to Bed, and led him fifteen miles on
foot, bare legged, in a mavelous cold night, and laid him in a deep Dungeon
the space of six months, where he saw no light but through a little hole;
whereupon the Duke of Cleve, whose Sister the old Duke that was Prisoner had
Married, made sharp War upon this young Duke Adolph; the Duke of Burgundy
sought by diverse means to reconcile them, but in vain. In the end, the Pope and
the Emperor began to stir in the matter, and the Duke of Burgundy under great
Cures, was commanded to take the old Duke out of Prison, which he did
accordingly, the young one not being able to prevent it; I have often seen them
together (says Philip Comines) in the Duke of Burgundies Chamber, pleading
their Cause before a great Assembly, and once I saw the old man present the
Combat to his Son; the Duke of Burgundy being desirous to make an agreement,
offered the young Duke whom he favored, the Title of Governor of Gelderland,
with all the Revenues thereof, save a little Town near Brabant, called Grave,
which should remain to the Father, with the Revenues of three thousand Florens,
a yearly Pension of as much more, and the Title of Duke, as was but reason; I
(says Comines) with others wiser than my self, were appointed to make report
of these conditions to the young Duke, who answered us, That he had rather
throw his Father headlong into a Well, and himself after him, than agree to
such an appointment, alleging; That his Father had been Duke forty and four
years, and that it was now time for him to gover^. Notwithstanding, he said, he
would agree to give him a yearly Pension of three thousand Florens, upon
condition he should depart the Country as a banished man, never to return; and
such other lewd speeches he used. Soon after, the young Duke in disguise left
the Duke of Burgundies Court, to repair home to his own Country, but as he
ferried over a water near to Namur, he paid a Gueldon for his, passage;
whereupon a Priest there present began to suspect him for his liberality, and
soon after knew him, so that he was taken, and led to Namur, where he remained
a Prisoner, till the Duke of Burgundies death; after which, by the men of Gaunt
he was set at liberty, and by them carried before Tournay, where being weakly
accompanied, he was miserably slain in a skirmish, in full revenge of his
impiety toward his Father. Philip de Comines. p. 105.

XL. When I was in Valentia in Spain (says Mr. Howel) a Gentleman told me of a
Miracle which happened in that Town, which was, that a proper young Man under
Twenty, was executed there for a Crime, and before he was taken down from the
Gallows, there were many gray, and-white hairs which had budded out of his
Chin, as if he had been a man of threescore. It struck amazement into all men,
out this Interpretation was made of it; That this young man might have lived to
such an Age, if he had been dutiful to his Parents, unto whom he had been
barbarously disobedient and unnatural. Howels Letters. p. 211.

XLI. Martin Luther reports of his own knowledge this wonderful History; that a
young man a Locksmith, growing vicious and debauched, to main tain himself
therein, was so villanously unnatural as to murder his own Father and Mother
with a Hammer, to get their Money and Estate; after which cruel deed, he
presently went to a Shoemaker, and bought him a pair of new Shoes, leaving his
old behind him, to be (by Divine Providence) his Accusers; for after an hour or
two, the slain bodies being found by the Magistrate, and inquisition made for
the Murderer, there being not the least suspicion of him, because he seemed to
make so great lamentation thereat; but God who knows the secrets of the heart,
discovered his Hypocrisy, for the Shoemaker observing that some of the blood
which ran from his Parents wounds, had besprinkled his old Shoes, made a
discovery thereof, which caused first some doubting, and from thence the
examination of the young man, who being confounded with the horror of the
Fact, confessed the same, for which he was justly executed. Beards Theat. p.
224.

XLII. Another Son at Basil in Switzerland, in the year 1560. having bought a
quantity of Poison from an Apothecary, ministered it to his own Father, whereof
he soon after died, but when he had effected his wish upon him, the Crime was
detected, and instead of possessing his Goods, which he aimed at, he suffered a
vile and shameful death, for he was drawn through the Streets, burnt with hot
Irons, and tormented nine hours on the Wheel, till his life forsook him. Beards
Theat. p. 224.

XLIII. Scander late King of Georgia in Persia (says Mr. Herbert) had by his
Lady three hopeful Sons, Scandercan, Trebeg, and Constandel, all born
Christians, but for preferment the two last were circumcised, and turned
Mahometans; Trebeg served the Turks, Constandel the Persians; Constandel was
naturally deformed, but of such an active Spirit, that his bodily imperfections
were not noted; but his hateful ambition rendered him more than monstrous; it
happened that Abbas King of Persia, had vowed some revenge against the Turks,
and to that end gave order to Allycawn to trouble them, Constandel perceives
the occasion right to attempt his hellish Resolutions, and therefore after long
suit, got to be joined in Commission with the Persian General; Through Georgia
they go, where Constandel under a pretense of Duty, visits his sad Parents, who
(upon his Protestation that his Apostasy was counterfeit) joyfully welcomed
him, but he forgetting that and all other ties of nature, next night at a
solemn banquet, caused them to be murdered, and till the Georgians saluted him
King, perpetrated all sorts of Villainies imaginable; but how secure soever he
stood in his own sancy, the dreadful Justice of an impartial God retaliated
him; the rest of his life after, this hated Parricide was infinitely miserable;
for first, near Sumachan, Cycala's Son, the Turkish General, wounded him in the
Arm, and by that gained the Victory over the Persians; the same night he was
also assaulted in his Tent by his enraged Countrymen, who in his stead cut a
Sod omitick Boy, his cursed Bedfellow to pieces, missing him, who at the first
Alarm made his escape; and though he so far exasperated the Persians to
revenge, that he brought the whole Army into Georgia, resolving there to act
unparalled Tragedies; yet was he overreached in his stratagems; for upon
Parley with the Queen, his late Brothers Wife, he was shot to death at a
private signal given by that Amazon, to some Musquiteers, ambushed on purpose
betwixt both Armies, a just punishment for such a Viper. Herberts Travels. p.
291.

XLIV. Justin tells of a certain African called Cartallus, who by the Vote of
the People was raised to an eminent degree of Dignity, and was soon after sent
upon a solemn Ambassy into a place where his Father with many others were
banished; he looking upon himself at that time like a Peacock, gloriously
furnished out with the Cloths and Ornaments of his Employment, thought it was
not suitable to his Honor, to admit his Father so much as to see him, though
the old man desired it with great earnestness; the unfortunate Father became so
much enraged with this contempt of himself, and the proud refusal of his Son,
that he instantly raised a Sedition, and mustering together a tumultuary Army
of banished men, he fell upon his Son, although a Magistrate, took him and
condemned him to death; he presently prepared a high Gibbet, and attired as he
was in Gold and Scarlet, with a Crown on his head, he hanged up this young
disobedient Gallant, as a strange spectacle to all beholders. Causins Holy
Court. p. 112.

XLV. A certain degenerate and cruel Son longing, and gaping after the
inheritance of his Father, which nothing but his lifehindered him from, used
this villainous means to accomplish his desire; he accused his Father of a most
abominable Crime, namely, that he had committed beastliness with a Cow; knowing
that if he were convicted thereof, the Law would take away his life; wherein he
was guilty of a twofold wickedness, one in going about to take away his life,
whom by nature he ought to have preserved, the other in robbing him of his good
name, which would likewise redound to his Posterity; he notwithstanding being
possessed by Satan, goes before a Magistrate, and accuses his Father of this
horrid Crime, which he says was upon his own knowledge; the poor innocent
Father is seized, and denying all (as well he might) he is put upon the Rack to
extort a confession from him, who not being able to endure the torment thereof,
accused himself, but as soon as he was off, he absolutely denied it again;
however this his forced Confession stood for Evidence, and he was condemned to
be burnt with Fire, which was speedily executed, and constantly endured by him,
exclaiming still upon the false accusation of his Son, and his own unspotted
Innocence, as by the issue thereof clearly appeared; for his Son not long after
fell stark mad, and hanged himself, and the Judge who condemned him with the
witnesses who evidenced his forced Confession on the rack, died all within one
month after, in a most wretched and miserable manner; and thus it pleased God
both to revenge his death, and also to clear his Reptitation and innocence,
from ignominy and discredit in this world. Beards Theat. p. 223.

XLVI An unnatural Son pretended to keepd is Father in his old age, but used
him more like a slave than a Father, and thought every thing too good for him,
one day a dainty dish of meat being brought to the Table the Son conveyed it
away, because his Father should not partake thereof, and ordered more ordinary
victuals in the room thereof; but observe what his dainties turned to, when the
Servant went to fetch it again, he found instead of meat snakes, and instead of
sauce Serpents to the great terror of his Conscience; and further one of the
Serpents leaped on his face, and catching hold by his lip, hung there till his
dying day, so that he could never feed himself, but he must likewise feed the
Serpent. Idem. p. 155.

XLVII. It is reported of a certain unkind and perverse: Son, that he one time
beat his aged Father; and drew him by the heir of the head to the threshold,
who when he was old, was likewise beaten by his Son, and drawn by the hair of
the head not only to the threshold, but out of doors into the midst of the
street, and that be reflected then upon himself, saying, He was rightly served,
only that his Son was more severe to him, for he left his Father at the door
and did not drag him out into the dirt; thus did his own mouth bear record of
his Impiety Another disobedient Son provided a Hog trough for his poor, aged,
decrepit Father because forsooth, he did not eat his meat cleanly enough; which
his little Son observing, asked for what use it was; he replied it was made for
his Grandfather; What (said the Child) must I make you such a one when you are
old? At which words he was so disturbed, that he presently threw away the Hog
trough. Idem, p. 156.

LXVII. One Garret a Frenchman and a Protestant by Profession was given to all
manner of debauchery, for which he was cast off by his Father; yet he found
entertainment in a Gentleman's house of note, in whose Family he became a Sworn
Brother to a Young Gentleman that was a Protestant: soon after Garret came to
his Estate, and then turned Papist; of whose constancy because the Papists
could hardly be assured, he promised his confessor to prove himself an
undoubted Catholic, by setting a sure seal to his Profession; whereupon he
plotted the death of his dearest Protestant friends, and thus effected it; he
invited his Father, Mounsieur Seamats who was his sworn Brother, and six other
Gentlemen of his acquaintance to dinner; all dinner time he entertained them
with Protestations of his great obligations to them; but the bloody Catastrophe
followed; dinner being ended, Sixteen armed men came up into the room, and laid
hold on all the Guests, and this wicked Parricide seized upon his Father, and
commanding the rest to hold their hands till he had dispatched him, he stabbed
the old Gentleman, crying to the Lord for mercy, four times to the heart, and
then with his Poniard killed all the rest but three, who were dispatched by
these armed Ruffians at their first entrance, and then they flung the dead
bodies out at a Window into a Ditch. Clarks Mirror. p. 78.

XLVIII. Tarpeia the Daughter of S. Tarpeius betrayed her Father, and the
Castle whereof he was Governor, to Tatius King of the Sabines, who then
beseiged it, upon condition that she should be rewarded with all that the
Sabine Soldiers wore upon their left Arms, she meaning, their golden Bracelets;
but when she demanded her reward, Tatius bid his Soldiers do as he did, and so
together with their Bracelets throwing their sheilds, which they wore on their
left arms upon her, they crushed her to death, Clarks Mirror. p. 78.

LXVIX. The nearest Relations next to these aforementioned are brethren, who
though, bred up together, and thus allied in respect of their bodies, yet their
minds have been as distant from each other as the Poles of Heaven, which when
opportunity has served they have showed in the effects of an implacable
hatred, and unnatural actions toward each other.

L. Peter King of Spain having reigned sometime with great cruelty, purpling
his hands in the blood of his Nobles. At last his Brother Henry took up arms
against him in 1369. He had hired Auxiliary Forces out of France against Peter,
and having met him in the field, a bloody battle was fought, agreeable to the
pertinacious hatred of the two brethren; The Victory resting on the side of
Henry, and his Brother being made Prisoner; he was brought before him, when
Peter with a dagger wounded Henry in the face; the other endeavoring to repay
it with interest, both grapled together, having thrown each other to the
ground, but others coming in to the help of Henry, he quickly became the
Superior, and having slain his Brother with many wounds, he succeeded in his
Kingdom. Lipsius Monit. p. 348.

LI. Alphonsus Diazius a Popish Spaniard, hearing that John Diazius his Brother
had renounced Popery, and was become a Professor of the Protestant Religion, he
fell into so deep an hatred of him, that like another Cain, he slew his Brother
with his own hands; for which he not only escaped punishment, but was highly
applauded by the Papists for this his heroical achievement; but he was so
haunted and hunted by the furies of his own Conscience that he desperately
hanged himself at Trent, about the neck of his own Mule. Clarks Mirror, p. 54.

LII. In 1080. Boleslaus King of Poland having slain his Brother Stanistaus
Bishop of Cracovia at the very Altar as he was celebrating Mass, he suddenly
fell into a frenzy, and such a degree of madness, that he laid violent hands
upon himself; it is said of this King, that he grew into a vehement hatred of
the Bishop his Brother, upon the account of that Freedom he took in reproving
him for those horrible crimes he frequently committed. Wanly Hist. Man.

LIII. Selymus, the first, Emperor of the Turks, having stepped into the throne
of his Father, sought the destruction of all his Brethren, and while his
Brother Corcutus lay quiet in Magnetia, he secretly led an Army thither to
destroy him; Corcutus having notice of it fled away with two Servants and all
Passages by Sea being shut up, he was glad to hide himself in a Cave by the
Seaside, where he lived miserably upon Country Crabs, and other such wild
fruit, till being discovered by a Country fellow, he was apprehended; Selymus
being informed of it, sent one to strangle him, and to bring his dead body to
Prusa; the Executioner, who was a Captain, coming to Corcutus in the dead time
of the night, and awakening him out of his sleep, told him his heavy Message,
That he was sent by his Brother presently to strangle him; Corcutus being
exceedingly troubled with this dismal news, and fetching a deep sigh, desired
the Captain to spare his life so long till he might write a few short lines to
his Brother Selymus which he did readily in Turkish verse, upbraiding him with
his horrible cruelty, and concluding with many a bitter curse, he besought God
to take a just revenge upon him; being then strangled, his dead body was
brought to Prusa; Selymus uncovered the face of it, to be sure that it was he,
when seeing this writing in his hand he took and read it; and is said thereupon
to have shed tears, notwithstanding his cruel nature, and stony heart. Turkish
Hist. p. 502.

LIVE. Cambyses King of Persia. seeing his Brother Smerdis draw a stronger bow
than any of the rest of his Soldiers could do, was so inflamed with envy
against him, that he caused him to be slain; not long after, Cambyses caused a
young Lion and a young Mastiff to fight together before him, but the Lion being
too hard for the Dog, another Whelp of the same litter broke his Chain, and
came in upon the Lion, and so being two, they were too much for the Lion;
whereupon Cambyses laughed, but his wife, who was also his Sister, fell a
weeping, and Cambyses asking her the cause, she answered, Because I seeing the
Whelp to help his Brother, I think of Smerdis whom thou have slain, and yet he
has none to reveng his death, this so provoked Cambyses that he slew her also
Pezel. Mel. Hist.

LV. And this introduces another particular, namely, the envious nature and
disposition of some Persons, who when they cannot blame the substance, will yet
represent the Circumstances of men's best actions with prejudice; and this black
shadow is still observed to wait upon those that have been the most Illustrious
for virtue, or remarkable for some kind of perfection, and to excel in either,
has been made a crime unpardonable.

LVI. Maximinus the Tyrant through envy of the honors conferred on Constantine
the great, and attributed to him by the People, contributed all that a
desperate envy could invent, and a great virtue surmount; he first made him
General of an Army, which he sent against the Sarmatians, a People extremely
furious, supposing he there should lose his life. The young Prince went
thither, and returned victorious, leading along with him the Barbarian King in
Chains; it is added, that this direful Tyrant in his most ardent fury after his
return from the battle, engaged the Prince in a desperate enounter with a Lion,
which he purposely had caused to be let loose upon him; but Constantine being
victorious over Lions as well as men, slew this fell beast with his own hand,
and impressed an incomparable Opinion in the minds of his Soldiers, which
easily gave him passage to the Throne by the same degrees which were prepared
for his ruin. Causins Holy Court, p. 55.

LVII. In the reign of Tiberius Caes^ there wa^ Portico or curious Porch at
Rome that bowed outward on one side very much, a certain curious workman
undertook to set it right and straight; he under propped it every way on the
upper part, and bound it about with the skins and fleeces of Sheep, and then
with the help of many Engines, and a multitude of hands, he restored it to its
former uprightness, contrary to the Opinion of all men; Tiberius admired the
Fact, and envied the man, so that though he gave him Money, he caused his name
to be unremembred in the Annals, and afterward banished him the City; this
famous Artificer afterward presented himself in the presence of Tiberius, with
a glass he had privately about him, and while he implored the pardon of
Tiberius, he threw the glass against the ground; which being bruised, and
crushed together, but not broke, he drew out his Hammer, and beat it again into
form, as if it had been Brass, this done, he imagined that he had conquered the
world, but it fell out otherwise, for Tiberius's envy increased thereby, and
inquiring of him, whether any other besides himself understood the secret, he
replied, No, whereupon he commanded to strike off his head, adding, That if
this Art of Malleable Glass should be practiced, it would make Gold and Silver
hut cheap and inconsider able things. Wan. Hist. Man.

LVIII. Ferrex, and Porrex jointly succeeded their Father Gorboduc in the
Government of this Land of Britain, in the year of the world 4711. and
continued in love and amity for some time; but at last Envy the Mother of all
disorder and mischief so far prevailed with them, that they both studied to
supplant each other, thereby to gain the whole Supremacy; and first, Porrex
raising an Army unknown to his Brother, designed suddenly to surprise and kill
him, of which, he having notice, and yet not being able for the present to
provide for opposition, he was forced to fly into France, where being supplied
with some Forces, he landed in England, gave his Brother Porrex Battle,
defeated his Army, and slew him in the Field. Ferrex proud of his Victory,
retired himself to his Tent, whither his Mother Midan came by night with some
of her Women; and being freely admitted to the place where he lay sleeping, she
with the rest, most cruelly murdered him, depiction of Morindus, King of
Britain, being devoured by a sea monster Morindus K. of Britain devoured by a
Sea Monster. Page.179.
depiction of Queen Tomyris having the head of King Cyrus put into a bowl of
blood Q Tomyris puts the head of K. Cyrus into a Bowl of Blood. Page.181.
and after cut his body into small pieces, cansing them to be scattered in the
Field, and in these two Brothers ended the issue of Brute. Thus we see the
dreadful effects of Envy, as well in the vanquished as the victor, but the
greatest in the last, to be so cruelly murdered, rather by a Monster than a
Mother. Beards Theat. p. 27.

LIX. Morindus was the Bastard-Son of Flavius King of Britain, by his
Concubine Fanguestella, and reigned in the year of the World 1880. The
Chronicle reports him to have been of a comely and beautiful Personage, having
an active Body, and a most daring Spirit, and strength withal, above any Peer
or Subject in the Land, but as a grievous stain and blemish to all these good
parts and endowments, he was of a cruel and envious disposition, for he grew
jealous of all such as were either wealthy, or remarkable in his Court for any
virtue or excellency, confiscating the Estates of the one, and discountenancing
the other, and hindering them from all Preferment; he was so furious, that when
he was vexed he would kill his Subjects with his own hand: His Kingdom being
invaded by a Foreign Prince, he fought with him, and chased him to Sea, taking
many Prisoners, whom to satisfy his Cruelty and Tyranny, he caused to be put
to death before his Eyes, with several sorts of Torments, as beheading,
hanging, burning drowning, and other kinds of Execution; but at length this
Morindus (called by our Historians Morwith) walking by the Sea side, and
espying a dreadful Monster upon the shore, which he out of his valiant and
Royal Courage, endeavoring to destroy, after a long fight was devoured, and
swallowed by this Monster. Beards Theater, p. 26.

LX. When K. Richard the First of England, and K. Philip of France were
Fellow Soldiers together at the siege of Acon, in the holy Land, and Richard
had approved himself to be the more valiant Man, insomuch that all men's Eyes
were fixed upon him, it so galled the heart of King Philip, that he was scarce
able to bear the Glory of King Richard, but cavilled at all his proceedings,
and sell at length to open defiance; nor could he contain any longer, but out
of very Envy hastening home, he invaded his Territories, and professed open
War. Burtons Melancholy, p. 86

LXI. We read of a Rich man in Quintilian, that was possessed of this Evil
Disease to that strange height and degree that he is said to have poisoned the
Flowers in his Garden, to the end that his neighbors Bees might get no more
Honey from them. Quintilian.

LXII. Alexander the Great both envied and hated Perdicc^s, because he was
warlike; Lysimuchus, because he was skilful in the Arts of a General; Seleus^s,
because he was of great Courage: He was offended with the Liberality of
Antigonus, with the Imperial Dignity and Authority of Attalus, and with the
prosperous Felicity and good Fortune of Ptolemaeus. Elian. Var. Hist.

LXIII. Hypatia of Alexandria, the Daughter of Theon the Philosopher, had made
such progress in Learning, that she exceeded all the Philosophers of her time,
and not only succeeded in the School of Plato, but also explained the Precepts
and Aphorisms of all sorts of Philosophers; so that a mighty Confluence was
made to her by all such as were desirous to improve themselves in Philosophy;
she came into the knowledge and Courts of princes, where she behaved her self
with singular modesty; and doubted not to present her self in public amongst
the Assemblies of men, where by reason of her Gravity and Temperance of mind;
she was received by all sorts, till at last the long suppressed flames of Envy
began to break forth, and a number of malevolent and hot-brained men, (whereof
Petrus of the Church of Cesarea was the Leader) seized upon her in her return
home, plucked her out of her Coach, vearried her to that Church, where having
ostript her of her Cloths, they tore her flesh with sharp shells, till she
died; then they pulled her in pieces, and carried her torn Limbs into a place
called G^aros, where they were burned. This deed was no small matter of Infamy
to Cyrillus the Bishop, and to the whole Church of Aerandria. Socrates
Ecclesiast. History.

LXIV. Revenge is near of kin to Hatred and Envy; and it is observable, that
great and Generous Souls are ever found to be most easily appeased, while the
weak and fearful are guilty of the greatest Barbarities, as not knowing how to
allot any measure or bounds to their Anger; of which the following Relations
are too real Evidences and Instances.

LXV. Pope Stephen the Seventh having been hindered from the Popedom by Formosus
his Predecessor, after his death, he caused his dead body to be taken out of
the Sepulcher, to be stripped of his Pontificial Garments wherein he was buried,
to be clothed in others, and to be buried without the Church: He also caused
his Fingers to be cut off, and to be cast into the River for the Fish to
devour. When Sergius the Third came to be Pope, he caused the Body of the same
Formosus to be drawn out of its second burying place, to be beheaded in the
Marketplace, and then to be cast into the River Tyber, to gratify Lotharius
the King of France, who thus hated the dead Formosus, because by his means the
Empire was translated from the French to the Berengarians: Others say, that
Sergius did this to Formosus, because he had also opposed him in the Election.
Heylins Cosmogra. p. 107.

LXVI. Cyrus making War against Tomyris Queen of the Massagetes, he had by a
stratagem taken her Son Spargapises; for he had left part of his Army with
plentiful provisions of Meats and Wine, on purpose to be seized upon: These
Troops Spargapises had cut in pieces, and that done, set his Army to Feasting
and Carousing; and while they were secure asleep, and enfeebled by drinking,
Cyrus set upon them, killed and took most of them; Spargapises being brought
Prisoner before Cyrus, desired that he might be unbound, which done, and his
Hands at liberty, being extremely grieved for the discomfiture of his Army, he
presently slew himself; after which, Tomyris in a great Battle overthrew the
Forces of Cyrus, and having found him amongst the dead, in revenge of her Sons
death, she caused his Head to be cut off, and to be thrown into a Vessel full
of Humane Blood, with this bitter scoff, Satiate thy self with Blood, which
thou have so much thirsted after. Herodotus writes she said thus; Thou have
destroyed my Son, taken by craft and guile, while I am alive and victorious,
but as I threatened, I will satisfy thee with Blood. Justin. Hist.

LXVII. As I went from Rome with my Company (says Camerarius) passing through
the Marquisate of Ancona, we were to go through a City called Terni; as we
entered the City, we saw over the Gate upon an high Tower, a certain Tablet, to
which was fastened (as at first it seemed to us) a great many Batts, or
Reremice; we thinking it a strange sight, and not knowing what it meant; one of
the City whom we asked, told us, There was, said he, in this City, two Noble,
Rich, and Mighty Houses, which of a long time bore an irreconcilable hatred
toward each other; their malice passed from Father to Son, as it were by
Inheritance, by occasion of which, many of both Families were slain and
murdered; at last one of the Houses, not many years since, resolved to stand no
more upon murdering one or two of the adverse Party by surprise, but to run
upon them all at once, and not to leave one of them alive: This bloody Family
secretly gathered together out of the Country adjoining, with their Servants,
and such other Hectors, as many Italians keep in pay to employ in the Execution
of their Revenges; these were privately armed, and had notice to be ready at a
word. About midnight they seize upon the Person of the Governor of the City,
and leaving Guards in his House, go on silently to the House of their Enemy,
disposing their Troops at the end of every Street; about Ten of them take the
Governor into the midst of them, as if they had been the Archers of his Guard,
whom they compelled by setting a Dagger to his Throat, to command speedy
entrance; he caused the Doors to be opened; for they seeing the Governor
there, made no refusal; which done, they call their Accomplices, who stood not
far off, and putting the Governor into safe keeping, they enter the House of
their Enemy, and kill them Man, Woman and Child, yea the very Horses in the
Stable; that done, they force the Governor to command open the City Gates, and
so they depart, and disperse into private places amongst their Friends; some
fled to the next Sea Ports, and so made their escape, but such as staid any
whit near, were so diligently searched for, that they were found, drawn out of
their Holes, and put to death, with grievous Tortures; after which, their hands
and feet being cut off, were nailed to that Tablet as a lesson to Posterity,
and the Sun having broyled those limbs so fastened, makes Travelers that know
nothing of the Tragedy, to suppose they are Reremice. Camer. Op. Subse. p. 390.

LXVIII. Ranimirus the Bastard Son of Sanctius the Great, was fetched out of a
Monastery by those of Tarracon in 1017. and made King; after which, in an
expedition against the Moors, having taken his Shield in his left hand, and his
Lance in his right, he was bid by some Nobles about him to take the Bridle of
his Horse; How can I, said he, unless I hold it in my Teeth, my hands being
already full; At this the Nobles fell into a laughter, and he thereupon
conceived such displeasure against them, that having sent for eleven of the
chief of them to Ostia, he caused their heads to be struck off; only saying,
The Fox knew not whom he played with. Zuinglius Theat.

LXVIX. Altobel, a Citizen of Todi, in the Duchy of Spoleto in Italy, made War
upon his Fellow-Citizens, and seized upon the City and Government; after which,
he behaved himself with great Cruelty amongst them, both toward Rich and Poor;
many inroads he also made upon the Neighbor Territories, spoiling and rifling
many other adjacent Cities; at last he was defeated, and taken Prisoner by the
Popes Army, and forthwith was bound stark naked to a Post in the Marketplace,
to the end, that all whom he had wronged, might revenge themselves upon him in
what manner they pleased; thither ran the Mothers, whose Sons he had killed,
who like so many wild Beasts, begin to tear his body with their greedy teeth;
others wound, cut, and slash him, some in one sort, some in another; The
Fathers, Kindred, and Friends of such as he had Massacred, pulled out his Eyes,
Heart, and Entrails, not forgetting any point of extreme rigor, he with a
Courage desperately obstinate, endured these Torments with Constancy, saying
between whiles, That no new thing had happened to him, and that long since he
had foreseen within himself this punishment. Being dead, they put an end to
their fury, by cutting his body into morsels, which, like flesh in a Butchers
Shop, were sold by weight, and afterward eaten by those that bought them.
Leander in his description of Italy, says, this fell out in his time.
Camerarius.

LXX. Conrade Trincio, Lord of Fulingo, in the same Duchy of Spoleto, hearing
that the Captain of the Castle of Nocera had slain Nicholas Trincio his
Brother, upon suspicion of Adultery, came and besieged this Captain so very
close, and straightly in his Castle, that being out of all hope to save
himself, he first cut the Throats of his Wife and Children, and then threw
himself down from an high Tower, that he might not fall alive into the hands of
his Enemy, but Conrade seeing himself frustrated of the means to torment him
according to his intention, set upon his Kindred, Friends, and Familiars, and
as many of them as he could take, he tortured without all mercy, and after he
had murdered them, plucked out their Bowels, chopped their Bodies into small
parcels, hung up their Quarters upon the Highways, and their Bowels and Guts
upon Bushes, and places of concourse, for people to gaze on, behaving himself
with that savage, and outrageous cruelty, that no man can call it a punishment,
or revenge, but must study to find out a fit name for it, and after all,
perhaps shall lose his labor. Idem. p. 392.

LXXI. The Duke of Linburg, deceasing without issue, the Duke of Brabant, and
the Earl of Gelders strove about the succession, each of them pretending right
to it; and when they could not agree, they fell to Arms; at last the Duke of
Brabant won the Victory in a Battle, and took amongst other Prisoners the
Bishop of Collen, who followed the Party of the Earl of Gelders. This Bishop
after he had been Prisoner to the Earl of Haynault the space of seven years,
was set at liberty upon certain conditions which he accepted; and being ready
to return home, he prayed the Earl that he would honor him so far, as to
convey him into the Country. The Earl willingly condescended, and having
brought him almost to Collen, not mistrusting any thing, he saw himself upon
the sudden enclosed with a Troop of Horsemen, who took him, and delivered him
to the Bishop, who locked him up in a Prison, where he ended his days; and the
more to vex and torment him, the Bishop caused an Iron Cage to be made, and
anointed all over with Honey, which was hung up in the Sun, the Earl being
locked fast within it. This was done in the memory of our Fathers, says P.
Camerarius.

LXXII. In the year 1500. when Tamas Shaw was King of Persia, the City of
Spahawn, which is the Metropolis of all Persia, surfeiting with Luxury, refused
not only to contribute reasonably to the Kings occasions, who was at that time
invaded by the Turks and Tartars, but audaciously withstood, and hindered his
entrance into their City; a Rebellion so unsufferable, as made him swear a
revenge scarce to be paralleled; he assaults the City with great fury, and in a
rage he enters it, firing a great part thereof; and in a hostile severity
plunders the Houses; and to conclude, regarding neither the Outcries of old
Men, weak Women, nor innocent Children, he in two days made headless three
hundred thousand Citizens, and erected a Pillar of their Heads, as a Trophy and
Memorial of their Disloyalty, and his bitter Revenge. Herberts Tra. p. 160.

LXXIII. A certain Italian having his Enemy in his power, told him there was no
possible way for him to save his life, unless he would immediately deny and
renounce his Savior; the overtimorous wretch in hope of mercy did it, and
immediately the other stabbed him to the heart, saying, That now he had a full
and noble Revenge, for he had killed him at once both Body and Soul. B.
Reynolds on Passions.

LXXIV. Frederick Barbarossa the Emperor, with a strong Army besieged Millain,
that had withdrawn itself from his Obedience, and had lately affronted his
Empress in this manner; the Empress being desirous to see the City, and not
fearing to meet with any disrespect from a place under her Husbands
Jurisdiction, came into it without any Guard; the mad People seize upon her,
set her upon the back of a Mule, with her face to the Tail, and the Tail in her
hand, instead of a Bridle, and in this shameful manner turned her out of the
other Gate of the City; the Emperor being justly incensed, besieged the City
very close, and urged the Inhabitants to yield, who at last did, and he
received them to mercy upon this condition, that every Person who desired to
live, should with their Teeth take a Fig out of the Genitals of a Mule, with
their hands tied behind them, and as many as refused, were immediately
beheaded; diverse preferred death before this Ignominy, those that desired life,
did what was commanded, though with many a kick, whence came that scornful
Proverb in Italy, when putting one of their Fingers between two others, they
cry, Eccola Fico, Behold the Fig. Heylin Cos. p. 144.

LXXV. The Neapolitans, as all the rest of the Italians, are exceeding
revengeful, says Mr. Howel; among multitudes of Examples that might be
produced, this may suffice: In the ancient City of Nocera, there were three
young Noblemen, called Conrado, Caesare, and Alexander, the eldest was Prince
of the Place; there was, and still is in Nocera a fair, and strong Castle,
wherein Prince Conrado kept a Garrison, making a familiar Friend of his Captain
thereof; the Prince kept usually at his Country House, yet would sometimes
come, and lie a night or two in the Castle; this Captain had a comely Woman to
his Wife, with whom Prince Conrado fell in love, and never left soliciting
till he had enjoyed her, which he afterward often did to the knowledge of her
Husband, who resolving revenge, contrived thus to do it; the Prince and his
Brothers being at their Country house, the Captain sent him word, That there
were two wild Boars discovered in the Forest hard by, and if he and his
Brothers would come such a day with their Dogs he doubted not but they would
find Princely sport; Conrado accordingly came with his second Brother Caesare,
but Alexander, upon some occasion, sent word he could not come till two days
after; the Captain provided a handsome Supper for the Prince and his Brother,
who had brought with him another Nobleman to partake of the sport; the Prince
loged in the Castle, but Caesare and the Nobleman lay in the Town; the Captain
was wonderful Officious to attend the Prince to his Chamber; but having engaged
some of the Garrison to join with him, in the dead time of the night they
rushed into the Princes Chamber, and first they cut off his Genitals, and then
his head; which they set to stand in a window, and quartered the rest of his
body; this being done very silently, in the morning betimes the Captain sent in
the Princes name for his second Brother to come in all have to him, and when
Prince Cesare came, the Captain waited on him to his Brothers Chamber; where
the first object he beheld was Conrado's head standing in the window, and his
members quartered and flung about the room, Ah, said Cesare, is this the wild
Boar you writ of, Yes, answered the Captain, but I writ to you of two; and so
they fell upon him also, and made the like Sacrifice of revenge upon him. This
being done, the Captain barred up the Gates, and going upon the walls of the
Castle, he sent for the Chief of the Town, and made a Speech to them, showing
in what Slavery they lived under Conrado, so that if they ever desired Liberty,
there was now a fit opportunity offered, because he had Conrado in his Custody,
and could do with him what he pleased; but the Citizens would hearken to no
such motion, but sent word speedily to Alexander the youngest Brother, who
coming with some Country forces, the Citizens joined with him, and beleaguered
the Castle; the Captain finding his case desperate, first took his wife to the
top of an high Turret, from whence he threw her down amongst them, and after
her his Children, and then lastly slew himself in the Eye of all the City.
Howels Hist. Naples. p. 62.

LXXVI. There are no greater Instances of Revenge says Sabellicus, than in the
factious Citys of Italy, where the chiefs of one faction falling into the hands
of the other, it was a great favor to be beheaded or strangled; Pontanus adds,
that he has heard his Grandmother tell, how in certain mortal differences
betwixt some families, one of the opposite faction being taken he was
immediately cut into small gobbets, his Liver was broiled upon the Coals, and
being divided into little morsels it was distributed among their friends, who
were invited to breakfast to that purpose, after which execrable feeding there
were brought Cups, in which some of the blood was mingled, then followed
congratulations amongst themselves, laughter, Jests, and witty Passages, to
season their Viands; and to conclude, they blasphemously drank to God himself,
as if he were the favourer of this their horrible, and tremendous revenge.
Wierus Op. p. 830.

LXXVII. Having thus seen the dismal effects of revenge, let us next consider
the base Ingratitude of some unworthy Persons, which was accounted so great a
crime among the Ancients, that they judged Ingratitude ought to be punished
with death, and very worthily it deserved to be so, at least in the Persons of
some who have been dreadfully guilty of this base and unworthy crime.

LXXVIII. In the time of the bloody Popish Massacre at Paris, one of the
Murderers, with some Companions of his, came to the City of Orleance, and went
to the house of a noble Counselor, inviting themselves to Supper; the
Counselor Ignorant of their intent made them very welcome, but when Supper was
ended, with horrible blasphemies, they murdered him, and then plundered his
house. Clarks Martyr. p 348.

LXXIX. Humfry Banister was brought up and exalted to promotion by the Duke of
Buckingham his Master; the Duke being afterward driven to extremity, by reason
of the Separation of his Army which he had mustered against Crookbackt Richard,
fled to this Banister as his most trusty friend, not doubting to be kept secret
by him till he could find an opportunity to escape; there was a thousand, pound
propounded as a reward to him that could bring forth the Duke; and this
Ungrateful Traitor, upon hope of this sum betrayed the Duke his Benefactor into
the hands of John Metton Sheriff of Shropshire, who conveyed him to the City of
Salisbury where King Richard then was, and soon after the Duke was put to
death; but as for this ungrateful Monster, the vengeance of God fell upon him
to his utter ignominy, and shame, in a very visible and strange manner, for
presently after his Eldest Son fell mad, and died in an Hog-sty; his Eldest
Daughter was suddenly stricken with a foul Leprosy; his second Son became
strangely deformed in his Limbs, and lame; his youngest Son was drowned in a
Puddle, and he himself was arraigned, and found guilty of a Murder, though
saved by reading his neck verse; as for his thousand pounds, King Richard gave
him not a farthing saying, That he who would be so untrue to so good a Master
must needs be false to all others. Beards Theat.

LXXX. In the Persecution of Germany a worthy Protestant Divine for reproving
his Prince sharply for his cruelty, was condemned by him to be hanged; and a
bloody Gentleman with a Troop of Soldiers was sent to see Execution done upon
him; the Gentleman coming to his house Saluted him very kindly pretending that
he came to make good cheer with him, for he was a good Housekeeper, and the
Gentlemen in the Country did often resort to his House; the Minister in a short
time prepared a Sumptuous Banquet for them, whereof they did eat freely: Dinner
being ended the Gentleman said to his men; Take this Priest, our host, and hang
him up without delay; the Soldiers were astonished at this Command and
abhorring to do the deed said, God forbid that we should Commit such a Crime,
as to hang him that has used us so courteously, it is a wicked act thus to
render evil for good; but the Gentleman still provoked them to execute his
Command; then said the Minister, I beseech you use not such cruelty toward me,
but rather carry me to my Prince, before whom I doubt not but to clear my self
from any thing shall be laid to my charge; neither do you so violate the Laws
of Hospitality which I have showed you, and other Noblemen, who resort to my
House; Consider what a sting this ungrateful act will leave in your
Consciences, for I have truly and faithfully taught the Doctrine of the Gospel
which is the Principal cause that my Prince bears me this ill will; but
whatsoever this good man could allege in his own behalf, the furious Gentleman
continued in his Resolution, calling upon his Servants to accomplish it, and
withal said to the Minister, You shall gain nothing by your Preaching in this
manner, for I am fully resolved to fulfill the will of the Prince; at last the
Servants took the Minister and with great Lamentation, and mourning, hanged him
upon a beam in his own House, the Gentleman standing by and looking on. Clarks
Martyr. p. 280.

LXXXI. In the Bohemian Persecution some Popish Soldiers coming to the House
of another Protestant Minister, he entertained them courteously, and made good
Provision for them; but when they knew he was a Minister, they first beat him
cruelly, and then killed him, stripped him and plundered his House; they also
burned his Library, and would not suffer his body to be buried for Seven weeks
space during their abode there. Idem, p 184.

LXXXII. In the third Primitive Persecution under the Emperor Adrian, there was
a noble Christian Captain called Eustachius, whom Trajan the Predecessor of
Adrian had sent to war against some Barbarians, and after he had subdued his
Enemies, and returned homeward with Victory, Adrian for joy of his success,
went to meet him, and bring him home in Triumph; but by the way the Emperor
would needs Sacrifice to Apollo for the Victory obtained, requiring Eustachius
to do the same with him; but when by no means he could be persuaded thereto, as
soon as he came to Rome, he with his Wife and Children suffered Martyrdom for
the Christian Faith, by the command of this Ungrateful Emperor. Idem, p. 30.

LXXXIII. When Xerxes had resolved on his expedition against Greece, he caused
his Army to make their Rendevouz at Sardis in Lydia, and when he had assembled
to the number of seventeen hundred thousand Foot, and eighty eight thousand
Horse; as he entered the Country, he was by one Pythias the Lydian entertained,
who out of his Flocks and Herds of Cattle, gave food to Xerxes, and his whole
Army; the Feast ended, he also presented him with two thousand Talents of
Silver, and four Millions in Gold; then Pythias besought Xerxes to spare one of
his five Sons from his attendance into Greece, because himself was old, and had
none whom he could so well trust as his own Son; but Xerxes like a barbarous,
and ungrateful Tyrant, caused the Body of the young man, for whom his Father
Petitioned, to be divided into two parts, commanding that one half of his
Carcass should be laid on the right, and the other half on the left hand of the
Highway, by which the Army was to march. Rawleighs Hist. World.

LXXXIV. It is remarkable what is reported by Zonaras, of the Emperor Basilius
Macedo, who being hunting, wherein he much delighted, a great Stag turned
furiously upon him, and fastened one of the Branches of his Horns into the
Emperors Girdle, and lifting from his Horse, carried him a distance off, to the
great danger of his life; which when a Gentleman in the Train espied, he drew
his Sword, and cut the Emperors Girdle, by which means he was preserved, and
had no hurt at all; but observe his reward; the Gentleman for this Act was
questioned, and adjudged to have his head struck off, because he presumed to
expose his drawn Sword so near the Person of the Emperor, and so he by an high
Act of Ingratitude, was put to death accordingly. Heywood of Angels, p. 528.

LXXXV. Philip King of Macedon had sent one of his Court to Sea, to dispatch
something he had given him in command, but a storm came, and he was
Shipwracked, but saved by one who lived there about the shore in a little Boat
wherein, he was taken up; he was brought to his Farm, and there entertained
with all civility and humanity, and at thirty days end was dismissed by him,
and furnished with somewhat to bear his Charges: at his return, he tells the
King of his wrack and dangers, but nothing of the benefits he had received; the
King told him he would not be unmindful of his fidelity and dangers undergone
on his behalf; he taking the occasion, told the King, he had observed a little
Farm on the shore, and besought him he would bestow that on him as a Monument
of his Escape, and reward of his Service; the King orders Pausanias the
Governor to assign him the Farm to be possessed by him; the poor man being thus
turned out, applied himself to the King, told him what humanity he had treated
the Courtier with, and what ungrateful injury he had returned him in lieu of
it. The King upon hearing the Cause, in great Anger commanded the Courtier
presently to be seized, and to be branded in the forehead with these letters
with a hot Iron, Hospes Ingratus, The Ungrateful Guest. And then restored the
Farm to the right owner. Lonic. Theat.

LXXXVI. Pope Adrian the sixth having built a fair College at Lovain in
Flanders, caused this Inscription to be written upon the Gates of it in letters
of gold. Trajectum plantavit, Lovanum rigavit, Caesar dedit Incrementum; with
an unworthy allusion to that of St. Paul to the Corinthians; that is, Vtrecht
planted me, for there he was born; Lovain watered me, there he was bred up in
Learning; And Caesar gave the Increase, for the Emperor had preferred him; one
that had observed this Inscription, and withal his Ingratitude; to reprove at
once both that and his Folly, writ underneath; Hic Deus nihil fecit; Here God
did nothing. Luthers Colloq. p, 305.

LXXXVII. Cardinal Charles Cariffa, and Duke John his Brother managed all
affairs under Pope Paul the fourth; he being dead, Pius the Fourth was made
Pope, and that chiefly by the favor and diligence of these Caraffa's; but as a
reward of their good service, he made it his first business to overthrow them.
He sent the Cardinal, and his Brother Duke, together with Count Alifane and
many others of their Kindred and Clients to Prison, in the Castle of St.
Angelo, there were they nine months in durance, and expectation of death; at
last by order from the Pope, the Cardinal was hanged, the Duke and Count
beheaded, and their dead Bodies exposed as a public spectacle to the People.
Lipsius Mo.

LXXXVIII. Bellisarius was general of all the Forces under the Emperor
Justinian the first, a man of rare valor and virtue; he had overthrown the
Persians, Goths, and Vandals, had taken the Kings of these People in War, and
sent them Prisoners to his Master; he had recovered Sicilia, Africa, and the
greater part of Italy; he had done all this with a small number of Soldiers,
and less cost; he had restored Military Discipline by his Authority, when long
lost, he was allied to Justinian himself, and a man of that uncorrupted
Fidelity, that though he was offered the Kingdom of Italy, he resused it; this
great man, upon I know not what Jealousy, and groundless suspicion, was seized
upon, his Eyes put out, all his House rifled, his Estate confiscate, and
himself reduced to that miserable state and condition, as to go up and down in
the common Road with this form of begging; Give a halfpenny to poor
Bellisarius, whom Virtue raised and Envy has overthrown. Fulgosus.

LXXXIX. Achmetes the Great Turkish Bassa, was by the confession of all Men,
the best Man of War, and the most expert Captain amongst the Turks; Bajazet
made him General of his Army against his Brother Zemes, where the conduct, and
valor of the General brought Bajazet the Victory; at his return to Court, this
great Captain was invited to a Royal Supper, with diverse of the Principal
Bassa's, where the Emperor in token of their welcome, and that they stood in
his good grace, caused a Garment of pleasing colors to be cast upon every one
of his Guests, and a gilt Bowl full of Gold to be given to each of them; but
upon Achmetes was cast a Gown of black Velvet, all the rest rose and departed,
but Achmetes, who had on him the Mantle of Death, according to the Turkish
Custom, was commanded to sit still, for the Emperor must talk with him in
private; the Executioners of the Emperors wrath came, they stripped, and
tortured him, hoping that way to gain from him what he never knew of (for Isaac
Bassa, his great Enemy, had secretly accused him of intelligence with Zemes,)
but he was delivered by the Janissaries, who would no doubt have slain Bajazet,
and rifled the Court at his least word of Command; but though he escaped with
his life at the present, he not long after was thrust through the Body as he
sat at Supper in the Court, and there slain; this was that great Achmetes, by
whom Mahomet the Father of this Bajazet, had subverted the Empire of Trapezund,
took the great City of Caffa, with all the Country of Taurica Chersonesus, the
impregnable Cities of Croia, Scodra, and all the Kingdom of Epirus, a great
part of Dalmatia, and at last Otranto, to the terror of all Italy. Turk. Hist.
p. 443.

XC. In 1565. Feb. 5. One Paul Suitor near Basil in Switzerland, came to the
House of Andreas Hager a Bookseller; he was then old and fick, and had been the
Godfather of Paul at the Font, and performed to him all the good Offices that
could be performed by a Father; being entered his House, he told him he was come
to visit him, as one that esteemed him as a Father; but as soon as the Maid
that attended upon the sick man was gone out of the room, he caught up a
Hammer, gave him some blows, and then thrust him through with a Knife; as soon
as the Maid returned, he with the same fury did the like to her; and then
seizing the Keys, he searched for his intended Prey; he found eight pieces of
Plate, which afterward for want of money, he pawned to a Priest of St. Blasius,
who suspecting the man, sent the Plate to the Senate at Basil, by which means
the Author of the detestable murder was known, he was searched after, taken,
and brought Prisoner to Basil, where after Condemnation, he had his Legs and
Arms broken upon the Wheel, and his head, while he was yet alive, being tied to
a part of the Wheel, he was burnt with flaming Torches, till in horrible
Tortures he gave up the Ghost. Lonic. Theat.

XCI. I shall conclude this Chapter with the Charity of Henry Keeble, Lord
Mayor of London, in 1511. who besides other great Gifts in his lifetime,
re-builded Aldermary Church, which was run to ruins, and bequeathed at his
death a thousand pounds for the finishing of it; yet within sixty years after,
his bones were unkindly, yea, inhumanely cast out of the Valut wherein they
were buried; His Monument was plucked down for some wealthy Person of those
present times to be buried therein. Upon which occasion says Dr. Fuller, I
could not but rub up my old Poetry, which is this: Fuller to the Church.
Ungrateful Church, over run with rust,
Lately buried in the Dust,
Utterly thou had been lost,
If not preserved by Keebles cost,
A Thousand pounds, might it not buy
Six foot in length for him to lie?
But outed of his quiet Tomb,
For later Corpse he must make room;
Tell me where his dust is east,
Though It be late, yet now at last,
All his bones with scorn ejected,
I will see them recollected,
Who fain my self would Kinsman prove,
To all that did Gods Temple love.
The Churches Answer.
Alas! my Innocence excuse,
My Wardens they did me abuse,
Whose Avarice his Ashes sold,
That Goodness might give place to Gold.
As for his Relics, all the Town
They are scattered up and down;
See a Church repaired well?
There a sprinkling of them fell.
See a New Church lately built?
Thicker there his Ashes spilt.
Oh that all the Land throughout
Keebles Dust were thrown about,
Places scattered with that seed,
Would a Crop of Churches breed.
Fuller's Worthies, p. 33.

CHAP. V. The Tremendous Consequences of Cowardice, Barbarity and Treachery.
THese three evil Qualities, or vicious Inclinations of the Mind, are much of
the same kind; for Cruelty and Treachery do commonly proceed from base and
Cowardly Dispositions. As touching Cowards, that is, such as preserving their
Lives or Estates before their Country's welfare, and that either will not, or
dare not stand co^ragiously in defense of it in time of Danger; they were
always reckoned to deserve the greatest punishments; and therefore the Romans
did sharply chastise them, and endeavored to render them odious; for they were
commanded and sworn never to eat their meat but standing: Nay, they were
accounted so hateful amongst them, that when Hannibal offered the Roman Senate
eight thousand Captives to be redeemed, they refused his offer, saying, That
they were not worthy to be redeemed, who had rather be basely taken, than die
honestly and valiantly.

I. The Senate of Rome indeed dealt more favorably with the Captives, which
King Pyrrhus took, for they redeemed them, but with this mark of contumel and
disgrace, that they were degraded from all their Offices and Honors, until by
getting a double Victory they had won their Reputation again. Beards Theater.

II. Titias a Captain of Horsemen in Sicilia, being overcharged with too great
a number of Enemies, delivered up his Arms to them, which was counted so
heinous a Crime, that Calpburnius Piso his General pronounced this Sentence
against him, That he should go barefooted before the Army, wearing a Garment
without seams, and that he should have society with none but such as were
guilty of the same fault, and from a General over Horsemen he was degraded, and
made a common Soldier. Idem.

III. How did the Roman Senate correct the Cowardice of Caius Vatienus, who
that he might prevent his being engaged in the Wars of Italy, cut off all the
Fingers of his left hand? Why, they seized upon his, Goods and cast him into
perpetual Imprisonment, that he might thereby consume that life in Bondage and
Fetters, which he refused to hazard in the defense of his Country. Idem.

IV. Fulgosus says, That among the Germans it was judged so dishonorable to
lose a Shield in War, that whosoever happened to do it, was suspended from any
Civil Office in the State, and likewise forbid to enter into any of their
Temples, insomuch that many (he says) killed themselves to avoid the infamy
and shame thereof. Idem.

V. The People called Daci, punished Cowards on this manner: They suffered them
not to sleep but with their heads to the feet of the Beds; and besides, they by
a Law ordained, that they should be Slaves and Subjects to their own Wives.
What more vile disgrace could there be than this? And yet the Lacedaemonians
used them more reproachfully, for with them it was a dishonor to marry into
the stock of a Coward; any man might lawfully strike them without punishment;
and they went with their Cloths rent, and their Beards half shaven. Idem.

VI. Artaxerxes after the Battle was ended which he sought with his Brother
Cyrus, punished one of his Commanders called Arbaces, for his cowardliness, by
compelling him to carry a Whore on his back stark naked all the day long about
the Marketplace. And another that had basely yielded himself to his Enemies,
and yet boasted that he had slain two men, he caused his Tongue to be bored
through in three several places with an Awl. Plutarch.

VII. It is likewise a token of a weak mind, and an infirm Soul, to anticipate
troubles by their own fearful apprehensions before they arrive, which is
oftentimes occasioned by a too great fearfulness of death, and being
over-desirous of life, which kind of Cowardice has occasioned great mischiefs
and miseries, as by the following Examples appears.

VIII. Lewis the Eleventh King of France, when he sound himself sick, sent for
one Friar Robert out of Calabria, to come to him to Toures; this man was an
Hermit, and famous for his Sanctity, and while in his last sickness, this Holy
man lay at Plessis, the King sent continually to him, saying, That if the
Hermit pleased he could prolong his life. The King had reposed his whole
confidence in Mounsieur James Cothier his Physician, to whom he gave monthly
Ten thousand Crowns, in hope he would lengthen his life. Never man (says
Philip Comines) feared death more than he, nor sought so many ways to avoid it
as he did; moreover, says he, in all his lifetime he had given commandment to
all his Servants, as well to my self as others, we should only move him to
confess himself, and dispose of his Conscience, but never to mention nor sound
in his Ear that dreadful word Death, knowing that he should not be able
patiently to bear that cruel Sentence. His Physician aforementioned used him so
very roughly, that a man would not have given his Servant such sharp language
as he usually gave the King, and yet the King so much feared him, that he durst
not command him out of his presence; for, though he complained to diverse of
him, yet he durst not change him, as he did all his other Servants, because
this Physician said once thus boldly to him, I know that one day you will
command me away but (swearing a great Oath he added) you shall not live eight
days after it; which word put the King into so great a fear, that he ever
after flattered him, and bestowed such gifts upon him, that he received from
him in five months time Fifty four thousand Crowns, besides the Bishopric of
Amiens for his Nephew, and other Offices and Lands for him and his Friends.
Philip Comines Hist.

IX. Mecenas the great Friend and Favorite of Augustus, was so soft and
effeminate a Person, that he was commonly called Malcinus, he was so much
afraid of death, that, (says Seneca) he had often in his mouth this saying,
All things are to be endured so long as life it continued: Of whom these Verses
are to be read.

Make me lame on either hand,
And of neither foot to stand;
Raise a Bunch upon my back,
And make all my Teeth to shake,
Nothing comes amiss to me,
So that life remaining be.
X. Heraclides writes of one Artemon, a very skilful Engineer, but withal says
of him, that he was of a very timorous disposition, and foolishly afraid of his
own shadow; so that for the most part of his time, he never stirred out of his
house: That he had always two of his Men by him, who held a brazen Target over
his head, for fear lest any thing should fall upon him; and if upon any
occasion he was forced to go from home, he would be carried in a Litter hanging
near to the ground for fear of falling. Plutarch. Vit.

XI. The Emperor Domitian was in such fear of receiving death by the hands of
his followers, and in such a strong suspicion of Treason against him, that he
caused the Walls of the Galleries wherein he used to walk, to be set and
garnished with the stone Phengites, to the end, that by the light thereof he
might seeall that was done behind him. Suetonius Hist.

XII. Antigonus observing one of his Soldiers to be a very valiant man, and
ready to adventure upon any desperate piece of Service, and yet withal taking
notice that he looked very pale and lean, would needs know of him what he
ailed? And finding that he had upon him a secret and dangerous disease, he
caused all possible means to be used for his recovery, which when it was
effected, the King perceived him to be less forward in Service, than formerly;
and demanding the reason of it; he ingenuously confessed, that now he felt the
sweets of life, and therefore was loath to lose it. Clarks Mirror. p. 354.

XIII. Caligula the Emperor was so exceedingly afraid of death, that at the
least Thunder, and Lightning, he would wink close with both Eyes, and cover his
head all over; but if the Thunder were very great and extraordinary, he would
run under his Bed. He fled suddenly by night from Messina in Sicily, being
affrighted with the noise, smoke, and roaring of Mount Aetna; being once in a
German Chariot, in a straight passage, where his Army were forced to march very
close together, and one happening to say, that if any Enemy should now appear,
it would make a very great hurliburly, he was presently so affrighted with the
apprehension of the Danger, that getting out of the Chariot, he mounted his
Horse, and finding the way filled up with Slaves and Carriages, he again
dismounted, and was from hand to hand conveyed over men's heads, till he came on
the other side of the water. Soon after, hearing of the revolt of the Germans,
he provided to fly, and prepared Ships for his flight, comforting himself in
this, that if the Conquerors should come into Italy; and possess themselves of
the City of Rome, yet he should have some Provinces beyond Sea, where he might
still live. Sueton. Hist.

XIV. What a miserable life Tyrants have by reason of their continual fears of
Death, we have exemplified in Dionysius the Syracusan, who finished his thirty
eight years rule in this manner; removing his Friends, he committed the Custody
of his Body to some Strangers and Barbarians; and being in fear of Barbers, he
taught his Daughters to shave him; and when they were grown up, he durst not
trust them with a Rasor, but taught them how they should burn off his Hair and
Beard with the white films of Walnut Kernels; and whereas he had two Wives,
Aristomache, and Doris, he came not to them in the night before the place was
thoroughly searched, and though he had drawn a large and deep moat of water
about the room, and had made a passage by a wooden Bridge, yet he himself drew
it up after him when he went in; and not daring to speak to the People out of
the common Rostrum, or Pulpit appointed for that purpose, he used to make
Orations to them from the top of a Tower; when he played at Ball, he used to
give his Sword and Cloak to a Boy whom he loved, and when one of his familiar
Friends had jestingly said, You now put your life into his hands; and the Boy
smiling thereat, he commanded them both to be slain, one for showing the way
how he might be killed, and the other for approving of it with a smile. At last
being overcome in Battle by the Carthaginians, he perished by the Treason of
his own Subjects. Wanly Hist. Man.

XV. And this introduces another particular, namely, the barbarity, and bloody
mindedness of some Persons; Theodorus, who was Tutor to Tiberius the Roman
Tyrant, observing in him while he was a Boy, a sanguinary nature and
disposition, which lay hid under a show of meekness, and a pretense of
clemency, was used to call him a lump of Clay steeped and soaked in blood; and
this his prediction of him did not fail in the event; this being that savage
Tyrant, who thought that death was too light and easy a punishment; for hearing
that Carnulius, being in his disfavour, had cut his own Throat; Carnulius, said
he, has escaped me; and to another who begged of him to die quickly, he told
him. He was not so much in his favor. Yet even this cursed Artist in Villainy,
has been since out-acted by Monsters more overgrown than himself.

XVI. It is in this kind a memorable example that Seneca relates of Piso, who
finding a Soldier to return from forraging, charging him to have slain him,
condemned him to death; the Executioner being in readiness, and he stretching
forth his Neck to receive the stroke of the Ax, behold, in the very instant his
Comerade appears in the place; whereupon the Centurion, who had the charge of
the Execution, commands the Executioner to forbear, and carries back the
condemned Soldier to Piso, toge her with his Comerade, thereby to manifest his
innocence, and the whole Army waited on them with joyful Acclamations. But Piso
in a rage gets him up to the Tribunal, and condemns both the Soldiers the one
for returning without his Comerade, and the other for not returning with him;
and lastly, he likewise condemns the Centurion for staying the Execution
without Warrant, which was given him in charge, and thus three suffered death
for the innocence of one. Causins Holy Court.

XVII. Mahomet the Great, first Emperor of the Tarks, after the winning of
Constantinople, fell in love with a most beautiful young Greekish Lady called
Irene, upon whose incomparable Perfections he so much doted that he gave
himself wholly up to her love; but when he heard his Captains, and chief
Officers murmured at it, he appointed them all to meet him in his great Hall,
and commanding Irene to dress and adorn her self in all her Jewels, and most
gorgeous Apparel, not acquainting her in the least with any part of his design,
taking her by the hand, he led this Miracle of Beauty into the midst of his
Nobles and Bassa's, who dazzled with the brightness of this illustrious Lady,
acknowledged their Error, professing that their Emperor had just cause to pass
his time in solacing himself with so peerless a Paragon; but he on a sudden
twisting his left hand in the soft curls of her hair, and with the other
drawing out his sharp Scimeter, at one blow he struck off her Head from her
Shoulders and so at once made an end of his love, and her life, leaving all the
Assistants in a fearful amaze, and horror of an act of that Cruelty. Turkish
Hist. p. 351.

XVIII. Vladus Dracula, as soon as he had gained the Kingdom of Moldavia, he
chose out a multitude of Spearmen, as the Guard of his Body; after which,
inviting as many as were eminent in Authority in that Country to come to him,
he singled out from them all that he thought did not love him, or had any
inclination to a change; all these, together with their whole Families, he
empaled upon sharp stakes, sparing neither the innocent age of young Children,
the weak Sex of Women, nor the obscure condition of Servants; the Stakes and
place where they were set, took up the space of seventeen furlongs in length,
and seven furlongs in breadth; and the number of those that were thus murdered,
and in this barbarous manner, were said to be no less than twenty Thousand.
Idem, p. 363.

XIX. Johannes Basilides Emperor of Russia in 1569. Used for his Recreation to
cause noble and well deserving Persons to be sewed up in the skins of Bears,
and then himself set Mastiss upon them which cruelly tore them in pieces he
often invited Michael his Father in Law to banquet with him, and then sent him
home to his ^ily through the snow, having first caused him to be stripped stark
naked; sometimes he shut him up in a room in his own House till he was almost
famished, causing four Bears of Extraordinary bigness to be tied at the door to
keep all Provisions from him; these Bears he at other times would let loose
among the People, especially when they were going to Church, and when any were
killed by them, he said, His Sons had taken great pleasure in the sport, and
that they were happy who perished in this manner, since it was no small
diversion to himself. Upon a mere suspicion which he had conceived against the
City of Novogorod, he entered the same and caused to be slain and thrown into
the River two thousand seven hundred and seventy Persons, without any respect
of Age, Quality, or Sex, besides an Infinite number of poor People, who were
trampled to death by a Party of his Horse, and there were so many bodies cast
into the River of Volga, that being stopped therewith, it overflowed the
Neighboring fields; the Plague which followed this Butchery was so great, that
no body venturing to bring provisions into the City, the Inhabitants were
forced to feed on the dead Carcases; The Tyrant took a pretense from this
inhumanity to cause all those that had escaped the Plague, Famine, and his
former cruelty to be cut in pieces. The Archbishop of this place having
escaped the first fury of the Soldiers, either as an acknowledgment of the
favor, or to flatter the Tyrant, entertained him at a great Feast, in his
Archiepiscopal Palace, whither the Duke failed not to come with his Guards
about him; but while they were at dinner, he sent to plunder the rich Temple of
St. Sophia, and seized on all the treasures which had been brought thither, and
to other Churches, as to places of safety. After dinner he caused the
Archbishops Palace to be in like manner Pillaged, and then told the
Archbishop, That it would now be ridiculous for him to act the Prelate; since
he had not wherewithal to support the dignity of his place; that he must put
off his rich habit which henceforth would be but troublesome to him, and that
he would bestow on him a bagpipe and a Bear, which he should lead up and down
and teach it to dance to get money; that he must resolve to marry, and that all
the other Prelates and Abbots that were about the City should be invited to the
Wedding, setting down a precise Sum of money which each of them should present
to the new married Couple; And there were none of them but brought what they
had made a shift to save, thinking the poor Archbishop should have had it; but
the Tyrant took all the money, and causing a white Mare to be brought, he said
to the Archbishop, This is thy Wife, get upon her, and go to Mosco; the poor
Archbishop was forced to obey, and as soon as he was mounted, they tied his
legs under the Mares belly, and thenhung about his neck some Pipes, a Fiddle,
and a Tymbrel, and would needs make him to play on the Pipes; all the other
Abbots and Monks who were present, were either cut in pieces, or with Pikes and
Halberds forced into the the River; this Tyrant had a particular longing for
the money of one Theodore Sircon, a rich Merchant, whereupon he sent for him to
his Camp at Novogorod and having fastened a Rope about his wast, he commanded
him to be cast into the River drawing him from one side to the other till he
was ready to give up the Ghost then he asked him, what he had seen under water;
the Merchant stoutly answered, That he had seen a great number of Devils
carrying the Dukes Soul with them into Hell; the Tyrant replied, Thou art in
the right; but it is just I should reward thee for thy Prophecy; whereupon
calling for boiling Oil, he caused his feet to be put into it and continued
there till he had promised to pay him ten thousand Crowns; which when he had
done he caused him to be cut in pieces; this Basilides was of a most cruel
disposition, delighting himself much therein; amongst his infinite acts of
cruelty, these are recorded by several authors; In 1570. his own Brother being
accused of some crime, he caused him without giving him leave to answer for
himself, to be first put to most exquisite tortures, and then to be killed; his
wife he caused to be stripped, and to be set naked before the Eyes of all men,
and then by a Rope to be drawn into a River and drowned. John Piotrowich, a man
of principal Command under him, being accused of Treason, came to clear
himself, but was not admitted to make any defense, but was set in Princely
Accoutrements upon a Throne, the Emperor standing bare before him, and bowing
to him; but soon after with a Knife he thrust him to the heart; causing his
Body to be dragged forth, his Servants to be slain, and three hundred others in
his Castle to be executed; he caused all his Boyars or Nobles, to be assembled
into one House, and there to be blown up with Gunpowder; their Wives and
Daughters he caused to be ravished by his Followers before his face, and then
to be cut in pieces, leaving no living thing in their Houses or Grounds. Their
Husbandmens Wives were stripped as naked as they were born, and so driven into
the Woods, where Executioners were purposely appointed to give them their fatal
entertainment; his Chancellor sitting at Table with his two Sons, were also
upon the like Accusation presently cut in pieces, and the third Son was
quartered alive by four Wheels, each drawn a contrary way by fifteen men; his
supreme Notary displeasing him, his Wife was taken from him, and after some
weeks detainment, was together with her Handmaid hanged over her Husbands
door, and so continued a fortnight, he being forced to go in and out by her all
that time; another of his Notaries Wives was first ravished, and then sent
home, and hanged over her Husbands Table, whereat he was forced daily to eat;
in his Traveling, if he met any Woman, whose Husband he liked not, he caused
her to stand with her nakedness disclosed, till all his Retinue was passed by;
his cutting out Tongues; cutting off the hands and feet of his Petitioning and
complaining Subjects, I omit; with his casting of hundreds at once into the
water under the Ice, namely, seven hundred Women at one time; and three hundred
seventy eight Prisoners at another; five hundred Matrons and Virgins of noble
blood he exposed to be ravished by the Tartars in his sight; he caused the
Ears, Lips, and other Members of his Secretary to be cut off piecemeal,
notwithstanding depiction of the Hollanders' cruelties against the English at
Amboyna The Cruelties of the Hollanders upon the Englich at Amboyna. Page.207.
all the protestations of his Innocence; above two hundred other Nobles were at
the same time variously executed, whereof one of them was his Treasurer, whose
Wife was set upon a Rope, and violently dragged to and fro thereon stark naked,
to force her to confess her Husbands Riches, whereof she soon after died; in a
Famine he gathered many people upon a Bridge, in expectation of relief, and
causing the Bridge to be cut down, drowned them all, as the readiest way to
make Corn cheaper; these are the least part of his inhumane Cruelties, but the
last was on himself; for his eldest Son Juan being falsely accused, he struck
him with a staff wrought with Iron, whereof he died within a few days after,
which this Tyrant laying to heart, died with grief. Ambassadors Yravels.

XX. Demetrius the King of Syria, after he had overcome Alexander the Jew in a
Battle, he led the Prisoners taken in that Fight to Jerusalem, where he caused
eight hundred of them to be Crucified in the midst of the City, the Sons in the
very sight of the Mothers, and after commanded the Mothers themselves to be
slain. Wanly.

XXI. The Island of Amboyna lies near Seran, the chief Town of it has also the
same name, and is the Rendevouz for the gathering, and buying of Cloves; the
English lived in that Town under the Protection of the Castle, which was
Garrisoned, and well manned by the Dutch. It happened that in the year 1622. a
Japan Soldier discoursing with the Dutch Sentinel of the Castle, was suspected,
tortured, and confessed that diverse of his Countrymen had contrived with him to
seize and surprise the Castle; also one Price an Englishman, and Prisoner with
them, accused other Englishmen of the Factories, who were all sent for, and put
to horrid Torture; the manner this; first, they haled up the Prisoner by the
hands with a Cord against a large door, fastening him upon two staples of Iron
(...) the top; as wide as his Arms could stretch, his feet (...) to the ground
stretched out at length, and full wideness, fastened beneath the door; then
they wrapped a cloth about his Neck and Face so close, that no water could go
by; then pouring water leisurely upon his head, and filling the Cloth up to his
Mouth and Nostrils, that he could not draw breath, but he must withal suck in
water, they so continued, till it forced his inward parts to come out at his
Nose, Eyes, and Ears; stifling, and choking him into a swound or fainting; but
being taken down, they made him vomit out the water, and being somewhat
recovered, they tortured him again four or five times, his Body being swollen
three times bigger than before, his Cheeks like Bladders, his Eyes staring out
beyond his Eyebrows; one Colson being thus tortured, yet still demed their
Accusation, whereupon they burn him under the Paps, Arm-holes, Elbows, Hands,
and Feet, till the fat dropped out of their Torches, then they lodged him in a
Dangeon, where his flesh putrified, and Maggots bred in it, to a horrid and
loathsome condition, till at the end of eight days they were executed, in
March, 1623. at which instant there was a sudden darkness, and a Tempest that
forced two Dutch Ships out of the Harbor, which were hardly saved; the dead
were all buried in one Pit, and one Dunkin their Accuser stumbled at their
Grave, and fell stark mad, and died so within three days after. Also a sickness
followed at Amboyna, of which several Dutch died. The names of the English thus
inhumanely dealt with, were, Captain Towerson, Tompson, Beaumont, Collins,
Colson, Webber, Ramsey, Johnson, Fard, and Brown. Sanderson Hist. K. James. p.
577.

XXII. The thirty Athenian Tyrants were of that fierce and cruel disposition,
that they caused the Daughters of some of the slain Citizens to dance in the
blood of their own Parents, who had newly been murdered by them. Dinoth. Mem.

XXIII. Nabis the Tyrant of Lacedemon, did utterly extinguish the Spartan name
forcing into banishment as many as were eminent for Riches, or the renown of
their Ancestors, and d^ing their Wealth and Wives amongst the mercenary
Soldiers he had hired, withal he sent Murderers after such as he had banished,
not suffering any place of retreat to be safe to them; he had also framed an
Engine, or rather an Image of his Wife, which after her name he called Apega;
with admirable Art it was fashioned to her resemblance, and was clothed in such
costly Garments as she her self used to wear; as often as the Tyrant cited before
him any of the rich Citizens, with a design to milk them of their Money, he
first with a long, and very civil Speech, used to represent to them the danger
that Sparta was in, the number of the Soldiers he kept about him for their
safety, and the great charge he was at in sacred and civil affairs, if they
were wrought upon by this means, it sufficed, but if otherways, and that they
would not part with their money, he then used to say, Possibly I am not able to
persuade you, yet it is likely that Apega may; and then with a show of
familiarity, he takes the man by the hand, and leads him to this Image, which
rises, and embraces him with both Arms, she draws him to her Breasts, in which,
and likewise in her Arms were sharp iron Spikes and Nails, though hidden within
her cloths; herewith she griped the poor wretch, according to the pleasure of
the Tyrant, who laughed at his cruel death. Rawleighs Hist. World.

XXIV. Not many years since there was a notable piece of inhumane Villainy
discovered in the City of Naples, which was this. There was one Francisco
Severino, a public Notary, that had a Sister who was a young Widow, but he
being to pay her six hundred Ducats toward her Dowry, instead thereof, he clapped
her up, together with a little Daughter of hers into a dark Cave, betwixt four
Walls, where he fed them with Bread and Water, and some few roots, for
seventeen years together; the Widow had also a Son, under the care of an Uncle
all that while, who being come to Age, demanded of this Notary his Mothers
Dowry, thinking she had been dead; the rumor hereof flying among the People,
who were then in Arms they rushed into the Notaries House; and the Woman in the
Cave hearing an extraordinary noise, began to shriek; which being heard, the
People broke down the Wall, where they found two Women like Savages, with long
disheveled hair hanging about their Shoulders, whereupon the Villainy being
discovered, the Notary was put to exemplary punishment. Howels Hist. Naples.

XXV. Sha Sefi, a late Emperor of Persia, when he came into the World, had his
hands all bloody, which his Grandfather Sha Abbas hearing of, said, That this
Prince would often bath his hands in blood; and so it proved; for as soon as he
came to the Crown, he made away Rustan-Can the Generalissimo of his Army, and
several other Lords he caused to be cut in pieces, and slew with his own hands
all his own Relations, and what other Person soever he was any way distrustful
of; by this means so accustoming himself to blood that when he was incensed, he
spared none; he caused the Eyes of his only Brother to be put out, and two of
his Uncles, after he had put out their Eyes, he caused them to be cast down
headlong from an high Rock, saying, That having lost the benefit of their Eyes,
they were useless to the World; He dispatched Isa Can another of his Uncles,
after he had cut off the heads of his three Sons upon a Trivial occasion,
saying, That he could now never be faithful to him, at least it was impossible
he should love him, after he had dealt so by him. In 1632. He having forced the
Turks to raise the Siege before Bagdat, at a private meeting of his Lords, they
said among themselves; That since in his tender Age he had committed so many
Cruelties, it was likely that in time he would extirpate all the Grandees of
Persia, Scinel-Chan presently discovered this to him, advising him to secure
himself against them, by taking away those of most credit among them; the
Tyrant replied, Thy advice is good, and I will begin with thee; for thou art a
Person of the greatest Age, and Authority among them, and therefore must needs
be of the Conspiracy; And presently after he killed him with his own hands; he
slew his Lord High Chancellor within a few days after, by running him into the
Body with a Cymiter, and then caused his head to be cut into small bits, and
thus he dealt with most of the rest, who were at the Meeting aforesaid; when he
came to Casbin, he sent for all the Lords, and Governors of his Provinces to
come to him, they all obeyed, save two, who thought it enough to assure the
King of their Fidelity, by sending each of them, one of their Wives, and one of
their Sons; but he being not satisfied herewith, sent their Wives to the
public Bawdy-Houses, and exposed their Sons to the Sodomitical brutality of
his Grooms, and common Hangmen; then he sent for Immanuel Can, Governor of
Shiras, and as soon as he came, he caused his head to be cut off, and the heads
of his fifteen Sons; these unparalled Cruelties frighted all that came near
him, and put some upon a Resolution to shorten his days by Poison, in which,
some of the Ladies in the Seraglio had an hand, which coming to his knowledge,
he revenged himself the night following, causing a great Pit to be made in the
Garden, wherein he buried forty Women alive, some Ladies, and among them his
own Mother. Ambas. Tra. p. 265.

XXVI. Innumerable are the Examples of Barbarity in the world, let us therefore
add a few instances of the Perfidiousness, and Treachery of some men; there is
nothing under the Sun that is more detestable than a Traitor, who is commonly
followed with the Execrations and Curses of those very men to whom his Treason
has been most useful; so that it is seldom but these perfidious ones meet with
their just rewards from the hands of their own Patrons; however the vengeance
of Heaven, where the Justice of men fails, does visibly fall upon them.

XXVII. The City of Sfetigrade in Hungary, being defended against Amurath, the
second Emperor of the Turks, was then watered but with one great Well in the
midst of the City, into which a traitorous Person having contracted for a
mighty reward, to cause the City to be yielded up to the Turks, had cast a dead
Dogs this had been no great matter to other men, but he well knew that the
Garrison consisted of the Soldiers of Dibra, who as they were the most valorous
of all Epirus, so were they more Superstitious then the Jews, about things
clean and unclean, and he knew they would starve, die any kind of death, nay,
deliver up the City, rather than drink of that polluted water, nor was he
deceived, for it was soon delivered upon certain conditions; he that corrupted
the water was rewarded with three Suits of rich Apparel, fifty thousand Aspers,
and a yearly Pension of two thousand Ducats, but short was his Joy, for after
he had a few days vainly triumphed in the midst of Amuraths favors, he was
suddenly gone, and never after seen or heard of; being secretly made away, as
was supposed by Amurath, whose noble heart could not but detest the Traitor,
although the Treason served well for his purpose. Turk. Hist. p. 320.

XXVIII. Ladislaus Kerezin, an Hungarian, Traitorously delivered up Hiula, a
strong Place, to the Turks, and when he looked to receive many and great
Presents for this his notable piece of Service, certain Witnesses were produced
against him by the command of Selymus the Turkish Emperor, who deposed, that
Ladislaus had cruelly handled certain Turks, who had been Prisoners with him,
whereupon he was delivered to some Friends of their's, to do with him, as they
should think good; they enclosed this Traitor stark naked in a Tun or Hogshead
set full of long sharp Nails within side, and rolled it from the top of an high
Mountain, full of steepy downfalls, to the very bottom, where being run through
every part of the Body with those sharp Nails, he ended his wretched life.
Camerar.

XXIX. The Venetians put to death Marinus Falienus their Duke, for having
Treacherously conspired against the State, and whereas the Pictures of their
Dukes from the first, to him that now lives are represented, and drawn
according to the order of their times, in the great Hall of the general
Council, yet to the end that the Picture of Falienus a perfidious Prince, might
not be seen amongst other of those illustrious Dukes, they caused an empty
chair to be drawn, and covered over with a black veil, as believing, that those
who carried themselves disloyally to the Common wealth, cannot be more severely
punished, than if their names be covered with perpetual silence, and secret
detestation. Camerar. Op.

XXX. In the French Persecution there was one Peter Serre, who at first was a
Popish Priest; but God of his mercy revealing the truth of the Protestant
Religion to him, he went to Geneva, and there learned the Shoemakers Trade
whereby he maintained himself, and having a Brother at Toulouse in France, out
of a singular love to his eternal happiness he went thither to instruct him;
but his Brothers wife being displeased thereat, Treacherously betrayed him, and
he was apprehended and carried before the bloody Inquisitors before whom he
made an excellent declaration of his faith, for which he was condemned and
delivered to the Judge, who asked him what employment he was of, he answered,
That of late he had been a Shoemaker, but was formerly or another Profession
which he was ashamed to remember or discover, it being the worst and vilest of
all other sciences in the World. The Judge and the auditors supposing that he
had been some Pickpocket or Thief, were the more importunate to know what it
was; but shame and sorrow so stopped his mouth that he could not declare it,
yet at last being overcome by their importunate clamor he told them, That he
had been a Popish Priest, this unexpected reply so desperately incensed the
Judge that he presently commanded him to be burnt. Clarks Martyrol. p. 45.

XXXI. Solomon the Magnificent Emperor of the Turks, employed a Treacherous
Christian in the conquest of the Isle of Rhodes, promising the Traitor to give
him for his wife one of his Daughters with a very great Dowry; after the Isle
was taken by his assistance, he demanded that which was promised him; whereupon
Solomon caused his Daughter to be brought in most Royal Pomp, in order to marry
her according to his desert the Traitor could not keep his Countenance he was
so transported with Joy; Thou see, said, Solomon, I am a man of my word, but
for as much as thou art a Christian, and my Daughter thy wife that shall be, is
a Mohammedan by birth and profession, you cannot so live in quietness, and I am
loath to have a Son in Law that is not a Musselman, and true believer both
within and without, and therefore it is not enough that thou abjure
Christianity in word only, as many of thy Sect usually do, but thou must
immediately pluck off thy Skin, which is Baptized and uncircumcised; having so
said, he commanded some that stood by, to flea alive the pretended Son in Law,
and that afterward they should lay him upon a Bed of salt, commanding that if
any Mahumet^n Skin came over him again, in place of the Christian, that then
and not before his promised Spouse should be brought unto him to be married,
the wretched Traitor thus shamefully and cruelly flouted and disappointed, died
in most horrible Torments; Camerar. Opera.

XXXIV. In the war with the Falisci, Camillus the Roman general had beseiged
the Falerians, but they being secure in the sortifications of their City were
so regardless of the seige that they walked gowned as before, up and down the
streets. These People, after the manner of Greece, sent their Children to a
Common School, and the Treacherous Master of them used to walk with them daily
without the walls; he did this often, and by degrees trained them so far
onwards, that he brought them unawares into the danger of the Roman Camp, where
they were all taken; he bids them lead him to Camellus, he was brought into his
Tent, where standing in the middle; I am, said he, the Master of these Boys,
and having a greater respect to you than to my Relations, I am come to deliver
you the City in the pledges of these Children; Camillus heard it, and judging
it to be a base action, turning to his Soldiers about him, War, said he is a
cruel thing, and draws along with it a multitude of injuries and wrongs, yet to
good men there are certain Laws of War, nor ought we so to thrist after victory
as to purchase it at the price of such unworthy and impious actions, a great
Captain should rely upon his own virtue, and not attain his ends by the
Treachery of another; then he commanded his Officers to strip the School
Master, and having his hands tied behind him, he delivered rods into the hands
of his Scholars, to whip and scourge the Traitor back into the City. The
Falerians had before perceived the Treason and there was an universal mourning
and outcry within the City for so great a Calamity, so that a concourse of
n^ble Persons both men and women like so many mad creatures were running to and
fro upon the walls; soon after came the Children driving with lashhes their
Master before them, calling Camillus their Preserver and Father. The Parents
and the rest of the Citizens were astonished at what they beheld, and having
the Justice of Camillus in great admiration they called an assembly, and sent
Ambassadors to let him know, that being subdued by his virtue they rendered up
themselves and theirs freely into his hands. Plutarch.

XXXV. Rhomilda was the Wife of Prince Sigulphus, her Husband being slain by
Cacanus King of the Hene^tians and she her self beseiged by the same Enemy, yet
nevertheless this wretched woman fell so far in Love with him, that upon
promise of Marriage, she agreed to deliver into his hands the City of Friol,
who burnt it, slew the men and carried the women and Children Captives into
Austria; Cacanus took Rhomilda into his bed for one night only and then
delivered her to be abused with the lust of twelve Henesians, and soon after
caused her to be impaled alive upon a sharp stake. Ca. Op.

CHAP. VI. The Tremendous Consequences of Unchastity, Intemperance, and
Ambition.
IT is not to be imagined that I should give an (...) of the Thousandth part of
the mischiefs and mi^ries that have been occasioned by Lust and Debauchery, all
Ages, and Nations are full of lamentable Accidents proceeding therefrom; for
though this violent Passion may seem to promise a world of vain pleasure; and
though lascivious Persons use many times all manner of Patience, services, and
profound submissions to gain the desired object, yet when they have obtained
their flagitious desires, and think themselves absolutely happy in the midst of
their libidinous, and unchaste Embraces, even at that very instant, there is
sometimes brought in an unexpected Reckoning, that drenches all their sweets in
blood, and closes up their unlawful pleasures in the black, and dismal Sables
of death, as by the following Examples is demonstrated, wherein Divine
Vengeance has visibly appeared in the woeful Tragedies which have been
occasioned by Adultery, Unchastity, and Lust.

I. The first I shall mention, is partly Comical, as well as Tragical. A Knight
of Eminent Fame, and of great nore with Henry the Fifth, King of England, as
being personally with him in all his Wars in France; after the King had
conquered, and settled that Kingdom, this noble Englishman retired himself into
his own Country; he had a Lady of such beauty, as attracted the Eyes of all
men, who residing with her Husband in the City of Norwich, he after so many
troubles and adventures, resolved to lead a more sequestered life, and next to
the pleasure of his fair Consort, he desired to lead a contemplative life, and
being very rich, according to the Devotion of that Age, by the direction of the
Priests, he resolved to build a handsome Church near his own House, which they
said would be for the benefit of his Soul, and likewise a Convent, allowing
maintenance to an Abbot, and twelve Friars; having finished them, there were
two of the Friars, one called Friar John, the other Friar Richard, who were at
continual variance and enmity to each other, and could not by any mediation be
reconciled; it was the daily Custom of this Knight and Lady to rise every
morning early to Mattins, or Prayers, and she being of an affable, and
courteous disposition to all Persons, this good humor of hers bred a strange
uncivil boldness in Friar John, so that she never came through the Cloister,
but he was still attending her with many bows, cringes, and complements, and
she suspecting nothing, returned him Thanks again, which so far encouraged the
Friar, that he made himself suspected by his Fellows, who as much as they
durst, whispered it about the Convent; he still growing more confident,
presumed at last to write to her, wherein he at large discovered his violent
Passion for her; this Letter with great difficulty he conveyed to the Ladies
hands, who being much surprised that such lasciviousness should proceed from
one that vowed, and professed Chastity, and not being certain, but that it
might be a design of her Husband to try her Virtue, she thereupon resolves,
that to prevent her Honor from being called in question, she would discover
the whole intrigue to her Lord, which she had no sooner done, but he began to
repent him of his former Charity in regard of this so great Ingratitude; yet
meditating Revenge, he writes an answer to this Letter, to which he commands
his Wife to set her hand to this effect; that she was very compassionate of his
Love, and that such a night her Husband being to ride toward London, he should
be admit^, lodged, and entertained according to his own desire; the Friar
received this Letter with extreme Joy, and providing himself with clean linen,
a perfumed Nightcap, and other necessaries, he exactly observes the time and
place, and is accordingly admitted by the Lady her self alone, and conveyed to
a private Chamber, where he was no sooner entered, but in came the Knight and
his Man, and in great fury, without giving him the least time either to call
for help to the House, or to Heaven, they strangled the lustful Friar, and left
him dead upon the place, this deed was no sooner done, and his rage somewhat
appeased, but he began to consider the horror, and danger of the Fact, both as
to his life and Estate, and after several projects betwixt him and his Servant,
they concluded some way or other to have his body conveyed back into the
Monastery; it being divided from his own House only by a Brick-wall, and
finding a Ladder hard by, the man mounts it with the dead Friar on his back,
and sits with him astride on the wall, then drawing up the Ladder, and letting
it down on the other side, he descends down into the Convent, where espying the
House of Office, he sets the Body thereon as upright as possible; and so leaves
it; and conveys himself over the wall again (but for have forgot the Ladder,)
and tells his Master, how, and where he had bestowed the Friar, at which being
better satisfied, they both retired to Bed; all being concealed both from the
Lady, and the rest of the Family, who were fast asleep; it happened at the fame
instant that Friar Richard being much troubled with a looseness in his Body,
had occasion to rise, and being somewhat hastily, and unhandsomely taken, he
hasts to the House of Office, where by the light of the Moon he espied some
Body before him, and therefore contained himself as long as he was able, but
finding there was no Remedy, he first called, and then entreated to come away,
but hearing no body answer, he imagined into be done on purpose, and the
rather, because coming nearer, he plainly perceived it was Friar John his (...)
Adversary, who the louder he called, seemed the less to hear; loath he was to
play the sloven in the yard because the whole Convent had taken notice of a
cold he had got, and how it then wrought with him; therefore judging this
pretended deafness was out of spite, and malice, on purpose to shame him, he
snatched up a Brickbat to be revenged, and striking his Adversary full upon the
Breast, down tumbles Friar John without life or motion; which he seeing,
thought at first to r^ise him up, but after many Trials, finding him to be
stone dead he verily believes that he had killed him; what shall he do now? The
Gates are fast locked; and fly for his life he could not, but as sudden
extremities sometimes create sudden shifts, he espying the Ladder against the
wall, presently apprehends what had been whispered of Friar John's love to the
Knights Lady, and lifting him on his Shoulders, by the help of the same Ladder
he carries him into the Porch of the Knights Hall, and there sets him,
afterward secretly conveying himself back into the Monastery the same way he
came, not in the least suspected by any; while this was doing the Knight being
perplexed, and troubled in Conscience, could by no means sleep, but calls up
his Man, and bids him go listen about the walls of the Monastery; forth he goes
out of his Masters Chamber, and having passed the length of the Hall, designing
to go through the yard, he finds Friar John sitting upright in the Porch, and
starting at the sight, he runs back affrighted, and almost distracted, and
speechless, tells the news to his Master, who being no less astonished, could
not believe it to be so, but rather his man's Fantasy, till he himself went
down, and became an Eyewitness of this strange object. At which, being
extremely concerned, he ressects on himself, that murder is one of the crying
sins, and such a one as cannot be concealed; yet recollecting his Spirits, he
resolves to try a desperate adventure, and put the discovery upon chance; he
remembers he had an old Stallion then in his Stable, one of those he had used
in Service in the French Wars, and likewise a rusty Armor in his Armory, these
he commands instantly to be brought, with a Case of rusty Pistols, and a Lance;
the Horse is sadled, and Caparison'd, the Armor is put upon the Friar, and he
fast bound in his Seat with strong new Cords, the Lance is tied to his wrist,
and the lower end put into the rest, his Headpiece is clasped on, and his
Beaver is put up; being thus accoutred like a Knight completely armed Cap-a-pe,
they designed to turn him out of the Gates, both he and his Horse, without any
Page or Esquire, to try a new Adventure; whilst these things were thus fitting,
Friar Richard in the Monastery was no less perplexed in his mind, than the
Knight about the Murder, and much dreading the strictness of the Law, summons
all his wits about him, to prevent the worst, and at length concludes with
himself, that it is his best, and safest way to fly for his life; he likewise
remembers that there was in the Fryery a Mare employed to carry Corn to, and
from the Mill, which was about half a mile from the Monastery, and being
somewhat fat, and doubting his own footmanship, he thinks it better to trust to
four legs, then two, and therefore calls up the Baker that had the charge of
the Beast, and tells him, he understands that there was Meal that morning to be
fetched from the Mill, which was grinded by that time; therefore if he would let
him have the Mare, he would save him that labor, and bring it back before
morning; the Fellow being willing to save so much pains, caused the back Gate
to be opened; the Friar gets up, and rides out of the Monastery Gate, just at
that instant when the Knight and his Man had turned out the Friar on Horseback
to seek his fortune, the Horse presently scents the Mare, and after her he
gallops; Friar Richard looking back, was amazed to see an armed Knight follow
him, and much more when by the light of the Moon, and the Beaver flying up, he
perceived that it was Friar John who was thus armed, and thereupon away flies
he through the Streets; and after him, or rather after the Mare, speeds the
Horse; a great noise there was in the City, insomuch that many being awakened
out of their morning sleep, looked out at their Windows; at length it was Friar
Richards ill fate to ride into a certain turn-again Lane, which had no passage
through; there Friar John overtakes him, the Stone-Horse covers the Mare, which
causes a terrible noise among the rusty Armor; Friar Richards guilty
conscience accuses him, and he cries out aloud, Guilty of the Murder; at the
noise of Murder, the People being amazed, ran out of their Beds into the
Street, they apprehend Miracles, and he confesses Wonders, but withal, he
freely tells them of the horrid, and inhumane Act he had committed in murdering
one of his own Convent; the former Grudge that was between them is generally
known, and the apparent Justice of Heaven the rather believed, Friar John is
dismounted, and sent to his Grave, Friar Richard is committed to Prison, he is
Arraigned, and in pursuance of his own Confession, is condemned. But before his
Execution, the Knight knowing his own guilt, and concern in the business, he
posts instantly to the King, makes his voluntary Confession, and has his life,
and estate for his former good Services, granted to him; Friar Richard is
released, and this notable Accident still remains upon Record. Hist. Women.

II. In the reign of Queen Mary, Sr. Walter Smith of Shirford in Warwickshire
being grown an aged man, at the death of his wife considered of a Marriage for
Richard his Son and heir, then at man's Estate; and to that end made his mind
known to Mr. Thomas Chetwin of Ingestre in Staffordshire, who entertaining the
motion in the behalf of Dorothy his Daughter, was contented to give five
hundred pound with her. But no sooner had the old knight seen the young Lady,
but he became a suitor for himself, offering five hundred pound for her besides
as good a jointure as she should have by his Son if the Match had gone forward;
this so wrought upon Chetwin that he effectually persuaded his Daughter and the
Marriage ensued accordingly; it was not long ere her affections wandering, she
gave entertainment to a young Gentleman of about Twenty two called Robinson of
Drayton Basset, and being impatient of all that might hinder her full enjoyment
of him, she contrived how to be rid of her husband; having therefore corrupted
her waiting Gentlewoman, and a Groom of the stable, she resolved by their help,
and the assistance of Robinson to strangle him in his bed, and though Robinson
came not the designed night, she no whit staggered in her Resolution; for
watching her husband till he was fallen asleep, she called in her accomplices and
casting a long Towel about his neck, caused the Groom to lie upon him to keep
him from struggling; whilst her self and the maid straining the Towel stopped
his breath; having thus dispatched the work, they carried him into another
room, where a close stool was placed, upon which they set him; an hour after,
the maid and Groom were got silently away; and to conceal the business this
Lascivious bloody woman made an outcry in the house, wringing her hands
plucking her hair, and weeping extremely, pretending that missing him sometime
out of bed, she went to see what the matter was, and found him in that posture;
by these feigned shows of sorrow she prevented all suspicion of his violent
death; and not long after went to London, setting so high a value upon her
beauty that Robinson became neglected; but within two years following, this
woeful deed of darkness was brought to light in this manner; the Groom before
mentioned was entertained with Mr. Richaro Smith Son and heir to the murdered
knight, and attending him to Coventry, with diverse other Servants he became so
sensible of his Villainy, that when he was in his Cups, out of his good nature
he took his Master aside, and upon his knees besought him forgiveness for
acting in the murder of his Father, declaring all the circumstances thereof;
whereupon Mr. Smith discreetly gave him good words but wished some others he
trusted to have an Eye upon him that he might not escape when he had slept, and
better considered what might be the issue thereof; notwithstanding which
direction, he fled away with his Masters best Horse, and ha^ing presently into
Wales, he attempted to go beyond Sea, but being hindered by contrary winds,
after three Essays or trials to lanch out, he was happily pursued by Mr. Smith,
who spared no cost in sending to several Ports, that he was found out, and
brought Prisoner to Warwick, as were also the Lady and her Gentlewoman, all of
them with great boldness denying the fact, and the Groom most impudently
charging Mr. Smith of endeavoring to corrupt him to accuse the Lady, his
Mother in Law falsely, to the end he might get her great jointure; but upon, his
arraignment, being smitten with the apprehension of his guilt, he publicly
acknowledged it; and stoutly justified what he had said to be true to the face
of the Lady, and her maid, who at first with much seeming confidance pleaded
their innocence; till at length seeing the particular Circumstances thus
discovered, they both confessed the fact, for which having Judgment to dye, the
Lady was burnt at a stake on Woolvey Heath near Shirford Lordship, where the
Country People to this day show the place, and the Groom with the maid suffered
death at Warwick. Dugdale of Warwickshire. p. 37.

III. The debauched life, and fatal death of Sultan Ibrahim Father to the
present Emperor of the Turks is very remarkable; his Brother Sultan Amurath or
Morat after a fever of eight days continuance, caused by an excess of
Debauchery in wine having on the 8 of February 1640 expired his last breath;
his Mother called Kiosem comforted her self with the thoughts that her son
Sultan Ibrahim still lived and was the sole surviver and undoubted heir of the
Ottoman family; to whose succession, that it might be the more facile and
without disturbance, she consulted with all the Grandees, requesting their
consent and assistance in the lawful promotion of her remaining Son to the
throne of his ancestors; for she had understood that Morat always abhorred the
ill shaped body and weaker mind of his Brother, envied him the dignity of the,
Ottoman Scepter, and therefore had bequeathed the succession to the Tartar,
having in the heat of a debauch and fumes of his wine compelled his Bashas to
swear to the performance of his Testament; and therefore the Queen was forced
to use very many arguments, to persuade them of the danger, and unlawfulness of
rejecting the right heir; with which being convinced, they all cried out, Let
Sultan Ibrahim live; herewith the great Council breaking up, the Viziers
accompanied with all the Officers and attendants of the Seraglio, went with
shouts and loud acclamations to the Prison of Ibrahim to salute him Emperor,
for he poor Prince had, now for four years remained a sad recluse in a dark
room, where he had received neither light nor air, but what came from a little
window which sometimes in favor was opened to him from above, and what was
worse, the continual expectations, and fear of death, without Friends,
Conversation, or hope rendered those apprehensions worse than death it self,
which daily were represented him in that solemnity as might terrify a mind more
constant and firm than his; so soon as he heard the shouts and voices of a
multitude near his door, he immediately conceived that the fate was now come
which he had so long expected, and therefore he barred his door, and denied to
give entrance, and when the viziers proclaimed him Empe. fearing it might be
some artifice of his Brother to see with what joy he would entertain the news,
he answered, That he did not so much as think of the Empire, nor desire it, but
only prayed that Sultan Morat might live, to whom he pretended not to be a
Brother but a slave; and when he perceived that they began to force the door,
though with terms of respect and observance, he still endeavored to keep it
close, for nature had taught him to conserve a life, however miserable and void
of Consolation; he continuing thus resolute not to open, reverence to his
Person commanded them to forbear any ruder violence until the Queen Mother
overhearing all this stir, descended her self in Person, and first causing the
dead Corpse of Sultan Morat to be extended before his door, with gentle
compellations, and confident assurances she satisfied him of the death of his
Brother, the voice of his Mother began to dissipate his fears, and being in
part already convinced by his ears, he adventured to peep at the door, and
giving then entire credence to his Eyes, his heart and Spirits revived and so
retiring back into his Chamber, he willingly received the Congratulations of
the Ministers and Soldiers; which being past, he readily applied his
Shouldiers to the Coffin of his dead Brother, and having bore his share of that
dear burden to the gate of the Seraglio, he there resigned it to his Domestic
Officers, who buried him in the Sepulcher of Sultan Achmet. From thence he took
boat, and passed to the Mosch of Jubs Seraglio, where in eight days he
completed all the Ceremonies of his Coronation, and afterward, according to
the custom of his ancestors he rode through the City to his great Paliace; but
whether it were for want of practice, or by reason of a posture natural unto
fools, he sat so ridiculously, on his saddle, as moved rather the laughter
than acclamation of the People. In fine being entered the Seraglio, he began to
breath, and enjoy the air of liberty, with so much contentment and
Satisfaction, that he was unwilling to lose the least part of it by thinking or
attending on business, and as if he enjoyed sufficient, committed all to the
management of his Mother; howsoever being desirous to handle something of
Government he did it with so little grace and dexterity, that it plainly
appeared that that Soul animated a body not fit to sway or weild a Scepter, yet
he indulged his luxurious, and wanton appetite to the highest excess of
sensuality, for having been accustomed to a Prison and restraint, he knew not
how to enjoy the freedom he had recovered, but by subjecting it to the
imperious servitude of his lusts, this humor the Viziers and great Ministers
of state cherished in him by continual banquets, feasts and entertainments, in
which he always took high contentment and satisfaction passing a most
Lascivious life in his Seraglio, and consuming an immense treasure on his
women, whereby he was seized with an apoplexy which was attributed to his
excessive use of them, to whom he was so immoderately addicted that he consumed
his days and nights in the women's apartments, wherein Amber was the Common
perfume which burned perpetually, and the Common sauce to most of his Dainties,
not perhaps because it so much pleased his Palate, as that it was a provocative
and incitement to his Lusts; and notwithstanding the great number of women
within the Seraglio which were all at the Devotion of the Sultan, yet Ibrahim,
not being contented therewith, passing one day to Scutari, had by chance cast
his Eye upon an Object which much pleased him, what it was, becomes me not to
relate; but being returned to his Seraglio, he sent orders to the Vizier to
seek out the biggest and best proportiond woman which was to be found in all
Constantinople, and the parts thereabout; hereupon Emissarys were dispatched
into all quarters of the City; at length he found a huge tall Armenian woman,
well proportioned according to her height, and a giantess for her stature; who
being found, she was presently washed and perfume^ in the bath, and as richly
clothed and adorned as the shortness of the time would permit; there was no
great difficulty to persuade her to become Turk, having so high preferment in
her prospect; so that being introduced to the grand Seigniors presence, he
became immediately inamoured, and was so pleased with her society that he
preferred her before all the women of his Court, an evidence whereof he gave,
in that he could not deny her any request she could make and particularly about
that time the Government of Damascus being void, this woman begged it for her
self, placing another in the Office, who was accountable to her for all the
profits and benefits thereof; by these particulars of favor the Queen Mother
becoming jealous, one day inviting her to dinner, caused her to be strangled,
and persuaded Ibrahim that she died suddenly of a violent sickness, at which he
poor man was greatly afflicted. And though during his reign the seige of Candia
began, and a bloody war continued against the Venetians yet Sultan Ibrahim like
a stout Soldier of Venus continued his Debaucherys to the height, and at
length fell in Love with the widow of his Brother Sultan Morat, but she
resolving upon widdowhood, he assaulted her by force, but his Mother coming in
at the outcry, hindered his design, and gave opportunity to the Sultana to
escape out of the hands of this Satyr; after this he had a great Passion for
the Daughter of the Mufti or chief Priest among the Turks offering her Father
to marry her and prefer her in honor equal to any other of his Sultana's, but
the old man knowing the wandering humor of Ibrabim, refused him, and instructed
his Daughter to do the same, which so enraged him, that resolving to have his
will of her, he caused her to be seized going from the ^ath, and carrying her
into the Seraglio, he possessed and enjoyed her for some days, but with such
tears, reluctance, and sullenness, a^ took off from the edg^, and appetite of
his enjoyment, so that he returned her back with scorn and contempt to her
Father, who at first dissembled the injury, but resolving on Reverge, he first
complains to Mahomet Pasha, a great Man in the Council, and afterward to the Q.
Mother, who hated her Son extremely, because he had lately committed her to
Prison for reproving him; hereupon they concluded to confine Ibrahim to his old
Prison, not that he should be absolutely laid aside, and deposed, but only
corrected a while and being put in remembrance of his past condition, might be
taught wisdom, and instructed for the future, what ^oderation and Justice
Sultans are obliged to exercise in the administration of Government; they then
got the two Lord Chief Justices into the Conspiracy, and Aug. 7. 1648. was the
day appointed for the Insurrection of the Janissaries, who being all in a
readiness on that day, went in a tumultuary manner to call the Musti, and other
Officers, and Ministers of the Law to go with them to the Grand Seignior, and
then they demanded of the Mufti, Whether that according to their Law, Sultan
Ibrahim as a Fool, and a Tyrant, and unfit for Government, ought not to be
deposed; to which the Mufti answering. Y^s, he sent to ci^e Sultan Ibrahim to
appear the day following in the Divan or Council, to administer Justice to his
Soldiers and Subjects, who expected it from him; but Ibrahim laughed at the
Summons which the Mufti made him, which being seconded by a Fetsa, which is a
point of Law resolved by the Mufti, who is the Month, or Oracle thereof, that
is, That the Grand Seignior being called to account, is obliged to appear
before the Justice; the Sultan in high disdain tore the Paper, threatening the
head of the Mufti; but it was now too late, he having already sufficiently
fortified himself with the power and strength of his rebellious Companions;
this Fetfa was immediately seconded by another of a higher Nature; which
declared. That whosoever obeyed not the Law of God, was not a Mussulman, or
true Believer, and though that Person were the Emperor himself yet being become
by his filthy Actions a Kasir, or Irsidel, he was ipso facto, fallen from his
Throne, and no further capable of Authority and Government; this Fetfa being
seen by Ibrahim, he tore it in pieces, commanding the Grand Vizier instantly to
put the Mufti to death, as guilty of Treason against his Prince; but he having
now lost his Authority, his Commands were no longer regarded, nor any Reverence
had of his Person; for the Janissaries being again assembled about five a clock
in the afternoon, came with their usual Tumult to the Gates of the Seraglio;
and now Sultan Ibrahim losing all Courage, fled into the Arms of his Mother,
begging her assistance and protection; she being a bold and subtle Woman,
employed all her Rhetoric and Eloquence to persuade the Soldiers not to offer
violence to the Person of their Lord and Master; promising that he should
relinquish the Government, and retire himself with a Guard to his old Lodgings;
Ibrahim comforted a little that he should save his life; shrunk himself
willingly into his old shell, wherein he had so long conserved his life. In the
mean time the Conspirators taking forth his eldest Son Sultan Mahomet, set him
on the Throne of his Father, and planting the Sargouch, or Imperial, Feathers
on his Head; saluted him for Emperor with loud Acclamations; Ibrahim continued
his Imprisonment for some days with great patience, but at length growing
desperate and furious, he often beat his head against the Wall, until at
length, on August 17. 1648. he was strangled with a Bow, string by 4 Mittes; or
dumb Executioners; in this manner Sultan Ibrahim ended his lascivious days,
which puts me in mind of the saying of a Wiser, and better King than he, That
there is little distance between the Prisons and the Graves of Princes; and
this Example made a great Officer understand how K. Charles the Martyr was put
to death; for he discoursing with the chief English Interpreter at
Constantinople, not then calling to mind the Fate of Sultan Ibrahim, demanded,
how, and when K. Charles was put to death? Sure, said he, Your King must have
no Power, or your People must be more Rebellious and Mutinous than other
Nations of the world; who durst commit an Act so horrid and vile as this; see,
said he, how our Emperor is revered and observed, and how submissive and
obedient half the world is to the Nod four great Monarch; the Interpreter
replied, it would be to lious to recount to him the History and occasion of
this prodigious Fact; but that the time it happened, was some months after the
death or murder of Sultan Ibrahim; which was a sufficient item to the Grand
Vizier, to give him a perfect understanding of what he required. The Poet makes
Ibrahim speak thus of himself.

I that of Ottoman blood remain alone,
Called from a Prison to ascend a Throne.
My silly mind I bend to sift Delights,
Hating unpleasing business, and Fights,
Till mad with wanton Loves, I fall at first,
Slave to my own; then to my Peoples Lust.
IV. Neither has Intemperance in Drinking been sometimes less fatal; for we
read, that there was one at Liege in Germany, who was addicted to daily
drunkenness, and in his Cups, as often as he had emptied his pockets of his money
by playing at Cards, he used to swear that he would be the death of his Wives
Uncle, because he refused to furnish him with more money to play with; this
Uncle was a Canon, and a Person of great hospitality; one night when he
entertained a Letter carrier, he was murdered by him, together with a Neice,
and a little Nephew of his. All men admiring that the Canon was not present at
Mattens, or morning Prayer, who never used to absent himself; having long
knocked at his doors in vain; this Drunkard of ours having scarce digested his
yesterdays Ale, set up a Ladder to the Windows, and with others entered the
House, espying there three dead Corpse; they raise the Neighborhood with a
lamentable cry, amongst the whispers of whom, when some said, that the Drunkard
was the Murderer, he was laid hold on, cast into Prison, and thrown upon the
Rack; where he says, that he does not think that he did it, that by reason of
his daily, and continual drunkenness, he could affirm nothing of a certainty,
that he had sometimes a will, or desire to kill the Canon, but that he should
never have touched his Niece, or young Nephew, well, he was condemned, and the
Innocent wretch, even in the presence of this execrable Letter-carrier, was
long wearied with exquisite Torments, and at last died an unheard of death. The
Letter-carrier being again returned to Liege, and not able to endure the hourly
Tortures of a revenging God inflicted upon his Soul, of his own accord
presented himself before the Judges, beseeching them that by a speedy death he
might be freed from that Hell he felt here alive; affirming that when he was
awake (though feldom when asleep) the Image of the little Babe whom he had
strangled, presented itself to his Eyes; shaking the furies whips at him, with
such flames as the Drunkard had perished in; when he spoke this at the
Tribunal, he continally fanned his face with his hands, as if to discuss and
abate the flames. The thing being evident by the Goods taken, and other
discoveries, he also the same year, Aug. 23. was hanged till dead, and then
burnt at a stake. Wanly Hist. Man.

V. There was in Salisbury not long since, one who in a Tavern, in the midst of
his carousing and healths, drank also a health to the Devil, saying, That if
the Devil would not come and pledge him, he would not believe that there was
either God or Devil; whereupon his Companions being struck with horror,
hastened our of the room, and presently after hearing an hideous noise, and
smelling a stinking savor, the Vintner ran up into the Chamber, and coming in,
he mist his Guest, found the window broken; the iron bar in it bowed and all
bloody, but the man was never after heard of Cla. Mir p. 148.

VI. In 1446. There was a Wedding near Zegbuick in Germany, celebrated, as it
appears, with such unheard of Intemperance, and dissolute doings, that there
died of extreme surfeiting no less than one hundred fourscore and ten Persons,
as well Women as Men. Stowes Annals. p. 385.

VII. A Gentleman having been revelling abroad, was returning home when it was
late at night, his head, that was overladen with Wine, proved too heavy for the
rest of his body, so that he fell down in the street, not able to rise through
the feebleness of his legs; he had a Sword by his side, when another coming
that way, and hearing the voice of his Enemy at some distance, suddenly snatched
out the Drunkards Sword, and having run it into the heart of his Adversary,
left it sticking in the wound, and in all have conveyed himself away from the
place. The Watch at that time chanced to pass by, who finding a man lie dead
with a Sword in his body, and this drunken Person lying near him with his
Scabbard empty, they took him along with them to the Magistrate, who having
received such apparent Testimony against him, committed him to Prison; he was
hanged for the Murder, tho Innocent; and afterward the real Murderer, being
to be hanged for some other matter, confessed it was himself who had made use
of his Sword to act his own private Revenge. Wan

VIII. Lastly, Ambition and Pride has produced no less mischievous effects upon
several Persons. Caesar Borgia, the Son of Pope Alexander, was a most Ambitious
man, he caused his Brother to be murdered in the streets, and his dead body to
be cast into the River Tyber; and then casting off his Priestly Robes, and
Cardinals habit, he took upon him the leading of his Fathers Army, and with
exceeding Prodigality he engaged to him many desperate Ruffians for the
execution of his horrible devices; having thus strengthened himself, he became
a terror to all the Nobility of Rome; he first drove out the honorable Family
of the Columnii, and then by execrable Treachery poisoned, or killed the chief
Personages of the great Houses of the Vrsini, and Cajetani, seizing upon their
Lands and Estates; he strangled at once 4 Noblemen of the Camertes, drove Guido
Feltrius out of Vrbin, took the City of Faventia from Astor Mar fredus, whom
heast beastly abused, and then strangled. In his thoughts he had made himself
Master of all Italy, but was cast down, when he least feared it; being at
Supper with the Pope his Father, which was prepared on purpose for destroying
several rich Cardinals, by the mistake of a Servant, he and his Father were
both poisoned by deadly Wine prepared for the Guests; and so he was rewarded
for his Ambition, and intent of Murder both at once. Clarks Mirror.

IX. Staveren in Holland was the chief Town of all Friezland, rich and
abounding in all wealth, the only staple for all Merchandise, whither Ships
came from all parts; The Inhabitants thereof through ease knew not what to do
nor desire, but showed themselves in all things excessive and licentious, not
only in their Apparel, but also in the furniture of their Houses, gilding the
Seats before their Lodgings, etc. So that they were commonly called, The
debauched Children of Staveren; but observe the just punishment of this their
Pride. There was in this Town a Widow, who knew no end of her wealth; which
made her proud and insolent; she freighted out a Ship for Dantzick, giving the
Master charge to return her in exchange of her Merchandise the farest stuffed he
could find. The Master of the Ship finding no better Commodity than good wheat,
freighted his Ship therewith, and so returned to Staveren; this did so
discontent this foolish and glorious Widow, that she said to the Master; That
if he had laden the Corn on the Starboard side of the Ship, he should cast it
into the Sea on the Larboard; which was presently done, and all the wheat
poured into the Sea, but the whole Town, yea, all the Province smanted for this
one Woman's error, for presently in the same place where the Mariners had
thrown the Corn, there grew a great Bar or Bank of Sand, wherewith the Haven
was so stopped, that no great Ship could enter, and at this day the smallest
Vessels that will anchor there, must be very careful, least they strike against
this flat, or Sand bank, which ever since has been called Vrawelandt, that is,
the Woman's Sand; hereby the Town losing its Traffic, in a little time
declined; the Inhabitants also by reason of their Wealth and Pride grew
intellerable to the Nobility, who in sumptuousness could not endure to be
brayed by them, so that this Town is now become one of the poorest of that
Province, though it has the greatest Privitedges of all the Hanse Towns. Hist
Netherlands.

X Deminicus Sylvius, Duke of Venice, Married a Gentlewoman of Constantinople,
she was plunged into sensuality with so much prosusion, that she could not
endure to lodge, but in Chambers full of delicious persurnes of the Fast, she
would not wash her self, but in the dews of Heaven, whell must be preserved for
her with much skill; her Garments were so pompous, that nothing remained but to
seek for new S^s in Heaven, for she had exhausted the Treasures of the Earth,
her Viands so dainty, that all the mouths of Kings tasted none so exquisite,
nor would she touch her meat, but with Golden Forks, and precious Stones; God
to punish this cursed pride, and superfluity, cast her on a Bed, and assailed
her with a malady so hideous, so stinking and frightful, that all her nearest
Kindred were forced to forsake her; none staid about her but a poor old Woman
thoroughly accustomed to stench and death; this delicate Lady was poisoned with
her own perfumes in such a manner, that from all her body there began to drop a
most stinking humor, and a kind of matter so filthy to behold, and so noysom to
the ^ell, that every many ainly perceived that her dissolute, and excessive
Pride and daintiness had caused this Infection in her, which brought her to
such a miserable, and tragical end. Causins. Hely Court.

FINIS.
There are lately published Seven very useful, pleasant, and necessary Books,
which are all sold by Nath Crouch, at his Shop at the Sign of the Bell in the
Poultry, near Cheapside.
I SVrprising Miracles of Nature and Art, in two parts. Containing, 1. The
Miracles of Natre, or the wonderful signs and prodigious Aspects and
Appearances in the Heavens, Earth, and Sea. With an account of the most famous
Comets, and other prodigies since the Birth of our blessed Savior;
particularly the dreadful Apparitions before the destruction of Jerusalem, and
the Temple, The terrible Presages during the Wars and Desolations in Germany,
as several Suns appearing at once, the water in Ponds and Conduits turned to
blood, and blood rained from Heaven, Armies of Crows, Dogs, and other
Creatures, fighting and destroying each other. Intermixed with Remarks on the
Life of the renowned Gustavus Adolphus, K. of Sweden. Also a particular
Description of the 5 Blazing Stars seen in England, since 1663. A Relation of
the burning of Mount Aetna, with the horrid River of Fire and Brimstone which
issued thence in 1669. burning near 20 Towns and Villages, with abundance of
other unaccountable Accidents and Productions of all kinds, to 1682. Likewise a
true account of the Groaning Board. II. The Miracles of Art, describing the
most Magnificent Buildings, and other curious Inventions in all Ages, as the
Seven wonders of the world, and many other excellent Structures and Rarities,
throughout the Earth, Beautified with Sculptures.

Price One Shilling.

EXtraordinary Adventures of several Famous Men; with the strange Events, and
many signal Mutations and Changes in the Fortunes of many Illustrious Places
and Persons in all Ages; Being an account of a multitude of stupendous
Revolutions, Accidents, and observable Matters in many Kingdoms, States, and
Provinces throughout the whole World; Namely, the Adventures of Christ.
Columbus, and the manner of his Discovery of America, or the New World: the
Cruelties used by the Turks upon the Christians at Argiers, their manner of
selling Slaves, etc. The dreadful Mutiny in the City of Naples about their
Privileges in 1647. and how Messanello, a Fisher-Boy, ruled there for 10 days,
with greater Power than any King or Emperor. An Account of several Nations
destroyed, or driven from their Habitations by Gnats, Moles, Pismires,
Sparrows, Locusts, Hares, Conies, Fleas, Frogs, Mice, Grasshoppers, Serpents,
Worms, and other inconsiderable Creatures; The Tragical Deaths of John and
Cornelius de Wit, at the Hague in Holland. Remarks on the Life and Death of Sir
W. Rawleigh, with his last Speech and behavior on the Scaffold; with Pictures.

Price One Shilling.

III. Admirable Curiosities, Rarities, and Wonders in England, Scotland, and
Ireland; Or an Account of many remarkable persons and places, and likewise of
the Battles, Sieges, prodigious Earthquakes, Tempests Inundations, Thunders
Lightnings, Fives, Murders, and other considerable occurrences, and accidents
for many Hundred years past: and among others, the Battle of Bosworth, and the
miserable Death of Crookbackt Richard. The beheading of the Lord Cromwell, and
the Earl of Essex, with their last Speeches. the Rebellion of the Papists in
Cornwall, etc. against the Common Prayer in King Edward 6 time, and the Kings
Letter to them. The Rebellion under Ket the Tanner, and his Laws and Ordinances
in the Oak of Reformation near Norwich. The Association in Qu. Elizabeth's
time. The proceedings against Mary Queen of Scots, Mother to K. James, with her
last words on the Scaffold. The Lady riding naked through Coventry. Together
wit the natural and artified rarities in every County in England, with several
curious Sculptures.

Price One Shlling.

IV. Wonderful Prodigies of Judgment and Mercy, discovered in above 300
memorable Histories, containing. 1. Dreadful Judgments upon Atheists,
Blasphemers, perjured Villains, etc. As of several forsworn Wretches carried
away by the Devit, and how an horrid Blasphemer was turned into a black Dog,
etc. 2. The miserable ends of many Magicians, Witches, Conjurers, etc. with
diverse strange apparitions and illusions of the Devil. 3. Remarkable
predictions, and presages of approaching Death, and how the event has been
answerable, with an account of some Appeals to Heaven against unjust Judges,
and what vengeance has fallen upon them. 4. The wicked Lives and woeful Deaths
of several Popes, Apostates, and Persecutors; with the manner how K. Hen. 2.
was whipped by the Popes order by the Monks of Canterbury; and how the Queen of
Bohemia, a desperate Persecutor of the Christians, was swallowed up in the
Earth alive, with all her followers, etc. 5. Fearful Judgments upon bloody
Tyrants, Marderers, etc. also how Pop^el, King of Poland, (a cruel Tyrant) his
Queen, and Children, were devoured by Rats; and how a Town near Tripoly in
Barbary, with the Men, Women, Children, Beasts, Trees, Walls Rooms, Cats, Dogs,
Mice, and all that belonged to the place, were turned into perfect Stone, (to
be seen at this day) for the horrid crimes of the Inhabitants etc. 6. Admirable
Deliverances from imminent Dangers, and Deplorable Distresses at Sea and Land.
Lastly, Divine Goodness to Penitents, with the dying Thoughts of several famous
Men, concerning a future state after this Life, Imbelli^hed with diverse
Pictures.

Price One Shilling.

V. HIstorical Remarks and Observations of the Ancient and present state of
London and Westminster, showing the Foundations, Wills, Gates, Towers, Bridges,
Churches, Rivers, Wards, H^s, Companies, Government, Courts, Hospitals,
Schools, Inns of Court Charters, Franchises, and Privileges thereof; with an
account of the most remarkable Accidents, as to Wars, Fires, Plagues and other
occurrences, for above Nine hundred years past, in and about these Cities; and
among other particulars, the Rebellion of Wat. Tyler, who was slain by the Lord
Mayor in Smithfield, and the Speech of Jack Straw at his Execution; The Murder
of King Hen. 6. and likewise of Edward 5. and his Brother, by Richard 3. called
Crook-back. The Insurrection in London in King Henry. 8. time, and how 411 Men
and Women went through the City in their shifts, and ropes about their Necks to
Westminster Hall, where they were pardoned by the King; with several other
Remarks to this Year 1681. and a description of the manner of the Trial of the
late Lord. Stafford in Westminster Hall; Illustrated with Pictures, with the
Arms, of the 65 Companies of London, and the time of their Incorporating.

Price One Shilling

VI. The Fourth Edition of the Wars in England Scotland, and Ireland, being
near a third part enlarged, with very considerable Additions, containing an
impartial Account of all the Battles, Seiges, and other remarkable
Transactions. Revolutions and Accidents which have happened from the beginning
of the Reign of King Charles the First 1625. to His Majesty's happy
Restoration, 1660. And among other particulars, the Debates and Proceedings of
the Fourforst Parliaments of King Charles. The Murder of the Duke of Buckingham
by Felton. The Tumults at Edinburgh in Scotland, upon the reading the
Common Prayer. The Insurrection of the Apprentices and Seamen, and their
assaulting of A. B Laud's House at Lambeth. Remarks on the Trial of the E. of
Strafford, and his last Speech. The horrid and bloody. Rebellion of the Papists
in Ireland, and their murdering above 200000 Profestants in 1641. The Death of
Archbishop Land Duke Hamilton, Lord Capel, Mr. Love, Dr. Hewet, and others.
The illegal Trial of King Charles 1. at large, with his last Speech at his
Suffering. And the most considerable matters which happened till 1660. with
Pictures of several remarkable Accidents.

Price One Shilling.

VII. THe Young man's Calling, or the whole Duty of Youth; in a serious and
compassionate Address to all young Persons to remember their Creator in the
days of their Youth. Together with Rmarks upon the Lives of several excellent
young Persons of both Sexes, as well ancient as modern, who have been famous
for Virtue and Piety in their Generations; namely, on the Lives of Isaac and
Joseph in their Youth. On the Martyrdom of seven Sons and their Mother; and of
Romanus a young Nobleman with the invincible courage of a Child of seven years
old, who was martyred. On the Martyrdom of diverse holy Virgins and Martyrs. On
the Life of that blessed Prince King Edw. 6. with his earnest Zeal for the
Protestant Religion, and his ingenious Letters to his Godfather A. B. Cranmer,
when but 8 years old, with his last words and Prayer against Popery. On the
Life and Death of Queen Jane, as her learned Dispute with Fecknam a Priest,
about the Sacrament, her Letters to her Father the Duke of Suffolk, to her
Sister, and to Harding an Apostate Protestant. On the Life of Queen Elizabeth
in her Youth, with her many Sufferings and Dangers, from bloody Bonner and
Gardener, and her joiful Reception to the Crown. On the Religious Life and
Death of the most Noble and Heroic Prince Henry, eldest Son to King James; And
also of the Young Lord Harrington, etc. With Twelve curious Pictures,
Illustrating the several Histories.

Price Eighteen Pence.

All sold by Nath Crouch, at his shop at the sign of the Bell in the Poultry,
near Cheapside. 1683.

FINIS

