The Loyal Remembrancer: OR, A POEM DEDICATED To the Queens most Excellent
Majesty, And may serve as a Remembrance to all Posterity.

Queenie

Printed at London, by R. Wood, 1650. But not permitted to be public till now,
1660.

To the Royal Majesty OF Henrietta Maria, Queen of Great Britain, France, and
Ireland, etc.
MADAM,
IT is now high time that your Princely eyes should no longer contract Redness
from Tears, but a brave fire from revenge, that you should deal with your
passion as the generous Ormond with that infamous firebrand of the World, that
Canker to the Royal tock and Branches, Cromwell, suffer it to possess some
Out-skirts and Frontiers of your Soul, that by the expansion of his
encroachments, its spirits may be wasted and laid open for ruin; And your
victorious reason (contracting all its forces) sweep all such Treacher us
invaders from the face of the World, and leave nothing of it in Nature but a
memory, which may make it stink to all Posterity.

Porcia's Coals are of no further use for despair, all they can be serviceable
in, is to create a flame to which the Barbarous rebels must be fuel, and the
fire may be a purifier to the region of Sovereignty, clearing all the air from
those two greatest plagues to order and mankind, Rebellion and Regicide: God
has now ripened them for the Sickle of Revenge; it is highly opportune to shake
them from the Trees of Authority and Rapine where^n they hang: And since
hanging is natural for such Gomorrah Apples, Tyburn in England is the properest
place in the World for such Fruits, if their rottenness be not too violent Eye
sores to the view, and of too great a stench to the Nosethrils of Passengers.

The 30th of January shall be reckoned amongst those Ominous days which are
fatal to the repose and safety of Nations, which though it antecede here that
in England by ten days, yet my passion of Revenge, and my engagement to follow
that Standard of your Heroic Son, which must carry with it a restitution of the
World to Laws, Liberty, Religion, Conscience, and all other Obligati^ns Divine
and Humane, has made me make use of the Calendar in France, and present an
Anniversary upon the most horrid Murder the Sun ever viewed; not to stir up
your un exampled piety to tears, but to awake your own royal and other loyal
Bosoms to revenge; which when it shall break forth in its just magnitude and
dimensions, the Rebels will then confess, That Our silence is like a Calm,
whose unsuspected Tranquillity is followed by nothing less dangerous then
totally subverting Earthquakes, or universal consuming Thunder.

Madam, The Persian Princes had a constant Moniter to remember them of Greek
affronts and injuries, may this Anniversary be your Remembrancer that all
Europe is engaged to your assistance; That you have a Fate more noble im^^nding
then to live in Exile, or Vn-revenged; That you have a SON, who by his fiery
persecutions and virtues, will one day make good in his examples all which is
related of the m^st excellent Princes; That there is a Nation which with
infinite groans implores its restitution to Monarchy, its redemption from
^ebellion, in which it is fatally captivated and engulphed and (which Madam
dese^ves a lower rank amongst th^se more Majestic concernments (...) let it be
a speaking testimony to the World, that I am (in spite of all the revolutions
occasioned by Thieves, Rebels, and Regic^des)

Your Majesty's and all your Royal Families most humble and never changeable
Servant and Subject, S. C.

Allegiance to the memory of our late Murdered Sovereign.
SUch was the Pride of Murder in our loss,
To dub the Scaffold equal to the Cross:
Since the Worlds Crucifix all Butcheries
The Jury finds Chance-medly unto this.
The Primitive and Modern Martyrs all,
Members of Charles his Body mystical,
The Universal Bill of Martyrdom,
In him contracted to a total sum.
It Is thought thy Savior, only Priest, would dye,
And leave his Kingly sufferings to thee.
In life and death his Viceroy as if all
His Offices were Hypostatical.
How durst they think he mortal was, or say
He less then Angels were assumed Clay?
Fooled Tyrant Wretches who believe him dead,
Who from Humanity but vanished.
Faith being weak, a Demonstration's He,
To loose the Riddle of Theanthrophie.
To all religious under standing Eyes,
Humanity was but his late Disguise.
But so much Deity may justly grudge,
To be condemned, and Barrabas his Judge.
When every drop of blood he shed, was much
Too precious to redeem the ^ouls of such,
For had old Adam spawned no better seed,
The Eternal Son had never lived or died.
If his Posterity had all been such,
The Blood of Bulls and Goats had been too much.
Lord, was it not enough, thy self to dye,
But thou must suffer too by Deputy?
Who his pure Breath a prey to Villains gave,
Not worthy to be Sextons to his Grave.
Shov'ling his Monarchy, as if it must
Follow like Earth to Earth, and Dust to Dust.
How will the Hoogen Chandlers scorn our fate,
When Hewson vampes and underlayes the State?
When Pride in Ale, and Dray-man Buffe shall sing
^'ve slain Goliath with a Small-Beer Sling.
And drawn our Royalty so near the Lee,
This hand must tappe a well-hop'd Anarchie.
It Is time to pass from this infernal host,
From whom I rise as from the Nethermost:
And pass, as through a Purgatory flame,
To a prepared Bliss in Charles his Name.
Whilst I with trembling and Religious care,
Do go unto my mourning as my Prayer.
I do repent I have profaned his Hearse,
And sacred Ashes with un-hallow'd Verse.
To whom, as one Religious Votarie,
Three Pilgrim Kingdoms owe their Piety.
Though Saint's too mean a Name for him, we know
His Virtues Canoniz^d him here below:
God did to him so much his Likeness deal,
'Tmight seem his second Precept to repeal.
He appears not only ^tir to every sense,
But Sphere; and ^e his own Intelligence:
So glorious that this Riddle he begets,
The Sun then solely rises when he sets.
Whose Guide his saving light is ere they rest,
Shall over take the Wise men of the East.
Who so his wisdoms just Admirer is,
Says Solomon's, was ^ypical to his.
Had they, and Shebahs Queen lived at one time,
With what delight would she have honored him!
For why his Continence was so Divine,
He it alone embraced as Concubine.
Vestal might have lain with him in bed,
And rise with her Religious Maiden head.
How did he in St. Michaels Angel-vein
Confute those evils which durst him arraign!
If we the Master-roll of Virtues call,
The name of Charles may answer for them all.
As what we attribute to God must be
It self, the absolute Divinity.
So reason coupled with morality,
This Definition gets that they were he.
Who now for either seeks (he being spent)
Without a Substance looks for Accident.
But, as the Sun sets only unto Us,
And never shines himself less glorious.
Our Sols eclipse was to improve his Light,
But smother us in an Egyptian Night.
As Earthquakes do destroy from mile to mile,
And fast Foundations silip Cross and Bile,
The Center yet being never stirred at all;
So we (not Charles) are bruised in his Fall.
His execution was his Subjects Pain,
They lost their King, and yet their King does reign,
Not as a Deaths-head shell, or a Gravestone,
Memento's are for Mortals of their own.
In this sad Paper every one may see,
His Epitaph, in his own Elegy.
Without a Contradiction 't may be said,
Though he did Dye, not he, but we are Dead.
What dying life is ours, that He must dye,
And we, that do survive him, Putrify?
But stay, his Urne is warm; and, at his Name,
His Ashes start, and wake into a flame.
Through all the shop of sublunary things,
Two are immortal, Phoenixes and Kings.
Like Angels, each a Species makes alone,
Yet neither dies without succession.
Draw, draw great Son; and let thy thirsty Steel,
Their Bowels tappe till thy full Vengeance reel.
Ride like a Whirlwind driving on the flood,
That Thames may know no full Sea, but of blood.
He that not follows may he drown in the Stream
Till brave Revenge has swept the Land so clean
That all thy blasted Enemies we see,
Like Sodomes Apples rot upon the Tree:
And Travelers praise thy Executions,
For paving Road-ways with the Rebels Bones.
Postscript.
THe Author of this Poem was sometimes a Scholar in Su^tons-Hospital; and when
the Lords came to visit, the Master of the School chose this Youth to make an
Oration to the Visitors, who performed it so well, that my Lords Grace of
Canterbury intended to prefer him; but the World growing wicked, was prevented,
and he left to himself, (in the worst of times) being forced to beg, till he
was starved, and died. He was so Loyal to his Prince, that he would take no
Employment from the Rebels, though it were offered him; So put pen to paper,
and wrote this Elegiack Anniversary, as a Monument in time to come of his
Loyalty.

FINIS.

