CROMWELL'S RECALL: OR, THE PETITION OF The zealous Fraternity, convented
iniquity, at the House of John Goodwin Arch-flamin of England, To the Supreme
Authority of this Nation, the House of Common-Traytors assembled in PARLIAMENT.

WITH A DECLARATION OF The said House, for the recall of Cromwell from his
dangerous expedition to sit with them and Vote that which he dare not do, July
the 30. 1649.

Together with CROMWELL'S Description.

IT is Ordered, that this Declaration and the Petition of our loving and
seditious Brethren be forthwith printed.

Hen. Scobel, Cler. de Com.

Written by Alethophilus Basiluphilus Britannophilus.

Darby-house Printed in the first year of our Reign, 1649.

CROMWELL'S RECALL: OR, The humble PETITION of the zealous Fraternity convented
in iniquity at the House of John Goodwin Arch-flamin of England: To the Supreme
Authority of this Nation the House of Common-Traytors Assembled in PARLIAMENT.
Shows,

THat whereas manifest tokens of our god Mammons assistance, have been both
precedent, present, and subsequent to all our undertakings in the seven last
years Rebellion; but more especially have gone along with us since the
Reformation, otherwise called, the New modelling of our Army under the Command
of his Servants Og and Magog, Cromwell and Fairfax, evidently demonstrating,
that he will not forsake us, while we shall obey and follow the direction of
those his chosen Servants; yet the Supreme Tyranny of England assembled in this
House of profanation has thought it convenient to employ that happy Instrument
of sedition our most noble Lord and Brother Oliver Cromwell for the propagation
of Heresy and Rebellion in the Land of Ham, alias Ireland: but how great an
impediment this may be to the thorough setlement of us and our Posterity in
this Country, that he the Pillar of Heresy and Mammons Vicegerent should leave
us, before a perfect establishment of our Government, and go amongst those that
are as cruel as we are wicked, we will refer to your most impious
considerations: but we cannot pass over (without hearty thanks and humble
acknowledgment of your care) the manifestation of your zeal toward the
promulgation of your schismatic tenants; zealously professing, that neither
Principalities nor Powers, Equity nor Honor, Religion nor Conscience, Life nor
Death shall part us from you, but we shall faithfully honor, serve, and obey
you and your Ministers, as we have done hitherto, in all things, and at all
times; but we hope that the door of Address shall be open for us, that we may
freely present our traiterous and unlawful requests to this dishonorable
House, both in the behalf of our selves, and of our Brethren the Freeborn
People of England; and that if we have at any time the Spirit of Contradiction,
or of Southsaying (corruptly called by us, Prophecy) as we have at this time,
that we shall have (without any molestation) access to this Assembly.

Now, in verity, we find many spiritual conflicts for the departure of our
Brother in the Devil Cromwell; yet we are very sensible of the profit may
accrue to us and our zealous Faction by his navigation; but we cannot imagine
that his endeavoring to get another Country is as convenient as the keeping
this, which cannot be defended without him our Headpiece and Buckler.

And besides, we conceive, and so we hope does this blear eyed Assembly, that
the multitude of Robbers, Murderers, Jayle-birds, Turks, Jews, Heretics,
and Atheists which are gone along with him, has so much debilitated the
strength of this Nation, that we should not be able to resist the least R^sing:
therefore we beseech this wall-eyed Conventicle to take this our Petition and
our Reasons into consideration, and that they will be pleased to call back
Goliath from facing the Israelites, so that we may live in peace and quietness
under the banner of the Devils anointed.

And your Petitioners shall pray for your lives and continuation of Authority,
till the Gallows which will be the end of us all, shall divide us. Signed by
many ill-affected in London.

The House after some debate, sent out the Mace to bring in Mr. Goodwin, and
three of the chief: to whom Mr. Speaker gave the thanks of the House, and
promise of speedy satisfaction which upon their return was presently took into
consideration, and order issued out, as follows:

An Ordinance of the Commons assembled in Parliament, for the sudden return of
the Lord Gen: Cromwell from the Irish expedition.
Die Lunae.

ORdered by the Commons assembled in Parliament, that Oliver Lord Cromwell,
General of all the Forces on this side Ireland, raised by the power of
Parliament for defense of that Place, do, if he can, return to us at
Westminster: And it is likewise Ordered, that all Soldiers do repair with him
to the City of London, where they shall be rewarded for their gallant
resolution and deportment. Every Colonel that has magnanimously ventured to
look upon the Sea without a prospective Glass, shall have a hundred pounds
when he can catch it; every Lieutenant Colonel of the same valor, fourscore
and ten pounds; every Major, fourscore, etc. And it is likewise Ordered, that
every Colonel that has pretended to engage for Ireland shall have fifty
pounds; every Lieutenant Col: five and forty pounds, etc. And those Moneys to
be raised out of Deanes and Chapters Lands. And further, it is Ordered by the
Authority aforesaid, that if any one be so adventurous as, notwithstanding this
Order, shall put to Sea and go to Ireland, shall have all his Goods Sequestered
in England to the use of the Commonwealth, and it shall belawfull for one
either Irish or English in the Domini^ns of Ireland to execute justice upon him
for contempt of the Authority of Parliament.

This Order is forth with to be printed and sent into all parts of this
Kingdom as soon as possible.

Hen. Scobel, Cler. de Com.

That his Lordship may be the better entertained in his return, I was
commanded by the Authority aforesaid to annex this description of him.

CROMWELL'S Description.
Mark Cromwell from the Head to the Feet
He Is like the Minotaure of Creet:
Or like the Prodigy of Nile,
Th'insinuating Crocodile:
But to speak truth, the wicked Elfe
Is like to nothing but himself:
Never before him, on earth did dwell
Such an Epitomy of Hell:
Surely the Devil could not find,
A body fitter for his mind.
H'as a Roundhead, Hair that the Cats
Monopolize unto the Rats:
His Ears hang over like a pent-house,
Or like an old decayed rent-house:
Or like a broad hat brims that do
Reach from the head unto the shoe:
A front branded with impudence,
And cheeks puffed up with arrogance:
With eyes sunk in his bead, to show
They dare not see, what he dares do:
But for his NOSE (p^x (...)) there w^^e
Can find a fit comparison;
It Is like the Pyramid that stands
On Egypts Pilgrim-trodden sands;
Like a fired Beacon, or it looks
Like the great Letter in News-books;
And if turned to the Sun, you may
See on his teeth the time of the day:
Africa never brought more Monsters out
Then this same edifying Snout:
Once in a month it breeds, and
Brings forth of Maggots a train band:
That and his mouth sends forth a breath
Of many Royallists their death:
And such sulphurous scents you would swear
Etna and Hell but vapors were
With Blasphemies, that will not thought on
By Blatant beast, or Julian:
Like to a Gulf, opening so wide
Into it, Curtius may ride.
His Teeth like Palisadoes be,
Or like Stakes standing three by three.
But oh! his Chin it wheels about
Like to his Soldiers in a rout;
And so disorderly does run
Unto his neck it is garrison:
His Neck, worth nothing, only that
It may sustain his Bodies fate:
With Shoulders bread, and a full Breast
In which all villainy does rest:
His Hands and Arms besmeared be
Ore with the blood of Royalty:
I know not with what to compare
His other parts, but even they are
Either like these, or like his Heart
That not degenerating part:
And joined with it make a complete
State Matchivilian Hypocrite.
FINIS.

