A Word in Season TO THE KINGDOM OF ENGLAND. OR, A precious CORDIAL for a
distempered KINGDOM. Wherein are laid down things profitable, and useful for
all, and offensive to none that love the Truth and Peace.

By the meanest of the Servants of Jesus Christ, M. Carry.

ISAIAH 48.17, 18, 19. Thus says the Lord thy Redeemer, the Holy one of
Israel; I am the Lord thy God which teaches thee to profit, which leads thee
by the way which thou should go.

O that thou had hearkened unto my commandments: then had thy peace been as a
river, and thy righteousness as the waves of the sea. Thy seed also had been as
the sand, and the offspring of thy bowels like the gravel thereof: his name
should not have been cut off, nor destroyed from before me.

LONDON, Printed by R. W. for Giles Calvert, and are to be sold at the
Black-spred Eagle at the West end of Paul's, 1647.

To the READER.
WHoever thou art that read the ensuing discourse, know, that if thou art
one that art active in helping on of that which I call the positive part; then
thou do what lies in thee to bring happiness, and tranquillity to thy native
Kingdom: and however it go with others, thou shall surely reap the benefit of
it, either internally, or externally, or both. But if thou art one that drivest
on the negative part, thou art one that endeavourest to drive on thine own
ruin: and this I hope thou will plainly see in the perusing of it: wherein I
should have been far more Copious, but knowing that generally brevity is
affected, I have endeavored to say as little as could be spoken (if I said any
thing) in the things that are most generally acknowledged, and to be as
compendious as I could in the things that are (though clear in themselves) more
stumbled at by some. Now therefore if thou would not be the contriver of
thine own ruin, but desire thine own and the Kingdoms prosperity; then
desire strength from above, to overcome all the temptations under which thou
art, and lay aside all the designs which thou have on foot (in which it may be
thou aimest at thine own outward advantage) wherein thou crossest all, or any
of the particulars, laid down in the positive part of this discourse: so shall
thou have thy desires satisfied, which that thou may obtain, is the aim, and
fervent desire of

Thine in any Christian office of Love (however thou dealest with me) that lies
in my Power. M. C.

A word in season to the Kingdom OF ENGLAND.
THe great God, having wrought by his own arm great deliverances for this
Kingdom of England, does doubtless now expect that England should bring forth
answerable fruit, when he had hedged, and fenced his vineyard, ( Isa 5.) and
bestowed choice favors upon it, he looked (says the text ver. 4) that it
should bring forth grapes, and it brought forth wild grapes. It were well for
England if he had not just cause so to complain of it. But that it may not be
so, let all the people, from the highest to the lowest, from the King that sits
upon the Throne, to him that sits upon the Dunghill; let Parliament, and Synod,
City and Country, attend to the ensuing discourse (and let it sink deep into
their spirits) which does contain a Narration (wholly drawn from the
Scriptures) of those paths which (a nation walking in them) will be the
readiest way, and shortest cut to a happy and flourishing estate.

But though this discourse concern all, and therefore in general I call upon
all to atend unto it; yet in a more peculiar manner I shall direct it to you
Chaire-men (that is to say) you that sit at the Stern, you that are the heads
and rulers of the people, and are in places of authority: for you are to act
for the whole kingdom, and what is done by you is done by them: and either the
benefit, or the evil of it will reflect upon the whole therefore to you in
particular I shall direct my discourse, and let all others observe so much of
it as concerns them in their several places, and stations.

But before I come to the positive part of my discourse, to lay down what
those paths are, which are the paths of happiness, etc. I shall first brieefly
lay it down negatively, what it is not, but what is the way to ruin (because
the Scripture so lay e it down also) and shall then more largely lay down the
positive part, for the making of it most clear, and perspicuous to every eye,
if posible: and shall answer those objections, which possibly some may make
against it.

As for the negative part. 1. Oppression of the poor, and suffering the violent
man to afflict the needy, and the neglect of doing justice in their behalf, is
not the way to happiness, but the way to ruin, Psa. 12.5. for the oppressing
of the poor, and for the sighing of the needy, now will I arise says the Lord,
I will set him in safety etc. Isa. 5.7, 9. He looked for judgment, but behold
oppression; for righteousness, but behold acry: and what is the effect? In mine
ears said the Lord of hosts, of a truth many houses shall be desolate, even
great and fair, without inhabitant, when by unjust, and unreasonable ways,
men shall pluck away the lands, or estates, or detain the wages of the poor,
and needy, or those that in comparison of themselves are in a mean condition,
on purpose to feather their own nests, and to build them great and fair
houses; it is the ready paths to destruction, and to leave their houses without
inhabitant.

2. The abounding of such vices as these in a kingdom, without the due
execution of justice upon them, is the way to bring in destruction upon a
kingdom: as drunkenness, adultery, fornication, swearing, etc. Isa. 5.12. Woe
to them that rise up in the morning, that they may follow strong drink, that
continue until night, till wine inflame them, etc. Romans 10.8. They committed
fornication, and fell in one day 23. thousand, and because of oaths the land
mourns, says the Prophet Jeremiah.

3. To refuse to stoop to the Scepter of Jesus Christ, and not to admit of him
as King: and consequently, to receive all rules for worship from him, and to be
governed by him in all spiritual respects, but to follow the precepts and
commandments of men therein, is the way to ruin: As for those mine enemies
that will not have me to reign over them, bring them hither, and slay them
before me.

4. The troubling, wronging, and oppressing the Saints of Jesus Christ, is the
way to ruin a kingdom. For he that touches them, touches the apple of Gods
eye, and they are the props and pillars of a kingdom, and that kingdom that
shall turn those Lots out of it, whether it be by death, or by banishment,
takes the way to set it self on fire, and to open a gap for a devouring enemy
to come into it.

5. And lastly, That kingdom that shall say unto the Prophets, prophecy not,
and shall stop the mouths of those which God has opened to preach the Gospel
of Jesus Christ, and shall charge them not to preach Christ any more; takes the
way to ruin and destruction* for such are fighters against God, Acts 5 39.
and it is hard for them to kick against the pricks* let the potsherds strive
with the potsherds of the earth, Acts 9 5.
but as for those that shall thus do, if they persist in it, he will rule them
with a rod of Iron, and break them in pieces like a potters vessel; which
when it is broken can never be made whole again.

And thus I have shown what are the paths of destruction; and now I come to lay
down positively what are the ways that bring prosperity, and happiness to a
kingdom: which I shall particularly present unto, and press upon those that
are in places of authority: because what shall be done by them, is done for
the whole.

Be wise now therefore ye rulers, and be instructed all ye that are in places
of authority in England, kiss the Son least he be angry, and ye perish from
the way, when his wrath is kindled but a little. Psalm. 2.12.
Be wise ye rulers, etc. and let it be your care to relieve the oppressed, and
to judge the cause of the poor and needy, and let justice and judgment take
place with you, suffer not others to oppress, neither let it be found among
you; Let not the complaints of the poor, and the sighing of the needy, enter
into the ears of the Lord of Sabbath against you; but execute judgment, and
justice in your gates: so shall the kingdom be blessed and prosper.

2. Be wise ye rulers, and seeing ye should not bear the sword in vain, but
for the punishment of evil doers; let the sword of just punishment pass
against drunkards, whore-mongers, adulterers, and swearers, and other vices:
but I mention these especially, because on these the sword of justice does
least pass; and these do most abound. O how may these be seen and heard in the
streets, and every corner of the City, and little notice taken of them, but
they sin with a face of brass, and are neither afraid nor ashamed; there being
none, or few, that as Phinias did, do stand up and execute justice upon them.
Let instice be done upon such, that the judgments of God might be stayed, and
the land may be safe.

Thirdly, Be wise ye Rulers, and be instructed you Judges of England, and let
Jesus Christ reign over you; Cast your Crowns at his feet, and submit your
selves to his royal and glorious Authority, and incroach not in the least
degree upon his prerogatives, who as a King must only reign in the consciences
of his people, and govern them by his own Laws: and therefore make you no Laws
for the consciences of his people, nor suffer any to do it by any authority
derived from you; for that were to take the Crown off the head of Jesus Christ,
and put it on your own head; and those people that shall subject their
consciences to those Laws, Christ Jesus will say unto them, Mark 7.7.
In vain do you worship me, observing for Doctrines the commandments of men. O
therefore beware how you subject your selves, or your people in spiritual
worship to any rules, but those that Jesus Christ has appointed. Indeed such
as are judged to be truly godly men, may give advise and counsel therein: but
upon no Terms impose their counsel as a Law upon consciences, to whom the truth
of it is dubious: nor ought they in the least to despise one another, for not
being of one mind in circumstantials. This is the very rule of the Apostle
Romans 14.3. Let not him that eats, despise him that eats not; nor let him
that eats not, despise him that eats. Therefore kiss the son with the kiss
of obedience, and subject your selves to his blessed government: so shall the
blessings of his grace be poured out upon you.

Fourthly, Let it be your wisdom to beware how you do offend one of the little
ones of Jesus Christ, of whom he says, It were better for a man to have a
Millstone hanged about his neck and to be cast into the Sea, then to offend
them. Zach. 2.8.
Beware therefore how you touch the Apple of Gods eye: let none of his Saints
be wronged, or troubled by you: let them not be imprisoned or banished by you;
for they are the pillars of the Kingdom (in a sense) if they be moved, the
Kingdom will shake: if they be removed, the Kingdom will fall. O kiss the Son
with a kiss of love, and express your love to him, in loving his Saints, and so
shall the kingdom be established.

Fifthly, Be wise, and be sure you do not stop the mouths of the Prophets of
Jesus Christ, commanding them to Preach no more in his name. Let it be far from
you to do so, for if you should do so, yet they cannot but speak the things
they have seen and heard; that vision of Christ they have seen, and that voice
of the spirit they have heard, that they must speak. If the Lion has roared,
who will not fear? If the Lord has spoken, who can but Prophecy? and if they
be commanded the contrary, they must rather obey God then man: therefore be not
fighters against God: do not kick against the Pricks. But if the Prophets and
Preachers of Jesus Christ abound in your Land, then shall you become a happy
and glorious nation.

These are the paths, in which, if a kingdom walk, it will soon come into a
happy estate and condition: but because this last mentioned, which is of as
high a concernment as any of the former, may be probably most stumbled at; I
shall endeavor to back it with the ensuing arguments. And,

1. You that are the rulers of this Kingdom, do profess your selves to be the
Subjects of Jesus Christ, and to approve all his Commandments. 1 Cor 12.31.
Now he commands all his to covet earnestly the best gifts, but especially that
they may Prophecy. 1 Cor. 4.1. And this is spoken to all Saints whether they
had been brought up at the feet of Gamaliel or not. And what this Prophesying
is, the Apostle shows in the 1 Cor. 14.3. That it is speaking to edification,
exhortation, and consolation. And he makes no distinction in the exercise of
this gift of the spirit, between an Officer of the Church and another; for he
makes it to appear that any Member of the Church may exercise this gift, though
none may execute the office of an Elder, but such as are ordained thereunto, by
the laying on of the hands of the Presbytery: but speaking of prophesying,
says the Apostle; Ye may all Prophecy one by one, 1 Cor. 14.31. Now if you
approve of the commands of the spirit of Jesus Christ, who says to all his
Saints, covet to prophecy; how can you silence them when they so do?

2. Let it be far from you so to do, for then you do endeavor to quench the
spirit: for though you do permit some to Preach Jesus Christ, yet if you do
prohibit any from Preaching Jesus Christ, you do quench the spirit, and oppose
the freeness of the spirit, who is a free Agent. And as the wind blows where
it lists, though we see it not, so does the spirit, and God has not tied
himself to give out his spirit to such particular men, and to no other, but to
whom he pleases. He did not tie up the spirit of Prophecy in Law, neither to
the Priests and Levites, nor the Prophets, nor the sons of the Prophets; but
gave out of that spirit to Amos a Heards-man, and to others: much less has he
tied up the spirit of Prophesying now in the Gospel, unto such and such degrees
of humane learning: for many learned, godly Ministers have confessed, that they
have learned many spiriutall truths of Jesus Christ, from such as have had no
learning: and we know that Christ passed by the learned men in that time, and
chose illiterate men to be his Apostles. Now for you to silence any that do
preach Jesus Christ, of what rank soever, it is an endeavoring to quench the
spirit: which the Lord grant you may not do.

3. Let it be far from you to hinder any, because every tallent which the Lord
Jesus has given, he requires an improvement of it to his use; and it ought not
to lie hid in a napkin, and therefore the Apostle says, Every gift is given to
profit withal. 1 Cor. 12.7.
Now we know what the Lord said to him that did not employ his tallent. Cast ye
the unprofitable servant into utter darkness; there shall he weeping and
gnashing of teeth, Math. 25.30. So fearful is the doom of him that imployeth
not his tallent: what then will become of those that shall forbid any to employ
their tallents? But, O be you wise, and as you are Ordained of God to be, as
for the punishment of evil doers, so for the praise of them that do well; so
manifest your selves to be.

4. Do not you enact any law against any Saints exercising the gifts of the
spirit, that are given to them in Preaching or prophesying: because the Lord
has promised in the latter days, to power out his spirit more abundantly upon
all flesh, and your sons and your daughters shall prophecy: your old men shall
dream dreams, and your young men shall see visions, Joel 2.28. and the time of
the accomplishing of this promise more fully, is near at hand: for the total
overthrow of Antichrist and his final ruin shall suddnely be; And then the
everlasting Gospel shall be preached unto all nations, and kindreds, and
tongues, and people: and can any think that at that time the Lord will call
forth none to this work, but those that have taken such and such degrees in
the Schools? Now what a sad thing would it be, if when God shall call forth
some of his people to this great work, any humane power should stand in
opposition to it, and say, such and such men shall not do such a work.

5. Let it be far from you to forbid any man to preach the word of the Lord,
because his word does good, it is strong and powerful in confirming, and
comforting those that are called; and convincing, and converting those that are
uncalled, to make a people a holy and peculiar people to the Lord; you may see
the force of this argument, in taking a view of a passage in the Prophet Micah.
Mic: 2.6, 7, 8. In the 6. ver. we find the Lord complaining against the
people, in these words; Prophecy ye not, say they to them that prophecy. In
the 7. ver. The Lord is speaking thus: O thou that art named by the house of
Jacob, is the spirit of the Lord straightened? are these his doing? do not my
words do good to them that walk uprightly? As if the Lord had said, art thou
the people that art named by the house of Jacob? and do thou say unto my
Prophets, prophecy ye not? Thou should have delighted in the words of the
Prophets; for the house of Jacob have had experience that my words do good, and
yet is the spirit of the Lord straightened by you? and silence you it in my
Prophets? Well, what was the issue of this? you shall see in the following
verse, and thus it was. My people are risen up as an enemy, ye put off the
robe with the garment from them that pass by securely. When the Prophets are
forbidden to prophecy, and the word of the Lord is not preached among the
people, then iniquity abounds, and the people perish for want of knowledge:
then every one does that which his vain heart leads him unto. But the word of
the Lord converts the soul. Psa. 19.7. And the truths of God sanctify the
unholy, John. 17.17. and the word of God does good to them that walk
uprightly, Mic. 2.6.

Lastly, though there be many precious men abroad, that by your permission do
preach the word, yet they are few in respect of the multitudes of people in the
kingdom, that have none to preach unto them, and that cry for bread, but
cannot have it: O therefore let it be far from you to stop the mouths of any
godly men, that have the gifts of speaking to edification, exhortation, and
consolation! and though they have not all taken degrees in the schools of men,
yet if they have been good proficients in the school of Christ, if they be
experienced Christians, let them be protected by your authority, in
discharging their duty, in improving their talents to their Masters use and
the kingdoms good, for the harvest is great, but the laborers are few;
therefore let not the laborers that God has sent forth, be forbidden to work
in the Lords Vineyard, least the blood of those that perish be charged upon
those that hinder these laborers.

But it may be objected; it is a truth indeed, that all Saints ought to covet
the gift of prophecy; and secondly, it is an evil to quench the spirit; and 3
all ought to improve their talents; and 4 the abundant pourings out of the
spirit are promised; and 5 the word of the Lord does good; and 6 the laborers
are few: and in these considerations it were a sad thing to silence those that
are sent forth by Jesus Christ, furnished with the gifts of the spirit, for to
preach the Gospel. But if they should be permitted to preach without
ordination, who cannot submit unto it by reason of scruples, though they are
really Godly and able men, then many that are erroneous persons, and err
grossly, even in fundamentalls, would take liberty to go and vent their errors
among the people.

To this I answer, erroneous persons are not here pleaded for; but it is to be
desired that their mouths were stopped; but first, if none should be permitted
to preach but such as were ordained, yet could not this hinder erroneous
persons from spreading their errors, for those that hold the grossest errors,
and are the most notorious vile persons, may, by making a fair compliance for
the present, be admitted to Ordination, when afterward they may preach
erroneous doctrine, and prove scandalous in their lives; and this is very
evident: and though it be a trouble to those that ordain them, yet all the
wisdom of man cannot prevent it.

And secondly, it is a frequent thing for truth to be counted error by learned
men, even by those that have continually studied the letter of truth; it was so
in our Saviors, and his Apostles times: The high Priests, and all the Priests
and Levits (whose lips should preserve knowledge, as the Prophet has it) and
all the learned Doctors of the Law, who studied it continually, yet they
counted the truths of Christ, and his Aposties, which they made evident by
Moses, and the Prophets, to be errors.

Nay 3. Not only learned men, but those that are learned and really Godly men,
may account some circumstantiall truths (though not fundamental) to be errors,
and some errors to be truths, for though all that are real Saints, are built
upon one foundation, have one God and father, and one Lord Jesus, and one
faith, and one spirit, and one joy in that one spirit; yet those that thus in
the foundation agree in one, may yet exceedingly differ in circumstances. They
did so in the Apostles time, one is of Paul, another of Apollo, another of
Cephas; One eatheth flesh, another who is weak eats herbs; 1 Cor. 3.4
one observes a day, another observes it not, Romans 14.2
and the Apostle in the 1 Cor. 3.11, 12. Implies, that it was possible for many
errors to be built upon the true foundation (which he expresses by wood, hay,
and stubble) yet says he, the person shall be saved, yet so as by fire, and
every work which is not of Christ shall be burnt, the fire of the spirit shall
pass upon it, and as wood, hay, and stubble is before the fire all combustible,
so shall all error be, when it comes to endure the trial of the spirit, but
truth only shall abide the trial of the fire of the spirit. Now if it were so
in the Apostles times, that through imperfection in knowledge there were
circumstantiall errors amongst the Saints, then it is no wonder if there be
many more now, there having been such an universal darkness spread over the
world by the midnight of Popery that has been in the world: many of the
clouds where of being yet remaining over the faces of Saints. Now if it be so,
as it is clear, that circumstantiall errors may be in men built upon the true
foundation, then those men that are or shall be Ordainers (if they may be so
called) may have errors; and so may account that Truth which is contrary to
their errors to be error, when it is the truth it self.

4. I answer, we all expect the breakings forth of truth more and more, and no
man can say they have yet attained to perfection. Now this truth may appear to
some before it does to others. In some Circumstances it may appear to those
that are commonly called Presbyterians, before it does to those that are
commonly call Independents: and in other Circumstances it may appear to those
that are commonly called Independents, before it does to Presbyterians: And
shall the Presbyterians despise the Independents, because God (who does what he
pleases) has not given them that light which they have obtained, and have the
comfort of? Or shall the Independents despise the Presbyterians, because God
has not given them that light which he has conferred upon them, and they have
the comfort of? Oh no! let it be far from either of them, seeing they are all
built upon one foundation: but let them rather seriously consider that passage
of the Apostle, If any man be otherwise minded, God shall reveal it to such a
one: if one man be otherwise minded and have not received that truth that
appears to thee: It is not in his power of himself to receive it, nor in thy
power to communicate it: But it is the Lord that must reveal it to him, or else
he shall never receive it. And therefore if thou excellest thy brother in the
knowledge of the truths of the Lord Jesus in Doctrine or Discipline, consider
who it is that has made thee to differ: What have thou, that thou have not
received? and know, that that God that has communicated so graciously to thee,
may in his own time communicate more abundantly to thy brother, and thou thy
self may also see more hereafter then now thou do, as thou now see more
then thou have seen, and this Age sees more then the former Age.

5. We all condemn that Antichristian principle in Popery, to enjoin all to
believe as the Church believes, that is, as the Pope and his Clergy, as their
Laws, and Decrees, and Canons required them, not suffering them to search the
Scriptures, and to ground their faith upon it. And we had indeed just cause to
condemn it, and to detest it, for though men should teach nothing but the truth
of Christ, and people should receive it; yet if they receive it but from men,
and have not the word of God, and the spirit of God witnessing the truth of
that which is preached unto them, though they might receive the Letter of
truth, they yet could not receive the truth in truth, and so might perish
notwithstanding: therefore whatsoever appears to another to be a truth, yet if
it does not appear from the word to thee to be a truth, thou art not to
practice it. And,

6. I answer, as for erroneous persons, we ought to use no other weapons
against them, then what the Apostles did: they preached against them, and held
forth the truth for the conviction of them, but used no other way; nor did
Christ nor his Apostles speak of any other way: but say they, the weapons of
our warfare are not carnal, but mighty: for if it were required that the Civil
Magistrate by any power or force, besides that which the Gospel allows of,
should go about to suppress them, then might they suppress truth instead of
error. The civil Magistrates being but men, may judge a truth to be an error
through their imperfection in knowledge, and so may commend error instead of
truth, and condemn truth instead of error.

7. If there be a spirit of error upon any, and they err in fundamentals, not
knowing Jesus Christ, nor having received his spirit, and they go forth and
vent their errors after all Gospel-means used, we are to leave them to the
just judgment of God, who has revealed, that he will inflict his Judgments
upon them. As Micah 3.5, 6, 7. Thus says the Lord, concerning the Prophets
that make my people err, that bite with their teeth, and cry peace; and he
that puts not into their mouths, they even prepare war against them:
Therefore night shall be upon them, etc. To this purpose there are several
other passages in Ezekiel, and other of the Prophets. And the Apostle Peter
speaking of false Teachers that shall be among the people, says he, They shall
bring upon themselves swift destruction, for their Judgment lingereth not, and
their damnation slumbereth not, 2 Pet. 2.2, 3 And says Paul, If any man love
not our Lord Jesus Christ, let him be Anathema Maranatha. I could desire if
there were any rule clearly revealed for it, that the civil Magistrate might
so restrain them, as they might not speak a word to any man all their days:
but seeing not how far the Civil Magistrate has a sure rule for this, I turn
this desire into a prayer, to the great Magistrate of the whole world, the
great God, humbly desiring that he would make all his implacable enemies as a
wheel, and as stubble before the wind; and that he would so giude the civil
Magistrate in all his affairs, that under him all the Saints of God may live a
quiet and peaceable life in all godliness and honesty: So much in answer to
that Objection: but seeing it is presented as the way to happiness, to protect
from all wrong and violence, the Saints of Jesus Christ, and to beware of
imprisoning or banishing of them, least the Kingdom come to ruin; it may be
quaeried who are those Saints of Jesus Christ that are unto him as the Apple of
his eye? etc.

I answer, they are not confined to any particular society of men, that are
distinguished by such or such a title, as Presbyterians, Anabaptists,
Independents, Seekers, etc. and therefore cannot be defined by any such title,
as to say, only such as are Presbyterians are the Saints of Jesus Christ, or
only such as are Anabaptists, are the Saints of Jesus Christ, etc. Nor are they
all Saints that are distinguished by any of these titles; for many that profess
themselves to be for the Presbyterian way, are very scandalous persons, and the
Author of the Gangraena might have had as plentiful instances of scandalous
persons among those, as any of the rest, and that upon as unquestionable
evidences, had he dealt impartially in that work; and many of the way called
Independencie, have been very scandalous also, and so of the rest: and yet
among all these which have several titles, there are undoubtedly many real
Saints, so that we cannot say such a one is not a Saint, because he is not a
Presbyterian, an Independent, or an Anabaptist, etc. But who are Saints, and
who are not, is most visible to him that knows all things.

But if you would be sure to deal well with all the Saints of Jesus Christ,
then deal well with all them that do hold the head, do acknowledge God the
Father to be true God, and Jesus Christ to be the son of God, the brightness of
his glory, and the express Image of his person; and that this Jesus Christ is
the Savior, Redeemer, and the Justifier of all that truly believe on his name,
and that there is no other name under heaven whereby men may be saved, but by
this Jesus: and that he is the great King, Priest, and Prophet of his people,
and that from the Father and the Son proceeds the holy spirit, which
teaches, comfort, and sanctifies the Saints. I say, if a man do
acknowledge these things, which are the foundations, upon which Christ has
built his Church, and if his walking be not scandalous, whatsoever such a man's
judgment may be in circumstantiall things, if any one should condemn such in
so doing, he might condemn those whom God has justified, and offend the
generation of his children. But all those that so acknowledge the true
foundation, which is the foundation of all the Apostles and Prophets, ought by
you to be protected, and not to be deprived of their liberties and privileges,
as they are subjects, whatsoever their judgments be in circumstantials; but if
any of these offend in being drunkards, swearers, whoremongers, etc, let them
suffer according to the fact; but as long as they walk holily in their lives,
beware how you fall upon them, least they prove a burthensom stone unto you,
and in falling upon them you be broken in pieces* But if (as God forbid) the
civil Magistrate should be so far persuaded by the lovers of discords, and
enemies of peace, as to imprison, punish, banish, or turn out of the world some
of them, it should do them no hurt, for they should lose nothing by whatsoever
they suffer, but receive an hundred fold; but those that do it, would be in far
better case, if they were sufferers, then Actors.

Nor if while it is called to day, this seasonable word shall be received, it
may possibly prevent the breakings out of another fire of wrath, which
otherwise, may suddenly break out upon this kingdom. If now this cordial shall
be received, it may allay the violence of (and expel) that distemper which is
upon this kingdom, which otherwise may prove its death. Now it must be first
taken in by the head, by those that are in highest Authority, and from thence
the sweet and comfortable effects of it shall descend to all the members, the
whole body, to the strengthening and heightening of it, and making of it famous
among all the nations.

Many other things might be spoken by way of motive, and clearing some other
objections, but to an understanding people it is superfluous. The things herein
proposed being so clear, as that few or none that love the truth and peace
will, or can oppose them.

FJNJS.

