A CROWN, A CRIME: OR, THE MONARCH-MARTYR.
" Set up your Scaffolds; -- and your Prisoner bring;
" Nere worser Fate befell a worthyer King;
" This will true Bards in after ages sing.
STate-shaking Cethegus, cursed Catiline,
Dissect this horrid Treason of our time,
And tax proud Rome for holding yours a crime.
Un-king a King, because He was too good!
Doom Him a Tyrant, who for Justice stood!
Cruel, whose hand was never dipped in blood!
Adjudg'd for living well, unfit to live!
Denied for heavens provision a reprive!
Traitor, for pleading his Prerogative!
Barred from Reply, when he at Bar was tryde!
By Achans and Achitophels defyde!
Kept from his Childrens sight until He did!
Inform our knowledge, Heavens; there is some amiss
Skrean'd from our Skaly Eyes occasioned this;
"To snatch three Crowns from Him ('it is feared) from His.
What might this be! -- -Me thinks I see a brave
Creature of His awaking from his Grave,
Showing that Hand which His Dismission gave.
Yet to Excuse that Error, there is writ
The Doctrine of our Prelates under it:
"It was an Act convenient and fit.
Ay me! How Cheerful days produce sad nights
When Kings give ear to Pulpit-Parasites!
Which Scene is here presented in our sights.
A Prince decreed to forfeit his Command
By signing Others Errors with His Hand:
Creating so a Democratick Land.
Heavens judgement's Which might be implied by those words He spoke before his
Execution: "God forbid that I should be so ill a Christian, as not to say that
Gods Judgments are just upon Me; Many times he does pay Justice by an unjust*
Sentence, etc.
just! Let Sovereigns take heed
In Acts against their Conscience to proceed:
Timists will find no Advo(...)ates to plead.
Timists will prove weak Reeds in time of need.
But those pure-crimson Streamlings which were shed
On the Sable Stage, where He resigned His Head,
Sealed with a deep remorce, have witnessed
His peace is made; and that his Diadem
Cannot be now pulled off by hands of Men;
"His Courts removed to New Jerusalem.
EPITAPH.
BEhold the Mirror of a Prince pourtraid!
The living Embleam of a glorious shade,
Whose Chair of State was late a Scaffold made.
One, then whom never any did profess
More Zeal to the Public, and received less;
Of more desert, and brought to more distress.
That real luster to our Royal Garter;
That late inlarger of our Cities Charter;
Whose Crown the Crime that made this Monarch-Martyr!
Adieu Dear Prince; Death, like a loving friend
Has crowned thy sufferings with a peaceful end,
While headless we our ruin must attend.
Nor can we less expect, Iudgement's at hand
To scourge the follies of a sinful Land:
"What Brightman wrote we would not understand.
" From the fatal period of a Charlemaine,
" VVaine should a Kingdom in her Charles-waine:
" But Prayers nor tears might call him back again.
" Lords should resign their Patents to the Sword,
" Lurdane should equal any English Lord.
O brave Platonic Level! Martial Board!
Augurium Criticum in Auspicium Civicum.
JAne geris frontem geminam, Nova Troja fricatam,
Dum pateris Regem caede perire tuum.
Sin Carolum nescis; minitantia flebilis Vrbis
Funera quo siccis suspicis ista genis!
Conjugis, aedis, opis, reditura est gloria flammis,
Militis aut manibus praeda futura feris.
Haec cecinit Vates; Sed non credenda Superbis;
Cassandra ulterius non mihi (Shipton) eris.
HEroes pereunt; Generosi praedia perdunt:
Artifices lachrymant; fana profana jacent;
Publica Causa ruit; Terras Astraea reliquit;
Et Caroli casu Regio tota gemit.
Haec Simulata fides incendia contulit Urbi,
Exilium Civi, tristia fata plebi.
FINIS.

