Conscience-Oppression: OR, A COMPLAINT Of Wrong done to the PEOPLES RIGHTS,
BEING A Word necessary and seasonable to all Pious Christians in England,
whether in or out of Church Way; and to all sober minded and rational men, that
yet know how to value Law and Christian Liberty.

2 Cor. 11.29. Is any offended, and I burn not? Is it ingenuous to ask Liberty,
and not to give it? Protector's Speech at the dissolution of the Parliament,
page 18. BY I. CROOPE, a Subject of Christ's Kingdom, and of England's
Commonwealth.

LONDON, Printed in the Year, 1656.

TO THE Transient Reader,
Friend,
Whilst I put my self in thy stead, and consider my self, looking upon the
Title of this little Book, I find these thoughts arising, viz. This is some
new Faetus of some hot brain, and adds to the infinite number of those Libels,
which the abuse of Liberty of the Press has brought forth; and it shall
content me to read the Title, I know better how to spend my time then to hazard
it in looking through these sheets. But again, if I had a mind to recreate my
self in reading a new book, I would not choose this subject, (Liberty of
Conscience) which has been so thoroughly ventilated, that to do any more in it,
would be but actum agere, to labor to no purpose: But because I know, let me
tell thee in answer, that the Author had as little time to spend in recreations
as thou, and was also as loath to be found among the Scriblers of the times;
and did well consider what was written for the vindication of the truth of
Liberty in Religion, from the pens of those that hold it in unrighteousness:
But withal he perceived, that some who have professed this truth with their
mouths, have yet denied it with their hands; therefore he goes not about to
argue with them for their conviction, (as supposing that done already;) but
historically to give some account of the bringing forth of this Monster
Persecution into the world; and of the strength and valetude thereof amongst us
at this day, notwithstanding all the blood spilt, and damage sustained in
contesting against it. That all those that resolve to walk in the way of God,
according to the persuasion of their own consciences, may first sit down, and
consider what it will cost them, lest the portion of that builder that had not
wherewithal to finish become their reward. And that they that are willing to
enjoy liberty themselves, and leave it (as a pearl of great price) to their
posterities may still be incited to make their christian applications to
heaven (where they shall not be rejected or upbraided) for this rich mercy; and
to earth also, if yet there be there any hope. These are some of the
principles and ends of this present undertaking, in which I cannot promise thee
(whosoever thou art) that thou shall find nothing that will disrellish thee;
for as much as the Author has not studied to please parties, but to serve
truth, according to his best judgment. But if it be matter of fact that
displeases thee, thou must not blame him, but the Actors; if his Judgment
occasionally given, remember he pleads for thy liberty, therefore give him
leave to take his own, while he does it soberly and peaceably. Thus having
found this piece willing to travel abroad; I thought that in humanity due to
Strangers, I should not suffer it to go alone; therefore have given this
Epistle to wait upon it; whether it be suitable or no, do thou judge.

Farewell.
A Necessary and Seasonable Word to all pious Christians in England, whether in
Church Way, or out; and to all sober-minded and rational men, that can yet tell
how to value Law and Christian-Liberty.
THat this Island of Great Britain has been the public Stage upon which many
admirable and notorious passages both of Church and State, has within these
sixteen years been acted, is an Assertion; the truth of which is so well known,
and trumpeted abroad in the world, that there is no man which has eyes and
ears to see and hear what is done below, can easily be unacquainted with it:
The rise and swelling of either of those Monarchies, so famous, both in sacred
and in common History, had few more eyes attending on them, to observe their
motion and their end, then have been upon our English Revolutions; the argument
of our bloody Tragedy is dark, and for matter diverse; the Actors have been
found to be of diverse tempers, and the Epilogue (if yet it be) has been as
strange and unexpected. They that have been spectators only of these things,
may stand aloof, and laugh, as sure they do, to see how strangely we have been
abused and cheated, by those who have put on a face, promising better things,
whereby we are become the scorn, and the byword of our enemies: Yet I am not
so much indulging the opinion of the Atheists, as to think our English affairs
to be bolted thus, without the hand of a divine Providence, No, I believe the
doctrine of the Psalmist to be true, (and some shall find it so)
That there is a God that judges in the earth; nor do I so look upon this
latter, as thereby to excuse men from the guilt of their Treasons, Murders,
Oppressions, Self-seekings, Oath, and Promise-breaches, etc. under pretense of
serving the ends of Providence.

A clear and full Narrative of the bloody travells of this Nation, would
without doubt, be profitable much in the exact perusal, and the comparing of
them with the present issues, that appear as a monstrous and unnatural
offspring, may teach the people how to make the place a B^chim, a Land of
Tears, as it has been made an Akeldama, a Field of Blood; such a relation is
not now my task, nor is it at any time within my power, to undertake; yet it is
a work not unworthy of some abler man to represent unto the Nations view, by an
Ink and Paper-Prospect; which way, and by what fair allurements they have been
led into their thraldom, that they may be the better able for the future to
discover, and make provision against all such false pretenders; I shall only
go back so far, as thereby to take a little tripping for the present discourse,
which ought to sink so deep into the soul of every Christian, and true
Englishman; for, who can hear of, and not be affected with the liberty of
conscience, the argument of the present discourse of person, of estate,
according to the fundamental right of all?

That the people of this Land have been a free people, many and happy, have
been the attempts of late time to prove; and so far have they gone therein,
that they have made the truth thereof to shine forth through demonstration
beyond a doubtful ghess; so that in this, we are not put so much to the
invention what should be in reason, not yet enjoyed, as of what has been the
peoples birthright, and their fundamental Law. It has been concluded by the
State-Caluists, that the end of civil Government is the peoples wel-ware, and
their welfare consists in the preservation of their Liberties and Estates from
wrong and robbery, and the Governors are to watch that these be not invaded by
force or fraud of any; for it can never be imagined that a people should elect
a Prince to rule them, upon any other terms, or to any other purpose then that
of their well-being; And for this cause, (and only this) they pay their
Tribute, and bow down themselves in honor and obedience; Cook's Redintegratio
Amoris.
no Law of Nature or Reason binding men to choose or serve such a power, that
does directly seek or endeavor to procure their ruin, and destruction. It Is no
need for me to dispute here (if I could) the rights of a pure and downright
conquest; for the present State of this Nation looks not with that face, nor is
it manifestly professed, as I know. And yet there are very bold interpreters of
State-proceedings that have confidence enough to speak much this way, to
insinuate themselves by such an attribution, into the affections of the present
Power, that they may sleep and dream securely in its bosom. Sadler's Rights of
the Kingdom, etc. p. 81. of 30. after 93. whether by the error of the Printer
or (...), ex Beda.
But I must not stand so far off the present intendment; it is manifest that the
peoples Liberties have been (in former, as well as later times) surprised, and
rent, and torn from them, and in special, the Liberty of Conscience, (the
subject principally aimed at, and the loss or curtailing thereof, most deplored
in this Address) that men must not be free to think or speak their thoughts
about the things of heaven, (if they differ from the Statute-Religion) without
endangering of their lives, or freedom: There was a time wherein the interest
of Christianity was clearly distinct, and carried distinctly from the Civil.

In the primitive times, when the Government of the Church was invested in the
person of the Son of God, and in him it yet resides, and the New Testament was
established before men, the Kings and Rulers of the Nations were altogether
Infidel and Paganish, and so they continued generally, till the British
Constantine sat down in the seat imperial; during most of which time the
Gospel flourisht much, and its worshippers did conquer still, although they
suffered without the least dependence on the arm of the Nations powers: The
sword of the spirit was then found sharp enough to cut off Heresy arising, and
Heretical men; and if it be nature and right reason in a Magistrate to censure
and subdue such as speak against the God of his Nation, as it is believed, the
Roman Emperors are justified by reason and the Law of nature, because they
persecuted the Christians, who, if they preached the Gospel, must be thought to
speak against the God of their Country; but how the Law of nature and right
reason, which are the work, or rather are of God, as well as ought beside can
be set at so great a variance with the Gospel, even to the point of sword, the
one piercing the very bowels of the other, by this state maxim I cannot
readily understand: But I suppose the rule must be qualified with a provision,
to make it hold the better; during the intervall then between the first
dawnings of the New Covenant, and the times of Constantine the great, there was
little compliance between the spiritual and secular Interest, and the Church
received little from the Emperors, or their Deputies, besides the Torments and
effusion of blood.

After the time of this Constantine, the first Christian Emperor, the minds of
the Church-leaders began to flagg much in the spiritual Profession of Christ,
and they that were professed Teachers of men in Divine Truth, do contrary to the
nature and ends of Christianity, make their nests in the profits and pomp of
the world; whiles by their example, as well as by their doctrine, they should
have provokt men to heavenly-mindedness. Now poison was sent into the Church,
it was an Oracle they say, heard in the Air, the Bishops consult for earthly
honor, and a pompous Religion or worship, much in outside and popular
ostentation: They are in conjunction with the Grandees and Rulers of the
Nations, the better to effect their worldly ends; they lie down together, and
between them there is, amongst others, this bastard, hellish Brat of violence
and persecution begoten, to be laid at the doors of whomsoever they pleased,
that now if any shall take the boldness to correct their errors in doctrine or
worship, they can quickly make him hold his peace, or send him packing: Nay,
now all the Nations under these godly Kings and Bishops, must, will they, nill
they, submit to that worship and those Rules they shall Impose upon them, by
the arguments of force and violence, if not by the force of their arguments.
Now the beast with the seven heads and ten horns, and that with two, are fitly
brought up, and joined together, to support each other mutually, and to call in
their worshippers, and to destroy those that refuse to come, prophesied on long
before, Rev. 13. throughout; and the Apostasy of the Churches is much
manifested, to the sons of light, whereby they see the truth of Paul's doctrine
about the man of sin.

The Christian Hierarchy thus degenerated and falling down to worldly
Interests, as to an Idol they most adored, hasten to the setting of Church
matters by the power of the Magistrate, which they have by this time in some
good measure made theirs, and to bring the professing Nations thereby to an
uniformity in doctrine and discipline, under pretense of avoiding confusion;
when indeed nothing has proved more banefull and poisonous to the sons of men,
and more prejudicial to the work of Christ's Kingdom, then this very thing, of
forcibly imposing upon men in cases of opinion and conscience: But the Kings of
the Earth have committed Fornication with the whore, and the wine thereof is
sent far abroad unto all the Nations, to the intoxicating of their minds; and
here we are, more or less at this present.

This Island of Great Britain was too near to that part of Christendom where
the pranks of this drunken Interest became first to be played, to escape the
temptation, and to keep her self unspotted of that damned concupiscence, that
now like a devouring fire begins by little and little to consume the marrow and
the sinews of true Christian love, and Gospel light.

It may be thought, on better grounds, then some are acted now, that those, who
ere they were, that first arrived at the British harbors, for the sowing of
the seed of Christ, the Word of the Kindome in this peoples hearts, came not
with sword and faggot with them, to consume and torture such as would not give
it entertainment: Surely the instruments they used in this work, for the
plowing of the minds of the Nation that lay fallow, upon which there grew the
wild and stinking weeds of Heathenish Idolatry, were of another, and more
heavenly or spiritual nature, if we may say what they did, and how they
labored here, by what Paul did in another place, 1 Cor. 2.1. And I Brethren
came not to you with excellency of speech or wisdom, much less with the
outstretched arm of humane power, to force them, declaring to you the
Testimony of God; nay, he shakes off the sword of man as nothing indeed to
effect that conquest, which he and all the primitive leaders were laboring to
obtain, 2 Cor. 10.4. The weapons of our warfare are not carnal, observe, but
mighty through God: Carnal weapons are here excluded as heterogeneous for
kind, and as ineffectuall to accomplish and to bring about the great design of
God, in converting men to the faith of the Gospel, or in keeping them there;
and when he arms the Christians against their adversaries, and such are errors
and heresies too, he girds them not about with the civil sword, not a little
of that here, but covers them with the Helmet of salvation, and teaches them to
buckle with the sword of the spirit, Ephesians. 6.12, 16, 17. By this we may conclude
that the instruments of violence were not, nor were to be promoters of the
blessed Kingdom of the Lord Jesus in those days.

Who they were that first began the heavenly plantation here, is much
uncertain, nor does it lie much in our way to inquire. Sir HENRY SPELMAN, that
great Antiquary, who set himself to lay open the moldy records of the British
Ecclesiastic affairs, exposes much, but modestly concludes without a certain
Demonstration who ere they were as I conceive. But through divine providence,
hither they came, and it may pass for certain, that they found the Nation, as
Paul found Athens, Acts 17.16. wholly given to Idolatry; now if it be the part
of a King to cut off such as speak against the God of the Country, how came
they, where they were, to set footing safely on this shore? or being a land,
and declaring the end of their coming, as no doubt they -- would be working
presently; what was the reason that they were not thrust through with a dart,
or fired at a stake? Did the present Governor neglect his duty? or suffer his
sword to remain asleep, unsheathed in its scabberd, when he should strike? But
some will say he was a Pagan; and 'twas the Gospel that was now proclaimed,
against which he must not draw; 2 King. 18.4. Especially the Idolatrous Priests
if they had ground in the Law of the Land.
yea, but this Gospel serves the Countries gods as Hezekiah did the Images and
Groves, it plucks them up root and branch, and burns them with fire; and what
must the Magistrate do now? The gainsayers among the people, might probably
complain to their Magistrate, that the heart strings of their Religion, and the
Worship began to break, and the sinews thereof cracked in these new flames; here
be men, and strangers, and foraigners too belike they were, that turn our
Images upside down, and draw away the people, yea, and speak against thy God, O
King. Now, if it be the proper office of the Magistrate also to determine, and
interpose with his sword, then of the present Magistrate; for in this case we
are taught by him that has set up or rather uncovered, the bound-marks of
liberty of Conscience, Ancient bounds or Liberty of Conscience, page 15.
and excellently contentended for them, with a parenaetick to the then
Parliament, etc. for their due observation and continuance; I say we are
taught, that that which belongs to a man, as a man, belongs to every man; for
quatenus and ad omne, are terms adaequate and convertible: And if the case be
thus, what had become of those poor hearts that traveled so far, and
adventured themselves upon the surges of the Sea, to bring the truth and peace
home to our doors, and escape that danger?

Now the vengeance of the Magistrate must not suffer them to live; A sad
requital for so great a good brought hither, on the wings of so much zeal and
love: The Magistrate believed it then reasonable enough for men to have their
freedom about divine things, if they levelled not their opinion at the
disturbance of the civil peace, which he was bound to keep; but I must wave the
handling of the point in Law and Argument, that has been done before, beyond
what I can do by far; it is matter of fact that I would touch at, and condole
the errors there. If Sir HENRY SPELMANS glass be clear enough, with that he
fetches in, Speeds Chron. page 73.
to look upon these remote times and actions therein, and fluent Mr. SPEED
inclines unto his Authors much, we may conclude we see the Gospel here in
ENGLAND preached and received in the Government of Arviragus; he was a stout and
hardy Soldier, and could not well endure the Romans Tax and Tyranny, which
cost him many a blow. The people then were grieved much to feel the sword of
Conquest cut so sharp into their Kingdoms liberties, and the King did storm
much; yet a moderate and peaceable ventilation of this new-sprang Doctrine of
Jesus past without control, except the Romans, when they could, grew angry;
for Arviragus protects, and in part provides for these new Dogmatists; Sir
H^nry Spelman, page 4.
who conculcatis Druidarum Superstitionibus Evangelii radiis illuminarent
populum, the superstitions of the Druides, so they called the Idolatrous
Priests, being trodden under foot, a great provocation both to Priests and
people, they illightened the people with the beams of the Gospel: The King is
not moved to stretch out his sword, though by some no doubt solicited; but
they, these new sowers, had rem apud Arviragum Regem adeo promovisse, ut licet
cauteriatum avita superstitione eum totum expedire nequeunt, quaseum tamen
reddunt and benignum, so promoted the matter with the King, that although they
cannot wholly deliver him, being seared with the superstition of his
forefathers, a thing that sticks much, yet they make him quash and mild. The
King continued Pagan still, yet these Christian laborers receive their freedom
without his deadly censures, and his sons become their benefactors upon the
account of their sanctimony; The Law of nature and right reason permitting them
to patronize such men that deport themselves in a peaceable and humble manner,
though of another worship. And there is as vast a difference between Idolatry
and Christianity, as between Calvinism, Arminianism, Socinianism, etc. The
Heathens may be our Correctors, and stain our faces with shame, who are less
bearing and more cruel then were they; yet we find not the Canons or
Constitutions of the Church uttering their voice through the gilded Image of
the Civil power, nor the Magistrates Authority or arm flashing such as acted
barely upon the terms of Conscience. LUCIUS, a Christian King of Britain, some
say the first Monarch that owned that way, submits to the faith here, Anno
(...) whereby, says SPEED, leaning on his Authority, This Province was the
first that received the faith by public Ordinance; it might be by public
Ordinance, and yet without penalty; for the Countenance of the Magistrate
shining upon the way and his provisions for the public preaching of it,
Speeds Chron. page 78. Spelmans Antiq. page 12.
might very well, in after writers, swell into the notion of a public
Ordinance; less things have come to more in latter times then these. And we
read that Rex ipse Lucius una cum uxore fidei imbuitur Lavacro, and exemplo
ejus undique concurrentes populi; i. e. King LUCIUS himself together with his
wife and the people, coming together on all sides by his example; note that not
by any force, or at least by any authoritative of Parliamentary Edict, they are
Imbued, or washed in faith's laver. I would assert that there was no Heresy or
error yet determined so by Law; nor no legal persecucution tending to death or
other punishment lay open against dissenters in such cases; nor no act of King
or Parliament for uniformity in doctrine and discipline: And by the way, we
must distinguish between an action lying at the Common Law against Heretics,
etc. and a violent irruption of a Tyrant or prevailing party against or without
law upon such men as are made odious to them, because they think or worship
otherwise then they would have them: the former was not yet in Esse. The latter
many times sprung up and shed much Christian blood, in England as well as other
places, when the Tyrants pleased to gratify themselves or others by such
cruelty: But persecution of men professing Religion, though diverse from the
state therein in many points, was not yet established by a Law, nor had yet
crept into our British Parliaments; for Parliaments we may conclude there
were, employed, and honored much by the Prince, if Mr. SADLER, or whosoever he
were that wrought the book Entitled The Rights of the Kingdom, or, etc. does
see well through his Authorities, nor made encroachments thereby upon the
people liberties: If there were no better ground, one might so argue from the
carriages of those that dealt here with PELAGIUS of Bangor, Ant. Eccl. Britt.
page 47.
of which Sir HENRY SPELMAN out of Matthew of Westminster: He says, Britanni
cum neque suscipere Dogma perversum gratiam, etc. The Britains when they would
not any longer, endure His perverse opinion in blaspheming the name of Christ,
neither could they in disputation refute the subtilty of his wicked persuasion,
they lighted on this wholesome advice, to seek the aid of a spiritual war from
the French Bishops; which war is not called spiritual, because they were to
fight for spiritual things, but because they must contend with spiritual
weapons, the other not being able to reach the understanding or the Conscience;
and for this they reinforce a disputation, at a Council or a Synod, where
were vulgar men and women, Laics, to hear the business; No talk of humane
Authority, or the Magistrates sword: that served well to keep the peace, that
these Dissenters might not run one upon another, but we find it here employed
upon no other service.

And a little after, upon the breaking forth of Pelagianism again, they call
for help; it comes, and praedicationis Antidoto vulnera sanat Incredulitatis,
etc. He, meaning Germarius, Ibidem page 49.
heals the wounds by the Antidote of preaching; A proper and reasonable
application. Who had the better or the worse in these contests I care now to
know: my desire is to see the sword of the Magistrate in its sheath in
spiritual things, for it is no fit Antidote to be given against dissenting
Judgments in matters of Religion: and it is hitherto left out, at least in Law.

But things continued not long at this rate: The Clergy begin to aspire to the
Civil power, to beg its help, or else to use it themselves: they forgot the
wisdom that descends from above: The sweetness and moderation, together with
the evidence of the spirit is in the war: they are willing to be great in the
world, and therefore exercise carnal arguments and weapons to accomplish what
they would: and that they may the better rule, and satisfy themselves in what
they longed for, men must be obedient to them, and embrace their Impositions in
Religion, or they shall hear on it loud enough: and to try their obedience,
there must still be new Sanctions and Canons made to the corrupting of the word
of God, and Gospel-simplicity. Nothing now will please but the confirmation of
the Popes authority, and Constitutions by a Law, and then this Beast will cause
the earth, and them that dwell therein, to worship the first Beast, Rev. 13,
12. Here is the strength and hour of Temptation, falling on the Christian Kings
and World: and oh! how happy might it have been, had they resisted this, and
refused to give their power, observe the phrase, unto this Beast, Rev. 17.13.
How much innocent and Christian blood that has been spilt as carelessly as
water on the ground, and as barbarously as ever any tyrant acted in this world,
had been preserved? the Kings of the earth should not have been branded with
this deep and reproachful signal, That they make war with the Lamb, Rev.
17.14. if they had kept within their sphere, and professed their own faith in
love and tenderness, instruments of the best Conquest unto all subjects under
them. I will touch a little upon one act, the first of our English bloody
Tragedy under this Head, for I wave the persecutions that were acted by the
Roman Emperors, since which there have been many, and of long continuance.
Those that write in favor of the Papacy, report the great father Gregory a
holy man, Spelmans Antiq. page 56.
and a great labourer to convert men to the knowledge of the truth: for which
say they, our Britain is much owing to him: He sent Augustine hither,
sometimes called the Monk, with Sanctions and Canons, and many orders for the
worship of the people, and the setting of Church Government with its face
toward Rome. The Roman favorites much commend the wisdom, the piety and
sanctimony of this man: such graces and such principles, if they were his,
brought forth very bad fruit, as will appear. Austine arrives with his
Companions, and is entertained by Ethelbert, Anno 596. He labors to bring the
Nation under the papal obedience: The King, though not concluding with his
doctrines, gives him his liberty, and provides maintenance for him and his
followers in Canterbury, where he was after Bishop, and had his See, He calls a
Synod, and the Bishops meet him; He commands obedience to Rome and other
things. They refuse with suspicion of Austines pride: and the Synod ended in
dislike. And it is added, Spelman's Antiq. p. 92.
That the British Church differed from the Roman in many other things also;
then what were propounded. The famous Monks of Bangor, reported much for
Industry and holiness, were principally eyed it is like, in this Assembly. The
head of their fraternity refusing still to subject themselves, by such Courses,
receive the interminating prophecy of this great Prelate, or rather the
promulging of his policy; Page 106. Cum aliis locis.
Si pacem cum fratribus accipere nolent, bellum ad Hostibus forent accepturi,
if they would not entertain peace with their Brethren; they should have war
from their enemies. And not long after, it fell out accordingly; for Austine
now was great with Ethelbert; this King in Austines Cause, provokes the King of
Northumberland, to fall upon the Britains, he enters Leicester; willing to
please the King of Kent, and there finds a number of these poor praying
Bangorites, and slaughters 1200. of them with cruel butchery; Austine is
doubted in this business, by Mr. Speed and others, to have wrought more by
pride and bloody policy, then by the spirit of prophecy; The action is so
much unlike that spirit which once lived in men. The Answer of these harmless
Monks was good, and very fair, without a merit of such wages as was after
paid them. Page 108.


And for the piety thereof, I shall transcribe it here, from Sir Henry Spelman,
to such as have him not by them; Be it known, and without doubt to you, that we
all are obedient subjects to the Church of God, and to the Pope of Rome, and to
every godly Christian, a practice now grown absolute with most, to love every
one in his degree in perfect Charity, and to help every one of them by word and
deed, to be the children of God; and other obedience, says the Abbot in the
person of the rest, I do not know due to him whom you name to be POPE; Nor to
be the father of fathers, to be claimed, or to be demanded: And this obedience
we are ready to pay to him, and to every Christian continually: Besides, we are
under the Government of the Bishop of Caerleon, upon Uske, who is to oversee
under God, over us, to cause us to keep the the way spiritual; This was their
answer, that we are yet, it seems, unaccustomed to any brutish impositions;
and one would think it not deserving so heavy a censure from the Romish Monk,
nor so bloody an execution by his Abbettors, but thus they perished; And thus
commonly it goes with them that make the sword the Ruler, and the Judge over
men in Cases spiritual that do relate to conscience. And here it is to be
noted by the way, as it may be guest at by the answer, that these faing
Britains make no mention of any humane statute, or Parliament decree, that did
contain the parts and points of their Religion, by which they were to be
guided, under pain of life or liberty; for had there been any such thing in
being, and had these Monks and Britains known it, as they must needs if there
had been such a thing, it would without question, have been urged upon this
great division, and remembered to us as well as other things: But I will hasten
on.

You may by this perceive, Romans, Praelates, and their power to have set their
Iron feet of cruelty upon the neck of British Christians, and their Christian
liberty: Twelve hundred slain in cold blood, in the midst of their devotions,
found unarmed, says the story too, because they would not bow their knees to
Romes great power and decrees: and all occasioned by the whorish compliance of
the Civil power, and with its listening to those religious Incendiaries; and
also that the Kings of this fair, famous Island began to sip betimes at the
whores cup of fornication: she was willing to ride; and the powers of the earth
must help her up, or else she cannot; and that they may the better do it, they
must be drunken: since which time they have swilled themselves with full
draughts of her poisonous liquor; and all Nations have been thereby astonished
and befooled and made to live upon the senseless laws and notions of the beast
and false Prophet, proceeding from them in this plunged estate: for they have
lain down together in the wanton bed of worldly lust and glory, and thence have
been conceived and born those hellish-hideous monsters, that have devoured and
swallowed up the bodies and the souls of men in Christendom, Britain.
with a witness. The spirit says, that the Ten Kings shall give up their power
to the Beast; this of England is concluded to be one. To give their power to
the Beast, is to serve its lust, and execute its laws, according to pleasure
and command; since the aforesaid Austine displayed the colors of the Romish
power in the field of this Nation, it is wonderful to consider how the secular
and the Ecclesiastic interest has combined together, and grown up in mutual
claspings and embraces: They have been so mysterially twined and interwoven,
that it is feared their separation will not be effected, the work is so tender
and difficult, until he come in power and spirit, whose the Kingdom is.

The former persecutions we may call violent Irruptions, or breakings in of
power upon liberty without the form of Law; now the scale is turning, and the
practice assumes another garb to appear under, the Prelates mount the chair of
state, and are taken in; to consult the affairs of the Commonwealth: now they
have liberty indeed to plot their own design, and to get their wills and
sanctions stamped with the Images of law and authority; they sit in Parliament,
and have a considerable stroke with the Laick Nobles and Gentlemen, so that
they can easily serve their own interest, and obtain their desire upon all: If
there arise any principle of light and truth, like to do their Kingdom wrong,
and to discover the darkness thereof, they are at hand to quash them presently
by bowing or breaking the fomenters thereof; they will make them stoop or stagger
to the grave; and they can do it easily, either by laying open the Jus Divinum,
of their holy Church, whose Canons are so sacred, they must not be touched, or
by insinuating into the Magistrates breast, Clavis Apocalyp. page 98.
which has been commonly open enough to entertain that inthralling Maxim of
the reason of state, and then present a subject to employ it upon; as the
keeping up of our interest abroad with foreign Princes, or the like, from this
unhappy marriage of these two fair Interests, that we have mentioned, have
proceeded all those statute Laws, by which they have taken cognizance of, and
undertaken to determine what is heresy and error, with the several
Punishments for such as shall thereby be made or found guilty. Herein they have
but served the design of the great mystery Babylon, The Mother of Harlots,
and abominations of the earth; for the rules were framed within her whorish
heart, they did but creep out at the mouths of our English Kings and
Parliaments as an unnatural vomit, occasioned by her poison: the ill effect
thereof is to be found upon the minds of most professing men, though
Protestants at this day, notwithstanding Pope, and King, and Lords, Bishops are
said to be departed hence, being kicked out and spurned at with a furious heel;
the minds and understandings of most will yet shows us that they have been
here, for it is hardly distinguishable in most, whether that which they profess
for truth, be settled upon them by the spiritual arm of Christ in light and
evidence, or by the arm of fleshly power, and forcing example of men. I say as
before, that the Magistrates pretended legal cognizance and determination of
the errors of the mind in Religion, is only by the Statute Law, since the great
confederacy betwixt Rome and England, or of the Civil and Church Interest, for
the ancient Laws and Customs of this Nation look a little better then to
manifest such a rage in Conscience-Tyranny; And when I mention Romes
confederacy with us, let no man puff at this, and say that is broken long ago,
I must confess like wrangling lovers they have quarrelled much and often, yet
have they loved the same bed of lust and lordliness still, though sometimes
they lie not there together; and it is no hard matter to show the Beast and
false Prophet alive, Rev. 19.
after the flames have taken hold upon Romes glory, and have burnt her down to
ashes; and if this be so, let England look about her, for she is not yet
delivered, as will be made appear ere long, This may be applied to later times
then of King Hen the Eight, could we but trace the footsteps of this mystery,
as it has traveled through the Saxon, Dane, and Norman times, and observe the
many mazing turnings it has made to secure it self, as in a laborinth, and to
put its pursuers to a loss, we should find the pavement of the way to be
stained with blood, and their proceedings to be full of oppressive cruelty:
yea, the deep Impressions that their feet have made upon our English Nations
fundamental liberties by trampling on them, and by treading them down, do yet
stand full of blood uncovered, and not dried up unto this day, to the shame of
the present Generation? which notwithstanding all the claims they have made,
and pretenses had to righteousness and judgment; have not found in their
hearts, though the present day does loudly call for it, to expiate and cleanse
the Land from. Ezekiel 29.
The Children of Israel were directed by the Spirit of Prophecy, to burn all
the Instruments of Gog, and to bury all the bones of his slain, and to appoint
men of a continual employment, that they may cleanse the Land; yea, every
passenger that past through the Land, if he saw a man's bone, Ver. 15.
he was to set up a sign at it, that the men of continual employment might
observe and bury it: So careful was the spirit that the Land might be cleansed
of strange flesh and bones. Brethren, the Rights and Liberties of this
Commonwealth have been invaded and overspread by cruel oppressive and
insinuating Principles of Tyranny and State-Engines, which like Gog, for I
shall but allude, not interpret, have broken down our ancient bounds, and so
polluted and extremely disfigured the comely feature and surpassing beauty of
our Nations Rights and Laws, that an English man can hardly discern their
native excellency and luster, they are hid in so many clouds, and made to walk
under so many masks of will and selfish humor, that the poor Nation cannot see
one glimps of what they should in an age, when it is our right to enjoy them all
with open face continually; we do pretend, and God has been willing I am
confident, to bring it to more then an empty pretense in this age, that the
heart of this invading Gog is broken, and the Arm of his power so shiveld, that
every man may believe the whole body is dead, yet it is not buried, the dead
Carcass lies in the streets and fields of England, and whether there be men
appointed for continual employment to bury the body or no, I shall not now
dispute, I fear there are not: yet pardon me if in my creeple-travels, I set up
a stick by a bone that lies unburied, this stinking carrion persecution, that
if any shall at length undertake the public Sextons charge, they may know they
shall not want employment: And there be more remainders of that Tyrant-Host
then this, that may teach men that have their sense to put the branch to the
nose, for the sents contagious not fit to be sufferd among Christian people:
But I proceed: 'Thas been enough confessed and concluded, That this Nation is a
free people: The meaning is, that their fundamental Laws are such as do
declare and keep them free from all arbitrary power, and that they cannot be
inslaved but by their own consent in their great Parliament or Council, so that
a subject of England, that by Law is not exempted from the Law, is freeborn.
How then came we to be under the yoke of bondage and slavery? Here is the
question indeed, the answer and unravelling of which has cost so much ink,
treasure and blood to little purpose; It was said before, that the King and
Prelates were long since in their great conjunction, from which have proceeded
those malignant influences that have so wrought upon the Nations freedom,
whereby it has been made to labor for life, it being so desperately afflicted
in its vitals. The Kings power and prerogative have been as a fretting moth,
and eating Rust that has been gnawing at the heart of liberty, until they
have consumed it; And the Prelates rage, their Dragon-rage, and subtilty has
inspired this boundless Image of the King with so much of their own lust and
will, that these have ruled the Roast as they say, all along, and by these means
have the pure freedoms of the land been ravished from it, and the minds of men
so vitiated and defild, that it requires the labor of an Hercules, or one
beyond him much in strength and glory, to cleanse us from those foul
Abominations that are committed now by pretext of Law: so that this way
departed liberty and righteousness; for the power of the King and Lords so
overruled the poor Commons, or courted them into a compliance by their
subtilty, that the Commons durst not, or else will not, speak or act too much
in vindication of the peoples Ancient Rights, for fear of raising such a storm
that might sweep them away like a devouring hail, our bulwarks thus shattered
and subverted, gave a free and easy passage and entrance for those wild
beasts to make a prey of us when they listed, to satiate their greedy minds
with our treasure or our blood.

From hence have issued forth Patents, Commissions, etc. for the erecting of
Spiritual Courts, and investing of Prelates, with power to inthral men in
things of Religion against the liberty of the Subject.

But I would not cast a blot upon any of our English w^thies in Parliament,
that have from time to time asserted what they could against Encroachments, and
put forth themselves as much as the times respectively would bear against these
great and potent Innovators.

They have done much, upon occasions, yet never did they do so much as to style
the Nation free thereby; such are to be remembered by us with their Honors, and
their deserved commendation: Neither would, or durst, I say that all our
English Kings and Bishops must be wholly judged the Nations bane, since the
aforesaid great conjunction: No, we have had Kings that have been wise and
valiant to a wonder, and have loved the people well, and acted for them; but
still they have don't with the remembrance and retaining of their great
Prerogative, that it must be thought an Act of Grace, free Grace in them to
give the People their due Rights, which could not be in Law or Equity detained
from them; yet let such have this honor, That they did no worse. And I believe
England can boast as much of Bishops, some Bishops, for their Learning and
their Piety, as any Nation under Heaven, since the Apostasy, yea, and such as
withstood the Roman Court in its foul dress unto the death, in the vindication
and defense of what they saw; yet their light led them not to renounce their
call from Rome, or to stick at the root of those Proceedings nearer home; by
which they, with many others, were violently carried to the stake, to breath
forth their souls in the fiery flames: And there was a worldly arm, which
others pious, it is like, and learned too, did lean to for supporting of their
Hierarchy, and in their Excommunications for the doing of that which was the
proper office of the Spirit with and in the Church, Sir Edw. Cook, 3. part of
the Inst. cap. of Heresy.
they would by their Spiritual power Excommunicate, and the Civil Power must
play the part of Satan for them, a strange Innovation, and most dangerous in
the New Testament Ministry: But yet I say, it is meet that all deserving
Predecessors should be remembered by us with their due respects. This by the way.

The cruel Proceedings of these Joynt-powers, and how heavy their loins were
upon the Subject, and with what Scorpions they did exercise the people, are, as
to fact, recorded by the peinful labors of an English man. M. Foxes Acts and
Monuments.
What? has it been the honor, or rather the dishonor of the English Nation to
make Martyrs? A dishonor and a shame indeed that will never be washed off till
the world be no more: although I could, and do with my soul desire, and say
with our learned Lawyer in another case, Sir Ed. Cook 4 part of Inst. page 37.
Auferat oblivio, si potest ut cunque silentium tegat; let it die and be buried
in forgetfulness; or however let it not be remembered to our disadvantage or
disgrace. It Is our honor that Britains Womb has been so fertile, to bring
forth so many ripe for Martyrdom, if need should be; but it may be of very
lamentable and sad regreet upon our memory and thoughts, that ever her heart
should be so butcherous and cruel as to act that bloody and inhumane part upon
her Sons with her own hands, that yet seem red with blood; and more then seem
if some mistake not; yea, and to do it with so much deliberation and
advisement, as a legal process does bespeak; which way she has appeared in to
be most cruel. If France, or Spain, or Rome, or Infidel barbarous Nation in the
world had by their mighty and prevailing Foreign Force bereft us thus of life
and liberty, it had been the more tolerable, we could expect but little better
from such hands; But it was thou O England, the Land of our Nativity; and you O
English powers, our pretended Friends and Familiars, born to a right in the
same Laws with us, and sworn to defend and keep those Laws inviolable; this,
this cutteth to the quick, and pierces to the very heart and soul of every
true English man.

Yet this has been our case, whereof we have just reason to complain; no poor
Christian durst lift up his head above the palpable darkness of the times; nor
profess he saw a little more, or a little otherwise in Spirituals, then the
formal settled Prelates did, but it must be upon his utmost peril; Bonds and
death attend him presently: Stand to our Rules say they, and pin your Faith
upon our sleeves, and think as we would have you, or you die for it. What
abominations have the Children of England committed in the dark, every one in
the Chamber of his Imagery? What Names have they invented and imposed on such
that would not bow down and worship the Image that they (...) Names of contempt
and odium, like the Skins put on the primitive Saints, that the minds of
Beast-like people might be the more enraged, and the easier inclined to kindle
the fire for their sufferings if they would not own the Beast, even in that
gross appearance that he was then in; besides the distinguishing Names derived
upon them in scorn from some principal leader in that profession, they must be
bruited a brood to be seditious, disturbers of the Peace, Subverters of the
Laws and Governments, Disobedient to Powers, etc. although they were the most
simple and plain hearted and quiet souls in the world; men that were willing to
serve and worship their God according to the dictates of their Conscience in
the Light they had of Scripture: I refer the Reader for this to S. ED. COOK, in
the third Part of his Jnstitutes, page 41. in Chap. of Heresy; where there is
the form of an Indictment for Heresy and Lollardy, so the opposite Judgment
to Popery was long time called, containing general Accusations of Disturbing of
the Peace, etc. And though it were adjudged insufficient in Law, as well it
might, yet this way the Prelates went, as might be showed by a Cloud of
Testimonies, yet shall this go for all.

And because I am so near it; let me here remember one Evil, well observed by
that great man, occasioned by coercive and restraining courses in matters of
Conscience, ibid. page 40. 'twill be sufficient to repeat his words: There was
a Statute supposed to be made in 5 R. 2. That Commissions should be by the Lord
Chancellor made and directed to Sheriffs and others to Arrest such as should be
certified into the Chancery by the Bishops and Prelates Mrs. of Divinity, to be
Preachers of Heresies and notorious Errors, their Fautors, Maintainers and
Abettors, and to hold them in strong Prison until they will justify themselves
to the Law of Holy-Church, by color of this supposed Act: Certain persons that
held that Images were not to be worshipped, etc. were holden in strong Prison
until they, to redeem their vexation, miserably yielded before these Mrs. of
Divinity to take an Oath, and did swear to worship Images, which was against
the Moral and Eternal Law of Almighty God. Thus far he.

A sad President for any men and Powers upon earth to follow, in taking
cognizance of, and punishing of men for Opinion, whereby the weight of other
men's sins is commonly laid upon their shoulders; and I think they have commonly
enough of their own, and too much for some to bear; let not the present
Boutefeaus for their own defense object it was ill done of these, for they
themselves were Heretics, and the Sufferers held the Truth; but we are in the
right, and therefore now there is no such danger; for they may be answered,
first, The former Prelates were as confident as any now; yea, it was their
confidence and fierce zeal that put so many honest hearts from time to time
into a deadly sweat, wherein they left their blood and marrow, life and all:
But, secondly, Admit that they or these are in the truth, as both would have it
thought so in their times; yet was it not the duty of any King or Magistrate
commanded to them by Christ, by whom Kings now do reign, to force men into his
Worship or his Service; I say so now; for if it were, it has been desired long
since to be shown, which yet no man can see; Nay, according to the Laws and
Customs of this English Nation, Ancient Bounds page 23.
the clear contrary may be thought to be the duty of the Magistrate, and that
he was and is to defend the people from such wrongs and infringements of their
Liberties; for he is sworn thereto; and he is to keep the Peace; so that the
good old Laws of England, and the Magistrates, the Executioners of those Laws,
are the Forts and Towers in whom all honest minds, though differing in the
business of Religion, a thing not imaginable to be under censure of the power
of man, and in reason and Scripture left to the decision of the Spirit, and to
Christ the Judge, are to be safeguarded from the furious persecution of all
state incendiaries Before I turn over from this Chapter of the Lord Cook
concerning Heresy, I shall observe these two things. First, The boundless
license that the Prelates used to take under color of Law to suppress and
quash the non-Conformists informer times, that they, Phaeton Fablelike, by
their reignless Fury, ranged through the Region of Christ's Kingdom, plucking
the Flowers from his heavenly Crown and Dignity, usurping his great Throne, as
also running through the Thrones of Earthly Princes, setting them on fire as
they pleased, whereby, with other places, the world of our British Island was
often scorch't with their too fiery Rays. Secondly, That the Satute concerning
Heresy, etc. made in q. Eliz. days, was principally intended to restrain
those Irregular Notions, and to contract their lawless Rage in a narrower
compass; so the work looked backward rather then ought besides, although the
contrivers had not the heart and happiness to cut it clean off and to cast it
out for ever, as may appear in this place to the Judicious Reader, and by the
Statute it self; as also by the second Part, Institutes, In Articulis cleri;
especially in page 615. But I am too tedious.

King HENRY the eighth was a blustering Prince, and quarrelled with the Roman
Court; See the Statute, 31 Hen. 8.4.
yet Lutherans and others were very odious to the Kingdoms Powers; the
principle of persecution was kept alive with very great offense to
Christianity, as all can now believe, by those that loved to Lord over their
Brethrens Conscience; yea, the Inquisition reaches to the Kings own Chamber,
and takes the queen from his side. There were six bloody Articles, says Mr.
SPEED, enacted, that made it death to such as held or taught the contrary: Who
can remember and forbear to melt at English sufferings? EDWARD the sixth was a
young, yet wise and tender Prince; our Isreal's Josiah, Speed's Histor. page
1046.
he would not send an Heretic to Hell before his time, as may be gathered from
Mr. FOX and others; yet persecution lived, it could not die, they kept it alive
that knew how to overawe the Court by cunning Policy, for that sat ruling
sometimes, and enveagling still the civil Power to unsheath the Sword against
dissenters in Religion: Who can repeat the Marian bloody days without laments?
Now Rome is called in again to help the doing of what was done too much before.
England can persecute without the Pope, as may be seen above: his Spirit is
here, although unto his Person or his Name we bid defiance. But now they flash
and lay about indeed: The Prelates rage the more because they had little check
before, and like fire pent in a little, break out in desperate flames, and the
poor Protestants die. ELIZABETH'S beginning was like water in abundance falling
on the Fires all over England, it coold and brake them all, yet did it not kill
or quench the Coals: they lay glowing still, and were stirred up against
Professors still upon occasion, because men would not know their liberty: The
Spirit of Violence lodging still in men's breasts, and laboring to bring the
Judgments of others to their Girdle. And so it went from hence into K. JAMES's
Reign: it is a continued Line not broken, though a little lessened; for the
Puritanes were as Thorns in the Prelates eyes, and they were rubbing still to
get them out; they could not see so well whiles these were near them. King
CHARLES follows and drinks in the poisonous Wines: the Prelates are as formerly,
his Cup Bearer and the common people were too much delighted with the sport
these made: They raged and staggered in this Spiritual Drunkenness, Separatists.
and stucrk at many Non-Conformists, till at last they lighted on those three
Gentlemen, Mr. BURTON, Mr. PRIN, and Dr. BASTWICK: The seat of the Bishops is
very high, their Authority great, and their minds as cruel: They cared not for
a Parliament, though they had as much room there as any, and as much honor: The
Prerogative and Arbitrary Rule of this King did please them better, as being
more serviceable to their purpose: you have them in their High Commission, in
the Star Chamber, every where: They please the King, and he gratifies them with
what they like well enough. The relation of their proceedings, with the three
above named, is worth the reading; New Discovery of the Prelates Tyranny,
printed, Anno 1641.
where you may see their Will instead of Law, their Tyranny instead of Piety.
Before we go any further, let us look upon what is past, with these queries.

1. Whether the Magistracy of England has done its Duty in taking Cognizance
of things relating to Religion?

2. Whether all present and future proceedings to oppress the Conscience, will
not justify theirs, and fill up the measure of their iniquity?

3. Whether such cruel dealings with dissenting men, do not manifestly show
they had no better argument to convince them, or at least weaken their own
cause?

4. Whether the Commonwealth has not been bereft of many honest, able and
faithful Subjects by this means?

5. Whether this kind of Persecution which came in with Papacy, ought not in
all reason to have taken its leave and gone with it? Or whether persecution
with color of Law, be not a toleration of Popery and Prelacy in some part at
least?

Lastly, whether such a coercive power in such cases be consistent with a right
administration of law and the Nations liberty? I am not willing to obtrude my
private fancies or opinions on any, only it is my desire that all might see
and make use of what is reason. And I could wish the case were indifferently
debated and decided by some able Lawyers, that are uninteressed and
uncorrupted, without any awing hand of force over them: by such I say, I wish
it determined, whose honest and judicious hearts have not suffered shipwreck by
the strange blasts and storms of these various and dangerous times. And yet
howsoever, I suppose that liberty of Conscience has more to plead for it self
then that in a Nation, under a Magistracy that makes profession of the
Christian faith. But let us turn our faces again.

Whiles the condition of our English State stood thus, and the darkness of the
times was witnessed against through sufferings, by the providence of the
All-seeing Jehovah, things at last are brought about so that a Parliament is
called and settled, Anno 1640.

Now the glory and the Tyranny of Prelacy begins to be ecclipsed: The pains of
the Nation begin to come upon her, and she is traveling sorely to be delivered
of the man-child of law and liberty, that should make the mother to rejoice:
many were the Attempts to increase her throes, and to render her abortive, or
at least, that she should bring forth nothing but wind.

All the policy of the Court and Prelates is called in and employed to this
purpose: but it must not prosper; for the day of their Judgment is dawned upon
them, and it comes up with clouds and darkness, their bloody and outrageous
cruelty exercised upon those three with others, mentioned even now, is but like
the roaring of a man subject to the epilepsy, the faling-sickness, before his
fall. The Parliament thus called, recalls the prisoners home, and entertains
them with respect and honor. They search into their own privileges and the
subjects liberty, and assert them with courage and resolution, for they are in
their virgin purity and masculine strength, and nothing can brow-beat them. The
Courtiers and Bishops hear of them, and are afraid of their righteous eye, and
oppression-revenging arm. The Bishops with their High Commission fall. The
Star Chamber is struck up by the roots, and all encroachments upon the peoples
rights declared against in general. Who sees not but there was an Item given by
this to all true English groaning hearts to lift up themselves, because the day
of their redemption drew near? such a motion surely was made, and it was with
joy accepted by the most rational and ingenuous people of the Nation: witness
the fair and honest Petitions presented to the Parliament from time to time,
and witness also those gallant Declarations, too many to be mentioned here,
wherein the good old Laws of England were asserted and contended for, with the
subjects liberty in all just things, which are of little better public use at
present then to be a Testimony of the Nations great Apostasy, or declination
from the grounds of the war; unto which all honest meaning people were upon
deep conjuring terms engaged, either in affection in opening of the purse, or
personal action.

It is evident and easy to be remembered, as it falls out in all civil wars,
that the Nation ran up into two general heads or factions, The one relating to
the regal interest and prerogative, The other to the Interest of Parliament and
the Commonwealth. The actings of the former, notorious enough, I shall wave
now, as being exploded and excentrical to the present Intendment; It is the
latter that I shall observe a little in its motion, although my observation be
but general, and their work be too lately done to be yet forgotten.

The sum and substance of the Parliaments Declarations, as to the careful
Reader does appear, amounts to this, That it was their sole design and
endeavor, as they hoped to be assisted and justified by the God of Heaven, to
maintain the Laws of the Land, which they say were trampled upon by the King
and his Party through their high and arbitrary courses, and to preserve the
Subjects Liberty as to Person and Estate; with this Standart they proceeded,
extirpated Episcopacie, root and branch; took up Arms against the King and his
party; and it is to be thought, that at that time they, or at least the major
part of them, really and unfeignedly intended what they then professed and so
solemnly declared. Thus things went on though through much struggling and
difficulty, till they had obtained their desired ends upon that Malignant Party.

I cannot say that there were no sufferers for conscience in these times of the
Kingdoms Travels; it may be judged there were no legal sufferers, but only what
was without Law carried on by a strong hand; for the Bishops, who might and had
the power to convict of Heresy, are gone; Third part of his Institut. page 40.
see what Sir EDWARD COOK says, That at this day no person can be indicted or
impeached of Heresy before any temporal Judge, or other that has temporal
Jurisdiction, as upon the perusual of the Statutes quoted by him he concludes.
But there was a Synod or Assembly of Divines called or held by Authority of
Parliament, that labored as a traveling woman to get their Doctrine and their
Discipline established by a Law: Many of these had been under the Prelates yoke,
and had been somewhat galled thereby; yet when their wounds were healed, they
forgot Smectymnuus and his cries, they bestir themselves most busily, to get
their dear Presbytery into the chair, that it may Lord, and sway the Scepter
over their Brethren; for to be pinched of other men's consciences is almost an
Epidemick Itch.

The dissenting Brethren then, especially those of the Independent-way, looking
on themselves as such as were like to lie under the Altar at the mercy of the
new raised Presbyter, Rev 6.
begin to send forth their preventing groans, and to endeavor the vindication
of Just Freedom by uncovering the landmarks of Liberty of Conscience, which
some have done to purpose, none daring to remove them but by a fleshly arm, too
weak and too disproportionate for such a work. But so loud were the thunders of
the rigid Presbyterians in their Pulpits, and their writings flashing forth so
much lightning of Vengeance upon Heresy and Sectarism and all its fautors,
that the Parliament it self was almost conjured to be of their Opinion, and to
write and act the voices of the present Thunders.

This amongst other things began to breed a difference between that great
Council and the Army under the Command of Sir THOMAS FAIRFAX, which was
reported to be made up in much of sectaries, and men of Heterodox Opinions,
which the Scotch and English National Ministry could by no means brook. The
English Sectarian Army is declaimed against by the Scottish Orators; and it was
so irksom to many Preachers here, that it led them frequently beside their
Texts; wherein they dealt not so much by solid Argument to cry Errors down, but
by calling on the civil Magistrate to cut the erroneous off; nothing was more
pleasing to them then to think and talk of Imprisonment, Exile, Death for
Sectaries: The Land of their Nativity was not fit to hold them any longer; one
might have thought that the Heresy of PYTHAGORAS his (...) or transmigration
of souls was revived now; for the Prelacie was, and would it were not still,
visibly rising in the Presbytery.

These clamors thus ventilating themselves in fire and Pillars of smoke, began
to suggest thoughts in the Army that the Parliament and the Presbyterian
Interest declined their first Principles for the securing of their own and the
Nations freedom, of which Liberty of Conscience was no small part, as will
appear ere long. The Trumpets of the Army also begin to sound, and they made
better music then they have done of late; Mr. SALTMARSH puts life into
SMECTYMNUUS, and groans again; he dedicates the work to the Parliament, Groans
for Liberty.
ANNO 1645. Let it be read again, it is a good Lesson for the present times; and
because it looks so much toward my present purpose with so fair an aspect, as
also because it may probably be thought to be the then mind of more and greater
then himself, I will here insert one passage from him.

Consider, Epistle to the Parl. ibid.
speaking to the Parliament, whether in the Kingdom of Jesus Christ any other
Scepter should be lifted up then that golden one of his own; and whether if
there be a Kingdom of God, if Jesus Christ be the Lawgiver, and the spirit of
Christ the interpreter of these Laws, and this Kingdom of God, within the
throne of the King of Kings and Lord of Lords, the Lord Jesus, any other power
should rule, any other Scepter, any other Laws, or any other sit down in that
throne which is only the throne of the son of David, whose throne is for ever,
the Scepter of whose Kingdom is an everlasting Scepter? Thus much he. And
would this have been spoken by him, that was the Generals Chaplain, in such a
public manner at least, except it had been the sense of the Grandees of the
Army, or the most prevalent part of them? Again, These Coercive courses sought
strongly to be used in Reformation of Religion, filled Mr. Dell with breath
enough to sound out his Right Reformation, Dell's Right Reformation, Anno 1646.
so called in opposition to the other way; which was presented both to the
Parliaments ears and eyes (to the house of Commons at least) wherein the power
of the Magistrate is excluded from the work, as much as we would have it, and
he is styled an Attendant to both the Generals in the Army.

These (with many other of the same Sect) did in their places in this juncture
of time, Title page to his Sermons.
endeavor much to counterplead Presbytery, and to prevent any rigorous course
in matters of conscience to be put in ure by the Parliament by a new Law (for
the old Statutes smelling so much of Popery and Prelacie were withered long
since) I mention these men not so much for what, as when they spoke, and whose
they were.

The Armies Declarations and Remonstrances themselves (in pretense at least;
Armies Remostrance, August 19. 164^ page 4.
for what end the great God knows and will judge) gave very fair and promising
hopes unto all men that their faces and their hearts were set toward the
maintenance and vindication of the Kingdoms Liberties (and in special of
conscience) by which the eyes of the best seeing in the Nation, were turned
toward them; in which work of theirs Mr. Cook, a man well thought on by the
Grandees of the Army, as by his after-imployment does appear. He, I say, gives
encouragement to them, and endeavors much to fire their Resolutions for the
effecting of this Work: I shall repeat some words of his and so leave this: And
to the purpose before mentioned, he brings in the Lord Jesus, speaking to the
Army, upon their jar with the Parliament: Thus (with other things) did I
preserve you from active Martyrdom that you should bring your selves to
passive? Redinte gratio Amories, page 84.
Would not I have taken your lives as kindly from you at Nas^by, Bristo, etc.
as if, after disbanding, you should be imprisoned and put to death for
Heretics and Schismatics? Is not my Kingly Government as precious to you, and
as well worthy fighting for as my Priestly Office? etc. And page 85. to the same
purpose; Has God preserved you hitherto in times of War, to be insensibly
destroyed in times of Peace? Was not your Commission to fight for Laws and
Liberties, whereof Conscience is the greatest? Has not the Kingdom
sufficiently dishonored Religion formerly in the Bishops time, but must they
now under a pretense of uniformity seek the life of her children, and of
Religion it self? Do they not aim at the life of Religion which is the heart of
God, and the lives of his children, which are the Apple of his eye? The
Mercunalists at Court did but strike at the Letter of the Law in some things;
but these Phaetons would set all on fire, and aim at the Power of Religion; the
very life of our Laws, whose humors are so corrupt, that the least scratch
turns into a gangreen?

Thus much from Mr. Cook; and it is pity his Language is so adaequate unto these
Times.

This is enough to show what the (then) thoughts of the Aymy men were
concerning Liberty of Conscience. Their means (that we may go on) with other,
proved as a hand clapped upon the mouth of that persecuting Spirit whereby its
burning breath could not break forth to do much mischief; yet in this doubtful
and disputing time, endeavors were not wanting to cast the seed of persecution
into the Parliament; it is done, not so much by a forced ravishment ('it is
thought) as by a willing prostitution; for they had now forgotten their
Virgin-dayes and glory. The Parliament grows pregnant and at last brings forth
that bloody and destroying Monster, whose heart is as flint, and whose teeth as
iron; that is able to cast down and trample on any serious Christian in the
World; that sees any thing beyond the Tradition of their forefathers (I mean)
that Ordinance of Lords and Commons against Blasphemy and Heresy, etc. the
unnatural offspring of such a Parliament, that did once assert and vindicate
the peoples Liberties with courage: But this proceeds from them; and it is laid
principally by some to the Scottish-rigid-Presbyterian-Clamors (with whom the
English then had much to do) as the Father of it, although some nearer home
might be afraid it was theirs. This child thus born into the world, Genesis 12.16.
may be likened well to Ishmael the son of Hagar, of whom the Angel said, He
will be a wild man, his hand will be against every man, and every man's hand
against him; but I must except, and hope he will not long dwell in the
presence of the Brethren to offend them.

The Bishops and that Prelatical Party living in those days, who were
pretendedly cast out for their oppression might laughed to see their former
cause so gratified by those that cast them down; and they might now believe
that their fair houses and their lands made them more guilty then their
tyranny: For what Prelacie in England for these fourscore years could have
desired more for them to act upon against Dissenters in Religion, then this
Ordinance? Nay, I am confident by this, through their great subtility, they
might have made (had they been up to act) their little fingers now heavier then
their loins were but a little before, so easy is this Ordinance like to sit
upon the neck of English Christians.

It Is very likely that this new-born-Law would have manifested it self in its
true colors presently, for those were not wanting that could open it, if the
affairs of tste Kingdom would have permitted: But things were not yet come up
to that maturity and fullness that some desired, and were posting to; the
Nation was but in a tottering state, not yet settled and secured from common
enemies both abroad and at home; therefore for the better effecting of the
work, the Heterodox (whose hand had been much in the business of the war and
pretended reformation) are in a manner courted still, and still retained to
plead against the public Adversary. All this while that Ordinance lay Dormant
in the Cradle, or if it wak't a little, it quickly fell asleep again; and if it
had been strangled there, it had been a work not worthy of repentance.

Pass we from this unto the trial and the great Catastrophe of King Charles;
the Bishops and their Jnrisdiction were extinct before: the King now follows
them, being condemned as a Prince not fit to rule any longer. Who would not
imagine now but all usurpations tyrannies over men's persons and consciences,
subversion of Laws, and whatsoever else may be called State-sinnes, I say who
would not have thought all those to be excluded and damned up for ever? except
it must be said that the Agents herein slew the persons to inherit their souls,
their sins and impieties, and so become sevenfold more the sons of oppression,
and arbitrary lust and power then all before them. As to the present case of
Liberty of Conscience, I will here insert one passage more from Mr. John Cook
Barrister, the Advocate of the Commonwealth against the King; Brook, King
Charles his Case in page 42 speaking concerning the Court of Justice, This high
Court (says he) has cut off the head of a Tyrant -- and in so doing they have
pronounced sentence not only against one tyrant, but tyranny it self;
therefore if any of them shall turn tyrants, or consent to set up any kind of
tyranny by a Law, (let this be heeded) or suffer any unmercifull domineering
over the consciences, persons and estates of the free people of this Land, they
have pronounced sentence against themselves. Lo! here is the sense of one
concerning Liberty, who speaks not [now] in his own behalf, but as the
Attorney General of the honest and well-affected in the whole Nation; and the
Armies servant, who were the great Zealots for taking off the Kings head he in
this capacity, sends all kind of tyranny (in word at seast) away with Charles
Stuart; he could not be ignorant of the aforesaid Ordinance, but may be
supoosed to believe that the Parliament to whom so great a purge (as they called
it) was administered by the Army, or part of it, had those peccant humors --
corrected, wherewith they did abound in passing of that Ordinance, and were
rendered more healthy, and better disposed unto the Nations service, in clearing
of their Rights and Laws, if so good an end could be effected by so bad a means.

These things past over and gone, that long Parliament (after its many strange
turns) fell into an absolute dislike by the Grandees of the Army, and having
had a part too long (it is thought) upon the Stage, it is dismissed and Exit. But
such acclamations and such ecchoings of joy were made and heard throughout most
of the gathered Churches in England, as if they meant to sound the Trumpet to
some great Jubilee, and as if the day of the Nations deliverance from their
long servitude and captivity were come; such sudden hopes were generally
conceived upon the rooting up of that long Parliament, that had been pruned
much by the Armies sword before, but was not likely to bring forth that fruit
which some expected, whatsoever it was; yet alas poor souls, who did not see
this to be the foundation to another thraldom?

Their resoundings upon this occasion were no sooner past, but they are
seconded by another, greater in conceit, then the former, occasioned now by
that strange summons given for a new Parliament, which for distinction-sake
shall be called the Extraordinary Parliament, or to use their own phrase in
their Declaration of July 12. 1653. Then called in an extraordinary manner, who
do there declare themselves the Parliament of the Commonwealth of England, and
so may I, and twenty more do, if we have a mind to it, and all to little
purpose and we may chance to hear more on it too another day. But the Churches
looked on it as an extraordinary blessing indeed, that they should hove the sole
(or at least the chiefest) power to elect a Parliament, a thing never so much
as dreamt on in our English Law Books or Antiquities.

These Gentlemen thus summoned, might have done the Commonwealth better service
had they staid at home, and endeavor red to engage the honest and well-affected
of the Nation, to remonstrate the case of the Commonwealth, and how far they
did assent unto the proceedings of the Army in their actings toward the former
Parliament, and boldly to have asserted what they did and might justly expect
to have done in the present overture of Providence, that seemed now at last to
call for Righteousness once more and common Justice, yea, seeing now upon the
fall of the remainder of that long Parliament, the Power and Supreme Trust
returned into the hands of the people, as the Army men themselves say, or
conclude it would and ought, upon the dissolution of the Parliament, in that
notable stratagem of theirs, their Remonstrance, printed in November. 1648. and
presented to the Commons; they might have done well to have called in question
The Agreement of the People, in order to the future Government and settlement of
the Nation, presented to the Commons by the Army, Jan. 20. 1649. that had lain
so long under the ashes of forgetfulness, never so much as called for by the
Authors of it. But these things waved, or not considered in that present
Juncture of providence, the Gentlemen make for Westminster -- to declare
themselves the Parliament of England; and what need that, had they not been
jealous of an innovation? For the Kingdom has had other means then these to
know their great counsels by, when they have been theirs; they needed not
declarations to inform them of that: Thither, I say, they come, and there they
sit (with better hearts to act by, then foundations to act upon) until they
most strangely and unexpectedly divide themselves; in one part of which
fraction formally carried on, there lay the irons by which the stately work or
engine of the following Government should be pretendedly effected which partly
by this means grew so hot, that it quickly melted and severed from the rest,
and fairly run into another mould prepared for it, and from hence come forth
our new Mngna Charta with a Protector of the Commonwealth of, etc.

Whiles these things were thus transacted, that Ordinance of the Lords and
Commons concerning Religion did not so much as whimper, that ever I heard; and
Conscience in Profession might have gone free enough, for all I know, as to any
legal cognizance thereof.

The Revolutions of the civil Interest being so many and so strange, filled up
the thoughts of most with something or other, that they could scarce get a
vacancie for the other.

The breach of this Parliament, and the breaking out of our new Government,
stroke many of the Churches, especially such as past under the notion of
fifth-Monarchy men, into such a damp that they knew not how to breath with
patience, and their discontent flew very high, which cost some the loss of
their Liberty for they conceived their hopes frustrated, [or stopped at least]
and looked upon the Leaders of the Army to have broken their Faith and Promises
which did occasion their high displeasure: Where I leave them with many more
to condole themselves in the midst of their Abuses, and proceed to what remains.

The Protector sworn and settled in his Seat, endeavors to beget thoughts in all
men of his moderation and his tenderness; for he has been heard to say, that
he thought no Man in Englaud suffered purely for conscience; such a design had
he yet to keep or gain the hearts of the religious people in the Nation to
himself, who had been not a little serviceable to him all along the War,
wherein they supposed also that they served the Common Interest, wherein their
own was included. But the Lord suffered not this flourish to stand long without
a trial; he comes down to see whether it would prove altogether according to
the sound; whether the practice of the State would verify their Profession, or
whether it were spoken rather to serve themselves upon men, then to serve the
Interest of Christ's Kingdom in men. Nothing, in my judgment, comes so near to
the touch of what was before pretended then the case of Mr. John Biddle,
which will appear in these two respects: First, The civil deportment and
conversation of the man was not in the least to be excepted against, even in
the confession of his Enemies. And Secondly, The Judgment and Opinion of the
man in matters of Religion, is about things not of a light but important and
weighty concernment, contrary to the most By the former, if any dissenting man
be capable of Liberty, he is. By the latter, his Liberty is now made
questionable, whom I mention but with this double instruction. First; Not as if
I would be understood to plead singly for him alone, or any individual person
in the world; although the unjust sufferings of any man cannot pass my
observation without some sad regret of grief. Nor, Secondly, I am as if I were
(under the same predicament) Heterodox with him in point of Doctrine, and so
may be supposed to groan out this from a principle of self love and
persecution. No, I profess were I (as for ought I know I may be) of the same
judgment with the Court-Chaplains and Favorites in all things (excepting this
of persecution) I should he willing, and so I am, to give all men their liberty
in matters of conscience; so that they may not be proceeded against by any
compulsive forcing means whatsoever; because I know Truth to be strong enough
to defend it self, and advance its cause by better and more proportionate
Weapons. The pursuit of this man's case then these things premised, shall serve
as a mean, to find out what Liberty the Dissenting Brethren in England have,
and upon what bottom it stands; then will I stop this unpleasant Journey where
the persecution of this Heterodox-Man first took life, I shall not now
discuss; or by what heat it was fomented before it appeared publicly upon the
Theater for Action; the cognizance of that too I shall here pass by; together
with the occasion of this persecution, this later being abroad already: It Is my
will only to observe how this tender thing, both in the eye of God and good men
freedom of Conscience has been coveted somewhat, but never sincerely and truly
or legally betrothed or espoused to the present Government; notwithstanding the
Provision in the instrument of Government made for Liberty, which in the
judgment of all that I ever heard, giving their thoughts thereupon, even of
some that were willing enough to tread upon their brethrens conscience, if they
might safely do it, did tie up the hands of some furious men, that they could
not reach that blow to their neighbors as they might: I say, notwithstanding
this, Mr. Biddle is sent with a Mittimus to Newgate Prison in London, in order
to his Trial for Blasphemy and Heresy; upon that rusty Ordinance before
mentioned he is indicted thereupon for denying Jesus Christ to be the most High
God, etc. and excepts against his Bill; mean-time his Friends, with many
gathered Churches, Petition the Protector, upon the general account of Liberty,
etc. to declare that Ordinance void, as being prejudicial to common Freedom,
and against the Government. The (...) is extant in Print to be read of all. The
Protector rejects the Petition, and denies the Prayer thereof: The Petitioners
plead that the Instrument gives Liberty; whereupon the Protector falls to his
Glosses and Interpretations thereof, and says, That the Government gives
Liberty to all that profess Faith in God through Jesus Christ; that is, That
believe as the generality of Protestants believe; which is as much as if the
Government had said just nothing: And moreover, he most affectionately inveighs
against men of such Opinions, as this man, the Prisoner, is reported to be,
together with an assertion of the Magistrates duty, That he must not tolerate
such as speak against the God of the Country; with more passages not here to be
inserted.

How liable these expressions, given by way of gloss upon the Government, or
that part of it, are to be wrested according to the advantages of will, time,
and persons, let any man that has a mind to see what he says, behold and
judge: But these Interpretations will serve well to gratify the interest of
the Clergy, who many of them long to see their Brethrens flesh frying at a
Stake; but how serviceable they will prove to the Reformation of Religion, and
the Kingdom of the Lord Jesus, a little time I trust will manifest. But let us
see in brief whether this sense of his Highness upon that part of the
Instrument concerning Religion, does agree with himself, and whether the
Instrument will rationally bear such an interpretation.

For the first I will remember such passages relating to this purpose, wherein
he has appeared jointly in concurrence with others; and such wherein he has
stood singly by himself; and I fear we shall find the Protector fighting
against Oliver Cromwell in his former respective capacities and titles. And
besides those things hinted at, and referred to page 36. etc. that do bespeak
the Armies sense, wherein the present Protector had no little sway, I will with
as much sparingnesse as is convenient, mention [but] a few more. First then,
not to go (...) backwards, let us view that Remonstrance spoken of but now,
page 20. where declaring the interest of the Parliament, and opposing it to
that of the Kings, they say it is To protect and countenance religious men, and
godliness in the power of it, to give freedom and enlargement to the Gospel,
for the increasing and spreading of light amongst men, to take away those
corrupted Forms of an out side Religion and Church Government, whether imposed
without Law, or rooted in the Law in times of Popish Ignorance, or of the
Gospels dimmer light; by means whereof snares and chains were laid upon
conscientious and zealous men, and the generality of people held in darkness,
superstition, and a blind reverence of persons and outward things, fit for
Popery and slavery; [where by the way I would observe, first, that (in the
judgment of those Remonstrants) there may be tyranny over men's consciences
without Law: Secondly, That such tyranny was rooted in the Law in times of
Popery, or the Gospels dimmer light, and so by consequence ought to be expunged
out of the Law again, it being but an innovation:] They say further, That the
interest of the Parliament is ' To take away or loosen that dependence of the
Clergy and Ecclesiashical affairs [observe this well] upon the King (and so
upon the Protector) and that interest of the Clergy in the Laws and civil
affairs, which the craft of both in length of time had wrought for each other,
which several (say they) were the proper subject of the Reformation endeavored
by the Parliament, (and so of right ought to be endeavored still.) Does not
this manifestly say, That Liberty of Conscience is a Legal Right which the
great Council of the Kingdom was to assume as their Interest, to maintain
against the Kings, which they bring in afterward in opposition to this: And
can it be imagined, that the present Protector, who was then Lievt. General to
the Army, did not consent to this? Or could it be done without him? I will cite
one passage more in this page 66. where they speak of a certainty for future
annual, or Triennial Parliaments, with Provision, among other things, for
future clearing and ascertaining of the Power of the said Representatives, (to
be done by an Agreement, and therein to be declared) that they have and shall
have the supreme Power and Trust -- as to the highest and final Judgment in
all civil things, without further appeal to any created standing Power: Why I
beseech you is this limitation [in all civil things] put in, if we may not
conceive that it was the mind of this Remonstrance and the contrivers of it,
and consenters to it, that things spiritual, and relating purely to conscience,
should not (at any hand) come under the cognizance of the Parliament, or any
after created or established Power whatsoever under it? Are we gotten out of
the hearing of this? must it not reach us now? nor be of no use to us? or was
it intended to draw in religious men to serve the turn of some men at a pinch,
and afterward to cast them out, and persecute them as thieves and robbers?
doubtless there is one that rules in the Heavens, there is a God that judges
in the earth. I might say again, that, that Common Liberty and Public
Freedom, so much contended for in this and all the Armies, and that long
Parliaments Declarations, etc. and made that the ordinary Dialect of every page
(almost in them, does indisputably involve this of Conscience; and I am
countenanc't and justified in this assertion by these passages that we made to
speak here out of this Remonstrance, as may appear to any considerate and
unbiast man in the world. Come we from this to the Armies Agreement of the
people, mentioned erewhile; and we shall find it speaking very plain and home
to the purpose in hand; whereby it may be noted by the way, that those passages
of the Army concerning Freedom or Liberty of Conscience, were no sudden
raptures, or soon-vanisht flashes; but constant and settled thoughts, and so the
more wonder that they should be more deleted or blotted out in any. They say in
general; page 24. (more plainly then before in the Remonstrance) That the
Representatives have, and shaell be understood ^o have the supreme Trust, in
order to the preservation and government of the whole -- concerning all natural
or civil things* but not concerning things Spiritual or Evangelical; clearly
intimating, that they conceived it no way tending to the preservation and
government of the whole, but rather the clean contrary, for the Representatives
Power to extend unto things Spiritual and Evangelical and to take cognizance of
such. How comes it to be otherwise now? Again, they agree, page 16. After an
absolute excluding of any compulsive means or courses for the confutation of
Heresy, Error, etc. (if I understand what I read) That such as profess Faith
in God by Jesus Christ, (however differing in judgment from the Doctrine,
Worship or Discipline publicly held forth) shall not be restrained from, but
shall be protected in the Profession of their Faith, and exercise of Religion
according to their consciences in any place (except such as shall be set apart
for the Public Worship, where w^ provide not for them except they have leave)
so as they abuse not this Liberty, to the civil injury of others, or to actual
disturbance of the public Peace on their parts: Nevertheless it is not
intended to be hereby provided, That this Liberty shall necessarily extend to
Popery or Prelacy; and that all Laws, Ordinances, Statutes and clauses of any
Law, Statute or Ordinance to the contrary of this Liberty, be, and are here by
repealed and made void. If the Protector were in the framing this draught of
Agreement, how is it that that Ordinance on which Mr. Biddles Indictment was
grounded, could not be declared null and void when it was so honestly and
submissively desired by so many godly men? Is that which was lawful, yea
necessary to be done by the agreement; become now unlawful by this Government?
Nay, does not the Government speak the same thing in the same words, Art. 36,
37, 38. with but little omission? Methinks those whose hands have been in such
works as this, that do now make it conscience to persecute for Opinion, as it
is said, should by ten thousand degrees make it their conscience not to
persecute in such cases, but to protect, according to their former Agreement;
and Declarations; and if such a Liberty be not hitherto eyed, let all the world
judge and make sense of what is past, if it be not meant, that matters of
Religion only should not come at any hand into the sphere of the civil
Magistrate, but be reserved, and kept entirely and distinct, without any the
least dependence, as such, upon the Powers of the world; however they may be
from time to time distinguished or dignified, of what nature and concernment
this branch in the Agreement about Religion was then judged to be; besides what
appears in the latter end of their Remonstrance, is easy to be collected from
their Petition presixt before, and presented to the House of Commons with the
Agreement it self, where, page 1. they say, (speaking of the draught) That we
(meaning the Army) are not Apt in any wise to insist upon circumstantial
things, or ought that is not evidently fundamental to the public Interest for
which you and we have declared and engaged. And further, Whether it shall be
approved by you, and received by the people, (as it now stands) or not; we
desire it may yet remain upon record before you a perpetual witness of our real
intentions and utmost endeavors for a sound and equal Settlement. And in their
Declaration concerning that Agreement, page 30. of that Book, they say,
speaking to the Nation, in a tender thereof, We shall not otherwise commend it,
then to say, it contains the best and most hopeful foundations for the peace
and future well-Government of this Nation, that we can devise or think on
within the line of humane Power, etc. with many other Arguments and
Insinuations, whereby to get a good Opinion in the Nation of their good
intentions to public Liberty and Settlement; these passages are so plain they
need no paraphrase; and so pregnant to this end, to guess at the Armies, and
so the Protectors sense about the business of Religion, that I shall mention
no more of that kind for evidence; only let it be remembered, that some are
still apt to think, that tyranny is tyranny wheresoever itbe, in Kings, or
whomsoever; but I must complain and not much argue. Yet secondly, let us
consider the Protector singly in his judgment, Protectors Speech to the Parl.
without the concurrence of others for the Verdict; and I Will only touch upon
those passages for the purpose, in his Speech to the Parliament at their
dissolution, (although there might be much collected from the two former) page
11. God has spoken very loud on the behalf of his people, by the judging their
Enemies, and restoring them a Liberty to worship, with the freedom of their
consciences, and freedom in their Estates and persons when they do so. And this
he after calls, the cause of God manifested by the works of God, against which
whosoever falls, splits and suffers Shipwreck; and I hope this cause of God
will never be lost; or if at any time it should so happen, the Lord will soon
find it again with a witness. But further, see page 17 18. Religion was not
the thing at the first contested for; but God brought it to that issue at last,
and gave it to u^ by way of redundancie, and at last it proved to be that which
was most clear to us; and wherein consisted this more then in obtaining that
Liberty from the Tyranny of the Bishops, to all species of Protestants to
worship God according to their own Light and Consciences? [then not according
the forms or impositions of any other.] And speaking of such who once beggd
Liberty, it is queried, Is it ingenuous to ask liberty, and not to give it? what
greater hypocri^e then for those who were oppressed by the Bishops, to become the
greatest oppressors themselves so soon as their yoke was removec? I could wish
that those who call for Liberty now also, had not too much of that
Liber^y-Spirit, if the Power were in their hands. How can this be interpreted
otherwise, then coming from a mind resolved to maintain the freedom of
conscience entire and uncurtaild, especially seeing there is so fair a rule
given to measure such a sense in it by that which follows; As for profane
persons, Blasphemers, such as preach Sedition, the contentious Raylers;
punishment from the Civil Magistrate ought to meet with them; for their lives
b^ing open, make them the sub^ects of the Magistrates sword. So much has the
Protector singly spoken, and if that old saying be true, Index est animi serm^,
Who can forbear to say, That it has been the Judgment of the present Power,
that all things singly relating to conscience, are out of the way of the
Magistrates Cognizance; yet who compares these things thus (though but a
little) opened, with the Interpretations put upon the Instrument about Liberty,
mentioned before, together with the tart and fiery sayings of many about
Toleration, and can refrain himself from wonder and astonishment, to see such
forgetfulness (to say no more on it) falling upon men's memories, of such things
which they themselves have most solemnly professed and published to the worlds
view, to be of an absolute necessity to the general settlement of the common
Interest and Peace of the Nation? What meaning to put upon these Transactions
as they thus stand, I think the wisest or most subtle head will never be able
to invent, except it be That men are resolved with him in the Poet, to say,
(...),
(...).
To have Tunes for all times, and (like Fiddlers) to sing that Song that fits
the humors of the greatest in the company, however it go with the rest. Thus
have we taken a little view of what the thoughts and workings of great men have
been concerning Liberty, and what they now appear to us to be.

Next, for the Instrument of Government [our new Charter it self] whether that
does not give Liberty to all Dissenters in matters of Conscience (excepting its
own exceptions.)

Shall (or can) I turn Common-Lawyer, or the Law? I shall not assume to my
self that Task; yet it being given for men to square themselves by, I may
endeavor to know it, and for that end make a search into it. To the answer of
the question then: First, That those Articles concerning Religion, mean a
Liberty to all Dissenters, as before is clear, and very plain if it be compared
with the mind of that Draught of Agreement out of which it seems to be taken;
I say, it seems to be takenby the indentity of voice they both speak, only the
Instrument omits some few passages which are mentioned in the Agreement: Now
the Agreement endeavors manifestly to take all Power compulsive out of the
Magistrates hand, yea out of the hand of the Parliament it self, as being
inconsistent with public Settlement and the Nations peace; and it is to be
noted, that therein they do but declare the Indibutable Rights of the people,
grounded on the Law of Nature and right Reason; for this kind of Freedom of
which we now speak, is a little elder then our new Government. But secondly,
The very repetition of the Articles about Liberty, is enough to answer the
Question to any unprejudiced man in the world; the plainness whereof will be a
witness against all false Glossaries; read Art. the 36, and 37. That to the
public profession (what is that? the Christian Religion, says the 35.
Article) held forth, None shall be compelled by any external force whatsoever
to be of the Christian Religion, because the Christian Religion is able to
gain, through the Power of Jesus, Disciples to its self, without any such poor
and beggarly Argument as the Sword of man is, compared with the Sword of the
Spirit, the Word of God; but that endeavors be used to win them (those that are
not of the Christian Religion publicly held forth) by sound Doctrine and the
example of a good Conversation; from from which later clause it appears, That
in order to the finding out of Error and Heresy, and its rational confutation,
there must be a free way open for the Dissenters from the approved Religion, to
profess and publish their Opinions; which being published, shall contract no
other evil to the Publishers, then an advantage thereby to be taken for their
better instruction, not for their Destruction, Imprisonment, Banishment, or
what censures else the Civil Power pleases to impose: For this Article
provides, that such Erroneous (yea Infidels, so far it goes) shall be dealt
withal only by Doctrine and good example. (I do verily believe that this sense
is not forc^t, but that every ingenuous man will see as much in the Text.) Yet,
because the civil peace and common safety and Liberty of the good people of
England have been disturbed and taken from them by a Sect and Interest of men
(for such a transition I conceive there is between this 36. and the following
Article) then therefore the 37. Article does limit, and therein expound the
former thus: That such as profess faith in God by Jesus christ (though
differing in judgment from the Doctrine, [note that still] Worship or
Discipline publicly held forth) shall not be restrained from, but shall be
protected in the Profession of their faith, and exercise of their Religion, so
as they abuse not this Liberty to the civil injury of others, [observe the word
civil, only the civil injury of others is thereby provided against) and to the
actual disturbance of the public Peace upon their parts, provided that this
Liberty be not extended to Popery, or Prelacy; nor to such as under the
profession of Christ, hold forth and practice licentiousness. The 38. Article
appeals all Laws, Statutes and Ordinances, etc. to the contrary of this
Liberty. Suppose now (for instance) that I maintained, and professed that there
is no resurrection of the dead, (which Doctrine my soul abhors) a position
which I hope, will be contrary to the Doctrine held forth publicly yet) I say,
suppose I did profess that thing, I conceive, and that from apparent ground in
these Articles, that I am not to be compelled to be of another mind, or else
to dye, or be abridged of my Liberty by the hand of man; but to be preserved
and protected unto the Reformation of my mind and the confutation of my Error
by sound Doctrine, which by this Law ought to be, notwithstanding that that
Ordinance, May 2.1648. expressly says, That if any one shall maintain and
publish, that the bodies of men shall not rise again after they are dead, it
shall be adjudged Felony; and why judge I that my protection lies in this
Government? but because all Ordinances made contrary to the Liberty given, are
hereby repealed and made void; and this amongst the rest, as being one of those
all. Again, here is an exception of, or provision made against Popery and
Prelacy, and Professors of licentiousness; which provision I humbly conceive)
was made, because if it had not, Popery and Prelacy might be adjudged to drink
their portion of this declared Liberty; which that it might not do, this
exception seems in reason to be put in; Nay, and I believe thus far we may go
too, as to say, That all the Doctrines and Opinions that Papists and Prelates
hold, are not (by this) excepted and provided against; for in many things, the
present public Profession, and the aforesaid Interests do kiss each other in
a friendly compliance; but such Opinions of theirs are hereby excluded, that do
give them the denomination of Papists and Prelates respectively: Now then its
clear (seeing that only is excepted, which otherwise is comprehended under the
general term) That no man professing faith in God by Jesus Christ, shall be
restrained in the Profession of his Faith, however differing, except they
profess Popery, or Prelacy, or licentiousness; so that as to the case in
hand, by which (as I have said the Government is tried, Mr. Biddle ought not to
be restrained from his Profession, That Jesus Christ is not the Most High God;
but to be protected therein, in order to the confutation of his Heresy by
sound Doctrine and Argument, which is able to pierce deeper by a thousand
degrees into the heart of Error and the Devil, then the point of the
Magistrates sword can, though driven by all the strength in the world united
into one Arm; neither am I singular in this Interpretation; I believe, and
hope. I speak the sense of all moderate and serious Christians in England, upon
this point of Liberty of Conscience; I am sure I have the Attestation, or
rather the Opinion of many hundred honest and professing Christians in the
Nation, concurring with me in the same Judgment, as it does most evidently
appear by that Petition-signed by them, occasioned by this Trial some of whom
(and I mention it to their honor) have had the happiness to keep constant and
close to their Principles therein, whiles others have played fast and loose,
and ('it is to be feared) have made shipwreck of Faith and a good Conscience,
endeavoring to satisfy their own lusts in serving other men's wills, and the
humors of the Times. Thus much for the finding out of the mind of the
Government, and the sense of the supreme Administrators thereof, as to freedom
in Religion, both before and since the lifting up of the hand to heaven for a
solemn and religious Execution thereof.

Notwithstanding the clearness of the case of Liberty, which is as manifest as
the Sun at Noonday, the bloody work of Persecution is countenanc't and
fomented by Court-Interpretations, put upon the aforesaid branch of the
Government; and to make it pass the better, it is said, That such a latitude
was never in the mind of the contrivers of that Charter; and that they had
rather be set quick in a Pit, and to have stones and dirt cast upon them to
damn them up, then to tolerate men of such Opinions. By means of which glosses
and asseverations, the presenters of that Petition for a further declaring of
that Ordinance null and void, etc. were put out of all hopes of obtaining their
desires, (though never so honest) and the Prisoner left to prepare himself for
the next Sessions in London, unto which he had been referred. But in the mean
time comes a party of Horse to Newgate, surprises the Prisoner, and carries
him away, who at length is sent into the Island of Silly, to be there kept a
close Prisoner, whereby the due proceedings and course of the Law was stopped
which is (or ought to be) the safeguard and the fortress of every honest, Decl
of the long Pail. Each. 17. 1647. page 17.21. ^um multis alis. It Is to be argued
from their denial of the neg. voice to the K. K. Char. case by Cook. See Sir.
Edward Cook 2. part of Institutes, page 45. cap. 29.
innocent, freeborn English man.

These strange and unexpected proceedings have been most bitterly inveighed
against, and most earnestly opposed in the late King, which were made a great
part of those heinous evils for which he lost his life, and were declared to be
contrary to the Laws of England, and the Liberty of the Subject. And although
there may not be pretenses wanting to make it pass the better in the
observations of men, yet has it been conceived illegal under what pretense
soever. All men know (that know any thing this way) that it is one branch of
the great Charter of Englands Liberties concerning the King, that he promises
Nulli vendimus, nulli negabimus, aut differemus Justitiam, vel rectum. We will
not sell, nor deny, nor delay Justice or right to no man. No man shall be
taken, imprisoned, or disseised, -- or outlawed, or exiled, or by any means
destroyed -- but by the legal Judgment of his Peers (or equals) or by the Law
of the Land. And Sir Ed Cook in his Exposition of this Chapter, says, it is
the worst oppression that is done by color of Justice (or right, or under
pretext of doing good) It is enough barely to read these words of that Charter;
the Commentary is worthy to be in the heart of every English man. Mr. Saaler
commends and closes with Polydor Virgil, in his relation of the business of
the Lord Chancellor in King Richard's time, Rights of the Kingdom, page 153.
who on pretense of the Kings Warrant, exceedingly polld the people; whose
proud injustice was brought down by Parliament, and to excuse himself the
better, he pleads the Kings Command, whereat the Historian (as Sadler brings
him in) puffed, and said, quas^ fas esse: jus omne prencipis Jussu rescindere, as
if the Kings Command might disannul the Law. 1. Part Cook, Deel. page 183.
The Lords and Commons in that long Parliament (in the day wherein Law and
Justice was strongly asserted by them against the King, in defense of whom,
therein the Army engaged against the Royal Party) declare and publish to the
world, That it is against the Laws and Liberties of the Kingdom, that any of
the Subjects thereof should be committed or compelled by the King to attend him
at his pleasure, but such as are bound thereto by special service. And if any
Messengers or Officers shall by color of any command from his Majesty, or
Warrant under his Majesty's hand, arrest, take or carry away any of his
Majesty's Subjects to any place whatsoever, contrary to their wills, That it is
both against the Law of the Land, and Liberty of the Subject, and it is to the
disturbance of the public Peace of the Kingdom; and any of his Majesty's
Subjects so arrested may lawfully resuse to obey such Arrests and Commands. Can
any thing be spoken more to the purpose? Or is not this the Language of all
rational men that have heard of Law or Liberty? I confess I am fallen into a
road both arduous and difficult; I shall deliver my self out of it by a bare
quotation from Mr. Frynne, who once felt the sharp edge of the Prelates cruel
and salvage Tyranny: His case is plain enough and pleaded by himself in Law
against his Star-Chamber-Judges, to a Committee of that long Parliament, New
Discovery of the Prelates Tyranny, page 210, 211, 212, 213.
appointed [almost] for that purpose; yet because I will not put the Reader to
a double charge in purchase, I refer him to those Authorities which he there
brings in and applies to his purpose, not unsuitable to ours. But it is
observable from all, first, That the Judges, (much less a Party of Soldiers)
were not to stay any Processes or Judgment; no, not by the Kings Commandment.
Secondly, That it was an. Article of a very Capital concernment, and heinous
nature against the Cardinal, to grant forth injunctious to stop the
Common-Laws, it being against the Liberty of the Subject, whereof see more in
the place aforesaid. Magna Char^. page 29.
I shall not undertake to accommodate these passages to any present; it is a
work of a tender, a touchy nature; only I shall conclude them in the saying of
Sir Benjamin Ridyard, in a Speech of his in Parliament, Let the matters bolt
out the men: Their Actions [will] discover them. Thus much of the sense of the
Government, and the Executors thereof concerning Liberty of Conscience, and
their proceedings therein.

It Is easy now to find out upon what foot of account the Administration of
Freedom in Religion stands. The Instrument of Government promises and provides
for a general Liberty (except what it excepts) yet there is this Ordinance
against Blasphemies and Heresies endeavored to be kept alive, and supported,
to be a check to the Government. This Ordinace has such a vast and
comprehensive reach, that it is able to draw in the greatest and most
considerable part of Christians in England into its clutches, and to pierce
into the heart of their lives and Liberties; for there are none of the
Independent or Baptized way, but more or less do fall into its verge. These,
because they have been (and that they may still be) serviceable for the
carrying on of State-designs, shall have a Sanctuary, or City of Refuge in the
Government, whenever that pursuing Ordinance shall break out after them; for
the Protector says, They are and shall be tolerated, although the Anabaptists
were once shrewdly glanc't at in his first Speech to the last Parliament,
because they [mostly] differ but in forms and other circumstantials; and here
the Ordinance shall be checked: As in Mr. Kiffins Case, etc.
As for others differing in Opinions or Doctrines of consequence, if they
chance to quarrel with the Ordinance; Currat Lex, Let the Law go on; they shall
have no little Zoar in this Government to save them in their flight; and if in
the defense of themselves their Pleadings be likely to prove profitable to them
for their safety, all shall be quasht and stopped presently before issue or
Judgment, and the Defendants damned to perpetual Imprisonment, to do them
Justice, and to save them from the Law: In conclusion, it is no more but this,
That if the Protector pleases, That Ordinance of Lords and Commons is in force
to some; and if he pleases too, it is not in force to others. It was declared
to be the Royal Anti-parliamentary Interest to uphold and maintain the
dependence of the Clergy and Church Matters upon the K. and greatness of the
Clergy under him; and in all these things to oppose the Reformation endeavored
by the Parliament, Armies Remonstrance, Nov. 16. 1648. page 20. Sir Edward ^ook
many times lays down this Rule in several Cases handled by him in his
Institutes, Misera serv^tus, ubijus est vagum, vel incertum. And surely nothing
can be more uncertain then the pleasure and the will of men; what is done to
one, may (when the circumstances of time and persons will afford) be done to a
thousand, yea to ten thousand times ten thousand, by the same rule; and then
what will become of Liberty of Conscience in general, if it must lie in the
breast or pleasure of man? 'Twas used to be said. That an unlimited Power not
bounded by Law and Reason, made any King or Magistrate whatsoever a Tyrant, in
potentia, at least, though he were the best and most righteous man in the
world; and what strong and conclusive arguments there have bin given since to
discover the error and the danger of that State or Common wealth-Doctrine, I
never understood. I desire to know this one thing, How or where it can be shown
in the Derivation and stating of the Magistrates Power, as they say in matters
of Religion, That he has a right, or it is his duty to give Liberty to this or
that dissenting party in Religion, for the Profession of their Faith, and not
to all? As for instance, Suppose a Magistracy maintains and publicly
professes the baptism of children to be the undoubted baptism in the new
Testament ^ub^^ct^ve; and notwithstanding shall think or make it his duty to
give Liberty to those that are adversaries in Doctrine and Practice to that
way, maintaining the baptism of believers only, where there is an appearing
ground to determine a Liberty to this (or such alike) interest, and not to all?
I speak of such a determination as is made by the judgment of Scripture and
Reason, and wave prudential ways here.

I shall not undertake to answer the Objections of the Adversaries laid in
against this Liberty contended for; it has been done already; yet if either of
these ensuing be urged upon this complaint, I will touch upon the Answer.

Suppose it should be the States conscience to proceed by their Power against
what shall be reckoned and adjudged Error, will you not give them leave to act
accordingly?

I answer; Grant the Hypothesis, and there is a distinction to be made between
a State and a private conscience. The State-conscience ought to be regulated by
the Light of Law that shines within its proper sphere; for it is one thing to
have the conscience directed in its public, and another in its prviate
capacity. Suppose a Judge scruple the reason of that Law of sentencing men to
dye being convict of Theft (as Mr. March's Amicus Rei Pub. p. 105. etc.
some I think not without cause have done) it is said, Thereon the Judge as a
Judge (if he proceed) is to follow the Law according to his Oath; yet if his
private conscience prove predominant, he may quit his place of Trust, and
resign: And it is observeable, That the Kings of England were sworn to execute
their Trust in Rule, not according to their conscience; for then the
Administration thereof had been uncertain; but according to the Laws, which
Laws (as it has been told us before) have been binding so far only, as they
have been grounded upon Reason, and made to look toward public good. There is
reason enough in the very mention, to satisfy any man in this, that the
private conscience must veyle before the public, and bow down its self.

Ob^. But those that differ in their Opinions may conceal their Differences,
and then they may be tolerated?

Ans. First, By such a course as the Objection insinuates, there is no
considerable evidence given of the indulgence, the meekness and gentleness of
the Government, and the ministration thereof; for to presume they tolerate, is
the most that can be said; all discovery of the Hetrodox or Erroneous being
prevented. Now it may be thought, that those Articles in the Instrument
concerning Religion, were intended to represent the Power, looking with a
milder face upon men of conscience, though differing in Doctrine, then the
former settled Authority had done. Again, Should all men be reftrained from the
publication of their opinions, the profession publicly held forth would be (in
very much) out of a capacity for the confutation of the errors in them, and no
pity and compassion showed toward the erring conscience at all, because if he
may continue in silence, he may go on in his error to the death; the means of
his reformation being so far prevented as the restraining of him from the free
discovery of his judgment comes to. Lastly, the Liberty by the objection
granted upon concealment of a differing doctrine is no more but what the
greatest Treason in the world may challenge from man, while it is kept within
the compass of a private thought or imagination; the powers on earth having no
cognizance in that case of the thoughts, until they are declared by some overt
act; then such as err in the business of conscience, may give the objector
thanks for nothing in the liberty granted by him in the objection: No more of
this kind of Replication for the reason given before.

You see upon what ticklish and uncertain terms the liberty of conscience
(onceso much asserted, See the Remonstrance spoken of before, page 21. worthy
to be read and revived.
and made to draw in the most professing part of the Subjects of this nation to
a compliance with the long Parliament and the Army) stands; his Highness (dear
friends and brethren) is but a man, and a man subject to like passions with
others; and how soon he may be drawn to give the reins to the Incendiaries of
the times, who knows? How ready many men's spirits are to kindle and blow up the
flames of persecution, if they can but get a fair advantage, has been so much
manifested of late, that it needs no argument for proof: Of what a lamentable
consideration is it, that those who once engaged in the promotion of that
Petition, for the further vacating and declaring that Ordinance, etc. null and
void, should turn their backs not only upon their former declared principles,
but upon their own hands, Mr. Kiffin, etc.
once employed and set for the quenching of that fire, and join themselves with
such that stand to add fuel for the fomenting thereof. The Lord Protector, as
he is a man subject to like infirmities with other, so he is not without
temptations to let fly and lay about him; nay, by how much the higher he
stands, by so much the more is he subjected to those violent and insinuating
blasts; which blasts may prove the more prosperous for their desired end, by
how much they are ventilated from a spirit of zeal in Religion, yet carried on
with a furious rage, to make the minds of others to bow down to their
conceits. How the Court abounds with these I shall leave it to be determined by
such as have more acquaintance there then I; yet I think my self bound to give
a taste thereof, to prove what I have said; Col. G^ffe, a man famed enough for
Religion, and interest in religious men (which is none of the weakest bonds
that ties him to the Protector) to discover his judgment about liberty, at a
private Fast kept by the General and his Officers at Whitehall, blames the
civil Magistrate (grounding his Speech upon the 34 of Ezekiel) because he did not
intermeddle in matters of religion, and judge between the fat cattle and the
lean; also he applies that which is spoken to the Church of Thyatyra about
their toleration of the woman Jezebel in Rev. 2.20. to the Magistrate. How
easy this goes down with the present Power, see by a late Expostulation made
with some Teachers of Churches, concerning Dissenters in doctrine, etc. 'Will
not you excommunicate such? Some said, They would. Then if you take care for
your Bodies and Societies to keep them clear, shall not I accordingly take care
of the Commonwealth? Is not this (I beseech you) something of kin to the old
Popish and prelatical principle for persecution? Excommunicate and deliver over
to the civil Magistrate? Thus much from this Preacher. M. Peter's another man
notorious enough, adds to this his profound reading in the French History, and
says, he found, That so long as Calvin and the Presbyters in Geneva dealt
courteously with Servetus by persuasion, and argument, his Heresies spread and
prevailed; but the cutting off of Servetus was the overthrow of the Heresy:
Whence he observes, That as the blood of the Martyrs is the seed of the Church,
so the blood of Heretics is the destruction of Heresy.

Gallantly concluded (Mr. Peter's) and a very clear Text for your bloody
Doctrine; Dr. Tailor may be opposed to Mr. Peter's Liberty of Prophesying,
Epist. page 19, 20, 21, etc. and in this Ibring as good an argument for Liberty
as he has done against it.
never did a more pernicious Principle crawle out of the mouth of any Roman
Jesuit in this world; if the Doctrine were not too gross to need refutation,
Mr. Peter's might be told in his ear, the saying of the wise man, as it is made
to speak by Ancient Bounds, p. 55.
another long ago, upon the like occasion, There be just men (and so just
ways) to whom it happens according to the work of the wicked; and there be
wicked men (and so wicked ways) to whom it happens, according to the work of
the righteous: And further, should we set the experience of this present time
in opposition to Mr. Peter's observation, we should find it otherwise, and he
himself will say it is including; but I leave him, for he is brought in not to
be disputed with. But to show that the Protector is not free from temptations;
no not from these of his own house; and when they are persecuted by men of such
intimacy, and appear so fitly accommodated to a desire of Ruledom, let the wise
fear, they may sometimes be admitted.

The uncertainty of Christian-freedom thus briefly touched upon, and so much
appearing as it does, prompts me (though the least of the many thousands of
Israel) to speak thus, and to bespeak all Christians to gird up, and prepare
themselves to the day of suffering; who knows how soon the Sword and Violence
of man may be ready to drink up the blood of the Religious, when our Liberty
lies grovelling at the feet of those that will not lift it up? Let there be all
pious and lawful courses thought on, that may delay, or else raze out that day
from the Calender of time; or if it may be in the wise disposing providence
thought meet to suffer such a blast and storm of Hell to fall upon the heirs of
Heaven, let it not take us at unawares, and surprise us unarmed for encounter;
we may expect the Devil will rage much, and belch forth his fury in fiery
flames when he is laid hold on by the Angels Hand and he may play Rex before
he go into the bottomless Pit: Who will not endeavor to hold the mystery of
faith in a pure conscience, whereby he may conquer the world, and reple the
assaults of the Devil, and of men led by devilish Principles? Pray, beseech
God for men, that we may lead a peaceable and quiet life in godliness and
honesty; and men, for the Lords sake, that they offer no injury nor violence to
his Kingdom; but let the Government alone upon his shoulders who is best able
to manage it. Do all things in love; and if after all you see your selves
exposed still to sufferings for conscience, say, The will of the Lord be done.
Prepare then, prepare (Christians) to meet oppression and persecution in the
field, and to conquer with faith and patience, the best and most powerful
Instruments of a Christians warfare.

Whiles I am in this humble posture (for it is time to contract my Work now)
give me leave, (oh! let me earnestly desire and beg leave) to tender upon a
bended knee these few partticulars (they are not new born, I think they can be
but revived) to the present ruling Power of this Nation.

1. Consider, whether all authoritative proceedings by civil force or power
against men for conscience, or things therein depending, be not prejudicial to
the Peace of the Nation, and liberty of the Subject by the old Laws of England;
and who in reason are the disturbers of the peace, the prosecutors in such
cases, or the prosecuted.

2. Consider, whether there was not a time wherein the Interest of Christ's
Kingdom was carried ou distinct, and withouut dependence upon the Kingdoms of
this world; and whether the power and life of Religion did not shine forth in
greater glory, and look more like Heaven then, then it has done since; and
whether it ought not to be so still, notwithstanding any Arguments yet urged to
the contrary.

3. Consider, whether the proceedings in cases of Religion, do not reflect
disparagement and dishonor, and an esteem of weakness upon the Arm of Christ
and power of the Spirit, whereby he is brought in as standing in need of
Instruments of an Heterogenous nature (to what he uses) even the trembling and
the fallible arm of man.

4. Consider further, whether the Magistrates Cognizance and coercive Power in
spirituals, be not an usurpation of the Royal Diadem of Jesus Christ the King
of the Church; and if so, whether it be not wisdom for all Powers in the world
to make a speedy and relenting resignation thereof before the time wherein he
I come to vindicate the wrongs he has received from all such bold Usurpers.

5. Consider [lastly] whether such Magisterial courses as before, do not in
their kind justify the oppressions of conscience made by all former powers,
and so draw all the innocent blood shed in this Land in such ways, upon the
head of the present Generation; and whether the Sword of Divine vengeance was
not drawn against the King and Prelates heretofore, principally for those
cruelties they took delight to exercise upon conscientious men, and the
encroachments they made upon the Kingdom of Jesus Christ.

These (with more) may be offered as matter meet enough for the consideration
of all, even from him that sits upon the Throne, to him that grindeth at the
Mill, in order to the drawing in of that arm of civil power, that is sometime
stretched out over the consciences of the Religious, which proves so much
offensive both to God and man. But I remit this too, and resume a Prayer.

And here let me beseech and beg again, and humbly pray the Powers on Earth,
that as they tender the honor of Christ's Kingdom, and the keeping of the Crown
upon his head entire and non-impeacht by them, as they would be free from the
guilt of blood, and a participation in other men's sins, as they would be
unwilling to hear Judgment pass against them when time shall be, for
exercising of their power there where they have nothing to do; and as they
rejoice in the power and prosperity of those Natitions that lie under them, who
ought to receive Justice and Righteousness as their due; I say, as they tender
all, or any of these things, that they would provide that Liberty of Conscience
may be fully declared and enjoyed, and the Rights and Freedoms of the people
may be perfectly vindicated and secured, lest the Lord come (too soon for some)
to destroy them that destroy the earth; whose name is Prince of Peace; and
whose delight is much in mercy and forgiveness, and in patience unto all; or if
this must be denied which is so just and reasonable, and that religious Freedom
must not yet appear, upon such terms as before; then let me beg again, (it is
but this, and I have done) That Heretics and Dissenters in Doctrine may live
and be abroad; and this, (if not out of respect to your own duty, and to all
their Right, yet) that they may serve (instead of Canaanites) to keep the
spirits of the present Orthodox active, that they may not grow idle; for one
main reason why the retinue of the former Prelates was generally so flat and
stupid, was because they had the power of the fleshly-arm so much at their
command to controvert and crush those (supposed erroneous) Principles, which
they could not (or else they would not take the pains to) bring down by force
of Argument or Scripture-reason, because they had an easier way to do it by;
and let me retire from the presence with this caution, That if I seem to plead
for Errors Liberty, it is by accident, and in order to have it all cut down by
a better and a sharper Sword, (that of the spirit in the mouth of Christ) at
the drawing of which I can rejoice exceedingly, none being more delighted to
behold the heart-blood of Error by such means, shed and spilt upon the ground,
nor more ready to pray that it may never rise again.

FINIS.
COurteous Reader, if thou shall find in this Treatise many Errata's, omission
of stops, Points, and Parentheses, and printing the Quotations in the same
Character with the Authors words, with whatsoever else of this kind may occur;
though I might say many things in excuse, yet I shall content my self to tell
thee, It came out of an oppressed Press, otherwise it had come to thy view
sooner by twelve months and better formed. I have here pointed at some faults,
which may be thus amended.

Page 1. that in the Margin read in the line: page 2. l. 11. Comma at
Discourse: p. 3. l. 10. Com. at suffered, p. 4. l. 24. for setting r. settling.
p. 5. l. 28. for little r. tittle, p. 6. l. 6. for where r. who ere, p. 9. l.
28. add not, p. 11. l. 31. for absolute r. obsoletc: p. 12, l. 8. for faing r.
praying: p. 17. l. 24. for stick r. strike, p. 20. l. 12. for left r. lost, p.
25. l. 8. comma at hand. l. 21. r. pinching of, p. 34. l. 13. for I am, r. am
1. l. 35. for coveted r. courted: p. 35. l. 16. for Protector r. Petition. p.
40. l. 33. for clear r. dear. p. 41. l. 5. for liberty r. lordly; p: 43. l. 30.
for appeals r. repeals, p. 44. del. That. p. 45, l. 9. at Trial point.


