HIS HIGHNESS THE LORD PROTECTORS TWO SPEECHES TO THE PARLIAMENT IN THE
PAINTED CHAMBER; The one on Monday the 4. of September; The other on Tuesday
the 12. of September, 1654.

Taken by one who stood very near him, and Published to prevent mistakes.

Printed at London, and reprinted at Leith, 1654.

His HIGHNESS the Lord Protectors SPEECH to the PARLIAMENT, In the
Painted-Chamber, on Monday, the fourth of Sept. 1654.
GENTLEMEN,
YOu are met here on the greatest Occasion, that I believe England ever saw:
having upon your shoulders the Interest of three Great Nations, with the
Territories belonging to them. And truly (I believe) I may say it without an
Hyperbole, You have upon your shoulders the Interest of all the Christian
People in the World. And the Expectation is, that I should let you know (as far
as I have cognizance of it) the occasion of your assembling together at this
time.

It has been very well hinted to you this day, That you come hither to settle
the Interests before mentioned: for, it will be made of so large extention in
the Issue and consequence of it.

In the way and manner of my speaking to you, I shall study plainness; and to
speak to you what is truth, and what is upon my heart, and what will in some
measure reach to these concernments.

After so many changes and turnings which this Nation has labored under, to
have such a Day of Hope as this is, and such a Door of Hope opened by God to
us; Truly, (I believe) some Months since, would have been above all our
thoughts.

I confess it would have been worthy of such a Meeting as this is, to have
remembered that which was the Rise, and gave the first beginning to all those
turnings and tossings that have been upon these Nations: And to have given you
a Series of the Transactions (not of men, but) of the Providence of God, all
along unto our late changes: As also the ground of our first undertaking to
oppose that Usurpation and Tyranny that was upon us, both in Civils and
Spirituals: And the several Grounds particularly applicable to the several
Changes that have been.

But I have two or three Reasons which divert me from such a way of proceeding
at this time. If I should have gone in that way, that which is upon my heart to
have said (which is written there, that if I would blot it our, I could not)
would have spent this Day: the Providence and Dispensations of God have been
so stupendous. As David said in the like case: Many, O Lord my God, are thy
Wonderful Works which thou have done: and thy thoughts Which are to usward,
Psalm, 40.5.
they cannot be reckoned up in order unto thee: If I Would declare and speak of
them, they are more then can be numbered.

Truly, another Reason, new to me, you had to day in the Sermon. Much
Recapitulation of Providence; much Allusion to a State, and Dispensation in
respect of Discipline and Correction; of Mercies and Deliverances; the only
Parallel of Gods dealing with us, that I know in the world: which was largely
and wisely held forth to you this day: Isreal's bringing out of Egypt, through a
Wilderness, by many Signs and Wonders, toward a place of Rest; I say toward
it. And that having been so well remonstrated to you this day, is another
Argument why. I shall not trouble you with recapitulation of those things:
Though they are things, that (I hope) will never be forgotten; because written
in better Books then those of Paper; I am persuaded, written in the heart of
every good man.

The third Reason was this, That which I judge to be the end of your Meeting;
the great end; which was likewise remembered to you this day; to wit, Healing,
and Settling. And the remembering Transactions too particularly, perhaps instead
of healing (at least in the hearts of many of you) may set the wound fresh a
bleeding.

I must profess this to you (what ever thoughts pass upon me) that if this
day, that is, this Meeting prove not healing, what shall we do? But as I said
before, seeing (I trust) it is in the minds of you all, and much more in the
mind of God, which must cause healing: It must be first in his mind; and he
being pleased to put it into yours, it will be a day indeed; and such a day, as
Generations to come will bless you for. I say for this, and the other Reasons
have I forborne to make a particular remembrance, and Enumeration of things,
and of the manner of the Lords bringing us through so many Changes and Turnings
as have passed upon us.

Howbeit, I think it will be more then necessary, to let you know (at the least
so well as I may) in what Condition this; nay, these Nations were, when this
Government was undertaken.

For Order sake. Its very natural for us to consider, What our Condition was
in Civils; in Spirituals. What was our Condition? Every man's hand (almost) was
against his Brother; at least, his heart. Little regarding any thing that
should cement, and might have a tendency in it to cause us to grow into one.
All the Dispensations of God, His terrible ones, (he having met us in the way
of his judgment in a ten years Civil War, a very sharp one;) His merciful
Dispensations, they did not, they did not work upon us: but we had our Humors,
and Interests: And indeed I fear our humors were more then our Interests, And
certainly, as it fell out in such Cases, our Passions were more then our
Judgments.

Was not every thing (almost) grown Arbitrary? Who knew where, or how to have
right without some obstruction or other intervening? Indeed we were almost
grown Arbitrary in every thing.

What was the face that was upon out Affairs as to the Interest of the Nation?
to the Authority of the Nation? to the Magistracy? to the Ranks, and Orders of
Men, whereby England has been known for hundreds of years? A Nobleman, a
Gentleman, a Yeoman? (That is a good Interest of the Nation, and a great one.)
The Magistracy of the Nation, was it not almost trampled under foot, under
despite, and contempt, by men of Levelling principles?

I beseech you for the Orders of men, and Ranks of men; did not that Levelling
Principle tend to the reducing all to an equality? Did it think to do so? or
did it practice toward it, for Propriety and Interest? What was the Design,
but to make the Tennant as liberal a fortune as the Landlord? which I think if
obtained, would not have lasted long. The men of that Principle, after they had
served their own Turns, would have cried up Interest, and Property then fast
enough.

This Instance is in stead of many, and that it may appear that this thing did
extend far, is manifest; because it was a pleasing voice to all poor men, and
truly not unwelcome to all bad men. To my thinking it is a Consideration, that
in your Endeavors after Settlement, you will be so well minded of, that I
might well have spared this; But let that pass.

Indeed in Spiritual things, the Case was more sad, and deplorable; and that
was told to you this day eminently. The prodigious Blasphemies, Contempt of God
and Christ, denying of him, Contempt of him and his Ordinances, and of the
Scriptures: A spirit visibly acting those things foretold by Peter, and Jude;
yea, those things spoken of by Paul to Timothy: who when he would remember some
things to be worse then the Antichristian state, of which he had spoken in the
first to Timothy, Tells them what should be the Lot, and Portion of the last
times, 1 Timothy 4. 1. 2.
and says, in the last days perilous times should come, 2 Timothy 3. 2, 3, 4.
for men should be lovers of their own selves, covetous, boasters, proud,
blasphemers, disobedient to Parents, unthankful etc. And when he remembers
that of the Antichristian State, he tells them, that in the latter days, that
State shall come in, wherein there shall be a departing from the faith, and a
giving head to seducing spirits, 1 Timothy 4. 1. 2.
and doctrines of Devils, 1. 2.
speaking lies in hypocrisy, etc. By which description he makes the state of
the last times, worse then that under Antichrist. And surely it may well be
feared these are our times: For when men forget all Rules of Law and Nature,
and break all the Bonds that fallen man has upon him, the Remainder of the
Image of God in his Nature, which he cannot blot out, and yet shall endeavor
to blot out, having a form of Godliness, without the power; these are sad
stokens of the last times.

And indeed the Character, wherewith this spirit, and principle is described in
that place, is so Legiole, and visible, that he that runs may read it to be
amongst us: for by such the Grace of God is turned into wantonness (...) and
Christ, and the Spirit of God, made the Cloak of all villainy, and spurious
apprehensions. And although these things will not be owned publicly, as to
practice, (they being so abominable, and (...):) Yet how this principle extends
it self and whence it had its Rise, makes me to think of a second sort of men;
who, its true, as I said, will not practice, nor own these things; Yet (...)
tell the Magistrate, That he has nothing to do with men thus holding in for
these are matters of Conscience, and Opinion; they are matters of Religion;
what has the Magistrate to do with these things? he is to look to the outward
man, but not to meddle with the inward. And truly it so happens, that though
these things do break out visibly to all, yet the principle wherewith these
things are carried on, so forbids the Magistrate to meddle with them, as it
has hitherto kept the offenders from punishment.

Such Considerations, and Pretentions of Liberty; Liberty of Conscience, and
Liberty of Subjects two as glorious, things to be contended for, as any God
has given us; yet both these also abused for the patronizing of villainies; in
so much as that it has been an ordinary thing to say, and in Dispute to
affirm, That it was not in the Magistrates power; he had nothing to do with it;
not so much as the Printing a Bible to the Nation for the use of the people,
lost it be imposed upon the Consciences of men; for they must receive the same
Traditionally, and implicitly, from the power of the Magistrate, if thus
received.

The aforementioned abominations, did thus swell to this height amongst us.

The Axe was laid to the Root of the Ministry. It was Antichristian: It was
Babylonish. It suffered under such a Judgment; that the truth of it is, as the
Extremity was great on that, I wish it prove not so on this hand. The extremity
was, That no man having a good Testimony, having received Gifts from Christ
might Preach, if not Ordained. So now, many are on the other hand, that he who
is Ordained, has a nullity, or Antichristianisme stamped upon his Calling; so
that he ought not to preach, or not be heard.

I wish it may not too to justly be said, that there was severity and
sharpness; yea, too much of an in posing spirit in matter of Conscience; a
spirit unchristian enough in any times, most unfit for these; denying Liberty
to those who have earned it with their blood, who have gained Civil Liberty and
Religious also, for those who would thus impose upon them.

We may reckon among these our spiritual evils, an evil that has more
refinednesse in it, and more color for it; and has deceived more people of
integrity then the rest, have done: for few have been catched with the former
m^st^kes, but such as have Apostatized from their holy profession; such as
being corrupt in their: Consciences, have been forsaken by God, and left to
such noysom opinions, But I say, there are others more refined: many honest
people, whose hearts, are sincere; many of them belonging to God: and that is
the mistaken Notion of the fifth Monarchy. A thing pretending more spiritually,
then any thing else: A Notion I hope, we all honor, wait, and hope for; that
Jesus Christ will have a time to set up his Reign in our hearts, by subduing
those Corruptions, and lusts, and evils that are there, which reign now more in
the world, then I hope, in due time they shall do; And when more falness of the
Spirit is poured forth to subdue iniquity, and bring in everlasting
righteousness, then will the approach of that Glory be. The carnal divisions,
and contentions amongst Christians so common, are not the symtoms of that
Kingdom.

But for men to entitle themselves, upon this Principle, that they are the only
men to rule Kingdoms, Govern Nations, and give Laws to people; to determine of
Property, and Liberty, and every thing else, upon such a pretense as this is:
Truly, they had need give clear manifestations of Gods presence with them,
before wise men will receive, or submit to their Conclusions. Besides,
certainly though many of these men have good meanings, as I hope in my soul
they have, yet it will be the wisdom of all knowing and experienced Christians
to do as Jude says, (when he had reckoned up those horrible things done upon
pretenses, and happily by some upon mistakes,) Of some, says he, have
compassion, making a difference; others save with fear, pulling them out of the
fire. (I fear they will give opportunity too often for this Exercise,) and I
hope the same will be for their good.

If men do but pretend for justice and righteousness; and be of peaceable
spirits; and will manifest this; let them be the subjects of the Magistrates
encouragement. And if the Magistrate by punishing visible miscarriages, save
them by that Discipline; (God having ordained him for that end,) I hope it will
evidence love, and no hatred, to punish where there is cause.

Indeed this is that which does most declare the danger of that spirit; for if
these were but Notions, I mean the instances that I have given you both of
Civil considerations and Spiritual; if I say they were but Notions, they were
to be let alone. Notions will hurt none but them that have them. But when they
come to such practices, as to tell us, that Liberty and Property, are not the
Badges of the Kingdom of Christ; and tell us, that instead of regulating Laws,
Laws are to be abrogated, indeed subverted; and perhaps would bring in the
Judicial Law, instead of our known Laws settled amongst us: This is worthy of
every Magistrates consideration: especially where every stone is turned to
bring confusion. I think, I say, this will be worthy of the Magistrates
consideration.

Whilst these things were in the midst of us; and the Nation rent and torn in
Spirit, and Principle, from one end to another, after this sort and manner I
have now told you; Family against Family; Husband against Wife; Parents against
Children; and nothing in the hearts and minds of men, but over-turning,
over-turning, over-turning: (A Scripture very much abused, and applied to
justify unpeaceable practices, by all men of discontented spirits) The Common
Adversary in the mean time he sleeps not, and our Adversaries in Civil, and
Spiritual respects, did take advantages at these Divisions, and Distractions,
and did practice accordingly in the three Nations, of England, Scotland, and
Ireland.

We know very well, that Emissaries of the Jesuits never came in those swarms,
as they have done since these things were set on foot. And I tell you, that
diverse Gentlemen here, can bear witness with me, how that they have had a
Consistory abroad, that rules all the affairs of things in England, from an
Arch Bishop, with other Dependants upon him. And they had fixed in England (of
which we are able to produce the particular Instruments in most of the Limits
of the Cathedrals,) an Episcopal power, with Archdeacons, etc. And had
persons authorized to exercise and distribute those things, who pervert and
deceive the people. And all this while, we were in this sad, and, as I said,
deplorable condition.

In the mean time all endeavors possible were used to hinder the work in
Ireland, and the Progress of the Work of God in Scotland, by continual
Intelligences, and correspondencies, both at home and abroad; from hence into
Ireland, and from hence into Scotland, persons were stirred up, and encouraged
from these Divisions, and discomposure of affairs, to do all they could to
encourage, and foment the War in both these places.

To add yet to our misery; whilst we were in this Condition, we were in War,
deeply engaged in a War with the Portugal; whereby our Trade ceased, and the
evil Consequences by that War, were manifest, and very Considerable.

And not only this, but we had a War with Holland, consuming our Treasure;
occasioning a vast burden upon the people. A War that cost this Nation full as
much as the Taxes came unto; The Navy being one hundred and sixty Ships; which
cost this Nation above one hundred thousand pounds a month, besides the
Contingencies; which would make it fixscore thousand pounds a month. That very
one War did engage us to so great a charge.

At the same time also we were in a War with France. The advantages that were
taken at the discontents, and divisions among our selves, did also foment that
War; and at least hinder us of an honorable peace; every man being confident
we could not hold out long. And surely they did not calculate amiss, if the
Lord had not been exceeding gracious to us.

I say at the same time we had a War with France. And besides. the sufferings,
in respect of the Trade of the Nation; it is most evident, that the purse of the
Nation had not been possibly able longer to bear it; by reason of the
advantages taken by other States, to improve the'r own; and spoil our
Manufacture of cloth, and hinder the vent thereof; which is the great Staple
Commodity of this Nation.

This was our condition: spoiled in our Trade; and we at this vast expense;
thus dissettled at home; and haying these engagements abroad.

These things being thus; (as I am persuaded it is not hard to convince every
person here, they were thus,) What a heap of Confusions were upon these poor
Nations? And either things must have been left to have sunk into the miseries
these premises would suppose, or a remedy must be applied.

A remedy has been applied: That has been this Government: A thing that I
shall say little unto. The thing is open and visible to be seen and read by all
men; and therefore let it speak for it self.

Only let me say this, because I can speak it with comfort and confidence,
before a greater then you all; that is, before the Lord, That in the intention
of it, as to the approving our hearts to God, let men judge as they please: It
is calculated for the Interest of the people: for the interest of the people
alone: and for their good, without respect had to any other interest. And if
that be not true, I shall be bold to say again, let it fpeak for it self.

Truly, I may (I hope humbly before God, and modestly before you) say somewhat
on the behalf of the Government: That is, (not to discourse of the particular
heads of it,) to acquaint you a little with the effects of it: and that not for
oftentation sake, but to the end that I may deal at this time faithfully with
you, by acquainting you with the state of things; and what proceedings have
been upon this Government; that so you may know the state of our affairs. This
is the main end of my putting you to this trouble.

It has had some things in desire. And it has done some things actually. It
has desired to reform the Laws, to reform them; and for that end, it has
called together persons (without reflection) of as great ability, and as great
integrity as are in these Nations, to consider how the Laws might be made plain
and short, and less chargeable to the people; how to lessen expense for the
good of the Nation, and those things are in preparation, and Bills prepared,
which in due time I make no question will be tendered to you. There has been
care taken to put the Administration of the Laws into the hands of just men;
men of the most known Integrity and Ability.

The Chancery has been reformed; and I hope to the just satisfaction of all
good men. And the things depending there, which made the burden and work of
the honorable persons entrusted in those services, beyond their Ability; It
has referred many of them to those places where English men love to have their
rights tried, the Courts of Law at Westminster.

It has endeavored to put a stop to that heady way (touched of likewise this
day) of every man making himself a Minister, and a Preacher. It has
endeavored to settle a way for the approbation of men of Piety and Ability for
the discharge of that work. And I think I may say, It has committed that work
to the trust of persons both of the Presbyterian and Independent judgments,
men of as known Ability, Piety, and Integrity, as I believe any this Nation
has. And I believe also, that in that care they have taken, they have labored
to approve themselves to Christ, the Nation, and their own Consciences. And
indeed I think if there be any thing of quarrel against them, it is, (though I
am not here to justify the proceedings of any) I say it is, that they go upon
such a Character as the Scripture warrants, to put men into that great
Employment; and to approve men for it, who are men that have received gifts
from him that ascended up on high, and gave gifts for the work of the Ministry,
and for the edifying of the body of Christ.

It has taken care, we hope, for the expulsion of all those who may be judged
any way unfit for this Work; who are scandalous, and who are the common scorn
and contempt of that Administration.

One thing more this Government has done. It has been Isntrumental to call a
free Parliament: which, blessed be God, we see here this day: I say a free
Parliament. And that it may continue so, I hope is in the heart and spirit of
every good man in England, save such disconted persons as I have formerly
mentioned. It is that which as I have desired above my life, I shall desire to
keep it so, above my life.

I did before mention to you the plunges we were in, in respect of Foreign
States; by the War with Portugal, France, with the Dutch, the Dane; and the
little assurance we had from any of our Neighbors round about. I perhaps
forgot it, but indeed it was a Caution upon my mind, and I desire that it
might be so understood; That if any good has been done, it was the Lord, nor
we his poor Instruments.

I did instance in the Wars which did exhaust your Treasure; and put you into
such a Condition, that you must have sunk therein, if it had continued but a
few months longer. This I dare affirm, if strong probability can give me a
ground.

You have now (though it be not the first in time) peace with Sweathland; an
honorable peace, through the endeavors of an honorable person here present,
as the Instrument; I say you have an honorable Peace with a Kingdom that not
many years since was much a friend to France; and lately perhaps inclineable
enough to the Spaniard. And I believe you expect not very much good from any of
your Catholic Neighbors: nor yet that they would be very willing you should
have a good understanding with your Protestant friends. Yet thanks be to God
that peace is concluded; and as I said before, it is an honorable Peace.

You have a Peace with the Dane: A State that lay contiguous to that part of
this Island which has given us the most trouble. And certainly if your enemies
abroad be able to annoy you, it is likely they will take their advantage where
it best lies to give you trouble there. But you have a Peace there; and an
honorable one: Satisfaction for your Merchant Ships, not only to their
content, but to their rejoicing. I believe you will easily know it is so.

You have the Sound open, which was obstructed. That which was, and is the
strength of this Nation, the Shipping will now be supplied thence. And whereas
you were glad to have any thing of that kind at the second hand, etc. You have
all manner of Commerce, and at as much freedom as the Dutch themselves there,
and at the same Rates and Toll; and I think I may say, by that Peace, they
cannot raise the same upon you.

You have a Peace with the Dutch; a Peace unto which I shall1 say little;
because so well known in the benefit and consequences of it. And I think it was
as desirable and as acceptable to the spirit of this Nation as any one thnig
that lay before us. And, as I believe, nothing so much gratified our enemies as
to see us at odds; so, I persuade my self nothing is of more terror nor
trouble to them, then to see us thus reconciled.

As a Peace with the Protestant States has much security in it; so it has as
much of honor, and of assurance to the Protestant Interest abroad, without
which no assistance can be given thereunto. I wish it may be written upon our
hearts to be zealous for that Interest: for if ever it were like to come under
a condition of suffering it is now.

In all the Emperors Patrimoniall Territories, the endeavor is, to drive them
out as fast as they can. And they are necessitated to run to Protestant States
to seek their bread. And by this conjunction of Interests I hope you will be in
a more fit capacity to help them. And it begets some reviving of their spirits
that you will help them as opportunity shall serve. You have a Peace likewise
with the Crown of Portugal, which Peace though it hung long in hand; yet is
lately concluded. It is a Peace that your Metchants make us believe is of good
concernment to their Trade; their assurance being greater, and so their profit
in Trade thither, then to other places. And this has been obtained in that
Treaty; (which never was since the Inquisition was ser up there,) That our
People which Trade thither have liberty of Conscience.

(Indeed Peace is as you were well told to day) desirable with all men, as far
as it my be had with Conscience and Honor.

We are upon a Treaty with France. And we may say this, That if God give us
Honor in the eyes of the Nations about us, we have rason to bless him for it,
and so to own it. And I dare say that there is not a Nation in Europe, but they
are very willing to ask a good understanding with you.

I am sorry I am thus tedious; but I did judge that it was somewhat necessary to
acquaint you with these things. And things being thus, I hope you will be
willing to hear a little again of the sharp, as well as the sweet. And I should
not be faithful to you, nor to the Interest these Nations which you and I
serve, if I should not let you know all.

As I said before, when this Government was under taken, we were in the midst
of these Divisions, and Animosities, and scatterings; Also thus engaged with
these Enemies round about us; at such a vast Charge; Sixscore thousand Pounds a
month for the very Fleet; (which was the very utmost penny of your
Assessments) I, and then all your Treasure was exhausted and spent, when this
Government was under-taken; ALL accidental ways of bringing in Treasure, to a
very inconsiderable Sum consumed; That is to say, the Lands are sold, the
Treasures spent; Rents, Fee-farms, Kings, Queens, Princes, Bishops, Dean and
Chapters, Delinquents Lands sold. These were spent when this Government was
under-taken.

I think it is my duty to let you know so much. And that is the reason why the
Taxes do yet lie so heavy upon the People, of which we have abated thirty
thousand Pounds a month, for the next three months. Truly, I thought it my
duty to let you know, that though God has dealt thus with you, yet these are
but entrances and doors of hope, wherein through the blessing of God you may
cuter into Rest and Peace. But you are not yet entered.

You were told to day of a People brought out of Egypt, toward the land of
Canaan; but through unbelief, murmuring, repining, and other temptations and
sins, wherewith God was provoked, they were fain to come back again, and linger
many years in the Wilderness, before they came to the place of Rest.

We are thus far through the mercy of God. We have cause to take notice of it,
that we are not brought into misery; But as I said before, A door of hope open.
And I may say this to you, If the Lords blessing and his presence go along with
the management of Affairs at this Meeting, you will be enabled to put the
Top-stone to this Work, and make the Nation happy. But this must be by knowing
the true state of Affair, that you are yet like the People under Circumcision,
but Raw, your Peaces are but newly made. And it is a maxim not to be despised,
Though Peace be made, yet it is Interest that keeps Peace. And I hope you will
trust it no further then you see Interest upon it. And therefore I wish that
you may go forward, and not backward, and that you may have the blessings of
God upon your endeavors. I'ts one of the great ends of calling this
Parliament, that this Ship of the Commonwealth may be brought into a safe
Harbor: which I assure you it will not well be, without your Counseil and
Advice.

You have great works upon your hands. You have Ireland to look unto, there is
not much done toward the Planting of it: though some things leading and
preparing for it are. It is a great business to setele the Government of that
Nation upon fit Terms, such as will bear that Work through.

Yot have had I kewise laid before you the considerations intimating your Peace
with some Foreign Status; but yet you have not made Peace with all. And if
they should see we do not manage our Affairs as With that Wisdom which becomes
us, truly we may sink under disadvantages for all that is done; And our Enemies
will have their eyes open, and be revived, if they see Animosities amongst us;
which indeed will be their great advantage.

I do therefore perfwade you to a sweet, gracious, and holy understanding of
one another, and of your business, concerning which you had so good Coussell
this day; that indeed, as it rejoiced my heart to hear it, so I hope the Lord
will imprint it upon your spirits, wherein you shall have my prayers. Having
sa^d this, and perhaps omitted many other material things through the frailty
of my memory I shall exercise plainness and freeness with you, in telling you
that I have not spoken shese things as one that assumes to himself Dominion
over you, but as one that does resolve to be a fellow servants with you, to the
Interest of these great Affairs, and of the People of these Nations. I shall
therefore trouble you no longer, but desire you to repair to your House, and to
exercise your own Liberty in the choice of a Speaker, that so you may lose no
time in carrying on your Work.

His HIGHNESS the Lord Protectors SPEECH to the PARLIAMENT in the Painted
Chamber, on Tuesday the 12. of September, 1654.
GENTLEMEN,
IT is not long since I met you in this place, upon an occasion which gave me
much more content and comfort then this does.

That which I have to say to you now, will need no Preamble to let me in to my
Discourse: For the occasion of this Meeting is plain enough, I could have
wished with all my heart there had been no cause for it.

At that Meeting I did acquaint you what the first Rise was of this Government
which has called you hither, and in the Authority of which you came hither.

Among other things that I told you of then, I said you were a free Parliament:
And so you are whilst you own the Government and Authority that called you
hither. For certainly that word employed a Reciprocation, or it employed nothing
at all.

Indeed there was a Reciprocation implied and expressed: and I think your
actions and carriages ought to be suitable.

But I see it will be necessary for me now, a little to magnify my Office,
which I have not been apt to do. I have been of this mind, I have been always
of this mind since first I entered upon it, That if God will not bear it up,
let it sink. But if a Duty be incumbent upon me, to bear my Testimony unto it,
(which in modesty I have hitherto forborne) I am in some measure now
necessitated thereunto. And therefore that will be the Prologue to my Discourse.

I called not my self to this place; I say again, I called not my self to this
place; of that God is Witness. And I have many Witnesses, who I do believe
could readily lay down their lives to bear Witness to the truth of that: that
is to say, that I called not my self to this place. And being in it, I bear not
Witness to my self: But God and the people of these Nations have born
Testimony to it also.

If my Cilling be from God, and my Testimony from the People; God ard the
people shall take it from me, else I will not part with it. I should be false
to the Trust that God has placed upon me, and to the Interest of the People of
these Nations, if I should.

That I called not my self to this place, is my first Assertion.

That I bear not witness to my self, but have many Witnesses is my second.

These are the two things I shall take the liberty to speak more fully to you
of.

To make plain and clear that which I have said, I must take liberty to look
back,

I was by birth a Gentleman, living neither in any considerable height, nor yet
in obscurity: I have been called to several employments in the Nation: to
serve in Prliaments: And (because I would not be over tedious) I did endeavor
to discharge the duty of an honest man in those services, to God, and his
peoples Interest, and of the Commonwealth; having, when time was; a competent
acceptance in the hearts of men, and some evidences thereof. I resolve not to
recite the Times and Occasions, and Opportunities that have been appointed me
by God to serve him in: nor the presence and blessings of God bearing then
Testimony to me.

I having had some occasions to see (together with my Brethren and
Contrymen) a happy period put to our sharp Wars and Contests with the them
common enemy, hoped in a private capacity to have reaped the fruit, and benefit
together with my Brethren, of our hard labors and hazards; to wit, the
enjoyment of Peace and Liberty, and the Privileges of a Christian, and of a
man, in some equality with others, according as it should please the Lord to
dispense unto me.

And when I say, God had put an end to our Wars, at least brought them to a
very hopeful issue very near an end, (after worcester Fight) I came up to
London to pay my service, and duty to the Parliament that then sat; and hoping
that all minds would have been disposed to answer that which seemed to be the
mind of God, ( viz.) to give pear and rest to his people; and especially to
those who had bled more then others in the carrying on of the Military Affairs,
I was much disappointed of my expectation: For the issue did not prove so, what
ever may be boasted, or misrepresented, it was not so, nor so.

I can say in the simplicity of my soul, I love nOt, I love not, (I declined it
in my former speech) I say, I love not to rake into fores, or to discover
nakednesles. That which I drive at, is this; I say to you, I hoped to have had
leave to have retired to a private life: I begged to be dismissed of my Charge:
I begged it again and again. And God be Judge between me and all men if lie in
this matter. That I lie not in matter of fast, is known to very many; but
whether I tell a l^e in my heart, as laboring to represent to you that which
was not upon my heart, I say the Lord be Judge: let uncharitable men that
measure others by themselves, judge as they please. As to the matter of fact, I
say it is true. As to the ingenuity and integrity of my heart in that desire, I
do appeal, as before, upon the truth of that also: But I could not obtain what
my soul longed for. And the plain truth is, I did afterward apprehend, that
some did think my judgment not suiting with theirs) that it could not well be.
But this I say to you, was between God and my soul, between me and that
Assembly.

I confess I am in some strait, to say what I could say, and what is true of
what then followed.

I pressed the Parliament, as a Member, to period themselves, once and again,
and again, and ten, and twenty times over. I told them (for I knew it better
then any one man in the Parliament could know it, because of my manner of life,
which was to run up and down the Nation, and so might see and know the temper
and spirits of all men, the best of men) that the Nation loathed their sitting:
I knew it. And sb far as I could discern, when they were dissolved, there was
not so much as the barking of a dog, or any general and visible repining at
it. You are not a few here present that can assert this as well as my self.

And that there was high cause for their Dissolving, is most evident, not only
in regard there was a just fear of the Parliaments perpetuating themselves; but
because it was their design. And had not their heels been trod upon by
importunities from abroad, even to threats, I believe there would never have
been thoughts of Rising, or of going out of that Room to the worlds end.

I my self was sounded; and by no mean persons tempted; and addresses were made
to me to that very end, that it might have been thus perpetuated, That the
vacant places might be supplied by new Elections, and so continue fiom
Generation to Generation.

I have declined, I have declined very much to open these things to you: yet
having proceeded thus far, I must tell you, that poor men under this Arbitrary
Power, were driven like flocks of sheep, by forty in a morning, to the
Confiscation of Goods and Estatus, without any man being able to give a reason
that two of them had deserved to forfeit a shilling. I tell you the truth, and
my soul and many person, whose faces I see in this place were exceedingly
grieved at these things, and knew not which way to help it, but by their
mournings, and giving their negatives when occasions served.

I have given you but a taste of miscarriages. I am confident you have had
opportunities to hear much more of them: for nothing is more obvious. It Is
true, this will be said, That there was a remedy to put an end to this
perpetual Parliament endeayoured, by having a future Representative. How it
was gotten, and by what importunities that was obtained, and how unwillingly
yielded unto, is well known.

What was this remedy? It was a seeming willingness to have successive
Parliaments. What was that Succession? it was, that when one Parliament had
left their Seat, another was to sit down immediately in the room thereof,
without any Caution to avoid that which was the danger; ( viz.) Perpetuating of
the same Parliaments; which is a sore now that will ever be running, so long as
men are ambitious and troublesome, if a due remedy be not found. So then, What
was the business; It was a Conversion from Parliament that should have been,
and was perpetual, to a Legislative Power, always sitting: and so the
Liberties, and Interests, and Lives of People, not judged by any certain known
Laws and Power, but by an Arbitrary Power, which is incident and necessary to
Parliaments by an Arbytrary Power: I say, to make men's estates liable to
confiscation, and their persons to imprisonments; sometimes by Laws made after
the fact committed: often by takirg the judgment both in capital and criminal
things to themselves, who in former times were not known to exercise such a
Judicature.

This I suppose was the case; and in my opinion the remedy was fitted to the
disease: especially coming in the Rear of a Parliament, so cxercising the Power
and Authority as this had done, but immediately before.

Truly, I confess upon these grounds, and with the satisfaction of diverse other
Persons, seeing nothing could be had otherwise; that Parliament was dissolved,
we desiring to see if a few might have been called together for some short
time, who might put the Nation into some way of certain settlement, did call
those Gentlemen out of the several parts of the Nation for that purpose.

And, as I have appealed to God before you already, I know (and I hope I may
say it,) though it be a tender thing to make appeals to God; yet in such
exigenc es as these, I trust it will not offend his Majesty, especially to make
them before Persons that know God, and know what Conscience is, and what it is
to lie before the Lord. I say, that as a principal ead in calling that Asembly,
was the settlement of the Nation; so a chief end to my self was, That I might
have opportunity to lay down the Power that was in my hands, I say to you
again, in the presence of that God, who has blessed and been with me in all my
adversities and successes, that waas to my self my greatest end. A desire
perhaps (and I am afraid) sinful1 enough, to be quit of the power God had most
providentially put into my hand, before he called for it; and before those
honest ends of our fighting were attained and settled. I say, the authority I
had in my hand, being so boundless as it was, I being by Act of Parliament
General of all the force in the three Nations, of England, Scotland and
Ireland, (In which unlimitted condition I did not desire to live a day) did
call that meeting for the ends before expressed.

What the event and issue of that meeting was, we may sadly remember. It has
much teaching in it; and I hope will make us all wiser for the future.

But this meettig succeeding, as I have formerly said to you, and giving such a
disappointment to our hopes, I shall not now make any repetition thereof; only
the effect was, That they came and brought to me a parchment signed by very
much the major part of them, expressing their resigning and re-delivery of the
Power and Authority that was committed to them, back again into my hands: and I
can say it in the presence of diverse persons here, that do know whether I lie
in that; that I did not know one tittle of that resignaton, until they all
came and brought it, and delivered it into my hands: of this there are also in
this presence many witnesses.

I received this resignation, having Formerly used my endeavors and
persuasions to keep them together; observing their differences, I thought it my
duty to give advices to them, that so I might prevail with them for union: But
it had the effect that I told you: and I had my disappointment.

When this was so, we were exceedingly to seek how to settle things for the
future. My power again by this resignation, was as boundless and unlimited as
before; all things being subjected to Arbitrariness, and a person having power
over the three Nations boundlessly, and unlimited; And upon the matter all
Government dissolved, all Civil Administrations at an end; as will presently
be made appear.

The Gentlemen that undertook to frame this Government, did consult diverse
days together, (they being of known Integrity and ability) how to frame
somewhat that might give us settlement; and they did so: and that I was not
privy to their Councels, they know it.

When they had finished their model in some measure, or made a very good
preparation of it, it became Communicative. They told me that except I would
undertake the Government, they thought things would hardly come to a Composure
and Settlement; but blood and confusion would break in upon us. I denied it
again and again, as God and those persons know, not complementingly as they
also know, and as God knows.

I confess, after many Arguments, and after the letting of me know that I did
not receive any thing that put me into any higher Capacity then I was in
before, but that it limited me, and bound my hands to act nothing to the
prejud^ce of the Nations, without consent of a Council until the Parliament;
and then limited by the Parliament, as the Act of Government expresses, I did
accept it.

I might repeat this again to you if it were needful, but I think I need not.
I was arbitrary in Power, having the Armies in the three Nations under my
command: and truly not very ill beloved by them; nor very ill beloved then by
the people, by the good people; and I believe I should have been more beloved
if they had known the truth, as things were before God, and in themselves; and
before diverse of these Gentlemen whom I but now mentioned unto you.

I did, at the entreaty of diverse persons of honor and quality; at theintreaty
of very many of the chief Officers of the Army then present, and at their
request, I did accept of the place, and title of Protector, and was in the
presence of the Commissioners of the Seal, the Judges, the Lord Major and
Aldermen of the City of London, the Souldierie, diverse Gentlemen, Citizens, and
diverse other people, and persons of quality, etc accompanied to West
minster-Hall, where I took my oath to this Government. This was not done in a
corner: it was open and public.

This Government has bin exercised by a Council, with a desire to be faithful
in all things; and amongst all other trusts, to be faithful in calling this
Parliament.

And thus I have given you a very bare and lean discourse; which truly I have
been necessitated unto, and contracted in, because of the unexpectedness of
the occasion; and because I would not quite weary you nor my self. But this is
a Narrative that discovers to you the Series of Providence, and of Transactions
leading me into this Condition wherein I now stand.

The next thing I promised you, wherein I hope I shall not be so long, (though
I am sure this occasion does require plainness and freedom,) is, That as I
brought not my self into this Condition, (as in my own apprehension I did not;
and that I did not, (the things being true which I have told you) I submit it
to your Judgments, and there shall I leave it, let God do what he pleases.)
The other things I say that I am to speak to you of, is, That I have not, nor
do not bear witness to my self I am far from alluding to him that said so; yet
truth concerning a member of his he will own, though men do not.

But I think (if I mistake not) I have a cloud of witnesses. I think so, let
men be as froward as they will: I have witness within, without, and above. But
I shall speak of them that are without, having fully spoken before of the
witness above, and the witness in my own conscience, upon the other Account;
because that subject had more obscurity in it, and I in some sort needed
appeals; and I trust might lawfully make them, as well as take an oath, where
things were not so apt to be made evident. I shall enumetate my witnesses as
well as I can.

When I had consented to accept of the Government, there was some solemnity to
be performed; and that was accompanied with some persons of considerablenesse
in all respects, who were the persons before expressed, who accompanied me at
the time of my entering upon this Government to west minster Hall to take my
oath.

There was an explicit consent of Interessed persons, and an implicit consent
of many, showing their good liking and approbation thereof. And (Gentlemen) I
do not think that you are altogether strangers to it in your Country: some did
not nauseate it: very many did approve it.

I had the approbation of the Officers of the Army in the three Nations of
England, Scotland, and Ireland, I say of the Officers, I had that by their
Remonstrances, and under signature: There was went along With that explicit
consent, an implicit consent of persons that had somewhat to do in the World,
that had been isntrumental by God to sight down the enemes of God and his
people, in the three Nations And truly, until my hands were bound, and I
limited, (wherein I took full contentment, as many can bear me witness,) when
I had in my hands so great a power and Arbitrarinesse, the Soldiery were a
very considerable part of the Nations, especially all Government being
dissolved: I say, when all Government was thus dissolved, and nothing to keep
things in order but the Sword, and yet they (which many Histories will not
parallel) even they were desirous that things might come to a Consistency, and
Arbirrariness might be taken away, and the Government put into a person
(limited and bounded, as in the Act of Settlement) whom they destrusted the
least, and loved not the worst: this was another evidence.

I would not forget the honorable and civil entertainment, with the
approbation I found in the great City of London; which the City knows whether I
directly or indirectly sought. And truly I do not think it is folly to
remember this: For it was very great and high, and very public; and as
numerous a Body of those that are known by names, and t^ttles, (the several
Corporations and Societies of Citizens in this City, as has been at any time
seen in England, and not without some appearance of satisfaction also.

I had not only this witness, but I have had from the greatest County in
England, and from many Cities and Boroughs, and many Counties, explicit
Approbations, not of those gathered here and there, but from the County of York
and City of York, and other Counties and Places assembled in their public and
general Assizes, the Grand Jury in the name of the Noblemen, Gentlemen,
Yeomen, and Inhabitants of that County, giving very great thanks to me for
under-taking this heavy Berden at such a time, and giving very great
Approbation and encouragement to me to go through with it. These are plain. I
have them to show. And by these in some measure it will appear, I do not bear
witness to my self.

This is not all: the Judges, (and truly I had almost forgotten it.) they
thinking that there was a dissolution of Government, met and consulted, and did
declare one to another, that they could not administer Justice to the
satisfaction of their consciences, until they had received Commissions from
me: And they did receive Commissions from me. And by virtue of those
Commissions they have acted. And all the Justices of the Peace that have acted,
have acted by virtue of like Commissions, which was a little more then an
implicit Approbation. And I believe, all the Justice administered in the Nation,
has been by this Authority, which also I lay before you, desiring you to
think, whether all these Persons beforementioned, must not come before you for
an Act of Oblivion and General Pardon, who have acted under, and testified to
this Government, if it be dis-owned by you.

I have two or three witnesses more, equivalent to all these I have reckoned,
if I be not mistaken, and greatly mistaken, If I should say, All you that are
here are my Witnesses, I should say no untruth. I know you are the same persons
here that you were in the Country. But I will reserve to speak to this at the
last, for this will be the issue of my Speech: I say, I have two or three
Witnesses that are more then all I have accounted and reckoned before.

All the People in England are my Witnesses, and many in Ireland and Scotland:
All the Sheriffs in England are my Witnesses, and all that came in upon the
Process issued out by the Sheriffs, are my Witnesses: Yea, the Returns of the
Elections to the Clerk of the Crown, not a thing to be blown away with a
breath, the Returns on the behalf of the Inhabitants in the Counties, Cities
and Boroughs, all are my Witnesses of Approbation to the condition and place I
stand in.

And I shall now make you my last Witnesses, and ask you whether you came not
hither by my Writs directed to the several Sheriffs? And so to other Officers
in Cities and Liberties, to which the People gave obedience, having also had
the Act of Government communicated to them, to which end great numbers of
Copies were sent down on purpose to be communicated to them; And the Government
also required to be distinctly read unto the People at the place of Elections,
to avoid surprises, where also they signed the Indenture, with proviso, That
the persons so chosen, shall not have power to alter the Government, as it is
now settled, in one single Person and a Parliament.

And thus I have made good my second Assertion, That I bear not witness to my
self; but the good people of England, and you all are my witnesses.

Yea surely, And this being so, though I told you in my last Speech, that you
were a free Parliament; yet I thought it was understood, that I was the
Protector, and the Authority that called you, and that I was in possession of
the Government by a good Right from God and men. And, I beheve, if the
learned men in this Nation were called to to shaw a President so clear, so
many ways approving of a Government; they would not in all their search find
it.

I did not in my other speech to you take upon me to justify. the Government
in every particular; and I told you the reason of it; which was plain. It was
public; and had been long publi^^ed, and it might be under the most serious
inspection of all that pleased to peruse it.

By what I have said, I have approved my self to God, and my conscience, in my
actions; and in this undertaking. And I have given cause of approving my self
to every one of your consciences in the sight of God.

If it be so, why should we sport with it? with a business thus serious? May
not this Character, this stamp bear equal Poyze with iany hereditary Interest,
which may have, and has had in the common Law, matters of Dispute, and Trial
of learning? wherein many have exercised more W^t, and spilt more blood then I
hope ever to live to see, or hear of in this Nation.

I say, I do not know why I may not balance this providence, as in the sight of
God, with any hereditary Interest, as being less subject to those Cracks and
Flaws they are commonly incident unto. Which Titles have cost more blood in
former times in this Nation then we have leisure to speak of now.

Now if this be thus, and I am deriving a Title from God and men, upon such
Accounts as these are: Although some men be froward, yet that your judgments
that are Persons sent from all parts of the Natition, under the Notion of
acceptance of the Government, for yon to disown, or not to own it; for you to
act Parliamentary Authority, especially in the disowning of it; contrary to the
very fundamental things; yea, against the very root it self of this
Establishment; to sit and not own the Authority by which you sit, is that that
I believe astonisheth more men then my self; and does as dangerously disappoint
and discompose the Nation, as any thing could have been invented by the
greatest enemy to our peace and welfare; or could well have happened.

It is true, there are some things in the Establishment that are Fundamental,
and some things are not so, but are Circumstantial. Of such, no question but I
shall easily agree to vary, or leave out, as I shall be convinced by reason.
Some things are Fundamentals, about which I shall deal plainly with you, they
may not be parted with; but will (I trust) be delivered over to Posterity, as
being the fruits of our Blood and Travel.

The Government by a single Person and a Parliament, is a Fundamental; It is
the Esse. It is Constitutive. And for the preson, though I may seem to plead
for my self, yet I do not, no nor can any reasonable man say it. But if the
things throughout this Speech be true, I plead for this Nation, and all honest
men therein, who have born their Testimony, as aforsa^d, and not for my self.
And if things should do otherwise, then well, which I would not fear; and the
Common Enemy, and discontented persons take advantage at these Distractions,
the issue will be put up before God. Let him own, or let him disown it, as he
please.

In every Government there must be som^what Fundamental, somewhat like a Magna
Charta, that should be standing, and be unalterable. Where there is a
Stipulation on one Part, and that fully accepted, as appears by what has been
said; surely a return ought to be: else what does that Stipulation signify; If
I have upon the Tea^ms aforesaid undertaken this great Trust, and Exercised it,
and by it called you, surely it ought to be owned.

That Parliaments should not make themselves Perpetual, is a Fundamentals. Of
what assurance is a Law to prevent so great an evil, if it lie in one or the
same Legislator to unlaw it again? Is this like to be lasting? It will be like
a Rope of Sand; it will give no security, For the same men may unbuild, what
they have built.

Is not Liberty of Conscience in Religion a Fundamental? so long as there is
Liberty of Conscience for the Supreme Magistrate, to exercise his Conference in
erecting what Form of Church Government he is satisfied, he should set up; why
should not he give it to others? Liberty of Conscience is a Natural Right: and
he that would have it ought to give it; having Liberty to settle what he likes
for the Public.

Indeed that has been one of the Vanities of our Contests. Every Sect says,
Oh! Give me Liberty. But give him it, and to his power he will not yield it to
any Body else. Where is our ingenuity? Truly that is a thing ought to be very
Reciprocal. The Magistrate has his Supremacy, and he may settle Religion
according to his Conscience. And I may say it to you: I can say it; all the
Money of this Nation would not have tempted men to sight, upon such an Account
as they have engaged, if they had not had hopes of Liberty, b^tter then they
had from Episcopacy; or then would have been afforded them from a Scottish
Presbyterian, or an English either, if it had made such steps, or been as sharp
and Rigid, as it threatened when it was first set up.

This, I say, is a Fundamental. It ought to be so: it is for us, and the
Generations to come. And if there be an absoluteness in the Imposer, without
fitting allowances, and exceptions from the Rule, we shall have our People
driven into Wildernesses; as they were when those poor and aflicted People that
forsock their estates and inheritances here, where they lived Pleat fully and
comfortably, for the enjoyment of their Liberty, and were nece sitated to go
into a vast howling wilderness in New England, where they have for Liberty sake
stripped themselves of all their comfort, and the full enjoyment they had,
embracing rather lots of friends, and want, then to be so ensnared, and in
Bondage.

Another, which I had forgotten, is the Militia, that is Judged a Fundamental,
if any thing be so. That it should be well and equally placed, is very
necessary: For, put the Absolute Power of the Militia into One without a Check,
what does it? I pray you, what does your Check put upon your Perpetual
Parliaments, if it be wholly stripped of this? It is equally Placed, and Desires
were to have it so ( viz.) in one Person and the Parliament, sitting the
Parliament. What signifies a Provision against perpetuating of Parliaments, if
this be solely in them? Whether without a Check the Parliament have not Liberty
to, alter the Frame of Government, to Aristocrasie, to Democrasie, to Anarchy,
to any Thing, if this be fully in them? yea, into all Confusion, and that
without Remedy, And if this One Thing he placed in One, that One, be it
Parliament; be it Supreain Governor, They, or He has Power to make what they
please of all the rest.

Therefore, if you would have a Balance at all, and that some Fundamentals
must stand, Which may be wortby to be delivered over to Posterity, truly, I
think, it is not unreasonably urged, That the Militia should be disposed as it
is laid down in the Government, and that it should be so equally placed, that
one Person neither in Parliament nor out of Parliament, should have the Power
of Ordering it. The Council are the Trustees or the Commonwealth, in all
Inte^vals of Parliaments who have as absolute a Negative upon the Supreme
Officer in the said Intervals, as the Parliament has whilst it is sitting. It
cannot be made use of: a man cannot be raised, nor a penny charged upon the
People, nothing done without consent of Parliament: and in the Intervals of
Parliament, without Consent of the Council, it is not to be exercised.

Give me leave to say, That there is very little Power, none but what is
Coordinate in the Supreme Officer, and yet enough in him that has the Chief
Government, in that particular he is bound in strictness by the Parliament,
out of Parliament by the Council, that do as absolutely bind him, as the
Parliament; when the Parliament is sitting.

For that of Money, I told you some things are Circumstantials. To have Two
hundred thousand pounds to defray Civil Officers, to pay the Judges and other
Officers, defraying the Charges of the Council in sending their Embassies, in
keeping Intelligence, and doing that that is necessary, and for supporting the
Governor in Chief. All this is by the Instrument supposed and intended. But it
is not of the Esse to much, and so limited, as so many Soldiers, 30000. twenty
thousand Foot, and Ten Thousand Horse. If the spirits of men be composed, five
thousand House, and ten thouasnd Foot may serve. These things are between the
Chief Officer and the Parliament to be moderated as occasion shall offer.

So there are many other Circumstantiall things, which are not like the Laws of
the Medes and Persians. But the things which shall be necessary to deliver over
to Posterity, these should be unalterable, else every succeeding Parliament
will be disputing to charge and alter the Government, and we shall be as often
brought into confusion, as we have Parliaments, and so make our Remedy our
Disease The Lords Providence appearing Evils, appearing Good, and better
Judgment will give occasion for the ordering of things for the best interest
of the People. And those Things are the Matter of Consideration between you and
me.

I have indeed almost tired my self. That I have further to say, is this, I
Would it had not been needful for me to have called you hither to have
expostulated these things with you, and in such a manner as this is, but
Neccssity has; no Law Feigned necessities, Imaginary necessities are the
greatest Cousenage that men can put upon the Providence of God, and make
pretenses to break known Rules by. But it is as legal and as carnal, and as
Stupid, to think that there are no Necessities that are manifest Necessities,
because Necessities may be abused or feigned. And truly should be so, if I
should think so, and I hope none of you think so.

I say, that the wilful throwings away of this Government, such as it is, so
owned by God, so approved by men, so testified to, in the Fundamentals of it,
as is before mentioned, and that is Relat^on to the good of these Nations, and
Posterity, I can sooner be wi^ling to be ro^led into my Grave, and buried with
infamy, then I can g^ve my consent unto.

You have been called hither together to save a Nation; -- Nations. You had the
best; people indeed in the Christian World in your Trust, when you came hither.
You had Affairs, and there Nations delivered over to you in Peace and
quietness: You were, and we all were put into an uninterrupted Possession, no
body making Title to us. Through the blessing of God our enemies were hopeless
and scattered. We had Peace at house: Peace almost with all Neighbors round
about: fit to take advantages where God did administer them.

To have our Peace and Interest, that had those hopes the other day thus
shaken, and under such a confusion; and we rendered hereby (almost the scorn
and contempt of those strangers that are amongst us, to Negotiate their Masters
Affairs; To give them opportunity to see our nakedness as they do, a People
that have been unhinged this twelve years day, and un inged still, as if
scattering, division, and confusion should come upon us (as if it were desired)
which are the greatest plagues God ordinarily lays upon Nations for sin: I
would be loath to say, they are Matters of our delight; but if not, Why not the
matter of our care, so wisely as we ought by uttermost endeavors to avoid?
Nay, when by such Actions as these are, these poor Nations shall be thrown into
heaps of Confusion through blood, and ruin, and trouble, upon the saddest
account that ever was, if breaking should come upon us, and all because we
would not settle when we might, when God put it into our hands: Your Affairs
now almost settled every where: And to have all recoyled upon us, and we our
selves shaken in our Affections, loosened from all known and public Interests,
as I have mentioned to you: Who shall answer for these things to God? Who can
answer for these things to God, or to Men? To the people that sent you hither?
who looked for refreshment from you, who looked for nothing but Peace and
Quietness, and Rest and Settlement. And when we shall come to give an Account
to them, we shall be able to say; Oh! we have quarrelled for, and we contested
for the Liberty of England. Wherein forsooth for the Liberty of the people? I
appeal to the Lord, that the desires and endeavors, and the things themselves
will speak for themselves; That the Liberty of England; The Liberty of the
people, the avoiding of Tyranous Impositions, either upon men as men, or
Christians as Christians, is made so safe by this Act of settlement, that it
will speak sufficiently for it self.

And when it shall appear what has been said, and done, and what our
Transact^o^s have been: for God can discover, and no Privilege will hinder the
Lord from-discovering, no Privilege or Condition of men can hide from the
Lord: He can and wi1l make all manifest if he see it for hi^ Glory. And when
these shall by the Providence of God be manifested, and the people shall come
and say Gentlemen, What condition are we in? We hoped for Light, and behold
Darkness, obscure Darkness! We hoped for Rest, after ten years civil Wars: We
are plunged into deep Confussion again. I, we know these Consequences will come
upon us, if God Almighty shall not find out some way to prevent them.

I had this thought within my self, That it had not been d^shonest, nor
dishonorable, nor against true Liberty, no not of Parliaments, when a
Parliament was so chosen, in pursuance of, in conformity to, and with such an
approbation, and consent to the Government, so that he that runs might read by
what Authority you came hither; That an owning of your Call, and of the
Authority bringing you hither, might have been required before your entrance
into the House.

But this was declined, and has not been done, because I am persuaded scarce
any man could reasonably doubt you came with contrary minds. And I have reason
to believe, the people that sent you least doubted thereof at all. And
therefore I must deal plainly with you. What I forbear upon a just confidence
at first, you necessitate me unto now -- That seeing the Authority calling you
is so little valued, and so much slighted, till some such assurance be given,
and made known; That the Fundamental Interest of the Government be settied and
approved, according to the Provisoe contained in the Return; and such a Consent
testified, as will make it appear that the same is accepted, I have caused a
stop to be put to your entrance into the Parliament House.

I am sorry, I am sorry, and I could be ^orry so the death, that there is cause
for this. But there is cause. ^^d if things be not satisfied, that are
reasonably Demanded. I for my part shall do that that becomes me, seeking my
Council from God.

There is therefore somewhat to be offered to you, that I hope will (being
understood with the Qualifications that I have told you of: Reforming
Circumstantials, and agreeing in the Substance and Fundamentals (which is, the
Government Settled, as it is expressed in the Indenture) not to be altered; The
making of your minds known in that, by giving your assent and Subscription to
it; is that, that will) let you in, to Act those things as a Parliament, which
are for the good of the people And this thing showed to you, and Signed, as
aforesaid, does determine the controversy; and may give a happy progress and
issue to this Parliament.

The Place where you may come thus, and Sign, as many as God shall make free
thereunto, is in the Lobby without the Parliament door.

The Government does declare, that you have a Legislative Power without a
Negative from me. As the Government does express, you may make any Laws; and
if I give not my Consent within twenty days, to the passing your Laws, they
are ipso facto Laws, whether I consent or no, if not contrary to the
Government. You have an absolute Legislative Power in all things that can
possibly concern the good, and interest of the public.

And I think you may make these Nations happy by this Settlement: And I for my
part shall be willing to be bound more then I am in any thing that I may be
convinced of, may be for the good of the people, in preservation of the Cause
and Interest so long contended for.

FINIS.

