HIS HIGHNESS THE LORD PROTECTOR'S SPEECH TO THE Parliament IN THE PAINTED
CHAMBER, On Tuesday the 12th of September. 1654.

Taken by one who stood very near him, and Published to prevent mistakes.

LONDON, Printed by T. R. and E. M. for G. Sawbridge at the Bible on Ludgate-
hill. 1654.

HIS Highness THE LORD PROTECTOR'S SPEECH TO THE PARLIAMENT IN THE Painted
Chamber, on Tuesday, the 12th of September. 1654.
Gentlemen,
IT is not long since I met you in this place, upon an occasion which gave me
much more content, and comfort then this does.

That which I have to say to you now, will need no Preamble to let me in to my
Discourse: For the occasion of this Meeting is plain enough. I could have
wished with all my heart there had been no cause for it.

At that Meeting I did acquaint you what the first Rise was of this Government
which has called you hither; and in the Authority of which you came hither.

Among other things that I told you of then, I said you were a free Parliament.
And so you are whilst you own the Government, and Authority that called you
hither. For certainly that word employed a Reciprocation, or it employed nothing
at all.

Indeed there was a Reciprocation implied, and expressed: and I think your
actions, and carriages ought to be suitable.

But I see it will be necessary for me now, a little to magnify my Office;
which I have not been apt to do. I have been of this mind, I have been always
of this mind, since first I entered upon it, That if God will not bear it up,
let it sink. But if a Duty be incumbent upon me, to bear my Testimony unto it,
(which in modesty I have hitherto sorborn) I am in some measure now
necessitated thereunto. And therefore that will be the Prologue to my Discourse.

I called not my self to this place; I say again, I called not my self to this
place; of that God is Witness. And I have many Witnesses; who I do believe
could readily lay down their lives to bear Witness to the truth of that: that
is to say, That I called not my self to this place. And being in it, I bear
not witness to my self. But God and the people of these Nations have borne
Testimony to it also.

If my calling be from God, and my Testimony from the People; God and the
People shall take it from me, else I will not part with it. I should be salfe
to the Trust that God has placed upon me, and to the Interest of the People of
these Nations, if I should.

That I called not my self to this place, is my first Assertion.

That I bear not witness to my self, but have many Witnesses, is my second.

These are the two things I shall take the liberty to speak more fully to you
of.

To make plain and clear that which I have said, I must take liberty to look
back.

I was by birth a Gentleman, living neither in any considerable height, nor yet
in obscurity: I have been called to several employments in the Nation: To serve
in Parliaments: And (because I would not be over tedious) I did endeavor to
discharge the duty of an honest man in those services, to God, and his peoples
interest, and of the Commonwealth; having, when time was, a competent
acceptance in the hearts of men, and some evidences thereof. I resolve not to
recite the Times, and Occasions, and Opportunities that have been appointed me
by God to serve him in: nor the presence and blessings of God bearing then
Testimony to me.

I having had some occasions to see (together with my Brethren and
Contrymen) a happy period put to our sharp Wars, and Contests with the
then common enemy, hoped, in a private capacity, to have reaped the fruit, and
benefit together with my Brethren, of our hard labors and hazards: to wit, the
enjoyment of Peace and Liberty, and the Privileges of a Christian, and of a
man, in some equality with others, according as it should please the Lord to
dispense unto me.

And when, I say, God had put an end to our Wars, at least brought them to a
very hopeful issue, very near an end, (after Worcester Fight) I came up to
London to pay my service, and duty to the Parliament that then sat; and hoping
that all minds would have been disposed to answer that which seemed to be the
mind of God, ( viz.) to give Peace and Rest to his People: and especially to
those who had bled more then others in the carrying on of the military
Affairs, I was much disappointed of my expectation: For the issue did not
prove so; what ever may be boasted, or misrepresented, it was not so, not so.

I can say in the simplicity of my soul, I love not I love not, (I declined it
in my former speech) I say, I love not to rake into sores, or to discover
nakednesses. That which I drive at, is this; I say to you, I hoped to have had
leave to have retired to a private life: I begged to be dismissed of my Charge:
I begged it again and again. And God be Judge between me and all men, if I lie
in this matter. That I lie not in matter of fact, is known to very man's; but
whether I tell a lie in my heart, as laboring to represent to you that which
was not upon my heart, I say, the Lord be Judge: let uncharitable men that
measure others by themselves, judge as they please. As to the matter of fact, I
say it is true. As to the ingenuity and integrity of my heart in that desire, I
do appeal, as before, upon the truth of that also. But I could not obtain
what my soul longed for. And the plain truth is, I did afterward apprehend,
That some did think (my judgment not suiting with theirs) that it could not
well be. But this I say to you, was, between God and my soul; between me and
that Assembly.

I confess I am in some strait, to say what I could say; and what is true of
what then followed.

I pressed the Parliament, as a Member, to period themselves, once, and again,
and again, and ten, and twenty times over. I told them (for I knew it better
then any one man in the Parliament could know it, because of my manner of life,
which was to run up and down the Nation, and so might see and know the temper
and spirits of all men, the best of men) that the Nation loathed their sitting:
I knew it. And so far as I could discern, when they were dissolved, there
was not so much as the barking of a dog, or any general and visible repining at
it. You are not a few here present that can assert this as well as my self.

And that there was high cause for their Dissolving, is most evident, not only
in regard there was a just fear of the Parliaments perpetuating themselves; but
because it was their design. And had not their heels been trod upon by
importunities from abroad, even to threats, I believe there would never have
been thoughts of Rising, or of going out of that Room to the worlds end.

I my self was founded; and by no mean persons tempted; and addresses were
made to me to that very end, that it might have been thus perpetuated, That the
vacant places might be supplied by new Elections, and so continue from
Generation to Generation.

I have declined, I have declined very much, to open these things to you: yet
having proceeded thus far, I must tell you, that poor men under this
Arbitrary Power, were driven like flocks of sheep, by forty in a morning, to
the Confiscation of Goods, and Estates, without any man being able to give a
reason that two of them had deserved to forfeit a shilling. I tell you the
truth, and my soul, and many persons whose faces I see in this place were
exceedingly grieved at these things: and knew not which way to help it, but by
their mournings, and giving their negatives when occasions served.

I have given you but a taste of miscarriages. I am confident you have had
opportunities to hear much more of them: for nothing is more obvious. It Is
true, this will be said, That there was a remedy to put an end to this
perpetual Parliament endeavored, by having a future Representative. How it was
gotten, and by what importunities that was obtained, and how unwillingly
yielded unto, is well known.

What was this remedy? It was a seeming willingness to have successive
Parliaments. What was that Succession? it was, that when one Parliament had
left their Seat, another was to sit down immediately in the room thereof,
without any Caution to avoid that which was the danger; ( viz.) Perpetuating of
the same Parliaments; which is a sore now that will ever be running, so long as
men are ambitious and troublesome, if a due remedy be not found. So then, What
was the business? It was a Conversion from a Parliament that should have been,
and was perpetual, to a Legislative Power always sitting: and so the
Liberties, and Interests, and Lives of People, not judged by any certain known
Laws and Power, but by an Arbitrary Power, which is incident and necessary to
Parliaments by an Arbitrary Power: I say, to make men's estates liable to
confiscation, and their persons to imprisonments; sometimes by Laws made after
the fact committed: often by taking the judgment both in capital and criminal
things to themselves, who in former times were not known to exercise such a
Judicature.

This I suppose was the case; and in my opinion the remedy was fitted to the
disease: especially coming in the Rear of a Parliament, so exercising the
Power and Authority as this had done, but immediately before.

Truly, I consesse upon these grounds, and with the satisfaction of diverse
other Persons, seeing nothing could be had otherwise; that Parliament was
dissolved, we desiring to see if a few might have been called together for some
short time who might put the Nation into some way of certain settlement, did
call those Gentlemen out of the several parts of the Nation for that purpose.

And, as I have appealed to God before you already, I know (and I hope I may
say it,) though it be a tender thing to make appeals to God; yet in such
exigencies as these, I trust it will not offend his Majesty, especially to make
them before Persons that know God, and know what Conscience is, and what it is
to lie before the Lord. I say, that as a principal end in calling that
Assembly, was the settlement of the Nation; so a chief end to my self was,
That I might have opportunity to lay down the Power that was in my hands I say
to you again, in the presence of that God, who has blessed and been with me in
all my adversities and successes, that was as to my self my greatest end. A
desire perhaps, (and I am afraid) sinful enough, to be quit of the Power God
had most Providentially put into my hand, before he called for it; and before
those honest ends of our fighting were attained and settled. I say, the
Authority I had in my hand, being so boundless as it was, I being by Act of
Parliament General of all the forces in the three Nations of England, Scotland
and Ireland, (In which unlimitted condition I did not desire to live a day,)
did call that meeting for the ends before expressed.

What the event and issue of that meeting was, we may sadly remember. It has
much teaching in it; and I hope will make us all wiser for the future.

But this meeting succeeding, as I have formerly said to you, and giving such a
disappointment to our hopes, I shall not now make any repetition thereof; only
the effect was, That they came and brought to me a parchment signed by very
much the major part of them, expressing their resigning and re-delivery of the
Power and Authority that was committed to them, back again into my hands: And I
can say it in the presence of diverse persons here, that do know whether I lie
in that, that I did not know one tittle of that resignation, until they all
came and brought it, and delivered it into my hands: of this there are also in
this presence many Witnesses.

I received this Resignation, having formerly used my endeavors and
persuasions to keep them together; observing their differences, I thought it my
duty to give advices to them, that so I might prevail with them for union: But
it had the effect that I told you: and I had my disappointment.

When this was so, we were exceedingly to seek how to settle things for the
future. My power again by this Resignation, was as boundless and unlimited as
before; all things being subjected to Arbitrariness, and a person having power
over the three Nations boundlessely, and unlimited; And upon the matter all
Government dissolved, all Civil Administrations at an end; as will presently
be made appear.

The Gentlemen that undertook to frame this Government, did consult diverse
days together, (they being of known Integrity, and ability) how to frame
somewhat that might give us settlement; and they did so: and that I was not
privy to their Councels, they know it.

When they had finished their model in some measure, or made a very good
preparation of it, it became Communicative. They told me that except I would
undertake the Government, they thought things would hardly come to a Composure,
and Settlement; but blood and confusion would break in upon us. I denied it
again, and again, as God and those persons know, not complementingly as they
also know, and as God knows.

I confess, after many Arguments, and after the letting of me know that I did
not receive any thing that put me into any higher Capacity then I was in
before, but that it limited me, and bound my hands to act nothing to the
prejudice of the Nations, wihout consent of a Council until the Parliament;
and then limited by the Parliament, as the Act of Government expresses, I did
accept it.

I might repeat this again to you, if it were needful, but I think I need not.
I was arbitrary in Power, having the Armies in the three Nations under my
command: and truly not very ill beloved by them; nor very ill beloved then by
the people, by the good People; and I believe I should have bin more beloved if
they had known the truth, as things were before God, and in themselves; and
before diverse of these Gentlemen whom I but now mentioned unto you.

I did, at the entreaty of diverse persons of honor and quality; at the entreaty
of very many of the chief Officers of the Army then present, and at their
request, I did accept of the place, and title of Protector, and was in the
presence of the Commissioners of the Seal, the Judges, the Lord Major and
Aldermen of the City of London, the Souldierie, diverse Gentlemen, Citizens, and
diverse other people, and persons of quality, etc. accompanied to
Westminster Hall, where I took my oath to this Government. This was not done in
a corner: it was open and public.

This Government has bin exercised by a Council, with a desire to be
faithful in all things; and amongst all other trusts, to be faithful in
calling this Parliament.

And thus I have given you a very bare and lean discourse; which truly I have
bin necessitated unto, and contracted in, because of the unexpectedness of the
occasion; and because I would not quite weary you, nor my self. But this is a
Narrative that discovers to you the Series of Providence, and of Transactions
leading me into this Condition wherein I now stand.

The next thing I promised you, wherein I hope I shall not be so long, (though
I am sure this occasion does require plainness and freedom,) is, That as I
brought not my self into this Condition, (as in my own apprehension I did not;
and that I did not, (the things being true which I have told you) I submit it
to your Judgments, and there shall I leave it, let God do what he pleases.)
The other things I say that I am to speak to you of, is, That I have not, nor
do not bear witness to my self. I am far from alluding to him that said so;
yet truth concerning a member of his he will own, though men do not.

But I think (if I mistake not) I have a cloud of witnesses. I think so; let
men be as froward as they will. I have witness within, without, and above. But
I shall speak of them that are without, having fully spoken before of the
witness Above, and the witness in my own conscience, upon the other Account;
because that subject had more obscurity in it, and I in some sort needed
appeals; and I trust might lawfully make them, as well as take an oath, where
things were not so apt to be made evident. I shall enumerate my witnesses as
well as I can.

When I had consented to accept of the Government, there was some solemnity to
be performed; and that was accompanied with some persons of considerablenesse
in all respects; who were the persons before expressed; who accompanied me at
the time of my entering upon this Government, to Westminster Hall to take my
oath.

There was an explicit consent of Interessed persons; and an implicit consent
of many, showing their good liking, and approbation thereof. And (Gentlemen) I
do not think that you are altogether strangers to it, in your Country: some did
not nauseate it; very many did approve it.

I had the approbation of the Officers of the Army in the three Nations of
England, Scotland, and Ireland; I say of the Officers. I had that by their
Remonstrances, and under signature; There was went along with that explicit
consent, an implicit consent of persons that had somewhat to do in the World;
that had been isntrumental by God, to fight down the enemies of God, and his
people, in the three Nations. And truly, until my hands were bound, and I
limited,(wherein I took full contentment, as many can bear me witness,) when I
had in my hands so great a power and Arbitrariness, the Souldierie were a very
considerable part of the Nations, especially all Government being dissolved. I
say, when all Government was thus dissolved, and nothing to keep things in
order but the Sword, and yet they (which many histories will not parallel)
even they were desirous that things might come to a Consistencie, and
Arbitrarines might be taken away, and the Government put into a person (limited
and bounded, as in the Act of Settlement) whom they destrusted the least, and
loved not the worst: this was another evidence.

I would not forget the honorable and civil entertainment, with the
approbation I found in the great City of London; which the City knows whether
I directly or indirectly sought. And truly I do not think it is folly to
remember this. For it was very great, and high, and very public; and as
numerous a Body of those that are known by names, and titles, (the several
corporations, and societies of Citizens in this City,) as has been at any time
seen in England; and not without some appearance of satisfaction also.

I had not only this witness, but I have had from the greatest County in
England, and from many Cities, and Boroughs, and many Counties, explicit
Approbations; not of those gathered here, and there; but from the County of
York, and City of York, and other Counties, and places, Assembled in their
public, and general Assizes, the Grand Jury in the name of the Noble men,
Gentlemen, Yeomen, and inhabitants of that County, giving very great thanks to
me for undertaking this heavy Burden, at such a time: and giving very great
Approbation, and encouragement to me to go through with it. These are plain. I
have them to show. And by these in some measure it will appear, I do not bear
witness to my self.

This is not all: the Judges, (and truly I had almost forgotten it) they
thinking that there was a dissolution of Government, met, and consulted, and
did declare one to another, that they could not administer Justice to the
satisfaction of their consciences, until they had received Commissions from
me. And they did receive commissions from me. And by virtue of those
Commissions they have acted. And all the Justices of the Peace, that have
acted, have acted by virtue of like Commissions: which was a little more then
an implicit Approbation. And I believe all the Justice administered in the
Nation, has been by this Authority; which also I lay before you: desiring you
to think whether all these Persons before mentioned must not come before you
for an Act of Oblivion, and General Pardon, who have acted under, and
testified to this Go.vernment, if it be disowned by you.

I have two or three witnesses more, equivalent to all these I have reckoned,
if I be not mistaken, and greatly mistaken. If I should say, all you that are
here, are my witnesses, Ishould say no untruth. I know you are the same persons
here, that you were in the Country. But I will reserve to speak to this at the
last; for this will be the issue of my speech. I say, I have two or three
witnesses, that are more, then all I have accounted, and reckoned before.

All the people in England, are my witnesses: and many in Ireland, and
Scotland. All the Sheriffs in England are my witnesses. And all that came in
upon the Process issued out by the Sheriffs are my witnesses. Yea, the
Returns of the Elections to the Clerk of the Crown, not a thing to be blown
away with a breath; the Returns on the behalf of the inhabittants in the
Counties, Cities, and Boroughs, Al are my witnesses of approbation to the
condition, and place I stand in.

And I shall now make you my last witnesses, and ask you whether you came not
hither by my Writs, directed to the several Sheriffs? and so to other Officers
in Cities, and Liberties, to which the People gave obedience: having also had
the Act: of Government communicated to them: to which end great Numbers of
Copies were sent down, on purpose to be communicated to them; And the
Government also required, to be distinctly read un. to the People at the place
of Elections, to avoid surprises; where also they signed the Indenture, with
proviso, That the persons so chosen shall not have power to alter the
Government, as it is now settled; in one single Person and a Parliament.

And thus I have made good my second Assertion, That I bear not witness to my
self; but the good people of England, and you all are my witnesses.

Yea surely, And this being so, though I told you in my last speech, that you
were a free Parliament; yet I thought it was understood, that I was the
Protector, and the Authority that called you, and that I was in possession of
the Government by a good Right from God and men. And I believe, if the
learned men in this Nation were called to show a President so clear, so many
ways approving of a Government; they would not in all their search find it.

I did not in my other speech to you take upon me to justify the Government in
every particular; and I told you the reason of it; which was plain. It was
public; and had been long published; and it might be under the most serious
inspection of all that pleased to peruse it.

By what I have said, I have approved my self to God, and my conscience, in my
actions; and in this undertaking. And I have given cause of approving my self
to every one of your consciences in the sight of God.

If it be so, why should we sport with it? with a business thus serious? May
not this Character, this stamp, bear equal Poyze with any hereditary Interest,
which may have, and has had, in the common Law, matters of Dispute, and Trial
of learning? wherein many have exercised more Wit, and spilt more blood, then I
hope ever to live to see, or hear of in this Nation.

I say, I do not know why I may not balance this providence, as in the sight of
God, with any hereditary Interest, as being less subject to those Crackes, and
Flaws, they are commonly incident unto. Which Titles have cost more blood, in
former times, in this Nation, then we have leisure to speak of now.

Now if this be thus, and I am deriving a Title from God and men, upon such
Accounts as these are: Although some men be froward, yet that your Judgments,
that are Persons sent from all parts of the Nation, under the Notion of
acceptance of the Government for you to disowne, or not to own it; for you to
act Parliamentary Authority, especially in the disowning of it; contrary to the
very fundamental things; yea, against the very root it self of this
Establishment; to sit and not own the Authority by which you fit, is that that
I believe astonisheth more men then my self; and does as dangerously
disappoint, and discompose the Nation, as any thing could have been invented
by the greatest Enemy to our peace and welfare; or could well have happened.

It is true, there are some things in the Establishment, that are Fundamental:
and some things are not so, but are Circumstantial. Of such, no question but I
shall easily agree to vary, or leave out, as I shall be convinced by reason.
Some things are Fundamentals, about which I shall deal plainly with you, they
may not be parted with; but will (I trust) be delivered over to Posterity, as
being the fruits of our Blood and Travel.

The Government by a single Person and a Parliament, is a Fundamental; It is
the Esse. It is Constitutive. And for the Person, though I may seem to plead
for my self, yet I do not, no nor can any reasonable man say it. But if the
things throughout this Speech be true, I plead for this Nation, and all honest
men therein, who have borne their Testimony, as aforesaid, and not for my
self. And if things should do otherwise, then well, which I would not fear;
and the Common Enemy, and discontented Persons take Advantage at these
Distractions, the issue will be put up before God, Let him own, or let him
disown it, as he please.

In every Government there must be somewhat Fundamental, somewhat like a Magna
Charta, that should be standing, and be unalterable. Where there is a
Stipulation on one Part, and that fully accepted, as appears by what has been
said; surely a Return ought to be: else what does that Stipulation signify? If
I have upon the Terms asore-said undertaken this great Trust, and Exercised
it, and by it called you, surely it ought to be owned.

That Parliaments should not make themselves Perpetual, is a Fundamental. Of
what Assurance is a Law to prevent so great an evil, if it lie in one or the
same Legislator to unlaw it again? Is this like to be lasting? It will be like
a Rope of Sand; it will give no Security. For the same men may unbuild, what
they have built.

Is not Liberty of Conscience in Religion a Fundamental? so long as there is
Liberty of Conscience for the Supreme Magistrate, to exercise his Conscience in
erecting what Form of Church Government he is satisfied, he should set up; why
should not he give it to others? Liberty of Conscience is a Natural Right: and
he that would have it ought to give it; having Liberty to settle what he likes
for the Public.

Indeed that has been one of the Vanities of our Contests. Every Sect says,
Oh! Give me Liberty, But give him it, and to his Power he will not yield it to
any Body else. Where is our Ingenuity? Truly that is a thing ought to be very
Reciprocal. The Magistrate has his Supremacy, and he may settle Religion
according to his Conscience. And I may say it to you: I can say it; all the
Money of this Nation, would not have tempted men to fight, upon such an Account
as they have engaged, if they had not had Hopes of Liberty, better then they
had from Episcopacy; or then would have been afforded them, from a Scottish
Presbytery, or an English either; if it had made such steps, or been as sharp,
and Rigid, as it threatened when it was first set up.

This, I say, is a Fundamental. It ought to be so: it is for us, and the
Generations to come. And if there be an absoluteness in the Imposer, without
fitting allowances, and Exceptions from the Rule, we shall have our People
driven into Wildernesses; as they were when those poor, and afflicted People,
that forsook their Estates, and Inheritances here, where they lived plentifully
and Comfortably, for the Enjoyment of their Liberty, and were necessitated to
go into a vast howling Wilderdernesse in New England, where they have for
Liberty sake stripped themselves of all their Comfort, and the full Enjoyment
they had, embracing rather loss of Friends, and want, then to be so ensnared,
and in Bondage.

Another, which I had forgotten, is the Militia, that is Judged a Fundamental,
if any thing be so. That it should be well and equally placed, is very
necessary. For put the Absolute Power of the Militia into One without a Check,
what does it? I pray you, what does your Check put upon your Perpetual
Parliaments, if it be wholly stripped of this? It is equally Placed, and Desires
were to have it so ( viz.) in one Person, and the Parliament, sitting the
Parliament. What signifies a Provision against perpetuating of Parliaments, if
this be solely in them? Whether without a Check the Parliament have not Liberty
to alter the Frame of Government, to Aristocrasie, to Democrasie, to Anarchy,
to any Thing, if this be fully in them? Yea into all Confusion, and that
without Remedy? And if this one Thing be placed in One, that One, be it
Parliament, be it Supreme Governor, They, or He has Power to make what they
please of all the rest.

Therefore, if you would have a Balance at all; and that some Fundamentals must
stand, which may be worthy to be delivered over to Posterity; truly, I think,
it is not unreasonably urged, That the Militia should be disposed, as it is
laid down in the Government: and that it should be so equally placed, that one
Person, neither in Parliament, nor out of Parliament, should have the Power of
Ordering it. The Council are the Trustees of the Commonwealth, in all
Intervals of Parliaments; who have as Absolute a Negative upon the Supreme
Officer in the said Intervalls, as the Parliament has whilst it is sitting. It
cannot be made use of: a man cannot be raised; nor a penny charged upon the
People; nothing done without Consent of Parliament and in the Intervals of
Parliament, without Consent of the Council, it is not to be exercised.

Give me leave to say, That there is very little Power, none but what is
Coordinate, in the Supreme Officer; and yet enough in him that has the Chief
Government, in that particular, he is bound in strictness by the Parliament,
out of Parliament by the Council, that do as absolutely bind him, as the
Parliament, when the Parliament is sitting.

For that of Money; I told you some things are Circumstantials. To have two
hundred thousand pounds, to Defray Civil Officers, to pay the Judges, and other
Officers, defraying the Charges of the Council, in sending their Embassies, in
keeping Intelligence, and doing that that is necessary, and for supporting the
Governor in Chief: All this is by the Instrument supposed and intended; But it
is not of the Esse so much, and so limited, as so many Soldiers, 30000, twenty
thousand Foot, and ten thousand Horse. If the Spirits of men be composed five
thousand Horse, and ten thousand Foot, may serve. These things are between the
Chief Officer, and the Parliament, to be moderated, as occasion shall offer.

So there are many other Circumstantiall things, which are not like the Laws
of the Medes and Persians; But the things which shall be necessary to deliver
over to Posterity, these should be unalterable, else every succeeding
Parliament, will be disputing to Change, and alter the Government, and we shall
be as often brought into Confusion, as we have Parliaments, and so make our
Remedy our Disease. The Lords providence, appearing Evils, appearing Good, and
better Judgment, will give occasion for the ordering of things, for the best
interest of the People. And those things are the Matter of Consideration
between you and me.

I have indeed almost tired my self. That that I have further to say, is this,
I would it had not been needful for me to have called you hither to have
expostulated these things with you, and in such a manner as this is: But
Necessity has no Law. Feigned Necessities, imaginary Necessities are the
greatest Cousenage that men can put upon the Providence of God, and make
pretenses to break known Rules by. But it is as Legal, and as Carnal, and as
Stupid, to think that there are no Necessities, that are manifest Necessities:
Because Necessities may be abused or feigned, And truly I should be so, if I
should think so, and I hope none of you think so.

I say, That the wilful throwings away of this Government, such as it is, so
owned by God, so approved by men, so testified to, in the Fundamentals of it,
as is beforementioned, and that in Relation to the Good of these Nations, and
Posterity; I can sooner be willing to be Rolled into my Grave, and Buried with
Infamy, then I can give my Consentunto.

You have been called hither together to save a Nation; -- Nations. You had the
best People indeed in the Christian World in your Trust, when you came hither.
You had Affairs, and these Nations delivered over to you in Peace and
Quietness: You were, and we all were put into an uninterrupted Possession, no
body making Title to us. Through the Blessing of God our Enemies were hopeless
and scattered. We had Peace at home: Peace almost with all Neighbors round
about: fit to take Advantages where God did administer them.

To have our Peace and Interest, that had those hopes the other day, thus
shaken, and under such a Confusion; and we rendered hereby (almost) the Scorn
and Contempt of those Strangers that are amongst us, to Negotiate their Masters
Affairs; To give them Opportunity to see our Nakedness, as they do, a People
that have been unhinged this Twelve Years day, and unhinged still; as if
Scattering, Division, and Confusion should come upon us (as if it were desired)
which are the greatest Plagues God ordinarily lays upon Nations for sin: I
would be loath to say, they are Matters of our Delight: But if not, Why not the
Matter of our Care, so wisely as we ought by uttermost Endeavors to avoid?
Nay, when by such Actions, as these are, these poor Nations shall be thrown
into heaps of Confusion, through Blood, and Ruin, and Trouble, upon the
saddest Account that ever was, if breaking should come upon us, and all because
we would not settle when we might; when God put it into our Hands: Your Affairs
now almost settled every where: And to have all Recoyl upon us, and we our
selves shaken in our Affections, loosened from all Known and public
Interests, as I have mentioned to you: Who shall answer for these things to
God? Who can answer for these things to God, or to Men? To the People that sent
you hither? Who looked for refreshment from you; who looked for nothing but
Peace, and Quietness, and Rest, and Settlement. And when we shall come to give
an Account to them, we shall be able to say; Oh! we have quarrelled for, and we
contested for the Liberty of England. Wherein forsooth for the Liberty of the
People? I appeal to the Lord, that the Desires and Endeavors, and the things
themselves will speak for themselves; That the Liberty of England; The Liberty
of the People; The avoiding of Tyranous Impositions, either upon Men as Men, or
Christians as Christians, is made so safe by this Act of Settlement, that it
will speak sufficiently for it self.

And when it shall appear what has been said, and done; and what our
Transactions have been: For God can discover, and no Privilege will hinder the
Lord from discovering, no Privilege or Condition of men can hide from the
Lord: He can, and will make all manifest, if he see it for his Glory. And when
these shall by the Providence of God be manifested, and the People shall come
and say, Gentlemen, What Condition are we in? We hoped for Light, and behold
Darkness obscure Darkness! We hoped for Rest, after ten Years Civil Wars: We
are plunged into deep Confusion again. I, we know these Consequences will come
upon us, if God Almighty shall not find out some way to prevent them.

I had this thought within my self. That it had not been Dishonest, nor
Dishonorable, nor against true Liberty, no not of Parliaments; when a
Parliament was so Chosen, in Pursuance of, in Conformity to, and with such an
Approbation, and Consent to the Government, so that he that runs might read
by what Authority you came hither: That an owning of your Call, and of the
Authority bringing you hither, might have been required before your Entrance
into the House.

But this was declined, and has not been done, bccause I am persuaded scarce
any man could reasonably doubt you came with contrary Minds. And I have reason
to believe, the People that sent You, least doubted thereof at all. And
therefore I must deal plainly with You. What I forbear upon a just Confidence
at first, You necessitate me unto now. -- That seeing the Authority calling You
is so little valued, and so much slighted, Till some such Assurance be given,
and made known; That the Fundamental Interest of the Government, be Settled,
and Approved, according to the Provisoe contained in the Return; and such a
Consent testified, as will make it appear, that the same is accepted, I have
caused a stop to be put to your Entrance into the Parliament House.

I am sorry, I am sorry, and I could be sorry to the Death, that there is Cause
for this. But there is Cause. And if things be not Satisfied, that are
reasonably Demanded. I for my part shall do that that becomes me, seeking my
Council from God.

There is therefore somewhat to be offered to you, that I hope will (being
understood with the Qualifications that I have told you of: Reforming
Circumstantials, and Agreeing in the Substance and Fundamentals (which is, the
Government Settled, as it is expressed in the Indenture) not to be altered; The
making of your minds known in that, by giving your Assent and Subscription to
it; is that, that will) let you in, to Act those things as a Parliament, which
are for the good of the People. And this thing showed to you, and Signed, as
asore-said, does Determine the Controversy; and may give a happy Progress,
and Issue to this Parliament.

The Place where you may come thus, and Sign, as many as God shall make free
thereunto, is in the Lobby without the Parliament door.

The Government does declare, that you have a Legislative Power without a
Negative from me. As the Government does express, you may make any Laws; and if
I give not my Consent within twenty days, to the Passing your Laws, they are
ipso facto Laws, whether I consent, or no, if not contrary to the Government.
You have an Absolute Legislative Power in all things that can possibly concern
the Good, and Interest of the Public. And I think you may make these Nations
happy by this Setlement: And I for my part shall be willing to be bound more
then I am, in any thing that I may be convinced of, may be for the Good of the
People; In Preservation of the Cause and Interest so long contended for.

FINIS.

