THE SPEECH OF HIS HIGHNESS THE LORD PROTECTOR TO THE PARLIAMENT IN The
Painted Chamber at Westminster, on Monday last, being the fourth of this
instant September, 1654.

EXamined by the Original Copy; Published by Order and Authority.

London, Printed for G. FREEMAN, 1654.

An excellent Speech of His Highness the Lord Protector, delivered to the
Parliament on Monday last in the Painted Chamber.
ON Monday last about 9 of the clock in the forenoon, hi^ Highness the Lord
Protector rode in his Coach to the Abbey Church in very stately equipage, the
Gentlemen of his Highness going bare before, ^ichly habited, and next before
the Coach the Pages and Lacquey^, (in their sever^l Liveries, most admirable to
behold) on ^h^ on^ side of the Coach was Mr Strickland, one of his Highness
Council, and Cap^ain of his Guard of Foot; on the other sid^, Mr Howard Capt.
of the Lif^g^^^d of Ho^^ both of them bare, went on foot. In the Coach wiih h^s
Highness was the ^^^d Henry his son, Maj. Genesis Lambert, and the Lord President
La^^ence, both rid bare, the Maj Gen, in the end of the Coach against his
Highness, and the Lord P^esident in the ^i^ht boot. After his Highness Coach
rid Mr Claypool, Mr of the Horse, and with him his Highness led Horse, very
rich, the cloth of covering costing 500 l. Next came the Lord Commissioners of
the Seal, and Col. Sydenham, and Col. Montague, Commissioners of the Exch^quer.
Then the Gentlemen of his Highness Foot Guard, and the Wardens of the Tower,
all in his Highness Livery, went along about his Highness Coach. His Highness
alighting at the Abbey-dore, the Officers of the Army, and the Gentlemen went
first in; after them 4 Maces, next them the Lord Commissioners of the Se^l the
L. Whitlock ca^rying the purse. After them, the L. Lambert, carrying the Sword,
bare, before his Highness. The rest followed, and his Highness was sea^ed ove^
against the Pulpit. After the Sermon was done (which was preached by Mr Th.
Goodw^^) his Highness went on foo^, in the same ^quipage, ^o the Painted
Chamber, th^re being a very rich Chair wrought and trimmed with Gold, upon a
place up ^^o steps, like a Throne, with a Table before it, and seats for the
members, and h^s Highness standing ^y with his head bare, delivered his mind
very excellently as large to the Parliament. The substance whereof was as
follows.

THat the Parliament them met, was such a Congregation as England never saw,
having on their shoulders the interest of three great Nations, with the
Territories thereunto belonging; Yea, that they had upon their shoulders the
Interest of all the Christian people in the world.

He promised in what he should say, plainness and truth; taking notice, That
after so many ch^nges and turnings as this Nation has labored under, to have
such a day of hope, and such a door of hope opened as this, was some months
since above all our thoughts. That it might have been a matter worthy such a
meeting, to have remembered them what occasioned the rise and first beginning of
all the tossings that have been upon these Nations, and to have given a series
not of the transactions of men but of the providence of God all along to these
Times, and the grounds of the first undertaking to oppose that Usurpation and
Tyranny which was upon Us in our Civils and Spirituals: but some Reasons
diverted him from that; As,

1 To have proceeded after that manner would have taken up the whole day; for
Gods dispensations have been such, that, as David says in another case, If I
should sit to count them, they are more then can be numbered.

2 Because the recapitulation of his providence had been largely and wisely
held forth in the Sermon that day, in an allusion to the state of, and
dispensations toward the Israelites (the only parallel to Gods dealing with
us, that he knew in the world) in bringing them out of Egypt through a
wilderness, toward their place of rest.

3 Because the end of that meeting was healing, and the remembering of former
transactions particularly might set the wounds fresh a bleeding; and if this
day proves not a day of healing what shall we do? but if it be the mind of God
(which alone must make it healing) to put it into their hearts, then it would
be such a day as Generations to come would bless them for it.

That it was necessary rather to let them know in what condition these Nations
were when this Government was erected, what were the breaches in our Civils and
Spirituals, when every man's hand (at least his heart) was against another,
little appeared tending to cementing.

All Gods dispensations, neither his terrible ones, when He met us in a way of
judgment in a ten years civil war, and a sharp ones, nor his merciful
dispensations did work upon us. That we had our Humors and Interests, and (as
He feared) our Humors were more then our Interests; our passions more then our
judgments. Was not every thing almost grown arbytrary? What face was upon our
affairs as to the interest and authority of the Magistrate, or to the rights
and orders of men, whereby distinctions have been made for hundreds of years
of a Nobleman, a Gentleman, a Yeoman; it being a good interest of the Nation,
and a great one? Every man's hand was upon his loins, and said, We see nothing
that bears sway or rule.

And that spirit that brought under that contempt, though it may be
comprehended in a very short expression of Men of levelling Principles, yet the
thing had a vast extension, tending to reduce all the orders and ranks of men to
an equality to make the Tenant of as liberal a fortune as his Landlord.

His Highness took notice in the next place of the prodigious contempt upon
God and Christ, and his Ordinances; a spirit visibly acting those things which
were fore told by Peter and Jude, and Timothy, as the lot and portion of the
last times, and something worse then the Antichristian state; that there should
be perilous days, and therefore perilous because they should break all
Rules, and labor to root out that remainder of the image of God which was left
in the nature of fallen man: And this by men that should have a form of
godliness, denying the power of it. And indeed the character whereby that
spirit and principle is described, is so legible and visible, that he that runs
may read it: And he wished that it were not to be read or seen, and that the
grace of GOD might not be turned into wantonness, and Christ and the Spirit of
God made a cloak of vile practices.

He observed, That many would not own these things, yet they could tell you,
the Magistrate has nothing to do with matters of Conscience or Religion; That
he is to look to the outer man, not to meddle with the inner. And such
pretensions he said there were of liberty of the Subject, and of Conscience
(two as glorious things, and as much to be contended for, as any gift God has
given us.) That both these were brought in to patronize such evils. Insomuch,
that it was affirmed, not to be in the power of the Magistrate so much as to
print Bibles, left it should seem an imposition on the Consciences of men, to
receive them from the Magistrate, as true.

And these abominations swelled to that height, that the Ax was laid to the
Root of the Ministry, as Antichristian and Babylonish. And as the extremity was
great before, that no man, though well approved, and having a good testimony
might preach, if not ordained, so now on the other hand, they would have
Ordination put a nullity upon the Calling. He took notice of another evil that
had more refinednesse in it, more color for it, and had deceived more people
of integrity then the former; for few were caught with the former mistakes, but
such as apostatized from their holy profession, such as having been corrupted
in their Consciences, have been forsaken by God, and left to noisome opinions.
But there was another thing that deceived many well meaning people, whose
hearts are sincere, and such (as he was persuaded) belong to God, and that is
the Fifth Monarchy, Men's pretending to more spirituality then any other. It is
a Notion, which (as he hoped) we all honor and wait for, That Jesus Christ
will have his time to set up his reign in our hearts, and to subdue that
corrup^ion and lust which reigns more in the world now than ever; and he hoped
in due time, it shall be; But for men to entitle themselves to be the only men
to govern Nations, and rule Kingdoms, and give Laws to the world, to determine
of property and liberty, and every thing else, needs a great manifestation of
Gods presence before wise men will submit to it.

Many of those he conc^ived in his very soul had good meanings, and he hop^d
this Pa^liament would (as Jude says, reckoning up the abomin^ble Apostacies of
the ast times) pluck some out of the fire, and ^ave others with fear, making
tho e o^ peaceable Spirits, the subject of their encouragement, and saving
others by that di^cipline that God has ord^ined to reform miscar^iages. The
danger of that Spirit being not in the notion, but in its proceeding to a
civil tr^nsgression. When men shall come into such a practice, as to tell u^,
That liberty and proper^y are not the badges of that Kingdom; and that in stead
of regulating Laws, Laws must be subverted, and perhaps the Judicial Law
imposed, or some fancy in stead of it (for that was good and honorable in the
Institution, though now by some misapplyed) specially when every stone is
turn^d to bring in Confusion. This will be a consideration worthy of the
Magistrate.

His Highness p^oceeded to show, That while these things were in the midst of
us, and the Nation rent and turn from one end to another, Family against
Family, Pa^^nt against Child, and nothing in the hearts and minds of men, but
Ov^^turn, ^ve^^urn, a Scripture very much abused, and challenged by all men of
discontented Spirits. The common enemy in the mean time s^eps not; swarms of
J^^uit^ c^^ing ove^, having their Consistories abroad to rule all the (...)
England, ^^d the dependancies thereof. In the mean time visible ende^vors (...)
^^der the work in Ireland, to obst^uct the work in Scotland; Correspon^^ (...)
Intelligencies are held to encourage and foment the war in these places. (...)
all we were deeply engaged in a war with Portugal, whereby our T^ade (...): and
not only so, but a war with Holland, which consumed our T^^sure (...) much as
the Assesment came to.

At the same time we fell into a war with France, or rather we were in it, and
all this fomented by the divisions amongst us, which begat a confiden^s we
could not hold out long; and the calculation had not been ill, if the Lord h^d
not been gracious to us B sid^s, strangers increased in the Manufacture, the
staple commodity of this N^tion. In such a he^p of confusion was this p^or
Nation, and that it might not sink into a confusion, from these premises a
Rem^dy must be applied.

A Remedy has been applied: This Government a thing that is seen, and read of
all; and which, let men say what they will (he could speak with comfort befere
a Greater then they all, as to his own intention, and let men judge out of the
thing it self) is calcul^t^d for the interest of the people, for their interest
alone, and to ^hri^ good, with u^ respect had to any ^ither interest. He added,
That he might wi^h humbleness toward God, and modesty before them, say
something in behalf of it.

^t has endeavored to refo^m the Laws and for that end has joined persons
(without reflection upon any) of as great ability and integrity as any other,
to consider how the laws might be m^^e pl^in, short, and easy which may in due
time be tendered.

It has taken care to put into seats of Justice, men of the most known
integrity and ability. The Chancery has been reformed, and (I hope) to the
just satisfaction of all good men. It has put a step to that heady way, for
every man that will, to make himself a Prea^her, having endeavored to settle a
way for appr^bation of men of piety, and fitness for the work, and the
business committed to trusty persons both of the Presby^erian and Independent
Judgment, men of as known ability and integrity, as (we suppose) any the Nation
has, and (we believe) have labored to approve themselves to God and their own
C^nsciences, in approving men to that great Function.

It has taken care to expunge men unfit for that work, who have been the
common scorn and reproach of that Administra^ion. -- One thing more, It has
been instrumental to call a free Parliament, blessed be God we see here this
day a free Parliament; and that it may continue so, he hop^s is in the heart of
every good man of England; and he added, That for his own part, as he had
desired it above his life, so to keep it free, he should value it ab^ve his
life.

Having thus instanced in the wars wherein we were plunged, and the little
assurance from Neighbo^us abroad, he procedeed to show that a Peace is made
with Sweden (wherein an honorable person was instrumental) it being of much
importance to have a good understanding with our Protestant Neighb^rs* A peace
is also made with the Dane, and a peace there that is honorable, and to (...)
^^tisfaction of the Merchants.

The (...) open to us, from whence as from a Fountain, our Naval provisions are
(...).

That a (...) is made with the Dutch (which is so well known in the consequen^^
of^

He set for^^ the advantage of a good Und rstanding with Protestant States. And
he begged, That it might be in the Parliaments hearts to be zealous of the P
otestant Interest ab oad, whibh if ever it be like to come under a condition of
suff^ring, it is now, many of them being banished and d^^ven to s^^k refuge
among strangers. That a peace is made with Po^tuga^ (though it hung long) of
great concernment to Trade; and the people that trade thither, have freedom to
enjoy their Consciences, without being subjected to the bloody Inquisition. And
that a Treaty with France is now depending.

His Highness then further declared, That it might be necessary for them to
hear a little of the Sea affairs, and took notice of the great expense of the
forces and fleet, and yet 30000 l. is now abated of the next three months
assesment. And having spoken about an hour and half, his Highness drew to a
conclusion, presenting them with this Observation, That the things
beforementioned are but entrances and doors of hope; That they are brought to
the edge of Canaan (into which many that have gone before could not enter) That
if the blessing and presence of God go along with them in management of their
Affairs, He makes no question but he will enable them to lay the top-stone of
this Work. He then remembered them, that they have a great work upon them;
Ireland to look to; that the beginnings of that Government may be settled in
terms of honor, That they had before them the consideration of those foreign
States tha^ as yet peace is not made with, who if they shall see we manage not
our Affairs with prudence as become s men, will re^ain hopes that we may sink
under the disadvantages thereof, and break into confusion. He persuaded them ^o
have a sweet, gracious, and holy understanding one of another, and put them in
mind of the council heard that day in order thereunto. And desired them for a
conclusion, to believe that He spoke not to them as one that would be a Lord
over them, but as one that was resolved to be a fellow servants with them, to
the Interest of this great Affair; and so wished them to repair to their House,
and exercise their own liberty in the choice of their Speaker. His Highness
having done, the Members went to their House, and having chose Mr Lenthal
Speaker, they ordered a Fast to be kept by them, and in London, and parts
adjacent on the 13 of this instant September. In all other parts of England,
Scotland, and Wales, on the 4 of October. And in Ireland the 1 of November. to seek
to God for direction and counsel, and to pray for a blessing upon their
endeavors.

After which, his Highness retired into the place, formerly called the House
of Lords, and so took Barge, and went down to White Hall by water.

The End.

