THE LITTLE HORNS DOOM and DOVVNFALL: OR A Scripture-Prophesie OF King James,
and King Charles, and of this present Parliament, unfolded. Wherein it
appears, that the late Tragedies that have bin acted upon the Scene of these
three Nations: and particularly, the late Kings doom and death, was so long
ago, as by Daniel pred-eclared.

AND What the issue of all will be, is also discovered; which follows in the
second Part.

By M. Carry, a servant of Jesus Christ.

AMOS 3. 7, 8. Surely the Lord God will do nothing but he reveals his secrets
unto his servants the Prophets: The Lion has roared, who will not fear? the
Lord God has spoken, who can but Prophecy?

London, Printed for the Author, and are to be sold at the sign of the
Black-spread-Eagle, at the West end of Paul's, 1651.

TO The Virtuous, Heroical, and Honorable Ladies, The Lady ELIZABETH
CROMWELL, The Lady BRIDGET IRETON, and The Lady MARGARET ROLE.

May it please your Ladyships,
BEing pressed in spirit to divulge this ensuing discourse, the maine scope
whereof, being to make this present age more sensible of the late past, and
present footsteps of God in the world, in order to the setting up of the
kingdom of our Lord Jesus; and the making of all dominions to serve and obey
him.

And observing, how that among the many pious, precious, prudent, and sage
Matrons, and holy women, with which this Commonwealth is adorned; as with so
many precious jewels, and choice gemmes, (which God having here and there
placed in it, do set out the glory and luster of the This Nation so far
excels in glory, and happiness all other Nations, because of of those numbers
of precious Saints that are in it; and for several other respects: As it made
a Reverend See Mr. Tho. Goodwins Sermon, preached before the Parliament in Feb.
1645. which is in print, and entitled, The great Interest of States and
Kingdoms. Which in many other respects is worthy the serious view of the best
saints.
Divine of this Nation, thus to express himself concerning it: That if we
had stood at Gods elbow, when he bounded out the Nations, and appointed the
times, and seasons, that men should live in; we should not have known, in what
nation, or kingdom, or age we should have chosen to have lived in, rather
then in this kingdom, for whom God has done such great things: unless when
Jesus Christ himself was alive, and the Apostles in those primitive times;
unless in Judea it self, where all the Apostles were together.
Nation) God has selected and chosen out your Ladyships, and placed you in
some of the highest places of honor (according to your present capacities) in
the three Nations; wherein you have more then ordinary opportunities to honor
him.

And observing withal, how that as God has placed you in the stations wherein
you are; so he has fitted you for them: the tendency of your aims, studies,
and endeavors, (as it is well known) being to the exaltation (as far as lies
in you) of that great King of Saints, the Lord Jesus; whom you love in
sincerity, and for the setting up of whose glorious Kingdom in the perfection
of it, you longingly wait: which frame of spirit in you, has not been of
yesterday only, but for many years together has shined conspicuously, and
gloriously in you all; demonstrating to all Saints, that indwelling presence of
the holy spirit which is within you.

I have therefore chosen, (being of your own sex) to dedicate these Treatises
to your Ladyships, (whom I honor because God has honored) and under your
favorable aspects, to publish them to the world; being assured both,

First, of your ingenuous, and gracious acceptance hereof; seeing that these
treatises tend to the quickening, and refreshing of the hearts, of those which
wait for, and expect the coming, and the kingdom of our Lord Jesus Christ:
Knowing that every thing of this nature, from how weak an instrument soever it
be, (so it be with the plain, and clear demonstrations of the holy Scripture,
and the holy spirit) is very acceptable unto you, who are in that waiting and
expecting posture.

And also secondly, of your owning, and defending, and maintaining all the
truths, which are therein laid down; as far as they shall appear, in the
energie, and evidence of the holy spirit unto you, who have already so
plenarily (compared with many other Saints of these present times) received of
that spirit.

And now right honorable; that as your God has graciously loaded you both
with internal and external glory; under which he keeps you in a sweet, meek,
and humble frame, which crowns all the favors which he has conferred upon
you; so that you may more and more abound, in every grace, and blessing of the
Lord, enjoying yet more full, spiritual, and sweet communion and fellowship
with the Father, and with his Son Jesus Christ, through the spirit; that as
transplendent stars you may shine gloriously, in the several spheres wherein.
God has set you, or shall set you; while in this world, until you are
advanced unto that beatificke vision, which is to be enjoyed, among the
glorified Saints, and Angels, with Jesus Christ in another world, shall be the
prayer of,

My Ladies, Your Ladyships devoted unfeignedly, to serve you in the Lord, MARY
RANDE.

To the READER.
Courteous Reader,
I Had written the first of these Treatises, entitled, The little Horns doom
and downfall, above seven years since, but have bin withheld from publishing
of it until now, (for ends best known unto divine Majesty; but (if may so
guess,) it may be, it was because that men would then generally have been
more incapable of receiving of such things, then now they are, because now
these things are fulfilled; and prophesies are then best understood, when they
are fulfilled.) But now, am I so pressed to publish both this first Treatise,
and this other which I have but lately written, upon this 27 verse of this
seventh of Daniel, Having finished it but since the beginning of the month of
August, this present year, 1651.
as that I cannot, I dare not, withold neither of them from public view any
longer; but by publishing of them in print, I shall expose them to the public
view of all men, as far as in me lies.

And having so done, shall leave it to the eternal Jehovah to make it
effectual, to those ends to which he has appointed it, which may be First,
to convince those of their folly, that persist in ways contradictory to, (or
crossing of) his present designs, to the disturbing of their own souls,
(though they cannot hinder his work, for who can let it?) for if he do not
convince them, none can: Or,

Secondly, it may be to confirm others; for there are some that are already so
far enlightened in their understandings, about the present proceedings of God in
the world, as they do in some competent measure, already discern the footsteps
of God, in these great present providence; and do discern also what his
designs are in these things.

Who yet are not fully persuaded, that the Saints suffering times are expired,
and that the time, times, and half a time, is come to a period; who possibly
may hereby be further enlightened, and satisfied, and further ^couraged to
rejoice in God, and in his pre^nt proceedings in the World.

And now first, if any shall slight these things, because hereby is discovered
any delusions, in which they are; or any folly, in the ways they have taken;
wherein they do any way support the enemies, and oppose the very real
servants of God; or for any other by-end whatsoever: let them know, that their
so doing, shall not trouble me at all, if it hurt not them.

And secondly, if any shall hereby receive any light, or any refreshment, let
them bless the Lord for it, from whom alone it came: for I am a very weak,
and unworthy instrument, and have not done this work by any strength of my
own, but have been often made sensible, that I could do no more herein,
(wherein any light, or truth could appear) of my self, then a pensill, or pen
can do, when no hand guides it: being daily made sensible of my own
insufficiency to do any thing, as of my self; that to use the Apostles
expression, and to speak it feelingly, (for I find it daily true) I must
profess, I am not sufficient to think a good thought, but my sufficiency is
of God, to whom be glory, and honor, and praise for evermore, Amen.

I have only one thing more, which I judge necessary to acquaint the reader
with, and that is this: In my former book, which I published in April, 1648, I
subscribed my name Carry, for that was then my name; for which reason I have
thought good, to subscribe the same name in the title page of this Book also;
that the reader may not be put to any doubt, by finding different names in the
Titles; (since I have in this Book, so often referred the Reader to that,) but
let the Reader know, That (having since changed my name) I am now known by the
name of,

Mary Rande.

THey that have any knowledge of my self, how worthless a worm I am; do also
know how unfit I am either to write Books, or to judge of others writings: yet
owing respect to this Author, I could not deny a word, being desired to read
and say something.

And this I must say (though not concurring in all things touching the personal
Which I eve^ accounted a harmless Error, if an Error.
reign, that this Author has these things commendable in the ensuing Treatise.

First, That she has taught her sex that there are more ways then one to
avoid idleness (the devils cushion) on which so many sit and sleep their last.
They that will not use the Distaff, may improve a Pen.

Secondly, A holy, modest, and painful spirit, runs through her endeavors;
which I desire may not be slighted by any, nor thrown by: for good wine may be
found in this Cluster: in this dress you shall neither see naked Breasts, black
Patches, nor long Trains; but an heart breathing after the coming of Christ,
and the comfort of Saints.

Thirdly, Scriptures clearly opened, and properly applied; yea, so well, that
you might easily think she plowed with another Heifer, were not the contrary
well known.

Upon the whole matter, I believe that it will be acceptable to all those that
desire to see Christ as he is; who will not be offended at this Treatise, or
rather the Spouses wish and longing, Make haste, my beloved, and be thou like a
young roe, or a heart, upon the mountains of Spices, Cant. 8. ult.

Two of this sex I have met with, very famous for more then their
mothertongue, and for that we call Learning, yet living. The one an unhappie
branch of that Tree which is cut off, and pulling up by the roots; of whom I
could say much, to whom I owe much. The other of deserved note in Vtrecht, the
glory of her sex in Holland. But this my Country-woman speaks the best
Language; yea, I will add: Other daughters have done virtuously, but thou
surmountest them, Prove. 31. 29.

More would I say; but my feeble thoughts or words will add but little to her
labors. Doubtless she had good help from above in her travel for this birth: I
will bequeath her Solomon's last words of his good houswife.

Favor is deceitful, and beauty is vain: but a woman that fears the Lord,
she shall be praised. Give her of the fruit of her hands, and let her own
works praise her in the gates, Prove. 31. 30, 31.

Hugh Peter's.

Touching this Treatise the Judgment of H. Jessey.
SEeing BLESSED is he that reads, and they that hear the words of THIS
PROPHECY, and that keep the the things that are written therein, Rev. 1. 3. it
must needs have a tendency to Blessedness, to help others in the understanding
thereof. The giver of any Talent or Talents this way, requires the improvement
thereof to our utmost for out Lords advantage, Matt. 25.

I have been frequently greatly refreshed in my spirits, for above twenty
years, with the consideration of the GLORIOUS STATE and PRIVILEGES of the NEW
JERUSALEM that shall be on earth, and the certainty thereof, foretold by the
Prophets and Apostles; whose prophecies to this purpose being cited in this
book, are therein, with much cleerness, familiar ly explained.

And for the application here of the little Horn, to the late King; and of the
time of the slaying of the Witnesses, to 1645; and the Jews conversion, to 1656
and Christ's kingdom's being in its complete glory, to 1701; the grounds here
laid down deserve to be well weighed, and time will make the Truth evident.

And whereas both here, and in the Authors former book on Rev. II. (called the
RESURRECTION of the WITNESSES) their slaying is said to be past, and they are
said to be risen again, henceforth no more to be slain, nor to be under Babels
power or yoke; to this I may say with Jeremiah in another case, Amen; though
yet I know some others, acquainted with much of the Lords mind, that do judge
that the slaying of the Witnesses is not yet past, but to come shortly; (some
of them judge before the year 1654.) to which I say,

First, If this latter judge meant shall prove to be the truth, it were best to
know the worst before it overtake us unawares. And

Secondly, I account that this worst (if it shall prove to be future) shall
prove but a short time of travel, [three days and a half space] of the woman
with child, that had for a long time been in much sorrow and pains; and then
being delivered, she rejoices, and forgets all her pangs and former
sorrows, Joh. 16.

Of these GREAT CHANGES in all the WORLD, now at hand; of the POURING out of
four VIALS; and of the slaying and rising of the Witnesses, and of the
conversion of the JEWS probably before 1658, and of the SCRIPTURES ORDER in
these proceedings, before the conversion of the Jews, and thence until the
THOUSAND years of Christ's REIGN begin, and of marvelous things therein and
afterward; I had made a Collection from the Book of the Revelation, and from
Daniel, and other Scriptures; which was appointed to be printed before my
Storehouse of cases of Conscience was printed, in 1650. but some reasons have
hitherunto moved me to forbear the publishing thereof: but those reasons appear
to me now an insufficient ground to forbear longer, having afresh considered
that pregnant Motive from Rev. 1. 3. before recited, and the sweetness of the
precious things to come, foretold herein, as well as therein, which should urge
us not to be wanting to help others, as far as in us is, to the sweet and
comfortable knowledge of the wonderful great things that our God is about to do
for his people shortly; as he himself says, Behold I come quickly, [or
speedily:] Amen. Even so COME LORD JESUS,

Says the soul of his servant, H. J.

Reader,
IT may so be, That thou art one of those, who are willing to follow the Lamb,
whither soever he goes; and rejoycest in spirit, that the King of Saints does
begin to be terrible to the Kings of the Earth. Now, if thou staggerest not
through unbelief, at those exceeding great and precious promises which are
recorded in the Scriptures of Truth, concerning the fifth kingdom; thou shall
in due time, behold, with a mixture of joy and wonder, those other grand
Mutations, and extraordinary Revolutions, which are even at the door, and ready
to break in upon the Princes and upon the People of the whole earth.

Indeed, many wise men after the flesh have been (and now are) much offended,
that a company of illiterate men, and silly women, should pretend to any skill
in dark prophecies, and to a foresight of future events, which the most learned
Rabbis, and the most knowing Politicians have not presumed to hope for. But
(after they who are thus offended, have perused those Scriptures mentioned in
the margint)' Psalm. 119. 98, 99. 100.
they shall do well to observe the fruits of that Faith and foresight which
dwelt in the hearts and in the minds of the old godly Nonconformists in Queen
Elizabeth's. and King James his days; there having been many hundreds of those
silly and illiterate ones (so called) of whom it may be said at this day, that
they were wiser then their enemies, wiser then their teachers, wiser then the
Ancients, ( Psa. 119. 98, 99, 100.) where may be seen the proper reason of this
their wisdom. For, are not those things come to pass, which they foresaw, and
foretold, concerning that fatal Catastrophe which has now befallen the
Prelates and their adherents? whereas the generality of the Ministers and
people of the Land, had very little acquaintance with the mind of God in those
particulars. And surely that eminent instance of the Teachings of the Spirit,
and that full assurance of Faith bestowed upon those Saints which like Caleb
and Joshua followed the Lord fully, may suggest such a thought as this, That
there may be now in this juncture of time, some neglected, despised reproached
Ones, both men and women, who clearly understand and perceive many precious
truths (concerning the golden Image, the fourth Beast, the seven Vials, the
seventh Trumpet, the New Jerusalem, the binding of Satan the pouring out of the
Spirit, the glorious advance of knowledge and Grace, the universal
Gospel-peace, the power and dominion of the Saints etc.) which not only the
world generally, but many of the Saints themselves look upon as well-composed
Fables, and as the Visions of their own hearts who are the teachers of them.

The ensuing Discourse, treating of some of those things (being a Gentlewomans
thoughts put into form and order by her self) was brought to me to peruse, with
this desire added, That (if I judged it meet) I would prefix a few words, to
signify my judgment concerning the usefulness thereof.

Two things there are which to me savor very well, and I believe will take the
hearts of diverse Christians. The one is the Collection and Collation of so many
of those precious promises which concern the times yet to come, and the
presenting them to the Readers view, (in words at length, and) not in figures,
as the manner of many is.

The other is, her vigilant care to insert here and there, as occasion is
offered, such necessary cautions as tend to the wiping off of those unjust
aspersions which Hierom and others would cast upon the Millenaries, as they are
called. For in the Book thou will find her pleading for the advance of
holiness, in the midst of all that happiness which is prepared for the Saints
in that thousand years.

As for her thoughts concerning the little Horn, thou will say (when thou
read) they are new and singular; therefore, be thou the more careful, and,
if thou can, serve the Saints with a more probable Exposition, and see the
Apology in the 45 and 46 pages.

Many are running too and fro, and knowledge is increasing, Dan. 12. 4. But
together therewith, the Lord be pleased, for the Lords sake, to advance the
power of godliness, zeal for the truth, and the delight of the Saints in
Communion with the Father and his Son Jesus Christ, and one with another. Do
thou, Reader, say Amen beleevingly, with

Thy servant for the Lords sake, CHRISTOPHER FEAKE.

Errata.
PAge 1. l. 5 dele another. p. 4. l. 14. for Monarchs, r. Monarchies. p. 5. l.
3. for Monarch, r. Monarchy. p. 72. l. 12. for a virgin, 1. O virgin. p. 75. l.
2, and 4. for Monarchs, r. Monarchies. ead. for Monarch, r. Monarchy. p. 160.
l. 11. for jot, r. iota. p. 161. l. 10. for wall, r. walk. p. 170. for of
Gospel, r. of the Gospel. p. 184. l. 6. dele that. p. 199. l. 16. for both
Jews, r. both of the Jews. p. 213. l. 3. for then to be their, r. then as to
their. p. 259. l. 7. for how shall Saints, r. how Saints shall. p. 282. l. 1.
for and will, r. and they will. ead. l. 21. for heart more, r. heart will more.
p. 294. l. 2. for take, r. execute. p. 287. l. 1. for external, r. eternal. p.
138. l. antepenult. for your, r. you.

IMPRIMATUR.

Joseph Caryl.

THE LITTLE HORNS DOOM and DOVVNFALL.
Dan. 7. 24, 25, 26, 27. And another, another shall rise after them which shall
be diverse from the first, and he shall subdue three Kings.

And he shall speak great words against the most high, and think to change
Times and Laws, and they shall be given into his hand, until a time, and
times, and the dividing of time.

But the Judgment shall fit, and they shall take away his Dominion, to
consume, and to destroy it unto the end.

And the Kingdom, and Dominion, and the greatness of the Kingdom under the
whole heaven, shall be given unto the people of the Saints of the most High,
whose Kingdom is an everlasting Kingdom, and all Dominions shall serve and
obey him.


THe Coherence of these verses with the former part of this Chapter being
observed, the meaning of them will the more clearly appear, which is briefly
thus.

The Prophet Daniel in the first year of Belshazzar had a Dream, and Visions,
wherein the all-disposer of all things was pleased to reveal unto him (not for
his sake only, but for ours also) many things which were to come to pass in a
very long time after: some of which things are not yet, but shall be fulfilled
in their season.

The sum of the Vision is this: The Prophet saw four great beasts rise one
after another, being diverse one from another; and the first was like a Lion,
the second like a Bear, the third like a Leopard, and the fourth beast was
such a Monster, as he compares it to no beast, being unlike any beast that
could be named; and its said to be exceeding dreadful, and terrible, having ten
horns, and among these horns there came up another little horn, before whom
three were plucked up, and in this horn were eyes like the eyes of a man, and a
mouth speaking great things, And at last the Prophet in his Vision saw a final
end of all these beasts, and all their Power, and Dominion taken from them, and
saw the Lord Jesus Christ (there styled, The Son of man) set up to be the only
Monarch of all the World.

The Prophet having seen this Vision: and it being dark, and mysterious to him,
he was troubled, and desired to know the truth of it, whereupon the
interpretation of the Vision was given to him, as it is at the 16 verse, and so
on. And it was declared to him, that the four great beasts, were four Kings
that should arise out of the earth; and when the Prophet desired more
particularly to know what the meaning of the fourth beast was, which was so
different from the rest, and so exceeding dreadful, and what was the meaning
of the ten Horns which were in his Head, and of the other Horn which came up,
before whom three fell. It was revealed to him that the fourth beast should be
the fourth Kingdom upon earth, which should be different from all Kingdoms,
and should devour the whole Earth, and should tread it down, and break it in
pieces; and that the ten Horns should be ten Kings which should arise out of
it, and that the other Horn which came up, before whom three fell, was another
King, which should arise after the ten Kings, which should be diverse from the
first, and should subdue three Kings, etc.

Now that this Prophecy has been accomplished, exactly, clearly and fully, in
the former part of it, viz. in the rising of the four Universal Monarchs,
which have acted their parts in the world, since the time that the Prophet
Daniel saw this Vision; The first being the Babylonian which was then in being.
The second the Persian which succeeded the Babylonian. The third the Grecian
which succeeded the Persian; And The fourth which was the worst, the most
dreadful, and terrible, and the last of the four, was the Roman which
succeeded the Grecian.


I say, that in these four Monarchs, this Prophecy has been in that part of
it fulfilled, is very clear, and acknowledged by all that acknowledge any
thing.

And moreover, in that since the breaking of the great power of the Roman
Monarchy, there has risen ten Kings out of it, which have been the Horns,
which the beast has made use of to push the Saints, those Kings being subject
to the Roman Beast, which was first Imperial, and afterward Papal, that Roman
Beast, whether Imperial, or Papal, having always had when least the number
of ten Kings subjected to it, Spain, France, England, Scotland, Ireland, and
Denmark, being a part of that number. In this also is that part of this
Prophecy fulfilled, which says, that the fourth Monarch should have ten
Horns, or ten Kings: and this is very plain and undeniable, and confessed by
all that have explained this Prophecy.

And thus having observed the Coherence, I shall by divine assistance, proceed
to explain the remaining part of this Prophecy, which is contained in these
four verses.

And another shall arise after them, and he shall be diverse from the first, and
he shall subdue three Kings.] Having observed how the former part of of this
Prophecy has been already clearly fulfilled, and that the ten Horns were ten
Kings, belonging to the Roman Monarch; and this part of this verse telling us
that another King should arise after the other ten Kings, which should be
diverse from the rest, and should subdue three Kings. And comparing this with
the eighth verse, to which this verse has reference, where Daniel says that
he considered the ten Horns, and behold there came up among them another
little Horn, before whom there were three of the first horns plucked up by the
roots (...) before whom three fell, as in the ^ verse: The result of all will
be this, that this King, mentioned in this verse, is the late King that reigned
over England, Scotland and Ireland, and that appears thus. The King mentioned
in this verse, is said to be among the ten horns, or Kings, or to be of them,
and have three horns, or Kings plucked up by the roots before him, ( ver. 8.)
or to have three of the ten Kings fall before he comes up; and this one to
succeed three, ( verse 20.)

Now this directly was the condition of the late King; he came up in the room
of three of the horns, and reigned over three of the Kingdoms That Kingdom may
be said to be, and is indeed subjected to the Roman Beast (the Pope,) when the
King or those in authority in the Kingdom gives liberty to Prelates, or to any
of the Clergymen (as they are called) to exercise any unwarrantable power over
the consciences of Saints; and to bind Saints to worship God in that way and
method which they presscribe, and no other way but so, (which God abhors, Esa.
29. 13. Matthew. 15. 9.) Exercising Lordship over the consciences of Saints: and
this is that for which Rome is called Babylon, because it proved in this
respect a house of bondage to ehe Saints. And thus England Scotland and
Ireland, were subjected to the Roman Beast, the Pope, until the late Kings
power was taken from him: and even so was England as well as the other
Kingdoms subjected to the Beast, even in Queen Elizabeth's days; for though
she was in many respects (...) virtuous Queen; yet herein she failed, in
suffering Bishops to Lord it over the consciences of Saints, and therein was
England one of the horns, even then as it has bin ever since, until of late
years.
subjected to the Roman Beast: and before him three Horns were plucked up by
the roots: For Elizabeth of England, and This was he that caused the
combustions in Ireland in Queen Elizabeth's time, and was wholly overcome at
that time.
Hugh Baron of Dungannon and Earl of Tir-Oen, whose predecessors claimed the
Kingdom of Ireland; and James of Scotland, were all three fallen: and the late
King was he that came in the room of these three, and entirely possessed the
Kingdoms of all three. So that this part of this Prophecy is exactly
fulfilled in that King, and not in any other of the Kings; nor in any other
person can these things be said to be so exactly fulfilled as in him. So that
if the Spirit of God here had no further described this little horn, it would
have been evident that this Prophecy had been fulfilled in this King; these
three Kingdoms being thus subjected to one King or Prince, that formerly were
governed by three; before whom three were plucked up, etc. But it is made more
apparent, that this Prophecy was fulfilled in him, by that further
description, which the Spirit of God in this Scripture gives, of the
dispositions, actions and end, or death of this King; which we have as it
follows.

Verse. 25. And he shall speak great words against the most High, and shall
wear out the Saints of the most High, etc.]

Our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, John 15. tells his Disciples, that whosoever
despised them, despised him, and whosoever despised him, despised him that sent
him: Whereby its clear, that that person that speaks great words against the
Saints of the most High, does therein speak great words against the most High.
That this King did speak great words against the Saints of the most High:
threatening the ruin and destruction of all Puritans, and Round heads as he
termed the saints of God, is so well known, as there needs nothing to be
further spoken to make it appear; nor need I mention the the persons which long
before the wars, which merely for their being servants of God, were
persecuted, imprisoned, fined, banished, and otherwise threatened: and as he
spoke great words against the most High in his saints; so he spoke great words
against the Laws and Ordinances of God, prohibiting of them, requiring godly
and faithful Ministers to refrain from the worshipping of God, from public
praying, and preaching of the Word of God, upon the first day of the Week:
Whereas many a poor soul might have been converted to, and confirmed in the
ways of God in those ordinances; but he constraind (as it were) the people of
the Kingdom to a profane and loose life, to dishonor God, by inviting and
requiring of them to practice profane and wicked sports upon that day, which
was appointed for a holy worshipping of God: Whereas many poor souls needed
rather to have been encouraged, and called upon to have more frequently
attended upon the Ordinances of God, for they perished for want of knowledge.
And as he thus spoke great words against the ordinances of the most High, so he
nourished and supported many wicked and abominable Priests, (when many holy and
faithful Ministers of Christ were rejected) who did most profanely abuse the
Scriptures, and despise the very spirit of God, and that publicly; of which
sort there were many among those Centuries of scandalous Ministers, that were
in the beginning of this Parliament sequestered for their delinquencies.

Thus in that this King spoke great words against the saints, and ordinances,
and spirit of God, and had pleasure in such as so did; he therein did as here
is said of him, speak great words against the most high.

And shall wear out the Saints of the most High.] Was it not long before the
sitting of this Parliament given out by this King, that he would not leave
until he had left no more Puritans in England, then there were Protestants in
Rome? and is it not generally known what means and ways were used to wear
them out, and to make them weary of living in the Kingdom? insomuch as many
godly and faithful people being weary of the impositions upon their
consciences, of those things which were evil, and the prohibitions of them,
from that which was good, (as their meetings to call upon the name of the Lord,
and to confer one with another of the things of God, and the repetitions of
Sermons,) did being thus wearied, leave their native Kingdom, though in all
outward respects to their great disadvantage; and those that remained how did
they groan under their burdens, and complain to heaven day and night, against
the insufferable and wearying proceedings of that unworthy King? Thus did he
wear out the Saints of the most high.

And shall think to change times and laws, and they shall be given into his
hand until, etc.] Therein also, he is more exactly characterized and
described: for it is well known, that he did think, and intend to change
times, and laws, he thought to have made sad times for all circumspect and
holy Christians, whom he called Puritans; and times of joy, and rejoicing for
all popish and profane persons. And he thought to have changed those Laws,
which had been by preceding Princes made for the privileges of the people, in
civil, and spiritual respects; and to have imposed laws destructive to the
peoples freedom and liberty, and to have ruled all by his own will, and made
the people slaves thereunto.

And they shall be given into his hand until, etc.] As he thought to change
Laws, and times, so he did; they were given into his hand for a while, he had
times and laws in his hand to change them at his pleasure, and he thought to
have done so always: And to this end, consulted with wicked Bishops, Popish
Lords, and profane Judges; and to this end also he raised Armies, first against
the Scots, and afterward against all well-affected people in Ireland, and also
in England: Thus this Horn that came up in the room of three, did in all things
answer this description of him, which is given in these 24 and 25 verses, and
he comes in no tittle short of it.

There is but one thing more spoken of him in this Chapter, whereby he is any
further described then as in these three verses; and that is in the 21 verse,
which I will here take in before I proceed to what follows: It is in these
words.

And I beheld and the same horn made war with the Saints, and prevailed
against them until, etc.] And herein also did this Horn or King, most exactly
act according to this which the Spirit of God by Daniel, so long since
predeclared of him: For he did make War against the Saints, and that in such a
manner, as no King, Prince, or Potentate ever yet did: For no History can
declare, nor in any age, or time can it be said, that ever armies were raised
more properly to fight against, and to make war with the Saints, as being
Saints, then these late Armies raised by him, and by authority from him have
been. Many combustions have been in the World, and many wars in this and
several other Kingdoms; but was ever the quarrel so exactly against Saints,
and saintship in any War as in this? For it was against Saints in a more
especial manner that this horn made War, and they under the notions of
Puritans, Roundheads, and Sectaries: So that where ever his Armies came, their
greatest hatred and malice was against such as they so termed. And in Ireland,
all such as had but the name of Protestants, were most cruelly and barbarously
dealt withal, that they might be sure to cut off all Puritans, as the most
real Saints were then termed: Thus he made War with the Saints.

And I beheld, and the same Horn made war with the Saints, and prevailed
against them until, etc.] As it is true of him that he made war with the
Saints; so it is true also that he prevailed against them for a time: so that
many faithful Saints, whose memories are still precious among those that
remain, lost their lives in that War, and he continued for a time, mightily
prevailing against them, both in Ireland, and also in England, and had once got
such strength, both in Garrisons, and in the Field, when Oxford, Bristol,
Exeter, and almost all considerable places in this Kingdom, both West, and
North were in his hand: I say, he had then got such strength, as it was near
to be, (if it were not) put to the vote in Parliament, whether all should be
delivered to his mercy or not; (whereby it appears that he had prevailed far.)
Thus in all the particulars already mentioned, was this Prophecy fulfilled in
him. But to proceed.

And they shall be given into his hand, until a time, and times, and the
dividing of time.] This expression of a time, and times, and the dividing of
time, is in it self a riddle hard to be understood; but it is the more easy
to unfold, because it is again used in the New Testament, in another Prophecy
of the same ten Horned Beast, that is here spoken of in this Chapter: for there
this expression, which is here in Daniel so hard to be understood, is more
plainly explained. It is in the twelfth Chapter of the Revelation, at the
fourteenth verse, where it is said, That the woman fled into the Wilderness
from the persecution of the Dragon, where she was nourished for a time, times,
and half a time; and in the sixth verse of that Chapter where there is another
mention of the woman's flying into the Wilderness, where she was to be fed or
nourished; it is said to be for a thousand two hundred, and sixty days. Now
what the meaning of these two expressions, which are used to express one and
the same time, is, does more clearly appear in the 11 and 13 Chapters of that
Prophecy. In the 11 Chapter at the 13 verse, it is said, That the holy City,
(that is the Church and people of God,) should be trodden under foot of the
Gentiles, forty and two months; and at the 3 verse, that the witnesses should
prophecy in sackcloath, a thousand two hundred and and sixty days; which is
one and the same period of time with that in the 12 Chapter: for a thousand two
hundred and sixty days, accounting 30 days to a month, is just 42 Months,
and forty two Months, accounting twelve months to the year, is three years
and a half, ^o that these three, 1 A time, times, and half a time. 2 Forty two
Months. 3 A thousand two hundred and sixty days;
These three are but various expressions of one and the same thing.

Now in the 13 Chapter, at the 5 verse, there is again mention made of this
one thousand two hundred and sixty days, for there it is said, that the beast
that had ten Horns, that was to persecute the Saints, was to continue a
thousand two hundred and sixty days, that is, so long as in the 11, and 12
Chapters the Church was said to be given up to the Gentiles, and to be
persecuted and trodden under foot. Now by this one thousand two hundred and
sixty days, is to be understood so many years, as it is usual in the
Prophets to put a day for a year. Ezekiel. 4. 56. Dan. 12. 11, 12.
So that when the one thousand two hundred and sixty years, in which the
Romish beast, (of whom that Prophecy speaks) was to continue prevailing
against the Saints, did expire, then the One thousand two hundred and sixty
years. Or, Forty two months, or Time, times, and half a time:
(For so it is variously expressed) of the Saints suffering persecution, did
expire also.

So that this then is the meaning of this expression in Daniel; And they shall
be given into his hand, until a time, and times, and the dividing of times.

That is, they shall be given into his hand, until the end of the one thousand
two hundred and sixty years, in which the Romish Beast was to be permitted to
persecute the Church or Saints of God, and to overcome them, and tread them
under foot.

So that, so long, this horn was to go on speaking great words against the
most High, and wearying out the Saints; and endeavoring to change times and
laws, and to have them given into his hand, even until that time was to be
expired.

Now that this one thousand two hundred and sixty years, in which the Romish
Beast was to be permitted to persecute the Church, and to tread it under foot,
is very near come to a period: As Brightman, and Cotton, and Archer, and others.
Is the concurrent judgment of all the learned, and godly men that have
written, and published any thing of it: and also the judgment of many private,
faithful, and precious Christians in these times.

But that it is not only very near, but is already fully expired, I have
already in another Treatise, upon another subject, See the Resurrection of the
witnesses, published in 1648.
clearly declared: there laying down my grounds for it, to which I shall now
only add this ground, which this Scripture in hand presents, which is this.

The Holy Ghost here declares, that this horn should continue, until a time,
times, and the dividing of time; so that when this Kings power of wearing out
the Saints, and changing times, and laws, and making war against the Saints is
taken away: then is the time, times, and half a time, or forty two months, or
one thousand two hundred and sixty days come to a period. For he was to
continue until then.

But this Kings power to wear out the Saints, and to change laws, and times,
and to make war against the Saints is taken away, Therefore the time, times,
and dividing of time, or one thousand two hundred and sixty years is come to a
period.

Object. But it may be objected, that though this Kings power be taken away;
yet the Pope, the Beast, remains, and the rest of the horns remain; how then is
the one thousand two hundred and sixty years of the continuance of the Beast
expired?

I answer, that this period of time is expired, is clear from the former
ground; For the Holy Ghost speaks expstesly, that this horn should continue
until a time, times, and the dividing of time: which is to be understood (as
is evident in the Revelation) of that period of time, of one thousand two
hundred and sixty years there mentioned: and in as much as it is said thut the
horn must continue until then; The meaning must needs be until that time is
expired, otherwise there can be no sense in it: For if the horn should
continue but until one thousand two hundred and twenty, or one thousand two
hundred and thirty, or any other term of time, that comes short of this one
thousand two hundred and sixty years; then it could not be said to continue,
and to have power given into his hand, to change laws and make War, etc.
Until a time, times, and the dividing of time, or one thousand two hundred and
sixty years, for one thousand two hundred and twenty, or thirty, is not one
thousand two hundred and sixty.

But since it is said that the horn should have power to change laws, and make
War, etc. until one thousand two hundred and sixty years, or a time, times,
and the dividing of time; it must necessarily follow, that when that power was
taken from the horn, that then the one thousand two hundred and sixty years, or
time, times, and dividing of times, was come to an end.

But more particularly, to answer the objection: Whereas it was objected that
the Beast, and some of his horns do still remain undestroyed, and therefore it
is questioned how the one thousand two hundred and sixty years can be to be
said to come to a period?

I answer that it may very well be, that the one thousand two hundred and
sixty years are expired, though the Beast and some of his horns do yet
remain; For the Holy Ghost says not that the continuance of the Beast should
be but forty two months, or one thousand two hundred and sixty years; but
says this, that the Beast should no longer make War against the Saints, so as
to overcome them, and should no longer tread the holy City under foot; for so
the Text runs, Rev. 11. 2. And the holy City shall they tread under foot forty
and two months; and Rev. 13. 5. Where (speaking of the Beast) the Holy Ghost
says thus of him: And there was given to him a mouth speaking great things,
and blasphemies, and power was given to him to make war forty and two months,
even to make war with the Saints, and to overcome them, ver. 7.

So that the forty and two months are then expired, when the holy City can be
no no longer said to be trodden under foot; and when the Beast does no longer
overcome, in his making War with the Saints; but they overcome him, as he has
overcome them.

And now if it do appear that it is already so come to pass, that God has
lifted up the heads of his people, and that they are no longer And this no man
can or durst deny, but the man that wilfully shuts his eyes against the truth
of it.
trodden under-foot, nor overcome by the Beast nor his adherents, but that they
overcome the Beast, in all those that defend his quarrel. THEN CERTAINLY,
these forty and two months are already expired, although the Beast and some
of the horns are not yet fully overcome.

But now it does appear, and is evident to the eyes of all the Christians all
the world over, who have had their eyes upon the late wonderful and strange
passages of providence in England, that God has lifted up the heads of his
Saints, and his Church, those whom the beast, and his adherents the Popish, and
profane party in England, Scotland, and Ireland most opposed, and hated, even
such as were most faithful, and most circumspect in their way, and who most
desired to worship God in his Ordinances in their purity, such as they termed
Roundheads, Puritans, Independents, Presbyterians, Anabaptists, Sectaries,
Precisians, and what not? These the Pope made war against, and thought to have
always trodden under foot; But God has owned them, and heard their prayers,
and delivered them from the persecution of the Beast, and given to them power
to overcome and bring down the Beast, so that for this six years time, they
have never been overcome in any battle, but ever since, they have wonderfully
overcome the beast, and his adherents, both in England, Scotland, and Ireland,
to the admiration of all that hear of it: And this they have done, whither
their outward strength were little or much, and ever since have they enjoyed
freedom, and liberty to worship God, according to the rules of the Gospel
without opposition, or molestation, whereby it is (I say) evident, that that
limited time, even that forty two months of the Saints suffering persecution,
and being trodden under foot is expired; although the beast and some of the
other Horns do yet remain; so that henceforth the Saints shall be
overcommers, until great Babylon be ruined. So much for answer to that
Objection, and for the Exposition of the 24 and 25 verses.

Only here remember, that the only Argument which we have in this place to
prove that the 1260 years of the Saints suffering persecution under the beast
(which is also expressed by a time, times, and dividing of time) is now expired,
is this: Because the little Horn is destroyed, which the Spirit of God in this
Prophecy said should continue until then. And that now we see it made good
that the Saints bow down their backs to the beast no longer, but are enlarged,
and delivered, and begin to reward her as she has done unto them. I proceed.

Verse 26. But the Judgment shall sit, and they shall take away his Dominion,
to consume, and to destroy it unto the end.

There being in the preceding verses a declaration of the horrible things which
this Horn should do against the Saints, as to change Times and Laws, and to
wear out the Saints, and to make war against them: In this verse we have a
comforting and refreshing word for those wearied, and persecuted ones, that
were so greatly afflicted, and that is brought in with this word, BUT, a word
usual in all cases, as when any thing is bad, or sad, its usually declared to
be so and so, BUT, we use to say, this or that mitigates it, or this or that is
a comfort against it: So here, God having appointed a time for his people to
suffer in, tells them, that so and so it shall be, that this little Horn shall
make war against them, etc. But for their comfort against that affliction, he
tells them that the judgment shall sit, and shall take away his Dominion, to
consume and to destroy it unto the end.

That which is first to be done in the exposition of this verse, is to explain
what is meant by the sitting of the judgment, which both with plainness and
brevity I shall endeavor to do.

To this end, I shall compare all the passages in this Chapter which have
relation to it, together with this verse: lest being not compared with each
other they be mistaken.

The first is in the 9. 10, 11. verses of this Chapter, where Daniel speaking
briefly of this Vision, and the manner how he saw it; before the more clear
interpretation was given to him, he speaks of this Judgment thus: That the
Ancient of days came, whose garment was white as snow etc. and the judgment
was set; And further he says, that the Ancient of days being come, and the
Judgment being set, that then because of the voice of the great words which
the Horn spoke the beast was slain, and his body destroyed, etc.

Again, in the 21, 22. verses, where Daniel desires further to know the
meaning of what he saw before, he speaks thus of it, I beheld, and the same
Horn made war with the Saints, and prevailed against them until the Ancient
of days came, and judgment was given unto the Saints of the most High, and
the time came that the Saints possessed the Kingdom.

And in the 26 verse after it had been said that the Horn should do so and so,
as in the two former verses, its here said, that the judgment should sit, and
should take away his Dominion, to consume, and to destroy it unto the end.

Now these passages being compared together, the result of them all will be
clearly thus.

First, That because this little Horn should speak great words against the
most High, and think to change Times, and Laws, and wear out the Saints of the
most High, and make war against them, that therefore the most high should
appear for to own and deliver his own people.

And secondly, that a certain number of Saints should be convened together,
and have a spirit of Judgment by the most High given unto them, and power and
authority whereby they should take away the Dominion of this Horn, to consume,
and to destroy it unto the end.

This in brief is the sense of these verses, which I shall more fully
illustrate thus.

I say first that because this little horn should speak great words, etc.
That therefore the most high should appear for to own, and deliver his own
people. Now by this appearing of the most high is meant, First his appearing in
Secondly his appearing for
his people.

First I say that by the appearing, or coming of the most High, spoken of in
this Chapter, is meant his appearing in, and among his people, and this shall
by and by be made evident: for though at the first view of the 9, 10, 11.
verses, it might seem to be a description of that visible, and glorious
appearance of the most high at the great day of Judgment: For thus it runs, I
beheld till the Thrones were cast down, and the Ancient of days did sit, whose
garment was white as snow, and the hair of his head like the pure wool, his
Throne like the fiery flame, and (...) wheels as burning fire, a fiery stream
issued and came forth from before him, thousand thousands ministered unto him,
and ten thousand times ten thousand stood before him: the Judgment was set,
and the books were opened. I beheld then because of the voice of the great
words which the horn spoke; I beheld even till the Beast was slain, and his
body destroyed, and given to the burning flame: as concerning the rest of the
Beasts, they had their Dominion taken away, yet their lives were prolonged for
a season, and time. I say though at the first view of these words, they seem to
be a description of the last and great day of Judgment, mentioned Rev. 20. 11,
12, 13, 14, 15. Yet in observing the last of these verses, ( viz. ver. 12) it
will clearly appear, that this is not, nor cannot be the meaning of the Spirit
of God in this place, for there it is said, that though by this appearance of
God, the Beast or little Horn was slain, and his body destroyed, because of
the voice of the great words which the little Horn spoke; that yet, the rest
of the Beasts (or of the horns) had their lives prolonged for a little season:
Which could not have been, if that had been the general day of Judgment; and
this is undeniable.

But now that this glorious appearance of the most High, (in garments as white
as snow, and hair of his head as pure That is in pure and unspotted
righteousness.
Wool, upon a Throne like the fiery flame, and wheels as burning fire, with a
That is impartial and zealous justice.
fiery stream issuing before him, and thousand thousands ministering unto him,
etc.) is his appearing in and among his Saints, is very clear, by observing
these passages; ver. 10. its said, the Judgment was set, and the Books were
opened; and ver. 11. that the Beast because of the voice of his great words,
was adjudged to be slain, and was slain. Now the 22 verse explaines the
meaning of the judgment here spoken of; and says expressly, that Judgment was
given to the Saints of the most high: So that this appearing of the most high,
is his appearing in, and among his people; in giving a spirit of judgment, and
righteousness unto them, whereby they shall act so purely, and righteously,
and withal so justly, and impartially; as that those actions of theirs in
themselves, shall be as white as snow, as pure wool; and withal to the
enemies of Christ, as fiery flames, and burning fire. This is the appearance of
God in his people; so that when the judgment was set, and the books were
opened, that is, all the horrid cruelties, and cruel cursed practices of the
Beast were declared; that then, not unjustly or without just cause, but (says
the Spirit of God) because of the voice of the great words which the horn
spoke, the Beast was slain, and his body destroyed. Thus God appears in his
Saints, Judgment was given to the Saints of the most high, and the Judgment
shall sit, and they (that is, a company of Saints) they shall take away his
Dominion, to consume and destroy it unto the end. So that, God giving judgment
to his saints, he brings to pass the great designs he has in the world by
them, as his instruments: so that he does it, and they do it; and they must do
it, and are always ready, and shall be so: For he has thousand thousands
ministering unto him; and ten thousand times ten thousand standing before him,
ready to execute his will, and do his pleasure.

But secondly, as by this appearance of God is to be understood his appearance
in his people; so it is also to be understood of his appearing for his people,
viz. in manifesting, evidently manifesting his power, and wisdom, and
faithfulness, in delivering of them from the tyranny, fury, and cruelty of
their oppressors, and owning of them for his own people: So that though the
Beast seemed to be, and was very potent, and very great, and spoke great words,
and thought not only to wear out, but utterly to root out the Saints, in his
making War against them: Yet God so appears for their help, and their
deliverance, as he gives them to overcome him, and his accomplices, that thought
to overcome them: And in this work he has thousand thousands ministering unto
him, and ten thousand times ten thousand standing before him: he has all his
Saints, all men else, and all his holy Angels at his beck, to execute his will,
and do his pleasure; And as once the stars in their courses fought against
Sisera; so God in doing this great work for his Saints deliverance, and making
way for the setting up of the Kingdom of his beloved Son, has multitudes,
multitudes, both of Celestial, and terrestiall creatures to attend him. And
certainly such great things could never have been done, if the Ancient of days
had not most gloriously, and wonderfully appeared, for the help and support of
his people. How could they which are so few in number, and in the eyes of the
world despised, and despicable creatures, have carried on that work so
effectually, as to have cut off the late King; though it was verily believed,
and it is very probable, there was at that very time, twenty to one in this
Nation of England, that were against it; had not the Lord assisted them with
thousands of Angels, and evidently manifested himself to be with them?

Thus it is evident, that by the appearing of the Ancient of days, mentioned
in this Chapter, is meant his appearing in his people, in that spirit of
judgment, and justice that he gives unto them; and his appearing for his
people, to own and defend, and deliver them; and to lay their enemies in the
dust, while he raises them up, and makes them sit in high places.

Secondly, whereas I said that this position was likewise the sense of this
verse, together with those other verses which I compared with it; viz. That a
certain number of Saints should be convened together, and have a spirit of
judgment given unto them by the most High; together with power and authority,
whereby they should take away the dominion of the little horn, to consume and
to destroy it unto the end.

I shall illustrate that, thus:

In the 10 verse its said, that thousands thousands ministered unto the Ancient
of days, and ten thousand times ten thousand stood before him, the judgment
was set, and the books were opened: and because of the voice of the great
words which the Horn spoke the Beast was slain. Here it is evident that the
beast or horn was slain by some that did sit in judgment, before whom the
books of his evil deeds were opened, because of which his evil deeds and
sayings, he was adjudged to be slain. And at the 22 verse it is plainly
declared who they were that did sit in judgment: That they were not Angels,
but Saints; the Saints of the most High: for there its said, that the horn
made war with the Saints, and prevailed against them until the Ancient of
days came, and judgment was given to the Saints of the most high, and then
was his power taken off, for then the time came that the Saints possessed the
Kingdom. And that those Saints that have judgment given to them, and that are
said to sit in judgment; that they are the instruments by whom the beast was
to be judged, and slain, is further clear in this 26 verse, where (it having
been declared in the former verse, how evilly the horn should deal with the
Saints) its said, But the judgment shall sit, and THEY shall take away his
Dominion, to, consume, and to destroy it unto the end.

Thus it is also evidently the sense of these verses compared together, that by
the judgment sitting is meant, a certain number of Saints, that by the
wisdom, providence, and power of the most High, were convened together, and
invested with power and authority, and a Spirit of Judgment for this end, to
judge this little Horn, and do justice upon him, and to take away his
Dominion, to consume, and to destroy it unto the end.

And this need not seem strange, that the Saints should thus sit in judgment,
and do such things as these, for do ye not know, says the Apostle, 1 Cor. 6.
2. that the Saints shall judge the World? And (verse 3.) Know ye not (says he)
that we shall judge Angels? This being a known truth, it is no wonder among
those that know truth, that God should put such power and authority, and such a
spirit of judgment upon Saints, whereby they should be enabled to do these
things.

And to this purpose that passage of the Psalmist is also very considerable,
Psa. 149. 4, 5 6, 7, 8. The Lord takes pleasure in his people, he will
beautify the meek with salvation. Let the Saints be joyful in glory, let them
sing aloud upon their beds: Let the high praises of God be in their mouths, and
a twoedged sword in their hands, to execute vengeance upon the heathen, and
punishment upon the people, to bind their Kings with chains, and their Nobles
with fetters of Iron, to execute upon them the judgment written, this honor
have all his Saints; praise ye the Lord.

Now I say, since it is certain that the Saints shall one day judge not only
the world, but the wicked Angels, the Devils also, and it being most certain
that this Prophecy of the Psalmist, wherein he speaks of a time when God will
beautify the meek of the earth with salvation, and put his high praises in
their mouths, and a two edged sword into their hands to execute vengeance upon
the heathen, and punishment upon the people, to bind their Kings and Nobles in
Chains and Fetters of Iron, and to execute upon them the judgment written:
Mark it, the judgment written; these things being so, it is no wonder that
this written judgment should be thus executed upon this horn or King.

Thus it is clear that a company of Saints convened together by the wise
providence of the most high, and invested with power and authority, and a
spirit of judgment, were to do this work upon the horn. And what particularly
they are, is by providence now made very conspicuous, (the things that are here
spoken of, being now in a great measure accomplished: for all prophesies are
best understood in the fulfilling of them,) Namely, that they are those
precious and gracious ones, that by the wise and gracious disposal of the most
high have been called to sit in Parliament, and the high Court of Justice which
they erected, who have had a spirit of wisdom, of judgment, and faithfulness
put upon them, whereby they have acted faithfully and zealously for the glory
of God, and the peace and welfare of all their brethren, I say, it is the
Parliament, and those employed by their Authority, who have hazarded all that
was dear unto them, rather than to suffer the free people of this Kingdom,
and amongst them the Saints and people of God, to be betrayed or given up to
the power of those that would have ruled tyranically and cruelly over them.

But here let me not be understood, as though I hereby asserted, that every
individual person, that has been, or is in Parliament, is a Saint, because I
say, that by the judgment sitting, here spoken of, is meant a company of
Saints, that by the wisdom and goodness of the most high were convened
together, and have a spirit of judgment given to them: and that the Parliament
are this company of Saints, who have had this spirit of Judgment, and have
acted faithfully, etc. But this I affirm, that those Saints that have been,
and are in Parliament, and have been, and are employed in counsels, and
otherwise by their Authority, are the judgment here spoken of. Now that there
have been, and are among these a choice and precious company of Gods dear
Saints, there is none that truly knows what it is to be a Saint, will or can
deny. And these are they that chiefly and principally have carried on these
great and glorious designs that have been so acceptable to God and to his
Saints, (though it may be they have been many times, if not always, less in
number than those others that have been among them, that have not been real
Saints) and it is they to whom God has afforded his presence in their counsels
and undertakings, and they whom God has blessed, and whom none can curse, and
the rest have fared the better for their sakes, they sitting in Parliament held
all together from being broken in pieces, even from the beginning of their
sitting: and admirable is that goodness and wisdom of God, that knew what his
own determinations concerning them were, that so brought it to pass, as to
cause the late King, (so contrary to his own intentions, and his own ends and
purposes) to pass an act for the continuation of this Parliament; so as though
he would, yet he had not that power which once he had to dissolve this
Parliament as he had done all others at his own pleasure. But this Parliament
must not, this Parliament could not possibly be dissolved by him: for God had
reserved this Parliament for further work.

Now it was not possible for the adverse party by all their struglings to
dissolve it, for the judgment must sit.

But the judgment shall sit, and they shall take away his Dominion, to
consume, and to destroy it unto the end. In these words, (having seen what is
meant by the Judgment) here is now to be declared what the work was which they
had to do, and the manner in which it was to be done,

The work which they had to do is expressed in these words: And they shall take
away his Dominion. And the manner of doing it, in these words: To consume, and
to destroy it unto the end.

Their work then was to take away the Dominion of that little Horn that spoke
great words against the most high, and made war against the Saints: that
whereas he had had Dominion, and great power, and authority, whereby he
persecuted, and grieved, and afflicted the Saints, and endeavored to wear
them out. This Judgment being set, this Parliament being assembled, they were
to take away his Dominion, even his authority, and power of ruling, and
governing according to his own will: yea all his strength of Arms, and
Ammunition: of Forts, and Castles, and places of strength, his Crown, Throne,
and seat of Honor; all and whatsoever appertains to his Dominion: That's the
work they were to do.

Now the manner in which they were to do it, was to consume and to destroy it
unto the end. I say to consume it, it was not to be done by them in a short
time, not at an instant; but they were to be long in doing of it, and to do
it by degrees; for so the word consume implies: for when a thing is said to
consume, that thing is wasted away by degrees, and in continuance of time it
comes to nothing: So this dominion, and greatness, and power, and authority,
and strength, which this horn had, was to consume away by little and little,
and in the end wholly to be destroyed. And thus exactly it came to pass.

When the Parliament first began to oppose the late King, he had great power,
and strength, and authority, whereby he made war, and prevailed for a while;
but at last by degrees, and as it were insensibly, they prevailed against him,
and began to take away his strength, and power and greatness from him: so that
by degrees, he lost City after City, and Town after Town, and County after
County, until he came to have dominion over none at all; but his dominion was
wholly taken away, and consumed and destroyed unto the end. And as here his
dominion was said to be consumed, and destroyed: so in the 11 verse the beast,
or the horn, or King himself, was said to be slain, and his body destroyed:
so it came to pass that his blood was also justly required at his hands,
having caused so much innocent blood to be shed, both of old men, young men
and babes in France, England, Scotland, and Ireland. God suffered not such a
man to die in his bed, but as he was a man of blood, so gave he him blood to
drink. For as the Parliament, God having given him up into their hands, took
away his dominion; so they also did justice upon his person; and executed upon
him THE JUDGMENT WRITTEN. For so it was written, verse 11; that he should be
slain, and his body destroyed and given to the burning flame of justice.

And thus this part of this prophecy being thus opened and explained: It is
made evident that the late King of these three Nations, that is by some called
the Nonesuch Charles, for his desperate impiety and hypocrisy, was long ago
Prophesied of as well as (he that was by him styled) his holy Father the Pope;
to whom he was as firm a son, as any King ever was; though he played the
greatest hypocrite in professing the contrary, as ever any King did.

I say it is evident, that the late King was long ago prophesied of, as well as
the Pope; and that as the Pope was fore-prophesied of, as being the beast that
should be desperately wicked and maliciously cruel against the Saints. So is
this King fore prophesied of, as being of the ten horns of the beast, and more
stout then his fellows: as exceeding them for wretched wicked dealing with the
Saints and cruelty to them.

Whereby the proceedings of the Parliament with and against him, is cleared
from having the lest stain or spot of injustice or unrighteousness in it,
which some would fasten upon them.

For it is here evident, that as the afflicted condition of the Church for
twelve hundred years and more under the Pope, was long ago prophesied of; so
this Parliament which were to be the instruments of the Churches deliverance in
their measure, were also long ago prophesied of: In which prophecy, it was so
long ago declared, that to them judgment should be given, and that they should
do justice upon that wicked King; take away his Dominion, and destroy him unto
the end: And what the issue of all this will be, is discovered in the following
verse; but of that in its place.

But now it may be some may slight this interpretation, saying that it is not
to be regarded; seeing several have given several Interpretations of
Scriptures, and most of them have been besides the truth; and so may this will
they say,

But to those, I have but this to say; first, that upon this account they may
continually slight all that shall be said in opening the Scriptures, though
it be never so consonant unto the Truth and mind of the Spirit of God, the
Author of the Scriptures: And so God (with such slight spirits) will not have
the glory of his pre-decreeing of the things he will have to come to pass many
hundred years after; and of his exact bringing things to pass according to
the counsels of his own will so many hundred years before resolved upon.

And secondly, they in so doing, do give less honor to God then the heathens
did to their Devilish Oracles; which would pretend to foreshew things to come:
and less then they do to Astronomers, who from the stars do pretend to
foretell things: whereas God oftentimes frustrateth the tokens of those liars,
and makes those diviners mad, ( Isa. 44. 25.) and they cannot foreshew any
thing infallibly; (though possibly from the stars, they may give some uncertain
hints of things) but it is that which is proper to God alone, infallibly to
foretell things to come. (As appears, Isa, 48. 3, 4, 5. and Isa, 46. 9, 10.)
and which he does from time to time do by his servants the Prophets; and
therefore what they have declared from God, has been done for our observation;
Romans 15. 4 Psa. 107. 43. Deuteronomy. 29. 29. Wherein we may see that what God has
done from age to age; has all along bin the fulfilling of his word, of which
we are to give him the glory.

And thirdly, though some Interpreters have failed of truth, which it may be
has been the hardening of the hearts of some: yet this will not be a
sufficient discharge for any from their duty of observing these things; that
when the truth appears, God may have the glory.

But fourthly, it is true things have often been ancertainely hit at by some
men, before they came to pass: but these things are come to pass, and all
prophecies are best understood, when they are fulfilled, or near to be
fulfilled: not but that oftentimes prophecies have been clearly understood,
long beforehand by many precious Saints.

But fifthly, this is certain, that when the very mind of God in Prophecies
is unerringly laid open, being clearly and convincingly discovered to his
Saints and servants, that desire to pry into, and observe these things
according to their duty; that even then some will not receive them: neither
the wise of the world, nor the wicked of the world; as appears, Mat. 11 25.
and Dan. 12. 10. But though the worldly-wise do not, yet they that have wisdom
from above, shall have these things revealed to them, and shall understand
them, as appears in the same Scriptures; for when truth is revealed, the
children of truth, having one and the same spirit, shall see it with the same
eye, and rejoice with the same joy, in seeing of it; My Sheep know my voice.
John 10. 27. They know that it is my voice, and not another voice: and indeed
it is chiefly for their sakes, who know his voice, who have his spirit, that
all truths are revealed.

But all these are general answers, but for this particular Interpretation, I
have only this to say.

That I do not pretend to be any more exempted from uncertainty, then any other
of the dear servants of God have been, to whom God has very often revealed
his secrets; though sometimes, some things of their own suppositions have
slipped from them: and therefore I shall not press any to believe these things,
because I have said them, unless they do therein hear the voice of Christ and
his spirit setting them home upon them. For this I know, that truth is
powerful enough to to prevail with Saints; and for the truth of these things
of which I have spoken, or of whatever is laid down in the following discourse,
I leave them to the great God, who has put me upon the publishing of them, to
make them prevalent with as many as he intends good unto by them.

And further, this I must profess, that it has not been a few days only, or
since the last Kings death only, that I have thus been made to understand this
Scripture; But I thus understood it, for above nine years ago; and to this the
Lord is witness, and several godly people, whom I have made acquainted with
it, at several times: so that when the late King was in his height, I declared
my confidence, that the Parliament should prevail over him, and at last
destroy him. But seeing as I have said, that all Prophesies are best understood
in the fulfilling of them; the truth of these things will therefore doubtless
now be the more prevailing with Saints.

But one word more, and that is this; That though it is true, that usually
Saints know the voice of Christ, and are able to say certainly, this is (or
this is not) the voice of Christ. I say, though it be thus usually with them,
yet there are some cases, in which they are uncertain; and some truths about
which they can neither say, that it is truth, or that it is not truth. And now
if this be the case of any, about these things I have spoken of; I have only
this to say to them, that though they cannot receive them presently, yet let
them beware how they slight them: and this I must tell them, that if the Lord
had not all along hitherto, in the works of his providence (which in many
particulars were very observable) evidenced the truth hereof; and if he do
not demonstrate it more and more, it might be the more tolerable for them
thus to slight it: but considering how wonderfully from day to day, this is
cleared, and will be cleared. Oh let them beware, how they wilfully shut their
eyes against the light of it, for any private interest whatsoever; lest in
shutting their eyes against light, they be shut up in Babylonian darkness, and
consequently, partake with Babylon, both in her sins and in her plagues.

And now I should here proceed to the 27 verse, but because it treats of the
glorious Kingdom which Jesus Christ shall have in the world; and that being a
subject, which my spirit is drawn out to treat more largely and amply of it,
then any yet have done, I shall therefore handle it in an entire book by it
self, closing up this discourse, with those expressions of the Psalmist, Psalm.
92. 5, 6, 7. O Lord how great are thy works! thy thoughts are very deep. A
brutish man knows not, neither does a fool understand this; when the wicked
spring as the grass, and when all the workers of iniquity do flourish: It is
that they may be destroyed for ever; but thou Lord art most high for evermore.

A new AND MORE EXACT MAP OR, DESCRIPTION OF New Ierusalems GLORY when Jesus
Christ and his Saints with him shall reign on earth a Thousand years, and
possess all Kingdoms. WHEREIN Is discovered the glorious estate into which the
Church shall be then put both in respect of external and internal glory, and
the time when. And also, What has been done these eight years last past, and
what is now a doing, and what shall be done within a few years now following in
order to this great work. Wherein also That great Question, whether it be
lawful for Saints to make use of the material Sword in the ruining of the
enemies of Christ, and whether it be the mind of Christ to have it so, is at
large debated and resolved in the Affirmative from clear Scriptures, and all
others answered.

By M. Carry a servant of Jesus Christ.

Rev. 22 6, 7. And he said unto me, These sayings are faithful and true, and
the Lord God of the holy Prophets sent his Angel to show unto his Servants the
thing which must shortly be done. Behold, I come quickly.

LONDON, Printed by W. H. and are to be sold at the sign of the Black
spread-Eagle at the West end of Paul's. 1651.

A description of new Jerusalems GLORY, when Jesus Christ and his Saints with
him shall reign on earth a thousand years and possess all Kingdoms.
Dan. 7. 27. And the Kingdom, and Dominion, and the greatness of the Kingdom
under the whole heaven, shall be given unto the people of the Saints of the
most high; whose Kingdom is an everlasting Kingdom, and all Dominions shall
serve and obey him.


THe Spirit of God in the former verses, having declared the rise, actions, and
end of the little Horn that was to afflict the Saints: and showing how that at
last the Saints should overcome him, Says expressly, They shall take away his
Dominion, to consume, and to destroy it unto the end; and then says in this
verse, that the Kingdom, and Dominion, and the greatness of the Kingdom under
the whole heaven shall be given to the people of the Saints of the most high,
etc.

The assertion which is laid down in these words is plain and clear, and
needs no explanation at all, which is this.

That not only this Kingdom of England, and some few others, but all the
Kingdoms and Dominions in the whole world, shall in a more peculiar and more
eminent manner than yet they have been, be subjected to the Lord Jesus Christ,
and by him given to his Saints to possess. This same truth likewise is
positively asserted in the 13, 14, 18, 21, and 22 verses of this Chapter; in
the 13 and 14 verses, where the Vision it self, of which these verses are an
interpretation, is declared; there it is thus expressed, I saw in the night
vision, and behold one like the Son of man came with the clouds of heaven, and
came to the Ancient of days: and they brought him near before him, and there
was given him Dominion, and glory, and a Kingdom, that all People, Nations, and
Languages should serve him; his Dominion is an everlasting Dominion, which
shall not pass away, and his Kingdom that which shall not be destroyed.

So that this is clearly asserted here also, that the Dominion, not only of
some, but of all people, Nations, and Languages should be given to the Lord
Jesus Christ, who is here expressed by this appellation, The Son of man, by which
he is often expressed in the New Testament: and this is to be done after the
Beast is destroyed, as is here expressed.

And what is in these verses said to be given to the Lord Jesus Christ is in
the 18, 20, 21, and 27, verses, said to be given to his Saints: for in the 18
verse it is said, that the Saints of the most high should take the Kingdom,
and possess the Kingdom for ever, even for ever and ever, and in the 21, 22,
verses, that the Horn prevailed against the Saints, until the Ancient of
days came, and Judgment was given to the Saints of the most high, and (the
several beasts having had the Kingdoms of the world for their appointed
times) the time (then) came, that the Saints possessed the Kingdom, and in
this 27 ver. that the Kingdom, and Dominion, and the greatness of the Kingdom
under the whole heaven should be given unto the people of the Saints of the
most High.

Thus what was in the 18 verse said to be given to the Lord Jesus, there called
the Son of man, is in these several verses said to be given to his Saints. The
truth is, that which is given to the head, is given to the members, that which
is given to the Husband, the wife must partake of: for there is nothing that he
possesses, which she has not a right unto. And the Saints of Christ are the
members of Christ, they are the Lambs wife: and having given himself unto
them, he will not withold any thing that is his from them; but when all the
Kingdoms, and Dominions under the whole heaven are given to him, they shall
possess them with him.

Thus is this assertion, that is laid down in this verse, confirmed in
several other passages in this very Chapter, namely,

That all Kingdoms, all the Nations, and Languages, and People under the whole
heaven, shall be in a more peculiar, and a more eminent manner than yet they
have been, be subjected to the Lord Jesus, and by him be given to his Saints to
possess. And as it is clear here, so there are very many other Scriptures
wherein it is as clearly asserted, several of which Scriptures I shall here
produce, that out of the mouth of many witnesses it may be confirmed against
all contradictions, which I shall the rather do, because this Doctrine is so
much despised by profane men, who jeering at Saints, say, these are the meek
that must inherit the earth.

But first let me premise;

That though it be unquestionably true, that the riches of this world, which
has been hitherto equally dispensed alike to all, shall in a very short time
be abundantly given to the Saints of the most High: as Canaans Land was to
Israel of old, which was but a shadow of what shall come to pass in the latter
days: that yet,

First, they that are indeed the Saints of the most High, and that walk most
with God will be the least seekers of this worlds wealth; and

Secondly, They that seek it least, and least desire it, shall have more than
they that seek it eagerly, and also shall enjoy it most comfortably, and with
greatest joy in God.

Thirdly, that those saints that God will most honor (though they shall have
abundance of the world, yet they) shall not set their hearts upon it; but shall
prefer the least degree of the flowings of the spirit of God (which they shall
in these days abundantly have) above all the treasures of the whole world. No:
their hearts shall not Zach. be set upon the world: but their 10. 7. hearts
shall rejoice in the Lord.

Fourthly, that the advanced saints of God, shall not in these days seek the
wealth of the Nations, but the Nations themselves, (as Paul expresses himself,
2 Cor. 11. 14. we seek not yours, but you;) that is, not their wealth, but
their weal; not their treasure, but their safety; not their riches but their
happiness; not their outward things, but the salvation of their souls: and
they that seek not these things, to wit, the public weal, and safety, and
happiness, and salvation of all; but that do covet to treasure up most riches
for themselves, and to poll, and rob, and cheat the people, to inhance their
own estates, and make themselves great in the world, and their children gay
and splendid amongst men; as do Kings, Princes, and evil Governors, (not to
mention some sorts of Committee Men) these shall become the basest, and the
vilest among men; and their children be despised, and contemned for their
sakes: especially if they walk in their steps.

Fifthly and lastly, it is heaven and not the earth; It is the kingdom of God,
and Math. his righteousness that Saints will 6. 33. seek after: and these
things shall be added unto them.

And now having thus premised, I shall come to mention those Scriptures which
do so clearly demonstrate that which is here asserted; and the truth is, the
Scripture is so pregnant, and so full of such passages, as it would be very
tedious to mention them all; and doubtless many saints are very well
acquainted with them; but for satisfaction to others, I shall mention some of
them, and the first shall be that known place in the second Psalm; where it is
clearly asserted, that all the kingdoms of the world, shall in a most eminent
manner be subjected to the Lord Jesus Christ, and that he should rule over
Kings, Princes, and Judges, (which would not obey him,) with a rod of Iron, and
break them in pieces like a potters vessel; if they cast not their Crowns at
his feet, and kiss him with the kiss of faith and obedience.

In the three first verses of that Psalm, the Prophet seems to have in his
eye the rage of the heathen, and the fury, and the madness of the Kings of the
earth, at that time when God shall set up the kingdom of Jesus Christ over the
whole world; as if that as soon as they see preparation unto such a thing, that
their spirits should be presently enraged; and they, their Kings, and rulers
especially, should set their whole strength, consultations, and counsels
against the effecting hereof, as being being resolved not to suffer it; and
therefore when they see that God is setting up of his Christ or anointed; they
say among themselves: Come let us break their bonds, and cast away their cords
from us. But alas poor worms what do they? He that sit in the heavens shall
laugh, (says the Psalmist) verse. 4, 5, 6.
The Lord shall have them in derision: Yea he shall speak unto them in his
wrath, and vex them in his sore displeasure, when they shall so do, and
notwithstanding he will set his King upon his holy hill of Sion, and shall
give him the heathen for his inheritance, and the uttermost parts of the earth
for his possession; some of which being pertinacious, and obstinate opposers,
he shall break with a rod of iron, and dash them in pieces like a potters
vessel. And therefore the spirit exhorts all those Kings, Rulers, and Judges
of the earth to be wise, and receive this instruction even to kiss the Son,
and and to serve the Lord with fear, and rejoice with trembling; lest the Son
be angry, and they perish in the way, when his wrath is kindled but a little.
But for the comfort of others who long to see that day, of the King, the Lord
Christ his exaltation; he adds, Blessed are all they that wait for him. Thus
this Scripture fully concurres with the present Text, in asserting this thing;
That all the Kingdoms of the world, shall be subjected to the Lord Jesus
Christ; and as its said here, that all dominions (or as the word may be more
rightly rendered, all Rulers) must serve and obey him: so the same is clearly
declared, in this Prophecy of the Psalmist also.

The next Scripture, which I shall quote for the clearing of this point, shall
be that in the 110 Psalm, which is also very full to this purpose: for there
the Psalmist speaks of a time when the Lord Jesus Christ, (there styled a
Priest for ever after the order of Melchizedeck) should be set up and exalted
above all the Kings and Potentates of the world; and when he should rule in the
midst of his enemies; and should have his enemies made his footstool, and
should judge among the heathen, and wound the heathen, and wound the heads over
many Countries, and fill them with the dead bodies; and his people should be
willing in that day of his power, so that hence it is clear also, that there
is a time coming when Jesus Christ shall have the Kingdoms of the world
subjected to him. And because it is, and will be so, that when he comes thus to
rule and reign, that many people, but especially the great ones, Kings,
Princes, Rulers, and Heads of Kingdoms, shall endeavor to oppose the Lord
Jesus in so doing: therefore it is said here, that he shall strike through
Kings in the day of his wrath, and wound the heads over many Countries. The
third Scripture which I shall cite for the confirming of this truth, shall be
that in the 149 Psalm, (a place already mentioned upon another occasion) where
it is said; That the Lord takes pleasure in his people, and he will beautify
the meek with salvation, and that the high praises of God shall be in their
mouths and a two-edged sword in their hands; to execute vengeance upon the
heathen, and punishments upon the people, to bind their Kings in Chains, and
their Nobles in Fetters of Iron: to execute upon them the Judgment written.
This honor have all his Saints.

Now true it is, that (almost) hitherto since the Primitive times: the Saints
have been as it were trodden under feet of the Gentiles (that is of heathen or
profane men) and they have trampled upon them, and sorely afflicted them. For
they have both imprisoned them, and chained, fettered, and whipped, and cropped,
and mangled, and rackt, and burnt them and what not? For all the cruelties that
wit sharpened with malice, could either invent or inflict, have the meek, the
precious ones of God undergone at the hands of their cruel raging enemies. BUT
here they have a promise, that the Lord who takes pleasure in his people, will
at last beautify the meek with salvation. And what shall the issue thereof be?
It shall be this. That whereas, for thus long time, they have been in a
mourning, and a sad condition, wearing sackcloath for a time, times, and half
a time.

Now the high praises of God shall be in their mouths; and whereas the heathen,
viz. profane men, have trampled upon them, and made them as the filth of the
world, and as the offscouring of all things, Now they shall have together with
the high praises of God in their mouth, a two-edged sword in their hands, to
execute vengeance upon the heathen, and punishments upon the people: to bind
their Kings in Chains, and their Nobles with Fetters of Iron: to execute upon
them the judgment written, This honor have all his Saints.

Thus, Kings, and Nobles, and mighty men, are to be subjected to his Saints,
This honor have all his Saints.

The fourth Scripture which I shall produce for the illustrating of this truth,
shall be that in Isa. 51. 21. etc. which is a promise to this purpose also, in
these words; Hear now this thou afflicted and drunken, but not with wine. Thus
says the Lord, the Lord and thy God, that pleads the cause of his people.
Behold I have taken out of thy hand the cup of trembling, even the dregs of the
cup of my fury, and thou shall no more drink it again: But I will put it into
the hand of them that afflict thee: which have said to thy soul bow down that
we may go ever, and thou have laid thy body as the ground, and as the street to
them that went over.

Here it is expressy said, that the cup of trembling, and fury, should be so
taken out of the hand of the Church, as they should never any more drink it
again; and not only so, but that it should be put into the hands of them that
afflicted her. So that those great and wicked ones, that most ragefully, and
most bitterly have afflicted and destroyed the Saints of God, must now drink
off the dregs of that cup, both that scarlet Beast the Pope, and all those
Kings, Princes, Prelates, and inferior persons, that continue implacable
enemies of his Saints.

Another clear passage to this purpose is in Isa. 51. 8, etc. in these words,
Thy watchmen shall lift up the voice, with the voice together shall they sing:
for they shall see eye to eye, when the Lord shall bring again Sion, break
forth into joy, sing together ye wast places of Jerusalem; for the Lord has
comforted his people; he has redeemed Jerusalem: The Lord has made bare his
holy arm, in the eyes of all the Nations: and all the ends of the earth shall
see the salvation of our God.

Here then its clear, that not only some, but all the Nations shall see the
glory; and all the ends of the earth the Salvation of our God. He will make
bare his holy arm in the eyes of every Nation, and People under heaven, and
they must all stoop to the Scepter of his Son.

Another clear confirmation of this truth we have Isa. 60. 1, 2, 3, etc. in
these words, Arise, shine for thy light is come: for the glory of the Lord is
risen upon thee, for behold the darkness shall cover the earth, and gross
darkness the people: but the Lord shall rise upon thee, and his glory shall be
seen upon thee: and the Gentiles shall come to thy light, and Kings to the
brightnesle of thy rising. Then thou shall see and flow together, and thine
heart shall fear and be enlarged: because the abundance of the sea shall be
converted unto thee, the forces of the Gentiles shall come unto thee. They
shall bring Gold and Incense, and they shall show forth the praises of the
Lord. Surely the Isles shall wait for me, and the ships of Tarshish first, to
bring thy Sons from far: their silver and their gold with them, unto the name
of the Lord thy God, and to the holy one of Israel, because he has glorified
thee: and the Sons of strangers shall build up thy walls, and their Kings shall
minister unto thee: and the Nation and Kingdom that will not serve thee shall
perish; yea those Nations shall be utterly wasted. The sons also of them
that afflicted thee, shall come bending unto thee; and all they that despised
thee, shall bow themselves down at the soles of thy feet; and they shall call
thee the City of the Lord, the Sion of the holy one of Israel: whereas thou
have been forsaken, and hated, I will make thee an external excellency, the
joy of many generations. Thy people also shallbe all righteous, they shall
inherit the Land for ever, the branch of my planting, that I may be glorified:
a little one shall become a thousand, and a small one a strong Nation. I the
Lord will hasten it, in his time.

These words are a Prophecy of the glorious estate which the Church must in
these latter days, (after all her sufferings) be advanced unto.

And first it is said of the Church, that is, the saints of the most high: that
the Light of the Lord shall rise upon them, and his glory shall be seen upon
them; and that so evidently and clearly, as that the Gentiles, i. e. the
profane men of the world shall come to that light: And not only the poor,
and the mean among the Gentiles; but some of their Kings, and great ones shall
be converted, and embrace the light, and come to the brightness of the saints
rising.

And secondly, as abundance of the heathen shall be converted; so those of
them, that have formerly afflicted the saints of the most High, shall come
bending unto them; and those that despised them, shall bow themselves down at
the soles of their feet, and that out of pure love to them: because they shall
see, that they are the people of the Lord, and the Sion of the holy one of
Israel.

And thirdly, those converted Gentiles, shall further manifest their love to
the saints of the most High: by bringing in their wealth, their riches, their
treasures, their silver and their gold to them; and by building their walls for
them, in this also their Kings ministering unto them.

And fourthly, the Church (the saints of God) seeing these things, and being
thus favored, and blessed of the Lord, shall be in in a sweet frame of spirit,
being filled with joy, and therewith enlarged and heightened; and this joy mixed
with a holy fear, and trembling, walking altogether in the paths of
righteousness.

And fifthly, the Church or saints, at this their rising, shall grow so potent,
as that a little or despised one, shall become a thousand, and a small one a
strong nation.

And sixthly, The Nation and Kingdom that will not serve Sion, i. e. the
saints, shall perish: yea those nations shall be utterly wasted.

And seventhly, whereas the saints have been (during the time of the prevalency
of the Beast) a despised and a contemned people, they shall now be an eternal
excellency; and the joy of many generations.

Thus in this Scripture is this truth most evidently demonstrated; That there
must be such a time, when the saints must be so lifted up out of the dust, as
they must be the top and the head of all Nations: and whatsoever Kingdom and
Nation will not serve them must perish (which yet has not been accomplished)
the Kings, and Princes of the Nations bringing in their treasures to Sion, the
redeemed of the Lord.

And as full to this purpose also is that passage, Esa. 65. 8, 9, etc. Thus
says the Lord, As the new wine is found in the cluster, and one says destroy
it not, for a blessing is in it: so will I do for my servants sake, that I may
not destroy them all; and I will bring forth a seed out of Jacob, and out of
Judah an inheritor of my mountains; and mine elect shall inherit it, and my
servants shall dwell there: and Sharon shall be a fold of flocks, and the
valley of Achor a place for the herds to lie down in, for my people that have
sought me. But ye are they that forsake the Lord, that forget my holy
mountain. -- Therefore thus says the Lord, behold my servants shall eat, but
ye shall be hungry, my servants shall drink, but ye shall be thirsty: Behold,
my servants shall rejoice, but ye shall be ashamed, behold my servants shall
sing for joy of heart, but ye shall cry for sorrow of heart, and shall howl
for vexation of spirit; and ye shall leave your name for a curse unto my
chosen: For the Lord God shall slay thee, and shall call his servants by
another name: that he who blesses himself in the earth, shall bless himself
in the God of truth: and he that swears in the earth, shall swear by the
God of truth; because the former troubles are forgotten, and because they are
hid from mine eyes: For behold I create new heavens, and a new earth, and the
former shall not be remembered, nor come into mind: but be you glad and rejoice
for ever, in that which I create; for behold I create Jerusalem a rejoicing,
and her people a joy: and I will rejoice in Jerusalem, and joy in my people:
and the voice of weeping shall be no more heard in her, nor the voice of
crying. There shall be no more thence an infant of days, nor an old man that
has not filled his days; for the child shall die an hundred years old, but
the sinner being an hundred years old shall be accursed; and they shall build
houses and inhabit them, and plant vineyards and eat the fruit of them. They
shall not build and another inhabit; they shall not plant, and another eat:
for as the days of a tree, are the days of my people; and mine elect shall
long enjoy the work of their hands; They shall not labor in vain, nor bring
forth for trouble: for they are the seed of the blessed of the Lord, and their
offspring with them: and it shall come to pass, that before they call I will
answer; and whiles they are yet speaking, I will hear. The Woolfe and the Lamb
shall feed together, and the Lion shall eat straw like the Bullock, and dust
shall be the Serpents meat; they shall not hurt nor destroy, in all my holy
Mountain says the Lord.

This Scripture also fully concurres with the former in clearing this truth;
most sweetly holding forth, that Christ (who was to come of the seed of Jacob
and of the tribe of Judah) and his Saints (here styled Gods elect) shall
inherit the Mountains, or Kingdoms of this world, which are the Lords: (
verse 12.) And that when that time comes, the saints former afflictions and
sorrow, shall be so done away, as they shall be as forgotten, and hid from
their eyes. ( verses 16. 19.) And to make them joyful, yea full of joy; they
shall have all the good things that their hearts can wish for.

For, first they shall be filled with the spirit, and bless themselves, or see
themselves blessed in the God of truth: and the Lord will rejoice in them, and
joy in his people, verses 16, 19.

And secondly, all their prayers shall be speedily heard, and answered, ver.
24.

And thirdly, as they shall be the blessed of the Lord, so shall their
offspring be also: that so their joys may be without mixtures of sorrow, ver.
23.

And fourthly, they shall inhabit the houses which they build, and eat the
fruit of the vineyards which they shall plant, and none shall take them from
them; but they shall long enjoy the work of their hands; and they shall have
abundance of flocks, and herds; and eat and drink, and rejoice in the Lord,
and sing for joy of heart, verses 10, 13, 14, 21, 22.

And fifthly, they shall live till they come to a good old age, and be blessed,
verses 20, 22.

And sixthly, no ravenous, or hurtful, or devouring creature shall then do any
hurt to man or beast, verse 25.

And because the condition of the Saints shall be so happy, and the Kingdoms
of the world shall be put into such a new posture, and be so changed from what
they were; therefore the spirit of God here calls them, new heavens, and a new
earth: ( ver. 17.) and the holy Mountains of the Lord ( verses 9, 25.) for so
they will be when these things are accomplished: and the confusions, and
combustions, and oppressions, and troubles that were in the old frame of the
world shall be forgotten, verses 16, 17.

Again, This is also cleared, Jer. 30. 16, etc. and 31. 1, 2, etc. in these
words, They that devour thee shall be devoured, and all thine adversaries
every one of them shall go into Captivity: and they that spoil thee shall be
spoiled -- And ye shall be my people, and I will be your God; behold the
whilewind of the Lord goes forth with fury, a continuing whirlewind: it shall
fall with pain upon the head of the wicked; and the fierce anger of the Lord
shall not return until he have done it; and until he have performed the
intents of his heart, in the latter days ye shall consider it; at the same
time says the Lord, will I be the God of all the Families of Israel, and they
shall be my people -- Again, I will build thee, and thou shall be built a
virgin of of Israel: thou shall again be adorned with thy tabrets, and go
forth in the dances of them that make merry -- For thus says the Lord, sing
with gladness for Jacob, and shout among the chief of the Nations: publish
ye, praise ye, and say, O Lord save thy people the remnant of Israel -- Hear
the word of the Lord, O ye Nations: and declare it in the Isles afar off; and
say, he that scattered Israel will gather him, and keep him as a shepherd does
his flock; therefore they shall come, and sing in the height of Sion: and shall
flow together to the goodness of the Lord for wheat, and for wine, and for
oil, and for the young of the flock: and their soul shall be as a watered
garden, and they shall not sorrow any more at all; then shall the virgin
rejoice in the dance, both young men and old together: for I will turn their
mourning into joy, and will comfort them, and make them rejoice from their
sorrow.

Though these words do more particularly, and peculiarly concern the seed of
Abraham after the flesh, or the natural Israelites, (who shall again be
received into the love and favor of God: which shall be to them, and others,
as life from the dead, Ezekiel. 37. 5. Rev. 11. 15. and be pardoned, and cleansed
from all their sins, Ezekiel. 36. and become very glorious;) yet in general do
they also concern all the Saints, and people of God, and must be applied to
them; and whereas they have for many hundred of years been oppressed, and
devoured, and spoiled, and as captives, imprisoned, and afflicted: the Lord
here assures them, that they that thus dealt with them shall be devoured, and
spoiled, and captivated, and destroyed themselves, and that his fury and fierce
anger, (that has been so provoked by the unjust, malicious, and cruel
dealings of those wicked ones, with his own dear, precious, and beloved
people,) shall go forth like a whirlewind, and fall with pain, with a witness
upon the head of those wicked ones: and not return until he have performed
the intents of his heart, and this must be in the latter days; And is this all
God will then do for his people, to avenge them upon their enemies, and to
bring down their power and pride? No, this is not all, but at the same time
will he lift up his people, and build them, and gather them, and make them
glorious, and fill them with joy, and rejoicing, and turn their mourning into
joy, so that they shall not sorrow any more at all.

Thus this Scripture also speaks the same truth with the rest foregoing; and
by all these is this truth sufficiently confirmed: And though I am sure that
multitudes of faithful and judicious ones are fully acquainted with these
truths; yet knowing that some yet are not, and that those that are, will be
rather delighted than wearied, by taking a review of these Scriptures compared
together, and considering the wilfulness of some, in shuting their eyes
against the light, breaking forth both from the word and works of God in
clearing these things. I shall therefore add some other Scriptures, in which
this is further manifested: and the next shall be tha^ Dan. 2. 37, 38. and so
on, where Daniel interpreting Nebuchadnezzars dream, declares, that after the
four Monarchs, the Golden, the Silver, the Brass, and the Iron Monarchs, have
been set up in the world, and continued their appointed times: that then the
God of heaven shall set up another Kingdom, which shall as a stone cut out of
the Mountains without hands, break in pieces this last Monarch of Iron, and
clay, and stone; and shall it self become a great mountain, and fill the
whole earth, and this Kingdom shall never be destroyed, nor be left to other
people, but it shall stand for ever.

This is that Kingdom that Christ and his Saints must possess, whose rise and
beginning may seem small, but as a little stone cut out of the mountain, and
that without hands, without the help of the strength and power of the Kings and
great ones of the earth: and yet this seeming small rising of Christ and his
Saints shall be hard enough, and potent enough to break in pieces the Roman
Iron legs, that last and worst Beast, and to make the Iron, and the Clay, and
the Brass, and the Silver, and the Gold, to be as the chafe that is carried
away of the wind, and this is undoubtedly that which is now a doing.

Another confirmation of this we have Joel 3. 1, 3, etc. For behold in those
days, and at that time, when I shall bring again the Captivity of Judah and
Jerusalem; I will gather all Nations, and will bring them down into the valley
of Jehoshaphat, and I will plead with them there -- Proclaim ye this among
the Gentiles: prepare war, wake up the mighty men, let all the men of war draw
near, let them come up: beat your plowshares into swords, and your pruning
hooks into spears: Let the weak say I am strong; assemble your selves, and
come all ye Heathen, and gather your selves together round about; put ye in
the sickle, for the harvest is ripe: get ye down for the press is full, for
the wickedness is great; multitudes, multitudes, in the valley of decision:
for the day of the Lord is near, in the valley of decision. The Lord also shall
roar out of Sion, and utter his voice from Jerusalem, and the Heavens and the
Earth shall shake; but the Lord will be the hope of his people, and the
strength of the Children of Israel: So shall ye know that I am the Lord your
God dwelling in Sion. And it shall come to pass in that day, that the
Mountains shall drop down new Wine, and the Hills shall flow with milk, and
all the Rivers of Judah shall flow with waters, and a Fountain shall come
forth of the house of the Lord, and shall water the Valley of Shittim.

In these words here is a very great war proclaimed; for what end? To bring
again the Captivity of Gods people, ( ver. 1.) or to enlarge and set them at
liberty, and bring them out of all their troubles; and to this end the Lord
says that he will plead with all Nations, that have afflicted his people, (
ver. 2.) And being determined to show forth his great power, and glory, and his
tender love to his people, he proclaims a War, and summons all the Nations to
gather themselves together, and to prepare for War, and to awaken all their
mighty men, all their most puissant, and valiant men of War: and to make the
greatest provision of men, and ammunition, that it is possible for them to make.
To that end to beat their instruments of Husbandry into instruments of War; and
to gather together the greatest strength imaginable: and when they have done
this, then will he sit to judge the heathen, and thither cause his mighty ones
to come, to be as a sickle to cut down this ripe harvest of wicked men; whose
wickedness is great, and then by destroying their multitudes, to decide the
controversy between them and his own people; which shall be an occasion of
calling the place where it is done, the valley of decision: for there the Lord
will marvellously show himself, to the causing of the whole earth to shake;
but to the joy and consolation of his people: for he will then be their hope,
and their strength, and then it shall be known that the Lord dwells in Sion,
and they shall abundantly enjoy the blessings of the Lord; and be delivered
from all their troubles for evermore.

Another Scripture which speaks of these same times, (though it do not so
fully declare particulars) is that in Act. 3. 19, 20. etc. Where Peter speaking
unto the Jews, charges this upon them, that they had denied the holy one and
the Just, and killed the Prince of Life, whom God had raised from the dead; by
faith in whose Name the lame man was healed: he adds, Now brethren, I wot
that through ignorance ye did it, as did also your Rulers; but these things
which God before had showed by the mouth of all his Prophets that Christ should
suffer, he has so fulfilled: repent you therefore and be converted, that your
sins may be blotted out when the times of refreshing shall come from the
presence of the Lord: and he shall send Jesus Christ which was before preached
unto you, whom the heavens must receive until the time of restitution of all
things, which God has spoken of by the mouth of all his holy Prophets since
the world began.

Peter here preaching to those that had been the actors of that most unjust,
and most unrighteous act that ever was acted by the most wretched, and most
sinful of the sons of men: he charges it home upon them, ver. 12, 13, 14, and
15. and having done so, he is guided by the wisdom of the Spirit, (lest they
should in the sense hereof be driven to despair,) to mitigate the terror of
of it; (though the sin was so heinous) by these two considerations.

First, their ignorance, verse 17. suitable to which is that passage of Paul, 1
Cor. 2. 8.

Secondly, by the determinate counsel of God, which he then fulfilled in that
act of theirs, which was in it self so hainously sinful as it came from them.

And having thus done, he presses them to repentance, and to an embracing of
the Lord Jesus Christ: from whom he preaches peace, notwithstanding their great
sin against him; telling them that upon their being converted unto him, their
sins should be blotted out; and tells them withal, that though they had
crucified him, and he according to the counsel of God had suffered death; of
which all the Prophets had spoken: that yet there was a time coming, when that
Jesus Christ which had been crucified, who was gone to heaven, and must there
remain until that appointed time, even that Jesus Christ should come again
and ( v. 21.) restore Restore all things, that is, to restore to his Saints a
comfortable and free enjoyment of all the comforts of the Spirit of grace, and
of all the comforts of the whole Creation; and when the Apostle here says, he
shall restore all these things, he means, he shall restore them to those that
are converted; to his Saints only; and not to all men, as some would have it,
for that is directly contradictory to other Scriptures that speak of this same
time, as Isa. 65. 13, 14. 15, 20. Isa. 51. 22, 23. Jer. 30. 23, 24. Rev. 21. 8.
Chap. 22. 15. besides many others to this purpose that are as clear; for if
this were true, then may it be said in this case as Paul in another said, if
so, etc. Saints are of all men most miserable, in that they suffer sharp
afflictious, and drink many a bitter cup from the hands of wicked men, because
they will not do as they do, and say as they say; because they are more
righteous, and for righteousness sake: but they it suffer because they know
that the righteous Judge of all the earth will quickly come, and reward every
one as his work shall be, Rev. 22. 12. even to them who patiently continue in
well doing eternal life, but unto the ungodly workers of iniquity,
indignation, and wrath, tribulation, and anguish upon every soul of man that
does evil, of the Jew first, and also of the Gentile, Romans 2. 6, 7, 8, 9.
all things, and pardon their sins, and refresh ( v. 19.) and comfort them; and
this is that time, says Peter, which God has spoken of by the mouth of all
his holy Prophets, which have been since the world began; and this doubtless is
that which is spoken of by the Prophet Daniel, in this passage we are treating
of.

And this is that which Paul also speaks of, Romans 8. 18, 19, etc. in these
words, The sufferings of this present time are not worthy to be compared with
the glory which shall be revealed in us; for the earnest expectation of the
Creature waits for the manifestation of the sons of God, for the Creature was
made subject to vanity: not willingly, but by reason of him who has subjected
the same in hope; because the Creature its self also shall be delivered from
the bondage of corruption into the glorious liberty of the children of God; for
we know that the whole Creation groaneth and travelleth together in pain
until now; and not only they, but our selves also, which have the first fruits
of the spirit: even we our selves groan within our selves; waiting for the
adoption, to wit, the redemption of our bodies.

Here the Apostle speaking of this exalted condition of the Saints, in these
latter days, does illustrate it in these 5 particulars; by which he sets out
what the condition of saints shall be, and by six particulars, in which he
speaks to the condition of the whole Creation. The particulars wherein he
speaks to the condition of the Saints are these.

First, That the condition of the Saints, until that time come, whatever their
enjoyments are, and how comfortable soever it shall be, yet (in comparison of
that) it shall be a sighing, a groaning, a sorrowing condition; for so he
says: even we our selves, we that are Saints, and have the first fruits of the
spirit; which are exceeding precious to us, and in which we have so much joy,
and peace, as Romans 5. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 11. we groan within our selves, are in a
sighing, sorrowing condition, waiting for the Adoption, or Redemption of our
bodies, until when we shall sigh; and indeed so it must needs be: for besides
outward troubles we meet with from wicked men, we the best, Paul's, Cephas's and
Primitive Saints, which are endued with the most eminent gifts, are also
troubled with sin that dwells in us; so that when we would do good evil is
present with us. But

Secondly, He tells us that at that time the condition of Saints shall be such,
as that their bodies shall be redeemed from the servitude, and slavery in which
they have been subjected to men, in that (over their bodies) other Lords have
had dominion, for that must needs be his meaning in those words,

Waiting for the redemption of our bodies. What shall our bodies have
redemption from else but that? And that is also the meaning of those words, The
glorious liberty of the children of God. They have not been in their bodies
free, nor in liberty, but in bondage, and subjection; but then comes the
redemption of their bodies; and they shall be at liberty. And

Thirdly, They shall also be freed from the power of corruption within: as well
as from the outward slavery and subjection of wicked men; and this is expressed
in these words, The glory which shall be revealed in us; present sufferings are
not worthy to be compared with the glory which shall be revealed in us; the
inward glory of Saints consists only in such things as these, in the presence
and power of the spirit within them, in subduing all corruption, and in leading
them into the paths of righteousness, when they do no Psalm. 119. 2.
iniquity, but walk in his law and light, etc. Then are they all-glorious
within: and this is the glory which shall be revealed in them: and in this most
eminently shall they be freed from the bondage of corruption.

Fourthly, that condition wherein the saints shall then be, shall be such as
wherein they shall be clearly and visibly manifested to be the sons of God,
which is expressed in these words: Waiting for the manifestation of the Sons of
God. The saints having all this while been as it were in obscurity, and lain
among the pots (to use the Psalmists expression) they shall then arise, and be
as the wings of a Dove, covered with silver, and her feathers with yellow gold;
for then shall be the manifestation of the sons of God. For then, shall God
so fully and so evidently own them, and appear in them, and for them, as that
the heathen shall see it, and acknowledge it to them; and then to all shall
they be manifested to be the sons of God: This is expressed in these words
also; waiting for the adoption, to wit, the redemption of our bodies: he calls
this time the adoption, because then the sonship of the saints of God, as
before he had said, should be made manifest: but that in the word the adoption,
he might be understood, he adds this, to wit, the redemption of our bodies;
implying that the time of the redemption of our bodies, will be the time of the
manifestation of our sonship or adoption.

Fifthly, this condition of the saints shall be a most glorious condition;
that is expressed in these words, the glory that shall be revealed in us, and the
glorious liberty of the children of God.

Thus in these five particulars does the Apostle set out, what the condition of
the saints shall be at that time: which is also further cleared in those six
particulars, in which he speaks to the condition of the whole creation: which
are these,

First, that the bondage of corruption is now universally spread over the whole
creation: as all mankind, so all other creatures since man sinned, and
corruption broke forth in him; (whereby he violated the Law of a righteous
Creator) are exposed to misery and pain; so grievous was the fall of man, and
so heinous is the sin, as that there is none of the sons of men, nor yet of the
creatures, which were appointed for the use of man; but the weight and bondage
of sin it lies upon.

Secondly, that this bondage lies so heavy upon the whole Creation, as it makes
it groan under the burden of it, as being very irksome and painful to it. The
whole Creation groaneth, and travelleth together in pain.

Thirdly, that it was not willingly, but with reluctance and pain, that the
creature became subject to vanity; to wit, to the bondage of corruption, that
is the misery that sin and corruption brought upon it: It is not willingly,
that any of them suffer pinching cold, and pining hunger, and killing storms,
and many other judgments which sin brought into the world: (though
willingly, and with delight some creatures, do and shall perform that service
to man in which they were appointed to be useful to man, as man is Lord over
all creatures: as the horse rusheth into the battle, and swiftly carries man
in journies, sometimes without whip or spur, and the Ox willingly takes the
yoke, and other services several creatures willingly perform, when they are
not abused by men that are unreasonable. The good man is merciful to his
beast.) But painful sufferings, and all the bondage that sin brought upon
the creature, it was not willingly subjected to. The Creature was made subject
to vanity, not willingly, etc.

Fourthly, that when it was subjected to vanity, it had hope given it of
deliverance; not willingly, but by reason of him, who has subjected the same
in hope: So that it was subjected in hope; not that such hope can be in an
unreasonable creature, as there may be and is in reasonable man; who hopes, and
has a reason of his hope: but it is with such a hope as its nature is capable
of; of which to give an exact definition, I will not undertake: But certain it
is that it has a hope such as it is; and this hope it had when first it was
made subject to vanity, and in this hope it was subjected: for though it was
with reluctance, not willingly, that it was subjected; yet, subjected it was,
by reason of him, who subjected the same in hope: Who for ends best known to
himself, both subjected it, and subjected it in hope.

Fifthly, as the whole creation was subjected in hope, so does it wait for and
expect accordingly, that liberty that it shall have at the time of the glorious
manifestation of the sons of God. Yea it earnestly expects and waits for it,
as it is expressed in these words. The earnest expectation of the creature,
waits for the manifestation of the sons of God. But this expectation and
waiting must be understood, of such an expectation and waiting, as the creature
is capable of, and not of any such expectations or waitings as are in
reasonable man, it being not capable of it.

But sixthly, and lastly, the creature that thus is as has been said, under
the bondage of corruption; under which it groans and travels, being not
willingly but with reluctance under it; but yet hoping for, and waiting for and
expecting deliverance, shall at that time, when the saints by being set at
liberty from the pressures of inward corruptions, and outward enemies, be
gloriously manifested to be the sons of God; be also set at liberty from all
its pressures, and griefs, under which it groans: and set into a condition of
gladsomnesse and freedom.

Thus in this place of Paul is this great truth, so much spoken of by the
Prophets, and saints, confirmed by Paul: wherein because he in some things,
speaks more particularly of the state of the creatures at that time. I could
not pass it by without this brief observation of it; wherein we may see that
the condition of the Saints must needs be exceeding glorious, since the
creatures over which man is Lord, shall be then in such a state of freedom and
liberty.

I shall not enlarge any further, in producing any other of those many passages
in Scripture, which witness this truth, but only those two, Rev. 5. 10. and
Rev. 11. 15, 16, 17, 18. Both which, do also punctually speak in the language
of the Prophet Daniel here in this Chapter; to wit, that the Kingdoms of this
world, must more visibly and more fully then yet they have been, become the
Kingdoms of the Lord Jesus, and obey him. So Dan. 7. 14, 27. and Revel. 11.
15. And that when that time is, the Saints must possess the Kingdom, and
reign on earth: so Dan. 7. 22, 27. and Rev. 5. 10.

The first of these passages mentioned in the Revelation, is that, Chap. 5. 9,
10. which runs thus. Thou wast slain, and have redeemed us to God by thy
blood; out of every kindred, and tongue, and people, and nation: and have made
us unto our God, Kings and Priests, and we shall reign on the earth. These
words are a part of a song, sung by Saints, wherein they praise the Lamb, and
herein they have in their eye, as matter for which their hearts are engaged to
honor and glorify Christ: both that which he had already done for them, and
also that which he had not yet done, but would do for them. That which he had
done for them, in these words; Thou wast slain, and thou have redeemed us --
and thou have made us unto our God Kings and Priests: and that which should be
done for them by Christ in these words, and we shall reign on the earth: this
being that which they knew he would do; he having declared it by the mouth
of all his Prophets, therefore they sing it out, we shall reign on the earth.

The other passage, which is, Rev. 11. 15, 16, 17, 18. runs thus. And the
seventh Angel sounded, and there were great voices in Heaven, saying, the
Kingdoms of this world are become the Kingdoms of our Lord, and of his
Christ, and he shall reign for ever and ever: and the four and twenty Elders
which sat before God on their seats, fell upon their faces and worshipped
God, saying, We give thee thanks, O Lord God Almighty, which art, and wast,
and art to come: because thou have taken to thee thy great power, and have
reigned; and the Nations were angry, and thy wrath is come, and the time of the
dead that they should be judged; and that thou should give reward unto thy
servants the Prophets, and to the Saints, and them that fear thy name, small
and great, and should destroy them which destroy the earth. And the Temple
of God was opened in Heaven, and there was seen in his Temple the Ark of his
Testament; and there were lightnings, and voices, and thunderings, and an
earthquake, and great hail.

This Scripture being so pertinent unto the present purpose; and having already
in another Treatise opened the former part of this Chapter, from the first to
the 15 verse; I shall therefore be the more copious in opening of this part,
which is from the 15 verse (where I left) unto the end of the chapter.

Verse 15. And the seventh Angel sounded, and there were great voices in
Heaven, saying, the kingdoms of this world are become, etc.]

The declaration of this truth, that the Kingdoms of this world are become the
Kingdoms of the Lord Christ, is here held forth unto us to be that great and
glorious part, and portion of the providence and counsel of God, that is to be
manifested under the sounding of the seventh Trumpet; which brings in the
seventh, and last, and greatest judgment of God upon that wicked, (as the
Apostle terms him,) or that man of sin. That great Saint opposer the Roman
Papal Beast, and his adherents: For by the seven Angels which were to sound
the seven Trumpets, is to be understood 7 several, remarkable, and great
judgments, that in so many several periods of time, by so many several
passages of the providence and purpose of God, should be brought upon that
beast, and his associates, whereby they should be gradually ruined. The first
of them being one degree of bringing them down; and the second bringing them
lower then the first had done, and the third bringing them lower then the two
former, and the fourth breaking down another part of their greatness, and
glory, which was not broken by the three former: but the three latter are to
be more terrible, and dreadful unto them then any of the former; and
therefore they are said to be three great woes which were to come upon that
crew, Chap. 8. 13. which are there styled the inhabitants of the earth: for all
along in this Prophecy they are called the earth, to distinguish them from the
Saints, who are all along called heaven, and as these are said to be woes, so
they prove woes indeed, unto that miserable crew; but it is to them, and them
only, and not to any others. As for the Saints, all the seven Trumpets produce
matter of joy to them, because therein Christ's enemies, and their enemies are
from time to time brought low: And indeed these seven Trumpets (or seven
several judgments of God upon the Beast and his adherents,) were obtained
from God in a great measure by their prayers; being offered up by the Lord
Jesus their blessed Mediator, who perfumed them with the incense of his own
righteousness and worthiness, in which they are acceptable: For upon the
offering up of the prayers of Saints, with that incense, these Judgments were
powered out upon the earth, that is, upon that crew: and these angels prepared
to sound, as appears, Chap. 8. 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, etc. So that, the Saints had
cause to rejoice, when these judgments came upon that faction; and they indeed
did rejoice, and their hearts have been made glad, in all these several
Judgments which have come upon them. As in that their Doctrines, and Doctors,
Bishops, Jesuits, and Priests, and much of their power and authority which they
had over the people, have been brought down and laid in the dust; in those six
several Trumpres sounding, or glorious dispensations already past, wherein
that party have been troubled, perplexed and pained at the heart: and now this
great and glorious dispensation we are treating of, is to be the seventh and
last; which is of greatest terror to them, and greatest joy to the saints: as
it follows,

And the seventh Angel sounded, and there were great voices in Heaven, saying,
the kingdoms, etc.]

There were great voices in heaven, that is, there were many in heaven, that
is, in the Church, or among the Saints, (that in the Prophesies of this Book
are styled heaven) that did trumpet forth, sound forth, or clearly hold forth,
and confidently speak out this truth: that the Kingdoms of this world are
become the Kingdoms of our Lord and of his Christ, and he shall reign for ever
and ever. They were voices; it was not only the single voice of one, but they
are voices; it is the voice of many in heaven, many among the Saints: And they
are not the whimsicall notions of unsound and rotten men, but they are voices
in heaven, voices of real Saints.

Great voices in heaven:] Being great voices, argues first, that they are not
some poor weak suppositions, or may be's: Nor secondly, are they some weak
faint sayings; but they are great, that is, effectual, convincing, and
unquestionable speakings: such as shall be heard, and be received, and be
believed among the Saints; they shall be spoken with such authority of
Scripture, and such demonstration of the spirit, and power going along with
them; and these great voices shall have a double effect: first, they shall
minister joy and gladness to the Saints; and secondly they shall minister
terror to the Popish party, for it speaks and works their ruin, and third
woe that comes upon them.

The Kingdoms of this world are become the Kingdoms of our Lord, and of his
Christ, and he shall reign for ever and ever.] The Kingdoms of this world are
become so, why were they not so before this seventh Angel sounded, or this
seventh dispensation? Is not the earth the Lords and the fullness thereof?
whose were the Kingdoms of this world but our Lords, and his Christ's? Answer,
Though it is true they were his, yet they were not so visibly the Kingdoms of
God, and of Christ as they shall then be. For they seemed rather to be the
Kingdoms of the evil one, they were so universally inslaved to the Devil,
among the Indians, and Heathens that professed not Christ, and they seemed
rather to be inslaved to that man of sin, that wicked one, that sat in the
Temple of God, and blasphemed among such as professed Christianity. But at this
time they shall in a most visible and glorious manner become the Kingdoms of
our Lord, and of his Christ: for he shall break down the power of other Kings,
even of all that will not stoop to him, and cast their Crowns at his feet,
yea, he will break them in pieces as a Potters vessel, and that great Papal
Beast shall be destroyed with the fire of his wrath, and his glory shall be
manifested to all people, and nations, and languages: who casting off all other
Lords shall willingly be subjected to him; and rejoice in his glorious reign,
according to that of the Psalmist, The Lord Psalm. 97. 1. and 96. 10, 11, 12, 13.
reigns and let the earth rejoice, and let the great England is one of the
great Isles.
Isles be glad thereof. Yea, the Kingdoms of this world shall be universally
so subjected to our Lord Jesus Christ, as they shall all serve and obey him
only: and other Lords shall not have Dominion over them, but they shall have
one Lord, and his name one in all the earth. Thus in a most visible manner
shall the Kingdoms of this world become the Kingdoms of our Lord, and of his
Christ. Zach. 14. 9.


And he shall reign for ever and ever. He having once subjected the Kingdoms
of this world unto the obedience of himself; it shall not be with him, as it
has been with all the great and potent Monarchs that have formerly ruled the
world: that one of them have thrust out and destroyed another: and one has
taken the Dominion from another. No, none shall take the Dominion from him: But
as Daniel says, His Kingdom shall be an everlasting Kingdom, and all Rulers
shall serve and obey him. So John here says, He shall reign for ever and ever.

And the four and twenty Elders, which sat before God on their seats, fell
upon their faces, and worshipped God, saying, we give thee thanks O Lord God
Almighty, etc.]

What those four and twenty Elders are will appear in the fourth and fifth
Chapters of this Prophecy. They are first mentioned Chap. 4. 4. where they are
thus described, And round about the throne were four and twenty seats, and
upon the seats I saw four and twenty Elders, sitting, clothed in white
raiment: and upon their heads were Crowns of Gold. Now that we may know what
these be: we must observe what the Angel says to John in the first verse of
that Chapter, in these words, Come and I will show thee things which must be
hereafter; whence it appears that these Elders, as well as the other things
which John saw, were representatives of some things that were to be after that
time. Now Chapter 5. we may see what they were that were to be hereafter; which
these four and twenty Elders did represent, and that is, that they were Saints
that were redeemed to God by the blood of the Lamb out of every kindred, and
Nation, and people, as appears in the 8, 9, 10. verses of that Chapter.

Now here in this 11 Chapter these four and twenty Elders, that is, these
Saints and redeemed ones of Christ, do upon the sounding of these voices, (that
the Kingdoms of this world are become the Kingdoms of our Lord, and of his
Christ) fall upon their faces, that is, they lay themselves low before God, and
worship him: being exceedingly affected with this great work of God, and with
his great grace toward them, in bringing them out of their suffering condition
to reign with Christ.

They fell upon their faces, and worshipped God, saying, we give thee thanks O
Lord God Almighty, which art, and wast, and art to come, because thou have
taken to thee thy great power, and have reigned]

The Saints, whatever others do herein, yet they, (if their eyes be open to see
it) they cannot but give thanks, yea, solemnly lay themselves low before God in
thanksgiving: for the great and signal manifestations of the Lord God
Almighty, and eternal, his taking to him his great power in ruling, and
reigning; and laying of such as are indeed his enemies in the dust, and yet
withal at the same time their hearts may be very much affected with this, that
any godly men should be so deeply engaged with Gods enemies: and consequently
do partake of their punishments.

Because thou have taken to thee thy great power, and have reigned] Because
thou have not suffered thine enemies always to boast, and to triumph, but have
begun to lay them low before thee, and now have taken to thee thy great power,
which thou seemedst to have laid aside, when thou sufferedst so long the rod of
the wicked to rest upon the lot of thy righteous ones: but now do thou take
to thee, and show forth thy great power, in punishing, and bringing down the
power of thine enemies; for these things we give thee thanks, and because that
now more generally, universally, and evidently thou appearest to reign over men
in thy just and righteous deciding of Controversies, and in justifying them
that in the integrity of their hearts give up themselves to glorify thy great
name, and to do that which may be for the good of all thy Saints, even of every
one that fears thy name, small and great: laying aside all by and self
respects; yea, we give thee thanks for that thou now so evidently appearest to
reign over men, in condemning and blasting those that pretending other things,
force themselves against their judgments to contend for some things which are
but a seeming ground of that quarrel against others which was primarily
occasioned by their self ends which self-love has so blinded them as they
could not, or would not see, but shall see, and be made to acknowledge them to
thee, and to thy Saints by thy righteous judgments.

This and much more is the Saints meaning in these words, when they say, We
give thee thanks because thou have taken to thee, etc. Wherein they express
how they are affected with, and do rejoice in these things: We know how David
expresses himself upon such an occasion, Psalm. 98. 7, 8, 9. Let the Sea roar
and the fullness thereof; the world and they that dwell therein: Let the floods
clap their hands, and let the hills be joyful together, before the Lord, for he
comes to judge the earth with righteousness, and to judge the people with
equity. David is so affected with this great and glorious dispensation, when
God comes to reign, and even for to judge the earth with righteousness, and
to decide with justice and equity, the controversies of the people; as that he
cannot be content, to only rejoice and be exceeding glad thereof himself, but
he also excites the whole Creation to rejoice in this most glorious
dispensation. And if these that are still of the world, (so they be not the
desperate, and implacable enemies of his Saints) shall have such cause to
rejoice when the Lord reigns; because they shall not be at all oppressed, nor
unjustly dealt with, as they had bin before, but shall have justice done them.
I say, if these, and the whole Creation shall rejoice when the Lord reigns:
much more shall Saints, when he shall come to Judge their cause with
righteousness, and destroy the man of sin; and shall lay all his supporters,
though Kings and Princes, (notwithstanding whosoever labors to prop or bear
them up) in the dust.

And the Nations were angry.]

When God comes to take his great power, and to reign himself, the Nations
are angry; because their vain customs which they have doated upon, must be
laid aside and this great man must be brought down: and that King, and 'tother
darling, and favorite of the Nations, (for opposing of the Lord Jesus Christ
and his Saints) must be destroyed, even the Psalm. 110.
heads over many Countries.

And thy wrath is come.]

When Jesus Christ comes to reign, he will break forth in wrath against his,
and his Saints implacable enemies: and this is that which he speaks of, when
he speaks of the year of recompenses, for the controversies of Sion. And
when he says the day of vengeance is in his heart, Isa. 63. 3, 4.
and the year of his redeemed is come; having suffered his adversaries a long
time, to go on unpunished, in afflicting and martyring, and oppressing his
Saints; he will at last have a time to reckon with them, and he will avenge
his Saints quarrel, (for vengeance is his) recompencing all the blood, and
cruelty of their enemies on their own heads: And he will show that he has
not been regardlesse, of all the sufferings and sad pressures which his people
have undergone, from the hands of wicked and cruel men; but when the year of
his redeemed is come, then will he recompense his enemies for all their
controversies with Sion: and as it is Jer. 30. 23. His fierce anger shall go
forth as a whirlewinde, and shall fall with pain upon the heads of the wicked.

For thy wrath is come, and the time of the dead that they should be judged.]

When Christ thus comes to avenge his people on their enemies, he does therein
give judgment for them, for in that those enemies have slain and martyred his
Saints long before, he herein judges his people that they have slain with
righteous judgment, when he passes the sentence of condemnation, and executes
it upon those that have thus destroyed, and had a hand in the destroying of so
many innocent, and so many righteous souls: for all the blood of all the
innocent souls, from righteous Abel to the blood of the many innocents lately
shed in Ireland and elsewhere must be charged upon the Pope, and that
Generation, And thus God judges the dead Saints cause.
for so says the Text, Rev. 18. 24. that in them will be found all the blood
of all the Prophets, and Saints, and of all that were slain upon earth

And that thou shou dst give reward unto thy servants the Prophets, and to thy
Saints, and to them that fear thy name, small and great.]

The time of Christ's reigning will be the time of Saints rewarding, for all
their love, and all the labor and sufferings of it. There is none that ever
did any thing for God, or that suffered any thing for God, but shall be
abundantly rewarded for all their doings, and sufferings; and for all their
shame and sufferings shall have a reward of double joy, according to that
passage, Isa 61. 7. For your shame you shall have double, and for confusion they
shall rejoice in their portion: therefore in their land they shall possess the
double, everlasting joy shall be unto them; And the reward which Christ will
give, when he has thus brought down his enemies, shall be universal to all
his Saints; not only (as some have conceived) unto those Saints that have been
Martyred for Christ; but to all his Saints, which are here expressed under
various denominations, that so all Saints may see themselves here included; and
therefore first it is thus expressed, That thou should give reward unto thy
servants the Prophets; by which in general is meant all Saints: for all Saints
have in a measure a spirit of Prophecy; For the testimony of Jesus is the
spirit of Prophecy, says the Angel, Rev. 19. 10. but more peculiarly by
Prophets, is ordinarily understood, the great preachers and publishers of
Gospelltruths: those that are gifted and enabled to hold forth publicly to
edification, exhortation and comfort Gospel truths; for this is prophesying,
as 1 Cor. 14. 3. and now if there had in this place been no other description
given of the Saints which should have been rewarded by Christ: but only this
his servants the Prophets, there might have been some question made whether
this did include all Saints? and it might be taken only for public officers;
but it therefore follows, and to thy Saints; this is a more general word, and
herein all saints might be satisfied, though they be not so eminently gifted as
others are: since this word is added, and to thy Saints: but if any should yet
conceive that they are not here included, seeing some that are Saints are
sometimes under some doubtings of their Saintship; therefore it follows: And to
them that fear thy name: so that if they have but a true filial sonlike fear
of God, they may hereby be encouraged; but yet further, that there may not be
any discouraged for their weakeness, because they are looked upon as little
ones, as babes: or because they are low in the world; it therefore follows,
and to them that fear thy name, small and great; all Saints, from the most
eminent Prophet, and Teacher, to the meanest and tenderest babe, that waits
upon, and loves, and fears the Lord Jesus, shall all be rewarded at his
coming; not that any thing they have done or suffered does merit a reward, but
he will freely give them a glorious reward, for all that they have suffered and
done for him.

And should destroy them which destroy the earth.]

This being the time in which he comes to do righteousness and justice in the
earth: he will render a just reward to the enemies of his people, and cause his
wrath to go forth against them to their destruction; but this is further spoken
of in the 19. verse, as it follows.

And the temple of God was opened in heaven, and there was seen in his temple
the Arc of his Testament, and there were lightnings, and voices, and
thunderings, and an earthquake, and great hail.]

This verse contains a declaration of two great effects, the first of which
concerns Saints, and the latter concerns the enemies of Christ and his
Saints. That which concerns Saints is in these words, And the Temple of God
was opened in heaven, and there was seen in the Temple the Arc of his
Testament; and that which concerns the enemies is in these words, And there
were lightnings, and voices, and thunderings, and an earthquake, and great
hail: of this latter effect of the sounding of this Trumpet I shall speak by
and by in its place; but first of the first effect mentioned in this verse,
which concerns the Saints, which is contained in these words, And the Temple
of God was opened in heaven, and there was seen in his Temple the Arc of his
Testament.] The Temple, and the Arc of his Testament are both Old
Testament-phrases: and for the opening of these things we must first enquire
what is meant by these phrases here in the New Testament?

Now this may be made clear by comparing Scripture with Scripture, for the
spirit of God ordinarily cleares that in one Scripture, which he leaves more
doubtful in another.

Now generally in the New Testament, our Lord Jesus Christ, and his Disciples
to whom he opened the Luke 14. 22.
Scriptures, of Moses and all the Prophets do make use of such phrases, as the
Temple, and Jerusalem, and Sion, and the Priesthood, and the Sacrifices, and
the like, to express those things by them which the outward things in use
under the law did type out, and they never spoke of these things as they are
literally understood; as to be so understood in the times of the Gospel: but
as being now abolished: and those spiritual things which they typed out, are
always to be understood by such phrases in the New Testament, and so the
spirit of Christ in the Apostles expressly declares: as for instance, the
Churches of God are now said to be the Temple of God, as 2 Cor. 6. 16. for ye
(says Paul to the Church of the Corinthians) are the Temple of the living God;
as God has said, I will dwell in them, and walk in them: and I will be their
God, and they shall be my people: and so also the Church of God is in the New
Testament called the heavenly Jerusalem, and Sion, as Heb. 12. 22. and Gal. 4.
26. and Rev. 21. 2, 3. and in the New Testament the title of High Priest is
given to Christ, as Heb. 8. 1. and the title of Priest is given to Saints, as
Rev. 1. 6. and the spiritual services of Saints are termed sacrifices for with
such sacrifices, (says the Apostle) God is well pleased.

So that these words in this verse, The Temple of God, and the Arc of his
Testament, are to be mystically understood, and not literally, since such
things are abolished. Now by the Temple of God, we are to understand here the
Church of God, the Saints, the people of God, which in the New Testament are
styled the Temple of God. And as the Arc of the Testament was of old that
wherein the Book of the Law was put in the Temple of old: so in this New
Testament Temple, that is to say in the Church of God, there is the Arc of his
Testament, there is the new and spiritual Laws, and Ordinances of God
contained; Now then this follows upon the sounding of the seventh Trumpet, That
the Temple of God is opened in heaven; that is, that the Church of God which
before seemed to be shut up, and to lie in obscurity, now it shall be opened,
that is, be more fully discovered, and manifested openly, it shall no longer
remain shut up, and in obscurity, but it shall be visible, and in it is seen
the Arc of his Testament, among the Churches, the saints of God, is to be seen
the Law, and Ordinances of God set up in Majesty, and purity; I say, it is to
be seen, it no longer remains in doubt what the Laws and Ordinances of God
are; but in his Temple, in his Church they are to be seen under the sounding of
this 7th Trumpet.

Thus much concerns and is peculiar only to saints, but that which follows
concerns the enemies of Christ, which is in these words; and there were
voices, and lightnings, and thunderings, and an earthquake, and great hail:
these words are to express terrible things to come upon the opposers of
Christ: the like words are used, Rev. 8. 5. To express the terrible Judgments
of God, that were to come upon his enemies in the sounding of the trumpets, in
answer to the prayers of Saints, which are there mentioned to be presented
before God: and we know that thundrings, and lightnings, and hail, is usually
very sad and dreadful weather: and earthquakes, and voices, are very sad and
amazing things. Now such terrible, dreadful, and amazing things do come upon
Antichrist, and his adherents, upon the sounding of the seventh Trumpet, which
will prove exceeding dreadful, distracting, and destructive to them: and this
shall be when the saints shall be in greater freedom, and liberty, and glory,
and splendour then ever they were; and when nothing shall disquiet them, for
these tempests must come upon the wicked: To them there will be earthquakes,
but there shall be none among the Saints, no earthquakes in heaven, (the Saints
and their societies are heaven) but Antichrist and his crew, and conclave is
earth, and upon these come these storms, and these earthquakes, but the saints
are above the reach of them.

And thus much for the opening of this latter part of the eleventh Chapter of
the Revelation, which I have the more fully and distinctly opened, as it now
came in my way, in the clearing of this truth in hand, because I have already
opened all the former part from the first verse to the fifteenth where I now
began; so that now I have opened the whole Chapter.

And now in all these thirteen several Scriptures which I have produced (and
opened as there was need) is this truth which in this twenty seven verse of
this seventh of Daniel is asserted or made as clear as the Sun.

And having thus cleared this truth in general, (which I have done the more
fully, to be a foundation to what I have in the following part of the discourse
to discover.) There are now several queries that may be made, about several
things which are such as these.

How and by what means shall the kingdoms of this world come to be possessed
by Christ and his Saints? Whether at all the material sword shall be made use
of in the cutting down the power of men? When Christ shall begin to take the
kingdoms of the world into his possession? Whether or no he shall take them
into his possession all at once? or when shall the time be when the work shall
be completely finished? Whether multitudes of the Gentiles shall not be first
brought into the belief of the Gospel, and the obedience of Christ? and when
the Jews shall be called? Whether at the time of Christ's taking the whole world
into his possession, he shall not personally appear on earth? Whether his
saints that have been sufferers for his sake, shall not then be raised and
reign on earth? Whether or no the world shall then be burnt with fire? Whether
temporary enjoyments shall be enjoyed by saints when Christ shall take the
world into his possession? Whether the Saints shall then practice any
ordinances? How long this Kingdom of Christ is to continue? and what is to
succeed it?
Now to all these questions I shall give full and clear answers: which that I
may do the more clearly, and without confounding of one thing with another; I
shall not observe that method of answering them particularly as they are laid
down, but (which will be more clear, and pleasant, and satisfactory when it
is done) I shall give a general description of the state of the Church, from
the Year 1645, already past, unto the day of the last general resurrection.
In which description all these Queries, and many others which might be made,
shall be answered.

Now the description or map of this new world, from the first entrance into it,
unto the utmost borders of it, as far as I have yet discovered, (or rather
has been discovered to me from the Scripture,) in my weak travels, inquiries,
searches into it; follows after this short preface.

The Preface.
When the Lord shall build up Sion (says the Psalmist then) Psalm. 102. 16.
he shall appear in his glory: Implying, as if the Lord did never appear so
gloriously as then he does, when he stands forth to build up his Sion: And
indeed it is very true, that when the Church of God is in a desolate afflicted
condition; when the enemies of the Church triumph over them, and make them as
vassals, and slaves to them, and tread them under their feet, as if they were
the offscouring of the world: then is the glory of God much obscured, and the
world cannot at all see it, nor is it so visible to his Saints as it shall be.

But when God arises to shake terribly the earth, and to visit the inhabitants
thereof for their iniquity; especially for the cruelty, and malice, and
inhumanity, they have exercised against his own people, his peculiarly beloved
ones, who bear his own stamp, and image, and name and nature; of whose souls
he is the beloved, and who are the beloved of his soul. Then when he comes
to visit wicked men for these things, and to own his own people, (as he did
the Israelites of old when he brought them out of Egypt,) and to manifest to
all the world that they are indeed his people, and that he will avenge their
quarrel; and when he comes to rebuke, destroy, and scatter the Kings, and the
great ones of the earth for their sakes; and when he sets his people at perfect
liberty, and crowns them with gracious blessings, and destroys all the
Nations that endeavor to injure them, or disturb their peace. Then I say,
when the Lord does these things, does he appear in his glory; and so he did
when he brought the Israelites out of Egypt; and so in a more glorious manner
then ever will he do, when he builds his Sion now in these latter days;
wherein he has spoken of doing greater things for them, then ever has been
done from the beginning of the world, as will appear in the following discourse.

The description of the new JERUSALEM.
THat I may set out the more clearly what the condition of the Church shall be
in these glorious times; it will be requisite, that I briefly take notice of
the condition the Church before this time has been in, as the Holy Ghost has
declared it in Scripture: of which having already spoken in my discourse, on
the former part of the eleventh Chapter of the Revelation, (and also hinted at
it in the beginning of this Book;) I shall therefore here but nominate some
particulars, to which I will refer the Reader, that so I may avoid
unnecessary prolixity: Only necessity compels me for the clear and orderly
proceeding in this present discourse, to recapitulate some particular heads of
that, of which I have already more largely discourst: as thus,

I have showed that the beloved people of God, (styled by the Holy Ghost, The
Holy City, The two witnesses, The Olive trees, and The two Candlesticks: who
witness too and prophecy the truths of Christ,) have for above 1200 years by
divine appointment and decree been kept in a low condition, in a despicable,
sackcloath, mourning, wildernesse-condition: and that so long they have been
warred against, and overcome by the Beast the Pope, and his crew, I have
shown; and that the ten Kings under the Popes Jurisdiction have been of one
mind with him in this, trampling upon, and persecuting the Saints, and that for
this end have the ten Kings given their power to the Beast.

I have also showed that the King of England was one of those that was of one
mind with the Beast: and that having one mind with the Beast he persecuted the
saints, and made war against them, and overcame them for a season as the Beast
did.

I have showed also that the time of this prevalency of the Beast, and the
Kings under him over the Saints, and making war against them, and overcomming
them, was a limited, prefixed time: and that beyond it they could not go, nor
have power to overcome the Saints after that time was expired.

I have also showed how long time it was that the Scripture declares that the
Beast and his Associates should have power to persecute the Saints, and
prevail over them, and that was 1260. years, after which term was expired
they were to prevail no more.

I have also showed when that time expired, and that was in the year 1645.

And now I proceed from this year to describe the state of the Church.

In this year, as I have said did the time of prevalency of the Beast and his
Associates over the saints cease: and though those enemies of the Saints do not
cease to be after this year; but they do and shall remain yet longer, yet
they cease to overcome the Saints, and instead of prevailing they shall be
prevailed against; and instead of overcomming they shall be overcome by the
saints. I say not that they shall never any more make war against the Saints in
these three Nations, nor in France, nor Spain, or Portugal, or Germany, or
any of the other Kingdoms, or any part of the world; but this I say, they shall
never any more overcome them in war. They shall no more tread them under feet;
for it was but Rev. 13. 5, 7.
1260. years that the Beast was to make war against the Saints, so as to
overcome them, and that time is expired, and in this ye are 1645. did it come
to a period, at the expiration whereof the Lord appeared in his glory, and
raised up his Saints out of their low condition, and gave them to overcome
their enemies, and to go on by Jesus Christ their great Lord General,
conquering, and to conquer: causing them to tread down strength, to overcome
the little Horn, giving him into their hands, causing them to do justice upon
him and his Associates, and to overcome all that rise up against them: (This
has already been done, and now to describe what is to succeed as the Scripture
declares it, thus) and now must they go on hence-forward to get victory over
the Beast.

Of the overcomming of the ten Kings.
And as the Lord Jesus has by his Saints already begun with that little Horn,
who came up in the room of three of the ten Kings: so he will go on to overcome
all the ten Kings, as appears, Rev. 17. where at the 14. ver. it is said, that
the ten kings while they were under the Beast should make war with the Lamb,
and this we know they did; for as the Beast made war with the Lamb, and with
his saints, so did the ten Kings also, they gave up their power and strength
unto him; but what follows? They shall make war with the Lamb, and the Lamb
shall overcome them.

But here it may be questioned, how the Lamb shall overcome them? And in what
way? And by what means?

To which I answer, The means by which the Lamb will overcome the ten Kings.
That as they are making war with the Lamb, (for in making war with his
saints, they do make war with the Lamb,) the Lamb shall overcome them; we
know how the late King made war with the Lamb, and how the Lamb overcame him;
we see now how the King of Scots is making war with the Lamb, and how the Lamb
is overcoming him; and so when the rest of the Kings shall make war with the
Lamb, shall the Lamb overcome them; that is plainly thus, the Lamb shall
overcome the ten Kings that make war with him in his Saints, by being in, and
among, and with the Armies of his Saints, subduing their enemies before them;
and as this is clear by what he has already done, so also is it clear in
this very Scripture that speaks of the Lamb his overcomming of them: thus,
And they shall make war with the Lamb, and the Lamb shall overcome them: for he
is King of Kings, and Lord of Lords; and they that are with him are called, and
chosen, and faithful; where it is clear, that when the ten Kings make war with
the Lamb, and that he being Lord of Lords, and King of Kings overcomes them,
that his servants that are called, and chosen, and faithful, attend him, and
are his instruments in this business; else why are they said to be with him
when he does that work? But it clearly implies, that by the Armies of his
saints he does it: as in the 19. of the Revelation it is said (that when he
comes to destroy the Beast, and) that in righteousness he does judge and
make war; that in that war also the armies in heaven (or of his saints)
followed him, so that the Lord Jesus is the great Lord General that goes
forth to overcome the ten Kings, and his saints, his choice, called, and
faithful ones, are the Armies that follow him.

The lawfulness of fighting against the enemies of Christ with the material
sword cleared.
But some may here object or say, is it lawful or warrantable for saints under
the Gospel to fight upon such an account? Does not the Gospel require them to
live peaceably? and not to avenge their own quarrel, but to suffer patiently
the wrongs done unto them, and whosoever smites them on the one cheek to turn
to him the other also, and to bless them that curse them, and to do good to
them that dispitefully use them, and persecute them; and are not saints
appointed to a suffering condition in this world, now under the Gospel
especially? and says not the Apostle that he who would live godly in Christ
Jesus must suffer persecution? and seeing these things are so, how can it be
lawful for saints to fight to maintain their own peace, and to preserve
themselves from suffering at the hands of those that would persecute them, and
do them wrong?

To which I answer, first that it is indeed true that saints should be meek,
and peaceable, and suffer wrongs, and do good for evil in their own private
cases, they are not to avenge themselves: and I believe they will not, but
rather than render evil for evil, will do good for evil; but yet withal we
are to consider, that this is as true, that those saints that are Magistrates
are indispensibly bound to do justice upon evil doers, Romans 13. 4, 5.
and that those saints which are subjects are to be subject to those
Magistrates in all just commands; and this being not denied (as it cannot be
denied) then it follows, that if a Godly Magistrate has some that are evil
doers under him, as that are the eves, or robbers, or murderers, or the like,
it is his duty to do justice upon them: for he is appointed of God for that
end, to be an encouragement to them that do well, and for the punishment of
evil doers, that justice may take place, and that he suffer none of his people
under him to be injured or wronged that would live peaceably and Godly; and if
such a Magistrate should neglect to do his duty in this case it would be his
sin: and he would not answer the end for which he is ordained of God. This
being so, then if the case be so, as that an Army of injurious men should rise
up, either within the territories of good Magistrates, or without, thus to rob,
and spoil, and kill their subjects; they are to command such of their subjects
as they think fit, to suppress those evil doers, and if possibly they can to
prevent them from injuring, and wronging, and spoiling those people whom they
are to protect: and their subjects ought to obey them in these their just
commands: for it is the duty of godly people to obey their superiors in all
lawful things; and now these things may be done by Magistrates, and people now
under the Gospel; and yet they may inviolably observe those rules, in respect
to their own private cases; of suffering patiently the wrongs that are done
unto them, and loving their enemies, and doing good to them that hate them:
These things may they do, and yet ought they not to leave the other undone.

But this may by the way be considered, that there has been times when there
was never a good Magistrate in the world; and then was it the duty of Saints to
be wholly passive, and observe the forementioned rules of patient suffering.

But when providence so orders it, as to place in authority godly men; then we
see it clear, that they should neglect their duty, if they should not protect
those that do well, from the wicked cruelties of evil doers: and thus the
objection is answered, and it is clear, that it is lawful in Gospel times for
Saints to fight against such as would murder, and destroy them (as the
Associates of the Beast would.) Nay, it is not only lawful to do it, but it
would be their sin if they should not do it. Godly Magistrates would sin if
they did bear the sword in vain, and did not punish evil doers: and godly
subjects would sin, if they should not obey the Magistrate when he requires
them to do this lawful thing; which is to be assistant to him in punishing of
evil doers: and thus have I answered this sufficiently, if I should not add
any thing else in answer.

But secondly, in answer to such as make this objection; that though it be true
that the Apostle says, that those that will live godly in Christ Jesus must
suffer persecution; and it was a truth in the Apostles time, and has been so
for almost this sixteen hundred years, since that the Saints have suffered
persecution, either from the Roman Beasts the Emperors, or the Roman Beasts
the Popes, or those that have acted by authority from them: yet it does not
follow, that this will always hold a truth, that the saints shall be always
sufferers: but the contrary is clear, and I know none that deny it; but that as
the Saints have had a suffering time, so they shall have a time of deliverance,
and freedom from suffering; and the rod of the wicked shall not always rest
upon the lot of the righteous; but God will (though he have borne Luke 18. 7.
long) at last avenge the quarrel of his people upon their enemies: and though
for this 1500 or 1600 years, God (having appointed his people thus long to a
suffering condition,) he never called his people to do justice upon their
enemies, as he did his people of old oftentimes under the Law, (as in the time
of Joshua, and of the Judges, and David, etc.) Yet it follows not out that he
may do it now: For it is no where said that now in the latter days, when the
time of the Saints deliverance comes, that they shall not by the sword (as
Israel of old did,) subdue the enemies of God, which are also their enemies.

I say it is no where said they shall not so do, but in several places it is
said that they shall so do, as in that known place in the 149 Psalm, (which
never was yet so eminently fulfilled as it shall be in these latter days,)
Where the Psalmist in express terms says, that the Saints shall execute
vengeance upon the heathen, and punishment upon the people; and bind their
Kings in chains, and their Nobles in fetters of iron; and execute upon them
the judgment written. And doubtless the time is coming, wherein the Saints
in a most glorious manner shall have the honor to do these things: And this
is clear likewise in the 110 Psalm, where the Psalmist speaks expressly of
the time, when the enemies of Christ shall be made his footstool, as appears
in the first verse; The Lord said unto my Lord, sit at my right hand until I
make thine enemies thy footstool. Now Jesus Christ when he ascended up to
Heaven, is said there to sit at the right hand of God, Mark 16. 19. and there
he sits, and there he must sit, until the time come that all his enemies
be made his footstool (says the Psalmist.) And in the fifth verse, speaking
of that time, when they shall be made his footstool, he speaks thus, The Lord
at thy right hand, (that is, the Lord Christ at the right hand of God* shall
strike through Kings in the day of his wrath, and he shall judge among the
heathen, and fill the places with dead bodies, and wound the heads over many
Countries. This is a great work that he will do, wound the heads over many
Countries, strike through Kings in his wrath; but what instruments shall the
Lord Jesus use in doing these things, he being at the right hand of God? that
is answered in the second and third verses, The Lord shall send the rod of thy
strength out of Sion, -- and thy people shall be willing in the day of thy
power. Here it is clear that the sons of Sion, are and shall be the Lords
instruments, the rod of his strength, and they shall be willing in this day of
Christ's power.

Another very clear place to this purpose, we have, Esa. 54. 15, 16, 17. The
whole Chapter is a Prophecy of the happy estate of the Church in these latter
days: But that which is observable to this purpose, is in these words; In
righteousness thou shall be established, thou shall be far from oppression,
for thou shall not fear, and from terror for it shall not come near thee. But
how shall this be? shall they have no enemies at all to oppress them, nor
terrify them? yes, they shall have enemies, but they shall have no power to
oppress them: nay, they shall not so much as be any fear, or terror at all
unto them; such confidence shall they have that they shall overcome them; for
so it follows in the next verse. Behold they shall gather together, but not by
me; whosoever shall gather together against thee, shall fall for thy sake --
and no weapon that is formed against thee shall prosper; and every tongue that
shall rise against thee in judgment, thou shall condemn. This is the heritage
of the servants of the Lord, and their righteousness is of me, says the Lord.
Thus its clear, that though the Church in these times have enemies, and though
these enemies do gather together, and rise up against them, yet Saints shall
not fear them, nor at all be terrified by them. Why? The Lord has promised,
that all their enemies shall fall before them, and though they make weapons and
fight against the Saints, yet they shall not prosper; But the Saints shall
overcome them in all the battles they fight.

Again, that the Saints shall in these latter days, be the instruments of
Christ in subduing his enemies, is clear, as in the fourteenth and sixteenth
verses of the seventeenth of the Revelation, and in the nineteenth Chapter; so
also in the sixth verse of the 18 Chapter, where the Lord gives an express
commission and command to his people, to execute his just vengeance upon his
and their enemies, in these words; Come out of her my people, -- and reward
her, even as she has rewarded you, and double unto her double according to her
works: in the cup which she has filled, fill to her double; how much she
has glorified her self and lived deliciously, so much torment and sorrow give
her: And thus much in answer to this objection.

Thus have I shown that the Lamb having raised his Saints, has in part
overcome, and is going on to overcome the ten Kings; in which he will make use
of his saints as his instruments.

And now I am to go on to declare, How the ten Kings shall so embrace Christ,
as they shall hate the whore.
that as the ten Kings or Kingdoms, (for it is not the Kings alone but the
Kingdoms also that he will overcome) shall be subdued by the Lamb and his
saints: So will he so pour out his spirit upon the people of those Kingdoms,
as they shall not unwillingly, (I mean many of them, or at least such a part
as shall rule the rest in those Kingdoms) but willingly yield obedience to him
that has subdued them: and that in love to him. And this appears in the
sixteenth verse; Rev. 17.
And the ten horns which thou saw upon the Beast, these shall hate the
whore, and make her desolate, and naked, and shall eat her flesh, and shall
burn her with fire. Thus, those that were once one with the Beast, when they
are overcome by the Lamb, shall have such clear light given to them to
discover truth; and shall be so freed from the smoke of the bottomless pit,
which is in the Beasts Kingdom: and shall have such clear light given to
them, as they so clearly see the delusions, and the abominable filthy practices
of the Babylonish crew, as their hearts shall rise against them, and they shall
loath and hate them; and then shall willingly, and freely yield obedience to
the Lamb that overcame them, and ruin that cursed City Rome, which is styled
the Whore, the Mother of Harlots and abominations of the Earth. Of this
destruction of Rome I shall speak more fully in its place: But first I must
declare what things must precede it; for about these days, when the Kings (or
Kingdoms) are thus overcome, and also converted and enlightened, and before the
ruin of Rome, the Gospel shall be preached universally unto all Nations, and
Kindreds, and Tongues, and People, which doubtless will be effectual to the
bringing in of multitudes, both Jews and Gentiles, the manner of which I should
here proceed, clearly and particularly to describe; but before I proceed any
further therein, I shall make a little necessary digression.

For first, I must make it to appear, Jesus Christ in the year 1645. began to
take his Kingdom.
that Jesus Christ in the year 1645. began to take his Kingdom, and this I
shall clear, to the end we may the more orderly proceed in describing what is
to follow.

Now that it is so, appears Rev. 11. where it is said, that when the witnesses
are raised, that then the seventh Trumpet was sounded, and then it is expressly
said, that the kingdoms of this world are become the Kingdoms of our Lord and
of his Christ: and he shall reign for ever and ever. Thus expressly is it said
to be done upon the resurrection of the witnesses, and before all his
judgments are powered out upon his enemies, some of which are mentioned in the
following verses, And so in this 27. verse of this seventh Chapter of Daniel it
is said, that when the time, times, and half a time are come to an end, and
the little Horn is overcome by the Saints, that immediately upon this, the
Kingdom, and Dominion, and the greatness of the Kingdom under the whole
heaven shall be given to the people of the Saints of the most High; whose
Kingdom is an everlasting Kingdom: and all Rulers shall serve and obey him.

But it may be objected, how can this be said to be so, seeing that we see the
great Monarchs of the world, or the toes of the 4 Monarchs (mentioned Dan. 2.)
among whom the world is divided, do yet possess most of the several Dominions
under the whole heaven: these only of England and Ireland excepted; and they do
not any of them stoop to the Scepter of Christ, nor to his Government, but
they do exclude it wholly, and rule according to their own tyranicall wills and
pleasures?

To this I answer, That although we see not yet those many Kingdoms and
Dominions of the world subjected unto Christ; yet this may be true
notwithstanding, and will appear, if we consider that the Kingdom of Christ
in the beginning of it (in the second of Daniel) is said to be a stone cut out
of the Mountain without hands, that should smite the Image upon his feet, and
break them to pieces: which stone was to become a glorious Kingdom, and fill
the whole earth; by which it appears, that the beginning of this Kingdom
should be so small as it should not appear whence it came, it should be a
stone cut out of the Mountain, it should not appear to be any Mountain, but
to be a stone at first, but afterward to become a great Mountain, and fill the
whole earth; Again, at first it should appear as a stone cut out of the
Mountain without hands, it should so miraculously appear at first as it
should seem to be done without hands, without the power, or strength, or help
of the Kings, Princes, or Monarchs of the world; and when the witnesses were
first raised, what help of the strength, and power of the Kings and Monarchs of
the world had they? What hands assisted them? Were they not a company of poor
weak despised people in the eyes of the world, that were indeed but as a
little stone cut out of the Mountain of the whole world without hands? and yet
this little stone cut out of the Mountain without hands must, and undoubtedly
shall smite the Image upon his feet, and break in pieces the Iron, and the
Clay, and the Brass, and the silver, and the Gold together, and not cease
until its self become a Mountain, filling the whole earth. Jesus Christ
having begun to take to him his great power, and to reign, will not cease
until he have subjected every Dominion to his Royal Scepter, and made them to
serve and obey him: which he is going on apace to do; and will doubtless go on
swifter yet; and the nearer he is to the end of his work, the swifter is his
motion like to be.

Thus have I digrest from what was in hand (being to describe the manner of
bringing in of multitudes to the obedience of Christ) to this end, that notice
might be taken of this along as I go, that what Christ does herein, is in order
to the becoming a great mountain: according to the phrase of the Prophet; but
now to return.

I was showing, When the Gospel must be preached to all nations.
how that when the Lamb had overcome the ten Kings, that then before the ruin
of Rome, the Gospel should be universally Preached unto all Nations; and this
is clear Rev. 14. In the five first verses of that Chapter we have a
declaration of Jesus Christ his standing upon mount Sion, his appearing for to
own his people, and of his peoples being gathered unto him, which are described
to be pure, and undefiled, and redeemed ones to God, and to the Lord Jesus: and
they are said to be the first fruits, and to follow the Lamb wheresoever he
goes; implying, that they are the first of those that were called to wait
upon the Lamb in the services that he has to do for them in order to the
setting up of his Kingdom. They were brought in to him before the everlasting
Gospel was generally preached, and before the fall of Babylon. They were the
first fruits. Now who are these first fruits that now stand upon mount Sion
with the Lamb, and follow him whithersoever he goes? Doubtless, those whom he
has now called forth to follow him, and those that he will call out of the
rest of the ten Kingdoms. Well what follows? In the 6, 7, and 8. verses. And I
saw an Angel fly in the midst of heaven, having the everlasting Gospel to
preach unto them that dwell on the earth; and to every nation, and kindred, and
tongue, and people: saying with a loud voice, fear God and give glory to him;
for the hour of his judgment is come, and worship him that made heaven, and
earth, and the sea, and the fountains of waters: and there followed another
Angel, saying, Babylon is fallen, is fallen, that great City, etc. Here we see
that before the fall of Babylon, and yet after the first fruits are come in to
the Lamb, the Gospel must be preached to all Nations: and doubtless,
glorious and wonderful will be the proceedings of Jesus Christ in the world,
now that he has begun to take the Kingdoms and Dominions thereof into his
possession; he has done great things in some Kingdoms already, and he will do
the like in others shortly; and will power out his spirit withal upon them,
and so cause the light to appear unto them, as shall effectually discover unto
them the baseness, the viciousness, the filthiness, and the abominablenesse,
of the cursed Doctrines of the Beast, and the whore: and cause them to loath
them, and to publish and manifest their dislike and hatred of them to all the
world: and with much zeal and fervency of spirit will all such as shall be
enlightened, and thereunto qualified, preach and publish the clear truths of
the Gospel, in opposition to the false Doctrines of Antichrist, in all parts
of the world, and unto all nations: discovering also unto them the glad tidings
of the Gospel, to the saving of their souls, and the turning of them from
Idols and vanities to serve the true and living God.

Of the Jews Conversion.
ANd by this means way will be made for the bringing in of the Jews, who are
at this day earnestly expecting of, and waiting for the coming of the Messiah;
Christ the anointed to be their King, their Savior, and their Prophet: But
before the ten Kings do hate the Whore, and before they manifest to all the
world a detestation of her, they cannot come in; but then shall the everlasting
Gospel be preached to all Nations, Jews and Gentiles; and a spirit of zeal,
for Christ will be then upon the Saints, so as they shall not be able to
withhold from preaching the Gospel more generally in all the world.

But if now any faithful and able Minister of the new Covenant, which is the
Ministration of life, and the Ministration of the Spirit; should go and preach
Jesus Christ unto the Jews, and publish glad tidings to them, and tell them
that the Messiah is come, and that Jesus Christ is he who will be their King,
and Lord, and Prophet, and Savior, and will save them from all their sins,
if they believe in him; and that he will restore all things to them, and do
glorious things for them; alas! they would scarce now say of such, Blessed is
he that comes in the Name of the Lord: and why? because they cannot believe,
that the Lord Jesus Christ in whom we believe, and rejoice, and glory; and who
is our light, and life, and peace, and joy, and strength, and all in all; is
indeed the Messiah, and the Savior of all the ends of the earth, as we know,
and believe he is: and why cannot they believe it? because that great Whore,
the City of Rome, who pretends to have power over all that are called
Christians, is such a filthy, abominable, hateful strumpet; such a mother of
harlots, and abominations. What is the present let of the Jews cunversion.
Whereas the Jews keep close to the Old Testament, and to the Law contained
therein, which is holy, just, and good: And they know, and are assured in the
Old Testament, that when the Messiah comes, he will turn away ungodliness
from Jacob; he will cleanse them from all their corruptions, and all their
ways that are not good; and that they that are his shall be a holy people, a
people taught of God: and therefore they cannot believe him to be the true
Messiah, whom such polluted, openly profane, and impudently filthy creatures,
as the Romanists are, profess to be their Savior. For besides many others,
there are five things especially, which the Jews take offense at, in the
practices of that cursed crew: as

First, their worshipping of Images, and statues, and crosses, and crucifixes,
and such like trumpery.

Secondly, their loathsome, hateful, and excessive giving up of themselves
unto unclean lusts; tolerating and allowing themselves, and others in them; as
in fornication, adultery, sodomie, and beastiality; practices which the very
heathen abhor: and yet these abominable sins the Popes, Cardinals, Bishops, and
Priests, and others of all ranks are frequent in the practice of: granting
liberty to all that are under their jurisdictions, to live in the practice of
them; if they do but purchase a pardon, with money from the Pope for them.

Thirdly, frequent murders, teaching it to be no sin to murder an Heretic,
and tolerating such as are murderers.

Fourthly, Their tolerating of drunkenness, and oaths.

Fifthly, Their allowing of sorcery, and witchcraft: most of their Priests
being sorcerers.

For these things especially, but for many others also are the Jews offended,
and cannot believe him to be the true Messiah that shall be the Savior of such
profane persons; for they are assured that such persons cannot be the people
of God: They know that Adulterers, and Idolaters, and Sorcerers, and
Murderers, and Swearers, and Liars shall not enter into the Kingdom of God.
None shall come into his holy Ps. 15. 1, 2. and 24. 2, 3.
Hill, says David, but such as have clean hands, and a pure heart; and this
they know, and therefore do hate the Popish crew.

But when the Lamb shall have overcome the ten Kingdoms, and shall have put
them into a new frame and posture: and when his glory shall be wonderfully seen
among his people, and all the world shall hear how gloriously he shall
manifest himself among them; in giving of his people miraculous victories
over, and unheard of success against the Beast and his Associates, and that in
such a wonderful manner as the like has not been heard of; and when the Jews
shall hear of this, and hear how the Kingdoms are fallen from the Beast; and
how they loath those abominable practices with a perfect hatred; and how that
they do all set themselves against that cursed company; and intend to make them
desolate, and utterly to destroy them as the enemies of him who is the true
Christ. At this time, I say, way will be made for the bringing of them in, and
then the Gospel in the purity of it shall be preached unto them: being wholly
freed from the imbasing mixtures of Romes inventions, and the pure Gospel of
Jesus Christ shall in the preciousnesse, and sweetness, and glory of it, be
clearly heldforth unto them, and they then will begin to be convinced, seeing
that our Lord Jesus Christ does manifest his wrath and displeasure against that
profane sort of men, and ruins them, and destroys them, and takes vengeance
on them, for all their abominations that they have committed, and all the
murders, and cruelties that they have exercised upon his holy people, whom now
he ownes, and gloriously goes on to save them with outward and external
salvation, as well as inward; and giving of them to tread upon the necks of
their enemies, and to be exalted above the Nations: Then, I say, clear way
will be made for them to be brought in, and to beleev the Lord Jesus to be
indeed their King, and Savior, and Prophet, and to give up themselves to him,
and to his protection; and when they shall thus do, they shall have the spirit
abundantly poured out upon them; and they shall bemoane themselves for their
folly, in that they have so long rejected Jesus Christ: and shall then look
upon this Jesus whom they have pierced, and shall mourn for him as for an only
son, as appears, Zach. 10. and that Scripture seems to import, that such
shall be the spirit of grace, and supplication, and so strongly shall that
spirit work in them, as they shall therein exceed us; for grace shall be so
powerful, and love shall work so wonderfully in them, and so melt their
hearts, as that they shall be so deeply afflicted for their having rejected
Jesus Christ, as they shall be in bitterness, as one that is in bitterness
for his first borne; and being so in good earnest, it is said that each soul
shall mourn apart.

Of the admirable manner in which the Jews shall be converted.
And for the manner of this their unfaigned conversion, the Holy Ghost speaks,
as if this work should be done very suddenly, and very admirably, as appears,
Isa. 66. 7, 8. Before Sion traveled she brought forth; before her pain came
she was delivered of a man child; who has heard such a thing? Who has seen
such a thing? Shall the earth be made to bring forth in one day? shall a Nation
be brought forth at once? For as soon as Sion travelved she brought forth her
children; Here it is clearly employed, that the work shall be very admirable,
and be very suddenly, strangely, and unexpectedly done. It shall be done as it
were before any work is visibly begun, and before those ordinary preparations
to such a work, that do use to precede the same work in others, at other
times, when others have been begotten and borne to Christ, there has been a
long traveling in birth for them before they have been brought forth, and the
pains, and the pangs of the new birth do ordinarily precede the bringing of it
forth, in some more, in some less, in all some; but here it is said, Before
she traveled she brought forth, before her pain came she was delivered. O
what a wonderful! what an admirable thing is this! and therefore in the next
verse it follows by way of admiration, who has heard such a thing! who has
seen such a thing! as if it had been said, this is a thing which has not been
heard of, these are things that never have been seen; and can ye believe such
things? Shall the earth be made to bring forth in one day? Shall a Nation be
borne at once? And shall these things be so indeed? Yea, they shall: for it
follows, As soon as Sion traveled she brought forth her Children. The work
of the birth of a Nation shall be very sudden. The earth shall bring forth in
one day.

Zion no sooner traveled but she brought forth her Children; it was so soon,
and her travel so quickly over, as it may in comparison of others, be said to
be no travel, but to be done before travel, and before pain came; a parallel
place to this we have Isa. 49. Where the Lord says, that though Sion said, my
Lord has forsaken me, and the Lord has forgotten me: that yet he had not
forgotten them, but they were graven upon the palms of his hands: and that
their walls were continually before him: and that the time should come when he
would wonderfully enlarge them; and therefore says in the 20. verse, The
children which thou shall have after thou have lost the other, shall say again
in thine ears: the place is too straight for me, give place to me that I may
dwell. And at the 21. verse, Then shall thou say in mine ears, who has
begotten me those? I have lost my children, and am desolate, a captive, and
removing to and fro, and who has brought up these? behold I was left alone;
these, where they? It is a broken expression (for thsre is no other word added
in the Heb: to, where they?) showing amazedness at the miraculousnes of the
thing. It shall be of such a sudden, that those multitudes shall be brought in,
after the Churches being desolate, a Captive, and being removed to and fro, up
and down at the pleasure of tyrants: when her children seemed to be all lost,
and none of the Sons of Sion could as it were visibly appear: that she shall
say in her heart, who has begotten me these? Or how came I so suddenly to have
so many Children? Who has brought them up? Or what shall I say? Where they?
What a miracle is it that I should have such a multitude of Children, on such a
sudden, after my desolated, captivated, and wandering condition? Thus in these
Scriptures it appears that this work shall be very sudden, in a very short
time it shall be done: a Nation shall be borne at once: and the Earth shall
bring forth in a day: which implies a very short time; but to consine it to a
natural day, consisting of 24 hours, I see no reason nor necessity of so
understanding it; but it is usual in the Scripture to account a day for a
year, and of more then so, of necessity we may not understand it: because the
holy Ghost has here so many emphaticall expressions to set out the suddenness
of it: as that it shall be sudden beyond what has been heard of; Who has
heard such a thing? And that it shall be done so suddenly, as that those usual
preparations that do precede the same work in others, shall scarcely appear
in this; and so sudden that Sion her self is as it were astonished at the
thoughts of it, and looks on it as that which she cannot imagine how it came to
pass; so that we may rather take liberty to conclude, that it shall be indeed
done in a natural ordinary day: then to conceive that it shall be more than a
year (which is a Prophetical day) a doing; for then it would not be so
miraculous, if it should be years a doing; but miraculous, and unheard of, it
shall be for the suddenness of it; As soon as Sion traveled she brought
forth, and a Nation is borne at once. By which Nation as we may no doubt
understand the Nation of the Jews: so may we unquestionably also be persuaded,
that the fullness of the Gentiles which is to come in with them, and upon their
coming in, is herein also included, and not at all to be excluded; for the
Scripture speaks as fully every where for the bringing in of the Gentiles by
multitudes in these latter days, as for the Conversion of the Jews.

But here some may object and say, it is true indeed; the Gentiles may not be
here excluded: for, for any thing appears to us, it is the Gentiles only that
are here spoken of; and we know no ground you have to speak particularly of
the bringing in of the Nation of the Jews, any more then they have been
brought in already at the first preaching of the Gospel, when the partition
wall was broken down between Jews and Gentiles; and both were equally alike
received into the favor of God, and made heirs of life by Jesus Christ: Yea
even some of those who had crucified and slain him; and they being then some of
them converted, were all one with the Gentiles: and for the most part of them,
being now mixed among the Gentiles, probably when the Gospel is preached to
all Nations, they may be converted among the Gentiles, without any distinction
from the Gentiles.

To which I answer, that though it be true, that the partition wall is broken
down, The objections against the Jews conversion removed.
that was between Jews and Gentiles, and both were equally alike received into
the favor of God, and made heirs of life by Jesus Christ: and we are all one
in Jesus Christ, the Gentiles in uncircumcision are saved, as well as the Jews
in their circumcision: For Romans 2. 28, 29.
he is not a Jew that is one outwardly, neither is that circumcision which is
outward in the flesh; but he is a Jew that is one inwardly, and circumcision
is that of the heart, in the spirit, and not in the letter, whose praise is not
of men, but of God. I say, though this be an undoubted truth, and that many of
the Jews in the first preaching of the Gospel were converted, and not their
external privileges in being Israelites, obtained that mercy of coming to
the knowledge of Christ; but the election obtained it, as the Apostle expresses
it, Romans 11. 7. And as there were in Elijahs time, seven thousand that had not
bowed the knee to Baal, (though few were visible to Elijah) so says Paul, that
in his time there were a remnant of the Jews, according to the election of
grace, that were saved, ver. 4, 5. of which number himself was one, being an
Israelite of the seed of Abraham, of the Tribe of Benjamin, verse first: and he
withal grants, that the small remnant, according to the election of Grace
being saved; the rest were blinded, and had a spirit of slumber upon them, as
verses 7, 8. I say though these things be so, yet certain it is, that the
Jews shall be distinctly called in these latter days; and this appears here
in this eleventh of the Romans, for at the eleven and twelve verses, Paul thus
expresses himself: I say then, have they stumbled that they should fall? God
forbid. It is as if he had said, have they so stumbled that they should fall
so, as not to rise again? God forbid. How then do they fall? and how are they
stumbled? May it be said to Paul; Why says he, God forbid, that in stumbling
they should have such a fall, as not to rise any more: No, it is not so; but
through their fall, salvation is come to the Gentiles; and the Gentiles are
thereby received into the favor of God, and made heirs of the promises, and
of the privileges, and prerogatives, that are by Jesus Christ; and they are
become the sons and daughters, and people of the living God. What then, is
this done to exclude those Jews, who are fallen through unbelief, from ever
being received into favor again? No, for says the Apostle; through their
fall, salvation is come to the Gentiles. For what end? To provoke the Jews to
jealousy; so that there is a time to come, in which by beholding the glorious
estate, in which the Gentiles are by Jesus Christ, the Jews shall be provoked
to jealousy. And now then says the Apostle, if the fall of them, be the
riches of the world; and the diminishing of them, the riches of the Gentiles,
how much more their fullness? It is as if the Apostle had said; by the fall of
the Jews salvation is come to the Gentiles: But this shall be the fruit of
the Gentiles conversion, the Jews shall at last, be thereby provoked to
jealousy, when this spirit of slumber is removed from them, (which now is on
them, verse 8.) And when they have received a seeing eye, and a hearing ear
again; then they shall be provoked to jealousy, and beholding the salvation,
and glory of the Gentiles, they shall be moved with emulation against the
Gentiles; envying, as it were, that they should enjoy that happiness, and
glory, which they have lost, and which did belong to them; and which was in the
first place offered to them: But o what indignation will they have against
themselves, for their great sin, in rejecting their Lord and Savior! and then,
says the Apostle, when they shall come in; the glory of the Gentiles will be
much augmented: For says he, If the fall of them be the riches of the World,
and the diminishing of them the riches of the Gentiles; how much more their
fullness?

And at the 15 verse, and so on, the Apostle does again clearly affirm, that
those fallen Jews, shall be again restored; and positively says, that
blindness in part, is happened to Israel; until the fullness of the Gentiles be
come in, and so all Israel (that is that people that were the natural Olive
branches) shall be saved, and graffed in again; as it is written, There shall
come out of Sion a deliverer, and he shall turn away ungodliness from Jacob,
for this is my Covenant unto them when I shall take away their sins; this
promise they had, Isa 59. 20. which the Apostle applies particularly to them
the natural seed of Jacob, and therefore of them he says, as concerning the
Gospel they are now enemies for your sakes, but as touching the Election they
are beloved for the Fathers sake, (what more clear?) For the gifts and calling
of God are without repentance, so that says the Apostle, they are an Elect
people, and they are beloved, and the time shall come when they shall be called
into the bosom of love, for the gifts and calling of God are without
repentance.

And in the 30. 31, 32. verses the Apostle does again argue it out of all
doubt, that they shall again obtain mercy; for says he, for as ye in times
past have not believed, yet have now obtained mercy through their unbelief;
even so have these also now not believed, that through your mercy they also may
obtain mercy: wherein the Apostle says thus much; as your former unbelief
excluded you not from mercy, but through their fall you which once did not
believe have now obtained mercy; so they now being in unbeleefe are in no worse
condition than you once were, and therefore they through your mercy shall also
obtain mercy; and so the Apostle lays down this conclusion, That God has
concluded them all in unbelief that he might have mercy upon all, and
thereupon he breaks out into the admiration of God in these words, O the depth
of the riches both of the wisdom and knowledge of God, how unsearchable are
his Judgments, and his ways past finding out! And thus I think is it
sufficiently cleared by Paul, that the Jews in particular are to be called,
and that the fullness of the Gentiles must come in with them; but I shall add
of many only two witnesses more to confirm it, and the first shall be the
Prophet Ezekiel, who ( Chap. 37.) under the figure of two sticks, united into
one, clearly declares, that the two Tribes, and the ten Tribes which were
divided in Rehoboams time, Judah and Benjamin, remaining under Rehoboam the Son
of Solomon, and the other ten Tribes being rent from them departing unto
Jeroboam the Son of Nebat. I say, Ezekiel declares, that the two Tribes, and
the ten Tribes that were thus divided under two Kings, should be again united
under one King, even one that should come of the seed of David, and being
united they should be one Nation in the Land upon the Mountains of Israel, and
one King should be King to them all, and they should never be divided into two
Kingdoms any more at all, neither should they defile themselves any more with
their Idols, and their detestable things, nor with any of their transgressions.
But, says the Lord, I will save them out of all their dwelling places where
they have sinned, and will cleanse them, so shall they be my people, and I will
be their God, and my servant David shall be a King unto them, and they shall
have one shepherd; they shall also walk in my Judgments, and observe my
statntes, and do them; and they shall dwell in the Land that I have given unto
Jacob my servant, wherein your fathers have dwelt, and they shall dwell
therein, even they, and their children, and their childrens children for ever;
and my servant David shall be their Prince for ever.

Now the Prophet Ezekiel, we know, prophesied in the time when the two Tribes
were carried Captives into Babylon, and began to prophecy in the fifth year
of Jehotakims Captivity, (the ten Tribes being carried into Captivity above a
hundred and ten years before by Shalmanezer the King of Assyria, even in the
sixth year of the reign of Hezekiah over Judah) and at this time, when they
were thus in Captivity, does Ezekiel thus prophecy of their returning again
into their own Land; but if it shall be said, that so they did return again
after they had been seventy years in Babylon, I answer, it is true, the two
Tribes which were carried into Babylon did return again in Ezra's and
Nehemiah's time, but we never read of the returning again of the ten Tribes
which were carried into Captivity by the King of Assyria, and scattered into
far Countries so long before the two Tribes were captivated; for there is
nothing at all upon record that ever they returned into their own Land again;
but here is a promise that the Lord will take the Children of Israel from among
the Heathen whither they be gone, and will gather them on every side, and bring
them into their own Land; and not only so, but they shall never any more be
defiled with their Idols and with their detestable things, nor with any of
their transgressions, but I will save them, says the Lord, out of all places
wherein they have sinned, so shall they be my people, and I will be their God,
etc. Now, though the two Tribes did then return, yet was not these promises
made good unto them, being united with the ten Tribes under one King, and so to
be for ever; nor were those promises that are in this, and in the 36 Chapter,
of dwelling in all prosperity and peace in their own Land without ever being
molested and troubled, and those promises of a plentiful enjoyment of all
spiritual and temporal blessings without being ever any more interrupted
therein, but we know, that though they that were carried Captives to Babylon
did return, yet they enjoyed not peace, nor had those promises made good unto
them in that their return, but were ever and anon interrupted in their peace
by their enemies in Ezra and Nehemiah his time; and besides we find that they
were not so cleansed from their detestable things, and their transgressions,
but the sins of strange wives, of Sabbath-breaking, and of oppression were
found amongst them in that time, and they were all the while they possessed the
land often exercised with much wars; and at last were utterly rooted out of
their own Land, and of Jerusalem by the Romans, in the time of Vespasian the
Emperor.

Therefore certainly, these promises being never yet made good to them, the
time will come (as surely as the word of God is true) in which these promises
shall be made good unto them, to the uttermost jot of them.

Another clear testimony to this truth is given by the Prophet Zachary, Chap.
10. 6, 7, 8, etc. In these words, I will strengthen the house of Judah, and
will save the house of Joseph, (here the two Tribes and the ten Tribes are also
particularly mentioned, the house of Judah and the house of Joseph) and I will
bring them again to place them, for I have mercy on them, and they shall be as
though I had not cast them off; for I am the Lord their God, and will hear
them; and they of Ephraim shall be like a mighty man, and their heart shall
rejoice as through wine, yea their children shall see it and be glad, and their
heart shall rejoice in the Lord: I will hiss for them, and gather them, for I
have redeemed them, and they shall increase as they have increased; and I will
sow them among the people, and they shall remember me in far countries, and
they shall live with their children, and turn again, and I will bring them
again out of the Land of Egypt, and gather them out of Assyria, and I will
bring them into the land of Gilead, and place shall not be found for them --
And I will strengthen them in the Lord, and they shall wall up and down in his
name, says the Lord. Here are clear promises that they should be brought out
of Egypt, and Assyria, and from the far Countries whither they had bin carried,
and brought into their own Land again; and there should be strengthened in the
Lord, and walk up and down in his name: that is, his name, and fear, and
Spirit should be upon them; all which shall come to pass in his due time.

And now by these several witnesses, it is evident, that the Jews in
particular shall be converted and be distinct from the Gentiles, under that
notion of the anciently beloved people of God, the seed of Abraham, Isaac and
Jacob, and that they shall possess their own land, even the land given to
their fathers to possess, the which very many other Scriptures do affirm,
which I forbear to multiply, as conceiving it needless.

And thus having made it clear, how that the Jews shall be called, I should
now come to speak more fully of the calling of the yet unconverted Nations of
the Gentiles also: But there is one remarkable thing which concerns the Jews,
which when they are converted shall be done, of which a word or two in this
place, and it is this: That when the Jews shall be converted and return to
their own Land, as the Lord of old, when he wrought deliverances for them,
caused them to pass through the red Sea, ( Exodus 14. 22.) and through that
mighty river, the river Jordan, ( Josh 3. 17.) on dry ground, wherein he
gloriously appeared unto them: so will he now also dry up the tongue of the
Egyptian sea, to make way for them, as appears, Isa. 11. 11, 12 etc. And it
shall come to pass in that day, that the Lord shall set his hand again the
second time, to recover the remnant of his people which shall be left from
Assyria, and from Egypt, and Pathros, and from Cush, and from Elam, and from
Shinar, and from Hamath, and from the Islands of the Sea; and he shall set up
an Ensign for the Nations, and shall assemble the outcasts of Israel, and
gather together the dispersed of Judah, from the four corners of the earth --
And the Lord shall utterly destroy the tongue of the Egyptian sea: and with his
mighty wind shall shake his hand over the river, and shall smite it in the
seven streams, and make men go over dry-shod; and there shall be an highway
for the remnant of his people, which shall be left from Assyria, like as it
was to Israel in the day that he came up out of the Land of Egypt. Here it is
plain, that thus the Lord will utterly destroy the tongue of the Egyptian Sea,
and smite it in the seven streams, for this very end; that his people, the
people of Israel and Judah, whom he intends to gather out of the four corners
of the earth, where they have been scattered, may have way made for them, at
least those of them, that must come that way, who are in Assyria, that they may
come into their own Land again. This is plainly asserted likewise in Isa. 27.
12, 13. And it shall come to pass in that day, that the Lord shall beat off
from the channel of the river unto the stream of Egypt, and ye shall be
gathered one by one, O ye children of Israel; and it shall come to pass in
that day, that the great trumpet shall be blown, and they shall come which were
ready to perish in the Land of Assyria, and the outcasts in the Land of Egypt,
and shall worship the Lord in the holy mount at Jerusalem.

This is also a clear Prophecy of the calling of the Children of Israel to
the obedience of Christ, their Lord and ours; and of the bringing of them when
they are thus converted into their own land; for which end the river of Egypt
is to be beaten off, that so clear way may be made, for them to go over dry
shod; for when God will work, who shall let it? and when he will bring his
people to any place, it is not vast and great rivers that lying in the way
shall hinder it.

But we find that when the Nation of the Jews, and all the seed of Jacob
shall again be converted unto the Lord; that that great work shall not be too
hard for God to do, but he will do therein that which shall be too hard for men
to believe. As, that a Nation shall be born at once: That they shall come to
the birth, and be brought forth in one day: And that before Sion travelleth,
before the Church does any thing considerable in order to the converting of a
Nation to Christ, it shall be done: It may be before any considerable numbers
of Gospel Ministers are sent to preach the Gospel to them, many thousands may
be converted by the preaching of one, or few, and the the spirit be richly
poured out upon them.
she traveled, she brought forth. These are things too hard for men to
believe, but not too hard for God to do: for when the Lord undertakes the
work, all obstructions shall be removed; and the Lord will suddenly, and
wonderfully convert these Nations; and being converted, they must be brought
into their own land: and if he will have it done, who, or what shall let it? If
the river of Egypt, even the tongue of the Egyptian sea be in the way, he will
beat off from the Chanel of the river, unto the stream of Egypt; yea he will
utterly destroy the tongue of the Egyptian sea, and with his mighty wind,
shall shake his hand over the river, and shall smite it in the seven streams,
and men shall go over dry-shod. So that as the red sea, and the river Jordan,
could not hinder the passage of his people that were to pass that way, when he
brought them out of Egypt; so neither shall the river of Egypt hinder his
people now, from their passage into their own Land.

But it may be queried, why should the river of Egypt be dried up, to make
way for the Israelites coming into their own Land, rather then any other
river, that may lie in their way?

I answer, first, That though the Scripture mention not the drying up of any
river, but the river of Egypt; yet it does not follow, but that there may be
other rivers besides this dried up, to make way for them, if any other rivers
shall be in their way; although the Scripture be silent in it, and mention not
particularly any others.

But secondly, the river of Egypt is chiefly mentioned, as that it shall be
dried up, because that lies in the way in which they must come, when they come
out of the land of Assyria, where its probable that greatest numbers of the
Israelites are: for though the two Tribes may be scattered, and are scattered
in all parts of the world; yet we know that the ten Tribes that were first
carried captives into the Land of Assyria, were never brought forth from
thence: so that it is probable that there may be, and is a greater number of
the Israelites there, then in any part of the world besides, and that may be
the reason why the Scripture, when it mentions any particular places from
whence the Children of Israel shall be gathered, when they shall be converted:
It does chiefly speak of Assyria, as Isa. 11. 11. And it shall come to pass,
that the Lord shall set his hand again the second time to recover the remnant
of his people, which shall be left from Assyria, and from Egypt, and from
Pathros, and from Cush, and from Elam, etc. Here Assyria is chiefly mentioned;
and so again, in this place, Isa. 27. 12, 13. It is said, Ye shall be gathered
one by one, O ye children of Israel; and they shall come which were ready to
perish in the Land of Assyria, and the out cast in the Land of Egypt, and shall
worship the Lord in the holy Mount at Jerusalem: and so again, in Zach. 10.
10. I will bring them again out of the Land of Egypt, and gather them out of
Assyria, and will bring them into the Land of Gilead, etc. In all these places,
Assyria is especially mentioned, from whence the Children of Israel must be
brought. And because of the great number which must be brought out of the Land
of Assyria, the river of Egypt is to be dried up, to make way for them to come
to their own Land; that they may again inhabit Jerusalem, and the Mountains
of Israel, according to the many promises which are made unto them to that
purpose; as Ezekiel. 36 2, 3, etc. And Jer 32. 41, 42, etc. and Zach. 10. 10. And
so much shall suffice to be spoken of the conversion of the Jews.

Of the Gentiles conversion.
ANd thus having discoursed of the conversion of the Jews, I now come to
describe also the conversion of the Gentiles; which about this time, are also
abundantly to be brought in. For so I made it evident before, out of the
fourteenth of the Revelations, that after the Lamb has overcome the ten Kings,
or part of them, before the fall of Babylon, that the everlasting Gospel is to
be preached to all Nations, and Kinreds, and Tongues, and People. Now as the
preaching of the Gospel at that time, will be the more effectual upon the Jews,
because then the wickednesses of Babylon shall be declared against, and
detested, and Jesus Christ shall manifest himself against that wicked crew; so
also will the preaching of the Gospel be the more effectual upon the Gentiles,
because then the judgments of God will be so terribly manifested against the
Idolatrous, sinful, and profane practices of wicked men. For mark, in that
fourteenth of the Revelation, where it is said, that the everlasting Gospel is
to be preached to all Nations, which shall teach men to fear God, and to give
him glory, and to turn from Idols, and to worship him that made the earth, and
the sea, and the fountains of waters; the motive that is given to prevail with
men to receive the Gospel; is this: ( ver. 7.) Because the hour of his
judgment is come. And if we would know what is meant by the hour of his
judgment, it follows in the eighth verse, Babylon is fallen is fallen. Herein
the judgment of God will be evidently manifested against profane ungodly men,
when he comes to ruin that great whore who corrupted all Nations: So that the
light of the glorious Gospel now shining forth, and the judgments of God being
evidently manifested against wicked men, doubtless the Nations that are yet
unconverted, shall then also be abundantly brought in to the obedience of
Christ. And the Scripture everywhere plentifully speaks of this abundant
bringing in of all Nations; As Isa. 2. 2. 3. And it shall come to pass in the
last days, that the mountain of the Lords house shall be established in the top
of the mountains: and what then? (not only the Jews, nor only some of the
Nations, but) all nations shall flow unto it: and they shall not come in by
drops, scatteringly, one now, and another then; but they shall come in by
multitudes; they shall flow unto it. That which comes flowing in, comes in
abundantly. Again, Isa. 60. 1. It is said to the Church, Arise, shine: for thy
light is come, and the glory of the Lord is risen upon thee. This Chapter all
along describes the rising and shining glory of the Church: I have already
quoted it; I shall here only mention those passages in it that speak to this
present purpose. And verse. 3. It is said, And the Gentiles shall come to thy
light, and kings to the brightness of thy rising. And verse. 5. The abundance of
the sea shall be converted unto thee, and the forces of the Gentiles shall come
unto thee. And verse. 9, 10 11. 14. 15, 16. It Is said that the Isles shall wait
upon the Lord. And again it is said that the Kings of the Gentiles and the
forces of the Gentiles shall come in to the Church, and be ready to serve and
minister to it. Again, Isa. 62. 2, 3. where the glory of the Church is also
described, it is said thus to Sion; The Gentiles shall see thy righteousness,
and all kings thy glory; and thou shall be called by a new name, which the
mouth of the Lord shall name; and shall be a crown of glory in the hand of the
Lord etc. And, Isa. 49. 23. Kings shall be thy nursing fathers, and their
Queens thy nursing mothers: and they shall bow down to thee with their face
toward the earth. And Isa. 66. 12. It Is said that the glory of the Gentiles
like a flowing stream, shall come into the Church. And verse. 18, 19, 20. I will
gather all nations and tongues, and they shall come and see my glory; and I
will set a sign among them, and I will send those that escape unto the
nations, to Tarshish Pull, and Lud; to those that draw the bow, to Tubal, and
Javan; to the Isles afar off, that have not heard my fame, neither have seen my
glory; and they shall declare my glory among the Gentiles. And Zech. 9. 9, 10.
Rejoice, O daughter of Sion, behold thy King comes unto thee: he is just and
having salvation, and he shall speak peace unto the heathen, and his dominion
shall be even from sea to sea, and from the river even to the ends of the
earth. And Zech. 8. 21, 22, 23. The inhabitants of one city shall go to
another, saying, Let us go speedily to pray before the Lord, and to seek the
Lord of hosts: I will go also. Yea many people, and strong nations shall come
to seek the Lord of hosts in Jerusalem, and pray before the Lord. And in those
days men shall take hold out of all languages in the nations, even shall take
hold of the skirt of him that is a Jew, saying, We will go with you, for we
have heard that God is with you. Thus the Spirit of God in Scripture has
clearly set forth the conversion of the Gentiles, together with the Jews, in
these several Scriptures that I have mentioned.

And as it is clear in these Scriptures; so there are several other Scriptures,
wherein it is as clear; but I shall add only one more, and it is a Scripture
that speaks of the conversion and turning to God of two particular Nations,
which at this day are yet Idolaters, as well as many others, and in the state
of gross darkness and unbelief; and they are the Egyptians and Assyrians, Isa.
19. the Prophecy hereof begins at verse. 18. In that day shall five cities in
the land of Egypt speak the language of Canaan, and swear to the Lord of hosts:
one shall be called the city of Here Is, (or of the Sun, or of shining glory.) In
that day there shall be an altar to the Lord in the midst of the land of Egypt,
and a pillar at the border thereof to the Lord; and it shall be for a sign,
and for a witness unto the Lord of hosts in the land of Egypt: for they shall
cry unto the Lord, because of the oppressors, and he shall send them a Savior,
and a great one, and he shall deliver them: and the Lord shall be known to
Egypt, and the Egyptians shall know the Lord at that day. Yea they shall vow a
vow unto the Lord and shall perform it: and the Lord shall smite Egypt, he
shall smite and heal it: and they shall return unto the Lord, and he shall be
entreated of them and shall heal them. In that day there shall be a highway
out of Egypt to Assyria: and the Assyrians shall come into Egypt, and the
Egyptians into Assyria: and the Egyptians shall serve with the Assyrians. In
that day shall Israel be the third with Egypt, and with Assyria, even a
blessing in the midst of the land, whom the Lord of hosts shall bless, saying,
Blessed be Egypt my people, and Assyria the work of mine hands, and Israel mine
inheritance.

In this Prophecy it is very clear, that there is a time to come, wherein the
Jews shall again be the beloved people of God; for never yet was there a time,
when Israel, Egypt, and Assyria: were all together at one time acknowledged to
be the people of God: but the time is coming when it shall be so, when not
only the Gentiles alone, but the Jews also; and not only the Jews alone, but
the Gentiles also, shall be the people of God; and when in particular, the
Egyptians, and the Assyrians, which are now so deeply involved in darkness, and
blindness, and have no knowledge of God, shall be a people blessed of the Lord.
For there are in these verses such expressions as do very plainly and clearly
speak the conversion of these Nations. As, that the Lord shall be known to the
Egyptians, and the Egyptians shall know the Lord, and that they shall engage
themselves to the Lord; which is expressed under the terms of swearing to the
Lord, and vowing to the Lord; which do clearly hold forth the engaging of their
hearts to the Lord. And again, it is said that the Egyptians being oppressed
shall cry unto the Lord: but they shall not cry in vain; for in answer unto
their crying, he shall send them a Savior, and a great one; and he shall
deliver them. And besides, it is said that the Egyptians being smitten of the
Lord, shall return, even to the Lord; and he shall be entreated of them, and
heal them; and that the Egyptians being thus converted, they shall then, and
therein be in fellowship with the Assyrians, and the Assyrians with them, and
they both with Israel.

And thus now is it clear in these several Scriptures, (as well as in many
others, which I forbear to mention, to avoid prolixity) that the Gentiles shall
be plentifully and abundantly brought in to the obedience of Christ (whose
dominion must be from sea to sea, from the rivers unto the ends of the earth)
and that not only some Nations, but all Nations shall seek after the Lord; And
that not only the mean, and inferior sort of the people of the Nations, but
some of their Kings, and Queens, and the greatest among them, shall come and
see the glory of the Lord, and become his servants, and be supports under him
to his people: Kings shall be their nursing fathers, and Queens their nursing
mothers, and bring their forces to their support: and they not weak ones, but
many people, and strong Nations (says Zechariah in the place forementioned)
shall come to seek the Lord of Hosts.

And now having shown, that the preaching of the Gospel to all Nations is to
follow upon the Lamb his overcoming the ten Kings, and that this will probably
be the time of the bringing in of Jews and Gentiles, because, that by the Lord
Jesus his so gloriously appearing (for his own people, and against that scarlet
whore, Rome, and the beast, and all that crew) way will be made for the coming
in of Jews and Gentiles. But this by the way I desire may be taken notice of,
That as many of the Nations as the preaching of the Gospel shall not prevail
with, to bring them in to the obedience of Christ, (for multitudes, as I have
made it evident, must come in that way) them shall the sword of Justice subdue,
both before, and at, and after the ruin of Rome. Those whom the grace of the
Gospel, the tenders of love, and the offers of peace win not; them vengeance
and wrath shall overtake. If they will not listen to that voice of the Spirit,
(that says to the Kings of the earth, Be wise now therefore, O ye Kings, and be
instructed, ye Judges of the earth: kiss the Son, lest he be angry, and ye
perish, etc.) then shall he speak unto them in wrath, and vex them in his sore
displeasure; and he shall break them with a rod of Iron, and dash them in
pieces like a potters vessel. Thus he will do with the ten kings, and thus he
will afterward do with the other Nations. But if any of these ten kings that
yet stand out, shall be overcome by his love, and by receiving the clear light
of the Gospel, (for there is no question but those his called, and chosen, and
faithful ones, those firstfruits whom he has now called forth, and engaged in
his works, shall, having the Spirit of their Lord upon them do according to his
ensample, first What course the Armies of the Saints under Jesus Christ, first
will take with the Nations or ten Kingdoms.
offer peace, and publish the clear light of Gospel to them, that if possible
they might be that way won:) I say if any of the ten Kings shall this way be
brought in they will doubtless be very acceptable to Christ. (And who knows
whether or no the Lamb may overcome some of them this way? Whether Spain and
other kingdoms may not be so gained to Christ, and made to hate the whore?) But
if not so, then will he deal with those that are implacable of them, in the way
of his justice, and overcome them (I mean those of them that are implacable:
for some of them shall hate the whore, when they are overcome) in his wrath,
and sore displeasure, as he has already done with those that in maintenance of
the beast, stood it out against him; making his people to execute upon them the
judgment written: for overcome them he will.

Of Romes ruin.
And thus having shown how that the Lamb will overcome the ten Kings; and that
about that time, when some, or all the ten Kings or kingdoms are overcome, and
made to hate the whore, the Gospel shall be universally preached all the world
over:

I now come to show, that when the Lord Christ has thus in larged his kingdom,
and diminished the kingdom of the beast: he shall then go on to cause his
people (those especially of the ten kingdoms) to go on in their work of
breaking down the strength of the beast, and bringing it to nothing, that the
Lord Christ may be all. And in order thereunto, they shall be the instruments
of the utter ruining of Rome: which is that whore mentioned, Rev. 17. 1. As
appears, verse. 18. The woman (or the whore) which thou saw, is that great
city which reigns over the kings of the earth (which Rome then did) I say the
Saints of the ten kingdoms, about this time when these things are done, shall
then be instruments of ruining this whore. And this appears, Rev. 17. 10. And
the ten horns which thou saw upon the beast, these shall hate the whore, and
shall make her desolate, and naked, and shall eat her flesh and burn her with
fire. Where it is very clear, that the ten Kings being overcome by the Lamb,
they shall have such a clear sight of the light of the Gospel, as shall not
only cause them to forsake the principles of darkness that are embraced by
Rome but they shall hate those principles, and hate Rome, for her filthiness,
and cursed lewdness; and shall manifest their hatred, in disrobing her of her
strength, and glory, and pomp, with which the text says she is decked, Rev. 17.
4. All which they shall take from her, and make her naked: And shall that be
all they will do? No: for they will not only make her naked, but will eat her
flesh; will make her destitute, not only of her outward robes of pomp, and
glory, but will eat her very flesh; that is, they will devour and consume that,
without which she can as little consist, as a man can whose flesh is consumed.
So that they shall so far manifest their hatred to Rome, as they shall reduce
her to the greatest straights that can be imagined: And shall they leave there?
No: but they shall burn her with fire. And that the Saints shall deal thus with
her, is again expressed in chap. 18. verse. 6, 7, 8. Where the people of God are
bid to reward Babylon, (that is, Rome) even as she has rewarded them; and
double unto her double according to her works: in the cup which she has filled
fill to her double: how much she has glorified her self, and lived deliciously
so much torment, and sorrow give her. For she says in her heart, I sit a
Queen, and am no widow, and shall see no sorrow: therefore shall her plagues
come in one day, death, and mourning, and famine; and she shall be utterly
burnt with fire: for strong is the Lord God who judges her. Thus it is clear,
that the Saints in the ten kingdoms shall so hate Rome, as they shall plague
her, make her desolate, expose her to great misery, and utterly burn her with
fire. And when this City is thus burnt with fire, Rev. 18. 6.
because she has made her self drunk with the blood of the Saints, and the
blood of the Martyrs of Jesus; and because she has made all Nations drunk with
the wine of the wrath of her fornication, verse. 2.
and the Kings of the earth have committed fornication with her; and because
that when she comes to be destroyed, verse. 24.
in her will be found the blood of Prophets, and of Saints, and of all that
were slain upon the earth; therefore, when she comes to be destroyed, she shall
be made a monument of vengeance, (as being the most cursed City in the world,)
and therefore it is said that when Babylon is fallen, she is become the
habitation of devils, and the hold of every foul spirit, and a cage of every
unclean and hateful bird, Rev. 18. 2. And the voice of harpers, and musicians,
and trumpeters, shall be heard no more at all in thee; and no crafts men of
whatsoever craft he be, shall be found any more in thee. And the sound of a
millstone shall be heard no more at all in thee; and the light of a candle shall
shine no more at all in thee; and the voice of the bridegroom and of the bride,
shall be heard no more at all in thee: for thy merchants were all the great men
of the earth; for by thy sorceries were all Nations deceived.

Thus Rome, when it is destroyed, shall be no more inhabited by the sons of
men, it is such a cursed City; but on the contrary, it shall become the hold of
every foul spirit, and a cage of every unclean and hateful bird, and the wild
beasts of the desert shall lie therein, and it shall be full of doleful
creatures Owls, and Satyrs* and Dragons; as it is at large expressed, Isa. 34.
9, 10, 11, etc. And Isa. 13. 19, 20, etc.

Thus Rome shall be ruined; and over it is ruins shall the Saints rejoice, as
Rev. 18. 20. Rejoice over her, thou heaven, and ye holy Apostles and Prophets:
for God has avenged you on her. But her confederates will greatly lament and
bewail her; As verse. 9, 10, etc. Thus much for Romes ruin.

Of what is to follow Romes ruin.
But the enemies of Jesus Christ and his Saints, are not wholly ruined, when
Rome is thus destroyed; but many will be left to bewail it: and amongst the
rest, it appears that the Beast, viz. the Pope still remains undestroyed; for
he is one of the last that shall be destroyed: and the manner how it shall be
is this: When these things we have spoken of shall be thus done, viz. When the
ten Kings are overcome and do yield obedience to the Lamb, and the Gospel is
universally preached, and Jews and Gentiles are abundantly converted to Christ,
and Rome is ruined; the Pope being then turned out of Rome, and he with his
Cardinals, Bishops, and Jesuits, being lurking in some other places, up and
down in the world, shall still act like himself, and show himself to be the
Beast; still retaining his cursed nature, continuing in enmity against Christ
and his Saints, and being so, shall resolve not to give all for lost yet,
though he be thus far prevailed against, but shall resolve to make one
desperate attempt more against the Saints; and to this end, shall send abroad
his Emissaries unto all the unconverted Kings, and great men of the earth, whom
neither the Gospel of peace, nor sword of war has overcome, and shall gather
them all together; which shall make a very great Army with which they shall
think to destroy all the Saints, who at this time will be increased to a very
great number, the Jews, and multitudes of the Gentiles, being brought in before
this last battle; but when they are brought in, they will meet with opposition
from this man of sin, and from the rest of the wicked of the world, who will
not have Christ to reign over them. And this Beast, I say, will gather together
all the unconverted Kings of the earth, and all their Armies, thinking to
destroy the Saints, Jews and Gentiles; but they shall not, neither first nor
last, prevail upon them: but they shall be overcome and foiled still; so that
now at last they shall grow desperate, and say (as some now do) they will now
fight for it, and they will either win all, or lose all; for the Beast and the
Kings of the earth are gathered together, with their Armies of profane wicked
men (for none else are with them) to make war against Jesus Christ, and his
Armies of Saints. In which last battle, (wherein the utmost strength of all the
enemies of Christ and his Saints shall be united together) shall the
controversy between the one and the other be decided; and the flesh of these
Kings, and Captains and mighty men of the earth, and of all their Armies, shall
be given to the fowls of the air; and all this more largely appears, Rev. 19.
11. 12, etc. And I saw heaven opened, and behold, a white horse, and he that
sat upon him, was called faithful and true; and in righteousness he does judge
and make war; his eyes were as a flame of fire, and on his head were many
Crowns, and he had a name written that no man knew but he himself. And he was
clothed with a vesture dipped in blood, and his name is called the word of God;
and the Armies which were in heaven followed him upon white horses, clothed in
fine linen white and clean. And out of his mouth goes a sharp sword, that with
it he should smite the Nations: and he shall rule them with a rod of Iron and
he treads the winepress of the fierceness and wrath of Almighty God. And he
has on his vesture and on his thigh a name written, KING OF KINGS, AND LORD OF
LORDS. And I saw an Angel standing in the Sun, and he cried with a loud voice,
saying to all the fowls that fly in the midst of heaven, Come, and gather your
selves together unto the supper of the great God: that ye may eat the flesh of
Kings, and the flesh of Captains, and the flesh of mighty men, and the flesh of
horses, and of them that sit on them, and the flesh of all men, both of free
and bond, both small and great. And I saw the Beast, and the Kings of the
earth, and their armies gathered together to make war against him that sat on
the horse, and against his army. And the beast was taken, and with him the
false Prophet that wrought miracles before him, with which he deceived them
that had received the mark of the Beast, and them that worshipped his image.
These both were cast alive into a lake of fire burning with brimstone. And the
remnant were slain with the sword of him that sat upon the horse, which sword
proceeded out of his mouth: and all the fowls were filled with their flesh.

In these words we see is a plain description of two Generals, and their
Armies; and of a battle fought between them, and of the success of the battle.

The description of the great Lord General of the Army of Saints.
The first General is described; by his Name, by his Frame, and by his Aim.

First, by his Nanme. And he is called, faithful and true, and his name is
called the Word of God, and he has a Name written, KING OF KINGS, AND LORD OF
LORDS. And this is the Name, and Title, of the Lord Jesus Christ alone.

But secondly, He is described also by his Frame, and posture in which he is:
thus, He sat upon a white horse. Which manifests his purity. And his eyes were
as a flame of fire: Which shows the piercing, discerning nature of them, being
the searcher of hearts, and trier of the reins. And on his head are many
Crowns: Which shows that all the Crowns of all Kingdoms must be put upon his
head, who is KING OF KINGS, AND LORD OF LORDS. And this is the Frame and
posture in which he is.

But thirdly, He is described also by his Aim; thus, that in righteousness he
does judge and make war. He ayms at doing justice, making war against the
Beast, and judging that other Army according to righteousness: and that he may
so do, his Aim is to give them blood to drink, and that in righteousness; for
they are worthy: and therefore he is said to be clothed in a vesture dipped in
blood, and that out of his mouth goes a sharp sword, that with it he should
smite the Nations. Out of his mouth it goes, that is, he commands with the
word of his mouth, a sharp sword to smite the Nations: and this justly. And his
Aim is to rule the nations with a rod of Iron: And this in righteousness; and
to tread the winepress of the fierceness of the wrath of Almighty God. And in
all this may it be said unto him, Righteous art thou, O Lord, who have judged
thus.

The Description of his Army.
But in the next place we have his Army described, thus: And the armies which
were in heaven followed him upon white horses, clothed in fine linen, white and
clean. Where first we may observe, the place where they were; and that is,
heaven; which shows that they are armies of the Church, that they are Saints;
for the Church of God is all along the Prophecy of the Book of the Revelation,
called Heaven. Now these Armies that follow this General, are the Armies in
Heaven, the Armies in the Churches of Christ, and out of heaven also is their
General said to come, ver. 11. But it is no wonder, for he always walks in the
midst of his golden Candlesticks, his Witnesses, his Saints, his Churches. Rev.
1. 13. But again, these Armies in Heaven are said to follow their General upon
white horses: As he is upon a white horse, which shows his purity; so also are
they upon white horses, which shows their purity: For he has put his own Frame
and Spirit upon them; which further appears in that they are also said to be
clothed in fine linen, white and clean; which also imports purity, and
undefiledness.

And thus we have the Description of the Lord General, and his Army on the one
side.

On the other side, The chief among them is called the Beast: which shows his
unworthy, filthy, beastly nature: and with him are the Kings of the earth; they
are not of heaven, but of the earth: and of the earth they may be said to be,
in opposition to the heavenly nature of those whom they oppose. And for the
Armies that are under them, they are said to be Their Armies, implying that
they were earthly, corrupt Armies; because they did belong to those that were
of the earth. And this is all the description that we have in this place of the
other General and his Army.

Now these being thus described. It is said that the Beast, and the Kings of
the earth, and their Armies, were gathered together, to make war against him
that sat upon the horse, and against his Army. It seems they have hopes to
overcome him, and his Army; because they gather together against them.

The event of the Battle.
But what is the event of the battle? The Beast and his Army are overcome, and
the Beast, and the false Prophet is that with him, are taken. What this false
Prophet is, is doutful; for there is no mention made of him before this at
least not under this Title The false Prophet.
, not in all the book of the Revelation: but it may be it is some new sort of
deceiver, which he will make use of to deceive the Nations by false miracles,
when he draws them to engage in this battle. But whether so or no, whatever he
be, when this battle is sought the Beast, and the false Prophet, that wrought
miracles before him, are both taken; and of them is it said, That they
particularly were cast alive into a lake of fire burning with brimston, and the
remnant are slain with the sword, and their flesh is given to the fowls of the
air; even the flesh of Kings, and Captains, and mighty men, etc.

And this is the success of this battle, or the event of it, as far forth as it
is in this place spoken of.

But because the day of the battle is to be such a great and terrible day to
wicked men, being that great and terrible day of the Lord, so much spoken of by
all the holy Prophets, and Apostles, and Saints of God; which day is
represented unto us in such a dreadful, terrible, and glorious manner, as if it
were the General day of judgment, (but that it is cleared not to be that day,
by the declarations of the things that must follow it; which are laid down in
the several Scriptures which speak of this day.) I say, seeing it is
represented unto us in a dreadful, and wonderful manner; and since so many
wonders shall be shown at that that time, and so much of the glory and majesty
of God shall then be seen; and such strange changes shall then be made in the
world: I say, these things being so wonderful, and so glorious, I shall be the
larger in giving the description of this day from several other Scriptures.
Thus:

Of the great day of the Lord.
This day is that great day, which is called the day of the Lords vengeance,
and the year of recompenses for the controversies of Sion; Mentioned, Isa. 34.
8. That day of which he speaks, when he says, The day of vengeance is in my
heart, and the year of my redeemed is come, Isa. 63. 4. For though it be true,
that he has already begun to take vengeance upon his, and his peoples enemies;
and to plead the cause of his people: and though he has begun to recompense
his wrath upon these enemies, for the controversies his Sion has against them;
yet the compleatment hereof is reserved unto that day, which of all days shall
be the most terrible to wicked men, because it shall utterly overthrow them,
and they shall not escape, nor avoid it; for then he will tread them in his
anger, and trample them in his fury; yea they shall be trodden in the wine press
of the fierceness of the wrath of Almighty God. And their blood shall be
sprinkled upon his Garments, and he will stain all his raiment, As Isa. 63. 3.
But who shall live when God does this? (was Balaams expression, when he spoke
of the ruin of several Nations Numb. 24. 23.) for let all wicked men look to
it, when this day comes; for to them it will be very terrible. For this is the
day which is spoken of Isa. 66. 15. For behold the Lord will come with fire,
and with Chariots like a whirlwind, to render his anger with fury, and his
rebukes with flames of fire: for by fire, and by his sword, will the Lord plead
with all flesh and the slain of the Lord shall be many. How terrible will this
day be, when the Lord shall thus plead with all flesh by fire and sword, and
render his anger with fury, and his rebukes with flames of fire! Who shall live
when God does this? It is answered by the Prophet in the same Chapter, that at
the same time, The hand of the Lord shall be known toward his servants, and his
indignation toward his enemies; and their hearts shall rejoice, and their
bones, shall flourish like an herb: They shall be so far from being quailed, or
discouraged, or amated, or terrified, when this terrible day comes, as they
shall then flourish most, and be most joyful at heart.

Again, this day is spoken of, Joel 3. 9, 10. where the Lord summons all the
Gentiles to gather together and make themselves as strong as they can for war:
and says, that when they are gathered together round about, in ver. 11. that
thither he will cause his mighty ones to come down: and at v. 12. That there he
will sit to judge all the heathen round about; and then declares that the
Sickle shall be put in to cut down this harvest of wicked men, for the
wickedness is great, and that multitudes shall be cut down, when the Lord shall
thus judge these men, and decide the controversies of his people: for which
cause it shall be called, The valley of decision. And then, verse. 16. The Lord
shall roar out of Sion, and utter his voice from Jerusalem: and the heavens and
the earth shall shake. This is that once more, wherein he will shake not the
earth only, but the heavens also: of which Paul speaks, Heb. 12. 26. And
therefore this is called, Joel 2. 31. The great and terrible day of the Lord.
But who shall live when God does this? When the Heavens and Earth shall shake?
etc. Why it is answered in the same 16. verse. But the Lord shall be the hope of
his people, and the strength of the children of Israel.

Of this day also Paul speaks, 2 These. 1. 7, 8, 9. Where he says, that the day
is coming when the Lord Jesus shall be revealed from heaven, with his mighty
Angels, in flaming fire, taking vengeance on them that know not God and that
obey not the Gospel of our Lord Jesus Christ; who shall be punished with
everlasting destruction, from the presence of the Lord, and from the glory of
his power. Thus does Paul render this as a most terrible day: and as the
Prophet Isaiah in the forementioned place, says the Lord will then render his
anger, and his rebukes with flames of fire: So Paul here says, that the Lord
Jesus shall in flaming fire take vengeance, on them that know not God, etc.
punishing them with everlasting destruction from his presence. But who shall
live when God does this? The Apostle tells us, that then the Lord Jesus shall
come to be glorified in his, Saints and to be admired in all them that believe
in that day, v. 10 The Saints shall then live, and glorify him, and admire him.

Of this day also speaks th Prophet Malachi, Chap. 4. 1. For behold, the day
comes that shall burn as an oven: and all the proud, yea all that do wickedly
shall be stubble: and the day that comes shall burn them up, says the Lord of
hosts, that it shall leave them neither root nor branch. But who shall live
when God does this? It follows in verse. 2. 3. But unto you that fear my Name,
shall the Sun of righteousness arise, with healing in his wings: and ye shall
go forth, and grow up as calves of the stall. And ye shall tread down the
wicked; for they shall be ashes under the soles of your feet, in the day that I
shall do this says the Lord of hosts.

Thus in a terrible manner is this day here also represented: being a day that
shall burn as an Oven.

Of this day also speaks the Apostle Peter, and represents it in the same
terrible manner, 2 Pet. 3. 7. But the Heavens and the Earth which are now,
(says he) by the same word are kept in store, reserved unto fire against the
day of judgment, and perdition of ungodly men: or as, Isaiah says, the day in
which the Lord will plead with all flesh, rendering his rebukes with flames of
fire. But says Peter, verse. 10. This day will come suddenly upon men, as a
thief in the night. And indeed, this numerous Army that shall be gathered
together against the Saints, shall little dream of such an overflowing scourge,
as shall overtake them: but rather, promise themselves a victorious overcoming
of the Saints; but alas! Miserable creatures, this day of their destruction and
perdition, says Peter, shall come, as a thief in the night: in which the
Heavens shall pass away with a noise, and the Elements shall melt with fervent
heat. (The whole world shall be on fire about their ears on a sudden, and there
shall be an utter destruction of them; and their corrupt and filthy courses
shall perish with them.) The earth also, and the works that are therein, shall
be burnt up. And verse. 12. The Heavens being on fire, shall be dissolved. But
what might some say, shall the Elements melt with fervent heat, and the Heavens
being on fire be dissolved, and the Earth with the works that are therein be
burnt up? Who shall live when God does this? Peter, in the very next words,
seems to prevent this question, and says, Nevertheless we according to his
promise, look for new Heavens, and a new Earth wherein dwells righteousness.
As if he had said, it is the perdition and destruction of ungodly men only
that I speak of: take notice of that. And this day that shall burn as an Oven,
shall burn up only such as do wickedly: but it shall not in the least manner
touch nor trouble the Saints. But we, when these wicked men are burnt up, shall
have new Heavens, and a new Earth, wherein dwells righteousness: It shall be
a new time to us, when these corrupt men shall be burnt up. And this we have a
promise for. And this promise they had in Isa. 65. 17. where this day is spoken
of: the promise runs thus. For behold I create new Heavens, and a new Earth,
and the former shall not be remembered, nor come into mind: but be you glad and
rejoice for ever, in that which I create; for I create Jerusalem a rejoicing,
and her people a joy, etc. And so he goes on to declare the happy estate that
Saints shall live in, in these new Heavens, and new a rth.

But this terrible day to wicked men is again mentioned, Isa. 33. 14. Who among
us shall dwell with the devouring fire? Who amongst us shall dwell with
everlasting burnings? Here are the same expressions, or expressions to the same
purpose with those we have already mentioned; where Malachi says, The day that
comes shall burn as an oven; and Paul and Peter speak of the Lords taking
vengeance in flaming fire, on wicked and ungodly men. The Prophet having this
in his eye, cries out, Who shall dwell with devouring fire! who shall dwell with
everlasting burnings! When the Lord comes to render his rebukes with flames of
fire, who shall dwell in those flames? But lest the Saints should be
discouraged, he presently adds, That though the sinners in Zion are afraid,
and fearfulness has surprised the hypocrites; yet (verses 15, 16, etc.) he
that walks righteously, and speaks uprightly; he that despises the gain of
oppressions, that shakes his hands from holding of bribes, that stops his
ears from hearing of bloods, and shuts his eyes from seeing evil: he shall
dwell on high, his place of defense shall be the munitions of rocks; bread
shall be given him, his waters shall be sure. Thine eyes shall see the King in
his beauty; they shall behold the land afar off, etc. Thus the righteous
upright man, that is free from dissimulations, is no hypocrite, that will not
oppress though he may gain much thereby, is so far from so doing, as he
disdains, he despises such gain: and he that not only refuses a bribe when it
is offered to him, but when it is put into his hand will not keep it, shakes his
hand from holding of it: and he to whom the cruel and corrupt courses of men
are irksome, even to hear of it, or see it, and therefore he stops his ears,
and shuts his eyes from it: This man shall hold proof in these times, and he
shall dwell on high; he shall have as sure a defense in these times, as the
munitions of rocks: for he is fixed in the Rock Christ Jesus, that cannot be
moved; and sure provision shall be made for him. And he shall see the King in
his beauty. The Lord Jesus, who shall then appear in his glory, and his
excellent beauty (as I shall show by and by) shall this man's eyes behold: and
these new heavens and new earth that shall then come, which in the Prophets
days was very far off, shall this man's eyes see: which land is described, verse.
20, etc. Thine eyes shall see Jerusalem a quiet habitation, a tabernacle that
shall not be taken down; not one of the stakes thereof shall ever be removed,
neither shall any of the cords thereof be broken: and the inhabitant shall not
say, I am sick; and the people that dwell therein shall be forgiven their
iniquity. But to proceed.

Of this terrible day that shall come upon wicked men, there is a large
description, in the whole 24 Chapter of Isaiah: but I shall mention but some of
the passages of it, as verse. 1. Behold, the Lord makes the earth empty, and
makes it waste, and turns it upside down, and scatters abroad the
inhabitants thereof. Here the Prophet shows how the Lord will depopulate the
earth, making it as it were empty; so great will be the slaughter of wicked
men: and then he shows what changes and mutations he will make in the earth; in
that he will turn it upside down, make it appear no more as it was before; but
make it a new, make new heavens and a new earth. But how shall this be done?
That the world shall be made new, and emptied of wicked men? Does the Prophet
declare, as Peter does, that it shall be done by fire? Yes: At verse. 6. The
earth is defiled, therefore has the curse devoured the earth, and they that
dwell therein are desolate: therefore the inhabitants of the earth are burned,
and few men left. Thus the Prophet speaks of the destruction of the wicked of
the earth by fire. There are several other expressions in this Chapter, that
show the dreadfulness of this day; as verse. 19. The earth is utterly broken
down, the earth is clean dissolved, the earth is moved exceedingly. As Peter
expresses himself, (Seeing that all these things shall be dissolved, what
manner of persons, etc.) so does the Prophet here say, The earth is clean
dissolved, etc.

But if any should ask the Prophet, Why, what is the meaning of all these
expressions, in the declaration of what shall come upon the earth? What is to
be done? Wherefore will the Lord do all these things? The Prophet, at the first
verse, tells ye, and says, That in that day the Lord shall punish the host of
the high ones, that are on high; and the kings of the earth upon the earth. So
that this is the time when he shall wound the Heads over many Countries, when
he shall strike through kings in the day of his wrath, when he shall rule them
with a rod of iron, that will not stoop to the golden scepter of his grace.
Thus terrible and dreadful will this day be to wicked men. And if it should be
said to the Prophet, Who shall live when God does this? He tells ye in the
midst of this declaration of the desolations that are to come upon the
inhabitants of the earth, verse. 16. We have heard songs, even glory to the
righteous; implying, that this great day, which is the day of wicked men's
greatest distress, shall be the time of the Saints greatest glory, joy, and
exaltation. Now is the time of their singing for joy of heart come.

But again, there is another description of the terribleness of this day, in
the 50 Psalm, which Psalm is a clear Prophecy of this day, (wherein God will
call that wicked crew that have nothing to do to take his Word into their
mouths to an account) where the Prophet speaks in the same language with the
Prophets and Apostles already mentioned; and says (verse. 4.) Our God shall
come, and shall not keep silence: a fire shall devour before him, and it shall
be very tempestous round about. Here also is this day represented to the
terror of wicked men: But at the same time the Psalmist says, that to him that
orders his conversation aright, he (that is, the Lord) will show the
salvation of God. Such a man shall be saved, when the wicked shall be devoured.

Again, the terribleness of this day is set out in several other Scriptures:
But having produced so many already, I shall only mention one more, (and
proceed to what I have further to say) and that is Isai. 30. 30. The Lord shall
cause his glorious voice to be heard, and shall show the lighting down of his
arm, with the indignation of his anger, and with the flame of a devouring fire;
with scattering, and tempest and hailstones. Thus the Prophet here sets out
the terror of that day when the Lord shall at last be fully avenged on his
enemies: he shall then show the lighting down of his arm; it shall then appear
to be his arm indeed, by which his enemies shall be overcome. And he shall
cause his glorious voice to be heard, and manifest his indignation and anger
against the enemies of his people, with a flame of a devouring fire, with
scattering, and tempest, and hailstones. But who shall live when God does
this? The Prophet (verse. 26, 27.) tells us, that this day shall be the day when
the Lord binds up the breach of his people, and heals the stroke of their
wound; and that in it unto them the light of the moon shall be as the light of
the sun, and the light of the sun shall be sevenfold, as the light of seven
days. So that though it shall be terrible to their enemies, yet it shall be the
most glorious and happy day to his people that ever was since the beginning of
the world: and because it shall be so, it is said, ( Isai. 24. forementioned)
that they shall lift up their voice, they shall sing for the majesty of the
Lord; they shall glorify the Lord in the fires, even the Name of the Lord God
of Israel, in the Isles of the Sea.

And thus I have laid down that description which is given in several
Scriptures, of this great day of the Lord; wherein he will by fire, and by his
sword, and by tempest, and hailstones, manifest his indignation and wrath
against the enemies of his people, so as multitudes, multitudes shall be slain:
So as the earth shall be emptied of them. So many shall be slain, as there
shall be few men left. And that when it is thus, the earth shall be turned upside
down, and there shall be new Heavens, and a new Earth, wherein dwells
righteousness. For the wicked, and the wickedness of the Earth, shall be so
burnt up, as in that respect i^ shall become a new earth and new heavens,
wherein righteousness shall remain and flourish.

And now having thus done, I should now proceed to show, that immediately upon
this day, when all the enemies of Christ are made his footstool, that at this
very time, shall Jesus Christ appear with his Saints, to reign on earth

Of the time when the full deliverance of the Jews and Gentiles shall be
completed.
But first a word or two about the time when it shall be, that Jesus Christ
will work this full deliverance for his Saints, from their enemies, when this
great day of his appearing shall be.

Now in general, the time (when this last great overthrow of wicked men, and
this wonderful glorious and complete deliverance of the Saints) shall be after
the Lamb has overcome the ten Kings. And after the Gospel has been preached
to all Nations, for the bringing in of Jews and Gentiles, and after Rome is
burnt, as we have already said.

But some may say, But how many years may it be, before these things shall be
done? If it might be, we would know the direct time; for it may be long before
all these things may be done, before the ten Kings are overcome and before the
Jews may be converted, and the Gentiles fullness come in and before Rome is
destroyed; and long before that great day come: and according to reason it will
be a very long time, if we should judge according to sense, but that we know
that beyond sense and reason, the Lord can make a short work of it, and cut it
short in righteousness. But if the Scripture do give any hint of the time, we
desire to know it.

To this I answer, first, that I believe this is enough to satisfy a Saint,
and to make his heart joyful, to know that the time of the prevailing power of
the Saints enemies over them is come to an end, and that they shall never
overcome them any more; but the Lamb is already seen to be come upon mount
Sion, where he has called out his called, chosen, and faithful ones, with
which he will go on conquering and to conquer, and by whom he will ruin Rome
and execute upon his enemies the judgment written. I say, this is matter of
joy to a Saint, to know that Christ is a doing these things, though they do not
know when he will finish this or that particular work.

But secondly, and more particularly. For the year in which, or near to which
this great day shall be, wherein the enemies of the Saints both Jews and
Gentiles that shall be converted shall be. I shall here propose my
apprehensions, and leave them to the judicious wise and intelligent Christian
to judge of them. Dan. 12. 10.


And for this, I must have recourse to Dan 12. a chapter which speaks plainly
and particularly of this great day of the final deliverance of the Saints in
general (though particularly it mention but the Jews; for the one cannot be
without the other) as in v. 1. At that time shall Michael stand up, the great
Prince, which stands for the children of thy people: and there shall be a
time of trouble, such as never was since there was a Nation. This is that great
day we have spoken of, wherein there shall be such a dismal, terrible time to
wicked men in general, as never was since the world began. But it shall be, as
I said, to wicked men, but not to the converted Jews, nor Gentiles; not to the
Saints. And therefore it follows in this verse, And at that time thy people
shall be delivered, every one that shall be found written in the book. When
Michael the Prince, i. e. Jesus Christ the great Prince of Israel; even of all
the Israel of God, shall stand up for them in this great day, then will he vex
their enemies, put them to such trouble as there never was the like. But all
his own people who have given up their names to him, who are listed in his
book, shall be delivered. This shall be the work of that great day, and that
which shall follow immediately upon it, follows in v. 2, 3. of the chap.
whereby it is evident that this chapter speaks of this great day of the
deliverance both of Jews and Gentiles. (Though to Daniel being a Jew there is
no mention made of the Gentiles, but of his people only.) Well, this being a
prophecy of this great day, let us now see what in this chapter is spoken of
the time.

Now I find that this Chapter speaks of three distinct periods of time, in
which three distinct remarkable things shall come to pass, in order to the
deliverance of the Saints.

And the first time mentioned, the 6 and 7 verses speak to: and in the 6 verse
this question is made, How long shall it be to the end of these wonders? To
which in the 7 verse a double answer is given (which is confirmed with a very
solemn Oath) first, that it should be for a time, times, and a half: and
secondly, that when he shall have accomplished to scatter the power of the holy
people, all these things shall be finished.

Now for the first of these answers, because I have had occasion already to
open the meaning of it, In my book entitled, The Resurrection of the witnesses.
and have showed that the same expressions in the Revelation, and this here,
agree in one, and point at one and the same thing; namely, the flourishing time
of the Beast, the prevailing time of the Beast, wherein he shall have power to
overcome the Saints, and to trample them under foot; even forty two months, or
a time, times, and half a time. And having cleared this, and showed when that
time did expire; and that after that time, neither the Beast, nor the little
Horn, prevailed any more: I say, having spoken of these things already, I shall
refer the Reader thereunto; where they shall find, that in 1645 the Beast
ceased to prevail against the Saints; and the time wherein he should tread the
holy City under foot, then came to an end: and neither he, nor his associates,
shall ever prevail more.

And then this is the effect of the first answer to the question, That there
should be a time, times, and an half; and then an end should come; in which
time, times, and half, the Saints should be kept under by enemies; but then an
end should come, and deliverance come.

And the second branch of the answer makes this clearly to be the meaning of
the former, which is in these words: And when he shall have accomplished to
have scattered the power of the holy people, all these things shall be
finished. In which, first, is clear, that there should be a time, when the
power of the holy people should be scattered; the Saints should be destitute of
power to oppose an enemy, and consequently should be kept under by an enemy.
Secondly, This is clear in these words, that there should be a time, when this
should be accomplished or completed, (I mean, their power being scattered;)
there should be a time when it should be fully done: for then a thing is
accomplished, when it is fully done as much as can be done, or shall be done.
And thirdly, this is clear, being plainly asserted, that when this scattering
is accomplished, then these things should be finished; that is, then
deliverance should come.

So then, this first period of time spoken of, points at the great thing that
should be done, in order to the deliverance of the Saints: The taking away of
the power of the enemy, which he has so long had to tread them under feet: so
that now he shall do so no more; which indeed is a great deliverance to the
Saints: but yet there remains other things to be done; they must be delivered,
and shall in due time, not only from his prevailing power, but from his
opposing power.

But now, for the time when that shall be, I must proceed to what follows in
the Chapter; and in verse. 8. Daniel says, that for the former answer, he heard
it, but understood it not; and therefore being very desirous to know, he again
puts the question, O my Lord, says he, what shall be the end of these things?
It having been told him, that Michael should stand up, and his people be
delivered, he is desirous to know when it should be: but in the 9 verse it is
said, Go thy way, Daniel; for the words are closed up, and sealed till the time
of the end. Herein is implied, that though Daniel were told these things, yet
they were as a sealed book to him; and they must be so, until the time of the
end. They are so darkly and mysteriously declared, because they must not be
understood till the time of the end. The words are closed up, and sealed, till
the time of the end: But then, the wise shall understand, but none of the
wicked, as it is in the 10 verse. And then in the 11 and 12 verses, this answer
is given to Daniel's question about the time when his people shall be
delivered: And from the time that the daily sacrifices shall be taken away, and
the abomination that makes desolate set up, there shall be a thousand two
hundred and ninety days. Blessed is he that waits, and comes to the thousand
three hundred and five and thirty days.

And here are two other Periods of times, wherein the great deliverances that
are yet to be wrought for (the holy people) the Saints, are to come to pass.

But what these two Periods of time are, and how we may understand these two
verses, is the great question.

Now, as I promised, I shall lay down what my apprehensions of them are, and
leave it to the Wise to judge. And thus: I apprehend that by the time here
mentioned, in which the daily sacrifice shall be taken away, and the
abomination that makes desolate set up, is meant that time when the Emperor
Julian the Apostata reigned: which Emperor, although he had been a great
professor of Christianity during the reign of Constantius the preceding
Emperor; yet when he came to be Emperor, he most wretchedly turned Pagan: and
then the abominations of the Heathens were set up, and their Temples and
Idol-groves were set wide open, in every City, which former Emperors had
caused to be shut up: and Julian himself sacrificed to the Idols. And thus the
abomination of desolation was set up. And then also Julian, to vex the
Christians, and to show how little regard he had to the truth of the Gospel,
(which abolished Jewish Worship) he commanded the Jews to sacrifice again. And
when they replied, that they ought not to sacrifice but in the Temple in
Jerusalem; he then commanded that the Temple should be built again, (and
allowed that it should be done at his own cost and charge, allowing it out of
the Public Treasury:) which the Jews (expecting a time to come wherein the
Temple should be built) very readily went about, supposing that to be the time.
And when they had begun the work, there was a great Earthquake, which shook
the old Foundation of the Temple, and turned all down to the ground, together
with the houses adjoining thereunto: and not only so, but a fire came from
heaven, which burnt all the Tools and the Instruments which had been brought
thither to build the Temple. And then, and not till then, was that Prophecy of
our Savior fulfilled, that not a stone was left upon a stone. And the Jews
being astonished hereat, never durst any more attempt to build the Temple to
offer sacrifice: And then, from that time hitherto has the daily sacrifice
ceased: for then it was taken away with a witness, in a most remarkable and
miraculous manner. And this I am persuaded is the time here spoken of in the
Prophet Daniel; and this is the judgment of M. Archer, and others also. And
this being granted, then we must begin the One thousand two hundred and ninety
Prophetical days (which are years) that Daniel here speaks of, at the year when
these things were done, which was about the second year of Julian, (for he
reigned not full three years) which was the year three hundred sixty six.

And then to this year 0366 if the years which the Prophet speaks of, be added
which are 1290 it makes up just 1656 So that in the year one thousand six
hundred fifty and six, by this account will be the second period of time which
the Prophet here speaks of, in which there will be some glorious thing done in
order to the deliverance of the Jews: which we may hope will be their
conversion; for what will so much tend to their deliverance as their
conversion? But their conversion, or something that will tend to their
conversion, and deliverance, it will certainly be. Which is clear, because this
is given as an answer to the question that Daniel made, When shall the end of
these things (that had been to him before declared) be? Or when shall Michael
stand up, and the children of my people be delivered? Now this time being
pointed at in the answer, it is certain that some glorious thing shall then
come to pass, in order to their deliverance: and though what it will be, be not
certainly discovered, yet we may hope it will be no less then their conversion.
But this again is clear, that though much may be then done in order to their
deliverance, that yet it will not be the complete deliverance, which they and
all the Churches of Christ shall have, at that great day of their deliverance,
already mentioned; for that is reserved for that third period of time,
mentioned in ver. 12. in these words, Blessed is he that waits, and comes to
the thousand three hundred and five and thirty days.

Much may be done, and much will be done, at the period of the one thousand two
hundred and ninety days: but how happy will he be that shall live five and
forty years beyond that! for that is the utmost period of time that is set for
the complete deliverance of the holy people, the Church, from all enemies
whatsoever. And blessed is the man that comes to, not only the one thousand
two hundred and ninety; but to the one thousand three hundred and five and
thirty days. So then, the full and complete deliverance of the Church, when
this great day will come, when all the enemies of the Church will be subdued,
will be at the period of the thousand three hundred and five and thirty days.

Now if to the year 0366 there be added 1335 it makes up just 1701

And in this year, or near this year, one thousand seven hundred and one, I am
persuaded that day will be: having my ground of this persuasion from this
Scripture, as I have laid it down, which I leave to the consideration of
prudent Christians. I shall now proceed.

And now I come to speak of those things which are to follow immediately upon
this great day, of which first a word in general, and then I shall descend unto
particulars.

But in general thus:

Immediately upon the ruining of the enemies of Christ and his Saints in the
manner we have spoken of, and upon the passing away of the old Heavens and the
old earth; shall be fulfilled that which is spoken in Rev. 21. 1, 2, 3. And I
saw a new Heaven, and a new Earth, and the first heaven, and the first earth
were passed away: and there was no more sea. And I John saw the holy city new
Jerusalem, come down from God out of heaven, prepared as a bride adorned for
her husband. And I heard a great voice from heaven, saying, Behold, the
tabernacle of God is with men, and he will dwell with them and they shall be
his people, and God himself shall be with them, and be their God, etc.

That which I take notice of in these verses, of which to speak a word in
general before I descend to particulars, is this:

That the new Jerusalem here is said to come dome down from God out of Heaven.
This glorious state and condition in which the Saints shall be put after this
great day, is to be here on Earth; and therefore it is said to come come down
from God out of Heaven.

First, in that it is said to come down, it argues that it is not above, but
below; for it is to come down from above.

And secondly, In that it is said to be from God out of Heaven, it speaks
plainly that it is not to be taken for that Glory which the Saints shall have
in the By the Heavens above, I mean that place which is far above all Heavens,
to which the Apostle says Jesus Christ ascended, Ephesians. 4. 10. Of which Heaven,
the Lord says it is his Throne, and the earth his footstool, Isa. 66. 1. The
height and glory of which place, the thoughts of men are (alas) too shallow to
apprehend. But the Heaven above it is called, in respect of the height and
transcendency of the glory of it above the earth that now is, or above the new
Heaven and the new Earth that shall be in the time we are speaking of; which
shall come down from God out of Heaven, from that inaccessible glory, and that
unapproachable splendour, that none eye has seen, or can see; in the beholding
of which, the Angels do veil and cover their faces, 1 Timothy 6. 16. Isa. 6. 1.
Heavens above to all eternity with God, but a glorious estate which comes down
from God out of Heaven unto them, which they are to enjoy for a thousand years
here below; in which time the Tabernacle of God shall be with men, and they
shall be visibly seen to be his people, and God himself shall be among them,
and be their God, and the effects thereof shall be glorious, as appears by what
follows. But this only is that in general which I here take notice of, that
this new-Jerusalem-glory is to be on earth, when there shall be a new molding,
and a new making of the Heaven and of the earth: and of the particular
mutations and changes that there shall then be, I shall now speak.

Of the personal appearance of CHRIST, And Of the Resurrection of his Saints to
Reign with him on Earth.
ANd in the first place I shall speak of the personal appearance of Jesus
Christ and the Resurrection of his Saints to reign on earth with him. That
Christ shall personally appear, is a point that is I know much controverted,
and is very much doubted by many Saints, who are eminently godly, and whom I do
very much honor and reverence: who yet are confident that he will very
gloriously appear in the treading down his enemies, in the ruining of the
Beast, and the settling of his people in peace, and filling of them with his
Spirit; but they question whether our Lord Jesus shall any otherwise appear,
then to be their spiritual eyes, and then as now: for now they spiritually
discern him in his present footsteps in the world.

And it being thus dubious to many, I was inclining to be silent in it, but
that the light shining so clearly to me, in the following Scriptures which I
shall mention, has such power and force with me* as I cannot but hold it
forth, leaving it to the more serious consideration of intelligent Christians.

And the Position that I shall lay down, is this:

That our Lord Jesus Christ, having subdued his enemies, shall personally
appear on earth, and shall raise up the Saints before departed out of this
world, to come and reign with him on earth. To prove this, we have several
Scriptures; and I shall begin first with that known clear place, Revel. 20. The
description of the total overthrow of the Beast, and all the Armies that were
gathered together with him, to make war against Jesus Christ and his Saints,
being laid down in the preceding Chapter; in this Chapter follows a declaration
of what things will succeed it: and that which is to this purpose, is in the 4,
5, and 6 verses. And I saw thrones, and they sat upon them, and judgment was
given unto them. And I saw the souls of them that were beheaded for the witness
of Jesus, and for the Word of God, and which had not worshipped the beast,
neither his image, neither had received his mark upon their foreheads, or in
their hands: and they lived and reigned with Christ a thousand years. But the
rest of the dead lived not again until the thousand years were finished. This
is the first resurrection. Blessed and holy is he that has part in the first
resurrection, (...) such the second death has no power; but they shall be
priests of God and of Christ, and shall reign with him a thousand years.

In these verses, this is laid down, That the Saints of God which had been
Martyrs, and sufferers under the Beast, should be raised from the dead, and be
advanced to sit upon thrones; and judgment should be given unto them: and they
should live and reign with Christ a thousand years. But though the Saints
should be thus raised, that yet this is not the General Resurrection, wherein
all the just and unjust shall be raised: no; for the text expressly says, that
the rest of the dead were not raised, until this thousand years were finished;
and therefore this resurrection which shall be when Christ and his Saints must
reign on earth, is called The first resurrection: and it is said, that no wicked
one shall have part herein; but only they that are holy and blessed, and who
shall never die the second death, but shall be priests of God and of Christ,
and shall reign with him a thousand years; and others are not to be raised till
the end of the thousand years.

What can be more clearly asserted? or what is more clearly asserted in
Scripture, then this truth is in these three verses? It is so clear, as I must
profess, that, for my part, had I no other Scripture to back it, yet having no
Scripture contradicting, I am persuaded that I should not dare to deny it. But
we have, besides this, several other Scriptures to this same purpose.

The next I shall mention shall be that, Rev. 5. 9, 10. where we find that the
four Beasts, and the Elders, which were the representatives of the Churches of
the Saints, and which were redeemed unto God by the blood of the Lamb, out of
every kindred, and tongue, and nation, and people; that they singing to the
Lamb, praise him, saying, For thou have made us unto our God kings and priests,
and we shall reign on the earth. This is spoken in the future tense, as being
to come; We shall reign on the earth: which that they may do, they must be
raised from the dead, as it is clearly said in the forementioned place they
shall.

And it is likewise as clear, Dan. 12. 2. where it is said, that when Jesus
Christ shall stand up to save his people, and to perplex and destroy his
enemies; it is said, that at that time, many of them that sleep in the dust of
the earth shall awake. Observe; this is a time when many of them shall be
raised, but not all. But whereas it follows, that some of them shall be raised
to everlasting life, and some to shame, and everlasting contempt; whereas there
is no such thing mentioned, Rev. 20. that any shall be raised to shame and
contempt; but it is said, Blessed and holy is he that has part in the first
resurrection, for on such the second death has no power: the truth in both
these Scriptures may very well consist together. For though John there mention
only the resurrection of Saints, yet does he not say that others are not
raised to shame, to be sent into shame and confusion presently, as doubtless
they shall: For some particular persons may be raised to be judged and
condemned, for their wickednesses, and cruelties, and outrages against Saints,
and sent presently into the place of torment, as the Beast and the False
Prophet are said to be, though there be no mention of it, Rev. 20. but the
Saints only are said to live; They lived and reigned with Christ, etc. And
whereas it is said, that blessed and holy is he that has part in the first
resurrection; that crosses not this in Daniel: for if some of the wicked be
then raised to be judged, yet have they no part in the first resurrection; for,
the dead in Christ shall be raised first; and it is they only, being blessed
and holy, that shall then live and reign with Christ: but none others shall,
and so have not others any part in this resurrection.

And another clear place, that speaks both of the personal appearing of Christ
to reign on earth, and to judge those that shall then be raised, is that in 2 Timothy 4. 1. I charge thee before God, and the Lord Jesus Christ, who shall judge
the quick and the dead, at his appearing, and his kingdom. Here the Apostle
speaks expressly of a time coming, wherein Jesus Christ must appear, and take
his kingdom. Now he always has his kingdom in the hearts of his people, and
appears to them always in the Spirit: but this is another manner of appear and
another manner of taking his kingdom, which Paul here speaks of: for at this
appearing, and at this kingdom, he must judge the quick and the dead. Those his
enemies that are then alive, he will judge; and some of those that were then
dead, he shall judge, (but the rest shall not live again, until the thousand
years are finished;) and his Saints that were dead, he shall raise, and give
them everlasting life, and grant them to reign with him a thousand years.

Again, Zech. 14. 5. The Prophet in that Chapter speaking of that time when the
Lord shall be King over all the earth, and there shall be one Lord, and his
Name one; says he there, And the Lord my God shall come, and all the saints
with thee. This is to be at that time, when all the Nations must yield
obedience to Christ; and whosoever of all Nations refuses to worship him, shall
be plagued with a fearful plague, as appears in that Chapter.

Thus is the Position that I have laid down, in these Scriptures clear, That
Jesus Christ shall come with his Saints to reign on earth.

But again, we have Paul speaking of it, 1 Thessalonians. 3. 13. where he prays that
the Thessalonians may be established in holiness before God even our Father, at
the coming of our Lord Jesus Christ with all his Saints. Here the Apostle
expressly speaks of the coming of our Lord Jesus with all his Sains: which
confirms what is said, That there is a time to come (for it is not yet come)
wherein Jesus Christ will come on earth, and bring his Saints with him.

And this is that which is also hinted at, Isa. 26. 19. Thy dead men shall
live, together with my dead body shall they arise. Awake and sing, ye that
dwell in the dust: for thy dew is the dew of herbs, and the earth shall cast
out the dead. This is brought in as a comfortable promise to the Saints, who
are complaining in the former part of the Chapter, that though they have
labored, yet have they not wrought any deliverance in the earth, neither have
the inhabitants of the earth fallen: which seems to look like the times that
were before the year 1645, when Jesus Christ began to set his people at liberty
from their enemies: then they labored, but all in vain, to free themselves
from being under the power of the Beast: they labored, but they had not
wrought any deliverance in the earth, neither were the inhabitants of the world
fallen; but now this is brought in as a comfortable promise to the Church, who
are complaining of these things; Thy dead men shall live, together with my dead
body shall they arise. Awake, and sing, ye that dwell in the dust, etc.
implying that though these were their complaints for a time, that yet it should
not be so always; there should a time come, when their dead men should live,
and, together with the body of Christ, should be raised, (he being the
firstfruits of the resurrection from the dead:) and they that slept in the dust
should awake and sing, and the earth should cast out the dead: and this should
be a joyful and comfortable time, which should make amends for all their
sufferings. And about this time, he speaks of the Lords coming out of his
place, to punish the inhabitants of the earth for their iniquity, and for all
the blood of his Saints which they have spilt; as appears, verse. 21. And it is
certain that the raising of the Saints to live and reign with Christ, will soon
follow upon this.

Again, of this appearing of Christ it is that the Prophet speaks, Isai. 33.
17, 18. when he speaks of him that is fire-proof, that shall dwell with
devouring fire, and everlasting burnings; and says he to such a one, Thine eye
shall see the King in his beauty. This is the time when he shall appear in his
glory and beauty indeed; and his Saints shall visibly see him; and then their
eyes shall see Jerusalem a quiet habitation, etc. as it follows in that Chapter.

And further, of this visible and corporeal coming of our Lord Jesus, does the
Angels speak, Acts 1. 10, 11. when that our Lord being with his disciples upon
the mount called Olivet; while they beheld, he was taken up, and a cloud
received him out of their sight: and, says the text, While the disciples
looked steadfastly toward heaven, as Jesus went up, behold, two men stood by
them in white apparel, and said unto them, Why stand ye looking up into heaven?
this same Jesus which is taken from you into heaven, shall so come in like
manner as you have seen him go into heaven. Now they visibly and corporeally
saw him go into heaven; and in the same manner did they (and we are to) expect
that he shall come again. And what but this does our Savior himself mean, when
he says to Philip, (who wondered that he should know him when under the
fig tree) Thou shall see greater things then these: for I say unto you,
Hereafter you shall see heaven open, and the angels of God ascending and
descending upon the Son of man. Certainly there is a truth in all these things,
and we shall see greater, and more glorious and admirable things then yet we
have seen. And though the time be not yet come, yet certainly it will come.

Again, in Act. 3. 19 20. 21. Peter tells us, that when the times of refreshing
shall come from the presence of the Lord (which time Saints have long waited
for) that he shall send Jesus Christ: whom the heavens must receive, until the
time of the restitution of all things. That is, until he make new Heavens, and
new Earth, restore all things. The Heavens, says he, must retain him until
these times, which were spoken of by all the holy Prophets which have been
since the world began. But then Jesus Christ shall appear in that presence
which the heavens now do retain; which is his corporal presence, (for it cannot
be said of his spiritual presence, which is always with us) for which appearing
his Saints wait.

And thus have I laid down the several Scriptures which do clear this truth,
wherein it is abundantly proved, by several testimonies; whereas two or three
Scriptures might have been authority sufficient to prevail. But the Scripture
is full in speaking of it: and indeed, it was much in the hearts of the Saints
in the primitive times, as appears by their frequent expressions of it, upon
all occasions; even of this coming of Christ. As 1 These. 5. 23. And the very
God of peace sanctify you wholly, and I pray God your whole spirit, and soul,
and body, may be preserved blameless, unto the coming of our Lord Jesus Christ.
And 1 Timothy 6. 14. I charge thee, to keep this commandment without spot, unto
the appearing of the Lord Jesus Christ; which in his time will appear, who is
the only Potentate, the King of Kings, and Lord of Lords, etc. And 2 Cor. 1.
14. Ye also are our rejoicing, in the day of the Lord Jesus. And 1 These. 1. 9,
10. And how ye turned to God from Idols, to serve the living and true God, and
to wait for his son from heaven; whom he raised from the dead, even Jesus which
delivered us from the wrath to come. And 1 These. 2. 19. For what is our hope,
or joy, or crown of rijoycing? Are not even ye in the presence of our Lord
Jesus Christ, at his coming? And 2 These. 2. 1, 2. We beseech you by the coming
of our Lord Jesus Christ, and by our gathering together unto him, that you be
not soon shaken in mind, etc. And 2 Timothy 4. 8. Henceforth there is laid up for
me a Crown of righteousness, which the Lord, the righteous judge, shall give me
at that day; and not to me only, but to them also that love his appearing.
Thus these Saints had much in their eye the day of Christ, the coming of
Christ, the appearing of Christ. And the Apostle makes it a principal piece of
Religion: For speaking of the Thessalonians, when they were converted, he says,
They turned from Idols; what to do? To serve the living and true God; and what?
To wait for his Son from heaven. Though that day was far off, as the Apostle
himself elsewhere informs them; yet they did so firmly believe this his coming
from Heaven, and their being gathered unto him, as they might truly be said to
be waiters for it.

Of the manner of the coming of Christ and his Saints, and with what bodies
they shall come.
But now this Question may be propounded It being granted to be an undoubted
truth, tha^ Jesus Christ shall personally appear on earth* and that the Saints
departed shall be raised from the dead, to reign with him in that day, With
what bodies shall Christ and his Saints come? And how shall they be raised up?
Does the Scripture say any thing to that?

I answer, Yes: For hitherto I have quoted the Scriptures, that speak only of
his coming, and the Saints being raised; but there are other Scriptures, which
speak of the manner how, as that Rev. 1. 7. Behold, he comes with clouds, and
every eye shall see him, etc. And Luke 21. 26, 27. For the powers of the heaven
shall be shaken; and then shall they see the Son of man coming in a cloud, with
power and great glory. And Mat. 24 30. 31. And they shall see the Son of man
coming in the clouds of heaven, with power and great glory. And he shall send
his Angels, with a great sound of a trumpet, and and they shall gather together
his elect, etc. And v. 27. As the lightning comes out of the east, and shines
even unto the West; so shall also the coming of the Son of man be. So that it
is clear, that as the Angels told his disciples, when they saw a cloud to
receive him out of their sight, that he should so appear out of the clouds, in
like manner as they had seen him go into Heaven; and as Angels then attended
him: so will Angels much more at his appearing, attend him; and he shall come
with power and great glory.

Now we know, that as the Apostle says of the Resurrection of the body, that
it is, raised spiritual: it is sown a natural body, it is raised a spiritual body;
it is sown in corruption, it is raised in incorruption; it is sown in dishonor,
it is raised in glory; it is sown in weakness, it is raised in power. So we know
was the body of Christ after his resurrection: it was not a natural body, but a
spiritual; it was not corruptible, but an incorruptible; it was not mean nor
weak, but glorious, and powerful: and being thus a spiritual body, and
incorruptible, etc. it was quick in motion; upon a sudden appearing to his
Disciples, and suddenly gone from them again. And it was passable to all
places: it appears to the Disciples when the doors are shut, and asccnds up
into the Heavens in their sight.

These things a natural body cannot do, but a spiritual and a glorious can. And
therefore he is said to come as the lightning that quickly shines from one end
of the Heaven to the other; so can the body of Christ, when he appears,
quickly pass from one end of the Heaven to another, to be visibly seen of all
his Saints, to their joy, but to the terror of their enemies: and so he will
come in the clouds, and every eye shall see him, with power and great glory.

And as the Scriptures speak thus of Christ in his coming, so there are
Scriptures which speak of the Saints, in their appearing with him; As Col. 3.
4. When Christ who is our life shall appear, then shall we appear with him in
glory. Thus the Saints then, were fully persuaded of the appearing of Jesus
Christ, and spoke often of it: and knew that at his appearing* as he should
appear in power, and great glory; so they should appear with him in glory. And
so again, 1 John 3. 2. Beloved, now are we the sons of God, and it does not yet
appear what we shall be: but we know, that when he shall appear, we shall be
like him; for we shall see him as he is. And so again, Phil. 3. 20, 21. For our
conversation is in heaven, from whence also we look for the Savior, the Lord
Jesus Christ; who shall change our vile body, that it may be fashioned like
unto his glorious body, according to the working whereby he is able to subdue
all things unto himself. Thus in this manner, shall the Saints that come with
him, appear with him in glory: and their bodies being raised, shall be
fashioned like unto his glorious body.

And now I shall conclude all that I have said touching this glorious appearing
of Christ on earth, and the Saints reigning with him on earth, with that
precious Counsel of our blessed Savior, worthy the daily observation of all
Saints, (as the use which is to be made of all that which is in Scripture
spoken of this appearing and kingdom of Jesus Christ) which we have, Luke 21.
36. Watch ye therefore, and pray always, that ye may be accounted worthy to
escape all these things that shall come to pass, and stand before the Son of
man. Knowing what he has said, Rev. 22. 20. He which testifies these things,
says, Surely I come quickly. Amen. Even so, Come Lord Jesus.

Of the ceasing of wars, and the perfect peace and tranquillity that shall be
enjoyed for a thousand years.
I now proceed, in the further description of this new world, the new Heavens,
and the new Earth, which is to follow upon that great day we have spoken of.

And in the next place, shall show how that after this time, and during this
thousand years of the Saints reigning with Christ on earth, all wars shall
cease. All the enemies of the Church being thus gloriously overcome, as has
been showed, there shall be no enemy left, that shall ever stir, so much as to
prepare to make war against the Saints any more. And this is clear, Micah 4. 3.
and Isa. 2. 4. Where it is said, that in the last days, when the mountain of
the Lords house shall be established in the top of the mountains, that then
they shall beat their swords into plow-shares, and their spears into
pruning hooks: Nation shall not lift up sword against Nation, neither shall
they learn war any more. There shall be such peace and tranquillity, and this
peace so firm, and they so certain of the abiding of it, as that they shall
see, that they shall have no need of using swords and spears any more; And
therefore they shall beat these instruments of war, which they shall no more
use, into instruments of husbandry, which they, then living in peace, shall
have occasion to use. For they shall sow seed, and reap it; and plant
vineyards, and drink the fruit thereof. And therefore Micah thus expresses the
peace they shall have (Mic. 4. 4.) They shall sit every man under his vine and
under his fig tree, and none shall make them afraid. They shall have no fear of
war; none shall make them afraid: Such peace shall they have. And Isa. 33. 20.
the Prophet speaking of these peaceful times, speaks thus: Thine eyes shall see
Jerusalem a quiet habitation, a tabernacle that shall not be broken down; not
one of the stakes thereof shall ever be removed, neither shall any of the cords
thereof be broken. Which fully manifests what security, or rather what
stability there shall be in these times of peace. Again, Isa. 32. 18. the peace
of these times is thus expressed: And my people shall dwell in a peaceable
habitation, and in sure dwellings, and in quiet resting places. And Isa. 60.
17, 18. it is further expressed thus: In that day (says the Lord to his Sion) I
will make thy officers peace, and thine exactors righteousness: violence shall
no more be heard in thy land, wasting nor destruction within thy borders: thou
shall call thy walls salvation, and thy gates praise. Thus with full, and
emphatical expressions, is the peace and tranquillity of the Church in these
times set forth. There are many other passages to this purpose; but these being
sufficient, I shall add no more in this place, but proceed.

Of the binding of Satan for a thousand years.
And the next thing I shall speak of, as that which is to be done immediately
upon this great day of the overthrow of the Saints enemies, and the settling of
them in peace, shall be this: That not only the external and visible enemies
of the Saints shall be subdued, and put under the Mal. 4.
feet of Christ and his Saints; but that also their internal and invisible
enemies shall be chained up: for now the Saints wrestle, not only with flesh
and blood, but with principalities, and powers, and spiritual wickednesses in
high places; and now their adversary the devil goes about as a roaring lion,
seeking whom he may devour: but then, this adversary of theirs shall have no
power to oppose them for this thousand years; but he shall be bound up: for so
says the holy Spirit, Rev. 20. 1, 2, 3. And I saw an angel come down from
heaven, having the key of the bottomless pit, and a great chain in his hand;
and he laid hold on the dragon, that old serpent, which is the devil and Satan,
and bound him a thousand years, and cast him into the bottomless pit, and shut
him up, and set a seal upon him, that he should deceive the nations no more,
until the thousand years should be fulfilled: and after that, he must be loosed
for a little season. Here we see, that for this thousand years, after the
destruction of the Beast, and False Prophet, and the Kings of the earth, and
all other enemies of the Saints; that grand enemy of the Saints is laid low
also, even that roaring lion. And that ye may be sure it is he that is thus
clapped under hatches, he is here set out under those several denominations that
the Scripture in several places gives him. And first, he is styled the Dragon:
but lest it should be doubtful what the dragon is, it follows, that he is that
old Serpent: and lest this be not plain enough, it is further said, Which is
the devil, and Satan. Thus this enemy of the Saints is, we see, to be bound up
also; and therefore it is said, that an angel, having a great chain in his
hand, laid hold of him, and bound him for a thousand years: and he did not
only bind him, but cast him into the bottomless pit: nay, and not only so,
but he shut him up in the pit, and set a seal upon him; importing the doing of
it to purpose, the doing of it securely; that so he might deceive the Nations
no more, until the thousand years were finished. Thus is it clear, that, in
this thousand years, this great enemy of the Saints shall have no power to
molest them. And this is that which Paul also speaks of, Romans 16. 20. The God
of peace shall tread Satan under your feet shortly. In that the Apostle speaks
of the doing of it in the future time, as that it shall be done shortly; it is
clear, that he means not that treading down of Satan which was then already
done, even that which Christ had done upon the Cross, when he conquered sin and
Satan, and so, in a sense, trod Satan under the feet of his Saints; but of a
further treading of him under feet, which was to be done in future times. But
yet we have not seen Satan trodden any more under feet then he was in the
Apostles times: for greater was his prevalencie in the midnight of Popery, then
in the Apostles time it was: Therefore this treading under foot of Satan, of
which Paul speaks, is yet to come: and doubtless the Apostle speaks of this
time when Satan shall be bound up, and shut up in the bottomless pit, and
sealed: And when this time is come, will this prophecy of Paul be made good,
The God of peace shall tread Satan under your feet shortly.

And now, having thus far described this new world, showing how it shall be
settled in peace by the God of peace, and that Satan shall be trodden under the
feet of his Saints; I shall now proceed to declare the great and glorious
privileges that shall then and in this kingdom, be conferred upon the Saints.

And they may be referred to two Heads: 1. Spiritual, and internal. 2. Outward,
and external.


Of the spiritual privileges and prerogatives that Saints shall then enjoy.
And first, I shall speak of the spiritual privileges and blessings which the
Saints shall then enjoy: for therein shall be their greatest joy and glory; and
without which, the other sort of blessings would be rather hurtful then
profitable to them. Now the fountain of all their spiritual advantages and
privileges, will consist in the abundant pouring out of the Spirit upon them:
of which I shall first speak, and then of the particular effects and benefits
of it. And of this abundant pouring out of the Spirit, the Scripture speaks
plentifully in several places; as Isa. 44. 3. I will pour water upon him that
is thirsty, and floods upon the dry ground: I will pour my Spirit upon thy
seed, and my blessing upon thine offspring. Thus abundantly will the Spirit be
poured out, as he here promises that he will pour it out by floods: it shall
not be by drops, or by small streams, but by floods shall it be poured out,
upon those that are dry and thirsty. But how do some Saints now thirst after
these waters of life; being as dry and parched ground, for want of it! But
alas! they have but now and then some drops; or at most, some small streams of
it, that does a little refresh them, and quicken them. But where is the soul
that has those floods of the Spirit yet poured upon it? How do the best of
Saints complain for want hereof? But the time is coming, when they shall have
no cause to complain: for they shall have floods of the Spirit poured out upon
them. And this is the time which is also spoken of, Isai. 32. 15. when the
Spirit shall be poured out from on high; and the wilderness shall be a fruitful
field, and the fruitful field be counted for a forest. Here the holy Ghost
says, that at this time the Spirit shall be so abundantly poured out upon the
Saints, as that those that were looked upon as a wilderness for barrenness,
shall now become a fruitful field; and those that were formerly a fruitful
field, should be accounted as a forest, in comparison of the fruitful fields
that shall then be.

Again, Joel 2. 28. And it shall come to pass, that I will pour out my Spirit
upon all flesh; and your sons and your daughters shall prophecy: your old men
shall dream dreams, and your young men shall see visions: and also upon the
servants, and upon the handmaids, in those days, will I pour out my Spirit.
This prophecy is clearly a prophecy of this time: for it is expressly said,
that this shall come to pass in that time, when the Lord will plead with all
Nations, for the controversies which his Sion has against them; which now he
will do, in these later days; and which never yet has been so fully done, as
he then will do. And he says, that when he does this, his people shall never be
ashamed any more: which time is yet to come, therefore this promise has not
yet been fulfilled. Besides, it is clear that this promise was never yet
fulfilled: for when was ever this promise in the fullness, in the altitude and
latitude, fulfilled? When was the Spirit poured upon all flesh? When was the
Spirit generally poured out? Was it ever poured out upon all flesh? The greater
number of people may, indeed, receive the denomination of All the people: but
the least number of people, as one of an hundred, or one of a thousand, cannot
be said to be All. But when was the Spirit poured out so much as upon one of a
thousand? Again, when was the Spirit so abundantly upon all ages, degrees, and
sexes, as that all might prophecy, that is, (in the lowest sense) be able to
speak to edification, exhortation, and comfort? How few of those that are
Saints, have the spirit of Prophecy in this sense, to any purpose, upon them,
carrying of them forth to publish the Gospel, for the edifying, comforting, or
conversion of others? The number of those is very small; witness the complaints
of many Country-towns and Parishes, even within this Kingdom, which they make
for the want of faithful able men to preach the Gospel among them. And if there
be very few men that are thus furnished with this gift of the Spirit; how few
are the women! Not but that there are many godly women, many who have indeed
received the Spirit: but in how small a measure is it? how weak are they? and
how unable to prophecy? for it is that that I am speaking of, which this text
says they shall do; which yet we see not fulfilled. Indeed, they have tasted of
the sweetness of the Spirit; and having tasted, are longing for more, and are
ready to receive from those few that are in any measure furnished with the
gifts of the Spirit for prophesying; but they are generally very unable to
communicate to others, though they would do it many times in their families,
among their children and servants: and when they would be communicating to
others into whose company they come, though sometimes some sprinklings come
from them, yet at other times they find themselves dry and barren. But the
time is coming, when this promise shall be fulfilled, and the That all ages,
sexes and degrees shall have the spirit of Prophecy in these later days.
Saints shall be abundantly filled with the Spirit; and not only men, but
women shall prophecy; not only aged men, but young men; not only superious,
but inferiors; not only those that have Universitylearning but those that
have it not; even servants and handmaids.

For this by the way let me say, There is nothing absolutely necessary to the
making of a convert, and of a convert, a publisher of the Gospel, which a soul
that is but furnished only with Understanding and Reason is not capable of, if
the Spirit be poured out upon it; whether it be a Heathen (so called for
distinction sake) or one brought up in the profession of Christianity; or
whether it be learned, or unlearned; or whether it be male, or female: I say, a
soul endued with Understanding and Reason, is capable of Religion, and all
religious performances, if it be endued with the Spirit; and there is no other
thing absolutely necessary thereunto. And when the Spirit shall be more
abundantly poured out upon Saints, this shall be made evident; so that,
according to this gracious promise, sons and daughters, servants and handmaids,
old men and young men shall prophecy.

But some may say, This promise was fulfilled in the Apostles times; and the
Apostle Peter expressly cites it, Acts 2. 18. when the Spirit was theu poured
out upon them.

But to that I answer, It is true, the Apostle Peter cites it there; but it
does not therefore follow, that this promise was then fulfilled; neither was
it; but the Apostle cites it upon this occasion: The twelve Apostles having
then received the promise of the pouring out of the Spirit, it carried them
forth powerfully, and wonderfully, and in an extraordinary manner, to speak
forth the things of God; which when those that were in Jerusalem, both
strangers and others, saw and heard, they began to marvel at it, and to say,
that they were full of new wine. But the Apostle Peter understanding this,
stands up, and tells them, that they were not drunken, as they supposed; but
cites to them this Scripture, whereby he would have them to understand, that
this need not be so strange to them, which they then saw and heard in them, if
they considered what was promised long ago in the Prophet Joel, That the Spirit
should be abundantly poured out upon all flesh: and considering this, they need
not wonder thus to see the Spirit now poured out upon a few men. But though the
Apostle thus, to this end, there cites this Scripture, yet was it not then in
the largeness of it fulfilled: For in those times, though some men, young and
old, and some women, some of their sons and daughters did prophecy; yet were
it very few, in comparison of those that did not: and therefore it could not be
said, that the Spirit was then poured upon All flesh; but that time is to come,
and is to be in that day we are speaking of, wherein indeed the Spirit shall be
poured out upon all flesh in an abundant manner, and come no whit short of what
this Scripture imports. So that, though for the time which has been ever since
the Apostles days, to this present time, it may be said of the Church, of the
Saints of God, that they have lien among the pots, (that I may allude to that
of the Psalmist, Psalm. 78. 13.) in respect of that obscurity, and deformity, in
which they have been, for want of that spiritual glory, which the abundant
pourings out of the Spirit will put upon them: yet at this time (to use the
Psalmists expression) they shall be as the wings of a dove, covered with
silver, and her feathers with yellow gold: that soil, filthiness, corruption,
and deformity that has appeared in them, wherein, in many respects, they have
seemed to be as worldlings are, covered over with earth, and sullyed with the
blackness of corruption, as having lien among the pots, all this shall be done
away, and as innocent doves, they shall mount up, and and shine in splendour,
and purity; when more abundantly the Spirit shall be poured out upon them.

And this time it is that is spoken of, Isa. 52. 1, 2. Where the Lord is
speaking thus to the Church. Awake, awake, put on thy strength, O Sion; put on
thy beautiful garments, O Jerusalem the holy city: for henceforth there shall
no more come into thee the uncircucised and the unclean: Shake thy self from
the dust, arise, and sit down, O Jerusalem, and loose thy self from the bands
of thy neck, O captive daughter of Sion. It Is the presence of the Spirit in the
fullness of it, that beautifies the Saints, and clothes them with beautiful
garments, and is their strength: and by it they arise, and mount up above the
world, and shake themselves from the dust; and are losed from all their bonds,
and are made free.

This time is also spoken of, Isa. 60. 1, 2. Where the Lord speaks thus to his
Church: Arise, shine; for thy light is come, and the glory of the Lord is risen
upon thee: for behold, darkness shall cover the earth, and gross darkness the
people; but the Lord shall arise upon thee, and his glory shall be seen upon
thee. And the Gentiles shall come to thy light, and kings to the brightness of
thy rising. And v. 19, 20. The sun shall be no more thy light by day, neither
for brightness shall the moon give light to thee: but the Lord shall be unto
thee an everlasting light, and thy God, thy glory. Thy sun shall no more go
down, neither shall thy moon withdraw it self; for the Lord shall be thine
everlasting light, and the days of thy mourning shall be ended. How glorious
shall the Church be, when thus, the glory of the Lord shall be seen upon them
in such fullness! It is true, there is in every true Saint, and has been, in
the darkest times of Popery, in the times of their greatest weakness, and
darkness, some true glory: But how has it been besmeared and eclipsed with
their weaknesses, and corruptions that have appeared in them? But now the
Spirit shall be poured so abundantly upon them, as they shall arise and shine.
Now the Sun and Moon shall be no more their light; those means, and
appointments wherein formerly they received light, and saw some brightness;
they shall now be no lights comparatively: for being compared with those full
pourings out of the Spirit, that they shall then have, and those immediate
inlightnings they shall then receive from God, they shall be no lights, and be
of no use unto them; because the Lord will be their everlasting light, and
their God their glory. And it being so, their Sun shall no more go down, nor
their Moon withdraw its self; and the days of their mourning shall be ended.
They shall no more have a midnight of Popery overspreading them, nor no more be
burdened and bowed down by corruptions, nor no more be afflicted by their
enemies. Their mourning dark days are past away, and they shall live in joy,
light, and glory for ever.

But thus having spoken in the general of the happy condition in which the
Saints shall be, in regard of the fullness of the Spirit which shall be poured
out upon them; I shall now proceed to the particular effects which the Spirit
shall then work in them; as the Scripture declares, that the Saints in these
days shall be filled with the Spirit.

1 By which they shall be filled with knowledge. 2 By which they shall be in an
humble frame. 3 By which they shall be filled with love. 4 By which they shall
be filled with a holy filial fear. 5 By which they shall be enabled to worship
the Lord acceptably. 6 By which they shall be all united. 7 By which they shall
be enabled to act justly and righteously. 8 By which they shall be put into a
meek and sweet frame. 9 By which the weak shall be made strong. 10 By which
they shall be enabled to speak a pure language. 11 By which their minds and
affections shall be raised and made heavenly. 12 By which their wills shall be
swallowed up in the will of God. 13 By which they shall walk in the integrity
and singleness of their hearts. 14 By which they shall be enabled to mortify
all corruptions. 15 By which they shall appear very glorious in the eyes of
all. 16 By which they shall be enabled to make a holy use of all the creatures.
And, 17 By which they shall abundantly be filled with divine joy.
I shall begin with the first; That the Saints having an abundant measure of
the Spirit, shall then be filled with knowledge How Saints shall be filled with
knowledge.
. And this appears clearly in that known place, Isa. 11. 9 For the earth shall
be filled with the knowledge of the Lord, as the waters cover the sea. This
whole chapter is a clear Prophecy of this time, when there shall be new
Heavens, and a new earth; and an universal rectitude shall appear in all the
world: as appears in that chapter. Then shall knowledge abound in the world:
the earth shall be filled with the knowledge of the Lord. It is not said, With
humane knowledge; but that knowledge which is infinitely transcendent unto all
humane knowledge, the knowledge of the Lord; yea, so full of divine light and
knowledge shall they then be, as they shall have no cause to complain, that
they have but little, and they want more; for if the Sea may be said to want
waters, then may they complain; but they shall have no cause: for they shall be
filled with the knowledge of the Lord, as the waters cover the Sea, in this day
when Jesus Christ and his Saints shall gloriously reign on earth. And then in a
most eminent manner shall that part of the new Covenant be made good, which
says they shall no more teach every man his neighbor, saying, Know the Lord;
for they shall all know me, from the least of them, to the greatest of them,
says the Lord, Jer. 31. 34. Though it is true that in a sense this is now made
good to the Saints; for the least of Saints has a true knowledge of God,
though but in a weak degree; but then most eminently shall this promise be made
good.

Again, Isai. 54. 13. in which Chapter, the Lord makes many glorious promises
of what he will do for his people, in this time wherein he will put more glory
upon them, then ever he has yet done. At the thirteenth verse it is said, And
all thy children shall be taught of the Lord, and great shall be the peace of
thy children. Thus with an abundant measure of divine knowledge, shall Saints
be filled in that time.

But secondly, being thus filled with the Spirit, they shall be thereby made
fully sensible of their own unworthiness, and so walk humbly That Saints shall
be in an humble frame in those times.
before the Lord. For when they shall consider in that time, what great and
glorious things God has done for them; how he has magnified his grace to
them, in giving of them full deliverance; and times of peace and joy, for all
their times of sorrow; and doubling their joys for their sorrow, (as Isai. 61.
7.) so as they never underwent so many sorrows, but they shall partake of
double joys; and that everlastingly: and when they shall consider that all this
is from free love, and tender mercy to an unworthy people, it will put them
into a very humble posture. And this is clear, Ezekiel. 16. 60, 61, etc. where the
Lord having promised, that notwithstanding all the unworthinesses of his people
which are there enumerated, yet he will do glorious things for them; but he
tells them, that when he does so for them, that then they shall be ashamed of
their ways, and remember them, and be confounded, and never open their mouth
any more, because of their shame, when he is pacified toward them. The
consideration of the grace of God to such as were unworthy, shall so melt and
humble their hearts before him, the Spirit being abundantly in them, as they
shall never be lifted up in the pride of their hearts any more. The like we
have, Ezekiel. 36. which is a Prophecy of this time; where, at verse. 27. God
promises to pour out his Spirit upon them: and when he has so done, at the 31
verse he says, That then they shall remember their evil ways, and doings that
were not good, and loath themselves in their own sight, for their iniquities
and their abominations. Though these be times in which Saints shall be advanced
The higher the Saints are, the more humble.
higher then ever they were; yet, being filled with the Spirit, they shall walk
more humbly then ever, and be more little in their own eyes then ever. The
truth is, none but such as are humble, shall be the Citizens of this New
Jerusalem: and therefore, Mal. 4. 1. it is said, that when that day comes, it
shall burn as an oven; and all the proud shall be burnt up: no proud men must
be left; it shall be only such as walk humbly before the Lord, that shall live
in this Kingdom.

But thirdly, The Spirit being thus abundantly poured out upon the Saints, they
will be thereby filled How Saints shall then be filled with Love.
with love, and that in a most eminent manner; so that, as David, being filled
with the Spirit, says, I will love thee, O Lord my strength; so shall they also
most truly and cordially say it, with wonderfullyraised and inflamed
affections. For where much of the Spirit is, there must needs be much Love; for
the Spirit of God is the spirit of Love it self. And because of the great love
that Saints shall have to God, it is said, Psalm. 149. 3. that the children of
Sion shall be joyful in their King: he alone indeed shall be the joy of their
hearts; in him and in nothing else, will they be satisfied: It is not their
corn, and wine, and oil; it is not all the outward enjoyments which they shall
then abundantly have; but it is the Lord alone, that will be their greatest joy
and pleasure: and therefore, Mal. 3. 1. it is said, The Lord, whom ye seek,
shall suddenly come to his temple; even the Messenger of the covenant, in whom
ye delight. There Jesus Christ is set forth as the object of the Saints love
and delight. It Is true, he is so now; but in that day, will most eminently be
so. And it is evident it will be so: for, if we compare Rev. 19. 7, 8. with Rev.
21. 2, 3. we shall find, that then the Saints are solemnly taken, to become
the Bride, the Lamb's wife; which argues that ardent and entire affection shall
then be in the Saints to Christ. But then, O what mutual exchanges of love will
there be between Christ and his Saints! And therefore the Lord thus highly and
wonderfully expresses himself, Zeph. 3. 16, 17. (which I can never read but
with great admiration) In that day shall it be said, Fear thou not, Sion: for
the Lord thy God in the midst of thee is mighty: he will save thee, he will
rejoice over thee with joy; he will rest in his love; he will joy over thee
with singing. What high and mavelous expressions are these, that the most
high and holy One should thus express his love to poor, empty, unworthy,
nothing creatures! What, that he will rejoice over them! Shall they be a joy to
him! Nay more, that he will not only love them, but rest in his love; as being
that wherein he can acquiesce, rest, be satisfied: And what? be so well
satisfied therein, as to joy over his Sion with singing. O wonderful! what can
be more said! Who can sufficiently admire at the height, and depth, and
breadth, and length of this love of God, which passes knowledge! And how great
must the love of Saints be, when they come more fully to apprehend this! For
this love begets their love: His love to them, is the spring of their love to
him.

But fourthly, Being filled with the Spirit, they shall be thereby What holy,
sweet, and filial fear shall be in the Saints then.
filled with a holy fear of the Lord: Not that any distracting disquieting fear
shall be upon them, or any slavish fear; but a holy filial fear shall abide
upon them; such a fear as will well become the sons and daughters of the
Almighty; whereby they shall be the better fitted to serve and honor their God
and Father. And of this the holy Ghost speaks, Isa. 60. 5. where speaking of
these times, wherein God will do such glorious things for his people, he says,
Their heart shall fear, and be enlarged. It shall not be a fear that shall
disturb the Saints, or make them walk heavily, or straiten them in their
services; but an enlarging fear: Their heart shall fear, and be enlarged. Such
a holy fear the Spirit always puts into the hearts of the Saints, to make them
fit for the service of God. And therefore the Psalmist has this expression,
Psalm. 2. Serve the Lord with fear, and rejoice with trembling: implying, that
such service, and such joy, is most acceptable, is sweetest, is best. And so
again the Prophet Hosea speaking of this glorious time, Hos. 3. 5. says he,
They shall fear the Lord, and his goodness, in the later days. It is not, that
they shall fear the Lord and his wrath; that they shall fear the indignation of
the Lord: no; they shall have no cause so to fear, his love shall be so visibly
and gloriously manifested to them; but they shall fear the Lord, and his
goodness: a holy reverential fear, under the sense of goodness, shall be in
their hearts. And that such services as have most of this holy fear in them,
are most spiritual, and most sweet, is well known to the experience of Saints.
And that such a fear shall be in the hearts of Saints in that time we are
speaking of, is also expressed, Jer. 33. 9. And they shall fear and tremble, for
all the goodness and for all the prosperity that I procure unto them. The
manifestation of goodness and love shall beget in them in whose heart the
Spirit is, a holy fear and trembling before the Lord.

But fifthly, Being thus filled with the Spirit, they shall be enabled to
worship the Lord acceptably How Saints shall then purely worship God.
and purely. The worship of God shall then be totally freed from men's
inventions; and they shall then worship God according to his own will: For,
what his will about his Worship and service shall then be, shall be clearly
known among his people, and be visible to all that truly desire to worship
him; as appears, Isa. 2. 2, 3. and Mic. 4. 1, 2. It shall come to pass in the
last days, that the mountain of the Lords house shall be established in the top
of the mountains; and all nations shall flow unto it: And many people shall go,
and say, Come ye, and let us go up unto the mountain of the Lord, to the house
of the God of Jacob; and he will teach us of his ways, and we will walk in his
paths. For out of Sion shall go forth the law, and the word of the Lord from
Jerusalem. Here it is evident, that he will then clearly discover his will
about his Worship to his people; and that his people shall purely worship him.
A parallel place to this, we have, Zech. 8. 20, 21, 22. And there shall come
people, and the inhabitants of many cities: and the inhabitants of one city
shall go to another, saying, Let us go speedily to pray before the Lord, and to
seek the Lord of hosts: I will go also. Yea, many people, and strong nations,
shall come to seek the Lord of hosts in Jerusalem, and to pray before the Lord.
What is meant by Jerusalem here spoken of? Whether it may be mystically or
literally taken, I will not here dispute: but whether it be taken mystically,
or literally; this is clear, that in this time, the multitudes of the Saints of
God in all Nations, shall clearly know the mind of God about his worship, and
by the Spirit shall be enabled purely to perform it.

But here some may question, what Ordinances shall be used at that time? And
how shall Saints then worship God?

To which in answer, I say, That what Ordinances there shall then be used, is
hard to be determined; in regard the Scripture speaks not directly, and
particularly, what the Ordinances are, that shall then be used: but as the
practice of some of them is to be referred for those times only, so likewise
is the clear knowledge of them; not to be had till those times.

And for my part, I shall not dare, not presume to speak any thing about the
Ordinances, or manner in Worship, that shall be in these times, but what the
Scripture clearly holds forth; which is doubtless sufficient for us to know.

And first, to speak of what shall not then be practiced. I find it employed by
Paul, 1 Cor. 11. 26. That the Ordinance of the Supper shall then cease.
that the Ordinance of breaking bread shall not be then practiced: for he says
there, that in that Ordinance, they do show forth the Lords death till he come;
implying, that when he comes, and is present with his people, it shall not be
then practiced; they shall not need to do that in remembrance of him, as now
they are commanded to do.

But whether any other Ordinance shall cease, or not, the Scripture is silent.
And the Scripture being silent, who dares say that any other shall cease?
Though on the other hand, there be no ground to say, that such or such an
Ordinance shall continue; if the Scripture say it not.

But secondly, This the Scripture clearly speaks, that that part of the worship
of God which consists in How God shall then be worshipped in prayer and
praises.
Prayer and Praise, shall continue. So that it concerns all to beware how they
say that it shall cease: for that these shall continue, is clear, in the
forementioned place, Zech. 8. 20, 21. Where it is said, that many people shall
go to seek the Lord of hosts, and to pray before the Lord. And Isa. 12. 1. 45.
In that day thou shall say, O Lord, I will praise thee: and ye shall say,
Praise the Lord, call upon his name, declare his doings among the people; make
mention that his Name is exalted. Sing unto the Lord; for he has done
excellent things; this is known in all the earth. Cry out, and shout, thou
inhabitant of Sion; for great is the holy One of Israel in the midst of thee.
And Isa. 65. 24. In that day it shall be, that before they call, I will answer;
and while they are yet speaking I will hear. And Jer. 33. 11. In that day there
shall be heard the voice of them that rejoice, and say, Praise the Lord of
hosts; for the Lord is good, for his mercy endures for ever: and of them that
shall bring the Sacrifice of praise into the house of the Lord. Thus is it
clear, in these Scriptures, that this part of the worship of God, which
consists in Prayer, and praise, shall then continue.

But thirdly, There are some things about the worship of God that shall be in
these times, which the Scripture speaks of, but not clearly; as that there
shall be an observation of That there shall then be an observation of new Moons
and Sabbaths, and a keeping a feast of tabernacles, wherein God shall be
worshipped.
new Moons, and of Sabbaths, wherein God shall be worshipped; and a keeping of
a feast of tabernacles; As Isa. 66. 23. And it shall come to pass, that from
one new moon to another, and from one Sabbathto another. shall all flesh come
to worship before me, says the Lord. And Zech. 14. 16. And it shall come to
pass, that every one that is left, of all the nations which came against
Jerusalem, shall even go up, from year to year, to worship the King, the Lord
of hosts; and to keep the feast of tabernacles. Here it is expressly said, that
from one new Moon to another, and from one Sabbath to another, all flesh shall
come to worship before the Lord. But what Sabbaths these shall be, and what
worship shall be performed on these Sabbaths, the Scripture speaks not clearly
of. And here it is said, that there shall be an yearly keeping of the Feast of
Tabernacles, wherein they shall worship the King, the Lord of hosts; but what
feast of Tabernacles this shall be, and for what particular end it shall be
observed, is doubtful. We know that under the Law, the Feast of Tabernacles was
kept at the ingathering of all the fruits of the fields; wherein they were all
to rejoice before the Lord. But this rejoicing Feast, that shall then be kept,
may be for higher things then these: but positively to say this, or that, we
may not; for the Scripture is therein silent.

But fourthly, The Scripture clearly declares, That in that time, they shall
have the Lord himself to be to them That Saints shall then have no need of a
Temple, no need to be taught by others; the Lord shall be in stead of a Temple
to them.
in stead of a Temple: As Revel. 21. 22. And I saw no Temple in the new
Jerusalem; for the Lord God Almighty, and the Lamb, are the Temple of it. The
Temple in this place, is to be understood as the place where they were wont to
resort for knowledge: for in the Temple was the Ark of the Testament; there the
Will of God, and the Laws of God, were to be understood. And therefore David,
Psalm. 73. 16, 17. professes his ignorance, until he went into the Sanctuary,
and there received knowledge. But in this time, there shall be no need of a
Temple for this: For the Lord God Almighty, and the Lamb, are the Temple of it.
And it follows, verse. 23. And the city had no need of the sun, neither of the
moon to shine in it; for the glory of God did lighten it, and the Lamb is the
light thereof. They shall then have no need of those men, that shine as the Sun
and Moon to the Church, to inlighten others: no, but then, as I have said, They
shall be all immediately taught of God; and they shall not need to teach one
another, saying, Know the Lord; but the glory of the Lord, and the Lamb, shall
lighten them.

And thus, as far as I have been enabled, and the Scripture giving clear
testimony, have I answered that Question, What Ordinances shall be used at that
time, and how shall Saints then worship God? I proceed.

Sixthly, The Saints being filled with the Spirit, they shall then be enabled
to worship the Lord with one The Saints shall then all worship the Lord in one
way.
mind, and one heart, and in one way. It shall not be then, as now in these
dark times it is, wherein one is of this mind, and another of that mind, and
a third of a third mind, about several parts of the Ordinances of God: and
these divisions in Opinion rest not there only, but make divisions in
Affection also. But then it shall not be so; and therefore we find mention
made but of one street in the New Jerusalem, Rev. 22. 2. implying, that they
shall all walk in one way. And Zeph. 3. 9. the Lord says, that he will turn
unto the people a pure language, that they may all call upon the Name of the
Lord, and serve him with one shoulder. And this appears also in that
forementioned place, Zech. 8. 20, 21. where it is said, that the inhabitants
of one city shall go to another, saying, Let us go speedily to pray before the
Lord, and to seek the Lord of hosts: I will go also. Yea, many people, and
strong nations, shall come to seek the Lord of hosts. Where it is clear, that
all people in all Cities and Nations, shall be of one mind in the Worship of
God. And Jer. 32. 39. the Lord there says, that in that time he will give his
people one heart and one way.

And seventhly, The Saints being thus in that time abundantly filled with the
Spirit, all Justice and righteousness shall flourish in those days.
just and righteous things shall be done by them. And this is clear, Isai. 60.
18. Violence shall no more be heard within thy land, nor wasting nor
destruction within thy borders. Though there has been violence in the Land
formerly yet then there shall be no more; but (verse. 21.) Thy people shall be
all righteous, they shall inherit the land for ever; the branch of my planting,
that I may be glorified. And so full of the spirit of judgment and
righteousness shall the Saints then be, as it is said, Isai. 32. 16. that
judgment shall dwell in the wilderness, and righteousness remain in the
fruitful field. In the verse before, it is said, that the Spirit shall be so
poured out, as that those that had been as a barren wilderness, should now
become as a fruitful field: and in this verse it is said, that in all (whether
they were such as had been a wilderness, or such as had been a fruitful field)
judgment and righteousness should dwell.

And to this same purpose is that, Isai. 1. 26, 27. Afterward thou shall be
called the city of righteousness, the faithful city. The like is said of it.
Jer. 31. 23. They shall use this speech of thee, The Lord bless thee, O
habitation of justice, and mountain of holiness. How full are these
expressions, showing how glorious for holiness this new world shall be! And for
this cause it is, that when these new heavens and new earth are promised, they
are distinguished from the old, or former heavens and earth, by this character:
WHEREIN DWELLS RIGHTEOUSNESS. Thus the Saints in these times shall be so full
of righteousness and judgment, as they shall receive their very denomination
from it. And as it is said of the Lord God Almighty, that his Name is holy; so
is it said of them, They shall be called The city of righteousness, the
faithful city, the habitation of justice, the mountain of holiness: so
gloriously shall they then shine in righteousness and justice.

Eighthly, By this abundant pouring out of the Spirit upon the Saints in that
time, they shall be put into a very The meekness of the Saints in those days.
meek and sweet frame of spirit. In Psalm. 149. (which is a place I have already
cited, showing that it is a Prophecy of these times) at verse. 4. it is said,
that the Lord will beautify the meek with salvation: whereby it is clear, that
they shall be meek spirits that shall then be beautified with salvation, that
shall be members of that kingdom. And indeed, it must needs be so, for their
Savior is so: they do learn, and shall learn of him, to be meek and sweet, and
lowly in in their hearts and carriages: but not so, but as that this meekness
shall be consistent with courage, stoutness, and valor also, when God calls
them to exercise it: And therefore as our Savior is a Lamb, and a Lion; so
they shall be as meek as How a Lamblike and a Lionlike nature may be consistent.
Lambs, and yet as bold as Lions; and not fear to do the work about which they
are set, as appears, verse. 6. 7. where it is said, They shall have the high
praises of God in their mouths, and a two-edged sword in their hands, to
execute vengeance upon the heathen, and punishments upon the people; to bind
their kings with chains, and their nobles with fetters of iron. Thus meek and
sweet in spirit shall the Saints be; and withal, full of life and courage.
Again, that the Saints shall be full of meekness at that time; appears by that
speech of our blessed Savior, Matthew. 5. 5. Blessed are the meek; for they
shall inherit the earth. Now the Saints could never be said so fully to have
this promise made good to them, as they shall in that time: for many of the
Saints, in a sense, never inherited the earth: And as their Savior spoke of
himself, in the days of his humiliation; so may it be said of them, in these
days of their humiliation, That they have not (many of them) where to lay their
heads: And, for the most part, wicked men have possessed the earth; but many of
them never had any inheritance in it. And I am persuaded that our Savior had
this time in his eye, when he said, Blessed are the meek; for they shall
inherit the earth. So that though yet this promise was never fully made good,
yet there is a time coming, wherein it shall be clearly and fully made good.
And of this time also speaks David, when he says, Psalm. 37. 11. But the meek
shall inherit the earth, and shall delight themselves in the abundance of peace.
He had said, in the two former verses, that evil doers should be cut off; and
that, though the wicked did flourish for a while, yet it was but for their
time; and after that, they should be no more: And in verse. 13. that though the
wicked plot against the just, yet the Lord shall laugh at him: for he sees
that his day is coming. In all which, he speaks of a time, and a day, when the
wicked shall be wholly cut off; but, says he, the meek shall inherit the
earth, and shall delight themselves in the abundance of peace. And verse. 18.
The Lord knows the days of the upright, and their inheritance shall be for
ever. So that it is clear, that those that shall inherit the earth at that time,
and be delighted in the abundance of peace, shall be of meek and sweet spirits.

And again, ninthly, When the Spirit shall be thus abundantly poured out upon
the Saints in these times, there shall be then no such complaining among
Saints, as there has been formerly; and yet is, That Oh* they are weak Saints
shall then have no cause to complain of weaknesses.
, and they are ignorant, and they are foolish, and they are dull, and slow,
and lame in duties; and many times they are dumb, or at least stammerers, when
they come to pray, or prophecy: but the Spirit then shall be so abundantly
poured out upon them, as it shall remove all these impediments from them; as
appears, Isai. 35. 1. The wilderness and the solitary place shall be glad, and
the desert shall rejoice, and blossom as a rose. This is spoken of the pouring
out of the Spirit upon those that were as a barren wilderness, which shall make
them thus to blossom as a rose. Well: but what follows? Verse. 5. Then the eyes
of the blind shall be opened, and the ears of the deaf shall be unstopped:
then shall the lame man leap as an heart, and the tongue of the dumb shall sing.
Here then we see that all these complaints shall be removed. They that
complained of ignorance, their complaint shall be removed: the eyes of the
blind shall see. They that complained of deadness and dullness, their complaint
shall be removed: the ears of the deaf shall be unstopped. They that complained
of weakness and lameness in duties, their complaint shall be removed: then
shall the lame man leap as an heart. A heart is a swift creature: they shall have
more then ordinary abilities, and strength, and activity, which before were
lame and weak: The lame man shall leap as an heart. And answerable to this, is
that passage Isa. 32. 3, 4. And the eyes of them that see, shall not be dim; and
the ears of them that hear, shall hearken. The heart also of the rash, shall
understand knowledge; and the tongue of the stammerers shall be ready to speak
plainly. Thus all these weaknesses and infirmities shall be removed, and Saints
shall be completely furnished with abilities, whereby they shall be enabled to
serve and worship the Lord; and they shall no more do it stammeringly, and
brokenly, as formerly they did. And this is to be done, as appears, verse. 1. at
that time, when a King shall reign in righteousness, and Princes shall rule in
judgment: When the Lord Jesus Christ, shall be King, and of his Saints, he
shall make Ps. 45. 16.
Princes in all the earth. Then, then it is, that all these infirmities shall
be removed from all his people. This likewise is that which is spoken of, Zech.
12. 8. In that day he that is feeble among the Saints; shall be as David; and
the house of David, as God; as the Angel of the Lord before them. Such strength
and power will he put upon all his people.

Tenthly, When the Spirit shall be thus abundantly poured out upon his people,
they shall all speak They shall speak a pure language.
a pure language a spiritual language; having a holy, heavenly style. For as in
their actions, and doings, there will be a glorious reformation; so also in
their words: and therefore, Zeph. 3. 9. the Lord says, That in that great day,
when all the earth shall be devoured with the fire of his jealousy; that then,
He will turn to the people a pure language, or a pure lip (as the word is)
which implies pure speech. There shall be no foolish, defiled speech coming
from them. No, they shall have a pure lip, and call upon the Lord; and this
pure language, or this pure lip, is that which is called, The language of
Canaan, Isa. 19. 18. Where it is said, That the Egyptians being converted unto
the Lord, they that are in the Land of Egypt, shall also speak the language of
Canaan, or the lip of Canaan: or with this pure lip, or this pure speech, which
the Lord shall give to his people.

And that by a pure lip, is meant a pure speech, is clear, Prove. 22. 11. Where
Solomon has this expression: He that loves pureness of heart, for the grace
of his lips the king shall be his friend. Implying, that from a pure heart
proceeds gracious language; such a man has grace in his lips, a pure lip.
Thus in an eminent manner, shall Saints then have grace in their lip, have a
pure language, when the Spirit shall be so gloriously poured out upon them.

Eleventhly, When the Spirit shall be thus abundantly poured out upon the
Saints, their minds, and affections shall be raised, and put into a The Saints
shall be in a raised, high and heavenly frame.
heavenly posture. It will be much below them, to have their minds set upon
vanity: and though it be certain, that they shall enjoy all outward enjoyments
to the full, yet they shall not manifest that vanity in the use of them, as now
appears in most people; as to observe the fickle, nice fantastical, and
foolish customs, or fashions of the time; in their clothing, househould
furniture, and deportments toward each other; wherein much vanity and foolery
ofttimes appears. No, these things will be far below them It will be fabelow
the Saints to mind vain fashions and fooleries.
, to have such unsetledness, and such vanity, in these respects appearing in
them. But they being filled with the Spirit, will manifest more gravity,
sobriety, and composedness of Spirit; and will not mind such vanity.

Not that the wearing rich apparel, or having rich furniture, and utensiis in
the house, is a sin, or unbecoming a Christian; for riches they shall then
plentifully enjoy: But deforming apparel, and the fickleness of the mind and
fancy about these things, is I fear the sin of (I am sure it is very
unbecoming to) Saints. For Saints to be thus light, and vain, and every day to
be minding the new fashion, and altering their apparel several times before it
is worn out; How uncomely is it! And how unsuitable to their high calling! as
if they had not things of a higher nature to mind!

Not that in speaking thus, I do commend those that keep themselves in such
fashions as wherein they appear ridiculous to all others, being altogether out
of use; nor do I say, that it is an evil to come into a fashion after it has
been some time used, if it be sober. No, I say not so; for I know no Scripture
that so says.

But I say, that it becomes Saints to be more composed then others, and not to
be so forward as others, in minding such vanities; and not to put themselves
into immodest habits; but to do what in them lies, to restrain the exorbitances
of the times in such things. And this I say, That they do discover that they
have very little of the Spirit, that are not able to deny themselves, not
sometimes, in very fooleries in this kind. Not but that rich apparel may be
worn, and comely ornaments may be used. Holy women Genesis 24. 22, 30, 47.
have been and may be adorned with Bracelets, and Rings, and Jewels: But
fooleries, and immodest apparel, etc. must be avoided; and when the Spirit is
more abundantly poured out, it will be so; And they will be very regardless of
these vanities; and be more grave, composed, and discreet in their carriages.
For then, in all their clothing, furniture, and necessary utensils, shall
appear, not vanity, but Holiness to the Lord. They shall be so clothed, and
have such furniture, as shall manifest, that they are not a vain people, but a
holy people: As appears, Zech. 14. 20, 21. For they shall make an holy use of
all the blessings which God shall multiply upon them: They shall no more abuse
them, but they shall be sanctified to their uses, so as all shall have this
inscription upon them, (in respect of their holy use of them) HOLINESS UNTO THE
LORD. Thus Saints shall not mind vanity in these times; But shall have their
Spirits raised, and lifted up, into an heavenly and holy frame.

Again, twelfthly, Another effect of this more abundant pouring out of the
Spirit upon the Saints, will be this, that they shall be more fully centred in
the will of God; and it shall be their resting place: his How Saints shall will
the will of God.
Will will be their Will, and be the satisfaction of their spirits. This the
Spirit always works in the hearts of the Saints, where he comes: and the more
of the Spirit a Saint has, the more of this appears in him. But in those times
we are speaking of, when the Spirit shall be thus gloriously seen upon the
Saints; then, in a most eminent and full manner, shall this appear in them: all
the will of God shall be sweet unto them. And this is intimated, in that
excellent pattern of Prayer which our Lord and Savior has communicated unto
his people, in these words, Thy kingdom come, thy will be done on earth as it
is in heaven: Where our Lord would have us to pray for the coming of this his
Kingdom, and for the doing of his will on earth, as it is done in heaven: which
will be, when that his Kingdom comes. For though now many know their Lords
will, and do it not; yet it shall not be so then; but, knowing his will, they
shall do it, and delight in the doing of it: for his will is their will; and
theirs it is, because it his: so that they shall all pray, and say, Thy will be
done; and shall have strength to do it. His will shall be done in earth, as it
is in heaven, in that day.

Again, in the thirteenth place, The Saints, in this time, being filled with
the Spirit, shall Saints shall then walk in the integri^y and singleness of
heart.
all walk in the uprightness of their hearts. Integrity and singleness of heart
shall appear in them; and hypocrisy, and doublemindedness, shall be loathsome
to them, and be utterly contrary to their natures. They are children that will
not lie: and none but such, shall be inheritors of this kingdom; as appears,
Psalm. 24. 4. where the Psalmist says, that none shall enter into this holy
hill, but he that has clean hands, and a pure heart; who has not lift up his
soul unto vanity, nor sworn deceitfully. And so also Psalm. 15. 2. the Psalmist
again says, that he that walks uprightly, and works righteousnesses, and
speaks the truth in his heart, shall dwell in it. So that such, and none but
such, shall possess this Kingdom. And Psalm. 37. 18. this is again confirmed:
The Lord knows (says the Psalmist) the days of the upright, and their
inheritance shall be for ever: they shall possess this inheritance. And of the
upright ones is it said, Isai. 33. 15. that they shall dwell on high, and shall
see the King in his beauty. This is their Character: They that walk in
righteousnesses and speak uprightnesses, v. 15.

And in the fourteenth place, The Spirit being thus abundantly poured out upon
the Saints, they shall thereby be enabled to mortify all corruption, so that
it shall not at Corruption shall not at all break out in the Saints then
all break out in them: for though it be true, that all that is born of the
flesh, is flesh; and those that are in the state of mortality, shall carry
flesh about them: yet they being all new born, shall be then so filled with the
Spirit, as that they shall mortify all the deeds of the body; and the Spirit
alone shall live, and act, and sway, and bear rule in them; and they being born
of God, shall not sin, but shall hate every false way, and not suffer the least
evil motion to take place: for indeed, it is not possible it should, they being
so full of the Spirit: for Saints do experiment this now, that when the Spirit,
in the power, and life, and glory of it, does abide in them, (as some tastes of
it some Saints sometimes have) O then, not the least evil motion will take
place in their hearts; there is an utter antipathy in their spirits, at that
time, to every thing that is not pure: But when this is withdrawn, then they
are often foiled with temptations, and vanity has too much place with them,
until a fresh supply of the Spirit come and mortify it. But when the Spirit
shall be so abundantly poured out upon the Saints as the Scripture declares,
What a wide difference will there be, between their condition now, and their
estates then! Then shall they always walk up and down in the strength and power
of the Spirit, and never want its presence; and then it shall be their
continual delight, to walk in the paths of holiness; and nothing will be more
irksome and more loathsome to them, then any sin, or sinful thought. And though
by the first Adam sin came into the world, so that all are born sinners; yet
being new born, the second Adam shall save them from all sin; and that not
only from the guilt of sin, but sprinkle clean water upon them, (pour out the
waters of the holy Spirit upon them) and they shall be clean from all the filth
of sin, in a more eminent and glorious manner then ever they have been: so that
corruption shall not then break out, and uncleanness shall not then appear in
them; and this appears, Isa. 62. 12. And they shall say to the daughter of
Zion, Behold, thy salvation comes; behold, his reward is with him, and his
reward before him: and they shall call them, THE HOLY PEOPLE, the redeemed of
the Lord: and thou shall be called, Sought out, a city not forsaken. And Joel
3. 21. For I will ^eanse their blood that I have not cleansed: for the Lord
dwells in Zion. And Isai. 1. 25. And I will turn my hand upon thee, and
purely purge away thy dross, and take away all thy tin. And in Isa. 60. 21. and
Jer. 21. 23. places already mentioned.

Again, in the fifteenth place, the Spirit being thus abundantly poured out
upon them, it shall make them appear very Great spiritual glory will then
appear in Saints.
glorious in the eyes of all: for herein will their greatest glory then
consist; this is that which will make Sion the praise of the whole earth, That
she shall be thus gloriously adorned with the Spirit, which is that glorious
apparel which makes the Kings daughter all glorious within, as well as
without; Psalm. 45. 13. The Kings daughter is all glorious within; her clothing
is of wrought gold. And therefore it is, that, Rev. 21. this New Jerusalem is
thus described: The building of the wall of this beloved City, (which, verse. 2.
is said to be prepared as a Bride adorned for her husband:) I say, the building
of the wall of this City is said to be of Jasper, and the City is said to be of
pure gold; like unto clear Glass; and the foundation of the wall of the City,
to be garnished with all manner of precious stones: the first Jasper, the
second Saphir, the third a Chalcedony, the fourth an Emerauld, the fifth
Sardonix, the sixth Sardius, the seventh Chrysolite, the eighth Beryl, the
ninth a Topaz, the tenth a Chrysoprasus the eleventh a Jacinct, the twelfth an
Amethyst. And the twelve gates are said to be twelve Pearls; every several gate
of one Pearl: and the street of the City to be of pure Gold, as it were
transparent Glass. All which serves to set out that luster and glory which
shall appear in the Saints, the beloved City of God, by reason of that abundant
measure of the Spirit which they shall enjoy in that day. And expressions to
the same purpose we have, Isa. 54. 11, 12. O thou afflicted, and tossed with
tempest, and not comforted; behold, I will lay thy stones with fair colors,
and lay thy foundations with Saphirs; and I will make thy windows of Agates and
thy gates of Carbuncles, and all thy borders of pleasant stones. The Saints of
God, which for a long time have been afflicted, and tossed with tempest, and
not comforted, both by reason of enemies from without, and corruptions from
within, so that no beauty nor comeliness has appeared in them, shall then be
so freed both from outward afflictions, and (by the plentiful enjoyment of the
Spirit) from inward corruptions, as they shall appear very glorious, all fair,
and richly garnished, and adorned with the choicest spiritual jewels. And
therefore, not without cause does David say ( Psalm. 87. 3.) Glorious things are
spoken of thee, O city of God.

Again, in the sixteenth place, The Spirit being thus abundantly enjoyed by the
Saints in these times, they shall thereby be enabled to make a holy use of all
the creatures which Saints shall not sin at all in the use of the creatures.
they shall then enjoy. And that which was said of those holy men of old, shall
be then truly said of them; they shall visit their Job.
tabernacles, and not sin; and they shall walk within Psalm. 101. 2.
their house with a perfect heart. They shall indeed build houses, and inhabit
them; and plant vineyards, and eat the fruit of them; but they shall not defile
their houses by sinning in them, nor shall they sin in using the creatures
which they shall enjoy: their corn, and wine, and oil, and flocks, and herds,
and fruits of the trees, and of the field, which they shall enjoy, shall in no
sort be abused by them: for the Spirit shall guide them to use all the
creatures in a holy manner, enabling of them to receive them with prayer and
thanksgiving; as Joel 2. 26. And ye shall eat in plenty, and be satisfied, and
praise the Name of the Lord your God. And Isa. 62. 8, 9. Surely I will no more
give thy corn to be meat for thine enemies, and the sons of the stranger shall
not drink thy wine for the which thou have labored: but they that have
gathered, shall eat it, and praise the Lord; and they that have brought it
together, shall drink it in the courts of my holiness. And as they shall thus
praise the Lord for all his mercies; so doubtless shall they pray unto him for
a holy use of them, though the Scripture do not particularly speak of it: for
at this time though they shall be assured of all mercies, of all sorts; yet
shall it be no A full assurance of having mercies, is no hinderance to a real
Saints praying for mercy.
hinderance to their praying for them, as to make them argue thus: Why I am
sure I shall have these and these mercies, whether I pray for them or not; and
therefore what need have I to pray for them? No; but as now those that have
most true and real assurance of mercies, are most in prayer, as the Lord Jesus
himself was, and as Paul was; so shall it be in these times, when the spirit of
grace and supplication shall be most a bundantly poured out, so that all
creatures shall be sanctified to them, being received with prayer and
thanksgiving. They shall eat and be satisfied, and praise the Lord.

And in the seventeenth place, The Spirit being then thus abundantly showred
down upon the Saints, it shall fill them with holy Saints shall be filled with
joy, joy without any mixtures of sorrow at all.
joy and gladness of heart: for it is the very nature of the Spirit, to be a
Comforter; and therefore where much of the Spirit is, there must needs be much
joy; and so indeed there shall be: and therefore it is said, Isai. 65. 18, 19.
Be ye glad and rejoice for ever in that which I create: for behold I create
Jerusalem a rejoicing, and her people a joy. And I will rejoice in Jerusalem,
and joy in my people: and the voice of weeping shall be no more heard in her,
nor the voice of crying. It Is true, that to complete this joy, they shall have
many external or outward mercies: but the pouring out of the Spirit is the main
ingredient of their joy; and without it, their joy in all other enjoyments,
could be no joy, no true joy. The voice of weeping, nor the voice of crying,
shall be no more heard among them: and it is true, that in respect of outward
also, there shall be no cause for weeping or crying: they shall not then lose
their dear relations, and other outward enjoyments, to their grief, (as I shall
show by and by) but shall comfortably enjoy them. But the top-flower, the crown
of all their joys, shall be spiritual, even those spiritual enjoyments which
they shall then be made partakers of. And in that respect chiefly it is said,
Isai. 35. 10. That the ransomed of the Lord shall return, and come to Zion with
songs, and everlasting joy upon their heads: they shall obtain joy and
gladness, and sorrow and sighing shall flee away. And therefore also is it
said, that God shall wipe away all tears from their eyes, Rev. 7. 17. They
shall be no more afflicted, and tossed with tempest, and not comforted, as they
have been, for want of spiritual enjoyments: no; but they shall have such full
supplies of the Spirit, in all cases, and upon all occasions, as they shall not
have cause to bewail, and mourn, and sigh, for the want of it: No; but the
Spirit shall be as bread to strengthen them; and they shall walk in the
strength thereof: and as new wine, to refresh, and make them cheerful. Zech. 9.
17 For how great is his goodness and how great his beauty? Corn shall make the
young men cheerful, and new wine the maids. Thus with holy joy and gladness,
shall the hearts of Saints be then filled. And everlasting joy shall be upon
their heads.

And thus have I as briefly as I could, declared what the spiritual and
internal privileges are, which the Saints shall be made partakers of, in this
new Jerusalem.

But now here by the way, let me add this word. That though I have all along
spoken of those spiritual privileges, and perfections, as prerogatives that
shall be gloriously conferred upon Saints, in those thousand years that I have
spoken of: yet let Saints know this also, That though the heights of these
spiritual glories are reserved for that time; yet as the time is already come,
wherein Jesus Christ is beginning to take his kingdom; and in a sense it may be
already said, That the kingdoms of this world are become the kingdoms of our
Lord, and of his Christ: so the time is already come, wherein these spiritual
promises are to be made good: at least these are the beginnings of that time.

And we see Those that are spiritual do see it, and their souls rejoice in it:
They see it in Saints of all ages, and Sexes, and degrees.
it very evidently; for upon the Saints in general, the Spirit is already more
abundantly poured out then it has been.

And this we may expect and duly look for, That as Jesus Christ rises higher
and higher, in his other dispensations, in subduing his enemies in this Nation,
and the Kingdoms abroad;

So he will rise higher and higher, in his spiritual dispensations; he will
more and more pour out his Spirit upon his people.

And as the Spirit of Prayer upon some, and the Spirit both of Prayer and
Prophecy upon others, and all the effects of the Spirit, as knowledge,
humility, love, etc. is already poured out upon Saints, learned and unlearned,
male and female, old and young, very richly, in comparison of what it was
twenty years since:

So before twenty, or ten, or five years more pass, we shall undoubtedly They
shall see it especially that look for it, that long and wait for it.
see much more of this spiritual glory upon the Saints then now there is.

We shall see I more knowledge among the Saints, and will be generally 2 in a
more humble frame of Spirit, laying themselves low before We have now great
cause to rejoice, ^o see so much of this frame as we do already see among the
Saints.
God. And 3 they shall have more inflamed affections to God, because of all his
goodness to them. And 4 they shall have upon their hearts a more holy son-like
fear of God. And 5 they shall worship him more purely, more according to his
will. And 6 there shall be among all Saints a more firm union. And 7 they shall
be enabled to act more justly and righteously. And 8 they shall be more meek.
And 9 those that are weak among them shall be more strong. And 10 their
language shall be more pure. And 11 their mind shall be more high and noble; I
mean more heavenly, less minding earthly vanities. And 12 they shall be more
fully swallowed up in the will of God. And 13 singleness of heart more
evidently appear in them. And 14 corruptions of any kind shall less appear.
And 15 their spiritual glory shall shine forth more fully. And 16 they shall
more purely use all outward enjoyments, all creature comforts. And finally,
they shall be filled with greater joy in God and more fully be joyful in their
King; his high praises being in their mouths, and a twoedged sword in their
hand, to take vengeance upon the heathen, etc.

I say, these things we shall see more perspicuously and more emmently in
Saints five years hence then now; but ten years hence much more then then; and
twenty years hence far exceeding that.

For these are not ordinary times, not such times as have been during the forty
two months, wherein the Church was appointed to be in a low condition; but
these are the Saints rising times, wherein they shall rise higher and higher.

Therefore all ye that are Saints, look for these things; *Let all Saints both
men and women, and sons and daughters, servants and handmaids expect these
things.
expect them, and labor after them: for this is the time wherein ye shall
(indeed) Hos. 6. 3.
know if ye follow on to know the Lord.

And therefore now let nothing satisfy you, but this. For it is not those of
ye (you well know) that have most outward, but those that have most of this
spiritual glory, that shall be most happy, and most in esteem with Jesus Christ
and his Saints; and such shall not want outward, as appears in what follows.

Of the Outward and external privileges that Saints shall then enjoy.
I come now to declare also what the external privileges of the Saints shall
then be. But first I shall premise these three things.

First, That though the external privileges of the Saints shall then be very
many, and very great; that yet these outward privileges are no way to be
compared with those spiritual privileges I have already spoken of: Neither can
the heart of a true Saint suffer any comparison to be made between them.

And secondly, That though these outward enjoyments are favors and blessings,
which may be lawfully desired; yet are they not desired by Saints, in
comparison of that desire they have to enjoy those spiritual privileges
already spoken of; which they would think themselves happy if they might but
now enjoy, though they had not those outward things any more then they have had
in their lowest condition.

And thirdly, That to the people who are in this frame, (and to none but such)
whose hearts are thus spiritual, and who so little regard these things in
comparison of spiritual; even to such, will God in these times we are speaking
of; abundantly give, not only these spiritual enjoyments and privileges; but
all other things shall be added unto them: that so their joy may be complete,
and nothing may interrupt it.

And now I come to declare how comfortably, and (if I may so say) how happily
the Saints shall live in this new world, in respect of outward. Concerning
which, hear how the Lord expresses himself, Isa. 60. 15. For I will make thee
an eternal excellency, the joy of many generations. It is a short, but a full
word: for speaking of the external glory that he will confer upon his Church,
he says, that his Sion shall have as much outward glory, as ever any people
had: nay, he says not only so; but that they that excel others: he will make
them an external excellency. The outward glory that was conferred upon Solomon,
the type of our King of peace, was very great; but this shall excel it, and
excel all kingdoms that ever were before it; for outward things, as well as
spiritual. It shall be an ex^rnal excellency, and it shall be the joy of many
generations: such outward glory, and such excellency above all others, shall be
conferred upon it, as shall be the joy, as shall glad the hearts of all that
live in those generations, or that shall be brought forth in those times, while
these thousand years shall last. And what the outward glories of it shall be,
is in part expressed in the following words: For brass I will bring gold, and for
iron I will bring silver, and for wood brass, and for stones iron. These are
the things wherein the external glory of a land consists: and he says withal,
that they shall suck the milk of the Gentiles, and suck the breasts of Kings.
Which imports that the treasures, and outward glory of the Nations, and of the
Kings, and great men of the world, shall be all drained together, and brought
in to them; they shall suck the sweetness of them, and shall enjoy them all.
And thus will the Lord make his Sion an eternal excellency in outward respects,
as well as in inward or spiritual respects.

But now more fully to declare what this external glory of this new world shall
be; thus:-

There shall be no outward thing wanting to the Saints, that may make their
life outwardly comfortable: for what is it that can be desired, or that heart
can think of, that ever at any time makes the lives of people comfortable, but
the Lord has promised that his people shall enjoy it, in these times?

And first, Saints shall then have that outward blessing of long life, and a
comfortable enjoyment of all their relations, until they come to a good old age.
Does the enjoyment of near relations, without losing of them, make the life
comfortable? Are children outward blessings, in which men take much outward
content and delight? And is it a very desirable thing to have our children the
Lords children, to be the blessed of the Lord? And is it a bitter thing to lose
an only son, a sad thing to lose children and near relations, and is the
contrary a desirable mercy? And is long life a blessing, and an outward favor
lawful to be desired? According to that, Psa. 91. 16. With long life will I
satisfy him, and show him my salvation.

Why, all these things has the Lord promised to his people in these days, when
these new Heavens and new Earth shall be, as we find in these Scriptures.
Isai. 65. 17, 18, etc. Behold, I create new heavens and a new earth: and then
what follows? I will rejoice in Jerusalem, and joy in my people: and the voice
of weeping shall be no more heard in her, nor the voice of crying. But if they
should lose their children, and lose their relations, before they come to a full
age, there would be mourning and weeping: for these things usually prove sad
afflictions to the best Saints; even to Jacobs and David's. But they shall not
lose these then: for, verse. 20. it is said, There shall be no more thence an
infant of days nor an old man that has not filled his days: for the child
shall die an hundred years old. So that this is clear, No infant of days shall
die; none shall die while they are young; all shall come to a good old age.
They shall not be afflicted for the loss of their children; for they shall live
till they be an hundred years old; and not an old man shall die that has not
filled his days. Again Zech. 8. 3, 4, etc. Thus says the Lord, I am returned
to Sion, and will dwell in the midst of Jerusalem: and Jerusalem shall be
called, A city of truth, and the mountain of the Lord of hosts, the holy
mountain, wherein the Lord will dwell. And what follows? Thus says the Lord of
hosts, There shall yet old men and old women dwell in the streets of Jerusalem,
and every man with his staff in his hand for multitude of days: and the streets
of the city shall be full of boys and girls playing in the streets thereof.
Thus shall the Saints in those days enjoy those desirable blessings of
children, and of long life: they shall have a numerous issue; The streets shall
be full of boys and girls; and old men and old women shall live till they come
to a good old age, till they walk with a staff in their hand for age.

But me thinks as I am speaking of these outward blessings, I cannot too often
insert this as a caution by the way: That, to a holy heart, these things are
but secondary comforts, under-comforts: their chief comfort consists in
spirituals.

But I proceed.

In Jer. 33. the Lord speaks of the great things he will do for his people in
that day; and verse. 9. he says, They shall be for a name of joy, and praise,
and honor before the nations; which shall hear of the good that he will do
unto them. And verse. 11. There shall be heard among them the voice of joy, and
the voice of gladness, and the voice of the bridegroom, and the voice of the
bride, and the voice of them that shall say, Praise the Lord of hosts, etc.
Thus shall they comfortably enjoy children, and all relations, and praise the
Lord. Nay, and to make their children which they shall enjoy a complete
blessing and mercy to them indeed, it is said that they shall be all holy unto
God, Isa. 65. 23. They shall not labor in vain, nor bring forth for trouble:
for they are the seed of the blessed of the Lord, and their offspring with
them. Their children being thus blessed with them shall be a joy unto them;
whereas otherwise they might be a grief and trouble to them. Again, to the same
purpose is that, Isa. 54. 13. and Isa. 61. 9. And all thy children shall be
taught of the Lord; and great shall be the peace of thy children. -- And their
seed shall be known among the Gentiles, and their offspring among the people.
All that see them, shall acknowledge them, that they are the seed which the
Lord has blessed.

Again, secondly, The noysomness and hurtfulness of wild beasts, and hurtful
creatures, shall be then taken away.
Is deliverance from the noysomness of destroying and hurtful wild creatures,
a desirable mercy? Is it a thing which may tend to the outward comfort of the
people of God, to have the offensiveness of offensive creatures taken away?
This also has God promised, and shall be granted in this time to his people.
And this is the meaning of Paul, Romans 8. 21. where speaking of this glorious
time, of the glorious liberty of the children of God, he says, that the
creature shall also be delivered from the bondage of corruption. And this is
that which is clearly also laid down, Isa. 11. 6, 7, 8, 9. The wolf also shall
dwell with the lamb, and the leopard shall lie down with the kid; and the calf,
and the young lion, and the fatling together, and a little child shall lead
them: and the cow and the bear shall feed, their young ones shall lie down to
gether: and the lion shall eat straw like the ox; and the sucking child shall
play on the hole of the asp, and the weaned child shall put his hand on the
cockatrice den. They shall not hurt nor destroy in all my holy mountain. And
Isa. 65. 25. The wolf and the lamb shall feed together, and the lion shall eat
straw like the bullock, and dust shall be the serpents meat. They shall not
hurt nor destroy in all my holy mountain, says the Lord. Thus do these
Scriptures declare, how the creatures shall be delivered from the bondage of
corruption. For what put an enmity between some of these creatures and Man, but
Man's corruption? Before man fell, he was Lord of them all, and they were all in
subjection to him, and offered him no violence: But now are these creatures in
enmity against Mankind, and many times they prove hurtful and destructive to
men, women, and children, by reason of that corruption that is upon Mankind:
but when men shall be cleansed from corruption, then this bondage shall be
taken away, and the creatures shall appear in their primitive beauty and
goodness wherein they were created, being all in subjection, and useful to man,
and they shall be in no case hurtful, neither one to another, or to mankind:
the wolf shall not destroy the lamb, nor the leopard the kid, nor the lion the
calf, nor the fatling; but they shall all feed together: and all these shall be
so far subjected to Mankind, as that a little child shall lead them. And
though the sucking child do play upon the hole of the asp, and the weaned
child put his hand upon the adders den, which are wont to sting and hurt them;
yet they shall then do them no hurt at all.

But if it be objected, What, shall not the lion destroy nor hurt any? How can
that be, since the lion uses to feed upon the prey that he gets, and not upon
the grass, as other beasts do? This is answered in these words, The lion shall
eat straw like the ox. Thus none of the creatures shall be offensive any more
to mankind. And for this cause is it said, Ezekiel. 34. 25. That evil beasts
shall cease out of the land; because there shall be then no evil or destroying
beast. So that it follows in that place, They shall then dwell safely in the
wilderness, and sleep in the woods.

But again, thirdly, *Saints shall then have a plentiful enjoyment of all the
fruits of the earth.
Is it an outward mercy which conduces to our comfortable living, to have
seasonable weather, for the bringing forth of the fruits of the earth? And does
it conduce to our outward comfort, to have a plentiful enjoyment of all the
fruits of the earth? All these things also will God grant unto his people in
that day: as appears in these Scriptures; Isa. 30. 23. Then shall he give the
rain of thy seed, that thou shall sow thy ground withal, and the bread of the
increase of the earth; and it shall be fat, and plenteous. And Joel 2. 23, 24.
Be glad, ye children of Sion, and rejoice in the Lord your God; for he has
given the former rain moderately, and he will cause to come down for you the
rain, the former rain, and the latter rain in the first month. And the floors
shall be full of wheat, and the fats shall overflow with wine and oil. And Isa.
62. 8, 9. I will no more give thy corn to be meat for thine enemies, and the
sons of the stranger shall not drink thy wine, for which thou have labored:
but they that have gathered it, shall eat it, and praise the Lord; and they
that have brought it together, shall drink it in the courts of my holiness. And
Amos 9. 13, 14. Behold, the days come, says the Lord, that the plow-men shall
overtake the reapers, and the treader of grapes him that sows seed; and the
mountains shall drop sweet wine, and all the hills shall melt. -- And they
shall plant vineyards, and drink the wine thereof; and they shall make gardens,
and eat the fruit of them. And Mic. 4. 4. They shall sit every man under his
vine, and under his fig tree, and none shall make them afraid. And Jer. 31. 12.
They shall come and sing in the height of Sion, and shall flow together to the
goodness of the Lord, for wheat, and for wine, and for oil, and for the young
of the flock, and of the herd, etc. And Ezekiel. 36. 30. And I will multiply the
fruit of the tree, and the increase of the field, etc. And Isa. 41. 18, 19. I
will open rivers in the high places, and fountains in the midst of the valleys;
I will make the wilderness a pool of water, and the dry land springs of water.
I will plant in the wilderness, the Cedar, the Shittah-tree, and the Oyl-tree.
I will set in the desert, the Firtree, and the Pine, and the Box-tree together.
And Zech. 8. 12. For the seed shall be prosperous; the vine shall give her
fruit, and the ground shall give her increase, and the heavens shall give their
dew: and I will cause the remnant of this people to possess all these things.

Thus plentifully do the Scriptures declare, how that in that time the Saints
shall comfortably enjoy all the fruit of their labors, in the fields, and in
their gardens, and their vineyards. And that to that end, they shall have
always seasonable showers of rain, and profitable springs of water, in all
places, to water and refresh the ground, and make it fertile, in bringing forth
of corn, and trees of all sorts, and all desirable fruit. They shall have no
more dry and barren years, years of famine, which have proved very
uncomfortable; but so abundantly, and so plentifully shall they have all these
things, as that the floors shall be full of Wheat, and the fats shall overflow
with Wine and Oil, and the mountains shall drop down sweet Wine, and the hills
abound with all desirable fruits, and trees; and in stead of the thorn, shall
come up the fir tree; and in stead of the bryer, shall come up the Mirtletree,
Isa. 55. 13. What can be more desired, as to these things? Well, but

Fourthly, They shall then have also flocks and herds in abundance.
Is it a comfortable mercy, to have a plentiful increase of flocks, and of
herds, and to enjoy them in abundance it being the blessing wherewith God
blessed Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob of old? Why these outward enjoyments will God
graciously give to his people in these times also; as appears, Jer. 33. where
the Lord speaking of this time, when the Jews shall enjoy these glorious times,
v. 12, 13. the Lord says, that In all the places which were desolate, without
man, and without beast; there shall be an habitation of shepherds, causing
their flocks to lie down; and the flocks shall again pass under the hand of him
that tells them. And Isa. 60. 6, 7. The forces of the Gentiles shall come
unto thee, the multitudes of camels shall cover thee; the dromedaries of Midian
and Epha; -- all the flocks of Kedar shall be gathered together unto thee. And
Isa. 30. 23, 24. In that day shall the cattle feed in large pastures; the oxen
likewise, and the young asses that ear the ground, shall eat clean provender,
which has been winnowed with the shovel, and with the fan. And Isa. 43. 20.
The beasts of the field shall honor me, the dragons and the ostriches, because
I give waters in the wilderness, etc. And Ezekiel. 36. 11. I will multiply upon
you man and beast. And Isa. 61. 5. The strangers shall stand and feed your
flocks, and the sons of the alien shall be your plow-men, and vinedressers. And
Isa. 66. 20. They shall bring your brethren out of all nations, upon horses and
chariots, and litters, and upon swift beasts, unto my holy mountain Jerusalem.
And Jer. 31. 12. it is said, They shall come and sing in the height of Sion,
and shall flow together to the goodness of the Lord, for wheat, and for wine,
and for oil, and for the young of the flock, and of the herd.

Thus shall they plentifully enjoy these outward comforts of flocks and herds;
and those flocks and herds shall have large pastures, and be fed with clean
provender: and there shall be such plentiful showers, and springs, for the
bringing forth of pasture, and for the refreshing of beasts and cattle, as that
the Dragons and the Ostriches shall find enough in the wilderness to satisfy
them; for which they shall honor God, according to their capacity: and such
plenty of these creatures shall there then be had, as they shall be satisfied
with the young of the flock, and of the herd.

Again, fifthly, They shall then have convement accommodations of houses and
gardens.
Is it a comfortable outward mercy, to have houses to inhabit, and to have
comfortable and conveent dwelling places, it being an uncomfortable thing to be
destitute of a habitation? This also the Lord will grant unto his people at
that time; As appears, Isa. 65. 21, 22. And they shall build houses, and
inhabit them; and they shall plant vineyards, and eat the fruit of them. They
shall not build, and another inhabit; they shall not plant, and another eat the
fruit: but mine elect shall enjoy the work of their hands, And Mic. 4. 4. They
shall every man sit under his own vine, and under his own figtree, and none
shall make them afraid.

Thus shall the Saints then enjoy their Houses and Gardens which they shall
build and plant for themselves; living comfortably, and peaceably in them. And
again, Isa. 61. 4. They shall build the old wastes, and raise up the former
desolations, and they shall repair the waste cities, the desolations of many
generations. And Isa. 60. 10. And the sons of strangers shall build thy walls.
And Amos 9. 14. And my people shall build the waste cities, and inhabit them;
and they shall plant vineyards, and drink the wine thereof; and they shall make
gardens, and eat the fruit of them. And Ezekiel. 36. 10. And men shall be
multiplied upon the mountains of Israel, and the cities shall be inhabited, and
the wastes shall be builded.

Thus in these glorious times, shall Saints enjoy this outward mercy mercy
also. They shall have commodious Houses and Gardens which they shall build and
make for themselves; which they shall peaceably and comfortably enjoy; building
up those Cities and places that have been laid waste and desolate, and making
of them convenient and comfortable habitations to be inhabited.

But sixthly, They shall also have abundance of gold, and silver, and brass,
and iron, and wood, in those times.
Is there any outward thing which may be useful and necessary for man and which
may conduce to his outward comfortable being, besides those things which we
have already mentioned? It may be replied, Yes, there are other outward things
which are useful and necessary, and which conduce to the outward comfortable
being of man; as apparel, and silver, and gold, and other sorts of metals,
which are for covering and outward ornament for the body, and for necessary
furniture and utensils for houshold-affairs; and these being wanting, they
cannot be so outwardly comfortable as with them, but the enjoyment of them
tends to a comfortable outward subsistence. Well, it being so God has promised
to give his people plentifully to enjoy all these also: (for they shall want
nothing that tends either to their inward or outward comfort:) and that
appears, Isai. 60. 9. They shall bring thy sons from far, (it is spoken of the
time when these glorious times shall be) and their silver and their gold with
them. And verse. 19. For brass, I will bring gold; and for iron, I will bring
silver; and for wood, brass; and for stones, iron. And Zech. 14. 14. And the
wealth of all the heathen round about, shall be gathered together; gold, and
silver, and apparel in great abundance. Those that shall be converted to the
Church, shall be many; and they shall have great wealth which shall add to the
outward glory of this New Jerusalem. And therefore is it said of the New
Jerusalem, Rev. 21. 24. That the nations of them which are saved shall walk in
the light of it, and the kings of the earth do bring their glory and honor
into it. Which must needs be spoken of this external glory, their outward
riches: for the Gentiles cannot be said to bring other glory into the New
Jerusalem.

Thus we see, that they shall then also have a plentiful enjoyment of silver,
and gold, and brass, and iron, and apparel in great abundance; and of all the
other outward mercies which we have spoken of. So that there is no
creature-comfort, no outward blessing, which Saints shall then want: but as the
earth, which is Psalm. 24. 1.
the Lords, shall be then given to them; so also all the fullness thereof; all
that which may conduce to the making of them fully outwardly comfortable, as
well as those inward comforts already spoken of. So that in all respects, the
Psalm. 118. 15
voice of rejoicing and salvation shall be heard in the tabernacles of the
righteous.

I should now proceed to speak of other things: but before I do, there will be
one Objection, and three Queries, to be answered.

An Objection. And first, some may say, It is true, they do expect that God
will do great things for his people; but they expected not these outward things
that have been spoken of: For how can it be a mercy to the Saints to enjoy
these, seeing the world, and worldly enjoyments, usually prove a snare unco
them? And therefore the Apostle says, 1 Timothy 6. 9. That they that will be rich,
fall into temptation, and a snare, and into many foolish and hurtful lusts,
which drown men in destruction and perdition. And it is too evident, how the
world has choked the growing of grace in those hearts where eminently it
shined before they did possess so much of the world: and since they have had
much of the world, they seem to be more proud, and are not in that humble
posture as before; and they appear to be more cold and formal, and can swallow
those things which before they condemned in others. And it being so, though the
Lord will do great things for his people, yet it is doubtful (say some) whether
it shall be in outward respects, which do thus usually prove snares to Saints,
and did prove so in Constantine the Great his time, and afterward, when the
godly Emperors bestowed great outward possessions upon the godly Bishops; then
they began to decay, and grow cold, and corrupt and loose in their lives; which
made S. Augustine utter this expression: Religio peperit divitias, and filia
devoravit matrem: that is, Religion brought forth riches, and the daughter has
devoured the mother: whereby he imports, that riches had proved a great snare
to religious people, and eaten out the power of godliness: And how then shall
we expect these outward enjoyments, (which have proved and do prove such
snares) in these glorious times we are looking for?

The Answer to the Objection. To which I answer, first, That God will do great
things for his people in outward, as well as in spirituals, is very clear, the
Scripture being so plentiful and full in the declaring of it.

And since it is his pleasure, in these later days, to deliver the creature
from the bondage of corruption, and to restore all these outward things to
their primitive goodness and glory, that his people may see how good these
lefthand-mercies (if I may so term them) are, which for their use were
appointed, that so they may be fully sensible of his goodness therein: I say,
since he has thus appointed, and the Scripture fully declares he will do it;
why should it be doubted?

But secondly, Whereas it is said that these outward enjoyments do prove, and
have proved snares; let that be considered which I have already said, how that
it shall not be with the Saints in these times, as it has been formerly; but
that the Spirit shall be more abundantly poured out upon Saints then it has
been: and if thou that so objectest considerest that, then thou will see, that
the Spirit, being so gloriously enjoyed, will preserve Saints from being so
snared and overtaken with the temptations of the world, as too many formerly
have been.

And thirdly, Whereas thou say that many now are snared with the world; I
desire thee to consider, first, Whether such as are so snared, and carried away
with the world from their first love, had ever any love to the Lord Jesus in
sincerity; whether they were not as the thorny ground, or the stony ground,
that never had good rooting, never had indeed the Spirit of the Son in them;
but seemed to receive the Word, but it was but with outward flashes of joy. Or
secondly, If they truly had the Spirit of Jesus, whether it were not in a weak
and a low degree: for thou shall find, that those that have a higher measure
of the Spirit, they, though they are great in the world, are as full of life
and vigor, and of fervent love to Christ, as those that are mean; and walk as
humbly as any of them: nay, some of those that God has given great outward
preferment unto, and have much of the world in their possession, do far exceed
many of those Saints that are of more inferior rank in the world, and go
beyond them in zeal and fervencie of spirit, and being exemplary in a holy
humble, and unspotted conversation. Therefore, if some be corrupt; and cold;
and carnal, that have much of these outward things, impute it not to those
outward things, (which, simply considered in themselves, have no evil in them)
but impute it to that corrupt heart that so abuses these enjoyments.

Again, fourthly, Consider what I have already said, viz. that the chiefest of
the Saints comforts, in these times, will consist in their inward enjoyments:
and those that are truly spiritual, and shall indeed be accounted worthy to
stand before the Lord Jesus in that day, shall be such whose hearts are set
upon desiring the spiritual enjoyments of this Kingdom, above all things else;
and to such, these things shall be added. But let such who more desire outward
comforts then spiritual enjoyments, (and manifest it by their present unjust
scraping of these outward things together) know, that they shall in that day
enjoy neither the one nor the other comfortably; as appears, Isai. 65. 13, 14,
20. And so much in answer to this Objection.

A Querie. But secondly, It may be queried, Whether, when the Saints shall
enjoy all these things, they shall not follow their several employments and
vocations as now they do?

An Answer to the Querie. To which I answer, Yes: it is clear they shall follow
several employments as now they do; but doubtless in a more regular, and more
excellent and comfortable way then many now do; i. e. some shall not labor and
toil day and night, (scarce allowing themselves any time to spend in the
performance of holy duties, or for lawful and convenient recreations) to
maintain others that live vitiously, in idleness, drunkenness, and other evil
practices: I say, It shall not be thus then; such idle and profane creatures
shall then have no allowance or sufferance to live such lives as now they do.

But to the Question. That men shall then follow their several employments and
callings, is clear in these Scriptures: Amos 9. 13. Behold, in that day, says
the Lord, the plowman shall overtake the reaper, and the treader of grapes him
that sows seed etc. Here is mention of four several employments, for several
men: 1. the Plowman, 2. the Reapers, 3. the treader of grapes, 4. the Sower of
seed. And Jer. 33. 12, 13. In that day, in the place where it had been
desolate, there shall be habitations of shepherds, causing their flocks to lie
down; and the flock shall again pass under the hand of him that tells them.
And Isa. 61. 5. And strangers shall stand and feed your flocks, and the sons of
the alien shall be your plow-men and vinedressers. Thus in these words is it
clear, that men shall then follow several employments. Again, Isa. 62. 8, 9. I
will no more give thy corn to be meat for thine enemies, and the sons of the
stranger shall no more drink thy wine for which thou have labored; but they
that have gathered it shall eat it, and praise the Lord; and they that have
gathered it together, shall drink it in the courts of my holiness. Here it is
clear, that labor they shall, and each man shall enjoy the fruit of his own
labors: they shall not be unjustly deprived of it, as now many be. And so
again, Isa. 65. 21, 22. They shall build houses, and plant vineyards; -- and
mine elect shall long enjoy the work of their hands. Mark this; They shall long
enjoy the work of their hands. By the work of their hands, they shall purchase
estates, and they shall be long enjoyed by them and their children: no
strangers shall deprive them of them. But now by these several Scriptures it is
clear, that several employments men shall follow; as plowing, sowing, and
planting, and reaping, and treading the vines, keeping and feeding flocks and
herds, and building houses, etc. But now, though the Scripture mention not
expressly the following other employments; as Handy-craft-employments, working
in gold, and silver, and brass, and iron, and silk, and linen, and woollen,
etc. yet is it clearly implied, that they shall use such employments, in those
Scriptures that speak of their building houses in those times, and of having
gold, and silver, and apparel in great abundance, etc. So that it is clear,
that Saints shall labor in several employments in those times. But whatever
the lawful employments be in which they labor, whether in Husbandry, or
Handy-craft-employments; strangers shall not drink the wine, nor eat the food,
nor inhabit the houses, nor wear the apparel, for which they have labored: but
they and their children shall comfortably enjoy the work of their hands. So
that all of them, by their labors and employments; not toylsom and burdensome
employments, but by their employments which shall be as recreation to them, as
some employments are to ingenious men now; for it is irksome to them to be
always idle: I say, All of them, by their pleasant, easy, and well-regulated
employments, shall get a plentiful If the diligent hand, by the blessing of the
Lord, do now make rich, much more shall it then.
store of all those outward things which shall tend to the comfortable
subsistence of them and theirs, with which they shall have no grief nor
vexation at all, but sorrow and sighing shall flee away, and everlasting joy
shall be unto them. And so much for answer to this Querie.

A Querie. But thirdly, Another Querie may be, How the raised Saints, that
shall come to reign with Christ on earth, shall walk and act here in the world?

An Answer to the Query. To which I have no other answer to make but this;
(having already shown that they shall be raised spiritual bodies) that they
shall not act with respect to their bodies, as those other Saints that shall
live and shall be born in those times; who have not laid down their mortal
bodies, and been raised again: for as our Savior speaks expressly, that in the
Resurrection They shall neither marry, nor be given in marriage, but they shall
be as the Angels of God: so it shall be with them: So that the actings and
walkings, of the raised Saints here on earth, may be much like the actings of
the Angels of God. But to declare how they shall act more particularly, and how
and in what manner they shall reign on earth with Christ; I dare not undertake
to describe any further; the Scripture being silent as to particulars; and I
think that enough for us to know in these matters, which the Spirit of God
thinks enough to declare of them in Scripture. But so much as the Scripture
declares, we may (not only safely, but) as our Deuteronomy. 29. 29.
duty, search into. Romans 15. 4.
Therefore, so much as I find the Scriptures declaring, thereof, do I here
exhibit, and shall no more.

A Query. But fourthly, Some may be apt to enquire, Whether all creatures shall
be made use of by us then; the sensitive creatures, as well as the vegetive?

This Querie is occasioned by that saying of the Apostle, which we have, Romans
8. 21. which has been already mentioned, where the Apostle says, that in that
day of the manifestation of the sons of God, that then the creature shall be
delivered from the bondage of corruption. Now will some say, Is it not a
bondage to the sensitive creatures to be killed for the use of man? And we do
not find that Adam in innocence made use of any of the sensitive creatures,
but of herbs, and fruits of the trees and of the ground for food. And is it not
therefore probable, that the Saints shall do so in the new Jerusalem-times?

An Answer to the Query. To all which I answer, first, It is clear by what I
have already said, that the Saints shall then be blessed, with the enjoyment of
all sorts of creatures in abundance, as with corn, and Wine, and Oil, and all
the fruits of the earth; so also with flocks and herds, and Camels, and Asses:
from whence also it is clear, that they shall make use of these sensitive
creatures, as well as the vegetive; for why else should they be promised as
outward blessings to them, if they should not make use of them? And what should
they keep flocks and herds for, if they did not use them for food? But it is
not to be doubted, but their flocks and herds are to be for food unto them, and
so likewise are their Camels and Asses, and other creatures of that kind, to
be for other uses to man kind; as for laboring in the ground, and carrying
burdens, and journying, and all other things wherein men have occasion to make
use of them; As appears, Isa. 30. 23. Thine oxen likewise, and the young asses
that ear the ground, shall eat clean provender, etc. And Isa. 66. 20. And they
shall bring your brethren out of all Nations, upon Horses, and in Chariots, and
in Litters, and upon swift beasts, etc. And by this, in man's making use of all
these creatures, it will be manifested that man is Lord of them all; in that
they shall be all subject to him, and be useful for him.

But secondly, To answer the ground of the Objection, thus: I see no reason why
any should conclude, that man's making use of the creatures in a reasonable and
a moderate manner, is that bondage of corruption that Paul speaks of: For it is
clear, that ^t is no burden to the creatures to be in subjection to man, and
to serve man, (when men are not unmerciful to them) as we may see by the
readiness of some creatures, (as it were by a natural instinct) to serve man
willingly. But if any thing (in or about man's using the creatures) may be said
to be a part of the bondage of corruption, it is in regard of men's unmerciful
dealing with many creatures, in laying more burden upon them then they can
well bear, and putting of them to do more then they can well do; but this
bondage will then be removed from them.

But thirdly, What most properly may be said to be the bondage of corruption
that now is upon the creatures, I have already spoken of; and that is that
enmity which is in many creatures each to other, and to mankind; or that
hurtfulness that is in them: and this they shall be delivered from in that day.
And that this is the genuine sense and meaning of the Apostle, when he says
that the creatures shall be delivered from the bondage of corruption, in that
glorious time of the manifestation of the sons of God, is clear: my ground is
this, Because I find the Scripture declaring that in that day this enmity and
hurtfulness shall be removed from them; as appears in those places I have
already quoted, viz. Isa. 11. 6, 7, 8, 9. And Isa. 65. 25. And this is the main
(if not the only) thing in which (the Scripture declares that) the changed
condition of the creatures in that day shall appear; and nowhere it is said,
that the creature shall not then be for the use and service of man; but the
contrary is clear.

But fourthly, That some creatures are killed for the use of man, what bondage
is it for them? For what other burden is it for one creature to be killed,
then for another creature to die a natural death? Is it not a silly thing to
conceive, that a violent death should be worse to them then another death is,
because it is so to man? seeing these creatures that are not reasonable, the
thoughts of death are not terrible to them, as to man they be; for they fear it
not, nor know not what it is, in regard they are not rational? Doubtless it
were a weak thing to conceive, that this kind of death should be more
burdensome to them then a natural death, and consequently to think this to be
the bondage of corruption spoken of by the Apostle.

But fifthly, As to that of Adam's eating fruit in Innocence, Who can say that
Adam in Innocence did eat only herbs and fruit? For though there be no
mention of his eating flesh, yet might he not eat flesh, though the Scripture
be silent in the mentioning of it? But if it should be granted, that Adam,
continuing but a little while in innocence, did not feed upon flesh, but upon
herbs and fruits at that time; Does it therefore follow, that if he had
continued longer in innocence, that he would not have eaten flesh at any time?
Was he at all forbidden to eat flesh? Would it have been a sin to eat flesh? We
know that all creatures were made for his use, and put in subjection to him:
and we know, that of his two eldest sons, the one was a tiller of the ground,
and the other was a keeper of sheep. And why was Abel a keeper of sheep, if
they were not of use unto them for food, as well as the fruit of the ground?
But doubtless the sheep which Abel kept, were of use for food unto them.

Thus is there nothing of force in that supposition that Adam did eat no flesh
in Innocence: Neither may it at all be argued, that these creatures shall not
be made use of in this time of the restitution of all things. But it remains
clear, as the Scripture declares it, that in that time the Saints shall have a
comfortable use of all creatures, in a more pure mannder then ever. And thus
much in answer to this Querie.

And thus having shown, as briefly as I could, what the glorious condition of
this New Jerusalem shall be* both with respect to its internal and external
glory, which is to continue for a thousand years: A declaration of what is to
follow after the thousand years are expired.
I shall now come to show (as far as it is revealed unto me from the
Scriptures) what shall follow after this thousand years are finished. In which
I shall be very brief: for the Scripture is but brief in speaking of these
things; they being things that are very far off: But doubtless more may be
revealed of them before that time come; but for the present thus the Scriptures
declares:

That after these thousand years are expired, Satan (which, as we have showed,
during this thousand years, must be bound, and shut up in the bottomless pit)
must be loosed again for a little season: and this appears; Rev. 20. 2, 3.
where it is said, that he was shut up for a thousand years; and after that, he
must be loosed for a little season: and being loosed, we shall see what work he
does in the world, verse. 8, 9. And he shall go out to deceive the nations which
are in the four quarters of the earth, Gog and Magog, to gather them together
to battle; the number of whom is as the sand of the sea. And they went up on
the breadth of the earth, and compassed the camp of the Saints about, and the
beloved city; and fire came down from God out of heaven, and devoured them.

Thus it is here declared what work Satan is to do after he is loosed; viz. He
will go up and down again in the world among the Nations that are in the four
quarters of the earth, that is, those of the Nations that are unbelievers,
(that are said to be without the holy City; being none of them, but being
subjected to them, and put under them;) and of these there will be in the whole
world at that time a very great number: for although all Nations shall be
converted to Christ, yet all persons in all Nations shall not; but many of them
shall be those that are said to be without the holy City, Rev. 22. 15. For
without are dogs, and sorcerers, and whoremongers, and murderers, and
idolaters, and whosoever loves and makes a lie. And these shall Satan, after
he is loosed, go up and down among, and deceive them; gathering them together
to battle, persuading them to join all their forces together, and once again to
make a desperate attempt against the Saints: but in so doing, says the text, he
will deceive them; (for they shall be drawn to their own destruction:) and such
fools will the devil make of them in deceiving of them, (as he did Eve) that he
will (it is likely) persuade them to believe that they shall by their power
overcome the Saints: and as he persuaded Eve to believe that in eating the
forbidden fruit they should be as gods, knowing good and evil; so he will
persuade these, that in making war they shall overcome the Saints, though Jesus
Christ be with them. Thus this old deceiver and liar shall deceive the
unconverted miserable people among the Nations of the world; who, during all
the time of the thousand years, will be quiet, and never dare to attempt any
such thing: and yet then, they shall gather togetner against the Saints, and
think to overcome them: but when they shall attempt to do it, the Saints shall
then have no need of swords nor spears to defend themselves against that brunt,
that one assault: for the text says, Fire shall come down from God out of
heaven, and devour all these wicked men.

Thus is declared what will be done after Satan is loosed: and what his reward
for this work shall be, is declared, verse. 10. And the devil that deceived the
nations, was cast alive into the lake of fire and brimstone, where the beast
and the false prophet are, and shall be tormented day and night for ever.

And now comes to be declared, what shall follow immediately upon this; and
that follows in verse. 11, 12, 13, 14, 15. And I saw a great white throne, and
him that sat upon it, from whose face the earth and the heaven fled away, and
there was found no place for them. And I saw the dead, small and great, stand
before God: and the books were opened, and another book was opened, which is
the book of life; and the dead were judged out of those things which were
written in the books, according to their works. And the sea gave up the dead
which were in it, and death and hell delivered up the dead which were in them;
and they were judged every man according to their works: and death and hell
were cast into the lake of fire. This is the second death: and whosoever was
not found written in the book of life, was cast into the lake of fire.

In these verses is declared, that immediately upon the ruining of all the
wicked of the Nations, the last and general day of judgment is to follow: When
comes the Resurrection of all, both just and unjust. I say, the last and
general day of judgment, and resurrection of all; for in this twentieth
chapter of the Revelation, it is clear, that here is a mention made of two
Resurrections, and the one to be a thousand years before the other: and the
first is treated of in the 4, 5, and 6 verses; and is there called the FIRST
RESURRECTION: and the second is laid down in these verses; where it is said,
that the Heavens and the earth are then to be annihilated, to fly away at the
presence of the Lord, who upon his white throne of righteousness, after these
thousand years are finished, is to appear, and to judge all the dead, small and
great; who are to stand before him, being all raised out of the Graves, and out
of the Sea, and all places where the dead have been laid; and to be judged
righteously, according to the Gospel, and according to their works: and they
being so judged, it will follow, that whosoever is not found written in the
book of life, shall be cast into a lake of fire. And this general day of
judgment here treated of, is also treated of in several other Scriptures; as
in Mat. 25. 31, 32, etc. Where our Savior thus describes it, and says, that in
that day he shall sit upon the throne of his glory, and before him shall be
gathered all Nations, and he shall separate them one from another, as a
shepherd divides his Sheep from the Goats: and he shall set the Sheep on his
right hand, but the Goats on the left. Then shall the King say unto them on his
right hand, Come ye blessed of my Father, inherit the kingdom prepared for you
from the foundation of the world; for I was, etc. And then shall he say also
unto them on the left hand, Depart from me, ye cursed, into everlasting fire,
prepared for the devil and his angels: for, etc. And these shall go away into
everlasting punishment, but the righteous into life eternal.

Thus in this Scripture, is this general day of the final judging of all spoken
of also; wherein to every one is to be rendered according to his works. Again,
another Scripture to this purpose, is that in the first of the Corinthians, at
the fifteenth chapter; where Paul more largely discourses of the doctrine of
the Resurrection, in some particulars of it, then it is any where else in
Scripture treated of; where in the first part of the chapter, he makes it his
work to prove the certainty of the Resurrection of the body, against those
Pharisaical spirits that denied it: And having proved the Resurrection, by many
undeniable and unanswerable Arguments, he comes to declare, at the twenty third
verse, and so on, in what order the Resurrection shall be; he having before
said that all shall be raised, But (says he, it shall be) every man in his own
order; Christ the first fruits, and afterward they that are Christ's, at his
coming.

Here is the Order of the Resurrection. Christ the first fruits: Well, Christ
was to be raised first in order of time, and that was done already: Christ was
raised when the Apostle writ this Epistle: But who are to be raised next? The
Apostle tells us, It must be they that are Christ's. And when must they be
raised? The Apostle answers, At his coming. Afterward they that are Christ's, at
his coming. This is the first Resurrection, wherein the Saints must at the
coming of Christ be raised, to reign with him, (spoken of Revel. 20. 4.) But
then the general Resurrection, and the last great day, he speaks of in verse.
24. 25. and 28. Where he says, Then comes the end, when he shall have
delivered up the kingdom to God, even the Father; when he shall have put down
all rule, and all authority, and power; for he must reign till he has put all
enemies under his feet: the last enemy that shall be destroyed is death. And
when all things shall be subdued unto him, then shall the Son also himself be
subject unto him that put all things under him; that God may be all in all.

Here he declares, that Jesus Christ being come, and having received his
kingdom, and his Saints being raised at his coming (to reign with him) that
after his coming, and reigning, and ruling, and putting all enemies under his
feet, and death it self: Then comes the end, when he shall deliver up the
kingdom to his father: and the Son also himself shall be subject unto him that
put all things under him, that God may be all in all.

That is, there shall be a cessation of the administration wherein God commits
all things to be done by the Son: And then, when the time of Christ's kingdom on
earth is expired, God shall be all in all, after this last general
Resurrection, when death it self shall be destroyed. And the Apostle gives a
further description of that general Resurrection, at verse. 51, 52, etc. Behold,
I show you a mystery: we shall not all die, but we shall all be changed, in a
moment, in the twinkling of an eye, at the last trump: for the trumpet shall
sound, and the dead shall be raised incorruptible; and we shall be changed: for
this corruption must put on incorruption, and this mortal must put on
immortality: so when this corruptible shall have put on incorruption, and this
mortal shall have put on immortality; Then shall be brought to pass the saying
that is written, Death is swallowed up in victory: O death, where is thy sting?
O grave, where is thy victory?

In these verses the Apostle clearly speaks of the last general judgment: for
he says, that the Saints shall not all Die, but shall all in a moment be
changed, and the dead shall be raised incorruptible; and this he says shall be
at the last trump; and that demonstrates it to be the last day that the Apostle
is speaking of, because he says it shall be at the last trump; for there is a
trump which must sound before this, of which the Apostle speaks, 1 These. 4. 16.
where he speaks of the raising of the dead in Christ, who must rise first; even
of the first Resurrection, when the Saints must rise to reign with Christ. Now
the Apostle calling this the last trump, it is clear he speaks here of the last
Resurrection: and again its clear by this also, because he says, that at this
time, Death shall be swallowed up in victory; And that then shall be brought to
pass that saying, O death, where is thy sting? O grave, where is thy victory?
That is, then the victory shall be gotten over death; death shall be no more an
overcomer; it shall destroy no more, but be destroyed it self. And this is the
last enemy that shall be destroyed; As Rev. 20. 14. and 1 Cor. 15. 26. Thus is
it clear, that in these verses Paul speaks of the last general Resurrection. I
have the rather mentioned and opened these Scriptures that speak of the last
general Resurrection, that there might not be a confounding of the first
Resurrection with the last; and that the one might not be taken for the other,
as is very common. And thus have I briefly shown, as far as from the Scripture
appears to me, what is to be done upon earth, after the finishing of the
thousand years of the reign of Jesus Christ and his Saints on earth.

And now having laid down this general description or discovery of the new
Jerusalem, both in the internal and external glory of it, and of what things
are to precede it, and to succeed it; I shall conclude all with that saying of
the Psalmist, Psalm. 111. 2, 3. The works of the Lord are great, sought out of
all them that have pleasure therein. His work is honorable and glorious, and
his righteousness endures for ever.

And now might I come to a large Application of all; which is applicable
several ways: but desiring to be brief therein, I have included all in these
following Verses.

Unto the Court of Parliament, who are Supreme, in England, Ireland, and
elsewhere; These Poems humbly are addressed,
Which placed are before the rest.

WHo knew, Grave Senators, when first of all
In Parliament to sit you had a Call,
What great designs you were appointed to?
What world-amazing acts you had to do?
None but Jebovah, doubtless, then could tell,
Who knew his own holy Decree full well;
And therefore did betimes to you appear,
And fill you with his holy Spirit and fear:
And then, his Purposes to bring to pass,
The Bill for non-dissolving of you was
Confirmed so, as not to be repealed,
To bring about his holy Will revealed
So long ago, to Daniel, when he writ,
That to 'stroy the Horn, the Judgment should sit.
And now, you see, you were the Instruments
To bring about JEHOVAH'S high Intents;
Which were, his People to defend and save
From all their foes; and therefore power he gave
You then, and strength, his enemies to withstand,
That did oppress the Saints with a high hand.
But they are overcome, and shall no more
Overcome the Saints, as they did heretofore:
For now the Judgment has the Horn destroyed,
And all that Crew that were by him employed:
And now the time's expired wherein the Beast
Should overcome the Saints: his wo's increast.
Now Jesus Christ does on Mount Sion stand,
And there his Saints do wait on his Command:
So that henceforth overcome all they shall
That up against them rise, and make them fall.
And now, ye that in Parliament have bin
The happy Instruments of this great King,
What cause have you in him for to rejoice,
That guided were to make so good a choice,
To cleave unto this Cause, and to forsake
The other Party; not for to partake
With them, in sins or punishments, but to
Wait on the Lord, his blessed Will to do.
But now, know this, If any of you did
Aim at yout selves, and walk in paths crooked;
And in that place of Judicature sitting,
Pretending one, did mean another thing;
And if your labor, care, and only aim,
Have been to serve your selves, and get a name;
The fruit's but temporary that you have had,
And soon will moulder, perish, quail, and fade.
And when you come to die, what good will it do,
When that your Consciences shall accuse you,
That you unfaithful and deceitful do
Prove to the Trust that is reposed in you?
For though accounts to man you never make,
Yet unto God you shall, who them will take:
And then, though all your heaps of gold you would
Give up, to clear your selves, yet never should
You be released, when Death does once you call
Before the great JEHOVAH'S Tribunal.
Your wisdom it would be, betimes, therefore,
For peace to seek, and for to clear your score:
For now is the time, if ever it be done,
Before your life's expired, and glass is run.
You know the way Zacheus took,
That Is written in the blessed Book.
But now I Have done with you, within this Court,
Whose ways have not been of a good report;
If that among you any such there be:
For I can none accuse; all may be free,
For any thing that I can prove, or lay
Unto the charge of any there this day.
And yet there may be many,
Though I do not know any.
NOw of the Wise, this will be accepted;
For why? such counsel never breaks the head.
And as for you who in that Senate fit,
Whose consciences before the Lord acquit
You fully do, from ill reports abroad,
And clear you from deceitfulness and fraud;
Who walked have in the sincerity
Of your own hearts, and have in equity
And justice acted in the things which you
Have been entrusted and employed to do:
Even you, who have the Lord before your eyes
Still set; and ever have, in all your ways,
His work and will endeavored to do;
His Sions welfare being dear to you.
For doubtless, in that Court there are and have
Been always some, both holy, wise, and grave;
Some that were chosen, faithful, and called,
Unto the King of Saints, Jesus their Head:
And these the happy instruments chiefly
Have been, to do the will of God: I say,
It Is Saints that have the little Horn destroyed,
And those he left behind have so annoyed:
For others of themselves this could not do,
Who loved the horn, and his oppressions too:
And so the Oracle divine does say,
That it is Saints that must the Horn kill, slay;
It Is Saints that must the honor have alone,
The written vengeance for to bring upon
The Heathen folk, and punishments also
On Kings, Princes, and Nobles, on a row:
In Saints the Spirit chiefly moved; that did
This work effect, though others that were led
By self ends, did therein their aid afford;
But Saints their eyes were in it on the Lord.
Therefore to you, O Saints, that in that Court
Of Parliament did sit, here is your comfort;
Your labors by the Lord have blessed bin,
And counsels prospered by him your King.
And is that all? Nay, Blessed you shall still
Be of the Lord, who blessings on you will
Abundantly pour out, as he has done,
If in his ways you still walk and go on.
And now what does remain? but that you do
Go on to carry on his work, and to
Give up your selves to him in holiness,
And wait on him, in truth and faithfulness;
Approving of your selves still in his sight,
And so to shine in holiness full bright.
And though men shall you slander and condemn,
Yet fear you not; God will not judge as men.
Do you rejoice in him, and be assured
You shall be ever saved by the Lord:
And honor also you shall have of him;
For, those that honor him, he honors them.
Great love also, he will show unto you;
Who loves all those, that purely love him do.
And you to sing new songs of thanks and praise,
Henceforth shall have great cause, even all your days.
Unto the Armies faithful Leaders, and Unto the Faithful under their Command,
In the three Nations, that called are
To wait upon the Lamb in this his War.

O Happy, Blessed ones, consider you
What Honor it is that you are called unto;
In that not only of the Common good
You have been Instruments, but that you stood
Upon Mount Sion with the Lamb, and did
At his command go forth, and eke were led
By him against his enemies and foes,
Their power, rage, and fury to oppose:
And not in vain; for why? he made them all
Before his presence among you to fall.
For when in Sixteen hundred forty five,
The time was come his Saints for to revive,
Who were before overcome by the Beast,
And lay as dead, then being unreleast;
He then you called forth, and in you made
His Witnesses to live, who as dead laid;
But then were raised, and on their feet did stand,
And opposed the Beast by a strong hand.
And is this all you have been called to do?
Not so; but to destroy the Horn also;
Yea, and all those that do remain the Whore
For to support, as the Horn did before.
And now, as happy instruments you have
Been for to do the work of Christ, to save
His People from the rage of enemies:
Even so henceforth it does remain likewise
That you follow the Lamb in every place,
And still expect his presence and his grace.
And if to other Kingdoms he you call,
Fear not; for all that oppose him shall fall
Before his presence among you; and then
His glory shall among the sons of men
Most gloriously appear, and shine before
The World; and many then shall hate the Whore.
Therefore, ye sons of Zion, who raised are
Against the sons of Greece, both near and far,
And are as Bows and Arrows in Gods hand;
Fear not to do what he does you command:
Fear not to go where ever he does you call;
For in your hand his work still prosper shall.
And now look unto him in all you do,
To fill you with his holy Spirit, that so
You may not only use in his service
The double-edged sword of his Justice,
His soes for to destroy; but that you may
Use the sword of the Spirit, that is to say,
The Word of God, which mighty is alone,
The Holds of sin and Satan to cast down;
That by the publishing of the Gospel,
You may also honor your Lord, as well
As By inflicting Justice on them who
Despise the offers of his grace, and do
Implacably remain, and desperate,
And ways of truth and purity do hate.
And Oh that as the Lamb you follow do,
Your garments may be white and clean, and you
May shine in spotless glory, having on
The garments of Christ's righteousness alone!
And Oh that in the sight of God and men,
Your walkings might be pure and spotless! then
Much honor, praise, and glory would you bring
To him who is your Savior and your King;
Who does on his white horse before you go,
When you in white garments do him follow.
Say I, O that you did so do! Nay, I
Do also bless the Lord, for that this day
So much of him appearing in you is,
Unto the joy and comfort of all his.
I mean, in you that faithful are, to whom
My speech I did direct; whom God does own,
And whom he does guide, counsel, and direct,
Love, honor, save, and bless, and still protect.
In you his holy Spirit appear does,
In ways of holiness you leading forth:
So that the solace of your hearts it is,
To walk with God in truth and righteousness.
But though you have attained much herein,
Yet O that your might higher rise! and bring
More praise to God, and joy to Saints, and so
Yet greater joy of heart would be in you.
Unto those people of the Lord that do In BABYLON abide, unto their woe: And do
not yet return,
But at the Truth do spurn.

COnsider, Sirs, what you have done, and do,
And think how sad, how sad it is that you
Should any help unto the Beast afford,
And should oppose the servants of the Lord.
Hear now the call of God, and Come you out
Of Babylon; O come, O come about!
Lest that abiding there, of her sins you
Partake, and of her punishments also.
The word is given, you must Come out, and you
Must reward her, as she has done; and do
Double to her what she has done, that she
Being drunk with blood, with blood may filled be.
Is this the word, and yet are you so sad,
Because the Beast his helpers low are laid?
Would you not have the little Horn destroyed,
Who has the Sain's of God so much annoyed?
Remember how you did long since complain
To God against his cruelties, and fain
Would live in peace and quietness; but he
Opposed that, and would not let it be:
But War against the Saints did make, that so
He might them all destroy and overthrow.
But now he is destroyed himself; and as
He did delight in blood, even so blood was
Given him to drink: are you, even you so far
From singing songs of praise, as that you are
Offended at this thing? as if you were
Of Rome her ruin unwilling to hear.
O let it not of you, of you be said!
But now do you remember how you have prayed
Against the Beast, the Whore, and all the Crew
Of their adherents that support them do:
And give not all the world just cause to say,
You are not as you were the other day;
But that whereas you did both pray and fight
Against that wicked Crew with all your might,
You now oppose (...) the Saints in the Land,
Who do unto those first Principles stand,
Which were, for to oppose King, Queen, and all
That did support the Whore, that down must fall:
Which they do still pursue unto the end,
And wholly unto that their counsels tend.
But if you will now show your selves to be
The sons of Sion, then let all men see
That you repent of your evils, in that
You Camels swallowed have, and at a Gnat
Have strained, when with foes you have joined,
And true Saints have opposed, because they did
Not close with you in every circumstance
And thing that was of lesser consequence.
But if you do persist herein, surely
You shall be made ashamed in that day
When God shall justly judge between you and
His other faithful people in the Land;
Who always have desired your happiness,
And eke also your liberty and peace,
If peaceably you would have lived in
The place or Nation where you have bin.
(But those that have been meddling peace to break,
Have themselves into trouble put their neck.)
But now, if that henceforth you shall no more
Support the Beast, nor helpers of the Whore,
But hearts and hands shall join with them that do
Oppose the enemies of Christ, and do
Give up themselves to wait upon the Lord,
And him to serve according to his Word;
Then upon you shall mercy be, and peace,
And all the Israel of God, these days.
FINIS.
POSTSCRIPT.
HAving often referred the Reader in this book, unto that entitled, The
Resurrection of the Witnesses; I shall here desire the Reader to take notice,
That in the last line of page 81. in that Book, he is, for The reign of Phocas
the Emperor, to read the reign of Arcadius and Honorius the Emperors: There
being in that Book a mistake of the Emperors name, by reason of a trusting to
memory, and neglecting to consult the history about it; but no mistake of the
time: for that is most evident, That in the year 404 Innocentius being made
Bishop of Rome, he then first usurped the Papal power, and advanced the Sea of
Rome above all other, and would have it to be judged by none. And presently
upon this, began the Saints to be persecuted, and deprived of their liberties:
For Innocentius was the first that drove the Novations out of Rome, and
deprived them of many Churches: as witnesses Socrates (lib. 7. chapter 8.) And
those that were Novations were the most truly religious people in those times,
as appears by the several testimonies Historians give of them: I will cite but
one expression that Socrates has concerning them. (lib. 4. chap. 9.) The
Arrians abhorred them, says he, because they loved entirely such as embraced
the Faith of one substance. Those that embraced the Faith of one substance,
were they that believed* the Son of God to be very God, and of one substance
with the Father; and these the Novations loved entirely, says Socrates. In many
other things they are by Historians discovered to be truly religious. And
these, and all that purely professed the truths of Christ, from this year 404
began to be persecuted and trodden under foot by the Popish crew.

Thus much I thought good here to insert, to correct that mistake in the first
impression of those books. There are two or three other faults escaped in
printing; but they being not material, I shall not trouble the Reader with the
mention of them.

FINIS.

