A CRUEL AND BLOODY BATTLE, Betwixt the VVeymarish and Hessish, and the
Imperialists, the like has not happened these many years.

Fought betwixt Collen and VVeesel, the 12.22. of the last month, where it
pleased God to give the victory to the Weymarish and Hessish.

The names of the Commanders both slain and taken prisoners. The exceeding
great fear and danger Collen is now in.

A fair opportunity being now offered to recover the Palatinate again, if
friends were both ready and willing.

LONDON, Printed for NATH: BUTTER. MDCXLII.

Hamborough the 28. of Dec.
THe new Swedish General Torstensehn is recovered again of the gowt, and is
to break up now with his Army within few days: The King of Denmark is at
Gluckshut. In his Camp before this City remain no more but two Regiments of
Foot, and two Companies of Horse, which are changed every month by turns; the
other Regiments are gone toward Krempe, Itzeho, Oldensloe, Seaberg, New
Munster, and Kuhl, to their winter quarters. The Swedish General Major
Stollhans is sent for to come to Sweden, because he has suffered himself to
be driven by the Imperialists out of Silesia. Duke Francis Albrech of Saxon
Lawenburg, commands the Imperial Army in those parts, upon whom the Emperor
has bestowed the Dukedom of Sagan.

Collen the 6/16 of Jan.
ON Sunday last, the Wymarian Army, together with the Hessish Forces, passed at
Wesel over the Bridge, which they had laid over the Rhyne. It is reported that
they have taken Ordingen, and assault now the City of Linn, at Ments, Orsoy and
other places belonging to the States of Holland, great store of bread is baked
for them: Mean while the Imperialists draw all their Forces together. Gen:
Lamboy with his Forces lies at Huls and about Kempen, expecting there
Field-marshall Hatsseld with his Troops. The other day the Elector of Collen
sent for Field-marshall Hatsfeld, Bishop of Osnabrugge, and General Vehlen to
keep Counsel of War about this business. In all the Spanish Guarrisons they
renounce the Neutrality with the Wymarians. In Venloe lie 3000. Spanish horse
and foot to aid and assist Lamboy in case of necessity. At this instant we
receive the confirmation, that the Wymarian and Hessish Army about 12000.
strong is passed near Wesel the river of Rhine, and has taken the City of
Ordingen, where they put to the sword 200. Imperial soldiers: the Inhabitants
for fear of the Wymarians flee hither from all places.

Another from Collen the 7/17 of Jan.
IT is most certain, that the Wymarian and Hessish Army is passed the river
of Rhine, and have taken by assault the City of Ordingen: They are accounted
15000. strong in all, together with the 2000. horsemen, and 1200. Musketeers
of the Holland Forces that joined with them. Col: Rosa, who went abroad with
3000. horsemen for forage, lighted upon some of Lamboys Troops, that were
under the command of Col: Hemmersbach, which he charged, and totally routed.

Basel the 5/15 of Jan.
IT is most certain, that on Friday last, Gen: Major Erlach, Governor of
Bressack, and Baron de Oisson ville, have relieved the Fort of Hohenwiel, for
being the Governor in it. Colonel Widerholt sallied at that time likewise out
of the Fort, and did great harm amongst the Imperialists, they betook
themselves to flight: The high Dutch and French horsemen are yet pursuing after
them. They took their retreat toward Zell, leaving behind them six Pieces of
Ordnance, great store of ammunition, and all their provision: the abovesaid
Erlach is now in the Fort, and provides the same again with all necessaries:
Mean while his horsemen run as far as Constance, and pilladge all the villages
thereabouts. Oisson ville is going by way of Shaffhausen and Solothum for Paris.

Collen the 9/19 of Jan.
THe other day, the Wymarian Army, after that it had taken Ordingen and Linne,
marched directly against Gen: Lamboy, who lay with his Army upon S. Anthonies
Plain, with whom they encountered, and totally routed and defeated him: In
which battle the most part of the Imperial Infanterie was either slain or
taken prisoners, the rest sled with the Cavallerie toward Kempen, leaving
behind them nine Pieces of Ordnance. General Lamboy himself is shrewdly
wounded, and taken Prisoner. At this instant we receive Letters from
Dusseldorp, which were written but yesterday, which cannot sufficienly express
the great and miserable fight both of Spiritual and Temporal persons from
Neus, Keyserswerth, and other places, all which confirm the total overthrow
of General Lamboy, and in such a manner, that his Infanterie and Cavallerie is
totally dispersed: Lamboy and the most part of the high Officers are either
slain or taken prisoners, and the Wymarians obtained all their Artillery,
ammunition, and took above 4000. prisoners, and withal obtained almost as many
horses, many Standards and Ensigns.

Aaken the 12/22 of Jan.
THe Imperial General Lamboy having received intelligence that the Wymarian
Army had taken Ordingen, together with the City and Castle of Lin, and were
coming from thence toward him, possessed himself, for his advantage, near
Huls, betwixt Kempen and Old Kirck, of a fair plot of ground, being surrounded
with a very high breast-work, in manner of a trench, where he planted his
Ordnance, amongst which were four demi-Canons, upon some high ground
crosse-wise, round about the aforesaid breast-work, lay the Musketeers and
fire-logs, and on the sides of the Camp stood the Cavallarie in 2 wings, and
betwixt both wings 2. Regiments of Infanterie, in so brave an order as ever was
seen. The Wymarians coming the 7.17. of this month before the Camp, begun
about 8. in the morning to charge the Imperialists, and to play with their
Canons, and about noone they came with their maine body up to the front of
Lamboys Army: At which time they fought so furiously on both sides, that it was
very doubtful, on whose side the victory would fall: at last the Wymarians,
upon nearer intelligence given unto them by a Country man where the breast work
was weakest of all, pressed with such a fury thitherwards, that Lamboys men
begun to retire; and about three of the clock in the afternoon they were
brought into disorder, and then the Wymarians begun to knock them down; those
that called for quarter in time, saved their lives: The Cavallerie found it
self environed, that they could not break through; those that fled toward
Neet, were all fetched back again; but those that fled toward Gelder and
Venloe, saved themselves. It is generally believed, that not above 12.
Companies of Horse in all escaped: Those that were slain, amount to the number
of about 3000. men, and the number of the Prisoners amounts to above 4000. Of
the Wymarians were not above 400. slain, amongst which is Col: Flersheim. At
this instant we receive certain avisees, that the Cities of Kempen, Dormagen,
Woeringen and Sons are surrendered unto the Wymarians, and that thereupon they
have begirded the City of Neus: In the City of Kempen they have obtained above
3000. sacks with corn, besides a very rich booty of other goods, the like was
never seen, what flying there is of the Inhabitants from morning till evening
into Collen: The Wymarians struggle already to the very gates of Collen: In the
said City they beat the drums day and night to take up fresh soldiers, but
they can get very few that will serve, because they run all to the Wymarians.
The Bishop of Collen himself in person is retired to Hermershein.

Collen the 13/23 of Jan.
THe great overthrow of Lamboy is confirmed, and it is most certain, that the
whole Army, as well Infanterie as Cavallerie is ruinated: The Wymarians have
taken Prisoners Gen: Lamboy, Gen: Major Mercy, Baron of Vehlen, Col: Dunckel,
Col: Isaac, Col: Hemmersbach, Col: Bicht, Col: Hinderson, Col: Hyacinto di
vera, Col: Crysti, Col: Rodoan, Col: Ladron, Col: Eppe, Col: Hennins. The names
of those that are slain, are Col: Gonzago, Col: la Riviere, Col: Savery, Col:
Paradyser, Col: Franchipani, the Lieutenant Col: of the old Beckish Regiment,
Col: Buttelberg, Col: Grisenay, and Lieutenant Col: Hunds. In a word, all the
Colonels, excepting Colonel Zell, are either slain or taken prisoners,
besides an exceeding great number of Lieutenants, Colonels, Sergeant Majors,
Captains of Horse and Foot, and other Officers, and above 4000. common
soldiers are taken prisoners. In this battle the Imperialists lost all their
baggage, Artillery, Ammunition, 64. Ensigns, and 40. Standards. It has been
a most cruel and bloody fight. Lamboy has desired that he might be carried
Prisoner first to Mastricht, which Conte de Guebrian granted unto him: From
thence he is to be carried to Rotterdam, and so for France. After this victory,
the Wymarians came before Kempen, which they took presently, and made the
Inhabitants pay 15000. Rixdallers for pillaging. The 10.20. of January, 600.
Hessish horsemen went near Hulekrath, through the river of Erfft, surprised at
Dormagen 300. Dragooners, that had escaped out of the battle, and totally
routed them, that not 18. of them escaped. The other day, they begirded the
City of Neus, which as it is reported, has begun already to parlie.
Grevenbruck, Caster, and other places are likewise surrendered unto the
Wymarians. The Swedish Army under Gen: Torstenson is likewise broke up, and
marching toward Garlelen, in the old Marquisate of Brandenburg: which way it
will farther take, we shall hear in time. The Imperialists are to take their
winter quarter in Misina.

Amsterdam the 17/27 of Jan.
THe 4000. Imperialists that were taken Prisoners in the battle, have all
taken pay under the Wymarians. Since this great overthrow of Lamboy, the
Wymarians have likewise taken the City of Nens, and are pursuing now after
Field-marshall Hatsfeld and his Forces. 70. Companies of Spanish horsemen are
marching now to succor the said Hatsfeld, wherefore 6000. Horse and Foot of
the States Forces, which are paid by the King of France, lie ready to succor
the Wymarians, as soon as they receive order. Ten Regiments more are coming
from France toward Mastricht, which are likewise to join with the Wymarian
Army. I received Letters from le Conte de Guebrian, Gen: of the Wymarian
Army, who writes that his Army is now complete 16. a 17000. strong, because
since the battle their Army is grown above 5000. stronger. In Dormagen,
which lies but two Dutch miles from Collen, they have surprised and totally
ruinated a Regiment of Dragooners of Hatsfeld his Forces, whereupon the rest of
his Army retired toward Coblentz. 6000. Hessish and Wymarian Horsemen are
passed by Collen, in pursuit of Hatsfeld. The Swedish General Torstensohn lies
with his Army yet about Garleben, in the old Marquisate of Brandenburg. Upon
the hearing of this good news, it is not doubted but he will likewise further
advance, because the Elector of Collen has sent to Piccolomini for some aid to
succor Hatsfeld, who is not above 4000. strong. Of the restitution of the
Palatinate upon fair terms, is little hope. It is said, that the Ambassadors
will shortly come back again from Vienna, without any expedition. The Spanish
Fleet is ruinated again by the Portugal, and our Fleet, whereof they have
sunk 8* of the Ships, and the rest fled again into Calis malis.

FINIS.

