CROMWELLS PANEGYRIC.
SHall Presbyterian bells ring Cromwels praise,
While we stand still and do no Trophyes raise
Unto his lasting name? Then may we be
Hung like the bells in our dependencie.
Well may his Nose, that is dominicall,
Take pepper in it, to see no Pen at all
Stir to applaud his merits, who has lent
Such valor, to erect a monument
Of lasting praise; whose name shall never dye,
While England has a Church, or Monarchy.
He whom the laurell'd Army home did bring
Riding Tryumphant over his conquered King,
He is the Generals Cipher now; and when
He Is joined to him, he makes that one a Ten.
The Kingdoms Saint; England no more shall stir
To cry St. George, but now St. Oliver.
He Is the Realms Ensign; and who goes to wring
His Nose, is forced to cry, God save the King.
He that can rout an Army with his name,
And take a City, ere he views the same:
His Soldiers may want bread, but n'ere shall fear
(While he is their General,) the want of Beer;
No Wonder they wore Bays, his Brewing-fat
(Helicon-like) make Poets Laureat:
When Brains in those Castalian liquors swim,
We sing no Heathenish Pean, but a Hymn;
And that by the Spirit too, for who can choose
But sing Hosanna to this King of Jews?
Tremble you Scottish zealots, you that han't
Freed any Conscience from your Covenant:
That for those bald Appellatives of Cause,
Religion, and the Fundamental Laws,
Have pulled the old Episcopacy down,
And as the Miter, so you will serve the Crown.
You that have made the Cap to the Bonnet veil,
And made the Head a servant to the Tail.
And you cursed spawne of Publicans, that sit
In every County, as a plague to it;
That with your yeomen Sequestrating Knaves,
Have made whole Counties beggarly, and slaves.
You Synod, that have sat so long to know
Whether we must believe in God, or no;
You that have torn the Church, and sat to impair
The Ten Commandments, the Creed, the Prayer;
And made your honors pull down heavens glory,
While you set up that Calfe, your Directory:
We shall no wicked Jewes-ear'd Elders want,
This Army's built of Churches Militant:
These are new Tribes of Levi; for they be
Clergy, yet of no Universitie.
Pull down your Crests; for every bird shall gather,
From your usurping back, a stolen feather.
Your Great Lay Levite Prynne, whose Margent tires
The patient Reader, while he blots whole quires,
Nay reames with Treason; and with Nonsense too,
To justify what e're you say or do:
Whose circumcised ears are hardly grown
Ripe for another Persecution:
He must to Scotland for another pair;
For he will lose these, if he tarry here.
Burges that Reverend Presbydeane of Paul's,
Must (with his Poundage) leave his Cure of Souls,
And into Scotland trot, that he may pick
Out of that Kirk, a nick-nam'd Bishopric.
And Calamy must now resign his place,
Because Scalpellum has cut through the Case;
The Protean Hollis, that will never burn,
Must here or'at Tiburne take another turn.
And Will the Conqueror in a Scottish dance
Must lead his running Army into France.
Or he and Stapleton among those Crews
In Holland build a Synagogue of Jews,
And spread Rebellion; Great Alexander
Fears not a Pillory, like this Commander.
And Bedlam John, that at his Clerks so raves,
Using them not like servants, but like slaves.
He that so freely railed against his Prince,
Called him dissembling subtle Knave, and since
Has stilled the whole Army Bankrupts; said, that none
Of their Estates were equal to his own:
He that was by a strong ambition led
To set himself upon the Cities head:
But when he has restored his both-side fees,
He Will be as poor, or they as rich as he is.
And that still-gaping Tophet Goldsmiths Hall,
With all his Furies, shall to ruin fall.
We Will be no more gulled by that Popish story,
But shall reach heaven without that Purgatory:
What honor does he merit, what renown
By whom all these oppressions are pulled down.
And such a Government is like to be
In Church and State, as eye did never see:
Magicians hold, he will set up Common Prayer;
Looking in's face, they find the Rubric there.
His Name shall never dye, by fire nor flood,
But in Church-windows stand, where pictures stood:
And if his soul lothing that house of clay,
Shall to another Kingdom march away,
Under some Barnes floor his bones shall lie,
Who Churches did, and Monuments defy:
Where the rude Thrasher, with much knocking on,
Shall wake him at the Resurrection.
And on his Grave since there must be no Stone,
Shall stand this Epitaph; That he has none.
(...)

Printed in the Year 1647.


