A LETTER TO His Highness THE LORD PROTECTOR From Captain UNTON CROOK,
Signifying the total Defeat of the Cavaliers in the West, under the Command of
Sir JOSEPH WAGSTAFFE.

Published by His Highness special Commandment.

LONDON, Printed by Henry Hills and John Field, Printers to His Highness, 1654.

A LETTER TO His Highness THE LORD PROTECTOR, Signifying the total Defeat of
the Cavalliers in the West, under the Command of Sir Joseph Wagstaff.
May it please Your Highness,
YEsterday morning, being Tuesday, I marched with my Troop to Huninton, being
fifteen miles Eastward from Exon, with intention to stop the Enemy from coming
further Westward; but gaining intelligence that they were come that way, and
that they would be too strong for me, I made my retreat to Exon; the next
morning I understood that they were in their march for Cornwall, and in order
thereunto they were come to Collumpton, within ten Miles of Exon, I heard they
were much tired, and their number two hundred, and therefore imagined that if
they should gain Cornwall, it might be much prejudicial; I was resolved to
hazard all that was dear to me rather than let them have their End, and
therefore marched toward Collumpton with only my own Troop, I had no more for
this Service, but when I came near that place, I understood they were marched
to Tiverton, whither I pursued them with all speed, but there mist them also,
but received Information that from thence they were gone to Southmolton, twelve
miles further, still in order for Cornwall; thither I resolved to follow them;
they took up their quarters about seven of the Clock this night, and by the
good providence of God, directing and assisting me, I beat up their Quarters
about ten of the Clock; they disputed it very much with me in the Houses for
more than two hours, firing very hot out of the windows; they shot seven or
eight of my men, but none I hope mortally wounded, they shot many of my Horses
also; but, My Lord, we broke open many Houses; some of them yielded to mercy; I
promised them, I would use my endeavors to intercede for their lives, I have
taken most of their Horses, about fifty Prisoners, amongst whom are Penruddock,
Jones, and Grove, who commanded those Horse, each of them having a Troop.
Wagstaff I fear is escaped, he was with them, but at present I cannot find him,
yet hope to catch him as soon as Daylight appears. I will raise the Country to
apprehend such Straglers, which for want of having Dragoons narrowly escaped
me. My Lord, they are all broken and routed, and I desire the Lord may have the
glory. I beseech your Highness to pardon this unpolisht account, I can hardly
indeed write, being so weary with extreme duty, but I hope by the next to
send your Highness a more perfect one, and a List of the Prisoners, many of
them, J suppose being very considerable. Colonel Shapcot of this County was
pleased to march with me on this Design, and was with me at the beating up of
their Quarters, and has showed himself wonderful ready, in every respect, to
preserve the Peace of this County. My Lord, I remain,

May it please your Highness, Your most obedient, and most humble Servant,
UNTON CROOK,
From South Moulton March 15. 1654. about two or three a clock in the morning.

