A SECOND LETTER TO His Highness THE LORD PROTECTOR From Captain UNTON CROOK,
Signifying the total Defeat of the Cavaliers in the West, under the Command of
Sir JOSEPH WAGSTAFFE.

Published by His Highness special Commandment.

LONDON, Printed by Henry Hills and John Field, Printers to His Highness, 1654.

A SECOND LETTER TO His Highness THE LORD PROTECTOR Signifying the total
Defeat of the Cavaliers in the West, under the Command of Sir Joseph Wagstaff.
May it please Your Highness,
I gave your Highness last night an account how far I had pursued the Enemy
that came out of Wiltshire into Devon; I sent your Highness the numbers of
them, which I conceived to be two hundred; It pleased my good God so to
strengthen and direct me, that although I had none but my own Troop which was
not 60. that about ten a clock at night I fell into their quarters at a Town
called South Molton, in the County of Devon; I took, after four hours dispute
with them in the Town, some 60. Prisoners, near one hundred forty horse and
arms. Wagstaff himself escaped, and I cannot yet find him, although I am still
sending after him; this party of them was divided into three Troops, Colonel
Penruddock commanded one of them, and was to make it a Regiment, Colonel Groves
commanded another, and was to complete it to a Regiment, Col. Jones the third
and was to do the like; these 3. Gentlemen are of Wilsthire, and men of
Estates. One of Sir Edward Clarks Sons was with them, he was to be Major to
Penruddock, the Prisoners tell me that we killed him.

I have brought all the Prisoners to Exon, and have delivered them over to the
High Sheriff, who has put them into the High Gaol. Your Highness may be
confident this Party is totally broken, there is not four men in a Company got
away; the Country surprise some of them hourly, the Mayor of South Moulton,
being with me in the Streets was shot in the body, but like to do well.

I have nine or ten of my Troop wounded, I remain, Your Highness most Obedient
Servant, UNTON CROOK.
Exon Mar. 16. 1654.

