TITHES No Property to, nor lawful maintenance for a Powerful Gospel-preaching
Ministry.

OR

A Compulsory Maintenance for Christ's Ministers is contrary to Christ's Doctrine
and example of his Apostles, and the example of the faithful Ministers of
Christ, and famous Reformers in all ages, as Wickliffe, Hus, and diverse
others, with an old Prophecy written by John Hus, as it is recorded by Fox in
his Acts and Monuments, commonly called the Book of Martyrs.

With a DISCOVERY Of the marks of the False Prophets and Ministers

In all Ages (as they are found recorded in the Ecclesiastical History) since
the Apostles days to this very time agreeing with the Scriptures of truth both
of the Old and New Testament.

Written by a lover of the souls of all men, John Crook.

(...),
Quinon habet vitam Christi, Christum non habet.
They are the children of Abraham that does the works of Abraham,

So they are the children of the Martyrs that follow their steps, and not they
who are crying them up with their tongues, and maintaining and taking of Tithes
and other abominations with their practices, which the Martyrs and holy men
witnessed against, and some have lost their lives for.

London Printed for Thomas Simmons, at the Bull and Mouth, near Aldersgate,
1659.

THE PREFACE.
BVY the truth and sell it not, was the saying of the wisest of men, and is the
voice and endeavor of all the children of Wisdom, who know the price thereof
to be beyond Rubies, and the enjoyment thereof to be more precious then fine
gold, and the purchasing thereof to be worth the selling of all, that it may be
possessed, for in it is riches and honor, and by it comes the pearl of great
price to be known; And who makes all truly rich, truly wise and truly free,
that comes to the knowledge of it, but this is the Mystery of it: It is not
purchased without the selling of all, nor cannot be enjoyed but by those who
are poor in Spirit, and yet nothing more free gift then that, nor nothing more
truly bought without money and without price then it, and the knowledge of this
Mystery is as free in its revealing as this truth is in its appearing in and to
the sons and daughters of men, many have taken pains to find it, but it has
been hid from the eyes of all living, and concealed from the wise and prudent,
who have talked of the fame thereof, but because of the dearness of the rate,
have been offended at it, and so have never come to the enjoyment of the thing
it self, but have satisfied themselves with dead Pictures, and likenesses
framed in the Chambers of their Imagery, which Idolatry is more dangerous then
theirs who fall down to an Image made of wood and stone; and when the beauty of
truth it self so appears, that it out-shines their Image, then they either
oppose it with open opposition, or else will not receive it, because it appears
with its visage marred more then any of the likenesses that has yet showed
themselves; and exp seth the livers of it to the worlds scorns, to professors
rage, and to great men's and Rulers disdain and hatred, and because it appears
to the staining of their glory and pride: they do now not much un-like the
Senate of Rome of old, when Tyberius made Relation to them of Christ and his
Miracles, who are said to reject them, for no other cause, but because they did
not first approve the same; And further, Tertullian a man well experienced in
the Roman Laws, in his Apology for the Christians, in his 5. Chapt. says (by
interpretation) thus, That it was an ancient decree, that no god should be
consecrated by the Emperor, unless it were first agreed unto by the Senate;
who says (on the behalf of the Christians) That the Deity is weighed amongst
you after man's will and judgment, unless that God please man, he is not made
God, so that by this decree man must be gracious and favorable to God; Not
much unlike to this constitution of mind have many grave Senators appeared in
these days, who could willingly have contributed to the putting down Tithes,
if the great men could bear it and the Priests be pleased to have it so, and
the Parliament account it no disgrace to move against them, nor the Lawyers be
angry for impairing their trade; but such (it is to be feared) loves the praise
of men more then the praise of God, and while they please men, are not the
servants of Christ; but where is these men's faith? and what is become of their
experiences? cannot be that has delivered from the oppressive Court of Wards,
and from the arbitrary Star Chamber Court, from the hands of the late King,
from the power of the Bishops, and from others also (who have said as Absalom
once did, to palliate his design, Oh that all men would come to me, and I will
do them Justice, and take away oppressions) deliver out of the hands of this
Philistiue (the Tithes) also? yea verily, the Lord will deliver his people from
this intolerable yoke of bondage, and if those in present power do not do it,
deliverance shall come another way, for the Lord God is appearing in power and
great glory, to deliver his oppressed seed, and to take away the abominations
from the midst of the Nations: and the longer any have continued, the more need
there is to hasten the removing of them; and whereas there is a cry among
people, that to take away Tithes, is to destroy property, etc. Therefore have I
written this following discourse, that all sober-minded people may understand,
how that both by the Law of God, the Common, and Statute Law of this Nation
also, together with several Presidents of the Martyrs and others, who in the
darkest times of Popery Witnessed against Tithes, and all kind of computsory
maintenance (what soever) for preaching, always esteeming Tithes to be but a
mere Alms, as by their own words at large may appear; which I have set down
(as I find them recorded in the Book of Martyrs) for the satisfaction of those
who desire to know the truth, and to be made free by it.

Tithes no property to nor lawful maintenance for a Gospel, powerful, preaching
Ministry, etc.
PRoperty is that which a man has a just right to and interest in, without
injury to another and is derived to him, either by descent, purchase, or gift,
and not by custom only, for that gives no man a title or property that had it
not rightly confirmed upon him, as aforesaid; for although oustome to places,
and some things are accounted as law, yet always with this limitation, such
customs as are good and reasonable; for says Cook, Custom ought to be
reasonable, Cook. 6. book of Reports.
and excerta causa rationabili usitata, etc. neither does the law of England
create or make any man a title or property, that had none before, but only
conserves and maintains every man's just property and equal right; for the just
laws of a Nation are their walls to their Cities, and bars to their gates; and
by them the land of every man is enclosed from other, though it lie in open
field; and if a man do trespass therein, the Writ shall be quare clausum
fregit, as says the law, and every law of the Nation must be consonant to the
law of God; and therefore (says the law book) The laws of Princes, the
commandments of Prelates, the Statutes of Commonalties, ne yet the Ordinance
of the Church, Dr. and Stud. cap. 4o p. 7. 8.
is not righteous nor obligatory, except it be consonant to the law of God, and
by such a law of man as is consonant to the law of God, it appears who has
right to lands and goods, and who not, for whatsoever a man has by such laws
of the Nation, he has righteously, and whatsoever a man has against such
laws, is unrighteously had; these be the very words of the law; and also by the
Statute law of this Nation it appears, That no man of what estate, degree, or
condition soever he be, Stat: made by King, Lords, and Commons.
has power to dispense with Gods laws, as all the Clergy of this Realm and
most part of all the Universities of Christendom, and we also do affirm and
think; these be the very words of the Statute of 28: Hen 8. and 7. chapter

Therefore seeing that every law of man must be consonant to the law of God, or
else it is no law; and that every custom that is accounted as a law must be
reasonable, and every law of man must be equal and just according to the law of
God (as the law it self says) as before is mentioned, and no man can have a
property but by defcent, purchase, or gift, the law it self, not creating a
property, but only conserving to every man his just right and interest, as
above said; and those laws for Tything made in the time both of Hen. 8. and
Edw. the 6. (there being no law before made by Parliaments, only the Statute
of Ric. 2.15. and 6. confirmed by Hen. the 4. by which it appears that Tithes
were but a free gift or alms, and therefore special care is taken that a
convenient portion of the Tithes be set out for a maintenance for the poor of
the Parish, (as by that Statute appears, though made in the midnight of
Popery,) not wholly forgetting the end for which they were given under the law,
that there might be no beggar in Israel.

And were it not righteous and just, that those who have robbed the poor of
that which was their due by law, should themselves be made poor, and have that
taken from them, which they have so long robbed others of, contrary to Law?) I
say the Statute made in Hen. 8. and Edw. the 6. time, did not create aright,
but only confirm what was then in that night of Popery, presumed and supposed
to be aright (upon grounds which now appears to be false) viz, as belonging to
God and holy Church, and were then called in the Stat. of Hen. 8. spiritual
gifts, and Impropriate Tithes that were sold after the dissolution, are said
now to be made temporal, and not before; and neither these nor any other laws,
ever gave any man a right or property in or to Tithes, but only through the
blindness and superstition of those Popish times, supposed a right upon a
spiritual ground, as aforesaid, and so gave power to Ecclesiastical Courts to
sue for them, which before they could not do, but only excommunicate for non
payment, but by those Statutes they might sue in Ecclesiastical Courts but not
else where, as the Statute of Edw. the 6. says, upon which Statute they bring
their Action for treble damages, which Statute it self restrains the trial of
Tithes to Ecclesiastical Courts, and not elsewhere; and for Judges to make
laws, or to interpret the laws contrary to the words of the law, is a
presumption, not much unlike that which Israel of old in difficult cases was to
beware of, and not to be hasty in, Deuteronomy. 17.12.
but to do according to the sentence of the law, from which they were not to
decline either to the right hand or the left (upon pain of death) for if the
law that is just be declined and left to man's will; is not the maxim of the law
made good, Misera servitus est, ubi jus est vagum, aut incognitum; that is a
miserable bondage, where the law is left to the will of the Judge, and in this
case where the Statute restrains it, what Judge may go further? and to say
where a penalty is appointed, and no way mentioned for the recovering of it,
that then it shall be taken for granted, that the Courts at Westminster are
intended; is (in this case) to make the law intend against it self (for the law
is called approved reason) and to suppose that the treble damages are
recoverable at common law, when the principle it self (for the non payment of
which the treble damages are due) is not yet proved a debt, nor is not
recoverable but in the spiritual Courts, is as much as if a man should say,
that I promised to pay him ten pounds upon the first of May last, and if it
were not paid I would give him thirty pounds, and he should be admitted to sue
for the thirty pounds (penalty for the non payment of the ten pounds) and yet
may not sue for the said ten pounds to prove that promised, and not paid
accordingly, or to try the accessory before the principal; when as if no fact
was committed, no man for being accessory could be punished; and therefore
before Tithes be proved in the Ecclesiastical Courts, to be subtracted, or
withheld, or not set out, no damages (for not setting out) can justly and
legally be recovered, and for any man to take away my corn and hay, etc.
without my consent, or recovered in manner aforesaid, differs nothing from him
that pretends a debt, and without any further proceedings, comes and takes away
my goods by force and against my will; but some do say Justices of Peace have
power to make a judgment in the case; many does that by power which they
cannot do by law, but Justices are only authorized by an Ordinance of
Parliament; and if the preamble of this Ordinance may be called (clavis legis)
as preambles to laws are called, then their power is at an end, because they
were but entrusted by reason of the exegencies of war, Courts of justice being
obstructed, and if the Justices of Peace, or their Clerks, or kindred were not
some way gainers by it, they need not now act upon that Ordinance, the reason
of that temporary law being taken away, viz. obstructions of Courts of Justice,
the law it self cease, if this maxim in the law be true, viz. That the reason
of the law is the law it self, and especially if Cook say true, viz. That an
Ordinance binds not in succession; besides, that matters of Title should be
determined in an Alehouse or private chamber, is a shame to a free State, and
no honor to Justices of Peace to intermedle with that (which indeed) they have
not legally to do withal, they acting only by an Ordinance, and that Ordinance
never yet confirmed by Act. What, are not all the Courts at Westminster
sufficient? Take heed, for To over do is to undo; but however the Justices
Ordinance has no better bottom then a supposed right, as aforesaid, which is
no right, but a common wrong, and they that act upon that Ordinance now, are no
friends to true freedom, to say no more.

And that Tithes are an oppression and unrighteous thing, many have born their
testimony, both Martyrs and others, as may appear more at large hereafter; and
for any to say that another has as good a property in, and right to the tenth
of my increase, as I have to nine parts, or as I have to the coat of my back,
or to the nine parts of my land, is ignorance to be pitied, rather then to be
disputed against; but as custom in sinning begets hardness, so does
superstition and ignorance, by tradition begat faith in a lie, which makes
truth so hard to be received, by aged, wise men, after the flesh, because they
have seen and read the records of their fore fathers, and some through their
blindness being settled on their Lees, are resolved to go no further then their
fathers went, nor to believe otherwise then the Church believes, and others
dare not see beyond their profit, nor believe further then may stand with their
gain, that being their godliness; Court-greatness having blinded their eyes,
and made them to despise the oppression of the afflicted, and to be regardless
of the consciences of the upright; their greatness having taken away their
feeling, and many old men, like those in Nehemiahs days, who wept when they saw
the foundation of the second Temple laid, and considered of the former Temple,
how beautiful that had been; so do many now begin to bewail their loss, and cry
out, what will become of their Gospel, if Tithes be taken away; and others say,
what will you destroy propriety, and take away men's rights? the taking away of
Tithes will quite destroy our Ministers, and impair the Lawyers trade, etc.
and so the downfall of Babylon must beget the bewailing of many Merchants, not
only of those who have enriched themselves by the laws, but also those who
have made Merchandise of the souls of men; for this is as horrable a thing in
our days, as it was in old in the days of the Prophet, viz. For the Priests to
preach for hire, and for the Judges to judge for reward; and may it not be said
of such now, as Micha said then?

The best of them is as a brier, Mich. 7.4:
and the most upright is sharper then a thorn hedge, the day of thy watchmen
and thy visitation comes, now shall be thy perplexity:

But to return to the Objection, That they have as good a right to the tenth
part as I have to nine, etc. To which it is said, by law they have no right, as
before is said, for the law only preserves my right, that another man may not
take it from me, but gives right to no man that had it not derived to him,
either by descent, purchase, or gift, as aforesaid; now if it cannot be made
appear (by him who challenges property in Tithes) that it came to him one of
these ways, aforesaid, then he has no right to, nor legal property in them;
now by descent he cannot have them, for that cannot descend to another, which
is not in rerum natura, as the increase and renewing of my land (by my labor)
is not, and therefore cannot descend from another, who never was owner of it,
nor never had it in his possession, as no man can of my increase, procured by
my labor, and if I plough not, no corn will grow, and if I mow not, no hay is
made; and so it is in my power, whether any thing, how much, or nothing the
Priest shall have. And again, If I by my own act do not set out my Tithes, he
has no property until by my voluntary act I give him it; for it comes not by
the land, nor does he challenge the tenth of the rent, nor tenth acre, but the
tenth of the increase, renewing, or growing in, and upon the premises, etc

And whereas it is said, the law implies a property in that it has provided a
punishment of treble damages for not setting it out, and what a Parliament
does, is supposed to be done by the people whom they represent, etc. To which I
answer, That it is true, the Lawmakers supposed a due to God and holy Church,
and upon this supposition and foundation, Enacted a penalty upon him that did
not set out his Tithes, but some of our late Judges have since adjudged that
Tithes are not so due, viz. by Gods law, as Chief Justice Rolls, in the Upper
Bench at Westminster. And if that supposed common right be generally seen and
be confessed to be a real common wrong, may not a man make use of his eye, to
avoid the pit which he and others in the time of their darkness fell into? and
if a man will wink when he may see, if he fall then into the pit, is he not
guilty of his own death?

And for the Stat. made in Ed. the 6. time, if the supposed right upon which
that law is built, be found to be oppression and wrong, and that God and holy
Church has disclaimed their right to Tithes under the Gospel, and that by
their writings upon record, that there being a change of the Priesthood, there
is made also a necessity of the change of the law; then what is that law worth
that is contrary to God, and that commandment which is opposite to his?

Again, as before is proved, not only by the law of God, but also by the
Common and Statute Law of this Nation, all Laws made contrary or not consonant
to the law of God, are void of themselves, and that law which is built upon a
false rotten foundation, must needs fall, as that is which supposes Tithes to
be due by common right, or due to God and holy Church under the Gospel, which
they are not, as before is proved; and then the reason of the law, failing, the
law it self falls; for says Cook, Lex non est infoliis verborum sed in radice
rationis, and if that which is said to be due by common right, prove to be a
common wrong, and general grievance, then that other maxim of the law, takes it
away also (salus populi suprema lex) the peoples weal is the chiefest law, and
that it is the peoples intolerable burden, I need not prove.

And as no right nor property to Tithes comes to any by descent, or reason of
any just law, so neither can any property be derived to any by purchase, or
gift, for no man has power (legally) to sell or give that which he has no
just interest in, neither may any man buy it (except in his own wrong) no more
then a man may sell my goods which he has gotten wrongfully from me, nor no
more then another has any just power to dispose, or give away that which is
none of his, or he has no right or property in himself to dispose of, the law
counts such a gift or sale, to be theist and robbery.

And to say that it is an encumbrance which every man knows of when he buys his
land, and therefore no wrong, is a mere device to deceive the simple withal,
for a man buys his land free from all encumbrances whatsoever with this general
warranty, and covenant, not only free from all Statutes; Morgages, Judgments,
etc. but also with these general words, Free from all other encumbrances
whatsoever, which words are a deceit, if so be a man knows a tenth part to be
due to another, and yet he sells the whole, so discharged as aforesaid; and if
it be a real encumbrance in the law upon the estate, or that another has a
right and property in that which I bought absolute and free, as aforesaid, will
not an Action in that Case lie against him that sold it free, and covenanted to
make it good, as aforesaid? if so, what work would this make in the Nation for
the Lawyers? but in truth, is it not in tended by the Law, that every man
should have and enjoy his land free as he bought it? and then he may give
freely what he will, and to whom he will, and then (volenti non sit injuria) to
him that is willing it is no wrong; and thus the famous reformers and Martyes
looked upon them, as John Wickliff in the 17. Article charged against him in
these words, viz.

That tenths are pure Alms, and that the Parishoners may for offense of their
Curates, detain and keep them back, and bestow them upon others at their own
wills and pleasures.

William Swindersby, says in these words, Simonie a Simone Mago quumquis
Ecclesiasticos functiones quae mera dei dona sunt nundinatur: Whosoever
purchases Offices with money which are Gods free gifts, commits Simony, and is
like Simon Magus.
That no Priest ows to sell by bargain and covenant his Ghostly travel, ne his
prayers, ne Gods word, etc, nor any worldly men's reward, to ask or take for
these, or for any of these, or for any Ghostly thing he errs and does Symony.

Walter Brute in these words, That Tithes are mere Alms, and in case that
Curates shall be ill, that they may be lawfully bestowed upon others, by the
temporal owners, etc.

Walt. Brute Further says, That a Priest receiving by bargain any thing of
yearly annuity, is in so doing, a Schismatic and excommunicate, etc.

William Thorpe, says as follows in these words, viz. After Christ's
ascension, and when the Apostles had received the holy Ghost, they traveled
with their hands to get their livelihood, when that they might thus do for
busy preaching, therefore by the example of himself, Saint Paul teaches all
the Priests of Christ to travel with their hands, when for busy teaching of
the people, they might thus do, whose Priesthood God accepts now, or will
accept, or did in the Apostles time, and after their decease, and will do to
the worlds end; but as Cisterciensis, in the thousand year of our Lord Jesus
Christ, Pope gregory the 10th first appointed tithes under the Gospel in in the
year about 1211.
211. year, one Pope Gregory the tenth, ordained new Tithes first to be given
to Priests, now in the new law, but Saint Paul in his time whose trace or
example all Priests of God enforce them to follow, seeing the covetousness that
was among the people, desiring to destroy that foul sin by the grace of God and
true virtuous living, and example of himself; wrought and taught all Priests to
follow him, as he followed Christ, willingly and patiently, in high poverty;
wherefore Paul says thus, the Lord has ordained that they which preach the
Gospel shall live of the Gospel, but we (says Paul) that covet and busy us to
be faithful followers of Christ use not this power, for lo, as Paul witnesses
when he was full poor and needy, preaching among the people, he was not
chargeous unto them, but with his hands he traveled not only to get his own
living, but also the living of other poor and needy creatures, and since the
people was never so coveteous, nor so avaritious I ghess as they are now, it
were good council if all Priests took good heed to this heavenly learning of
Paul, following him here in wilful poverty, nothing charging the people for
their bodily livelihood; but because that many Priests do contrary to Paul in
the aforesaid doctrine, Paul bids the people take heed of these Priests,
that follow not him, as he had given them example, as if (says he) Paul would
say thus to the people, Accept ye no other Priests then they that live after
the form that I have taught you, for certain in whatsoever dignity or order
that any Priest is in, if he conform him not to follow Christ and his Apostles
in wilful poverty, and in other heavenly virtues, and specially in true
preaching of Gods word, though such a one be named a Priest, yet he is no more
but a Priest in name; for the work of a very Priest in such a one wants: this
sentence approves Augustine, Gregory, Chrysostom, and Lincoln plainly.

And he says further in these words, It is no wonder, though people grudge to
give the Priests the livelihood that they ask, mickill people know now, how
Priests should live, and how that they live contrary to Christ and to his
Apostles, and therefore the people are full heavy to pay, as they do, their
temporal goods to Parsons, and to other Vicars, and Priests, which should be
faithful dispensators of the Parish goods, and taking to themselves no more but
a scarce living, of Tithes nor of offerings, by the Ordinance of the common
Law; for whatsoever Priests take of the people (be it Tithes or offering, or
any other duty or service) the Priests ought to have thereof no more but a bare
living, and to depart the residue to the poor men and women, especially of the
Parish of whom they take this temporal living, but the most deal of Priests now
wastes their Parish goods, and spends them at their own will, after the
world in their vain lusts, so that in few places poor men have duly (as they
should have) their own sustenence, neither of Tithes, nor of offerings, nor of
other large wages, and foundations the Priests take of the people, in diverse
manners, above that they need for needful sustenance of meat and clothing, but
the poor needy people are left and forsaken of Priests to be sustained of the
Parishioners, as if the Priests took nothing of the Parishioners to help the
people with, and thus sir (says Thorp to the Biship) into over great charges
of the Parishioners, they pay their temporal goods thrice, where once might
suffice if priests were true dispensators. The Parishioners that pay their
temporal goods (be they Tithes or offerings) to Priests that do not their
offfce among them justly, are partners of every sin of those priests, because
that they sustain those priests folly in their sin with their temporal goods;
if these things be well considered, what wonder is it then if the parishioners
grudge against these dispensators.

And he further says that Paul says, that Tithes were given in the old Law to
Levites and to priests that came of the lineage of Levi, but our Priests came
not of the lineage of Levi, but of the lineage of Judah, to which Judah no
Tithes were promised to be given, and therefore Paul says since the priesthood
is changed from the generation of Levi to the generation of Judah, it is
necessary that changing also be made of the Law, so that priests live now
without Tithes and other duties that they claim, following Christ and his
Apostles in wilful poverty, as they have given them example, for since Christ
lived all the time of his preaching by pure alms of the people, and by example
of him, his Apostles lived in the same wise, or else by the travel of their
hands, as it is said above. Every priest whose priesthood Christ approves,
knows well and confeseth in word and in work, that a disciple ought not to be
above his master, but it suffices, so a disciple to be simple and pure,
patient and meek, and by his example, specially of his Master Christ; every
priest should rule him in all his living; and so after his cunning and power, a
priest should busy him, to reform and rule whomsoever he might charitably.

And he further says thus, There is a Dr. (I think it is St. Hierom) that
says thus, the priests that challenge now in the new Law Tithes, say in
effect, that Christ is not become man, nor that he has yet suffered death for
man's love. Wherefore this Dr. says this sentence; Since Tithes were the hires
and, wages limited to Levites, and to priests of the old Law for bearing about
of the Tabernacle, and for slaying and fleaing of beasts, burning of
sacrifices, and for keeping of the Temple, etc. and other things that pertained
to their office, those priests that will challenge or take Tithes, deny that
Christ is come in the flesh, and do the priests office in the old law, for whom
Tithes were granted, for else this Dr. says, Priests take Tithes now
wrongfully; and says further, That Tithes and other duties which priests
challenge now are wrongfully called (freedom of holy Church) since neither
Christ nor his Apostles challenged nor took such duties; therefore those
takings of priests now are not justly called the freedom of holy Church; but
all such giving and taking ought to be called and holden the slandrous
covetousness of men of holy Church.

And further says in these words, viz. Since by the viciousness of priests
both Lords and Commons are most sinfully infected and led into the worst, and
because of the Covetousuesse of priests and pride, and the boast that they have
and make of their dignity and power, destroys not only the virtues of the
priesthood in priests themselves, but also over this it stireth God to take
great vengeance both upon the Lords and upon the Commons, which suffer these
priests charitably: And he further says in answer to the Bishop in these
words, viz. That a proud priest may be known; when he denies to follow Christ
and his Apostles in wilful poverty and other virtues, and coveteth wordly
worstip, and takes it gladly; and gathers together with pleading, menacing,
or with flattering, or with Simony any worldly goods, and most if a priest
busy him not chiefly in himself, and after in all other men and women after
his cunning and power to withstand sin.

And further I find by the Ecclesiastical Histories (written by Eusebius)
mentioning Apolonius against Montanus says thus, mat. 10. Luke 9. mark 7.
Eusebius. Lib. 5. cap. 16.
That Montanus sed the maintainers of his doctrine with sums of money and great
hire to preach, which was forbidden in the holy Scripture that prophets should
take hire, Christ commanded his disciples to take no man's gold or silver or
apparel, or two coats; and says by their fruits you shall know them; and
further says, That if hire be taken by a prophet, he is then no longer a
prophet, let all that be false be tried conditional.

These are the faithful sayings of these men of famous memory, who in their
time bore a faithful Testimony against the priests in their days, and other
abominations and innovations brought in by those who were in the apostacy,
since the days of Christ and his Apostles, which I have faithfully set down,
that so those who say what is become of our fore fathers who suffered in the
flames for witnessing against the superstition and Idolatry of those times in
which they lived, may see themselves where they are, and what they are doing,
while they ask what is become of their forefathers, and yet they themselves
found walking in the steps of those men who persecuted and martyred those who
they call their forefathers, but are indeed monstrous children, or rather the
children of those who put the martyrs to death, as by their practices they make
it appear in their maintaining like priests (though now called Ministers) and
their unrighteous wages; which their forefathers witnessed against with the
loss of their lives, Oh! blush for shame to behold thy practices, lest thou
partaking of their sins do partake of their plagues also, and came out from
those ways, lest thou fall together with them, as thou have helped to uphold
the enemies of the Lord, for as it is truly recorded in the same book of
Martyrs in these words, viz. Whosoever do receive the holy Order by giving of
money, is not a priest, secundum rem and nomen, but to say the truth, he
desires to be called a priest, that is, to be a priest secundum nomen tantum,
and such a priest which is a priest in name only, is no priest no more then St.
Mary painted is St. Mary, nor a false Dr, a Dr. but no Doctor, and a man
painted is not a man, but no man; and thus such a priest in name only is not a
priest, because that all faithful men do firmly believe, with St. Gregory, that
no man buying the holy Orders may then be called a priest, as he says they who
buy or sell holy Orders can be no priests, whereupon it is written ana thema
dandi, and anathema accipiendi that is he is accursed that gives; and he no
less that takes; and those who are now found with the marks of the false
Prophets and Priests upon them, are, as was said then, uni voce natura but yet
aequi voce in moribus, that is one in nature, though different in manners, and
thou who art such a one, or thou who maintains such a one as is made a Priest
for his money, or by the arts learned from men, and natural knowledge gotten by
study, though such a one be called a gifted man, yet he will be found to be one
whom Christ never sent, and his marks makes manifest who sent him if he preach
for hire, and divine for money, or take any thing by compact or agreement with
any people, whatsoever name they go under, filthy lucre is not far off, and
poison enters and eats like a canker until utter consumption overtake, and let
none think to excuse themselves with saying, how shall I live, or how shall my
wife and children be maintained, or in putting it off, with saying, I preach
not for money, if so, let thy money and gifts alone and preach without any, (if
thou must needs preach) for it is actions and not words only by which the
Ministers of Christ were made to differ (from Antichrists ministers) in all
ages since the beginning, and if thou do not preach freely henceforth, and
leave taking thy gifts and rewards, then I shall conclude it is for money, and
the way thou runnest so greedily and zealously in, is the way of Balaam, and
thou art to take heed to thy self least the day come upon thee; when thou shall
desire to die the death of the righteous, and thy latter end to be like his,
but then it will be too late, and Esaues portion must be thine, who have
profaned the Name of the Lord, and sold thy birthright for a morsel of bread,
even that sweet peace and content in God, which (it may be) sometime thy soul
has tasted, but consulting with flesh and blood, and looking out at the
examples of others, and how deliciously they fare every day, thy mind has been
beguiled from the simplicity that is in Christ, and so have put thy self from
under Gods care, and now art caring for thy self, and wife, and children, and
thy life is miserable to thee, although thou put as good a face upon it as
thou can: yet in secret have many gone mourning because of these things, and
at last have sunk under the burden of them, for whose sake my soul has
mourned in secret, and I have been pained within me to consider how hard a
thing it is for such a one to be saved, and what shifts they have found out to
keep their gifts, livings, and rewards, under several pretenses, covers and
distinctions as that they are free gifts given of old, and no man now is at all
prejudiced by the receiving of them, and in their saying if I did not, some
else would; and some saying as they say Luther once said, that as in time past
the ministers of Satan was maintained by them, and those that did work for the
Devil, so now they for a time may be employed for the service of God to
maintain his ministers, and his pure worship; and besides say some, if I go out
of them a worse may come in my room, and such like reasonings have mine ears
heard from some, who are accounted not the least amongst many, and others
looking at the esteem they have amongst great men, and therefore say, if I
forsake taking gifts they will conclude me a sectary, and then I shall be more
retired, and grow more in acquaintance with God and delight in communion with
him, and so by my faithfulness to him, I shall stand a witness for God against
greater abominations then these, knowing that God reveals his secrets to them
that fear him, and depart from iniquity, and hate every evil way, and so at
last shall loose all my acquaintance and familiars, and shall become as an owl
in the desert, and pelican in the Wilderness, and like a sparrow cherping
alone upon the house top, which I do now prevent, by walking in a way wherein I
have many good men of my side, and company enough to go along with me, and in
hopes as the times mend to come to greater preserment, and as long as I take no
more then just does maintain me, I know not but if any man will give me a gift
or living, I may take it, and do good to others with it, for out of my gift I
may maintain and contribute to maintain diverse gifted brethren that may be
serviceable in the Lords work, and other good deeds I may do with my gift,
which if I had it not I could not do.

Oh, Take heed least the charge against Job be made good against you, regard
not iniquity, Job 36.21.22.
for this have thou chosen rather then affliction, behold God exalts by his
power, who teaches like him; do thou not know that the least evil is not to
be done that good may come of it, and how that rehellion is as the sin of
witchcraft, 1 Samuel 15.
and stubborness is as iniquity and idolatry, and because you Priests have
rejected and neglected the word of the Lord, he has also rejected you from
being his Ministers, and as Saul for his disobedience to Gods command, the
Kingdom was rent from him, though he had observed part thereof, and that which
he left undone was as he thought for the best, and could not be reckoned a
neglect or rejection, and therefore said with confidence to to the Prophet of
the Lord, when he came to him, blessed be thou of the Lord, for I have
performed the commandment of the Lord, etc. what means then the taking hire
and gifts and preaching for money, and taking men's goods by force from them,
that for conscience sake cannot maintain a hireling Priest? has not God more
delight in obeying his voice then in burnt offerings, and in obedience then in
sacrifice? and to live by faith and take no thought nor no staff nor scrip, but
like the children of Abraham walk in his steps and go when God says go, and
come when he says come, and plant a vineyard and eat of the fruit of it, but
eat not of the fruit of other men's labors that have received none of your
spirituals, and therefore cannot give you their carnals, nor mind not the
fleece nor the wool but mind the Lord of the harvest, who gives his penny to
them he sends forth, and though they took nothing with them when they went out,
when they returned he asked them if they wanted any thing, and they said no;
and none of the Apostles of Christ took any more then what was freely given
them by the Saints that had reaped of their spirituals, and that only to
supply their present necessities, but never took any thing by constraint,
neither coveted any man's silver, or gold, or apparel, or took any thing for
preaching, but preached freely, and took what they had as free alms, and such
cannot want while there is any of the love of God in people, for he that has
this Worlds goods and sees his brother want, how dwells the love of God in
him? and if this is showed to every brother, how much more to him that labors
in the Gospel of Christ; therefore it may well and upon good ground be
suspected that either the Gospel that those preach that take any thing in lieu
of preaching (as hire, or as wages is due for work or any other gift for to
preach, which gift I cannot have, if I preach not) is not the Gospel of Christ
which the preachers of it was to live upon, For the statute of Ed. 6, gives not
the treble damages to them.
but another Gospel, seeing by experience we see that the Gospel, which these
men preach would starve them, if it were not for the Justices of peace and
Judges favor, which causes peoples goods to be taken from them against their
wills, and given to the Priests, contrary to the Law of God and this Nation as
before is proved, or else that they are no ministers of Christ's sending forth;
for whom he always did and ever will provide maintenance, and furnish them
with his presence to the end of the World, so that such cannot complain of
want, but those who have not his presence with them are full of complaints to
Parliaments, to Councels, to Judges, to Justices, and who not that they have
the least hope of relief from? by which things we know them to be none of the
ministers of Christ's sending; or else lastly there is none of Gods love in
people, and if they beget not men and women into God, love, what do they preach
for? for strife, for debate, and malice, and envy, and hatred, and
covetousness, and pride, and Worldly greatness, and respect of persons
because of advantage, and taking hire, and paying hire for preaching, and
giving gifts, and taking gifts for preaching, and taking Tithes, and giving
Tithes for preaching, which since Christ's ascension are all marks of carnal
people, and carnal priests, and the word of Reconciliation is not committed to
them, as it was to the ministers of Christ of old, and there was witnesses
against them in all ages by some that were faithful, as by these few presidents
out of the book Martyrs may appear, with many witnesses more both before and
since, which might be produced out of several authors of no mean esteem, but
those who will not turn and repent, and be washed from their marks of falsity
and deceit, must have their portion with the deceivers: and the deceived, that
pay them for their deceit the wages of unrighteousness as aforesaid, will be
marked also if they speedily repent not, but not with the mark of Christ's
sheep, (for they know his voice, and a strangers voice they will not follow)
but of the goats; and of which sentence that famous Reformer John Hus have by
way of prophecy foretold, and also of a deliverance that shall come to the
Church and people of God, as it is recorded in the book of Martyrs in these
words,

Moreover hereupon note and mark by the way that the Church of God cannot be
reduced to his former dignity, or be reformed before all things first be made
new; the truth whereof is plain by the Temple of Solomon, like as the Clergy
and priests, so also the people and Laity; or unless all such as now be
addict to avarice from the least to the most be first converted and reclaimed,
as well the people as Clergy and priests; Vol. the 1. page 830.
albeit as my mind now gives me, I believe rather the first, that is, that
then shall rise a new people, formed after the new man, which is created after
God; Of the which people new Clerks and Priests shall come, and be taken, which
all shall hate covetousness and the glory of this life, hastening to a
heavenly conversation, notwithstanding all these things shall come to pass,
and be brought by little and little in order of times, dispensed of God for the
same purpose, and this God does and will do for his own mercy and goodness and
for the riches of his great longanamity and patience, giving time and space of
repentance to them that have long lien in their sins, to amend and fly from the
face of the Lords fury, while that in like manner the earnal people and carnal
priests successively and in time shall fall away and be consumed as with the
moth, etc.

And further it is yet more sure out of that Record, against which lies no
averment, viz. Jeremiah 23.1.2.3.4.5. and 6. and throughout that chapter. Woe be
unto the pastors that destroy and scatter the sheep of my pasture says the
Lord, Therefore thus says the Lord God of Israel against the pastors that
feed my people, ye have scattered my flock and driven them away, and have not
visited them, Behold I will visit upon you the evil of your doings says the
Lord, and I will gather the remnant of my flock out of all Countries whether I
have driven them, and will bring them again to their folds, and they shall be
fruitful and increase, and I will set up shepherds over them which shall feed
them, and they shall fear no more nor be dismayed, neither shall they be
lacking says the Lord, behold the days come says the Lord, that I will raise
up unto David a righteous branch, and a King shall reign and prosper, and shall
execute Judgment and Justice in the earth, in his days Judah shall be saved,
and Israel shall dwell safely, and this is his Name whereby he shall be called.

The Lord our Righteousness.

THE END.

