THE TESTIMONY OF Several eminent Commanders, late of the Army, commanded by
the Lord INCHEQVIN, Commander of the Parliament Forces in MUNSTER.

Sent by Vice Admiral CROWTHER TO The PARLIAMENT at WESTMINSTER.

London, Printed for R.L. Anno, 1648.

THE TESTIMONY Of several eminent Commanders late of the Army, commanded by
the Lord Inchequin.
IN obedience and discharge of our trust to the Parliament of England, sitting
at Westminster: we give this information under our hands, to be presented to
them, which we shall be ready to make good in our persons upon oath: viz.

That the Lord Baron of Inchequin Lord President of Munster, having been abroad
with some part of his Army, whereof we are members: Did upon the third of this
month upon his return home, being at Mayallo, send for us, who have hereto
subscribed to appear presently before him at his Quarters, which being
performed, and all of us assembled together in his presence Chamber: His
Lordship declared this unto us, that in order to the National Covenant, and to
that particular branch thereof, which concerns the re-investing his Majesty in
his Throne: he had with the advice of his Officers taken a resolution to
oppose the present pretended Parliament in England: who were forced by an
Independent faction, they having broken all Oaths and Covenants, which they had
made both to God and Man: and to that purpose, was now putting himself into a
posture of defense: And that for the managing of this Design, he had
correspondency with the King, with the Scots, and generally all the
Presbyterian party that were agreed with the King: who were resolved to
endeavor to their utmost the re-inthroning the King, and restoring a free
Parliament, which he fully declared this not to be: and for the better
effecting and carrying on this Design, he was resolved to join with the Lord
Taff, and the whole Irish of the Province of Munster: who have assured him of
their assistance, both with their persons and estates, and that he had now sent
for us, who were only the suspected party of the Army to report this to us, and
to require of us our resolution whether we all would comply with him in this
or no: To which we answered, We stood for the King and Parliament, as we had
ever done, upon which he required us not to juggle with him, but to declare
whether it was this present Parliament we meant, for he said the truth was,
they did not acknowledge this to be a Parliament, to which we answered his
Lordship, we could not comply with him: he still using many aggravations, to
make good what he had said against them, and farther said, He hoped to see
this present Parliament laid flat on their backs by Michaelmas day, and that
this was no rash resolution, but a premeditated action, he being confident;
that let it come to the worst it could, yet in spite of all, he would be able
to procure good terms both for himself and the rest that adhered to him: and
that which induced him chiefly to put it in practice at present was, that he
was now assured, he was beforehand with the Independent party, which he
never was before; yet he had thought for some time longer to have forborne his
declaring, but yet some suspicions, the Vice Admiral Captain John Crowther
had of him; could not permit him to carry it private any longer, in regard the
said Captain Crowther had protested against him, and blockt up his Harbors,
and his Lordship did further declare, that all which would not join with him in
this design, he required the^ to depart, and go for England, for that he would
not permit any near him, or in his Army, that would not faithfully comply with
him in his intention; and as a motive to induce us to join with him, he
informed us that he was certainly assured, that Colonel Jones had by order
from the Parliament of England, made a Cessation with Owen Roe Oneal, and that
faction; who chose rather to enter into League with the Parliament then the
King: and in this respect he would now join with the Lord Taff, and Munster
forces against the other, for the truth of all these we have here to subscribed
our names this seventh of April 1648, aboard the Bonaventure, in Kinsale
Harbor.

Christopher Elsing. Alexander Barington. John Gray, Thomas Davis, Thomas
Chandlor, Copia vera, John Crowther.


WE under written having this present seventh of April, 1648, heard read unto
us the several heads made by the Lord Inchequin, to the respective Commanders
in his Presence Chamber, at his head Quarters at Mayallo, the third instant
forementioned, do declare, that the said things were in the field upon the
same day propounded to us, and the other Officers then in the Army, whereupon
he desired our compliance, we refused the same, as inconsistent with our duties
to the Parliament, and thereupon disserted our several Charges, and Offices
under his command.

John Benyworth, William Battle, William Stotesbury, John Gettings.


HE whose name is under written does inform, that being under restraint for his
affection to the Parliament. At the instance of my Lord, (it making for the
aforesaid Declaration) the same was presented to him by Major John Craford,
with many arguments to induce him to comply with my Lord Inchequin promiseing
thereupon preferment, but he scorning to betray his trust, or dissert the
Parliament of England whom he served; denied any such commission, upon which he
was expunged from his command, with charge to depart, in testimony of which, he
has subscribed his name the 17 of April, 1648.

Thomas Heyford.

FRom the premises, the Reader may observe,

First, The universality of the design pretended.

Secondly, The pillars on which he would set or fix it. Rebels, Papists,
Royallists, Presbyters.

Thirdly, Against whom, The present Parliament.

Fourthly, the setting up of a free Parliament, and a free and good one it is
like to be, if set up by an Irish power.

Fifthly, The way intended to restore his Majesty, the fall of this Parliament.

Lastly, The ground, the Covenant, that ends old, and begins new miseries.
Which sure should awaken those in power, first, to sement among themselves:
secondly, to carry on with more vigor the War of Ireland, and afford them
reasonable money, which will sufficiently draw dry this new adversary of his
power: and lastly to speed the settling of this Kingdom, that when storms arise
from so many parts, England may be unanimous in bearing up against them.

FINIS.

