The Lady PECUNIA'S Journey unto Hell, with her speech to Pluto, maintaining
that she sends more Souls to Hell then all his Fiends: With Pluto's answer and
applause.
I Lady Pecunia, Mistress of the Mint,
Am riding unto hell all in a Print.
The Fiends dance for joy Pecunia's banished.


GReat Pluto, Prince of hell, I come to thee,
To give account what has been done by me:
When all your Fiends (great Pluto) did small good
In bringing souls to Hell, I understood,
I sent you thousands, who my ways then trod,
That honored me, as I had been their God;
Forgot their prayers, neglected their own souls,
And all for love of me, poor simple fools!
And many of them too (such is their case)
They cannot rest until they see my face;
Nay, when they are in bed, so kind they be,
They cannot sl^ep for thinking then of me,
The Clergy mourns, my absence often does grieve 'em,
Till I come double handed to relieve 'em.
Which of your Feends can do more feats than I?
I can fool Conscience, make the guiltless die,
Pull Justice from her seat, and free the guilty,
Make the impure seem pure, though never so filthy.
The Lawyer will not plead the Subjects case,
Without he sees Lady PECUNIA'S face:
Such is their love to me, and such my might,
That when a cause is bad, I make it right.
The Judge himself does know I speak but truth;
For I have made them Knaves, even from their youth:
Nay, many mortals are such simple Elves,
That for my sake they will forswear themselves,
D^mn their own souls, and all for love of me,
So over loving, and so kind they be,
The great Church of S. Paul's, I Will have it down,
Though it were once a place of great renown,
The wood, the sead, the stones, which some count trash,
In time may yield the Commonwealth some cash:
Kings cannot war, nor make their foes afraid,
Nor make their swords drink blood without my aid.
I can bewitch the Prudent, spoil Devotion,
With promise of some wealth, and high promotion.
I ruin Towns, and make the slave rebel,
And after send the Rebels souls to hell.
Some think the Poet for applause does sing,
When for my sake he undertakes this thing;
A Cup of Sack does make his spirits glad,
But without me there is no Sack to be had:
Of all men living he cares least for me,
For a rich Poet who did ever see?
My Slver-hooke can never bring him in,
Though many years about it I have bin:
I have looked here about me pretty well.
Yet I can see no Poets here in hell.
And so great Lord I have no more to say,
All living men but Poets me obey.
Pluto's Answer.
Lady* quoth Pluto, I do honor thee,
For sending of so many souls to me;
Thou shall be called the Lady of the Earth,
As I was Prince of The Air before thy birth:
Though thou can do but little good in hell,
Send souls to me, and that shall do as well,
With that there was a fearful noise in hell,
The hellish fiends began for to rebel,
'Cause Pluto took Lady PECUNIA'S part,
His subjects from their loyalty did start,
The hellish fiends at him exceptions took;
Murder spoke first with fearful angry look:
Shall I (quoth Murder) slighted be, great Lord,
Who have destroyed so many by the sword?
How many men have I made, for your good,
Most barbarously to shed each others blood?
Have I not made the brother kill the ^^other,
The little infant murdered by the mother?
Have I not made the man to kill the wife,
And made the woman end the husbands life?
What mischief have I left undone in Towns?
With bloody hands and feet trampled on Crowns.
Tell me what mischief I have left undone
To advance you: and will you dote upon,
And honor this great Lady 'bove us all,
Who to raise you do make so many fall?
Brother Revenge, now speak, is this not true?
How many men have fallen by me and you?
Then came Revenge with hands all dipped in blood,
And said, great Prince, if it be understood,
Murder and I have done best service now,
To enlarge hell under command of you:
How many duels h ve I made men fight,
And kill each other in revenge and spite?
How many women have I Witches made,
And to revenge their cause lent them my aid?
What is it but I can do? you know it well,
I have brought thousands to the pit of hell.
Nay then quoth Lust, I pray Iet me come in,
For I have made more men and women sin
Then either of you both: you kill and slay;
But I bring souls to hell an easy way:
I tempt men from the Dunghill to the Crown,
And bring them unto hell in beds of down;
I Iull them so asleep with pleasures rate,
Till they are in hell they know not where they are:
I tempt the wanton woman day by day;
The idle man can hardly say me nay:
I with provoking meats can please their pallats,
And strengthen nature with voluptuous sallats:
My name is Lust; 'cis I can do these things,
And with fair Maids deceive the greatest Kings.
You see (great Prince) by what is here expressed,
I have done more for Hell then all the rest.
Thou vaporing fool, quoth Pride, it is I must reign,
Thou waitst on every Pander, Whore, and Queen;
I rule in Princes Courts, it is I alone
That can advance the Peasant to the throne,
And if Ambition render him a Crown,
We find a way to pull the Peasant down:
New fashions day by day I do invent,
To please the humorist and male content.
I into Barbers shops do creep, and there
Invent white powder to perfume the hair;
And so with that, and such like simple toys,
I make them look just like Millers boys:
I make the Oyster woman leave her bawling,
And wear gold lace, a thing beyond her calling.
Not without me quoth Money, by your leave,
For without me none can go fine and brave.
With that the Fiends on Lady PECUNIA fell,
And cast her in great fury out of Hell:
And since she is come again, thus stands the case,
She makes division still in every place.
O love not Money then so well,
That sends so many souls to Hell.
HUMPHREY CROVVCH.

LONDON, Printed for John Clarke, at the sign of the Flowre-de-luce, near the
Hospital Gate in Smithfield, 1654.


