PROPOSITIONS Sent in a LETTER FROM Lieu. Genesis Cromwell AND His Officers, to
the Lords and Commons of the Committee of Derby-house.

And by them presented to the House of COMMONS: And by them Read, and referred
to a COMMITTEE.

Die Sabbati November. 19. 1648.
ORdered by the Commons in Parliament assembled, that this Letter from
Lieutenant General Cromwell, be referred to the Committee of the Army, to make
provisions of the particulars therein desired and mentioned.

H. Elsynge, Cler. Parl. D. Com.



Printed by Robert Ibbitson, in Smithfield, near the Queenes-head Tavern, 1648.

HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE royal blazon surmounted by a crown and flanked by
the English lion and Tudor rose on one side and the Scottish unicorn and
thistle on the other
Die Sabbati 19 November. 1648.
1. ORdered by the Commons in Parliament assembled, that this Letter from
Lieutenant General Cromwell, be referred to the Committee of the Army, to make
provisions of the particulars therein desired and mentioned.

2 Ordered by the Commons in Parliament Assembled, That the Lieutenant of the
Ordnance, be required to make provisions of, and issue out of the public
stores, two hundred and fifty barrels of powder, for the service of the siege
against Pomfret, and Scarborough Castles, and that they be likewise required,
to provide and issue, such cannon bullet and ball, as the Committee of the Army
shall give order for.

H. Elsynge Cler. Parl Dom. Com.

A Letter read in the House of Commons from Lieut. General Cromwell, Presented
by the Committee at Derby-House, to whom it was directed.
For the Right Honorable the Committee of Lords and Commons sitting at
Derby-House these present.
My Lords and Gentlemen,
SO soon as I came into these parts, I met with an earnest desire from the
Committee of this County, to take upon me the charge here, for the redufing of
the Garrison of Pomfret.

I received also commands from my Lord General, to the same effect.

I have had the sight of a Letter to the House of Commons, wherein things are
so represented, as if this siege were at such a pass, that the prize were
already gained: In consideration whereof, I thought fit to let you know what
the true state of this Garrison is, as also the condition of the Country, that
so you may not think my desire for such things as would be necessary to carry
on this work, unreasonable.

My Lords,

The place is very well known to be one of the strongest inland Garrisons in the
Kingdom, well watered, situated upon a rock in every part of it, and therefore
difficult to Mine The walls very thick and high, with strong Towers, and if
battered, very difficult of access, by reason of the depth and steepness of
the Graft. The Country is exceedingly impoverished, not able to bear free
quarter, nor well able to furnish provisions, if we had moneys. The work is
like to be long, if materials be not furnished answerable. I therefore think it
my duty, to represent unto you as follows, Viz. 1 That moneys be provided for
three complete Regiments of Foot, and two of Horse. 2 That Money be provided
for all contingencies, which are in view too many to innumerate. 3 That five
hundred barrels of powder, six good battering Guns, with three hundred shot to
each Gun, be speedily sent down to Hull. 4 We desire none may be sent less
then Demy-Canon. 5 We desire also some match and bullet 6 And if it may be, we
should be glad that two or three of the biggest Morterpeeces with shells may
likewise be sent.


And although the desires of such proportions may seem costly, yet I hope you
will judge it good thrift, especially if you consider that this place has cost
the Kingdom, some hundred thousands of pounds already.

And for ought I know, it may cost you one more, if it be trifled withal,
besides the dishonor of it, and what other danger may be immergent, by its
being in such hands.

It is true, here are some two or three great Guns in Hull, and hereabouts, but
they are unserviceable: And your Garrisons in Yorkshire are very much
unsupplyed at this time.

I have not as yet drawn any of our Foot to this place, only I make use of Col.
Fairfax, and Col. Maleveries Foot Regiments, and keep the rest of the Guards
with the Horse, purposing to bring on some of our Foot to morrow.

The rest being a little dispersed in Lincoln and Nottinghamshires, (these
parts being not well able to bear them) for some refreshment, which after so
much duty they need, and a little expect.

And indeed, I would not satisfy my self, nor my duty to you and them, to put
the poor men at this season of the year to lie in the field, before we be
furnished with Shoes Stockings, and Clothes, for them to cover their
nakedness (which we hear are in preparation, and would be speeded). And
until we have Deal boards to make them Courts of Guards, and tools to cast
up works to secure them.

These things I have humbly represented to you, and waiting for your resolution
and command, I rest

Your most humble Servant O. CROMWELL.
Knottingley 15 November. 1648.
FINIS.

