THE TRANSACTIONS OF Several matters between Lieut: Gen: CROMWELL AND THE SCOTS,
For Surrendering the Towns of BERWICK, CARLISLE, And all other Garrisons
belonging to the Kingdom of ENGLAND.

Together with the Reason of Lieut: Gen: Cromwels entering the Kingdom of
SCOTLAND to assist the Marquis of ARGYLE.

Die Jovis, 28 Septembr. 1648.
ORdered by the Commons assembled in Parliament, That the Extracts of the
Letters of the Committee at Derbyhouse to Lieut: General Cromwell, and the whole
Dispatch from Lieut: General Cromwell now reported, and the Votes thereupon, be
forthwith printed and published.

H: Elsynge, Cler.Parl.D.Com.

London, Printed for Edward Husband, Printer to the Honorable House of Commons,
October. 2. 1648.

To the Right Honorable, The Committee of Lords and Commons at Derby-house.
My Lords and Gentlemen,
I Did from Alnwick write to Sir William Armyn an account of our Condition, and
recommended to him diverse particular considerations about your Affairs here in
the North, with desire of particular things to be done by your Lordships
appointment, in order to the carrying on of your Affairs. I send you here
enclosed a copy of the Summons that was sent to Barwick when I was come as far
Alnwick; as also of a Letter written to the Committee of Estates of Scotland, I
mean those who we did presume were convened as Estates, and were the men that
managed the business of the War: But there being (as I here since) none such,
the Earl of Roxbrough and some others having deserted, so that they are not
able to make a Committee, I believe the said Letter is suppressed and retained
in the hands of Colonel Bright and Mr. William Row, for whom we obtained a
safe Convoy to go to the Estates of that Kingdom with our said Letter; the
Governor of Barwicks Answer to our Summons leading us thereunto: By advantage
whereof, we did instruct them to give all assurance to the Marquis of Argyle,
and the honest Party in Scotland (who we heard were gathered together in a
considerable Body about Edinburgh, to make opposition to the Earl of Lanerick,
Monro, and their Armies) of our good affection to them; wherewith they went the
Sixteenth of this Month.

Upon the Seventeenth of this Month Sir Andrew Car and Major Straughan, with
diverse other Scottish Gentlemen, brought me this enclosed Letter, Signed by the
Lord Chancellor of Scotland, as your Lordships will see: They likewise showed
me their Instructions, and a Paper containing the matter of their Treaty with
Lanerick and Monro; as also an Expostulation upon Lanericks breach with them,
in falling upon Argyle and his men contrary to Agreement, wherein the Marquis
of Argyle hardly escaped, they having hold of him, but Seven hundred of his men
were killed and taken: These Papers also I send here enclosed to your
Lordships. So soon as these Gentlemen came to me, I called a Council of War,
the Result whereof was, the Letter directed to the Lord Chancellor, a Copy
whereof your Lordships have also here enclosed, which I delivered to Sir Andrew
Car and Major Straughan, with which they returned upon the Eighteenth, being
the next day. Upon private discourse with the Gentlemen, I do find the
condition of their Affairs and their Army to be thus; The Earl of Lanerick, the
Earl of Crawford-Lindsey, Monro, and their Army hearing of our advance, and
understanding the condition and endeavors of their Adversaries, marched with
all speed to get the possession of Sterling-Bridge, that so they might have
three parts of four of Scotland at their backs to raise men, and to enable
themselves to carry on their Design, and are above Five thousand Foot, and Five
and twenty hundred Horse, or Three thousand, The Earl of Leven, who is chosen
General, the Marquis of Argyle, with the honest Lords and Gentlemen, David
Lesley being the Lieut: General, having about Seven thousand Foot, but very
weak in Horse, lie about six miles on this side the Enemy; I do hear that their
Infantry consists of men who come to them out of Conscience, and generally are
of the godly People of that Nation, which they express by their Piety and
Devotion in their Quarters, and indeed I hear they are a very godly and honest
Body of men.

I think it is not unknown to your Lordships what Directions I have received
from you for the prosecution of our late Victory; whereof I shall be bold to
remember a Clause of your Letter, which was,

That I should prosecute the remaining party in the North, and not leave any of
them (wherever they shall go) to be a beginning of a new Army, nor cease to
pursue the Victory, till I finish and fully complete it, with their Rendition
of those Towns of Barwick and Carlisle, which most unjustly, and against all
Obligations and the Treaties (then) in force, they surprised and Garisoned
against us.

In order whereunto, I marched to the Borders of Scotland, where I found the
country so exceedingly harrased and impoverished by Monro and the Forces with
him, that the country was in no sort able to bear us on the English side, but
we must have necessarily ruined both your Army, and the Subjects of this
Kingdom, who have not bread for a day, if we had continued amongst them. In
prosecution of your Orders, and in answer to the necessity of your Friends in
Scotland, and their desires, and considering the necessity of marching into
Scotland, to prevent the Governor of Barwick from putting Provisions into his
Garrison on Scotland side (whereof he is for the present in some want, as we are
informed) I marched a good part of the Army over Tweed yesterday about Noon,
the residue being to come after as conveniently as we may. Thus have I given to
your Lordships an Account of our present condition and Engagement; and having
done so, I must discharge my duty in remembering to your Lordships the Desires
formerly expressed in my Letters to Sir William Armyn and Sir John Evelyn for
Supplies; and in particular, for that of Shipping to lie upon these Coasts, who
may furnish us with Ammunition or other Necessaries wheresoever God shall lead
us, there being extreme difficulty to supply us by land, without great and
strong Convoys, which will weary out and destroy our Horse, and cannot well
come to us if the Tweed be up, without going very far about. Having laid these
things before you, I rest, My Lords,

Norham this 20 of Septem. 1648. Your most humble Servant, O. CROMWELL.
Whilst we are here, I wish there be no neglect of the business in Cumberland
and Westmerland: I have sent Orders both into Lancashire and the Horse before
Pontefract; I should be glad your Lordships would second them, and those other
Considerations expressed in my Desires to Sir William Armyn thereabouts.

O. C.



Lieut: General Cromwels Summons to the Governor of Berwick.
SIR,
BEing come thus near, I thought fit to Demand the Town of Berwick to be
delivered into my hands, to the use of the Parliament and Kingdom of England,
to whom of right it belongs: I need not use any arguments to convince you of
the justice hereof; the witness that God has born against your Army in their
Invasion of this Kingdom, which desired to sit in Peace by you, does at once
manifest his dislike of injury done to a Nation that meant you no harm, but
has been all along desirous to keep Amity and brotherly affection and
agreement with you: If you deny me in this, we must make a second Appeal to
God, putting our selves upon him, in endeavoring to obtain our Rights, and let
him be Judge between us; and if your ayms be any thing beyond what we profess,
he will require it; if further trouble ensue upon your denial, we trust he will
make our innocence to appear: I expect your Answer to this Summons this day,
and rest,

Your Servant, O. C.

For the Governor of Berwick.
For the Right Honorable, Lieutenant General Cromwell.
Much Honored and Noble Sir,
I Have received yours, wherein ye desire the delivering up of this Town, which
I was put in trust with by the Committee of the States of Scotland, wherewith I
am immediately to acquaint them, and expects their Order; and in the mean time
rests,

Berwick, 15. Sep. 1648. Noble Sir, Your humble Servant, LO: LESLIE.

The LETETR to the Commit of Estates of Scotland.
Right Honorable,
BEing upon my approach to the borders of the Kingdom of Scotland, I thought
fit to acquaint you with the Reasons thereof: It is well known how injuriously
the Kingdom of England was lately invaded by the Army under Duke Hamilton,
contrary to the Covenant and our Leagues of Amity, and aginst all the
Engagements of Love and Brotherhood between the two Nations: And
notwithstanding the pretenses of your late Declaration, published to take with
the people of this Kingdom, the Commons of England in Parliament assembled,
Declared the said Army so entering, as Enemies to the Kingdom, and those of
England who should adhere to them as Traitors; and having received commands,
with a considerable part of their Army to oppose so great aviolation of Faith
and Justice, what a witness God, being appealed to, has born upon the
Engagements of the Armies, against the unrighteousness of man, not only your
selves, but this Kingdom, yea, and a great part of the known world, will I
trust acknowledge, how dangerous a thing it is to wage an unjust War, much more
to appeal to God the righteous judge therein: we trust he will persuade you
better by this manifest token of his displeasure, least his hand be stretched
out yet more against you, and your poor people also, if they will be deceived.
That which I am to Demand of you, is, the Restitution of the Garrisons of
Berwick and Carlisle into my hands, to the use of the Parliament and Kingdom of
England: If you deny me herein, I must make our Appeal to God, and call upon
him for assistance, in what way he shall direct us; wherein we are and shall be
so far from seeking the harm of the well-affected in the Kingdom of Scotland,
taht we profess as before the Lord, that what difference an Army necessitated
in an Hostile way, to recover the ancient Rights and Inheritance of the Kingdom
under which they serve, can make, we shall rejoice, and use our endeavors to
the utmost, the trouble may fall upon the Contrivers and Authors of this
Breach, and not upon the poor innocent people, which have been led and
compelled into this Action, as many poor souls now Prisoners to us confess: We
thought our selves bound in duty thus to expostulate with you, and thus to
profess, to the end we may bear our integrity out before the world, and may
have comfort in God, what ever the event be. Desiring your Answer, I rest,

Your Lordships humble Servant, O. C.

For the Right Honorable, the Commander in chief of the Forces of the
Parliament of England, near Berwick and Carlisle, or in any other part within
the Northern Counties.
Right Honorable,
HEaring that some Forces of the Parliament of England are come Northward, near
the borders of Scotland, to reduce Berwick and Carlisle; The Desire we have to
preserve a right understanding between the Kingdoms, has moved us to signify
to you, That as we did dissent from, and protest against the late unlawful
engagement against England, carried on by a prevalent party and faction,
against the Declaration of this Church and their Commissioners, and against the
desires and supplications of the most considerable shires of this Kingdom; so
shall we be ready to cooperate, by contributing our best endeavors with you,
that the Garrisons of Berwick and Carlisle be reduced, and the Towns delivered
to the Houses of Parliament, or such as are or shall be by them authorized.

These who command the Forces returned from that Army which went into England,
and their adherents, have made applications to us for a Treaty; we have desired
them to disband their Forces and Garrisons, and deliver those Towns, that they
may be surrendered to the Houses of Parliament; assuring you, that in any
transaction of Peace with them, or pursuance of War against them, we shall be
as careful and tender of the interest and good of the Kingdom of England, as of
our own Nation; and our Actions in this and in every occasion shall be real
evidences of our sincere resolutions to observe inviolably the Covenant and
Treaties between the kingdoms, and to be mutually ayding to each other against
the common enemy, till it please God to grant both Kingdoms the great blessing
of a safe and wellgrounded Peace.

Falkirk, 15. Sep. 1648. By Warrant, and in the Name of the Noble men,
Gentlemen and Burgesses now in Arms, who dissented in Parliament from the late
Engagement against the Kingdom of England. Loudoun Canc'

Instructions to the Lord Gramheat, and Major Straughan.
1. YOu shall show, That the remainder of that Army that went into England in
the last wicked Engagement, with the Forces with George Monro and their
Adherents, being returned into this Kingdom, are very active to raise new
Forces, and strengthen themselves to carry on the former Designs. 2. You shall
show, That we are resolved to oppose them, and that we shall agree to no desire
of that Army, without disbanding of their Forces, and denuding themselves of
all power, that the power of Peace and War may be entrusted to such as have
dissented from the late Engagement, and desire to preserve the Union between
the Kingdoms. 3. You shall show, That if they lay not down their Arms, but
persist to pursue their Engagements against the Kingdom of England, and disturb
the Peace of this Kingdom, we are confident that the Houses of Parliament and
their Armies will be ready to assist us with their Forces, to pursue them as
common Enemies to both Kingdoms, as we were and are willing to assist the
Houses of Parliament against the Malignants in England. 4. That we desire and
expect they will be in readiness to concur with us, when we shall give them a
call; and that we are to send to the Honorable Houses of Parliament, to desire
their assistance, and that by joint Councels and Forces, the Disturbers of the
Peace of both Kingdoms may be brought to Trial and condign punishment.
Falkirk, 15. September. 1648.
Articles in Treaty between the two Armies.
THe Members of Parliament who dissented in Parliament, and the Gentlemen and
Burgesses chosen by the several Shires and Burghes, now in Arms for the
Covenant, do propound to those in Arms against us, That all their Forces in the
Field be forthwith Disbanded, and the Garrisons of Berwick and Carlisle, and
other Garrisons in their Power within the Kingdom of Scotland and England be
forthwith delivered; that we may Surrender to the Kingdom of England their own
Garrisons and Forts, and for continuing the Union betwixt two Kingdoms, and
dispose of our Garrisons for securing the Peace of this Kingdom.

That all these of their number, who have been employed in Public Place or
Trust in the Kingdom (in respect they have by manifest abuse of their Power and
Trust so exceedingly endangered Religion, and brought the Kingdom to the very
brink of Despair and Ruin) shall forbear the exercise of all Place, Power or
Trust, until a free PARLIAMENT or CONVENTION of ESTATES, consisting only of
persons free from the late unlawful Engagement; and that the benefit of their
Places be Sequestered, to be disposed of by the Parliament or Convention of
Estates, and they giving assurance that in the mean time they shall not disturb
the Peace of the Kingdom, we shall not challenge them for their lives or
Estates; being always understood, That nothing herein contained, shall prelimit
the Parliament of this Kingdom to the Kingdom of England, according to the
Treaties and Covenant.

It is to be remembered, That the Persons above written, Nominated and
Authorized for the Treaty, shall not have any Power to conclude, but after
Debate of all matters in Writing, to make a report thereof to us.

Woodhouse, 14 September. 1648.
The Expostulation between the two Armies.
Upon Tuesday morning about five of the clock, the Lord Humby and the Lord Lee
your Commissioners, presented a Letter Subscribed by the Earl of
Crawford-Lindsey, the Earl of Lanerick, and Col: Geo: Monro; wherein they did
agree, That a Treaty should begin at eight of the clock in the morning at
Wenchborow; with this limitation, That the Treaty should only continue till
twelve at noon, promising that the Army under your Command should march no
further then they were at present, our Army doing the like; And that during the
Treaty, there should be a Cessation from all acts of Hostility. Though this
Letter came late to our hands, about three hours after the time appointed, and
so it was in our choice to have marched presently, or to have embraced a
Treaty; yet we resolved to stay, and were content to send some of our number to
Treat at Wenchborow with the like number from you; provided, That the Treaty
might endure until Wednesday at four of the clock in the morning, and all
marching of Forces, and acts of Hostility on either side should cease during
that time: Whereupon your Commissioners the Lord Humby and the Lord Lee did
undertake, That either your Lordships should agree to prorogate the time of the
Treaty until Wednesday four of the clock in the morning, the Forces of both
sides not marching further then they were at present, and the Marquis of Argyle
not coming with his Forces to St. Nynyans Kirk, about a mile on this side of
Sterling: Or otherwise if you did not agree to this, that then none of your
Forces should march before eleven of the clock at the soonest. Two from us were
sent along with your Commissioners to receive your Answer, which was delivered
by the Earl of Crawford and Glencarn, at the Town end of Lithgow, in these
words:

That it was impossible for you to consent to prorogate the time of the Treaty
until four of the clock on Wednesday morning; And that you resolved to fight
that night for the Pass at Sterling, though it were with Twenty thousand: but
withal promised to make good what your Commissioners had undertaken; viz. That
none of your Forces should march before eleven of the clock out of your
Quarters; particularly, That they should not before that time cross the River
of Evarn near Lithgow: All which notwithstanding, we were credibly informed
part of your Forces marched through Falkirk, which is about six miles distant
from Lithgow, betwixt nine and ten of the clock in the Forenoon, and about two
of the clock in the Afternoon marched into Sterling, which is distant twelve
miles from Lithgow, and so under trust and fair pretenses to Treat, your
Lordships did take an opportunity to surprise the Forces of the Marquis of
Argye, killing some, and taking others Prisoners, when they were in security,
being advertised by us of a Treaty betwixt your Lordships and us; which we
cannot esteem to be a fair way of proceeding: And therefore we desire, That all
those of the Marquis of Argyle's Forces, detained Prisoners by your Lordships,
may be forthwith released and set at liberty; and for the Blood of those that
have been killed under trust, we know not how it can be expiated.

For the Right Honorable, The Earl of Loudoun Chancellor of Scotland, to be
communicated to the Noblemen, Gentlemen, and Burgesses now with the Army, who
Dissented from the late Engagament against the Kingdom of ENGLAND.
Right Honorable,
WE received yours from Falkirk of the 15 of Septem. instant; we have had also
a fight of your Instructions given to the Lord of Gramheats and Major
Straughan; as also two others Papers, concerning the Treaty between your
Lordship and the Enemy, wherein your care of the Interest of the Kingdom of
England, for the Delivery of their Towns unjustly taken from them, and desire
to preserve the Unity of both Nations, are dearest: By which also we understand
the posture you are now in to oppose the Enemies of the welfare and Peace of
both the Kingdoms; for which we bless God for his goodness to you, and rejoice
to see the power of the Kingdom of Scotland in a hopeful way to be invested in
the hands of those, who we trust are taught of God to seek his honor, and the
comfort of his people. And give us leave to say, as before the Lord who knows
the secret of all hearts, That as we think one especial end of Providence in
permitting the Enemies of God and Goodness in both Kingdoms to rise to the
height, and exercise such Tyranny over his people, was, to show the necessity
of the Unity amongst his of both Nations; so, we hope and pray, That the late
glorious Dispensation in giving so happy success against your and our Enemies
in our Victory, may be the foundation of the Union of the People of God in Love
and Amity: and to that end we shall, God assisting, to the utmost of our power
endeavor to perform what may be behind on our part: And when we shall through
any wilfulness fail herein, let this Profession rise up in Judgment against
us, as having been made in Hypocrisy; A severe Avenger of which, God has
lately appeared, in his most righteous witnessing against the Army under Duke
Hamilton, Invading us under specious pretenses of Piety and Justice: We may
humbly say we rejoice with more trembling, then to dare to do so wicked a thing.

Upon our advance to Alnwick, we thought fit to send a good party of Horse
toward the Borders of Scotland, and therewith a Summons to the Garrison of
Berwick; to which having received a dilatory Answer, I desired a safe Convoy
for Col: Bright and the Scoutmaster General, to go to the Committee of Estates
of Scotland, who, I hope, will have the opportunity to be with your Lordships
before this come to your hands, and according as they are instructed, let your
Lordships in some measure (as well as we could in so much ignorance of your
condition) know our affections to you, and understanding things more fully by
yours, we now thought fit to make this return.

The Command we received upon the defeat of Duke Hamilton, was, To prosecute
the Business until the Enemy might be put out of a condition or hope of growing
into a new Army, and the Garrisons of Berwick and Carlisle were reduced: Four
Regiments of our Horse, and some Dragoons, having followed the Enemy into the
South parts being now come up, and this country not being able to bear us, the
Cattle and old Corn thereof having been wasted by Monro and the Forces with
him, the Governor of Berwick also daily victualling his Garrison from Scotland
side, and the Enemy yet in so considerable a posture, as by these Gentlemen and
your Papers we understand, still prosecuting their former Design, having gotten
the advantage of Sterling-Bridge, and so much of Scotland at their backs to
enable them thereunto; and your Lordships condition at present not being such
as may compel them to submit to the honest and necessary things you have
proposed to them for the good of both the Kingdoms; We have thought fit out of
the sense of our Duties to the Commands laid upon us by those who have sent us,
and to the end we might be in a posture more ready to give you an assistance,
and not be wanting to what we have made so large Professions of, to advance
into Scotland with the Army; And we trust by the blessing of God, the Common
Enemy will thereby the sooner be brought to a submission to you, and we thereby
shall do what becomes us in order to the obtaining our Garrisons; engaging our
selves, That so soon as we shall know from you the Enemy shall yield to the
things you have proposed to them, and we have our Garrisons delivered to us, we
shall forthwith depart out of your Kingdom, and in the mean time be more tender
toward the Kingdom of Scotland in the point of Charge, then if we were in our
own Native Kingdom. If we shall receive from you any desire of a more speedy
advance, we shall readily yield compliance therewith, desiring often to hear
from you how Affairs stand. This being the Result of the Council of War, I
present it to you as the expression of their affections and my own, who am,

My Lord, Your most humble Servant, O. CROMWELL.

An Extract of Letters from the Committee of Derby-house, of 24 Augusti, and
19, Septembr. to Lieutenant General CROMWELL.
SIR,
WE doubt not but God will so direct and assist you in doing what remains, as
both those that are come Southward will be destroyed; and that you then will
prosecute the remaining party in the North, and not leave any of them (where
ever they shall go) to be a beginning of a new Army; nor cease to pursue your
Victory, till you finish and fully complete it, with their Rendition of those
Towns of Berwick and Carlisle, which most unjustly, and against Obligations,
and the Treaties (then) in force, they surprised and Garisoned against us.

Derby-house, 24 Aug. 1648.
BY the Postscript of your Letter of the 11th, we conceive you will be advanced
as far as the Borders before these come to you; and that you will lose no time
nor opportunity for the regaining of the Towns of Berwick and Carlisle, and
desire you to use the best means that you in your judgment shall think most
conducing to that end; The regaining of them being a thing of so grent
concernment to the Honor of this Kingdom, and safety of those Northern parts.

Derby-house, 19 Septem. 1648.
Die Jovis, 28 September. 1648..
Resolved upon the Queston,

THat the Lords and Commons assembled in Parliament, do approve of the actions
of Lieut: General Cromwell, in pursuance of the Orders he received from the
Committee sitting at Derby-house, which they likewise approve of.

Resolved upon the Question, etc.

That in case those Noblemen and others that dissented against the Invasion of
the Kingdom of England by the Army under the Command of Duke Hamilton, shall
desire the assistance of Lieut: General Cromwell, that he be ready to afford
them all seasonable relief and assistance.

H: Elsynge, Cler.Parl.D.Com.

FINIS.

