A Brief DISCOURSE TOUCHING A Broken Heart.

In which the nature, causes, and signs of it are solidly treated of; as also,
its acceptablenesse to God; Together with many other motives pressing us to
labor after the procurement of it, and the means leading thereunto:

Being the sum and substance of certain Sermons preached by Mr. Daniel
Carwardine, late Minister of Eling in the County of Middlesex.

And since his death put forth by S. R. a friend of his.

Whereunto is annexed, A CONFESSION OF FAITH by Mr. Samuel Rowles, late Fellow
of Trinity-Colledge in Cambridge.

And now Minister of Thistleworth in the County of Middlesex.

London, Printed by E. G. for J. Rothwell, and are to be sold at his shop on
the Northside of Paul's. 1652.

To the Reader.
Christian Reader,
THis little Treatise, if thou will please to peruse it (as thou soon may)
has a very gracious and profitable design upon thee, namely, to help forward
the great work of softning and breaking thy hard heart, that so it may become a
Sacrifice of a sweet smelling savor to the great God, who delights in
nothing wherewith the sons and daughters of men can present him, more then in
an humble and contrite spirit. I have ventured to call thy heart hard, whoever
thou art that may cast thine eyes upon these lines, taking it for a certain
truth, that the hearts of all the sons and daughters, as well of God, as of
Belial, are more or less obdurate, if you consider them absolutely, though the
hearts of good men may be called soft in comparison with the hearts of wicked
ones; or if compared with that greater degree of hardness which was sometimes
upon themselves, even since the time of their conversion. Such as do take
themselves to have least need of any helps and furtherances in order to
brokenness of heart, it is to be feared have of all men else the most. The
Church of Laodicea, which thought it self to have been rich (namely, in grace
and holiness) and increased in riches, (that is, in a growing thriving
condition, more holy every day then other) yea at length so rich as to stand in
need of nothing, arrived at the very perfection of grace, was (it should seem)
in the account of God wretched, miserable, poor, blind, naked, Revel. 3.17.
usually, by how much richer any man is in spirituals, by so much poorer he is
in spirit; and by how much poorer in spirit, by so much richer in spiritual
substance. If I may measure thy wheat by my Bushel, as Solomon gives me leave
to do, Prove. 27.19. As in the water face answers to face, so the heart of a
man to man. I say, according to that maxim of Solomon, I can tell thee by the
hardness of my own heart, that there is some of that bitter root of
obdurateness springing up in thine. I would not do thee so much wrong not
knowing of thee (nor being ever able to know thy heart) as to say that there is
so much of it in thy heart as in my own. But how little soever it is, you know
what the Scripture says touching leaven. A little leaven leaveneth the whole
lump, so it is with the leaven of heart-hardnesse. If thou look not to it in
time, what our Savior says concerning Mustardseed, Matthew. 13.31. thou will
find true in relation to hardness of heart. Mustardseed (says he) is the
least of all seed, but when it is grown it is the greatest of al herbs, and
becomes a tree, so that the birds of the air come and lodge in the branches
thereof. Hardness of heart is at the first one of the least sins (not in
respect of nature, but degree) for men do set upon great sins at the first
with tenderish reluctant consciences, and softish hearts, (hardness of heart
being usually introduced not merely by the hainousness of one sin once
committed, but by frequency and custom in sinning) but afterward it grows up
to be as a mighty tree (and well it may, seeing all sins do contribute sap
and moisture toward the growth of it) and then the birds of the air (I mean
all sorts of soring high flown wickedness) do come and lodge in the branches
of it; that is to say, are welcomed and entertained by means of it. When the
heart of a man is waxen hard, it becomes a very cage of unclean birds, an open
house keeper to receive all sorts of profane vagabonds. If thou art any ways
prejudiced against this argument of heart-contrition as too legal (which is
the usual form of their Mittimus who do imprison soul-searching truth in
unrighteousness) It Is legal doctrine, say they, away with it. I say, in case
thou do apprehend this doctrine too legal (the common imputation cast upon
unpleasing truths) the ensuing Treatise will sufficiently convince thee of
thine error, if thou had rather part with it then keep it, when thou have
light sufficiently whereby to see that it is indeed an error. I need not tell
thee how frequent a thing it is with Christ and his Apostles in the new
Testament, to commend, encourage, and exhort unto humility, poverty of spirit,
unfeigned repentance, godly sorrow, all which expressions signify no other then
brokenness of heart, and contrition of spirit, which some are so loath to hear
of, and so upon a true account unwilling to come under the influence of those
beatitudes and benedictions pronounced by ur Lord Jesus Christ, Blessed are the
poor in spirit, Blessed are they that mourn, etc. Dare thou to lay any thing
to the charge of that doctrine which Christ has not only justified by his
preaching, but also crowned with his blessing, which also was much in use
amongst the Apostles, who were exact followers of their Lord and master Christ.
If God despise not a broken heart, but accepts it, delights in it, and dwells
with it, take heed of entertaining undervaluing thoughts concerning brokenness
of heart. Believe it, God will despise thee, and whatsoever proceeds from
thee, if thou despise it. What Paul says in reference unto preaching the
Gospel, 1 Cor. 9 16. Necessity is laid upon me, and woe unto me if I preach not
the Gospel; we may say the same in reference to brokennesse of heart: necessity
is laid upon us (not a necessity of custom or tradition but of commission) and
therefore woe unto us if we preach it not. See our commission for it, Heb. 3.13
Exhort one another daily, lest any of you be hardened thorough the
deceitfulness of sin. Even private Christians are enjoined to exhort one
another for the prevention of hardness of heart, how much more ought the
Ministers of the word to do it yea the text says, it must be done daily; and
all little enough to keep our hearts soft, which are as subject to be hard, as
water that is taken of the fire is to wax cold. (Reader) if thou art desirous
to have thy heart spiritually broken, (for so thou ought to be, though many
do all they can to keep their hearts from being broken,) thou may meet
with many helps and encouragements thereunto (one or both) from several
hands, namely, from the word and spirit of God; from both law and gospel,
threatenings and promises, mercies and afflictions; from things within and
things without thee, from the living voice of Gods surviving Ministers, who cry
as John the Baptist in the Wilderness, Repent, repent, for the Kingdom of
Heaven is at hand; as also from the public, labors of Gods servants who are
dead and gone; and amongst the rest from this little work which is the only
orphan exposed to public view of a late reverend and godly Minister who now
rests from his labors. The work is of so very small a bulk that thou
may read it over in a few hours, but of so great difficulty in respect of
practice, that thou can make no great proficiency therein in many days,
weeks, or years, unless thou gird up the loins of thy mind and set about
it with all earnestness. Such was the modesty of the author that he could
never be prevailed upon by any importunity to suffer any thing of his during
his life time to come near the press, nor yet to consent to it after his
death. But that some of his friends desirous to erect a memorial of him and to
make him serviceable to the public as well since his death as in the time of
his life have used him not unlike to Saul's usage of the Prophet Samuel (though
with a better Conscience and intent, calling him forth as it were from the
grave into the Land of the living (where he was content to have lain in
perpetual silence and obscurity, till the day of the revelation of all things.
The seasonablenesse of the subject was one of the maine inducements moving
those to get it published whose desire it was to bring it forth into the light.
And it must needs he granted that this argument was never more seasonable then
now it is, hardness of heart and haughtiness of spirit being an epidemicall
disease of the present age, as he that runs may read. And yet never less
complaining of hard hearts then now a days: but I wonder not at that it being
the nature of this distemper to steal upon men so insensibly that they do not
only not perceive it of themselves, but are also let loose to an
inapprehension of such discoveries as spiritual physicians do make unto them
of their being under the power thereof though they show them ever so many
symptoms to evince the truth of what they charge them with. That I lay no
false imputation upon the men and women of the present age, in saying that
their hearts are generally hard above measure, is easy to make appear from
several clea^e demonstrations; I shall give you but one which is this, we
find by sad experience that the work of conversion is very much at a stand,
few there be that are taken in the net of the Gospel in comparison of what had
wont to be, yea we hear not of many who come so far as to be pricked at the
heart and put that necessary question, what shall we do to be saved? whence
should this proceed but from the general hardness of men's hearts more then
formerly. The word of God is as quick and powerful, as sharp and piercing now
as ever it was, consider it in its self, for these are inseparable properties
of the word of God, as we read Heb. 4.12. but the hearts of men are not so
pliable as heretofore, they are become law proof and gospell-proofe more then
ever, in such a sense as we call that kind of armor which no bullet oan
enter, armor of proof. But I have no pleasure in upbraiding men with the
hardness of their hearts, we had much rather be employed in provoking them to
labor after the softning and mollifying of them that they may send forth a
fragrant smell into the nostrils of the great God (as spices being bruised are
most fragrant.) If thou will ply this work of laboring to break thy heart
Evangelically, besides all those excellent helps, whereof I told thee before,
which do most willingly offer themselves to thy assistance: there are others
thou may have for pressing and compelling such as thou little dreamest of,
namely the Devil the world and the flesh, all and every of which by the power
of God and grace may be made use of toward the breaking of thy hard heart. If
thou take this passage for a riddle, the meaning of it is this; the people of
God reflecting upon, and laying to heart those motions of sin which are
continually stirring in them, as also those several temptations both from the
devil and world, whereunto they are daily and hourly obnoxious are hereby
greatly humbled and abased in their own eyes as Paul was by reason of the body
of death which he carried about with him, and the Messenger of Satan which was
sent to buffet him. Surely this was the english of that good man's paradox, who
said he had sometimes received hurt by his graces, and good by his sins, the
good which his sins did him surely was no other then this, that they did serve
to humble him and make him poor in spirit. Though it be a very spiritual and
excellent employment to admire the riches of Gods love revealed in the Gospel,
and to rejoice therein: yet this is not a Christians only work whilst he
sojourneth in this vale of tears, as some would represent it who affect this
kind of sublimity in the state of grace which is proper for and consistent
only with the condition of glorified Saints in Heaven. If we could imagine
sin to be in Heaven there would be occasion for sorrow and brokennesse of
heart even there also; because there are certain actions in the state of grace,
sinful actions committed by us, which shall never be in the state of glory.
Thence it is, that there are passions and affections also proper for this
state, which shall be done away in that; as sorrow brokenness of heart, etc.
Surely Christ was no whit angry with Peter (but rather well pleased at it) for
weeping bitterly, after that he had denied his Lord and Master. When Peter did
flow with tears, then did Christ cast an eye of compassion toward him. The
ensuing discourse will furnish thee wiih many motives unto brokenness of heart,
I shall therefore spare the labor of mentioning any, save only this one
consideration tending thereunto, namely, that the heart of man is almost the
only thing amongst all created things that remains unbroken. I say, there are
few pieces of the creation round about us, but have been or are exceedingly
broken, were not the apostatizing Angels greatly broken when they were cast
down from Heaven like lightning, and thrust into the nethermost hell? Is not
the image of God in man exceedingly broken and defaced in comparison of what it
was in the state of innocence? are not the several faculties of the souls of
men, their understandings, wills, affections, consciences, memory, wretchedly
broken by that fall, so that they are nothing like to what they would have
been, if man had stood in his primitive glory and excellency. We have now
broken apprehensions of things, leaking memories, like to broken vessels,
broken inclinations to good in our wills, like bowls that are not half
biassed. If we look upon the law of God, has not that been miserably broken
by us, and yet is from day to day? Our duties and performances are they not for
the most part, yea altogether broken and imperfect things, like children borne
before their full time, weakly heartlesse things? Our very graces are they not
broken and imperfect habits full of mixture and adulteration, our Faith mixed
and as it were sophisticated with unbelief, our humility with pride our
self-denial with self-seeking. If we look upon those creatures which are
below us, is not their primitive excellency greatly abated and impaired by the
fall of man, as the Apostle intimates when be says. That the whole creation is
made subject to vanity, by reason of him who has subjected it: that is to say,
sinful man. As for the Civil State, in how broken and unsettled a condition
that is for the present, I need not tell thee: for that is the breach whereof
the generallity of men are but too too sensible. And as for the Church of God
it self, is not that in a broken shattered condition, now if ever? are not
professors of Religion all to pieces almost in every place? I had almost
compared the condition of the Church at present to a ship that is wrack, here
swims one planke, there another, It may be scarce two whole planks to be found
together. The Lord helps us, what sad and numerous or rather innumerable
breaches are in the midst of us at this day. And yet alas, our hard hearts do
still remain unbroken. Add to all that has been spoken, that thou who read
this book have, it may be, many breaches in thy holiness, many in thy peace,
several breaches in thy name, estate, friends, and comforts of every kind;
and yet perhaps after all this a heart in a great measure hard and unbroken.
It it great pity that should not be broken of all the rest, were that broken as
it should be, it would conduce to the making of all the rest whole again. It
is indeed a difficult work to break a hard heart; but thorough Christ
enabling thee thou may do that and all things else: be strong therefore in
the Lord and in the power of his might, and so go forth to encounter this
mighty Giant, thy hard heart, I mean, Wrestle with God in prayer for a soft
heart, and resolve not to let him go till he have blessed thee therewith, as
Jacob did in another case. Beg of him who triumphed over principallities and
powers, and made an open show of them upon his Cross, which was the time of
his greatest humiliation that being now exalted to the right hand of his Father
he would enable thee to triumph over thy hard heart, which is his enemy no
less then thine, and to make thee more then conqueror on that behalf. He
that has promised to break the Serpents head can with greatest ease break thy
heart. And who can tell but that he may please to do it, at least in part,
with the little hammer of this ensuing discourse, if thou be willing to come
under the stroke of it. If this little Treatise, with the blessing of God upon
it, shall prosper in thy hands (or heart rather) as I desire with all my soul
it may) give God the glory; and seeing the author himself is where thy prayers
cannot reach him, where and where only the people of God are indeed above all
such duties and ordinances (I mean heaven) substitute me in his room as the
object of thy hearty remembrances at the throne of grace: which if thou shall
please to do, I shall think my self well appayed for my poor endeavors in
the perfecting and publishing of it for thy use and benefit, as also obliged to
be further serviceable to thee, as God shall hereafter enable me, Farewell.

Thine in the service of the Gospel, SAMUEL ROWLES.
From my Study in Thistleworth, March 26. 1652.
A TREATISE OF Brokennesse of Heart.
Psalm 51.17. The sacrifices of God are a broken spirit; a broken and a contrite
heart O God, thou will not despise.


THe title of this Psalm shows us both the Author (or rather Penman) and
occasion of it, being styled a Psalm of David, when Nathan the Prophet came
unto him, after he had gone into Bathsheba, which story you may read at large
in, 2 Samuel, 12.1. and so onwards. The Psalm it self does excellently suite the
occasion, being full of humble and sorrowful acknowledgement of the greatness
of his offense, as you may see verse 3:4. I acknowledge my transgressions and
my sin is ever before me. Against thee, thee only have I sinned and done
this evil in thy sight, etc. so likewise in other verses of the chapter. And
as he condemns himself, so likewise does he expressly own the righteousness
of God in the judgment which was denounced against him, as it is written verse.
4. That thou may be justified when thou speak, and be clear when thou
judge. You have also in several verses of this Psalm earnest supplications
made unto God (doubtless with strong sighs and groans) by this holy penitent
Prophet; as in the first place, that God would take away the guilt of his
sin, so verse. 1. According to thy tender mercyes blot out my transgressions.
2. That God would take away the filth of his sin, so verse. 2. Wash me
thoroughly from mine iniquities, and cleanse me from my sin. 3. That God
would preserve him from relapsing into the same sin or sins of like nature;
for which purpose he prays, v. 10. that God would create in him a clean
heart; probably in reference to his unclean sin And in the 14 verse. that God
would deliver him from bloud-guiltinesse, probably with relacion to his having
shed the innocent blood of Vriah. In the fourth place he begs of God to restore
unto him the joy of his salvation, to make him hear joy and gladness, that
the bones which he had broken might rejoice. Furthermore he promises unto God,
that if he will do for him according to the tenor of his requests, namely
pardon his sin, he will thorough his grace inabling him, teach transgressors
his ways, and be isntrumental that sinners may be converted to him, verse. 13*
as also that his tongue shall sing aloud of his righteousness and his mouth
shall show forth his praise, verse. 14, 15. If God did so much regard sacrifice
and burnt offerings, he says he would not spare for them, verse. 16. Thou
desire not sacrifice, else would I give it. If thousands of rams and whole
rivers of oil might have been acceptable to God, he would have offered them
with all his heart. But he knew there was somewhat else which God did more
look at then all the burnt offerings and sacrifices that he could present him
with; of which he makes mention in the words of the text, verse. 17. The
sacrifices of God are a broken spirit. It is put in plural number, The
sacrifices of God, for emphasis sake, thereby intimating that a broken heart is
more worth to God then many outward sacrifices; yea, then all of them put
together, not, but that other sacrifices were of some account with God in
David's time, especially if they were joined with this inward sacrifice of a
broken heart; but this always had the pre-eminence in Gods esteem, even in
those days when he did appoint so much outward worship to be used. Of the
verses which do follow the text we shall need to say nothing; only this we
may observe from them by the way, namely, that David was not unmindfull of the
Church its public good, when his heart was as full as it could hold of grief
and sadness by reason of the weight and burden of his sins, together with
the absence of the light of Gods countenance, which was so grievous to him,
that he says, it broke his very bones, verse. 8. That the bones which thou have
broken may rejoice. A high expression indeed: you know that sickness and
sadness may wear a man to nothing but skin and bone; may make a very Anatomy
of him, and yet never a bone of him be broken thereby* yet when David was in
this low bone-broken condition he forgets not the Church of God, but prays
heartily for it, verse. 18. Do good in thy good pleasure unto Sion and build
thou the walls of Jerusalem: of this by the way. Return we to the words of the
text. The sacrifices of God are a broken spirit, etc. It were needless to
divide the words being one single proposition. The doctrine which is held forth
in them we shall commend unto you in these words.

Doct. A broken heart, a soul humble for sin is a sacrifice well pleasing to
God; you have this truth averred once and again in this Psalm, yea in this one
verse. First, In that a broken heart is called Gods sacrifice; it is thereby
intimated to be well pleasing to him; God will not own those things for his, he
will not call them by his name which he has no pleasure in. Is this such a
fast as I have chosen, to hold down his head of a bulrush, and to spread
sackcloth and ashes under him? will thou call this a fast, etc. Isaiah 58.5. as
if God should have said, will you offer to call such a fast as this, my fast?
Gods fast? It is no fast of mine, It is your own, you have not at all fasted
unto me in this. That which makes for our purpose is, that God will not have
that called his, which is not pleasing to him. So then forasmuch as a broken
heart is called Gods sacrifice, this very expression, if there were no other,
does speak it that which pleases him. But there is another expression or two
in the text which are observable for this purpose. The one is, that a broken
heart is called The sacrifice of God; which you know is a note of eminency; as
when we say, Christ was the word of God, that is the word of words, the
essential word: or Christ is the Son of God, that is, the Son of God in a
more special way, namely by eternal generation. Secondly, In that a broken
heart is said to be the sacrifices of God and not only one of the sacrifices
of God; it speaks as if this sacrifice were instead of all others, did contain
all other sacrifices in it eminenter (as Philosophers speak) as if God could
be satisfied with such a sacrifice as this, though he had no other but this,
etc. But the third and last expression in the text is most emphaticall, A
broken and a contrite heart O God thou will not despise. Here are two
expressions used to signify brokennesse, namely broken and contrite, which may
signify thus much to us; that if the heart of a man be ever so much broken and
shattered with sense of, and sorrow for sin, be a man ever so vile and
worthless in his own eyes, though he account no more of himself, then of a
broken potsheard or earthen vessel that is dashed in pieces, yet God will not
therefore despise, nay indeed he will respect him the more for it. Though men
are wont to trample when the hedge is low, and to slight those that are in a
broken condition, broken in their estate, and broken in their spirit by much
sadness, yet God will not do so. There is much in this phrase, viz. that God
will not despise, etc. It is a plaster which does excellently fit the wound of
a broken heart. That which men in such a condition are wont chiefly to fear is,
that God, who is a great, a glorious, and holy God, will not vouchsafe to take
notice of such poor vile sinful creatures as they are; or of any thing which
can come from them. They think they are as vile, yea more in Gods eyes then
they are in their own. As if God should have said in so many words by the mouth
of his Prophet, I know what poor brokenhearted sinners do think, their
secret thought is, that I will despise them, because they are so despicable in
their own eyes. No such matter, says God, by his Prophet here, appealing to
God. A broken and contrite heart O God thou will not despise; that is, thou will accept, thou will have respect unto it, thou will smell a savor of rest
from it, as from a well pleasing sacrifice, etc. So much of the truth of the
doctrine evidenced from Scripture. In the further pursuance thereof we shall
this do; namely, show you in the first place what this broken heart is which
is said to be a sacrifice well pleasing to God; and wherein it does consist.
Secondly, what it is that causes brokennesse of heart. Thirdly, why it is that
God will not despise a broken and contrite heart, but accepts of it as a
sacrifice so well pleasing to him. Of these in their order. 1. Quest. What is
the brokennesse of heart here spoken of, or wherein does it consist? Ans. Here
to we shall give answer, First, more generally, Secondly, more particularly.
First, In the general take this account of it. Brokennesse of heart is a true
grief and sorrow in the sight of our sins. Heartbreaking as well in
Scripture phrase as in our common language denotes deep sorrow; so it is taken
Act. 21.13* What do you weeping and breaking my heart, said Paul, to those who
dissuaded him from going to Jerusalem, which you know is the same as if he had
said, why do you thus grieve me, and fill me with sorrow at my departure by
weeping over me. We may also gather, that by heartbreaking is meant sorrow;
forasmuch as God is said to dwell with him who is of an humble and contrite
spirit, to revive him; which reviving presupposes drooping and sadness. The
soul that is not cast down with sorrow needs no reviving. But every kind of
sorrow is not the brokennesse of heart here spoken of, but only that kind of
sorrow which we spoke of even now, namely, sorrow for sin. There is a sorrow
called worldly sorrow, or heart breaking, which is said to work death, God
has no pleasure in seeing his people break their hearts after such a fashion;
nay, he has commanded that in respect of outward men should be so far from
breaking their hearts with sorrow, that they should mourn as if they mourned
not. But godly sorrow which is said to work repentance never more to be
repented of, that is the brokenness of heart here commended, as may appear
from Isa. 57.15. where a broken heart is twice in one verse joined with an
humble heart, as being convertible terms. I dwell with him that is of an
humble and contrite spirit, to revive the spirit of the humble and contrite.
Now you know that great trouble of spirit occasioned by outward crosses is not
true humility; for such affliction of spirit may stand with great pride and
great hardness of heart; yea, it may arise from pride. By how much more proud
the heart is, by so much more will it rage and take on when it meets with
opposition; like waves that swell and roar and dash themselves in pieces
against those rocks which stand in their way. If you look also into the 66
chapter of Isaiah, verse. 2. there are two passages in that verse which do
manifest that by brokennesse of heart must needs be meant sorrow for sin, and
not any other kind of sorrow. A broken heart is there called a poor spirit,
and a spirit which trembles at the word of God. To him will I look that is
poor, and of a contrite spirit, and that trembles at my word. Now a man may
be much broken with afflictions, and yet be far from that poverty of spirit
to which Christ pronounces the blessing, Blessed are the poor in spirit. A
man's heart may be as much lifted up within him when he is poor, naked in
outward respects, as if he were rich and full and wanted nothing. It is only a
true sight of sin which can work true poverty of spirit. So whereas a
contrite heart is said to tremble at the word of God, you know that is usually
a fruit of men's being sensible of their sins, and not of outward troubles, to
make them tremble at the word of God. Thus have we proved to you, that by
brokennesse of heart is meant a true and godly sorrow for sin. Come we now to
show you more particularly, wherein this brokennesse of heart does consist,
which is as follows. It does consist first in a through conviction of the ugly
nature of sin. I call that a through conviction of the ugliness of sin,
whereby men are not only inclined to think of sin as an ugly deformed
thing, but are altogether persuaded that it is so, and do no more question it
then they question the ugliness of any thing which is abominable to the eye or
against which they have, a natural antipathy. As those that have a natural
antipathy against any kind of creatures, etc. Or rather we may describe a
through conviction thus, namely, it is such a conviction of the loathsomenesse
of sin as is effectual to persuade with men to endeavor the forsaking of it.
Observe that we do define brokennesse of heart to consist in a thorough
conviction not merely of the dangerousnesse of sin or evil consequences
thereof, but in conviction of the ugly nature of sin as it is contrary to the
holy nature and righteous law of God; see a text for this purpose namely Job.
42.51.6 I have heard of thee with the hearing of the ear, but now mine eye
sees thee; therefore do I abhor my self and repent in dust and ashes. That
which made Job abhor himself was the sight of God; and how did that do it?
why thus; the more he beheld God, the more he did observe his own contrariety
to God by reason of sin; whence sprung that self abhorrence of his. And this
is the first particular wherein brokennesse of heart consists. Secondly, It
consists in true mourning for sin. They go about to divide betwixt things
that are inseparable, who say their hearts are affected with a true hatred of
sin, and yet are not broken with real sorrow for sin. Hatred of sin and
sorrow for the commission of it do always go together. In the 12 of
Zachariah verse. 10. you have the repentance or broken heartedness of the
Jews, which is there prophesied of, thus described. They shall took upon me
whom they have pierced, and they shall mourn for him as one mourns for his
only Son, and shall be in bitterness for him as one that is in bitterness for
his first borne. Thirdly, in shame of heart and soul that we have sinned.
Shamefulnesse in respect of sin does constantly attend broken heartedness,
yea our being ashamed of sin does much help to break our hearts for sin.
See what is said of brokenhearted Ephraim, Ier. 31 19. After I was instructed
I smote upon my thigh, I was ashamed; yea even confounded because I did bear
the reproach of my youth. Brokenhearted sinners reflect upon the days of
their vanity before conversion, as a great reproach to them. They blush to
think what they were before God called them, I was a blasphemer; a persecutor,
an injurious person, doubtless with no small shame he speaks it; If one that
were afterward a great personage advanced to some great preferment had
formerly been a scullion or kitchen boy, how ashamed would he be to be told of
it; yea if he did but think of the mean offices which he had done in his
time, it would much abash him, especially if he were a man of a proud spirit.
So broken hearted sinners when they call to mind what base drudges they have
been to sin and Satan, and what sordid work they have been employed in by
them formerly, it fills them with shame and confusion of face; not because
their spirits are proud (for this is not pride in them) but because they are
raised up to a holy disdain and contempt of sin, as of that which is the
greatest badge of dishonor that can cleave to them. Noble personages are not
more ashamed of having their blood stained by treason, then broken hearted
sinners are of those stains of sin which have cleaved to them. Nor are they
only ashamed of the days of their vanity, but also of the vanity of their
present days, etc. Fourthly, broken heartedness consists in selfe-denyall
and resolution to forsake sin for the time to come. A broken heart is always
a selfe-denying heart, and it must needs be so, because broken hearted persons
are very sensible of their own unworthiness, and consequently apt to think
every good thing too good for them, as he that said, he was less then the
least of all the mercyes of God. The reason why men are so hardly brought to
deny themselves, in any thing which may any ways gratify them, is this,
namely, because thorough the self-love that is in them, they do think
nothing too good for themselves. Now when humility and broken heartedness has
once taken men of from this conceit, and made them to think the quite
contrary, namely that every thing is too good for them, they can safely deny
themselves in this or that which they would otherwise seek to enjoy. By how
much more of self denial is in any man by so much more is there in him of
broken heartedness; and by how much more of broken heartedness, by so much
more of self denial. You know that famous instance of the Prodigal returning
to his father with a broken heart, Father, says he, Jam unworthy to be called
thy son, make me as one of thy hired servants. A broken heart will deny it
self in many things; as for example, not only in the pleasure which it might
have in repeating sins formerly committed, against which it does firmly
resolve, in the strength of Christ: but also in those lawful actions which may
any ways give occasion unto relapsing into former sins, or be any appearance
of setting their faces toward them. Yea such a person will be apt to deny
himself in the lawful use of that which he has formerly abused, through
excess, as wine, company, recreation, etc. 5. It consists in (or rather is
always accompanied with) self accusing and condemning before God Out of the
abundance of the heart the mouth will speak. Persons that are full of self
judging will fall to self accusing, and from thence to self condemning. The
devil (who is called the accuser of the brethren) might spare himself that
labor, forasmuch as broken hearted sinners are as forward to accuse
themselves, as he can be. How highly does Paul charge himself, whom he calls
the greatest of sinners. David does much accuse himself in this and several
other Psalms, and condemn himself also. For then is a man said to condemn
himself, when he acknowledges that God were most just if he should condemn
him, in respect of any argument which can be drawn from himself to the
contrary; what may be alleged to the contrary in reference to his surety Jesus
Christ, is another matter, etc. Men that Pharisee like do stand upon their
terms, and go about to justify themselves before God; I do not speak of
pleading their sincerity (for that is lawful in some cases) but rather their
innocence in a great degree, as if they were no great sinners, but like the
cloud which the Prophet Malachy saw, at the first of the bigness of a man's
hand; sinners of a small size, I say, they who so justify themselves may talk
much of broken heartedness, but they never knew indeed and in truth what it
meant. Men that take up a new fashioned kind of praying (new in reference to
those prayers which are recorded in the word, as also which have been used
amongst Gods people generally) leaving out the confession of sin, and taking
of shame to themselves for it, it is to be feared have their hearts little
broken in that duty. Sixthly, broken heartedness consists in self abhorrence,
as was instanced before in Job. A man that has a noisome disease upon him; as
an overspreading leprosy, etc, is not only offensive to others, but also
loathsome to himself. He is an abomination to himself, so that he could even
leap out of his skin, if he knew how. So it is with broken hearted sinners:
they are even an abhorring to themselves, by reason of the leprosy of sin
which cleaves to them. Hence Paul cried out, O wretched man, who should deliver
him from his body of death which he carried about with him? Because he could
not tell how sin and his body could otherwise be parted, then by parting
soul and body; he did long to be rid of his very body. As a man that is given
to cleanliness, if any vermin come near him, begins to be sick of him
self, or at leastwise of his clothes, and longs till he be shifted. So Paul
did long to put off his mortal body, because the loathsome vermin of sin
did breed in it do what he could; and to put on immortality, in which
condition, all filth would be done away. You know sin is (...) mitted. As it
is amongst friends in the world; though they truly love each other, yet because
there are certain differences between them for the present uncompremised,
such courtesies as may be offered on either hand, for the present will not be
accepted. It is the complaint of the Church unto God, Lament. 3.44. Thou have
covered thy self with a cloud that our prayers should not pass thorough. It
was a time in which God had led his people into captivity for the hardness of
their hearts, and it should seem that was not all, but he did also for the
present stop his ears against their prayers, looking upon them as yet not
sufficiently humbled, and heart broken for their sins. 4. Use. This should
put us upon examination whether we have broken hearts or not. And believe it,
there has been much said to put us upon diligent inquiry thereinto, forasmuch
as we have proved it to be a sacrifice well pleasing unto God; Who would not
think it worth his while to enquire, whether himself and his services be such
as God accepts? Quest. But how may we come to know whether our hearts be truly
broken for sin or not? Ans. For the discovery hereof, you may have recourse
unto the description of broken heartedness laid down in the beginning of this
discourse: in which we told you that brokennesse of heart did consist in these
several particulars, namely, in a thorough conviction of the ugly nature of
sin. Now put the question to your hearts; are you convinced of the evil of
sin, after such a manner as is there described? nextly, in being really
ashamed of sin? Now do you find this also, viz. that sin is matter of
great shame and confusion of face to you? that you look upon sin as that
which is your great reproach? Thirdly, what mourning and relenting of heart is
there in you for the commission of sin? is it matter of grief and
lamentation to you? Fourthly, has the sight and apprehension of your sins
brought you to the unfeigned denial of your selves, looking upon your selves as
less then the least of the mercies of God, by reason of them? Fifthly, are you
come to that pass, as even to loath, abhor, and be weary of your selves by
reason of sin? Sixthly, do we judge, accuse, and condemn our selves before
God sincerely for sin? add hereto a seventh sign of broken heartedness,
which has not as yet been mentioned, and that is, do we really pity those
that hang down their heads, and are perplexed by reason of sin? men that
have been in the same condition with others who are in any kind of misery are
most inclinable to pity and commiseration. Upon this account it is said of
Christ, that we have not a high Priest who knows not how to be touched with
our infirmities; in as much as he was made like unto us in all things, sin
excepted. It is also thus written, Heb. 2.18. For in that himself has
suffered being tempted; he is able to succor them that are tempted. Men that
have been exercised with any kind of bodily infirmities, as gout, stone
colic, are best able to pity those who have the like infirmities; So they
who have themselves known what belongs to a broken heart, will express it by
their sympathy with others who fall into the same condition. Not but that it is
matter of rejoicing to see the hearts of our friends broken with godly sorrow,
if we consider the fruit and effect of it, but if we consider it merely as it
is in its self, what is said of affliction, is true of brokenheartednesse: No
affliction is joyous for the present, but grievous; but it works the
peaceable fruits of righteousness for them who are exercised therewith. So
broken heartedness is not joyous for the present, and in that regard it calls
for pity and sympathy, though it do afterward work the peaceable fruits of
righteousness. We pity our friends when their Physic does make them heart
sick, though we know it will do them good in the conclusion. Thus much shall
suffice of the use which is by way of examination, etc. 5. Use. this should
exhort us to labor to get broken and soft hearts. For motives whereunto
consider these following particulars which are reducible to two general heads:
1. The danger, evil, and inconvenience of a hard unbroken heart. 2. The
benefit of a soft, broken heart, under each of which we might rank many
particulars etc. The evils ensuing upon a hard heart are as follow: 1. God
will not accept, but reject an hard heart, together with all that which
proceeds from it, etc. See Jer. 4.3. Break up your fallow grounds, sow not
amongst thorns, circumcise your selves to the Lord, and take away the
foreskins of your hearts, lest my fury break forth like fire, and burn that
none can quench it. How far is the great God from accepting those, the fallow
ground of whose heart is not broken up, seeing he does here threaten, that the
fire of his wrath shall break forth upon them, and there shall be none to
quench it. And thou by thy hard and impenitent heart, says the Apostle,
treasurest up to thy self wrath against the day of wrath. That is, all any man
shall get at the hands of God by a hard heart, namely, a treasure of wrath; you
know that God does chiefly eye with what hearts men do bring their services
before him: So that if men pray with ever so much appearance of zeal and
fervency, if they fast ever so often, if they give ever so much Alms to the
poor, if they make ever so large professions of religion, etc. and their hearts
under all this do still remain hard and unbroken, it is as if they had done
nothing at all. All their bodily exercise will profit them very little etc. 2.
A hard heart will shut out all that which would come to do us good. If we have
hard hearts, mercies will not win us, judgments will not affright us. Look
how it is with men of harsh dispositions and and inflexible natures, use fair
means to them, and you stir them not, use foul means, and they are still
at the same pass of insensiblenesse: you had as good threaten a wooden post,
or speak to it friendly, and it would be to as much purpose as to threaten such
men or to entreat them friendlily. Just thus it is with a hard heart. It is
like stony rocky ground, no seed of grace will thrive there, how should faith
thrive in a heart that is insensible of sin? will they go to Christ for
life, who apprehend not that they are lost, and dead in themselves. How should
repentance flourish there, where sin is not felt? how should they love God
much, who do not apprehend that they have many sins, which had need to be
forgiven? A hard heart is so far from being better for mercies, that it
waxes worse and worse under them. It turns the grace of God into
wantonness, Because judgment is not speedily exercised upon the children of
disobedience, therefore is the heart of the children of men set to do evil.
And not only so, but they do take occasion by the judgments of God also to
wax worse and worse. As they are smitten they revolt more and more, like the
smiths anvill, the more it is beaten upon, the harder it grows. The more
plagues God did send upon Pharaoh, still the more hard and insensible he did
grow. A hard heart is like the clay that is made more hard by contrary causes:
both by the warm sunshine, as also by the cold frost. If God put not more then
ordinary efficacy into the means, a hard heart will rather be worse then
better for them, etc. 3. We can never hope upon good grounds to enter into
Heaven with unbroken hearts. None shall dwell with God hereafter but those with
whom God dwells here. Now the text says, that God does dwell with him that is
of an humble and contrite heart, thereby intimating that God dwells not with
them that are of proud unbroken hearts. Thou by thy hard and impenitent heart
treasurest up unto thy self wrath against the day of wrath, Romans 2. That Is all
a man gets by a hard heart. We read of some, who when they shall come at the
day of Judgment and knock saying, Lord, Lord, open to us; shall receive this
answer, I know ye not, depart ye workers of iniquity; for when I was hungry
ye fed me not, etc. And do you think that hard hearted sinners shall receive
any other answer then this, Depart etc. For when I knocked at the door of your
hearts ye would not open to me, though my locks were wet with the dew of the
night, therefore now will I not open to you. If you observe who they are whom
Christ pronounces blessed in his Sermon, Matthew. 5. Blessed are the poor in
spirit, etc. You will find that the most of those which are there mentioned
are men of a temper as contrary to hardness of heart, as white is to black.
Our Savior does there pronounce them blessed who are poor in spirit, who
mourn, who are meek, who do hunger and thirst after righteousness; now these
are the properties of broken hearted men, and there is nothing more contrary to
them then a hard heart. Thus have we set before you the great evils attending
upon a hard heart, namely, it hinders our acceptance with God, suffers us not
to reap benefit by what would otherwise do us good; and which is worst of all,
it shuts Heaven gate against it; which three things are most true concerning
it, if by a hard heart you understand a heart not in the least truly broken for
sin etc. Come we to the second sort of motives which we promised to speak
of, namely, such as are taken from the benefit and usefulness of a broken
heart. The benefits of a soft heart are as follow. 1. A soft heart is fit to
receive any Grace, as soft wax is fit to receive any impression. Metal being
softened by fire, is fit to be wrought in such manner as the artificer does
desire to have it. When God is about to stamp his image upon the soul of a
man, the work of grace I mean) his manner is to prepare the heart thereunto
by breaking and softning of it with the power of spiritual conviction. As
those we read of in the Acts who were pricked at heart, which is the first good
we hear of them. It is said of the spirit, that he shall convince first of
sin, and then of righteousness. As ground is prepared to receive the seed by
being first ploughed and broken up, so likewise is it with the hearts of men.
It is said That the humble God will teach, God makes men teachable by humbling
them, and then he teaches them. Thou bindest man in cords of affliction, and
sealest up instruction to him: why then? namely because men are usually most
humble and broken in a time of affliction; and therefore most teachable at such
a time. Now it is a great matter to have our hearts fit to receive good, as
Scripture counts fitness, because such a heart is near unto good; good does
as it were lie at the door of such a heart. Many mercies are long coming,
because the heart is long in fitting to receive them. And it is the manner of
God in dispensing of mercies, first to look that the heart be made fit to
receive them: as a wise Physician will not give strong physic till he have
prepared the body of his patient for it; A smith will not strike his iron till
he have first made it hot, and so capable of impression from his blow. Though
God could perfect several kinds of work in an instant, yet it is his manner
to do things gradually, as first to fit men for mercies, and then to bestow
mercies upon them, humble your selves under the mighty hand of God that he may
lift you up in due time. If God give men good things before such time as they
are fit for them, he gives them usually in wrath and not in mercy, for their
hurt and not for their good. It is therefore a great benefit to have our hearts
fit to receive good. So much of the first motive. 2. God will take up his abode
in thy heart, if it be an humble heart; yea Christ will come, and the spirit
will come and take up their abode in thy heart, if it be a soft heart. Isa.
57.15. Thus says the high and holy one, I dwell in the high and holy place,
with him also that is of an humble and contrite heart, to revive the heart of
the contrite ones. Now this is an expression which speaks much intimacy and
nearness for God to say that he dwells with them that are of an humble spirit.
It is a step toward familiarity to dwell in the same town, a further step
to dwell the next door to any neighbor; but beyond either of these, to dwell
in the same house with any friend; how happy would a sick man think himself if
he had an able Physician dwelling constantly in the house with him, so as to be
always at hand when he has any occasion to make use of him. God dwells with
broken hearted sinners for that very end that he may revive them. If any friend
in whose company you take great delight, so much indeed that you are not well
without him, should say, well, rather then you shall be melancholy for want of
my company, I will even come dwell with you for altogether; would you not count
it a great privilege? how much greater privilege is it to have God, and
Christ, and the spirit dwell with us? Oh! who would lose such a privilege
rather then be at the pains to break a hard heart? 3. An humble, a soft heart
is in the best capacity to be freed from sin. Look how it is with the ground
whilst it is hard and fast bound with frost, there is no getting up the weeds
if you would ever so feign; but when the rain descends upon it and softens it,
then you may pluck them up with ease. Sin is bound up in the hearts of men
whose hearts are hard, as weeds are bound in the ground in frosty weather, but
when it waxes soft it may be plucked up by the roots. God does sometimes
suffer sin to continue in greater strength and vigor in the hearts of his
people then it otherwise should, on purpose to humble them, as knowing that
nothing can be matter of greater humiliation to a gracious heart then the power
and strength of sin within it. Some think that by the messenger of Satan
which was sent to buffet Paul, that he might not be puffed up with revelations,
we are to understand some sin whereunto he was tempted, as a means to keep
him humble; seeing then it is the manner of God sometimes to break the hearts
of good men by suffering their sins to remain in a great measure unsubdued
(as some good men that are subject to violent passion, pensiveness, and
discontent of spirit) broken heartedness must needs make way for the
delivering men from the Tyranny of their sins; for if you take away the cause
of sins continuance in good men which is oftimes the want of due humiliation
and brokennesse of heart, the effect will follow. 4. A soft heart is fit to
receive all sorts of good things. John the Baptist is said to have prepared the
way of Christ, now you know the great Doctrine which John insisted upon was
repentance or broken heartedness; as being very preparatory to the great work
of Christ, which was to bind up the broken hearted, and to proclaim liberty
to the captives, to bring the glad tidings of salvation into the world. Tidings
of pardoning grace is most acceptable and welcome to a broken heart. A broken
heart is fit for comfort, counsel, mercy, grace, and indeed what not that is
truly good. If you would know in what respect a broken heart is most fit for
any kind of good, take this brief account of it. 1. A broken heart stands in
the most need of mercy, as comfort, etc. A man is then most fit for meat and
drink when he is most hungry and thirsty; and so stands in the greatest need
of it. He that has not so good an appetite is not so fit to eat. 2. A soft
heart is in the least danger of getting hurt by mercies, of being spoiled with
kindness; as we sometimes say of children, they are spoiled with kindness. It
is not so apt to be puffed up with mercies and to turn them into wantonness
as others are. 3. It receives mercy most thankfully, and in that respect is
most fit for mercy. Beggars by how much lower they are brought thorough want,
by so much more thankful will they be for any small alms that is given them;
whereas those that are not sensible of much want begin to look big if you
offer them a small matter. 4. Broken hearted Christians make the best use and
improvements of their mercies, and therefore are most fit for mercy. They who
think themselves most unworthy to receive are always most careful what and
how to render, etc. 5. The fifth benefit of a soft heart is, a soft heart is
most fit to do any thing that is good, as to pray, hear, receive the Lords
supper, or perform any other duty acceptably. Indeed no heart but a soft heart
is fit for duties, or can perform them as they ought to be performed. Prayer
that proceeds not from a broken and contrite heart, though it be joined with
fasting, is as no prayer, no fast in the sight of God. If we be frequent in
hearing the word; and have not our hearts broken and humbled thereby, we lose
the benefit of that duty. So likewise, if we come to the Lords Table, and then
behold the body of Christ broken with unbroken hearts, we shall go away as
empty as we came, and do God as little service in coming as if we had staid
away. And it must needs be so that a soft heart should be most fit for duty,
because an humble self abasing temper is the best posture for the soul to draw
nigh to God; and not only so, but this is further observable, namely, that
humility and brokennesse of soul fills men with zeal and activity for God; an
humble heart thus thinks with it self, I have hitherto been very
unprofitable, it is little service, scarce worth speaking of, that God has had
from me as yet; Oh how shall I redeem time for God? how shall I make amends
for my former baseness and uselesnesse? If God will but honor my utmost
endeavor to be any ways isntrumental for his glory, how happy shall I
account my self, etc. 6. The sixth and last benefit of a soft heart is, that
it does fit for a Kingdom, for Heaven and happiness. We read of being made
meet to be partakers of the inheritance of the Saints in light; now
brokennesse of a heart is a thing greatly conducing to the meetnesse for an
inheritance in light there spoken of. And that it is so, will appear, if we
shall but consider what is the work and employment of Saints and Angels in
Heaven. Is it not to admire and adore God, and to sing everlasting Hallelujahs?
Now, who so fit to praise and to admire God, as broken hearted humble men. I
can but think how poor humble hearted Christians will stand amazed and
astonished at the day of judgment, when God shall call them to his right hand,
when Christ shall bid them sit down together with him, and judge the world. Do
you think they will not be full of such thoughts as these? Alas, what were we,
or what are we, that God should thus delight to honor us; that we should be
made Kings and Queens unto God, when thousands of the great ones of the world
are cast down to hell. Surely they will cry out, Not unto us O Lord, not unto
us, but to thy name be all the Praise and Glory. For by grace we are saved: by
free grace alone are we saved; Hallelujah. Thus have we set before you the
several benefits of a soft heart, so much shall suffice by way of motives, to
put us upon endeavoring after the getting of soft hearts. Qu. But peradventure
some will be ready to ask. How may we come by soft hearts, which we have heard
to be sacrifices so acceptable to God? By what means may we attain thereunto?
Ans. That it may be attained in the use of means, such Scriptures seem to
signify wherein God calls upon us, to rend our hearts, and to plow up the
fallow ground of our hearts, etc. Now the means to be used are as follow. 1.
Means. We must attend upon the word of God. For that is Gods hammer to break
the heart, and we must hear it with reverence, faith, and diligence, else it
will harden our hearts and increase our condemnation. It had wont to be no
strange thing to hear of hard hearts broken by the power of Gods word:
sometimes several in some one town or village, and that within the space of a
few years. There is the same efficacy in the word now as was then, were it not
that the prejudice which is in the minds of men against it, and great neglect
and contempt of it did intercept the benefit which they might otherwise receive
by it. That it is the proper work of the word of God to soften men's hearts (I
mean as an instrument in the hand of the spirit) I may make appear from this
experiment: you see when the word of God does not soften men's hearts, usually
nothing else does, the work remains undone. Men ordinarily carry hard hearts
with them to their graves, when they will not make use of the word of God
wherewith to break them. See Heb. 4 12. The word of God is quick and
powerful, and sharper then any two edged sword, piersing even to the dividing
of soul and spirit, and of the joints and marrow, etc. David prays that God
would sanctify him by his truth, his word is truth. Now brokennesse of heart
is a great part of sanctification, etc. 2. Mean, we must take away that or
those sins which do harden our hearts: Sin is the great cause of hardness of
heart. It is like some evil humor which is got to a head, and causes a great
swelling and hardness. There is no mollifying the place until such time as the
evil humor which is in it be either dissolved or dissipated. There are some
kind of sins which do more especially conduce to hardening of men's hearts; as
for example, scandalous sins, sins against knowledge, sins which have much of a
man's understanding and will in them; deliberate sins, sins committed upon very
slender temptations; delightful sins, customary sins, sins which begin to
justify themselves, and to put men upon pleading their cause, or at leastwise
extenuating and making light of them. It is impossible for a man to keep a
tender conscience, if he will entertain any one sin as his constant welcome
guest. I might show you several ways whereby sin does harden men's hearts.
One is this: any sin that a man does allow himself does as it were shade his
soul, that is, keep off the warm beams of the light of Gods countenance
which would otherwise shine upon it; you see how it is with the high ways,
such as lie open to the sun beams are soon melted, though there have been
ever so great a frost; but those places that are in the shade when the Sun is
kept off by hedges or the like, continue to be hard when all the rest are
thawed. Sin intercepts the light of Gods countenance, keeps back the warm
rays of the Sun from shining upon the souls of men, which is the most
effectual means to thaw and melt them of any other. Sin breeds
strangeness betwixt God and men, causes fallings out between them; now as it
is with friends, when there is any falling out or strangeness between them,
they begin to be hardened against one another, and they can speak and do that
against each other without any trouble, which they could not do at another
time, upon any terms, etc. 3. Mean. It were good to call to mind every night
what have been our failings that day and be humbled before God for that or
those sins whatsoever they have been. We say, Gutta cavat lapidem, Continual
dropping upon makes the hardest stone become hollow, so the most stony heart
would probably become soft by the continual dropping of daily humiliation, and
self examination. If the Sun begin to shine out by that time it has frozen
but a day or so, it will presently thaw it. So it is good for us to thaw the
ice of our hearts before it have been so long frozen that it will bear; you
know when ice is come to that pass, men do walk or ride upon it without
fear. He that shall but seldom call himself to an account for his
miscarriages, will go nigh to grow so bold in the interim that he will be past
fear of what conscience can say to him: yea he will also go nigh to have
forgotten many sins which might be matter of deep humiliation to him, if they
were fresh in his memory. Besides, that sin does oftimes look most ghastly
upon men, and most like it self soon after the commission of it, whilst all
circumstances are yet before them: whereas the sense and apprehension of it is
apt to wear out by degrees, and like meat, that has lain long in the
stomach, it begins to be digested by little and little, till at length they
complain no more of it. If David did every day call to mind a sin committed
long before, as that passage seems to imply, my sin is ever before me, etc.
How much more should we each day call to mind the sins of the present day? 4.
Mean. We must labor to see our misery by reason of sin. There is a world of
misery which attends sin; the consideration whereof might serve greatly to
humble us. For you know misery is a very humbling consideration, it is hardly
possible for a man to think himself very miserable, and yet be very proud at
the same time. I need not put you upon considering what mischief sin does
expose you to: it may suffice unto the breaking of our hearts, to think what
misery sin has actually brought upon us. It made Paul cry out, O wretched man
that he was; etc. Gods people count themselves more miserable upon the account
of that body of sin which they carry about with them, then upon account of
all the calamities in the world besides. Crosses could never make them
miserable were it not for sin; I mean, nothing like so miserable as now they
do. It is their frowardness and impatience which doubles and trebles every
affliction. 5. Mean. We must consider of the great mercy of God toward us, in
giving us hope that we shall be freed from hell, and received up into heaven.
Some may think it strange that the mercies of God should be reckoned amongst
the means of breaking men's hearts. And yet there is nothing more true, see
Romans 2.4. Despisest thou the riches of his goodness and forbearance, not
knowing that the goodness of God leads thee to repentance? Paul was able to
say Romans 7.25. I thank God thorough Jesus Christ, namely, for delivering of
him from the condemning power of his sin; and yet he cries out in the verse
immediately foregoing, O wretched man that I am, etc. see Titus 2.11, 12. The
grace of God which brings salvation has appeared to all men, teaching us,
that denying ungodliness we should live soberly, righteously, and godly, etc.
Observe that he says, the grace of God which brings salvation appearing to him
did teach him to deny ungodliness, and to live godly, etc. If an ingenuous
spirit would set it self to mourn over any offense committed by it, it could
use no more effectual motive then the consideration of the several favors
and kindnesses received from them against whom the offense was committed. Now
what greater favor is possible for a man to call to mind then this, that by
the free grace of God in Christ he has been delivered from the wrath to come,
and brought into the glorious liberty of the sons of God. 6. Mean. We must
beg a soft heart at the hands of God, for if we ask it sincerely we shall have
it, God having promised that whatsoever we shall ask in the name of Christ
according to his will, he will hear us. Therefore let us press him with his
promise, as we have cause. You cannot please God better then by going to him
for certain mercies concerning which he delights to be sought unto by the
sons of men: you know how well God approved of it when Solomon did ask for
wisdom instead of asking gold and silver etc. Surely a petition put up for a
soft heart will be every whit as acceptable or rather more, etc. There are
certain requests which if men would be earnest with God in, and lay the stresse
of their desires upon, would be greatly beneficial and advantageous to them
far beyond those petitions which the most of men are wont chiefly to insist
upon, and urge with the greatest strength and heat of affection. A soft heart
is one of those, of which may be truly said what is spoken concerning Faith,
namely that it is more precious and (let me add more rare) then gold. Well
might the Scripture say, Romans 8.26. We know not what to pray for as we ought,
etc. It being the manner of most men to pray most for what they have least need
of, or will do them least good: and least for them of which they stand in the
most need, and from whence they might reap the greatest good. If men be sick,
how earnestly do they pray for health, but if troubled with hard hearts how
coldly do they pray to have them softened? He that prays for a soft heart is
under the encouragement of an excellent promise, namely, that God will take
away the heart of stone, and give a heart of flesh, which promise surely is as
applicable to the people of God in all ages, as that which was made to Joshua,
which the Apostle calls upon all believers to make use of, and depend upon, viz.
I will never leave thee nor forsake thee.

There are two considerations Which may put us upon praying for soft hearts,
besides the promise of God, whereof we have spoken already: as first, we cannot
glorify God with hard hearts. Men of hard hearts do sin the greatest honor
and service that is possible for men to do it, and God the greatest dishonor
and disservice. I shall make it out to you thus: He that commits sin, and is
never troubled for it, or lays it to heart does upon the matter justify it;
and say in effect, that he has no cause to be ashamed; that sin is no such
ugly abominable thing as the Scripture represents it, and hereby he does sin as
much credit and service as in him lies: and on the other hand, he dishonors
God as much, in that he makes light of breaking his righteous law, as if it
were a small thing so to do. You cannot slight any man more, then in making
nothing of offending him, as if it were not a pin matter whether he were
pleased or displeased. Now this were a very good argument for a man to plead
with God, in relation to the obtaining a soft heart; Lord, thou know I
cannot but dishonor thee, and honor sin thy great enemy in a high degree,
so long as my heart continues thus hard; wherefore I beseech thee to soften
it. 2. Men of soft and tender hearts are most like to be continued in the
enjoyment of those good things which God has bestowed upon them. Mercies
bestowed upon hard hearted men do many times prove like the seed sown in the
stony ground, Mark 4.5, 6. which had no deep rooting, so that it soon sprung up
and withered. Such men's mercies do ofttimes soon wither. When men do turn
the grace of God into wantonness, and take occasion from the light of Gods
countenance to wax more hard and proud (as the Clay that is hardened by the
Sunbeams) usually God does quickly withdraw the light of his countenance from
them, and leave them in darkness; but when those beams do melt the heart,
and make it more and more soft, God is pleased ofttimes to let them abide
longer with us, being improved for that end whereunto they were sent, etc. This
may encourage us to pray for soft hearts, etc. 6. Use. This may serve for the
comfort of all those who have broken and contrite hearts. Though men despise
them, God will accept of them and love them. St. James reproves those, chap.
2.2. who were full of their respects toward such as came into their Assemblies
with Gold rings and goodly apparel, but despised the poor, saying, stand here,
or sit under my foot stool: thereby intimating, that in this carriage of
theirs, they were altogether unlike to God, who is no respecter of persons upon
any of those accounts, and yet he has more respect unto some then unto others,
namely, unto those who are of broken and contrite hearts. Great persons look
that it should be accounted a high respect, if they vouchsafe now and then to
bestow a visit upon them that are poor; How much greater is the respect and
condescension of the great God toward broken hearted sinners, in that he
vouchsafes not only to visit them now and then, but to take up his abode with
them, to dwell with them. Though God do sometimes retire himself, so that a
broken hearted Christian fears he is departed (as a man may think one that
lodges in his house is not within, when he keeps close, not willing to be
spoken with) yet he always dwells with the broken heart, to revive the spirit
of the humble and contrite. Let broken hearted Christians be of good cheer,
they may safely call God and Christ Emanuel, that is, God with them, etc. Obj.
But will God show mercy to, and accept of me, who am a grievous sinner? I
cannot believe it. Ans. Yes, God will show thee mercy, if thou be an humble
soul. Obj. But I have been a grievous sinner, a notorious liver, and therefore
I am justly humbled for my sins. Ans. Thou must not look upon thy self, as
thou have bin, but as thou now art; if thou be humbled, the blood of Christ
washes thee from all thy sins, how many and great soever they have been. I
do not say, that thou ought not to reflect upon thy former conversation,
upon any account whatsoever. For you know that the Apostle Paul did call to
mind what he had been, namely, a blasphemer, a persecutor, an injurious person,
etc. This he did in reference to the magnifying of Gods grace, in making him
such as he was by grace; but I say, that in a time of trouble and perplexity of
spirit we ought to look upon the present humiliation of our souls, and
brokennesse of our hearts, as a ground of joy and comfort. Obj. But I am not
worthy that God should show me so much mercy as to accept of me. Ans. No, nor
ever wilt be worthy in thy self of any mercy, but God looks upon thee in
Christ, and in him does account thee worthy. Therefore go to God in the name
of Christ, that is the way to find acceptance: For God is very ready to hear
his peoples prayers, and to grant their requests; and he has promised to hear
when they call, and he takes delight to hear his people pray. Therefore this
may encourage us to pray, for God will hear. Obj. But will God hear and grant
the prayers of all? Ans. No. They must be godly which do prevail with God.
They must be such as do not allow themselves in any sin whatsoever. If I
regard iniquity in my heart, the Lord will not hear my prayers, etc. Psalm.
66.18. Again, They that would prevail with God must pray in faith, and with
earnestness. Again, They must be constant in prayer, and not give over
praying. Again, they must put up their requests in the name of Christ, with
thankfulness for such mercies as they have already received. Obj. I hope I am
Gods child, and I have prayed, but God hears not me. Ans. God may have heard
thee, though not at the same time that thou desire, not in the same thing.
There may be good reason for that. Thou must not tie God to thy time, nor to
thy means. For God is wise, he does delay the granting of our requests for
several holy ends and purposes; as for example, To try our faith, to humble
us, to make us see the want of a mercy, that we may the better prize it when it
comes, be more thankful for it, and use it more to his glory. etc.

FINIS.
A Short CONFESSION OF FAITH: BY Mr. SAMUEL ROWLES, Master of Arts: LATE Fellow
of Trinity College in Cambridge: And now Minister of Thistleworth in the
County of Middlesex.

LONDON, Printed for John Rothwell. 1652.

To the Reader.
Good Reader,
THe ensuing confession of faith (which was delivered by me some years since at
my Ordination in Kent) was not then intended or calculated for public view,
but merely for that season, occasion, and Auditory. If after perusal thereof
thou shall think it worthy keeping by thee (which I dare not say thou have any
cause to do) do not thank me for it, but rather those friends of mine, who
importuning me for more written copies then the little time I could spare from
ministerial employments would afford them, did upon the matter compel me to
expose both it and my self to common censure, by committing of it to the
press; which I was the less unwilling to do, in regard I had a more then
ordinary opportunity for such a purpose, in as much as the preceding Tract
touching brokennesse of heart was to pass thorough my hands: which I thought
not so big, but that it might well admit of an Appendix, especially such an
one as this; which was too too little to came forth by it self. I have printed
it with confidence only touching the undoubted verity and truth of all that is
contained in it (else I had been much to blame to have made and styled it the
confession, or profession of my Faith) and I hope I am so far confident of
that, as that I should not refuse to seal much of it with my blood (God
assisting me, without whom I am unable to do any thing, much more unable to
suffer for the truth) if ever I should be called thereunto. Touching the phrase
and method of it, judge as thou please: In case thou shall approve one or
both, I shall think it thy candor, more then its desert: and if thou
disapprove either, or both, I shall not say thou do me any wrong, whatsoever
they may think of it whose love and groundless respects to me may cause them
to prize what is mine far above the measure of its real worth. I have gone
the way of a general dedication unto whomsoever pleases to read this little
summary of divine truths; partly, because I thought it too small a work
wherewith particularly to present my best friends; and partly, because the
persons and places whereto I am obliged are more then I could gratify at once;
and of three places whereto I am much indebted, I knew not which to single out
to begin with: (namely, Trinity College in Cambridge,) where I had the
greatest part of my University education, and encouragements, and was several
years together happy under the government of a most pious and prudent Master,
and in the Society of as deserving Fellows, I speak it without the lest
tincture of flattery or partiality, as I believe either University has any,
from whom I did all along receive more love and respect, then I shall be ever
able to deserve or requite. The next place, which I became a debtor to was West
Farleigh in Kent, where I was much engaged to the worthy Knight of that shire,
in whose family I there dwelt, and to his religious consort, for the great
affection they did bear to me, not to omit the reverend and godly ministers of
those parts from whom I received my Ordination, together with many respects and
encouragements from first to last in that place, where God called me to bestow
the first fruits of my ministerial labors. Nor am I less engaged to the
inhabitants of Thistleworth, for whose souls God has set me to watch these
two or three last years, amongst whom I yet continue, I bless God, with less
gainesaying and more general acceptance from them then many, not to say the
most of my brethren, do in their several places. It is the Lords doing and
mavelous in my eyes, knowing my self to be the unworthyest of all the
faithful servants of my Lord and master Christ, I say, not knowing which of
these three places (for I have not time to mention persons) I am most obliged
to and consequently should begin with, I have made my dedication inclusive of
all my friends (who are most like to be the readers hereof) but not exclusive
to others, if they also please to read it. Touching the work it self, I have
only this to say, namely, that I call to mind very few, if any branches of
truth growing upon the root of this confession, which I should not think it
very dangerous for any man to turn his back upon, or look toward with an eye
of mere indifferency or scepticall neutrallity. The reason it, because I take
them to be fundamentals, which whosoever denies or derogates from, does in my
opinion run a great hazard, and Sampson-like take hold upon the pillar of
that house, in the fall whereof himself is like to perish, and cause many more
(as he did) to perish with him. Errors rising up against truths but preter
fundamentals, do many times prove of sad consequence to the Church and state
in which they are held; but fundamentalls always much more hurtful and
prejudicial to the souls of them that hold them. Wherefore, let thou and I
receive each divine truth in the love thereof, lest we be given up by God to
strong delusions, to believe lies (a judgment ordinarily inflicted upon the
wantons of this unsettled age) which that we may never be, is the hearty prayer
of him who is,

Thine in the service of the Gospel, SAMUEL ROWLES.
From my Study in Thistleworth, March 26. 1651.
A SHORT CONFESSION OF FAITH.
I Believe there is a God, Concerning God.
and but one, who is an infinite spirit, one in essence, three in persons,
truly though, not fully, made known to us by his glorious attributes of
wisdom, holiness, Justice, mercy etc. which are not so many qualities in God,
as in men they are) but his very essence thus represented to us, he being
Holiness, Justice and Mercy it self* and that the distinction of persons, or
Subsistences arises from three several incommunicable properties, wherewith
the divine essence is clothed, the incommunicable property of the father being
to beget, of the son to have bin begotten, of the Holy Ghost to have proceeded
from the Father and the Son. Yet are all these three persons coequal,
coessential, coeternal, as the Sun and the light are contemporary, though light
do stream from the Sun. I further do believe, that the Heavens, the earth,
and the great deep, with all things contained in all, and every of them
(whether living or without life, are the workmanship of his hands by the only
word of his power in time created out of nothing. As also that God did from all
eternity foreknow and pre-ordaine all those things which have or shall come to
pass in time, and both has and will by his executive power give being unto
all such things in his own fullness of time, which he had decreed and resolved
upon in himself from all eternity. Providence.
Only the decree of God concerning sin, I steadfastly believe to be merely a
permissive decree, which he does not prosecute and pursue by the exerting of
any such positive power or casuality as in other cases, Sin.
(for sin has no efficient cause, but springs from mere deficiency or
defectivenesse, which were flat blasphemy to ascribe to God who is all light,
and in him no darkness at all) but merely suffers to be and for holy ends
and purposes (some of which we may partly guess at) does refuse to let and
hinder, though it be in the power of his hands to do it. God is no ways bound
to stay the hands of men, when they stretch them forth to their own ruin, nor
can he be said to tempt any man, when he is tempted and drawn away of his own
hearts lusts, the Lord mean time refusing to prevent or return that his
captivity. We deny not that God does concur to those actions which are
sinful, but not to the sinfulness of those actions. As he that strikes a
lame horse makes him go, but does not make him halt, for that proceeds merely
from his lamenesse. He that plays upon an untuned instrument with a skilful
hand is the cause of the sound, but not of the jarring; for that it jarres,
proceeds merely from the untunednesse of the instrument, and not from the
unskilfulnesse of such a Musician. There is something in every evil action
which is good, namely, its natural being as it is a physical motion, and so
far forth it is from God, but the moral pravity and irregularity of it is
from man alone. We also grant, that God does sometimes lay stumbling blocks in
the way of sinners, as it is Ezekiel. 3.20. but yet he only suffers, and no
ways compels them to fall, or thrusts them down. A man may walk if he be
very careful without falling, though many stumbling blocks should lie in his
way. That God is only the author of the occasion, and has no hand in the
sin it self, is intimated to us in that passage of the Lords prayer, in which
we are taught thus to speak, Lead us not into temptation, but deliver us from
evil; and not, lead us not into evil, but deliver us from temptation; implying,
that though we are lead into temptation by God, yet not into evil, not into
sin, though he offer the temptation yet he only suffers the sin. I
speak nothing to the prejudice of Gods providence in disposing of sin as
well as other occurrences; for God may only permit the commission of sin,
and yet dispose of sin committed in subserviency to his own Glory. But to
proceed from Gods permissive decree to his positive providence. I believe it
to have such an universal influence upon all the affairs of the world, that
the most inconsiderable passages and occurrences are ordered and disposed
thereby, insomuch that not a hair can fall from our heads, or two sparrows
light upon the ground without it. Concerning the dealing of God with Angels and
men, Angels.
which are of all other most remarkable, I thus believe: First, as touching
Angels that they were all of them created by God pure and spotless spirits, an
order of being above men, of a more Noble and active constitution; in which
estate many of them yet continue (and are probably confirmed by Christ therein)
being pure flames, ministering to him that is the consuming fire; as also
pitching their Tents about the godly, and attending upon their good and safety)
but others of them thorough affectation (as is conceived) to have been equal
with God, fell down from Heaven, like lightning: that is, were forced down
from thence, (as fire, which naturally tends upwards, is, when it lightneth,
driven downwards by the violence of the breaking cloud, and that those who kept
not their standing are reserved in chains of darkness to the judgment of
the great day, God having made no provision for their recovery, as he did for
raising up the tabernacle of Adam, which was fallen. Concerning man (the next
creature to Angels in point of dignity and excellency) the spirit of God
speaking in the word has thus persuaded me, Man.
(namely) that God at first did make him righteous, stamped his own image upon
him, gave him freedom of will with an indifferency to good or evil, put him
into a capacity of standing (though not into an impossibility of falling) made
a Covenant of works with him, that in doing he should live; gave him a
positive law (besides that which was written in his heart) whereby to try his
obedience; which law he wilfully transgressed, and we in him; (that one Adam
being all of us representatively, and after a sort really, forasmuch as we were
all in his loins) and by that his transgression brought a curse upon himself
and his posterity, yea his posterity upon themselves and all other creatures
inferior to them, which are said to be made subject to vanity by reason of him
who subjected them, that is man (viz.) obnoxiousnesse to eternal death, the
inflicting whereof upon those for whom Christ interposeth not, is most just;
and had been so in respect of all, if Jesus Christ had not interposed, as will
appear if we consider the heinousness of the sin, Man's fall.
which did contain in it a manifest breach of all the commandments (though it
may seem at the first view to have been of no such magnitude and malignity) or
the incapacity of one man to receive that great weight of wrath which was due
for it; or the relation wherein we stood to Adam being somewhat of himself, in
a sense sufficiently proper, being bone of his bone, and flesh of his flesh,
that is seeminally and radically in him. I say, these things considered, we may
salve the justice of God, without having recourse to his Sovereign power. It
is no part of Gods Sovereignty, nor yet consistent with his justice, to charge
guilt upon innocent creatures; neither would or could the righteous God, who
can do no unrighteous thing have laid Adams sin at our door, had it not been
our sin as well as his. The woeful fruits of that accursed fall we have daily
experience of, The sad consequences of it.
in the universal depravation of our natures displaying it self, and being
too too legible in the miserable darkness of our understandings (for how small
a portion is it that we know of God, our selves, or the nature of those
creatures which are round about us, in comparison of what we might have known)
perverseness of our wills (which take occasion by the Law of God, to sin out of
measure sinfully) disorder of our affections (which are fixed most when they
should be least, or not at all; and least when they should be most of all;
which also change their due centres, our love moving toward those things which
should be the center of our hatred) erroneousnesse, stupidity, searednesse,
defilement and interessednesse of our consciences, and continual pronenesse of
the whole man unto that which is evil; as it is written, the imaginations or
figments of the minds of men are evil, and only evil, and that continually.
But to proceed, I further believe, that God soon after the fall of man
(probably so soon as that the Sun did hardly go down upon his wrath) disclosed
that gracious design which he had resolved upon from everlasting, of
recovering and saving some of the sons and daughters of the first Adam,
Recovery.
by Christ the second Adam who was exhibited (though somewhat obscurely) in
that glorious promise, the seed of the woman shall break the head of the
serpent; which words contain the tenor of the Covenant of grace, or second
Covenant which God entered into with man suspending life and salvation upon the
condition of believing, of which I shall speak more hereafter. This second
Covenant was at first called no other then the promise of the blessed seed,
Several names of the Covenant of grace, with the reason of them.
viz when made known unto Adam in the words forementioned, namely, that the
seed of the woman should etc. Afterward it was called a Covenant, when
revealed to Abraham, and ratified by many solemnities. Afterward it was styled
a Testament or Legacy, where in Moses his time, it was sealed with the blood of
Christ, who was typically slain in the several sacrifices; and now the new
Testament, because sealed with the blood of the Testator Jesus Christ himself;
which is a new seal in comparison of the blood of Christ typically shed, which
was long before it. Other reasons there are of its being called the new
Testament, though it be for substance the same with the old Testament, which is
very Gospel as well as the new (for the Covenant of works was never called a
Testament, nor could bear that name) which we shall hint hereafter. Touching
the Promise, Condition, Mediator, and Seals of the new Covenant or Testament,
I believe as follows. First, that the things promised to those which are
concerned in it, are Christ with all his rich purchases, Covenant of grace, its
promises.
such as are the gift of the spirit, pardon of sin, healing of our natures,
peace of conscience and eternal happiness. New testament-promises are mostly
spiritual, but those of the old testament were more carnal, that is, more
relating unto temporal and outward things. Secondly* That the condition of the
new Covenant, Its condition, not assurance, but faith. Assurance proved not
essential to saving faith.
on which the forementioned promises are suspended, is Faith, I do not say
assurance, for that Faith may be where assurance is not, is clear to me from 1 John 5.13. These things have I written to you that believe on the name of the
son of God, that you may know that you have eternal life; and had their
Faith been Assurance, they would have known that they had had eternal life,
( i. e. were heirs of it without his writing to them) and that ye may believe
on the name of the son of God, (that is, that you may increase in faith. Now
assurance being the highest pitch of faith, a speaking the absence of all
doubting, does admit of no increase: (Indeed vision is beyond Assurance, but
there is no degree of faith higher and greater then assurance) if unbeleife may
be mingled with true faith, as appears from this place it may, as also from
Mark. 9.24. when the man cries out, Lord I believe, help my unbelief, there
Assurance is not of the essence of true faith, but a higher degree of it for
Assurance excludes all unbelief. I might add, that the fruits of saving
faith, Faith.
as purifying of the heart, prizing of Christ, etc do experimentally appear to
be in the hearts of many who are far short of Assurance. But such a Faith is
required to bring us within the Covenant as is an Affiance or resting
innitency, or resting of the soul upon Jesus Christ exhibited in the promise
for life and salvation, expressed in Isaiah by trusting in the Lord, and
staying upon the name of God, when we sit in darkness and see no light.

As for the effects of true faith, they are these: 1. It works by love, and
consequently puts men upon obedience to the commands; For those that love God,
will keep his commandments, and are indeed constrained thereto by the love of
God shed abroad in their hearts. So you see, that faith does not exclude but
include obedience to the commands of God, wherein holiness consists. Though we
are justified by faith without works, yet not by a faith which has no works.
Saving faith receives Christ according to all his offices, as well as he is a
King and Lord, as Priest and Savior. Touching the Mediator of the New
Covenant, which is Christ, I believe concerning him, as such: Mediator and his
Offices.
1. The duplicity of his nature, that he is God as well as man, man as well as
God. 2. The triplicity of his offices, namely, that he is 1. a King, having a
Mediatorious Kingdom committed to him by God the Father, by virtue whereof he
does chiefly act and appear in the Kingdom of grace, and ought principally and
immediately to be addressed to, which Kingdom it is said he shall hereafter
deliver up to God the Father, and then shall God be all in all. This Kingdom of
his he does administer by certain outward means, and visible dispensations, as
the Word and Sacraments (as well as by the inward operation of his Spirit) which
whosoever cast off, in so doing do in effect say, that they will not be
subjects of Christ his Kingdom. 2. That he is a Prophet for the enlightening and
instructing of his Church, which yet he does not ordinarily, immediately, but
mediately, by those Ordinances which he has appointed in his Church, having
given variety of gifts for the edification thereof. 3. That he is a Priest who
has offered up himslfe a sacrifice for us, did raise himself from the grave
within three days by the power of his Godhead; shortly after ascended up to
Heaven, where he now sets at the right hand of God the Father, always making
intercession for us. As touching the seals of the new Covenant (having spoken
of the promise, condition, and mediator thereof.) I do this further believe,
namely, that they were and are but two, Sacraments.
properly called Seals or Sacraments, viz The Passover and Circumcision under
the Old Testaments administration, Baptism and the Lords Supper under the (...)
of God, etc. He had said verse. 13. that Moses did put a veil upon his face,
that the children of Israel could not see to the end of those things which are
abolished; that is, they could not see Christ who was the end of the
Ceremonial law, which is now abolished by reason of that veil which is not
only upon the hearts of the Jews at this day, but was then upon the face of
Moses; that is of Moses his writings: which veil was no other then the
darkness and obscurity of the manner in which the mysteries of the Gospel
were then delivered. They are said to have had but the shadow of good things to
come (the shadow of a man is so dark a representation of him that he can never
or very hardly be known by it) but we to see those same things as in a glass
(we may as well know a man by the representation of him in a glass as if we
should see him face to face) and with open face too (which may signify more
light shining into the understandings of men under the Gospel then did in the
time of the law) and to behold the glory of God, whereas they saw little of it
in comparison. 3. Efficacy
3. In point of efficacy, the new Testament administration of the Gospel does
excel. But believers in the old Testament were generally as trees growing in
the shade except some few worthyes, such as Abraham and David. Whereas
believers under the new Testament dispensation are as trees growing in such
places where the influence of the warm beams of the Sun may come at them
without hinderance or interposition. Hence the time of the old Testament is
called the time before the coming of Faith, Gal. 3.23. Before Faith came (i.
e. in that plenty that it comes in the time of the new Testament) we were shut
up unto the Faith which should afterward be revealed. All which expressions
do speak the old Testament administration of the Covenant of grace to have
been less effectual then is the new; some think that place Zach. 12.8. He
that is feeble shall be as David, and the house of David shall be as God, as
the Angel of God before them. I say some think that it is a promise of that
eminency of grace which shall be in believers in the time of the new Testament
above what was in the generallity of old Testament believers. 4. 4. Change of
Seals a a fourth difference.
The administration of the Covenant of grace under the new Testament differs
from that of the old in respect of the alteration of seals, of which we have
spoken already. Thus have I declared my persuasions touching the Covenant of
grace, and the several things belonging thereunto. After the publication of
the foresaid Covenant in that first promise, the seed of the woman shall break
the head of the Serp^nt, God was pleased by several piece-meales, and in
several manners, to make known himself to those who lived in the infancy of
the world, declaring himself to them sometimes by a voice from Heaven, as the
law was given from Mount Sinai; sometimes by visions, other times by dreams,
other times by prophecies; sometimes by inspiration of things not prophetical;
which things were afterward written for our instruction, upon whom the ends of
the world are come, that we thorough Faith and patience might inherit the
promises; Scriptures.
which writings are commonly known by the name of the Bible or holy
scriptures, concerning which I thus believe (namely) that they were inspired by
God, and left as a rule of faith and manners so to continue to the worlds end,
and are able to make the man of God, perfect to every good word and work. As
also, that we who live under the Gospel, ought still to have respect unto that
part of Scripture which is called the old Testament. My reasons for it are
these: 1. That exhortation of Christ, John 5.39. Search the Scriptures, Reasons
why the old Testament should be still respected.
(which is meant of the old Testament, for then they had no other) for in them
ye think (that is you your selves are persuaded as well as the truth is) that
ye have eternal life, that is, the way to eternal life, which is Christ
himself declared to you, as appears to be the meaning by the following
words; and they are they which testify of me. Who dare reject that word which
gives testimony to Christ? if you say that the ceremonial law did so, I
answer, that the observation of it now, would be a witnessing against Christ,
as if he were not already come in the flesh but expected hereafter, and
therefore it is abolished. 2. The identity or samenesse of the old and new
Testament is another reason why I contend for having respect to it. The old and
new Testament do both treat of the same subject, namely Christ, and the way
of salvation by Faith in him, though with some difference of circumstance etc.
It is said that unto Christ did all the prophets bear witness. 3. The
frequent quotations which are in the new Testament out ot the old, as if Christ
himself and his Apostles had but commented upon the old Testament, and would
not urge things upon the belief of those to whom they Preached without good
warrant and testimony from Moses and the Prophets. 4. I am induced to have
respect to the old Testament from this undeniable principle, namely, that as it
is dangerous to plant what God has not planted, so much more dangerous to
pluck up what God has planted, till he begin to do it with his own right
hand. Now we do (...) estranging them to the world, affecting them to, and
enflaming them for God. 2. Touching the duties of men toward God, The duties
of men toward God.
I thus believe, viz. That all sorts of men are bound to love, fear, serve,
and trust in him with all their hearts and souls, by virtue of their being
received from him, in conjunction with all other mercyes, as also for the
continued preservation (which is equivalent to a continual creation) of their
beings and wel-beings. But that there is a double tie upon believers to give up
their whole selves, souls and bodies unto God. For they are least of all their
own, being Gods, not only by creation and forfeiture (as all wicked men are)
but by redemption also, he having bought them with a price. The manner in which
they are to serve God for the external part of it, I conceive to be in the way
of his ordinances, viz by praying, reading, Singing of Psalms, what it is.
hearing, meditating, singing of Psalms (which is meditating and praising of
God with the voice lifted up for the expressing and provoking of greater
cheerfulness, and affording further leisure by due pausing and treatable
delivery for divine consideration) not to omit attendance upon God in the
sacraments of baptism and the Lords supper. Right manner of performing duties,
what it is.
As for the manner of performing these duties (in which the life and spirit of
religion does consist) they are to be done in Faith from Gospel motives, to
spiritual ends, by way of testifying our thankfulness and the rule of them
is to be the word of God. I might add that God is to be served in the exercise
of all graces, as Faith, humility, patience, self-denial, zeal, Expectations
of men from God. Of all men.
etc. which are the fruits of the spirit of God within us. Lastly, I shall
conclude with my persuasions touching what men are to expect from God: 1. In
general, 2. In special. In the general, all men are to look for a summons
by death to a particular appearance and account, for the resurrection of their
bodies after they have lain awhile in the grave, for a citall of soul and
body to appear before God at the day of the great Assize to give an account of
the deeds done in their bodies. These things are to be expected in common both
of good and bad. Of wicked men.
But to descend to particulars: As for men continuing in unbelief and
impenitency, I know nothing belongs to them but a certain dreadful
expectation of fury and vengeance, to be poured out upon all the adversaries,
and that having compassed themselves with sparks they should have this at
length at Gods hand, namely, to lie down in sorrow, and that their souls,
being at the great day reunited to their bodies, should return to hell, whence
they came, the Sentence of eternal condemnation being irrecoverably past upon
them. Depart ye cursed, etc. Of good men in respect of the present life, and
of that which is to come.
But as for Believers, they have something to expect from God here, and
something hereafter. Here they expect some things for themselves and other
things for the Church; for themselves, the keeping of them by the power of God
to salvation, the peace of God to guard their hearts. For the Church, The
presence of Christ with it by his spirit to the worlds end, the breaking of the
Serpents head, and putting down of the man of sin, and all other enemies of
Christ which shall be made his footstool. For hereafter, they expect that
their souls being joined to their bodies which shall be made conformable to
the glorious body of Christ, shall re-enter into their mansions of glory being
an entire glorified essence (whereas but a part of them was before in glory)
having heard their judge, who is also their redeemer and surety, thus pronounce
concerning them, Well done good and faithful servants, enter into your Masters
Joy.

FINIS.

