depiction of the rosary, with St Benedict and St Dominic The glorious St.
BENNET and his Disciples, with immortal fruit and profit, practiced and
promulgated the Blessed Virgins Psalter: The pious St. DOMINICK, revived it is
decaij'd use, and is the Institutor of the Blessed Virgins Rosary as it is now
in practice.
A. Voet fe


Jesus, Maria, Joseph, OR, THE DEVOUT PILGRIM* OF THE EVER BLESSED VIRGIN MARY,
IN HIS Holy Exercises, Affections, and Elevations. Upon the sacred Mysteries of
JESUS, MARIA, JOSEPH.


Published for the benefit of the pious Rosarists, by A. C. and T. V. Religious
Monks of the holy Order of S. BENNET.

Printed at Amsterdam, Anno D. 1657.

(...) sacred Majesty, this small Book (which we have compiled for the comfort
of your devout children) as a public and permanent Testimony and Profession
of our being entirely vowed and addicted to your sons, and your honor and
service; And we are thereto induced by much more forcible reasons, than such as
are wont to move men to make an Oblation of their works, to the worthy's of
this world: For first, you (O Glorious Virgin!) are the greatest Princess of
the whole universs, and can therefore repay our endeavors with more real
rewards than the richest earthly Monarch can confer upon his Clients. Moreover,
you are meek, mild, and merciful, and therefore will not disdaign the meanest
offerings of your devoted and well meaning Vassalls: Furthermore, The
particular and personal Favors we have already received, by your powerful
patronage, prayers, and protection; ( Favors, which can be by no one denied
without a spice of infidelity, nor disguised without doing you an apparent
injury, nor suppressed without our express ingratitude) give us a certain kind
of hopeful confidence, that (according to your wonted goodness and clemency)
you will not now reject us, coming before you with these presents, (such as
they are,) in our hands; who have so piously heretofore helped and relieved us,
in our most urgent and pressing necessities: And finally, This Book it self (O
Sovereign Queen Mother!) stands in need of your special favor, to render it
fruitful to its Readers; For whosoever will make right use thereof, must have
simple and Dove-like eyes, aiming only at Heaven; single and disinteressed
Hearts, pretending nothing but Piety; humble and obedient spirits, captivated
to Faith's mysteries; docible, diligent, and devout souls, willing to learn how
they may raise their thoughts to celestial affections, whilst their tongues
run over their common prayers and supplications; briefly, earnest and ardent
desires to imitate your Sons, and your virtues, and to express in their lives,
manners, and conversations, what they resent and resolve in their meditations:
All which necessary capacities, you (O singularly perfect and powerful
Virgin!) can principally obtain for them; and which we beseech you, (O most
compassionate Mother!) to procure for us, and for all the devout children of
your sacred Rosary; that so our daily Prayers may not be without fervent
affections, nor our affections without efficacious works, nor our works without
the sweet fruits of Eternal life.

We pretend not here (O most worthy Mother of the Word Eternal and Incarnate!)
to make a Panegyric of your praises, which were a design far above our forces;
and we willingly acknowledge, that our wings are too weak to raise us up to
this Sphere of wonders; that our dim eyes want strength to support the radiant
splendour of this divin Sun; that we should lose our selv's in this large Ocean
of your Mervails; and finally, that by our over-near approaching to so great a
Majesty, we should infallibly be oppressed by your Glory: But should we undertake
so impossible a task, and adventure upon so rash an enterprise; have we not
summed up all the advantages of your glory, by styling you Gods worthy Mother?
Surely to be Mother of the Sovereign Deity, is a Supreme Dignity, (since it is
the basis, groundwork and foundation of all imaginable height, holiness, and
happiness, that can befall a creature) but yet it is incomparably more
perfection to deserve this dignity, than to possess it; so that had you, (O
most holy Virgin Mother!) deserved it without having it, you had remained much
greater, than by having it without deserving it: For your merit was not so
strictly tied to your Maternity, nor your Dignity to your desert, as that they
might not have separatedly subsisted; since the Divin Majesty might have made
choice of some other less perfect Woman than your self, for his Mother; as also
he could have conferred on you this plenitude of Grace, whereby you acquired
your worth without obliging himself to make you h^s Mother: whence it most
evidently follows, that deserving to become Gods Mother, though you had not
been so, is to you a greater honor and dignity, than it had been to another to
be so, without having deserved it: And though the greatest Gratification, which
God can bestow upon a simple creature, is to make it his Mother, yet this
singly considered, is only an Act of pure Gratification; whereas your Sanctity
(O Sacred Virgin!) had it not been joined to your Maternity, would nevertheless
have raised you to that prime place you now possess in your Creators favor,
and rendered you worthy of that inexplicable glory, you shall there enjoy in
heaven above all other Creatures for all future Eternity. Wherefore, if to
style you Gods Mother, is to say, you can be no higher in dignity, without
being God himself; surely to entitle you Gods worthy Mother, is to say, you are
by your merit, above all that is not the Divin Majesty; since it is to avouch,
That the desert of your Person agrees with the greatness of your Prerogative;
and that the greatness of your merit, corresponds to the glory of your
Maternity; which is so eminent a Dignity, that the Almighty by his absolute
power, can exalt no purely created being to any higher pitch of perfection: A
Dignity, which is the origin, the measure, and the abridgment of all your other
numberless excellencies, privileges, and greatnesses: A Dignity, to which they
all yield homage as subjects to the Sovereign, on which they all depend as
light on the Sun; from which they are all derived as rivulets from the
Fountain; A Dignity, which (except only Gods Sovereign Divinity, and our
Redeemers Sacred Humanity) is the highest subject, the holiest object, the
noblest entertainment of Men's and Angels contemplation: Finally, A Dignity,
which we may ravishtly admire, but can never hope to explicate.

And what mervail is it, (O Mother of God!) if we (Alas! Weak-spirited, and
short-sighted wretches!) falter in our expressions; since the most fluent,
learned, eloquent tongues and pens trembled to treat of this your divin and
incomprehensible Title?

The great Bishop S. Gregory of Neo-Cesaria [Serm. de Annunciatione] that
famous worker of Miracles and wonders, can find no words to unfold the Infinite
excellencies which are included in these three Syllables, Gods Mother; here,
his wit, his language, his learning fail him, when he is to fall upon this
unexplicable subject.

The worthy and wise Prelat of Constance Saint Epiphanius [Serm. de Deipara]
professes himself unfortunate for presuming to adventure upon so impossible an
employment, as is the explication of your perfections; the deep sense whereof
so seized all the faculties of his Soul with fear and astonishment, that his
heart became (as it were) dried up in its dreadful apprehension.

S. Bernard [Serm. 4. de Assump.] though he was brought up (if we may say it)
in your blessed bosom and suckled at your sacred breasts, yet ingenuously
protests, that nothing more amazes, terrifies, and troubles him, than to treat
of your greatnesses and glories, because they are unspeakable, unexplicable,
incomprehensible.

Wherefore with these holy Saints, we may well confess our incapacities to
celebrate your praises (O great and glorious Mother of God!) and so casting our
selv's on the ground, before the Throne of your Greatnesses; we admiringly
(with faithful Moses) gaze upon the bush afar off, burning in the flames of
the Divinity, without being diminished and reduced into ashes; we extasiedly
reverence, (in the very bottom of our hearts and Souls, and with a chaste and
awful silence,) Gods Royal Sanctuary, replenished with all sorts of
celestial prodigies.

We proclaym aloud with S. Gregory Neocesariensis, [Serm. 2. de Annunc.] that
the sense of this only word, Gods Mother, exceeds all other Encomiums, which
Men and Angels can confer upon you.

We willingly profess with S. Bernardinus, [Tom. 3. Sermon. 1. de Nom. Virg.]
that since our ignorance permits us not to speak properly, we must forcedly
have recourse to proportions; And as when we discourse of the Divinity, (whose
simple nature cannot be conceav'd by our shallow imaginations,) we invest him
with all the perfections which can be collected from his various creatures,
adding that he yet infinitely excells whatsoever we have said of him: So when we
speak of you (most sacred Mother of God!) and have rallied together all the
dispersed rarities, ornaments, and excellencies, wherewith this spacious and
specious world can furnish our tongues, Pens, and fancies, we justly conclude,
that you not only possess them all, but incomparably out-passe them.

We further assert, (being supported by S. John Damascens [orat. 1. de Nativit.
B. M.] and S. Ildephonsu's [lib. de Virgin: and parturitione B. V.] authority)
that who so desires to shadow forth that sublime degree of honor and dignity,
to which you, (O Glorious Virgin!) are elevated by becoming Gods Mother in his
temporal generation within your bowels; can propose to himself no less or
lower Idea; than the divin words eternal generation in his Fathers bosom: For
as Gods Son is eternally emanated from the Fathers fruitful understanding,
receaving an entire communication of himself without any alteration or division
of his substance; so he is temporally born of you his blessed Mother, without
the least blemish, corruption, or violation of your Virginal integrity.

Finally, if we may be permitted to soar yet higher upon the wings of our
contemplation (presuming on the Angelilicall Doctors assistance) [1. p. q. 25.
ar. 6. ad 4.] we clearly perceive through the curtain of this inaccessible
Splendour, That you (O highest and holiest of all creatures!) by receiving the
honor of being Gods Mother, are united to a Term of Infinite perfection,
whereby you are (in a certain manner) elevated to a divin order; and by a most
necessary and undeniable consequence, you appear (in some sort) to enter into
the possession of an Infinite perfection. O Maternity! O Dignity! O sublimity!
what eyes (but those of your divin Son humaniz'd) can support the piercing
luster of this pure and perfect object?

Having thus followed you (O singularly blessed Virgin Mother!) with our
borrowed Speculations to the Non plus ultra of all created height and
perfection; and yet finding our affections desirous to feed themselv's somewhat
longer in this fair and delicious field of your praises: We crave your leave to
descend to such Figurative and Enigmaticall expressions, as your faithfully
devoted Doctors have found out to Paraphrase upon your unparalleld Excellencies.

We therefore exclaim with the Blessed Archbishop Proclus (in his admirable
Oration had upon our Saviors Birthday in the Council of Ephesus:) You (O
Mother of God!) are the pure Treasury, the perfect Ornament, the prime honor
of Virginity: you are the spiritual Paradise of the second Adam; the delicate
Cabinet of that divin Marriage, which was made between the two Natures; the
great Hall wherein was celebrated the worlds general Reconciliation: you are
the Nuptial bed of the Eternal Word; the bright Clowd, carrying him who has
the Cherubins for his chariot; the Fleece of Wool filled with the sweet dew of
Heaven, whereof was made that admirable robe of our Royal Shepherd, in which
he vouchsafed to seek after his lost sheep: you are the Maid and the Mother,
the humble Virgin, and the high Heaven both together: you are the sacred Bridge,
whereby God himself descended to the Earth: you are that piece of cloth, of
which was composed the glorious garment of Hypostaticall union; where the
worker was the Holy Ghost, the Hand the Virtue of the most high, the wool the
old spoils of Adam, the woof your own immaculate Flesh, and the shittle Gods
incomprehensible goodness which freely gave us the ineffable person of the Word
Incarnate.

We continue our glad exclamations with the glorious Martyr Methodius (orat. in
hypopante) you (O most Amiable, and Admirable Mother of God!) are the Container
of the Incomprehensible; the Root of the worlds first, best, and most
beautifall Flower; the Mother of him who made all things, the Nurse of him who
provides nourishment for the whole universe; the Bosom of him who infolds all
being within his Breast; the unspotted Robe of him, who is clothed with light
as with a garment: you (O sacred Virgin!) are the Sallie-port, through which
God penetrated into the world; you are the Pavilion of the Holy Ghost; and you
are the Furnace into which the Almighty has particularly darted (as it were)
the most fervent Sunbeams of his dearest love and affection.

We cheerfully salute you (O incomparable Virgin Mother!) with S. Andrew of
Jerusalem (Sermon. de Annunciat) All hail, holy Temple of the Holy of Holyes,
triumphant Throne of incorruptible life, blessed Chariot of the bright-shining
Sun: All Hayl, fruitful Earth, alone proper, and only prepared to bring forth
the Bread-corn by which we are all sustained and nourished; happy leaven, which
has given relish to Adam's whole Race, and seasoned the Past whereof the true
life-giving and soul-saving Bread was composed; Ark of honor in which God
himself was pleased to repose, and where very glory it self, became sanctified;
Golden Pitcher, containing him who provides sweet Manna from heaven, and
produces Honey from the rock to satisfy the appetites of his hungry people:
Spiritual Mirror of sacred Contemplation, by whom the Prophets (inspired from
Heaven) prefigur'd Gods descent to the earth: you (O most lovely Lady Mother!)
are the incomprehensible secret of the divin Economy; The admirable house of
Gods humiliation, through whose door he descended to dwell amongst us; The
living Book, wherein the Fathers Eternal Word was written by the Pen of the
Holy Ghost; The authentical Instrument of that happy agreement made between
God and Man; The Imperial chariot, laden with millions of spoils, led by you
in triumph, and by you presented to the divin Majesty; The Mountain of Sion,
where our Sovereign Lord takes his pleasure, and recreation; The Pillar of
Light, not now conducting a captive people through the desert by a perishable
glimmering, but illuminating the true Israelites, and leading them to their
promised land of Conquest: you (O the most accomplished of all Creatures!) are
pleasing and comely as Jerusalem; and the aromaticall odours issuing from your
garments, outvie all the delights of Mount Libanus: you are the sacred Pix of
celestial parfumes, whose sweet exhalations shall never be exhausted; you are
the holy Oil, the unextinguishable Lamp, the unfading Flower, the divinly woven
Purple, the Royal vestment, the Imperial Diadem, the Throne of the Divinity,
the Gate of Paradise, the Queen of the Universe, the Cabinet of Life, the
Fountain ever-flowing with Celestial Illustrations.

More words are wanting to us (O Mother, worthy of all praises!) for the
further expression of our Conceptions; and our Conceptions are too weak and
languishing to second the ardours of our Affections; and yet our Affections
encourage us to keep on in this Carriere of your Commendations, and to salute
You afresh with Your faithful servant S. Epiphanius (Orat. de Deipara) All
Hail, the honor of virtues, the divin Lanthorn, encompassing that Crystal
Lamp, whose light out-shines the Sun in in its midday splendor; The mystical
Ark of glory; The undraynable source of sweetness; The spiritual Sea, whence
the worlds richest Pearl was extracted; The radiant sphere, enclosing Him
within your sacred folds, whom the Heavens cannot contain within their vast
circumference, The Celestial Throne of God more glistring than that of the
glorious Cherubins; The pure Temple, Tabernacle, and Seat of the Divinity.

And with Sophronius (Sermon. de Assump) You (O Mother of God!) are the
well-fenc'd Orchard, the fruitful Border, the fair and delicious Garden of
sweet Flowers, enbalming the earth and air with their odoriferous fragrancie,
yet shut up and s cured from any enemies entrance and irruption, you are the
holy Fountain, sealed with the signet of the most sacred Trinity, from whence
the happy waters of life inflow upon the whole Univers; you are the happy City
of God, whereof such glorious things are every where song and spoken.

And here (O great and glorious Virgin Mother!) amidst our admirations of your
miraculous privileges, prerogatives, and perfections: We cannot choose, with
S. Peter Chrysologus (Sermon. de Annunciat.) but Compassionate such poor spirited
Christians, who pretending to any true knowledge of your Sons greatness, find no
motives to contemplate your glories: O their Ignorance! Stupidity! Infidelity!
For what thought can frame a right conception concerning any one Mystery of his
sacred Incarnation, and yet separate you (dear Mother) from him your divin Son!
The Heavens (says he) are terrified, the Angels tremble, all creatures stand
astonished, whole Nature is amazed at the birth of this great-little-man-God
into the world; whilst you (O blessed Virgin Mother!) remain undaunted, and not
only lodge him in your bosom, receive him into your embraces, refresh him with
your breast-milk; but moreover with an unparalleld Confidence, you make him pay
for his entertainment, asking no less a reward for his nine months lodging,
than the grant of a general and universal Peace to the world, Glory for the
heavenly Inhabitants, Grace for Earthly Criminalls, Life for the dead, a strict
league between the CHURCH Militant, and Triumphant, and a perpetual Alliance
of his divin Person with our human nature.

But now, being at an absolute loss, and not knowing what more can be added to
these Epithetes of your Excellencies, greatnesses, and glories; we again beg
your l^cence (O most Blessed Virgin Mother!) to breath out what remains in mere
raptures and astonishments: Crying out to you with the great Patriarch of
Antioch S. Ignatius (epist. ad Joan.) O celestial Prodigy! O sacred spectacle!

With S. Chrysostom (Sermon. de B. V.) O Miracle! O Miracle of Miracles!

With S. Augustine (Sermon. 11. de Temp.) O Miracles! O Prodigies! The Laws of
Nature are changed, God becomes Man; you (O sacred Virgin!) remaining a maid,
are made a Mother; you are a Mother, but without corruption; you are a Virgin,
but you have a child; you continue entire, and yet, you become fruitful! O
Miracles! O Prodigies!

With S. John Damascen (orat. 1. de Not. B. V.) O Abysmus of Miracles! you (O
Virgin Mother!) are as much elevated above the Seraphins, as your Son is
humbled below the Angels.

With S. Epiphanius (orat. de Sancta Deipara) O extraordinary Prodigy in
Heaven! A woman enfolding God in her bosom! O new created Throne of Cherubins,
containing the Son of a woman, who is the Father of his Mother! O precious
nuptial bed; prepared in your sacred womb for the Celestial Bridegroom, who
is together your own Son, and the truly and only Son of God.

With S. Anselme (lib. de excellentia Virginis) Inviting all faithful
Christians, to behold, contemplate, admire the height of honor to which the
Eternal Fathers affection has raised you, (O Royal Virgin Mother!) He had
but one only Son every way equal to himself, and of his own substance; and he
condescended to have him in common with you! O his incomprehensible dignation!
O your incomparable dignity!

And finally, with your S. Bernard (Hom. 4. super Missus est) solum datum est
nosse, cui solum datum est experiri: your own Greatnesses (O glorious Virgin!)
are only known to your own self, who only had the happiness to experience them:
which perchance may be the proper meaning of that profound sentence; The virtue
of the most high shall overshaddow you; whereby the celestial Paranimph would
seem to intimate, That as you had the honor to be directly exposed to the
beams of that divin Sun, which by an unheard of Intimacy and friendship,
fostered you under the immediate shadow of his own splendour; So you had also
the riches of your own rare excellencies, prerogatives, and perfections
revealed unto you: But besides your self (O Blessed Mother!) who were thus
prodigiously admitted to be an Isntrumental Partner with the most Sacred
Trinity in this secret Mystery? It Is in vain to conceive there can be found out
any other, capable to unfold or comprehend them.

Wherefore we humbly let fall our weak hand and wearied wings, and convincedly
confess your miraculous greatnesses (O incomprehensible Mother of God!) to be
unexplicable, incomprehensible, inaccessible to all created imagination; the
glory whereof must necessarily be referred by us, and all your devout honorers
and admirers, to the Eternal Father, who has created such a Daughter; to the
Son, who has chosen such a Mother; to the Holy Ghost, who has thus enriched,
adorned, and beautified his Spouse, his Temple, his Tabernacle; to the most
sacred Trinity, who best understands the sublime height of his own most holy
handy work.

And now (O worthy Mother of God!) since we have hitherto presented you with
the fervent Affections which your faithful servants have put into our hearts
and mouths, (as well knowing that our own faint inventions could furnish us
with none more pithy, or to more pleasing;) permit us also to presume upon your
pious Doctor S. Ildefonse (de Virginitate Mariae cap. 1.) for this our
concluding Protestation.

That the height of all our ambitious desires is, To praise you as much as you
deserve to be praised, To love you as much as it is possible to love you; and to
render you as much service as your self can desire from such caitif creatures
as we are.

Yes (O Sacred Queen Mother!) had we hearts larger than the Empyreall heaven,
we would most willingly employ their whole extent in loving you: Had we the
Crowns, Kingdoms, Riches of all earthly Monarchs and Princes, and as many lives
as the Seas have sands, we would most cheerfully leave all, lose all, forfeit
all, for the defense of your honor, for the procuring of your affection, for
the promoting of your service: Finally, had either of us as much collected
Capacity as all creatures have dispersedly, it would come far short of our
unlimited desires and affections, which are to Love, Honor, and Serve you,
perfectly, entirely, eternally.

Receive our Hearts (O Sovereign Queen of all Hearts!) replenished with these
our pious intentions and protestations, together with this small Mite, which we
here again most humbly offer up to your sacred Majesty, as a votive Table of
the now promised Homage, we will ever hereafter be performing; to the end that
all such as shall make use of these ensuing Devotions, may assuredly know, that
in the solemn tender of this small pledge, we jointly intend to include an
absolute Dedication of the whole remainder of our lives and labors to your Love
and service; and that we are content every Line, Syllable, Letter, and Title of
this Treatise, shall rise as so many accusing witnesses to call for just
revenge upon us; and remain as so many marks to brand us with eternal infamy,
if we at any time hereafter maliciously, ungratefully, disloyally forfeit these
our maturely made Resolutions of being your faithful servants: And finally,
that we hereby avouch in the face of Heaven and Earth, to esteem nothing in
this world, (after the inestimable benefits reaped by the precious Death of
your divin Son our dear Redeemer CHRIST JESUS) comparable to the honor we have
in being,

Most worthy Mother of GOD! The meanest of your Chaplains at the Head-Altar of
your Holy Rosary, A. C. and T. V.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE, OUR Noble Patron, and most worthy Prefect of this
Sacred Confraternity of the ROSARY.
RIght Honorable,
Though this little Book, which carries in its Front, the lovely Names of
JESUS, MARIA, JOSEPH, can want no foreign recommendation, whereby to invite
all faithful Christians, and especially the devout Rosarists to receive and
embrace it, and that the excellency, sublimitie, and utilitie of the subject,
is to it self, a sufficient safeguard, and protection.

Yet surely could this Book have been conveniently dedicated to any other than
the Queen of Heaven (whose honor is its chief aim and intention) it must
necessarily have had recourse unto your self under whose wings it received its
birth, growth, and accomplishment: In acknowledgment whereof, and the many
signal favors, you have charitably conferred upon us, and upon this holy
Confraternity of the sacred Rosary, we conceived our selv's bound to give this
public testimony of our sincere gratitude and withal to declare our earnest
desire of contributing something toward your own spiritual advancement and
perfection.

For notwithstanding that your Piety to God, and devotion to the sacred
Virgin Mother, and her glorious Bridegroom Saint Joseph, are so deeply settled
in your heart, as it may seem superfluous to lend you any assistance in order
to their further increase or confirmation: yet the perusal of this present
Treatise, (which so far excells all others of this nature, in the solidity of
the delivered doctrine, in the explication of the most important points, and in
the clear, facil, and familiar insinuation of this sort of Piety; that we need
not blush to yield to their Judgment, who esteem it the chief of them which
have yet seen light in our mother language,) must needs prove both pleasing and
profitable unto you; as being a perfect Mirror of what you either are already,
or zealously wish to be: where you will find, both Fuel to foment your
fervor, and Fire to add to it; where you will read the Precepts of Perfection
reduced into Practices, and the Doctrine of Devotion drawn into forms of Duty;
Briefly where you may learn a compendious way to extract the fruits of your
Predestination to glory, to taste the sweetness of heavenly affections during
this your earthly Pilgrimage, and to procure your Souls repose here, and its
salvation hereafter, which is the desired end and Crown of yours, and all pious
Christians endeavors.

And all these happinesses, (with more, if more can be imagined) are obtained
by means of the sacred Rosary, whereby these influences of celestial blessings
slide efficaciously into faithful hearts from her holy hands, who is appointed
by her all-powerfull Son to be the charitable Dispensatrix of his divin
treasures, and the Common Mother of all the pious Christians, which are
regenerated in Baptism, by his most precious Blood and Passion.

For as all they, who are predestined to glory, are properly Gods Children;
since they have the self same heavenly Father by Grace and Adoption, which the
Son of God has by Birth and Nature (according to that expression of S. John,
Behold how great the Fathers goodness is toward us; for that we are called and
are the Sons of God:) And as the Eternal Father in begetting his Co-eternall
Son, gives part of the honor of this Divin Filiation to such as he foresees
conformable to his Sons Image; so that they may truly call him their Father,
who is the Father of Gods Son; as himsef expressly declares by teaching us to
say, Our Father which art in heaven:

So the Son in his human generation (given him by a Mother upon earth) is
pleased to make his friends partakers with himself in the title of his
Temporal Filiation, by giving them the same Mother, whom he chose for himself;
whereby they become Brethren to Gods Son, both on the Fathers side who adopts
them, and on the, Mothers side, who by her own Sons will and command
acknowledges them for her Children: Behold your Mother, said our Savior, to
all his friends and Brethren, represented in Saint John's person; Behold your
Children, said he to the sacred Virgin, showing her Saint John who represented
all the faithful: Words, appointing her our Mother, and adopting us her Sons:
Words, recommending to Her a Maternall care and affection toward us, and to us
a filial duty and reverence toward Her.

Nor are we only Children of this blessed Mother, as being the adopted Brethren
of her divin Son, but moreover as being the Children of her Child, by whom we
are regenerated to a spiritual life.

Thus, thus, She is also our Mother, since she is Mother to him, by whose death
we are all re-born to the Life of Grace; Thus we are truly holy Mary's
Children, since we are the fruits of the Blessed fruit of her womb JESUS. She
indeed brought forth, but One only Son, but by that One, She begot All them who
are by him regenerated; and whosoever derive from Jesus their spiritual life,
are surely debtors to Mary, who gave Him his Nativity.

Finally, if the dear Blood of CHRIST JESUS, is the divin seed of our
Baptismall regeneration; which precious Blood issued first out of this Mothers
veins: who sees not that our best birth and being, is (in some manner) borrowed
from Blessed Mary, and has from her Blood its beginning and Origin.

Where (by the way) this is a circumstance well worth all pious Christians
consideration, That our Redeemer then gave us Mary for our Mother in Saint
John's person, when he powered forth his Blood, (the blessed seed of our
regeneration) on the Cross for us: To the end, that at the same time in which
he gave us this seed of our new life, we should acknowledge Her for our Mother,
from whom this life-giving seed was derived unto us; and that the name and
title of Mary's being our Mother, was imposed upon Her, at the very instant,
when the Blood from Her derived, constituted us her Children.

Now, if the sacred Virgin (as has been plainly deduced and proved) is the
common Parent of all Christians, both in quality of their being her Sons
Brethren, adopted and chosen by his Father; and also in quality of their being
her Sons children, regenerated and resuscitated by his Death: How much more
singularly is she their Mother, who make it their profession to render unto her
a particular honor and homage, and to receive her for their special
Protectrice and Patroness. If she is (in the Churches Dialect,) the Mother of
love and Charity, and consequently cannot but bear a general affection toward
all mankind: How much more tenderly does she affect such faithful and dutiful
children, as totally addict and dedicate themselves to her love and service?

Amongst which, the pious Rosarists, (whereof your self, Honorable Patron, and
most worthy Prefect is a prime Scion,) may without presumption arrogate to
themselves this glorious prerogative of being the Joseph's and Benjamins of her
maternall affections, (not in quality of youngest Children, since their origin
is very ancient, as will be hereafter declared; But) as most particularly
cherished by this compassionate mother, or at least most highly enriched with
her Royal favors and benefitts (as will also hereafter be exemplifi'd.)

All Flowers Spring and flourish by the Suns influence; yet the Sun is
singularly styled the Parent of the Heliotrope; as borrowing from his glorious
beams the gold-lustre of its leaves; from his course the motion of its body,
and from his name its denomination of Sunflower: So the Sacred Virgin has
undoubtedly (by the influence of her blessings and prayers) given birth to all
Religious orders, Societies, and Confraternities, (which Saint Hierom calls the
Church-flowers,) but surely amongst all these fair Flowers (which with their
variety beautify and enrich her garden) the Confraternity of the sacred Rosary,
may fitly be said to be the Heliotrope of this Sun, the Paragon of this Garden,
the Darling and Minion of this Mother; since from Her it derives its
Denomination, draws its virtue, receives its Beauty and ornament.

Happy Rosarists! who (by the special grace and favor of Christ Jesus your
Savior) can say to God, you are my Father! and to the Son of God, you are my
Brother! and to the Daughter of the Eternal Father, to the Mother of the Son
of God, to the Spouse of the Holy Ghost, to the Queen of Men and Angels, to
the Empress of Heaven and Earth, you are my Mother, by my own peculiar choice
and election.

Happy you! if acknowledging the honors and advantages which accrue to you
from such a Filiation; you correspond to the height of so divin an alliance, by
your holy life and conversation.

Happy you! if seriously considering of what a worthy Mother you are Children;
you effectually endeavor to be such as she deserves, such as she demands, such
as she desires.!

Which that you all, (and your Noble self in particular,) may truly be; shall
be the daily prayer (at the head-Altar of your holy Mother of power) of

RIGHT HONORABLE, Your most affectionate Bedes-men, and servants, A. C. and T.
V.

A MARIAN CALENDAR, OR, A Catalogue of some few, amongst the multitude of
glorious Saints of S. Bennets Order, who have been singularly devoted to the
sacred Virgin Mary.
Together with the several Festivities of our Blessed Lady, according to the
monthly days upon which they are celebrated.
S. Augustine lib. 10. de Civitate Dei. c. 4. We dedicate and consecrate the
memory of Gods benefits, to certain days, feasts, and solemnities, least by
length of time ungrateful forgetfulness should creep in.


S. John Chrysostom. Tom. 5. Sermon. 1o. de Martyr. No Christian is so ignorant,
as not to know that the glories of the Saints are celebrated by Gods people;
both to the end, they may be duly honored, and we instructed by the examples
of their virtues.


JANUARY.
1. St. ODILO, Abbot of Cluny, a most faithful servant of the sacred
Virgin Mother, even from his tender years, till his last gasp. In his youth he
was seized on by a languishing disease, which deprived him of the use of his
limbs; yet making a hard shift to creep along into the holy Church dedicated to
the sacred Virgins honor, he was there presently and prodigiously cured, in
the sight of many admiring spectators. Whereupon he made an Oblation of himself
unto her in these terms:

O most sacred Virgin, and Mother of the worlds Savior! from this day forward
I resolve to serve you, hoping to have you for my compassionate Mediatrix upon
all occasions: for after God, I prefer nothing before you; and therefore I
freely deliver up myself unto you, as your peculiar servant and Bondslave.

He dyed in the 87th. year of his age, and of Christ, 1048.

11. S. Egwinus, Bishop of Worcester in England who being of the Royal blood,
changed his purple for a poor Cowle, in Worcester Cloister, which he never left
off in his Episcopal dignity, to which he was forcedly called for his
excellent learning and Sanctity: He was evermore most zealous in the sacred
Virgins service, by whose express command he built and founded that famous
Abbey of Evesham, and dedicated it to her honor; which service of his, she
frequently acknowledged to be to her most grateful and acceptable.

He dyed in the year of our Redeemer. 712.

15. S. Maurus, Abbot of S. Maur's in France, the Disciple of our Glorious
Patriark S. Bennet, the most diligent Promotor of the sacred Virgin Mothers
honor, and the devout Propagator of her Psalter, according to the institute
and practice of his pious Father. He dyed in the year 583.

Item, S. Bonitus, Bishop of Auvergne in France, commonly called the sacred
Virgins Chaplain, for that he was seen to celebrate the holy Mass by her
command, and in her presence, in the Church of S. Michael: where there remains
even till this day, an evident mark of this miraculous apparition, imprinted
upon the main Pillar of the said Temple, against which the Saint leaned; where
also is reserved the admirable vestment, (of a color, Matter, Contexture,
Softness, and Lightness altogether celestial and prodigious) wherewith the
Queen of Heaven adorned her holy Chaplain: In the year 704.

22. The Feast of the Espousalls of the sacred Virgin Mary to S. Joseph,
instituted in France by Petrus Auratus a Dominican, who composed the Office of
this solemnity in the year 1546.

23. S. Ildefonse, Archbishop of Toledo in Spain, who for his singular
integrity of life, and for having happily undertaken the defense of the sacred
Virgins Virginity against the Helvidian heresy which opposed it; deserved to
be styled one of her Doctors and Chaplains, and to receive a most admirable
white vestment from her own holy hands, upon the Festival day of her
Expectation, which he instituted in her honor, in the year 660.

24. Upon this day, is celebrated a Commemoration of the Patronage and
Affection of the Sacred Virgin MARY, toward the whole Order of Saint BENNET,
Which she has been graciously pleased to testify from time to time, by most
rare and signal examples: and which, they gratefully acknowledging, renew the
Oblation, Dedication, and Recommendation of themselv's and their Order to her
pious and powerful protection.

FEBRUARY.
2. THe Purification of the sacred Virgin MARY, called by the Greek Church
Hipapante Domini, or the meeting of our Lord and his holy Mother, with the
Prophet Simeon, Anna, and others in the Temple of Jerusalem upon the fortieth
day after his happy birth into the World: where HE was presented to his
Eternal Father, and SHE was purified according to the Law of Moses, Levit.
12.6.

22. S. Peter Damian, (a noble man of Ravenna, afterward Monk, Abbot, and
Cardinal, Bishop of Ostia) was a most zealous Promotor of the sacred Virgins
honor, the Author of the Primer, commonly called, Our Ladies Office; the
Beginner of that pious custom of allotting Monday, to pray for the souls
departed, Friday to commemorate our Redeemers Passion, Saturday, to the sacred
Virgins praise; which custom the universal Church soon after approved,
received, and continues to this day. He dyed in the year 1072.

MARCH.
9. St. Francisca, a Noble Roman widow, was frequently and familiarly visited
by the sacred Virgin and amongst many other signal favors, was by her covered
with a golden veil in recompense of her fervent devotion. She dyed full of
Sanctity and miracles, in the year 1440.

12. S. Gregory the Great, Pope, Doctor of the Church, Apostle of England, etc.
His fervent devotion toward the Queen of Heaven, appears by that famous
Procession, wherein he carrying her sacred Image, obtained a cessation of the
raging pestilence, etc. vide infra page 144. No one (says he) can behold the
greatness of Gods Mother, but by beholding her Sons excellency.

21. S. Bennet, the great Abbot and glorious Patriarch of Monks in the Western
Church; was from his tender years a most faithful honorer of the sacred
Virgin Mother, by whose special assistance (says blessed Alanus de Rupe) he
became the Author and founder of so divin a Monastical institution: Nor is the
propagation of the Marian Psalter (proceeds the same Author) the least of S.
Bennets praises; which sort of piety, She was graciously pleased to approve, by
heaping many signal favors, not only upon her Bennet (as she was heard to
name him,) but upon his whole Order, in which she seems (as it were) to have
fixed her seat, showing herself upon all occasions to be its true Mother and
Protectrice. He dyed in the year 542.

22. Blessed Pope Gregory the ninth, the sacred Virgin-Mothers most faithful
and affectionate servant, ordered and commanded, That the solemn Anthem, Salve
Regina, should be publicly sung in the Church after the Canonical hours: As
also, That the Bells toling at certain set hours of the day, should admonish
all Christians wheresoever and howsoever employed of their duty and devotion
toward the Queen of heaven, by saluting her with the Ave Maria. He dyed in the
year 1241.

25. The Annunciation of the most Blessed Virgin Mother of God. A Feast of
great Solemnity and antiquity in the Church, (as appears by the Orations and
Homilies of the Primitive Fathers had upon this day;) in memory of that happy
Embassy brought down from heaven to holy MARY, by the Archangell Gabriel, in
which she was denounced and declared Mother of the Word Eternal, and
Incarnate. Luke 1.31.

27. S. Rupert, Bishop of Salisburg, a glorious Doctor, Champion, and Chaplain
of the sacred Virgin Mother, from whom he received the intelligence of holy
Scriptures, to whose honor he built and founded several famous Churches, to
whose Name he dedicated the yet flourishing Imperial Abbey, and whose praises
he propagated throughout Germany and the adjoining Kingdoms. He dyed in the
year, 623.

APRIL.
20. St. Fulbert, Bishop of Charters, a special devote of the sacred Virgin;
To whose honor he erected the famous Cathedral of Charters; In whose praise
he composed many pious Hymns and Prose, and who first ordained that
Commemoration; Sancta Maria succurre miseris, juva pusillanimes, etc. to be
daily used in the Lauds and Even song. He also first introduced the
celebration of the Blessed Virgins Nativity into France: And when in his las^
Agony he lay gasping for breath, and parched up with thirst, the blessed
Virgin Mother was pleased (O her wondrous Compassion toward her faithful
servants!) to appear to him, to refresh him, and to suckle him with her sacred
Breast-milk; whereof a drop falling upon his garment, is reverently kept
amongst the sacred Treasures of the Church of Charters, even till this day, as
a perpetual monument of this her signal favor and affection. He dyed in the
year 1028.

21. S. Anselm, Archbishop of Canterbury, another holy Doctor and Chaplain of
the sacred Virgin Mother, a most zealous defender of her Immaculate Conception,
and the first Introducer of that annual Feast of the Conception of our Lady,
into the Church. He dyed in the year, 1106.

29. S. Robert, the first Abbot of Cistertium, whom the Queen of Heaven
espoused to herself whilst he yet remained shut up in his Mothers womb, in
these words: My will is* that the child which thou (O Erengardes!) bear in
thy entralls, be betroathed unto me by this golden Ring* Which she afterward
confirmed (...) the born Infant, who after a long led holy life, was translated
to a happy immortality in the year 1098.

MAY.
13. AT Rome, The Dedication of the Church of Sancta Maria ad Martyrs, which
Pope Boniface the fourth (cleansing the ancient Temple Pantheon consecrated to
all the Gods) dedicated to the honor of the ever blessed Virgin Mother, and
all the holy Martyrs in the year 609.

16. S. Brandanus, an Abbot in Scotland, a most zealous servant of the sacred
Virgin, to whom he consecrating the labors sustained in his seven years
navigation, and laying upon the Altar (dedicated to her honor) a book
containing the whole course of his journey; was summoned by a voice from Heaven
to exchange this life for immortality, and having finished the celebration of a
solemn Mass upon the same Altar, he most happily expired after the year, 570.

19. S. Dunstanus. Archbishop of Canterbury, a great Favorite of the sacred
virgin, whom she piously cherished even in his Mothers womb, prodigiously cured
in his tender age, and frequently visited during the time of his Pontifical
dignity. He dyed in the year, 988.

27. S. Bid, a venerable Priest and most affectionate servant of the sacred
Virgin Mother, whose Psalter (according to the Institution of his glorious
Father S. Bennet) he most zealously preached, promulgated, and planted, not
only in his own native Country England, (where in the public places, of
Prayer, he caused the material Psalters to be hung up, to invite all
Passengers and Pilgrims to this sort of devotion: and which in Veneration of
his name are there ever since called Bedes, even to this day) but also (says
Alanus) in France and the neighboring Kingdoms. He dyed full of years,
sanctity, and learning, after the 731. year of Christ.

29. The Feast of the Miracles wrought by the Mother of Power; Celebrated in
memory of the many signal and prodigious wonders she has been graciously
pleased to work in several Monasteries of S. Bennets order.

JUNE.
18. THE Feast, or Commemoration of the Psalter of the sacred Virgin Mary;
instituted by the admirable Father and Patriarch of Monks S. Bennet to be
observed in his holy Order; and afterward propagated by his Disciples
throughout the whole world: whereof, Blessed Alanus de Rupe, (the great
Secretary of the glorious Virgin Mother, and another Restorer (after S.
Dominick) of this Marian Psalter) has these words, ( Apolog. part. 1. cap. 8.
and part 2. cap. 2. 4.) S. Bennet, the famous Patriarch of Monastical
Institution, introduced the use of the Marian Psalter (which he himself had
long before practiced) amongst his Religious Children; and this not so much by
any precept, as by the very use thereof passed to posterity as a most pious and
religious custom.

JULY.
2. THE Visitation of the Blessed Virgin Mary; in memory of her visiting S.
Elizabeth, after she had conceived the Son of God: at whose presence S. John
the Baptist leaped in the womb of his Mother Elizabeth, Luke 1.41. which Feast
was instituted by Pope Urban the sixth, in the year 1385. and promulgated by
his successor Boniface the ninth, in the year 1389. to implore the Blessed
Virgins assistance against the Schism which then miserably divided the Church.

S. Otho, Bishop of Bamberg, and Apostle of Pomerania, a most affectionate
servant of the sacred Virgin Mother, whose special assistance he always
implored and obtained, especially in the Conversion of Nations, and to whose
honor he erected that famous Cathedral of Weier: He left this life in the
year 1139.

14. S. Henry the first, Emperor, surnamed the Lame, (otherwise called the
second, for that he had a predecessor of the same name, who out of modesty and
humility refused the denomination of Emperor) a most devout Client of the
sacred Virgin Mother, to whose honor he founded that fair Cathedral of Spire,
as also that of Basil, and several others; and in whose imitation he kept
perpetual virginity together with his wife S. Cunegundis; whereby he became so
highly pleasing to the Virgin Queen of Heaven, that he was frequently admitted
to her familiarity: He was isntrumental to the Conversion of S. Stephen, King
of Hungary, and the whole Hungarian nation, and full of sanctity, and all sorts
of virtues: he yielded his Soul into the hands of his heavenly Bridegroom in
the year, 1024.

17. S. Leo the fourth, Pope, a singular honorer of the sacred Virgin Mother,
and promotour of her praises throughout the whole world. He instituted the
Octaves of her Assumption, and departed this life in the year 855.

19. Blessed Hermannus Contractus, so named from the Contraction and weakness
of almost all his members) a most dev^ut Monk of Augia (which is an Island in
Germany, not far distant from Constantia) and a most zealous servant of the
sacred Virgin Mother, by whose powerful prayers he obtained such inward gifts
of learning and wisdom; as abundantly recompensed the outward defects of
nature. He wrote much in her praises, and amongst the rest those most famous
Anthems, Salve Reginae, and Alma Redemptoris Matter. He dyed about the year
1052. till which time he produced his Chronicle of the worlds six Ages.

29. Blessed Vrbanus the second, Pope; a most holy and learned Man, and a most
zealous promoter of the sacred Virgins honor; whose office (composed by S.
Peter Damian) he confirmed, and commended to the world in the Council of
Clermont, in the year, 1096.

AUGUST.
5. THE Dedication of the Church of our Blessed Lady ad Nives, or at the Snow,
which miraculously covering a part of the Exquilin mountain near Rome, at this
time when the greatest heats use to parch the City; gave occasion to the
building of a famous Church to the sacred Virgin-Mothers honor (thereby to
perpetuate the memory of so signal a miracle) in this same place thus by her
self designed, in the year, 367.

15. The Assumption of the most sacred Mother of God; celebrated time out of
mind, with greatest solemnity, both by the Greek and Latin Church, in memory of
her being assumpted or taken up into heaven, both body and soul after her
dissolution.

S. Arnulphus, Bishop of Soissons in France; whose soul amidst the festival
joys of his dear Mothers Assumption, was by her visited, and called out of his
body to a blessed eternity in the year 1087.

20. S. Bernard, first Abbot of Claravall, the singularly beloved Minion,
Favorite, Child, and Chaplain of Gods holy Mother; whom she (as a stupendous
argument of her delicate affection) frequently fed with her virginal
breast-milk: familiarly resaluted with Salve Bernarde; and lovingly visited,
cured, and comforted in the time of his sickness and infirmity. He amongst all
the Fathers is most profuse in the sacred Virgins praises, in whose honor he
composed many most pious and pithy Treatises, amongst which is the Ave Maris
Stella, used in the vespers of all the Blessed Virgins Festivities. He dyed
full of admirable sanctity and learning, in the year 1153.

22. S. Bernardus Tolomaeus, Founder of the Order of S. Mary of Mount Olivet;
who being prodigiously cured of a grievous sickness and blindness by the
Blessed Virgins intercession; vowed himself to her perpetual service: and
forthwith ascending into the Pulpit, he divulged this divin miracle; and
deciphered the worlds vanity, and contempt with such eloquence and efficacy,
that he presently obtains many followers and disciples. In the year 1370. under
Pope Urban the Fifth.

SEPTEMBER.
5. S. BERTIN, Abbot of the Monastery called Sithin, and Founder of the famous
Abbey, now known by the name of S. Bertins at S. Omers in Artesia, a most
zealous Promotor of the sacred Virgins honor both by himself and his
succeeding disciples (especially by S. Joscio surnamed the Rosy.) He was
translated to immortality in the year 698.

8 The Nativity of the most Blessed Virgin Mary, Mother of God: celebrated both
by the Greek and Latin Church, in memory of her happy birth, by whom the holy
author of all life was born into the world, ever since the Council of Ephesus,
(which was held in the year 436. against the Nestorians, denying her title of
Deipara, or Gods Mother.)

22. S. Salaberga, Abbess of Laudune, whom the Blessed Virgin took into her
special care and protection, and frequently comforted with her presence and
visitation. She dyed about the year 614.

24. S. Gerardus Bishop and Martyr, the Apostle of Hungary, and Protomartyr of
Venice; a most fervent and faithful Honourer of the Virgin Mother, whose
sacred Name he never pronounced without a most affectionate show of reverence
and devotion; and who counseled King Stephen to make his whole Kingdom
tributary to the Queen of Heaven, styling her always, and saluting her under
the title, of Queen of Hungary. He was crowned with Martyrdom, in the year,
1047.

OCTOBER.
7. THE Commemoration of Holy Mary of Victory instituted by Pope Pius the
fifth, in memory of the signal Naval Victory gained by the sacred Virgins
assistance, this day over the Turks, in the year 1571.

Which solemnity, was afterward decreed (by Pope Gregory the thirteenth) to be
yearly celebrated upon the first Sunday of this Month, under the name and title
of the Feast of the Rosary, in the year 1573.

8. Blessed Beatrix, sister to the blessed Amadeus (a most chaste Spouse of
Christ, to whom she consecrated her virginity, under his holy Mothers Ensigns)
instituted at Toledo, an order entitled of the sacred Virgins Conception; which
was confirmed by Pope Innocent the eight in the year 1485. and having most
zealously propagated the holy Virgin-Mothers honor throughout all Spain, she
dyed full of merits and sanctity.

NOVEMBER.
16. S. Edmund, Archbishop of Canterbury, dedicated himself to the sacred
Virgins service from his tender age; before whose Statua he maturely and
deliberately making a vow of perpetual Chastity, placed a Ring upon the finger
of the Image, as a pledge of this his bethroathing, and as a perpetual argument
of his most chaste affection. He departed this life in the year 1246.

17. S. Gertrude, surnamed the Great, a noble Virgin of Germany, despising all
worldly pomp and vanity vowed her self to the service of Christ her Spouse,
and of his sacred Mother, who both of them most frequently and familiarly
conversed with her, and instructed her in the mysteries of Faith, in the manner
of prayer, and in the way of perfection; which she communicated (for the
inestimable benefit, and comfort of all devout souls) in her divin Books of
Insinuations. She dyed Abbess of Elpidia in the year 1311.

18. S. Odo, the first Abbot of Cluny, who was dedicated to Christ and his
sacred Mother by his Parents before his birth, (which was in the night of our
Saviors Nativity) ordained that the Reformation of his Order should be
celebrated by his successors, under the Name of the Blessed Virgin Mary. He
changed this life for a better, in the year 942.

19. S. Mechtild, the natural sister of the Great and Admirable S. Gertrude,
and Chantress of the famous Monastery of Elpidia (vulgarly named Helfte)
whereof her sister S. Gertrude was Abbess, a most dear darling of the
Virgin Mother, who was pleased to reveal many secret Mysteries unto her ( See
page 221. of the second Book following,) which she charitably left to
Posterity, in her Treatise of spiritual Grace and Revelation. She departed
this life full of M^racles, sanctity, and the Spirit of Prophecy after the year
1300.

21. The Presentation of the Blessed Virgin Mary in the Temple of Jerusalem;
where in her tender age she vowed herself to God both body and Soul. Which
Feast was anciently celebrated in the Greek Church, as appears by the Orations
and Homilies of the Grecian Fathers, related by Surius in his sixth Tome, and
introd^ced into the Latin Church by Nicholas, the French Abbot, in the year
1373. and afterward approved and generally received.

27, A Commemoration of such Saints, as have been singularly devoted and
addicted to promote the sacred Virgins honor and service; the great number
whereof appears by their monuments of piety left to posterity.

28. S. Gregory the third, Pope, a most meek, wise, and learned Prelate, and a
most zealous defender of the sacred Virgins honor and Images, against the then
raging heresy of the Iconoclasts. He was translated to a happyer life in the
year 741.

29. Saint Joscio, surnamed the Rosy; famous for his sincere devotion toward
Gods sacred Mother, and for her singular benevolence toward him, departed this
life at Saint Omers, in the Monastery of Saint Bertin, in the year 1163. upon
the Vigill of S. Andrew. At whose sacred departure happened this signal
Miracle. He used daily to recite Five Psalms, whereof the first letters in
Latin express the Name MARIA; which devotion so highly pleased the sacred
Virgin, that she vouchsafed to cause Five fresh and fragrant Roses to spring
out of the dead face of her servant Joscio: One out of his Mouth, Two out of
his Ears, and the other Two out of his Eyes, all stamped with five Golden
Letters MARIA; Which Miracle was manifested to all the multitude of Spectators
who flocked thither for seven days space, from the parts far and near to behold
it.

The Five Psalms are these, Magnificat. Luke 1. Ad Dominum. Psalm. 119.
Retribue. Psalm. 118. In convertendo. Psalm. 125. Ad te Levavi. Psalm. 122.


DECEMBER.
8. THE Conception of the glorious Virgin MARY Mother of GOD. A Feast anciently
and solemnly celebrated in the Greek Church, and introduced into the Latin
Church by S. Anselme Archbishop of Canterbury, in the year 1106. and commanded
to be generally celebrated by Sixtus the Fourth in the year 1466. In memory of
her miraculous and immaculate Conception of her old and barren Parents, S.
Joachim, and S. Anne, and of her being sanctified in the womb, from the first
instant of her Conception.

18. The Feast of the Expectation of our Blessed Lady; or the O; Instituted by
S. Ildephonse, out of his extraordinary affection and devotion to the
Virgin Mother, and lately approved and confirmed by Pope Gregory. 13.

24. The Feast of the Descent of the sacred Virgin into the Church of Toledo;
instituted in Spain by S. Ildephonse, in memory of her miraculous apparition
unto him, and clothing him with a celestial garment.

29. S. Thomas, Archbishop of Canterbury, and Martyr; a most devout servant of
the sacred Virgin, even from the cradle to his last gasp; received from her
many signal favors and comforts, both in the time of his Bishopric, and of
his banishment. Amongst other demonstrations of her Affection toward him, she
vouchsafed to instruct him in his prayers and devotions: and whereas he used
daily to salute her, in honor of her seven temporal Joy's; she was graciously
pleased to reveal unto him, Seven other Celestial Joys, which she does and
shall possess in heaven for all eternity, enjoining him to add the memory of
them also to his former daily duty. This glorious Bishop and Martyr dyed in the
year 1170.

Besides the Festivities of the sacred Virgin Mother, affixed (as above) to
certain days of the year: there are yet some others which are Moveable.
1. UPon the Friday before Palm Sunday. The Feast, or Commemoration of the
sacred Virgins sorrows, which blessed Simeon prophesied unto her when she
presented her Son Jesus to his Eternal Father in the Temple; This feast is
celebrated by the Cistercians (as appears in their Breviary) upon the 16. of
April; but by others (more properly) upon the Friday before Pal^ Sunday, in
memory of the many swords of sorrow, which pierced her maternall heart in her
dear Sons Death and Passion.

2. Upon the Saturday after the Ascension: The Feast, or Commemoration of the
Blessed Virgins Joys, which she received both in this world, and possesses for
all Eternity in heaven: which Joys are expressed in most pithy and pious verses
by the glorious Martyr S. Thomas Archbishop of Canterbury: As may be seen in
Canisius, lib. 4. cap. 13. and which were revealed to S. Mechtild, in the first
Book of her Revelations. Chap. 66.

3. Upon the last Sunday of August. The Feast, or Recollection of all the
Feasts of the sacred Virgin Mother; which is solemnly celebrated at Doway upon
this day; though in other places it is transferred to the First Sunday of
September. The Institution whereof is related by Lipsius in the first Book and
fifth Chapter of his Lovanium; and the Office thereof may be found in the
Cambray Breviary, printed at Paris. 1507.

4. Upon the Sunday within the Octave of the Nativity of the Blessed Virgin,
the Feast of her glorious Name MARIA, is with great solemnity celebrated at
Bruxels, and in other places.

R. B. Prefect of the Arch-Confraternity of the ROSARIE, in the Oratory of the
ever Blessed Virgin Mary, Mother of Power, in the City of Amsterdam, wishes
eternal health and happiness to the devout Rosarists.
Honored, Zealous, and Religious Brethren and Sisters! The service which I
have long since promised and protested to the ever blessed Virgin Mary (the
glorious Mother of my God, The Great Queen of Heaven and Earth, The Powerful
Patroness of all Mankind, The Sovereign Mistress of our Arch-Confraternity,) and
the Place and Title of Prefect, which I (though most unworthy) possess amongst
you, has put this days discourse into my mouth.

A discourse, not directly tending to the Reformation of your Lives, Manners,
and Conversations, (which were a design in me as presumptuous, as improper, a
matter as far above my Sphere, as beyond my Ability; A task, which our worthy
Dean painfully and carefully performs, to our great comfort and profit, in his
pious Exercises and Orations.) But a discourse, aiming at these two ends; To
declare, what the Rosary is, And what it is to be of the Rosary: To describe
the Dignity of this our Confraternity, and the Duty of us, who are ascribed
into this holy Society, to show you how fitly it is by us embraced, and how
faithfully we ought to behave our selves in it.

O Sacred Spirit, by whose Conduct our pious Predecessors laid the happy
foundation of this most renowned Confraternity, inspire my understanding to
conceive something worthy so high a Subject; Enable my tongue to speak
something beseeming the blessed Virgins praises; Direct my Pen, to couch
something for her devout Childrens comfort, encouragement, edification.

Man being by nature a Sociable Creature, is inclined by the principles of his
Essence, by the temper of his complexion, by the violence of his original
disposition, to seek out some Consorts and Companions of his own kind and
condition, to the end he may solace himself in their Society, Conduct his lives
course by their Counsel, and Communicate with them his affairs and affections.

And his natural propension to Society, is that which has civilized Mankind,
policy'd the whole World, built up Cities, ordered Commonwealths, and Kingdoms,
and which conserves all things in their due order and union.

God the Sovereign Creator of all things, who ingrav'd this powerful instinct
of Society in man's Soul, as a disposition connaturall to his life and being. A
condition necessary for the conservation, entertainment, and common good of the
whole Universe. A quality, which he made recommendable from the first origin
of time, not only amongst his own people, (as may appear in the Law of Nature,
and the Law written, but even amongst the Pagans, Idolaters, and most barbarous
Nations, (as might be exemplified out of all profane Annalls and Histories,)
would not have it perish in the law of Grace, but cutting off the abuse,
permitted the use thereof to be continued and preserved for the good of his
Church, for the salvation of Christian Souls, for the solace and support of his
faithful Servants. And therefore he has from time to time excited pious
people to assemble themselves together (for the inflaming of one another Zeal,
Fervor, and devotion, for their mutual assistance and consolation, for the
increase of each others merit and virtue) To live soberly, piously, justly,
under the discreet Laws, Rules, and Ordinances, of one common Society,
Congregation, Confraternity.

And surely, our blessed Redeemer himself, (to begin at the fountain head of
all Sanctity, the exemplary pattern of all Perfection,) descending from Heaven
to accomplish on Earth the sacred design, which he decreed from all Eternity,
(as if this point had been one of the Prime and principal projects of his
Incarnation;) seems to aim at nothing more than the establishment of unity in
number, Union in division, Peace and Charity amongst men. This was his Life,
his Preaching, his Practice, to put down Schisms, Divisions, Partialities, and
to Imprint in Christians hearts, the love of Concord, and the Honor of a happy
Confraternity. For what is more frequently inculcated in the Sacred Gospells,
in the Epistles, Decrees, Constitutions of the Apostles, in the whole Volumes of
the holy Bible, than Peace, Charity, Fraternity? What greater precept did
Christ impose upon all Christians, than when he said, I give you a new Command
to love one another, adding immediately, In this the World shall know you to be
my Disciples, if you are united in affection? Mutual charity is the manifest
Signet of Christianity, the Royal Ensign of my Religion, the true badg of
Piety, the particular livery of my Children, the distinguishing mark of my
faithful followers, friends, and favorites. In obedience to this command, we
find registered in holy Writ, that the first Christians were so perfectly linked
together in holy love and affection, as their whole multitude seemed to have but
one Heart, and one Soul; They lived under the same Laws, aimed at the same End,
conspired in the same Wills; their Manners, their Devotions, their Designs,
their Rules, their way of Living, was all one and the same, all Love, all
Peace, all Union; all tending to Gods honor and service, all aiming at their
Souls perfection and Salvation: Briefly, they entered into a Community and
Association of all things, and seem to have been reduced into a most perfect
manner of Sodality, Congregation, or Confraternity.

In imitation of Christ, and these primitive Christians, St. Mark the
Evangelist presently after instituted sacred Sodalities and Confraternities in
Egypt; And from these blessed fountains have since flowed so many holy Families
of Religious, so many Confraternities of Seculars, which have flourished in all
succeeding Ages, in all places, amongst all Christians; descending from these
pious Parents to their Children, from these holy Predecessors into the hearts
of their Posterity.

These worthy Examples (I say) have since moved many generous Captains,
(Fervent in Gods love, Disgusted with worldly vanities, Ardent in devotion,
Ambitious of Virtue, Piety and Perfection,) to take up the like Commissions,
(sent them from Heaven, and warranted by the effectual inspiration of the
divin Spirit;) And with the sound of the Drumms and Trumpets of their Doctrine,
to summon valiant Soldiers together, To draw Companies of zealous Christians
from out of Cities into Solitudes, where freed from worldly cares, affairs,
and affections, they might with hearts unanimously joined, serve their Creator,
and day and night sing forth his praises.

Such were those great Generals of Religious orders, those Glorious Patriarks
of Monastical Congregations, those Heroique Champions of the holy Church, St.
Basil in Greece, St. Augustine in Africa, St. Bennet in Europe. Such after them
were those multitudes of like Religious and resolute Spirits, St. Bruno in
France, St. Francis in Italy, St. Dominick in Spain, and many more in the same
and other Countries; Who forsaking the World, following the divine Call, flying
into the Deserts, laid the foundations of so many blessed Societies,
Sodalities, Confraternities.

Others breathing the like Zeal and Piety, but not able (by reason of their
worldly calling and condition) to embrace the like purity and perfection: (yet
willing to secure themselves from dangers, zealous to get (at least) some
degree of Sanctity, and desirous of the Salvation of their Souls:) have also
united themselves together, entered into a holy combination and Society,
resolved to wear the same livery, to pursue the same designs, to live under the
same Common Laws and Constitutions.

Such are the brave Knights of Malta in Italy, of the Holy Ghost in France, of
St. James in Spain: and such were, and should be, the Knights of St. George in
our England; All which having Kings for their Colonels, may be fitly called
Royal Congregations, Noble Societies, and yet are still Christian
Confraternities.

This pious practice descends from Princes to the People, and branches it self
into almost as many Societies, as there are several Estates, Callings, and
Conditions in a Commonwealth; The Lawyers taking Saint Yve for their Patron;
the Doctors St. Thomas, the Students St. Nicholas; the Goldsmiths S. Eligius;
the Carpenters St. Joseph; the Stationers or Booksellers St. John the
Evangelist; and others, other Saints. Some march under the Standard of the
Passion, others of the Blessed Sacrament; others of the Cross, many of the
Glorious Virgin; all of the Catholic Church; which is Colonell-Generall of
all these particular Companies, and which sits as Mistress of the full Music,
which these several faithful Societies make up by striking the several
strings of their various rules, diverse statutes, and different institutions,
one singing the Superius of contemptation; another the Bassus of the active
life; A Third, the Mean, Marrying action with contemplation, yet all agreeing
in the same harmony of Faith, all aiming at the same common end, which is Gods
glory, their Neighbors good, their own Souls Perfection, and Eternal
Salvation.

And all these faithful Societies, Companies and Confraternities of devout
Christians founded upon Charity, Concord, and Union; Governed with prudence and
discretion, cannot but subsist with Honor, flourish with Admiration, and adorn
the whole body of Christianity.

These are the Buttresses of Religion, the Academies of Virtue, the Schools of
Sanctity, the Magazins of Merits, the Rendevous of Heroique Spirits, the lists
wherein all sorts of devotion and piety are perfectly exercised and practiced.
Here is taught simplicity of Conversation, Humility of life, Charity, Mercy,
Compassion, Brotherly affection toward our necessitous Neighbors,
Forgetfulness of injuries, Patience in tribulation, Zeal for Gods honor and
glory. O how good and pleasant a thing it is, (sings holy David,) to behold
Brethren living together, and loving one another! O the Spiritual pleasure,
Profit and Comfort of well ordered Confraternities! How full of honor and
happiness! How grateful to men and Angels, to heaven and earth! and how
terrible, to our ghostly enemies! Where holy souls heat each other in the divin
love, help each other in bearing the burden of their crosses and calamities;
awake each others negligence and tepidity, excite their fervor, increase their
piety, zeal, and devotion! Where if one member be tempted, troubled, afflicted,
the whole body concurrs by joined prayers and petitions to cure him, comfort
him, encourage him in his combat, and assist him to conquer his enemies, and
overcome his infirmities: If a brother aided by a brother, (as the wiseman
averrs) is a strong City; How strong a body will so many assisting brothers
make; Whose forces are all united to further and facilitate each others
victory, whose counsels are so charitable, whose combined courages are so
invincible, whose designs are so warrantable, whose exercises tend only to
advance Gods honor, to tread down sin and sensuality, to attain perfection, to
obtain their own, and their Neighbors Salvation! These are the practices, the
profits, the pleasures of pious Confraternities, where Love is in its
perfection, Concord in her throne, Friendship in its purity, Sanctity in its
excellency; and therefore safety, and security, in their truest height and
greatness. These are the rich harvests reaped in Religious Societies, where
many being united in the same affections, participating the same Sacraments,
passing their lives under the same laws and statutes, render themselves
victorious against all the violent assaults and enterprises of their
adversaries. These are the honorable interests returned to such prudent
usurers as place their stocks of piety in these Spiritual banks, where Charity
makes all flourish, Peace produces plenty, Concord gets the conquests, and
perseverance a Crown of Glory. These finally are the holy places and
professions in which men live more purely, fall more rarely, rise more
speedily, walk more warily, rest more securely, dye more confidently, are
rewarded more bountifully.

And all these profits, pleasures, and prerogatives, belong as properly to your
happy state and condition, (O devout children of the Rosary!) as to any other
secular Sodality or Confraternity whatsoever.

For though all well ordered Congregations and Societies, marching under the
Ensigns of Christianity, and approved of by the Church Catholic, (the only
Royal seat of true Faith, Religion, and Devotion,) are highly praiseworthy,
and exceedingly pleasing to the divin Majesty: (since, though their Laws are
different, their ways diverse, their devotions distinct; Yet they aim all at the
same end, steer their courses toward the same Haven, breath the same zeal of
Gods honor and glory, seek with like ardour their own and their neighbors
Perfection and Salvation:) Yet I may boldly say, there are none more holy, more
honorable, more happy, than such as choose the glorious Virgin Mary, the
powerful Empress of both worlds, for their Protectress and Patroness: And this
in respect of her Dignity, her Power, her Perfection, her Purity, and her
other Attributes, Privileges, and Prerogatives, which prefer her before all
other Creatures, and which cannot without Heresy or Blasphemy be (by any
Christian) denied or doubted of.

For First, she was appointed, designed, predestined, by the sacred Trinity
from all Eternity to be the worthy Mother of the Word Incarnate.

Secondly, her birth was not only prefigured, promised, prophesied, but
foretold by an Angel appearing to her barren Parents, immediately before her
Conception.

Thirdly, being born free from all sin, she led a life so full of all Sanctity,
so singular in all Purity, so excellent in all Perfection, that she deserved
yes, She deserved (says Saint Augustine) (by her Creators mercy, the prime
Author of this her Purity, Innocence, and Perfection,) to be chosen the Mother
of Gods Son.

Fourthly, a Mother, yet remaining a Virgin: a Mother of God; which is an
Attribute containing alone, all that is great, glorious, excellent.

Fifthly, an Attribute, which constitutes her Queen of Angels, Saints, and Men,
(for to which of them all (says our St. Bernard) has God said, You are my
Mother?) This is the Privilege of Mary; an Attribute, not communicable to any
other creature; A Dignity to which all other heights and excellencies, yield
homage and reverence, A Prerogative, to be silently admired, since it is
impossible to be explicated.

And what marvel is it, if whole multitudes of faithful children have flocked
to the protection of such a Mother? What wonder, that so many worthy Assemblies
have desired to shelter themselves under her sacred wings, in hope to sail
securely over the dangerous Sea of this lives pilgrimage, by her powerful
tutelage and direction?

This greatness therefore, this glory, this excellency of the Virgin Mary, is
the cause of so many holy Confraternities erected in her honor; whereof some
fixing upon the mysteries of her life, have made choice of the Annunciation, or
the Conception, or the Nativity, or the Purification, or some other mystery
for their particular Motto and name of their pious Confraternities.

Others observing the places, which she has been pleased to make famous by her
frequent miracles, have entitled their devout Societies from Loretto in Italy,
from Mount-Serrat in Spain, from Liesse in France, from Hall and Sichem in
Flanders.

Others, admiring and honoring her, in her effects and attributes, have
founded several Congregations, according to her several properties,
qualities, denominations, And as she is the Lady Mother of Power (which is the
title of this our little Altar) of Pity, of Virtue, of Grace, of Comfort, of
Mercy, of Deliverance; So there are as many particular Assemblies,
distinguished from each other by these diverse denominations, but all
concentring in the sacred Virgins honor; all conspiring in their zeal and
devotion to her service; all desirous to testify, that (though their choice is
different, their statutes several, their ways many, yet) their design is
common, their end and aim is one and the same.

To discourse here of all these devout Confraternities erected in her honor,
and dedicated to her service, were as endless a project in it self, as useless
to my present design and purpose; and therefore contenting my self to have
given you these general notions, names, and praises of the most eminent and
signal Orders, Sodalities, and Congregations, I shall confine the residue of
my discourse, to declare that only Confraternity, which we our selves have
happily made choice of; I mean the Arch-Confraternity of the sacred Rosary,
which contains all the other Societies, under its general name and title, and
communicates it self to their general Subdivisions, as the great Ocean (the
general Magazin of waters) discharges it self into many Sea-armes, creeks, and
bosoms.

But before I lanch forth into this large Ocean, I shall (with the permission
of your patience) speak a word since it particularly concerns our
Confraternity) of our Lady Mothers title of Power, the surname of this our
sacred Altar; and consequently the Notion under which we have engaged our
selves in the sacred Virgins service and Sodality.

A Title, (Most devout Rosarists!) truly Royal, Noble, Glorious. A Quality,
capable to call, invite, and encourage all afflicted Souls to fly to her
Patronage. A Name, which only pronounced, cannot choose but afford present
comfort.

Is there any one amongst you afflicted in mind, perplexed in spirit,
over-tyrannized by your passions, overswayed by your sensuality, apprehensive
of malicious enemies, fearful of threatened torments, tribulations,
persecutions? Have you not a powerful Mother, as ready, as able to help you?

Are you sailing upon the boisterous Sea, wafted to and fro, with the
tempestuous winds and billows, bruised against the rocks, run upon the
quicksands, in eminent danger of utter ruin, shipwreck and drowning? Lift up
your eyes, hands, and hearts to Heaven, look for present help from Mary your
Powerful Mother.

Are you journying by land, strai'd from your right path, set upon by robbers,
surprised by nights darkness, tired, troubled, disconsolated with the
inconveniences of travel? Think upon the Mother of Power, who will pray for
you and protect you.

Are you seized upon by sickness, alarmed with deaths summons, thunder-stricken
with the terror of Gods severe Judgments, the torments of Hellfire, the
length of your doubtful Eternity? O despair not, distrust not, quit not your
hopes and hold; you have a merciful Father to pardon you, a Powerful Mother
to Patronize you.

Are you assaulted with sudden, strong furious temptations, shaken with secret
suggestions, violented by your lawless affections, ready to give consent to
mortal sin? O resist manfully, resolve valiantly, fight confidently under your
Powerful Mothers ensigns; visit this holy Altar with your thoughts and
affections, reflect upon the sacred Confraternity whereof you are a member.

Are you deprived (by some accident) of your fortunes, fame, friends, reduced
to poverty, infamy, extremity?

Remember your Mothers Power and Charity, implore her prayer's and protection,
and doubt not to obtain either patience to support what so much troubles you,
or a speedy deliverance from it.

Finally, in all dangers, difficulties, distresses, think upon the Mother of
Power, call upon the Mother of Power: let her not depart from your mouth, let
her not depart from your heart, and that you may obtain relief by her
intercession, swerve not from the example of her conversation: following her,
you stray not, calling upon her, you despair not, thinking on her, you err not:
she holding, you fall not, she protecting, you fear not, she guiding, you faint
not.

How properly then (O children of Mary!) do we entitle our Mother Powerful,
since (says our learned and devout Doctor Damian) the Almighty has so highly
priviledg'd her with all Power in Heaven and Earth, in so much as she makes her
addresses to the sacred Altar of our reconciliation ( non solum rogans, sed
etiam imperans, Domina, non ancilla: Not only entreating, but also commanding,
as a Mistress, not a handmaid; wherefore I conclude this digression with the
mellifluous Saint Bernard: whatsoever you desire to offer up to the divin
Majesty, be sure to deposit it in Mary's hands, that so your oblation may
ascend to the source of Grace, by the same channel, whereby grace descended
unto you: Not but that our Creator can easily distill the dews of his grace,
without the mediation of this Channel, by what other means he best pleases;
but he would mercifully provide this powerful help for you, and therefore take
special care to place in Marye's powerful and grateful hands, whatsoever
petition you desire to prefer to her divin Son, if you will not have it to
miscarry, and receive a denial.

And now returning to the prosecution of my intended purpose: Though the
general devotion of all faithful Christians toward the sacred Virgin Mary;
is as ancient as our faith and Christianity themselves, (she being constituted
the Churches Mother, by the bequest of her blessed Son, when he uttered these
words to St. John (as his last will and testament) on the Cross, Son Behold thy
Mother; Nor did ever yet any true Catholic, acknowledging God for his Father,
and Christ Jesus for his Brother, exclude Mary from being his Mother:) yet,
this particular manner of honoring her, this pious Method of praying to her,
this our Confraternity of the sacred Rosary had its first rise and institution
from the glorious St. Dominick, about four hundred years since, and its decayed
use was zealously renewed by the Blessed Father Alanus de Rupe, about two
hundred years past, as the Ecclesiastical Histories largely declare, which
being obvious to every ones perusal, and I hastening to other matters, which
are to us of more importance, purposely pass over, that I may come to the
performance of my first promise and proposition, which is, to declare the
Dignity of the Rosary, and the Duty of us who are of it.

The Masters greatness (says Solomon) redounds to the servants glory, and the
Parents honor to the renown of the children. Since therefore you (O devout
Rosarists!) have as befits humble servants, made choice of so high a Mistress;
and as beseems good children have promised loyalty to so Honorable a Mother,
great surely is your glory, your honor, your happiness. A Mistress, of such
Majesty, A Mother, of such excellency, that the sole consideration of her
greatness and goodness, is a sufficient charm to engage the whole world in her
service to contain all Christians in their filial duty and affection.

I have already given you a glimps in general of your Mistr^sses and Mothers
greatnesses, privileges, and prerogatives; and to descend to the particular
mention of all the honorable titles, high qualities, admirable epithets, which
heaven and earth, Angels and Men, the Scripture and the Church, bestow upon
this Blessed Virgin, were to write whole volumes, not to recite a succinct
Oration.

She is represented by the Tree of life in the Terrestrial Paradise, by the
Ark of Noah upon the waves of the Deluge, by the Tabernacle of the Testament,
made of incorruptible materials, (signifying her virginity, her purity, her
impeccability,) by the Ark of the Covenant, which contained the tables of the
Commamdements, as she did their Author.

She is prefigured by the Altar of Perfumes (the types of her odoriferous
virtues:) by the golden Candlestick, (She bearing him who is the True Light of
the World:) By the Gate of Heaven in the Prophets, By Jacobs Ladder in Genesis,
By the Valiant Woman in the Proverbs, By the Ever burning, never consuming Bush
in Exodus, By the Hill elevated on the Mountain top in Isay, By the City of
God, whereof such wonders are spoken in the Psalms, By the sweet smelling
Balsome, the still flourishing Cypress upon Mount Sion, The ever flowing vein
of Honey, The fair Olive of the fields, The Lilly amongst the thorns, The Rose
of Jericho, The Palm of Cades, The Royal Throne of Solomon, The strong Tower
of David, The Fleece of Gedeon, The miraculously flourishing Rod of A^ron, The
Eastern Gate of Paradise.

The Angel qualifies her full of Grace; The wiseman, abounding with delights;
The Spouse, a Garden of pleasure, The Gospel, the mother of Jesus; The Church,
the exemplar of Perfection; Heaven the Queen of the Universe, Earth, the
Phoenix of Mankind; and all the World, the Fountain of their felicity.

The Celestial Spirits acknowledge her for their Empress, the Apostles for
their Mistress, the Martyrs for their Mirror, the Confessors for their Pattern,
the Virgins for their Glory, all Christians for their powerful Patroness and
Advocate.

Judge now (O faithful Rosarists!) by these few mentioned Titles of the
miraculous Excellency, Greatness, Glory, Dignity, of her, to whose honor you
have dedicated your hearts, your loves, your lives, your services.

Surely you cannot but joyfully confess with me, that (after a Christ Jesus)
Heaven never produced any thing more holy, the World never had any thing more
worthy, the Sun never saw any thing more admirable, amiable, precious and
perfect, than our ever blessed, and honored Mistress, and Mother Mary. And
consequently we must conclude also, that very great is our own dignity, who
have the honor to be of her particular family, by means of this pious
Institute of the Confraternity of the Rosary.

1. An Institute, not of a novell invention, but (as you have heard) of above
four hundred years standing and antiquity.

2. An Institute, of that large extent, that it has spread it self over the
whole habitable world, and acknowledges no other limits, than those which bound
the universal Catholic Church.

3. An Institute, of that generality, that no person is exculded from its
participation: not the Husbandman in the fields, not the Tradesman in his
shop, not the Traveller in his journey, not the unlearned for his ignorance,
not the Woman by her sex, not the Married by their state, not the Younglings by
their simplicity, not the Aged by their impotency, not the Sick by their
infirmity; Briefly, not any devout and faithful Christian by any calling,
employment, condition whatsoever.

4. An Institute, of that easiness to learn, and facility to practice, that it
requires no more knowledge, than the skill to recite the Pater and Ave, no more
expenses, than the price of a pair of Bedes, no other place, than where every
one lives, no other site of body, than that in which devotion find's us,
whether it be standing, sitting, lying, walking, or kneeling.

5. An Institute, of that infinite spiritual profit, that it is impossible to
be expressed, whereof I shall instance only these few particulars.

1. In respect of the special Patronage, and protection of the Blessed Virgin;
for though she is a careful Mother of all faithful Christians, yet surely she
is more tenderly solicitous for the domestiques of her family, more heedfully
diligent for the advancement of her devoted servants, more seriously studious
for the good of her dutiful children.

2. In respect of the Community of Merits, amongst the members of this sacred
Society: For it is a point of our Religion, an Article of our Faith, an
infallible Maxim amongst our Divins; that the merits of all the Saints, are
common to all faithful Christians; that there is a communication between the
Church Militant upon Earth, the Church suffering in Purgatory, and the Church
Triumphant in Heaven: yes, there is such a connection amongst all Gods Children,
such an association of all the Churches members, which make up one spiritual
body under their sacred head CHRIST JESUS, that the least of them all
(supposing he is capable of merit, and in good state, whereof grace is the root
and foundation) has a title, and may claim a share in all the spiritual
goods, and consequently in all the treasures of merits and good works heaped up
from the Worlds first Origin to this present, and which shall be laid up in the
Churches Storehouse, till the Worlds Consummation.

Our Creed teaches us this truth, wherein we profess to believe the Communion
of Saints, that is, we acknowledge a communication of merits, between them who
are happily lodged in Heaven, and them who (living upon Earth, and lying in
Purgatory) hope to follow after.

We believe that whatsoever the greatest Saints have done, merited, obtained;
what the ancient Patriarks by propagating Gods honor, putting down idolatry;
what the Prophets by preaching Gods Judgments, proclaiming open War against
all impiety; what the glorious Apostles by planting the Faith, publishing the
Gospel, converting the World; what the invincible Martyrs, by their endured
torments, persecutions, deaths; what the holy Confessors, by the courageous
carriage of their crosses, chastisements of their flesh, mortifications of
their sensuality; what the good Hermits, Anchorites, Monks, in their Solitudes,
Cells, and Cloisters; what the learned, zealous, eloquent Doctors, by their
writings, preachings, teachings; what the chaste Virgins and Widows, by the
inviolable preservation of their purity; Finally, whatsoever the pious people
in their secular calling, or any persons under each Pole of the World, and in
the four corners of the Universe, have profited in good works, in godly
actions, in virtuous exercises: all this is communicable to each one of the
Catholic Churches members; all is to them proportionably imparted and
distributed. I am partaker (sings joyfully the Royal Psalmist,) with all them
who fear you, and faithfully follow your Laws and Ordinances. All such as live
Christianly, carefully, devoutly; all such as practice works of piety, make
progress in virtue, march up the degrees of perfection and sanctity; labor for
me, profit me, lay up treasures for me: we are all fellow members under one
head, we all make up one common purse amongst us, we all aim at the same end of
Gods honor and glory, and our own eternal felicity.

Now besides this general communication of spiritual goods and merits amongst
all faithful Christians, (the stock whereof is in the Churches hands and
storehouse) there is another bank in the bodies of Confraternities common to
them alone who are of that particular family and community, and from whence
all the influences of graces and blessings, which Heaven imparts to this whole
body, inflow into each one of its members. And to instance this also in some
particulars.

First, what an immense profit is it, to have a part in all the zealous
prayers, meditations, acts of charity, and exercises of Virtue and Piety,
performed in a whole Confraternity? All which entering into common, and making
one only deposi^um, redound to each particular members spiritual profit and
advantage: So that when any one of us offers up his prayers to the Throne of
mercy, he pray's (as it were) by as many mouths, as there are brethren and
sisters in our whole Confraternity.

And what an incredible force (judge ye, devout Rosarists!) must this needs add
to our petitions? How can a just demand, presented by so many pious Souls, sent
up to Heaven by so many humble hearts, pronounced by so many devout tongues,
suffer a repulse? If our Creator, though most highly incensed and irritated by
the wicked and malicious Sodomites; yet mercifully promised to pardon all their
enormous impieties, might there have been found amongst them only ten just Men,
to join in prayer with holy Abraham for their delivery; May we not (without
presumption) persuade our selves, that the prayers of so many good Souls,
(whereof this Sacred Confraternitie is composed) may have great power to move
our Maker, (when he is justly angry with us for our offenses, ingratitude,
disloyalty,) to pity and pardon us, and to reverse the sentence of our
deserved punishment and condemnation? Surely united forces, (you know) are far
more prevalent than when divided; many Torches give a greater luster, many
fires affoard a fiercer heat, many men remove a heavier weight, and in all
cases whatsoever, that which one alone is unable to attain, incapable to
effect, unworthy to deserve, a multitude conspiring together in the same end
and intention, may hope to atchieve and compass.

Secondly, what an inestimable profit is it to have a share of merit in so many
divin Sacrifices of the Mass, celebrated yearly, monthly, weekly, daily (to
Gods glory, to his Mothers honor, to his Saints praises, to the Solace of the
living, to the Succor of the dead:) both at this sacred and priviledg'd Altar
of our blessed Mother of Power, And wheresoever, throughout the World this
Arch-Confraternitie of the Rosary is erected and established?

If one only Mass, the lively representation of what passed upon
Mount-Calvary, the highest act of Religion, the authentical memorial of the
great sacrifice of the Cross, is capable (says our Venerable Father Bid) to
add glory to God, joy to the Angels and Saints, grace to the just, pardon to
Sinners, comfort to the living, help to the Souls in Purgatory; what good, what
grace, what advantage may you here expect, where so many Masses are daily
celebrated for the forenamed intentions, whereof each member participates?

Thirdly, what a vast treasure of Indulgences, Pardons, Jubilies (given and
granted by the prime Pastors of the Church, the general dispencers of divin
blessings, the universal Stewards of celestial riches) are annexed to this
our holy Confraternity? Indulgences, which no Catholic can deny or doubt of;
Indulgences, so ample, as no Society ever had larger; So many, as merely to
mention them, would take up another hours time, and tire out your patience;
there being no Pope since Sixtus the fourth, who has not freely opened the
Churches Storehouse, and added new privileges, prerogatives, and benefits unto
his predecessors liberality, in so much as I find above forty authentic Bulls
and Instruments issued forth of that highest spiritual Court, for the
approb^tion, confirmation, and ornament of this renowned Arch-Confraternity of
the Rosary.

Fourthly, I may add to this large inventory of spiritual profits; That to be
of this Confraternity, is a probable sign of being predestined to eternal
feli^ity; For if with the holy, you shall be holy (says the Psalmist) and with
the Elect, elected, what better sign of holiness, what surer token of election,
can one have in this life, than to be associated with so many good Souls,
aspiring zealously, and unanimously to piety, to perfection, to salvation?

Fifthly, the last profit, (to let pass many others) is a confidence, a comfort,
and a kind of security in the article of Death. Death is commonly accompanied
with three corrosives. Bitterness, because of the Cessation of all pleasures,
the p^ivation of all worldly riches, the separation of body and Soul, two
ancient friends and companions. Danger, because of the dire conflicts and
dismal temptations of the then most busy devil. Dread and terror, because of
the doubtful and severe judgment immediately ensuing.

Now the devout and diligent members of this sacred Confraternity are exempt
from the most part of these alarm's: For death seems not to them so bitter,
because long before expected, prevented, p^ovided for: The enemies assaults and
temptations are not to them so dreadful and dangerous, because the daily use
of their spiritual weapons renders them expert in these combats, able to foil
their adversaries, and experienced to defend themselves: The apprehension of
Gods Judgments is not to them so terrible, because they continually think of
them, and accordingly order their Life and actions, discharge their consciences
of sin, practice works of piety, and endeavor to acquire the sacred Virgins
favor in hope to have her then their friend and advocate, which is surely the
best way to die with safety and security: The just man dy's (says Saint Bernard)
as well as the wicked; yet the just man dy's with this advantage and assurance,
that the ending of his life here, is the entrance into a better Life hereafter;
and therefore he living dy's to the world; that dying, he may begin to live to
God: O Life truly holy! O Death truly happy! where the conscience is pure, and
the Soul unspotted!

These are some part of the spiritual profits, which proceed from this
renowned Society of the ROSARY: It now remains that I briefly tell you, how you
may become capable to participate of these privileges and prerogatives, and
what duty and devotion befits the faithful servants of the sacred Virgin Mary,
and the true members of this most holy Society.

For it is not enough to have registered your names in the Rosary Catalogue, to
enter with the rest into her Chapel, to be externally associated to this
Confraternity: but in the first place.

1. You must resolve upon an honest, honorable, holy life; A reformation of
your manners, a renouncing of all vice and vanity, a pursuit of all virtue,
piety, perfection; Yea, you must strive to surpass in devotion and sanctity all
such other worldlings, as have not that honor and happyness you have, to be of
the blessed Virgins family: for you (O devout Rosarists!) have dedicated your
selves more particularly to God service, you make a more special profession to
honor his holy Mother, than they who walk in the wide track of the World: and
if you surpass them not in perfection, how deserve you the title of her
particular servants? If you make not appear in your lives and actions more
Modesty, Humility, Patience, Piety, Devotion, and all sorts of virtues, than
others; how are you worthy to be her special friends and favorite? Finally if
you pretend to be truly her children and domestics, she expects from you
cleaness of heart, purity of conscience, sanctity of life and conversation.

2. And in order to obtain this mundicity, purity, and sacntity, you must have
a high esteem, and make frequent use of the Sacrament of Penance, as being the
main Pillar of a spiritual life, the sovereign Medicin to recover our Souls
decayed health, the first and fundamental step to all perfection.

Yes, every Christian, who has any Zeal for his own salvation, much more we
(who make a profession of somewhat more than ordinary devotion) must presently
upon his lapse into mortal sin dispose his Soul to Contrition, his mouth to
Confession, his hands to Satisfaction, his body to Penance, which is the true
D^ttany curing these bitings, the wholesome Mithridat expelling these poisons,
the clear Fountain cleansing us from these filths and impurities. O how
important is the observation of this point, to all pretenders to piety and
perfection, and how prejudicial the neglect of it?

For first, a Soul fallen into one mortal sin, has set the door open to let in
a second, and that makes way for many followers: Such is the weight of sin
(says St. Gregory) that it bears dow the Soul under it, and sways the
inclination to commit more and more, on Abyssus calling on another.

Secondly, a Soul in mortal sin, looses all her good works, all merit, all
hope of Heaven, all title to eternal happyness: no alms avail her, no prayers
profit her, no austerities help her, no good actions can open to her the gates
of Paradise, without the key of an entire confession, or a true Contrition.

Thirdly, sin as it gains time, gets strength, becoms insensibly master of the
Soul, shutts up the doors against the divin mercy, and at length leaves her in
despair of pardon, and makes her give over all hopes of favor, and petitioning
for grace. Ah! what comfort, what confidence, what means of salvation is left
to a miserable Soul, that wilfully persevers in her impiety? The longer she
stays in it, the deeper she sinks into it, the less she deserves favor, the
more highly she provokes Heavens anger and revenge.

Fourthly, and which is yet worse, a Soul wounded with mortal sin (and uncured
by Confession or Contrition) is continually worried with a worm of remorse; and
if she be grown so insensible, as not to feel now its gnawings, she shall
surely resent its dismal bitings at the approaching hour of death, and much
more piercingly after her departure, when this worm that devours her shall
never die where the fire that burns her shall never be extinguished.

Behold the inevitable ruins, the irreparable losses, the unexplicable
miseries, which are by them incurred, who after their fall, delay to do
Penance. Let it be therefore your chief care (O devout Rosarists!) to arise
speedily, to present your selves presently to the Tribunal of confession, to
announce your frailty, renounce your impiety, that so you may obtain grace to
walk afterward more warily. For as a spot or stain is sooner rubbed off at
first, than when sunk down to the bottom; so it is with sin, the cure is
desperate, when the disease is deeply rooted.

3. The frequent use of the Holy EVCHARIST is no less necessary to all
faithful and devout Christians, where they are visited by God himself,
honored with his Real Presence, fed with his sacred flesh, made the Temple of
the Holy Ghost, the Cabinet of the Word Incarnat, the Tabernacle of the Immense
Trinity: the Throne, the Heaven, the Palace, the Paradise of the whole divinity.

O what privileges! what profits? what prerogatives? to have their sins
pardoned, temptations quelled, passions conquered, enemies repulsed, new
strength granted, all sorts of graces communicated? To have the spirit cleared,
the memory awaked, the will inflamed, the understanding illuminated, the heart
confirmed, the appetite regulated, the reason instructed, the sensuality
repressed, the whole man divinized? To receive the antipasts of Paradise, the
pledges of eternal bliss and beatitude? who would not endeavor to be
frequently partaker of such heights, such honors, such happinesses?

4. Another important practice of devout Christians is to hear Mass as often as
they may; for it is a Sacrifice, whereby the merits of our Redeemers Passion
are applied to us. A Sacrifice, in which and by which: thanks are rendered to
the Divin Majesty, for all the benefits received from his bounty. A Sacrifice,
of infinite worth and efficacy, inflowing multitudes of graces, favors, and
blessings upon the devout assistants, which this time and place permit me not
to particularize.

5. Furthermore, to hear Gods Word preached and announced (if that happiness
may be obtained) is also a point of great piety, profit, and merit; nor is
there indeed any more express sign of a Christians belonging to Christ's flock
and fold, than the frequent and affectionate hearing of his divin Word,
according to his own saying: He that is of God hears his Word, and my sheep
hear my voice.

Surely, they who lend a willing ear to their prime Pastors voice, (preached
to them by his Missioners and Officers) testify thereby that they are his
loving and obedient Sheep; the imitators of his Blessed Mother, (who kept all
his words carefully in her heart) and children designed for his heavenly
inheritance.

6. The last piece of devotion, which I shall now mention belonging to pious
Christians and especially to the religious children of Jesus and Mary, is to
addict themselves to the reading of the spiritual Conflict, and Conquest, and
other good, holy, and spiritual books, for these are the dumb masters which
teach us the lessons of true wisdom and heavenly Philosophy; These are the
fire-steels of Gods love and fear, the matches of devotion, the interpreters of
sacred mysteries, the pilots of our pilgrimage, the Registers of Gods wondrous
works, the Court-Rolls where we may turn to the authentic effects of his
severe justice, and of his sweet mercy.

Behold, these are the true badges of perfect brethren and sisters; these are
the undeniable seals of devout Confraternities; these are the essential
properties of our Queen-Mothers children and servants. Study them seriously (O
devout Rosarists!) and endeavor punctually to observe and keep them.

First, admiring, praising, thanking the divin Majesty, for providing you so
powerful, so worthy, so perfect a Mother, Patroness, and Advocate.

Secondly, striving to make your selves worthy children, of so great and
glorious a Mother; worthy members of so pious and profitable a Confraternity.

Thirdly, Remember the promises made at your first admission, and honor her
accordingly love her, admire her, and propagate her praises to the whole World.

Fourthly, above all, aim at the imitation of her Life and Virtues, which is
the most perfect, and (to her) most pleasing way of homage and service.

Fifthly, frequent the Sacraments of Confession and Communion, hear Mass daily
and devoutly, be present at holy exhortations, and give your self to spiritual
lecture.

Sixthly, let no day pass without a special recommendation of your self, your
fellow-brethren and sisters of the ROSARY, and the Universal Church (not
forgetting our distressed Nation, her ancient Dowry) to your Mother of Powers
care and protection.

Finally, make your most humble and hearty addresses unto your Mother of Power
in all your pressing necessities; and doubt not but you shall receive singular
benefits and blessings (by your being of this sacred Confraternity) during the
course of your life, and singular comfort and confidence at the hour of your
death; that is, you shall live well, and dye well, which is the happiness we
all aim at, and which is my hearty and daily prayer for my self, and for you
all, my devout brethren and sisters of this most sacred and most renowned
Arch-Confraternity of the ROSARY.

THE FIRST BOOK OF THE SACRED ROSARY; Which is, the Doctrinall part thereof:
Containing briefly these Particulars.
1. THat every faithful Christian ought to have a particular devotion toward
Gods holy Mother, the sacred Virgin Mary. 2. That the Practice of the sacred
Rosary, is a devotion very pleasing to the Divin Majesty, profitable to our
selves and grateful to the blessed Virgin. 3. That this sort of devotion is
proper for such Catholics as live in heretical Countries. 4. What the Rosary
is. 5. The Rosary is twofold. the great and little Rosary. 6. Why this manner
of prayer is called the Rosary? 7. That the Rosary comprehends the two sorts of
prayer, vocal and mental. 8. Three advices concerning this manner of praying
and meditating. 9. A difficulty (concerning this conjunction of vocal and
mental prayer) proposed and cleared. 10. Of the advantage which this
Confraternity of the Rosary has above all others, in point of Communication of
merits. 11. Of Indulgences in general. 12. Three necessary advertisements for
the gaining of Indulgences. 13. Of the Indulgences conferred upon the
Confrater^ity of the Rosary. 14. The general rules and Statutes of the
Confraternity of the Rosary. 15. The form of receiving brothers and sisters
into this s^ered Confraternity: with the blessing of their Bedes, Roses, and
Candles. And a form of the general absolution to be imparted to them at the
hour of death. 16. Of the pious use of Processions. 17. An Elevation for the
Procession of the Rosary with the Litanies of our Blessed Lady of the Rosary:
and the Litanies of our Blessed Lady of Loretto for a happy death. 18. Several
other prayers to be recited after the Litanies, as occasion shall require.
. 1. That every faithful Christian ought to have a particular devotion toward
Gods holy Mother, the sacred Virgin Mary.
THIS is a Subject so generally handled, a Doctrine so universally received, a
verity so largely proved, by all the learned, holy, and pious Writers of the
Catholic Church, that the only reading of the Title seem a sufficient motive
to mind all faithful Christians of this duty and devotion, without seeking for
further Arguments to convince an undeniable Tenet, which is supported by such
almost infinite multitudes of solid arguments, that the bare recital thereof
would swell this discourse (which aims at a compendious brevity) into many
large volumes.

We shall therefore (both in this and the following points) content our selves
to declare the Truth, not dispute it, to presuppose it, not prove it, to set
down Maxims, not Problems; and our endeavors shall be to excite the faithful
Rosarists to this sort of Piety by applying some of the holy Fathers pithy
sentences and expressions; not to amuse their fancies, by producing
curiosities, and falling upon the subtilties of controversies.

Wherefore abstracting here from the sacred Virgin-Mothers own Worth, Dignity,
Prerogatives, Perfections, Excellencies, (which are briefly touched in the
precedent Oration, and which are abundantly capable to ravish the whole World
with her love and admiration and move them to her honor and service) we shall
insist only upon some of the most signal benefits which redound to our selves
by our devotion toward her, reducing them to these five general heads.

The first is, That she loves her devoted children and servants.

Though the sacred Virgin is called in the Churches Dialect Matter pulchrae
dilectionis, The mother of love, and charity; and consequently cannot but have
a general ^ff^ction for all mankind: yet surely she has a particular kindness
and tendernes^, for such as addict themselves to her special honor, and
dedicate themselves to her service; according to that other passage which holy
Church also applies to her: Ego diligentes me diligo; I love them who love me.

Hence our devout. St. Bernard upon those words of the Gospel: Ecce Matter tua.
Behold thy Mother, which were delivered from the Cross by our dying Savior,
and directed to his dear Minion Saint John, and to all mankind in his person,
has these pithy expressions: If Mary is thy Mother (O Christian!) then Jesus
is thy Brother then Chr^sts Father, is thy Father, then his Heaven is thy
Inheritance, then Mary's grace is thy treasure, (for Mothers usually lay up
treasures for their Children;) then she is sensible of all thy sufferings,
sollicitous to supply thy wants, careful to provide for thy necessities, (for
a Mother is tender over her Children;) Therefore (O Christian!) make choice of
Mary for thy Mother; For it is impossible (says elsewhere the same devout
Doctor) that she should abandon them, who place their confidence in her
Patronage and Protection, since she is the Mother of Mercy and compassion.

Who would not then become a loving Child and obedient servant of so pious and
tender a Mother? who would not strive to gain the favor and affection of so
faithful a friend, and so powerful a Patroness?

The second is, That she is liberal and bountiful in bestowing benefits and
favors upon her children and servants.

Worldly affection (if it be true and perfect) has such power over the heart
of Man, as to cause him to confer freely upon his beloved object, whatsoever he
most dearly prizes and esteems. And can it be conceived that the Saints charity
(and particularly Hers, which far excels that of all Men, Saints, and Angels
together) being more perfect, should be less liberal?

The glorious Virgin, (say our Doctors) is the Treasuress of the celestial
Riches, the Dispensatrix of Gods gifts, she carries the keys of the divin
Coffers: All power is given to you (great Empress of both Worlds! says her
mellifluous Doctor) so that you have leave to do what you please in Heaven and
Earth! And she is surely no niggard in dispensing them, as being equally
bountiful and powerful, equally good and great, equally courteous and
charitable: Why dread you, (O ye devout children and servants of MARY, says the
same Doctor) to approach your Mother and Mistress? There is nothing in her of
rigidness and austerity; She Is full of meekness, charity, courtesy toward all
them that sue unto her.

I well know (says the ancient Father Theophilactus) that you (O most glorious
Queen Mother!) are the great Protectrice of mankind: And who is he (O merciful
Princess!) that having placed his confidence in you, has remained confounded?
Who is that he or she, amongst the children of Adam, who having besought your
succor, and assistance, has been rejected and abandoned? Let Us therefore make
(to her our humble addresses in all our necessities, since she is so Powerful
to assist us, so Merciful to admit us, so Ready to relieve us.

The third is, that she comforts her children and servants in all their
afflictions, persecutions, desolations.

This follows from the former: For if (as a most tender Mother) she loves and
cherishes her children and servants; and showers down so many goods, graces,
and favors upon them; she surely compassionat's them in there pressing
necessities; For it is then chiefly, that true friendship shows it self, true
charity expands it self, true liberality diffuses it self. Certainly (says a
pious Author) were all the devout servants and children of Mary summoned out of
their graves to give in their several answers to this Interrogation: How often
have you heartily invoked your holy Mistress and Mother in your necessities, and
been denied her speedy succor and assistance? They would unanimously exclaim
with her holy St. Bernard; Taceat ille, etc. Let that impious tongue be silent
(O most compassionat Virgin Mother!) which dares falsely avouch that you have
failed to help and comfort him, whenever he faithfully called upon you in his
distressed condition.

Therefore St. German (the Patriark of Constantinople) thus addresses his
discourse unto her: no one is saved (O most sacred Virgin!) but by your
assistance: no one if free from misery (O must pure Virgin!) but by your
means: no one receives Gods gifts and graces (O most merciful Virgin!) but by
your mediation: No one obtains the pardon of his offenses, (O Virgin worthy of
all praise and honor!) but by your prayers and intercession. Who (says he)
after your Divin Son, takes so much care of poor Mankind as your self? Who so
zealously defends and strengthens weak man in his troubles and temptations? Who
so readily succors him in his afflictions and persecutions? Who so charitably
excuses his crimes, pleads his cause, procures his pardon, and delivers him
from the severe punishment, which his sins have justly deserved?

Let therefore each afflicted Soul (proceeds this holy Patriark) make to you O
Compassionat Mother! his humble addresses: let him who perceives his frail
vessel to be in danger of drowning amidst the impetuous winds and waves of
this wicked and tempestuous World, cast his eyes up to you (bright Star of the
Sea!) and let him rest confident that you will speedily and securely conduct
him to his desired haven.

The fourth is, That she is their faithful Advocate in Heaven.

The cause is half gaind, that is undertaken by a powerful Advocate, And who
can possibly be imagined more Powerful, than the Queen Mother, pleading at her
own Sons Tribunal?

There she sustains her childrens processes, embraces their protection,
procures their pardon, diverts the sentence of their deserved damnation, and
omits nothing, which may conduce to the appeasing of their sovereign Judge, and
the saving of their Souls.

O faithful Patoness of afflicted sinners! How fitly does holy Church qualify
you with this Title?

Eia ergo Advocata nostra, etc.
O therefore you our Advocate,
Turn those your eyes of pity sweet:
Upon our miserable state,
Thus prostrate here before your feet.
For (as the learned Cassian confirms) all our affairs of highest importance
are in your holy hands, and the salvation of all mankind consists in the
multitude of Queen Mary's graces and favors.

We may therefore well hope for a happy issue, since we have an Advocate (says
her devout St. Bernard) adorned with all the conditions, which are requisite,
and likely to carry the cause, which are three.

First, to have credit at Court, Power wih the Prince, and the Judges ear at
command.

Secondly, to be knowing in the cause, and capable of the undertaken charge.

Thirdly, to be sedulous and faithful in the prosequution thereof.

1. Now to express our Queen-Mothers credit in the Court of Heaven, and her
power with her Son, exceeds all human and Angelical capacity: Let it suffice
to say, she is his Mother, and therefore makes to him her addresses (if I may
speak it after our learned Saint Peter Damian) Non solum rogans, sed imperans;
Domina, non Ancilla; Not only entreating but commanding, as a Mistress not a
handmaid.

And St. Gregory of Nicomedia styles her all Powerful in her place of pleading
the causes of sinners, as being the Mother of the Supreme Judge. For which
reason holy Church frequently minds her of her Motherhood, and supplicates that
she will be pleased to show that great authority wherewith this Title of Titles
impowers her.

Monstra te esse Matrem,
Sumat per te preces,
Qui pro nobis Natus,
Tulit esse tuus.
Do like a mother bear
Our prayers up to his ear,
Who, for us born put on
The Title of thy Son.
2. Nor is she defective in the second quality, required in a good Advocate:
for surely she is abundantly capable to undertake this charitable charge, as
well knowing our calamitous condition: As Power is not wanting in Mary (says
St. Bernard) because she is the Judges Mother; so neither is there any want of
sufficiency to plead, because she is the Mother of wisdom; nor of good will to
impetrat and obtain the cause, for she is the Mother of mercy.

3. Nor is there any cause to question the third condition, which is a
faithful performance of this charge: For how can it be conceived, she should
be careless, (in a matter which is to us of such importance) being so full of
Clemency, Charity, Compassion? How affectionately and effectually, will she
perform this pious Office, who is also our tender and loving Mother? How shall
she endure an ill understanding between Us and the Judge our Brother; and not
rather seek by all possible means to settle a fraternall Peace, to make a
friendly Atonement, to work a perfect Reconciliation between Us? O blessed
Virgin (exclaims the same St. Bernard) you are Mother both of the Prince, and
of the banished Person; of the Judge, and of the Criminal; of God, and of Man:
being therefore Mother to them both, you may not endure to see any discord
continue between them both.

The fifth is, That she procures for them a happy departure out of this world,
the salvation of their souls, and the enjoyment of eternal Felicity.

What more can you expect (O devout Children and Servants of Mary!) than to die
well, and become eternally happy, which is the end of your Creation, and the
Crown of all your endeavors?

And surely, it is the generally delivered opinion of all the Doctors, that it
is impossible for any one, who dy's a faithful servant of the sacred Virgin,
to perish eternally: And they give the reason; because it is not possible they
should die impenitent, who have the Faith to call heartily upon her, whose
powerful Prayers will obtain for them a disposition to grace, and a contrition
for their offenses.

This is frequently asserted by Saint Bernard (as has been before alleged)
And by St. Anselm in these words: You (O compassionate Mary!) embrace the poor
sinner with a Motherly affection, and you never leave him, till your Son,
appeased by your prayers, gives him his pardon, and receives him into his
favor and friendship. And elsewhere, O Beatissima (says St. Anselm) sicut
omnis a to aversus, and a te despectus, necesse est ut intereat: It a omnis ad
te conversus, and a te respectus, impossible est ut pereat. O most blessed
Mary! as he must needs perish who turns his back to you, and whom you reject
from your favor; so it is impossible he should perish who is zealous of your
honor, and whom you vouchsafe to behold and countenance.

And Theophilus; I know (says he) O sovereign Lady, that you have too great
care of sinners to quit them in their greatest necessity.

And Origin, I hold (says he) as an assured verity; that the Virgin Mary will
never abandon that person, who implores her assistance in the time of his
necessity: for she is full of goodness, full of mercy, full of grace, and
therefore cannot refuse her compassion to him that calls upon her.

We conclude with this sentence of the glorious Martyr St. Ignatius: you (O
blessed Mary!) are the sacred Mother of the sovereign Deity, the true Mother of
the worlds Savior, the adopted Mother of the poor Sinner: receive me now into
the bosom of your Maternall mercy and compassion.

. 2. That the practice of the sacred Rosary is a Devotion very pleasing to the
Divin Majesty, profitable to our selves, and grateful to the Blessed Virgin.
THis precedent Foundation being solidly settled in our hearts; (to wit, that a
singular devotion toward the sacred Virgin, is so beneficial unto us; as has
been briefly declared and abundantly proved by the express testimonies of so
many of our pious Fathers and Predecessors; to which many more might have been
added, as many be seen at large in Jodocus Coccius; in the Volume of the sacred
Virgins Triple Crown, and in the several Authors upon this subject.

It now behooves us to choose out (amongst the many ways of honoring and
serving Gods blessed Mother) that particular sort of devotion, which may
probably be most pleasing to God, profitable to our selves, and grateful to
the most pure and Immaculate Virgin.

And this (without the least thought of undervaluing any ones judgment, or
derogating from the several manners of honoring her, who can never be
sufficiently honored by any human industry and invention:) we conceive to be
the devout practice of the sacred Rosary.

For if we seriously consider its Extent, its Antiquity, its Generality, its
Facility, its large Community of Merits, its vast Treasures of Indulgences, and
the like prerogatives, (which are compendiously enumerated in the foregoing
Oration:) we shall find it far exceeds all other sorts of devotion (of this
nature) whatsoever.

And surely, that manner of Prayer, cannot but be very pleasing to our
Sovereign Lord and Maker, profitable to our selves, and grateful to the
blessed Virgin, which directly tends to the advancement of the divin honor, to
the promotion of our own salvation, and to the increase of the sacred Virgin
Mothers glory.

Now the exercises of the holy Rosary, aim directly at these three heroic ends:

For first, since the Rosary (as shall be hereafter declared) consists of the
two richest pieces of Christian Piety, which are the Pater noster and Ave
Maria, and of the principal mysteries of our Christian Faith, What subject
imaginable can be more proper, what object possible can be more powerful, to
raise our Souls to the love, praise, and honor of our Creator and Redeemer,
than the due and daily consideration of those Divin Mysteries, which are (as it
were) the sacred Tables, and lively Pictures, representing continually to our
memories, their admirable benefits, their excessive love, their infinite
liberality to Mankind?

Secondly, By what Prayers can we more confidently promise to our selves the
obtaining of our just desires, (and consequently the promoting of our
salvation;) than by the Pater noster dictated by our Redeemers own divin mouth,
enjoynd by his special command to be frequently used by all faithful
Christians, and by him indu'd with so great efficacy and virtue?

Thirdly, by what ladder of praise, can we more probably reach the glorious.
Virgin-Mothers perfections than by the Ave Maria, which was framed in Heaven by
the Holy Trinity it self, and thence brought down to the Earth by his
Ambassador, the Angel Gabriel, in which, all the greatnesses, excellencies, and
prerogatives of Gods blessed Mother, are so briefly, distinctly, divinly
couched together. (For Ave is as much as to say, sine vae, without woe, without
sin, without malediction: Gratia plena, declares her full of all grace, virtue,
and goodness, Dominus tecum, denounces her the happy Mother of the Almighty.)

Since therefore the Ave Maria is a compendious abridgment of all the
Virgin-Mothers praises: Surely it must needs be a salutation to her most
grateful, pleasing, and acceptable.

. 3. That this sort of devotion, is proper for such Catholics as live in
Heretical Countries.
THIS Title is chiefly intended for their satisfaction, who fondly conceive,
that the use of the Rosary, the devotion of the Bondage, and all high manners
of honoring Gods most holy Mother; are unfit, (or at least) improper and
inconvenient to be practiced in such places as are overspread with heresy, and
by such persons as are liable to persecution: because the treatises of such
subjects falling into their hands, who are of so contrary a judgment; turn
commonly to their great scandal, and to the evident detriment of the
Catholic cause and Religion.

But this surely argues a great weakness of their Faith, and is a plain error
and mistake of their understanding.

For it is there principally, that this manner of Piety ought to be most
zealously practiced, and most diligently propagated, where it is most
maliciously impugn'd, and most unjustly and violently persecuted: and as the
deceived miscreants of these our days and in this our Country, endeavor (by
all manner of false subtilties, and blasphemous untruths) to derogate from the
Sovereign Queen Maryes glory; so it behooves every faithful Catholic, to
procure (with all possible care, industry, and devotion) the amplification and
increase of her most just, due and deserved honor and praises.

Moreover, though the most sacred Virgin Mary (being Gratia plena, full of
grace and goodness; Matter misericordiae, the Mother of mercy and compassion;
and Matter Dei, the Mother of the Almighty) is both willing and powerful to
afford all sorts of assistances whatsoever, for which she is humbly implored:

Yet it is her singular and peculiar property, to destroy heresies, and so to
terrify all the Satanicall Armies of her Sons and his Churches adversaries,
that they are defeated, and put to flight, at the sole appearance of her
formidable presence and power, who is styled, Terribilis ut castrorum acies
ordinata, Dreadful to these Rebels, as an Army ranged in battle array; And
to whom the Church joyfully fings in gratulation of these her signal
victories: Gaude Maria Virgo, cunctas haereses sola interemisti in universo
Mundo, Rejoice (O you glorious Conqueress! who alone have destroyed all
heresies in the whole World.

Nor is this a lately invented Title, as hers and our Enemies vainly urge and
inculcate: For it is above five hundred years since Saint Bernard avouch'd this
to be one of the Mother of Powers special Prerogatives, concluding his Sermon
(preached in the honor of her glorious Assumption) in these words, Sola
contrivit universam haereticam pravitatem, She alone has dashed all heretical
impiety.

And well might Saint Bernard assert this proposition, who knew the practice of
past ages, and had read the writings of his holy Predecessors related in the
ancient Counsels of Ephesus, and Chalcedonia, against the Manicheans,
Nestorians, Hesuidians and other Heretics.

For you shall not find any Father or Doctor of the Church; but that before he
entered the lists to combat against these cross-grained adversaries, he first
implored the sacred Virgin-Mother's assistance, as well foreseeing that without
the help of her Powerful prayers, all their writings, wrestlings, skirmishes,
would little advance their own cause or conquest, and as little conduce to
their Antagonists confusion or conversion. Saint Irenaeus, who lived in the
year 180. and was one of the first Writers against Heretics, is the first
witness of this verity, largely extolling Gods sacred Mother, and opposing her
by many apt Antitheses against our first Parents indiscretion, and inconstancy.

Tertullian, who lived in the year 230. does the like in his learned Treatise
of prescriptions against Heretics.

St. Athanasius, the great Antagonist of the Arrians, who lived in the year
304. conceives it better to invoke her alone, and implore her powerful
assistance, than (omitting that) to address our selves to all the other Saints
and celestial Inhabitants.

St. Epiphanius, who lived in the year 370. and undertook to write against all
Heretics, honors her with all sorts of praises.

St. Hierome, who is commonly called the Hammer of Heretics, and lived in the
year 390. is wonderfully profuse in her praises.

Ss. Augustine, the Churches Champion against the Pelagians, who lived in the
year 420. says; That she alone brought the salving Remedy to heal our otherwise
incurable wound.

And to return to S. Bernard (who for his singular devotion to this sacred
Queen of Heaven, is frequently surnamed her Favorite, her Priest, her
Chaplain, her Champion:) he assures, that she possesses the middle place,
between the Sun and the Moon; that is, between her son Christ Jesus, and the
Church Militant upon earth; Between whom, she is the perpetual Mediatrix, as
Christ is the Mediator between his Eternal Father and us: adding elsewhere:
Nihil nos habere vult Deus, quod per manus Mariae non transiret. It is the will
of the Almighty (says he) that we mortals should have nothing, but what
passes through Mary's hands.

Lastly, Saint Dominick the great Patriark, and Institutor of this
Arch-Confraternity of the holy Rosary, considering all these things; and being
desirous to oppose the most prevailing Antidote against that most pestiferous
Poison of the Albigean Heresy (then largely spreading it self abroad, and
blasphemously raging against the sacred Virgins honor;) judged it expedient,
and necessary to have recourse to this valiant Judith: And therefore (by her
own advice and revelation,) he invented this now practiced Rosary, consisting
of the fifteen Mysteries; recommending the use thereof to all devout
Christians: Which sort of Piety proved so prevalent and succesfull, that soon
after, that Infernal fire was quenched, that contagious current was stopped,
that wicked Heresy was utterly abolished.

If we therefore lay hold of the same means, make use of the same remedy, and
present the like humble and hearty petitions, to the same Mother of Mercy and
Power, We may also hope to obtain the same happy effects; and to see these our
blind Adversaries enlightened, these strayed Sheep reduced, these our obstinate
Countrymen converted.

It Is therefore convenient for all Christians, and proper for us in particular,
to practice this sort of Piety and devotion to Gods glory, his Mothers honor,
and the extirpation of Heresies.

. 4. What the Rosary is?
THIS Word Rosary, betokens properly, a Rose-bed, border, or place planted with
Rose-trees: Or also, it signifies the Bushes themselves, which bring forth the
Roses upon their several branches. But as we here understand it, and generally
all devout Christians practice it.

The Rosary is a spiritual Posie, made up of Mystical flowers, which we
present to the glorious Virgin Mary, the Mother of our Redeemer, as a sweet
smelling garland to adorn her sacred head: That is to say;

The Rosary, is a certain peculiar manner of offering up our Prayers to the
divin Majesty, in the honor of his holy Mother; by the recital of one hundred
and fifty, (or only fifty) Angelical Salutations: interposing our Lords
Prayer between each ten of them, and meditating (in the mean while) upon he
divin Mysteries of our Redeemers Incarnation, Life, and Passion.

The sacred flowers whereof this Mystical Garland is composed; are the
principal Prayers, and the prime Mysteries of our Religion.

These prayers are the Pater noster, and the Ave Maria. The First, pronounced
by our Redeemers mouth: The Second, delivered unto us, partly by the heavenly
Ambassador, the Archangell Gabriel; partly by S. Elizabeth, the holy Baptist's
Mother; partly by the Catholic Church.

These Mysteries (which make up, and connect together these sacred Prayers into
this sweet smelling Posie, and Garland;) are flowers of three several colors;
Green, Red, and Azure; of each color, Five; and in the whole, Fifteen.

The Green, are the Mysteries of Christ's Incarnation, called Joyful, as
bringing gladness to the World.

The Red, are the Mysteries of our Redemption, called Dolorous; as being died
with the vermillion tincture of our Redeemer's Blood.

The Azure, are the Mysteries ensuing upon our Saviors Resurrection, called
Glorious, as being commemorations of his, and his Mothers triumph.

. 5. The Rosary is twofold; the great Rosary, and the little Rosary.
THE Great Rosary, is so called, for that it contain's fifteen Tens, or Decads,
(that is, fifteen times ten Ave's, and fifteen Paters,) and has all the
fifteen Mysteries to be run over in Meditation, during the time of its recital.

And this great Rosary, is otherwise named the Psalter of the sacred Virgin,
because it comprehends the same number of Angelical Salutations, as the
Prophet David's Psalter does of Psalm's.

The little Rosary, is so termed, for that it ends in five Tens or Decades;
(That is, fifty Ave's and five Paters;) and takes only five Mysteries (during
its recital,) for the subject of its Meditation.

And this is commonly called he Third part of the Psalter; because being thrice
performed, it makes up the whole Psalterium.

. 6. Why this manner of prayer is called the Rosary.
FIrst, because as a Rose-bed has many bushes, bringing forth sweet Roses,
which refresh and recreate the senses of such as gather them: So this manner of
praying contains a multitude of Paters and Ave's, which wonderfully comfort,
rejoice, and perfect their souls, who with a due devotion, with an humble
reverence to the Divin Presence, and with a diligent attention to the sacred
Mysteries of our Saviors Life and Passion, shall use and frequent them.

Secondly: Because as we commonly name such works or collections, Rosaries,
which contain the prime and principal points, that can be delivered upon that
subject, (for that the Rose is the Princess of all flowers): So this manner of
Devotion is fitly called a Rosary, for that it involves the chief form's of
Prayer; to wit, the Pater noster, (which, as Saint Thomas largely proves, is
the prime of all Prayers, directed to the Divin Majesty); and the Ave Maria,
which is the chief of all Salutations directed to the Blessed Virgin.

Thirdly; because this word Rosary, signifies also a Garland of Roses; which
name may properly be applied to this pious Exercise; it being a certain
spiritual Crown and circular Garland compacted of these chief Prayers, and
presented to the Sacred Virgin.

Fourthly: Because as the Rose-Bush consists of Leaves, Prickles, Flowers; so
this our Rosary is composed of Joyful, Dolorous, and Glorious Mysteries: The
Joyful, correspond to the Leaves; The Dolorous, resemble the prickles; The
Glorious, sympathize with the Flowers.

. 7. That the Rosary comprehends the two sorts of Prayer; Vocal and Mental.
Mental Prayer, is conceived only in the Soul and Spirit, without any
pronunciation of words.

Vocal Prayer is pronounced with the Mouth, and also conceived in the mind.

The Mental prayer is surely more perfect:

First, as being more like that of the celestial Inhabitants.

Secondly, As consisting in a simple and quiet aspect of the understanding,
without any motion or mixture of discourse.

Thirdly, as being more concealed from the sworn Enemy of our good; and
therefore less exposed to the danger of his temptations, and of external
distractions.

And this sort of Prayer is most proper for such as have made some progress in
a spiritual course of life, and who can soar aloft upon the swift wings of
their internal desires, and affections, fixing the eyes of their spirits upon
the Eternal Splendour of the Divinity it self which they can as steadfastly
behold and contemplate, as the Eagle does the Sun.

The vocal Prayer, though it is less perfect; yet is conceived to be more
proper for the generality of Lay People, and especially for all ignorant,
illiterate, and unexperienced souls, who are commonly far more capable to
comprehend exterior words, actions, and ceremonies, than the interior ways
and conceptions of the Spirit.

Now, to recite the sacred Rosary as we ought; we are to make joint use of both
these manners of Prayer, vocal and Mental: That to pronounce the Pater and
Ave distinctly with our mouths: This to meditate devoutly upon the divin
Mysteries.

And this way of vocal and mental Prayer may (in a short time of practice)
become easy and familiar, even to the meanest capacities; if whilst their
tongue is employed in the pronunciation of the Prayers, their mind be exercised
in the Consideration of the respective Mystery.

. 8. Three advices concerning this manner of Praying and Meditating.
HEre by the way, the devout Rosarist may please to take particular notice of
these three important advertisments.

First, That though there are many points set down, and many Mysteries proposed
for the Theams and subjects of our Meditations: yet it is not necessary for him
to run over all those points; no, nor all those mysteries as often as he recites
the Rosary: but if he can sweetly entertain his spirit upon one only point, or
one only Mystery; he may not only lawfully, but very laudably stay there,
without hasting forward: (like the Be, (which forsakes not that Flower upon
which she first fastens, as long as she finds any sweetness to be sucked from
it:) referring the other points and Mysteries to another spiritual repast.

Secondly, That since in all well-ordered Mental Prayer, there is a
concurrencie of the understanding and will: (we speak not here, of that high
Exercise of Recollection largly described in our spiritual Conquest) it being
the proper office of the understanding in Mental Prayer, to move the
affections of the will, and to give it reasons to fly or follow what is
represented unto it, as good or evil; without which concurrency of these two
powers of the soul, all Meditation would prove fruitless, and unprofitable:
Therefore the understanding is to represent to its internal eyes, that Mystery
(whereupon it intends to employ it self) as if it were then really done and
transacted before it: Which is a most efficacious way (as long experience has
taught devout persons), to contain the spirits evagation, within its due bounds
and limits.

Thirdly, That as soon as by the diligence and discourse of the understanding,
there is discovered some devout conception, the Will be forthwith excited to
holy affections, either of love or hatred; of avoiding or embracing, of joy or
grief, according to the subject of the present Meditation, the suggestion of
the understanding, and the internal motion of Gods Holy Spirit. For since (as
has been said) the chief office of the understanding in all mental Prayer, is
to inflame the Will with sacred affections; And since Affective Prayer (as all
spiritual Authors agree) is far more perfect in it self, profitable to us, and
pleasing to the Divin Majesty, than discoursive Prayer; surely all discourses
ought to cease, as soon as these affections are sufficiently stirred and
excited.

Wherefore the devout Rosarists, and whosoever aims at the speedy amendment of
his life, and the advancement of his soul in the way of perfection by the means
of mental prayer must take heed of permitting all, or overmuch to his
understanding, and nothing or very little to his Will; as may more largly be
seen in the Maxims of our spiritual Conquest.

. 9. A difficulty concerning this conjunction of vocal and Mental Prayer,
proposed and cleared.
BUT since the Recital and sense of our Lords Prayer, and of the Angelical
Salutation, is altogether different and foreign, as to the Meditation upon the
Mysteries: And since our understanding cannot attend to several objects, and
apply it self to the consideration of diverse senses at one and the same time:
How can this joint mixture of vocal and mental Prayer choose but dissipate
and distract the spirit: and consequently destroy the soul's settled attention
and recollection, which is the very life of all Prayer, and without which the
vocal rehearsing of the devoutest words, is but a fruitless lip-labor; and
the meditating upon the divinest Mysteries, is but a mere loss of time, and of
no effect and virtue.

For this reason, Some are of opinion, that it were not amiss to divide them,
in the recital of the Rosary: And because mental Prayer is the higher,
harder, and perfecter; they give advice, (following herein the order of nature,
which generally proceeds from the less to the greater) to begin with the vocal
recitation; thereby to excite their spirits ardour to ascend to the
contemplation of the proposed Mystery: As for example, after the Rosarist
shall have devoutly recited his first Decade in honor of the first Mystery;
he desists a while from a farther prosecution of the rest, till he has
silently considered that Mystery, and drawn from thence some pious affections
and practical resolutions. Which way of thus separating the vocal recital of
the Prayers, from the Mental rumination upon the Mysteries, though it is
undoubtedly a very profitable practice: yet surely to couple both together, and
so to make this Prayer run upon two feet, or rather fly with two wings up to
Heaven; seems far more powerful and efficacious.

For, as concerning what is objected, of the dissipation of our atte^tion by
this conjunction of vocal and mental prayer: The devout Rosarist may
confidently ground himself upon the doctrine delivered in our Spiritual
Conquest, and derived from S. Thomas: That all vocal Prayers (to render them
profitable) must necessarily be accompanied with some one of these three
Attentions:

The first is, an Attention to the Words; pronouncing them clearly, entirely,
distinctly: which Attention is good and sufficient:

The second is, an Attention to the true sense, and meaning of the words,
whether Literal or Mystical; which Attention is much better, (and more
profitable for such as can practice it), but not absolutely necessary; because
they who pray in a language they understand not, cannot possibly attain to it,
and yet (according to the Churches decision, and all our Doctors opinion) they
cease not therefore to pray profitably.

The third is, an Attention to the end, at which all pious Christians aim in
all their Prayers, and which is principally Gods honor and glory, the
salvation of their own soul's, and the good of their neighbor: which Attention
is best of all, and most benefi iall: for it is so ample, that it supplies all
the defects of the two former; and so easy, that the most simple Idiot may
procure it, in whatsoever language he powrs forth his petitions.

Now the usual and ordinary way of reciting the Rosary by interlacing vocal
and mental Prayer, does not at all hinder or divert the thought (thus fixed
and directed by the understanding), from this chief and common end; nor putts
the least impediment to this last, principal, and only necessary Attention.

. 10. Of the Advantage, which this Confraternitie of the Rosary, has above all
others in point of Communication of Merits.
THough every zealous Christian (by concurring with Gods every where profferr'd
grace); may so duly, diligently, and perseverantly practice his Devotions in
his own private Oratory; as to arrive at the perfection of virtue, and the
salvation of his soul: yet these heights are not there obtained with that
alacrity, facility, security; as by being joined to sacred Confraternities;
which are the Academies of Devotion, the Schools of sanctity, the Buttresses of
Religion, Piety perfection: And where (under the observation and Practice of
certain spiritual exercises, tending to the common end of our Creation) the
fervor and good examples of his faithful Associats, warm his Tepidity, excite
his Piety, and add the continual fuel of courage and constancy to his holy
Resolutions; according to that saying of the Wiseman: Si unus ceciderit
fulcietur ab altero etc. where many are united together, if one falls, he may
be raised up by his fellow; and if one be assaulted, two may be able to repulse
the adversary. For, Funiculus triplex difficile rumpitur: A triple cord (says
he) is not easily broken: And one man alone, is as a small, single, slender
thread; feeble, frail, and easily pash'd in pieces; but being twisted and tied
to many others by the strong bands of a spiritual friendship, he becoms
formidable to all his Infernal Enemies.

And this by reason of the mutual succor of their multiplied prayers and
merits, according to that pithy expression of Saint Ambrose; Dum singuli orant
pro omnibus, sequitur ut omnes orent pro singulis. When as every single person
pray's for all, it follows, that all pray for every single person.

Now, though generally in all confraternities, there is a Communication of
prayers, merits, and spiritual goods, yet not in all alike. And this is the
particular point, wherein this Arch-Confraternity of the Rosary, seems to
excel all others; In which (according to their several Institutes,
Approbations, Intentions,) this participation of Prayers and Community of
Merits, is confined to some certain place, where they are received, and to that
congregation whereof they are children and members.

Whereas the Brethren and Sisters of this Arch-confraternitie, being any where
received are every where priviledg'd; and who so is enrolled in this Book of
our Blessed Lady of Power, is forthwith made a happy partaker of all their
spiritual perfections, who are registered in Rome, in Paris, in any place of
the whole universe.

The learned Doctor Navar, gives the reason hereof: Because (says he) this
Communication is expressed and declared in the Statuts, Erections, and
Confirmations of this Confraternity, without which particular expression they
could not enjoy that special privilege. For confraternities are certain
associations of several people together; In societatem autem non veniunt nisi
bona expressa (say the Jurists) In Societies, there is no farther communication
of any goods amongst the associated persons, than only of such as are expressed
in the contract of association: Therefore (proceeds this famous Canonist) Hanc
communicationem universalem ipse tanto magis suspicio, quanto minus memini
logere, per aliarum Confratriarum Statuta, esse similem factam. I set a higher
price upon this Confraternity, by reason of this universal Communication, for
that I remember not to have read the like in the constitutions of any other
Confraternity.

Besides this Privilege, which gives the Confraternity of the Rosary a
precedence before all its collateralls; and which is thus briefly here insisted
upon (not to obscure their luster, but to blazon its own splendour) there is yet
another, in which it also much more surpasses all other confraternities
whatsoever: Which is; The vast Treasure of Indulgences conferred upon it by the
prime Pastors of the Church; there having been no Pope, since Sixtus quartus,
who has not liberally laid open the Churches Storehouse to enrich the sacred
Rosary, and added new benefits to his predecessors bounty, as will apear by the
sequall of this discourse.

. 11. Of Indulgences in general.
BEfore we give in the large Catalogue of Indulgences, it may be very
convenient to declare the nature, reason, and ground of all Indulgences (with
as much brevity and plainess as is possible) for their information, whose
capacities cannot reach the intelligence of School Divinity.

It is therefore an assured Tenet amongst all Orthodox Authors; (as is
elsewhere largly declared in our Oration of Indulgences, and may be abundantly
proved by many expressed passages of Holy Writ): That when our Merciful
Creator pardons the fault of a converted sinner; he does not always remit the
punishment, which he has thereby deserved. Adam and Eve, the first sinners;
and the first Penitents, were surely pardoned, and yet severely punished; for
neither was he restored to the privilege of Immortality; nor she exempted from
the pangs of childing.

God pardoned his Idolatrous people, by the interecession of Moses but bids
them expect to be punished in the day of his revenge.

Nathan declared King David absolved from his Adultery; and yet God visited him
for the chastisement of the same crime with many rigorous adversities.

Our Original Sin, is remitted in Baptism, and yet our understandings remain
still punished with ignorance; our wills with malice, and all the faculties of
our bodies and souls with sensuality and Rebellion against our Reason.

From which (and other infinite examples) we must needs infer. That when the
fault is pardoned, the punishment is not always relaxed, and consequently: That
after our Reconciliation to the Divin Mercy, by our due Contrition, Confession,
and Conversion, we are still liable to make satisfaction to the Divin Justice.

This then being supposed as most certain: First; That whosoever offends God
mortally; on the one side committs a fault, and on the other side contracts an
Obligation to satisfy for it, (which are called culpa, and poena.) Secondly,
That the Fault may be pardoned by Confession, and the penalty, by Penance and
satisfaction; either in this World, or in the next. Thirdly, That few in this
world, either do or can fulfill that penance, which their sins deserve:


Hence it is, That every sinner stands in need of some foreign assistance, to
warrant him from the flames of Purgatory; in which he must pay, Usque ad
ultimum quadrantem, Even to the last farthing, who has not paid it in this
world.

And this Assistance must necessarily be derived unto us from the superabundant
merits of our Blessed Redeemer, whose precious Blood, Death, and Passion, is
the prime source of all Christians merit and satisfaction.

Now (say our learned Divins), The same blood of our Savior, which has
merited for us a Remission of our crimes, and a Reconciliation to Gods favor;
is also applied to us, for the relaxation of our deserved punishments, By four
manners of means; First, By means of the Sacraments: Secondly, By means of some
Heroique Act of Charity, such as is Martyrdom, etc. Thirdly, By means of
satisfactory works done in the state of Grace, such as are Almesdeeds, Fasting,
and Prayer. Fourthly, by the means of Indulgences.


The First three, are the Ordinary means, whereby our Redeemers Satisfactions
are applied unto us:

The last (of Indulgences) is the extraordinary means, whereby they are also
applied unto us; either by our Savior himself immediately, or by him
instrumentally, who is entrusted with this power by our Saviors own
concession, expressed in these words: Tibi dabo claves Regni Coelorum, etc. I
will give to thee, (O Peter!) the Keys of my heavenly Kingdom: Whatsoever thou
shall bind upon Earth, shall be bound in Heaven; and whatsoever thou shall
loose on Earth, shall be loosed in Heaven. Whereupon St. Cyprian, St. Ambrose
and St. Augustine (Three very sufficient Doctors to ground an opinion) conclude,
That by this general term, Quodcunque, whatsoever; We are absolutely
prohibited to put in any exception, and expressly obliged to believe, That
whatsoever (whether offense or punishment) St. Peter (and consequently his
successors the Popes) shall unbind upon Earth, shall be unbound also in Heaven.

And this large power must of necesty belong to the Keys; (says the Council of
Lateran) since they are expressly given to take away all obstacles, which may
hinder our entrance into Heaven: As therefore there is a double hinderance; the
Fault, and the Pain; so the Keys, must be capable to open both these doors, to
make them complete and perfect.

From all which, may be gathered this brief definition of an Indulgence. That,
It is a gift, a Relaxation, an Acquittance of the temporal pain, due to the
Divin Justice for the sins already pardoned by Confession.

And this Relaxation is twofold; General, when the Indulgence is Plenarie,
which quits us from all the pain due to our sins. And Restrained, when the
Indulgence imports only some certain number of Day's, Quarantins, and year's of
Pardon. When therefore you find in the Popes concessions, an Indulgence of so
many days, Quarantins, or years: you are to understand it of the days and years
of this world, and not of Purgatory: As for example, He that gains an
Indulgence of an Hundred years, satisfies the divin Justice, as much, as if for
an hundred years space he had done severe Penance. So likewise a Quarantin is
as much as if he had Fasted a whole Lent, according to the custom, and so of the
rest.

Where you must take notice; That for every mortal sin, the sacred Canons
ordain seven years Penance: so that for 14. or 15. Mortal crimes, he who has
committed them, should in rigor undergo an hundred years penance, which is
above the age and ability of human nature. Whereby appears the great profit of
Indulgences, to solace our weakness, and shorten our pains; whch must surely
otherwise be paid to the divin Justice, either by severe Penance in this world,
on by more severe punishments in the next; though not necessarily long: since
they may be intensively so rigorous, that one day there may be in quantity and
quality of punishments, more than seven years Penance of this World.

But you may ask, what means a plenary, and a Quarantin, or a plenary, and Ten
yearts granted together?

Rodriguez answers, That it is to satisfy such pains as are due to venial
sins, of which pains, we are not acquitted by the plenary.

Others (as Valentia and Corduba) say better, That they are added ad cautelam,
for more security; That so, if by reason of some defect, we ga^n not the
greater Indulgence, we may at least obtain the lesser.

. 12. Three necessar I Advertisements for the gaining of Indulgences.
BUT here the devout Rosarists are to take three Advices:

The first is: That Indulgences are not indifferently obtained by all sorts of
persons but by such only as have duly, and diligently purified, prepared, and
disposed their souls to receive them by precedent Penance: Or, have led their
lives in such Innocence, since their last confession as that they continue in
the state of Grace: Or have made an Act of Contrition, and detestation of their
mortal sins, with purpose of confessing them in fit time, and avoiding them
for the future.

The second is, That they must obey such other particular commands, as the
Bulls of Indulgences import: That is; They must punctually perform the enjoined
Actions of Almesdeeds, Fastings, Prayers, Processions, visitations of Altars,
and all other the works of devotion and piety there expressed.

The third is, That they must offer up their devotions, for these generally
recommended ends and intentions in all the concessions of Indulgences. 1. For
the increase of Gods honor and glory. 2. For the exaltation of the Catholic
Church. 3. For the prosperity of the Sea Apostolic. 4. For the peace of
Christian Princes. 5. For the Reunion of Schismatiques. 6. For the Conversion
of Heretics. 7. For the correction of sinners. 8. For the Consolation of the
afflicted, both living and departed.


. 13. Of the Indulgences conferred upon the Confraternity of the Rosary.
AND now let us produce the promised Treasures of the Indulgences themselves. In
the discovery whereof.

First, we shall mention none but such as are expressly avouch'd by approved and
authentical Authors, and directly drawn out of the Popes Bulls and Indults.
For since Clement the fifth in the Council of Vienna, has imposed a formal
precept in virtue of holy obedience, and upon pain of incurring eternal
damnation, on all such as shall presume to promulgate any Indiscreet, that is
(as the Gloss in Clem. Verb. Religiosi, explicats) not granted Indulgences, we
have carefully (as behooves us) endeavored to avoid the penalty, by diligently
and painfully examining each particular Concession here set down and delivered.

Secondly, we shall purposely omit the multitude of less Indulgences, which
remit certain day's, years and Quarantins of enjoined penances, and set down
only the plenary Indulgences, which are abundantly numerous to satisfy the
most covetous Christians devotion.

I. At their first Admittance.
UPon the day that any one is first received, and enrolled into the sacred
Confraternity of the Rosary, having confessed and communicated, and recited a
third part of the Rosary, and prayed for the peace and tranquillity of the
Church, he gains a Plenary Indulgence and Remission of all his sins.

Pius quintus in his Bull, Consueverunt Romani Pontifices. 27. of Sept. 1559.

II. At their own choice.
ANy member of the Rosary has the liberty once in his life, and at the Article
of his death to make use of any Ghostly Father, who is empowered to confer upon
him a plenary Indulgence.

Innocentius octavus 15. October. 1484.

III. At the hour of death.
IN the hour, Agony, and Article of Death:

1. Being confessed and communicated a plenary Indulgence. Pius Quintus.
Consueverunt 27. of September. 1559. 2. Or, saying (with mouth, or in heart)
Jesus Maria a Plenary. 3. Or, calling thrice (either by mouth or in heart) upon
the holy Name of Jesus, a Plenary. Pius Quintus. Greg. 13. Clemens 8. 4. Or,
having a blessed Candle of the Confraternity in their hand in honor of the
Virgin Mary, at the time of their departure. a Plenary.
Adrianus 6, Illius qui Dominicum. Call. Aprilis 1523. who is cited and
confirmed by Clement the 7th. Ineffabilia. 10. Call. April. 1529.

To gain which Indulgence the third part of the Rosary must have been (at least
once) recited in the Chapel of the Rosary, or in some place where the Reciter
thereof might have a view of the Rosary Altar, as appears by the Collation of
the words of the Popes grants, and by the ends for which they grant this
Privilege; to wit, that the Rosarists may show more reverence and respect to
their Mother-Altar, and often visit it with more devotion. All which is to be
understood (as aforesaid) where these conveniences may be obtained; otherwise
they may perform these devotions, and obtain the like Indulgences in any other
Church or Oratory according to the express dispensation of the said Popes.

IV. Every first Sunday within the Month.
1. HAving confessed and communlcated, a plenary. Greg. 13. Pastoris aeterni
die quinta Maii 1581. 2. Or visiting the Altar of the Rosary, a plenary. Greg.
13. 3. Or, being present at the Procession of the Rosary, a plenary. Greg. 13.
Ad augendam. 28. October. 1577. Paulus 5. Piorum hominum. 15. April. 1608.
V. Upon the seven Feasts of our Blessed Lady which are,
THe Purification, Annunciation, Visitation, Assumption, Nativity,
Presentation, and Conception.

1. Being Confessed and Communicated, or being Contrite with a will to Confess
and Communicate at fit time, a Plenary. 2. Or, visiting the Altar of the
Rosary, a plenary. 3. Or, being present at the Processions of the Rosary upon
these days, a plenary. Pius quartus, Dum praeclara meritorum, anno 1562.
VI. For saying, or hearing the Mass of the Rosary.
1. THey who (by virtue of their privileges) shall say the Mass of the Rosary,
gain a plenary Indulgence. 2. Or shall cause it to be said, a plenary: 3. Or
hear it, gain all the Indulgences which are granted to them who recite once the
whole Rosary, which is a plenary. Paulus tertius ultimo Augusti 1537. The said
Mass of the Rosary thus begins: Salve Radix Sancta, etc. which grant is
confirmed by Sixtus quintus, Dum ineffabilia 30. Jan. 1586.
VII. For saying the Rosary.
THey who shall recite the whole Rosary, gain toties quoties a plenary, Julius
2. and Leo 10. who granted a plenary to them, who recited the Crown of our
Lady, consisting of sixty three Ave Mary's, with seven Pater Noster's
interposed; which Paul the third communicated and extended to all such as
should recite the whole Rosary, toties quoties.

VIII. For the days in which the Fifteen Mysteries of the Rosary are
celebrated.
THey, who being truly penitent, confessed and communicated, shall devoutly
visit the Chapel of the Rosary upon the days in which the Fifteen Mysteries
thereof are celebrated gain a plenary Indulgence. Greg. 13. Pastoris aeterm
5to. Maii 1581.

IX. For praying for the Dead.
1. EVery time they recite the whole Rosary for the departed, they gain the
delivery of a soul out of Purgatory. Paulus 3.3o. Junii, 1542. granted this
vivae vocis oraculo, to the Rosarists of the Kingdoms of Spain; which Pius
quintus: Consueverunt. Greg. 13. Pastoris aeterni, and Sixtus quintus: Dum
Ineffabilia, extend to all other confraternities of the Rosary throughout the
world.

2. As often, as they shall say, cause to be said, or are present at the Mass of
the Rosary celebrated for that intention, they free a Soul out to Purgatory.

3. All the Indulgences granted to the living, may be applied to the dead, by
communicating, saving Mass of the Rosary, reciting the Rosary, etc. for them.
Paulus 3.13. Aug. 1537. see John Carthagena Homelia 6. de Rosario.. 3.

X. For them who cannot be present.
SUch Brethren and Sisters of the Rosary, who by reason of sickness, a journey,
Imprisonment, Persecution, Service, distance, Danger, or any other lawful
Impediment, cannot be present at the Processions aforesaid, nor visit the Altar
of the Rosary; may notwithstanding gain all the Indulgences, as if they were
present.

1. By Confessing and Communicating. 2. Or by saying the Rosary. 3. Or the
seven Penitential Psalms, before some Altar or devout Picture. Greg. 13. Ad
augendam devotionem. 29. Aug. 1579. Idem in Bulla cupientes 24. December. 1583.
XI. Of the Stations of Rome.
ALl the Indulgences of the Stations of Rome, are granted to the Members of the
Rosary, by visiting upon these days five Altars; or one only (if there be no
more) and reciting before each Altar fiv^ Paters, and five Aves; or twenty-five
before that one Altar. Leo Decimus Maii 22. 1518, which grant Clement the 7th.
recites and confirms in his brief, Etsi temporalium, 8. Idus Maii 1534. And
Paulus tertius. Rationi congruit 3. November. 1534. And Pius Quintus Inter
desiderabilia, 28. Junii. 1569.

XII.
ANd these are a chief part of that vast treasure of Indulgences and
privileges, granted to the Arch-Confraternity of the sacred Rosary

The rest (being of less consequence) would (we conceive) be as tedious to be
read, as they are indeed needless to be known by them who shall duly consider,
That besides the particular Indulgences (which are determined to certain days,
times, and places) there are others which are general, unlimited, perpetual,
and which we shall briefly set before you (as a close of this Catalogue of
Indulgences) in these two chief heads, drawn out of what is before delivered.

I. Every day a Plenary.
THe first is; That they who are of the Rosary, in the state of Grace, and
having a general Intention to pray for such ends as are required: (which are
the three conditions absolutely necessary for the obtaining of any of these
Indulgences), may gain a Plenary, upon every day in the year; and consequently
every hour of their whole life, By performing any one of these things following.

1. Saying the Rosary. 2. Celebrating the Mass of the Rosary. 3. Causing it to
be said. 4. Hearing it. 5. Visiting five Altars (or one if there be no more)
and saying five Paters and Aves before each Altar or 25. before the one.
The consequence hereof is most clear.

First, because a Plenary is annexed to the due performance of these Acts of
Piety, toties quoties, how oftsoever they are don, without any restriction.

Secondly, because at Rome, in the Church of St. John Lateran, there may be
gained a Plenary, (if any one pleases) six times every day; and in each one of
the seven Churches of the Stations. All which, and all other City-Indulgences,
are granted to all the Brothers and Sisters of the Rosary (performing the
devotions aforesaid) wheresoever dispersed throughout the whole world: by Leo
the tenth 22. of May 1518. and by the succeeding Chief Pastors.

II. Every day a Soul out of Purgatory.
THe second is, That they may every day, (praying, and being disposed as
aforesaid) obtain the deliverance of a Soul out of Purgatory; which directly
follows from the former: First, since all the Indulgences granted to the
living, may be applied for the dead. Secondly, since at Rome, there is every
day, in one part or other of the City the delivery of a Soul out of Purgatory.

The Particular grants of all these before recited Indulgences may be seen at
large in Peter Louuet, Alphonsus Fernandez, Andreas Coppensteinius, and other
Fathers of the order of St Dominick; who have faithfully collected and
published them, according to their originalls.

Misericordias Domini in aeternum cantabo. Psalm. 88.

Our grateful hearts. O our Eternal King! Shall ever of your boundless
mercies sing.

. 14. The General Rules and Statutes of the Confraternity of the Rosary.
IT is (in the first place) to be presupposed, That there be a Priest or Dean
of the Rosary empowered with sufficient authority from the Superiors of St
Dominicks Order to receive such as desire to be admitted into this sacred
Confraternity: and to make choice of a Prefect, with such other Counselors and
Officers, as he shall conceive requisite for his assistance in order to the
managing of the public affairs of the Confraternity.

Secondly, That there be also a Chapel or Altar of the holy Rosary, to which
all the Brethren and sisters have a particular Relation. Pius Quintus in his
Bull, Consueverunt. and in his Bull, Injunctum nobis. Which being supposed,
These are the general Rules with their explications.

The first Rule.
THat all faithful Christians (of whatsoever calling and condition) may be
received into this sacred Confraternity; without any obligation to pay any
thing for their entrance and admittance. Leo the tenth Pastoris aeterni 1520.
pridie nonas October.

Annotation.
THe receiving of what is freely given, and offered by devout persons; Either
for the ornament of the Altar; or for the entertainment of him that serves the
Altar, or for the succouring of the poor Members of the Confraternity, is not
hereby forbidden: But it is inhibited to exact any thing as due, for any ones
admittance.

First, because it is a spiritual and holy thing;

Secondly, to the end the Poor, as well as the Rich, may enjoy this benefit;

Thirdly, because this pious Institut, intend, not the Receivers advancement;
but his real good who is Received.

The second Rule.
THere is to be a particular Book provided, wherein the Names and Sirnames, of
all such as are admitted, must be enregistred.

Annotation.
IF the keeping of such a Register-Book, or this manner of inrolling, be found
in some places and Countrey's inconvenient; It abundantly suffices to have the
Names written and delivered to the Prefect of the Confraterternity, though they
be presently burnt and cancelled.

The third Rule.
WHosoever is once thus admitted in any one place, is made partaker of the
prayers and merits of all them that are of this Confraternity, throughout the
whole Univers.

Annotation.
AS concerning this large participation of spiritual Benefits, See the tenth
precedent.

The fourth Rule.
NOt only the living, but also the ^aithfull departed (to wit the souls in
Purgatory) may be received and enrolled in this Confraternity, and made
partakers of these spiritual Benefits and Privileges; if any of the living
Brethren and Sisters, (performing for their deceased friends, such pious duties
and devotions as the Rules demand,) shall desire and procure it.

Annotation.
THis is grounded upon that Maxim; That all the Indulgences, which may be
obtained by the living, are also applicable to the Dead;

The fifth Rule.
ALl the Brothers and Sisters are obliged to recite once every week, the entire
Rosary, or whole Psalter; which they may (as themselves please) either perform
together, or divide into three parts, for their greater ease and convenience.

Annotation.
THe whole Psalter or Rosary, (as is before declared. 5.) is composed of 15.
Paters and 150. Aves: The three parts contain each one five Paters, and fifty
Aves. The Creed is commonly and commendably recited in the beginning, and added
to the end of every third part; with some other prayers, (as shall be hereafter
set down,) but are no necessary part thereof.

The sixth Rule.
IN case of any lawful Impediment, the brothers and sisters, causing the
Rosary to be recited for them by another, satisfy their own obligation.

Annotation.
THis is to be understood of some sufficiently excusing circumstance; for it is
dangerous to trust a Procurator, when we traffic for Paradise.

The seventh Rule.
IF through forgetfulness, multiplicity of Employments, or negligence, (and not
out of contempt) they omit this weekly Recital of the Rosary, It is no sin,
but only a privation (for that time,) of such spiritual benefits, whereof they
should otherwise have been partakers.

Annotation.
YEa, if through carelessness and tepidity, any one shall for a long time
neglect the saying of the Rosary; he cease not therefore to be a member of
this Confraternity but may return to his wonted devotions, and reobtain the
usual graces and benefits without any new admission.

The eighth Rule.
ALl the Rosarists should be present at the Mass and Procession, which are
uually performed in the Head-Chappell, upon all the Feast-days of the sacred
Virgin, and first Sundays of the months.

Annotation.
THis is enjoined by Pius 4. in his Brief Dum Praeclara, etc. Both for the
gaining of such Plenary Indulgences as are then, and there granted. And also,
that the devout Rosarists, may honor their sacred Virgin Mother with their
presence, and unitedly implore her Patronage and Protection.

The ninth Rule.
THe Dean, Prefect, and Officers of the Confraternity, are to cause four
Anniversaries, to be every year celebrated at the Rosary Altar, for the Souls
of their departed Brethren and Sisters, upon the morrows of our Blessed Ladies
four principal Festivities; which are her Nativity, Annunciation,
Purification, Assumption. At which, all the Rosarists should also assist, that
they may expect the same piety from their surviving Brethren for themselves
after their own decease.

Annotation.
WHen the days next following the four feasts before named, fall out to be
either Sundays, or some other greater solemnities: then these Anniversary
duties are remitted to the next day, not so hindered.

An advertisement.
SInce these two last Rules cannot well be practiced in some places, The devout
Rosarists are exhorted to perform their devotions, upon the days before
specified, at their private homes, and in their several habitations, with a
Relation to such duties as are then solemnized in their Mother-Chappell;
whereby they may gain the same spiritual benefits, as if they were personally
there present: As is expressly granred by Pius quintus. Inter desiderabilia 28.
June 1569. by Greg. 13. Cupientes: 24. December. 1583. And by Sixtus quintus Dum
ineffabilia meritorum. 30. Jan. 1586.

The tenth Rule.
THe great Feast of the Rosary, is not to be henceforth solemnized (as it was
formerly,) upon the 25. day of March, but upon the first Sunday of October.

Annotation.
THis solemnity was thus translated (from the 25. of March to the first Sunday
of October) by Pope Gregory the 13. who instituted the Feast of our Blessed
Lady, under the title of the Rosary, as appears at large in his Brief
beginning, Monet Apostolus, the first of April. 1573. and ordained it should be
(upon that first Sunday of October) perpetually celebrated in the Catholic
Church; for an Eternal and grateful rememoration of that most remarkable and
altogether miraculous Navall victory gained over the Turks, by a handful of
Christians under the conduct of Don John of Austria, in the Bay of Lepanto in
the Gulf of Achaia, upon the 7th day of October, which was then the first
Sunday of that month in the year of our Redeemer 1571. about the end of Pius
quintus's Popedom, (who was the zealous promotor of this holy war) and at the
beginning of the Popedom of his no less zealous successor Gregory the
thirteenth.

In which happy conflict, twenty of the Enemy's Galley's were consumed with
fire; as many more inguif'd by the waves; one hundred and fourscore taken, the
great Bashaw with twenty five thousand Turkish Soldiers slain in the place,
most of the residue brought away captives, twenty thousand Christians freed
from their sl^very, and the Catholic Cause asserted from most imminent danger
and calamity.

And this glorious victory was obtained (as is piously conceived, says this
holy Pope Gregory in his Bull aforesaid) by the Prayers of the devout
Rosarists, who even at that very time, were making their public Processions in
the several parts of Christendom for this end, most earnestly imploring the
divin assistance, (by the Intercession of their powerful Mother) that he would
be pleased to protect his Church in her pressing necessity, and favor the just
designs of those generous souls, who were then exposing their lives for the
preservation of their Faith. Nor did the effect fail (but rather exceed) their
hopes and expectation; as has been briefly declared.

The eleventh Rule.
THe third Sunday of April is also to be solemnized by the devout Rosarists,
according to the grant of Pope Gregory the 13. in his Bull, cum sicut
accepimus. Jan. 3. 1579.

Annotation.
THe reason of the Institution of this solemnity, was the signal Miracle which
happened in the City of Pavia; and which was briefly thus.

When in the year 1578. all Italy, and particularly Lumbardy, and more
particularly the City Pavia, was afflicted with a violent Plague: The
Inhabitants (by advice of the then and there Director of the Rosary) had
recourse to the sacred Virgin Mother in this their extreme and urgent
necessity; vowing to erect a Chapel, which should be dedicated Virgini
liberatrici, after their deliverance from this eminent danger. The Mother of
Mercy heard their prayers; obtained for them a present redress of their
miseries, an entire cessation of the raging Pestilence; and they gratefully
performed their promises, building a most sumptuous Chapel to her honor.

Seraphinus Siccus, General of St. Dominicks Order, was an eyewitness of this
famous Miracle. And Pope Gregory the 13. gave most ample and Plenary
Indulgences to all such as should devoutly visit the Chapel aforesaid upon
the third Sunday of April: which Indulgences were afterward extended by the
same Gregory 13. and Sixtus quintus to all the other Confraternities of the
sacred Rosary throughout the world.

. 15. The form of receiving Brothers and Sisters into this sacred
Confraternity: With the blessing of their Bedes, Roses, and Candles. And a form
of General Absolution at the hour of Death.
WHen the Dean of the Rosary has maturely and prudently considered the quality
and condition of the person who desires an admittance into this sacred
Confraternity; [Which is a caution only necessary for such Countries and
places where the Catholic Faith and profession is under restraint, and where
there may be danger of Persecution. For where our Religion is permitted to its
full and free exercise, there needs no scruple be made of admitting any one to
the Rosary, who humbly petitions for it, unless it be such a Person, whose life
and conversation is notoriously and publickely scandalous, without hope of his
being reclaimed from his wickedness:] He writes down his name, and enrolls him
in the Register-book of the Rosary.

Which done, he causes the man or woman to kneell down, before the Altar of the
Rosary, (if it be there present,) or some other devout picture, or in any place
whatsoever (as opportunity shall permit,) with a Rosary-Candle in his or her
hand; and speaks to them briefly in this, or the like manner: Think with your
selves (dear and devout Brethren and Sisters!) that you are now entering into a
spacious and specious Garden, full fraught with all sorts of spiritual fruits
and flowers: A Garden, wherein sinners may find food to convert them; the Good,
means to better them; the Bad, motives to correct them, the Just, way's to
confirm them, the Tepid, occasions to excite them; the Desolate, helps to
comfort them; the Weak, cordialls to strengthen them; the Sick, Physic to cure
them, and all Faithful Christians, fit conveniences to save their soul's;
which is the end of our creation, the period of our pretensions, the Crown of
all our laborious endeavors in this our earthly Pilgrimage.

Now these fruits are not only to be gazed upon, and admired, but to be
gathered, swallowed, disgested: Nor is it sufficient to have your names
enrolled in the Rosary Catalogue, and to be externally associated to this
sacred Confraternity; but you must seriously resolve upon an honest, honorable,
holylife and conversation; a detestation of sin, vice, and vanity; and in
brief, a total reformation of your whole outward and inward man. For since you
desire to dedicate your selves this day particularly to Gods service, and to
make a special profession of honoring his sacred Mother for the future, by
becoming a member of her family; you must also endeavor to surpass such
others, as pretend not to this height, holiness, and happiness, in all sorts of
Christian piety, virtue, and perfection: That so really corresponding to what
you outwardly promise, you may deserve to obtain her desired Patronage and
Protection.

Say therefore with heart and mouth as follows;

The Form of offering ones self to the Blessed Virgin.

THrice sacred Virgin Mary, Mother of God! I. N.N. though most unworthy to be
registered amongst your servants, yet moov'd (by that Goodness which the Angels
admire in you) to an ardent desire of honoring, loving, and serving you; do
here this day withal possible humility, sincerity, and devotion, (in the
presence of my Angel Guardian, and the whole Court of Heaven) make choice of
you for my singular Lady, Advocate, and Mother; firmly purposing to honor,
love, and serve you, with all filial duty, diligence, and fidelity; and to
procure (as much as it shall lie in my power) that all others may do the same.

I therefore most heartily beseech you, (O merciful and compassionate Mother!)
by the precious Blood which your dearly beloved son, my Blessed Savior, shed
for me in his bitter passion; That you will be graciously pleased to receive
and admit me into the number of your devout Clients, as one dedicated to your
perpetual service.

Be you favorable to me (O Blessed Lady!) and obtain for me of your
All-powerfull Son, that I may so behave my self in all my Thoughts, Words, and
Actions, as never more to think, speak, or act any thing displeasing to his
sacred Majesty.

Grant furthermore (O my good and gracious Mother!) that I may never forget
you, nor forfeit this my now made promise of honoring, loving, and serving you
all the days of my life; that so I may never be forgotten, forsaken, nor
abandoned by you; but be always protected, aided, and assisted by you,
especially in the hour of my Death. Amen.

Then he receives him or her into the Confraternity, by speaking these words,
and giving them his Benediction, as follows.

BY the Authority, which is committed to me for this end, by the Superiors of
the holy Order of St Dominick: I receive you into the Confraternity of the
Rosary of the most Blessed Virgin Mary: And do admit you to a participation of
all the spiritual benefits, which (by the merits of Jesus Christ) the Brothers
and Sisters of the sacred Rosary do commonly enjoy.

In the Name of the Father, and of the Son,, and of the holy Ghost, Amen.

Then laying the Bedes upon the Altar; he puts a stole about his neck, and
blesses them for the use of the newly received Brother or Sister: saying as
follows.

The Blessing of the Bedes of the Rosary.
Verse. Adjutorium nostrum in nomine Domini.

Resp. Qui fecit coelum and terram.

Psalm. Laudate Dominum in Sanctis ejus, laudate eum in firmamento virtutis ejus.

Laudate eum in virtutibus ejus: laudate eum secundum multitudinem magnitudinis
ejus.

Laudate eum in sono tubae; laudate eum in psalterio and cithara.

Laudate eum in tympano, and choro: laudate eum in chordis and organo.

Laudate eum in cymbalis been sonantibus; laudate eum in cymbalis jubilationis:
omnis spiritus laudet Dominum.

Gloria Patri and Filio, etc.

Verse. Dignare me laudare te virgo sacrata.

Resp. Da mihi virtutem contra hosts tuos.

Verse. Cum dederit dilectis suis somnum.

Resp. Ecce haereditas Domini filii merces fructus ventris.

Verse. Domine exaudi orationem meam.

Resp. Et clamor meus ad te veniat.

Verse. Dominus vobiscum.

Resp. Et cum spiritu tu^.

Oremus.
OMnipotens and misericors Deus, qui propter eximiam Charitatem tuam qua
dilexisti nos, Filium tuum unigenitum Dominum nostrum Jesum Christum, pro
Redemptione nostra, de coelis in Terram descendere, and de Beatissimae Virginis
Mariae Dominae nostrae utero, Angelo nunciante, carnem suscipere, crucemque ac
mortem subire, and tertia die gloriosi a mortuis resurgere voluisti, ut nos
eriperes de potestate Diaboli: Obsecramus immensam clementiam tuam, ut haec
signa Rosarii, in honorem and laudem ejusdem Genitricis Filii tui, ab Ecclesia
tua fideli dicata, Been dicas, and sancti fices, eisque tantam Sancti Spiritus
infundas virtutem; ut quicunque horum quodlibet secum portaverit, atque in domo
sua reverenter tenuerit, and in eis ad te secundum ejusdem sanctae
Confraternitatis Instituta, divina contemplando mysteria devote oraverit;
salubri and perseveranti devotione abundet; sit que consors and particeps
omnium gratiarum, privilegiorum, and Indulgentiarum, quae eidem Confraternitati
per sacram Sedem Apostolicam concessa sunt; and ab omni host visibili and
invisibili semper and ubique in hoc and in futuro saeculo liberetur, and in
exitu suo, ab ipsa Beatissima Virgin Maria Dei genitrice, tibi plenus bonis
operibus praesentari mereatur.

Per eundem Dominum nostrum Jesum Christum Filium tuum, qui tecum vivit and
regnat, in unitate Spiritus Sancti Deus. Per omnia saecula saeculorum. Amen.

Then he besprinkles the Bedes with holy water; saying; In nomine Patris, and
Filii, and Spiritus Sancti. Amen, and gives them to the party.

The blessing of the Roses for the use of the Confraternitie.
Verse. Adjutorium nostrum in nomine Domini.

Resp. Qui fecit coelum and terram.

PSALM.

ECce quam bonum, and quam jucundum habitare fratres in unum.

Sicut unguentum in capite: quod descendit in barbam, barbam Aaron.

Quod descendit in Oram vestimenti ejus: sicut ros Hermon, qui descendit in
montem Sion.

Quoniam illic mandavit Dominus benedictionem: and vitam usque in saeculum.

Gloria Patri and Filio, etc.

ANTIPHONA.
Virgo Maria non est tibi similis nata in mundo inter mulieres, florens ut
rosa, fragrans sicut lilium.

Verse. Ora pro nobis sancta Dei genitrix.

Resp. Vt digni efficiamur promissionibus Christi.

Verse. Sicut dies verni circumdabant eam flores Rosarum.

Resp. Et lilia convallium.

OREMUS.
DEUS Creator and conservator generis humani, dator gratiae spiritualis, and
largitor aeternae salutis! Benedictione tua sacra been dicas has Rosas, quas
pro gratiis tibi exolvendis, cum devotione ac veneratione Beatae semperque
Virginis Mariae hodie tibi prasentamus, and petimus benedici, and infundi in
eis per virtutem Sanctae Crucis benedictionem caelestem: ut qui cas ad odoris
suavitatem, and repellendas infirmitates humano usui tribuisti; talem signaculo
sanctae Cru cis benedictionem accipiant, ut quibuscunque in infirmitatibus
appositae fuerint, seu qui eas in domibus suis servaverint, vel cum devotione
habuerint, aut portaverint, ab infirmitate sanentur; Discedant, contremiscant,
and fugiant Diaboli cum suis ministris, de habitationibus illis; nec amplius
tibi servientes inquietare praesumant. Per Christum Dominum nostrum. Amen

Then he sprinkles the Roses with holy Water, saying, In nomine Patris, and
Filii, and Spiritus Sancti. Amen.

The Blessing of the Wax Candles for the Brothers and Sisters of the holy
Rosary, to hold in their hands, at the hour of Death.
Verse. Adjutorium nostrum in nomine Domini.

Resp. Qui fecit coelum and terram.

CANTICUM.
NUnc dimittis servum tuum Domine: secundum verbum tuum in pace.

Quia viderunt oculi mei: salutare tuum.

Quod parasti: ante faciem omnium populorum:

Lumen ad revelationem gentium: and gloiam plebis tuae Israel.

Gloria Patri and Filio, etc.

ANTIPHONA.
AVE Regina Coelorum,
Ave Domina Angelorum,
Salve Radix, Salve Porta,
Ex qua mundo lux est orta,
Gaude virgo gloriosa,
Super omnes speciosa,
Vale O valde decora,
Et pro nobis Christum exora.
Verse. Post partum virgo inviolata permansisti.

Resp. Dei Genitrix intercede pro nobis.

Verse. Domine exaudi orationem meam.

Resp. Et clamor meus ad te veniat.

Verse. Dominus vobiscum.

Resp. Et cum Spiritu tuo.

OREMUS.
DOmine Jesu Christ, lux vera, qui illuminas omnem hominem, venientem in hunc
mundum! Effunde per intercessionem Virginis Mariae matris tuae, and per
quindecim ejus Rosarii mysteria, Been dictionem tuam super hos cereos and
candelus, and sanctificae cas lumine tuae gratiae, and concede propitius ut
sient haec luminaria igne visibili accensa, nocturnas depelunt tenebras; Ita
corda nostra invisibili igne; id est, Spiritus Sancti Splendore illustrata,
omnium vitiorum coecitate careant, ut puro mentis oculo cernere semper
possimus, quae tibi sunt placita, and nostrae saluti utilia: quatenus post
hujus soecuti caliginosa discrimina, ad lucem indeficientem pervenire mereamur.
Qui vivis and regnas Deus, in saecula saeculorum. Amen.

OREMUS.
DOmine Jesus Christ, splendour gloriae, and figura substantiae Patris, and
virginalis uteri fructus! Qui per temporalem Nativitatem tuam divinae
Filiationis imaginem per gratiam hominibus contulisti, illosque fratres vocare
dignatus es: Auge in nobis famulis tuis, (in Confraternitate virginis Matris
tuae gloriantibus) Spiritum gratiae quem dedisti, and has candelas quas in
honorem Nominis ejus suscipimus, ita Been dicere and sancti ficare digneris, ut
quicunque cas in manibus accensas tenuerit, ab omnibus liberetur tentationibus,
and in hora mortis suae, remisnem omnium peccatorum percipiat; and demum ad Te,
qui verum lumen es, ipsa dirigente perveniat. Qui vivis and regnas in saecula
saeculorum. Amen.

Then he sprinkles the Candles with holy Water, saying, In nomine Patris, and
Filii, and Spiritus Sancti. Amen.

THE GENERAL ABSOLUTION OR, Plenary Indulgence, To be applied to the Brethren
and Sisters of the Rosary, at the hour of their Death.
The sick Person (or some other for him) having said the Confiteor, the Priest
standing up, says.

Misereatur tui omnipotens Deus, and dimissis peccatis tuis, perducat te ad
vitam aeternam.

Indulgentiam absolutionem and Remissionem peccatorum tuorum tribuat tibi
omnipotens and misericors Dominus.

Then holding his right hand over his head: he proceeds.

DOminus noster Jesus Christus Filius Dei vivi, qui Beato Petro Apostolo suo
dedit potestatem ligandi atque solvendi; per piissimam suam misericordiam te
absolvat; Et authoritate ipsius and Beatorum Apostolorum ejus Petri and Pauli,
and authoritate Apostolica, Absolvo te a vinculo Excommunicationis majoris and
minoris, [suspensionis and interdicti] in quantum possum, and tu indiges; and
Restituo te Sacramentis Ecclesiae; Communioni and unitati fidelium, In nomine
Pa tris; and Fi lii, and Spiritus Sancti, Amen.

Item, Apostolica authoritate mihi commissa and tibi concessa, Absolvo te ab
omnibus peccatis tuis, quaecumque toto decursu vitae tuae quomodocumque
commisisti, de quibus cord contritus, and ore confessus es, and quorum
memoriam non habes, nec recordaris usque in praesentem diem, and de quibus
confiteri minime recordatus fuisti, Et Restituo te illi Innocentiae, in qua
eras quando Baptizatus fuisti, ac paritati eidem in quantum claves sanctae
Matris Ecclesiae se extendunt. Et per Indulgentiam plenariam a summis
Pontificibus, Innocentio octavo and Pio quinto confratribus Sanctissimi Rosarii
in articulo mortis constitutis concessam, liberet te Misericordissimus Deus a
praesentis and futurae vitae poenis; dignetur Purgatorii cruciatus remittere,
portas Inferni claudere, Paradisi januam aperire, teque gaudia sempiterna per
sacratissima suae vitae, passionis and glorificationis Mysteria sanctissimo
Rosario comprehensa perducere. Et hoc; si de qua agrotas Infirmitate decedas;
si non, ex misericordia Dei, salva sit tibi, plenaria haec Indulgentia donec
fueris in mortis articulo constitutus. In nomine Patris, and Filii, and
spiritus Sancti Amen.

Another shorter form of General Absolution out of Antonius. 1a part tit. 10.
cap 3.. 5.

AUthoritate Apostolica, mihi pro nunc commissa, concedo tibi plenam omnium
peccatorum tuorum Indulgentiam and Remissionem. In Nomine Patris, and Fi lii
and Spiritus Sancti, Amen.

. 16. Of the pious use of Processions.
WHereby the devout Rosarists Religiously honor God, and the sacred Virgin
Mary, upon the first Sundays of the months, and upon the seven feasts of our
Blessed Lady; to wit, The Purification, Annunciation, Visitation, Assumption,
Nativity, Presentation, and Conception, and upon the Saturdays, and other
Festival days of the fifteen Mysteries.

1. The word Procession signifies literally a passing forward from one place to
another: Allegorically, a progress from virtue to virtue: Tropologically, our
Peregrination upon earth: Anagogically, our tendencie toward heaven.

2. Processions had their beginning in the Age of the old Patriarks; in which
the Ark of the Testament, was reverently carried to and fro by the Priests of
the Tribe of Levi, who were peculiarly set apart, for that sacred purpose, and
performed that office, with great pomp and solemnity: As also when David
brought the Ark into the Tabernacle, and Solomon into the Temple, with Hymns,
Canticles, and all sorts of musical instruments, and placed it under the wings
of the there prepared Cherubins.

3. Our solemn Processions, seem in all things to imitate the Egression of the
Israelites out of Egypt. For [1] That people was freed by Moses, out of the
hands of Pharao: We, by Christ, out of the Clutches of the Devil. [2.]
Ensigns were carried before their Troops: And before us Crosses and Banners.
[3.] A pillar of Fire went before them: Burning Candles are born before us.
[4.] There the Levites carried the Tabernacle of the Covenant, and the Ark of
the Testament: Here, the Priests carry the Statua's of Saints, the Relics of
the Martyrs, or the Pix with the sacred Eucharist. [5.] Aaron the High Priest
followed them in his Pontifical habits; and our Chief Priest follows us in his
Cope, and Church Ornaments. [6.] There was Moses with his Rod: Here is (a
Prelate with his Crosier) a Prefect with his Official staff [7.] The people
there marched in complete armor; the Clergymen are here covered with sacred
vestments. [8.] they were besprinkled with Blood: we with holy water. [9.] they
had a Josuah for their conductor, and conqueror, we have a Jesus. [10.] they
came at last into the Land of Promise: and we come up to the holy Altar, in
hope to arrive one day at Heaven, our promised home and happy country.

4. Our Processions are the Memorialls of our Redeemers mercies, minding us of
the Piocessions he made from his eternal Fathers bosom, into the womb of the
blessed Virgin, from her womb into the Manger: from the Manger, to Jerusalem:
from Jerusalem, to the Mount Olivet: from Mount Olivet, back to his heavenly
Father; All which we gratefully commemorating, move after his sacred Standard
the Cross, and make to him our humble supplications, that we may pass after
him, from this our Pilgrimage, to his Paradise: from the Church Militant, to
the Triumphant.

5. Our Processions (especially those of the pious Rosarists (are also
Commemorations, and Imitations of the blessed Virgin-Mothers journeys upon
Earth: when she [1.] carried, or [2.] accompanied, or [3.] followed her beloved
Son Jesus; [1.] when she carried him in her sacred womb into the Mountains, to
the house of Zachary and Elizabeth, and into the Bethleem stable: and when she
carried him in her sacred arms into the Temple, and into Egypt; [2.] when she
accompanied him, being twelve years old to Jerusalem: and being thirty years
old throughout Judea and Galile in his preachings. [3.] when she followed him
laden with his Cross to Mount Calvary.

And surely, if all the journeys and pilgrimages from place to place, of Jesus
and Mary upon Earth, may not properly be called Processions: yet they may fitly
be styled the exemplary Pattern of our Processions, which are made to their
likeness, and in their memory and imitation.

6. There are four chief and solemn Processions celebrated yearly and
universally by the Catholic Church. [1.] in the Purification of the blessed
Virgin Mary: [2.] upon Palm Sunday: [3.] upon Easter day: [4. upon Ascension
day, in memory and representation of that last Procession wherein the Disciples
waited upon our Redeemer to Mount Olivet, to see him assumpted into Heaven:
where it is to be noted, that in the Primitive Church, there were made two
weekly Processions: one upon Sunday, in memo^y of the Resurrection, and another
upon Thursday; in memory of the Ascension: Whence sprung up that common Proverb
of Thursdayes being near a kin to Sunday.) But when afterward the Festivities
of Saints became multiplied, the Solemnity and Procession of Thursday was
abrogated by Pope Agapitus, and transferred also to that of Sunday: which is
therefore still observed in the joint memory of the Resurrection and
Ascension, in all cathedral and conventuall Churches.

7. To these four Processions may be added those of the greater and less
Litanies; which are also yearly and generally celebrated; the Procession of the
great Litanies, upon St. Marks day, instituted by Pope Gregory the great, to
implore the divin assistance against the then raging Pest^lence, the Procession
of the less Litanies, upon the three day's before the Ascension begun by St.
Mamertus Bishop of Vienna, to implore a remedy against the many miseries,
wherewith France was then afflicted.

Both which customs were afterward confirmed by the Church, and commanded to
be kept by all her faithful children.

8. Having prefated thus much of Processions in general, let us briefly
consider them of the sacred Rosary in particular, which (as aforesaid) are made
upon each first Sunday of the month, and the blessed Virgins Festivities.

1. The first Ceremony in these (as in all other) Processions is the carriage
of the Cross, [1.] because it is the ancient and perpetual custom of the
Catholic Church, to carry the Cross before in all her supplications. [2.]
because the Cross is the common sign, mark, and cognizance of all Christians.
[3.] to show that the pious Rosarists ground all the hope and confidence of
their prayers and supplications, chiefly upon the merits of Christ's passion.
[4.] because the Devil being once fully conquered by the Cross; is again
foiled, defeated, and put to flight by these Processions.

2. The second is, the relics of Saints. [1.] to profess the Communion of the
Saints of both Churches, Triumphant and Militant. [2.] to declare that we beg
the Saints intercessions. [3.] to honor God in them.

3. The third is, the Statua of the blessed Virgin. [1.] this is the custom of
the Church, and the tradition of our Ancestors. [2.] it is a confusion to
Heretics, and Image-haters: and a motive to us (at the sight of her sacred
Representative) to pray unto her for their conversion, who is entitled by the
Church the confoundress of all Heresies throughout the whole World; (This
praying for the conversion of Heretics, being one of the principal causes of
these our Processions. [3.] it is a practice, which Heaven has frequently
approved of, by many signal miracles.

Let us insist a little upon this point, and prove this carriage of our blessed
Ladies Image or Statua in Processions to have been the continual practice of
the Catholic Church, by producing some few, but most famous examples amongst
the multitude which might be cited out of authentic writers: in order to
confute, not only such flat Heretics, as fondly affirm these manner of
Processions to be no other than modern and monkish inventions: but also such
ignorant and critical Catholics, as scruple to render this sort of honor to
her, who can never be sufficiently honored by any human industry.

Poor deceiv d, and undevout wretches deserving rather to be pitied for your
ignorance, than to be satisfied by arguments, in a subject of so clear evidence
we will stick steadfastly to our well-taken up Tenants, continue cheerfully in
our rightly intended devotions, and pray perseverantly for your illumination,
in our sacred Processions, hoping at last to conquer your peevishness by our
piety and charity, and by her power and intercession: in whose name, for whose
love, and to whose honor, we (the children of Mary) are gathered together (as
brethren in one heart, soul and mind) to march under the Banner of the sacred
Rosary.

We therefore (returning to our intended purpose) confidently affirm, that the
Examples of our pious Ancestors, and the miracles wrought by the carriage of
our blessed Mothers Images in Procession, are sufficient warrants and motives
to induce us to the same devout practice, Examples and miracles! which may
abundantly be read throughout the whole body of the Ecclesiastical histories;
from whence we will borrow these few following instances.

And to begin with our great St, Gregory (who sat in the Roman chair, in the
year of Christ, 601. at which time the Inhabitants of that City dyed suddenly,
lying in their beds, sitting in their houses, walking the fields, standing in
the streets: so violently raging was the pestilentiall contagion!) he ind cting
a three day's supplication, let us (says he) O my afflicted children! meet
together in the Church of blessed Mary, the perpetual Virgin, and holy Mother
of our Lord Jesus Christ, and there w th sighs, tears, and prayers implore the
divin mercy, for the remission of our sins, and the remedy of our miseries.

The people being gathered together accordingly, He in his own person, takes
the sacred Virgins Picture, drawn by St. Lukes pensill, (which picture is
carefully kept, and highly honored even till this day, in the same Church of
St. Marie ad Praesepe, or, of the manger in a sumptuous chapel, built by
Paulus quintus, for that purpose) and carries it along the street in
Procession; when behold the celestial Spirits, are heard ecchoing forth the
blessed Virgins praises, in answer to their pious hymns and Litanies, the air
is filled with the melodious harmony of angelical Choristers, in toning sweet
Athems to her honor, and saluting her with these sacred words, (used ever
since by the Church in the paschall Office.)

Regina coeli laetare; etc. O Queen of Heaven rejoice, Alleluja. for he whom
you deserved to bear, Alleluja. Is risen from death as he foretold, Alleluja.
To which the holy Pope, by divin inspiration, added of his own.

Pray unto God for us, Alleluja. and an Angel is seen upon the top of the
Adrian Towr, putting up a Sword into its scabbard.

The astonished St. Gregory, inferring, from that action, a mitigation of the
divine indignation, denounces to the no less ravished people, a Quietus est,
from the Court of Heaven.

And (O admirable prodigy of the divin mercy! O clear testimony of holy Maryes
Power!) there immediately followed a full and happy delivery from that dire
disease and mortality.

And is not this only miracle, (wrought in the open view of the world, done in
the head-Citie of the Universe, acted (as to that part of it which is cavill'd
at,) by the Churches chief Pastor, and Christ's vicegerent upon earth, and
registered by so many undeniable and authentic authors) able to confound you; O
Heretics and Image-haters! capable to convert you: O half-Catholiques, and
dishonourers of holy Mary! sufficient to comfort you: O devout children of the
sacred Rosary! yet cast an eye upon some others of like nature, in the
succeedding ages.

St. Stephen the third, making a Procession on his bare feet, together with the
Roman Clergy and people, and carrying a holy Image on his own shoulders to the
same Church of St. Marie at the Manger, implored and obtained the like heavenly
assistance.

Sergius the Patriarch of Constantinople, carried the sacred Virgins Image in
procession about the Citie-walls, and received a present and miraculous remedy
against Caganus, and the rest of the Scithians, his besieging enemies.

The same was done under Heraclius the Emperor in his Persian expedition who
thereupon obtained a complete victory over his enemies, destroying (with the
loss only of fifty of his own Soldiers) the two vast Armies of Duke Razates,
whose golden Armor he afterward hung up as a trophe to the victorious Virgin.

And when the same City of Constantinople was again straightned by the cruel
Saracens, the distressed Inhabitants making their accustomed addresses to their
Powerful Patroness, and carrying her sacred Effigies, as formerly about their
besieged walls, saw their Enemies suddenly perishing before their faces: some
with fire from Heaven, the rest with famine, pestilence, shipwreck, and such
like severe punishments: In memory of which miraculous delivery the grateful
Citizens celebrated an annual Festivity in her honor, by whose help they
obtained it.

Many more examples might be here multiplied: in Constantin the last Eastern
Emperor, Emmanuel the Conqueror of Pannonia, Joannes Ximisca the Overcomer of
the Russians, Joannes Commenius the Triumpher over the Persians. etc. But these
few are more than sufficient to vindicate this our pious custom, not only from
Innovation, but from all other aspersions whatsoever.

The fourth Ceremony in these our Processions is the carryage of wax-Candles,
or Torches, in imitation, of the Churches ancient custom, observed upon the day
of the blessed Virgins Purification: of which our Saint Bede said long since: This
good custom speading it self abroad, was kept also in the other Festivities of
the sacred Mother, and Virgin Mary.

The fifth and last Ceremony is the singing or reciting of the Litanies of our
blessed Lady of the Rosary: which Litanies are sung in the Church called our
Lady of Minerva in Rome, and in many other Churches throughout all Italy upon
every Saturday, by the approbation and authority of Pope Gregory the
thirteenth in his Brief bearing date, April the fifteenth 1580. which Lita^ies
are as fallows after this Elevation.

. 17. An Elevation for the Procession of the Rosary.
O Sacred Virgin Mother! Conduct my footsteps, my thoughts, and my prayers;
[1.] That I may honor your Excellencies, Greatnesses and Glories, [2.] That I
may submit to the Sovereign power you have over me; [3.] That I may implore and
obtain your favor and mercy, which are the three Ends and Intentions I propose
to my self in accompanying this sacred Procession, which is now made in your
honor by your faithful children and servants.

I intend also hereby to honor, all your sacred courses and journey's.

The first, (which in your tender age) you made to the Temple, to present and
consecrate your self entirely to the divin Majesty, dedicating to him your body
by a vow of perpetual Virginity; your soul, by a resolution of future
affection; and all your Actions, by a Sacrifice of your whole life to his
service.

The Second, which (being declared Gods Mother) you made into the Mountains, to
visit your Cousin Elizabeth, to sanctify St John Baptist, to bless that whole
Family.

The third, which (being big with the divin Word Incarnate) you made from
Nazareth to Bethleem, to show your loyal Obedience to an Earthly Princes
Edict; but more to profess your prompt subjection to the Heavenly Kings
Providence.

The fourth, which (bearing your Blessed Babe in your arms) you made from
Bethleem to the Temple, to offer up to the Eternal Father, the highest and
holiest Oblation that ever was, or shall be offered to his divin Majesty: An
Offering which was the full accomplishment of all the ancient Figures and
Sacrifices.

The Fifth, which, (to avoid Herod's cruelty) you made with your tender son
Jesus, and your dear Husband St. Joseph into Egypt.

The sixth, which (having lost your beloved Jesus) you made to Jerusalem,
carefully seeking him.

The seventh, which (during his three last years preaching;) you made
throughout Judea, and Palestin; painfully following him.

The eighth, which (in the time of his Passion), you made to Mount Calvary
dolefully accompanying him.

The ninth, which (having completed your happy Pilgrimage upon earth) you made
to Paradise, to remain there, the glorious Empress of Heaven for evermore.

In the honor of these your journeys, O sacred Virgin! Star of the Sea and
Guide of my life!) I will take my stepps in this present Procession; humbly
desiring to run after the odours of your sweet perfumes, (that is, to imitate
the examples of your heroique virtues) that so I may be found worthy to
accompany you in Celestial glory, and there with you to bless, praise and
honor, the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost for all Eternity, Amen.

THE LITANIES OF OUR BLESSED LADY OF THE ROSARY.
Antiphona. Sub tuum Praesidium confugimus Sancta Dei Genitrix, nostras
deprecationes ne despicias in necessitatibus nostris, sed a periculis cunctis
libera nos semper, Virgo gloriosa and benedicta, Domina nostra, Mediatrix
nostra, Advocata nostra, tuo filio nos reconcilia, tuo Filio nos commenda, tuo
Filio nos representa, nunc, and in hora mortis nostrae.

KYrie Eleyson.

Christ Eleyson.

Kyrie Eleyson.

Sancta Trinitas unus Deus, miserere nobis.

Virgo, Audi nos.

Virgo, Exaudi nos.

Sancta Maria,

Sancta Dei Genitrix,

Ora pro nobis Sancta Virgo Virginum, Matter Pietatis, Matter Veritaetis, Matter
Charitatis, Virgo Potentissima, Virgo Prudentissima, Virgo Clementissima,
Ancilla Domini mitis, Ancilla Christi humilis, Ancilla Dei fidelis, Sponsa
aeterni Patris, Filia summi Regis, Templum Spiritus sancti, Domus Dei,
Sanctuarium Christi, Sacrarium Paracleti, Speculum Justitiae, Seeds Sapientiae,
Fons Misericordiae, Salus Infirmorum, Refugium Miserorum, Advocata Peccatorum,
Stella rutilantior, Luna pulchrior, Sole splendidior, Scala Coeli, Porta
Paradisi, Domina Mundi, Cedrus Fragrans, Myrrha Conservans, Balsamum
Distillans, Flos Virginitatis, Lilium Castitatis, Rosa Puritatis, Palma Virens,
Virga Florens, Gemma Refulgens, Oliva speciosa, Columba Formosa, Mulier
Gratiosa, Rubus Incombuftus, Hortus Conclusus, Puteus Signatus, Vellus
Gedeonis, Favus Sampsonis, Thronus Salomonis, Vitis fructificans, Navis
abundans, Arca Salvans, Gloria Saeculi Honor Populi, Nutrix Parvuli, Regina
Angelorum, Regina Patriarcharum, Regina Prophetarum, Regina Apostolorum, Regina
Martyrum, Regina Confessorum, Regina Praedicatorum, Regina Virginum, Regina
Sanctorum Omnium, Regina Sanctissimi Rosarii.


Ab omni malo and Peccato,

Libera nos Domina.

Per salutiferam Nativitatem and beatam Praesentationem tuam,

Te rogamus Domina.

Per sanctam Purificationem and caelestem vitam tuam,

Te rogamus Domina.

Per admirabilem Assumptionem, and gloriosam Coronationem tuam,

Te rogamus Domina.

Ut veram paenitentiam and perseverantiam, nobis impetrare digneris,

Te rogamus Domina.

Ut Ecclesiasticos ordines and Catholicos Princ^pes conservare digneris,

Te rogamus Domina.

Ut hanc nostram, Cunctasque Congreg^tiones tibi devotas auge^e and Conservare
digneris,

Te rogamus Domina.

Ut hanc nostram, Cunctasque Congregationes tibi devotas, augere, and
conservare digneris,

Te Rogamus Domina.

Ut Populo Christiano Pacem, salutem, and abundantiam obtinere digneri,

Te rogamus Domina.

Ut Navigantibus portum, pro Fide pugnantibus Victoriam, Fidelibus vitam,
defunctis Requiem aeternam Impetrare digneris.

Te rogamus Domina.

Verse. Ave de coelis Alma,

Resp. Sucurre nobis Domina.

Verse. Ave de coelis Pia,

Resp. Fer opem nobis Domina.

Verse. Ave de coelis Dulcis,

Resp. Intercede pro nobis Domina.

Verse. Sancta Maria, Matter Christi,

Resp. Audi rogantes servulos; and impetratam nobis coelitus tu defer
Indulgentiam.

Verse. Orate pro nobis omnes Sancti Dei,

Resp. Ut digni efficiamur promissionibus Christi.

Verse. Salvos fac servos tuos, and Ancillas tuas.

Resp. Deus meus, sperantes in te.

Oremus.
SUpplicationem servorum tuorum, Deus miserator exaudi, ut qui in Societate
sanctissimi Rosarii Dei genitricis and Virginis Mariae congregamur, ejus
intercessionibus a te, de instantibus perisulis eruamur.

Deus, cujus unigenitu^, per vitam, mortem, and Resurrectionem in nostrae
carnis substantia, nobis salutis aeternae praemia comparavit, Da famulis tuis
haec omnia per Sanctum Rosarium recensentibus, imitari quod gessit, sentire
quae pertulit, and assequi quod promisit.

Tribue, quaesumus Domine, omnes Angelos and Sanctos tuos jugiter pro nobis
orare, and cos clementer exaudire digneris.

Ecclesiae tuae, Domine, preces placatus admit, ut destructis adversitatibus,
and erroribus universis, secura tibi serviat liberate.

Custodi (Domine!) famulum tuum, N. Patronum nostrum, pro quo Majestati tuae
supplicam us, ut in fide Catholica, constans perseveret, ac vita hujus pericula
illaesus pertranseat, nullisq tentati nibus a te summ^ bono unquam so paretur,
Remittantur illi, quaesumus, peccata, quibus iram tuam promeruit: Augeatur in
eo justitia, Tibi, Majoribus, and Proximis exhibenda: Vocationi suae, in qua
degit, probe satisfaciat: aeque in prosperis atque in adversis rebus sese
moderate gerat; Atque finem Vitae faelicem, te duce, conseqatur; Corpus illius
and Animam, Vitam and mortem tuae divinae gratiae magnopere commendamus, ut
Benedictionis tuae Virtute in Viis omnibus dirigatur, and contra omnes hostium,
tam visibilium quam invisibilium, insidias defendatur; Per Christum Dominum
nostrum,

Verse. Ave Maria,

Resp. Gratia plena,

Verse. Dominus tecum,

Resp. Benedicta tu in mulieribus, and Benedictus fructus ventris tui, Jesus.
Jesus Christus Amen.

Verse. Sancta Maria, Matter Dei, ora pro nobis Peccatoribus, nunc and in hora
mortis nostrae.

Resp. Et fidelibus defunctis requiem sempiternam impetra. Amen.

Benedictio.
Nos cum Prole pia Benedicat Virgo Maria.

A devout recommendation to the ever blessed Virgin, after Procession.
O Mother of Mercy, Mother of Power, Mother of Jesus, Mother and Advocate of
poor and repentant Sinners, to whom your care and affection is greater than
that of a Mother to her child! Into your sacred hands, and heart, I do most
humbly recommend this day and for ever my body and soul, all that I am and
have, my life and my death, that in all I may seek your Sons honor, and find
my own happiness.

Beg for me (O blessed Mother!) diligence to seek Jesus, love to find him,
obedience to follow him, purity to see him, charity to embrace him, patience to
suffer for him, devotion to sigh after him, indifferency to adhere to him, and
perseverance to remain with him for evermore.

O Empress of Heaven, Beauty of Angels, and Lady of Love! How long shall
nature, sensuality, and selfishness bear sway? How long shall I seek, and not
find; sigh, and not enjoy; live, and not truly love Jesus and Mary; the good
Son, and glorious Mother, the holy Fruit, and happy Tree.

O my compassionate Mother! obtain for me your poor child, counsel in all my
doubts, comfort in all my distresses, courage in all my temptations, and
confidence in all my troubles.

Help me (O holy Mother of my Lord Jesus!) to be truly humble in my self, truly
devout and loyal to my God, truly obedient to my Superiors, and truly meek to
all.

Be you always mindful of me (O my dear Mother!) both living and dying; and
then especially have a care of me, when I forget my self by falling into Sin,
and when my Soul must be forced out of my Body by death; that after death I may
see, praise, and love both you and your Son Jesus for all eternity: Amen.

THE LITANIES OF OUR BLESSED LADY OF LORETTO.
So called, For that they are usually sung in that sacred Church of Loretto,
upon all the Saturdays in the year, and Feasts of the Blessed Virgin Mary.
THE pious Rosarists may please to take notice, that some years since there
were certain Religious Persons, who agreed together to recite daily these holy
Litanies for the happy death of each other; to whom many thousands joined
themselves, throughout all Italy, Spain, France, Germany, and the Indies. And
why should nor the like sacred Association be established also in our Country,
amongst such devout Christians as are equally zealous of the Blessed Virgins
honor, and as much desirous of a happy death?

We therefore (the Compilers of this Book) do hereby declare unto all you, (the
devout Children and Servants of our Common-Mother the ever Blessed Virgin Mary)
that we intend henceforth to recite daily these following Litanies for each
others happy death: And that we do now, (even by these presents, without any
further declaration or ceremony) admit, receive, and associate unto our selv's,
and to a joint Communication with us in these our prayers; All such as being
desirous thereof, shall mutually perform these three following points.

1. Recite daily these Litanies, with the adjoined Antheme and Prayer, to the
sacred Virgin, and to Saint Joseph.

2. Recite them for all such as ar^ thus associated, as they all recite the
same for him.

3. Recite them for his own and their happy death, and for the obtaining of
Grace necessary for that purpose.

ANTHEM.
WE fly to your Patronage (O sacred Mother of God!) despise not our Prayers in
our necessities, but deliver us from all dangers, O ever glorious and Blessed
Virgin! Our Lady, our Mediatrix, our Advocate! Reconcile us to your Son,
recommend us to your Son, represent us to your Son, now, and at the hour of our
death.

Lord have mercy upon us.

Christ have mercy upon us.

Lord have mercy upon us.

Christ hear us.

O Christ graciously hear us.

God the Father of Heaven,

Have mercy upon us.

God the Son, Redeemer of the world,

Have mercy on us.

God the Holy Ghost,

Have mercy on us.

O holy Trinity, one God,

Have mercy on us.

Pray for us. Holy Mary, Holy Mother of God, Holy Virgin of Virgins, Mother of
Christ, Mother of Divin Grace, mother most pure, Mother most chaste, Mother
undefiled, Mother untouched, Mother most aminable, Mother most admirable,
Mother of our Creator, Mother of our Redeemer, Virgin most Prudent, Virgin most
Venerable, Virgin most Renowned, Virgin most Powerful, Virgin most Merciful,
Virgin most Faithful, Mirror of Justice, Seat of Wisdom, Cause of our Joy,
Spiritual Vessel, Honorable Vessel, Vessel of singular Devotion, Mystical
Rose, Tower of David, Pray for us. Tower of Ivory, House of Gold, Ark of the
Covenant, Gate of Heaven, Morning Star, Health of the Weak, Refuge of Sinners,
Comfort of the Afflicted, Help of Christians, Queen of Angels, Queen of
Patriarchs, Queen of Prophets, Queen of Apostles, Queen of Martyrs, Queen of
Confessors, Queen of Virgins. Queen of all Saints, Queen of the most sacred
Rosary,


Lamb of God, who take away the sins of the World,

Spare us, O Lord.

Lamb of God, who take away the sins of the World,

Hear us, O Lord.

Lamb of God, who take away the sins of the World,

Have mercy on us.

ANTHEM.
WE fly to your Patronage (O sacred Mother of God!) Despise not our prayers in
our necessities, but deliver us from all dangers, O ever glorious and Blessed
Virgin, our Lady, our Mediatrix, our Advocate! Reconcile us to your Son,
Recommend us to your Son, Represent us to your Son, now, and at the hour of our
death.

Verse. Pray for us, O holy Mother of God.

Resp. That we may become worthy of Christ's promises.

Let us pray.
REmember (O most compassionate Virgin Mary! Mother of Power, Mercy, and
Consolation!) That it was never yet heard or known, that any one was by you
rejected, who in his grievous pressures, and afflictions, had reco^rse to your
powerful Prayers, Patronage, and Protection.

Imboldned with this confidence, we your distressed Children of the holy
Rosary, with eyes full of tears, and hearts full of sorrow, make now to you (O
sacred Virgin Mother!) our most humble addresses in these our present and
pressing necessities.

Despise not our words, we beseech you (O Blessed Mother of the Word Eternal
and Incarnate!) Reject not the Petitions of your poor servants, (O you pious
Comforter of all afflicted Souls!) but graciously vouchsafe to hear us, to help
us, to protect us, and to obtain for us the accomplishment of all our just and
humble desires; That we may have fresh occasion to admire your transcendent
Mercy, Charity, and Compassion, and to magnify and praise with eternal
gratitude and thanksgiving, the infinite goodness of your Divin Son, our sweet
Savior, Christ Jesus.

The Verse and Prayer of Saint Joseph.
Verse. The just man shall flourish as a Palm Tree.

Resp. He shall be multiplied as the Cedar of Libanus.

Let us pray.
ASsist us, O Lord, we beseech thee, by the merits of Saint Joseph, thy sacred
Mothers Bridegroom; that what we are unworthy to obtain, may be granted us by
his intercession: who live and reignest world without end. Amen.

. 18. Several other Prayers. Whereof one or more may be sometimes added after
the Litanies of our Blessed Lady, according to each ones Devotion, Occasion, or
Necessity.
I. A Filial Recommendation of our selv's to the sacred Virgin-Mothers
protection.
O Sacred and Sovereign Lady-Mother! next after God, the only hope of my soul!
Into that singular faith, commendation, and custody, whereby your tenderly
loving Son, Christ Jesus my Savior, recommended you from the Cross to his
dearly beloved Disciple Saint John: I do this day, and all the days of my life,
commend and commit my body, my soul, my senses, my honor, all my hope and
comfort, all my anguishes, miseries, and afflictions, all my thoughts, words,
and actions, my whole life, and the final end thereof: Most humbly beseeching
you, that I may (by your powerful intercession) be preserved from all sin,
from all scandal, from whatsoever may any way displease yours, or your Son's
pure eyes, provoke your anger, or hazard the loss of your favor, and from a
sudden and unprovided death. Obtain for me, I beseech you, (O my glorious
Lady-Mother!) that I may be truly penitent for all my past offenses, that I may
manfully resist all present occasions of sin, that I may walk more warily and
innocently for the future.

Let me feel your prompt and powerful assistance during the whole course of
this my lives pilgrimage; and in the dreadful day of my judgment, be you
pleased (O sacred Mother!) to become my pious Advocatrix at the Tribunal of
your Son Christ Jesus: To whom, with the Father and the Holy Ghost, be all
honor and glory for evermore. Amen.

II. A Prayer for a happy death.
O My dear Lord Jesu! I most humbly beseech you by those most bitter pains and
pangs which you suffered for me in your cruel passion, and particularly in the
hour wherein your Divin Soul passed forth of your Blessed Body; take pity upon
my poor and sinful soul in its last agony, and in its passage to Eternity.

And you, O compassionate Virgin Mother Mary! remember how you sadly stood by
your dear Son dying on the Cross, and by that your excessive grief, and your
Sons sacred death, assist my soul in its last conflict with death, and conduct
it to a happy Eternity.

And you, O glorious Saints, John, Joseph, Nicodemus, Lazarus, Mary Magdalen,
Mary of James, Mary of Salome, and Martha, who stood by my dear Redeemer Christ
Jesus expiring on the Cross; assist me also in the hour of my souls departure,
and accompany it to a happy Eternity. Amen.

III. A General Prayer, for our selves, our Friends, and the whole Church.
DIssolve we beseech you, O Lord, by your bounty, the bonds of our sins; and by
the intercession of the sacred Virgin, and all your blessed Saints, preserve
us, our Friends, our Brethren, and our Benefactors, in your grace and sanctity:
Purge, O Lord! from all impiety, and enrich with solid virtues and perfections,
all such as have any relation to us by consanguinity, affinity, or familiarity;
grant us health of body, peace of mind, quiet of conscience; assist us against
all our visible and invisible adversaries; destroy in us all carnal and worldly
desires; impart wholsomness unto the Air, and to the Earth fruitfulness; unite
the hearts both of our Friends, and of our Enemies, in true love and charity;
defend all them of our Confraternity of the sacred Rosary from all contagious
diseases, from all plaguey infection, and from all heretical cruelty and
incursion. Protect our chief Pastor, our Superiors, the Clergy and the whole
Body of the Catholic Church, from all misery and adversity; give prosperity to
the living, and rest to the departed; and let your divin blessing be upon us
all, this day, and evermore. Amen.

IV. A Prayer for the conversion of Heretics and Infidels.
O Almighty and all-mercifull God! who seek and desire the salvation of
all souls; Take pity (we beseech thee) upon all such as are seduced with
pestiferous errors, and segregated from the unity of thy sacred Church: Pardon
them, O Lord! for they perceive not what they do; Illuminate the eyes of their
understanding, O true light of all spirits! that they may see their own
blindness, and seeing it, may speedily abandon it; and that so becoming
sincerely reconciled to thee the supreme Shepherd, and to thy Church the only
safe Sheepfold, they may joyfully praise and magnify thy mercies, together
with us thy faithful Children, for evermore. Amen.

V. A Prayer for a special Friend.
PReserve, O Lord! this your servant, and our Benefactor N. for whom we humbly
offer up these our Petitions to your sacred Majesty; beseeching you to grant
him a perseverant constancy in the Catholic Faith, a safe passage through this
lives dangerous pilgrimage, and that no worldly, carnal, or diabolical
temptations may have the power to separate him from you his prime and only
good.

Pardon his sins, we beseech you, whereby he has deserved your indignation;
Increase his justice, due to your self, and to his neighbor; give him grace to
correspond to the calling and condition wherein you have placed him; let him be
equally moderate, patient, resigned in adversity, and in prosperity; direct him
in all his ways, and defend him against all his enemies, and grant him finally
a happy death and departure out of this world, and a speedy passage after death
to the fruition of your eternal felicity.

VI. A Prayer for a Friend in Tribulation.
VOuchsafe (we beseech you, O merciful Creator!) to afford the sweetness of
your consolation to your afflicted servant N. Remove (O Lord!) according to
your good pleasure, the heavy burden of his calamities; give him patience in
his sufferings, resignation to your providence, perseverance in your service,
and a happy translation from this calamitous life to eternal glory.

VII. A Prayer for a Friend in his sickness and infirmity.
O Sovereign Lord God! the Author of our health, and our comfort in sickness;
in the watch of whose divin providence run all the moments of our lives earthly
pilgrimage! Hear (we beseech you) the prayers which we pour out before you for
N. your infirm, but faithful servant; and mercifully restore him to his former
welfare, that he may henceforth walk more worthy of his calling, and make
greater progress in Christian virtue and piety. But if it be your pleasure (O
supreme Lord of life and death!) to call him hence to Eternity, let your most
just will (O heavenly Father!) be accomplished in this, and in all things
whatsoever; only let Death find him well prepared, and rightly disposed! Let
him humbly kiss your paternal rod which chastises him, and patiently submit to
the cross which your loving hand has laid upon his shoulders: let him behave
himself, during the remaining time of his infirmity, as befits a pious and
devout Christian; free from pusillanimity and despair, full of hope and filial
confidence: And finally, being strengthened with the Sacraments, reconciled to
his Enemies, and settled in your grace and favor, let him cheerfully expect,
and joyfully embrace Death's summons, and his bodies and souls separation. Amen.

VIII. A Prayer for our Enemies, Detractors and Persecutors.
O Meek and merciful Lord Jesu! the great Master Exemplar, and Practiser of
Peace, Charity and Union amongst men! Who have commanded us to love our
Enemies, and to do good for them that hate us, and who prayed on the Cross for
your capital Adversaries; increase within us (we most humbly beseech you) the
spirit of Christian charity, meekness, and sweetness; that we may freely,
sincerely, and heartily forgive all such as have any way offended us, injured
us, or persecuted us; and that we may conquer all our Enemies malice by our
fraternal compassion and affection: Bestow on them also, (O blessed Savior!)
the same spirit of perfect peace, love, and charity; and powerfully defend us
from all their treachery and deceits. Amen.

IX. A Prayer for a Woman great with Child, or laboring in Childbed.
O Most dread Sovereign! who for the just punishment of the first Woman's
prevarication, have pronounced and imposed a severe and unavoydable sentence of
malediction upon all Woman-kinde, to wit, that they should conceive their
Children in Original sin; that having conceived them, they should be subject to
many miseries; and that they should bring them forth with the hazard of their
own lives: we most humbly beseech you, (O undrainable Fountain of goodness and
mercy!) that you will be graciously pleased by your Blessed Mothers pious
intercession, to mitigate the rigorous edict of this general Law in behalf of
this your poor Handmaid, (now laboring in the pangs of Childbed) and to give
her courage, comfort, and patience in her sorrows. Grant that in due time she
may be happily and speedily delivered; that the Child she bears in her womb,
may be brought forth into the world, accompanied with all such perfections of
body, soul, and senses, as are befitting our human nature, that it may live to
be re-born by sacred Baptism, and that both the Child and the Mother may become
your faithful servants. Amen.

X. A Prayer to appease the Divin Indignation, in any public or private
necessity.
WHen we compare, O Lord! your punishments with our own impieties, we are
forced to confess, that our crimes do far exceed your chastisements. We are
sensible of our sins penalty, but we leave not our sinful pertinacy; our sick
minds are troubled, but our stiff necks are not bowed; our life languishes
under the burden of our afflictions, and yet we amend not our wicked actions;
we acknowledge our misdeeds in the day of correction, and we forget what we
bewailed after the visitation. If you, O Lord! stretch forth your hand to
strike us, we make you large promises; if you sheath your sword, we fail in our
performances. If you scourge us, we petition you to spare us; if you mercifully
spare us, we again maliciously provoke you to scourge us.

Behold, O dread Sovereign! you have us self-accused, adjudged, condemned; and
we well know, that unless you will pardon us, we must needs perish.

Grant unto us (O compassionate Father!) that which we desire, though we
deserve it not, who have given us a being when we were not. Amen.

XI. A Prayer to withdraw our minds from the superfluous cares and solicitudes
of this World.
O Lord, our true Lover, our faithful Teacher, our bountiful Nourisher! Take
from us all vain, superfluous, and noxious cares and solicitudes; and since you
have been graciously pleased to promise us, that your self will make a
sufficient provision for us, grant that we may confidently rely in all things
upon your sacred providence. Let us therefore six our hearts and affections
upon heavenly objects; let us seek only your Kingdom, and be only solicitous
for the advancement of your honor and glory; let us run on cheerfully,
courageously, perseverantly, in the way of your precepts, during our earthly
pilgrimage, that so we may be finally translated to your heavenly Paradise.
Amen.

XII. Prayers to be said in time of the Plague.
The ANTHEM.
REmember your Covenant (O merciful Creator!) and say to the smiting Angel,
Now hold thy hand; that the Earth may not become desolate, and every living
soul destroyed.

Verse. Lord let your anger cease from your People.

Answer. And from your City.

Let us pray.
HEar (we beseech you, O compassionate Lord God!) the prayers of your People;
and as we confess our selves to be justly afflicted for our offenses, so be you
pleased in mercy to free us, for the glory of your own sacred name.

O God! who well knows that our human frailty cannot subsist amidst so many and
great dangers, without the support of your divin favor and assistance. Give us
(we beseech you) health of mind and body; and grant that we may overcome by
your help and mercy, what we deservedly suffer for our own sins and impieties.

Lord! lend a gracious ear to the petitions of your poor servants, grant them
the desired effect of their faithful supplications, and avert from us the fury
of the raging Pestilence; whereby the hearts of all mortal men may humbly and
gratefully acknowledge, that such scourges proceed from your just anger and
indignation, and cease through your boundless mercy and goodness.

A Prayer to the sacred Virgin Mother, called the Miraculous Prayer against the
Plague.
THe Star of Heaven, whose snowy breast
Did suckle our sweet Lord, suppressed
The Plague of Death, whose origin
Was from the very first of men;
May that clear Star at present daign
Those Constellations to restrain;
Whose wars deprive men of their breath,
By the destructive wound of Death.
Repeat thrice these ensuing Verses.

Bright Star of the Sea, against Plague your help afford,
Naught is denied you by your Son, our Lord,
Who honors you, Blessed Maid: us, Jesu, save,
Which for us, at your hands, she daigns to crave.
Let us pray.
O God of mercy, God of compassion, God of Pardon! who taking pity upon your
afflicted people, gave command to the striking Angel, that he should withold
his hand from further punishing them: we most humbly beseech you, for the love
of that glorious Star, whose sacred Breasts you most sweetly sucked, to expiate
our sins; that you will vouchsafe us your gracious help, whereby we may be
preserved from all Plague, delivered from an unprovided death, and secured from
all destructive accidents and incursions; through you, O Jesu Christ, King of
Glory, who live and reign with the Father and Holy Ghost, world without end.
Amen.

Paul the fifth granted a Plenary Indulgence to all such as being in the state
of grace shall devoutly recite this Salutation and Prayer.
Hail Glorious Virgin! Star more bright,
Than is the Sun in its full light;
Mother of him who all shall doom,
More sweet than Honey from the comb:
Each just man celebrates your praise,
Each Saint to you due honor pays;
And Christ your Son, above the Sky,
Crowns you for all Eternity.
Let us pray.
GIve me, O gracious Lord God! what best pleases your Divin Majesty, for I
put my will, and all that concerns me, into your sacred hands; dispose of me as
you please, and direct me in all to accomplish your divin will. Amen.

THE SECOND BOOK OF THE Sacred Rosary, Which is the Practical part thereof.
An Oration Of the Antiquity, Excellency, and Utilitie.
Of the Bedes, Psalter, and Confraternitie of the Rosary.
By way of a Preface to this second Book.
ALthough this Argument may seem sufficiently handled in the Oration, which is
prefixed to the beginning of this work: yet since, Nunquam materia deficit
laudis, ubi nunquam sufficit copia Laudatoris; There can never want subject of
praise, (says St. Leo) in a subject which can never be sufficiently praised;
we will here somewhat more largely prove, what was there only pointed at: and
deduce this most excellent manner of Prayer, and most eminent Fraternity of the
Rosary, from their first Original Fountains, for the increase of your comfort
and devotion, (O Zealous children of Mary)! to whom we dedicate these our pious
labors and endeavors.

This way of honoring the divin Majesty, and the sacred Virgin Mother, by a
certain number of our Lords Prayers, and Angelical Salutations, has been
variously practiced by the ancient Fathers, and described under several names
and notions; whereof some called it the blessed Virgins Epithalamium, her
Canticle, her Crown, her Rosy Garland, her sacred Quinquagena.

Others relating to the number of the salutations therein contained, called it
the Virgins Psalter in imitation of the Psalter of David, consisting of the
same number of Psalms, or alluding to that Musical Instrument (which the
Hebrews named Nahalum, the Greeks Organum, and we a Psalterium) composed of an
hundred and fifty Pipes, (the just number of these our salutations:) whereupon
the Psalms of David were usually sung to the divin praise and honor.

Others finaly called it by the now commonly received denomination of the
Rosary and that most properly; For as a Rosary signifies literally a place
beset with Odoriferous Roses; So this our Rosary betokens mysticaly the sweet
fragrancie which replenishes their hearts and souls, who thus devoutly praise
the divin Majesty, and honor the Virgin Mary.

Having explicated its Name, let us pass on to its Antiquity: which undoubtedly,
as to its substance is of equal standing with the sacred Gospel; Since the
Lords Prayer, and the Angelical Salutation (the material parts of our
Rosary,) are the very Evangelicall words and sentences: And as to its use, is
also of equal antiquity with our primitive Christianity, since (according to
the general Maxim of our School-Divines) When in Ecclesiastical matters by
the Church Universally embraced, no certainty can be found of their first
beginning, they must be believed to have proceeded from the Apostles.

Which moved the learned Aquensis, to write thus to Maximilian the Emperor;
This pious custom of saluting the sacred Virgin, cannot be said to be any
Novell invention, but may be convinced to be as ancient as the Church it self;
For when at the beginning, the Priests and Ecclesiastical persons, being full
of Zeal and Fervor, recited daily all the verses of the Davidicall Psalter,
(comprehending thrice fifty Psalms) so employing the greatest part of their
time in the divin praises: The devout Laity, (though much inferior to them in
point of learning and knowledge, yet desirous to equal them in Gods love and
service:) emulating this laudable custom, (but some of them being unable to
read, others incapable to understand these sacred Psalms) invented and daily
recited a certain Psalter (according to the mystical number of the Davidical
Psalms) of the Lords Prayer, and Angelical salutation an hundred and fifty
times repeated; piously conceiving (as well they might) that all the sacred
mysteries of those many Psalm's were compendiously contained in this singular
Prayer and Salutation, since they declared him to be now come and present, whom
those Psalms had foretold and promised.

Which devotion of the Primitive Christians, will not seem any wonder to such
as duly consider their great fervor and piety in other spiritual exercises:
as may be instanced, in that the whole generality of the lay people received
then daily the sacred Eucharist. Surely a most convenient way to lay that first
foundation of a new Church upon solid devotion and sanctity, which was to
sustain afterward so weighty a superstructure.

But when in the following ages (the number of Christians increasing and the
fervor of piety decaying) this kind of Psalter became burdensome to the
multitude of Christians (who were now more attentive to their domestic and
temporal negotiations, than zealous of the divin service) it was abridg'd into
an hundred and fifty Angelical salutations; keeping still the same mystical
number, but changing its denomination into that of the blessed Virgins Psalter;
and interlacing each Decade, with the recital of our Lords Prayer, in
imitation of the Clergy, so performing their Church Psalmodie.

This was that Psalter, so much praised and practiced by the Egyptian Hermits
and Anchorits, to which they had recourse, as to their present solace in all
their pressing sadnesses and afflictions, their powerful Remedy against all
their troubles and temptations, their secure Sanctuary in all their spiritual
conflicts and combats.

This manner of Prayer was also frequented and practiced (not only as to its
substance, which are the Lords Prayer and Angelical salutation; but also as to
its forenam'd Quantity and Qual'ty by the holy Fathers and Doctors of the
Church; Witness St. Hierom, of whom it is related in the Ecclesiastical
histories, That he placed an undoubted hope in the suffrages of this Psalter
against all temptations, troubles and afflictions whatsoever, and especially
against the Adversaries of the Christian Faith: nor would he ever settle
himself (says Fossaeus lib. 1. de Psalterio) to any serious reading, writing,
or dictating, till he had first implored the divin assistance by the recital
of this Psalter

Neither must we omit (says Alanus de Rupe) to make mention of that most
worthy Patriark of Monks, St. Bennet: who chose this Psalter for his familiar
and perpetual companion, and so deserved to become the famous founder of
Monastical Institution.

Which propagation of the Marian Psalter (says Bucelinus in his Menologium,
March 21.) is none of the least of St. Bennets praises; the Queen of Heaven her
self highly approving and commending the same, endowing her Bennet (for so she
was heard to name him) with many signal favors, benefits, and blessings, and
chosing the Monasteries of his sacred Order (as it were) for her earthly seat
and mansion even to this day.

And in the Benedictin Annals, ( anno 538.) we find registered, that though St.
Bennet from his very infancy, and in the beginning of his conversion, when he
laid the first platform of monastical Perfection, was singularly devoted to
the Empress of Heaven, and a great Promotor of her Honor, Name, and Kingdom;
Yet chiefly about this time (to wit, the 59th. year of his age) he promulgated
in the head City, and to the whole World, that sweet, easy, and efficacious
exercise of the blessed Virgins Psalter, which himself with his Disciples had
so piously and profitably practiced within the private Cloisters of Sublake and
Mount Cassin, and which St. D^minick the glorious Institutor of a new Marian
Family, and Reformer of the old (when by length of time this sort of devotion
became neglected) after 700. years space, revived and re-established; This
Psalter (I say) this very Psalter, did our great Patriarch St. Bennet deliver
to the World, and recommend with immortal fruit and merit to his Disciples,
who were to be sent into the earths several Climats to establish monastical
discipline, which they undoubtedly performed with so much the more happy
success, by how much they preached and promoted the sacred Virgins honor,
together with the sincere faith of her Son Christ Jesus.

Hence it is, that the whole Quire of his succeeding Monks, imitating the
example of so glorious a Father, became ever since most zealous practitioners
and promoters of the same piety and devotion: and to the end it might be
perpetuated to all their posterity, they prudently set apart one day of the
year, in which they make a particular Commemoration of the sacred Psalter, thus
instituted by their Patriarch St. Bennet: to wit, the 18. of June, where their
Martyrologe says thus. Upon the same day, the Feast or Commemoration of the
blessed Virgin-Mothers Psalter, instituted to the honor of the glorious
Empress of Heaven aad Earth, by our admirable Father and Patriarch St. Bennet,
to be practiced in his whole Order, and propagated throughout the whole World by
his most holy Children and Disciples.

And how zealously his said children performed this their Fathers precept of
promulgating in all places, the sacred Virgins Psalter might be largely
demonstrated and exemplified in all the succeeding ages.

For of St. Maurus (whom our holy Father yet living sent into France, and who
dyed in the year 583.) it is thus expressly written: He promoted the honor of
the admirable Virgin Mother with all possible diligence, and with incomparable
fruit and merit, and propagated far and near the use of her sacred Psalter,
according to the institute of his most blessed Father St. Bennet.

And of St. Eligius (the glorious Builder, Founder, and Abbot of Solemmacum,
the Bishop of N^yon, the Apostle of many Provinces, a man famous not only for
his prodigious sanctity, but also for his skill in Smithery, who dyed in the
year 665.) he was a singular Honourer of the Sacred Virgin Mother, whose
Psalter he carried for his Pontifical Ensign, and made for himself an
Episcopal Chair adorned with an hundred and fifty golden-nails or bosses,
distinguished with other fifteen of a greater size and bulk; upon which he
daily performed his devotions of the Psalter.

And in the ensuing Age, the same sort of Piety was spread abroad (not only
over our English Nation, but into the far and near adjoining Kingdom's) by the
preaching of our venerable Bede (who dyed in the year 738.) of whom it is
written: that he brought his Country men into so great a veneration of the
Marian Psalter, that the material Rosaries or Psalters, (which in honor and
imitation of his name, they called Bedes; and which (a thing well worth the
noting) are so named amongst us till this day) were hung up every where in the
Churches, Chappells, and public places of P^ayer, to invite all people (who
would please to make use of them) to this manner of piety and devotion.

And to pass over an hundred and six other famous Prelates and Saints of the
same Benedictin Family (which are named and praised by our Gabriel Bucelinus
upon this particular score of having been devout servants of the Sacred Virgin,
and diligent practisers and preachers of her Psalter.)

St. Dominick (called Loricatus, from the Iron Breast Plate wherewith he
perpetually mortified his body,) one of the great Ornaments of our glorious
Order, another Baptist of his Age, the mirror (yea andumiracle) of all
Penitents, (who dyed in the year 1060. and whose sacred Corpse remaining (after
his Souls departure) nine days uncorrupted, was interred by our St. Peter
Damian, the Eyewitness and faithful writer of his admirable life and actions
^ used to recite his Psalter nine times a day; adding frequently whole nights to
his days continued and uninterrupted devotions.

Also Peter the Hermit, treating with Pope Urban the second, concerning the
expedition into the holy Land, and inviting all Christians to that sacred
enterprise, recommended to them this very manner of prayer and devotion, in
1093. and the years following, of whom, and the diligent propagation of the
Marian Psalter, by him and others of our sacred Order, read the Benedictin
Annals largely and authentically describing them.

The same devotion of the Psalter was most zealously preached and promulgated
by St. Otto the Bishop of Bamberg, and Apostle of Sclavonia, who (in the year
1139.) not only recommended this sort of Prayer to that new converted Nation;
but commanded the people to bear about them the blessed Virgins Psalters, as
outward badges of their interior affection and devotion toward her: which
custom is yet generally kept amongst the Christians of that Country, where
both sexes are seen to wear Chains and Bracelets of Bedes about their necks and
arms, even till this day.

Finally, this pious practice of honoring the holy Virgin Mother, by the
recital of the Psalter, became afterward very common throughout the whole
Church, as may be read in the Tripartite History, where it is reg^stred, that
the devout Christians made certain Cords, distinguished with greater and
smaller knots for that sacred purpose.

St Bernard also, the most zealous servant of the sacred Virgin, and amplifier
of her honor, composed a Psalter to her praise, in imitation, and according to
the number of that of King David ( sicut and vidi and tenui says Alanus, which
I have beheld with these eyes, and held in these hands) for which and his other
devout practices of piety toward the Queen of Heaven, he deservd to become her
special friend and favorite.

St. Mary of Ognia, practiced the same in a most eminent manner, adding to her
daily performance of the Davidical Psalms the devout recital of as many
Angelical Salutations, which make up the complete number of our Psalter.

And this custom of joining together both Psalters, was generally observed
amongst the Religious persons of those times, and afterward embraced by them
of the Carthusian Family, who after each Psalm of David, usually saluted the
sacred Virgin, with certain pithy verses, artificially composed for that
purpose.

All which Examples, (to which many more might be added) abundantly prove this
sort of Virginal Psalter to have been anciently in use, amongst some or other
pious honourers of the sacred Virgin, in all precedent Ages: though by degrees,
as the divin Charity grew colder in men's hearts, so all sorts of Devotion
decreased, and this manner of prayer became also neglected.

When behold, the divin providence rayses up a Saint Dominick to revive and
reestablish it. He lived in Spain, at what time the Albigean Heresy had
infected a great part of Christendom; An Heresy so black and blasphemous, that
to recount its Tenants, were [methinks] to offend the ears of faithful
Christians: yet whosoever has the curiosity to know, and can have the
patience to read such impieties, may find them largly registered, and solidly
refuted by the learned Antoninus,

This glorious Champion of Christ and his Church St. Dom^n^ck, zealously
opposes himself against this perverse Heresy: praying, preaching, traveling,
and using all possible endeavors to suppress the rage of its contagious
infection: But, [alas!] all his pious endeavors were to very little purpose;
so deply was the custom of liberty, sin, and sensuality, settled in men's hearts
and affections!

The holy man therefore with heart full of grief, and eyes full of tears; makes
his addresses to the Mother of Mercy, and of Power, humbly complaining,
expostulating, and questioning; why his so great diligence, his so many
painful journeys, his so frequent and fervent exhortations, declamations, and
disputations, should prove so fruitless and ineffectuall? To whom she was
graciously pleased to return this answer: No mervail if the Earth wanting
moisture, becomes barren and fruitless; nor is it any wonder that worldlings
wanting the dew of the divin grace, remain devoid of Faith, and of the
fertility of good Works. When God in his mercy intended the Worlds reparation,
he prepared it with Rain, [the Angelical Salutation] whereby it became blessed
and fruitful; Preach thou also my Psalter, and there will follow a present and
plentiful fruit of thy painful labors.

The Saint did as he was commanded, propagating the sacred Virgins Psalter,
throughout Spain, France and Italy, fitting it to each ones capacity, reducing
it into a fraternall unity, and confirming his doctrine with such evident
miracles, that Christians became every where, not only converted from the
Albigean Heresy, but also devout servants of God, and diligent honourers of
the Virgin Mary.

Thus (most devout Rosarists!) you have the Virginal Psalter, briefly brought
down to St. Dominick, who not only revived its decayed use, but is undoubtedly
the Author of the Rosary, (as to the particular method and manner wherein we
now recite it) and who is the Beginner of this sacred Confraternitie whereof we
are members, as appears by the Bull of Pius Quintus (whose last words we shall
only here produce to avoid unnecessary prolixity in a matter of so great
certainty.)

The blessed St. Dominick (says he) directed (as is piously believed) by Gods
holy Spirit (upon the like occasion that now happens in the Church: when France
and Italy were miserably ore-spread with the Albigean Heresy) lifting up his
eyes to Heaven, and beholding that Mountain, the glorious Virgin Mary, Gods
holy Mother; invented and propagated a very easy, plain, and pious manner of
praying called the Rosary or Psalter of the most sacred Virgin Mary: whereby
the said Blessed Virgin is honored with the Angelical Salutation an hundred
and fifty times repeated, conformably to the number of Psalms contained in the
Davidicall Psalter, with our Lords Prayer interposed between each Decade; and
the rest of the meditations comprehending the whole life of our Lord and Savior
Christ Jesus etc.

Let Us now cast a view upon the Excellency, Dignity, and Utilitie of this our
sacred Rosary, which can be no better declared than by showing the Excellency
of each several part whereof it is composed; to wit, the Creed, the Lords
Prayer, the Angelical Salutation, and the Meditations upon the fifteen
Mysteries; In the Creed we profess our Faith, and by Faith we please God; in
the Lords Prayer we speak to God (as it were) in his own dialect, and we may be
confident, the Eternal Father will hear^ to the divin words, which his own
dear Son dictated. In the Angelical Salutation, we gratefully commemorate the
chief mystery of our Salvation, which is our Redeemers Incarnation; And in
Meditating upon the fifteen mysteries, we sweetly melt away in the admiration
of the divin love, mercy, and goodness.

The Creed (wherewith we begin and conclude our Rosary, and which may therefore
be fitly called the first and last accidental part thereof) contains as many
Excellencies, fruits, and profits, as Faith it self, whereof it is a formal
Act and Profession.

Now the fruits of Faith are so many, that merely to relate them, would make
up a large volum; and therefore be pleased to content your selves for the
present (most devout Rosarists!) to take only a compendious touch of such as
are expressly registered in holy Writ.

1. Faith purges our sins. Thy Faith (O Woman! says our Savior to the
Penitent Magdalen) has saved thee.

2. Faith purifies our hearts, (says S. Peter.)

3. Faith joins, espouses, and unites our souls to God, (says the Prophet
Oseas.)

4. Faith is the very life of our souls. The just man (says the Prophet Abacuc,
and after him the Apostle S. Paul) lives by faith: And Christ our Savior; He
that believes in me, though he be dead (in flesh) he shall live, (in his soul.)

5. Faith enobles, exalts and dignifies our nature, rendering us Gods adopted
children; He gave power (says S. John) to them who believe in his name to
become his children.

6. Faith is here the beginning of the hereafter ensuing eternal life. This is
eternal life (says our Savior) to know the only true God.

7. Faith gives all the fruit, worth, and merit to our works. Whatsoever is not
of Faith (says Saint Paul) is a sin.

8. Faith is our Armor against all sorts of Temptations of the World, Flesh,
and Devil Above all (says S. Paul) take the shield of Faith wherewith ye shall
be able to quench all the fiery darts of the wicked: And S. Peter; Your
Adversary the Devil goes about, like a roaring Lion seeking whom he may
devour, whom resist, steadfast in Faith. And S. John: This is the victory, that
overcomes the world, even your Faith.

9. Faith causes our Prayers to be heard, and our Petitions granted. What
things soever you desire (says our Savior) When you pray, believe that you
receive them, and you shall have them: And S. James: Let him ask in Faith,
nothing doubting, and it shall be given him.

10. Faith works Miracles, He that believes in me (says our Savior) shall do
the works that I do, and greater than these. And S. Paul proves this by many
instances throughout his whole 11th. Chapter to the Hebrews.

Finally, there are no greater riches, no higher honors, no better substance
in this world (says S. Augustine) than the Catholic Faith; which saves
sinners, cures the sick, justifies the righteous, repairs the penitent,
perfects the just, and crowns all the Elect.

These are a part of the innumerable fruits and profits, which spring from
Faith, as from the foundation, ground work, and root, of all goodness, and
which may be abundantly gathered by you (O Faithful servants of God, and
devout children of Mary!) by renewing, exciting, and professing it in the
recital of your Creed, at the beginning and end of your Rosary.

The second Part of the Rosary, is our Lords Prayer; so called from its divin
Author Christ Jesus; and for its own excellency, as being (says S. Thomas) an
Abridgment of all that needs to be desired, or ought to be demanded.

This sacred Prayer contain seven Petitions; and that not without special
Mystery: For as this inferior world is governed by seven Orbs or Heavens,
which are under the starrie Firmament; and is cherished and conserved by the
Influences of seven Planets: And as Man consists of the three powers of his
soul, and the four Elements (whether virtually or formally, it matters not)
which compose his Body: And as our spiritual Perfection depends upon seven
virtues; The three Theological, and the four Cardinal: And as the gifts of
the Holy Ghost, wherewith our souls are adorned, are seven: And as the
Beatificall Dowries make up the same number, three of them belonging to the
soul; vision, love, fruition; and four to the Body; Impassibility, Agility,
Subtility, Clarity:

So Christ our Lord, the Eternal Fathers Coeternall wisdom, concluded all
things, for which he would have us pray, in these seven short, and sweet
Petitions.

To relate all the fruits and effects, which are reaped by the devout recital
of this divin Prayer, were to run over the large fields of prayer in general,
whereof this our Pater noster is a perfect summarie; as has been already
proved by the authority of S. Thomas; and may be further confirmed by this
saying of S. Augustine: If thou searchest after all the sacred Prayers, that
ever were composed, thou can (in my opinion) meet with nothing, which is not
herein contained and included. And by that of S. Cyprian: O what mysteries are
in our Lords prayer? How many and how great Sacraments are in this short
speech; contracted in words, but copious in spiritual sense, and virtue? In so
much as there is nothing at all to be prayed for, which is not comprehended in
this compendium of heavenly doctrine. To which Encomiums of these great Saints,
(omitting almost infinite others of Tertullian, S. John Chrysostom, S. Gregory,
and all the Fathers) we shall only add this excellent expression of a modern
Author: Amongst all divin Prayers and praises, nothing is comparable to the
Pater noster: It far excells all the supplications of the Saints; It fully
contains all the conceptions of the Prophets, all the expressions of the
Psalms, all the sweetnesses of the Canticles: It asks all that is necessary, It
praises God highly, It joins the soul to God entirely, etc. See Thomas a Kempis
Enchirid. Monastic. cap. 5.

But to make you (most devout Rosarists!) yet more enamored with your Pater
noster: We shall succinctly deliver unto you its manifold fruits and effects in
the very sense of S. Dominick himself (the Author of this our Confraternity):
who (by divin Inspiration) preached to his numerous Auditory of Tolosa upon a
solemn feast of the sacred Virgin, to this effect.

First, (says Saint Dominick) if little weak children, were to walk through
some wild and uncouth wilderness: had they not need of a Fathers help, to hold
them by the hand, and direct their unskilful footsteps? We (most devout
Auditors!) are these little weaklings in the wilderness of this world; unable
of our selves to walk forward, or work any thing: Let us therefore have
recourse to him, from whom is all our force and sufficiency, humbly, imploring
his presence and assistance; by saying, Pater noster. Our Father.

2. If any were to pass over a Field full of Snakes, Serpents, D^agons, and all
sorts of venomous creatures; had they not need of some holy Guide; who were
free from being hurt by them; Of some valiant Champion, who were able to
destroy them; of some Powerful Person, who were capable to carry them on his
shoulders above the reach of the stings and poisons of these ravenous Beasts?
We live (alas!) in a land full of Infernal Dragons; Christ only is this holy,
valiant, and strong Champion, who can deliver us from their dangerous morsures;
lets therefore incessantly invoke his assistance, saying: Qui es. Who art.

3. If any were to pass through some dismal and darksom place; had they not
need of Heavens light to help them forward? We sejourn here in darkness and in
the shadow of death; Christ is the Clarity of Heaven, the shining Sun of
Justice, the bright Star of Jacob. Lets therefore often lift up to him our eyes
and hearts, saying: In Coelis, In Heaven.

4. If any were to make a journey; during which, whosoever should be caught in
a deadly crime, must presently be adjudg'd to death: had he not need to be
himself holy, or to be in the company of holy persons? we have such a journey
to make; and the soul that sins (mortally), dies, (presently, as to grace, and
Eternally, without Gods great mercy): To the end therefore that our selves may
be sanctified, and that we may be assisted by the Saints, and by the Saint of
Saints, lets often say: Sanctificetur. Hallowed.

5. If any were to pass through an unknow Country, to an unknown City; had
they not need to learn the language, or rely upon some faithful Interpreter?
Our Pilgrimage is through a strange land, to enquire after a far and future
City, where the Angels language is used: and there are two Schools, wherein
this celestial language is learned; The Lords Prayer, and the Angelical
Salutation. Let Us therefore betake our selves seriously to our sacred Rosary,
and there humbly invoke that name, which designs Gods Word by which all things
were made; saying: Nomen tuum: Thy Name.

6. If any were to pass through the Territories of some cruel Tyrant, who made
bondslaves of all such as he could catch within his clutches, had they not need
to cast about for some means of succor, in case of their surprisall? The World
is this Tyrant, and Christ is our only succor; to whom we must instantly and
frequently sue and sigh; saying: Adveniat Regnum tuum; Thy Kingdom come.

7. If any were to pass through an enemies Dominion, had they not need of a
safe conduct, or letters Patents? The accomplishment of the divin Will (says
Saint Augustine) is our chief liberty; Lets therefore amidst all our dangers
produce these Patents, pronouncing often Fiat voluntas tua: Thy will be done.

8. If any were to pass a Field overflowed with water, had they not need of a
Ship to support them from sinking? This World (says S. Basil) is a deluge of
wickedness, and this life is a flood of miseries; wherefore lets fly to heaven
for refuge, saying frequently: Sicut in coelo; As it is in heaven.

9. If the road be rough and rugged with Rocks, Hills, and Mountains;
unpassable by reason of boggs and quicksands: unsafe through Earthquaques,
etc. had not the Pilgrims need to seek out some secure path, whereby to escape
such evident dangers? Our souls are such Pilgrims in our bodies, encompassed
with calamities, shaken with fears and apprehensions, terrified with visible
and invisible enemies; Let Us therefore walk in the way of our Lords Prayer,
which will surely lead us to Paradise, and say often; In terra: In earth.

10. If any live in a barren land, oppressed with famine and poverty, must they
not make some daily provision for victuals, or else be sure to perish with
hunger? We live in a dismal desert, in a place of horror, and vast solitude
(says the Prophet Moses Deuteronomy. 32.10.) in a land of death, famine, and misery:
and Prayer (says S. Basil) brings in the bread of life for our spiritual
sustenance: Let Us therefore betake us to our Psalter, and pray frequently:
Panem nostrum quotidianum da nobis hodie. Give us this day our daily bread.

11. If any were engaged in great sums, to a severe prince, who would
infallibly punish them with death, if they punctually paid not their debts; yet
promising freely to pardon all such as should humbly petition him: were it it
not a madness to refuse the asking of so great a mercy? we are debtors to the
D^vin Justice; and since we are incapable to pay, we are liable to Eternal
Death; unless we will pray humbly, fervently, perseverantly; Dimitte nobis
debita nostra; Forgive us our trespasses.

12. If any were presently to suffer a cruel death for their enormous crimes;
unless they would condescend to pardon some smaller offenses of their
neighbors; were they not miserable, unhappy, obstinate wretches to deny it?
This Pardon is given, and our own obtained by saying cordially: Sicut and nos
dimittimus debitoribus nostris, As we forgive them, that trespass against us.

13. If they who are grievously troubled with Diabolical, Carnal, Worldly
temptations, might be freed by the carryage of one little Stone about them:
were they not strangely stupid to neglect so small a matter for the obtaining
so great a benefit? our Lords Prayer is this precious Stone, which (says St.
Augustine) preserves from all harms and illusions: who then would not have it
always in his heart and mouth, saying evermore: Et ne nos inducas in
tentationem, and lead us not into temptation.

If finally any were to sail over a boisterous sea, beset on this side with
Sirens, Whales, Gryphons: and all sorts of devouring Monsters; on that side
full of Rocks, Sands, Gulphs, and all sorts of death bringing danger: And a
King and Queen standing on the shore, should proffer to give them two Gemms
indu'd with power to prevent all these perils: might they not be said
willingly to perish who wilfully refused them? This is our case (my Christian
Auditors!) who are to sail over the Sea of this life, beset on every side with
Devils, Sins, and all sorts of dangers; and behold Christ our King and Redeemer
offers us his efficacious Prayer; and Mary our Queen Mother her Angelical
Salutation to secure us from shipwreck. O let us gratefully accept them, and
frequently repeat in our Psalter. Sed libera nos a malo.

But deliver us from evil, Amen.

This is the Summary of St. Dominicks sermon, whereby he parabolically (in
imitation of our blessed Savior) and efficaciously inculated the fruits of
this divin Prayer into the hearts of his devout Auditors: and which we surely
may hope also to receive, if we daily fervently, and perseverantly pour it
forth in the divin presence, by the due performance of our Psalter and Rosary.

The third part of the Rosary is the Angelical Salutation, dictated by the
divin wisdom to the Archangell Gabriel, to St. Elizabeth, and to the Church. A
Salutation which the Apostles and Primitive Fathers so highly reverenced, that
they prescribed it to be recited in their Lyturgies; A Salutation, which (says
St. Peter Damian) briefly contains Christ's Incarnation, Man's Redemption, the
Worlds Renovation.

And surely by this admirable connection of our Lords Prayer, and the Angelical
Salutation in the Rosary; we are admonished; that as in the fall of human
nature both Sexes were guilty, and our common misery proceeded from Adams and
Eves joint prevarication; so in the reparation and redemption of Mankind, there
is the concurrencie of a Man Christ our Lord, and also (though in an inferior
degree) of a Woman the Virgin Mother: and therefore joining together both these
Prayers, we render most humble thanks for this inestimable benefit; Thanks to
our blessed Redeemer for having vouchsafed to become man for us; And thanks to
his holy Mother for having furnished him with this humanity, in which he
redeemed us.

But if you desire (most devout Rosarists!) to have a more particular sight of
the signal Fruits and Effects of this Angelical Salutation; listen attentively
to this compendious Narrration.

First, of the joys wherewith it replenishes the blessed Virgin mary.
Secondly, of the terrors wherewith it strikes the Devil. Thirdly, of the
profits it brings to mankind.
First, this Salutation (I say) replenishes the sacred Virgin with a new
accidental Joy, sweetness, and complacencie, as often as it is devoutly and
reverently recited.

For by saying Hail, (or Ave,) that is, sine vae, without woe,) we offer her
the Joy of her great Purity, immunitie, and exemption from all the woe and
misery, whereunto all women (except her self, the singularly preserved
Virgin Mother) were subject by the fall of our first Parents; For as Ave, is a
literal conversion of Eva: so our Mother Mary receiv's in this Salutation a
triple Benediction; [1.] of becoming fruitful without corruption: [2.] big
with child without burdensomness. [3.] and a Mother without feeling the pains
of childbearing, opposite to our Mother Eves triple Malediction; of corruption
in conceiving, cumbersomness after conception, and pains in childing.

By saying Mary, we renew in her the Joy of her great D^gnitie, designed by
this glorious Name and Title; First, as it signifies the Star of the Sea, to
which [says St. Bernard] she is most fitly compared: because, as a Star sends
forth its beam without any self-blemish, so Mary brings forth a child without
any self-violation. The Beam does nothing diminish the Stars claritie, nor
Mary's child her integrity etc. Secondly, as Mary signifies, illuminated: for
she received from God [as a full Moon from the Sun] a plenitude of the light of
Grace here below, and enjoyes a plenitude of the light of Glory there above.

Thirdly, as Mary signifies an Illuminatrix to which St. Bernard alluding;
Maryes presence [says he] illuminates the whole World, and even Heaven it self
shines now more clearly, being irradiated with the beams of her virginal lamp.
Fourthly, as Mary [in the Syriack language] signifies a fair Lady: and what
Creature [says St. Bernard] was comparable to her in the beauty of mind and
body, who bore and brought forth the beauty of Men and Angels? when therefore
we say Ha^l Mary, we say rejoice, Sacred, Worthy, Noble Virgin, bright Star,
illuminated of God, enlightner of Men, fair Lady of the whole Universe.

By saying Full of Grace, we renew a double joy in her. First, we affirm that
Grace, which man lost by Sin, to be restored by her Sanct^ty: and Secondly, we
pronounce that Grace, which other Saints possess partially, to be in her
unitedly, fully, universally. You O Mary! [says the admiring St. Hierom] are
indeed full of Grace, for the Grace which was given to others by parcel, was
powered into you in a full plenitude.

By saying, our Lord is with thee: we renew in her the joy of her divin
Conception, than which, nothing imaginable can be to her more grateful,
pleasing, and acceptable: for hereby, we not only pronounce God the Son to be
with you, O Mary! [says St. Bernard] whom you cloth with your flesh; but God
the Holy Ghost, by whom you conceive; and God the Father, who eternally begets,
whom you temporally bear. Yes, O Mary! The Father is with you, who powerfully
makes his Son yours; the Son is with you, who is admirably born of you; the
Holy Ghost is with you, who graciously with the Father and Son, sanctifies you,
etc.

By saying, Blessed art thou amongst Women; We renew in her the Joy of her
supernall Benediction: As if we should say, Rejoice, O Mother Mary! who
deserved'st to have our mother Eves curse changed into a blessing for thy self
and all others; and to become the glory, honor, and crown of all Women;
consecrating the Virginal estate, before thy Marriage; the Conjugall estate,
in thy wedlock; and the estate of Widowhood, after thy husbands death, and thy
Sons Passion.

By saying, Blessed is the fruit of thy Womb: We renew in her the Joy of the
divin praise: As if we should say, with S. Bernard: Thou art surely Blessed, O
sacred Virgin! but we bless him above all, who has so highly blessed thee: Not
because thou art Blessed, therefore is the fruit of thy womb blessed; but thou
art therefore Blessed, because he has prevented thee with his blessings, in
whom all Nations are blessed, and of whose fullness, thou also with others,
though far above all others, have received what thou have, etc.

Behold (O children of Mary, who have your hearts inflamed with her sacred
affection!) what excesses of joys you present, offer, and renew in your dear
Mother, when you devoutly salute her with this Angelical Canticle and
Jubilation! All which we shall confirm by one only authentic Revelation which
her self was graciously pleased to impart to one of her dear darlings, a famous
Saint of our Order. S. Mechtild, studying which way she might render some
grateful service to her glorious Mother, the Virgin Mary: beheld her in a
vision with the Angelical Salutation before her in great and golden
characters; and heard these words proceeding from her sacred Mouth.

Know (daughter!) that no human devotion can ever reach higher than this
Salutation; nor can any one more sweetly gratify me, than by reverently
pronouncing this Ave, Hail, wherewith the Eternal father at the first greeted
me; confirming me by his omnipotency (ab omni va culpae) from all woe and
misery of sin and impiety: The eternal son likewise illustrating me with his
wisdom, ordained me to be forthwith the bright Star, wherewith Heaven and earth
are enlightened, as by this my name Mary is declared: The holy Ghost also
imbuing me with his goodness, rendered me so full of Grace, that whosoever seeks
grace and favor by my means, may surely find it. And by that sentence: Our
Lord is with thee, I am reminded of the ineffable union and operation, which
the whole Trinity wrought within me, when he coupled the substance of my flesh
to his own Divin Nature in one Person; God becoming Man, and man God. Surely
the sweetness I then felt, exceeds all expression.

By the following words: Blessed art thou amongst Women; all Mankind admiringly
confesses my singular privileges, prerogatives, and perfections, above all
other pure creatures. And lastly; By, Blessed is the fruit of thy Womb, he is
pray'sd extolled and magnified, who made me thus blessed by vouchsafing to be
born of me. Thus much of the first effect of this divin Salutation.

2. This Slutation strikes the Devil with terror, and each word thereof
exceedingly troubles, torments, and confounds him. For Ave or Hail, displeases
the Devil; because by Eve he had procured man's woe and misery, which by this
Ave is redressed. Mary, he cannot abide, because she bruised his head. Full of
Grace, affrights him, who is full of malice. Our Lord is with thee, renews his
torment; because himself was formerly with Eve, and the greatest part of her
posterity, til he became disposess'd by Christ's being with Mary. Blessed art
thou amongst Women, exceedingly troubles him, because he by Eve had brought a
Malediction upon all mankind; which by Mary was cancelled and changed into a
Benediction. Blessed is the fruit of thy Womb Jesus; utterly confounds him,
because by this blessed fruit of Mary, he was totally defeated, and conquered.

3. This Salutation brings great profit to mankind; and if we will seriously
dive into the hidden sense and meaning of each syllable whereof it is composed;
we shall every where find some evil to be repelled, or some good thing
acquired. Let us therefore frequently make our humble addresses to the most
holy Virgin Mary saying:

Ave, Hail, O Immaculate Mother! you were free from all woe, and blemish of sin;
help me, who am therewith defiled; and defend me from the Eternal woe I have
thereby deserved. Mary, O Virgin Illuminated of God, Illuminatrix of Blind
sinners, Bright Star of the Sea, and the worlds beautiful Lady; Enlighten my
eyes, that I may not sleep in death, and plead my cause at your Sons Tribunal,
that I may be preserved from blindness of heart, and final Impenitencie; Full
of Grace: O Mary, you found grace with God, to become his dearly beloved
Spouse, Daughter, and Mother; to be indu'd with all virtues, excellencies, and
perfections; to be honored and exalted above all creatures, and to be crowned
Queen of Heaven: Impart to me so much grace out of this your great plenty, as
may procure my reconciliation to your Sons favor and friendship, Our Lord is
with thee: And O sacred Mother, let him by your powerful means, be with me
also. He was with you; In your Soul spiritually, in your Body corporally; and
let him be here with me by Faith and charity spiritually, and hereafter by
vision, and fruition eternally. Blessed art thou amongst Women: O most Blessed
Mother! bestow a Mothers blessing upon me your child, and free me by your
merits, and intercession from all future curse and malediction; And blessed is
the fruit of thy Womb Jesus. O Eternally Blessed Jesu! be unto me a Jesus. O
Mary! be unto me a Mother.

Thus both Saints and sinners, may find sufficient fuel for their devotion in
the recital of this divin Salutation. They, for the increase of their
sanctity: These, for the redress of their misery. And what pious Christian will
not be henceforth stirred up the fervent and frequent use of this Salutation,
which is so short, and yet so sweet, and so full of celestial fruits and
profits; and to which they are invited (says the mellifluous S. Bernard) by
Gabriels example, by the Baptists exultation, and by the hopes of gaining a
resalutation? O happiness! to be met with reciprocal courtesies by so holy, so
honorable, so powerful a Mother! and to be repaid with rich and real gifts
and benefits for our verbal salutations and services! For she will not be
backward (says Albertus) to answer us, nor silent to resalute us, because she
is the Mother of humility, civility, and courtesy; and her resalutation, is a
collation of all sorts of spiritual favors, and benefits. Let us therefore, O
my Brethren! (says S. Bernard) come before her sacred Image (or Representative)
and with bended knees, imprint upon it our kisses, saluting her and saying:
Hail Mary full of Grace; our Lord is with thee, etc.

The fourth Part of the Rosary, is the Meditation upon the Fifteen Mysteries;
whereof, Five are called Joyful, Five Dolorous, and Five Glorious; as shall be
hereafter more particularly set down and described.

Now since the great fruits and Profits, which redound to pious souls, by the
devout reflection upon these divin Mysteries, (and the same may be said of all
internal Prayer) are much more easily experienced, than explicated: And also,
since this is largly delivered by several learned Authors, upon the subject of
Mental Prayer and Meditation; we shall only here give you (most devout
Rosarists!) some few rules and cautions, whereby you may understand how to
manage these your Meditations, for your best spiritual profit, and advantage.

Whosoever therefore will fruitfully meditate upon the Joyful, and Glorious
Mysteries of the Rosary:

First, must do it, with a certain intimate and affectionate congratulation of
heart and soul: as holy Church invites us in the person of the sacred Virgin:
Congratulate with me, all ye that love our Lord; for that I being a little
one, have pleased the most high, and have born God and man in my bowell^, for
by this sincere congratulation, we become sweetly transformed into the holy
Virgins affections; feeling (as it were) the same Joys, wherewith her heart was
replenished.

Secondly, It must be done, with a due and grateful thanksgiving, for the
Benefitts bestowed upon us, and upon the Blessed Virgin: Praising God for his
Mercies with her, and by her example in her divine Magnificat.

Thirdly, It must be done with a devout attention and recollection: without
which, all prayer and meditation (as our Reason dictates, and the Angelical
Doctor proves) will be altogether fruitless and unprofitable.

In like manner, whosoever will reap true profit by reflecting upon the
Dolorous Mysteries, must do it;

First, with a mind and intention, to imitate the Patience, Humility, Piety,
and whatsoever virtue, he finds there exemplifi'd. 2. To compassionate with our
loving Redeemer, and his dear Mother in their sufferings. 3. To admire our
Saviors Mercy and Goodness: Considering Who? What? For whom? And from whom he
endured. 4. To rejoice at our own Redemption, and at the Angels Reparation. 5.
To transform our selves by sincere affection, (as it were) into our Crucified
Savior. 6. To rest sweetly upon that sacred object, making it our place of
retreat and refuge; and hiding our selves in the opened holes of that Rock (the
wounds of our Redeemer) from the World, Sin, Satan, and whatsoever tempts, or
troubles us during this our lives Pilgrimage.
If in this, or some such like manner, you seriously reflect upon these sacred
Mysteries, (which the Rosary represents for your mental entertainment, whilst
your mouth utters the Vocal Prayers;) you may undoubtedly gather the desired
Fruit of your devotion, and make a speedy progress in the way of solid piety
and perfection.

And having thus declared unto you (most devout Rosarists!) with as much
brevity, and perspicuity, as the sublimity of the Argument, the slenderness of
our Capacity, and the Law's and limits of a Prefatorie Oration would permit;
the excellent virtues, fruits, and benefits of each single part of the Rosarie
and Psalter; to wit, of the Apostles Creed, the Lords Prayer, the Angelical
Salutation, and the Meditations upon the Mysteries: It will be needless to
dilate upon such profits, as proceed from the whole Rosary together; both for
that the praise of the parts, expressly redounds to the whole Compositum, and
also because it were to undertake an impossible task. For who can worthily
commemorate the manifold wonders, and Miracles, the infinite fruits and profits,
the multitudes of benefits and blessings, which have been from time to time
derived, and do still daily descend upon all Mankind, by the due practice of
this divin sort of prayer and piety? All Ages afford authentic examples of
them; All Books are full fraught with them; all Histories make mention of them.

Wherefore, for a conclusion of all that might be added concerning this never
sufficiently praised, extolled, and admired subject: Let the frequent Reflection
upon those five points (which are in the beginning of our first Book more
largly produced, and clearly proved by the ancient Fathers express Testimonies)
content you, comfort you, and encourage you, (O faithful and devout Children
and servants of Queen Mary!) in the prosecution of these your well embraced
Exercises of Piety; in the Confraternity of the Rosary.

First, That your dear Mother entirely loves you. See Page 49. 2. That she will
confer large Favors upon you. page 50. 3. That she will assist you in all your
afflictions. page 51. 4. That she is your faithful Advocate in Heaven. page
53. 5ly. And lastly, That she will procure for you a happy passage out of this
your worldly Pilgrimage; the salvation of your Souls; and the Fruition of
Eternal felicity. Read the page 57, 58, 59. To which lead and conduct us all,
(by her powerful patronage and intercession) The All-powerfull and Eternally
Blessed Father, Son and Holy Ghost.
THE SECOND BOOK OF THE SACRED ROSARY WHICH IS The Practical part thereof
containing these Particulars.
To the Devout Rosarists.

1. OF the sign of the Cross, wherewith we begin our Rosary. 2. Of the Apostles
Creed, the first part of the Rosary: An Exercise upon the Apostles Creed.
3. Of the Pater noster, the second part of the Rosary. The Affections
contained in the Pater noster. A larger Explication of our Lords Prayer. An
Exercise upon our Lords Prayer dilated with Acts, etc.
4. Of the Ave Maria, the third part of the Rosary. The Affections contained in
the Ave Maria, or Angelical Salutation, with an explication thereof. An
Exercise upon the Hail Marie dilated with Acts, etc.
5. The manner how to recite the Rosary. 6. Of the Fifteen Mysteries in
General; the fourth part of the Rosary. 7. Of the Fifteen Mysteries of the
Rosary in particular. The first Appendix Jesus; or, the Confraternity of the
sacred Name of JESUS, with Elevations. The second Appendix, Maria, or, the
Devotion called the Bondage of the Blessed Virgin Mary, with Elevations. The
third Appendix, Joseph, or Devotions to S. Joseph; with Elevations.
To the devout Rosarists.
WE have hitherto (in our first Book) prepared you (O pious Children of Mary!)
with some necessary Instructions, and encouragements; and brought you (as it
were) with your Bedes in hand, ready to recite your Rosary.

Now since the Rosary, is begun and ended with [1.] the Sign of the Cross, and
[2.] saying of the Creed; and consists [3.] in the frequent Repetition of the
Lords Prayer, and [4.] Angelical Salutation; and [5.] in the continual
Meditation upon the chief Mysteries of our Redeemer and his sacred Mother: you
are first to ground your selves in the knowledge and understanding (at least in
some measure) of these Prayers, and of these Mysteries; that so your devotions
may prove more efficacious, and your Prayers be performed with more gust and
satisfaction.

To which end you may profitably read over and peruse this ensuing explication
of them; and (as often as your occasions shall permit, and your devotion serve)
recite them, as they are hereafter affectively enlarged and paraphrased.

. 1. Of the Sign of the Cross, wherewith we begin our Rosary.
THe sign of the Cross, was prefigur'd and announc'd by the Prophets, taught
and recommended by our Redeemer Christ Jesus; and even used and practiced in
the Catholic Church.

With this sign all faithful Christians ought to begin all their actions
(according to that Counsel and command of S. Cyprian; Make this sign both
eating and drinking; and sitting and standing; and speaking and walking: And of
S. Hierome: At every action, and upon all occasions, let the hand imprint a
Cross): But much more careful should they be, to begin their prayers and
devotions, (which are the chief Acts of Religion) with this sacred sign; Amd
most of all, ought they so to begin the recital of their Rosary, which (as
has been declared in the precedent Oration) is the most eminent sort of prayer
and devotion.

S. Augustine, alleadges several Reasons for this general custom of all
Christians: Because this sign of the Cross (says he) directs the course of our
Pilgrimage, instructs us for our combat, helps us in our conflict, strengthens
us for our Conquest; It destroys all dangers, and defends us from all
Diabolical subtilties and machinations. To which may be added,

1. That this sign of the Cross, is a compendious Profession of the Christian
Faith, wherein the Mystery of the sacred Trinity, the Incarnation, and Passion
of our Blessed Savior, and the Remission of sins by his merits is briefly
taught and declared.

2. It is a certain badge, by which Orthodox Christians are known and
distinguished from Sectaries and Infidells: we are all said to be Christians,
(says S. Augustine) for we are all signed with Christ's signet.

3. It is an Invocation of the divin assistance in all our actions, for by this
sign we invoke the sacred Trinity to our aid, by the mediation of our Saviors
Passion.

4. It affords us spiritual comfort and courage; For if thou art not ashamed
(says S. Augustine) to make this sign exteriourly before men; thou may
confidently expect to feel the divin sweetness in thy Soul.

5. It is a Meditation, and Imitation of our Redemers passion. When thou
signest thy self with the Cross, (says S. Chrysostom) ruminate in thy mind the
whole cause of the Cross, and thou shall easily quench the fires of all thy
passions.

6. It gives us hopes of our salvation. For what may not he hope, who beholds
Christ dying on the Cross for his Redemption; and who looks upon Christ more
faithfully, than he, who frequently imprints his Cross upon his heart and
forehead? to which the Apostle alluding, exhorts all Christians to remember, at
how dear a rate they are bought, and to glorify and carry God in their Bodies.

7. It inflames our souls in the divin love and charity. For who can consider
Christ expiring on the Cross for his sake, and continue cold and tepid? God
commends his love toward us (says the Apostle), In that while we were yet
sinners, Christ dyed for us.

8. It a verts from us Gods indignation and revenge: In which sense, that
saying of the Psalmist is understood by S. Gregory of Nice, and by S. Hierom.
Thou (O Lord!) have given a sign to them that fear thee, that they may fly from
before the Bow.

9. It defends us from all our enemies: so the same Fathers explicate that
other passage of the Psalmist; show some sign upon me for good, that they who
hate me, may see it, and be ashamed, because thou (O Lord) have helped me, and
comforted me.

10. It drives away the Devils. Sign thy self (says S. Cyril) with the Cross
in the forehead; that the Devil perceiving the Kings character, may be
affrighted and fly from thee: And again, This sign (says he) is a comfort to
Christians, and a terror to the Devils: And the Martyr Ignatius: The sign of
the Cross is a Trophe against the power of the Prince of this world, which
hearing and beholding, he fears and trembles.

Finally, The sign of the Cross (says S. Cyrill) is the Seminary of all
virtues: and in it alone (says S. Ambrose) consists the prosperity of all
Christians.

And if any shall question you (O Christians! says Tertullian) whence this
Ceremony had its first rise and origin? Answer them boldly: Tradition has
taught it, custom has confirmed it, Faith has practiced it.

Since therefore this sign is of so great power and efficacy, against the
Devils; so assured an Antidote against all sorts of dangers; so undrayn a ^lea
fountain of all desirable good and happiness (as in these few words supported
by the authority of such ancient and learned Fathers, seems sufficiently
declared:) Let us (O devout Fellow Members of the sacred Rosary!) be careful
to arm our selves therewith, upon all occasions, at all times, in all places
(and especially at the beginning and end of our Psalter) remembering that we are
spiritual Soldiers, listed by Christ our Captain, to fight under the banner
of his blessed Cross, against the World, the Flesh and the Devil; and
undoubtedly hoping by virtue thereof, to overcom and vanquish them.

. 2. Of the Apostles Creed, which is, The first part of the Rosary.
THe Apostolical Symbol, or Creed; is so called; for that it was made and
compiled (says S. Clement) by the twelve Apostles, being yet together, each
one of them adding what was conceived necessary; to the end, that when they
were separated, they might preach this Rule of Faith to all Nations: (which as
S. Augustine, largely declares) is a Plain, Short, Complete comprehension of our
Faith, that so its Plainness might correspond to the Hearers capacity; its
Shortness to their memory, its Compleatness to the contained doctrine. For that
which in Greek is named Symbolum, is called Collation in Latin because the
Catholic doctrine, is compendiously knit and collected together in this divin
Symbol; which signifies also Indicium, a mark, note, or token, whereby Orthodox
Believers might be known and distinguished from all others. Now some of the
Reasons, why this sacred Creed ought to be recited at the entrance upon our
Rosary, may be briefly these.

1. Because order and Reason seem to require, that after the solemn confession
and Invocation of the Holy Trinity, (which is don, (as aforesaid) by making the
sign of the Cross): We should in the next place, make a profession of what we
believe of the Trinity.

2. Because Faith, being the Foundation of Prayer; (as the Apostle expressly
tells us; He that comes to God, must believe) We do hereby most fitly at the
beginning of our Prayer renew, excite, and reduce our Faith from its habit, to
an act.

3. Because the Church begins and ends the Canonical Office with a Creed; and
the Rosary (as has been declared) is an Imitation of the Davidicall Psalter
and Church Psalmodie.

4. Because the Fathers do most seriously recommend the frequent recital of
the Creed to all faithful Christians: Amongst whom S. Augustine; (some of whose
many pithy expressions upon this point, we shall only here produce, to avoid
unnecessary prolixity) says thus Having learned your Creed recite it daily;
when you rise out of your bed, when you compose your selv's to rest, etc. Let
i^ not seem irksome to repeat it, Repetition is convenient, to avoid oblivion:
Do not pretend, that you said it yesterday, that you said it this day, that you
have it fresh in your memory; but express it again, repeat it, contemplate it;
let your Creed be your glass, there consider your selv's and see whether you
believe what you profess, and rejoice daily in your Faith: Let your Faith be
your richess, and let your Creed be (as it were) the continual clothing of
your interior. Do you not cloth your body when you rise out of your Bed? So
by reciting your Symboll, you cloth your soul least forgetfulness should leave
it naked, etc.

An Exercise upon the Apostles Creed.
I Believe.
I Believe, acknowledge, and confess with heart and mouth, all such Articles of
Faith as the holy Church proposes to be believed, because God, (who is the
Truth it self) has revealed them.

In particular I believe all that is contained in the Apostles Creed, whereof I
here make my profession in the presence of God my Creator, and all the Court of
Heaven protesting and promising to live and die in this Faith.

O Lord increase my Faith!

I believe, (Lord!) help my unbelief.

I believe in God the Father Almighty, Creator of Heaven and Earth.
I Believe in the first Person of the sacred Trinity, the Eternal Father,
whom I acknowledge to be full of all possible and imaginable might and power:
and that he produced the Heaven, the Earth, and all Creatures both visible and
invisible of nothing, by his sole word and command, and out of his own
free will and goodness.

O my Almighty, and Allmercifull Father! you can as easily bring me back into
the dark Abysmus of my first Nothing, as you from thence powerfully drew me,
and gave me this present Being; Behold, I most humbly acknowledge the absolute
and perpetual dependancie which I have upon your divin Majesty: I confess,
that of my self I am nothing, have nothing, can do nothing, and that my whole
Being, breathing, and motion, proceeds from your bounty, goodness, and power.

And in Jesus Christ his only Son, our Lord.
I Believe in the second Person of the sacred Trinity, the Son, whom the Father
begot from all Eternity, communicating to him all his own Essence, Greatness,
Perfection: who continuing God, became Man for the Salvation of Sinners; was
named Christ Jesus, and is the Sovereign Lord and King of all Souls.

O divin word! which descended from Heaven to Earth, to deliver me from sin and
Satan, be you my Lord by Election, as you are by Creation and Redemption. I
freely give and bequeath my self to you for your perpetual Bondslave.

Live O Jesu and reign in my Soul, as you do in the whole extent of this large
Universe.

Who was conceived by the Holy Ghost, born of the Virgin Mary.
I Believe that Gods Son, that he might become Man, did vouchsafe to unite to
his divin Person, a Rational soul and a human body, which the Holy Ghost
miraculously formed in the chaste bowels of the blessed Virgin Mary, and of her
proper and pure blood: so that he was truly conceived in her, and truly born by
her, without any prejudice to her Virginity; O Jesu! the lover of Purity, who
chose the chastest woman of the World for your Mother: by the Immaculate Purity
of your Conception, and Nativitie, give me the gift and grace of purity of Life
and Conversation.

Suffered under Pontius Pilate, was Crucified, dead, and buried.
I Believe that the Son of God Incarnate endured very severe Torments in his
humanity for the Worlds Redemption, that he was adjudg'd to die by the Prefident
Pilate: and that after his death he was buried and laid in a Sepulcher.

O Jesu! the Redeemer of my Soul! your death is the only hope of my Life: be
you graciously pleased to apply to me one single drop of your sacred Blood, and
I shall rest secure in this Life, and be happy for all Eternity.

He descended into Hell, the third day he arose again from the Dead.
I Believe that in the death of my blessed Savior, his Soul was really
separated for a time from his Body, to descend into that part of Hell which was
called Limbus Patrum, where all such souls as from the Worlds first beginning
departed this life in a good estate, were till then detaind; I believe that he
delivered them from that Dungeon, and that upon the third day, his Soul
returned to his buried Body, became reunited unto it, and raised it up to Life
and Immortality.

O most glorious Soul of Christ my Savior! which thus mercifully visited the
Patriarchs lying in the sad Prison of Limbus: vouchsafe to give me also a
gracious v^sit, that whilst I live, I may duly and devoutly love and honor
you: and when my Soul shall be called out of this imprisoning Body, it may be
raised up to Contemplate, admire, and praise your greatness, goodness, and
glory, for all Eternity.

He ascended into Heaven, and sits at the right hand of God the Father
Almighty.
I Believe that Jesus my Redeemer, being by his own power resuscitated from
death to life, ascended up to Heaven by his own strength, where he sits at the
right hand of God his Father (to whom he is every way equal) as the chief of
all the Blessed, full of glory, and felicity.

O Jesu, my Redeemer! how worthy are you, thus to triumph, to reign, to be
exalted above all creatures! But O, forget not in the state of your greatness,
the condition of your miserable Creature, bought with the price of your
precious Blood! O King of glory! grant that all my thoughts, words, actions,
and desires, may aim at nothing but your only honor.

From thence he shall come to judge the Quick and the Dead.
I Believe that Christ Jesus when he shall please to put a Period to time, and
all sublunary things will descend visibly from Heaven in his glorious Humanity,
to judge all Manking, both the good and the bad, and publicly to reward to
punish every one according to their works.

Ah! just Judge of all consciences! what shall I then do or what shall I answer,
when you shall question me concerning my whole lives transactions?

I believe in the Holy Ghost.
I Believe in the third person of the sacred Trinity, the Holy Ghost, who
jointly proceeds both from the Father and from the Son, and is to them equal
in Greatness, in Majesty in all things whatsoever.

O sacred Spirit! the God of Infinite Love and Charity! breath upon my flinty
heart, mollify it into meekness toward my Neighbor, and melt it into the
sweet affections of your pure and perfect Love.

I believe the Holy Catholic Church, the Communion of Saints.
I Believe the Catholic Church to be the only Church of Christ; that it is
holy, universal, apostolical, and infallible in things appertaining to Faith,
and that in this Church there are found many pious Souls, pleasing to the divin
Majesty, which mutually help each other by their prayers and good works! O my
Lord and my God! I render you most humble and hearty thanks for having made me
a child and member of this holy Church, in which I have so great hopes, and so
many helps to save my soul: give me your grace (good Jesu!) that I may improve
this signal favor, and persever in this saving Faith, that from it I may pass
to the clear vision of your prepared glory.

The Forgiveness of Sins.
I Believe that God is both able and willing to forgive me my Sins, and that he
has left power in his Church to remit them (be they never so heinous and
enormous) and this especially by the Priests absolution in the Sacrament of
Penance. O God of Infinite goodness and mercy! let all Creatures Eternally
praise and magnify your sacred Name, for having given such power to men, and
such comfort to poor sinners.

The Resurrection of the Flesh.
I Believe that the very body, in which my Soul now lives and breaths, and all
human bodies (though after death they are red^c'd into dust in their graves)
shall at the end of the World, and at the great day of general Judgment, be
raised to l^fe, by Gods omnipotent command, and his Angels ministry to be then
rejoined to their same souls, and to live for evermore.

O Dread Sovereign in whose hands are life and death, and to whose beck all
things are obedient; Ingrave deeply in my heart and soul the hope of a happy
Resurrection, that the horror of this temporal dissolution, and death of my
body, may not over-terrify and dismay me.

And life everlasting, Amen.
I Believe that the good shall live in Heavenly glory for all Eternity; and
that the wicked shall live eternally in infernal torments. O good God! grant
that I may so live in your grace during this my short Pilgrimage, that I my
live with you in glory, in your Eternal Paradise, Amen.

. 3. Of the Pater Noster, or our Lords. Prayer. The second part of the Rosary.
THe Pater Noster, is the Prayer, which our Lord Jesus taught his disciples,
informing them from his own sacred mouth (and in them all Christians) how they
should pray, and what they should beg daily of the divin Majesty.

It is the prime Exemplar of all Prayers, the Abridgment of the Gospel the
Summary of all our just and fitting petitions; and the absolute Form of
imploring all such good things as we can expect and desire, and of deprecating
all such bad things as we are to shun and avoid.

Finally, It is to be by so much the more zealously frequented, prized and
reverenced before all other prayers whatsoever; by how much it excels them all
in all sorts of prerogatives.

First, in Authority and dignity, as being prescribed by Christ Jesus, the
W^sdom it self, the Truth it self, the Divinity it self.

2. In Brevity and facility; as embracing in few, easy, and intelligible words,
all that can rightly be demanded of the Divin Majesty.

3. In virtue and efficacy; For how should our heavenly Father refuse to hear
our petitions which are humbly presented to his Throne of Mercy in the express
terms, and in obedience to the precept of his dearly beloved Son Christ Jesus.

Affections contained in our Lords Prayer.
1. OF a poor Pilgrim and Prodigal child, sighing after his Country, kindred,
and Fathers house: Our Father which art in Heaven. 2. Of a Faithful servant,
forgetting himself to procure his Masters honor, Hallowed be thy name. 3. Of a
loving Spouse; desiring the sweet presence, embraces, and enjoyment of her
beloved Bridegroom: Thy Kingdom come. 4. Of a dutiful Son; conforming himself
absolutely to his Fathers sacred will and pleasure. Thy will be done in Earth
as it is in Heaven. 5. Of a needy Beggar, asking an Alms at the door of the
Divin Mercy: Give us this day our daily bread. 6. Of a guilty Prisoner, deeply
indebted, ready to be condemned, and petitioning for pardon and remission, And
forgive us our Trespasses, as we forgive them that Trespass against us. 7. Of a
Blind and weak Traveller, imploring light and strength that he err not, fall
not, faint not in his journey. And lead us not into temptation. 8. Of a soul
Weary of all things which hinder her desired perfection, and craving to be
freed from them. But deliver us from evil.
A larger Explication of our Lords Prayer: It contains a Preface and seven
Petitions.
THE PREFACE, Our Father which art in Heaven.
THese words put us in mind (at the beginning of our prayers) of the several
parts of our duty.

1. (Our) being a form of plural signification declares, that we are to draw
into the communication of our devotions all such as are confederated with us in
the common relation of sons to the same Father.

2. (Father) If God be our Father, we surely owe unto him a filial Love, Fear,
Reverence, Obedience: For if we are Refractory, Irreligious; Rebellious, how
can we presume to call him Father? But if we are dutiful children, pliable to
Will, and obed ent to his precepts; we may confidently expect from him,
childrens portions and inheritances.

3. Which art in Heaven.

This tells us where our Treasure is, and consequently where our hopes and
hearts should be fixed; and whither all our desires, petitions; affections, are
to be directed.

4. In Heaven. We are Prodigal children, and therefore sigh after our Parents
house. We are poor Pilgrims, and therefore stear our course toward our happy
Country. We are wretched Exiles, and therefore yearn after our heavenly home.

The first Petition. Hallowed be thy Name.
1. Whereby we desire to forget and forgo our selves and all things whatsoever,
to promote and procure the honor and glory of our loving Father.

2. We desire that his holy Name, his divin Essence, his glorious Attributes,
may be honored by all creatures, Believed by Faith, loved by Charity, and
celebrated with continual praises throughout the whole Universe.

3. It is a direct and formal Act of Adoration; For Gods Name being the
Representative of God himself; we here Petition, that he may be truly honored,
worshipped, adored by all, in all, above all.

4. It is also an Act of Thanksgiving for all our received Benefits and
Blessings, and a returning of all that we have, are, and can to God, as to
their Origin and Fountain; to whose only Goodness we ascribe all that is Good
in us, and in all creatures.

The second Petition. Thy Kingdom come.
1. Whereby we desire that God may reign by his grace and Justice in us, in his
Church, in the hearts of all men, and every where subdue all his Enemies.

2. We desire that he will be pleased to exercise his absolute Dominion in our
spirits, and fully rule in all our faculties: in our understanding by Faith; in
our wills, by Charity; in our Memories, by Hope; in our members, by
Mortification; in our whole Interior, and exterior Man, by totally possessing
all, entirely Commanding all, and being truly All in all.

3. We desire, that his spiritual Kingdom, to wit, the propagation of his
faith and Gospel, and the perfection of Souls, may yet make more and more
progress in he world; Extending that, where it is not; and Intending this where
it is: And that his Kingdom may not only be amongst us in Name and Form, but in
Effect, in efficacy, in Power.

4. We lastly desire, not only his Kingdom of Grace in this world, but also of
Glory in the next.

The third Petition. Thy will be done in Earth, as it is in Heaven.
1. Whereby we desire the sweet presence and fruition of our beloved Lord in
our Souls, and beg for a prefect union and conformity to his blessed will.

2. We desire that the dispensation of his divin Providence, may be the
absolutely directing Guide of the whole world, and the entire measure of all our
wills and wishes.

3. We desire that in all our praises and proceedings we may be evermore
pliable to his holy will and pleasure: Resigned in all accidents; Patient in
all sufferings; unchangeable in all good purposes; submissive upon all
occasions; and that we may perform all our duties of devotion, obedience,
perfection, cheerfully, promptly, perseverantly.

4. We finally desire, that as the holy Angels and Saints in heaven serve our
dread Sovereign with perfect Harmony, unity, tranquillity; agreeing all
together sweetly, lovingly, peaceably to praise and glorify his divin Majesty:
so all our hearts and Soul's here upon Earth, cancelling all crooked and
sinister intentions; may live and love together in an Angelical Conformity,
and jointly please and praise our Sovereign Creator with a Saint-like Peace,
purity, and Charity, fervently, incessantly, Eternally.

The fourth Petition. Give us this day our daily Bread.
Whereby acknowledging our own Poverty, necessity, indigency, we humbly crave
an alms from him who is the Author and Fountain of all Mercy.

First, we beg the Bread of Pilgrims, for the support of our lives, and for the
supply of our bodies necessities; that is, a daily Portion of all such things,
as we daily want: we are prohibited to be solicitous for to morrow; and
therefore we petition only for the present: We must not be covetous to have all
at once, but content to receive it, as we need it, and as the Divin Giver
pleases, to dispense it, with a constant relying upon his continued providence;
which therefore feeds us with extemporarie provisions, that being always
needy, we may always be begging, and being daily supplied, we may be daily
grateful for the past; joyful for the present, and confident for the future.

2. We beg the Bread of sinners: Contrition, Tears, Repentance.

3. We beg the Bread of Children; Love, Devotion, Obedience, Resignation.

4. We beg the Bread of Angels; the nourishment of our souls; Contemplation,
Communion, Union.

The fifth Petition. For give us our trepasses, as we forgive them that
trespass against us.
1. Whereby we confess our selves to be deeply indebted, fearful to be
condemned, careful to be released, and therefore humbly sue for Mercy,
Compassion, Remission.

2. We here petition for a Pardon, not only of our sins of frailty, ignorance,
and sudden surprisall: but those of deliberation, of election, of express
malice.

3. We petition for a Pardon, not only of our Sins of Om ssion, but of
Commission: not only of our Carnal sins, but of our Spiritual: not only of
our known sins, but of our secret ones: not only of sins don directly against
the divin Majesty, but also against our Neighbor and our selves: not only of
mortal sins, but of venial.

4. Forgive us, as we forgive.

By which condition we tacitly oblige our selves to forgive all such as have any
way injured and offended us, even from our hearts, not entertaining so much as
a thought of Revenge, but truly loving all them that have wronged us; for so
only and not otherwise: we desire our Creators Pardon for our own committed
crimes and impieties.

The sixth Petition. And lead us not into Temptation.
1. Where by we desire light that we fall not, help, that we fail nor, strength
that we saint not, a guide that we err not, comfort that we perish not.

2. St. Cyprian (out of an old latin copy) reads, Suffer us not to be led into
Temptation: that is, permit us not to be overcome by Temptation, nor to give
our assents to sinful suggestions.

3. Since our life upon Earth is a perpetual warfare, and no one can be
Crowned unless he courageously resist the World, the Flesh, and the Devil, his
swo^n Enemies; therefore we instantly implore the divin assistance against
them, that we may be able to resist the Devil, chastise our Flesh, despise the
World: and so finally obtain a Crown of Glory after our Victory.

4. Finally, we here acknowledge our own weakness, frailty nothing, and that
all our sufficiency is from our Creators grace, mercy, and bounty: which we
therefore beg and implore not to abandon us in our necessities, afflictions,
temptation,

The seventh Petition. But deliver us from Evil.
Whereby, as weary of all things which hinder our desired union and
conjunction, with our beloved Lord and, the only Spouse of our Souls, and the
final End of our Life and Pilgrimage upon Earth, we beg to be delivered.

First, not only from all temporal and corporal Ev^lls, as Famine,
Pestilence, Wars.

2. But also from all spiritual Evils, as impatience, pus^illanimity,
distrust of the divin succor in our tribulations, sufferings, persecutions.

3. From this World, which allures us to sin, and from these bodies, which
imprison our Spirits.

4 Finally, from all that displeases the divin Majesty, under whose sacred
wings we desire to shelter our selves from the violence of all our adversaries,
that so no Temptation may weaken our Faith, discomfort our Hope, distroy our
Charity, daunt our Courage, alter our Resolutions, hinder our Perseverance, or
overthrow our Glories.

An Exercise upon our Lords Prayer, Dialated with Acts and Affections.
1. Our Father which art in Heaven.
Adoration and Acknowledgement.
O Heavenly Father! I no sooner had a Being, but I see the Effects of your
paternall Bounty, inflowing upon me all things necessary for my preservation,
even to this present Instant, in which I appear before your dread Majesty to
adore you, praise you, and to implore your Mercy.

I humbly acknowledge my own Ingratitude, Rebellion, Disobedience: all which
notwithstanding, you have still continued the affection of a tender Father
toward me, in cherishing me, comforting me, correcting me, pardoning me,
protecting me, and treating me not as a Traitor, a Prodigal, a Slave, but as
one of your dearly beloved Children.

Wherefore I adore you as my Sovereign Lord God, and I honor you, as my
heavenly Father, and I praise you, as my powerful Creator, and I love you as
my merciful Preserver; and I promise for the future to obey you more
punctually, to serve you more faithfully, to praise you more fervently, and to
procure the dilatation of your divin honor and glory more zealously upon all
occasions, with a sincere, filial and cordial affection.

Hallowed be thy Name.
A desire of true Light.
O what a Father! How full of pity, patience, compassion, to have so long
endured the undutifullness, irreverence, insolency of an ^ll behaved,
uncivil, unnatural child! who instead of procuring the sanctification of your
sacred Name in all your creatures, and the exaltation of your honor in all his
actions, has still continued to dishonor your Majesty, to disedify his
Neighbor, to misuse your gifts, graces, and mercyes; and to defile his heart
and soul with all sorts of sins and impieties.

Grant, O Father of Light and Love that I may have a clear sight and lively
apprehension of your affection, and my obligation: that truly considering you^
mercy, and my own misery, I may rely confidently upon that, and rise speedily
out of this: so recovering your favor and friendship, and eternally
sanctifying praising, and magnifying your sacred Name and Majesty.

3. Thy Kingdom come.
Sorrow for our Sins, and sighing for Heaven.
I freely confess, O Father of Mercy, an^ King of Majesty! that my own willful^
blind^ess and disobedience has mo^ justly de^riv'd me of a Child's title an^
quality, Permit me therefore to present my self before you as a poor
Bond-slave, or at least as the Prodigal Child with tears in my eyes, sighs in
my heart, and this humble petition in my mouth.

Father! I have offended against Heaven, and before you: I have dissipated all
the graces, you so lovingly and liberally gave me, and forfeiting my whole
freedom, am become the absolute slave of sensuality, vanity, impiety, which
now overruled me, reign within me, and render me a rebel against your divin
Majesty.

Mercy, O most compassionate Father! Destroy this Kingdom of Sin and Satan, and
Establish yours in my soul! Live Lord Jesu in my heart! I will have no other
King but him.

Deprive me not (Dear Father!) of that happy inheritance, which your Son my
Savior has purchased for me with the price of his precious blood; But
mercifully grant that your glorious Kingdom may come to be my lot and portion,
at my departure out of this place of banishment; that I may there contemplate,
praise, and love you for evermore.

4. Thy will be done in Earth, as it is in Heaven.
Efficacious Purpose and Resolution of self-denial.
I Desire no longer, O Eternal Father! to follow my irregular appetites, and
to march under the Banner of my own will and opinion, which are the fountains
of all my defects, disloyalties, transgressions: No Lord! For your love, I
utterly renounce them with all possible horror and hatred.

All my will, and wish is, that your sacred will may be accomplished in me upon
Earth, in Heaven, in all things whatsoever, purely, perfectly, eternally; for
all your Ordinances are full of Justice and Equity; I adore them all; I embrace
them all; I submit to them all.

Thrice happy those souls which are truly conformable to you, which incessantly
contemplate you, which unweariedly follow you, which faithfully serve you, and
perpetually praise you.

5. Give us this day our daily Bread.
Petition for a supply of our Necessities.
IT is the property of Children oppressed with hunger, to address themselv's to
their Parents with tears and cry's to move them to compassion: Behold here your
poor Child, O loving and liberal Lord God! extremely laboring with
spiritual thirst and hunger, exceedingly wearied in the worlds service: you
are my Father, my Feeder, my daily Bread; And it is you only who are capable to
satisfy my hunger, quench my thirst, comfort me in this my calamitous
condition: All Creatures are but small Crumbs, falling from your Royal table.

O how sweet and savory is the Bread of tears, and the Water of contrition to
a truly Penitent, Contrite, Converted Soul! Your sugared words (O Lord!) and
your celestial inspirations are her most delicious sauce, and the
participation of your most precious Body and Blood, her daily Bread.

O my God? Let not the affection to temporal objects, deprive me of spiritual
comforts; nor let any earthly solicitudes and greediness after worldly goods
choke up the memory and gust of those better goods you have promised and
prepared for me in Heaven.

But let my daily Exercise be to sanctify your holy Name; Let the interior
feeling of your Kingdom of Love in my soul, be my only pleasure, palace, and
Paradise; and let the accomplishment of your sacred Will, be my daily Bread and
sustenance, during the space of this my Pilgrimage. But alas!

6. Forgive us our trespasses, as we forgive them that trespass against us.
Reflection upon our Impieties, and Supplication for pardon.
WHen I consider, O Father of Infinite Clemency! not only my life past, but even
my present condition; not only all my enormous and innumerable offenses, but
even my daily and hourly imperfections, negligences, iniquities, to wit,

1. My Time still lost, either in doing Evil, or in doing nothing, or in doing
things impertinent. 2. My lingering and voluntary complacencies in thought
against Charity, Chastity, Humility. 3. My continued Resistency, contristation,
hinderance of your holy spirit in my self or others. 4. My Irreverence,
Indevotion, Tepiditie in my prayers, recollections, spiritual Exercises. 5. My
Excesses of Tongue, Eyes, Ears, and all my senses, as well in respect of your
divin Majesty, as my neighbor, and my self.
When (I say) I seriously reflect upon these and the rest of my manifold
transgressions, I find my self so deeply indebted, that I should undoubtedly
turn Bankrupt, did not your fatherly goodness, and my deer Redeemers boundless
mercy and merits give me hope, comfort, and encouragement:

For, O my God! In what large sum do I stand engaged to your sacred Justice.

1. I owe thanks for so many signal Benefits. 2. I owe Contrition for so many
committed Crimes. 3. I owe love, for love; my life for your Sons death; my whole
self, for your self given, and regiven so frequently unto me.
And yet, insensible wretch that I am! I pay none of these just debts, but
daily increase my obligations by my daily Ingratitude.

What other course then can I now take, but humbly to cry out, Dimitte mihi;
Pardon your prodigal Child (O compassionate Father!) for the love of your dear
Son Christ Jesus: He is my surety, and he has satisfied for my debts, even
according to the severe rigor of your divin Justice, whose least drop of blood
is abundantly sufficient to expiate the whole worlds impieties.

If therefore my own guilt shuts up my mouth, and your Mercy gate; yet his
sacred blood will be my Key to open both the one and the other. Pardon me then
(O my pious Father!) for your Crucified Jesu's sake, as I for the love of him,
do most freely, heartily, and sincerely pardon all them who have injured,
wronged, and offended me in any thing whatsoever.

7. And lead us not into temptation.
Recourse to the divin Protection.
I Am day and night, (O most Powerful Father and Protector!) assaulted with an
infinite number of Enemies, which incessantly seek my utter ruin and
destruction: The flesh charms me, the world enchants me, the Devil cheats me,
and every thing becomes an object of Temptation unto me.

Ah! How shall poor I conquer such powerful champions? I find no other means,
than to make my addresses to you (My all-powerfull Father!) and humbly to
shelter my self under the wings of your paternall Protection.

For Alas! such is my frailty, that I shall surely fall without the support of
your Grace; being fallen, I shall be unable to rise without the help of your
strength; being raised up, I cannot hope to persevere without the continual
influence of your assistance.

Shield me then under your sacred wings; Protect me as the Apple of your eye;
command your Angel of light to preserve me from the darkness of Sin, from the
dangers of my Adversaries, from the dismal sleep of sudden and unprovided
death, from all that is any way displeasing to your divin will and liking.

8. But deliver us from evil.
Aspirations to perfection, fruition, union.
WHen (O Father of Glory!) shall I be freed from sin, from Satan's from my
self, from all that hinders the coming of your Kingdom?

O Kingdom of Peace, Kingdom of love, Kingdom of all desirable felicity! There
it is (O Father!) that I shall sanctify your Name, that I shall perform your
will, purely, perfectly, eternally.

There I shall no longer beg of you my daily Bread, but remain abundantly
satiated with the sight of your blessed face, and the fruition of your
beatifying glory.

There my Debts will be all paid, my sins pardoned, my soul glorified.

There, will be neither Temptation, nor Tribulation; neither occasion of sin,
nor punishment of sin, but all tranquillity, all conformity, all perfection.

There lives thy loving Father (O my Soul!) There is thy home and Country,
there lies thy portion and patrimony.

O Jerusalem, my dear Country, my delicious Kingdom, my desired Inheritance,
when shall I possess thee? O sweet Father! when shall I sincerely love you! O
my poor Soul! when shall I see thee free from stains and blemishes, full of
purity and perfection?

Let Us yield, let us yield to our good Father: Let Us promptly submit to all his
precepts, and Ordinances; Let Us serve him with a filial reverence, obedience,
confidence; that we may here feel the effects of his Grace, and hereafter enjoy
the privileges of his Glory.

. 4. Of the Ave Marie. Or, Angelical Salutation.
The third part of the Rosary.
THere is no question amongst all faithful Christians; but that the Pater and
Ave are the two most excellent Prayers we have (as S. Thomas largely proves)
and consequently that they are of greatest efficacy to obtain what we want and
desire: The one being delivered and dictated by the divin Mouth of Gods own Son
our Redeemer Christ Jesus: The other, being pronounced by an Archangell, sent
Ambassador from the sacred Trinity to Her who was chosen out amongst all women,
to be the worthy Mother of the second divin Person, the Word Eternal. And who
can doubt, but that God himself is also the Author of this Salutation, and that
he put this lesson into his Legates mouth, whom surely he sent well instructed
in all things which might concern his weighty Embassy?

Let us therefore briefly declare the use and scope of this short, sweet, and
mysterious Salutation, and Prayer; and afterward dilate it with Acts and
Affections; that it being so often to be repeated in the recital of the
Rosary, may give more gust to their devotion, who will sometimes take the time
and leisure to ruminate upon it more diligently.

There is surely nothing more befitting a faithful Christian, than a frequent
Reflection upon his Redemption: And since the Incarnation of Gods Son in the
sacred Virgins womb is the chief Mystery thereof, we must needs conclude, That
it is an office of Piety most grateful to the divin Majesty to revolve often
those very words, whereby so great a Mystery (so long expected, so ardently
desired, so zealously begged by the holy people of all precedent ages) was
first announced to mankind; especially it being directly intended, as a
thankful and dutiful commemoration of the signal benefit of our Redemption,
and our Saviors Incarnation.

The Ave Maria (says our devout S. Bernard) is of such power and excellency,
That it causes Heaven to smile, the Angels to be glad, the Devils to fly
away, and Hell to fear and tremble, as often as it is reverently recited.

After whom, said another of the B. Virgins Minions Alanus; The Ave Mary is a
prayer little in words, but large in Mysteries it is short in discourse, but
sublime in sense and virtue; it is sweet above honey, and precious beyond the
purest gold.

Listen, says he, with admiration to what I shall here tell, O you true Lovers
of Mary's name and honor.

All Heaven rejoices, and the whole Earth is astonished, when I say Ave Maria.

Satan avoyds, and Hell trembles, when I say Ave Maria.

The world becomes contemptible, and my heart melts into inward affections,
when I say Ave Maria. All fear is banished, and the Flesh is conquered, when I
say Ave Maria.

Devotion arises, compunction increases, when I say, Ave Maria.

Faith is strengthened, Hope redoubled, Charity enflamed, comfort renewed, the
Spirit recreated, when I say Ave Maria.

This Angelical Salutation may be said to have three parts, as it has three
Authors, though all inspired from God, the Prime Author, and Origin thereof.

The First part; ( Hail Mary full of grace, our Lord is with thee, blessed art
thou amongst women) was delivered by the Angel Gabriel, as it is recorded in
the 2. chap. of St. Luke verse 28.

The second part; ( and blessed is the fruit of thy womb Jesus!) was pronounced
by St. Elizabeth the holy Baptists Mother, Luke 2. verse. 42.

The third part; ( Holy Mary, Mother of God, pray for us sinners now, and at
the hour of our death) was added by the Catholic Church, in the general
council of Ephesus, and recommended to the use of all Christians in opposition
of Nestor, and other heretics, who denied the blessed Virgin to be Gods Mother,

The first and second part of this Salutation were frequently made use of, even
from the first Infancy of Christianity, (as appears by the Liturgy of St.
James, received in the sixth general Council:) and the third part ever since
the general Council of Ephesus.

The affections contained in the Hail Mary, or Angelical Salutation.
1. Of Congratulation, Hail Mary.

2. Of Exultation Full of Grace.

3. Of Admiration, our Lord is with thee.

4. Of Benediction, Blessed art thou amongst women, and blessed is the fruit of
thy womb, Jesus!

Whereby we bless and praise both the Mother and the Son, we beg both their
blessings, and desire all creatures to bless, praise, and honor them both.

5. Of Invocation and Petition, founded upon her Power, she being Gods Mother;
Holy Mary, Mother of God, pray for us Sinners now and at the hour of our death.

An Explication of the Angelical Salutation.
Hail.
That is, be you glad, joyful, secure and happy, in being made the prime
Instrument of Gods providence and mercy, in order to our Redemption, and to the
changing of our Mother Eves hereditary curse into a happy blessing for all
succeeding generations.

Mary.
Is the proper name of the glorious Mother of Jesus, signifying, Lady and Star
of the Sea.

Full of Grace.
As being full of God, by her special privilege of conceiving the Word
Eternal, and consequently full of all virtue, goodness, and perfection
whatsoever.

Our Lord is with thee.
For God the Father in a most singular manner over-shaddowed her, God the Holy
Ghost most abundantly came upon her, and God the Son most wonderfully became
man within her.

The Father was with her, as with his Daughter: the Son was with her, as with
his Mother: the Holy Ghost was with her, as with his dearly beloved Spouse, and
choycest Tabernacle.

Blessed art thou amongst Women.
That is, over, above, and beyond all women, because a Mother, and a Virgin:
the Mother of God, which is above all other human Titles, and yet a perpetual
Virgin, a privilege which never any other creature did, or shall possess.

And blessed is the fruit of thy womb, Jesus
Who remaining perfect god, evermore blessed in his divin Person, became
perfect man in her sacred womb, to whom we give all possible praise, homage,
and gratitude, for all that we have and are, and especially for this his
clothing himself with our human nature in her, whereby he truly becomes our
Brother, and provides her for our powerful Mother.

Holy Mary, Mother of God, pray for us sinners now, and at the hour of our
death.
We make to her our humble addresses in all our pressing necessities, that by
Her we may receive what we want, by whom we received the Author himself of all
goodness.

An Exercise upon the Ave Mary, dilated with Acts etc.
Hail Mary.
All Hail! the most holy, excellent, and admirable of all pure creatures!
Princess of Heaven and Earth! Queen of Men and Angels! I desire now to salute
you with the reverence of the Archangell Gabriel, with the affection of St.
Elizabeth, with the devotion of the holy church, and with all such honor as is
due to Gods sacred Mother.

I salute you, admire you, congratulate you, O amiable Virgin Mother- Mary! as
the chief Instrument of our Redemption, the prime Ornament of Paradise, the
singular Glory of human nature, and the bright Star shining unto us by your
exemplary Virtues, and directing us by your powerful assistance in this sea of
miseries, and place of Pilgrimage.

Full of Grace.
I salute you, O most sacred, pure, and perfect Virgin Mother! as full of Grace
from the first instant of your immaculate Conception: full of Sanctity, during
the whole course of your unspotted life upon Earth, full of glory in the happy
state of your Eternity in Heaven.

O most Powerful, and most Compassionate Virgin Mother! out of this your
plenitude of grace, virtue, sanctity, and perfection; impart what you see
wanting to my poor, needy, and naked Soul.

Our Lord is with thee.
Our Lord God, was, is, and will be evermore with you; O Virgin Mother! and you
are, and always shall be with him: He was with you upon Earth, in your womb,
in your arms, at your breasts: He is with you in Heaven, by his beatifying
presence, he will be there still with you, bestowing on you a continued
Eternity of glory.

O most unspotted Temple of the sacred Trinity! by this your perpetual and
perfect union with the Divinity, obtain for me that I may pass on this my
Pilgrimage in the daily exercise, and reflection upon the divin presence, to
the end I may with you be perpetually united to him hereafter in his happy
Paradise.

Blessed art thou amongst women.
O Mary! the only Mother amongst all Virgins!

O Mary! the only Virgin amongst all Mothers! you conceived without Sin,
brought forth without sorrow, lived without blemish, and after your death were
translated to Eternal glory, without the least touch of corruption; therefore
blessed are you above all women, who were totally exempted from the common
curses of all other women.

You bore him in your womb, who bears up the whole World: you infolded him in
your arms, who encompasses the spacious frame of the vast Universe: you
nourished him with your breast-milk, who gives Being, life, food to all
Creatures. Finally, you were, and are Gods Mother: in which miraculous word is
included all the privileges and perfections, which can posibly befall a
creature, and therefore you are justly styled, and shall be so esteemed by all
succeeding generations, the most blessed of all womankind; O blessed Mary! the
Paragon of all Mothers, the Crown of all Virgins, the Joy of all the Saints,
the best and most accomplished of all Gods Creatures! by these and all other
your numberless Benedictions, avert from me those maledictions, which I have
deserv'dly incurred by my enormous sins and transgressions.

And blessed is the fruit of thy Womb, Jesus.
O Jesu! the sacred fruit of Maryes virginal body! be your Name and Majesty
eternally blessed by all creatures in Heaven and upon Earth.

Blessed be your divin Person, which you thus vouchsafed to unite unto a human
body and soul for the Worlds Salvation.

Blessed be your Will, which was thus inflamed with the love of lost Mankind.

Blessed be your Memory, which mercifully reflected upon us miserable and
caitiff creatures.

Blessed be your Understanding, your Wisdom, your Power, your Providence, and
all your ineffable Attributes, which found out such an efficacious way to win
us to your self, and wed us to your sweet affection and friendship.

O Amiable Jesu! the Ornament of the Universe, the Beauty of Heaven, the Glory
of Mankind; Be you blessed in each member, part and particle of your most pure,
immaculate, virginal Body, which you exposed to such cruel torments for our
Redemption.

By these and all other the infinite blessings which are in you, and belong to
you: (sweet Jesu!) bestow on me the blessing of your grace in this my lives
Pilgrimage, and of your glory in your Eternal Paradise.

Holy Mary, Mother of God, pray for us sinners now, and at the hour of our
death.
O blessed Mother of blessed Jesus! despise not them for whom the dear Son of
your womb, disdained not to die upon the Cross: but in your tender pity and
compassion succor the miserable, encourage the weaklings, comfort the
afflicted, and let all such feel the happy effects of your helping assistance,
as have recourse to your powerful Prayers and Patronage.

We beseech you, O gracious Mother! by all the greatnesses which God has given
you, by the glorious Name of Mary, and Title of Gods Mother, wherewith he has
honored you, by the singular love he bore you upon Earth, and the supereminent
glory wherewith he has Crowned you Queen of Heaven; Pray now for us, that we
may pass on the short remainder of our lives* Pilgrimage in his grace and
favor; and when Death shall summon us to depart out of this miserable World;
Then, O then (most charitable Mother!) chiefly assist encourage, and strengthen
us, your poor children, and conduct our Souls to the happy mansions which your
divin Son, our dear Redeemer has before all time prepared for them in his
Heavenly Kingdom, wherewith you (O most glorious Queen Mother!) they shall see
him, enjoy him, and be united to him for all Eternity.

If we would thus devoutly reflect sometimes upon these or the like mystical
senses, and raise up our Souls to such like affections, when we recite these
divin forms of Prayer, we should probably reap more Spiritual profit by their
frequent repetition.

But we therefore take little or no gust in these and our other pious
Exercises, and make small progress in perfection, because we commonly content
our selves with the bark and bare outside of the words, and seldom or never
penetrate into their inward marrow, sense, and meaning.

. 5. The manner how to recite the Rosary.
1. IN the first place you are to settle your self reverently in the divin
presence, and (seriously recollecting your senses) to cast of all evagations of
mind, and extraversions, (which is the general preparation to all Prayer.)

2ly To the end your understanding and will (both which concur in all
wellorder'd Prayer and Meditation) may be profitably employed; you may please
to remember these two Rules (which were before intimated in the first book of
this present Treatise.. 8.

The First Rule (which concerns the action of your understanding) is, To
represent before the Eyes of your Soul that mystery, whereon you are to
meditate, as even then acted in your presence.

As for Example, The mystery whereupon you intend to make your meditation, is,
The Nativity of our Savior: Imagine your self standing in a private corner of
the poor Bethleem Stable, beholding hearing, and admiring all that there passed
in that sacred night: run over in your mind the condition of the place, and the
circumstances of the Persons, and think what were their thoughts, affections,
words, actions: above all consider who it was, that appeared to the World in
this mean equipage: to wit, the Son of God, the King of Glory, the Monark of
the whole Universe: then ponder his love to mankind in general, and to your
self in particular, etc.

The second Rule (which concerns the action of your will) is, That you pass
speedily from speculative discourses to devout affections, and
self-reflections, as for example, had you been in the Bethleem stable
aforesaid, how diligently would you have employed your self in the service of
little Jesus, and his loving Mother? How willingly would you have picked up
sticks, made a fire, ayr'd his swaths, and fetched or carried whatsoever might
have been useful for their solace and succor, etc.

Such like reflections will raise enflamed desires, and firm resolutions in
your soul of better loving and serving both the Son and Mother for the future,
and of suffering for his sake, who suffered so much for yours, etc.

And in some such manner you may conclude each mystery by some particular
resolution (drawn from the subject of the meditation) either of correcting such
an imperfection, or of exercising such a virtue: and assure your self, that if
you presently apply your self to the practice of such well made resolutions
(humbly imploring the divin assistance therein by the blessed Virgins
Intercession:) you shall find it a most speedy and efficacious means to the
amendment of your life, the extirpation of vice, the implanting of virtue; and
finally much conducing to your general advancement in all sorts of spiritual
Perfections.

3 You may also represent to your self the sacred Virgin.

Sometimes as sitting or kneeling in her silent and solitary retreat, and
attentively listening to the Angel Gabriels Salutation and Embassy.

Other times, as enfolding gently her sweet Infant Jesus in her sacred arms,
embracing him tenderly in her bosom, suckling him lovingly at her breasts,
watching him carefully with her eyes, cherishing him affectionatly with her
kisses, contemplating him devoutly with her heart.

Other times as painfully waiting on him from place to place in the time of his
Passion, sorrowfully standing by him at the foot of his Cross, cheerfully
rejoicing with him at his Resurrection.

Other times, as gloriously reigning in Heaven, mercifully vouchsafing to
hearken to our prayers, and piously presenting them to her Son.

Or otherwise according to the several mysteries, and sutably to each ones
gust and devotion.

4. You are also here to be exhorted to propose to your self the cause (whether
common or particular) which moves you now to the recital of the Rosary: as for
example, I intend now to praise my Lord God for the benefit of my Creation,
Redemption, Vocation, etc. Or In the honor of my Saviors sacred Nativity,
bitter Passion, glorious Resurrection, admirable Ascension, etc. Or In the
honor of the blessed Virgins Annunciation, Visitation, Assumption, Coronation,
etc. Or I intend to render thanks to my Creator for such a particular favor as
for mine own, or my friends Conversion, delivery from danger, etc. Or any other
private or public benefit. Or, I intend to implore the divin assistance for the
overcoming of such a Temptation, extirpating such a vice, obtaining such a
virtue. Or, For a good success in such an affair; Or, that I may make a happy
progress in my Studies, etc.

Consider therefore briefly at the beginning of your prayers, what it is that
you chiefly intend: and if it be any temporal or worldly benefit which you
desire to obtain, be sure you demand it not absolutely, but only conditionally,
as thus: If it please the divin Majesty, and that it is for my good and his
glory: I humbly beg a happy end of such a Law-sute: success in such a journey,
prosperity in such an undertaking, etc.

5. Then taking your Bedes in hand, or having this your Book open before you:
begin your Rosary with the sign of the Cross: saying, In the name of the
Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost; Amen.

6. Then adding this Preparatorie Prayer of the Church, Aperi Domine os meum,
ctc.

O Lord! Open my mouth to bless your holy name, purge my heart from all vain,
wicked, and wandering thoughts: enlighten my understanding, and inflame my
affections: that (reciting this Rosary, with due reverence attention, and
devotion) I may be graciously heard by your divin Majesty: through the merits
of your Son, our Lord and Savior Christ Jesus.

7. Then making a Profession of your Faith, with heart and mouth, say.

I believe in God the Farher Almighty Creator of Heaven and Earth, etc.

8. After your Creed recite thrice your Hail Mary, upon the three grains which
are commonly placed at the head of your Rosary, saluting the blessed Virgin, in
honor of her three singular Prerogatives.

Of being 1. The Daughter of the Eternal Father. 2. The Mother of the Eternal
Son. 3. The Spouse of the Holy Ghost.


9. Then Reflecting upon the first mystery: say, our Father, and ten Hail
Mary's, and so pass on to the second, and the rest of the Decades, according to
the order hereafter described: and in the end of every Decade you are to say,
Glory be to the Father, and to the Son, and to the Holy Ghost. As it was in the
beginning, is now, and ever shall be, World without end, Amen.

Then recite these verses devoutly.

These Prayers Angelical with bended knee,

We offer holy Virgin up to thee;

Steer us a prosperous course while here we tarry,

And in deaths Pangs assist us blessed Mary.

Remember Virgin that no age has known,

Any by thee deserted, that has flown,

To thy Protection, or implored thy Aid,

By which encouragement, most sacred Maid,

Mother of Virgins, I to thee repair,

And for thy help address my humble prayer,

Mother of God! desert me not but hear,

And listen to me with a gracious ear.

10. And having completed the Recital of your Rosary, conclude with the
repeated Creed and sign of the Cross: (so ending where you began) which is both
the ancient, and a most laudable custom.

After all, add this Prayer of the Church, to obtain the remission of all the
negligences committed in your Prayers.

Sacrosanctae and Individuae Trinitaeti, etc.

To the sacred and undivided Trinity, to the blessed Humanity of our
crucified Lord Jesus, to the fruitful integrity of the most glorious Virgin
Mary, and to all the Saints universally, be ascribed all praise, honor, and
glory, from all creatures for evermore; and to us be granted (by Gods Mercy)
the Remission of all our Sins.

And likewise, ever blessed be the Bowels of the Virgin Mary, which bore the
Eternal Fathers Son: and blessed be the Breasts which suckled Christ our Lord;
Amen.

. 6. Of the fifteen Mysteries in general; The fourth part of the Rosarie
THe devout Rosarist is here to be remembered of what was briefly related in the
first book:. 7. that whilst his mouth is employed in the due pronunciation of
the aforesaid prayers, his mind is to be embusied in the serious contemplation
of certain divin mysteries, which are fitly reduced to the number of Fifteen,
answering to the fifteen Decades, or Tens of the sacred Rosary, and are here
set down in that direct order which ought to be observed in meditating upon
them: which is, First to begin with the five joyful mysteries.

Secondly, to proceed to the five Dolorous.

Thirdly, to conclude with the five Glorious; For according to this order they
were accomplished in the Persons of our Savior Christ, and his Blessed Mother.

The five Joyful Mysteries; So called, for that they contain the chief Joys
which the most sacred virgin Mary felt, concerning her Son Christ's human nature.

1. The Annunciation of Christ's Incarnation by the Archangel Gabriel to the
Blessed Virgin Mary, which is briefly expressed in these verses.

Heavens loftyest turret to earth's center bends,
The Incarnat Word to our low vale descends,
And Eccho's there ushered by Angels voice,
And by a purer Virgins vocal choice;
While She, according to this word of thine,
Humbly replied, thy Masters word be mine.
2. The Visitation, which the Blessed Virgin made to her cousin Saint Elizabeth.

Mary salutes Eliza, while from far,
Our Sun is brought to light his morning Star.
The Star, though clowded, feels the welcome ray,
And leaps to show he can fore-run his day.
Dance unripe Child before thou come to light,
An after-dance will cause thy fatal night.
3. The Nativity of our Lord Jesus Christ.

Learn Man, what wonders in this birth appear,
The lesser Orb involves the greater Sphere:
Etheriall lightning leaves its native shroud,
Comes forth, not breaking the mysterious clowd.
Angels their God, their Master Beasts discern,
Of those above, of these below thee learn.
4. The Oblation, or Presentation of Christ, to his Eternal Father in the
Temple, and the Purification of his Mother.

How cheap a thing is light? and more we pay,
For oylin flame, than goulden locks of day.
His ransom, who from darkness all redeemed,
The Priest a two poor Turtle-Doves esteemed.
Jews are wise marchands, this new Sun ere old,
Must to the Priests again b'as cheaply sold.
5. The Finding of Christ in the Temple disputing amongst the Doctors.

Found in the Temple midst the Doctors placed,
Jesus, at once virtue and learning graced:
If Church and Schools be severd, zeal turns blind,
And knowledge lame, they both are perfect joynd.
Adore the Altar, reverence the Chair,
Learn what to ask, and then present thy prayer.
The five Dolorous Mysteries, so called, for that they contain the chief
sorrows which Christ our Redeemer felt in his bitter Passion.

1. His Agony whilst he was at his Prayers in the Garden.

What man of sorrow with two blood-shot eyes,
Ten thousand bleeding pores, there prostrate lies?
All middle colors by extremes are bred,
His candor with our blackness makes him red.
Whose present dress, though Scarlet, but displays,
The rosy dawn of two more Crimson day's.
2. His most cruel Flagellation.

Can all these bleeding wounds, that scourging, find
No blush in face, no pity raisd in mind?
Behold the Man: you worst of savage beast;
Malice enough has done, more Hell detests.
Hate forward goes till her loathed object she,
Not to be wretched knows, but not to be.
3. His Crowning with sharp Thorns.

The pungent cares on regal Scepters born.
Do prove all Diadems be crowns of thorn:
Yet Kings from scoffs and low contempt are free,
Derisions reach not earthly Majesty.
Christ's Crown no fewer slights than thorns emboss,
More keen than those sharp nayls that pierced his Cross.
4. The Carrying of his Cross to Mount Calvary.

Striving his Cross, to bear he faints and falls,
He that sustains Heaven and Earths massy balls,
Simon succeeds; on whose weak shoulders they,
The shadow of the Cross, not substance lay.
Simon the wood, the weight Christ only bore,
A world of heavy sins thronged in each pore.
5. His Crucifixion, and Death upon the Cross.

Hail Tree of life, whose trunck the table made,
Whereon the worlds dear price was told and paid.
On thy fair planks, our sinking souls that bore,
Poor shipwrackt men laid hold and swim to shore.
Raisd from the depth by thee they floating stood
Boy'd up with spring-tides of Christ's copious blood.
The five Glorious Mysteries, so called, for that they contain the chief
Glories, which befell Christ, and his sacred Mother.

1. The Resurrection of our Lord JESUS.

The piercing sword leaves sad Maria's, breast,
Sorrow's old wound makes for new joy's a nest.
Jesus himself, and her revives, his light
Relumins many a fire long quenched in night.
She sees the Patriarks shine with him, his ray,
Dimms not their weaker Stars, yet doubles day.
2. His Ascension into Heaven.

Our Heav'n-ascending Lord no fiery Steed's,
Nor flaming Chariot of Elijah needs:
The wings of wind or Angels are too slow,
His feet in their own motion swifter go:
The Sun at his approach, that fabulous sign,
Of Aries leaves, in him the Lamb t^ shine.
3. The sending down the Holy Ghost to his Church.

In form of fire a rushing wind conveighs
Ardours divin the Infant Church to raise,
And high enthrone in a majestic Sphere,
Above the reach of cold distrust or fear
The Elect thus freed from bonds of narrow sense,
In all known tongues all unknown truth dispense.
4. The Assumption of the Blessed Virgin up to heaven.

Enoch alive translated walks with God,
Walks, and finds yet in bliss no fixed about
The zealous Thesbite undissolv'd ascends,
And at Heaven gates the worlds last year attends:
Death's the sole way to life, Maria dies,
Closes on earth, open's in heaven her eyes.
5. The Coronation of the Blessed Virgin in Heaven.

It Is thy Sons light Maria makes thee shine:
The beam's are his, the sole reflection thine;
Bright as the Moon thou look for borrowed rays,
Both tributarie to the Prince of days.
The Sun her globe opposed only fills,
On thee full light thy Sun conjoined distills.
These fifteen Mysteries for greater ease of the memory are briefly
comprehended in these six verses.

Annun. Vis. Not. Present. and Find,
Reduce the Joyful Five to mind.
Prayer Scourg, Thorn, Cross, and Crucify,
Do the five Dolorous imply.
Res. As. Parac. Assump. corone,
By those the Glorious five are known.
Or thus in three verses.

She Is told, She visits, He Is Born, Offered and Found.
He Pray's, is whipped, is crowned, carries, is killed.
R^ses, Ascends, sends down: She dies, is Crowned.
. 7. Of the fifteen Mysteries of the Rosary in particular.
The first part containing the five Joyful Mysteries.
1. The first Joyful Mystery: [She's told.]
THE Annunication of Chirsts Incarnation by the Archangell Gabriel, to the
Blessed virgin Mary. Luca.

To Blessed Mary the Angel of our Lord, Announces she shall bear The Eternal
Word.

This first Principal, and Joyful Mystery (as also all the others hereafter
following,) comprehends under its notion, may other singular and particular
Joy's, wherewith the sacred Virgins soul was ravished, and replenished, upon
the news brought down to her from Heaven, of the Eternal Words Incarnation in
her womb: which we shall (both here and hereafter) briefly reduce to Ten heads,
or points of Meditation, according to the number of the Angelical Salutations,
which are to be recited in the each Decade: That so the pious Rosarist may
entertain his devotion by mentally ruminating upon one or more, or all of them,
as his leisure shall permit, and his zeal suggest unto him.

Our Father, etc.

The Blessed Virgin Exceedingly rejoiced.

1. At her Eternal Preelection.
THat she amongst all the women of the world, was made choice off from all
Eternity to be the sacred Daughter of God the Father, the worthy Mother of God
the Son, the glorious Spouse, Temple and Tabernacle of God the Holy Ghost.

Hail Mary, etc.

2. At her singular Benediction.
THat she should be that Blessed one above all creatures, indu'd with all the
gifts, graces, virtues, and perfections, answerable to so high an Election.

Hail Mary.

3. At the Reparation of Mankind.
THat she should be ordained for the Cooperatrix of the worlds Redemption, the
Mediatrix of Mankind, the Advocatrix of sinners, the Lady, Queen, and Empress
of Heaven and Earth.

Hail Mary.

4. At the Angelical Salutation.
THat she should be thus particularly visited, and thus honorably saluted by so
noble an Orator, and so high an Ambassador, as was the Archangell Gabriel sent
purposely unto her from the sacred Trinity upon business of such great weight
and concernment.]

Hail Mary.

5. At the Angelical Consolation.
FOR when she was troubled, (not at his Apparition, because she was well
acquainted with Angelical visits, and accustomed to these like visions, but)
at the contents of his message, (which trouble was only a certain fear,
apprehension, admiration) the Angel presently and familiarly calls her by her
Name, and comforts her, saying, Fear nothing, O Mary! I come not to deceive
you, but to declare divin Mysteries unto you; you have found Grace with God;
and what need that Soul fear (says S. Gregory) which is in Gods Grace, favor,
and friendship.

Hail Mary.

6. At the Angelical Revelation.
FOr he informed her, that she was to conceive in her womb, (without sin,
without seed, without Man) and bring forth a child (without sorrow, without
pain, without violation of her virginal integrity) and call his Name (not
impose it) JESUS (which signifies a Savior) He shall be Great (above the
common sort of sons,) and the Son of the most High, (not as the Saints by Grace
and Adoption, but by nature and essence.) And our Lord God shall give him the
Seat of his Father David, (not his material Throne, and temporal Kingdom, but
a spiritual and eternal Jurisdiction over all the Faithful) And he shall
reign in the house of Jacob (in the Church Militant and Triumphant) for
evermore.

Hail Mary.

7. At the Angelical Instruction.
FOr when she had reverently replied; How can this be, since I know not man,
(but have vowed my virginity to God my Maker!) he carefully and punctually
instructs her in the manner and circumstances: The Holy Ghost shall descend
upon thee, and the virtue of the most High shall overshadow thee, (and
therefore, fear not thy Chastity) but know thou shall hereby receive an
addition to thy former purity.

Hail Mary.

8. At her being with Child.
FOr she had no sooner signified her obedient consent, by uttering those humble
words: Behold the Handmaid of our Lord, he it unto me according to thy speech;
(whereby she prayed that God would be pleased to fulfill what his Angel had
declared unto her) but she immediately became with child of the Word Incarnate.

Hail Mary.

9. At her Conception by the Holy Ghost.
O The joy of her Heart when she was ascertaind of her Conception of Christ in
her womb, not according to the common and natural order, but by the Holy
Ghosts supernatural power and operation: And that she wa^ to be his Mother
without a husband, as God was his Father without a wife.

Hail Mary.

10. At her Marriage with S. Joseph.
WHich was done undoubtedly in obedience to the divin ^ctamen for her comfort,
cr^dit, assistance, and many other important reasons without the least ^tion of
carnal Concupiscence in either of the married couple.

Hail Mary.

Glory be to the Father, and to the Son, and to the Holy Ghost, etc.

These Prayers Angelical with bended knee,
We offer holy Virgin up to thee:
Steer us a prosperous course while here we tarry,
And in Deaths Pangs assist us Blessed Mary.
Remember Virgin that no Age has known,
Any by thee deserted that has flown
To thy Protection, or implored thy Aid,
By which encouragement, most sacred Maid,
Mother of Virgins, I to thee repair,
And for thy help address my humble prayer.
Mother of God! desert me not, but hear
And listen to me with a gracious ear.
Affections, Elevations, Petitions.
O Eternal Father! who were mercifully pleased to send down your heavenly
messenger to treat with Her (who before all time was designed to be the worthy
Mother of your Co-eternall Son, my sweet Savior Christ Jesus) concerning the
weighty Mystery of Man's Redemption by his Incarnation: Dispose my Soul (I
beseech you) to receive the Influences of your grace, that so I may not hinder
the effects of those mercies, which in the Councills of your Eternal
Providence you designed for me.

Give me (O my Creator!) a promptitude to obey your precepts: Give me Purity,
Prudence, Modesty, and all other virtues and perfections, which so highly
pleased you in the Blessed Virgin.

O that my whole Employments might be henceforth so unmixt with worldly
affections, so free from vain Interests, so retired from secular disturbances,
so conformable to sacred Mary's most perefect examples, that I might converse
with Angels, conceive Jesus in my soul, nourish him in my interior with my
innocent affections, and bring him forth by my actions of Piety toward the
divin Majesty, and of charity toward my neighbor.

O Jesu, the only Son of the Eternal Father! who by the Holy Ghosts wonderful
operation, were graciously pleased to descend into the womb of an humble Virgin,
and there to cloth your self with our Humanity; Let your powerful Grace
descend into my poor soul, and adorn it with such virtues and perfections, as
are to your self most pleasing and acceptable.

O the profound Humiliation of Gods Son, and the perfect Humility of Gods
Mother! He, being the dread Sovereign of Heaven and earth annihilates himself
to take a servants form: She being declard Gods Mother, takes upon her a
Handmaid's title! O King of Humility! Grant me this Royal virtue, which is the
root and Groundwork of all others, by the intercession of your most humble, and
holy Mother.

O glorious Empress of both worlds! I rejoice at your titles of honor and
greatness, and especially, that you were the only one, chosen out amongst all
women to be Gods worthy Mother: By this Supreme Mystery of your divin Sons
Incarnation, obtain for me, I beseech you, that I may also conceive and carry
your sweet Son Jesus always in my heart and soul, and continually produce the
fruits of good works, answerable to my christian obligation and profession:
that so he dwelling with me, and within me continually, during this my short
Pilgrimage, I may dwell with him for ever in his eternal Paradise.

The Second joyful Mystery, [She visits.]
The visitation which the blessed Virgin made to her cousin St. Elizabeth, Luke
1.

She visits St. Eliza. to rejoice,
With her for what was told by th'Angells voice.
Our Father etc.

The blessed Virgin exceedingly rejoiced.

1. At the consideration of Gods wonderful works.
Which were now made known unto her by his heavenly Messenger, for pondring all
his words after his departure from her: she admiringly compares her own meaness
with Gods Immensity; She ravishtly extolls his mercy, his goodness, his
compassion, toward poor mankind; She gratefully acknowledges her own
unworthiness to have such wonders wrought in, and by her.

Hail Mary.

2. At the Inhabitation of God within her.
O the joy of her heart! O the jubily of her soul! to contain him in her womb
whom the Heaven of Heavens cannot comprehend.

Hail Mary.

3. At her perfect Sanctification.
For she knew her self to be consummated in the fullness of Grace, adorned with
the gifts of the Holy Ghost, confirmed in all virtues, absolutely impeccable,
and secure of her final perseverance.

Hail Mary.

4. At her singular Illustration.
For by the Inhabitation of the Eternal word within her, she became enlightened
both in soul and body; In Soul, so as to know secrets, to understand sciences,
to foresee things to come, as appears by her Prophetical Magnificat: In body,
insomuch as her external beauty, and comeliness, attested Gods inward presence:
and we may piously believe (with St. Bernard) that no one, no not her husband
St. Joseph, could fixedly behold the beams of her shining countenance: and so
the Gloss understands that passage of St. Matthews Gospel; Joseph knew her
not, till she had brought forth.

Hail Mary

5. At her journey into the Mountains of Judea.
For reflecting upon the Angels last Speech: Behold thy Kinswoman Elizabeth
has also conceived a Son in her old age; She speedily, cheerfully, and
joyfully undertakes this long journey (of thirty four miles (says Ludolphus)
and on foot) in order to visit her, congratulate her, assist her.

Hail Mary

6. At the carriage of Christ in her womb.
For though the way was long, and mountainous, though she a tender Virgin, and
with child: yet neither was the journey irksome, nor her burden cumbersom, nor
her travail wearysom, because she carried him, who supported, encouraged and
enabled her.

Hail Mary

7. At the blessing of Elizabeth.
Who at her approach runs ravishtly into her embraces, and affectionately
exclaims; Blessed art thou amongst (all) women, and blessed is the fruit which
thou bear in thy womb: Blessed is the Tree together with the fruit: the
Stemm with the Flower, the Mother with the Son.

Hail Mary.

8. At her conjoined Virginity, and Maternity.
For she joyfully perceived that Prophetical saying, completed in her own
Person; Behold a Virgin shall conceive, and bring forth a Son, and she as
joyfully knew her self to be the Mother of God, according to St. Elizabeth's
expression; How deserve I this honor, that the Mother of my Lord should
vouchsafe to visit me?

Hail Mary.

9. At the overflowing of her Grace into others.
For at her voice and visitation, St. John, St. Elizabeth, and St. Zacharie^
were filled with the Holy Ghost.

Hail Mary.

10. At the many miracles accompanying and following this Visitation.
1. In Elizabeth, replenished, with Gods holy Spirit.

2. In St. John, clean's from original Sin, sanctified in the womb, confirmed
in grace.

3. In Zacharies illumination, etc.

Hail Mary.

Glory be to the Father, etc.
These prayers Angelical with bended knee. etc.

Affections, Elevations, Petitions.

O what a confluence of joys were found at this blessed meeting of these two
Mothers of two great Princes! whereof one was the greatest that was born of
women, and the other was his Lord, and these made Mothers by two miracles.
Surely, never but in Heaven was a greater ecstasy of Iubilation; The word
Incarnate rejoycingly begins to bestow his blessings on the World, before he is
born into it: Elizabeth rejoycingly admires Gods goodness and mercy, and his
Mothers charity and humility; St. John rejoycingly dances in the womb after the
harmonious music of their mutual Salutations, whilst the holy Virgin her
self sweetly in tones her Creators praises, who is the true Author and Origin
of all these wonders, singing with heart and mouth.

My ravished Soul extolls his name,
Who rules the Worlds admired frame.
My Spirit with exalted voice,
In God my Savior shall rejoice;
Who has his glorious beams displayed,
Upon a poor and humble Maid:
Me all succeeding Ages shall,
The blessed Virgin Mother call.
O the ardent charity of my Savior Christ, and of his sacred Mother! He is no
sooner conceived in her womb, but be carries her, and she him into the
mountains of Judea, to give the life of grace to the young Baptist. O Jesu! the
powerful Sanctifier of all souls, vouchsafe to give mine also a gracious
visit, and to inflame it with the fire of your love; that I may henceforth
more readily correspond to your holy motions; more carefully lay hold upon all
occasions conducing to virtue, piety, perfection; and more charitably assist my
necessitous neighbor.

And you, O most lovely, most loving, and most beloved Virgin! bestow a visit
on this poor house and heart of mine. Here I live in a vale of tears,
temptations, miseries; I sojourn amongst continual dangers, I dwell in
darkness, and the shadow of death; and my being in this world is like that of a
child in his Mothers belly, expecting with fear and hope to be born into the
bright-light of a Blessed Eternity. O let your comfortable visitation, and your
Sons grace-bringing presence disperse my inward darkness, qualify my
fearfullness, fortify my hope and confidence, and give me a sweet Antipast of
my future happiness.

Come then, O most charitable and most compassionate Virgin! My good Mother, my
gracious mediatrix, my only Hope next to your holy Son Jesus! Come, and cast an
Eye of Pity upon your poor servant: Let your harmonious voice resound in my
souls ears, and obtain for me a taste of your Sons goodness, that I may
henceforth relish nothing but himself, and (according to your most perfect
example) rejoice in nothing but God my Savior.

The third joyful Mystery, [He is Born.]
The Nativity of our Lord Jesus Christ. Luc. 2.
THe Son of God born of a sacred Maid,
Between two beasts is in a manger laid.
Our Father, etc.

The Blessed Virgin exceedingly rejoiced.

1. At the first sight of the newborn Jesus.
O The Jubily of her ravished heart! To see him safely brought into the world,
whom she carefully carried nine months in her womb; To swathe and suckle him,
who is the Son of the most high; To kiss him, who was comely above all the
children of men; To embrace him, whose beauty the Sun and Moon admire, and
whose countenance the Angels desire to contemplate.

Hail Mary.

2. At her preserved Virginity.
FOr she now found her self completely a Mother of God and Man; and entirely a
pure and unspotted Virgin. O News! (exclaims S. Bernard) never before heard of!
A Mother, and yet a Virgin; A Virgin, and yet a Mother.

Hail Mary.

3. At her bringing forth without pain.
O You Blessed, and the only Blessed amongst women (says the same Saint,) who
alone were exempt from the general curse of all women! But what wonder, if he
put his Mother to no pain at his birth, who was born to take away all pain from
the whole world.

Hail Mary.

4. At the Angelical Iubilation.
FOr She saw the heavenly Court rejoicing at her Sons Nativity, and heard the
alternate Echo's of their, Glory to God on high, and Peace on Earth to People
of good will.

Hail Mary.

5. At the vision of the divin Essence.
FOr if She frequently enjoyed this privilege in her lifetime, (as is the
opinion of many learned Fathers) She now surely enjoyed it in a most eminent
manner, when she brought forth Gods Son into the world.

Hail Mary.

6. At the many benefits bestowed on Mankind by her Son's Birth.
TO wit, The Exaltation of human Nature, The Redemption of the World; The
satisfaction for sin; The victory over Satan; The Promotion of Man to virtue,
Sanctity, Perfection; The certainty of Faith; The Erection of Hope; The
Increase of Charity, The conferring of an Eternal Life and Kingdom.

Hail Mary.

7. At the multitude of miracles wrought then for his manifestation to the
World.
FOr (1.) A great bright unusual Star invites the Wisemen to Bethleem stable.
(2.) Three Suns appear in Spain; soon after joining themselves into one Body:
signifying (says S. Thomas) that the Flesh, the Soul, and the Deity, of the
then born Infant, were united in one person. (3.) A golden circle encompasses
the Sun, in the midst whereof stands a beautiful Virgin with a child in her
bosom, which the Sybill shows to Octavian the then Roman Emperor, with many
other wonders, declaring to the whole world the divin Majesty and glory of her
newborn Son.

Hail Mary.

8. At the Adoration of the Wisemen.
WHo exteriourly summoned by the appearing Star, and interiourly instructed by
the Holy Ghost; came, and fell down at his feet, full of Faith Religion, and
Devotion; and there brake forth into Acts of Adoration, and ecstasies of
Admiration.

Hail Mary.

9. At their mystical offerings.
WHich were Gold as to a great King; Frankincense, as to a true God; Myrrh, as
to a mortal man, who was to die for the worlds Redemption.

Hail Mary.

10. At the Vocation, Conversion, and Salvation of the Gentills.
WHereof she saw a happy beginning in these holy Kings.

Hail Mary.

Glory be to the Father, and to the Son, etc.

These prayers Angelical with bended knee, etc.

Affections, Elevations, Petitions.
O Great Monarch of Heaven and Earth! Is your Mercy, your Compassion, and your
Charity to poor Mankind so excessive, as that you should thus descend from your
Throne of Majesty, into a vale of misery for our salvation? O Virgin Mother,
the choice Chamber, Temple, and Tabernacle of Gods Son, the Queen of Heaven,
and Lady of the World; Be you Eternally blessed, who have been found worthy to
bring forth the so long desired and expected of all Ages! O Jesu, My Lord and
my Redeemer! who were born of a poor Handmaid, wrapped in poor Swathes, housed
in a poor Stable, Bedded in a poor Cribb: Give me true poverty of spirit, and a
perfect contempt of all worldly honors and greatnesses, O sweet Savior of the
World! who called the Kings to acknowledge and adore you in your Cradle, and
commanded them to return back by another way into their Country: Call and
compel my rebellious heart unto you by the powerful light of your efficacious
grace, shining in my interior, and dispersing all darkness and indevotion in
my soul, that I may there find you, feel you, see you, adore you, and offer up
to your divin Majesty the Myrrh of true compunction, and mortification; The
Frankincense of fervent Prayer and devotion; the Gold of ardent love and
affection. O grant that I may henceforth more faithfully follow your holy
lights, vocations, and inspirations, which will conduct me into the right way
leading to my heavenly home; out of which I have hitherto strayed by my own
wilful malice, negligence, and sinfullness.

O my glorious newborn King Christ Jesu! you were pleased to want a lodging
upon Earth, that you might lodge me in Heaven; To be deprived of all worldly
conveniences, that you might heap on me your Celestial comforts; To embrace
Poverty, Humility, self-contempt, abnegation, annihilation, that you might
enrich me with all the spiritual Treasures of virtue and perfection. And shall
I gape after temporal goods and glories, seek for fleshly solaces and
satisfactions, place my affection upon poor and perishable trifles? No my dear
Redeemer! I will henceforth endeavor to imitate your most perfest Example. And
O that I were sincerely willing to abandon all, truly content to be abandoned
by all, and really resolved to submit my self and all to your sacred will and
disposition, that so I might be absolutely conformable to you, my All and All!

O holy Virgin! O happy Mother! how sweetly is my Soul ravished in the
contemplation of that unspeakable joy and gladness which your dilated heart
felt when you first embraced the long desired of all Nations in your tender
folds? I congratulate this your happiness, O glorious Mother of my good Jesus!
and humbly creeping in amongst the holy crew of admiring Angels, Kings, and
Shepherds, I affectionately present you with these my meaner Canticles of
conjubilation. We were the poor, banished, miserable progeny of our unfortunat
mother Eve: we were the wretched Bondslaves of sin and Satan: we were the
forlorn, lost and strayed sheep wilfully fled away from our faithful
Shepherd: We were the Prodigal children carried abroad by our own
concupiscences from our loving Father: and by your Sons means. O Blessed, and
most fortunate Mother! we are disingaged, deliverd, redeemed from all these
miseries, woes, and disasters. O the happy change of our unhappy condition! O
Eternally Blessed Tree, and Blessed Blossom! Blessed Womb, and Blessed Fruit!
Blessed Mary, and Blessed Jesu!

The fourth joyful Mystery [offer'd.]
THe Oblation and Presentation of Christ to his Eternal Father in the Temple:
And the Purification of his Blessed Mother: Luc. 2.

The Virgin's purified; her dear Son warm's
Old Simeons breast, presented in his arms.
Our Father, etc.

The Blessed Virgin exceedingly rejoiced.

1. At the carriage of her sweet Son Jesus.
FOr upon the fortith day after our blessed Saviors birth; she cheerfully sets
forth of Bethleem stable with her little Jesus in her arms, and S. Joseph in
her company toward Jerusalem, to fulfill the Law of Moses, and to offer up
her Son to his Eternal Father in the Temple: And though she had just reason to
dread King Herod's cruelty, yet she was more afraid to offend the divin Majesty.
The way (says Ludolphus) was five miles long; yet she felt not the least
weakness, nor weariness; for she carried him who strengthn'd her, and afforded
her a full abundance of courage and comfort.

Hail Mary.

2. At the completing of former Prophecies.
FOr as she walked on her way, she joyfully reflected upon that Text of Aggeus;
The desired of all nations shall come, (to this Temple in Jerusalem); and I
will fill this house with glory etc. And that of Malachie. Our Lord whom you
seek shall come to his Temple, the Angel of the Covenant whom ye delight in,
etc. And such other Prophetical predictions.

Hail Mary.

3. At the offering up of her Son.
FOr entering the Temple, she puts her self humbly on her knees, and places her
Son reverently upon the Altar; entirely bequeathing both her self and him to
the Eternal Father in these or the like expressions: Behold (O heavenly
Father!) yours, and my Son: yours Eternally begotten, as the perfect Image of
your substance; Mine, temporally born, as clad with human nature in my womb:
Take both Mother and Son into your fatherly Protection; I here freely offer up
to your divin Majesty, in your sacred Temple, and upon your holy Altar, this
new oblation, this God-man, this great-little Jesus, this pure and precious
Sacrifice; who will hereafter offer up himself to you upon the Altar of the
Cross, a more perfect and worthy Holocaust for the World's salvation.

Hail Mary.

4. At her exemption from the Law of Purification.
FOr though she punctually performed each tittle of the Mosaicall Law; paying
five sicles of silver to the Priest for her Sons Redemption, and a pair of
Turtles, or young Pigeons; one as a Holocaust for the Infant, the other as an
offering for sin: yet she well knew (to her unspeakable joy) that both her self,
and her Son were absolutely free from any such Law; He being far above it, and
she nothing concerned in it.

Hail Mary.

5. At the instruction and example of her Sons Humility and Obedience.
FOr by this Oblation, she plainly perceived that her Son came to serve, and
not to be served; to fulfill the Law, not to infringe it; to do, as well as to
teach: whereby she also understood her own duty, and that she likewise was to be
a pattern of Humility and obedience to the world.

Hail Mary.

6. At the wonderful Manifestation and revelation of her Son.
TO wit; Not only to S. Joseph, S. Zachary, S. Elizabeth, the Shepherds, and
the Kings; but now also to S. Simeon, and S. Ann in the Temple: For she
joyfully considered that her Son would therefore be revealed to Virgins, to
Widows, to wedded people, to all ages, degrees, sexes, professions, conditions,
because he came to redeem all.

Hail Mary.

7. At Venerable Simeon's receiving her Son into his arms.
O the Jubiley of all the hearts there present, (and especially of the sacred
Virgin Mother) seeing the good old Prophet, so devoutly falling prostrate on
the ground, so faithfully adoring the divin Infant, so ravishtly taking him
into his embraces, and so zealously proclaiming his praises!

Hail Mary.

8. At the Blessing of Simeon.
FOr applying his Prophetical discourse to the Blessed Virgin, Behold (says
he) O holy Mother of Jesus! This Son of yours is set for the fall and rising of
many in Israel, (for he shall be the ruin of the wicked, and the reward of the
righteous); and for a Sign, which shall be contradicted (by the Jews, Gentills,
Heretics, half-Christians); yea and a sword of sorrow shall also pierce your
own Soul, (so great shall be hereafter your compassion, at the sight of his
sufferings). Now although these predictions of Simeon were in themselv's harsh
to the tender-mothers senses, yet they were joyful to her resigned soul, in
respect of the ensuing salvation of mankind.

Hail Mary.

9. At the like Devotion, Iubilation, and Illumination of S. Ann.
FOr this holy and ancient Prophetess, the daughter of Phanuel of the Tribe of
Aser, (who had dedicated the remainder of her days to the divin service, and
departed not from Jerusalem, but persever'd in fastings and prayers, night and
day, in expectation of this blessed time) came also (says S. Luke) into the
Temple, at the same instant, praising our Lord, and speaking of him to all that
looked for Redemption in Israel.

Hail Mary.

10. At the signification and fruit of this Oblation.
FOr it signified, that her Son Christ should one day offer up himself on the
Cross for the Worlds Redemption; and that he should procure a perfect
Reconciliation between Man and his Eternal Father.

Hail Mary.

Glory be to the Father, and to the Son, etc.

These Prayers Angelical with bended knee, etc.

Affections, Elevations, Petitions.
O My Lord J^su! who thus mercifully permitted your self to be seen, adored,
embraced by your faithful servant Simeon; come also into my desirous,
languishing, and greedily expecting soul. Purge, and perfect it, O pious
Redeemer! and expel from thence whatsoever is any way displeasing to your
divin liking. Prepare it as you please for your own purpose, and make it a fit
temple for your self to inhabit.

Give leave, O sweet and loving Savior! to your sincerely affectionate
servant, to embrace you in my Interior with the two Arms of profound Humility
and perfect Obedience; and permit me not to depart this life, before I there
enjoy your happy sight and presence; who are the only Fountain of true light
and love, the only desire and delight of my heart, the only comfort and support
of my Pilgrimage, and the only Hope and expectation of my future bliss and
felicity.

O Dear Virgin Mother! I dare not presume to decipher the numberless affections
which dilated your faithful heart in this free oblation of your self and your
son in the Temple! O when shall I, (comformable to your perfect example)
consecrate my whole self, with all I have and can, entirely, cheerfully,
resignedly to the divin Majesty?

My Creators Law, and my own duty obliged me to dedicate unto him, not only
the first, but all the fruits of my life and love: And shall I not bequeath to
him, at least, the small remainder thereof, by this my irrevocable will and
Testament? If the World, the Flesh, and the Devil have gathered the fairest
flowers of my youth, and manly age: may I not justly be ashamed, to deny Him,
to whom all was due, at least the leaves, which shall hereafter fall from this
old, shaken, rotten Tree?

O my past incivility, disloyalty, Ingratitude! O my present confusion and self
condemnation! To reserve for my Sovereign Creator, the last, and worst part of
my lives Sacrifice! yet, since such is your divin goodness (O my gracious Lord
and maker!) as not to disdain the meanest offering, when humbly, heartily,
affectionatly, presented to your sacred Majesty: Accept I beseech you, this
little, (and alas! too long delayed) Oblation I now lay upon your Altar, which
is my Will to obey you, my heart to love you, and my life to serve you,
henceforth for all succeeding time and Eternity.

The fifth joyful Mystery. [And Found.]
The finding of Christ in the Temple disputing amongst the Doctors Luke 2.

In Seas of joy, the Virgins breast was drowned,
When Jesus lost, she in the Temple found.
Our Father, etc.

The Blessed Virgin Mother exceedingly rejoiced.

1. At the sight of her newfound Son.
FOr when the child Jesus was twelve years old; his Parents went up with him to
perform their Devotions in the Temple of Jerusalem, where they lost him for
three days space, sought him up and down with many tears, and at last found him
amongst the Doctors. O the Joy of their hearts at this happy sight! For the
sweetest comforts spring from precedent sorrows; now their sorrows were
proportionable to their loss; and consequently their Joy was correspondent to
the affection they bore their blessed Son, first possessed, then lost, and now
retriv'd again.

Hail Mary.

2. At the Hearing of his Learning and Wisdom.
For they found him not playing, idling, sleeping; but discoursing of the Law,
disputing with the Doctors, proposing questions to the Priests, and resolving
their difficulties with such readiness and dexterity, that all the Auditors
were astonished at so ripe an understanding in such tender years.

Hail Mary.

3. At the fulfilling of that Prophetical saying: I Wisdom dwell with
Counsel, and am present amongst learned cogitations:
WHich passage, S. Vincent explicates literally of this prefence of our Lord
JESUS amongst the Priests and Doctors.

Hail Mary.

4. At her first conference with him after She had found him.
WHen with heart brim-full of Joy, She brake forth into these expressions: O my
dear Son! Why have you dealt thus with us? (not making me, your so tenderly
affectionat Mother acquainted with your stay:) which was no rebuke, but a
certain loving complaint for his long absence; Behold your (Putative) Father
and I have sought you out with sorrow, (fearing you might fall into the hands
of Archelaus the Son of Herod, and Heir of his cruelty, as well as of his
Kingdom.

Hail Mary.

5. At his Mystical Answer unto her.
FOr He mildly and modestly teply'd: And why (O Mother!) did you (so carefully)
seek after me? Know you not, that I must be about my (heavenly) Fathers
business? (whereof one part is to instruct the ignorant, and instill into their
hearts the hidden Intelligence of his Law.)

Hail Mary.

6. At the Instruction couched in his reply.
FOr though, at first She understood him not, by reason of the excess of Joy,
in having found him, yet reflecting afterward upon his words, She well
perceived, he was now (even in his tender age) setting forward that great work
of man's conversion, Redemption, Salvation, which he was in his riper age to
complete and perfect.

Hail Mary.

7. At his return with her to Nazareth.
FOr he immediately leaving the Doctors company, and yiedling to his Mothers
summons; went down with his Parents to their dwelling house in Nazareth.

Hail Mary.

8. At his humble Obedience and Subjection.
FOr the sacred Gospel tells us, He was subject unto them.

Hail Mary.

9. At the consideration of her own happiness, dignity and excellency.
TO wit, That He should become thus voluntarily subject to her command; to
whose beck, both her self and all creatures, were necessarily subject and
obedient.

Hail Mary.

10. At the delicious conservation of all his words and actions in her heart.
FOr so the sacred Penman of the holy Ghost informs us: His Mother kept all
these sayings, conferring them in her heart. To the end she might (by her daily
and diligent study, reflection, and meditation), dive into the meaning of what
she yet understood not, and take joy and comfort in what she understood.

Hail Mary.

Glory be to the Father, and to the Son, and to the Holy Ghost, etc.

These Prayers Angelical with bended knee, etc.

Affections, Elevations, Petitions.
O Blessed JESU! who (for reasons best known to your own divin Wisdom, and
all-disposing providence) would be thus lost, sought, and found by your Parents
in Jerusalem, amongst the Doctors in the Temple: Grant that I may never lose
your Grace, Favor, and Friendship, by following my own irregular appetites,
passions, and affections, by yiedling, to wordly vanities, allurements,
enchantments; by consenting to Satan's suggestions, temptations, delusions:

But if through Ignorance, negligence, carelessness, or any other motive
whatsoever, I shall unhappily chance to be deprived of your sweet presence in
my interior; Excite me (O merciful Savior!) to seek you out diligently,
speedily, mournfully, during the three days space of this my lives Pilgrimage,
by perfect Contrition, pure Confession, entire Satisfaction; that so I may at
last joyfully find and see you in your Celestial Jerusalem; sitting on your
Fathers right hand, amidst your Angels and Saints, in the Temple of your
Eternal Glory.

O Jesu! The rare Pattern of perfect Obedience, Humility, and all virtues! you
are the All-powerfull God, and you obey poor man: you are the Sovereign
Creator, and you submit to your own Creature: you are the Supreme Monarch of
both worlds, and you are subject to your Handmaid Mary! And shall any Christian
remain any longer rebellious, refractory, disobedient to his Parents, to his
Superiors, or to any other just authority?

Be ashamed proud dust, and ashes! God humbles himself, and will thou exalt thy
self? He obeys men, and do thou desire to domineer over them? Is not this
directly to prefer thy self before thy sovereign Lord and Maker?

But o sacred Virgin Mother! How singular is your Privilege? To have him
subject to you, whom all human and Ang licall nature reverences and adores? O
my soul! Admire both; and make choice of which thou will chiefly admire! Either
the Sons stupendous condescension; or the Mothers excellent dignity: Both are
mervailous, both miraculous: That God should obey a Woman, is a Humility beyond
all Example; That a woman should command God, is a Height beyond all comparison.

O good Jesu How does my Soul languish, when I have lost you? and how
reproachfully does my conscience cry out unto me, Where is thy God? And yet,
Alas! I seek you not with due sorrow and diligence; because I love you not,
with true fervor and devotion!

O loving Mother of Jesus! Had I the least spark of that sincere affection you
bore your blessed Son; How sensible should I be of my sad loss? How seriously
should I seek to retrive it! But ah my misery? That is lost without much grief,
which was possessed without any great joy; and therefore I find not my loss,
because I feel no love; and finally I feel no love because I reflect not
faithfully upon my Redeemers real worth and value.

And yet, what is there considerable, or desirable in Heaven or Earth, in
comparison of sweet Jesus? O my Lord, my love, my lot, and my portion for time
and Eternity! Dart one Efficacious beam of your divin light into my dull, dark,
and desolate Soul; that I may see your greatness, to the end I may love your
goodness; and that truly loving you, I may willingly leave all to look after
you; contentedly forfeit all to find you; and having found you, I may be more
faithful in following you, more careful in keeping you, more sincere,
constant, perseverant in serving and obeying you.

Be you my guide (O most glorious Virgin Mother!) in this my inquest after your
dear Son; Following your footsteps to the sacred Temple, I shall find him by
your favor, whom I have lost by my own fault; And having once found him; O let
me never more loose him by my disloyalty; that living here, and dying in his
sweet embraces, I may live with him hereafter, and enjoy him eternally in his
blessed Kingdom.

Amen.

Then end this first part of the Rosary with the Profession of your Faith and
the sign of the Cross, saying, I Believe in God, etc. with the Prayer: To the
sacred and undivided Trinity, etc. as it is set down in the end of the 5..

The second Part of the Rosary, containing the Five Dolorous Mysteries.
Begin this Part of the Rosary with the Prayer, sign of the Cross, and Creed,
as in the first Part.

The First Dolorous Mystery, [He Prays.]
THe Agony of Christ whilst he was at his Prayers in the Garden. Matthew. 26.

Christ in the Garden pray's, his anguish'd Breast
Is in his face through sweats of blood expressed.
As in the Precedent Joyful Mysteries, we have showed that those five
principal and common heads, comprehended (under their signal notions)
several particular Joys of the sacred Virgin Mother; so each one of these five
general Dolorous Mysteries, (like a long chain made up of many links) includes
a multitude of particularly aggravating circumstances in our dear Redeemers
Passion, and his holy Mothers compassion: which Concatenation of sorrows, we
shall endeavor (as before in the Cohesion of Joys) to reduce briefly to Ten
Heads, or points of Contemplation, correspondent to the respective Decades of
this second part of the Rosary. Our Father, etc.

Our Blessed Savior was exceedingly sad and sorrowful.

1. At the apprehension of the loss of his corporal life.
FOr if Death is of all things most horrible to human nature, it was surely
(according to the said human nature) much more horrible to him, than to any
other; because his life was of greater dignity than that of all others, by
reason of its conjunction to the Divinity.

Hail Mary.

2. At the foresight of his sufferings.
FOr his understanding clearly comprehending the quality and quantity of his
approaching pains and torments; And his souls eyes efficaciously seeing all the
causes of fear and sadness; and furthermore, he permitting (says S. John
Damascen), each one of his senses and Powers to act according to its own
natural property; it must needs follow, that as his knowledge was most
perfect, his sufferings were most excessive.

Hail Mary.

3. At the consideration of Sins heynousness.
FOr he came to suffer for all the offenses of Mankind in general, and for
each ones sin (past, present, and to come,) in particular. O the anguish of his
soul, at the sight of their multitude and malice!

Hail Mary.

4. At the Jews Ingratitude.
FOr besides his particular Benefits showered down from time to time upon that
perverse people, he had now borrowed his humanity from their Blood, conversed
many years amongst them, preached his Gospel unto them, wrought infinite
Miracles before them; And that they after all this, should so inhumanly,
unnaturally, ungratefully, condemn, kill, and crucify him, was surely a
corrosive more bitter to his afflicted heart, than death it self.

Hail Mary.

5. At the little profit, which Christians would reap from his Passion.
FOr though the least drop of his precious Blood, was abundantly sufficient to
redeem, not only all men, but many worlds: yet he well knew how few would make
themselves partakers of the fruits thereof: And this foreseen sloth,
negligence, and wilful ingratitude of Christians, (if we will credit S.
Bernard, Bonaventure, and Hugo,) more afflicted our dear Redeemer, than all the
corporal calamities he endured on the Cross for them.

Hail Mary.

6. At the Treason of Judas.
FOr that a Servant should betray his Master; a Disciple, his Lord; an Apostle,
his Savior: And this by a fraudulent Kiss, (the sign of peace, friendship, and
affection); are circumstances (says S. Ambrose) much aggravating our Redeemers
sorrow.

Hail Mary.

7. At the Scandal, scattering, and flight of his dearest Disciples, friends,
and followers.
O the Affliction of his tender heart! To see Them whom he loved so sincerely;
Them, whom he had served so diligently; Them, whom he had so lately comforted
and confirmed by his long Sermon, and so earnestly commended to his Fathers
care and custody: Them, whom he had from time to time fed so efficaciously with
his sacred Doctrine, and feasted so deliciously with this Blessed Body and Blood
in the very last nights Banquet; to fly now fearfully from him; to be
scandalized at him, and to seem to doubt of his Divinity: And above all to see
Peter's Ingratitude, Infidelity, Pusillanimity: did surely pierce his Soul with
inexplicable sorrow.

Hail Mary.

8. At his taking, binding, and bringing out of the Garden of Mount Olivet.
Imagine (O my Soul!) What injuries thy Innocent Savior here suffered by a band
of barbarous Soldiers, set on by the spiteful Jews, ledd on by the
Sacrilegious Judas, egged on by their own malice and fury! See how violently
they rush upon him; binding his arms, baring his head, beating his body,
pulling his beard, tearing his hair, and every way, abusing him, insulting over
him, deriding him, blaspheming him.

Hail Mary.

9. At his presentation to Annas and Caiphas, and the suborning of false
witnesses against him.
O What an affliction! To be tried by such unjust and partial Judges; and to
be made guilty by such envious and sinister proceedings!

Hail Mary.

10. At his Blows, Buffets, and other opprobrious usage, all night long.
FOr when the wearied Ringleaders, and wicked Priests, had delivered him over
to be baited by the rabble of the enraged people; O how inhumanly did they
handle the meek, humble, and patient JESUS! His face (says S. Bonaventure)
which fills Heaven with Joy, is here defiled with loathsome spittle, smiten with
sacrilegious hands, covered with mock-hoods, etc. and nothing was omitted which
malice could invent to torment him.

Hail Mary.

Glory be to the Father, and to the Son, etc.

These prayers Angelical with bended knee, etc.

Affections, Elevations, Petitions.
O holy Jesu! the absolute Pattern of heroic Resignation! grant that in all
the accidents (which by the dispensation of your divin providence, shall befall
me during this my earthly Pilgrimage) I may cheerfully, cordially,
affectionately, say with you, and to you; Not my will, O my heavenly Father!
but yours be done. O let me have no wishes, but that your will may be
accomplished; no desires, but that your commands may be obeyed; no designs,
but that you may be faithfully served, loved, praised by all creatures.

Give me (O Jesu!) the gift and spirit of Prayer, which is the chief exercise
of Religion: that in Imitation of your example, I may henceforth more seriously
addict my self unto it, (especially in the time of my tribulation and
temptation) with due humility, fervor and perseverance.

You (O meek Jesu!) received the malicious Judas with the sweetness of a
Savior; you permitted him to kiss you with the calmness of a friend, you
suffered the soldiers to bind you, buffet yo,u abuse you, with a patience
exemplary to all ages: and you cured the wound of him that came to kill you
with the affection of a Parent; Embrace me also (O blessed Jesu!) with the
entertainments of a Savior, kiss me with the countenance of a friend, cure me
with the compassion of a Father, and b^ud me fast unto your self with all the
chains of perfect charity, that I may henceforth truly serve you, please you,
and live with you for evermore.

O my Soul! what are thy thoughts at the sight of thy sweet Savior thus
suffering for thy sake?

Behold, He is fad for thee, even unto death, and do thou rejoice in sinful
delights?

He lies with his body prostrate on the ground, and snortest thou on thy downy
bed, wallowing in thy sensuality?

He is bathed in tears of blood, sighing, sweating lamenting for thy
wickedness: and wilt not thou shed one tear, send forth one sigh, nor give one
groan in token of thy true sorrow for thy own grievous offenses? O his love!
and O thy insensibility? thou shall one day sadly sigh, sweat, weep, lament, (O
thou obdurate Core of mine!) when, alas! it will prove too late, if thou now
presumptuously delay'st it.

Wherefore (O my God!) look upon me even now at this very instant, returning,
repenting lamenting all my former ingratitude, disloyalty, impiety: and
whilst you behold my misery, cast also an eye upon your dear Son Jesus, to
move you to mercy.

Look (O compassionate Father!) upon the face of your Christ, not now outvying
the Suns Splendour upon Mount- Thabor, yet still the self-same object of your
eternal Complacency; See his Garments, not now white as Snow, yet still
representing the Robe of your beloved Joseph. There he appeared in Glory; Here
sadly prostrate on the ground; There he was elevated with honor; Here he lies
bleeding, sweating, languishing with sorrow: yet both here and there; He is
your Son, and my Savior, and every where the powerful motive of your mercy
toward poor Mankind.

And you [O sacred Virgin!] the most accomplished of all women, and the most
compassionate of all Mothers! look also upon your beloved Son not now white and
ruddy, the chosen of thousands and the most beautiful amongst the Sons of men:
but all pale and wan with weeping, all discolored with blood and sweat, and
every way the most afflicted of all creatures!

O what thought can comprehend the resentment of your tender heart, condoling
with your so dearly beloved, and so deeply distressed Son Jesus!

And thou, [O my soul!] what do thou? what say thou? what resolv'st thou?
contemplating these sad objects of the here lamenting Mother, and the there
languishing Son? Thou, who art the cause of her anguish, and of his Agony: will thou still [by thy sinful obstinacy] slight the Sons blood, and the Mothers
tears?

No my dear Mother! no my sweet Savior! I here in your presence protest the
contrary: and for the love, respect, and honor I ow unto you both, I
absolutely renounce all sin and impiety, and whatsoever is displeasing to your
holy wills and likings.

The Second Dolorous Mystery. [Is Whipped.]
THe most cruel Flagellation, or whipping of Christ our Savior. John 19.

While to a Pillar Christ's dear hands are bound,
His body is Scourged till all become one wound.
Our Father, etc.

OUr Blessed Savior was exceedingly afflicted.

1. At his Presentation to Pilate.
FOr after the spiteful Jews had spent the night in punishing him, and the
morning in plotting his death: They led him bound from the house of Caiaphas
the Priest, to Pontius Pilat the President; there anticipating the sentence of
his condemnation, by their prejudicating clamors; to the end that Pilat should
not dare to absolve whom they all desired should perish.

Hail Mary.

2. At his standing before a Pagan Judge, in quality of a notorious Criminal.
O The stupendous Humility of Innocent JESUS! He is ordained by his Eternal.
Father the Supreme Judge of all creatures; and here he stands as a guilty
Malefactor before a Petty-President of Judea.

Hail Mary.

3. At the Jews false Accusation.
AS if he were a Subverter of the people, an Abettor of rebellion against
Caesar, a Broacher of Blasphemy against God.

Hail Mary.

4. At his being sent to Herod.
WHereby he was not only forced to undergo another tiresom, troublesome, and
afflictive journey: But also to hear and endure new, false, and malicious
accusations before this perverse Prince of Galilee, who was a wicked,
incestuous, sensual wretch, and the murderer of the holy Baptist.

Hail Mary.

5. At Herod's scorn, and contempt.
WHo sent him back to Pilat, as an Idiot, in a white garment.

Hail Mary.

6. At the Peoples clamor, to have Barrabas pardoned, and Christ put to death.
O the hard-heartedness of this Inhuman Nation! To prefer a Thief, before
Jesus! a Manslayer, before Man's Savior! A Murderer, before the Life giver! O
the Jews blindness and brutishness! Set Barrabas free, and Crucify Christ!
What means this? but, let him die, who rayses the dead; and let him be dismis'd
to destroy yet more of the living.

Hail Mary.

7. At his most cruel and contumelious whipping.
By the Ministers of Pilat, who by their Masters command fall like ravenous
Wolves upon this meek Lamb, tear off his garments, tie him to a pillar, and try
their strength in tormenting him.

Hail Mary.

8. At his being stripped naked before the whole multitude.
O How did this afflict the virginal heart of Jesus, the Lord of purity, and
lover of Chastity!

Hail Mary.

9. At the stretching and distorting of his tender Body.
WIth coards and ropes, to force and fasten it to the whipping stock.

Hail Mary.

10. At the tearing and wounding of his flesh, with the whips.
WHich was done with such severity, that from the sole of his foot, to the
crown of his head there was no part of it left unmangled.

Hail Mary.

Glory be to the Father, and to the Son, and to the Holy Ghost, etc.

These Prayers Angelical with bended knee, etc.

Affections, Elevations, Petitions.
O Innocent and Immaculat Lamb of God! who were mercifully pleased to suffer
these multitudes of shames and sorrows; to be thus hurried from Tribunal to
Tribunal; thus treacherously betrayed, maliciously accused, unjustly condemned,
and rudely scourged even for my sake, I most humbly beseech you, by all the
fountains of blood issuing from your sacred Body, to give me a lively
apprehension of sins heynousness; that so I may perfectly hate the cause of
your sufferings, and perfectly love you for your sufferings. What am I, Dear
Redeemer! that you, the Eternal Son of God should endure one stripe for me?
But O the excess of your affection! And shall I by new crimes abuse so signal
a favor, despise so miraculous a mercy, provoke so great a goodness, incense
so immense a clemency, and inflict fresh wounds upon Gods Son, by my continued
wickedness?

Tell me, O my soul! do thou truly believe, that thy sweet Savior suffered
all this for thy sake? That he was stripped naked, to cover thy crimes? fastened
to a pillar, to loose the fetters of thy bondage? Whipped with cruel rodds, to
secure thee from the scourges of his Fathers severe Justice? all over beaten,
bruised, and worried, to cure the wounds of thy soul?

Believe thou all this, and have thou no sense of compassion, no feeling of
compunction, no resolution of correcting thy life, cancelling thy sin,
converting thy self to his love and service; who, for these very ends and
intentions underwent all these woeful torments?

O meek Jesu! seeing you thus patiently bearing all sorts of abuses, shall I
storm at the least offered injury?

O Son of God! seeing you stripped naked in the sight of your Enemies; shall I
be ashamed to discover my faults before a Priest?

O sweet Savior! seeing your whole Body torn with whips, and your flesh turned
into as many open mouths, as it had wounds, to proclaim the love you bear me;
shall not I open my mouth to manifest your Mercy, to admire your goodness, to
adore your bounty, to acknowledge my obligation, to testify my compassion, to
renounce my impiety?

And since you, O my dear Redeemer! Spilt all your blood for me! shall not I
shed one tear for my self and you?

You (O charitable Samaritan!) permitted your tender skin to be torn from off
your back and shoulders with cruel scourges, to serve as swathes, wherewith to
bind up my ulcers. You were content (O pious Pelican!) to have the blood
drained out of your veins, to make therewith a precious balsum of oil and
wine, for the efficacious cure of my wounds; and shall I yet ly dead and buried
in the sepulcher of sin and Impenitencie?

You weep tears of blood over my dead corpse, and cry out aloud unto my soul
with as many Tongues, as you endured Torments: N. Come forth of thy grave! And
I cry out to you (Dear Jesu!) the Abysmus of misery, calls upon the Abysmus of
mercy! O when shall I be led out of this loathsome sepulcher! when shall this
headkercher of evil customs, sinful habitudes, vicious inclinations be untied
and taken off from my eyes and face, which hinder my desired sight and
enjoyment of you my dear Savior!

Behold I appear upon your summons; but yet bound hand and foot, and in quality
of a guilty Criminal before you my God and my Judge: I come creeping, as a poor
prodigal child, and ready to perish, to you my pious Father. I cast my self at
your sacred feet with tears in my eyes, contrition in my heart, and Confession
in my mouth, as a Penitent Magdalen: O compassionate Savior! unbind and
absolve your guilty Criminal: Receive and embrace your fearful Prodigal:
Comfort and pardon your Penitent Magdalen: Apply to me one small drop of your
sacred blood, and I shall be cured: Speak only the word (sweet Jesu!) and my
soul shall be saved.

The third Dolorous Mystery, [Is Crowned.]
THe Crowning of Christ our Savior with Thorns. Matthew. 27.

His sacred Head is pierced with pungent thorns.
And made the subject of ten thousand scorns.
Our Father, etc.

Our blessed Savior was evceedingly tormented.

1. At the pressing of the sharp-pointed thorns into his sacred Head.
FOr Pilat having called him in derision The King of the Jews: the Soldiers,
(at their instigation) twisted thorny brakes into the shape of a Crown,
boysterously placing it upon his bare head; and violently pressing it into his
skull, to increase his misery, and make him a more ridiculous object of all
men's mockery.

Hail Mary.

2. At the pulling it off and on.
WHich was done both upon a pretense of fitting it to his head, and also to
augment his torments.

Hail Mary.

3. At his clothing with Purple:
FOr they sportingly invented all manner of tricks, to please their fancies,
glut their malice, and aggravate his miseries: Not content therefore to have
Crowned him; they would also cloth him as a counterfeit King: and so rashing
off his garments, which were now glu'd to his body with the former goares of
blood, they scornfully cast a despicable Purple-cloak over his naked shoulders,
which was a color used by the ancient Kings.

Hail Mary.

4. At the holding a Reed in his right hand.
THis was intended as a mock- Scepter, being (after the Crown and purple) the
third Royal Ensign.

Hail Mary.

5. At the scoffing Salutations, Genuflexions, Adorations.
ANd the like feigned Actions of Religion and worship, whereby the Soldiers and
Jews maliciously derided him, as blasphemously usurping the title of the
divinity.

Hail Mary.

6. At the spitting in his face.
WHich amongst the Jews, was held the greatest contempt, injury, and disgrace
could be put upon any person: For as spittle is a superfluous matter, whereof
the Mouth endeavors to be discharged; so they reputed our Blessed Redeemer, no
better than a base despicable wretch, and a thing worthy to be cast out from
amongst the people.

Hail Mary.

7. At the smiting His head with the Reed.
WHereby the prickles of the thorny Crown, were driven deeper and deeper into
his wounded skull; and the Blood forced out of the new opened surrows, trickled
down a fresh upon his neck and forehead, which embodying with the beastly
spittle, wherewith they were before besmeared, changed our Redeemers sweet
countenance, (which the Angels admiringly contemplate) into an object of
horror, and into the likeness of a Leper, most loathsome to be looked upon.

Hail Mary.

8. At the iterated and multiplied blow's, boxes, and buffetings.
O Barbarous cruelty! Was It not enough to cane his head, but you must cuff his
cheeks: His face and flesh is already one continued tumor by your former
stripes; the color of his skin is already metamorphoz'd into blackness and
blueness by your former beatings: And have you the hearts (hard-hearted
wretches!) to add yet more blows to blows, more torments to torments? O meek
Lamb of God! How great is my malice, which is the cause of all these your
miseries?

Hail Mary.

9. At his being showed to the people in such a posture.
Jesus came forth (says the Gospel) carrying a Crown of Thorns, and a purple
garment: and Pilate spoke to them.

Behold the Man, O prodigious spectacle! O Jesu, King of Glory! what a Crown,
what a Garment, what a Scepter do you here show for your royal Ensigns.

Hail Mary.

10. At the Iew's horrid clamors and repeated vociferations.
OF, away with him, away with him, crucify him, crucify him: nothing but his
death can satisfy their implacable malice; O harsh words! yet you sustained
them, [sweet Savior!] to free me from the harsh sentence of eternal death and
damnation.

Hail Mary.

Glory be to the Father, etc.

These prayers Angelical, etc.

Affections, Elevations, Petitions.
O Jesu! the beauty of Men and Angels! the glory of Heaven and Earth! when I
behold your venerable head crowned with cruel thorns, your amiable face
besmeared with the mixture of tear's blood, and spittle: your whole Body mangled
with whips and scourges, and all this for my sake: can I choose but loath my
self for my sins, and love you for your sufferings?

O my soul! what do thou in token of thy grateful acknowledgment for thy
Saviors great charity, thus crowned, wounded, mangled, martyred, for the
expiation of thy sins, and procurement of thy Salvation?

Can thou see thy Redeemer doing so much for thee and not be ashamed to do so
little for thy self and him, and to live so unconformably to his example, which
should be the model and pattern of thy life and actions? Is it decent for a
member to addict it self to sinful vanities, pleasures, and sensualities,
under a head crowned with thorns? O what an excess, or rather an abuse of love
and sorrow, do I here contemplate? Love is mistaken in making choice of so
amiable and honorable a person, to be the object of undeserved derision and
torments: and sorrow is as much mistaken, in not seizing upon some odious and
abominable wretch, who might have justly deserved to be so dealt withal. It Is
I, alas! it is I, who deserve to be thus despised, tormented, crowned with
cruel thorns, and every way punished, persecuted, afflicted: since it is I that
have by my heinous Crimes betrayed my Creators cause, incurred his indignation,
and wilfully forfeited all my claim, and pretention to the Kingdom which he
had mercifully prepared for me.

I deserve to wear no worthyer a Crown upon my wicked head, than one gathered
from the Tree of Malediction, plaited together with perpetual woes, and
interlac'd wirh the sharp prickles of all sorts of punishments, miseries, and
torments.

Such a Crown is according to my deserts, O dear Jesu! I most heartily
acknowledge it, most humbly confess it, and most obediently submit to it.

But since you are evermore ready (O compassionate Redeemer!) to Crown a truly
contrite, converted, and penitent soul with your favors and benefits; bow down
your blessed Head (I beseech you) toward me your unworthy servant, and
according to your wonted mercy, bestow on me some effect of your tender
affection.

Behold, O my most loving, and most beloved Lord Jesu! my soul being pierced
with a lively sense of your severe sufferings for her sake, and desirous to
conform her self, (O that she could do it perfectly!) to you her most perfect
Savior, makes here a deliberate choice of this Crown of sufferance in this
world, thereby to obtain the Crown of Justice, which is the only means to
purchase the Crown of Grace, and lastly to attain to a Crown of Glory, which
she hopefully expects from your goodness in your heavenly Kingdom.

A Prayer. In honor of the sacred Crown of Thorns. THE ANTHEM
O Blessed Crown, whereby we are delivered from the severe punishments of
eternal death, which our sins have justly deserved: Thou art the hope of
offenders, thou art the strength of weaklings, thou recoverest our lost Crowns
for us.

Verse. O Christ! we adore your sacred Crown.

Answer And renew the memory of your glorious Conquest.

Let us Pray.
GRant (we beseech you, O Almighty Father!) that we renewing the memory of
your dear Sons Passion, and humbly reverencing his holy Crown of Thorns upon
earth, may become worthy to receive from him the happy Crown of honor and
glory in his celestial Kingdom, where he lives and reigns with you and the
Holy Ghost for ever, and ever.

The fourth Dolorous Mystery. [Carries.]
Christ our Savior painfully carries his Cross to Mount Calvary, John 19.

Of shame and dolor to increase the account,
They make Christ bear his Cross up to the Mount.
Our Father, etc.

Our blessed Savior was exceedingly aggrieved,
1. At the Jews new invented accusation.
FOr they perceiving the unwillingness of Pilate to condemn the innocent Jesus,
produced their last envious Stratagem to strik him dead. This man (say they)
has made himself Gods Son, and therefore deserves to be destroyed as a
blasphemer of the divin Majesty, which they so vehemently urge, and so
maliciously aggravate against him, till at last they force the fearful
President by their threats and clamors to give way to their unjust desires.

Hail Mary.

2. At the pronunciation of Deaths cruel sentence upon him.
FOr when the Judge saw that neither pity would move them, nor justice could
prevail with them: apprehensive of Cesars indignation, and of the peoples
disfavour, he sentences Jesus to die on a Cross; O how easily does he swerve
from Justice, who seeks not Gods honor, but is swayed by human respects in his
actions?

Hail Mary.

3. At his contumelious leading out of Jerusalem.
FOr the cruel sentence was no sooner spoken, but the greedy hang-men flock
about this meek lamb, fastening cords to his neck and hands, and tugging him [as
a Traitor Blasphemer, and notorious Malefactor] out of the Town toward the
place of Execution.

Hail Mary.

4. At his association with Thieves.
THey had already preferred Barrabas the murderer before him, and now they place
him in the Thieves company, that so the ignorant people might conceive him to
be a complice in their Crimes.

Hail Mary.

5. At the carrying of his own Cross on his shoulders.
O Unheard of proceedings! It was never known that any wicked criminal was
constrained to carry his own Gallows, but only the good Jesus; O Savior, the
true Isaac! you bear the wood on your back, and the fire in your heart, to be
immolated for me upon Mount Calvarie.

Hail Mary.

6. At the oppressing weight of the heavy Cross.
WHich was fifteen foot long, [say several holy Doctors and Fathers] and of a
massy thickness proportionable to its length; O ponderous burden, to his
tender and already bruised, weakened, and wounded shoulders!

Hail Mary.

7. At the multitude of people thronging about him.
SOme triumphing at his misery, and laughing, scoffing, spitting at him,
others pressing, pulling, thrusting, stricking, and spurning him.

Hail Mary.

8. At the doleful lamentation of the devout women.
WHich were those who had faithfully served him before his Passion, charitably
sustained him and his Disciples with their temporal faculties, painfully
followed him from Galilee into Judea, and now mournfully waited on him to
Mount- Calvarie.

9. At the compassion of his most sorrowful Mother.
WHo undoubtedly made one, amongst the sad number of his followers; O her
inexplicable grief to see her dear Son Jesus in this dismal condition. And O
the anguish of his affectionate heart, to behold his sweet Mothers tears and
tribulation!

Hail Mary.

10. At the circumstances of the place.
TO which he was led, and where he was to be put to death, to wit, the most
loathsome, stinking, despicable Mount Calvarie: the common Theater for the
execution of all Malefactors, to show that he suffered in general for all
Mankind.

Hail Mary.

Glory be to the Father, etc

These prayers Angelical etc.

Affections Elevations Petitions.
O Jesu my dear Redeemer! are you not equal in omnipotency to your eternal
Father? How then do I see you panting, fainting falling down through feebleness?

Are not you the supporting strength of this spacious Universe? did not your
power extend the Firmament [encircling therewithal the celestial Orb's, and
fix the Earth upon the point of its own upholding center? How then do I now
behold you lying prostrate under the oppressing weight of this one single
burden?

O my Savior you promise to lend men your helping hand, and send them the
assistance of your Angels, to keep them from all harms in their fallings, and
your self falls here under your heavy Cross without admitting any succor from
your own divin Person, from your Angels, or from Men, in this your extreme
necessity?

O my soul! how heinous are thy sins; which ly so heavily upon thy Saviors
shoulders? And O my proud and perverse spirit! which refusest to submit thy
stubborn neck to the sweet weight, and light burden of God and his Church!
Did thou ever seriously contemplate thy Redeemer Christ Jesus, groaning for
thee under the burden of his Cross? How then do thou still continue thy
disobedience, ingratitude, impiety?

Or did thou ever take into thy serious consideration thine own [perchance
nearly approaching] passage out of this World to an eternity? How then do
thou not apprehend what a heavy weight will oppress thy wicked heart at that
dreadful hour, and how thou will be beaten down under the burden of thy sins?

And alas! who will then assist thee, when thy angry Creator shall thunder his
just judgments upon thy head, which like formidable waves, will overflow and
drown thy frail vesell? What succor can thou expect when a sad despair
seizing upon thee thou shall vainly desire to ly covered in some cranny of the
Rocks, or to hide thy head in some hole of the Mountains, or to be deep buried
in some Dungeon within the Earths bowels? Who will then lend thee a charitable
hand in this thy extreme calamity? or what can comfort a conscience thus
cauteriz'd, crucified, oppressed with so many crimes crying out against
themselves for vengance?

O my soul? Let Us not remit our conversion to that dismal hour, but let us now
efficaciously do, what we shall then fruitlesly desire to have done.

Le^ in the first place discharge our conscience of its deadly crimes, whilst
time and opportunity afford us leave and leisure; Then let us away with all
these fardles of ill-gotten Goods; cancel all unlawful, usurarie,
extortionous contracts: cut off all our sinful customs, concupiscences,
sensualities; and finally shake off the two long carried, and overheavily
charging yoke of the World, the Flesh, and the Devil; This done, let us
cheerfully receive the Cross of Penance, and mortification from the sacred
hands of suffering Jesus. He carries it before us, to encourage us to follow
him: his is weighty, to make ours light and easy, he fall under his, that we
may stand fast under ours, and we shall neither want strength nor comfort in
this our heroic enterprise of virtue and piety, if we frequently cast our
faithful eyes upon our valiant Captain marching before us toward Mount
Calvarie, with his royal Standard on his shoulders.

The fifth Dolorous Mystery. [Is kill'd]
Christ our Savior is crucified and dy's on the cross, John 19. Luke 23. Mark
15. Matthew. 27.

With nails extended on the Cross he dy's.
Who Is God and Man, for Man a sacrifice.
Our Father.

Our Blessed Savior was put to excessive pain and torture.

1. At the pulling off of his Garments.
FOr when (by the help of a certain poor fellow called Simon) he had trained
his heavy Cross to Golgotha, His Executioners tear off his clothes, together
with his skin and flesh, to which they were in several parts (in a manner)
fast glued, with the Blood flowing out of his wounds.

Hail Mary.

2. At his there standing again naked in the sight of all the Spectators.
TO be hanged up naked, was the greatest disgrace they could put upon the most
despicable person, and don only to the worst sort of Malefactors.

Hail Mary.

3. At the boisterous stretching out of his body on the Cross.
WHich they racked with such vio^ence by the help of ropes tied to his wrists
and ankles, that according to the Royal Prophets prediction, all his
dislocated Bones might have been numbered.

Hail Mary.

4. At the Piercing of his hands and feet with nayls.
O Christ, my Rock! out of these sacred holes I may suck honey, draw forth oil,
and fully taste the sweetness of your affection.

Hail Mary.

5. At the Erection of the Cross, with Jesus upon it.
TO publish his Crucifixion, and show him to all the greedily expecting people.
What faithful Christian will not be now raised to hopes of obtaining pardon;
When he considers his Redeemers arms thus extended to embrace him, and his
hands thus opened to bestow benefits upon him.

Hail Mary.

6. At the superscription of the Title; of Jesus of Nazareth, King of the Jews.
WHich was written in a threefold language, that no one might be ignorant of
the cause of this his cruel usage; but that all might conclude, He was justly
crucified, who had unjustly usurped a Kings title.

Hail Mary.

7. At their continued calumnies, whilst he hung on the Cross.
O Princes and People! How implacable was your hatred, how great your malice,
how insatiable your fury; which could not forbear your abuses in his last
Agony? But he endured your peevishness, and kept his own patience; and though
he descended not now from the Cross, he soon after arose from the Sepulcher.

Hail Mary.

8. At the sight of his compassionate Mother, standing by his Cross.
O Sorrowful Mother! you see the Innocent Son of your chaste womb, wounded, and
cannot cure him, weltring in blood, and cannot wipe it off, inclining, and
hanging down his weak and wearied head, and cannot uphold it; etc. What tongue
can express the compassion of your tender heart, at the sight of these your
Sons afflictions! Or the grief of his tender heart at the sight of his thus
afflicted Mother!

Hail Mary.

9. At his Thirst upon the Cross.
GReat surely was the natural thirst of his Body, which was almost exhausted,
and drained dry of all his blood and moisture: But far greater was his Souls
spiritual thirst for the salvation of Mankind. What do you thirst after (O
dear Redeemer!) (says S. Augustine.) wine of the grape, or water of the River?
your thirst, is my salvation; your drink, my Redemption! Be thou also thirsty
(O my dry Soul!) and drink thy fill of that blessed Fountain, which thirsts
thus after thee.

Hail Mary.

10. At his giving up the Ghost, and expiration on the Cross.
JESUS bowing down his head, breathed out his soul, and delivered up his spirit
(freely, voluntarily, unconstrainedly,) into the hands of his eternal Father.
And so completed and consummated, the penal and afflictive part of the great
Mystery of man's Redemption.

Hail Mary.

Glory be to the Father, and to the Son, etc.

These prayers Angelical, etc.

Affections, Elevations, Petitions.
O My Soul! would thou know where thou may assuredly find thy sweet
Savior Jesus, the desired object of thy dearest affections? It is upon Mount
Calvary. There he feeds upon Gall and Vinegar: There is his habitation, upon
the hard Cross: There he reposes, with extended legs, and stretched forth
Arms, to have his feet and hands pierced with horrid nayls. There and thus, he
expects thy return from far, O prodigal child! ready to embrace thee with a
Fatherly affection.

And do thou see thy sweet Savior hanging thus on the Cross for thy sake;
and yet solacest thy self in sinful delights? remainest still wallowing in the
mudd and mire of thy wicked customs? and not content thy self to commit sin,
and give scandal to others by thy bad example; teach them lessons of
malice, to draw them to thy unjust desires, and their own utter damnation?

O sinful wretch! Return (now at least) into thy self, turn to thy sweet
Savior, and run into the opened arms and bosom of thy beloved Jesus, calling
thee, alluring thee, ready to receive thee.

He cry's out to thee from his Cross, I thirst after thy conversion,
correction, salvation. He cry's aloud to awake thee, excite thee, hasten thee,
to accept of his proffered love, before he renders up his life.

O when will the time come, in which they who are buried in the Sepulchers of
deadly sin; and ly rotting in the graves of their inveterate crimes, will hear
the voice of God's Son; and hearing it, will return to the life of grace; if
not at this present, when he himself dies to resuscitate them?

When will earthly souls, full of terrestrial affection, fear and tremble; if
they now remain unmovable? when will the Rocks of stony hearts be rent asunder
with sorrow; if they are now insensible?

When (O my soul!) will the veil of thy vicious conscience be corn from the top
to the bottom by a true confession of thy secret sins; if shame, and cowardice
keeps it now covered, when Jesus hangs naked on his Cross?

When will the Sun of thy Pride and vanity be obscured; if it now shines, when
the glorious Sun of Justice shuts his eyes, and becomes totally eclypsed?

O Jesu! you call me; And it is high time for me to answer to your summons: you
incline your sacred head toward me, to give me a kiss of Peace, and to whisper
in the ears of my heart and Soul: Behold I die for thee; I die willingly for
thee, I die purely for the love of thee: And O my heart and Soul! What answer do
you make?

O my Jesu! my sweet Savior, my dear Redeemer, my soverarign Lord and Lover!
you die, and do I yet live? O that I, who have hitherto lived so little for you,
and so long for the world: That I who have lived so long without you in
negligence, forgetfulness, ingratitude; That I, who have lived so long against
you in sin, Impiety, rebellion: That I who have employed so small a portion of
the time and talents you lent me, faithfully, and sincerely in your love and
service! O that I might (now at least) die for you, and with you.

Or, if your providence will have my Pilgrimage yet prolonged; O Let me not
live hereafter one moment, but only for you; and let me rather lose my life,
than your Love; that living and dying, I may be entirely yours for all
succeeding time and Eternity. Amen.

Then end this second part of the Rosary with the Creed, sign of the Cross and
Prayer To the sacred and undivided Trinity, etc. as before in the first part.

The third Part of the Rosary containing, The five Glorious Mysteries.
Begin with the sign of the Cross,
Prayer, and Creed as formerly.
The first Glorious Mystery, [Rises.]
THE Resurrection of our Lord JESUS, Mark. 16.

Our Savior Rises, reindu'd with breath,
Victorious over Hell, and horrid Death.
These five Principal and common heads of the Glorious Mysteries, may be also
subdivided into many particular points of contemplation; which (according to
our precedent method in the Joyful and Dolorous) we shall reduce to the number
of Ten answerable to the Decades of this third part of the Rosary.

Our Father, etc.

Our Blessed Redeemer, and his sacred Mother exceedingly rejoiced.

1. At his Bodies clothing with Immortality.
FOr by conquering death, it was triumphantly raised up to a glorious,
immortal, incorruptible life.

Hail Mary.

2. At the joint Glorification both of Body and Soul.
NOt that the Soul of our Blessed Savior (which was absolutely glorious from
the first instant of his Conception) received now any new increase of glory:
but that the Miracle, which retained his souls Glory, from redounding into his
Body, did now cease upon this day of his Resurrection: So that his Body
received now its hitherto hindered Dowries of Claritie, Agility, Subtility,
Impassibility.

Hail Mary.

3. At his exaltation above all creatures.
1. THat in the Name of Jesus, every knee should bow. 2. That by no other means
than his merits, any one should be saved. 3. That he should have all power in
Heaven and Earth. 4. That he was constituted the Judge of the living and dead.
All which he deserved by his exact obedience to his Eternal Father.

Hail Mary.

4. At his entire victory over all his enemies.
FIrst, The Jews, who having upbrayded him of Impotencie in not descending from
the Cross, were now utterly confounded at this far greater miracle of his
Resurrection from Death; 2. The Devil and all the Infernal Powers whose Pride
he abated, whose Kingdom he invaded, whose spoyl's he divided, etc.

Hail Mary.

5. At his delivering the Holy Fathers out of Limbus.
TO wit, Abraham, Isaac, Jacob, Moses, David, and the rest of the Patriarks,
Prophets, and holy Persons, whom he triumphantly led out of their long
sustained captivity.

Hail Mary.

6. At the now perfected Redemption of mankind.
FOr his and his mothers present joy and glory, were commensurate to their
former grief and sorrow, undergon in his late cruel death and passion.

Hail Mary.

7. At his being the true cause and perfect exemplar of the future Resurrection
of all Mankind.
FOr as Christ is risen, we also shall arise, to wit to immortality, etc.

Hail Mary.

8. At the filling up the places of fallen Angels.
THe Resurrection of our Savior (says S. Gregory,) was the festivity of the
Angels; for their number was to be completed, by his calling us to his
heavenly Kingdom.

Hail Mary.

9. At the corroboration, consolation, and confirmation of the Apostles.
ANd at the Reparation of their Faith, Hope, and Charity, which were not only
shaken, but even lost; and they exceedingly contristated, and scandalized at
his death.

Hail Mary.

10. At his frequent Apparitions for forty days space.
TO his dearly beloved Mther, To the pious Magdalen, and the rest of the
devout Women; To all his Disciples in general; To S. Thomas in particular;
whereby he manifested to them the reality of his glorious Resurrection, and by
them to the whole world.

Hail Mary.

Glory be to the Father, and to the Son, and to the Holy Ghost, etc.

These Prayers Angelical with bended knee, etc.

Affections, Elevations, Petitions.
WHy weep you, O sacred Virgin! Why do you grieve and mourn, O glorious Mother
of Jesus! your Son lives, triumphs, reigns.

He that was lately accounted the outcast of the people, is now the most happy
of all mankind.

He that was crucified, dead, and buried, appears now clothed with Clarity,
Agilitie, Subtility, Impassibilitie.

Behold the Man; look up, O Blessed Mary, upon your beloved Jesus; the lively
Image of the Eternal Father, the beauty and brightness of Heaven and Earth,
the Crown and ornament of Men and Angels! Lo, He here presents himself unto
you, to wipe all tears from your eyes, and disperse all sorrows from your
heart: Hear him speaking unto you in his wonted tone and terms of respect: All
Hail, my most honored Mother! Peace and joy be with you: It Is I my self who am
the comfortable Messenger of this happy exchange of yours and my sorrows into
gladness and Jubilation; both, that you may with me incessantly praise and
bless my Eternal Father; and also, that you may take the first and best share
of joy, who have the greatest interest in me, and had the greatest part with me
in my passion of any mortal creature.

See and admire the power of the Almightyes right hand, in the person of your
Son: The disgraced is glorified; the defamed is justified; the condemned is
absolved, the crucified is resuscitated! Rejoice then, dear Mother! together
with you joyful Son; for whom you need not now fear any further miseries,
persecutions, Crosses; since he is above the reach of man's malice, and the
Devils power, having put on the robes of glory, impassibility, immortality. The
short Winter of suffering is turned into a perpetual Summer of consolation;
The stormy showers of blood, into a sweet dew of blessings: All my wounds are
perfectly cured, and the scarrs only remain, as Rubies of my honor, and badges
of my victory.

O the excesses of Joy, which transported your extasi'd heart and soul, O
sacred Virgin Mother! at the sight of your now again living, and gloriously
triumphing Son Jesus! And, O my soul! If thou desire a share in these Joys
and gloryes of Jesus and Mary; thou must also resolve to bear a part in their
sorrows and sufferings: Thou art much mistaken, in thinking to triumph without
trying for the Victory, or to be crowned without conquering.

No, my delicate Soldier! Christ thy King and Captain suffered before he entered
into his glory: Queen Mary's heart was pierced with sorrow, before it was
replenished with comforts. All the Saints combated, before they were crowned:
And refusest thou all sufferings, all sorrows, all combats, all that thy flesh
and blood cannot relish?

O dear Jesu! What will you do with me, who dare not encounter with the least
difficulties? How will you deal with me, who bear the name of a Christian
soldier, and am indeed no better than a base and cowardly sensualist?

If I love the glory of your Crown, why dislike I the ignominy of your Cross?
If I desire the reward of a Conqueror; why do I not adventure into the field of
the combat?

O why should your painful death and passion so much affright me; since your
glorious Resurrection confirms me in the Hope and Faith of a future felicity?
why should I more dread, in reflecting upon the difficulties occurring in my
Pilgrimage: than rejoice, in fixing my thoughts upon the pleasures of Paradise,
which is the end of my Pilgrimage?

O why am I not content to suffer with Jesus and for Jesus, were there no
reward to be expected for all my sufferings! It being a sufficient glory to a
faithful Christian, to be conformable to Christ his Captain.

Behold therefore: I humbly prostrate my self here at your sacred feet, O my
victorious Redeemer! imploring your pardon for my past pusillanimity, and
purposing to behave my self hereafter more manfully.

Come all sorts of crosses and losses; all sorrows and sicknesses, all
punishments and persecutions, all derelictions and desclations: I will no more
be daunted or dismayed; but animated by your example, and assisted by your
grace (O Christ my King, my Captain, my glorious Conqueror!) I will either pass
through them courageously, or pass by them patiently, or pass over them
victoriously.

Yes, (my Lord Jesu!) I will receive henceforth all afflictions from the hands
of your divin providence, as pledges of your paternall affection; and most
willingly, joyfully, resignedly embrace them, as the happily offered occasions
for the increase of my merit, the exercise of my virtue, the perfection of my
soul, the expiation of my sins, the crowning me with glory.

The second Glorious Mystery, [Ascends.]
THE Ascension of our Lord Jesus into Heaven. Mark 16.

His great work don, and his Commisons given,
In Glorious triumph, he ascends to Heaven.
Our Father, etc.

THE Glorious Virgin Mother exceedingly rejoiced.

1. At the Ascension of her Son Jesus, in hers, and his Disciples presence.
FOr upon the fortieth day after our Redeemers Resurrection; his sacred Mother,
with the Apostles, the seventy two Disciples, and many more of his faithful
friends and followers met together (by the divin instinct) upon Mount Sion, and
marched from thence pro^essionally to the Mount Olivet, (distant a mile from
Jerusalem) to be spectators of this admirable catastrophe of their dear Savior
Christ's humanity; and to receive his last blessing, before he left the Earth,
to ascend into Heaven.

Hail Mary.

2. At his great Power showed in his Ascension.
FOr he elevated himself by his own strength and virtue: nor could he need any
foreign help or assistance, whose inhabiting Divinity, and glorified soul
could move his impassible, and agile body as himself pleased.

Hail Mary.

3. At the joyful meeting and acclamation of the Angelical spirits.
WHich undoubtedly descended all, to accompany his humanity, to congratulate
his victory, to echo forth the triumphs of his praises.

Hail Mary.

4. At his soaring above all the Heavens.
TO wit, above the spheres of the seven Planets, above the Christallin orb,
above the starrie Firmament, even to the Empyreall seat of the Divinity:
according to that sentence of the Apostle: He ascended up far above all the
Heavens, that he might fulfill all things.

Hail Mary.

5. At his ascending above the Angelical quires, and all creatures whatsoever.
ACcording to that expression of the same Apostle; God (the Father) placed him
(his son Jesus) far above all principalities, and Powers, and Dominations, and
every thing that is named, not only in this world, but in that which is to
come, and has put all things under his feet.

Hail Mary.

6. At his being seated on the right hand of his Eternal Father.
ACcording to that of S. Mark, He was assumpted into Heaven and sits on his
Fathers right hand: And of S. Paul; His Father set him on his own right hand,
in the heavenly places; Which is a Metaphorical expression, signifying
equality and society of Majesty, honor, power, felicity, etc.

Hail Mary.

7. At his conducting the souls of the saints with him into heaven.
ACcording to that passage of the Psalmist: He ascending on high, led captivity
captive; which S. Thomas understands of the Patriar^ ^ee'd from the captivity
of Limbus.

Hail Mary.

8. At his opening Heaven gates for our entrance.
ANd preparing places against our coming, as himself said: I go to prepare a
place for you, that where I am, you may also be. So that Christ's Ascension
(says S. Leo) is our Promotion; and whither the glory of the head is gone
before, the hope of the body is called to follow after.

Hail Mary.

9. At his being appointed the Advocate of Mankind.
WE have (says S. John) an Advocate with God the Father, Christ Jesus, the
Just, and he is the propitiation for our sins.

Hail Mary.

10. At the great Fruit and Profit redounding to us by his Ascension.
FOR (as S. Thomas proves) the withdrawing of his corporal presence, increases
our Faith, elevates our Hope, inflames our Charity; and therefore, He himself
said: It is expedient for you, that I go.

Hail Mary.

Glory be to the Father, and to the Son, and to the Holy Ghost, etc.

These Prayers Angelical with bended knee. etc.

Affections, Elevations, Petitions.
O My glorious Lord Jesu! It is just, that you should Ascend to the Highest
Heaven, who descended to the center of the earth! And that you should be
exalted above all Angels, since you humbled your self under all men.

O my Soul! designed for an Eternity! where will thou ground thy feet, that
thou may securely take thy flight toward Heaven, thy happy home, the final
end of thy Pilgrimage, and the only aim of all thy endeavors?

Look upon Christ thy Captain, and learn by his most perfect example to ground
thy self in Humility; and to content thy self with crosses, contempt, and
poverty, which were his three individual companions, during the whole time of
his earthly Pilgrimage.

O Jesu! the amiable Object of all my affections! And who should be the
absolute pattern of all my actions? I am resolved to leave all for the love of
you, and to forsake all, that I may freely follow you; For alas! what are all
worldly pleasures greatnesses, and glories? or what sweet Object can the whole
Universe show my eyes, which can fully satisfy my heart?

And ha! why then should I any longer (miserable and ill advised wretch that I
am!) let my self be surpised with the false luster of earthly vanities? why
should I fix my love upon fond toys and trifles, which only fool my senses,
but fill not my soul!

No my soul! let us now at last leave the Earth, and look up to Heaven. Thither
Christ is ascended: There our Treasure is placed, and let our affection be
there also fixed: and O what shall hinder us? a moment of brutish pleasure? a
grain of self-interest? a sparkle of soon fading glory? O mere Nothings and,
less than Nothings!

No my good Jesu! I feel my self [by the secret impulse of your inacting grace
in my spirit] so forcibly moved to sent you, to obey you, and to bestow on you
the whole remainder of my life and love, that if it should hereafter happen;
[and ah my frailty! how can I trust thee, which have so often betrayed my best
intentions, and broken my strongest resolutions] If therefore it shall fall
out, that my eyes [or any respect of this Worlds most pleasing Objects] hinder
me from seeing your beauty, contemplating your bounty, and reflecting upon your
mercy: Tear them out of my head, that I may behold you with my spiritual Eyes;
O Jesus the true light of my soul!] without disturbance or distraction.

If my right hand (or any thing I possess, or which is as near to my heart, as
my arm is to my hand) becomes the occasion of my offending you, hinders me from
fast holding you, diverts me from serving you diligently, devoutly, and
according to my obligation and duty; Cut it off (O Jesu my sovereign Good, my
sole Riches and Treasure!) that I may clip you, embrace you, and be inseparably
united to you with all the affections of my soul.

If my very heart it self (or that which is nearer and dearer to me than this
fountain of Life) hinders me from bequeathing my self entirely to you, from
purely seeking you, from perfectly loving you, pluck it out of my breast: O
Jesu, the only beloved of my Soul! that henceforth I may have no thought but of
you, no will but yours, no affection but for you, no life but in you; So shall
I want neither eyes, nor hands, nor heart, living thus spiritually [during this
my Pilgrimage] in the heart of Jesus, which is my seat, my Sun, my center, my
all, till I become happily translated to live with him, and be more perfectly
united to him in his eternal Paradise.

The third glorious Mystery. [Sends down]
Our blessed Savior sends down the Holy Ghost to his Church, Acts 2.

Our Lord to his Apostles joined in Quite.
Sends down the Holy Ghost in tongues of fire.
Our Father, etc.

The glorious Virgin Mother exceedingly rejoiced.

1. At the miraculous manner of the Holy Ghosts coming.
FOr the Disciples returning back from Mount Olivet [where our Savior
ascended] to Jerusalem, went into the same upper Room, in which he had
celebrated his last supper, continuing there unanimously in prayer, with Mary
the Mother of Jesus, and many other devout men and women, until the tenth day:
when suddenly [about the third hour of the morning] there came a sound from
Heaven, as of a rushing mighty wind, filling the whole house, as it were with
fire, which dividing it self into several parts resembling cloven tongues,
settled upon each ones head, and replenished their hearts with the Holy Ghost.

Hail Mary.

2. At the fullfilling of Christ's promises.
FOr he had told them, if I depart from you the Holy Ghost shall descend unto
you, he shall teach you all truth, and inform you of what is to come hereafter:
all which was now fully accomplished.

Hail Mary.

3. At the multiplication of tongues, or speaking of all languages.
WHereby the blessed Virgin clearly saw, that the Apostles were not only
designed to preach the faith of her Son Christ Jesus to the whole World, but
joyfully perceived they were also indu'd with all such perfections as were
necessary, in order to the effecting so great a work.

Hail Mary.

4. At the Apostles confirmation in grace and goodness.
FOr the sacred Virgin, who had sadly seen their former frailty and the
feebleness of their Faith, knew [to her great content] that they were now so
strengthened with Gods holy Spirit, as they were out of all danger for the
future, both of falling into infidelity, and also of sinning mortally.

Hail Mary.

5. At the Apostles patience, courage and constancy in their persecutions.
FOr they who were lately so fearful, are now so cheerful in their
sufferings, that they esteem it a special honor to endure shame for the holy
name of Jesus.

Hail Mary.

6. At the confutation of the Iew's and Infidels.
FOr the spiteful Pharisees hearing the Apostles speaking all sorts of
languages, sought to undervalue the miracle, by vilifying them as Drunkards:
but St, Peter standing up in his own and his brethrens defense, solidly refutes
their malicious imputation, to the great joy, admiration, and confirmation of
all the Auditors, and confusion of his enemies.

Hail Mary.

7. At the sudden multiplication of the faithful.
FOr St. Peter's efficacious Oration was no sooner ended, but three thousand
Souls were presently converted to the Faith of Christ, and forthwith baptizd in
his name, and five thousand more within few days after.

Hail Mary.

8. At the fructification of Christ's Passion.
FOr the blessed Virgin Mother saw not only the present fruits of her Sons
death and sufferings spread abroad in the Apostles and the new converted
Christians: but she also foresaw the future multitude of martyrs, who should
courageously die for his love, besides the vast number of confessors, virgins,
and religious Persons, who should cheerfully take up their Crosses, and
faithfully follow him.

Hail Mary.

9. At the great increase of the divin honor and worship.
FOr Pagans, Gentills, Idolaters, and people of all professions, renouncing
their ancient errors came flocking in amain, to be instructed in the Faith of
Christ, and to follow the Evangelicall doctrine.

Hail Mary.

10. At the accomplishment of the number of the Elect.
FOr the blessed Virgin joyfully foresaw, that all such souls as should depart
this life in the true Faith of of her Son Jesus informed with charity, were to
be added to the number of the Saints, and to be admitted to his heavenly
Kingdom.

Hail Mary.

Glory be to the Father. and to the Son; etc.

These Prayers Angelical, etc.

Affections, Elevations, Petitions.
O Glorious Creator! How great is your Mercy! how infinite your liberality? How
excessive your affection, to undeserving and ungrateful Mankind.

After your only Son was so ill treated amongst us, would you also send down
the Holy Ghost unto us?

It plainly appears that we have a potent Advocate in Heaven ( Jesus Christ the
just) to plead our cause, and a Powerful Mother upon Earth ( Mary the Mother
of Jesus) to impetrate for us this extraordinary favor:

It is therefore the Mothers merit, and the Sons Mercy, and the Eternal Fathers
liberality, and the Holy Ghosts goodness, that this holy Spirit descends from
Heaven upon us; A Spirit of life and love; a Spirit of solace and sweetness; a
Spirit of grace and happiness; a Spirit which comes in form of fiery tongues,
to clear our understandings with his light, to inflame our wills with his heat,
and to govern our tongues and affections with his gracious direction; A light
which dazels not, a fire which consumes not, a tongue which threatens not,
accuses not, condemns not.

O sacred and divin Spirit! you are the Father of the afflicted, the
Distributer of graces, the enlightner of hearts, the comforter of Souls; and
alas! how opposite are my actions to your properties, perfections, inspirations?

You descend to instill into me the spirit of sweetness, meekness, patience:
and I converse with such as are under my charge [and with others who are
perchance far better before you than my self] with a spirit of choler and
peevishness, with a spirit of rigor and harshness, with a spirit of revenge
and bitterness!

Ah, uncharitable wretch that I am! shall I contristate my neighbor, instead
of comforting him? shall I exact from others instead of conferring benefits
upon them? shall I under-value my brethrens actions, censure their intentions,
obscure their reputations, instead of putting a charitable construction upon
all things whatsoever?

Change this my crooked and crabbed disposition, [O powerful Spirit, the
plentiful bestower of all perfect gifts!] by the efficacy of your sacred
influence upon my soul: purge me [I beseech you] from my present imperfections,
pardon me for my past impieties, and prevent me from future fallings, by
implanting your spirit of true peace and charity in my interior, which may
keep my heart evermore burning in the love of you and my neighbor, till I come
to be totally absorpt in you, [together with the coequall Son and Father] in
your blessed Eternity; Amen.

The fourth glorious Mystery. [she dy's]
THe assumption of the blessed Virgin up to Heaven: Allegorically understood by
Maryes chosing the best part Luke 10.

The Virgins sacred Corpse [too rich a prize.
For Earth] is born by Angels 'bove the Skies.
Our Father, etc.

The glorious Virgin-Mothers heart was replenished with exceeding great joy.

1. At the news of the near approaching dissolution of her soul and body.
FOr (as the holy Doctors deliver unto us) after the dispersion of the Apostles
into the Worlds several quarters to preach the Gospel: the blessed Virgin
retired her felf into a private dwelling, near adjoining to Mount Sion, that she
might pass the remaining day's of her Pilgrimage upon earth, in the devout
contemplation of her divin Sons actions, and the frequent visitation of the
holy places of his Baptism, Fasting, Passion, Burial, Resurrection, Ascension,
when behold (at the time appointed by the eternal providence) a heavenly
Messenger, (probably the Arch-Angell Gabriel) reverently saluting her in her
Sons name, informs her of her near approaching departure out of this life.

Hail Mary.

2. At the security of he^ Glorious and speedy Resurrection.
FOr (as Albertus and all the Doctors agree) she could not possibly doubt of
her present and immediate Translation to Eternal happiness.

Hail Mary.

3. At her dying without any dread terror, or trouble.
FOr how could She fear death, who was so fervent in Charity, as that she
desired nothing more than to be dissolved, and to be with Christ? How could She
be terrified at Deaths approach who was absolutely free from all sin and
impiety? Or, how could She be troubled at the apprehension of Gods severe
Judgments, who was secure of her salvation?

4. At the presence of the Apostles at her departure.
FOr it is a generally received Tradition of the Fathers; That all the Apostles
were (by divin instinct) suddenly gathered together from the worlds several
climats, to honor her with their personal presence, at this time of her
earthly dissolution.

Hail Mary.

5. At the sweet separation of her Soul a^ Body.
FOr (says S. Hierom) as She was free from the corruption of the flesh; so she
was exempt from the calamities of Death: And S. John Damascen: The pain's which
she suffered not in childing and dying; She paid at the time of Christ's Passion.

Hail Mary.

6. At the Joyful Reunion of her Soul and Body in her Resuscitation and
Assumption into Heaven.
FOr (according to S. Augustine); There was no reason, corruption should seize
on her after death, whose integrity was preserved in her life, etc. but 'twas
fit, she should be always living, who was the Parent of all life; and that she
should be always with him, who (for nine months space) was with her in her
womb, etc.

Hail Mary.

7. At Christ's meeting her accompanied with the Heavenly Citizens.
WHo can conceive (says S. Hierom) how gloriously the world's Queen this day
appeared? with what affection the celestial legions met her? with what
melodious Canticles she was conducted to her throne of glory? with what an
amiable and pleasing countenance her dear Son received her into his divin
embraces, and placed her above all other creatures, etc.

Hail Mary.

8. At her being exalted above all the Angelical Orders and Hierarchies.
ACcording as the Church sings in her praises: You, O sacred mother of God! are
exalted above all the Quire^ of Angels, etc.

Hail Mary.

9. At her being placed on her Sons right hand.
FOr (as S. Hierom says) we may piously believe, that our Savior seated her
next to himself in the throne of his glorious Humanity: How else had he
accomplished, what himself commanded: Honor thy Father and Mother.

Hail Mary.

10. At her being appointed the powerful Advocatrix of mankind.
WE have Her to plead for us (says S. Bernard) who can suffer no repulse,
because she found grace with God: Let us therefore seek Grace, from the
Fountain of Grace, by the Finder of Grace: and whatsoever we offer to the divin
Majesty, Let us commend it to Mary; that so all may return to the Author of
Grace, by the same channel, whereby it ran unto us.

Hail Mary.

Glory be to the Father, and to the Son, etc.

These prayers Angelical, etc.

Affections, Elevations, Petitions.
O Sacred Virgin Mother! your Deifi'd Soul is not forced out of your dying
Body, by the violence of pains, but sweetly leaves it, in an ecstasy of love.

O how welcome, how amiable, how desirable is death, to a Soul that is well
settled in the fear of God, and fully confirmed in the divin love and favor?
And how easily is that thing quitted without any affliction, which is possessed
without overmuch affection?

Thrice happy he, who so prudently regulates the use of life; as to be always
prepared to yield it up to Death.

Happy he, who patiently, cheerfully, resignedly, endures the inconveniences of
this soon-passing Pilgrimage, in hope of a never-ending felicity, in the
heavenly Paradise.

Happy he, who willingly deprives himself of this worlds most pleasing
contentments, upon confidence of laying up thereby more solid pleasures in the
Magazin of Eternity.

O glorious Virgin! who have left me so perfect a Pattern of living virtuously,
and of dying happily: Assist me (I beseech you) both in the one and the other.

I humbly acknowledge (to my own great shame and sorrow) that my life has been
hitherto far wide from the Imitation of your holy example: But (O pious
Mother!) passing by my former indignity, and pitying my present necessity;
take my perishing cause into your maternall consideration; strengthen my
Resolution of living virtuously for the future, and assist me in that dreadful
hour of my deaths agony.

O let your Prayers, patronage, and protection, then fortify my Faith in its
apprehension of the approaching Eternity.

Encourage my Hope in its consideration of the severe Judgment then near at
hand; and inflame my Charity, in its last tendency to the long desired object
of my Soul.

I now contemplate you (great Empress!) seated there above in a throne of
Majesty, and satiated with the fullness of glory and felicity; And I also
consider you, the still compassionate Mother, the powerful Mediatrix, the
pious Advocatrix of poor Mankind: Wherefore, I humbly beg, for the love of
your holy Son JESUS, and by all that is dear to you in Heaven and Earth; leave
me not in that last hour; but cast then your Eyes of mercy and favor upon me;
so shall I not doubt to be translated from a temporal death, to an Eternal
life, and to remain perpetually with you in the perfect enjoyment of that
fountain of life and love, to which you are happily assumpted.

The fifth Glorious Mystery. [Is Crowned.]
THE Coronation of the Blessed Virgin in Heaven.

The blessed Promotress of all Chaste desires.
Is Crowned Queen of th'Celestiall Quires.
Our Father, etc.

THE Blessed Virgin Mothers Soul was filled with inexplicable joy.

1. At her being seated upon a Royal throne in the celestial glory.
WHere (says S. Hierom) the Immaculat Virgin Mother was triumphantly placed
next to her glorious Son Jesus in the celestial Palace. A Throne of Kingly
glory (says S. Augustine) is prepared for you (O great Queen Mother!) in the
Court of the heavenly Kingdom.

Hail Mary.

2. At her being clothed with Royal Garments.
ACcording to that saying of the Psalmist: The Queen stood on thy right hand in
a vesture of gold, wrought about with diverse colors: Whereupon Saint Bernard
extasiedly exclaims; Gods Mother, the worlds Lady, Heavens Queen, is elevated
to the Eternal Fathers Throne; and seated next to the sacred Trinity; Where
she stands on the Kings right hand in a golden garment; (To wit, a body most
pure and unspotted) encompassed with variety (that is, a Soul enameled with
all sorts of virtues.)

Hail Mary.

3. At her being adorned with Royal Jewels, Earrings, and Bracelets.
TO wit, the Plenitud of all Prudence, Science, and Intelligence in her Soul;
and of Clarity, Subtility, Impassibility, in her Body.

Hail Mary.

4. At her being honored with a Royal Ring.
TO wit, In her Soul, (which was the singular Spouse of the Eternal King) a
singular Joy, Glory, and felicity: And in her Body (which was singularly
Isntrumental in the Eternal Words Incarnation) a singular beauty.

Hail Mary.

5. At her being graced with a Royal Scepter.
TO wit, in her Soul, by a special Power which was given her in Heaven and
Earth; and in her Body, by a special prerogative of glory.

Hail Mary.

6 At her being decked with a royal crown.
TO wit; first, with a general Crown, which is the substantial and essential
reward of Eternal glory and Beatitude, consisting in the clear vision, the
perpetual Fruition, and the perfect possession of the Divinity. This Crown
corresponds to the threefold Theological virtues in the Soul: To Faith
succeeds vision; To Charity, Fruition; To Hope, Possession; Now as the sacred
Virgin excells here all others in these virtues, so her Crown out-shines there
all others in Glory.

Hail Mary.

7. At her being crowned with the silver Aureola of Virgins.
FOr she being the Immaculat Mother of God, and the unspotted Queen of all
Virgins; (having none like her in the first; nor any to parallel her in the
Second) is adorned with a Crown as far surpassing the Aureola's of other
virgins, as the Suns brightness excells that of the lesser Stars.

Hail Mary.

8. At her being crowned with the golden Aureola of Martyrs.
FOr as She endured more than all Martyrs, when the sword of sorrow pierced her
heart, at the time of her Sons Passion: so she deserved a Crown (above all
Martyrs) correspondent to her sufferings.

Hail Mary.

9. At her being crowned with the Starrie Aureola of Doctors.
FOr they who instruct others to Justice (says the Prophet Daniel) shall shine
as Stars in perpetual Eternity: Now the sacred Virgin was the Teacher and
Instructor of the Apostles; and therefore is described (by S. John in his
Revelations) with a Crown of twelve Stars upon her head.

Hail Mary.

10. At her being crowned with the verdant, and perpetually flourishing Aureola
of Innocence and Purity.
FOr as she was of such extraordinary Purity, that (under God-man) a greater
cannot be conceived (says Saint Anselm); And of such unimitable Innocence, that
from the first instant of her Conception, to the last moment of her life; She
preserved it absolutely entire, without the least spot or blemish; so She
enjoyes a Crown of extraordinary Clarity far above all others, (the same
God-man only excepted.)

Hail Mary.

Glory be to the Father, and to the Son, and to the holy Ghost, etc.

These Prayers Angelical, etc.

Affections, Elevations, Petitions.
O King of Glory! How great is your bounty, and how excessive is your
liberality? You confer upon men whole Torrents of pleasurs, and full Oceans of
delights, for their Cups of cold water; given for your sake! You bestow on the^
magnificent Crowns and blessed Kingdoms for their morsells of bread, bestowed
upon their necessitous brethren.

And shall we question, whether your own dear Mother, (whose pure Blood gave
your Body its Being; in whose chaste entralls you so long lodged; upon whose
Breast-milk you so sweetly fed) is now highly rewarded by you in heaven?

She clothed you (O word Eternal and Incarnate!) with the robes of her
Humanity; and can we doubt but that you have vested her with the light of your
Heavenly glory, and crowned her with the glittering Jewels of Wisdom, Power,
Dominion, and whatsoever may beseem the Sovereign Empress of Men and Angels?

O Virgin! O Mother! How great is your Glory? How singular your Honor? How
Eminent your Dignity? Since you are the Mother of Grace, which is God himself,
you are seated on the right hand of God himself in his Glory! Since you have
the advantageous quality (above all creatures) of being Gods Mother; you surely
have an advantageous Crown (above all Creatures) which constitutes you Queen of
Heaven. For, to what Woman (besides your happyest self); Or to which of the
Angels, (howsoever high, holy, and perfect) did ever God say, you are my
Mother, you begot me, bore me, brought me forth?

O Mother of God! O Title of Titles! O words few in number, but full of
numberless Mysteries and miracles! O Quality, containing all the Abyssall
perfections, which can possibly fall within the compass of Men's and Angels
Imagination, thinking upon a pure creature.! Mother of God! Be you praised,
honored, and admired, (next to your Son Jesus) by all Creatures in Heaven and
Earth for evermore.

You have sufficiently showed me (O sacred Mother!) by your divin example, the
ready way to real glory and happiness; Which is, To prefer Gods honor, love,
and service, before all things else whatsoever: But, alas! How Poorly have I
hitherto practiced your instructions; and how ill have I imitated your examples?

Your continual Exercise was to magnify the Divin Majesty with heart and
mouth; and therefore you have deserved to be blessed, praised, and proclaimed
happy by all succeeding generations: because the Almighty wrought great things
in you; placing you upon the worlds Theater, as the Prime work of his hands,
and the most accomplished pattern of all created perfections: But I, on the
contrary have made small account of God, and his service; and how then can I
expect to obtain the blessing of him and others; or hope he should effect great
things in me, by me, for me.

Yet if he and all others call me not blessed, in the last great Judgment day,
I must remain accursed for all Eternity. And if he work not great things in me,
what can all other things avail me in order to my happiness?

Ha! How long then shall my affection be fastened to falsehoods, follies,
vanities? How long shall my soul be enslaved to these sordid passions, and to
the base customs of my corrupted nature, which are repugnant to Reason,
contrary to my Creators Law, opposite to his profer'd grace, destructive of my
expected glory?

O my Lord, and my God! I will no longer forget you: I will even now begin to
praise you, with heart and mouth in all, before all, above all: your only love,
honor, and service, shall be the first in my esteem; the first in my
affections; the first in my actions: For alas! what else have I to esteem,
desire, love, in Heaven and Earth; but you the God of my heart, my sovereign
good, my All for time and Eternity?

And thou, my poor Soul! Take courage; Eternity draws on: Thy glorious Mother,
(with millions of blessed Saints and Angels, more beautiful than so many Suns
in the midday of their brightness) invites thee to be (with her) satiated with
her Sons amiable countenance, and absorp'd in the boundless Sea of his
beatifying delights: Thy beloved Lord himself expects thee with a Crown of
evelasting rewards in his right hand, and with these sweetly alluring words in
his sacred mouth: Come my Love, my Dove, my Fair one, come thou shall be
crowned, for having served me faithfully, loved me fervently, suffered for me
freely, and accomplished my will fully: Live henceforth with me eternally in
Satiety, and security.

THE FIRST APPENDIX JESUS, Or the Confraternity of the most sacred Name of
JESUS, With Elevations suitable thereunto.
IN so much as there is a certain pious Fraternity of the most holy Name of
Jesus, which had its first rise and origin from that of the sacred Rosary (Et
ex illa tanquam ex Matre filia prognata sit) being (as it were) the Daughter of
that Mother; and to which it is so firmly fastened, and so nearly allied, as
that generally (in Catholic Countries) all they who are children of the
Blessed Mothers Rosary, are also thus Members of the Son's Society: It will not
be amiss, after this large Declaration of the Rosary, to annect a brief
description of this Confraternity, that so nothing may be wanting, which may
conduce to the devotion of faithful Christians, and enrich them with
spiritual Benefits.

This pious Confraternity of the sacred Name of Jesus was begun in Italy by
Didacus a Victoria, a Doctor of Divinity, and devout Preacher of S. Dominicks
order in the year 1564. and soon after promulgated throughout Spain, by Joannes
Micon, who was another learned Doctor, and zealous Preacher of the same Order,
the Disciple of that Blessed and famous man Ludovicus Bertrandus.

The Reason and End of the Institution thereof, was to extirpate that execrable
(and then Customary) vice of Swearing by Gods holy Name, and blaspheming the
divin Majesty.

The Rules of this Confraternity are these.

1. They who desire to be of it are either to have their Names enrolled into a
Book provided for that purpose (as it is said of the Rosary:) or to be admitted
into this Confraternity, (by such as have power from the Superiors of Saint
Dominick's Order) by some other legal, lawful, and formal way.

2. Upon the day of our Redeemers Circumcision (which is the principal, and
indeed the only proper Feast of this Confraternity), they are to Confess,
Communicate, and be present at the solemnity then celebrated by their fellow
members of this Confraternity, in the place appointed by the Chief Director
thereof.

3. Upon the second Sunday of each month, they are to Confess, Communicate and
assist at the solemn Mass and Procession of the Confraternity.

4. They are with all possible care and diligence to avoid swearing not only in
themselv's, but also in all others: admonishing, checking, and correcting (as
far as the Rules of Charity and Discretion will permit) all such as shall
inconsideratly and rashly Swear, and Blasphem in their presence and hearing.

5. They are to assist at the Anniversary of their departed Brethren,
celebrated upon the first vacant day after the Feast of the Circumcision.

The Plenary Indulgences (omitting the many particular) granted to this
Fraternity.

In the year 1564. (Idibus Aprilis) Pope Pius the fourth (the first Approver
and Confirmer of this Confraternity, endowed it with most large Favors,
Privileges, and Indulgences: and amongst the rest he granted to all the
Members thereof, who shall Confess, Communicate, and Assist at the divin
service (either in whole or in part) upon the Feast of the Circumcision; such
Plenary Indulgences of all their sins, as the Apostolical Seat usually bestows
in the year of Jubily upon all them, who visit the Churches in and without Rome.

In the year 1580. (5th of September) Pope Gregory the thirteenth grants a
Plenary Indulgence to all the Members thereof, who shall accompany the
Procession (which, as also the Mass of this Confraternity, he appoints to be
had upon each second Sunday of the Month, not otherwise hindered) having
confessed, communicated, and prayed for the generally intended ends of the
Church, in the granting of all Indulgences; to wit, For the Peace of Christian
Princes, for the extirpation of Heresies, for the exaltation of the Catholic
Church, etc.

In the year 1598. (2. of February) Pope Clement the 8th. grants a plenary
Indulgence to all the Members thereof (Confessing and Communicating) upon each
day of the Festivities of the fifteen Mysteries of this Rosary of the Name of
Jesus.

In the year 1606. (21. of October) Paul the fifth grants a Plenary Indulgence
at the entrance into this Confraternity to all such, as shall then being truly
penitent, confess and Communicate; and also to all such as shall devoutly call
upon the sacred name of Jesus (either by mouth or in heart) at the Article of
death.

And in the year 1612. 28. of September he renews and confirms the former
Grant of Gregory the 13.

And lastly, in the year 1626. Pope Urban the 8. Grants also a Plenary
Indulgence at the entrance into this Confraternity to all such as shall then
Confess and Communicate. etc. and to all such as shall devoutly call upon the
holy Name of Jesus at the Article of death.

The Manner of Reciting this Rosary of the holy Name of JESUS invented by
Joannes Micon, to implore Christ's Mercy for our selv's and for all sinners, is
this.

Taking your Ordinary Bedes of the Rosary, begin with the sign of the Cross
either in Latin or in English.

In the Name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost. Amen.

Then after the recital of one Paternoster, Ave Maria, and Creed, begin thus,

V. Intend unto my aid O. God:

R. Lord make have to help me.

V. Glory be to the Father, and to the Son, and to the Holy Ghost.

R. As it was in the Beginning, is now and ever shall be world without end.
Amen.

The first part of this Rosary consists in the Repetition of these words fifty
Times [O Jesu Christ, the Son of David, have mercy upon us] Meditating during
the recital of each Decade upon one of the Five Mysteries of the Life of Our
Blessed Redeemer Christ Jesus, and ending each Decade with, Glory be to the
Father, and to the Son, and to the Holy Ghost, etc.

The Mysteries of the first Quinquagena, or Fiftieth.
1. Christ's Incarnation. 2. The Nativity of Christ in Bethleem. 3. The
Circumcision of Christ. 4. The finding of Christ in the Temple disputing
amongst the Doctors. 5. The Baptizing of Christ in the River Jordan.
O Jesu Christ the Son of David have mercy upon us.

The second Part of this Rosary, consists in the Repetition of these words also
fifty times [O Jesu of Nazareth King of the Jew's have mercy upon us.]
Meditating in like manner during the recital of each Decade upon one of the
Five Mysteries of the Death and Passion of our Blessed Redeemer Christ Jesus,
and ending each Decade with; Glory be to the Father, etc. as aforesaid.

The Mysteries of the second Quinquagena, or fiftieth.
1. The washing of the disciples feet. 2. The Prayer in the Garden. 3. The
Apprehension of Christ in the Garden. 4. The carrying of the Cross. 5. The
Descent into Hell.
O Jesu of Nazareth King of the Jews, have mercy upon us.

The third Part of this Rosary consists in the Repetition of these words also
fifty times; [O Jesu Christ Son of the living God, have mercy upon us.]
Meditating likewise during the recital of each Decade upon one of the Five
Mysteries of the Glory of our Blessed Redeemer Christ Jesus, and ending each
Decade with Glory be to the Father, and to the Son, and to the holy Ghost, etc.
as formerly.

The Mysteries of the third Quinquagena, or Fiftieth.
1. The Resurrection. 2. The Ascension. 3. The sending of the Holy Ghost to his
Church. 4. The Crowning of the Virgin Mary, and the Saints. 5. The coming to
Judgment.
O Jesu Christ Son of the Living God, have mercy upon us.

A brief Declaration of the Crown of our Lord.
THe devotion called the Crown of our Lord, Or the Rosary of the age of Christ,
or the Crown of Camaldula, was invented by one blessed Michael, by birth a
Florentin, by profession a Monk of Camaldula (a man of admirable piety and
sanctity) who changed this life for a happy immortality in the year 1522, since
which time this manner of prayer has been far and near propagated throughout
the whole World, with the Churches general applause and approbation, and to the
great profit and comfort of all faithful Christians.

The Tenor of the Brief of Pope Leo the 10th. (as far forth as it concerns the
confirmation and declares the form of reciting this sacred Crown) is as here
fallows.

Bishop Leo the servant of Gods servants, to all and singular the faithful
people of Christ, to whom these his letters shall come, sends greeting, and the
Apostolical Benediction.

We have lately had notice from persons worthy of belief, that a certain
ancient Hermit of the sacred Wilderness of Camaldula, having already finished
fifteen years of his earthly Pilgrimage in great austerity, as a Recluse shut
up within the narrow limits of one only Cell: Has conceived (by divin
inspiration, as may be piously believed from whence every right thought
proceeds) that it would much redound to the honor of Christ our Lord and
Savior, and conduce to the increase of devotion in the hearts of all pious
Christians: If as [according to the very ancient institution, and generally
received custom] several godly people use to recite sixty three Angelical
Salutations, with our Lords Prayer, seven times interposed, in honor of the
most blessed Virgin Mary, according to the number of years which she is
esteemed to have lived upon earth, which kind of prayer is called the Virgins
Crown, so they would also inure themselv's to recite thirty three Lords
Prayers, interposing four Ang^lical Salutations in the honor of our Redeemer
for a commemoration of the years, in which he conversed upon earth amongst men,
which would be [as it were] our Lords Crown etc.

We whom it behooves to promote the honor of our Lord Jesus Christ as far
forth as he shall enable us, and to add fuel to the devotion of his faithful
flock; Do approve and confirm the aforesaid manner of Prayer, invented by that
ancient and recluded Hermit, and will have it called the Crown of our Lord etc.
Given at Florence the 18, of Feb. in the year 1516.

The same Rosary or Crown of our Lord was afterward confirmed by Pope Gregory
the 13. and endowed with more and greater Indulgences: vide Augustinum
Florentinum, Lucam Eremitam, Bucelinum in Annalibus Benedictinis, etc.

The Crown therefore consisting of 33. Pater Nosters, or Lords Prayers
[consonant to the number of years, in which our dear Redeemer conversed with
men in his human flesh upon earth, to merit for us a happy Crown of Glory in
Heaven] and of four Ave Mary's, or Angelical Salutations with one Creed added
for a conclusion is divided into four parts [whereof the three first parts are
Decades or Tens, there being in each of them a ten-times-repeated Lords Prayer,
and one Angelical Salutation: and in the fourth part there is only a
Thrice-repeated Lords Prayer, with one Angelical Salutation and the Creed] and
may be recited as it is here distinctly set down, with an additionall point of
Meditation upon some of the pious Mysteries of our Saviors life, and a short
Aspiration, which may easily be dilated with more affections and resolutions
according to each ones Spirit of devotion.

The first Part of the Crown of our Lord. Of Christ's coming into the World.
1.
OUr dear Redeemer descended from his royal Throne, from his eternal Fathers
Bosom, from his happy Heaven into this vale of misery, and clothed himself
with human flesh in the holy Virgins Womb.

O Jesu! how excessive is your Mercy, how infinite your affection, how
stupendous your condescendency to undeserving man? Ah! that my heart were
perfectly free from all that displeases you, that so it might deserve
perpetually to harbor you.

Our Father.

2.
HE [being conceiv'd] inspired his sacred Virgin Mother to take a journey into
the Mountains of Judea, there to visit, salute, and serve St. Elizabeth her
Kinswoman.

O Jesu! that my soul were always pliable, docible, obedient to correspond to
your sweet and sacred impulses, motions and aspirations! how cheerfully should
I then serve your sovereign Majesty, and how charitably should I assist my
necessitous neighbor.

Our Father.

3.
AFter he had been carried nine months in his Mothers chaste entralls; he was
born in a cold Stable, wrapped in poor rags, cradled in a hard Cribb.

O Jesu! make me in love with poverty, humility, and mortification, which you
have made so amiable by practicing them in your own divin person.

Our Father.

4.
THe Angels congratulate his happy birth with their heavenly Canticles, and
the shepherds humbly, joyfully, and admiringly adore him.

O Jesu! let my tongue incessantly sing forth your Praises, let my heart
perpetually breath forth acts of gratitude for your Mercies, and let my soul
sweetly melt away in her reciprocal affections.

Our Father.

5.
UPon the eighth day after his Nativity he was circumcised and called Jesus.

O Jesu! O sacred and sugared Name! O Jesu, be unto me a Jesus! O that my
tongue, heart, and hands, with all my senses, powers and faculties of body and
soul, were truly circumcised from all superfluous, curious, vicious
inclinations, passions, and affections, that so I might never more think,
speak, or act any thing offensive to your divin will and liking.

Our Father.

6.
HE was diligently sought out by the Eastern Sages, humbly adored by them, and
highly honored by their royal Presents and Oblations.

O Jesus! let me never leave seeking till I find you, the only beloved Object of
all my affections, and strengthen me [sweet Jesus!] to make a total Oblation,
Consecration, and Resignation of my whole self to your holy will and pleasure,
entirely, irrevocably, eternally.

Our Father.

7.
HE was carried to the Temple in his sacred Mothers arms, to be presented as
her firstborn to his eternal Father, showing himself in all things subject to
the Law.

O Jesus! shall not I humble my self; and submit to all men for your sake!

Our Father.

8.
HE to avoid Herod's cruelty; sustained a tedious banishment in his tender years.

O Jesu! give me patience in all my persecutions, temptarions, and troubles,
and let not my grievous sins banish me from your sweet grace and presence.

Our Father.

9.
HE returned from Egypt after his seven years sufferings.

O Jesu! let your efficacious grace recall me from vice to virtue: let me return
into you my first Origin, and let me repose in you my only center and security.

Our Father.

10.
HE dwelt with his Parents int he City Nazareth.

O Jesu! dwell in my soul here by your grace, that my soul may dwell with you
hereafter in your eternal glory.

Our Father.

O Sacred Virgin Mother! who having conceived your divin Son without sin, and
brought him forth without sorrow, served him so diligently during the time of
his minority: appease him (I beseech you) in my behalf, by your powerful
Prayers and intercession.

Hail Mary.

The second Part. Of Christ's Conversation amongst men.
1.
OUr dear Redeemer being twelve years old went up with his Parents to Jerusalem
to perform his devotions, where he was lost, sought and after three day's found
in the Temple.

O Jesu! replenish my heart with solid devotion, that sincerely seeeking you, I
may happily find you, and having found you, I may faithfully keep you company
in my interior for evermore.

Our Father.

2.
HE returned with his Parents to Nazareth, and was subject unto them.

O Jesus! break my rebellious will, that I may promptly obey you and my
Superiors, according to your most perfect trample.

Our Father.

3.
HE being thirty years old was baptized by St. John in the river Jordan.

O Jesus! permit not my sinful soul to pass forth of my body, till it be
baptized in a river of tears, and restored to purity by the Sacrament of
Penance.

Our Father.

4.
HE fasted forty days and nights in the Desert, and was tempted by the Devil.

O Jesus! give me courage to subdue all sensuality, constancy to resist all
temptations, and strength to conquer all my enemies.

Our Father.

5.
HE painfully went from place to place, preaching the Gospel to the people.

O Jesu! let my soul incessantly thirst after your honor, and the salvation of
my neighbor.

Our Father.

6.
HE honored marriage with his presence, and with his first miracle, and
afterward (for three years space) he plentifully powered forth his miraculous
benefits upon all sorts of Persons.

O Jesu! overflow my heart with a general affection and compassion toward all
Christians; and permit me not to grow weary in performing works of piety.

Our Father.

7.
HE often times spent whole nights in Prayer, and suffered hunger, thirst, cold,
heat, poverty, and persecution for my sake.

O Jesu! how much have you done and endured for me, and how little have I done
and endured for you, and my self?

Our Father.

8.
HIs chief lesson was humility: Learn of me, for I am meek, and humble of heart.

O Jesu! This is one of the virtues I chiefly stand in need off; Ah! that my
heart were truly simple, supple, innocent, and humble! how happy a Scholar
should I be (O my Redeemer!) in your holy School, could I as cheerfully
practice, as I can easily resolve?

Our Father.

9.
HIs principal precept was Charity, I give you a new commandment, that you
love one another.

O Jesus! this is the other virtue I principally want and wish for; Ah! that my
whole interior, and exterior, my heart, soul, body, and senses, were nothing
but pure Charity! that so it might be impossible for me to speak! think, act,
or breath any thing, but the perfect love of you and my neighbor.

Our Father.

10
HE made his triumphant entrance into Jerusalem [in order to his Passion)
sitting upon an ass, and he shed tears amidst the peoples applauses and
acclamations.

O Jesus! give me a true sight of my self, and of the World, that perfectly
knowing my own vility, and its vanity, I may incessantly bewail my
selfwretchedness, weep for the Worlds wickedness, and render to you only all
honor and glory.

Our Father.

O Sacred Virgin Mother! who so faithfully, diligently, and devoutly
accompanied, followed, and served your divin Son in his manly age: appease him
[I beseech you] in my behalf, by your powerful prayers and intercession.

Hail Mary.

The third part. Of Christ's bitter Death and Passion.
1.
OUr dear Redeemer, after his last supper, washed the feet of his Disciples,
and instituted the Sacrament of the Eucharist.

O Jesus! which shall I most admire, your stupendous humility? or your
unheard-off charity?

Our Father.

2.
HE entered the Garden with his Disciples, where after he had most fervently
prayed, he fell into a vehement Agony, in which, blood mixed with sweat,
trickled down from his whole body.

O Jesus! how great are my sins, which are the cause of your so great sorrow?
place your Passion [I bessech you] between them and your judgment; O let your
sufferings cancel their heynousness, and let your precious blood wash away
their erroneous filthiness.

Our Father.

3.
HE was seized on by a crew of armed Soldiers, manacled with cords, dragged
away to Annas and Caiphas.

O Jesus! dissolve the bands of my unruly passions, perverse inclinations, and
impure affections, and take me, tie me, shackle me, and draw me unto you with
the sweet cords of your sacred love and charity.

Our Father.

4.
IN the whole night of his passion, he suffered all sorts of injuries,
vexations, and torments.

O Jesu! and shall I repine at small pains and persecutions? shall I faint
under the light burden which your loving hand lay's upon my shoulders? O meek
lamb of God! pardon my past impatience, and give me a perseverant Resignation
to your will and pleasure.

Our Father.

5.
HE was contemptibly hurried away to Pilate and Herod, and by them scorned as a
silly Idiot.

O Jesu! you are every way humbled, depressed, annihilated, and I seek nothing
but honor, applause, estimation! Is this to imitate you, my Lord and Master? O
change me, correct me, convert me by your power, in your mercy, by your example.

Our Father.

6.
HIs tender body was tied naked to a pillar, and torn with whips and scourges.

O Jesus! uncloath me of the old man, with all his wicked works, and revest me
with the new, created in justice and sanctity, according to your own heart.

Our Father.

7.
HE was beaten with a cane, buffeted with their fists, spurned with their feet,
defiled with their spittle, crowned with Thorns, every way abused.

O Jesu! the beauty of Men and Angels! how are you worried for my wickedness? O
wound my soul with a deep sense of your sufferings, that I may henceforth
absolutely detest all sin, trample upon all sensuality, cancel all vanity,
serve you more innocently, and adhere to you more fervently.

Our Father.

8.
HE was forced to carry his heavy Cross upon his weak and wounded shoulders
from Jerusalem to Mount Calvarie.

O Jesu! let me cheerfully take up the Cross of self-contempt, self-abnegation,
self-denial, and follow you till death, constantly, courageously,
perseverantly.

Our Father.

9.
HE was stripped naked, and stretched on the Cross, having his hands and feet
barbarously nayl'd unto it, and his side pierced with a Lance.

O Jesus! strip me of all that displeases the eyes of your divin Majesty, dilate
my heart with celestial affections, and fasten my ^oul to your self, with the
sweet nayls of your sacred Love.

Our Father.

10.
HAving hung three hours on the Cross, inclining his head, he gave up the Ghost.

O Jesus! you died for me, that I might live eternally: O let me die to all
things, that I may henceforth live to you only, who are to me All in All.

Our Father.

O Sacred Virgin Mother! who so patiently, constantly, perseverantly stood by
your divin Son, dying on the Cross for me; appease him [I beseech you] in my
behalf by your powerful Prayers and Intercession.

Hail Mary.

The fourth Part. Of Christ's glorious Triumph after Death.
1.
OUr dear Redeemer, rising victoriously [upon the third day] from his
Sepulcher, replenished the hearts of his holy Mother, Disciples, and Friends,
with unspeakable joy and gladness.

O Jesus! give me grace, strength, and courage to shake of the death of my
inveterate vices and bad customs, and to rise to newness of life and
conversation. O let me henceforth savor the things which are above, and not
these vain, vile terrene, and transitory trifles, which can never satiate my
soul, created for you only.

Our Father.

2.
HE triumphantly ascended to Heaven (on the forti'th day after his
Resurrection] amidst the jubily of Angels, in the company of the Patriarks, in
the sight of his sacred Mother, Disciples, and Friends, where he sits at his
Fathers right hand blessed for evermore.

O Jesus! that my soul might follow you, the only object of her affections! O
that I could incessantly aspire to you, long after you languish for you my only
center and security, the only comfort of my life, and Crown of all my desires.

Our Father.

3.
HE sent down his holy Spirit upon his Apostles, and the rest of his chosen
children to instruct them in his will, to encourage them in their duties, to
confirm them in their Faith, to assist them in their preaching, to strengthen
them in their persecutions.

O Jesus! send also your holy Spirit to cure, cleanse, and comfort my sick
sinful and sad soul; adorn each corner of my interior with your divin love
and grace, that you sacred Spirit may find there a sweet and grateful
habitation; rule, reign, and remain in my heart (O Jesus! King of Glory!) for
evermore.

Our Father.

O Sacred Virgin Mother! whose soul was dilated with such unspeakable joy and
sweetness in the glorious Resurrection and admirable Ascension of your divin
Son JESUS: appease him (I beseech you) in my behalf, by your powerful Prayers
and Intercession.

Hail Mary.

Conclude this holy Crown with that Apostles Creed: saying.

I believe in God etc. Thirty-three Elevations and Petitions to Jesus our
blessed Redeemer, in honor of the Thirty-three year's of his holy Life.
1. O Good Jesu, the word of the Father convert me. 2. O Good Jesu, the lamb of
God! puryfie me. 3. O Good Jesu, my Master! teach me. 4. O Good Jesu, the
Prince of Peace! govern me. 5. O Good Jesu, the sure hope of penitent Sinners!
behold me. 6. O Good Jesu, my Refuge! defend me. 7. O Good Jesu, my Instructor!
direct me. 8. O Good Jesu, my Patience! comfort me. 9. O good Jesu, the chief
Comforter of sad Souls! refresh me. 10. O good Jesu, my Redeemer! save me. 11.
O good Jesu, my Lord and my God! possess me. 12. O good Jesu, the life, the
way, and the truth! enliven me. 13. O good Jesu, my firm Foundation! strengthen
me. 14. O good Jesu, the light of the world! illuminate me. 15. O good Jesu, my
Justice! justify me. 16. O good Jesu, my Mediator! sanctify me. 17. O good
Jesu, the Physician of my soul! heal me. 18. O good Jesu, my Judge! absolve me.
19. O good Jesu, the Son of Justice shine upon me. 20. O good Jesu, my King!
deliver me. 21. O good Jesu, Son of David! pity me. 22. O good Jesu, my
sanctification! cleanse me. 23. O good Jesu, the living bread descending from
Heaven! satiate me. 24. O good Jesu, the wine bringing forth Virgins! inebriate
me. 25. O good Jesu, my Father! bless me. 26. O good Jesus, the only joy of my
heart! visit me. 27. O good Jesus, my Helper! assist me. 28. O good Jesus, my
Protector! protect me. 29. O good Jesus, my Love! transform me. 30. O good Jesus,
my Propitiation! hide me in your wounds. 31. O good Jesus, the faithful
Shepherd! feed me. 32. O good Jesus, the eternal Life! receive me into the
number of your Elect. 33. O good Jesus, my Glory! gloryfie me.
An Advertisement to them of the sacred Confraternity of the holy name of JESUS.
AFter the recital of the Rosary of Jesus, or Crown of our Lord, and these
Thirty-three Petitions in honor of the Thirty-three years of his holy life,
you may make use of some of the following Elevations to Jesus Christ our Lord,
and to the holy Trinity, (according as your opportunity and devotion shall
dictate unto you, and not as any part belonging to the said Rosary of Jesus,
which contains nothing more than what is before prescribed and expressed:) for
though they may be practiced with very great spiritual profit by all faithful
Christians, as containing a most eminent, sublime, and heroic manner of
offering up our selv's to the divin Majesty yet the frequent use thereof is
especially proper to the members of this sacred Confraternity, who above all
others ought to adore Gods greatness, admire his goodness, extol his mercies,
and dedicate themselv's to his perpetual service, by the continual
remembrance of the mysteries of his Life and Incarnation, which is the end of
their devout Confraternity, and the drift of these divin Elevations.

ELEVATIONS TO JESUS CHRIST our Lord: In honor of his several Estates, and of
the singular Mysterries of his Life.
TO ADORE

The supreme greatness of JESUS: And to offer our selv's to him in way of
humble servitude, and absolute dependency, which is due to him in consequence
of the ineffable Union, of the Divinity, with our Humanity.

1. The Eternal Greatness of the word Incarnate.
O JESUS, my Lord! King of Angels; Redeemer of Men; Sovereign of the Universe:
only Son of God, only Son of the Virgin; Born from all Eternity, in the
Eternal Fathers bosom; and in times fullness born of the Virgin Mary; true
God, true Man! I adore you in your eternal, and your temporal Greatness, in
your divin and human Fullness: in your created, and uncreated Highness.

You are the second Person of the sacred Trinity, but equal to the First, and
origin of the Third: you are the Splendour and Glory of the eternal Father; you
are his power, and his wisdom, you are his lively Image and perfect
resemblance; you are his only Son, and his eternal word; you are God of God,
Light of Light.

2. The Equality and Consubstantiality of the Divin Persons in a perfect
distinction, is a wonder in God himself.
YOU are in these Greatnesses by Birth: Such a Birth, which Equals the Power
and Paternity of him, who is your Father, and which is one and the same thing
with the Divinity. A wonder, not in the world, but in Eternity; not in the
created, but uncreated Being; and the Prime wonder of Eternity: For you are the
first Production of the Eternal Father, and source of the last. And by this
wonderful Birth, you are Infinite as he is; All-powerfull is he is, God as he
is. Beginning and Original of a Divin Person as he is: Nor is there any other
difference, but that in one self-same Divinity, in one equal Eternity, in one
semblable Majesty, He is Father, and you are Son: you are Son, but without
inequality, without posteriority: you are Son, yet of even antiquity, of equal
authority with him, and Eternal God as he is. You are Son, but without
diversity of Essence, or of Power, or of Wisdom; having the unity of Essence,
with the diversity of Subsistency, in which you are one only God with him: you
are adored as he is, and you are the Creator, Conserver, and Commander of the
whole world as he is.

3. God low's himself to us, and makes himself one of us.
THese Greatnesses dazzle our souls, we cannot look upon them from out our
Earths obscurity; They are to be adored, not beheld; and we must vail our faces
in the presence of this divin object, as did the Angels (by Isay's relation)
in the sight of your Throne.

But you are willing to exercise you mercy's upon us; you will cast a cover
upon your self, and render your self visible to our weak spirits, and to our
mortal aspects: you will stoop down to us, and become accessible; and by a
Council which even ravishes us with wonder, you will come near us, and make
your self as one of us. For, O LOVE, O MERCY! O MERVAIL! You will unite your
Greatness to our Baseness, your Eternity to our Mortality; your Divinity to our
humanity, becoming Son of Man, Son of Mary for an Eternity, as from all
Eternity, you are the Son of GOD, the only Son of the Eternal Father.

4. Gods Son gives his Eternal Essence and Subsistence to our nature.
I Adore you in this highest Council and divin Will; I Adore you in this new
estate and deep Mystery: I Adore you in the unity of your divin Person, and in
the diversity of your natures; the one Divin and Eternal, the other human and
temporal. I Adore you as receiving your Eternal Essence from the Eternal
Father, and as giving your Essence, you subsistency to human nature united to
your self for an Evermore, United (I say) to your self so intimatly, and so
powerfully; so gloriously and so divinely. O Adorable Estate! O Unspeakable
Mystery! O happy Moment of the Incarnation, which makes man God, and God man:
Which gives to Heaven a King of Glory, and to the Earth a Sovereign: To
Angels. a Repayrer, and to Men a Savior!

5. Jesus is born, lives, suffers, dies for us.
O JESU, my Lord and my Savior. I Adore you as Gods Son, I Adore you as Man's
Son, and Man God: I Adore you in these two different Estates; The one Eternal,
the other Temporal; the one uncreated, the other created; the one divin, the
other human; joined together, and joined inseparably.

But I must yet Adore you as Man-God for man: For it is for us that you would be
made Man, it is for us, that you live and die; it is for us that you do and
suffer; it is for us that you are born in a Stable, and bedded on straw; it is
for us that you lead an abject, laborious, suffering life; it is for us that you
die upon Mount Calvary; and hang on the Cross; it is for us that you arise, and
ascend into Glory: O Birth! O Life! O Death! O Divin, glorious, heavenly Life!
O blessed hour of the Incarnation, of the Expiration, of the glorification of
Gods Son! O Estates of Jesus in his Fathers bosom, and at his Mothers breasts,
hanging on the Cross, and sitting on the right hand of God! O Abodes! O
Estates! O Mysteries of Jesus, in Judea, in Egypt, in Galilee, in Bethleem, in
Nazareth, in Jerusalem, in the Crib, on the Cross, in the Grave, on Earth, in
Hell, in Heaven! Who can recount your thoughts, your griefs, your delights in
these places? But Heaven will one day reveal them unto us, and the
Contemplation hereof shall be one of the employments of our Eternity; till when
the Earth must remain ignorant hereof; must Reverence them, and must be content
with the Crumbs falling from your Saints Tables, whom you plentifully nourish
with this living, and life-giving bread on Earth and in Heaven.

6. Jesus Adores his Heights by his Lownesses, and rayseth up his Lownesses by
his Greatnesses.
1. BY their Example and Imitation, I Contemplate and Adore you, O Jesu, my
Lord! I Adore you in your Greatness, and in your Abjectness; in your Cross, and
in your Glory; in your life, and in your death. 2. I Adore you as raising up
your Lowness by your Greatness; your human life, by your divin Life; your
disgraces, by your glory; and your suffering estate, by your impassible,
immutable, and eternal condition. 3. I Adore you, as Adoring your self, your
Greatness by your Littleness, your Divinity by your Humanity; your Birth in
your Fathers bosom, by your Birth of your Mother-Virgin in the Ox-stall, your
supreme Authority, by your humility; and your uncreated Essence, by your
Created Being. 4. And after this Contemplation of you in your self, I
contemplate and Adore you, as going forth of your self; as extending and
spreading your self; and as filling Heaven and Earth with your Grace and your
Glory; with your gifts, and your Mysteries, and finally with your self. O God!
O Man! O Man-God! O Infinitely prodigal of your self!
7. Jesus's excessive love in the effusion of his last drop of Blood for us;
thereby testifying the effusion of his Greatness and Goodness also upon us.
I Enlarge my self in the variety of these thoughts; I am ravished in these
different Exercises, which my Soul makes of your self; and I lose my self in
the Contemplation of these so high and great verities. For in honor of that
supreme Communication which you receive from your Father in the Eternal
generation; and in honor of that Ineffable Communication of your Divinity with
our Humanity in the Incarnation; I look upon you, I admire you, I Adore you, O
my Lord! as annihilating your self, and as exhausting your self, that you may
bestow your self on men.

You (as it were) drayn your Divinity pouring it out upon your humanity,
consuming it incessantly in the furnace of your love; and at last sacrificing
it in the Holocaust of your Cross: you shed your Blood in suffering and you die
by the effusion thereof, chosing, that kind of death, to demonstrate the
effusion of your self: And the Nayls and Executioners, being unable to empty it
all, the ardour of your love, which cannot be extinguished in death it self
preserv's liquid in death's coldness that residue left in your heart and body,
to be drained out, even to the last drop: Such was your good pleasure to make
an abundant and super-aboundant Effusion both of your blood, and also of your
self together.

8. Jesus is all ours; and we are all his; yea, we are in him, we live in him,
we are parts of him.
WHat shall I say, what shall I do in the Contemplation of these things? Let me
forget my self, for you forget Your self for me: Let me leave and loose my
self, for you annihilate Your self for me: Let me be yours, for You are mine,
let me be all yours, for you are all mine; Let me be all yours for ever, for
you are all mine for ever. Your Divinity, (as it were) Incarnated, is my
substance, and my subsistence: your humanity (as it were) divinized, is my
health and my life: your Body is my diet, and your Blood is my Bath, your Death
is my life, your weakness is my strength, your Cross is my quiet, your
suffering is my rejoicing. Thus I am yours, and you are mine; And I am yours (O
my loving Savior!) by your self, and by a means so noble, and so divin, so
dear and near unto you, and by so many sorts of ways which give you unto me,
which consecrate me to you; and which even draw and drain you all out for me.

But I discover yet a greater secret in your love, and in your Mysteries, and a
greater favor in your way of dealing with me; For you are not only mine, and I
yours, but I am in you.

I perceive that whilst I Contemplate your self and your Father, and see that
you are in him, that you live in him; you frame within me a lively Image of
your self, and of your divin Emanation; and by your Incarnation, you establish
a new manner of gracious favor in the world, which makes me in the Order of
Grace, not only existent by you, but existent in you: So that by this manner of
Grace, proper to this Mystery, and springing from it, in the honor and
Imitation of your Eternal Procession, I am not only yours, not only by you,
but I am in you; I live in you, I make a part of you; I am bone of your bone,
and flesh of your flesh: let me be then also spirit of your Spirit, let me live
by your life, let me participate of the Interior, of the Grace, of the Estate,
of the Spirit of your Mysteries; let me appropriate my self to you, let me
appropriate them to my self; let me appropriate my self to your Greatnesses,
and to your debasings; your Cross, and your Glory; your Life and your Death.

9. The Perfection of a Christian requires, that Jesus live in him and that he
imprint in his Soul the Spirit and life of his estates and Mysteries.
It Is my desire, and my hope, but it surpasses my power, and therefore I expect
it from the new Grace, of the new Man. For this Grace joins me to him, and
places me in a condition not only to work, but further to receive and bear his
sacred and divin Operations; yea, and tends to a more strict and inward
Communication. For this new Grace issuing out of the Incarnation, and
resembling its own original and Prototypon, tends to this, that I be in Jesus,
and that Jesus be in me, as he is in his Father, and his Father is in him.

Be then in me, O Jesu, live in me, work in me; form and figure in me your
Estates, and your Mysteries; your actions, and your sufferings. And as the
Father expresses and impresseth in you his substance, as in his divin
Character, so imprint in my soul, and in my life your inward and outward
Conversation, and make me a lively character, bearing the impression of your
Spirit, of your estates, of your holy and wholesome operations.

You are the Image of God, make me the perfect picture of your self, make me
like to your self, conforming me to your Mysteries, as you have been pleased to
make your self like me, conforming your self to my miseries; and let me carry
the effects and lineaments of your Grace, and of your Glory; of your Power and
of your life, which you led upon earth.

Let your Birth make me be newborn; born; Let your Infancy put me in the state
of Innocence: Let your flight into Egypt, make me fly the world and sin; let
your Servitude render me your slave, let your bonds unfetter me, and
infranchise me from my sins, from my passions, and from my self. Let your
hidden and unknown life, hide me from the world, and from vanity: let your
solitude entertain me; let your temptations strengthen me, let your labors
solace me; let your griefs cure me; let your Agonyes comfort me; and let your
death make me live, and be newborn in Eternity.

10. The Principal Mysteries of Jesus applied to our sanctification; And his
qualities and offices referred to our use.
LEt me thus enter Commerce and communication with you, O my Life, and my Love!
O my God, and my All! Let the course and the Moments, the Periods and the
Estates of your Life upon earth, be thus applied and appropriated to me, and
let your Qualities and Offices thus work in me, and imprint in me their
comfortable efforts. You are the uncreated Wisdom, I will adhere to your
Maxims, and follow your conduct; you are the Doctor of Justice, I will enter
into your School and Discipline; you are the Holy and Health-bringer of God, in
you will I have Grace and Salvation; you are the live, I will live in you; you
are the way, I will walk by you; you are the God of Heaven and of Earth, I will
be yours.

11. By how many titles we belong to Jesus, and Jesus to us.
I Know I am yours, and that by many titles: For I am yours by your Greatness,
your Powerfulness, your Privileges: I am yours by your Dignities, your Merits,
your Benefits; I am yours by the gift of your Father, who gives me unto you, in
giving the whole Earths circumference to you; I am yours by your own gift,
whereby you give your self to your Father for me.

And you are mine; for your Father gives you to the world in the excess of his
love; and you are your Fathers gift; you are Gods gift in diverse and sundry
significations: And it is your own self, which thus qualifies your self, telling
the Samaritan woman; Did thou know Gods gift, and who he is that talks wtth
thee: This was your discourse of your self to this poor stranger, whom you
happily made a Domestique of your Faith, and of your word, and vouchsafed your
self to Catechize so familiarly.

12. Jesus is Gods Gift unto us, and what this Gift demands of us; with an
Explication of Christian Grace.
WHerefore being taught by your sacred mouth, that this quality of being Gods
Gift, is proper unto you, I adore you, I behold you, I receive you in this
quality: As by this you are mine, I will be yours; Nor shall it suffice me to
be yours by your self, and by your Father, I will be yours by my self also, and
by choice of my own Free Will.

I give my self then to you, O Jesu, my Lord! I give to you my self, with my
whole power, and according to the full extent of your own power and will over
me. I give my self to the Grace of your Mystery of the Incarnation: Grace,
which ties me unto you in a new manner: Grace which separates me from my self,
unites and incorporates me in you; Grace, which makes me yours in so noble, so
intimate, and so powerful a fashion, and renders me yours, as a parcel of
your self; Grace, of life and of death both together; Grace of annihilating,
and also of establishing.

In the strength and virtue of this Grace which has its origin in you, and in
your new estate of God-Man; I annihilate my self in my own self, to be in you;
and I will carry within my Soul a death to all things, that I may live in you:
And I will that my Being be reduced to be nothing else than a pure Capacity of
you filled up with you.

13. This Christian Grace is formed upon the Mystery of the Incarnation, which
is its Model; And requires of us a particular manner of Oblation and Donation
to Jesus.
ACcording to the Power and efficacy of this Grace, which is peculiar to your
Mystery of the Incarnation, and which is formed upon it as upon its Copy; I
bequeath my self to you, O Jesu, my Lord! I give you my Being, my life, and my
love; I give you my time, and my Eternity; I give you my Body and my Soul; I
give you my senses, and powers: I render my self slave to your Greatnesses, to
your Cross, and to you love. I put into your hands the last hour of my life,
which is the decider of my Eternity. I offer my self to you. I apply my self to
you, I will transfrom my self into you: I lose my self, and Abysm my self in
you: for you are my God, and I am your Creature; you are my Sovereign, and I
your vassal; you are my Redeemer, and I your Bondslave.

14. A total Reference and Oblation of our selv's to Jesus.
THese are your qualities, and these my endeavors and duties; I accept of
them, and entirely yield up my self: And I make an Oblation to you of my
Obedience, of my servitude, and of my Absolute dependency upon you; and this I
offer up to you for evermore. I render up, and totally submit my self to the
motion of your Spirit, and to the efficacious conduct of your Grace,
established on Earth and in Heaven, by the new Mystery of your Incarnation:
And I will have no other repose upon earth, than in your labors, no other
delight, than in your Cross; no other life, than in your death, no other
solace, than in your sufferings; as it is your Will, that I should in Heaven
and in Eternity, have life in your life, felicity in your felicity, Paradise in
your Paradise, fruition in your fruition, and subsistency in your Divinity.

ELEVATIONS TO THE SACRED TRINITY UPON The Mystery of the Incarnation.
TO ADORE the Supreme Greatnesses of JESUS; and to offer up our selv's unto him
in the estate of humble servitude, and absolute dependency, which is due to
him, by reason of the ineffable union of the Divinity with the Humanity.

HOLY, Divin, and Adorable Trinity, in the Unity of your Essence, in the
Society of your Persons, in the fecundity of your Emanations! I praise and
adore you in the sublimity of your Greatnesses; and I Abysm my self in the
profundity of your Councills, and in the extent of your Mercies.

1. God Created two Natures capable of himself; upon one he exercises his
Justice, upon the other his Mercy.
YOU have created two Natures capable of your self: That of the Angel, and
that of Man. You will exercise upon one of them your Justice, and upon the
other your mercy.

I Adore you in this your will, and I give you thanks for this your Council,
which you held from all Eternity in the excess of your miserations; Council,
most sublime, and most profound; Council most holy, and most sacred, to unite
one day and for evermore human nature to your Divin Essence.

2. The Mystery of the Incarnation is the head-work of Gods Love and Power: And
what is proper to the Person of the Father in the Mysteries of the Trinity and
Incarnation.
O Eternal Father! who do produce in your self an only Son equal to your
self, and do produce him out of your self by a second and new Nativity,
choosing him to unite in his person your nature and ours: I praise and bless
you as God, and as Father, an ds God and Father of this only Son Jesus Christ
our Lord. You beget him eternally, and you bestow him as another your self in
this unspeakable generation; and since the Moment chosen by your wisdom, you
give him incessantly to this humanity derived from the Virgin. Happy Moment,
which served for the Beginning of this great work, the head-work of your love
and power. O God and all-powerfull Father! be you Eternally blessed in this
moment, in this work, in this love: Love, by which you power out of your self
this Celestia^l dew, this divin substance, this precious gift which the World
and the blessed Virgin receiv's, and in her our nature. Work wherein is
accomplished the work of your works, the mystery of your mysteries, the
mystery of the Incarnation: Moment, in which our nature received and that for
an evermore, the Person of your only Son for her peculiar Person: and this by a
tie so sacred, so divin, so inward, and conjoined to your Divinity.

3. What is proper to the Person of the Son in these Mysteries.
O Only Son of God! who do give your Essence to the Holy Ghost, and your Person
to our Humanity, by an ineffable and secret Power of your Love; I praise you,
contemplate you, and adore you in your self, and in these two different
donations: you eternally produce the Holy Ghost, and give him the same essence
which you have received of the Father; you create and form a new man by a new
effort of your grace and power, and you give your self to him, uniting his
nature to your own Person: nor do you ever cease in this union and divin
donation: you thus worthily and divinly exercise your love; you conspire in
unity with the Father in these two great donations, the one Eternal, the
other Temporal, and you fill up with the one times fullness, and with the
other the fullness of Eternity; blessed be you in time, and in Eternity.

When you discoursed of your self to your most inward and familiar friends,
that is, to your Apostles in the last hour of your life; you then named your
self Life, and so you are the Life, and Original of Life, and of Love in the
thrice sacred Trinity, which Death cannot bereave you of: but in the the excess
of your love; you would yet become a new Life, and a new beginning of Life and
Love in your humanity.

Blessed be you in this will, and in this love, Love depressing and exalting;
Love annihilating and deifying; Love crucifying and glorifying; for this Love
elevates the humanity, and depresseth the divinity; this Love annihilates (in a
manner) your nature, and deifies ours: this Love puts you on the Cross, and
places us ^n Glory; and finally, this Love transforms us into you not only by
communication of qualities, but even by communication of substance. O Son of
God! I love you, and I adore you in this love, in this annihilation, in this
powerful transformation.

4. What is proper to the Person of the Holy Ghost in these Mysteries.
FRom you I come to the Holy Ghost, who proceeds from you, as you proceed from
the Father: for in this way of Life and Love, I trace the order of the divin
Processions and sources of Life: and after the Son, I address my self to you O
Fountain of Life! O holy Spirit! Spirit of Truth, of Life, and of Love, and I
adore you in your self, for you are God, in the unity which you have with the
Father and the Son; I adore you in your Emanation, for you proceed from them,
and you are their Spirit, their Tie, their Love: and I again adore you in the
admirable operation, which you exercise in the time ordained by the eternal
wisdom: for it is the highest and holiest Operation which can be terminated out
of your self: Operation, which environs the worthiest person that ever shall be
next to the divin Persons, that is, the Person of the Virgin: Operation, which
depresses and exalts her: depresses her, even into the center of her nothing,
drawing from her these sacred words; Behold our Lords hand-mayd: and exalts her
to the greatest dignity which shall ever be communicated, either to her, or to
any other, making her Mother of God; Operation, which prepares and unites our
nature with the Divinity, and the Person of the Virgin, with the Person of the
Word: Operation, which accomplisheth the Incarnation of the word and the
deification of human nature: which remaining human in the very estate of this
divin union, receiv's uncreated and infinite Grace, in a being which is
created, finite, and like to ours.

5. Contemplations upon the humanity of Jesus.
ANd you O sacred Humanity! which by this Operation of the Holy Ghost are
divinly derived from the Virgin, and personally united to the eternal Word; I
contemplate and adore you in that mervailous estate whereunto you enter: Estate
of Existency in the divin Being: Estate of subsistency in the Person of the
Word: Estate of Filiation, not adoptive, but proper and natural: and I lose my
self in the consideration of the inward and secret communications of the divin
perfections, which are singularly conferred upon a nature rhus resident, thus
living, thus existent in the divinity.

6. Contemplations upon the association of the blessed Virgin in the Mystery
of the Incarnation.
ANd since the most sacred Trinity chooses you, (O holy Virgin!) and
associates you to himself in this admirable operation; I cannot forget you in
this Mystery, nor ought I to separate, what God in this work has conjoyn'd^
Work in which he vouchsafes to you so great and honorable a part, and so
peculiar to you only amongst all Creatures.

I praise then and reverence you with a singular Veneration, correspondent to
the excess of that excellency and dignity communicated unto you; For you are
Mother of God, and you are the only in this order and quality, and it is in
you, and in you only, that this work of works is accomplished, and this divin
union between the Humanity and the Divinity is consummated.

In these thoughts there is enough to ravish a Soul, to loose it in the
diversity of these Objects, and to swallow it up in their deep profundities: I
am confounded in the contemplation of them, I ca^ my self down; I lift my self
up; I rejoice, I leap out of my self, and I will have share in this new grace,
of this new mystery of the Incarnation.

7. An Oblation of humble Servitude to Jesus, and to his deifi'd Humanity.
ANd expecting until it shall please God to make me capable of some one of the
holy inventions of his Spirit, and of the operations of his grace and love by
consequence of this mystery; I offer and submit my self, I vow and dedicate my
self to Jesus Christ our Lord in the state of perpetual servitude, to him and
to his deify'd Humanity, and to his humaniz'd Divinity: and this with a
resolution as firm, constant and inviolable, as by his grace is possible for me
to make: and as the durance and perpetuity of this stable mystery, permament
for all Eternity, does deserve.

8. A larger expression of this servitude
WHerefore, in honor of the unity of the Son with the Father and the Holy
Ghost, and of the union of the ^ame Son with human nature, which he ^a^th
united and joined to his own Person: I do unite and fasten my being to Jesus
Christ, and to his deify'd Humanity, by the bond of perpetual servitude; I
knit this knot on my part with all my power, and beg of him to give me more
power to tie my self to him with a closer and faster colligation, in honor of
those holy and sacred connexions, which he will have with us in Earth and in
Heaven, in the life of grace and of glory.

9. The Life of the Divinity in the Humanity.
I Reverence and adore the Life and annihilating of the Divinity in the
Humanity; the life, the substance, and the deification of this Humanity in the
Divinity: and all the actions humanly divin and divinly human, which have
proceeded from this new and mutual life of the Man-God, living in two Essences,
whereof one is Eternal, the other Temporal, the one is Divin, the other
Human^ Life, great, high, and profound of the Man-God, and of the God Man;
Life, rare and admirable, but hidden in its own sublimity: Life, unknown even
to Angels, and to all created nature under the manifestation of glory; Life,
hidden (I say) and unknown of the Divinity in this Humanity, and of the
Humanity in the Divinity. In homage of this double Life and Essence; I dedicate
and consecrate to him, my life and my actions of nature, and of grace, and this
I consecrate to him in quality of the life and actions of one of his
Bondslaves for evermore.

10. The denudation of Jesus's human subsistencie is the cause that his
humanity and all its actions are appropriated to the Person of the Eternal
word, by which it subsists.
I Reverence the denudation and nakeding, which the Humanity of Jesus has of
its own proper and ordinary subsistencie to be revested with another
subsistency, which we may call foreign and extraordinary to its own nature:
whence it is, that its life and its estate: its moti^s and its actions are not
now from it self, nor its own to speak properly, but they are all that is
actions, which sustains it thus denuded of its won peculiar subsistence.

In honor of this Privation of the Humanity, of a thing so inward, and so
conjoined to its own nature, and of the new and absolute dependencie which it
has of a divin Person; I renounce all power, authority, and liberty, which I
have to dispose of my self, of my being, of all the conditions, circumstances,
and ^ppurtenances thereof, and of all my actions; to dismiss my self entirely
into the hands of Jesus, and of his sacred humanity; to his honor and glory
for the accomplishment of all his purposes and powers upon me.

11. An Oblation of all that we are, and can, to this sacred Humanity.
I make unto you, (O Jesus!) and to your deify'd Humanity, an entire, absolute,
and irrevocable Oblation and Donation of all that I am by you in the Being, and
in the order of nature and grace: of all that which depends thereupon, of all
the natural and good actions which I shall ever perform, referring my self
totally, that is, all that which is in me, and all that which I can refer to
the homage and honor of your sacred humanity, which I from henceforth look
upon, and lay hold on, as the object whereunto (after God) I refer my soul, my
interior and exterior Life, and generally all whatsoever is mine.

12. JESUS is doubly in the state of a servant: (1.) by humbling his divin
Person to a created nature: (2.) by dying on the Cross.
O Great and admirable Jesu! notwithstanding your greatness; I behold you in
the state and form of a servant, and I see that you have taken this form, and
this estate in two several manners, the one by taking our human nature in the
Mystery of the Incarnation, and abjecting in it the infinite and supreme being
of your Divinity, even to the nothing of our nature: the other by taking the
abject condition of our mortal, infirm, and miserable life upon ^arth, and
depressing this humanity thus united to the Word, in the state and mystery of
your mortal, wayfaring, unregarded, and suffering life; for this Humanity
being in this sort elevated into the Throne and estate of a divin Person,
should not have been in any other condition, than of Glory and Splendor: Of
Splendor, (I say) befitting the Divinity, to which it is inseparably united.
And yet, O Love! O Bounty! you depress it for me, even to an estate and form of
an humble life, and serving your own creatures; and at last, even to the
opprobrious, cruel, and servill punishment of the Cross.

13. An Oblation of our selv's to Jesus, in honor of this his double estate of
being a servant.
Therefore in honor of this double estate and form of servant unto which you
have been pleased to reduce your Supreme Greatness: I offer and present my self
unto you, (O Jesu!) I render my self for ever a Slave to you, and to your
Adorable Humanity: I render my self Slave to your Love, Slave to your
Greatness, and Slave to your depressions. I embrace this condition, and make it
universally and totally subjecting all whatsoever is in me: For my will is,
that all that which I am; my will is, that my life of nature, and of grace, and
all my actions be yours and your sacred Humanities, as things belonging to it,
in a new manner, by this quality and condition of servitude toward it, which
I now here offer: And I require, that my life, my estate, and my Soul carry a
Particular badge of this my belonging, dependency, and servitude to you, and to
your Humanity thus Deifi'd, and thus depressed both together.

14. The Continuance of this Oblation of Servitude.
AND could I but come to the knowledge of any estate and reference of my self
toward you more dependent of you, and any relation more humble, and more
strict, than this of bondage and servitude; I would forthwith embrace it,
thereby to refer my self to you, as a thing due both to the greatness of the
estate to which your Humanity is elevated by the Hypostaticall union, as also
the excess of its love, and of that voluntary depression whereunto it humbled
and annihilated it self for my salvation, and for my glory.

15. A confirmation of this our, Oblation of Servitude.
BUT alas! what shall I do? your greatnesses are permanent, our duties of
Fealty are perpetual, and I come late to these lights; and yet they also are
unsteady, and our minds do easily permit themselv's to be diverted from things
so great, so worthy, and so just. But I will confirm my self in these verities
and in these Intentions: I will repair the time past, I will render my self
yours, even for all that time in which I might have known you, and might have
served you, I will bequeath unto you for ever all that I am, and all that I
can: I will that all that which is in me, reflect toward you, and serve you
only and perfectly: I will have no other conduct, motion, or sense, but by you,
and for you; And I will that in virtue of this present cogitation, intention,
and oblation, each moment of my life, and each action of the same, appertain to
you (O Jesu!) and to your sacred Humanity, as if I made a particular tender of
them all unto you.

16. An ardent desire of an inseparable union with Christ.
O Only Son of God! The Tie whereby you have fastn'd your self to us, is
indissoluble; nor was Death which you suffered, nor Hell which you entered; nor
Men's sins which you carried, able to break it: I would also make with you an
indissoluble knot, (O Jesu, my Lord!) You can grant me this favor: And that on
my part, I may dispose my self thereto, I Adore you in the unity you have with
the Father; Unity, which renders you inseparable from him: I adore you in the
Union, which you have with us: Union, so strong, that nothing can dissolve it:
Union, so inward, that it cannot be more intrinsecall and immediate, since that
it penetrates even to the bottom of human Being.

In the honor, and in the efficacy of this union, I offer up to you this my
desire of being united to you for evermore; And I make irrevocable (as much as
possibly I may,) this my Oblation, Donation, and servitude to you, and to your
humanity, as being holy and sacred by reason of your Divinity it self, which is
substantially and personally resident therein.

17. The Humanity of Jesus is the Temple of the Divinity.
O Holy Humanity! you are the Temple of the Divinity, and even so he calls you,
who chose you for himself, and united you to himself, and who has the words of
life; for he said to the Jews: Dissolve this Temple, and I will in three days
build it up again: And those gross and material minds applied this discourse to
their Temple, and to their stones: But (O Jesu!) according to your own Apostle
you spoke of another Temple; of the Temple of your body. A Temple, principal,
singular, and particular of the Divinity, which was pleased to choose this Body
and this Humanity, to triumph in it, and by it, and render it self visible in
its greatnesses in the amidst of the Earth.

18. What great things are wrought in this Humanety.
THE Divinity therefore reposeth in you (O sacred Humanity!) as in its Temple.
Temple, living, and animated; Temple, consecrated by the unction of the
Divinity it self, which is present, subsistent, and living in you, to take up
there, its repose, to be there acknowledged and adored, and there to operate
divin and adorable actions: And it reposeth in this Humanity, more holily, more
divinly, and more admirably, than even in the order and state of glory: And it
cooperats there things more high, and more great, than it does in Heaven: For
we see that in it, God is Man and Man is God; God is born and dying; God is
living and suffering; and Man-God is satisfying in the terms of Justice to the
Divin Justice: A thing far surpassing all present and possible condition of
Grace and Glory.

19. This Humanity is holy by the Divinity it self, which is a substantial
sanctity flowing from him into himself, and thence into us.
I Also Reverence and Adore you (O sacred Humanity!) as the most holy thing,
after God, which God himself finds amongst the Treasures of his Wisdom, and
amongst the unexhaustible depths of his absolute power. For notwithstanding
that you resemble us in nature, you are not like to us in Grace; because the
Grace and Sanctity, which is proper to you, is not such as is proper to
Angels, and men, which though it were infinitely multiplied, could never arrive
to the shadow of your sanctity, but would be still infinitely distant: But you
are holy with a holiness incomparably higher; with a holiness proper to your
self; with a holiness which is adorable; with a holiness issuing from the divin
Essence, and Person, as from its act, and from its proper form. And I consider
and Adore you as holy, and that not by any adjoined and accidental form of
sanctity, but by the Divinity it self, which renders you holy by a substantial
holiness, by an uncreated holiness, by a primitive and radical holiness: By a
holiness, constituting the Order and admirable estate of the Hypostaticall
union; and by a holiness, sanctifying, even that grace which is in you, and
which flows from your self into your self, and from you derives into us its
created grace, which is in you, and which adorns your created essence and
puissance; finds you holy, and not makes you holy, as it does us, but it
receives it self in you, and by you, an estate and manner of sanctity, which it
has not in it self, and which it cannot have but in you; the which elevates
it, ennobles it, and makes it capable of greater things than it could in it
self do.

20. And this sanctity sanctifies even that Created Grace which is in himself.
O Sanctity of JESUS! O new Sanctity! O admirable Sanctity! O singular
Sanctity! O Sanctity, source of all Sanctity! O Sanctity, Sanctifying and
Deifying that very Grace, which Sanctify's all things! O the Greatness of
JESUS, and of Jesus's Humanity! For as all is God in God, all is holy, all is
great in Jesus, and his Humanity remaining human, is made divin, in as much as
it is elevated into the Throne of the Divinity it self, by the Personal union:
Union so high, and so singularly particular, that it is unknown, even in its
possible Being to all light and intelligence of created nature.

21. An humbling, yiedling, submitting, and dedicating of our whole selv's to
the Deifi'd Humanity of Jesus in the way of perpetual Bondage.
WHat shall I do in the survey of these things so high and so great? I must
Abysm my self in this Ocean: I must lose my self in these Greatnesses: I will
make a Collection of them all, and will Reverence all the Excellencies revealed
and not revealed, which follow and accompany an Estate so sublim and elevated,
as that of the Personal union of this created nature to the uncreated Word: I
raise up my self and unite my self to this nature, and by it to the Eternal
Word, and by the Word to the Father who begot it, and bequeathed it to us. I
yield up my self to the Soveraigntie (which is supreme and not communicable to
the order of creatures) which this nature possesses by its estate of divin
filiation. I submit my self to the power which this admirable Estate gives it
over all created things. I dedicate my self, and consecrate all to this Deifi'd
Humanity. I deliver my self up to his power, and leave my self to his conduct
and love, And my will is that it have a special sway over my Soul, and my
estate, over my life and my actions, as over a thing belonging to himself by a
new peculiar and particular right in virtue of this present resolution, which I
here offer unto him, to depend upon his greatnesses; and namely upon the estate
of filiation and sovereignty, to which it is elevated.

Behold, This is that I can do, (O Jesu my Lord!) yet this suffices neither my
duty, nor my desire; my power is too small to fill the capacity of my Soul,
which has its aspect on you, and its reference to you, and will be replenished
and actuated with your Puissance, and not with its own; for you can with me,
that which I cannnot with my self.

O sacred and Deifi'd Soul of Jesus! Act you in my Soul, and daign to take upon
your self that power over me. which I cannot give you, and constitute me your
Slave in that manner which I know not, and which your self well knows: Make me
to be yours, and to serve you, not only with my actions, but even with the
estate and condition of my being, and of my interior and exterior life. And I
humbly entreat you to esteem and treat me upon earth as your Bondslave, who
totally abandons himself to all your desires, who delivers up himself to all
your powers, and to all the effects of your Greatness and Sovereignty over
those things which belong unto you.

And you O Virgin, and Mother of Jesus! To you I supplicate, that you will
conceive and consider me henceforth, as your Sons bondslave, and under this
notion obtain for me a Share in his Eternal Mysteries and Mercyes.

THE SECOND APPENDIX MARIA, OR, The devotion called, The Bondage of the Blessed
Virgin Mary, with Elevations suitable thereunto.
1. The Author, and Origin, of the Bondage.
THis Devotion of the Bondage of the Blessed Virgin, so much practiced in these
our days, throughout all Spain (says Father Anthony Yepes): had its beginning
in Hungary about the year 1010. by the means of S. Gerard a glorious Monk and
Martyr of S. Bennets Order, the Apostle of that Country, and Bishop of
Chanadin, which is a City in the Confines of Moravia and Hungary. By whose
Counsel and advice, (says Baronius); the most holy King Stephen gave himself,
and his whole Kingdom by Vow and Oblation, to the sacred Virgin Mother: And the
Hungarian Church (says Bishop Cartuitius), did so highly honor this Blessed
Virgin; that they celebrated the feast of her glorious Assumption, (which in
their language they called by excellency Diem Dominae, the Ladies day) with an
equal Solemnity to that of Christmas and Easter; and styled themselves, The
Blessed Virgins Bondslaves.

2. An ancient and Authentic Example of the practice of this Bondage.
SOon after S. Gerard, lived our S. Peter Damian (the learned Cardinal and
Bishop of Ostia); who gives us at large, a rare example of his Bondage, in his
brother Marinus, (a devout servant of the Blessed Virgin): n these words.

Marinus (the brother of Peter Damian) whilst he yet flourished with strength
and health; uncloathing himself of his garments, and putting about his neck the
Belt wherewith he was girded; delivered up himself to the sacred Virgin before
her Altar, as a servil Bondslave, and treating himself as such a one whipped
himself in the same place before her, saying: O my glorious Lady, the Myrrhor
of virginal Purity, and perfect Pattern of all virtues! etc. Behold I now give
my self to you as a servant, submitting the neck of my prostrate heart, to the
Empire of your power. Bow me, mollify me, receive me; and let not your Piety
despise me a sinner, whose Immaculate Virginity brought forth the Author of all
Sanctity. By this small gift, I offer you the Tribut of my servitude and
Bondage; and henceforth, so long as I shall live, I promise to pay unto you
this yearly Revenue.

And so laying a certain sum of money, in Altaris crepidine, upon the corner of
the Altar; he departed with a firm confidence to find the mercy, which he had
faithfully sought, and humbly implored.

This holy Man continuing this Devotion during his lifetime, deserved to be
particularly visited and comforted by the Blessed Virgin, at the hour of his
death: To whom he spoke in this sort: Whence is it (O Sovereign Lady, Queen of
Heaven and Earth!) that you thus vouchsafe to give a visit to your unworthy
Bondslave? Bestow on me your Blessing, (O my Lady!) and permit me not to go
into darkness, whom you have been graciously pleased to visit with the light of
your glorious presence.

Then turning toward the bystanders: The Queen of the World was here (says
he) the Mother of the Eternal Monark was present: She has showed me the
gladness of her countenance, given me her holy blessing, and is hence returned
into heaven.

And soon after his departing Soul followed his sacred Mistress: leaving a most
lively and memorable example, to excite posterity to the like piety and
devotion.

3. Whereupon this Devotion of the Bondage is grounded.
THis Devotion of Bondage, is chiefly grounded upon that most heroique Act of
Humility, which the sacred Virgin produced at the time of our Saviors
Incarnation: when being declared Gods Mother by the Angelical Messenger, she
answered: Behold the Handmaid of our Lord: Luk 1. 38.

Whereby she depressing her self into the center of her own nothing, chose
undoubtedly the meanest degree of servitude and Bondage to the divin Majesty,
upon contemplation that his Infinite Greatness should so humble it self, as to
become Man in her womb for the worlds Redemption.

And surely if we will only put together the several sentences of sacred Writ
which expressly concern her; we shall find, that she made up the Chain of her
Bondage with the links of twelve most excellent virtues.

1. Virginal MODESTY, She was troubled at the Angels words. Luk 1.29. 2.
Mature PRUDENCE. She cast in her mind, what manner of Salutation this should
be? Luk 1.29. 3. BASHFUL TIMEROUSNES. Fear not MARY, for thou have found grace
with God. Luk 1.30. 4. Immaculate CHASTITY. How shall this be, seeing I know
not man? Luk 1.34. 5. Profound HUMILITY. Behold the Handmaid of our Lord. Luk
1.38. 6. Perfect OBEDIENCE. Be it don to me, according to thy word. Luk 1.38.
7. Firm FAITH. Blessed art thou who have believed. Luk 1.45. 8. Grateful
THANKSGIVING. My Soul does Magnify our Lord. Luk 1.46. 9. True POVERTY. She
wrapped the Infant in swaddling clothes and laid him in a manger. Luk 2.7. 10.
Invincible PATIENCE. Thy Father and I, grieving have sought thee. Luk 1.48. 11.
Charitable PIETY. Son, they have no Wine. John 2.3. 12. Perseverant CONSTANCY.
Near to the Cross of Jesus, stood his Mother. John 19.25.
In imitation therefore of these her holy virtues, and especially of that high
Act of Humility (as is aforesaid) by which she rendering her self Gods
Bondslave, was raised to be his Mother: (for no sooner had She finished that
humble speech, Behold the Handmaid of our Lord, be it unto me according to thy
saying, but the Word was made Flesh, and dwelt in her sacred bowels.)

As also, in consideration of the Sovereign Dominion, which God has given her
in Heaven over the Angels: ( The Queen stood at thy right hand. Psalm. 44.) on
Earth over men, ( Kings reign by me, etc. Prove. 18.) And thou alone have
overcome all heresies in the whole world, sings the Church); And over Hell, and
the Devil; ( She shall bruise thy head. Genesis 3.) And Lastly, in remembrance
that Christ Jesus our Redeemer, was himself subject and obedient unto her, (
Luc. 3.51.

In Imitation, Consideration, and Memory of these things (I say) this holy
manner of honoring the most sacred Virgin, was (as you have briefly heard)
invented above six hundred years since, (by divin inspiration as we may piously
believe) and is much practiced amongst the devouter sort of Christians
throughout the world, even at this day.

4. The Rules of this Devotion of the Bondage.
1. IN sign of the Invisible and spiritual Chain, which links our sincere
affection to the sacred Virgin, and moves us to become her servants and
Bondslaves, we must wear some little material Chain or manacle of Iron, about
our middle, neck, or arms.

2. We are to have the Chain, we intend to wear, blessed by some Priest, in
this following manner.

The Blessing of the Chains.
Verse. ADjutorium nostrum in nomine Domini.

Resp. Qui fecit coelum and terram.

Verse. Sit Nomen Domini Benedictum.

Resp. Ex hoc, nunc, and usque in saeculum.

Verse. Domine exaudi orationem meam^.

Resp. Et clamor meus ad te veniat.

Verse. Dominus vobis^um.

Resp. Et cum Spiritu tuo.

OREMUS.
OMnipotens sempiterne Deus, qui vincula peccatorum nostrorum disrumpis, ut
liberate Filiorum gaudere valeamus; and qui ad vincula salutis, hominem
advocas, dicens: Injice pedem tuum in compedes illius, and ne acedier is
vinculis ejus; Haec vincula quae in signum perpetuae servitutis, ad honorem
Beatae Virginis, servi ejus defer intendunt, Benedicere, and Sanctificare
digneris: Et concede eis, sic devote illa gerere, ut vivendo, candore
castitatis illustrentur, ac moriendo, a vinculis peccatorum absoluti,
intercessione ejusdem sanctissimae Matris Mariae tecum and cum illa in regno
gloriae congaudere valiant sine fine. Qui vivis and regnas in saecula
saeculorum. Amen.

Then he sprinkles the chains with holy water saying,

In nomine Patris, and Filii, and Spiritus Sancti, Amen.

3. We may do well to make choice of some day, dedicated to the Virgins honor,
for the entering into this Bondage, and putting on of this Chain to make our
Profession more memorable and solemn.

Note, that the most proper and principal Feasts of this Bondage, are the
Annunciation, and the Assumption: The first, being the Origin thereof grounded
upon those words of the sacred Virgin to the Angel; Behold the Handmaid of our
Lord: And the second, being her taking possession of that sovereign Dominion,
next after God, whereupon the whole duty of this devout servitude depends. In
these days therefore, we are more particularly and zealously to offer up our
devotions in thanksgiving to the Divin Maj^stie, for the supreme excellencies
bestowed upon the glorious Virgin; and to renew the profession of our Bondage,
by the recital of the Prayer and Oblation made at our first entrance into it;
as it shall be hereafter set down.

4. We should also prepare our selv's before hand, by some particular Devotion;
as Fasting, Mortification, Meditation, Almsdeeds, Confession; Communion; to
render the Profession of our Bondage more efficacious and meritorious.

5. Then at the time appointed; we are to kneel down reverently before some
Altar or Image of our Blessed Lady, and make an Oblation of our selv's unto
her, in mannner following.

The Prayer and Oblation of our selv's in Bondage to the Blessed Virgin.
O Blessed Mary, Mother of God, Queen of Heaven, and Empress of the whole
universe! Behold I N. N. a most unworthy wretch, humbly prostrate before the
Throne of your Mercy and Goodness, heartily Congratulating your glory and
greatness, and faithfully acknowledging your sovereign Power, and Dominion
(next after God) over my self and all Creatures; Do here make a voluntary,
absolute, and irrevocable Oblation, Donation, and consecration of my self unto
your Majesty; desiring, intending, and resolving to be hereafter not only your
loyal subject and servant, but even your real vassal and Bondslave. In
confirmation whereof, I will continually wear this material Chain about my
Body, both as a Badge of my now professed Bondage, and also as a token of my
perpetual affection toward you.

Vouchsafe therefore, O Sovereign Queen! to Receive, Admit, and own me
henceforth, as a thing peculiarly yours; and as such a one, to defend and
protect me, during this life, from the snares of sin; to dissipate and break
asunder, at the hour of my death, the shackles of Satan; and to draw my
departing soul, by this happy Chain, to your Sons heavenly Kingdom; there to
praise, admire, and enjoy, both him and you for all Eternity. Amen.

6. After the recital of this oblation of your self in Bondage to the Blessed
Virgin; put the chain about some part of your Body, and endeavor
thenceforward, to walk worthy so noble a Profession.

5. The Practices and Exercises of this Devotion of the Bondage.
1. The first Exercise may consist of jaculatory Prayers, frequently darting
out these or the like affections.

O my blessed Lady! I am your Servant, and the Bond-slave of your greatness.

Or, O my Lord Jesu! I am yours, and your Mothers Servant and Bond-slave.

Or, Holy Mary, Mother of God! pray for us sinners (and your bondslaves) now,
and in the hour of our Death.

Or when you hear the clock strike, salute the blessed Virgin with an Ave
Marie, to which all Christians are invited by Pope Leo the tenth, and Paul the
fifth, who gave large Indulgences thereunto.

Or, say then, blessed be the hour and day in which our Lord Jesus Christ was
born of the Virgin Mary.

Or, Eternity is at hand.

Or, Jesus, Maria, Joseph.

Or, let the Souls of the faithful departed, rest in Peace.

2 The second Exercise may be a short pair of Bedes, consisting of three
Paters, in honor of the holy Trinity and twelve Ave's, in honor of the twelve
Privileges of the sacred Virgin, to be said in this manner.

1. Pater Noster, etc.
Thanking the eternal Father for having made choice of so worthy a daughter.

1. Ave Marie, etc. considering her eternal Predestination. 2. Ave, her
immaculate Conception. 3. Ave, her most pure Virginity. 4. Ave, her most
admirable Maternity.
2. Pater Noster, etc.
Thanking the eternal Son, for having made choice of so worthy a Mother.

1. Ave, considering her most happy Childbirth. 2. Ave, her sovereign
Dominion, not only over the World, but over the Creator of the World: [ He was
subject to them, Luke 2.] 3. Ave, her excellent Purity of Soul and Body. 4.
Ave, her continual and sublim Contemplation.
3. Pater Noster, etc.
Thanking the Holy Ghost, for having made choice of so worthy a Spouse.

1. Ave, considering her sweet departure out of this life. 2. Ave, her
miraculous Resurrection. 3. Ave, her glorious Assumption. 4. Ave, her eternal
Glorification and Coronation.
3. The third Exercise may be a Crown consisting of five precious Pearls, in
honor of the blessed Virgins five principal Virtues, to be offered up to her
in the manner following.

1. The Jasper of Faith: Produce Acts of Faith, with most ardent affection*
saying,

O Sovereign Queen, I firmly believe that you were an entire Virgin, both
before and after your happy Childbirth: That you are the true Mother of Gods
Son; That your life was without the least Sin: That you were a Martyr at the
foot of the Cross: That you are exalted above all pure Creatures in the
Celestial glory: That you are our Advocate, interceding for us wretched sinners
etc. Add such other points of Faith, as your devotion, shall suggest, and then
conclude thus.

Receive [most sacred Lady] this Protestation of my Faith, as a Jasperstone
belonging to your Crown, and obtain for me a lively, perfect, and perseverant
Faith unto the end: Amen. And recite one Ave Mary to this intention.

2. The Emerald of Hope. Produce Acts of this Virtue, in honor of the blessed
Virgin* saying.

O Sovereign Queen! I contemplate you as the hope of the World; long expected
by the Fathers in Limbo; earnestly looked upon by the Souls suffering in
Purgatory; humbly besought by the Children of the Church Militant, who cry out
incessantly: Hail to Queen that reigns above the Sky,
Hail to the Mother of true Clemency;
Hail Life, hail Sweetness, and our Hope to you,
We that are Eves exiled Children sue;
In cry's and groans, which from this vale of tears,
Are fanned with sighs, up to your sacred Ears.
O then Chaste Advocate! on us reflect,
From Heavens bright Mansion, your benign aspect;
And make us [after this our Exile] come,
To JESUS the blessed Offspring of your Womb;
Sweet Virgin, and Gods Mother! pray that we,
Of Christ's rich promises may worthy be.
In this number I rank my self, and place in you (O holy Virgin!) next after
God, my hope and confidence, trusting that you will be to me a Fountain of
Grace, a Tower of Defense, a City of Refuge, and a Gate of Heaven to give me
entrance into Paradise. Receive, (most sacred Lady!) this Emerald, which I
present unto you for your Crown, and strengthen my hope unto the end; Ave
Maria, Gratia Plena: etc. 3. The Rubie of Charity; Produce Acts proper to this
Virtue, saying.

O Sovereign Queen! I consider you as brimfull of perfect Love and Charity, and
inviting the whole World to participate with you of its sweet fruits and
effects: saying, come to me, all you who desire me, and be replenished with my
generations; Eccles. 24. Behold, I come to you with an ardent and enflamed
affection, beseeching you to enrich me with the treasure of true Charity
toward God and my Neighbor. Receive (most sacred Lady!) this Rubie, which I
offer unto you for your Crown, and confirm my love and charity to the end,
Amen; Ave Maria, etc. 4. The Diamond of Fortitude: Produce the Acts belonging
to this virtue, saying.

O Sovereign Queen! I behold you as a valiant Champion: terrible [to the Troops
of Satan] like a well ordered Army. Encourage me, I beseech you, to fight under
your banner; support my weakness with your strong hand, and help me to overcome
all worldly, fleshly, and diabolical temptations, etc. Receive [most sacred
Lady!] this Diamond, which I present unto you for your Crown, and obtain for me
an invincible Fortitude to the end, Amen; Ave Maria. etc. 5. The Pearl of
Chastity; Produce Acts appertaining to this virtue, saying.

O Sovereign Queen! I admire you as the Mother of Purity, the Mirror of
Chastity, the First who vowed Virginity: obtain for me I beseech you, that all
my thoughts, words, and actions, may savor of Purity, be seasoned with
modesty, and be accompanied with Chastity, etc. Receive [most sacred Lady!]
this Pearl, which I present unto you to illustrate your Crown, and powerfully
protect me against all carnalitie, and impurity to the end, Amen. Ave Maria
etc. 4. The fourth Exercise, may be to practice some particular devotion upon
such day's as are dedicated to the blessed Virgins memory and honor, which are
all the Saturday's besides the rest of her annual Festivities; These devotions
may be to visit her Altar, to recite her Litanies, to make use of some of these
[or the like] prescribed forms, etc.

5. The fifth Exercise, may be the paying of some Annual Tribute [as St. Peter
Damian terms it] to the blessed Virgin, [how little soever it be] in token of
the homage and servitude due to her Sovereign Empire: This Tribute may be
tendered at some Altar, dedicated to her honor, together with the recital of
this Prayer.

Receive [O Sovereign Empress!] this small Tribute, which I here most humbly
present to your sacred Majesty, in acknowledgment of that supreme Dominion, you
have [next after God] over my heart: and to testify the desire I have to live
and dye your Bond-slave; Permit not [O sacred Virgin!] that I ever pay unto
Satan, the World, or my sensuality, any Tribute of Sin: and procure for me a
happy passage from this my earthly Pilgrimage, to the Heavenly Paradise: there
to offer up to your Son and You, an Eternal Tribute of praise and benediction:
Amen. 6. The sixth Exercise, may be that of Penance and Mortification, by
discreetly taking a Discipline, or wearing some harsh thing upon the bare skin,
etc at certain times of the year, according to each ones strength of body, and
the counsel of his Ghostly Father, reciting upon such day's seven times the
Salve Regina, in memory of the blessed Virgins seven sorrows: and adding this
Prayer taken out of St. Peter Damian.

O my most glorious Lady! the Mirror of purity, and pattern of all virtue! I
wretched Sinner, do most humbly acknowledge that I have higly offended your Son
and You, by the foolish and besotted liberty of my body and soul: and therefore
having now no other Refuge left me, I here prostrate my heart before you; [O my
compassionate Mother!] bequeathing my self unto you in quality of a Bond-slave,
and submitting my whole self to your holy Empire, and command. Curb, I beseech
you, this rebellious body of mine, receive this contumacious and stubborn
heart, and let not your Mercy reject me a sinner, since your Immaculate
Virginity brought forth the Author of all Piety. 7. The seventh Exercise, may
be these sublim Elevations following, which may be divided into several parts,
and recited according to each ones opportunity and devotion.

ELEVATIONS TO GOD, AND ADORATIONS To the thrice holy Trinity.
In honor of the share he was pleased to give unto the Virgin Mary, in the
Mystery of the Incarnation, effecting it in her, and by her, and to honor the
most holy Virgin in that Dignity of being Gods Mother;
And to offer our selves to her in the state of Dependencie and servitude,
which is due unto her upon this title; and to correspond by our inward devotion
to the special Power, which she has over us, by consequence of this her divin
and admirable Maternitie.

1. Adoration of the Sacred Trinity.
SAcred Trinity, Adorable in your self, and in your works! I praise, Admire,
and Adore you in the Unity of your Essence; in the Equality of your Persons; in
the Profundity of your wisdom, in the Extent of your Providence, and in that
your Work of Works, which makes God, Man; and a Virgin, Gods Mother.

2. The Greatness of the Mystery of the Incarnation.
WORK, Ineffable, Admirable, Incomprehensible: Work, only worthy the power and
greatness of the Worker: Work, The chief of your works, the Original of your
Mysteries, the Sampler of your Greatnesses, and the Sun of your Mervails: Work,
which incloseth your Essence, is terminated by one of your Persons, and
produces the most Eminent dignity, which was ever brought forth into a Being,
out of the Divinity.

3. Which is so Eminent a Work.
AND this Work so great, so rare, so Eminent, was don in a Moment, yet not for
a Moment, but for an Eternity. This Work, is done in time; yet not for a time,
but for an ever and ever. This Work, is don in Nazareth; yet not for Nazareth,
but for the whole universe. This Work is don on Earth, not in Heaven; but it is
done both for Earth and for Heaven. This Work, is don amongst men; but it is
done for Angels, for Men, and for the God of Gods; For it gives a Mother to
God; a King to Angels; and to Men a Savior.

4. And the chief work ad extra of the Divinity.
IT IS the Head-work of your hands, O Divin, Admirable, and Adorable Trinity!
which imitates and expresses the Life, the Communication, the Society, which we
Adore in the divin Persons: For you who Work all things for your self; and in
contemplating your self, would in this Work imprint an Idea of your self; would
in the honor of your own life and communication (which is divin and eternal)
make a life and communication divin and temporal; would enter into society and
communication with your creatures, to Imitate and honor the communication and
Society, which is in your persons: would in a fair Resemblance seem to match
the force of your inward love and internal communication in this outward
effusion of love, and external communication out of your own Essence: And
making choice of your lowest creature, would enter into league, into
communication, into unity with men, by singularly imparting your self, and
peculiarly associating your self to one human nature, and to one human Person:
To one human nature, by the Incarnation of one of your Persons: To one human
Person, by the Operation of your three Persons, who in the greatest of their
Works would in a manner enter Society with the Virgin.

5. The mystery of the Incarnation is divided between the sacred Trinity and
the Virgin.
O Infinite condescendency! The Three divin Persons, living and acting in
perfect unity, eternally happy, and completely content in their own mutual
Society, will extend this Society to a new person; and being to operate jointly
the Head-work of their Power and Bounty, will associate the Virgin to
themselv's in this their greatest operation; in that (for the full
accomplishment of their own glory, love, and greatness, being to conjoyn the
Created Being, with the Being Increated, in one of their Persons, and to give
it a new nature) they would share the Glory of this great work between the
Virgin and themselves; and making choice of her amongst all Creatures, they
made her worthy and capable to give (together with themselv's) this new Nature;
and to be Mother of the word Incarnate: thus elevating a human Person to such a
pitch of Power, and to so high a Prerogative, and conferring on it, so great a
part, in so great a Mystery.

Blessed be you, O sacred Trinity! in this your divin will, and holy Council,
which makes the Son of God, Man's Son; and which makes a Virgin, Gods Mother.
Highest Council, therefore worthy the most high! Profoundest Council, therefore
worthy the Fathers Majesty, the Sons Wisdom, and the Holy Ghosts love and
affection.

6. The Person of the Virgin (next the divin Persons) is the most worthy, and
greater than all human and Angelical Persons together.
IN contemplation of this Council and this work; Permit me Lord! to address
unto you my devout Vows and Elevations concerning this quality which you
establish in Heaven, and on Earth by the sacred Mystery of your Incarnation,
Quality of Mother to the most high; And give me leave to trace your divin and
admirable ways in the managing of this work with my humble thoughts and
devotions.

You herein, (O Great Creator!) do associate the sacred Virgin unto your own
self: you Elevate her up to work with your self, and even to work the work of
your works: And as you associate a Human nature to one of your Divin Persons,
you will also associate a Human Person to one of your Divin works.

Contemplating therefore, this work (O sacred Trinity!) and there finding this
Virgin in Society with your self, I look on her, love her, and reverence her,
as a Person the most high, the most holy, and the most worthy of your love and
greatness, that ever shall have a Being: yea, I contemplate and respect her, as
the only She, who surpasses in Height, in Holiness, in Dignity, even all Human
and Angelical Spirits together and unitedly considered.

7. The Virgin constitutes an Order, Empire, and Universe apart.
MOreover, you (O sacred Trinity!) made her singly for your self, you have made
her, as a World, and a Paradise apart: World of Greatnesses, and Paradise of
delights for the New-Man, who was to come into the world; you have made her, as
a new Heaven, and a new Earth: Earth, which only bears the Man-God: And Heaven,
which contains none but himself alone; which turns not but about him alone;
which moves not but for him alone. You have made her in the Universe, as
another Universe; And in your Empire, as another Empire: For the sacred Virgin,
is her self a Universe, which has its different center and motions. The sacred
Virgin, is her self an Empire, which has its distinct Laws and Estate: The
sacred Virgin amongst all the subjects of Gods Divin Majesty, is so great, so
particular, so eminent a subject, that it alone maks a new Order amongst the
orders of his power and wisdom. Order, surpassang all the Orders of Grace and
of Glory: Order, altogether singular, making, and carrying a new Empire over
Gods works: Order, which is conjoined to the order and state of Hypostaticall
union: Order, which has a direct Reference to the divin Persons: For as the
Angels are disposed into Hierarchies properly relating to the Divin Essence,
according to its distinct perfections and attributes of love, of Power, of
light, etc. So also the sacred Virgin in her Order, and in her Hierarchy
(which she solely fills with her Greatness) beholds and honors the state and
the proprieties of the Divin Persons.

Thus the God of Heaven, who has unity of Essence, and plurality of Persons,
has divided the Celestial Court into two different Quires: In one of which
all the Angels (which in number are almost Infinite, and which are ranged in
their several Orders and Hierarchies) behold according to their Estate the
distinct Perfections of the Divin Essence: In the other, the Virgin alone in
her Order, (by an Excellency peculiar to her self alone) beholds according to
her new Estate the divin Persons, as depending on their Personal Proprieties:
And this sole Quire of the sacred Virgin, renders more homage, both to the
divin Essence, and to the divin Persons, than the Nine Quires of all the
Angels together.

8. The Virgin is a singular work of Gods Power; the holiest that ever shall be
created. The divin Paternity is the Samplar of this divin Maternity. The
Eternal Father and the Son are tied by the Person of the Holy Ghost, and the
Eternal Father and the Virgin are tied by the Person of the Son.
O God, O All-powerfull Father! who can express, how this Virgin is to you
precious and acceptable? You frame her and sanctify her to be the Mother of
your only Son, whom you will Incarnate in the world; and you form her in the
orders of Nature, of Grace, and of Glory, as a singular work of your Power and
Bounty, and the head-work of your hands: You fashion her, as the greatest, the
worthiest, the eminentest subject of your Domination and sovereignty in the
whole round and Circumference of all your Creatures. For in the Order and
Existency of all created Entities, God commands not, nor ever will command any
thing greater, than this greatest Virgin; God has not yet made, nor will
hereafter make, any thing more Holy, than this Holiest Virgin. O how highly is
she then to be Reverenced in this Eminency and singularity of Grace, of
Sanctity, of Power!

Yet (O Eternal Father! I again Reverence her in the Origin of this Grace,
which is the design you have to make her a Mother to him, to whom your self is
a Father.

For after you had conducted her to the accomplished point of a singular Grace;
you being (at your chosen time) to enter a near Alliance with her, separate her
from all things created; you seat her close to your Divinity; and you unite
your self to her, as to a Person, whom you will have the most intimately, and
nearly conjoined to your own peculiar Person, of all that ever shall have a
Being: And she is thus joined to you to cooperate with you in this Great work;
to render you the fruit of so close an alliance; to give you a son born of her
substance, and having your Essence; and to produce by you, and with you, Him,
who being your only Son, is also her Son by a new Nativity.

O Ineffable Greatness! O Admirable sublimity! The Eternal Father, who
contemplating his own Essence, produces his Son; contemplating his own
Paternity, Source of all Paternity, yea source even of the Divinity, honors
it, Imitates it, and expresses it in the holy Virgin; and forms and produces
in her this admirable Estate of Divin Maternity, which Adores the Father in his
Personal Propriety; and which gives him to the Father, and to the world, who
is the life of the Father, and the health of the world.

It Is in this happy, great, and gloria our Estate, O sacred Virgin! that the
Eternal Father appropriates you to himself, and himself to you; Renders
himself all yours, and renders you all his own; unites himself to you; and you
to himself: And communicating to you his Spirit, and his love, makes you
fruitful with a divin fertility; and being resolved to have of you, One
self-same Son with you, makes you by this his Alliance to be Productrice to the
world and to himself of Him, who by this Birth, according to the Angels saying
is his Son, and your Son together. Your Son, as issued from your own proper
substance: His Son, as emanated from his own proper virtue, and Power.

O Father! O Son! O Mother! How great and glorious things ought to be spoken
and thought of you? The two Divin and Eternal Persons, the Father and Son are
divinly linked together, and for their link in their Eternity, they have a
divin Person, to wit, the Holy Ghost equally proceeding from them both; in
whose unity they are both Eternally joined together; And these two sacred
Persons, the Father, who is in Heaven, and the Mother, who is upon Earth, are
also holily linked together, and have in like sort for the Tie of their sacred
union a divin Person; to wit, One self-same only Son; who proceeds from them
both, and who between them both, is this indissoluble band, whereby they are
for an Eternity conjoined together.

O union! which has Jesus for its Tie: Jesus, I say, who is the Center if the
Created and Increated Being: Jesus, in whom is holily and happily terminated
the union of two natures; the one human, the other divin, which establishes
the mystery of the Incarnation; and the uniting of two Persons, the one
likewise divin, the other human, which also establishes the Divin Maternity,
wherein the sacred Virgin is united to the Father, by the production of Jesus;
wherein she is linked to him with so near a union, so powerful a union, and so
fertile a union, that it has not its like in the large extent of all created
things.

O let us be the Fathers! let us be the Sons! let us be the Mothers! And let us
honor the Father, and the Son in this Mother, who is so nearly joined unto
them both, and who in her Estate has so close an alliance with the Father,
that she conceives his Son, and brings forth so worthy a fruit, so powerful an
effect, so lively an Image of the Divine Paternity.

9. The Eternal Word, who is in Society with the Father and Holy Ghost before
all time, does in time enter League and Society with the Virgin.
AND you, O Eternal Word! who being her God; will also become her Son! What
shall I say, what shall I do in honor of the Son, and of the Mother? You are
in unity and in Society with the Father, who produces you, and with the Holy
Ghost, whom you produce, and yet you will besides these two divin and
co-eternall Persons enter into so inward and honorable a band, union, and
Society with a third Person, with a human Person, with a temporal Person: you
will be the Virgins Son, as you are the Son of God; and you will have her, for
Mother, as you have God for Father: And by your Power and Goodness you make her
the worthy Mother of God, by your humility, you render Obedience to her, and
become subject to her, during your life upon Earth; and trowning your own
handy-works by your love and wisdom, you in Heaven confer upon her such glory
as corresponds to this her sacred dignity and authority.

Be you eternally blessed and praised O great God; I will for ever Reverence,
both the Son and the Mother: I will Reverence the Mother, by reason of the Son,
and the Son in the Mother; I will Reverence all that which the Virgin is to her
Son, and to her God, and all that which her Son God is to her. And I will
honor all the mutual connexions which are unknown, and ineffable between the
Son of God and the sacred Virgin, as secrets of which the Earth must remain
ignorant, and which are reserved to the glory, to the love, and to the light of
Heaven.

10. Oblation and Donation to the Son, and to the Mother in quality of
Bond-slave.
IN the sight, and at the thought of these so great, so high, so holy things: I
offer up and submit my self; I vow and dedicate my self to Christ Jesus, my
Lord and my Savior in the state of perpetual Servitude; and also to his holy
Mother the sacred Virgin Mary.

To the Eternal honor both of Mother and of Son, I will be henceforth in the
quality and condition of slavery, in regard of her who is in the state and
quality of the Mother of my God; thereby to honor more humbly, and more holily
this her so high and so divin qual^ty and condition; And I bequeath my self to
her as a perpetual Bond-slave, in the honor of that Donation, which the
^ernall word made to her of himself in quality of a Son, by the mystery of the
Incarnation, which he accomplished in her, and by her.

11. Enlargment and Explication of this Donation: with the particulars thereof.
Renounce all my own power and liberty of disposing of my self and my actions;
yiedling up this power to the sacred Virgin, and dismissing my self entirely
into her hands, in homage to her greatness, in honor of that perfect demission
which she made of her self, to her Son Jesus.

I give to her that power, which God gives me over my self, to be hers, and no
longer my own; to be in her power and tuition, and no more in my own; In honor
of the power, which Gods Son gave her over himself, and of the humble
dependency and subjection he was pleased to yield unto her, delivering up
himself to her custody, direction, and tutelage, during the whole time of this
Infancy and childhood; I bequeath to her my Being and my Living, during the
whole remainder of my Pilgrimage upon Earth, with all the conditions,
circumstances, and appurtenances which accompany the same: I yield up all to
her greatness, [as much as I can] and dedicate all to her honor and glory, for
the fulfilling of all her wills and powers over me; In this ardour of spirit,
and to this intention, I humbly address my self to you, O sacred Virgin! and I
make here unto you, an entire, absolute, and irrevocable Oblation of all that I
am [by Gods mercy] in the Being, and in the order of Nature, and Grace, of all
that thereon depends, and of all the actions I shall ever perform; For my will
is, that whatsoever is mine, be absolutely yours, and that the power and the
grace which is bestowed on me, be employed in referring my self wholly, with all
that is in me to your honor.

And I here make choice of you, O holy Virgin! and I will henceforth look upon
you as the only object whereunto [next after your Son, and under your Son] I
shall make the reference of my soul and of my life, both interior and
exterior, and generally of all that any way belongs unto me.

12. This Oblation tends to the honor of the Virgins Elevation, and Depression
in the Mystery of the Incarnation.
WHilst I am in these contemplations of you O holy Virgin! I find that even in
the day of your Greatness, you humble your self even to the very center of
nothing, rendering your self then, our lords servant when you are declared his
Mother; Wherefore, I honor in you these two motions, and these two different
qualities: I honor this Humiliation, and this Exaltation both together; I
honor both your Servitude, and also your Mother-hood: and I reverence you as
pronouncing these sacred words: Behold the handma^d of our lord: and as
receiving the effect of his divin will, by yielding your self his Mother, at
the same instant in which you render and profess your self to be his Servant:
and in honor of these two different estates, and of this admirable
disposition, which thus depresseth and exalts you; I give up my self to be
for ever your Bond-slave; I put my life and my soul in an estate of Relation of
Dependancy, and of Servitude in respect of you: My will is, that my life of
Nature, and of Grace, and all my actions be yours in this quality: as things
totally appertaining to you, by reason of this my state and condition of
Servitude toward you.

I offer unto you my whole life, and all my actions in the honor of your life,
and of your actions toward your only Son, and in honor of your Sons actions
toward you. And could I come to the knowledge of an Estate more humbling, more
subjecting, and more corresponding to the excesses of your Greatness, I would
most willingly embrace it: thereby to render you more homage and honor; and my
will is, that in virtue of this my present Intention, each moment of my life,
and each one of my actions, belongs as much to you, as if I made to you a
particular tender thereof.

13. In the Virgin all is Great, and particularly her Maternity, her
Soveraignity, her Sanctity.
I Offer up also unto you [O Virgin and Mother of God!] all that I am, all that
I have, all that I can, to render homage to all that you are: For in you all is
great, all is holy, all is worthy of singular Veneration: and you are an
abysmus of greatnesses, and a world of wonders, excellencies, and rarities,
which ravish Heaven with their beauty, and which the Earth neither knows nor
can conceive.

In expectation of having these things manifested hereafter unto me; I will
steadfastly behold, and singularly reverence your sacred Maternity, your
glorious Sovereignty; your great Sanctity.

Your Maternity, for it unites you to God by a conjunction appertaining to your
self alone, and gives you so eminent a degree of affinity with him, as no one
durst have imagined.

Your Sovereignty, for this admirable quality of being Gods Mother, gives you
not only an Eminency above all Creatures, but also a Power and Dominion over
them all as Mother of their Creator. And are there any Spirits so little versed
in the light of our christian mysteries and so insensible of your greatness. (O
sacred Virg n!) as to find fault with this your Domination, and contradict this
sort of servitude, which beholds and honors it in you? let them get forth of
their darkness, and raise up themselv's above the shallow reach of their sense:
let them contemplate God and his Creatures, and by the light of the Creator
they shall quickly discern that all Sanctity has a certain degree of
Greatness, of Dignity, and of Domination annexed unto it; They shall perceive,
that the Creatures as Creatures, are all born in servitude; the slavery is (as
it were) their natural estate and condition; and that they are (at least) far
nearer unto bondage in their lowness, than God (in the Eminency of his Being)
was to the Maternity which he gave unto you, and whereby he was pleased (as it
were) to enclose and bound himself: and yet he passes over this Infinite (yea
Infinite times Infinite) distance which is between the Created Being, and the
Being Increated, making himself a Son to one of his own Creatures,
acknowledging and respecting you as his Mother, and giving you a sweet,
honorable, and Motherly power over himself.

And can it then be conceived unjust, or unbeseeming, that to honor this
low-stooping of God unto his Creature; and this high-raysing of the Creature
unto God; every Creature should bear impressed on it self, the mark and badg of
its servitude toward this supreme Dignity? Dignity. which God in his wisdom
equally adornes, and accompanies with Power, and with Sanctity; with Power,
toward the Creatures; with Sanctity, toward God: for if it be good, that God
in respect of us has a Mother; It is surely just that in respect of himself,
he should establish her in an estate of high Power, and admirable Sanctity: and
that he should render due honor to himself in this dignity, which so divinly
incloses him, and so highly concerns him.

Your sanctity also (O Virgin Mother!) is incomparable; for the Holy of Holies,
who vouchsafes to make you his Mother, forms also for you, a New Holiness (far
surpassing all other degrees and orders of Holiness, which he has already, or
ever will produce) to make you thereby worthy of so high a preferment, and of so
holy an office and employment: and to settle you in a glorious state,
answearable to so great a quality.

In the honor therefore of your Sanctity, of your Maternity, of your
Sovereignty, I dedicate and consecrate my self totally to you, O Virgin of
Virgins! Saint of Saints! Daughter and Spouse of God the Father; Mother and
Servant of God the Son; Temple and Sanctuary of the Holy Ghost! My will and
desire is, that you have a special power over my soul, over my estate, over my
life, and over my actions, as over things belonging unto your self, both by the
title of your own Greatness, and also by this new and particular right, to wit;
in virtue of this choice which I now make to depend hereafter entirely upon your
Sanctity, upon your Maternity, upon your Sovereignty, by reason of this my
servitude, which I now and for ever present unto you.

14. It is a small matter that we make our selv's the Virgins Bond-staves, and
therefore we wish her to employ her power over us, and that she would vouchsafe
to make us truly so.
BUt yet all this neither suffices your Greatness and Dignity, nor satisfies
my affections and desires; and therefore I make it my humble Petition to you (
O sacred Virgin, and Sovereign Lady of all hearts and souls, which are
consecrated to Jesus!) that you will of your self vouchsafe to take upon you
that power over me, which I cannot give you; and that you will render me your
own Bond-slave in the way your self best knows and approv's, and which I know
not.

Enclose me, I beseech you, within your power and your privileges, and make me
your own in a particular manner, and grant that I may serve you, not only by my
actions, but even by the state and condition of my very Being, and of my whole
Life both interior and exterior.

And generally, I beseech you to take me, and treat me in this World as your
slave, who abandons himself to all your wills, and delivers up himself to all
your powers, and to all the effects of your Greatness and Soveraigntie.

And I beseech you also (O Jesus, my Lord and my God!) to consider me from
henceforth, as the Bond-slave of your blessed Mother, in the honor of her
being your Mother; and of your being her Son; and likewise in the honor of
this, that she is the only one amongst all Creatures, who has this admirable
estate, and this singular relation to you: and I humbly beg of you, that in
this quality you will vouchsafe me a share in your eternal way's and mercyes.

AMEN.

A concluding Prayer to the sacred Virgin Mother upon the same subject.
O Holy Virgin, Mother of God! Queen of Men and Angels! Mervail of Heaven and
Earth! I reverence you in all ^he ways that I can according to God, that I
should according to your own Greatness, and according as your divin Son Christ
Jesus our Lord would have you reverenced upon Earth and in Heaven.

I make to you an Oblation of my soul and my life, and will belong to you for
evermore; and I will render you some particular Homage and Dependencie in all
future time and Eternity.

O Mother of grace and mercy! I make choice of you for the Mother of my soul,
in honor of that choice which God himself made of you for the Mother of his
Son.

O Queen of Men and Angels, I accept and acknowledge you for my Sovereign
Mother, in honor of that Dependency, which my Savior and my God had on you as
upon his Mother; And in this Quality, I bequeath unto you all power over my
soul, and over my life, as much as (according to God) I can bequeath it.

O sacred Virgin Mother! look upon me as upon your own thing, and in your
goodness use me as the Subject of your power, and as the Object of your pity.

O Source of Life! Fountain of Grace! Refuge of Sinners! I have recourse unto
you, hoping thereby to be freed from sin, furnished with Grace, and preserved
from eternal Death.

O take me into your tuition; let me have a part in your privileges, and
obtain for me (by your greatnesses, and by this right of my appertaining to
you) that which I deserve not to obtain, by reason of my offenses: and let the
last hour of my Life; ( that hour which is to decide my Eternity) be in your
hands, in honor of that happy Moment of the Incarnation, wherein God became
Man, and you were made Gods Mother

O Virgin, and O Mother both together! O sacred Temple of the sovereign Deity!
O Mervail of Heaven and of Earth! O glorious Mother of my God! I am yours by
the general Title of your greatness; but I will be also yours by the
particular Title of my own choice, and by this act of my own Free Will.
Wherefore I give my self wholly to you, and to your only Son Christ Jesus my
Lord and Savior; and I resolve to let pass no day without rendering to him, and
to you some particular homage, and some special testification of this my
dependency and servitude, in which my desire is to die and live for Evermore.

THE THIRD APPENDIX JOSEPH; OR, Devotions to S. Joseph, the Glorious Husband of
the Virgin Mary, and reputed Father of Christ Jesus.
With Elevations unto him.
THE many Excellencies, Privileges, and Prerogatives of Saint Joseph, are
largely deduced by several Learned Writers: Out of Whom, these few following
are selected, whereupon to ground our Devotion to this great Saint; and to lay a
foundation for the ensuing affective Acts, and Elevations.

1. Saint Joseph, was sanctified in his Mothers womb: Which favor seems (in
some sort) due to him, who was to have so near a relation to the Word
Incarnate, (the Source and Origin of all sanctity) and who was designed from
all Eternity, in the Conclave of the Adorable Trinity, to be the President of
Gods great Council of State upon Earth, the Angel Guardian of the Queen of
Angels, the reputed Father, and the real Fosterer, Nurser, Conductor, and
Governor of JESUS, the worlds Messiah, and the Head of his holy Family. Now
since Gods Family consisted only of two Persons, Jesus and Mary, who were of
more worth and dignity, than all the rest of Heavenly and Earthly Creatures
together; it was convenient that He, who was to govern them, should also
resemble them in Greatness, Dignity, and Sanctity, and consequently that he
should possess in some measure (by an anticipated pardon of his Original sin,
and by an advanced favor of sanctifying Grace) that Purity which the Son
possessed by Nature, and the Mother by Privilege.

2. He was the next after the sacred Virgin, who made an express Vow and
promise to God of Perpetual virginity. And this Resolution, Intention, and
Promise both of Her, and Him, was revealed to each other respectively, and
renewed by them jointly, before they were contracted together by formal
Matrimony. For how else could Blessed Mary (who had obliged her self to
virginal Integrity) have consented (either in Prudence or Justice) to give the
Power over her body to a person, of whose Chastity she might be ignorant, or
doubtful of his Constancy? Surely, the known Purity of her Chaste Bridegroom,
gave her the confidence to treat and converse with him, as securely as she did
with the holy Seraphins.

3. He no sooner perceived his Blessed Spouse to be bigg with child, but he
cast about how he might handsomely retreat from her company: not as harboring
the least doubt or distrust of her Innocence, (being more certain of her
Invisible Chastity, than of her visible appearing to be with child; and knowing
that it was more easy for a Virgin to conceive, than for Mary to deceive him,
or distain her own honor): But out of a deep and humble sense of his due
respect toward her Son and her self; as judging himself altogether unworthy to
contemplate with his eyes, and carry in his arms the Divin Word Incarnate, and
to converse intimately and familiarly with the glorious Mother of this God Man,
who was shorthly after to be born into the World.

4. He governed Gods Family for above thirty years space. As the Divin
Providence has established three Orders in the World; That of Nature, that of
Grace, and that of Hypostaticall Union: So he has chosen and appointed three
sorts of servants for the conduct and government of these Orders. The Angels
serve him in the order of Nature; the Apostles in the order of Grace; but he
chose S. Joseph alone, (after the sacred Virgin) to serve him in the third
Order, which is that of Jesus in the ineffable Mystery of his Incarnation. O
the Excellency, the Eminency, the Greatness of Saint Joseph! O his honor and
happyness, to enjoy so long the Innocent embraces of Jesus in his Childhood!
The holy Entertainments of Jesus in his riper years! The divin actions,
examples, and instructions of Jesus in his perfect age! And to live so long in
company and conversation with the most holy and accomplished Princess that ever
was!

5. He (together with his sacred Spouse) circumcised Jesus, in the Stable of
Bethleem, eight day's after his Birth into the world; and (according to the
divin Order and command, which was signified unto him by an Angelical
Messenger) imposed upon him that glorious name of JESUS.

6. He nourished, fed, and maintained Him, with the sweat of his brows, and
labor of his hands; who, affords food and sustenance to all living Creatures.
And clothed him, who furnished the Lillyes, Roses, and flowers of the Field,
with all their beautiful Robes and Ornaments.

7. He was (in some sort) the saver of his Savior, by sheltring little Jesus
from Herod's rage and cruelty, and stepping aside with him into Egypt, whilst
the Innocents, bought the palm of Martyrdom with the price of their blood.

8. He commanded him, who commands all earthly Princes and Monarchs; and had
him obedient to the beck of his hand, to the nod of his head, to the twinkle of
his eye, and to the sound of his voice, before whom the Powers of Heaven fall
down and tremble. O the admirable power of S. Joseph! O the adorable subjection
of Jesus! O the sublim^tie of Joseph, to command Jesus! O the Humility of
Jesus, to obey Joseph!

9. He possessed and practiced all virtues in their perfection, especially
Humility, as being to pass the remainder of his days in her company, who being
the greatest, was the most humble of all pure creatures; And in his company,
who being the Son of the most high, made himself the least, and lowest amongst
the Sons of men. Nor can S. Joseph's virtues, perfections, and Greatnesses, be
comprehended and measured by any better means than by the greatnesses of Jesus
and Mary, to whom he was so strictly allied; For he w^ Mary's true Husband, and
consequently the true and legal (though not the carnal and natural) Father
o^ Jesus. O what Communications o^ affections, what ecstasies of spirit, what
unions of hearts, was there amongst these Three, JESUS, MARIA JOSEPH? Now since
God give grace proportionable to each one place, vocation, and office; surely a
S. Joseph's Office was exceeding great so was his grace, virtue, and perfection
great, excellent, and heroique.

10. He was (as the Fathers pioufly and probably believe) elevated to Heaven,
both in Body and Soul, upon the day of his glorious Sons triumphan^ Ascension,
and remains there enthroned next to the Humanity of Jesus and the Virgin Mary,
in the Celestial Kingdom; as he was nearest and dearest unto them. during the
time o^ their earthly Pilgrimage.

11. He is the faithful, powerful, and charitable Protector and Advocate of
his devout children and clients in the Court of Heaven; as having so great
credit with his Son King Jesus and his Spouse Queen Mary, that his demands may
seem (in some sort) to be commands, and his Petitions being presented to the
Throne of Mercy, with a Fathers confidence and authority, will not easily be
rejected by Jesus in Heaven, who was so obedient to Joseph upon Earth.

12. He is the chief Patron of all Contemplatives, and the Great Master, Guide
and Director; of the Interior, hidden, and Spiritual life. S. Teresa happily
experienced this verity; and frequently expressed it, saying; They that cannot
meet with a Master to instruct them in the manner of their Prayer; Let them
take the Glorious Saint Joseph for their Teacher and Tutor, and they shall
infallibly find the safe and secure way to solid Sanctity and perfection.

A SHORT ROSARY, IN THE HONOR OF S. JOSEPH: CONTAINING, The principal
Mysteries of his Life; drawn out of the precedent Excellencies; and
distinguished into Five Tens, or Decades.
Begin also this Rosary with the sign of the Cross and the Creed.

The first Decade. Of his Election.
SAint JOSEPH was chosen in the Council of Gods Eternal Wisdom and
Providence, to be the worthy Bridegroom of Mary, and the ^puted Father of JESUS.

Our Father, etc.

1.
He was the highest and holiest of the Patriarchs.

Hail Mary.

2.
He descended from the Royal Progeny of David.

Hail Mary.

3.
He was particuarly prefigur'd by Joseph the deliverer of Egypt.

Hail Mary.

4.
He was sanctified in his Mothers ^omb.

Hail Mary.

5.
He was confirmed in Grace and Virtue.

Hail Mary.

6.
He was a Just man by the testimony of the Holy Gospel.

Hail Mary.

7.
He was instructed from Heaven, in the Mystery of Incarnation.

Hail Mary.

8.
He was indu'd with the plenty of all spiritual blessings.

Hail Mary.

9.
He was enriched with gifts and qualities, both natural and supernatural,
suitable to the sacred charge, for which he was designed.

Hail Mary.

10.
He was the first, (after the Virgin Mother) who by Vow consecrated his
Virginity to the Divin Majesty.

Hail Mary.

Glory be to the Father, and to the Son, and to the holy Ghost, etc.

These Prayers Angelical, etc. As in the Great Rosary of the Blessed Virgin
Mary.

The Second Decade. Of his place, office, and dignity.
SAint Joseph, was appointed the Head, Governor, and Steward, of Gods Family
upon Earth.

Our Father, etc.

1.
He was espoused to the sacred Virgin Mary.

Hail Mary.

2.
He was the Guardian and witness of her Virginity; and allotted by Divin
Providence to be her Counselor, Comforter, and Companion, upon all occations.

Hail Mary.

3.
He was her faithful Assistant in her journey to Bethleem.

Hail Mary.

4.
He found out the Stable for her harbor, when the Innes refused to entertain
her.

Hail Mary.

5.
He was present at our Redeemer's happy Birth into the world.

Hail Mary.

6.
He helped the holy Virgin Mother to swath him, cloth him, and cradle him in
the Ma^ger.

Hail Mary.

7.
He was the first, who with the extasi'd Mother, had the honor to adore the
Newborn Man-God.

Hail Mary.

8.
He concurred with the sacred Virgin to Christ's Circumcision, and together with
her, imposed upon him the sweet Name of JESUS.

Hail Mary.

9.
He was reverenced by the Eastern Kings, when they offered their Royal
Presents to his reputed Son JESUS.

Hail Mary.

10.
He with his Virgin-Spouse presented JESUS to his Eternal Father in the
Temple.

Hail Mary.

Glory be to the Father, and to the Son, and to the Holy Ghost, etc.

These Prayers Angelical, etc.

The third Decade. Of his Flight into Egypt.
SAint JOSEPH took the young Child, and Mary his Mother, and departed into
Egypt; so preserving Jesus from Herod's cruelty, who sought to oppress him in
his Infancy.

Our Father, etc.

1.
He readily, resignedly, and in the night season, obeyed the Angels admonition.

Hail Mary.

2.
He cheerfully undertook a long, tedious, and troublesome journey, into an
unknown Country.

Hail Mary.

3.
He patiently endured with Jesus and Mary, a seven years banishment.

Hail Mary.

4.
He provided food for him, (with the sweat of his brows, and labor of his
hands) who affoards food to all living Creatures.

Hail Mary.

5.
He clothed him, who clothes the flowers of the field.

Hail Mary.

6.
He (next to the sacred Virgin) was the most ardent of all Jesus's lovers;
serving him in his Exile, with more than Seraphicall affection.

Hail Mary.

7.
He loved the sacred Virgin, with a natural affection, in respect of her
eminent perfections: with an acquired affection, in respect of her reciprocal
favors; with a supernatural affection, in respect of her celestial dignity:

Hail Mary.

8.
He was an Isntrumental Cooperator with God, in his great design of man's
Redemption.

Hail Mary.

9.
He was (in some sort) the Saver of his Savior, by sheltring him from his
enemy's Tyranny.

Hail Mary.

10.
His life was a continued Contemplation, Recollection, and Ecstasy in the
perpetual presence of Gods Son, and Gods Mother.

Hail Mary.

Glory be to the Father, and to the Son, and to the Holy Ghost, etc.

These Prayers Angelical, etc.

The fourth Decade. Of his return from Egypt: and of his Death.
SAint JOSEPH informed by Angelical Revelation of Herod's death, returns home
with Jesus and Mary.

Our Father, etc.

1.
He, Jesus, and Mary, after their banishment, dwell together in Nazareth.

Hail Mary.

2.
He conducted Jesus, when he was twelve years old, to the Temple in Jerusalem.

Hail Mary.

3.
He there lost Jesus to his unspeakable grief and sorrow.

Hail Mary.

4.
He retriv'd him after three days enquiry, sitting amongst the Doctors.

Hail Mary.

5.
He reconducts him home to Nazareth, where Jesus (the great Monarch of both
worlds) was subject and obedient to Joseph's command.

Hail Mary.

6.
And as he had the Privilege to enjoy the Innocent embraces of Jesus, in his
childhood, so he had the honor to enjoy his holy entertainments in his riper
years; and his divin actions, examples, and instructions in his perfect age.

Hail Mary.

7.
He also had the honor to govern the sacred family of Jesus and Mary, for
thirty years space.

Hail Mary.

8.
He had the happiness to be assisted by Jesus and Mary in his last Agony.

Hail Mary.

9.
Having completed the course of his Earthly Pilgrimage, he changed this life
for Eternity.

Hail Mary.

10.
He sweetly breathed forth his soul in a high act of sigh and love, in the
sacred embraces of Jesus and Mary.

Hail Mary.

Glory be to the Father, etc.
These Prayers Angelical, etc.
The fifth Decade. Of his Glory.
SAint JOSEPH was elevated to Heaven, upon the day of his Son's triumphant
Resurrection.

Our Father, etc.

1.
He is enthroned there above, next to Jesus and Mary; as he was here below
nearest and dearest unto them.

Hail Mary.

2.
He is adorned with a Garland of virginity; for having preserved it unblemisht
to his last breath.

Hail Mary.

3.
He is enobled with the Aureola of Doctorship; for having instructed the
ignorant, and particularly the Egyptians, in the time of his so journing
amongst them.

Hail Mary.

4.
He is rewarded with a Crown of Martyrdom; for having hazarded his life for his
Sons preservation.

Hail Mary.

5.
He is a Powerful Protector of all them who are particularly devoted unto him;
as having great credit with the All powerful Jesus.

Hail Mary.

6.
He is the general Patron of the Church Militant, as being the special
Favorite of its head Christ Jesus.

Hail Mary.

7.
He bears a singular affection to all that sincerely love Jesus and Mary; as
being so nearly allied unto them.

Hail Mary.

8.
His Petitions are presented to the Throne of Mercy with a Fathers confidence;
and his Requests will not easily be rejected by Jesus in heaven, who was so
obedient to Joseph upon earth.

Hail Mary.

9.
He is the chief Patron of all Contemplatives.

Hail Mary.

10.
He is the great Master, Guide, and Directors of the Interior, hidden, and
spiritual life.

Hail Mary.

Glory be to the Father, and to the Son, and to Holy Ghost, etc.

These Prayers Angelical with bended knee, etc.

Credo, etc. as in the great Rosary of the Blessed Virgin Mary.

Conclude this Rosary with these ensuing Elevations.

ELEVATIONS TO S. JOSEPH, TO Honor God in him, and him in God, in his Dignity
of being the reputed FATHER of the Word Incarnate, and the BRIDEGROOM of the
Blessed Virgin MARIE.
And to offer up our selv's to him, in the state of dependencie, which is due
to him upon these titles; and to correspond by our inward devotion to that
power which he has over us, by consequence of the power he had over the Son
and Mother of GOD.
GReat and glorious Patriarch, Saint Joseph! The worthy Bridegroom of Mary, and
esteemed Father of Jesus! In the honor of Gods beholding and electing you in
the Council of his Eternal Wisdom; and of his placing you, at the time
appointed by his divin Providence in these two high and sublime estates.

In honor and union of all the singular graces, prerogatives, privileges, and
perfections, which he plentifully heaped upon you, in order to render you
capable of these eminent offices, and undertakings.

In honor and union of your souls extraordinary sanctity, of your Bodies
virginal Purity, of your profound humility, of your perfect Obedience, of
your voluntary Poverty, and of all the rest of your consummated virtues.

In honor and union of your dear affection to Jesus, and Mary, of the
continual application of your spirit toward these two divin objects; of the
tenderness of your devotion unto them, and of your silent, solitary, retired,
recollected, and contemplative life with them.

In honor and union of all the services, you rendered to the Word Incarnate, in
the state and order of his hypostaticall postaticall union with our nature.

In honor and union of that last Act and sigh of love, wherein you sweetly
breathed forth your faithful soul in the embraces of Jesus and Mary, your
divin Son, and dear Spouse.

In honor, homage, and union of all your other Greatnesses, and especially of
the right, power, and jurisdiction you had over Jesus and Mary, in quality of
Father and husband, and of the subjection, obedience, and duty they rendered you.

Finally, in acknowledgment of your having been established the Head, the
Steward, and the Director of Gods Family upon Earth; The Father, the Tutor, and
the Trainer up of Jesus; the Bridegroom, the Guardian, and the Helper of the
holy Virgin Mary.

I do now choose you (O great and glorious Patriarch!) for my particular
Patron, for my powerful Protector; for my pious Father, and for my chief
Sovereign, next after Jesus and Mary.

And upon this score, I do here yield and resign unto you all the power I have
over my self; desiring to become your servant and Bondslave; willing to submit
my self to you, as my Savior Jesus was subject unto you; and begging your
leave to place all the future transactions, motions, and passages of my life,
during this my earthly Pilgrimage under your sacred conduct, government, and
protection.

Make me worthy. (O glorious Father!) by your merits, to become (with you) a
faithful Member of Jesus and Mary's Family, and to be thereunto firmly and
intimately united, associated, and incorporated by Grace and Sanctity: And
obtain for me by your powerful intercession, that I may never be separated
from sweet Jesus, and Mary, in my life, in my death, in my Eternity.

Take also (O powerful Protector!) the last moment of my life (that Moment
which must decide my Eternity) into your pious care and Custody: Assist me
then, I beseech you in that harsh Passage, and obtain for me a happy death, and
departure out of this World, in the Faith, Favor, and Affection of Jesus: To
whom be all honor, praise and glory for Evermore. Amen.

ELEVATIONS TO THE SACRED TRINITY UPON EARTH. Jesus, Maria, Joseph. In honor
and homage to the Glorious Trinity in Heaven, the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost.
O JESU, Son of the living God, and Savior of the World! O Mary, Mother of
Jesus, and Mediatrix of Mankind!

O Joseph. Bridegroom of Mary, and esteemed Father of Jesus! O sacred Trinity,
Jesus, Maria, Joseph! I honor you, reverence you, admire you in your
excellent, eminent, sublime Greatnesses, in which you seem to be an express
Image of the Incomprehensible Trinity: and I adhere to you in union of the
perfect homages, which you rendered to the Father, Son, and holy Ghost, by your
high Estate, and holy operations.

The deep Mystery of the divin Trinity, is Invisible to our eyes, Ineffable to
our Tongues, Incomprehensible to our Spirits; And behold, the poor Bethleem
stable, affoards us a human Trinity; Jesus, Maria, Joseph, upon Earth; which
views, adores, and Imitates the Trinity of the Empireall Heaven; the Father,
Son, and Holy Ghost. This, is Increated; that, is both created, and Increated,
in the Person of the God-Man Jesus. This is divin, and Eternal; That is
Deifi'd and temporal. The one is Adorable; the other honorable. The one is
admirable in its greatness; The other amiable in its sweetness: In the one, is
a unity of Essence in a Trinity of Persons: In the other, is a union of Love,
of Grace, and of Spirit, in a Trinity of Essence and of Persons. In the Divin
Trinity the Father begets his Son in Eternity; In the other, by a reverted
order, the Son gives Being in Time, both to the Father, and to the Mother. In
the first, the Father and the Son, and the Father by the Son, produces the holy
Ghost in unity of origin; In the second, Jesus and Mary, and Jesus by Mary,
gives the Life and Being of Grace to Joseph in the unity of spirit.

So that Mary has an admirable resemblance to the Eternal Father; the Son of
Mary has an express unity with himself; and S. Joseph represents the Holy
Ghost.

For the Father in Heaven, is the only Parent without a Mother; and Mary upon
Earth, is the only Parent without a Father: And as nothing greater can be
attributed to God, than his being the Father of a God; so nothing more sublime
can befall a pure creature, than to be the Mother of the same God, whereof God
is Father.

The Holy Ghost is the sacred knot and Tie of the divin Persons; And Joseph
has a union with Mary as his Spouse, and with Jesus as his Father: The Holy
Ghost formed Jesus in the Virginal Cloister of Maryes Womb; And Joseph fed
him, educated him, and preserved for us, (far more fortunately than the ancient
Joseph of Egypt ^) this Bread of the Elect, this blessed pledge of our future
happiness, this Eternal Bliss of Men and Angels.

Wherefore, O Jesu! We acknowledge, honor, and adore you, in your Eternal
heights and greatnesses: we praise, bless, and love you, in your temporal
humiliations and sweetnesses: we contemplate you in Heaven with the Eye of
Faith, between the Father and the holy Ghost: We admire you upon Earth, between
Mary and Joseph; And I invite and conjure all Creatures to praise, bless, and
adore your divin Majesty, in both these estates,

O Mary! We also look upon you, as upon Gods sacred Mother; and in this supreme
dignity, I salute, reverence, and honor you, with the singular homage of
Hyperdulia, which is due to your Excellencies and Greatnesses.

O Joseph! I likewise honor you, as the reputed Father of Jesus, and
Bridegroom of Mary: and in regard of these two Eminent qualities; I subject my
self to the power which is given you over my soul, by consequence of the
Jurisdiction you had over Jesus my Savior.

I offer my self to you, O Great Saint Joseph, Father, and Husband without
Paragon! to be by you presented to Mary. I give my self to you, O glorious
Mary, Virgin and Mother without Parallel! to be by you addressed to Jesus. I
consecrat my self to you; O Great-little-God-man Jesus! as your servant and
bondslave, to become associated in this quality, with the domestiques of your
sacred Family.

O Jesu, my King! reign in my Soul, and exercise the absolute power you have
over my spirit. O Mary, my Sovereign Queen after my King Jesus! possess my
heart, and my will, to consign them over to your Son: O Joseph, My chief
Prorector after Jesus and Mary! take my Body and senses into your safe custody,
to be consecrated to Jesus.

O Jesu! annihilate and absorp my soul in your affection; O Mary! Inflame my
heart with the love of Jesus: O Joseph! Bless all my labors and endeavors,
and present them to Jesus and Mary.

Let the whole world, be replenished O Jesu! with your mercies; be assisted, O
Mary! with your favors; be secured, O Joseph! under the shadow of your
Protection.

For, You, O JESU! are the Fountain issuing forth of the Terrestrial Paradise
( Mary's Virginal Womb) is the Origin of all our happiness: you, O Mary! are
the Prime Basin of this Fountain, and the pure Glebe from whence it proceeded.
And you O Joseph! are the River, who disperse abroad these waters of Life by
your efficacious intercessions.

O Jesu! you are the fruit of life; O Mary! you are the Paradise that bore it,
and the Tree that brought it forth: And you, O Joseph! are the Cherubin
appointed by God to guard it.

O Jesu! You are the sacred Propitiatory of the world: O Mary! You are the
Mystical Ark of our Reconciliation. And you, O Joseph! are the High Priest;
who alone are permitted to enter into this Holy of Holies; to be the faithful
Coadjutor of Gods great Counsel in the world; and the Feoffee in trust of his
treasures and secrets.

In honor therefore of these three ineffable T^es and unions between these
admirable subjects (which are the greatest under Gods command and Jurisdiction)
I most humbly beg of you, O Jesu, Mary, and Joseph.

1. A chaste and filial Fear of God; that nothing, either in life or death, may
separate me from his grace and friendship.

2. A faithful, fervent, and perseverant Love of God and my neighbor, with a
generous zeal of the divin honor, and my own salvation.

3. A good and happy end of my life, consummated in the act and exercise of
these sacred affections.

O JESU! Be an Advocate for me your Bondslave to your Eternal Father. O Mary!
intercede for me your servant, to your Son. O Joseph! pray for me your child,
to Jesus and Mary.

O Jesu! show your wounds suffered for my sake: O Mary! discover your Breasts,
which suckled Gods Son: O Joseph! represent your hands, which nourished, the
Word Incarnate.

O Jesu! replenish my Soul with the abundance of your celestial blessings, by
the effusion of efficacious grace upon it, which may intimately unite it unto
you.

O Mary! Pour out the milk of your Chaste Breasts upon my heart, by the
impression of an humble piety and devotion upon it, which may entirely
sanctify my Interior.

O Joseph! bestow on me the blessings of the Earth, (that is, of your labors,
sweats, and merits) whereby the works of my hands may become prosperous, and all
my exterior actions, profitable and meritorious.

That honoring and loving you upon Earth, O sacred Trinity, JESUS, MARIA,
JOSEPH! I may enjoy your happy sight and presence, O Jesu! with Mary and
Joseph, in Heaven; and there render due honor, praife, and glory to the
Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, one only God, for all Eternity. Amen.

THE FOURTH APPENDIX STATIONS, Or, a Catalogue of the Plenary Indulgences of
the Stations of ROME.
AND FIRST Of the Stations in Advent, Lent, and other Moveable Feasts, as they
are set down in the Bulla Cruciata, publisbed in the year, 1612.
ALL the Indulgences of the Stations of Rome, are granted to the Members of the
holy Rosary (as is declared in the 13 sect;. Numb. 11. page 103. of our first
Book,) by visiting (upon those days) five Altars (or one only, if there be no
more) and reciting before each Altar five Paters and five Aves; or Twenty Five,
before that one Altar.

Now the days of the Roman Stations upon which Plenary Indulgences are granted
in Advent, Lent, and other moveable Feasts, are these following.

The first Sunday in Advent, at S. Maria Major. The second Sunday, at the holy
Cross in Jerusalem; and at S. Maria de Angelis. The third Sunday, at S. Peter's.
Wednesday in Ember week, at S. Maria Major. Friday in Ember-week, at the twelve
Apostles. Saturday in Ember-week, at Saint Peter's. The fourth Sunday in Advent,
at the 12. Apostles. Septuagesima Sunday, at S. Laurence without the walls, And
a soul out of Purgatory. Sexagesima Sunday, at S. Paul. Quinquagesima Sunday;
at Saint Peter. Ashwensday, at S. Sabina. Thursday, at S. George. Friday, at
SS. John and Paul. Saturday, at S. Tryphon. The first Sunday in Lent, at S.
John Lateran. Monday, at S. Peter in Vinculis. Tuesday, at S. Anastasia, and a
soul out of Purgatory. Wensday, at S. Maria Major. Thursday, at S. Laurence in
Panerperna. Friday, at the twelve Apostles. Saturday, at S. Peter. The second
Sunday in Lent, at S. Maria in Domnica, and S. Maria Major. Monday, at S.
Clement. Tuesday, at S. Balbina. Wensday, at S. Cecily. Thursday, at S. Maria
trans Tyberim. Friday, at S. Vitalis. Saturday, at S. Peter and Marcelline. And
a soul out of Purgatory. The third Sunday in Lent, at S. Laurence without the
walls, And a soul out of Purgatory. Monday, at S. Mark. Tuesday, at S.
Pudentiana. Wensday, at S. Sixtus. Thursday, at SS. Cosmus and Damianus.
Friday, at S. Laurence in Lucina. Saturday at S. Susan, and at S. Maria de
Angelis. The fourth Sunday in Lent, at the holy Cross in Jerusalem: and a soul
out of Purgatory. Monday, at SS. Quatuor Coronati. Tuesday, at S. Laurence in
Damaso. Wensday, at S. Paul. Thursday, at S. Sylvester, and at S. Martins in
the Mount. Friday, at S. Eusebius. Saturday, at S. Nicholas in Carcere. The
fifth Sunday in Lent, at Saint Peter. Monday, at S. Chrysogonus. Tuesday, at S.
Cyriacus. Wensday, at S. Marcellus. Thursday, at S. Apollinaris. Friday, at S.
Stephen in Caelio monte. And a soul out of Purgatory. Saturday, at S. John ante
Portam Latinam. And a soul of Purgatory. Palm Sunday, at S. John Lateran.
Monday, at S. Praxedes. Tuesday, at S. P^sca. Wensday, at S. Maria Major.
Thursday, at S. John Lateran. Friday, at the holy Cross: and at S. Maria de
Angelis. Saturday, at S. John Lateran. Easter day, at S. Maria Major. Monday,
at S. Peter. Tuesday, at S. Paul. Wensday, at S. Laurence without the walls.
And a soul out of Purgatory. Thursday, at the twelve Apostles. Friday, at S.
Maria ad Martyrs. Saturday, at S. John Lateran. Low-Sunday at S. Pancratius.
Monday in Rogation week, at S. Maria Major. Tuesday. at S, John Lateran.
Wensday, at S. Peter. Ascension day, at S. Peter. Whitson-eve at S. John
Lateran. Whit-Sunday, at S. Peter. Monday, at S. Peter in Vinculis. Tuesday, at
S. Anastasia. Wensday, at S. Maria Major. Thursday, at S. Laurence without the
walls; And a soul out of Purgatory. Friday, at the twelve Apostles. Saturday,
at S. Peter. And a soul out of Purgatory. On, the Feast of Corpus Christi, and
all the days within the Octave, at S. Peter. Wensday of the Ember-week in
September, at S. Maria Major. Friday, at the twelve Apostles. Saturday, at S.
Peter.
Plenary Indulgences which may be gained by them of the Rosary, (reciting
twenty five Paters and Aves, before five Altars, or all before one, as
aforesaid) upon such days of the Months as are here set down in order.
JANUARY.
1. ON the Feast of the Circumcision, and all the days within the Octave, at S.
Maria Trans Tyberim, and at Ara Coeli. 6. On the Feast of the Epiphany, and all
the days within the Octave, at S. Peter's. 17. At S. Anthony the Abbot. 18. At
S. Peter, and also at S. Prisca. 20. At S. Sebastians. 21. At S. Agnes. 25. At
S. Paul. 27. At S. John Chrysostom, and at Ara coeli. 31. At the holy Crossin
Jerusalem.
FEBRUARY.
2. PUrification of the Virgin Mary. And a soul out of Purgatory, at S. Maria
Major: S. Maria de Pace, S. Maria de Angelis, and S. Maria Inviolata. 3. At S.
Blase. A soul out of Purgatory. 22. Chair of S. Peter, at S. Peter's. 24. S
Mathias, at S. Matthew the Apostle. 26. At S. Constantia, a Chapel in the
Church of S. Agnes.
MARCH.
UPon all the Frydays in March at S. Peter, a Plenary Indulgence. 7. S. Thomas
of Aquin, at the Minerva. 12. At S. Peter, and at S. Gregory. 19. At S.
Joseph's. 21. At S. Bennets. 25. Upon the Feast of the Annunciation, and all the
days within the Octave, at the Minerva, and at the Annunciate.
APRIL.
23. AT S. George. 25. Upon S. Marks day at S. Peter's. 29. Being the Feast of
S. Peter Martyr of the Order of S. Dominick, at the Minerva.
MAY.
UPon all the Sundays of this Month at S. Sebastians a Plenary. 1. At SS.
Philip and Jacob. 3. At Holy Cross in Jerusalem. 6. At S. John Lateran: where
all so from this day until the 6. of August there is a special Station, with
a Plenary, and a soul out of Purgatory. 8. The Apparition of S. Michael, at S.
Maria Major. 19. S. Peter Celestin, at S. Maria Major. 20. S. Bernardin, at S.
Maria de Ara coeli. 21. At S. Helena.
JUNE.
11. AT S. Barnabie the Apostle. 13. S. Anthony of Padua, at S. Maria de Ara
coeli. 24. At S. John Lateran. 29. At S. Peter's. 30. Commemoration of S. Paul.
JULY.
2. THE Visitation of our Blessed Lady, and all the days within the Octave, at
S. Maria de populo, and S. Maria de Pace. 14. S. Bonaventure, at S. Maria de
Aracoeli. 17. At S. Alexius. 22. At S. Mary Magdalens. 25. S. James the
Apostle. 26. At S. Anne. 30. At S. Mark.
AUGUST.
1. AT S. Peter's Chains. 3. S. Stephen, at S. Laurence without the walls. 4. S.
Dominick, at the Minerva, and at S. Maria Major. 5. Our Blessed Lady of Snow,
at S. Maria Major. 6. At S. John Lateran. 10. At S. Laurence, and all the days
within the Octave. 12. S. Clare Virgin. 15. The Assumption of the Blessed
Virgin, and all the days within the Octave, at S. Maria Major, at S. Maria de
Populo, at Aracoeli, at Rotunda, and S. Maria de Angelis. 24. At S.
Bartholomew. 28. At S. Augustins. 29. Decollation of S. John, at S. John
Lateran.
SEPTEMBER.
3. THE Nativity of the Blessed Virgin, at S. Maria Major, at the Rotunda, at
Aracoeli, at the Inviolata, at S. Maria de Pace, de Populo, and de Angelis. 14.
At the holy Cross in Jerusalem. 21. At S. Matthew. 29. At S. Michael. 30. S.
Hierom, at S. Maria Major.
OCTOBER.
4. AT S. Francis trans Tyberim. 18. At S. Lukes. 28. SS. Simon and Jude, at S.
Peter's.
NOVEMBER.
1. ALL Saints day, and all the days within the Octave, at S. Maria Rotunda. 2.
All Souls day, and upon all the days within the Octave, at S. Gregory. 9.
Dedication of our Saviors Church at S. John Lateran. 11. S. Martin, at S.
Peter's, and at S. Martins. 18. Dedication of the Church of SS. Peter and Paul.
21. Presentation of our Blessed Lady in the Temple, at S. Maria Major. 22. At
S. Cecilia. 23. At S. Clement. 30. S. Andrew, at S. Peter's.
DECEMBER.
6. SAint Nicholas. 7. S. Ambrose. 8. The Conception of the Blessed Virgin, at
S. Maria Major. 21. S. Thomas Apostle at S. Peter's. 24. Christmas Eve, at S.
Maria Major. 25. Christmas night at the first Mass, at the Chapel of the
Crib. At the second Mass, at S. Anastasia. At the third Mass, at S. Maria
Major. 26. At S. Stephens, in coelio Monte. 27 S. John the Evangelist, at S.
Maria Major. 28. Innocents day, at S. Paul's.
Finally, at the Church of S. John Lateran, which is the first of the seven
Churches of Rome; in the Chapel of S. Laurence, and in the Chapel of S. John
Baptist, there may be gained every day a Plenary Indulgence.

Also in S. Laurence Church without the walls, every Wensday, a Soul out of
Purgatory.

And in the Church of S. Paul every Sunday throughout the year, a Soul out of
Purgatory.

In this Church also may be gained all those Indulgences, which are granted to
them who visit the holy Sepulcher; where there is every day a Plenary, and a
Soul out of Purgatory.

Note also, that upon all the Feasts of the twelve Apostles, there is a
Plenary, at S. Philip and James: likewise at S. Peter's.

The Practical manner of performing the aforesaid Roman Stations, and gaining
these Indulgences with ease and efficacy, may be briefly thus:
1. Begin with the sign of the Cross, as formerly in all your other devotions,
and Spiritual exercises.

2. Then with an humble and penitent heart, make this following Act of
Contrition; Thereby to settle your Soul in the state of Grace; which is a
necessary condition for the gaining of all Indulgences.

O my good Lord Jesu! who art the Lord of my life, and should be the love of
my Soul, did I not like an ungracious, and ungrateful wretch, give my heart,
and sell my affection to fond, frail, filthy, and fading Creatures and
comforts, which are so far from affording me either quiet of mind, peace of
Conscience, purity of Soul, or perfection of spirit, which my obligation, and
vocation require of me; that they leave me nothing but trouble, confusion, and
remorse, with a world of dismal and desperate thoughts, violent passions, and
vicious inclinations.

Amidst all which disorders, I find no other Refuge, nor Remedy, than to return
to you, my true Center, to convert my self to you my Sovereign Creator, To cast
my self at your sacred feet; my sweet Lord Jesu! And there with an humble and
contrite Spirit, to sue for Mercy, Remission, Reconciliation.

O Heavenly Father! I confess and acknowledge my ingratitude, treachery,
rebellion; and I am sorry from the bottom of my heart and soul, that ever I
offended you, who deserve from me all possible love, honor, and obedience;
beseeching you, (as a guilty Criminal) to take compassion upon your poor and
penitent creature; and to forgive me the great and grievous transgressions, and
offenses, which I have committed against your divin bounty, as I do (for the
love of you, my Lord and Maker!) most freely forgive all those that have any
way offended, distasted, contristated, or scandalized me; sincerely knowing,
that I deserve no comfort from any creature, but all contempt, and confusion;
and not only to be troubled, and trampled on by all on earth temporally; but
even to be tormented by the Devils in Hell eternally.

Ha Crucified Jesu! take pity on my soul, for which you powered forth your
sacred blood, and gave up your dearest life on the Cross. Alas! How ungrateful
a child have I been, to offend so frequently, so heynously, so disloyally, so
loving, and liberal a Father, so meek, and merciful a Redeemer, and so sweet
and sovereign a Majesty? who has always showed himself to me so benign and
bountiful; sparing me in my sins, and expecting me to Repentance; wooing me to
his love, and calling me to his service by a thousand means; all which I have
either rejected or neglected; and still nevertheless continuing unto me my
life, time, and means to do penance!

Oh, my poor soul! How have thou been blinded, and bewitched, to leave the
Bread of Angels, and to feed on the husks of Swin; to abandon God and all
solid goodness, (upon whom depends all thy hope and happiness, all thy quiet,
content, and comfort in time and eternity) for trifling vanities, empty
shadows, mere nothings?

O strange folly and s^ensy! would I had never sinned! and oh, that I might
never sin more!

O my God! what have I done, and not don? would I had suffered on the Cross,
(with you my sweet Savior, and for your love) pains of body, pangs of Soul,
and even death it self, when I thus grievously sinned! And what can I say or do
more? I abhor and detest whatsoever I have don, said, thought or desired
contrary to your divin will and liking. I rencunce all company, and occasions
which may induce me to offend you.

I cast my self at your sacred feet, to be your faithful Bondslave for ever. I
firmly resolve to take up my Cross, and carry it after you (dear Jesu!) till
death, and to do penance and satisfaction for my past pride, pleasure, and
impiety, desiring no more in this world, but to linger out my pilgrimage at the
foot of the Cross, like the Penitent Magdalen, in perpetual solitude, silence,
and submission.

Good Jesu! for your infinite Mercy's and Merits sake, suffer not your poor
creature to be separated from you eternally. O amiable Eternity! O Eternal
amity of God! Shall I leave and loose thee for filthy pleasures, frail
creatures, fond friendships, fading honors?

No, my dear Lord! Be pleased rather to take my Soul out of my body* than your
love out of my Soul; Let me rather die miserably, than sin mortally; Let me pass
on the rest of my pilgrimage in your grace and fear; that I may fi^ish it in
your friendship and favor. Grant me this, I beseech you, O meek, and merciful
Savior! by the merits of your bitter Death and Passion, by the intercession of
your most blessed Mother, by the suffrages of all your holy Saints in Heaven,
and happy Souls upon Earth. Upon all which relying, as upon the Anchors of my
Hope; I absolutely commit and resign my self to your sacred disposition and
providence for time and eternity; fully trusting, that you will marcifully
pardon all my sins* carefully assist me in all my wants and weaknesses, and in
the end happily bring me to your Eternal bliss and beatitude by such means as
your divin Wisdom knows most expedient for me.

3. Then offer up your devotions for the generally recommended ends and
intentions in all the Concessions of Indulgences, which are specified page 94.
of the first Book.

4. And whilst you Vocally recite the twenty five Paters and Aves, you may
mentally reflect upon some one of the Fifteen Mysteries, as they are set down
in the Rosary of the sacred Name of Jesus; dividing the same into three days
Stations after this manner.

Upon the First day, meditate upon the Five Mysteries of our Blessed Redeemers
Life and Incarnation, which are briefly and pithily comprehended in these
verses:

1. Christ's Incarnation.
THe Throne and Footstool meet, Heaven Cling's to Earth.

The All conspires to this All-saving Birth.

Dear Partner of our weakness! since we see,

Thy self made us; Oh! change us into thee.

Five Paters, and five Aves.

2. His Nativity.
SEE the fair Sun of Glory does arise,

In the dark Midnight of our miseries!
Sad Clouds of Tears and Woes, ^'advance our Good,
Dim his bright Birth; but (ah!) he will set in Blood.
Five Paters, and five Aves.

3. His Circumcision.
HEre Innocence, whose unstained Purity,
White Robes best suit, wears Crimson's guilty Die.
Enough dear Lord! Mankind is richly won:
Oh no; these drops a deluge but forerun.
Five Paters, and five Aves.

4. His Finding in the Temple.
RVn, joyful Mother! to embraces run;
Doctors have found their Master. Thou thy Son.
Lord! Consecrate my Heart, thy House Of Prayer,
And I shall find thee wisely teaching there.
Five Paters, and five Aves.

5. His Baptism.
DO Baptist, with thy puddled Jordan try,
To Wash this Spring of spotles Purity.
Command does with Presumption dispense;
Pride is not Pride, vouch't by Obedience.
Five Paters, and five Aves, and one Creed.

Gloria Patri, and Filio, and Spiritui Sancto, etc.

O Jesu Christ the Son of David, have mercy upon us.

Upon the second day, take for your Meditation, the five Mysteries of our
Blessed Redeemers Death and Passion.

1. The washing of his Disciples feet.
THeir God on knee, such sordid work in's hand.
Heaven, and The Apostles both amazed stand.
Ah! my Affections, Feet unto my Soul,
Thus washed, thus wiped, how can you still be soul?
Five Paters and five Aves.

2. The Prayer in the Garden.
Heavens Floud-gates are all open; each widen'd pore,
Is made a purple sluice, Griefs painful door;
Sin drowned the Earth once in a watery Flood,
And now drowns Heaven, but (ah!) in Gods own Blood.
Five Paters, and five Aves.

3. Christ's Apprehension in the Garden.
SMall cords, rude hands, on all sides bind th'Immense,
Twined flax does pinion weak Omnipotence;
Philistines, now seccure, Samson invade;
His greatest strength by's greater love's betrayed.
Five Paters, and five Aves.

4. His carrying of the Cross.
THus burdened, and thus faint! See how he droops!
Under our load of sin, Heavens Bearer stoops.
Riddle of Grief, which pain afflicted more,
When th'Cross bore thee, or thou bor'st it before?
Five Pater, and five Aves.

5. His Descent into Hell.
REstore thy Prey, proud Hell! Thy Conquerors sight,
Breaks sins stiff chains, puts thy dark shades to flight:
Gives the joy-ravisht soul new wings of Love,
With their triumphant Lord to mount above.
Five Paters, and five Aves, and one Creed.

Gloria Patri, and Filio, and Spiritui Sancto, etc.

O JESU of Nazareth King of the Jews, have mercy upon us.

Upon the third day take for your Meditation the five Glorious Mysteries of our
Blessed Redeemer.

1. His Resurrection.
FAir earnest of our second life! this day,
Glory revived with a new-burnisht ray.
Cheer up my drooping Soul, thou shall not die;
Thy Lord has earned thee Immortality.
Five Pater, and five Aves.

2. His Ascension.
TAke wing my earth-clogg'd-mind, and fly along,
With thy great king amongst this heaven'n-soaring-throng.
And ere thy self return'st to sojourn here,
Leave with thy Lord thy best affections there.
Five Paters, and five Aves.

3. His sending of the Holy Ghost.
Blessed Fire, Fount, Breath, enkindle, wash, inspire,
Our Wills, Hearts, Thoughts, with Love, Grace, pure desire.
Souls Life, Gods Finger, Gift, revive, work, win,
Our flesh, sense, love, to Spirit, to Grace, from sin.
Five Paters, and five Aves.

4. The Crowning of the Virgin Mary and the Saints.
WInter's ore-blown, calm Blisse's endless Spring,
Charms the glad Birds of Paradise to sing.
Your Eyes shall know no tears, your Face no frown,
Partakers of my Cross, partake my Crown.
Five Paters, and five Aves.

5. The Coming to the last Judgment.
GReat Day! the Accomplisher of Bliss, of Woe;
Expressed by a joyful COME, and dreadful GO,
Rise guilty Dust, and hear, (though thou be loath)
At once thy Summons, and thy Sentence both.
Five Paters, and five Aves, and one Creed.

Gloria Patri, and Filio, and Spiritui Sancto.

Sicut erat in principio, etc.

O Jesu Christ, the Son of the living God: Have mercy upon us.

FINIS.
The general Table, briefly containing the substance of the whole work.
THE Epistle Dedicatory to the sacred Virgin Mary. A Marian Calendar or
Catalogue of Saints, of the holy Order of S. Bennet, devoted to the Blessed
Virgin, together with her several Festivities, usually celebrated by her
faithful Rosarists. The Prefects Oration: which shows: 1o. Man's natural
inclination to Society. Page 3 Christ our Savior established and commanded it.
4 The Primitive Church practiced it. 5 All succeeding Ages imitated it. 6 The
Praises of pious Societies and Confraternities. 7 And particularly, of this of
the sacred Rosary. 10 A Digression of our B. Lady's Title of Power. 17 S:
Dominick the beginner of the Rosary. 21 Blessed Alanus the Restorer of its
decayed use. The Greatness of our glorious Mother Mary. 22 The dignity to be of
her family. 24 The profits thereof, expressed in five Particulars. 26 The duty
of the Rosarists, in six particulars. 35
The first Book of the Rosary which is the Doctrinall part thereof. page 44 1.
That every faithful Christian ought to have a particular devotion toward Gods
holy Mother. 47 1. Because she loves her devoted children and servants. 48 2.
She is liberal and bountiful in bestowing benefits and favors upon them. 50
3. She comforts them in all their afflictions, persecutions, desolations. 51 4.
She is their faithful Advocate in Heaven. 53 5. She procures for them a happy
departure out of this world, the salvation of their Souls, and the enjoyment of
Eternal felicity. 57 All which is plainly evidenced by express and pithy
Sentences drawn out of the holy Fathers and Church Doctors.
. 2. That the practice of the sacred Rosary, is a devotion very pleasing to the
Divin Majesty, profitable to our selves, and grateful to the B. Virgin. 60 For
it intends Gods honor, our own salvation, the sacred Virgins glory. 61
. 3 That this sort of devotion is proper for such Catholics as live in
heretical Countries. 63 The reason of this Title. The answer of the Objection,
and the proof of this assertion; because it is the blessed Virgins peculiar
property to destroy heresies, as is declared out of the Fathers. 66
. 4. What the Rosary is. 70. 5. The Rosary is twofold, the Great Rosary, and
the little Rosary. 72. 6. Why this manner of Prayer is called the Rosary. 73.
7. That the Rosary contains the two sorts of Prayer, Vocal and Mental. 74. 8.
Three advices concerning this manner of praying and meditating. 76. 9. A
difficulty concerning this conjunction of Vocal and Mental Prayer proposed
and cleared. 79. 10. Of the advantage which this Confraternity of the Rosary
has above all others in point of Communication of merits. 82. 11. Of
Indulgences in General. 86. 12. Three necessary advertisements for the gaining
of Indulgences. 93. 13. Of the Indulgences conferred upon the confraternity of
the Rosary. All which are reduced to 12. heads 94. 14. The general Rules and
Statutes of the Confraternity of the Rosary; Being eleven in number. 107. 15.
The form of receiving Brothers and Sisters into this sacred Confraternity; with
the blessing of the Bedes, Roses, and Candles: Also a Form of the general
Absolution, at the hour of death. 119. 16. Of the Pious use of Processions. 136
What Processions signify; Their origin. 136 That our Processions are imitations
of the Israelites egression out of Egypt: and memorialls of our Redeemers
Mercies; and Commemorations of the B. Virgins Journeys. 137 There are four
Solemn and Annual Processions: Besides those of the Great and Lesser Litanies.
139 The Rites of the Rosary Processions. 141 1. The Cross is carried. 2. The
Relics of Saints; The Statua, or Image of the B. Virgin, which is largly
declared, insisted upon, and proved to be an ancient and laudable custom. 142
4. VVax-torches or Candles. 5. The Litanies are sung or recited. 148
. 17. An Elevation for the Procession of the Rosary. 149 To honor the Nine
several Journeys of the sacred Virgin. 150 The Litanies of our B. Lady of the
Rosary. 152 A devout Recommendation to the B. Virgin after Procession. 155 The
Litanies of our Blessed Lady of Loretto, to be daily recited for a happy death.
161
. 18. Several other Prayers, to be added after the Litanies, according to each
ones devotion, occasion, or necessity. 168 1. A Filial recommendation of our
selves to the sacred Virgin-Mothers Protection. 168 2. A Prayer for a happy
death. 170 3. A General Prayer for our selves, our friends, and the whole
Church. 171 4. A Prayer for the Conversion of Heretics and Infidells. 172 5. A
prayer for a special Friend. 173 6. A prayer for a friend in tribulation. 174
7. A prayer for a friend in his sickness and infirmity. 175 8. A prayer for our
enemies, detractors, and persecutors. 176 9. A prayer for a Woman great with
child, or laboring in Childbed. 177 10. A prayer to appease the Divin
Indignation in any public or private necessity. 178 11. A prayer to withdraw
our minds from the superfluous cares and solicitudes of this world. 180 12.
Prayers to be said in time of the plague. A prayer to the sacred Virgin Mother,
called the Miraculous Prayer against the Plague. 181

The second Book of the sacred Rosary which is the Practical part there of. An
Oration, of the Antiquity, Excellency, and Utility of the Bedes, Psalter, and
Confraternity of the Rosary. By way of a Preface to this second Book. 187 In
which Oration is declared, the several names of the Rosary. 188 The Antiquity,
and general practice of this sort of Devotion amongst the primitive
Christians. page 189 By the Egyptian Hermits. 191 By the Fathers of the Church.
192 By our holy Father S. Bennet. 193 And all his svcceeding Monks. 194 By S.
Maurus in France. 195 By S. Eligius Bishop of Noyon. By S. Bid in England. 196
By S. Dominick Loricatus. 197 By Peter the Hermit. By S. Otto the Apostle of
Sclavonia. 198 By S. Bernard. 199 By S. Marie of Ognia. By S. Dominick, Author
of the Preachers Order who revived and reestablish'd it. 200
The Excellency of each part, whereof the Rosary is composed. 203 To wit, 1.
The Apostles Creed, where the fruits of Faith are briefly explicated. 204 2.
The Lords Prayer, the effects whereof are parabolically explicated by S.
Dominick. 206, 209 3. The Angelical Salutation. 216 4. The Meditation upon the
fifteen Mysteries. 226

To the devout Rosarists. 235. 1. Of the sign of the Cross, wherewith we begin
our Rosary. 236 The sign of the Cross, was prefigured by the Prophets, expressly
by Ezech. c. 9. where all were to be slain, who had not the Sign Tau in their
foreheads, taught by our Redeemer, Matthew. 28.19. ever practiced in the Church.
Tertul. de Corona militis. 237 The general custom thereof is approved of, for
many reasons. 238
. 2. Of the Apostles Creed, which is the first part of the Rosary. 241 Why it
is so called, and several reasons for the recital thereof at the entrance
upon our Rosary. 242 An Exercise upon the Apostles Creed, dilated with
Affections. 243
. 3. Of the Pater noster, or our Lords Prayer, the second part of the Rosary.
252 Of it in general; and how far it excells all other Prayers. 252 The
Affections contained in it. 253 A larger Explication of it. 254 An Exercise
upon it dilated with Acts and Affections. 264
. 4. Of the Ave Maria, or Angelical Salutation, the third part of the Rosary.
276 Of it in general, and its excellency, 277 The affections contained in it.
280 An Explication of it. 281 An Exercise upon it, dilated with Acts, etc. 283
. 5. The manner how to recite the Rosary. 290 By settling our selv's in the
divin presence: well ordering our understandings and our wills: passing from
speculations to affections, applying the senses: making Intentions, etc. 291
. 6. Of the 15. Mysteries of the Rosary in General; The fourth part of the
Rosary. 298 Their Order, their Names,; and with certain verses to help the
memory. 299
. 7, Of the Fifteen mysteries in particular. 308 The first part of the Rosary,
containing the five Joyful Mysteries. The first Joyful Mystery, branched into
ten heads, or points of Meditation, with Affections, Elevations, Petitions. 309
The second Joyful Mystery. 318 The third Joyful Mystery. 327 The fourth
Joyful Mystery. 337 The fifth Joyful Mystery. 348
The second Part of the Rosary, containing the five Dolorous Mysteries. 359 The
first Dolorous Mystery, divided into ten heads or points of Meditation, with
Affections, etc. 360 The second Dolorous Mystery. 372 The third Dolorous
Mystery. 381 An Anthem and Prayer in honor of the sacred Crown of Thorns. 391
The fourth Dolorous Mystery. 392 The Fifth Dolorous Mystery. 400
The third Part of the Rosary, containing the five Glorious Mysteries. 410 The
first Glorious Mystery, drawn into ten heads or points of Meditation, with
Affections. 411 The second Glorious Mystery. 421 The third Glorious Mystery.
431 The fourth Glorious Mystery. 440 The fifth Glorious Mystery. 450


The first Appendix JESUS, or the Confraternity of the most Sacred Name of
JESUS, with Elevations suitable thereunto. 462 The Author and origin of this
Confraternity. 463 The reason and end of its Institution. 463 The five Rules of
it. 463 The plenary Indulgences (omitting many partial) granted to it. 465 The
manner of reciting this Rosary of the Name of Jesus, 467 A brief Declaration of
the Crown of our Lord. 471 Its Author, Origin, Manner of reciting, and
Confirmation by Pope Leo the tenth. 472 The Crown of our Lord consists of 33.
Pater nosters, and of 4. Ave Maria's, with one Creed added for a Conclusion.
473 The first Part: Of Christ's coming into the World, consists of Ten Pater
nosters and One Ave Maria, with points of Meditation, and Elevations upon each
Pater noster. 474 The second Part Of Christ's Conversation amongst men; consists
likewise of Ten Pater nosters, and One Ave Maria, with points of Meditation,
and Elevations correspondent to this Decade. 479 The third Part: Of Christ's
bitter Death and Passion; consists also of Ten Pater nosters, and One Ave
Maria, with points of Meditation, and Elevations, as in the two precedent
parts, 483 The fourth Part: Of Christ's glorious Triumph after death, consists
only of Three Pater nosters, and One Ave Maria, with points of Meditation, and
Elevations correspondent. 487
Thirty-three Elevations, and Petitions to Jesus, in honor of the Thirty-three
years of his holy Life. 490 An Advertisement to the Practisers of these sacred
Devotions. 493 Elevations to Jesus Christ our Lord, on honor of his several
estates, and of the singular Mysteries of his Life: To adore the Supreme
Greatness of Jesus, and offer our selves to him by way of humble servitude and
absolute Dependencie, which is due to him, in consequence of the ineffable
union of the Divinity with our Humanity. 495 1. The Eternal Greatness of the
Word Incarnate. 496 2. The equality and consubstantiality of the Divin Persons
in a perfect distinction, is a wonder in God himself. 497 3. God low's himself
to us, and makes himself one of us. 498 4. Gods Son gives his Eternal Essence
and substance to our nature. 499 5. Jesus is born, lives, suffers, dies for us.
500 6. Jesus adores his heights by his lownesses, and raises up his lownesses
by his greatnesses. 501 7. His excessive Love, in the effusion of his Blood for
us, thereby testifying the effusion of his greatness and goodness also upon us.
503 8. Jesus is all ours, and we are all his; yea we are in him, we live in
him, we are parts of him. 504 9. The perfection of a Christian, requires; That
Jesus live in him, and that he imprint in his Soul the spirit and life of his
Estates and Mysteries. 506 10. The principal mysteries of Jesus, applied to
our sanctification: and his qualities, and Offices referred to our use. 508 11.
By how many Titles we belong to Jesus, and Jesus to us. 509 12. Jesus is Gods
gift unto us, and what this gift demands of us, with an explication of
Christian Grace. 510 13. Christian Grace is formed upon the Mystery of the
Incarnation, which is its Model: and requires of us a particular manner of
Oblation and donation to Jesus. 512 14. A total reference and oblation of our
selves to Jesus. 513
Elevations to the sacred Trinity, upon the Mystery of the Incarnation. To
adore the Supreme Greatness of Jesus; and offer up our selv's to him in the
state of humble servitude, and absolute Dependencie, which is due to him by
reason of the ineffable union of the Divinity with our Humanity. 514 1. God
creates two Natures capable of himself: upon one, he exercises his Justice,
upon the other his Mercy. 515 2. The Mystery of the Incarnation, is the
Head-work of Gods love and power: And what is proper to the Person of the
Father, in the Mysteries of the TRINITY and Incarnation. 516 3. What is proper
to the Person of the Son in these Mysteries. 517 4. What is proper to the
person of the Holy Ghost in these Mysteries. 519 5. Contemplations upon the
Humanity of Jesus. 520 6. Contemplation upon the associating of the B. Virgin
in the Mystery of the Incarnation. 521 7. An Oblation of humble servitude to
Jesus and his Deifi'd Humanity. 522 8. A larger expression of this servitude.
523 9. The life of the Divinity in the Humanity. 523 10. The denudation of
Jesu's Human subsistencie, is the cause that his Humanity, and all its actions
are appropriated to the Person of the Eternal Word, by which it subsists. 524
11. An Oblation of all that we are, have, and can, to this sacred Humanity. 525
12. Jesus is doubly in the state of a servant; First, by humbling his Divin
Person, to a created nature, Secondly, by dying on the Cross. 526 13. An
Oblation of our selves to Jesus, in honor of this his double estate of being a
servant. 527 14. The continuance of this Oblation of servitude. 528 15. A
Confirmation of this our oblation of servitude. 529 16. An ardent desire of an
unseparable union with Christ. 530 17. The Humanity of Jesus, is the Temple of
the Divinity. 531 18. What great things are wrought in this Humanity. 532 19.
This Humanity is holy by the Divinity it self, which is a substantial
sanctity, flowing from him into himself, and thence into us. 533 20. And this
sanctity, sanctifies even that created Grace, which is in himself. 534 21. An
humble yiedling, submitting and dedicating of our whole selves to the Deifi'd
Humanity of Jesus, in the way of perpetual Bondage. 535

the second Appendix Maria, or the Devotion called the Bondage of the Blessed
Virgin MARY, with Elevations suitable thereunto. 538 1. The Author and Origin of
the Bondage. 539 2. An ancient and authentic example of the practice of this
Bondage. 539 3. Whereupon this Devotion of the Bondage is grounded. 542 The B.
Virgin made up the chain of her Bondage, with the links of 12. virtues. 543 4.
The Rules of this Devotion of the Bondage. 545 The Blessing of the Chains for
the Bondage. 546 The Prayer and Oblation of our selv's in Bondage to the
Blessed Virgin. 548
5. The Practices and Exercises of this Devotion of the Bondage, being seven in
number. 550 Elevations to God, and Adorations to the thrice Holy Trinity, In
honor of the Share he was pleased to give unto the sacred Virgin Mary, in the
Mystery of the Incarnation: Effecting it in her, and by her. And to honor the
most holy Virgin, in that her high dignity, of being Gods Mother: and to offer
our selv's to her, in the state of Dependency and servitude, which is due to
her, upon this title: and to correspond by our Interior Devotion, to the
special Power, which she has over us by consequence of this divin and
admirable Maternity. 560 1. Adoration of the Sacred Trinity. 560 2. Greatness
of the Mystery of the Incarnation. 561 3. Which is so eminent a work. 561 4.
And the chief work (ad extra) of the Divinity. 562 5. And it is divided between
the Sacred Trinity, and the Virgin. 563 6. The Person of the Virgin (next the
Divin Persons) is most worthy, and greater than all human and angelical
Persons together. 565 7. The Virgin constitutes an Order, Empire, and Universe
apart. 566 8. She is a singular work of Gods Power; the Holiest that ever shall
be created. The Divin Paternity is the Samplar of this Divin Maternity. The
Eternal Father, and the Son, are tied by the Person of the Holy Ghost; and the
Eternal Father, and the Virgin, are tied by the Person of the Son. 568 9. The
Eternal Word, who is in Society with the Father, and Holy Ghost, before all
time, does in time enter league and Society with the Virgin. 573 10. Oblation
and Donation to the Son, and the Mother, in quality of Bondslaves. 574 11.
Enlargement and Explication of this Donation, with the particulars thereof. 575
12. This Oblation tends to the honor of the Virgins Elevation and Depressions
in the Mystery of the Incarnation. 577 13. In the Virgin all is great, and
particularly, Her Maternity, Her Sovereignty, Her Sanctity. 579 14. It is a
small matter, that we make our selv's the Virgins Bondslaves, and therefore we
desire her to employ her Power to make us truly so. 583 A concluding Prayer to
the sacred Virgin Mother upon the same subject. 585
The third Appendix JOSEPH, or, Devotions to Saint Joseph, the Glorious Husband
of the Virgin MARY, and reputed Father of CHRIST JESUS: with Elevations unto
him. 588 Twelve Excellencies, Privileges, and Prerogatives of S. JOSEPH
related out of Josephus a Jesu Maria, and Joannes a Carthagena, who largely
prove the same and many more, by force of reasons, and authority of the
Fathers. 589 A short Rosary, in the honor of S. Joseph, containing the
principal Mysteries of his life, distinguished into Five Tens, or Decades,
whereof the first is of his Election. 596 The second, of his Place, Office, and
dignity. 599 The third, of his Flight into Egypt. 60^ The fourth, of his return
form Egypt, and of his Death. 60^ The fifth, of his Glory. 605
Elevations to S. Joseph to (...) God in him, and him in God in his ^nity of
being the reputed Fa^ (...) Word Incarnate, and the Bridegroom of the Blessed
Virgin Mary. 608 Elevations to the sacred Trinity upon Earth: JESUS, MARIA,
JOSEPH; In honor and homage to the Glorious Trinity in Heaven, The Father,
Son, and Holy Ghost. 612
The Fourth Appendix Stations, or a Catalogue of the Plenary Indulgences of the
Stations of Rome. 620 First, of the Stations in Advent, Lent, and other
Moveable Feasts. 621 Secondly, of the Stations fixed to the days of the year
625, with the Practical manner of performing the said Stations. 632


FINIS.
The Principal Errors of the Press, are thus easily corrected with a Pen.
PAge 3. line 13. his read this. p. 25. l. 7. exculded r. excluded p. 35. l.
29. favorite r. favorites. p. 37. l. 1. dow r. down. p. 52. l. 30. must r.
most p. 54. l. 14. Patoness r. Patroness. p. 96. l. 7.27. r. 17. p. 96. l. 8.
1559. r. 1569. p. 96. l. 24. 1559. r. 1569. p. 101. l. 16. out to r. out of. p.
118. l. 6. iminen^ r. imminent. p. 125. l. 28. gloriosi r. gloriose. p. 132. l.
2. remisnem r. remissionem. p. 195. l. 4. aad. r. and. p^ 197. l. 14. and
umiracle r. and miracle. p. 211. l. 14. unknow r. unknown. p. 237. l. 1. amd r.
and. p. 255. l. 9. to will r. to his will. p. 264. l. 2. Dialated r. Dilated.
p. 288. l. 30. wherewith r. where with. p. 369. l. 24. shed r. sheed. p. 372.
l. 19. Caiaphas r. Caiphas. p. 379. l. 23. shed r. sheed. p. 390. l. 26.
oodness r. goodness. p. 437. l. 12. of of r. of. p. 460. l. 30. evelasting r.
everlasting. p. 516. l. 13. an ds r. and as. p. 598. l. 1. of Incarnation r. of
the Incarnation. p. 623. l. 30. soul of r. soul out of.


