A CURRENT. 12 Julii, Stylo novo, 1642. OR, Some passages of great and
dangerous Consequence in FRANCE. Also an exact RELATION Of the present state
and condition of GERMANY, between the Imperialists Swedes, and others; And of
the happy success and progress of the said Swedes. With other considerable
matters fitting to be known in these times, wherein so many heads are employed
against the Parliament of ENGLAND.

London, Printed for Edward Husbands, and John Frank. 1642.

Paris, 12 Julii, 1542. Stylo novo.
BY an Express to a great Person it is certified, That the Queen mother is
dead, and is verily believed. Monsieur is gone, being of the Plot; and some say
a great one that must be namelesse knew of it If M. Jermyn, M. Percy, and M
Mountague had not been gone for Holland, there was order to have stayed them
here. The Duke of Bulloyn is prisoner at Turyn; some say his brother is got
into Sedan: There were many in this Plot, and it falls out happily it is
discovered; for France and Spain had joined, if the Plot had taken, which could
not but have produced dangerous effects to England in this sad time of
distraction. As for the German News, the underwritten will fully satisfy you,
being a most exact and impartial Relation of the present state of those parts.

The Prince of Transylvania seeing the happy success of the Swedes, toward
the hereditary Countries of the Emperor, and believing he has now found a fit
occasion to execute his design contrived long since, which is, To make himself
King of Hungaria, does begin to arm very powerfully: that preparation, with the
happy progress of the Swedes, puts both the Emperor into great perplexity,
and all Austria into an Alarm; for General Tortonsen, after his taking of
Necosse, having pursued the Imperial Army into Moravia has caused them to
retire, and take their post toward the Frontiers of Hungaria, near to
Malsborgh, and Badison, whither Piccolomini is gone with all diligence, to put
the Imperial Army in good order; but because the Troops which are come out of
high Saxony and Franconia are dispersed, and for that the Swedes are come
between them, they can very hardly join; besides some Regiments of the
Emperors which are amongst them, are mutined, and have pillaged the Baggage of
the Arch duke Leopoldus: Likewise it is not known whether it were the Swedes or
Imperialists that have pillaged 300 Wagons laden with very rich
housholdstuffe, which was intended to have been saved out of Moravia, by
conveying of it to Vienna: In the mean time Conningsmarck, a Commander of the
Swedes, has taken the Town of Olmits, the Capital of all Moravia, at the
third Assault, and killed all which were found in Arms, from thence gone to
Bruin, and it is believed at this time he will take it. Tortonsen threatens Gas
and Prague; his Horse makes courses within 15 Leagues of Vienna, and does
expect speedily new succors out of Sweden. The Treaty with Luenburg goes not
forward, by reason that Hildesheim will receive no Garrison. Touching the
Armies about the Rhyne, they remain in this state, each work upon their Bridges
upon Boats, do fortify their Camps with new succors: Hatfeld has received a
new Supply of four Regiments out of Franconia and Swale, and the Marshall de
Guibriane, has joined to him his confederates the Hessens and the Weymerians;
the first is encamped about Zoiet, and the other near Ortingson: Don Francisco
de Melo was not passed the River of Meise the first of this Month, but lodged
between Riermond and Hepsemwert, and is in dispute with Hatfeld for the highest
Command: but the Prince of Orange, and Marshall de Guebriane agree very well,
and their Camps are so near together, that their Armies seem to be but one
body: there passes in their quarters nothing but daily Skirmishes, in which
the Imperialists lose many men, besides those which daily disband; but the want
of Victual and Forage will in the the end force one Army or the other to a
Battle, or to dislodge from their quarters. The Sea Fleet of the Dunkerkes was
the third of this instant under their Fort, which is as well apprehended in
England as in Holland.

FINIS.

