A CVNNING PLOT TO DIVIDE AND DESTROY, THE PARLIAMENT AND THE CITY OF LONDON.
Made known (at a Common Hall) by the Earl of Northumberland, Master
Solliciter, and Sir Henry Vane. The Design is fully discovered in the Several
Examinations and Confessions, of Master RILEY Several Examinations and
Confessions, of Sir BASIL BROOK Several Examinations and Confessions, of
Master VIOLET Proclamations from his MAJESTY Letters from his MAJESTY Letters
from the Lord DIGBY Letters from Colonel READ.


LONDON, Printed, and are to be sold by Peter Cole at his shop in Cron-Hill,
right over against Pope's Head Aily near the Royal Exchange, January 16. 1643.

The Right Honorable, the Earl of Northumberland his Speech.
MY Lord Mayor, and you Gentlemen of the City of London, the two Houses of
Parliament, have not of late had any occasion to employ us hither, the reason
has been, because that your readiness and your forwardness have upon all
occasions prevented any thing that they could ask or desire from you; But now
at this time, we come from command of the two Houses to communicate unto you, a
discovery that has been lately made under a fair and specious pretense of
desiring peace, to raise divisions, and to make factions here in the City, and
between the City and the two Houses of Parliament: What has already passed,
and come to the knowledge of the Houses, they have sent us here to acquaint you
with, the Papers and the Examinations will be here read unto you, and likewise
the Sense of the two Houses. When you shall hear these read, and consider the
Instruments that were the Actors and the Persons employed in this Negotiation,
you will be best able to judge of the business; If you please to have the
patience to hear these Examinations read, these Gentlemen will read them.

A Narrative of a Design and Practice upon the City of London, lately
discovered, and some Observation upon it by Mr SOLLICITER.
MY Lord Mayor, and you Gentlemen and worthy Citizens of this City: You have
heard by this Noble Lord, that it has pleased Almighty God, out of his
goodness within these few days to make a discovery to both the Houses of an
intended practice upon the Parliament and City, and so by consequence upon the
whole Kingdom. And in respect, that the Stage whereupon this design was to
have been acted, were the Houses of Parliament, and principally this City, and
that some of the Actors in that Tragedy (for so I may call it) were members of
this City: And likewise in respect of that near Conjunction between the
Houses and you, That as Hypocritus twins, they are like to live and dye
together, Therefore they have commanded me and diverse other Gentlemen of the
House of Commons to make known unto you, what this design and practice was.

But before I tell you either what it was, or the dangerous consequence of it,
I think it will not be amiss, that you should hear it from one of themselves
who was an Actor and projector of it, that is, from the Lord Digby, who in a
letter writ to Sir Basil Brook concerning this business does profess, That
since these troubles did begin, There was no design, nor no practice that was
so likely to have taken, that was so likely to have produced that good effect
(as they style it) as this.

You may very well remember the bloody Design upon the Parliament and this
City discovered about half a year since: he himself said, That this is above
all that hitherto has been in agitation. This is their sense upon it, that
were the Projectors, and were to have been the Actors in it.

The thing in brief is thus: It was a seditious and Jesuitical Practice and
Design, under the specious pretense of Peace, to have rent the Parliament from
the City, and the City from the Parliament; To have severed and disjoined the
Parliament within it self, the City within it self, Thereby to render up both
Parliament and City to the Designs of the Enemy, which is not all; for the
destruction and nulling of this present Parliament was intended; as likewise
the engaging our selves in a Treaty of Peace without the advice or consent of
our Brethren of Scotland, contrary to the late Articles solemnly agreed upon by
both Kingdoms, to the perpetual dishonor of this Nation, by breach of our
public Faith, engaged therein to that Nation, thereby not only utterly to
frustrate our expectation of assistance from Scotland, but which is worse (in
all likelihood) to engage the two Nations in broils, if not in a war.

This in brief was the design, the particulars whereupon it was framed, and
the parties that were Actors in it, I shall likewise discover to you.

There was one Read, who called himself Colonel Read, a man I suppose well
known by name to this City: He had been heretofore many years since, a common
Agent for the Papists, he was a principal person to whom the Packets and
addresses from Rome were made; it was he that did disperse them abroad in the
Kingdom, with whom for the advancing of the Popish Cause, continued
consultations were held, who for advancing of the Catholic Cause (as they
call it) went over into Ireland, there fomented the Rebellion, having been one
of the Plotters of it, and was taken Prisoner there and sent hither; This was
the man, who was the principal contriver and Actor in the present business.

Who together with Sir Basil Brook (a known Jesuited Papist, a great Stickler
in all the Popish transactions, and Treasurer of the moneys lately contributed
by the Papists in the War against Scotland) both prisoners having laid the
design here, Mr Reads enlargement must be procured that he might act his part
at Oxford; Sir Basil Brook must lie ledger here.

But because so great a business required more mannagers, therefore one Violet
a broken Goldsmith, and a Protestant in show, must be brought in as a fit
person to go between these Papists and the parties in the City; Mr Ryley by
reason of his place of Scoutmaster of the City, and his reputation amongst the
Commoners must be gained, who in these respects might be very useful, both in
the way of Intelligence between Oxford and them, as likewise by promoting it
with the Citizens; others in the City of principal note amongst the people are
dealt withal.

The first thing Mr Ryley must act, is the exchange of Read (a prisoner for the
Treason and Rebellion in Ireland) under the name of Captain Read, taken
prisoner at Burleigh House in this Kingdom, for one of no greater rank than a
Quartermaster. That being done a Character of Intelligence was agreed on
between Read, Ryley, and Violet, Read to be known by the name of Colonel Lee,
Ryley by the name of The Man in the Moon, and Violet by the name of James
Morton.

After Reads going to Oxford, the Queen, the Duchess of Buckingham, and the
Lord Digby are consulted with; These are the Managers at Oxford with his
Majesty's knowledge: Read from Oxford, by Letters to Master Rily by the name
of the Man in the Moon assures him, The business goes on well at Oxford;
Promises of reward are made to Ryley and Violet: Peace being the pretense;
Therefore Propositions are framed and agreed on, fix in number, by Read, Sir
Basil Brook, Ryley, and Violet, and seen by others, and afterward sent to
Oxford. A Petition for Peace being intended, the better to induce that, It was
agreed that his Majesty must write a powerful and promising letter to the
Lord Major and Citizens, to be read at a Common Hall, and fit Instruments
thought upon to be employed to prepare my Lord Major before hand: The Letter
was written and agreed uponhere by Sir Basil Brook, Master Ryley and Violet and
sent to Oxford, Violet a prisoner by Master Ryleys means was procured to be
exchanged, that he might from Oxford bring the letter and advises, for the
carrying on of the business: At Oxford the business was so diligently
solicited by Read, that at Violets coming, all things were ready, and after
three hours discourse in his Majesty's presence, with the Queen, the Duchess
of Buckingham, and the Lord Digby, Violet the same day, (being the Monday
before the discovery) dispatched from Oxford with his Majesty's Letter, altered
in nothing save the Title, and with another Letter from the Lord Digby to Sir
Basil Brook, whereby the whole managing of the business is entrusted to Sir
Basil Brook, and it is wholly left to his Wisdom and Discretion, whither the
letter to the City shall be delivered or not.

Violet brought both the Letters to Sir Basil Brook the Wednesday after, and
one Wood having formerly brought a Letter from Oxford to the City, the same in
matter with this that Violet brought, which will be read unto you; Sir Basil
Brook delivered the Letter that came last from Oxford to Wood to be delivered
to my Lord Major: the next day after which was Thursday, and with direction,
That it should have been published on the Friday; The delivery of it to my Lord
Major, by the discovery of it the same day was prevented, and Sir Basil Brook,
Ryley and Violet that night were examined.

Before the Reading of the Examinations, Letters, and Propositions unto you at
large, That the main design to be made out by them, as they are conjoined and
have relation to the precedent narrative, may be the better understood, I shall
in brief touch upon the matter of them, as likewise upon such Conclusions as
may necessarily be deduced from them.

As first, That no Peace was really intended, appears throughout the whole
transaction: The propositions, which upon the Supposition that this is no
Parliament, if anything, were to have been the groundwork and foundation of
it, which upon the reading you will find so flight and frivolous, that no man
can conceive that our Peace could have been built upon such a foundation;
Nothing so much as spoken of concerning Ireland, or the disengaging of of our
^elves from the Articles of Agreement with our Brethren of Scotland; No
provision for Reformation of Religion, or preservation of that we have, or of
our Laws and Liberties: But in stead thereof there are quaedam iniqua, the
Excise must be continued beyond the war, that out of it the King might have a
benefit, and the debts of the Enemies to the Parliament repayed: and the City
immediately to be Treated with.

That no Peace was intended, appears further from the L: Digbies Letter
(written within a day or two of that to the City) to the Ki: Agent at Brussels,
who writes that the French Treaty was at an end, because the Parliament must
not be acknowledged to be a Parliament, that as the King for a long time had
taken that for a ground, so he held the same resolution still, being thereunto
advised by all his Lords at Oxford; and by his resolution of holding a Great
Counsel in the nature of a Parliament at Oxford the 22. of this Month. And
when his Majesty's Letter shall be read, you will find no particulars
whereupon a Peace should have been built, save only kind words in generals.

This further appears from the persons who were the first Designers and
Contrivers, and were to have been the chief managers from first to last of the
business, Read and Sir Basil Brook known Iesuited Papists, and always active
in promoting Popish practizes; This Peace must have been such as these persons
shall contrive; The prayer for our deliverance from the Gun powder Treason
agreed upon in Parliament, says, That the Faith of such Papists is faction,
Their practices, the murdering of the souls and bodies of men; Read he has
been a Contriver and prosecuter of the bloody Tragedies of the Protestants in
Ireland; the other not without suspicion to have had his hand in it; what is
said concerning the Queen in that particular, is set forth by the Declaration
of both or one of the Houses, and the Articles of her Impeachment, the
Countess of Buckingham (beside that her husband has appeared visibly in that
Rebession) is not free of other cause of suspicion: These as was said before,
assisted with the Lord Digby, must be the Instruments of this Peace; which as
it is set forth in his Majesty's Letter, must be such as that whereby the true
Protestant Religion, the Laws and Liberties of the Kingdom must be maintained.

These Papists you see, who had done so good service for the Protestant
Religion in Ireland, must lay the foundation for the preservation of it here.

Sir Basil Brook, and Read, well knew that the Pope and and Popery have been
banished this Kingdom by the Parliaments of England, and that the succeeding
Parliaments to this time have always endeavored the suppression of popery, and
therefore Degenerating from their Predecessors, who in the Gunpowder Treason
endeavored for that cause to have blown up the parliament, They must now
endeavor the Preservation of the Parliament, and the Laws and the Liberties
of the Kingdom.

The things which from this brief Narrative, the reading of the Examinations,
Propositions, and Letters, will appear to have been designed, are these;

First the dividing the Parliament from the City, and the Parliament and the
City within themselves.

First in respect that this Treaty of Peace was to have been immediately
between the King and the City, and that whereupon the Peace of the whole
Kingdom should have been settled, as appears by his Majesty's Letter, what
wide rents such a Treaty must have produced between the City and Parliament is
obvious. Again, for the prosecution of the Treaty when entertained by the City;
safe conducts were to have been granted, not only to those of the City, but to
such of the Members of either House, as would have repaired to Oxford for that
purpose; Every man sees by this, what division and confusion would have
followed both in City and Parliament. The Projectors were well acquainted with
Machivels maxim, divide and impera.

The second was no less then the utter destruction, the nulling and making
void of this present Parliament, as will appear by the Lord Digbyes letter to
De vic, and the summoning of the great Council or Parliament at Oxford
compared with the third of these Propositions. By the letter to De vic this
Parliament, as the resolution then was at Oxford, must not be acknowledged; and
by this third Proposition for that very cause, the Parliament must be waved,
and the Treaty must be immediately between the King and City. The consequence
whereof had been no less then the rendering of the Kingdom for ever incapable
of having any more Parliaments; This Parliament, It was called and continued
according to the known Laws and Usages of the Kingdom, was afterward by an
Act of Parliament, assented unto by his Majesty, so acknowledged, and made
indissolvable without its own consent; (a greater Testimony of the validity of
this Parliament, then I think was ever given to any:) If neither the Common
Laws and usages of this Kingdom, nor the concurrent Authority of an Act
Parliament be able to support this Parliament, when his Majesty shall declare
the contrary, I shall without more words leave to your judgments, whether this
doctrine does not at once blow up the fundamentalls of all Parliaments, Laws of
the Kingdom, Liberty of the Subjects, and of the whole policy and
Government of this Kingdom, which being destroyed, what security you could
have devised for the maintaining of the Religion, Laws, and Liberties of the
Kingdom, as is promised you in his Majesty's letter, I know not.

3. The third was not only the preventing of the assistance of our Brethren in
Scotland; But that which is worse, and must have necessarily followed
thereupon, the embroiling of both the Nations in divisions, in all likelihood
fat all unto both; this will appear by putting together what has been done
by the Parliament, those at Oxford, and the transactions in this design.

The Parliament long since have invited that Nation to our assistance in this
common cause upon weighty considerations.

As first, conceiving that by this means through Gods blessing, this great
cause which concerns our Religion, Laws, Liberties, and all we have, would be
assured, and the event of the War, otherwise doubtful, made more certain.

2. Secondly, that by their assistance the war might be the sooner ended, and
so by consequence the calamities which of necessity must accompany it, their
assistance adding so considerable a strength to our party, besides the
reputation which the concurrence of a whole Nation with us, will add to the
justness of the cause.

3. And thirdly, that as in likelihood by their joint concurrence, a better
Peace for present might be procured, so in all probability what shall be agreed
upon would be the more lasting and durable, both Nations being equally
interested in what should be agreed upon.

Besides the Covenant maturely sworn and agreed upon by both Nations for the
maintenance and defense of Religion, and of the mutual Laws and Liberties of
each Kingdom, a solemn league and Treaty has likewise been mutually agreed
upon between the Parliament here and that Kingdom, concerning the manner of
their assistance (and great sums of money have been thereupon sent unto them.)
In which Treaty one Article is, That neither Nation shall entertain any Treaty
of Peace, without the advice and consent of the other. This in brief contains
the transactions between that Nation and the Parliament. At Oxford by papers in
the form of Proclamations, they have styled this assistance, an Invasion of
the Kingdom, and one end of the calling of that great Council or Parliament
is for opposing of the same.

In the carriage of the present design, by one of Reads letters to Ryley he
says, That a door is open by the coming in of the Scots for the destruction
of this Kingdom; That therefore this Peace must presently be concluded. That
all is lost unless it be done speedily. The maine intent of the letter is for
the speeding of it to that end. The Lord Digbyes letter to Sir Basil Brook,
referring the delivering of his Majesty's letter to my Lord Mayor to his
discretion, he forthwith delivers it to Wood, to be the next day delivered to
my Lord Mayor, and he next day after the delivery to be by him published; He
saw it necessary, and so resolved at Oxford, That we must speedily break with
the Scots.

Their assistance, how necessary, and by Gods blessing how beneficial it is
like to be unto us, I think you see, but this must be prevented; The honor and
public faith of Nations how Sacred it is, and from the rules of Religion and
common policy, how tenderly to be preserved each man knows; But this design
must violate and stain our honor in the highest: For contrary to the Article
before mentioned, this Treaty must presently be set on foot without them; such
violations are always deeply resented by the parties injured: how dangerous
therefore the consequence must needs have been, he that runs may read.

This was the Design: It was too Ugly, It was too Black, Bare faced, to have
been presented to your view, and therefore it must be masqu't; This hook must
be baited with the sweet word Peace; It has been long since observed from the
Ecclesiastical proceedings of the Romish Church. That in nomine Domini Incipit
omne malum, The Holy Name of God must bear out all their Spiritual
wickednesses: The end of all Civil Policy is the preserving of just and
Honorable Peace; and therefore these men when Divisions, Violence, and what is
most contrary to Peace is intended, yet for the compassing of these ends, Peace
must be pretended. So was it by many of them about this time twelve month
Designed in their Petition to the Parliament for a Peace, and so was it in the
bloody plot upon the City, and diverse Members of both Houses discovered the
last Summer. For upon the examinations of diverse of them, It appeared that the
ground of that plot was laid in the first Petition, and that the second was to
have been gilded over with a Petition for Peace.

These men, (I speak of these designs) they cry Peace, Peace, that destruction
might have come upon you as an armed man: You shall now hear the examinations
and other things read at large unto you.

SIR HENRY VANE JUNIOR, His Introduction to the Reading the several
Examinations taken in this business, Together with several Observations,
delivered by him, upon occasion thereof.
GENTLEMEN,
YOU have heard very fully the State of this bu sines, by what the Persons that
have already spoken, have opened to you in general; that which you are now in
the next place to have communicated to you, are the Examinations, as they
proceeded from the mouths of the Parties themselves, that you may see the
Design in its lively colors, and that as you have had it summarily presented
to you from this Noble Lord and worthy Gentleman; you may now hear the parties
themselves speak.

The first Examination that was taken, was the 4. of Jan. 1643. and it was the
Examination of Theophilus Reyley,
Who says:
THat since Newbery fight, one Pitsons wife (whose Husband was taken at Newbery
fight, was a Quartermaster, and formerly employed by this Examinant, as an
Intelligence) did move this Examinant to speak to Colonel Harvey, for some way
to get her husband to be released, who replied, He would do what he could, but
conceived the best way was to apply her self to Col. Harvey, who could do it,
having Interest in my Lord General.

VUpon this occasion, it is necessary for me to give you this account likewise
of this exchange, that it is very true, Colonel Harvey did hereupon move his
Excellency (that is now here present with you) but it was so conveyed, as it
seems to Col. Harvey (whose merit is known very well among you, and how well he
has deserved of the Commonwealth) that he did acquaint my Lord General with
it, under the Notion of a person called Cap. Read, that should be taken at
Burlee Castle, in a fight here in the Wars in England, thereby to disguise
him to his Excellency, that so he might be induced to grant this Exchange, and
by this handsome shift, it should seem (as you will hear by and by) that this
warrant was procured from his Excellency, who had he known it, as he was not
bailable by the law, so his Excellency, from the tenderness he had to the good
of the Commonwealth, he would have had a care to have prevented it, but by
this shift it was gotten.

Whereupon a warrant was procured from my L. Genesis for the release of Col. Read,
in exchange for James Pitson, and the said Col. Harvey did write a letter to
this Examinant to take security of Col. Read for the exchange aforesaid, and
directed him to call for the Warrant which Pitsons wife, by the direction of
this Examinant, did fetch from Col. Harveys wife, and brought the warrant to
this Examinant, who thereupon did proceed as he was directed, to take security
from Colonel Read, by which occasion this Examinant began to be acquainted
with the said Read, who said that now he was released, he protested to God, no
man was more wronged then he, that he had never born arms, that none wished
happier to the State, for a good Peace, then he; and that he would, upon his
going to Oxford, make it appear, and endeavor the procuring of a Peace, at
which time Master Violet a Goldsmith was present, who said, That the said Read
would be found to be as likely a man to procure Peace, as any in England, the
security being given, the said Read went to Oxford, and about a fortnight
after, Violet came to this Examinants house, and desired to speak with him; for
he had heard from Read, and that he should see the said Read would be a good
Instrument for procuring of Peace, at which time Violet produced a Paper of
Propositions for Peace, and asked his opinion, how they would relish with the
Parliament, who replied, That he did verily think that the Parliament would
not agree unto them all, in his opinion; the particulars this Examinant does
not well remember: that during the imprisonment of the said Violet, the said
Violet came Two times to this Examinant, and told him, That Read would work
the Queen to a Peace, as he should see shortly, this Examinant further says,
That upon the news of Sir. Arthur Haselrigs kinsman-being taken Prisoner at
Beaver by the Enemy, this Examinant coming to my Lady Haselriggs, she
(speaking of Pitson) said, She would be glad this Examinant would think of
somebody for the exchange of her Kinsman, to which this Examinant then replied
nothing: but after that, the said Violet coming to him, he demanded of Violet,
if he could think of any one to be exchanged for Sir Arthars kinsman, who
replied to this Examinant, Do you think I might be exchanged for him, or to
that effect, to which this Examinant answered, He would speak to Sir Arthur
Haselrigge concerning him, who did so accordingly, and Sir Arthur Haselrigge
prayed this Examinant to send Violets name, which this Examinant did; and
thereupon by Order of the House, this exchange was appointed between Sir Arthur
Haselriggs kinsman and Violet, and security taken accordingly, and the Bonds
left at this Examinants house. Upon Saturday night last, Violet came to this
Examinants house, to know if the said warrant were obtained from my Lord
General, for his release, and this Examinants man told him it was. the said
Violet, upon taking his leave of this Exam. told him he would be back with him
within three or four days, and bring the Discharg of Sr Arthur Haselrigs
Kinsman, and that there was a Letter already agreed upon at Oxford, to be
written from the King to the City, about Petitioning him, and that it would be
here on New-yeers day, and that accordingly the said Violet yesterday returned
from Oxford, and this morning told this Examinant, That he had brought a Letter
and a Message to Master Alderman Gibbs, and the Lord Major, and appointed him
to meet with him again to morrow at Nine of the Clock, the Examinant being
then very busy.

THEOPHILUS RILY.

This is the examination that was first taken of Master Riley, and at the same
time when the Committee finished this examination, there chanced to fall from
Master Riley, without any observation at that time by the Committee a paper
upon the room, which afterward the Comnsittee also by accident, hardly
observing what it should be, took up; and found it to be the Letter as was
afterward confessed from Read at Oxford to Master Riley, which Letter you shall
now hear read, and in the second place Master Riley his confession that this
letter was directed to him, and was the letter of Read to him; the letter is
directed on the back of it for the man in the Moon, for when Master Read left
this town, there was a threefold character agreed upon for intelligence
between Master Read, Violet, and Master Riley, Master Riley was to be called
the man in the Moon, Master Violet to be called James Morton, and Colonel
Read to be called Colonel Lee, so according to this threefold character,
Master Riley himself acknowledged this was that which was to be applied to
him, the letter ye shall now hear read.

Sir,
I Wrote to you formerly but never had any answe, I assure you faithfully I
have not bin wanting to do what you desired (as you may perceive by the
effects) and if you have not your desire blame your self, but give me leave to
tell you that if you neglect the opertunity now offered to you, it may be you
shall never have the like again, for I have made those whom you have given just
occasion to be your worst friends to be your best, and the only instrument to
procure what here is sent you, and be you confident she shall still be so,
provided you do your part; consider I beseech you what a gap is opened by
bringing in of the Scots for the destruction of this Kingdom if there be not a
peace, (which I pray God almighty to send speedily) you must expect armies of
strangers from several places, who are now preparing, who certainly at their
coming in will overrun the whole Kingdom, and when it is past remedy, you will
see your own errors, and therefore to prevent more misery then I am able to
express to this deplorable Kingdom, and the effusion of the blood of millions
of men, women, and children which must inevitably be this summer, apply your
selves in a humble and submissive way to his Majesty, whom I know you will find
ready with arms cutstretched to receive you to favor and mercy, and grant you
favors even beyond your expectation, defer no time (for Gods sake) and what
you will do; do it speedily, I say again do it speedily and lose no time, for
reasons I may not write.


The direction of the letter by the same hand that it is written within, is for
the man in the Moon, without date.

Upon the falling down of this note to the ground we examined Master Riley
upon it, who did protest to us clearly he did not know he had this note about
him, who did thereupon declare as you shall hear, that the note directed upon
the backside to this examinant to the man in the Moon, he confesses to be
sent him a fortnight since from Colonel Read, and that he received another to
this effect before, which is also here, and shall be read unto you. The
inscription upon the back of this letter is for the man in the Moon.

Sir,
I Assure you I have not bin wanting to further your good desires, and if it be
not your own faults I make doubt but things will have a happy issue, for I find
those that are most concerned in it forward enough, reflect now upon the misery
of the times, and upon the groans and sufferings of those you see not, which
yet have bin nothing to what they will be if not speedily prevented by a Peace;
which to obtain, I beseech you, let it not only be your own care but the care
of all those you love, or have power with; otherwise be confident of a general
ruin; which certainly will be inevitable both to your selves and posterity;
and therefore take it into your serious consideration, and let not causeles^e
jealousies hinder you to apply your selves in a humble submissive manner to his
Majesty, who I am sure will yet look upon you with a gracious eye, lose no
time, for the longer you delay, it may prove more difficult, no doubt.


TThe former of these letters in this examination which is sign dwith his own
hand, he does acknowledge, this letter which has bin first read: we shall read
you his other examination wherein he likewise acknowledges this letter which
has bin since read, and you may observe upon these letters that this Gentleman
Colonel Read (who as was told you, is a famous lesuit) has bin the
Ringleader in the rebellion of Ireland, O how tender hearted he is now to the
Peace and liberty of this Kingdom, he has there in Ireland kindled a flame,
and raised a rebellion to hinder the good endeavors of this Parliament, which
if it had not bin, you might have enjoyed your liberties without this war and
blood that has bin since spilt, and now he returns a preacher here to exhort
Mr. Riley for fear of this ruin which himself has caused for to come to a
Peace now, upon Propositions of his own contriving, which are nothing else but
a delivering your selves up to the designs of these Jesuits and Papist, who
would in the same manner bring our Protestant blood to be spilt here in
England, which with out mercy they have already done in Ireland, I only tell
you this by way of Observation.

Gent. This paper which was first read to you, confessed by Mr. Riley to be sent
him from Col. Read, falling thus strangely into our hands, who knew nothing of
it, nor knew nothing at all of this conspiracy, we did thereupon tell M. Rily,
that he could not but take notice of the finger of God, that would bring the
same to light, and though from our tenderness and respect to him before, we
would not examine him of his papers that were about him, we now did desire he
would pull out his papers from his pocket, to let us see what he had beside,
having done so, here is another paper directed like wise to M Theophitus Riley,
and it is but of four lines, but that which did like wise discover another
person that we knew not of, to be interested in the business, and that is Sir
Bafil Brook, It is directed for M Riley, and it runs thus; Good Mr. Riley,
these are to let you know, that I am returned from Oxford, with good sirccesse
in my business, and perceiving that you have appointed to meet B. B. at 9. of
the Clock, I pray without fail, be here at the Eyon in South work before 8. of
the clock to morrow morning. It is subscribed T. V. that is, Tho. Violet, and
dated Wednesday. 3. Jan. 1643. which was the day Mr. Violet returned from
Oxford: was this good success as he wrote here in the note, and the next
morning it seems, Mr. Riley and Sir Basil Brook appointed to meet at 9. of the
Clock, and he desired him to meet an hour before, and M. Riley upon the
examination coufest this B. B. was Sir Basil Brook.

The further Examination of Theophilus Riley, 4. Ianuar. 1643.
This Examinant being further demanded concerning a Letter directed for Master
Theophilus Riley, and subscribed T. V. (which was the Letter last read to you)
confesses the said Letter was written to himself from Thomas Violet, and sent
to him this morning; that B. B. mentioned in the Letter, is Sir Basil Brook,
as he conceives: that he has twice had conference with Sir Basil Brook at the
three Cranes in the Vintrey, which time the said Thomas Violet was also there,
this Examinant being brought thither by the said Violet, where they had
discourse about the Treaty to be transacted by Colonel Read: that Sir Basil
Brook sent for this Examinant on Tuseday last to the three Cranes, where he
told this Examinant, a Letter of grace and favor would be sent from the King
to the Lord Major, that his Majesty would be willing to receive a Petition from
the City: Then Sir Basil Brook showed to this Exaninant a copy of the Kings
letter, which was to this effect as he remembers: That whereas this City had
been famous for their loyalty to the King, and that they had of late been
disobedient, yet if they would petition to him, he would lovingly receive them,
and protested how he had ever endeavored to maintain the true Protestant
Religion, Privileges of Parliament, and liberties of the Subject: that there
was a Messenger come already about this business; that Violet would return
within three of four days, and upon that appointed another meeting upon
Friday at nine of the clock, in expectation of Violets return. He further
says, that the like note to this showed him, directed to the Man in the moon,
was delivered to him by Violet about a fortnight sithence, and this Note was
delivered to him by Sir Basil Brook at the three Cranes on Monday or Tuseday
last, both of them coming from Colonel Read.

T. Riley.

So there he acknowledges both these Letters, the one to be delivered him by
this Violet, the other by Sir Basil Brook.

He further says, that the said Violet delivered this Examinant a paper of
Propositions, demanding this Examinants opinion; who told him which he thought
would be consented to by the Parliament, and which not: That the said Violet
also asked this Examinant, whether there might not be thought on some
Propositions that might please the King and Parliament.

Theophilus Riley.

Having proceeded to examine Master Riley thus far, the Committee did
likewise send for Sir Basil Brook, who was Prisoner in the Kings Bench, and
his Examination is that which is next to be read to you, and is the fifth of
January 1643.

Who says,
That he knows Colonel Read; that he was the man (as he thinks) did design
the Treaty of peace, now in agitation between the King and the City: That he
knows Thomas Violet; that he acquainted this Examinant with Propositions,
which he knows not whether himself drew, or that he did it with the
assistance of others: Who further says, that Master Violet told this
Examinant, that he thought all those in the City that formerly showed
themselves for peace, would do so now; among which was Alderman Gibbes, who
had made a Speech tending that way in the house of Commons: that he knows
Master Riley, upon occasion of this business, and has met with him at the
three Cranes in the Vintrey two several times, where he desired to know of the
said Riley, whether if that a Letter came from the King, it might be a means
to procure the City to move the Parliament for the procuring of a Treaty of
peace? To which Master Riley replied, he thought the Lord Major and Common
Council would acquaint the Parliament with it and that it was probable
thereupon Propositions might be thought upon, and a peace might ensue. This
Examinant being showed the note directed to the Man in the moon, did confess
he received it from Master Read by Wood, and that he delivered it with his own
hands to Master Riley at the three Cranes at their second meeting, and says
that Violet told him this, that by the Man in the moon was meant Master Riley.
This Examinant further says, that in less then a fortnight one Wood brought
several Letters from Oxford; one from his Majesty, to the Lord Mayor,
Aldermen, and well-affected Citizens; another from the Lord Digby to this
Examinant, and a Copy of the Kings Letter: That Thomas Violet returned from
Oxford on Wednesday night, and brought with him Letters also from his Majesty,
to the Mayor, Aldermen, and Common Council, a Letter from the Lord Digby to
this Examinant, and a copy of his Majesty's Letter; that the later of the Kings
Letters is in the hands of the said Wood, and that the said Letter was given
him on Thusday night, with direction to deliver it to the Lord Mayor: the rest
of the Letters this Examinant has in his power, and undertakes to deliver them
to this Committee, and knows who has the charge of them; that the Kings
Letters differed very little, and were to this effect.

That the City had showed great loyalty to the Kings predecessors, and had
received great favors from them, and that he doubted not that he had many good
subjects in the City that did desire Peace, and were weary of their misery;
that he had sent these Letters to let them know he would confirm the
Protestant Religion, and the liberties of the subjects, in any way they should
devise, and that he would be ready to receive their petition, if they
presented any to him, and give safe conduct to them they should send with their
Petition.

That the substance of the Lord Digbies Letter was to direct him to deliver the
Kings Letter, or to forbear, according as he found it probable the City were
inclinable thereunto. That Violet did tell this Examinant, that he conceived
the City would be very well inclined to that the King expressed in his Letters,
and thereupon would acquaint the Parliament with it.

That Violet told this Examinant he had spoken with Alderman Gibbes and Master
Riley since his return from Oxford, and acquainted them that he had brought a
Letter from the King, and though Alderman Gibbes refused to have any thing to
do in the business but in a public way, yet he was conceived by Violet
notwithstanding to be the same man he was before, inclinable toward peace: He
further says, that he desired Mr. Riley to promise him secrecy in what he
delivered to him, which he did. That Violet told this Examinant, that the King
promised him to requite him well if the business succeeded; Riley also should
be well requited if a peace did follow. That at the meetings between this
Examinant and Master Riley, at the three Cranes, the said Riley told him he
thought the said Alderman Gibbes, and diverse others in the City, would be for
peace; and that he thought that the Cities declaring for Peace, would be the
most probable and best way to draw the Parliament to join, and so to effect it.

Basil Brook.

The next Examination which shall be read to you, is the Confession of Violet,
written with his own hand.

Tho. Violet says, that he being aboard the Ship called the Prosperous Sarah,
for his twentieth part, he did write two Letters, to my Lord Mayor and
Alderman Gibbes, to entreat their assistance for bringing him on shore; which
was done within four or five days, and he was committed to the prison of the
Kings Bench.

That about ten days after, Master John Read was remanded from the aforesaid
Ship to the prison of the Kings Bench, and lay in the same house part of the
time of his stay in prison, where he procured to be exchanged for one that was
taken by the Kings forces, and carried to Oxford; and understanding by Master
John Read that the Warrant for the exchange was in Master Rileys hands to take
the security, he went twice over with Master Read, to have the security taken;
and Master Read then telling Master Riley, that if there were not a Peace,
there would needs come a great destruction upon this Kingdom; that he would be
a blessed Instrument that could procure peace, which Master Riley seconded.

Thereupon Mr. Read told Mr. Riley and me, that when he came to Oxford he would
intimate how he found things to incline to a peace, and protested he would to
the utmost of his power do good offices in that behalf, and that he would
signify how he found things to stand: Whereupon he sent a small note to me,
that I should tell Master Riley, he had moved him that was most concerned in
the business, and that he found him very willing to embrace any occasion to
have these differences reconciled. And another Note he sent me, to go to
Master Riley, with a Superscription, To the Man in the Moon, in which he
pressed earnestly, that if they would take into their consideration the groans
and sufferings of them they see not, and keep ruin from themselves and
posterities, the likeliest way was to petition his Majesty, that so these great
mischiefs might be removed, and things brought to a good end between the
King and Parliament; which Note I delivered to Master Riley.

Within a week after there was a Paper left at my Lodging, wherein were about
ten Questions propounded, two of them I had formerly spoken of to Colonel
Read, which was, That his Majesty would be pleased to pass an Act of Oblivion:
And that, if his Majesty would come and fit with his Parliament, there was
revenue enough to satisfy all demands in a peaceable way by the Excise, both
for the King and Parliament. But finding diverse other Questions in the Paper, I
went to Master Riley, who upon perusal usall of the Paper, told me, that some
three or four of them he did conceive might very well be taken into
consideration: and he did often desire before me, that some course might be
taken that his Majesty would signify to the Parliament or City, that he would
come up to the Parliament, and that the City would petition him in that behalf.

Whereupon I went to Sir David Watkins, and knowing that he was a man zealous
for the Parliament and Commonwealth, I told him.

Sir, I am come to you, to ask your advice in a business of great
concernment, and if I did think there were any danger in the doing of it, I
would not meddle with it: and therefore I am come to you to desire your opinion
in these things I present to you, and what you advise to do in it. Whereupon I
showed him the paper wherein the Questions were. He asked me where I had them:
I told him, I did conceive they came from Master Read, and declared to him most
of the foresaid passages, but some of them I told him I had in the way of
discourse spoken of to Master Read, but for the greatest part, I know nothing
of it.

Sir David Watkins told me, if I would leave the Papers with him, he would ask
a friend of his, and take advice; the next day I brought them to him, and he
told me he did conceive many of the questions were good ways for a Peace, and
that the Parliament and City must first be moved in it, and for the present he
would not do any thing in it; but would not speak of it to any one, but wished
it might bring a good peace, and said the Excise would give content to both.
Whereupon I told Mr Riley, that I would desire Sir Basil Brook to see if he
could procure his Majesty's Letters to the Parliament or City, to desire an
Accommodation: And thereupon Sir Basil Brook, before he did write any thing,
desired to speak with Master Riley himself, to know what he did esteem the
Excise to be worth, and what way he desired to be taken concerning the Debts of
the Public Faith; and how the Kings engagements might be satisfied, and what
ground he had for what he should speak; and what he conceived the Excise to be
worth a year, if the times were settled.

Whereupon Master Riley replied, he did esteem it to be about three millions a
year, if the times were quiet, which would quickly satisfy the debts on both
sides: and afterward a proportion of what should be agreed on might go for
the increasing of his Majesty's revenue.

Their meeting was at the three Cranes in the Vintrey, about a month ago, and
what assurance was spoken of, if the King would assent to come to his
Parliament, he should have. Sir Basil Brook told Master Riley, that though he
were a Papist, he suffered as much by the war as any other; for he could not
receive his rents, and Soldiers were billeted in his house, and therefore it
concerned him to look after peace as well as any other; and he would thank
God, if he could be an instrument to bring a lasting and good Peace about.

Master Riley told him, there was no Question to be made but if the King would
send a Letter to the Militia to that effect as this which his Majesty has
sent, they would petition the House about it; for without their consent they
could not meddle in any thing: Which Sir Basil Brook told him he never expected
or thought otherwise; and to this effect was their discourse. Whereupon he told
Master Riley, he would take some course to see if he could persuade the King,
by such friends as he had about him, to send a Letter to the Parliament, or
the City of London, to signify the desire he had for Peace and unity with all
his subjects. Thereupon they parted, and the next morning Sir Basil Brook
spoke to me, that he would write to my Lady Duchess of Buckingham to be a
means to persuade the Queen, to be a visible actor to procure a peace, and
that by that means she would procure the love of the people; and that she
would procure his Majesty to give an exchange for me, and that if I could have
his Majesty's Warrant to come to Oxford; which when he told me of, he had
written, though I did not see it: I made my petition to the Militia, my Lord
Mayor, and Alderman Gibbes. I writ a letter, and desired Master Riley to
deliver it to them; desiring them to move the Militia that I might have liberty
to go to Oxford, upon putting in bail to pay 70. li. or to return to London
within 20 days, which was not granted: Then I desired Mr Riley to find me an
exchange, which he did, and I am now again returned with the Kings pleasure in
that business concerning my exchange. There was a Letter sent down by Sir Basil
Brook, by Wood, concerning what was desired, but the King would not send it to
the Parliament, but writ the Letter as it is come up, and in Sir Basil Brooks
custody, with a power in him only, from my L. Digby, to deliver it, if he
thought it would work the effect of a blessed peace: and upon my salvation
never any thing entered into my heart, but to do all things for the honor of
the Parliament, and good of the common wealth, to my power. When I came to
Court, on Tuseday morning, I found the King in the garden, and Read took me a
way and brought me to the L. Digby, and presently my L. Digby told me he had
sent up the Kings letter by one Wood, to the Lo. Mayor, Aldermen, and common
Council, which was delivered to Sir Basil Brook, to which letter I humbly
refer my self: and another letter was sent up to Sir B. Brook, if he saw good
to deliver the letter, under the L. Digbies hand, which letter I brought up,
and delivered it to Sir Basil Brook, and that was not to be delivered unles Sir
Basil Brook saw good, and that it would be a means to work a blessed peace:
since I came to Town I told Sir David Watkins, Alderman Gibs, Rily, Joseph
Alderman Gibs his man, and some others, that there was hope of a blessed peace:
all which I humbly submit to your grave wisdoms. That I was to tell my L.
Major, the King had directed his letter to him Lord Major of London, which (
Read told me) was his Majesty's pleasure, which he did, hearing he was a
moderate man in his place: and for Alderman Gibs, his Majesty did recommend it
to his care, that he would further the business, as he should think best
(according to the Letters) for accomplishing a happy peace.

M. Ryley told me that it could be no trouble to me to bring up these Letters,
for when they have brought up any Message to the Lord Major and
Common Council, they will do nothing in it till they have acquainted the
Parliament, and receive their direction what answer to give. Sir David Watkins
told me, that after it was recommended to the houss, be would affist it both by
himself and friends to the uttermost of his power for a peace; and the reason
he gave me, was, that if a peace was concluded, he hoped to be reimbursed the
money he has laid our, and that the Parliament would look well to the keeping
of the Covenant; the reason M. Ryley gave, that the Letters should be directed
to the City, was, that he did believe, if the King did write to them he would
not touch upon any thing of the differences between King and Parliament, but
leave it to the City to Petition the Parliament, without whose consent and
privity he and Sir D. Watkins could or would do nothing, for it was resolved
the House should know and give their directions for every thing. Besides Sir B.
B. in his directions from the King, was to be assured that this Letter would be
a means to work a blessed peace, or else to forbear the delivery, and before
Sir B. B. wrote about it, he did speak to M. Ryley to know how he should be
assured of the good inclination of the City for a Peace, to whom M. Ryley
replied, there was no question of it but it would, and it was resolved that
^int and request of the Militia for a peace to the houses, was ground enough
for the King to take notice of, the inclination of many of his Subjects in
London for a peace. And to this last, when I told Sir D. Watkins of the way
which was intended, the King would take notice of the inclination, by that
message he did approve of it, that M. Ryley meeting at the Tavern in
Cheapeside, the sign of the man in the moon, did give order to Read when he
writ to him to write by that name, Reads name was to be known by M. Lee, and
Thomas Violets name by Morton, but that I never received any note from Read,
other then I have declared.

Tho. Violet.

You shall hear now a further Examination of Tho. Violet, who being showed a
note, beginning; Sir, I assure you, an ending may prove the more difficult,
which was the former note I read that was delivered to M. Ryley, by Violet
himself. He accknowledgeth he received this note from one Wood, who told this
Examinat, it came from one Colonel Read, whose hand writing he conceived it
was, but it was to be delivered to M. Ryley, which this Examinat did
accordingly, in a day or two after his receipt, by occasion of meeting the said
M. Ryley, and M. Ryle's inquiring of him what Read had done in the business of
Peace.

He says, that Sir Bazill Brook wished him to tell the Queen (which he did)
that if she would be a mediator in this peace, she would make her self very
famous and glorious, and get the love again of all the people, and that there
would be enough as he did conceive out of the Excise to satisfy all Public
debts. And that he should acquaint the Queen that M. Ryley had told him, that
as soon as the Kings Letter was brought up, it should be communicated to the
Common Council, and from thence to the house, which in all probability would
be a certain way for peace.

The Queen hereupon replied, that she would be glad with all her heart to be a
mediator between the King and his people, and that this Examinat should
deserve very well in promoting this work, and took it very kindly from this
Examinat, and Sir Bazill Brook; and that she would study to requite it.

That the same Message that this Examinant delivered to the Queen, he presented
also to the King, who expressed a good acceptance of the business.

This Examinant further says, that for the better effecting of the peace
desired, it was thought fit by consent of Sir Bazill Brook, and M. Ryley, that
this Examinat should prepare a rough draught of a Letter for the King to write
to the City, which was by this Examinat after it was drawn by himself to be
communicated to M. Ryley, and Sir Bazill Brook, for their advice concerning
the same, which was accordingly done by this Examinat, and thereupon the said
Sir Bazill Brook in the first place did polish and amend the rough draught
framed by this Examinat, and M. Ryley after him did also make some alterations,
which done, this Examinat did then communicate it to Sir David Watkins, who
approved thereof, and thereupon this frame of the Letter was sent to Oxford by
one VVood, about fourteen days since, and was delivered by VVood to Col.
Read, who procured the Kings Letter accordingly with some alterations, in
form, but little in substance, which was brought to Sir B. B. by Wood upon
monday last, being the first of this instant January, to present to the Lord
Major, Court of Aldermen, and Common Council, and from thence to Communicate
it to the House of Parliament.

Tho. Violet.

The further Examination of Sir Bazill Brook, who says, that M. Violet did
frame the rough draught of the Letter for his Majesty to write to the Cuy, that
when it was communicated by the said Violet to this Examinat, he did polish and
mend the English of it, that afterward the said drought of the Letter was sent
to Oxford about 14 days since or thereabouts, and delivered by one John Wood
to Colonel Read, who procured the Kings Letter accordingly in substance,
though with some alterations in form; which Letter was brought under the Kings
band and Signet to Sir B. B. upon monday last being the first of this instant,
to present it to the L. Mayor, Court of Aldermen, and Common Council, and from
them to be communicated to the Houses of Parliament.

Bazill Brook.

In this Examination observe only thus much, That whatever pretense there was
of having the grace and favor of the King, to be communicated in his gracious
Letter, that this grace and favor was of the coutrivement of Sir B. B. or M.
Ryley, and M. Violet here in this City before hand, and that they gave reasons
and arguments to the Court afterward, why they should send it. And in it Sir
David Watkins that is named in this, is a party, it is true he was acquainted
with this business, but did discover it in part ten days before it came to
light, to some Members of the house of Commons, and did freely come himself
before he was sent for to the Committee, and desired that it might be found out
and searched.

This is the last Examination we shall read in this business, after which you
shall hear the Letters themselves, of the Lord Digby and his Majesty, the 7 of
January, 1643.

The further Examination of Sir Bazill Brook.
That George Wood, mentioned in his former Examination, is called John Wood,
who was an Apprentice to a Merchant in the City, and recommended by Read to
this Examinat, as a fit man to be trusted to carry Letters between Oxford and
this placo in this business. That Violet with the advice of of M. Ryley as
this Examinat believes, framed some Propositions, about 12 or 14 in number,
which were brought to this Examinat by Violet, which mended the English of
them; which Propositions were reduced afterward to six by Violet, Ryley, or
both, and afterward was with the approbation of this Examinat.

That this Examinat at the three Cranes in the Vintry, did meet with M. Ryley
and Violet, to confer upon the said Propositions, and to consider of the
probability of them to please this City and Parliament, which afterward were
carried to Oxford, by the said Wood to Colonel Read, who returned an answer,
that he thought the King would approve of them upon a Treaty, which might be
between the City and some Parliament men joined with them.

That Wood also, when he dwelt with his Master near the Stocks, and was
employed about taking up the exchange of moneys, and since that time the
Examinat says, the said Wood told him he served in the wars, particularly he
served in the Battle at Newbury, and being asked, whether he knew the usual
abode of the said Wood, or how to find him out upon occasion, he says he does
not know.

That the Propositions formerly mentioned, this Examinat remembers to be
these, or to this effect.

1. That the City might be satisfied, that the King would settle the Protestant
Religion, for without that neither the Parliament nor City would admit any
Treaty.

2. That the debts contracted upon the Public Faith, on either side by King or
Parliament, should be satisfied: and the most likeliest way for the doing
thereof was to settle the Excise for those purposes.

3. That it was conceived, that in respect of the Kings Declaration, that the
Parliament was no Parliament, and that therefore the King could not Treat with
them any more, this Treaty was to be immediately between the King and the
City, and the City was to be the medium between the King and Parliament.

And this Examinat further says, That the said Wood told the Examinat; that if
any Parliament men would join with the City in this Treaty, they also might
come with them to Oxford, under the safe conduct granted to the City, though it
were not expressed in the Kings Letter; and that the said Wood received
directions at Oxford, for this Examinat to declare so much to whom he should
think fit.

4. That there must be an Act of oblivion for all parties and Delinquents
whatsoever, and a general pardon, that no Cessation should be expected during
the Treaty, if there had been any: That no mention was made in all these
Propositions, either of Scotland or Ireland.

That this Examinat does remember. That M. Alderman Gibs and M. Ryley, were
thought upon as fit men to be sent to Oxford about the Treaty, as being persons
inclined to the furtherance of Peace. That VVood told this Examinat, that it
was wished from Oxford that the said parties might be employed in this Treaty,
that Read being to procure his release, first made a Petition to the Militia,
by the Name of John Read Gent. to secure his quality as Colonel, under
pretense that he was a poor man, and had children in great want; in which
business the said Read made use of some Citizens to promote this Petition.
That M. Ryley told the said Read, when his release was obtained, that he might
perceive notwithstanding he might have been h^ndred from his enlargement, but
that he said he knew no opposition, and therefore he wished him to labor to
requite this courtesy, by endeavoring a peace between the King and City when
he came to Oxford, which he said he would do.

Bazill Brook.

Upon this examination you may observe that which will give you most light in
this design, it was made so plausible, not only under the name of Peace, but
it must be that which must answer all men's expectations, and that which most
pinched, which was that the debts of the Public Faith should be paid by these
propositions, by the settling of the Excise when all things should be
established, that very thing which the Parliament in their wisdom and care,
would prevent that when your laws have their freedom, and when you enjoy your
liberties, you should have no such extraordinary courses now on foot only for
this extraordinary occasion, this must be the way and the means when your
liberties are settled, to bring you under the greatest slavery that is, to bring
thosethings upon, you that when you have said all, that must not only pay you
that have borne the brunt here, but satisfy all the Delinquents on the Kings
side also.

And secondly you may observe clcerely that now the Parliament must sit under a
cloud by his treaty it must be by the King and the City, the Parliament: must
be wholly obscured and waved: The Kings Proclamation which is but a Paper and
form of a Proclamation, must have anthority to abolish a Parliament settled by
an Act of Parliament, and that is the end, that while you had a bait laid you
for your liberties and peace to be settled you might have made such a president
as never to have recovered a Parliament again, but in stead of that Act of
Oblivion, you might have made an Act for to have buried all Parliaments in
Oblivion; this was the right state of this Design.

This Letter, Gentlemen, was directed to Sir Bazill Brook, in an outward Cover.

The Letter here which is for Sir Bazill Brook; it is under my Lord Digbies
own hand, it is the Letter which Wood brought to Town on Monday night last.

Oxford 29. December. 1643. Your affectionate Servant George Digby.

SIR,
THe King and Queen have both commanded me, to give you thanks in their Name
for your care and diligence in their service; and His Majesty has so much
confidence in your discretion, and wariness not to be deluded, that in the
hopes of the good effects toward a happy peace, which you seem to promise
your self from this negotiation, His Majesty is pleased to descend very far in
writing so gracious a Letter to those who may seem to have deserved so ill of
him.

I send you herewithall a copy of the Letter it self, which varies only in
style, not in matter, from that draught which was sent down hither, which if
you like and continue your confidence that it might be effectual to so blessed
an end, as peace and union: you are to deliver to those parties seconded with
assurance of his Majesty's most gracious and sincere inclinations, to give them
full satisfaction in all their reasonable desires; but if you shall find cause
to lessen the belief of a powerful effect by this Letter of His Majesty's; It
is then recommended to your discretion to forbear the delivery of it, since it
would be a very unfit thing, to expose so great a grace, and condescending of
his Majesty to hazards of being made frustrate and contemned. God send you
happy success in this great undertaking: I profess it is that whereth wih my
belief and reason go along more comfortably, then with any thing I have known
in projection since these troubles; But it is not fit to ravell further into
the business this hazardous way, and therefore I shall add no more, but I am

Oxford 29. December. 1643. Your very affectionate Servant GEORGE DIGBY.


GENTLEMEN,

If there had been no Comment made upon this business, this Letter would have
been enough. This Letter acknowledges the draught that was sent from the City
of London, from those that had contrived it here, and that it was past the
Court at Oxford, without any material alteration, this Letter likewise
acknowledges so much wisdom, so much caution in Sir Bazill Brook that known
lesuited Papist, as has bin told you before, so much tenderness of his
Majesty's Honor to be in him, that all is left to his discretion, as he thinks
fit of: If he find the Temper of the City to be right, to be delivered, it is
left to his caution, to his wariness, to his sense and measure of his
Majesty's honor, to do in it as he pleases: there is likewise held forth
unto you, that in his opinion (which is my Lord Digbies opinion) there was
nothing that ever he observed of any projection (It is his own word, and
therefore you may the better observe it) that he never observed any thing in
projection, or in design all this Parliament, tending this may, that was more
likely and probable to bring the Kings ends about: And if you remember this
till you hear another Letter of his read by and by, which there declares
plainly that the Kings end in his Councels now about him, is never to
acknowledge this to be a Parliament: Compare that with this here, and then you
may understand what a project this was.

In the last place you may observe that the Lord Digby his great inclinations
as well as Sir Bazill Brooks, for a blesled peace, and a blessed union in this
Kingdom, when you know very well there has not been a more unhappy
instrument to blow up jealousies and misunderstandings between his Majesty and
his People, and that durst not stand the justice of Parliament, but was fain to
fly out of the Kingdom for it, and at the beginning of these unhappy
distraction he advised his Majesty to retire into some strong place, the better
to engage him in a war upon his Subjects. And yet no other phrase in his
mouth but a happy peace, and a blessed union, to cozen poor people, to lead
them into snares.

This Letter on the outside is thus directed, To Our Trusty and welbeloved, Our
Lord Major and Aldermen of Our City of London, and all other our well affected
Subjects of that City. It is Superscribed, Charles Rex. And beneath, By His
Majesty's Command, George Digbie.

TRusty and welbeloved, We greet you well. When We remember the many Acts of
Grace and favor We and Our Royal Predecessors have conferred upon that Our
City of London, and the many Examples of eminent Duty and Loyalty, for which
that City has been likewise famous, We are willing to believe, notwithstandthe
great defection We have found in that place, that all men are not so far
degenerated from their Affection to Us and to the Peace of the Kingdom, as to
desire a continuance of the miseries they now fell; and therefore being
informed, that there is a desire in some principal Persons of that City to
present a petition to Us, which may tend to the procuring a good understanding
between Us and that Our City, whereby the peace of the whole Kingdom may be
procured: We have thought fit to let you know, That We are ready to receive any
such Petition, and the Persons who shall be appointed to present the same to
Us, shall have a safe Conduct; And you shall assure all Our good Subjects of
that Our City, whose hearts are touched with any sense of duty to Us, or of
Love to the Religion and Laws established, in the quiet and peaceable Fruition
whereof they and their Ancestors have enjoyed so great Happiness, That We have
neither passed any Act, nor made any Profession or Protestation for the
maintenance and Defense of the true Protestant Religion, and the Liberties of
the Subject, which We will not most strictly and Religiously observe; and for
the which we will not be always ready to give them any security can be
desired. And of these Our Gracious Letters We expect a speedy Answer from you.
And so We bid you farewell.

Given at Our Court at Oxford, in the 19. year of Our Reign: 26. December. 1643.



GENTLEMEN, In this Letter also you may observe some few particulars upon the
reading of it over:

First, the good informations his Majesty has of the inclinations of his
people here, how that some principal men in this City, as it seems; was
informed him, were very willing for to petition him to peace, the grounds of
this you know, upon what has been offered already, how they came to be
presented to him, and that by expressing of it here in his Letter, it was
rather to win your affections to it, under these plausible pretenses, then that
he had any real or solid ground for any such thing.

In the second place you may observe thus much, as has been told you already,
that his Majesty's scope in this Letter, and the design of the Counsel about
him, is to invite you of this City to be his interposers for the peace of the
whole Kingdom, as if there were no Parliament sitting, or as if you had quite
forgot the trust that your selves have reposed in this present Parliament; for
he faith he understands, that you have a mind to petition him for a peace,
that by that means the peace of the whole Kingdom may be effected; and if you
will fend him such a Petition, he will then very willingly receive it.

The third thing is this, That his Majesty declares, that there is no art he
has hitherto passed in Parliament, but he will be most willing to confirm, a
Declaration that is renewed; upon all occasions, but never otherwise observed
then it is now: for in the mean time that act whereby this Parliament is a
Parliament, whereby all other acts of Parliament, and the whole frame of the
Laws of this Kingdom are confirmed and preserved, that very act in this
design is to be laid aside, and utterly to be destroyed. And this Treaty is
brought about for no other ends, but to destroy that; so that you may plainly
see upon what ground these things are got from his Majesty, and upon what
counsels; and withal, consider what color of ground you can have to receive
any fruit from any such Declarations and Protestations as these are, when they
must only serve to amaze you, til this Parliament, and in this all Parliaments
are for ever rooted out, and destroyed.

The next Letter that is to be offered to you, is the Letter of the Lord Digby,
upon another occasion, which was presented to the Houses by a Noble Lord that
is here present, his Excellency, my Lord General, who intercepted it, going
beyond Sea: you shall understand there yet more clearly what manner of counsels
his Majesty is now upon at Oxford, which Letter shall be now read unto you.

For my very worthy Friend, Sir Henry De Vic.

From Oxford the 27. December. 1643. Your very effectionate Friend and Servant,
George Digby.

SIr: My indisposition the last week fore'st me to refer you to my Secretary
for an account of what Occurrences that offorded: This week has been so little
productive of any thing Considerable, that when I shall have told you of taking
of Beston Castle in Cheshire, by his Majestes Forces under the Lord Biron, a
place of huge Importance, both for strength and Command of all those countries
of Cheshier, Lancashire, and some parts of Stafford, and Darbishiere, I shall
have told you all, the Marquess of New castle having attempted nothing since
the taking of Winckfield Manor: Plymouth remaining still in its former
condition besieged, and there having been nothing done between my Lord Hopton
and Sir Walliam Waller, since the unlucky beating up of one of our Quarters at
Alton; But we are in daily expectation of a critical Blow between them: The
Lord Wilmot being now joined with the Lord Hopton, with a fresh strength of a
thousand Horse, and both being under march to attain Waller, who has possessed
himself of Arundell-Town, we having a strong Garrison in the Castle, and it is
probably hoped, he cannot avoid fighting with him upon disadvantage: Thus much
for the Military part. The Prince de Harcourts Negotiation, by way of Intermise
for an Accommodation, is well nigh at an end, as I believe, for that the
pretended Parliament will not hearken to any Propositions from him, in any
other way, then of an avowed address, by which they might seem either to be
owned by him as a Parliament, and applied to by him as an Ambassador; or else
to be admitted by the King, for somewhat more considerable, then He has in a
long time owned them for: A point which His Majesty may not suffer them to
gain without subverting the grounds and Maxim of all his late proceedings
against them, and that which He now goes upon by the advice of all his Nobility
here, as you will perceive by this enclosed Proclamation, upon the effects
thereof all the Eyes of the Kingdom are now fixed, God send them to be as good
actuated, as they are in speculation, for I am confident that in reason it
carries Probability, of the surest and readiest way to the reestablishment of
His Majesty, and his Just Rights and powers, of any course that has been yet
attempted: This is all, more then the heartiest respects of

Your affectionated Servant: George Digby.
I have received yours of the 19. and will by the next give you an account of
that particular in it, that concerns your self.




GEntlemen, this letter for what concerns the Military part of it, I believe
your own knowledges are able to give your selves the best judgment, how that
that Critical blow that he there sperketh of is now fallen in great part upon
their own heads, and that thanks be to God Sir William Waller being now in the
Castle of Arundell, having taken above 1000. or 1200. prisoners, and some 100.
and odd Officers, with all other things delivered to him, we see which way the
Critical blow is fallen: for which we have all cause to acknowledge the
goodness of Almighty God. The second part declares to your consideration,
that boldness and confidence, which breaks forth in the Lord Digbyes Pen,
that it seems he has forgotten he has been a Parliament man, he calls
that Parliament which is settled by Act of Parliament, the very name whereof
ought to be sacred to the ears of all true English men and lovers of their
Country, he calls a pretended Parliament. That which durst never be called,
said, or written at any time heretofore in England by any whatsoever.

The second thing you may observe is this,

That that council of Nobility which you will hear of by and by in a
Proclamation, must now not only be of a Council of Nobility there, but of all
those that have been likewise expelled out of the house of Commons or house of
Peers, or withdrawn themselves from their duty, and the trust put in them by
their Country: all these now must assemble together. and what to do? To settle
his Majesty's just rights and Power; and this just right and power is to make
this Parliament, though settled by an Act of Parliament, a pretended Parliament,
or in a word to give our laws, liberties, or rights a being or not a being
solely in his Majesty's pleasure; how just that is, you your selves may easily
discern, and how destructive it would be to you. A third thing considerable in
this letter is, that though his Majesty should have any inclination to do his
Parliament right, to acknowledge them a Parliament, yet my Lord Digby says it
is a point that must not be suffered. It is a point which his Majesty must not
permit to be gained, though it be but to do the Parliament that right, as to
acknowledge what they are by Act of Parliament, his faithful and Supreme
Council. But in stead of this, as you will hear by a Proclamation of the 22.
of December; All the members of both Houses that have forsaken their Country,
deserted the cause, contributed to undermine the State and Kingdom, and expose
them to the prey of the Irish Rebels. This must be the wholesome advice about
his Majesty, and this wholesome advice must beheld up, though with the
unnatural ruin of this Parliament, which must not be acknowledged; but another
thing, set up in form of a Parliament, somewhat like a Parliament thereby to
delude simple people, if it were possible that might take place, to subvert the
Laws of this Kingdom, and subject al our liberties to an arbitrary power,
under pretense of Law, to the worst of all evils. By this you may easily
understand the drift of the Councels that are at Oxford, and this use we ought
to make of it, to unite our selves with more strong resolutions and unwearied
affections then ever, with our purses, lives, and estates, to labor to redeem
our selves from this misery and thraldom that is threatened us, and now
appearing in more clear Demonstrations than ever yet it has.

You shall now hear the Proclamation it self read; this Paper that is now to
be read to you, is that which comes in the form of a Proclamation: for as
you well know, the great Seal of England is now with the Parliament, and the
other great Seal by the Ordinance is made void: and such is the confidence
they have of this good doctrine of theirs, and to set up another Parliament in
the room of it, and to proceed upon these principles and grounds, they think
it necessary to send it beyond sea, hoping hereby to unite all Popish Princes
upon this point, who know very well, the true Protestant Religion must
inevitably be rooted out, if this Protestant Parliament be made no Parliament
or destroyed, in which all our other Laws at the same time, and upon the same
grounds are no Laws, but must perish also.

By the King
A Proclamation for the Assembling the Members of both Houses at Oxford, upon
occasion of the Invasion by the Scots.
Whereas we did by Our Proclamation, hearing date the twentieth day of June
last, upon due consideration of the miseries of this kingdom, and the true
cause thereof, warn all Our good Subjects no longer to be missed by the Notes,
Diverse, and pretended Ordinances of One or Both Houses, by reason the Members
do not enjoy the freedom and Liberty of Parliament, which appears by several
instances of Force and Violence, and by the course of their proceedings
mentioned in Our said Proclamation, and several of Our Declarations: since
which time Our Subjects of Scotland have made great and Warlike preparations to
enter and inhave this Kingdom with an Army, and have already actually invaded
the same, by possessing themselves, by force of Arms, of Our Town of Barwick,
upon presence that they are invited thereunto by the desires of the two houses;
the which as we doubt not all Our good Subjects of this kingdom will look upon
as the most insolent Act of ingratitude and dissoyalty, and to the apparent
breach of the late Act of Pacification so solemnly made between the Kingdoms,
and is indeed no other then a design of Conquest, and so impose new Laws upon
this Nation, they not so much as pretending the least probecation or violation
from this Kingdom: so We are most assured that the Major part of both Houses of
Parliament, do from their souls abhor the least thought of introducing that
for reign Power, to increase and make desperate the mile, ries of their
unhappy Country. And therefore that it may appear to all the world how far the
Mayor part of both Houses is from such Actions of Treason and disloyalty, and
how grossly those few Members remaining at Westminster have and do impose upon
Our People; We do Will and require such of the Members of both Houses, as well
those who have been by the faction of the Malignant Party expelled for
performing their duty to Us, and into whose rooms no Persons have been since
chosen by their Country, as the rest who have been driven thence, and all those
who being conscious of their want of freedom, now shall be willing to withdraw
from that Rebellious City, to assemble themselves together at Our City of
Oxford, on Monday the twenty second day of January, where care shall be taken
for their several Accomodations. and fit places appointed for their meeting,
and where all Our good Sujects shall see how willing We are to receive Advice
for the preservation of the Religion, Laws and safety of the kingdom, and, as
far as in Us lies, to restore it to its former Peace and Security (Our chief
and only end) from those whom they have trusted, though We cannot receive it in
the place where We appointed. And for the better encouragement of those Members
of either House to resort to us, who may be conscious to themselves of having
justly incurred Our displeasure by submitting to, or concurring in unlawful
actions; And that all the World may see how willing and desirous We are to
forget the Injuries and Indignities offered to Us, and by an Union of English
hearts, to prevent the lasting miseries which this foreign Invasion must
bring upon this kingdom, We do offer a free and General Pardon to all the
Members of either House, who shall at, or before the said twenty second day of
January appear at Our City of Oxford, and desire the same, without Exceptions;
which considering the manifest Treasons committed against Us, and the condition
We are now in, improved by Gods wonderful blessing to a better degree then We
have enjoyed at any time since these Distractions, is the greatest instance of
Princely and fatherly Care of Our People that can be expressed, and which
Malice it self cannot suggest to proceed from any other ground. And therefore
We hope, and are confident, that all such who upon this Our gracious Invitation
will not return to their duty and Allegiance, shall be no more thought
Promoters of the Religion, Laws and Liberty of the Kingdom (which this way may
be, without doubt, settled and secured) but Persons engaged from the beginning,
out of their own Pride, Malice, and Ambition, to bring confusion and desolation
upon their Country, and to that purpose (having long once contrived the
Design) to invite and join with a foreign Nation to ruin and extinguish
their own, and shall according be pursued as the most desperate and malicious
Enemies of the kingdom. And Our Pleasure is, That this Our proclamation be read
in all Churches and Chappells within this Our kingdom, and Dominion of Wales.

Given at Our Court at Oxford, the 22th day of December, in the Nineteenth year
of Our Reign. 1643.
God save the King.
GENTLEMEN, I believe upon the reading of this Paper, which is put forth in the
form of a Proclamation, you cannot but discern a great affinity in it to this
present business that is now before you; which is to occasion division between
the City and the Parliament, to raise factions in both, and to say open as much
as possible may be to the power and malice of their enemies, howsoever they
cover themselves under these fair and specious expressions, which you have
heard before.

This Proclamation does very ill agred with his Majesty's Letter; here it is
called the disobedient and Rebellious City, in this Proclamation; and here the
Parliament is endeavored to be brought from you, though before you are the
only darlings in his Majesty's eye; whereby they might have served their turns
and their ends of you: In that therefore you must have as fair and good words
as possible may be. But now in this on the contrary side, when it is to work
upon the Parliament, then you must be called an odious and rebellious City, to
draw them from you to Oxford. This sufficiently discovers how palpable and
gross they are, that all this fair and foul weather is made up only to shift
hands to work the same design of sowing division and dissension among us, that
so their party might prevail: you may likewise observe from the title of this
Proclamation, which is by occasion of the invasion of the Scots, that they,
themselves have forgotten the cessation of Ireland; whereby they have let loose
worse then a foreign nation, a nation imbrued in the Protestant blood, and
settled upon principles, for the utter destruction of the Religion and Laws of
this Kingdom: I say you may discern thereby how far forth the cessation of
Ireland is forgotten, that complyes with all this: For after they had murdered
almost all the Protestants there, and after they have laid that Kingdom waste,
they must have an opportunity to be let into this Kingdom, and no council
called about it to hinder them; but rather the council to bring them over; and
the princiall actors in that rebellion must be nearest his Majesty's heart. For
the coming of the Scots, I believe you all know very well, that the Parliament
did think fit, finding how near the interest of these two Nations were
conjoined in one, finding the constant love and amity of that Kingdom to this,
and how in its greatest extremity it was very punctual to it; how that the
last time it was here, it was very punctual and careful to observe all
conditions, and at the desire of the Parliament, return back again according to
their promise: they thought it fit to enter into a Treaty with them in a solemn
Covenant, which Treaty is now solemnly ratified by both Kingdoms; yet this
must be called an Invasion. When they were last in the Kingdom, if they would
have joined with that Army, to have come up against the Parliament, they might
have had very large conditions, but that is now forgotten; the offers that were
then made to them, I believe you have heard of already, which was, that they
should have the four Northern Counties, formerly esteemed their ancient
bounds; that they should have three hundred thousand pounds in money paid them
down at Newcastle; that they should have the plunder of the City of London, and
that all manner of grace or honor that his Majesty could bestow upon
particular persons: this is that which those that have been in Scotland know
was then sent by way of Proposition, by Sir John Hinderson, who is now at
Oxford; they then rejected those with scorn, and did refuse to make an Invasion
upon this Parliament, but kept true and faithful to the Parliament. And upon
this experience the Parliament thought fit to make use of them again, against
the public danger, against the ruin of the Protestant Religion, which is
threaned in all his Majesty's three Dominions; and therefore, as for that
point, though for the present we cannot give you the full and large
Declaration, as hereafter will come forth from both Houses; yet it is necessary
to acquaint you with thus much, that you may not be amazed by any such printed
Papers as these are.

Here is a second paper in the form likewise of a Proclamation, whereby you
shall see the unevenness, and unsteddinesse of His Majesty's Councels, at
least in appearance; for though they be steady and united in that which is to
bring destruction, and ruin upon the Parliament and Kingdom; yet you may see
them halt in their expressions: Before you were called a famous City, you had
deserved so well, and had all encouragements offered you; here on the contrary
you shall see what language is given you, and because the welfare of this City
consists much in the residence of this Parliament, and Courts of Justice that
are here; And of such persons of quality, as are necessarily attendant
thereupon. It is not now only thought fit to call away the Parliament from you,
but the Courts of Justice, that so you might be left a miserable confused
City; notwithstanding all the fair words and promises that have been given
you.

BY THE KING.
A Proclamation for the removing of the Courts of King's Bench, and of the
Exchequer, from Westminster to Oxford.
WHereas the sole power of appointing the Place or Places, in which Our Great
Courts of Justice shall be kept, and of removing them from one place to
another, as urgent occasion shall move Us, by the Laws of this kingdom is
inherent in Our Royal Person. And whereas it is of great importance to Our
service in these times of difficulty and distraction, to have Our Judges of Our
said Courts to attend near unto Us, by whose advice We may the better proceed
in in all those Cases wherein the Judgment and knowledge of the Laws is
required. And whereas more especially the Chancellor, or Lord keeper of the
Great Seal of England, and the Judges of Our Court, called the King's Bench,
were and are to follow the King; and Our Court of Exchequer, being the proper
Court of Our Revenue, ought to attend Us as We shall appoint. And whereas Our
Cities of London and Westminster have been, and yet are, the chief Causers, and
Maintainers of this present Rebellion against Us. And We taking into Our
serious consideration, that while Our Courts of King's Bench, Common Pleas, and
of Our Exchequer, are kept at Westminster, many of Our good and Loyal Subjects
might be compelled or enjoined, by Process in Our name, to make their
appearance there, which they could not do without hazard of Imprisonment, or
other damage or violence from the fomentors of this Rebellion; and many might
suffer prejudice by Verdicts and Judgments had and obtained against them by
default or otherwise, when they could not with safety come to make their just
defenses: thereupon We did re^olve to remove those Courts from Westminster to
Our City of Oxford, whether other of Our Courts of Justice has been and are
already removed by Our former Proclamation. And to the end that there might not
be any prejudice to any of Our Subjects, by discontinuance of their Suits in
those Courts or otherwise, We did send Our several Writs of Adjournment,
directed to Our Judges of Our said Courts of King's Bench and Common Pleas, and
to Our Barons of Our Exchequer, thereby commanding and giving Warrant and
authority to them respectively, to adjourn all Pleas and Process depending
before them, in and from the Two and Twentieth day of November last past, to
the first return of Hillary Term next, commonly called Octabis Hillary, to be
holden then at Our City of Oxford. But our Messenger sent with those Writs (as
We have been informed) for no other cause but for doing his duty in carrying
and delivering those Writs, was imprisoned, and in an unjust and illegal way
Sentenced to die, and brought to a place of execution, and threatened to be
Hanged, as at that time another of Our Messengers for no other cause then for
doing his duty in the like kind, in carrying Our Proclamations to London, was
then shamefully Hanged and Murdered, (an Act so Barbarous as no former age can
parallel) and We have not yet received any certain and particular information
touching the execution of those Writs. In pursuance therefore of Our former
resolution of removing those Courts from Westminster to Our City of Oxford, We
do for the present by this Our Proclam^tion, authorized under Our Great Seal of
England, Ordain and appoint, and by these presents publish and Declare Our Will
and Pleasure to be, that Our said Courts of King's Bench and Exchequer, shall
for the next Hillary Term, at the usual and accustomed time for holding of
the same, be holden and kept at Our said City of Oxford, and not at
Westminster, and shall be continued and kept there during that whole Term, and
afterward at the several times and Terms for holding and keeping of those
Courts, until Our further pleasure be known and published for removing them
from Oxford. And We do hereby straightly charge, and Command all Our Judges of
Our said Court of King's Bench, and Our Barons of Our Exchequer, and all
Officers, Prethonotaries, Clerks, and Ministers of or belonging to either of
those Courts, or which are or ought to do or perform any duty or service in
either of them, That they according to their several places and duties, give
their several and respective attendances at our said City of Oxford, and there
do and perform their respective Offices and Duties, during the Term and time
aforesaid, at Our said City of Oxford and not elsewhere: And that all such as
have any Suit or other occasion to attend in either of Our said Courts, in the
said Term of Saint Hillary next coming, or which have any cause or command to
appear then in either of the said Courts, do give their attendances, and make
their appearances respectively in the said Courts at Our said City of Oxford,
and not elsewhere. And We do hereby farther straightly Charge and Command all
Our Judges of our said Court of King's Bench, and our Barons of the Exchequer,
and all officers, Prothonotaries, Clerks, Ministers, and Atturnies, of or
belonging to either of the said Courts, that they presuine not, contrary to
this Our command, in any sort, to meet, sit, or attend at Westminster, or
elsewhere, then at Our said City of Oxford, for the holding or keeping, or upon
pretense or color of holding, or keeping of either of the said Courts for the
Term and time aforesaid, or any part thereof, or in any sort to proceed in any
Action Suite, or Plaint, or Award, make or issue out any Process, or do any Act
or thing whatsoever, proper or belonging to the said Courts, or either of them,
in any other place then at Our said City of Oxford, or where We shall hereafter
appoint the same, as they will answer the contrary at their utmost perils. And
We do hereby likewise charge and Command all Sheriffs, Bayliffes and others,
that have to do in the execution or return of any Writs, Precepts, Warrants, or
Process, that for such Writs, Precepts, Warrants, or process, as have issued
out of either of our said Courts of King's Bench or the Exchequer, and are not
yet returned, they make their several Returns of the same into the said
Courts respectively, at Our said City of Oxford, and not at Westminster. And
that they presume not in any sort, to obey or execute any Writ, Precept,
Warrant, or Process, which shall hereafter be awarded, made or issued, contrary
to the Tenor and effect of this Our Proclamation, as they will answer the
contrary at their Perils.

Given at Our Court at Oxford, the first day of January, in the nineteenth year
of Our Reign. 1643.
GOD SAVE THE KING.
GEntlemen, you may remember, that the Kings Letters that has been read to
you, was dated the 26. of December. the later of them was dated the second of
January, and notwithstanding all those expressions that were there given you,
the Cities of London and Westminster, are in this Proclamation of the second
January (as if that they had forgot what they had set out before, they are
here) called the principal Maintainers, and Causers of this Rebellion; but not
only so, but (as was told you before) an endeavor used to lay this City, as
much as in them lay, desolate; desolate from all traffic, as you have had it
before by Proclamation, desolate from the great Council of the Kingdom, which
is the Parliament, by carrying it to Oxford, desolate now of the Course of
Instice, that should be here the life and preservation of all your affairs and
businesses; and yet this is that which in his Majesty's letter, you have so
many fair expressions of affection and good inclination to settle your peace;
It is not to be doubted, but upon the whole matter, you will hereafter learn,
to understand all such Complements as these are, and know how to manage your
Councels, and to express your affections, according to the advice of the two
Houses; wherein as the Houses are to acknowledge your faithfulness, and
readiness to comply with them; so they, likewise have been willing to expose
their lives, estates and pains; and all that lies in them, to go before you,
in that which may be for your preservation. In the former Proclamation there
was notice taken, that the Major part of the two Houses were of the opinion (or
would be, in all likelihood) with the King at Oxford thus much we can declare
to you, that there is above 200. (as I remember 13. score) that have already
solemnly taken the Covenant with us here, and which we are confident of will
be so tender of the honor of God, and their own honors, and what they have
promised in the Covenant, that they will pursue that interest they have
expressed; and that they remaining here, make the Major part, you may easily
judge. And for this Proclamation, we have Authority to declare to you, that
such is the care of the two Houses, and such is their affection to your selves,
that they are resolved to establish the Courts of Justice here, with fuller
power then hitherto they have been, that is, they will fill the Judges upon the
Benches, and take care to have all the Courts settled here, in a steddie way:
And all those that shall go to Oxford, in compliance with this Proclamation,
they shall have their estates confiscate, and they will proceed in such a
course, as you shall see the natural care they have to preserve you in
following their advice, which all of us by the fundamental laws of this
Kingdom are bound to do; and thus much we have authority to declare unto you.

There is only one thing more in this Proclamation, which is only a
particular by the bye, that gives you notice of that barbarous and unheard of
usage of a spy that was here justly condemned, by a Council of war at the
instance of the Houses of Parliament, by Command from his Excellency; it is
told you, such a murder was never heard of; the murder must now be put upon
this, when you may very well remember, in your own case, how an honest Citizen
at Reading was proceeded against, with an unheard of murder indeed, this being
nothing but that necessary Justice which in times of war is to be expected in
all such cases.

The Right Honorable, the Earl of Northumberland his Speech.
MY Lord Major, and you Gentlemen of the City of London, you have fully heard
delivered by these Gentlemen, all the proceedings, in their late discovery; You
are now well able to make a right judgment upon the whole matter; I am
commanded in the name of both Houses to read unto you here, their Opinions, and
the sense that they have delivered, and resolved of among themselves;

That the matter of this report, contains a sedicious and Jesuiticall
practice and Design, under the fair and Specious pretense of Peace, having its
rise and fountain from known Jesuits and Papists, to work Divisions between
the Parliament and City of London, to raise Factions in both, thereby to render
them up to the Designs of the Enemy; and tending also to the breach of the
Public faith of this Kingdom, unto our Brethren of Scotland, engaged by the
late solemn Covenant and Treaty, entered into by both Nations, thereby not only
to weaken us in our united force against our Popish and Common Enemies, but to
embroyle the two Nations in unhappy divisions.

FINIS.

