ENGLANDS Plus ultra, BOTH Of Hoped Mercies, and of Required Duties: SHOWED IN
A SERMON PREACHED to the Honorable Houses of PARLIAMENT, the Lord Major, Court
of Aldermen, and Common Council of London; together with the Assembly of
Divines, at Christ-Church, April 2. 1646.

Being the day of their public Thanksgiving to Almighty God for the great
success of the Parliaments Army in the West, especially in Cornwall, under the
Conduct of his Excellency Sr THOMAS FAIRFAX.

By JOSEPH CARYL, Minister of the Gospel at Magnus near the Bridge, London; and
a Member of the Assembly of DIVINES.

LONDON* Printed by G. M. for John Rothwell at the sign of the Sun and fountain
in Paul's Churchyard, and Giles Calvert at the sign of the black-spread-Eagle
at the west end of Paul's, 1646.

Die Veneris, April 3. 1646.
ORdered by the Commons assembled in Parliament, That Thanks be given to M.
Caryl and M. Peter's for the great pains they took in the Sermons they preached
yesterday before the Lords and Commons, and City of London at Christ-Church in
London, at the entreaty of both Houses, being a day set apart for a public
Thanksgiving to God for the great successes it pleased him to give the Army
under the Command of Sr Thomas Fairfax Knight, General; and that they be
desired to print their Sermons. And it is ordered that none shall presume to
print their Sermons without license under their hands writing. And that Sr
Arthur Hesilrig and M. Prideaux do give them thanks, and desire them to print
their Sermons accordingly.

H. Elsyng. Cler. Parl. D. Com.

I Appoint John Rothwel and Giles Calvert to print my Sermon.

Joseph Caryl.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE THE LORDS and COMMONS Assembled in PARLIAMENT.
WHen that holy Prophet foretold the sorrows and ill usage which the Son of
God should find among sinful men in the days of his flesh, he cries out, Who
shall declare his Generation (Isa. 53. 8.) which many understand of his
eternal, some of his Generation in the fulness of time, the mystery whereof was
beyond words: Others of his holy seed, his cross being fruitful, and his
death giving life to an innumerable Generation. But besides all these we may
with good probability interpret the word Generation (...) Est generatio,
seculum, tempus vitae humanae and per Synecdochen, homines una aetate and
generatione viventes Buxt.
for the time or age in which Christ was born, lived and died. And then the
meaning is: whose tongue shall be able to speak, or pen to write the History of
His Age? Where shall Rhetorique enough be found to draw out or delineate with
lively colors, the malice and enmity, the plots and conspiracies, the
villainies and cruelties contrived and acted against that innocent Lamb Jesus
Christ: Together with his most glorious victories and triumphs over them all?
Who shall declare his Generation?

I believe there has scarce been a Generation, since that of Christ's so
journing upon the Earth, more hard to declare then this. We may well cry out,
Who shall declare this Generation? What Age has brought forth such monstrous
births of man, or such mavelous births of God? When did man or God show more
of Himself? Did men ever assay to destroy a Nation by policies and by power,
by threatening and by flattering, by confederacies abroad and combinations at
home, as some have assaied to destroy this Nation? Or has God assaied to
deliver a Nation by temptations, by signs, and by wonders, and by war, and by
a mighty hand, and by a stretched-out arm, and by great terrors, according to
all that the Lord our God has done before our eyes? Some have said of
Zenophons Cyrus, that surely it was written (Non ad historiae fidem, sed ad
Principis effigiem) not to show what Cyrus personally was, but what a Prince in
exactest compleature may be fancied to be. Such censures I am persuaded after
Ages will give of the true Stories (I hope some pens will write the truth) of
these times, that surely they are poetical raptures, or feigned Romances to
show the height of imagination, not the realitie of action. For whether we
consider the strange beginnings, the difficult proceedings, the variety of
judgments, the contrariety of opinions, the stands and motions, the effects
or issue; of these wars and troubles, together with the faithfulness or
falsenesse of men, the power and goodness of God discovered in them, it will
be found the most improbable relation that ever was put to paper.

The providence of God, which acts in all Nations, has (as it were) striven to
represent such scenes of action in England as are hardly paralleled by any that
are past. His works among us, have not only justice, but beauty and wonder; not
only mercy, but skill and art in them (Though to do them be his property, not
his study, his nature, not his labor) Man cannot so much as be suspected to
have done these things, God has done like God. The Lord needs not subscribe
his name to his work, for, that his Name is near, his wondrous works declare.
It must be said by way of assertion, This God has wrought, as well as by way
of admiration, What has God wrought?

God has done so much for us, that the most which remains for us to do, is to
Admire and be Thankful. If these Talents of mercy have not fair improvements,
we shall be cast for the most unprofitable servants and idle Stewards that were
ever trusted by the great Master of heaven and earth. Sad will their reckoning
be, who slight these mercies, but theirs saddest of all, who put forth a hand
to corrupt and spoil them. The reason given by the holy Ghost, why his blood
must he shed, who sheddeth man's blood, is this, because in the Image of God
made he man. God has made our victories and deliverances in his own image;
There Is not one of them, but looks like God. What their doom shall be, who by
envy or self ends, who by sowing divisions or making sides, who by somenting
jealousies or nourishing discontents go about to murder them, the perpetual
equity of that first statute law puts into the mouth of every ludge. Right
honorable, that these works of God may be aeclared by all manner of
declarations, perfected into all manner of perfections, and that God who has
wrought them may be honored with all manner of honors should now be Your
special care and study: the care also and study of all, who taste the comforts
and share in the blessings of them: of which number, I thankfully subscribe my
self, and,

Your Honors humbly devoted in the service of the Gospel Joseph Caryl.

A THANKSGIVING SERMON Preached to the Honorable Houses of PARLIAMENT, etc.
April 2. 1646.
PSALM. 118. 17. I shall not die, but live; and declare the works of the Lord.
THis is a Psalm of mercies, and of praises. A Psalm composed of victories, and
of thanksgivings.

The holy Penman at the first verse, makes a general invitation to the duty,
upon a general ground, O give thanks unto the Lord, for he is good; because
his mercy endures for ever. But because that which is every bodies work, is
usually no bodies work; therefore (in the next words) he puts the duty into
distinct hands, Let Israel now say, let the house of Aaron now say; let them
now that fear the Lord say, that his mercy endures for ever. The Church of the
Jews falls here under a threefold distribution.

First, Israel the body of the Commonwealth.

Secondly, The house of Aaron, the Ministers of the Temple.

Thirdly, All that fear the Lord, Converts and Proselites out of all Nations
under heaven.

Having thus awakened and summoned all to this duty, he begins a narrative of
the special grounds and reasons of it; which appear in two branches.

First, The readiness of God to hear and help him, from the 5. verse. to the
10. I called upon the Lord in distress: the Lord answered me, and set me in a
large place. The Lord is on my side, etc.

Secondly, The malice of his enemies in opposing him; who are described,

1. Their multitude, All Nations, ver. 10. That is, the Nations round about:
such as are named ( Psalm. 83. 7.) Gebal and Ammon, and Amaleck, the Philistines
with the inhabitants of Tire, etc. These have consulted together with one
consent, they are confederate against me.

2. Their neernesse of prevailing, They compassed me about. David was never in
such a straight, or so near the borders of ruin, as when Saul and his men
compassed Him and his men round about to take them (1 Samuel 23. 26.) when an
enemy charges both in front and flank, both van and rear, they look like
Masters of the field.

3. Their frequency in renewing their assaults; They compassed me about; they
compassed me about; yea, they compassed me about; They compassed me about like
Bees. Four times they compassed him about, and the fourth with an addition; the
last charge was hottest, as setting their Rest upon it, to show how restless
and uncessant they were in their opposition.

4. He describes his enemies by the end which the Lord brought them unto, They
are quenched as the fire of thorns (verse. 12.) Some read, They are kindled as
the fire of thorns; both the Greek and the Chaldee translate so; and it is
usual in the Hebrew for the same word to signify contraries, as to bless and
to curse; so here, to quench and to kindle. The sense amounts to the same, for
that which is soon kindled, is soon quenched. David's enemies were soon kindled
as the fire of thorns, a small matter set them on fire: and they were quenched
or consumed like thorns, which in a moment are both flame and ashes.

5. He describes his enemies by the end which they intended him, or by their
design against him, at the 13. verse, Thou have thrust sore at me that I might
fall; ruin was the project. Malice knows not how to go less then destruction,
They thrust sore at him, that he might fall.

The Psalmist having made this report of his dangers and deliverances of his
enemies rising, rage and fall, gives glory to God, verse. 14. The Lord is my
strength and song, and he is become my salvation. And all his people celebrate
these mercies as well as share in them ( verse. 15, 16.) The voice of rejoicing
and salvation is in the tabernacles of the righteous. He, in whom they
rejoiced, and who was the subject of their song, stands forth in the next
words, The right hand of the Lord does valiantly: The right hand of the Lord is
exalted; The right hand of the Lord does valiantly.

David's joy now grows up to confidence, and from telling over the former
mercies of God, he goes on to foretell those which were future, in the Text
now read.

I shall not die, but live; and declare the works of the Lord. The words are a
holy rapture or exultation of spirit; his faith was too big for his heart, he
must vent it at his lips, I shall not die, but live, etc.

There are two parts in this verse.

1. David's confidence of future mercy, I shall not die, but live. 2. David's
conscience both of a present and future duty, And declare the works of the
Lord.
There is a double reading of the words.

Some thus, I am not dead, but alive; which translation is contended for, as
the best, by a learned Interpreter; and then the sense has a mixture of joy
and thankfulness, that he who could number so many enemies, and so many dangers,
should yet pass the pikes untoucht and outlive them all, I am not dead, but
alive, O wonderful! Blessed be God for this.

We read, I shall not die, but live. And so the words carry the sense of an
high acting faith, or of a faith raised up to a full-grown assurance. Having
told the story of his passed sufferings and salvations, he believes above and
beyond all possible sufferings.

I shall not die, but live. But was David immortal? What man is he that lives
and shall not see death, and shall he deliver his soul from the hand of the
grave? Psalm. 89. 49. Is it not appointed unto all men once to die? And after
David had served his generation, did not he fall asleep? Read we not often of
David's sepulcher? How then is it that he promises thus much to himself, I
shall not die, but live?

There is a twofold death.

1. A Natural death. 2. A Violent death


David does not promise himself privilege from the former, he waves not a
submission to the law of nature. But David did believe God would protect him
from the later: I shall not die, that is, a violent death, I shall not die by
the hand of these men, I shall not die the death which they have voted me to in
their counsels long ago.

Again, Death may be taken under another distinction. There is either, A
natural, or A civil death.

We may understand David of the later, I shall not die a civil death: as not a
violent corporal death, they shall not take away the life of my body; so I
shall not die a civil death, they shall not take away the prosperity of my
estate. The two witnesses are said to be dead ( Revel. 11. 8.) and their dead
bodies to lie in the streets, when they were divested of all power and
privilege in holding forth the truth of the Gospel. The state of the Jews in
their Babylonian captivity is represented to Ezekiel by a valley full of dry
bones (Chap. 37. 1, 2.) A man may have breath in his body, and yet the man
scarce alive. The Apostle speaks this sense, (1 Thessalonians. 3. 8.) Now I live (that
is, now I live comfortably, now I feel my self alive) if ye stand fast in the
faith. So here, I shall not die; that is, I shall not be miserable, I shall not
be trodden under foot, or live at the courtesy and allowance of my enemies.

And when he says [ I] we are not to restrain it to David's person, he means
himself, and they who had adhered to him in that cause; I and my friends, I and
the Commonwealth of Judah, I and they shall not die, but live. A good man
never reckons his happiness alone.

But how would David employ that his present and promised felicity? How would
he bestow that life, that prosperous life?

He does not say, I will now live merrily, I will eat and drink, and take my
pleasure: he does not say, I have got down mine enemies, I will now (as some
perhaps slanderously reported him) neglect my friends. He does not say, I have
got power over my opposers, now I will use this power to oppress whom I
please. David could easier have died or been miserable all his days among his
enemies, then to have lived and prospered to these ends.

Once more; He does not say, I shall not die, but live; to declare my own great
works: Now the world shall know how succesfull I have been in this war; the
Nations round about shall hear what my Generals and Chieftains have done;
stories shall report to after ages, what gallant men Joab and Abishai have
been. No, here is no mention of Himself or of These, his declaration runs all
upon the works of God, I am not dead, but alive, or, I shall not die, but live;
and declare the works of the Lord.

The sum of all is, as if David had said:

I well perceive that the design of my enemies was to take away my life, or at
least the comforts of my life; they thought a being in the world too much for
me, and they were resolved a well being I should not have; but blessed be God,
notwithstanding all their projects and oppositions, I am not dead: my life is
whole in me still, and my state is well mended: my enemies have not had their
wills on me, either to tear my soul from my body, or to violate the comforts of
either. I am not dead, and more I am alive, I, and my friends, I, and they who
have embarked in the same cause and run the same adventures with me: We all
thrive and flourish, we are alive and lives-like. And me thinks from the
mountain of this my present felicity I look upon the mercies of many years to
come; my faith begins to prophecy, and my spiritual prospective draws before
me the blessings of many generations, even blessings for the children yet
unborn; as I am not dead but alive, so I shall not die but live; God has not
given me into the hand of these men, nor shined upon their counsels against me,
and now I am confident that he will not. The sense and faith which I have of
these things pleases me exceedingly, but that which is most content full to me,
and the very project of my soul, is, that my life shall run out in the
honoring of my God, that these victories which he has given me over mine
enemies shall overcome me to his service that the greatest work of my reign
shall be to make a declaration of what God has wrought.

I shall not die, but live; and declare the works of the Lord. I shall now draw
out some particulars from the general sense thus given. And first take an
Observation rising equally from either reading;

That the design of malicious enemies is the ruin of their opposers.

When David says, I am not dead, but alive; he intimates that the enemy sought
his life; or, when he says, I shall not die, but live; he implies the enemy
would still go on pursuing his life. Jacob foresaw no less danger from his
malicious brother ( Genesis 32. 11.) I fear him (says he) lest he will come and
smite me, and the mother upon the children. Queen Esther in the sixth of that
book, shows the malice of Haman, acting thus high, We are sold, I, and my
people, to be destroyed, to be slain, and to perish; If we had been sold for
bondmen and bond-women, I had held my tongue, though the enemy could not
countervail the Kings damage; but that is not the thing which will satisfy
Haman, We are sold to be slain, and to be destroyed.

It is a vexation to malice not to do it is uttermost. Some of the Talmudists
have observed, that the devil was as much wounded with that restraint which God
put upon him, that he should not take away the life of Job, as Job was with all
the wounds which the devil inflicted upon his body; See, he is in thine hand,
but save his life. The devil would have gone to life, unless he had been
stopped. Malice has no bounds, and it keeps none, but those, which an
insuperable hand prescribes or imposes. The children of Edom are not contented
with defacing the beauty, with breaking down the battlements, or uncovering the
roof of Sion, their cry is, Raze it, raze it, even to the foundation thereof
(Psalm. 137. 7.) As Antipathy is not against any one individual, but against
the whole kind; so it is not against any one good of the individual, but
against all kind of good which he enjoyes. Thus the Prophet describes the
Babylonian cruelty against Jerusalem (Jer. 51. 34.) Nebuchadnezzar King of
Babylon has devoured me, he has crushed me, he has made me an empty vessel,
he has swallowed me up like a dragon, he has filled his belly with my
delicates, he has cast me out. By that time all the lusts of wicked men are
served, they sweep all away. That (as the Prophet speaks) which the Palmer-worm
leaves, the locust eats, and that which the locust leaves the canker-worm eats:
so we may say, that which ambition leaves, covetousness takes; that which
covetousness leaves, cruelty takes; that which cruelty leaves, gluttony and
drunkenness take; and that which gluttony and drunkenness leave, wantonness
takes away, till all is gone.

Hence it is that the Lord is so severe against the enemies of his people,
Revel. 16. 6. Thou have given them blood to drink, for they are worthy: they
must drink blood, for nothing would satisfy them but blood. And ( Jer. 51.
35.) the Church is prophesied, imprecating like vengeance upon Babylon, The
violence done to me be upon Babylon, shall the inhabitant of Zion say; and my
blood upon the inhabitants of Caldea, shall Jerusalem say. And again, O
daughter of Babylon who art to be destroyed, happy shall he be, who rewards
thee, as thou have served us. Psalm. 137. 8.

In this glass we may see the face of many of their hearts, out of whose
hands, we rejoice that we are delivered this day. It is nothing but the want of
power which has hindered the execution of utmost rage. And therefore where God
gives power, what should stand between justice, and the execution of it? I
would not blow up revenges, but thus much I say, It is as dangerous not to
execute justice, as it is to take revenge.

So much in general, from the design of David's enemies, it was death and ruin.

Take two notes from that reading, I am not dead, but alive. First, thus,

It is a mercy in times of great danger, to escape death, or to come off with
our lives.

It is a mercy not to live in times, when God visits a people only to punish
their sin; and therefore some of the good Kings of Judah, were promised that
they should die, before such troubles were borne: even Balaam (Numb. 24. 23.)
prophesying of the sore calamities of diverse Nations, breaths out in
compassion, Alas, who shall live when God does this? Who would desire to live
in such a time? The righteous is taken away from the evil to come (Isa. 57. 1.)
But to live in times, when God visits a people, for the purging of their sins,
this is a great mercy. To live in such times, and to get through them, though
but with an escape, is a mercy. But to get through those times with a conquest,
is a great mercy. It is an honor to live in troubles which overcome us, while
we are contending for truth and righteousness: But to live in troubles, where
contending for truth and righteousness we overcome, is our happiness. To be
in deaths often is an honorable life; but often to conquer deaths is an
Heroical life.

Right Honorable and Beloved, this is Englands mercy. Life is the richest
commodity of this life. Life among Naturals is next in value to the soul, and
it is in value above all Civils. Satan's estimate may be taken in this point
(Job 2.) Skin for skin, and all that a man has will he give for his life. Life
is sweet, life is a treasure. And there has been much digging for this
treasure. We have gone through fire and water variety of dangers: we have walked
for four or five years, not only in a valley of tears, but of blood, in the
very valley of the shadow of death, and yet we are not dead, but alive. What
though it has cost much to preserve these lives; (who would die to save
charges?) what though estates be shortened, yet life is lengthned? what though
some of the lading has been cast overboard in this storm, yet the vessel is
safe; We are not dead, but alive; We (if ever any) may say it with a mixture of
wonder and thankfulness, England is not dead but alive. There were many who
looked upon her as dying and gasping out her last breath: Many hoped and many
feared England would have been in her winding sheet before this time. How often
have we (like Israel at the red sea) been talking of our graves? How often have
we waxed strong in unbelief, and concluded (as David once did) we shall one day
perish? yet we may say, England is not dead, but alive.

And what a mercy is it that we can read this text to the Parliament of
England, Ye are not dead, but alive. The Parliament has had death standing at
their doors, death looking through the keyhole, scarce suffering the door to
shut, lest (if called) it should not come in fast enough, and yet we may say,
The Parliament of England is not dead, but alive. And which is most
considerable (as in it is greatest swounings and convulsions it always retained
life in it self, and lived in the hearts and prayers of the faithful in the
land, so) it now lives in the tongues and pens (I know not in what state it is
in the hearts) of those with whom it was reckoned among the dead. The
Parliament of England has been prayed to death, cursed to death, drunk to
death, devoted to death, and voted to death (I am sure a civil death) in
deepest consultations, and yet it is alive, and lives in the mouths of many,
whose throats were once an open sepulcher, to swallow it up and bury it
forever. Let this mercy be remembered, as that which is the mother-mercy, or the
instrument, the parent of all our National mercies. The Parliament of England
is not dead, but alive.

For the City of London, this great and renowned City, what a mercy is it that
we can say, London is not dead, but alive? Death has been hovering about your
walls, death waited when it should be admitted to look in at your windows. Yea,
the death of this City has been breeding in it is own bowels. Some members have
been contriving the death of the whole body, and have themselves justly died
for it. And that which the Prophet speaks ( Lam. 4. 12.) concerning Jerusalem,
The Kings of the earth, and all the inhabitants of the world would not have
believed, that the adversary and the enemy should have entered into the gates of
Jerusalem; may be inverted concerning London, The Kings and Nations about us
would not believe but that the enemy would have entered in at the gates of
London before this time; yet notwithstanding secret underminings and open
threatenings, This great City (which holds much of the life of the whole Nation)
is not dead but alive: This City has not had so much as a mount cast up, nor
an arrow shot against it.

Lastly, How many are there in this Honorable Audience, who have gone forth
with their lives in their hand, who have (as it were) conversed with death?
Some (I believe) are here, who have led Armies in the field, who have been in
the head of them in times of greatest danger, and hottest assaults, who have
seen pale death on every side, who have heard the groans and beheld the wounds
of the dying; let them all bless God, that they and we can say, They are not
dead, but alive.

A great King (1 King. 20. 32.) made it his request, and would have been glad
of the grant, I pray thee let me live. Esther makes the same suit to Ahashuerus
(Chap. 7. 3.) Let my life be given me at my petition, and my people at my
request. And all that God himself promised some very good men (in a time of
common calamity) was, That they should have their lives for a prey, as for
great things they were not to be looked for, Jer. 39. 18. and 45. 5. That we
can say thus much, we are alive, is a mercy, if we could say no more.

But if we can say more; if we can say, we are not only alive, that is, numbered
among livers: but we are alive, that is, numbered among rejoycers, this would
rise to a high prized mercy. That Is a second Note, which I shall briefly touch.

For a people after they have run through great dangers, to live enjoying
great comforts and successes, is an amazing mercy.

Not to be dead but alive, is mercy, but to be alive and prosperous, what a
mercy is that! This calls as much for admiration, as thankfulness. It was
much that the Bush burned, and was not consumed, Exodus 3. 2. but that a Bush
should burn, and at that time blossom and bear fruit, how admirable were that!
When Joseph's brethren ( Genesis 45.) returned and told their father, Joseph is yet
alive, had the report ended there, Jacobs heart had been exceedingly revived;
but when they tell him, Joseph is yet alive, and he is Governor over all the
land of Egypt; how did this amaze the spirit of old Jacob! He was ready to die
with joy, to hear that his son was not only not dead, but alive in such an
estate of honor.

This day is witness; This solemn meeting is a proof, That the Kingdom, the
Parliament of England, the City of London, do not only live but prosper. Ye are
not escaped only (as Job speaks, Chap. 19. 20.) with the skin of your teeth,
but with your Ornaments and Honors, with your riches and privileges. Ye have
not only breath and a being, but strength and a wel-being; ye are encompassed
with blessings, and the Candle of God shines upon your heads. Though (as the
Psalmist speaks, Psalm. 66. 12.) Ye have gone through much fire and water, yet
God has brought you to a wealthy place. Ye are not enjoying a life only, a
life within one step or degree of death, but ye live your lives, ye have a life
that has abundance of life in it, such livelines, such vigor your affairs
have not had since these troubles began.

What the Orator spoke with indignation of Catiline, a conspiratour against
the peace of his country, Vivit, etiam in Senatum venit, the man has honor,
whose life is more then his due: The same may I say with much gratulation, of
you, Noble Patriots, Vivitis, etiam in Senatum venitis, Ye live, and ye live
still like Senators. Your Honor is great in the salvation which God has
wrought: Your Sun rises in the West; Your victories abroad are stupendous;
Your union (which this days appearance is a great demonstration of) I say, your
union at home is pleasant and harmonious, the Two Houses with each other, both
with the City concentring in this solemn duty.

I would say this, from the sense of this great mercy.

Right Honorable, seeing the Lord has given you your lives for a prey, and
added prosperity to your lives, let the cause of God not only live but prosper
in the land. Improve your utmost, that Jesus Christ may have, not only a being,
or a breathing in the land, and in your lives, but that he may reign and live
gloriously both in the Land, and in your lives. The Apostle John in his 3d Ep.
to Gaius, wishes that his body might prosper even as his soul prospered; My
wish is that all your souls, and all the affairs of souls, may live and
prosper, as God has caused your bodies and outward estates to live and
prosper: My wish is, that all the Churches of Christ, may live and prosper,
even as the Commonwealth prospers, The Church of Christ is the soul of that
Commonwealth, where it is. Many Commonwealths have prospered where Christ
has had no Church at all, but (I think) there was never any Commonwealth that
prospered where Christ had a Church, if that Church did not live up in the same
degree of prosperity, that the Commonwealth did, I mean, if the Church had not
a flourishing life in it is capacity according to the flourishing of the State
wherein it lived. I speak not of the Church, under the old notion of the
Churchmen, but I speak of the Church, as comprehending all the Saints and
servants of Jesus Christ, all the faithful in the Land; let them all have, not
only a life, but a comfortable life. This will answer the mercy of God, in
giving the State, not only a being, but such a comfortable being, as it has at
this day.

I know, Right Honorable, it was far from your thoughts, ever to have spoken
like that Roman Tyrant, If I must die, let fire and earth mingle, let all go to
confusion: if I must die, let all the world die too. I doubt not but you would
have rejoiced (though your own lives had been the price) to have known, that
England should live, it would have been your comfort, that the foundations of
mercy to a future generation had been surely laid, though in your own ruins:
Though (as Judah pleads with Joseph for the return of Benjamin, Genesis 44. 30.) I
verily believe, that the life of the Kingdom of England, is bound up in the
Parliament of England, and when this dies, that must, in the notion here
intended. But I am sure ye are further off from the speech of that other Roman
Tyrant, who said, Let fire and earth mingle, so I may live and prosper, so I
may have what pleases me, no matter what becomes of the rest of the world. I
know ye abhor to think, much more to resolve, Now we live and prosper, let
fire and earth mingle, let justice and oppression mingle, let Christ and Belial
mingle, let truth and error mingle, let light and darkness mingle, let good
and evil mingle, let confusion and disorder appear in the face, and live in the
body of the whole Nation, if they will. Therefore as the Lord has given us in
this mercy, that you are not dead but alive, so let it be, I humbly beseech
you, your care in answer thereunto, that the work of God, that all who fear
God, that the cause and people of God, that the flook of Jesus Christ, may not
only not die, but live prosperously with, and under your Government.

I now come to the second reading, our reading of the Text, I shall not die,
but live: So it is a voice of holy confidence, and it yields this plain
Observation.

That, The experience of former mercies and successes is a ground of hope for
future and continued mercies and successes.

Faith turns this experience, I am not dead, but alive, into this confidence,
I shall not die, but live. Hope is the firstborn of experience ( Romans 5. 4.)
The Apostle argues so (2 Cor. 1. 10.) He has delivered us from so great a
death: A great death; all death in it self is of one size, but the ways of
death, and the dangers of death are of different sizes and dimensions, He has
delivered us from so great a death (deadly dangers) and he does deliver us;
what of that? And we trust that he will also deliver us. What God has done and
does, is easily believed he will do. The people of Israel being got through the
red Sea, kept a day of Thanksgiving, and we find that they grew confident of
getting into Canaan presently, Exodus 15. 13, 14. Thou in thy mercy have led
forth the people, which thou have redeemed; thou have guided them in thy
strength unto thy holy habitation: the people shall hear and be afraid, sorrow
shall take hold of the inhabitants of Palestina, the Dukes of Edom shall be
amazed, etc. Israel had set but a foot (as it were) beyond the red Sea, and yet
now they triumph, as if they had a footing in Canaan. Was not Moses too forward
in this, and were not the people over confident? No, they had a just ground of
hope, that God would carry them through that Wilderness, because he had brought
them through that red Sea. David saw Goliath vanquished in the victory he
obtained over a Lion and a Bear, this uncircumcised Philistime shall be as one
of them.

I beseech you let your faith grow thus vigorous, and turn experiences into
confidences, Because ye are not dead, but alive; believe that ye shall not die,
but live.

I would not invite you to build Castles in the air, nor would I nurse up
presumptuous thoughts in any. I know that Babylon shall be as confident, as
confidence it self, immediately before her destruction, Revel. 18. 7. I sit a
Queen, and am no widow, and shall see no sorrow, and yet all her sorrows shall
then come upon her. I know the people of God may over-act their faith, and be
confident without cause, as the Prophet speaks (Jer. 2. 37.) The Lord has
rejected thy confidences, and thou shall not prosper in them. But though I
would not, yea, I dare not be over-bold or presuming, yet I would not have any
distrustful or unbelieving. God is a Rock, and his work is perfect: We are
sure he has begun a work, why should we not believe he will bring it unto
perfection?

It may be, some abroad will object, as Rabshakeh once did against Hezekiah and
the Jews (2 King. 18. 19.) Thus says the great King, the King of Assyria, What
confidence is this wherein thou trustest? Thou presumest thou shall be
delivered from the invasion of Senacherib, What is this confidence, says
Rabshakeh, tell me thy strength? Possibly thou will say (but they are but vain
words) I have counsel and strength for the war. Or, if thou have not
strength of thy own, yet thou have friends and confederates to assist thee. I
wonder where. Tell me? Now on whom do thou trust, that thou rebellest against
me? If thou will not discover the lock wherein thy strength lies, then I will
do it for thee; Now behold, thou trustest upon the staff of this bruised reed,
even upon Egypt, on which if a man lean, it will go into a man's hand, and
pierce it: So is Pharaoh King of Egypt unto all that trust on him. Thus he
sleights his confidences in men: And because he knew Hezekiah and the Jews had
a reserve, when the arm of flesh was broken, therefore hetakes them off from
that too (verse. 22.) But if ye say unto me, We trust in the Lord our God; Is
not that he, whose high places, and whose altars Hezekiah has taken away, and
has said to Judah and Jerusalem, ye shall worship before this Altar in
Jerusalem? As if he had said, Do ye build your confidence in God, when ye have
done God such a disservice as this, the defacing and demolishing of his Altars?
Are ye so audacious as to believe that God will help you, when you have thus
dishonored him? Can you expect his aid should be the reward of your
sacrilege? Be ashamed of these hopes, make not your God a protector of your
impieties. Some (I say) from abroad may think to cut the sinews of our
confidence by such an argument; What is your confidence to prevail, or that the
Parliament should prosper? Are not they the men, who have pulled down Altars,
and abolished Prelacy? Have not they turned out the old Liturgy, and dashed the
Ceremonies? Have not they done these things by their authority, and shall they
live?

To such Objecters I say, our confidence gathers life from this Objection.
These (Right Honorable) are splendida peccata, shining sins indeed, and holy
impieties. If these be your faults, they are glorious ones, and we may fatten
our faith by such doubts cast in from these without. We may rather build upon
it, that you shall prosper, because God has enobled your spirits, to do such
things as these: even as Hezekiah prospered in those works, which yet the
railing Rabshakeh supposed his certain ruin.

There are other Objections against this confidence, which are more weighty and
sad. I will name but three.

First, What? so confident that we shall live, and yet the Kingdom so abound
with sin? When there is so much life in sin, shall such a people live? Live
and prosper?

I acknowledge, that when we consider the sins and profanenesses, the
wickednesses and blasphemies, which are in the Nation, we have just cause in
reference to them, not only to rejoice with trembling, but to tremble without
rejoicing. These may give us cause to fear, that all the troubles we have
hitherto had, are but the beginning of our sorrows; And that the Lord, in stead
of turning back our captivity, should turn us back into captivity. We may have
cause to fear, that even the great and solemn meeting of this day, upon (as I
may so call it) this mountain of our present felicity, should be but like Moses
his going up to Mount Nebo, or the top of Pisgah, in the later end of the book
of Deuteronomy, from thence to view the Land of Canaan, which himself should
never enter into: The Lord may make this happy spectacle, but as a short view,
a transient glimpse of those glories and comforts, of those blessings and
mercies, which peace and union in a settled estate bring forth to a Nation: and
the word might go out against us all, even against Moses and Aaron, Magistrates
and Ministers, even against those, who have been most faithful in the carrying
on of this great service and most industrious, even against those, who have
shed most tears, and have laid up most prayers, even against those who have
sweat most, or bled most, Ye shall all die on this side Jordan. Your sins
shall* consume your carcases in this wilderness; this is acknowledged, and
what ever the issue be, let God be glorified.

But the Lord does not account, as man accounts, neither are his thoughts as
man's thoughts. Take but two instances. The one, Psalm. 106. 6, 7. where the
unbelief and provocations of the people of Israel are reported, We have sinned
with our fathers, we have committed iniquity, we have done wickedly. Our
fathers understood not thy wonders in Egypt, they remembered not the multitude
of thy mercies, but provoked him at the Sea, even at the red Sea. Yet, he comes
in with a non obstante, at the 8. verse, Nevertheless he saved them for his
Names sake, that he might make his mighty power to be known. If God will save
for his names sake, what people is there whom he may not save?

The other Scripture is (Isa. 57. 17.) For the iniquity of his covetousness
was I wroth, and smote him, I hid me, and was wroth: What did this smiting
effect? It follows, He went on frowardly in the way of his heart; he went on
sinning, while God was smiting; what could any one expect now, but that the
Lord who smote him before, should at the next blow destroy him? Yet hear, O
miracle of mercy! I have seen his ways (verse. 18.) What ways, repenting
ways, reforming ways, holy ways? No, his ways, the ways of his own froward
heart. And what will God do? Does he say, I will strike him down in his ways,
I will kill him in his ways? No, I have seen his ways, and will heal him. I
will heal the former wounds instead of making new wounds; There is more mercy,
yet, I will lead him also, and restore comforts unto him, and to his mourners.
God does not usually heal the wounds of judgment, till the wounds of sin are
healed: yet sometimes he does. And what know we but the Lord may once again
make a parallel mercy to that promised his ancient people, and restore comfort
to those hearts, Who go on (as this Objection charges) frowardly in the way of
their hearts?

Secondly, Others may object, what? so much confidence of a succession of
mercies? Look to the Church, and to the matter of the worship; Superstition is
gone, but profaneness stands at the door; Prelacy is gone, but Anarchy is
feared: and can we yet be confident? Sure to invite to a day of rejoicing, when
we are in such a condition, is but like bidding the sons of Zion to sing one of
their songs at the waters of Babylon.

I acknowledge, there is little reason to rejoice in the light of this world,
whilst the Gospel is under a cloud; that there is very little reason to take
warmth at the heat of any Sun, while Christ the Sun of righteousness is
eclipsed by the interposition of any sublunary interest whatsoever.

But must we despond, and give all for lost, because light has not (supposing
that it has not) that free and kind entertainment which we desire? Must we
resolve that Christ shall lose his right (suppose it so) because he has it
not, or because he has it not by the day set in our Calendar? Possibly, the
Calendar of Heaven has a postdate to ours. A woe belongs to those who neglect
to finish the work of the Lord (like them in the Prophet) upon this surmise,
The time is not come, the time that the Lords house should be built: Yet a woe
lies not against those, who conscientiously endeavoring to build, cannot
finish it. Christ accounts those his enemies, and calls them out to destruction,
who say, We will not have this man to reign over us: But they may be in the
roll of Christ's friends, and he may be preparing salvations for them, who being
seriously upon that design, yet fail in advancing his reign. If that be not our
case, I grant, there is no reason any man's faith should have life, that we
shall live.

But if it be (as I believe it is) our faith has reason to hold up in life and
strength too, that we shall live: For we know Christ works by degrees in the
hearts of his people. Light comes not in all at once. In the prophecy of
Ezekiel, The waters of the Temple were first but to the ancles, and then to the
knees, and then to the loins, and then it was a river of waters to swim in, a
river that could not be passed over. We must give providence leave to go it is
own pace. Things are still under consideration, The plummet is still in the
hand of Zerobbabel, and who knows to what perfection the work may be brought in
a short time? It is not the doing of what comes short of the mind of Christ,
but a resolving not to do the mind of Christ, which makes a people hopeless.

When Christ was in the world, he was not received presently; Did he therefore
fire the world presently about their ears, and destroy those places which
received him not? When some persuaded him to do so, he tells them, Ye know not
of what spirit ye are. There Is many a good man, who, if he knew his own spirit,
would be ashamed of it. Christ is not so fierce as many Christians are. It Is
true, his anger when it burns is infinitely fierce, and who can abide it? But
we know he is patient, and he is patient very long, even unto those who
knowingly abuse him; much more toward those who are sincerely seeking after
him. He is patient to those who abuse him, and patient so long, that they take
occasion (cause they have none) to scorn and mock him, Where is the promise of
his coming? And, Let the Lord hasten his work that we may see it. Much more
will he be patient toward those who are praying, consulting and enquiring,
though as yet they should not come up to give him the honor due unto his name.

When the Jewish worship was cast out, and the Ceremonial Law abolished; the
Apostles themselves being alive, and preaching it, Christian worship was not
received in a day or in a year: the Apostles were long working it into the
hearts of believers. And we may read in the 14t^ Chapter of the Epistle to the
Romans, how much bearing there was exercised, and how much forbearing toward
those who were not yet come up to Gospel heights, either of their duty, or of
their privilege? Therefore (I say) though this Objection should stand a while
in the letter of it, yet we need not fall in our hopes; though we are not where
we should be either in worship, or in Government, yet Christ will bear, while
we are seeking and enquiring with sincerity that we may. Christ will at last
break those, who wilfully break his bands, and cast away his coards from them.
And all they who in uprightness pray and endeavor that his Government may be
set up, shall be heard and blessed, though perhaps, not in their own way.

A third Objection lies thus. But there are many errors, and strange opinions
amongst us: Tares grow up, and are like to overgrow the wheat: sores and
sicknesses overrun many minds. Can a people thrive, who have such diseases
upon them? Can the Physicians who behold these distempers, offer us any hope
that the patient shall live?

I think no forehead can deny that there are errors amongst us: and some very
dangerous destructive and damnable, perverting souls, and wasting the vitals of
religion.

Errors are not to be sported with. Who can love Christ and error too, much
less plead for, and give it patronage? Christ is truth. And though persons
erring may have our charity, yet no error ought to have our love: though many
who err may have much of our patience, yet there is no error (how small
soever) should any of our have countenance.

But to this sad Objection, I answer.

First, Possibly there are more errors named then are. All is not error which
every one thinks to be error. We know who spoke it, After the way which they
call heresy, so worship I the God of my fathers (Act. 24. 14.) and they were
no mean, no unlearned men who called that way heresy. And I shall never
believe all Heresiographers for his sake, who put Aerius into his Catalogue for
opposing Prelacy. There may be an error in taxing somewith errors.

But secondly, Whatsoever is an error, or an heresy, whatsoever is contrary
to wholesome Doctrine (such opinions are knowable, else all rules about dealing
with them were vain) Whatsoever (I say) is an error or heresy, let all the
penalties which Christ has charged upon it be executed to the utmost: If we
favor error, I know not how we can with confidence lift up our eyes to Christ
for favor. If Christ would not have had error to be opposed, why has he
left us means both for the opposition and suppression of error? As he has
given a complete Armor to every Christian wherewith to fight against the
vviles and temptations of the devil; so he has given a complete Armor to his
Church, wherewith to fight against all the errors and unsound doctrines of
seducers. Therefore search the Magazines of the Gospel, bring out all the
artillery, ammunition and weapons stored up there, look out all the chains and
fetters, the whips and rods, which either the letter of the Gospel, or the
everlasting equity of the Law has provided to bind error with, or for the
back of heresy: let them all be employed, and spare not. I hope we shall never
use (I am persuaded we ought not) Antichrists broom to sweep Christ's house
with, or his weapons to fight against errors with. Christ has formed and
sharpened weapons for this war; we need not go to the Popes forge or file.
We (says the Apostle) have weapons in a readiness to revenge every
disobedience; They are ready made to our hands; we have them in a readiness,
says Paul, let these be sheathed in the bowels of every error, and corrupt
opinion: and the event will show (a thought that it will not, were an infinite
disparagement to the wisdom of Christ, who has appointed them) the event, I
say, will show that these weapons of our warfare are not carnal, but mighty
through God; not a wooden dagger, or spears of bulrushes, no pot-guns, or
papershot, as some (at least in consequences) blaspheme, but mighty through God
to the casting down of strongholds, and the bringing of every thought into
captivity to the obedience of Christ. And when errors are more the erroneous
(tumultuous or blasphemous) the general rules of the word will show us
expedients, fit to meet with such distempers. If we thus prosecute and oppose
the errors of these times (which I conceive no man is hindered from doing in
his sphere, though all the spears wherein this may be done, are not in a
desired motion) If, I say, we thus prosecute error, and contend for truth, we
may keep our hopes alive, that as we are not dead but alive, so we shall not
die, but live; that, yet Counsels at home, and Armies abroad shall prosper;
that, this shall not be the last Thanksgiving day, which this great Assembly
shall keep for received victories; that, God will yet go on to crown this
Nation with so many mercies as shall fill both the present age and posterity
with books and declarations of what God has wrought. A service, to which
David engages himself in the next words of the text, I shall not die, but
live; and declare the works of the Lord.

And declare the works of the Lord. The general issue of which words, as
considered in conjunction with the former, is,

That all received mercies should be designed to the glory of God.

This is the design of the Saints, when they pray for mercies (Joel 2. 14.) Who
knows if he will return and repent, and leave a blessing behind him; For
whom? for you? Nay, Even a meat offering, and a drink offering to the Lord
your God. The captive Jews were taxed, because they fasted forthemselves, and
not unto God ( Zech. 7.) It must be the project of prayer and fasting, that we
may receive mercies to honor God with: and it should be our project in days
of praise and thanksgiving to honor God with the mercies we have received.
So much of our lives is as lost, and so many of our mercies are as buried, with
which the name of God is not lifted up and advanced. To seek our own glory, is
not glory; or to deal with God, as the Story speaks of one, who vvrote the
founders name that had been at the cost and charge of a curious fabric upon
the plaster of the wall, but cut his own name in a marble stone underneath:
While vvorldly men bestow outward thanks on God, Their inward thought is, that
their houses shall continue for ever, and their dwelling place to all
generations, and they call their lands after their own names, Psalm. 49. 11. To
give God a day of vocal praises, and to reserve the chief, the fattest of the
honor to our selves, is to mock God in stead of praising him, and to commit
sacrilege, while we are offering holy things.

But I cannot stay upon that general. Take this in special.

That to declare the works of the Lord, is the debt of honor and duty, which
we ought to pay him for all the work he is pleased to do for us.

The works of God are his counsels acted, Psalm. 31. 19. O how great is thy
goodness which thou have laid up for them that fear thee? The goodness of God
is laid up; in what Storehouse does God lay up this goodness? Surely, in his
own breast: there he laid up the creation of the world from all eternity, and
there he laid up the redemption of man, and wrought it in the fullness of time:
There he laid up all the deliverances which at any time he has wrought for his
Church. O how great is thy goodness which ^hou have laid up! (then follows)
which thou have wrought for them that trust in thee, before the sons of men.
The works of God are the goodness of God made visible, they are as so many
beams or rays of the power, wisdom, faithfulness and justice of God. God
declares himself in his works, The invisible things of him from the creation of
the world, are clearly seen, being understood by the things which are made,
even his eternal power and Godhead, Romans 1. 20. The work of Creation
declares much of God, but the works of Providence declare more. And as God
declares himself in his works, so we must declare the works of God. But how
shall we make this declaration?

There is a five-fold declaration of the works of God.

The first is an Arithmeticall declaration; the original word in the text
primarily signifies, to make a catalogue or an enumeration of things, and so of
the works of God, setting them down by number. Thus God himself declares his
works (Judge. 10. 11, 12.) Did not I deliver you from the Egyptians, and from
the Amorites, from the children of Ammon, and from the Philistines? The
Zidonians also, and the Amalekites, and the Maonites did oppress you, and ye
cried to me, and I delivered you out of their hand. Here is nothing but the
bare names of deliverances set down, seven in number: So many you have received
from me, says the Lord. As if we should write now, The battle at Keinton one,
The battle at Newbery two, The battle at Chereton-Down three, At Marston-moor
four, At Nazeby five, At Langport six, At Torington seven, and the disbanding
of the late Army in the West without battle, which may go for many victories,
etc. And this is a declaration which becomes us; some pens have done this to
my hand already; there is an Arithmeticall declaration of our mercies and
victories in the Field, and over Strongholds this last year, newly set out and
printed, and I think the number is ninety and one, besides some remarkable ones
given in since: we may conclude this declaration with that of the Psalmist,
Many, O Lord, are the wonderful works, which thou have done, and thy thoughts
which are to us ward, They cannot be reckoned up in order unto thee, if we
would declare and speak of them, they are more then can be numbered, Psalm. 40. 5.

Secondly, There is a logical declaration of the works of God, when we show
the several kinds of them; as, the work of Creation, the work of Redemption,
the work of Providence; and distribute these into works of mercy, or works of
justice; into those works wherein God protecteth his people, or wherein he
destroys his enemies; and those either in defeating their Counsels, or in
overthrowing their Forces. Many such divisions, and subdivisions, differences
and properties also of the works of God may be set forth in a logical
declaration.

Thirdly, There is an historical declaration, when besides the several kinds
and differences of the works of God, we declare the persons acting, the places,
the times, the counsels, the managing of the several actions, the events and
successes, the issues and fruits, the effects and consequences of every
undertaking. Such considerations as these make up the history of the works of
God.

The fourth is, a Rhetorical declaration; when besides a bare narrative of the
facts, etc. (which is proper to history) we labor to find out the several
circumstances and aggravations of every work, which may raise up our spirits,
and warm our hearts in considering of, and looking over them. It is our duty to
make more then bare narratives and histories, we must clothe them with
eloquence, and make oratory do homage to the honor of God. The holy Penmen
have been admirable in this, read the Song of Moses (Exodus 15.) The Song of
Deborah (Judge. 5.) The Song of David, in the day that the Lord bad delivered
him out of the hands of all his enemies, and out of the hand of Saul (2 Samuel
22.) and you will find them over-matching all Poets and Heathen Orators in
depth of conceit, exactness of style, and flowers of Rhetorike, as much as the
Sun does a Candle, or the spirits of wine the dregs of it. Thus should we
polish and garnish, embroider and bedeck the works of God, not with vain
ostentation of wit, not with affectation or pedantick pomp of words, but with
sobriety and holy gravity: Not, as Austin I remember censureth a passage in one
of his own Confessions; it was, says he ( Declamatio levis) alight
declamation, not ( Confessio gravis) a sober confession. Some bestow too much
rhetorike upon confession of sin. There may be pride in our confessions of
repentance, and so there may be in our confessions of praise. Our confessions
therefore or our declarations of the works of God, must not be tainted with
wantonness and vanity, lightness and curiosity, we must not flourish and
word* it only with God, but we ought to make as solidly rhetorical
declarations, as any ability that God gives us, can reach unto.

For as it is not enough to make an Arithmeticall confession of sins, to tell
God how many they are, how many in number as near as we can; or, to make an
historical declaration of them, to set down the time and place, when and where
we sinned; but it is our duty to make rhetorical confessions, to aggravate our
sins against our selves, to show the Lord not only our sin, but the iniquity
of our sin, the filthiness of our lewdness, the abomination of our
provocations: That (as the Apostle speaks) Our sins may become exceeding
sinful, Romans 7. 13. So here, the Lord must have more then a naked history of
his works; or, a superficial declaration, that This and That was* done; our
hearts and heads should be busied in searching things to the bottom, and in
giving an accent to every circumstance. For, as a small fact committed against
God may be a very huge sin: so a small work done by God may be a very huge
mercy. I shall give a few hints toward this Rhetorical declaration of the
works of God.

First, Consider them in reference to the way which God takes to bring them
about. He works sometimes immediately by his own hand, and then his work is
miraculous. He works at other times by weak and improbable means, and then his
works are mavelous. He often makes oppositions, and cross counsels serve his
ends, he makes a Table out of a snare, and what was intended for our casting
down, the occasion of our standing, wounds heal us; losses enrich us; divisions
unite us; our being overcome gives us the victory, and then his works are
glorious.

Secondly, Consider the strength of opposers, their helpers and abettours,
their heights and former successes, their resolvednesse and rage, their pride
and confidences. From all these learn how vast a mercy it is to be delivered
from them.

Thirdly, Consider the time when God works for us. The season is as much as the
mercy it self. We have had remarkable heightnings of mercy, from the dates of
our mercies. What a remarkable mercy for the season was the Expedition to
Gloucester, when we were, as it were dying, and giving all up? What a seasonable
mercy was the victory at Nazeby, in the beginning of the last year, when we
were despondent, and sinking in our spirits? You may find the like
seasonablenesse of many other mercies, As words spoken, so actions done in
season, are like Apples of gold in pictures of silver. With diverse such golden
Apples, and silver pictures, God has at once fed and delighted us.

Fourthly, Consider, for whom God works. When for persons undeserving, and
disoblieging him continually. This is a mercy-raising consideration indeed. As
Job, (Chap. 7. 17.) speaks in general, What is man that thou should magnify
him, and that thou should set thine heart upon him? So we should say at this
time; What are we, and what is the Nation, that God should magnify us? a
Nation against which there are so many objections, upon which there are so many
sins, a Nation which has so many ways disoblieged God; what are we, that
God should work such wonders for us? When David offered Mephibosheth great
kindenesses, restoring him all the lands of his father, and enviting him to eat
bread at his Table continually; Mephibosheth who was but a lame man, and one
that had mean thoughts of himself, stands amazed, What is thy servant that thou
should look upon such a dead dog, as I am? (2 Samuel 9. 8.) Though he was a man
of honor by his birth ( Jonathans son) yet he speaks thus low of himself
(who am I?) at the offer of so great a favor. What then may we say of our
selves, that God should respect us, who may be called dead dogs before him? A
people lame in his service, unanswerable to former mercies. When God must work
as much for his own name, as by his own power; when God remembers to work for
those who have forgotten his works; when God is faithful to those who have
distrusted him, how do these considerations of our lownes, heighten our
mercies, and render our deliverances as so many wonders? Thus glory comes in to
God by our abasement: for, as in confessing the circumstances of sin, some
special sinfulness of our hearts breaks forth upon every one of them, to
humble us. So in confessing these specialties of Gods works, some beam of his
Wisdom, Justice, Power, Patience or Goodness breaks forth and irradiates all
the mercies which we receive from him. Therefore be very careful in making
these Rhetorical declarations: let not God have history and naked relations,
but be diligent in finding, and eloquent in describing every, even the least
passage of his providence. The Rabbis have a saying, that there is a mountain
of sense hanging upon every Apex of the word of God; I assure you, the least
Apex in the works of God, may have a mountain of goodness and mercy hanging at
it, did we but search them out.

There is yet a fifth Declaration of the works of God, which I would rather
press, and it is more necessary then all these forementioned, more necessary
then either your Arithmeticall, or your Logical, or your Historical, or your
Rhetorical declarations, and that is a declaration purely theological, or a
practical declaration of the works of God.

Right Honorable and beloved, God will bear with us, though we should be
somewhat out in our Arithmetike, and indeed the works of God exceed our
Arithmetike, they are innumerable; God will bear with us though we are not
such exact Logicians to methodise his works, to give their descriptions,
definitions, kinds differences and properties: God will bear with us, though
we are but mean Historians, but flat, feeble and languide Orators, if yet we
come up in this last act, and make him a full, a hearty, a pithy declaration of
his works, by ours. The Lord is better pleased with the language of our hands,
then with the language of our tongues; and we honor God more with the words
which our works speak, then with the words which our mouths speak. I beseech
you therefore make this declaration as full as may be; Let your feet declare,
and your fingers speak to the whole Nation, yea to all the world, what God has
done for us. It will be a very sad thing if declarations of the works of God
should be made only in sermons, or written in books, and none found written in
our hearts and lives: If it should be so, mercies will be our burdens as much
as judgments have been, and the heavier burdens too. The Baptist exhorts,
(Matthew. 3.) Bring forth fruit meet for repentance: I exhort, bring forth fruit
meet for mercies, for victories; bring forth fruit meet for days of
thanksgiving. And give me leave a little to drive this point more home, and to
fasten in more distinctly upon your spirits.

First, I would bespeak the whole Kingdom of England. O England, becarefull to
make this practical declaration of the works of God. God appears as unbending
his bow, and putting his arrows up to his quiver, as sheathing his sword, and
repenting of those evils of punishment which he determined against thee; make
have to declare this work of the Lord, by repenting of thy evils of sin, and
by turning to God in duty, from whom thou have departed, and whom thou have
provoked by thine iniquity. God has given the Armies of thy enemies into thine
hand, and he has caused their strong holds to submit. O England, declare this
work of the Lord, by preparing a new war against those Armies of outrageous
lusts which encamp in all places, and fight against the soul; by planting
batteries against the strong holds of foolish customs, and vain practices,
received by tradition from our forefathers. The Lord has broken the yoke of
thy oppressors, and taken their burdens from off thy shoulders. O England,
declare this work of the Lord, by thy willingness to put thy neck under
whatsoever is the yoke of Jesus Christ, and thy shoulders to his burden. God
has much purged, and still preserves the Ordinances of his worship, he still
continues the Gospel to thee, and many faithful Ministers to dispense it. O
England, declare this work of the Lord by prizing pure worship, by improving
the Gospel, and honoring the dispensers of it, by saying, how beautiful are
the feet of these, who bring thee the glad tidings of everlasting peace? God
has showed that he works freely, he has wrought beyond all obligations. O
England, declare this work of the Lord: Be faithful, seeing thou art under so
many obligations; perform cheerfully and sincerely all the Vows and Covenants
which are upon thee, to the utmost of thy power and opportunities.

Lastly, God has showed himself a friend to thy friends, and an enemy to thy
enemies. O England, declare this work of the Lord. Do not thou by unkindnes or
hard usage, sadd the hearts of any of Christ's friends, or by thy flatteries and
unworthy complyances give his enemies occasion of rejoicing.

Let the Honorable Houses of Parliament be persuaded to make. This declaration
of the works of the Lord. He shines upon your counsels, and has exalted you in
them; Declare this work of the Lord, by exalting and setting up his name in all
your counsels: make it appear to all the world, that you are so far (which
possibly may have been the jealousy of some) from not admitting Christ
petitioning at your doors, that you are daily petitioning him to command in
your hearts, and over all your ways. God by works of wonder has maintained
your privileges, your honors, and your houses: declare these works of the
Lord, by maintaining the honor and privileges of his house, and by the
advancement of his service. God has done justice and judgment in the land to
admiration; he has wrought terrible things in righteousness: declare this work
of the Lord by the exactnes of your justice, by your streamings out of
righteousness toward all the people of this land, and by clothing your selves
with judgment: Let it be as hangings about your walls, as a crown and a diadem
upon your heads: break the teeth of oppressors, be eyes to the blind, ears to
the deaf, feet to the lame, Fathers to the poor, and the cause which ye know
not, search ye out. And whatsoever ye do in the cause of God or of his people,
do it with all your might, for the Lord has wrought with all his might in
your cause.

Let this renowned City be exhorted carefully to make this declaration. God
has been as a wall, as a wall of fire, as a place of broad rivers, as gates of
brass and bars of iron to this City, to keep out the enemy. O declare this
work of the Lord, by letting your Heart-gates stand open continually to truth
and holiness. Lift up your heads, O ye gates, and be ye lift up, ye everlasting
doors, that the King of glory may come in. God has blessed you in your costs
and charges, in your counsels and correspondencies, etc. for and with the
public interests. Declare this work of the Lord by continuing steadfast to
that interest; Be not unwilling to venture for the time to come, (if the like
occasions should call for it) either in your persons or purses, God having made
you so good a return both in City and National blessings for your former
adventures. God has wrought graciously in preserving your City from fire, your
estates from plundering, your persons from slavery; declare and show forth
these works of the Lord by improving your estates, your power, your lives and
liberties to make this a City of Refuge for the oppressed, A solace to the
Saints, A mart of righteousness to the Nations round about. God has not
suffered violence to enter your streets, let not deceit and guile lodge in your
streets: God has not punished you with famine or want of bread: let not fulness
of bread be your sin. God has preserved commerce and trade for your bodies:
Declare this by making more voyages (like royal Merchants) to the port of
Heaven, by trading more for your own souls, by trading more for the souls of
others within your line. There is a good work in hand, for the helping, not
only of poor bodies, but of poor souls, I mean of those who are destitute of
dwellings and unimployed, whether elder or younger, men, women or children.
This is a noble work, a work well becoming not only the Magistrates of this
City, but the Parliament of England. Disorderly poor (who live not only without
government, but without God in the world) being so great a scandal both to
this City, and to the whole Kingdom.

Lastly, let all the faithful Ministers in the land set about the study of
this Theological declaration: the greatest part of the work lies upon us, our
whole work lying in Theology. It is not our books or sermons, but our lives
and works in the whole discharge of our Ministry which reach this duty. We, by
our painfulnes, by our patience, by our zeal, by our humility, by our
watchfulnes, by our earnest desires of maintaining union and unity in the
Churches of Christ, and among all estates in the land, we by being an example
of the believers, in word, in conversation, in charity, in spirit, in faith, in
purity, should declare what God has wrought. God seems to aim at the
reconciling of hearts, at the healing of breaches, at the atoning of
differences; He seems to be bringing in peace among us. Let not any of us make
new divisions and rents, or make the former wider and less curable then they
are. God has freed us from many burdens, from that sore bondage under which
many of us groaned and complained bitterly both to God and man, and gave both
no rest, till they gave us ease. Let us declare this work of the Lord by our
sensiblenes that others may yet be burdened, and by our care that they be not;
Let us desire that no burden may be laid, but of necessary things, of such
things as the wisdom of Christ has made necessary: we should know the heart
of one oppressed in conscience, seeing we our selves were but lately so
oppressed, and are now releeved.

God has appeared to us as a workman that needs not be ashamed: Let us all
(according to that counsel of the Apostle to Timothy) behave our selves as
workmen (in the service of the Gospel) that need not be ashamed, rightly
dividing the word of truth.

Thus I have epitomized and contracted the great volume of our practical
declaration of the works of the Lord into some few overtures, essays and
offers about it. I beseech you stay not in any of the former, how exactly
soever they may be framed, (I hope you will have them more exactly framed
before you go hence But stay not in them) give God his glory in this which is
the last, and highest declaration of his works: give him glory in all, but
chiefly in this.

But may we not (in days of thanksgiving) make mention of any, but of the
works of the Lord? Does the Lord work alone? Or have his hands only brought all
these things to pass?

In the work of creation God did all alone, and in many works of providence God
only works; He keeps state in some works, no man acts with him. But in most of
his works, and in those we are this day declaring, he acts (as I may so speak)
in consort with the creature; it is seldom that God has an immediate
attingence with effects; He uses and delights to use the service of men.
Atheists of old scorned at the work of creation, and asked ( Quibus machinis)
with what tools or instruments, with what engines, ladders or scaffolds the
Lord did set up this mighty frame of heaven and earth? but in the works of
providence we may soberly ask, ( Quibus machinis) with what tools and
instruments, by what hands or counsels has he done these things? His hands
are visible, his tools are plain before our eyes in most of these works: yet
because the whole effect, or the effectualnes of all instruments is from his
co-working and concurrence; therefore little mention is to be made of
instruments, all must, be ascribed to him. God will have us use means, as if he
were to do nothing; and he looks to be honored, as if means had done nothing.

Yet means and instruments may be remembered, yea, instruments must be remembered
in their place. The Lord is so jealous of his great name, that he permits not
any to come in competition with him; yet he is so zealous of his servants good
name, that he is willing they should have honor in a subordination to himself.
Hence we find, that though David says, I will declare the works of the Lord:
yet the Lord takes care for, and makes a declaration of the works of David, and
of his worthies. In the second book of Samuel ( chap. 23. 8.) we have a
catalogue of David's worthies, and of their exploits set down in particulars.
Though the story of the Bible be the most exact and compendious that ever was
written, yet God vouchsafes faithful and worthy instruments a place in that.

And therefore, though the fatnes and the strength of our Eucharisticall
sacrifice, ought to be bestovved upon the Lord, yet be not unmindfull of those,
whom the Lord has used as his tools and instruments, as his sword and buckler
to do these great works for us, and to fight our battles. Let not any of those
Honorable names, who from the beginning of these wars and troubles, have
valiantly interposed themselves, and set their bodies and estates in the breach
between us and danger, be forgotten, or slightly remembered. Let it never be
charged upon the Parliament or Kingdom of England, that they have been
unmindefull of, or ungrateful to any of those Heroes, whom God has used as
their Saviors, and Protectours; Let them all receive, and enjoy rewards both
of honor and of bounty. And let those by whom God is now acting, and whose
most memorable successes in action, give the occasion of this days joy and
solemnity, be acknowledged, and acknowledged, thank't and thank't. I am
persuaded it is both honor and reward enough to many of them, that they do God
and their country service; but God requires that they who serve us, should
have reward and honor.

Let not England discourage valor, faithfulness, and unwearied industry in Any,
or in These, who have given not promises only, but proofs of these Three
martial accomplishments. To despise the instruments of our civil, as well as
of our spiritual salvation, is to despise the God of our salvation.

And to all the Members of the Honorable Houses of Parliament, who have
faithfully staid by, tended and watched with this troubled, sick and languishing
Nation these five or six years past, the whole Kingdom of England is obliged
to speak their thanks; and to say concerning them, as Christ ( Luke 22. 28.)
once did to his Disciples, Ye are they which have continued with me in my
temptation; As a reward of which pains and patience, Christ in the next words
tell them, And I appoint unto you a Kingdom: Though we have not a Kingdom to
appoint you, yet we ought to wish you the best and fairest portions in the
Kingdom, A Jacobs blessing, even the Dew of Heaven, and the fatness of the
earth, and plenty of corn and wine, all as the gift of God. And that the people
of the Land (in the capacity ye are now in) may serve you, and the Nation bow
down to you. Thus it becomes us to bless our Helpers, and to bless God for
our Helpers, lest our unthankfulness and murmurings, cause the Lord (as he
threatened Israel, Isa. 3.) To take away from England the stay and the staff,
not only the stay and the staff of our Natural lives, Bread and water (verse.
1.) but the stay and the staff of our Civil and Spiritual lives (verse 2, 3.)
The mighty man, and the man of war, the Judge and the Prophet, and the
prudent, and the An^ient; The Captain of fifty, and the honorable man: And
give children (froward men) to be our Princes, and babes (weak and impotent
ones) to rule over us.

And now let the Preservers join with the preserved, They who have labored,
with Those who eat the fruit of their labors, in blessing and praising the
Name of God, by whom it is, That we are not dead, but alive, by whom it is
that we and our friends are not only alive, but (as David once complained
about his enemies ( Psalm. 38. 19.) lively and strong, or, (as another
translation has it) live and are mighty. Let us all join in praising God,
who has given us hopes for the future, That we shall not die, but live, and
has given us this present opportunity, To declare the works which he has
done; These wonderful works in keeping us alive and lively, in filling us with
good hope, that we shall live to declare more and greater of his works then
these. That, as at this time it is, so likewise it shall yet be said in our
English Israel, WHAT GOD HAS WROVGHT.

FINIS.
Die Jovis 26. February, 1645.
IT is this day Ordered by the Lords in Parliament, that this House give thanks
to Mr IENKYN, for his great pains taken in the Sermon he Preached yesterday in
the Abbey Church Westminster, before the Lords of Parliament, it being the day
of the public Fast; And he is hereby desired to Print and publish the same:
which is not to be Printed by any, but by authority under his own hand.

J. Brown, Cler. Parl.

I Appoint Christopher Meredith to Print my Sermon.

William Jenkyn.


