Culpepers Midwife, 2. Part.

Culpeper's DIRECTORY FOR Midwives: OR, A Guide for WOMEN.

THE SECOND PART.

Discovering, 1. The Diseases in the Privities of Women. 2. The Diseases of the
Privy Part. 3. The Diseases of the Womb. 4. The Symptoms of the Womb. 5. The
Symptoms in the Terms. 6. The Symptoms that befall all Virgins and Women in
their Womb, after they are ripe of Age. 7. The Symptoms which are in
Conception. 8. The Government of Women with Child. 9. The Symptoms that happen
in Childbearing. 10. The Government of Women in Childbed, and the Diseases
that come after Travel. 11. The Diseases of the Breasts. 12. The Symptoms of
the Breasts. 13. The Diet and Government of Infants. 14. The Diseases and
Symptoms in Children.


London, Printed for George Sawbridge, at the Sign of the BIBLE on
Ludgate Hill. 1676.

THE CONTENTS OF THE FOURTH BOOK OF PRACTICAL PHYSIC. Of Women's Diseases.
THE FIRST PART. Of Diseases in the Privities in Women.
THE FIRST SECTION. Of Diseases of the Privy Part, and the Neck of the Womb.
Chap. 1. Of the straitness and largeness of the Orifice. Page 1 Chap. 2. Of
the Mentula or Yard in a Woman. Page 3 Chap. 3. Of Atretae or Closures, and
straitness of the Neck and Mouth of the Womb. Page 4 Chap. 4. Of Pustles and
roughness of the Privities. Page 6 Chap. 5. Of Condyloma in the Neck of the
Womb. Page 7 Chap. 6. Of Warts in the Neck of the Privities and Womb. Page 8
Chap. 7. Of the Hemorrhoids of the Womb. Page 9 Chap. 8 Of the Ulcers in the
Neck of the Womb. Page 11 Chap. 9. Of the Clefts in the Neck of the Womb. Page
14 Chap. 10. Of Fistulaes in the Neck of the Womb. Page 15 Chap. 11. Of a
Cancer in the Womb. Page 16 Chap. 12. Of a Gangrene and Sphacel in the Womb.
Page 18
The CONTENTS of the Second SECTION. Of the Diseases of the Womb.
Chap. 1. Of the Knowledge of the Temper of the Womb. Page 20 Chap. 2. Of the
hot Distemper of the Womb. Page 22 Chap. 3. Of the cold Distemper of the Womb.
Page 24 Chap. 4. Of the moist Distemper of the Womb. Page 25 Chap. 5. Of the
dry Distemper of the Womb. Page 26 Chap. 6. Of Compound Distempers, and first
of cold and moist. Page 27 Chap. 7. Of the ill shape of the Womb, and first of
the straitness of it and its Vessels. Page 30 Chap. 8. Of the opening of the
Vessels of the Womb besides Nature. Page 32 Chap. 9. Of a double Womb, the
wanting of the Womb, and evil shape of the Womb, and strange things found in
it. Page 33 Chap. 10. Of the Magnitude of the Womb increased, and first of the
Inflation of the Womb. Page 25 Chap. 11. Of the Dropsy of the Womb. Page 38
Chap. 12. Of a Tumor in the Womb from Blood in its Veins. Page 42 Chap. 13. Of
Inflammation of the Womb. ibid. Chap. 14. Of a Scirrhus and Cancer in the Womb.
Page 45 Chap. 15. Of the displacing of the Womb, and first of the Ascent of it.
Page 47 Chap. 16. Of Falling out of the Womb. Page 49 Chap. 17. Of the Rupture
of the Womb. Page 54 Chap. 18. Of Wounds, and breaking of the womb. ib. Chap.
19. Of Ulcers and rottenness of the Womb. Page 55 Chap. 20. Of the Diseases of
the Stones, and Vessels of Procreation in Women. ibid.
The CONTENTS of the Second PART. Of the Symptoms in the Womb, and from the
Womb.
Chap. 1. Of Weakness of the Womb. Page 57 Chap 2. Of the Itch of the Womb.
Page 59 Chap. 3. Of Pain in the Womb. Page 60 Chap. 4. Of the Diseases of the
Womb that come from sweet scents and stinks. Page 63
The CONTENTS of the Second SECTION. Of the Symptoms in the Terms, and other
fluxes of the Womb.
Chap. 1. Of the flux of the Terms. Page 66 Chap. 2. Of the Terms flowing too
soon. Page 69 Chap. 3. Of want and stoppage of the Terms. ibid. Chap. 4. Of
fewness of the Terms. Page 78 Chap. 5. Of Dropping of the Terms. Page 79 Chap.
6. Of the overflowing of the Terms. Page 80 Chap. 7. Of the Terms flowing with
pain and Symptoms. Page 85 Chap. 8. Of evil discolored Terms. Page 86 Chap.
9. Of Terms coming before their time. Page 87 Chap. 10. Of Terms that come
after their usual time. Page 88 Chap. 11. Of the Terms voided another way. Page
90 Chap. 12. Of the Whites. ibid. Chap. 13. Of the Gonorrhoea. Page 94 Chap.
14. Of strange things voided by the Womb. Page 95
The CONTENTS of the Third SECTION. Of the Symptoms that befall all Virgins and
Women in their Wombs, after they are ripe of age.
CHap 1. Of Virginity. Page 96 Chap. 2. Of the Green Sickness, or White-feaver.
Page 100 Chap. 3. Of Symptoms from the Womb, and Mother-fits in general. Page
106 Chap. 4. Of Suffocation of the Womb. Page 108 Chap. 5. Of the Frenzy of
the Womb. Page 115 Chap. 6. Of the Melancholy of Virgins and Widows. Page 118
Chap. 7. Of an Epilepsie from the Womb. Page 120 Chap. 8. Of pain of the Head
from the Womb. Page 122 Chap. 9. Of the Diseases of the Heart, and beating of
the Arteries in the Back and Sides from the Womb. Page 124 Chap. 10. Of the
Diseases of the Spleen, and the Hypochondriack disease of the Womb. Page 126
Chap. 11. Of the Distemper of the Liver from the Womb, and of a Beard growing
by consent from the Womb. Page 127 Chap. 12. Of the Diseases of the Stomach
that come from the Womb. ibid.
The CONTENTS of the Fourth SECTION. Of the Symptoms which are in Conception.
CHap 1. Of the desire of Venery hurt. Page 130 Chap. 2. Of Barrenness, and
want of Conception. Page 131 Chap. 3. Of Barrenness for the time, and
conceiving seldom. Page 139 Chap. 4. Of Conception, and forming of the Child.
Page 141 Chap. 5. Of the Generation of the Twins, and many Children. Page 142
Chap. 6. Of Superfoetation. Page 144 Chap. 7. Of the ill Formation of the
Child. Page 145 Chap. 8. Of a Child turned into Stone. Page 147 Chap. 9. Of a
Mole. Page 148 Chap. 10. Of Monsters. Page 151 Chap. 11. Of false Conception,
and Swelllling. Page 153
The CONTENTS of the Fifth SECTION. Of the Government of Women with Child, and
preternatural Distempers in Women with Child.
Chap. 1. Of the signs of Conception. Page 155 Chap. 2. Of the Government and
Diet of Women with Child. Page 156 Chap. 3. Of the Cure of Women with Child in
general. Page 158 Chap. 4. Of the Symptoms that befall Women with Child in the
first Months. Page 162 Chap. 5. Of the Symptoms in Women with Child in the
middle Minths. Page 164 Chap. 6. Of the Symptoms that are in the last Months.
Page 166 Chap. 7. Of Weakness of the Child. Page 167 Chap. 8. Of Crying in the
Womb. Page 168
The CONTENTS of the Sixth SECTION. Of Symptoms that happen in Childbearing.
Chap. 1. Of Childbearing in general. Page 170 Chap. 2. Of Abortion. Page 172
Chap. 3. Of the signs of Natural Birth, and the manner and government of such
as bring forth. Page 175 Chap. 5. Of Natural hard Travel. Page 177 Chap. 6. Of
a vicious disorderly Birth, or difficulty preternatural. Page 179 Chap. 7. Of a
slow Birth. Page 180 Chap. 8. Of a Child dead in the Womb. Page 181 Chap. 9. Of
the Caesarean Birth. Page 183
The CONTENTS of the Seventh SECTION. Of the Government of Women in Childbed,
and of the Diseases that come after Travel.
Chap. 1. Of the Government of Women in Childbed. Page 186 Chap. 2. Of the
Secundine or Afterbirth, or a Mole that is left after Childbearing. Page 187
Chap. 3. Of the Purgation after Childbearing diminished or detained. Page 189
Chap. 4. Of too great a flux of blood after Childbearing. Page 191 Chap. 5. Of
the Pains after Travel, and Torments in the Belly. Page 192 Chap. 6. Of the
Tearing of the Vulva to the Arse, and coming forth of the Womb, Inflammation,
Ulcer, Suffocation, and falling out of the Fundament. Page 193 Chap. 7. Of
Watching, Doting, and Epilepsie of Women in Childbed. Page 194 Chap. 8. Of the
swelling of the Womb, Belly, and Feet after Childbearing. Page 195 Chap. 9. Of
Vomiting, Looseness, Belly-bound, and not holding of Urine in Women in
Childbed. ibid. Chap. 10. Of the Wrinkles of the Belly after Childbearing,
and mending of the largeness of the Privities. Page 197 Chap. 11. Of Fevers
and acute Diseases in Women in Childbed. Page 198
The CONTENTS of the First SECTION. Of the Diseases of the Breasts.
Chap. 1. Of the increased number of Breasts, and greatness extraordinary. Page
203 Chap. 2. Of swelling of the Breasts with Milk. Page 205 Chap. 3. Of
Inflammation and Erisipela's of the Breasts. Page 206 Chap. 4. Of the Oedoma of
the Breasts. Page 209 Chap. 5. Of the Scirrhus of the Breasts. Page 210 Chap.
6. Of the Glandles or Kernels in the Breasts, being swollen, or of the Scrofula
and Struma in the Breast. Page 211 Chap. 7. Of the Cancer of the Breasts. Page
212 Chap. 8. Of Ulcers and Fistulaes of the Breasts. Page 215 Chap. 9. Of
straitness of the passages of the Breasts. ibid. Chap. 10. Of strange things
bred in the Breasts. Page 216 Chap. 11. Of the Diseases of the Nipples. ibid.
The CONTENTS of the Second SECTION. Of the Symptoms of the Breasts.
Chap. 1. Of want of Milk, and not giving of suck. Page 218 Chap. 2. Of too
much Milk. Page 220 Chap. 3. Of Curding, and other faults in the Milk. Page 221
Chap. 4. Of Milk coming forth at wrong places. Page 222 Chap. 5. Of strange
things coming forth of the Breasts. Page 223 Chap. 6. Of the change of color
in the Nipples, and pain of the Breasts. Page 224
A TRACTATE Of the CURE OF INFANTS.
The CONTENTS of the First PART. Of the Diet and Government of Infants.
Chap. 1. Of the Choice of the Nurse 225 Chap. 2. Of the Conditions of good
Milk 227 Chap. 3. Of Curing the Faults in Milk ibid. Chap. 4. Of the Diet and
Government of new born Children 229 Chap. 5. Of the Diet of an Infant from
breeding of Teeth, till it be Weaned 230 Chap. 6. Of Weaning of Children ib.
Chap. 7. Of Childrens Diet after Weaning. 231
The CONTENTS of the Second PART. Of Diseases and Symptoms of Children.
Chap. 1. Of Infants Diseases in general. 232 Chap. 2. Of Fevers in Children,
Meazles, and Small Pox. 233 Chap. 3. Of the Milkey Scab, Achores, and Favi. 235
Chap. 4. Of a Scald Head. 236 Chap. 5. Of Ptiriasis, or breeding of Lice. 239
Chap. 6. Of Hydrocephalus, or swelling of the Head. 240 Chap. 7. Of Siriasis.
141 Chap. 8. Of Frights in the sleep. 242 Chap. 9. Of great Watching. 243 Chap.
10. Of Epilepsie and Convulsion. 244 Chap. 11. Of Strabismus, or Squint-eyes.
246 Chap. 12. Of pain in the Ears, Inflammation, Moisture, Ulcers, and Worms.
ibid. Chap. 13. Of the Thrush, Bladders in the Gums, and Inflammation of the
Tonsils. 247 Chap. 14. Of Breeding of Teeth. 248 Chap. 15. Of Loosing of the
Tongue, and of the Frog. 249 Chap. 16. Of Catarrh, Cough, and difficult
Breathing. 250 Chap. 17. Of the Hicket. 251 Chap. 18. Of Vomiting. 252 Chap.
19. Of the Torments or Pains of the Belly. 253 Chap. 20. Of puffing up of the
Belly and Hypochondria. 255 Chap. 21. Of the Flux of the Belly. ibid. Chap. 22.
Of Binding of the Belly. 257 Chap. 23. Of the Worms. 258 Chap. 24. Of the
Rupture. 261 Chap. 25. Of sticking out of the Navel. 262 Chap. 26. Of
Inflammation of the Navel. 263 Chap. 27. Of falling out of the Fundament. ibid.
Chap. 28. Of the Stone in the Bladder. 264 Chap. 29. Of difficulty and stoppage
of Urine. 265 Chap. 30. Of not holding the Urine. 266 Chap. 31. Of chafing in
the Hips, called Intertrigo. 267 Chap. 32. Of Leanness and Fascination. ibid.
THE FOURTH BOOK OF PRACTICAL PHYSIC. Of Women's Diseases.
THE FIRST PART. Of Diseases in the Privities of Women.
THE FIRST SECTION. Of Diseases of the Privy Part, and the Neck of the Womb.
Chap. 1. Of the straitness and largeness of the Orifice.
THere are three Diseases in this Part. The straitness, and the largeness, and
Yard of a Woman.

The straightness is, when the Cleft is narrow, that it will not admit a Man's
Yard, or with much difficulty, it hinders Childbearing; and if it be from the
first confirmation, it is hard to be cured by Physic: but it is enlarged,
either by copulation, or by bringing forth of children. Sometimes it is from an
Ulcer, or from astringent Medicines given unadvisedly, that they may appear to
be Virgins, when they are not.

Sometimes the cleft is shut up outwardly, and there is only passage for the
Urin and the Terms: these Women are called Atretae, that is shut up, and bored,
of which Chap. 3. Sometimes it is so close, that neither Terms nor Urin can
come forth.

The contrary to this, is largeness of the Cleft, or when there are more holes
then Nature has usually, by often Copulation or Childbearing. This laxity or
largeness causes Barrenness and falling out of the Womb, as Hippocrates shows
in the Nature of Women. And this makes women unpleasant to men.

This is cured by purging after Childbearing, by Fomentations, Baths,
Liniments of Alum water, and the Decoction of astringent Plants.

Take Comfry roots, Bole, Sanguis Draconis, Pomgranate flowers, Alum, Mastich,
Galls, each half a dram: make a Powder, and with steeled Water make a Mixture,
dip a Pessary therein. Or, Take Oaken leaves, Plantane, each half a handful;
Comfry roots an ounce, Pomegranate peels and flowers, Sumach, each half an
ounce; Alum an ounce, boil them in Water, and foment the Privites.

Sometimes in hard travel, the space between the Fundament and the privy Cleft,
is broken into one hole. Eros shows the Cure of it. Some put a long piece of
Alum into the Cleft. When there are diverse passages in a Woman's Privities it
is from the first confirmation, De passion, mulier. c. 20.
when by Natures error, the passage from the straight Gut goes to the Womb.

Chap. 2. Of the Mentula, or Yard in a Woman.
THe Alae or Wings in the Privities of a Woman, are of soft spongy flesh, like
a Cocks-comb in shape and color; the part at the top is hard and nervous, and
swells like a Yard in Venery, with much spirit. This part sometimes is as big
as a man's Yard, and such women were thought to be turned into men.

It is from too much nourishment of the part, The Causes.
from the looseness of it by often handling.

It is not safe to cut it off presently: The Cure.
but first use Driers and Discussers, with things that a little astringe; then
gentle Causticks without causing pain, as burnt Alum, Aegyptiacum.

Take Aegyptiacum, Oil of Mastick, Roses, Wax, each half an ounce If these will
not do, then cut it off, or tie it with a Ligature of Silk or Horse-hair, till
it mortify.

Aetius teaches the way of Amputation, Tetrabser. 4. c. 103.
he calls it the Nympha or Clitoris, between both the Wings: but take heed you
cause not pain or Inflammation. After cutting, wash with Wine, with Mirtles,
Bays, Roses, Pomgranate flowers boiled in it, and Cypress nuts, and lay on an
astringent Powder.

Some Excrescences grow like a tail, and fill the Privities: they differ from a
Clitoris: for the desire of Venery is increased in that, and the rubbing of the
Clothes upon it, cause lust: but in an Excrescence of flesh, they cannot for
pain endure Copulation, but you may cut off this better than a Clitoris,
because it is all superfluous.

Chap. 3. Of Atretae or Closures, and straitness of the Neck and Mouth of the
Womb.
THey are threefold. Is it either in the Orifice, or the Neck, or in the
middle: it is always hurtful, either to Copulation or the Terms, or to
Conception, and Childbearing.

I saw one that had the first: the Orifice was very little, only fit to purge
the Terms, and receive Seed; she conceived, and the Midwives discovered in time
of Childbearing, and the Surgeon opened it, and she was happily delivered:
but how the Seed was spent into it, is not to be understood.

Lib. de ab. sana. and morb. cau. cap. 78.
Flesh or a Membrane is from evil conformation, or a Wound, or Ulcer, of which
Benivenius, Fabricus and Hildanus.

The Cleft also may be closed by a Wound or Ulcer, as in a woman who with the
French Pox, had all eaten off, and it grew together after, only there was a
little passage for Urin.

This is, either when the sides grow together from an Ulcer, or when proud
flesh stops it up, which is sometimes in the French Pox.

When it is in the Privities, it is to be seen: The Signs.
but when in the Neck or Orifice of the Womb, it is not known, but when the
Terms are to flow, or when they copulate: and it is either broken by the force
of blood, or there is pain; and being Virgins, they are taken to be with child:
for if it last long, the womb swells, and the whole body is bluish.

These either hinder the Terms from the neck of the womb, or from the veins of
it. If inflammation or ulcer was before, this disease may be suspected to be;
if there the closing be by the Membrane, the place is white; if by Flesh, it is
red. And it is known by the touch: for the Membrane is harder then Flesh.

The inconveniences are great, The Prognostic.
either in Copulation, Conception, or Childbearing especially: for the Child
cannot get forth without hazard of it self or mother.

It is easier cured when it is from a Membrane only, because it is easily cut
or broken; that in the Orifice of the Womb is not to be cured, because the
instruments cannot reach it.

Take away that which stops the passage, The Cure.
a Membrane that is outward is easily cut: but if it be in the neck of the Womb
or be flesh, it is hard. For if the cut be large, there is pain and bleeding,
and the wound is hard to be cured, because the neck of the Bladder is easily
hurt thereby.

Uvierus teaches this Operation in his Observations. And Hippocrates in his
Book of Sterility shows how a Membrane may be taken away without cutting.

If flesh grow from an ulcer after purging, use Driers and Discussers to
diminish it, with Frankincense, Birthwort, Roses, Pomgranate flowers, Mastick,
Mirrh, Aloes etc. as in Chap. 2.

Nicol. Florentius.
Some think this Disease may come from dryness, but it is incredible. If it come
from a hard tumor, soften and dissolve it with Butter, Oil of sweet Almonds,
Lillies, etc.

Chap. 4. Of Pustles and Roughness of the Privities.
ROughness and Itching come from Pustles in the neck of the Womb and Privities,
with scurff and swellings which itch and pain.

The Causes.
They are from an adust humor malignant and sharp, which abounding, evacuate
themselves by these loose and moist parts, and their sticking, exasperate the
flesh; this is in the French Pox.

The Signs. The Prognostic. The Cure.
They declare it themselves.

It is stubborn, long, and infectious to men, and hard to be cured.

If the adust sharp humors come from the whole body, prepare with Borrage,
Fumitory, Succory, Endive, and the like, then evacuate them with Senna,
Epithimum, Syrup of Apples, Violets, Roses, Catholicon, Confection Hamech,
pills of Fumitory, Tartar.

Let blood if there be fullness, first in the Arm, then in the Ancle: but if it
be from the French Pox, first use Guajacum and Sarsa, and the like.

Foment the part often with a hot Decoction of Dock roots, Fumitory, Hops,
Pellitory: or use this Ointment: Take Plantane and Rose Water, each four
ounces; Sal gem, Niter, Alum, each three drams; Sublimate a dram and half:
boil them to the third part, strain them, and add Verdigreece a scruple: then
use gentler means two days after, till the Pustles fall off, and new flesh
appear, and then use the Ointment again.

Let the Diet be to resist evil humors, of good Juice, avoid salt, sharp and
sour things.

Chap. 5. Of Condyloma in the Neck of the Womb.
COndyloma is a tubercle or excrescence with heat and pain: for these parts are
wrinkled, and when the wrinkles swell, there is a Condyloma. Sometimes it is
without Inflammation and soft, or with Inflammation and hard. It is usual in
the Privities and Fundament of such as have the French Pox.

They are from a sharp malignant humor, The Causes.
which is always in the Pox, and sometimes they follow hard Clefts or Chaps.

They are pain and burning, The Signs.
the skin is wrinkled; and when they are many, they are like a Bunch of Grapes.

They are hard to be cured, The Prognostic.
if they are from the Pox, first cure that, and then they often vanish of
themselves.

After general Evacuations proper against the Pox, use Tropicks: The Cure.
first see if there be Inflammation, and then abate pain. As, Take Oil of
Linseed and Roses, each an ounce; Oil of Eggs half an ounce; mix them in a
Leaden Mortar. Or, Take Pellitory, Mallows, Althaea, each half a handful;
Chamomil-flowers two pugils, Linseed and Foenugreek, each half an ounce. Boil
them to a pint, add Oil of Roses three ounces, inject it with a Syringe.

If there be no Inflammation, use Driers and Repellers, as Vervain, Ivy, Acacia,
Pomegranatepeels and flowers: for Baths and Fomentations, and after add
Discussers, as Chamomil and Thyme.

If it be old and hard first soften it with the same, and after thrice using
them, use Digesters and Driers that are strong as a Powder. Take round
Birthwort a dram, Savin, Hermodactils burnt, each two drams; burnt Alum two
drams, red Lead a dram, Calcitis half a dram; sprinkle it upon the loofe flesh.

Or, Take Aloes, Frankincense, Mirrh, each a dram; Ammoniacum dissolved in
Vinegar a dram and half, Alum two drams, red Lead two drams, Galls half a
dram, Turpentine, Oil of Tartar, each a dram; with Oil of Roses and Wax, make
an Ointment.

This is very strong: Take Turpentine an ounce, Oil of Nutmegs two ounces, read
Lead two drams, Alum, Vitriol, each a dram; Verdegreece half a dram, Sublimate
a scruple, with Wax make an Ointment, or of Balsom of Mercury.

Tetrab. 4. sermon. l. c. 3.
If Medicines will not do, the Ancients advise Burning, of which see Aetius.

Chap. 7. Of Warts in the Neck of the Privities of the Womb.
THey are from a gross feculent and malignant humor sent to the skin, and
turned to a Node.

The Signs.
They are known by their shape: the malignant are known by their hardness, and
heat, and blewness, filth, and pain.

The Prognostic.
They are often hard to be cured, because the pox is with them, and they are in
a place to which Medicines are hard to be applied, and to continue.

The Myrmeciae are not cut off, but they leave a great ulcer, the Thymi and
Clavi grow again. Acrochordones once cut, leave no root.

After Universals, and order of diet, The Cure.
either use Medicines, or cut or burn them to discuss, then use Sage dried with
Figs, Organ, Rue burnt, dry Savin, Frankincense, with Wine and Vinegar, or
Snakes skins with Figs: these also dry.

These corrode, eat and burn, as juice of wild Cowcumbers, with Salt, Milk of
Figgs, Sheeps-dung, Goats-gall, with Niter, Aqua fortis, Spirit of Vitriol,
Sulphur, Butter of Antimony. Take heed that you hurt not the parts adjacent,
but defend them with Bole, sealed Earth, Rose Water and Vinegar; if you put the
Corrosives into Nut-shells, change them twice or thrice in a day, and wash the
part with a cleansing Decoction, and then cut or burn.

Chap. 7. Of the Haemorrhoids of the Womb.
THe veins that end in the neck of the womb often swell, like the Haemorrhoids;
it is from gross blood that comes to these veins out of the time of the terms.

Inordinate flux of terms may occasion it, The Causes.
when they flow out of the usual time, they grow thick, and cannot get out of
the veins, but swell them.

They are to be touched, The Signs.
and with a Speculum matricis to be seen. There is pain and bleeding without
order: she is pale and lazy.

The Cure.
Correct the blood, purge, and bleed in the arm to derive and revel, of which in
the diseases of the womb.

If pain be, abate it by sitting in a Decoction of Mallows, Althaea, Chamomel,
Melilot flowers, Moulin, Linseed, Foenugreek; of which also make Fomentations
and Ointments, with Butter, Populeon, and Opium if there be pain.

Take Populeon, Oil of Roses, and sweet Almonds, fresh Butter, each half an
ounce; Saffron a scruple, with the yelk of an Egg, make an Ointment. Or,

Take Mucilage of Quinces, Althaea, each half an ounce; Oil of Roses, and
Hens-grease, each a dram; the yelk of an Egg, and Saffron half a dram, mix them
in a Leaden Mortar.

If pain be gone or abated, and they bleed not, use Dryers of Bole, Earth of
Lemnos, Acacia, Ceruss, froath of Silver, Lead burnt and washed, long
Birthwort, Alum, Verdigreece.

If they swell with blood, evaporate it, or foment with the Decoction of
Mallows, Althaea, Pellitory, Chamomil-flowers, Moulin, Melilot, seeds of Line
and Foenugreek. If they do not good, open them by Fig Leaves rubbed upon them,
or by Horsleeches, of which Chap. 2.

If there be proud flesh, take it off, as is showed.

If they bleed gently, let Nature alone to the work, for it is good, and frees
from other diseases. If the flux be great, and abate the strength, open a vein
in the arm diverse times, and do as in overflowing of the Terms.

Question. How do the Haemorrhoids differ from the Terms flowing or stopped?
Mercurialis says, That though a flux of Terms be immoderate: yet it has its
periods, and is without pain, and makes not the body lean, but it is contrary
in the Haemorrhoids. But this is not true: for the body is not made lean
always by the Haemorrhoids, nor do the Courses keep their periods always.

Besides the pain which is almost always in the Haemorrhoids, they differ in
that the terms flow from the veins of the womb and its neck: but the
Haemorrhoids are when the blood flows too much to the veins that nourish the
privities, and sticks or is evacuated.

Chap. 8. Of Ulcers in the Neck of the Womb.
THey are seldom cured in the body of the womb, and they are simple and clean,
or sordid and malignant.

Are a flux of sharp humors that lasts long in the Pox and Gonorrhaea. Corrupt
after-births, The Causes.
and courses after childbearing detained, inflammations turned to imposthumes;
these are the internal.

The external are sharp Medicines, hard travel, a great child taken out by
force, violent lechery, wounds, falls, strokes.

Are pain and constant biting that increases, The Signs.
especially in copulation, or when Wine or Hydromel is injected. You may also
see it with a Speculum: also there is matter gentle or filthy; if the ulcer go
toward the bladder, they piss hot and often: there is pain in the roots of the
eyes to the hands and fingers fainting, and a little Fever sometimes.

The external Causes are to be related by the Patient. If it be from the Pox or
Gonorrhoea, the signs of them will appear, of which Hippocrates.

They are hard to be cured, because they are in a part fit to receive humors,
soft and moist, and that has consent with many parts. Hence are diverse
Symptoms: the great, old, and foul are worst, when they corrode, and are
hollow, they are seldom cured; they that may easily have Medicines applied to
them, are easiest cured.

The Cure.
First, stop the flux of humors to the part, if it be either from the whole
body, or any part. And amend the distemper of the womb, that it may neither
breed nor receive bad humors. If the French Pox be with it, resist that first.

If there be pain, first abate that with Milk steeled, or with three whites of
Eggs, and Mucilage of Fleabane, or an Emulsion of Poppy seeds. Or, Take Althaea
roots an ounce, Dill seed two drams, Barley a pugil, Faenugreek and Linseed,
each an ounce; Fleabane and Poppy-seed, each half an ounce; boil them in Milk.
Of which in pain of the womb.

In a foul ulcer, first use Clensers, as Whey, Barley-water, Honey, Wormwood,
Smallage, Orobus, Orris, Birthwort, Mirrh, Turpentine, Alum. As, Take new Milk
boiled a pint, Honey half a pint, Orris powder half an ounce. Use it hot often
every day.

When that which was injected, is voided, wash with the Decoction of Mallows,
and put up this Pessary: Take Eruum and Lentils in powder and Orris, each two
drams; with Honey. Or,

Take Diapompholigos, with Frankincense, Mastick, Mirrh, as the Ulcer requires.

Of such Fumes: As, Take Frankincense, Mastich, Mirrh, Storax calamite, Gum of
Juniper, Labdanum, each an ounce: make a powder, or Troches with Turpentine.

If there be suspicion of the French Pox, add a little Cinnabar. In a very foul
ulcer, and Aegyptiacum or Apostolorum, or a little Spirit of Wine. In a
creeping corroding ulcer, with Cleansers mix cold, drying and astringent
Medicines. Allum-water, Plantane and Rose Water, with Pomegranate-flowers
boiled, and Pomegranate-peels, and Cypress-nuts is also good, and with Aloes.

After cleansing, fill it with flesh, and heal it up. As, Take Tutty washed
half an ounce, Litharge, Ceruss, Sarcocol, each two drams; with Oil of Roses
and Wax make an Ointment.

Or smoke the Privities with Mirrh, Frankincense, Gum or Juniper, Labdanum two
drams in powder with Turpentine make Troches.

Or use Sulphur, or Alum Baths, and Plasters.

Inwardly give vulnerary Potions. As, Take Agrimony, Burnet, Plantane,
Knot-grass, each two pugils; China three drams, Coriander-seed half a dram,
Currants half an ounce: boil them in Hen-broath, give it twice a day. Or give
Turpentine and Sugar for a month, or a dram of Pills of Bdellium often.

If the body consume, give Asses milk, with Conserve of Roses for a month.

Chap. 9. Of Clefts in the Neck of the Womb.
THese are long Ulcers that are small, like those in the hands and feet in
Winter; they eat off the skin, and are sometimes deep with hard lips, if old:
sometimes they are dry, or sometimes bleed.

The Causes.
They come from hard travel, when some parts in the neck of the womb are broken
by a great Child, or violent Copulation, or flux of sharp humors that stick in
the parts, and corrode.

The Signs.
If it be new, it is hidden sometimes and known in Copulation, by pain and
bleeding.

The Prognostic. The Cure.
The new are easier cured, then when they are old and callous.

If they come from hard travel, make a Clyster of the Decoction of Roses,
Plantane, Birth-wort, Bole, Sanguis Draconis, Frankincense or with the white of
an Egg, a Pessary.

If from sharp humors: after universaller Evacuations, use Topics that bind
without biting, (if the Clefts be not callous) as Oil of Linseed and Roses,
with the yelk of an Egg, and Juice of Plantain mixed in a Leaden Mortar. Or,

Ung. Stpollonij apud Gal.
Take Oil of Roses eight ounces, stir it in a leaden Mortar, till it is black
and thick, then put in the powders of Litharge of Silver and Ceruss.

If they are callous, make an Ointment of Oil of Lillies, Marrow of a Deer,
Turpentine and Wax. If they are malignant, cure them as Fistulaes, of which in
the Chapter following.

If there be Itch and pain; Take Diapompholigos, Populeon, each an ounce; Sugar
of Lead, Camphire, each a scruple: make an Ointment.

Let the Diet be moist, of good Juice, Chickens, Veal, Kid, rear Eggs, Mallows,
Bugloss, Borage; Abstain from sharp and salt meats.

Chap. 10. Of Fistulaes in the Neck of the Womb.
MAny times there are Ulcers in these parts, because they are soft, and easily
corroded, and are hard to be cured.

Some of them are straight, others crooked. Some Simple, others hollow.

If matter stay there, The Causes.
it corrodes and makes buroughs, and divides the parts, and makes a Callus;
and when the matter is divided, the parts divided cannot unite.

It is known by the figure of the ulcer, The Signs.
there is a callous Lip, and a thin evil matter, when it is pressed, flows out:
there is no pain, except it reach a sensible part. Sometimes it reaches the
Bladder, and then the urin comes forth at the Fistula. Sometimes the Fundament,
and then the dung appears in the Fistula.

A new Fistula is easier cured than an old, The Prognostic.
and a straight than a crooked. It is scarce to be cured in a Chachochimical
old body, when it pierces into the parts adjacent.

First, use Universals, and good, Diet, The Cure.
then see if it may be cured by Medicines, or better left to Nature to evacuate
Excrements thereby.

If the last is best, use a pallative Cure, by often purging and sweating twice
in a year, and Injunctions and Strengtheners, and lay up a Plaster of Diapalma.

If you hope for a Cure, after universals, give drying vulnerary Drinks; of
male Fern roots, Centaury, Agrimony, Bettony, Ladies-mantle, etc.

Then use Topics: first dilate the Orifice (if it be strait) with a Sponge or
Gentian roots, then consume the Callus: but first make it soft with Oil of
Lillies, Deers Marrow, Turpentine and Wax.

Three things consume a Callus: Medicines, Cutting and Burning, there in a new
strait Fistula, use Gentian, black Hellebore, Aegyptiacum, or Vigo's powder
with a pencil. Or, Take Sublimate half a scruple, Rose or Plantane-water fix
ounces, set it upon Embers. If it be toward the Womb, take heed of strong
Medicines.

If it be callous and foul, burn it either by a Caustic or hot Iron. These are
good in the outward of the Neck: then cleanse and heal.

Chap. 11. Of a Cancer in the Womb.
IT is seldom seen, and never cured: but here I shall speak of that in the neck
of the Womb, which is ulcerated, or not ulcerated.

The Causes.
It is from terms burnt, and hot burnt humors that are black, that flow thither.
It is after long scirrhous tumors, that have been immoderately softened. It is
first not ulcerated, and when the humors are more corrupt, it is ulcerated.

The Signs.
They are hard to be known at first, because it is a tumor without pain, and
after there is a pricking in it, and a pain in the Groins, Loins, and bottom of
the Belly. The tumor is hard, blew, with blew stinking Lips. When it is
ulcerated, the Symptoms are all worse, and there is a thin, black, stinking
matter. Sometimes much blood that is dangerous, a gentle Fever, Loathing,
trouble of Mind, the Cheeks are red, from the vapors that fly up from the womb.

It is hard to be cured, The Prognostic.
because mild Medicines are not felt, and strong, exasperate; and the part
makes it more hard, because it is neglected at the first, and increases.

Let the Physician prevent ulceration: The Cure.
or if it be to hinder the increase of it, let diet be against Melancholy:
prepare and purge Melancholy.

This powder for many days given, is excellent: Take Smaragds, Saphir, and
East Bezoarstone, each a dram; give every day three or four grains with
Scabious or Carduus water.

Let the Tropicks not be biting at first. But foment with juice of Plantane,
Nightshade, Purslane, or use Diapompholigos. Or, Take Juice of Plantane,
Nightshade, Purstane, each two ounces; Mucilage of Fleabane an ounce, Oil of
Roses three ounces: stir them in a leaden Mortar. Or, Take Oil of Roses, of
Eggs, each an ounce and half; Sugar of Lead a dram: stir them in a leaden
Mortar, then add Litharge, Ceruss, each three drams; Tutty a dram, Camphire a
scruple. Or,

Take Juice of Nightshade six ounces, Tutty and burnt Lead, each two drams;
Camphire half a dram: stir them long in a leaden Mortar, and add powder of
Cray-fish.

Inject a Decoction of Cray-fish: and if pain be great, foment with Mallows,
Althaea, Water Lillies, Coriander, Dill, Fleabane Seed, with Saffron in Milk:
or make a Cataplasm of the same.

Some use Antimony, Arsenick, etc. which are good in other parts. But this
cannot bear them.

A noble Woman had on the right side of her Face an ulcerated Cancer, and when
all the French, Italian, German, Spanish Physicians could not cure her, a
Barber cured her only with Chickens sliced thin, and laid on often every day.

Chap. 12. Of a Gangrene and Sphacel in the Womb.
SOmetimes the whole Womb is gangrenated, and it is from the Privities that
receive many Excrements apt to corrupt.

The Causes.
It is from an Inflammation and Ulcer not well cured, because the part has many
Excrements, which easily quench the natural heat, and then the part mortifies.

The Signs.
There is an usual heat in the Neck of the Womb, and a Fever with horror all
over the body, then the color changes in the part; it is black and blew,
without pulse or sense. When it is cut or pricked, it stinks, and the strength
decays, and the heart faints.

The Prognostic. Aetius leth. 1. cap. 72. Nichol. Florent. ser. 6. tr. 3.
Math. degrad. in 9. Rhasis C. de exitu matricis.
It is very dangerous, and worse when it goes to the womb than outward. Some
have had the Womb fall out, and have lived, which besides grave Histories,

We saw at Avinion in an old noble Woman. Anno 1635.

Stop the putrefaction, take away that which is rotten, by scarrifying if you
can, then wash with the Decoction of Wormwood, Lupines, and with Aegyptiacum,
and apply this Cataplasm: Take Orobus and Bean flour, each two ounces; Oxymel a
pint, boil them, add Lupines, Wormwood, Aloes, and Mirrh.

Cut off the dead flesh, The Cure.
strengthen the principal parts, the Heart, lest the Spirits be infected with
evil vapors that fly by the Arteries.

Give Conserve of Borrage, Bugloss, Gilli-flowers, Diamargariton frigid,
Electuary of Gems frigid, Confection of Hyacinths, Syrup of Sorrel,
Pomegranates, Borrage; and apply Epithems to the Heart. In Observatio.
Vuierus cured a noble Woman aged twenty five, she had a Pustle in her
Privities in the Dog-dayes, from violent Lechery with her Husband, and she used
a Cataplasm from a silly Surgeon, and in few days it rotted, grew black,
and mortified, and went toward the Fundament very fast.

THE FOURTH BOOK. THE SECOND SECTION. Of the Diseases of the WOMB.
Chap. 1. Of the Knowledge of the Temper of the Womb.
Lib. uterus muliebris.
MArk Anthony Ulmus Physician of Bononia, shows the Temper of the Womb: He
says, That a Beard in Women shows that they have a hot Womb, and hot Stones.
It comes with the beginning of the Terms, and when the Breasts swell, and is
hard to be seen.

Lib. 3. de lui. any. c. 11.
Aristotle says, That some Women have hairs in their Chin, when their Courses
stop, and when they have a hot Womb and Stones.

But there are more certain signs of heat.

1. When hard hair comes forth suddenly, thick, black and long, and large
about. If they come forth slow, thin, soft, yellowish, and but few, not
spreading, the Womb is cold.

Also when the Terms come forth at 12 years of age, it is a sign of a hot Womb,
and when they last long, the blood is red, hot, but not very much. In an old
Constitution they come later, and the blood is cold and waterish, and they end
sooner. If it be hot and moist, they flow plentifully, and last till after
fifty. If it be hot and dry, the blood is yellow, thin and sharp, and pricks
the Privities.

If it be cold and moist, the blood comes late forth, with difficulty, and it
is whitish and thin. If it be cold and dry, the Terms come forth very late, and
with difficulty, and seldom continue till forty, and the blood is thick and
little.

The third sign is from Lechery: for they who have hot wombs, desire Copulation
sooner and more vehemently, and are much delighted therewith: they who are
cold, do the contrary. The hot and moist are not tired with much Venery. The
hot and dry have great Lust and a Frenzy if they want it: but they are quickly
tired, because there are but few Spirits. If it be cold and moist, they are not
soon lecherous, and are easily satisfied; and if they miscarry often, the womb
is made colder, and they delight not in the sport: but Copulation does them
good, and makes them more youthful. If it be cold and dry, they desire not a
man in a long time, and take no delight; because the Spirits are few.

The fourth sign is from often Conception: for the hot conceive often, and
bring forth males or Viragoes, if the seed of the man agrees with it.

the cold does the contrary.

A hot and moist Womb is very fruitful, if the man be well tempered; and though
he be old and weak, yet she will conceive by him. Sometimes they have twins, or
over-do, and have a Mole.

Hot and dry are fruitful, but not so much as the former.

Cold and moist are hard to conceive, especially when they are in years; when
they are young, and the Seed of the man is hot and dry, they conceive males;
but seldom well shaped or healthful: and the woman while she is with Child, is
sickly.

A cold and dry Womb is commonly barren; and if they conceive, the Man's Seed is
hot and moist, they bring forth Females; and if Males, they are tall, and
quickly look old.

Chap. 2. Of the hot Distemper of the Womb.
HEat of the Womb is necessary for Conception; but if it be too much, it
nourishes not the Seed of the man, but disperseth its heat, and hinders the
Conception.

The Causes.
This preternatural heat is from the Birth sometimes, and makes them barren. If
aftewards, it is from hot causes that bring the heat and the blood to the womb.
From internal and external Medicines, too much hot meats and drinks, and
Exercise.

The Signs.
They are prone to Lust, have few Courses, yellow, or black, or burnt, or sharp;
they have hairs betimes upon their privities; they are subject to the Headache,
and there are signs of much Choler, their Lips are dry.

When this distemper is strong, The Prognostic.
they have few terms, and out of order: they are bad and hard to flow, and in
time they are Hypochondriacks, and for the most part barren; and there is
sometimes a Frenzy of the Womb.

Use Coolers: The Cure.
so that they offend not the Vessels that must be open for the Flux of the
terms: therefore,

Use inwardly Succory, Endive, Violets, Waterlillies, Sorrel, Lettice, Sanders,
and Syrups and Conserves made thereof. As,

Take Conserve of Succory, Violets, Waterlillies, Borage, each an ounce;
Conserve of Roses half an ounce, D^amargariton frigid, Di^trio santalon, each
half a dram; with Syrup of Violets or Juice of Citrons make an Electuary.

Outwardly use Ointment of Galens Cooler, Ointment of Roses, Cerot of Sanders,
Oil of Roses, Violets, Waterlillies, Gourds, Venus-navel to the Back and Loins:
or make Cataplasms of Barley meal, Roses powdered, Violets, Waterlillies,
Sanders, with Juice or water of Plantane, Waterlillies, Succory, Lettice, Oil
of Roses, Violets, Waterlillies.

Baths are good to sit in, and cooling Fomentations; and after let her take
some of the Coolers mentioned. In great heat, use this cooling Pessary.

Take Opium a scruple, Goose grease two scruples, Eras. de pass. mulic. cap. 7.
Wax and Honey, each four scruples; Oil at ounce, whites of two Eggs.

This was from an opinion the Ancients had, that Opium was cold: but take heed
of the using it too much, lest the narcotick quality hurt.

Let the Air be cool, her Garments thin: let her meat be with Lettice, Endive,
Succory, Barley: give no hot meats nor strong Wine, except it be waterish and
thin. Rest is good both in body and mind. She must not copulate, but she may
sleep much.

Chap. 3. Of the cold Distemper of the womb.
THis causes many Evils, and Barrenness.

They are contrary to those of a hot Distemper; The Causes.
cold Air, Rest and Idleness, and cooling Medicines.

The Signs.
It is known by their not desire of Lechery, not receiving pleasure in the time
of Copulation, when they spend their Seed. The terms are phlegmatic, thick and
slimy, and flow not rightly: there is wind in the womb, the Seed is crude,
waterish with a Gonorrhoea.

The Prognostic. The Cure.
It is the cause of Obstructions and Barrenness, and is hard to be cured.

Use things proper to heal the womb, as this Water.

Take Galangal, Cinnamon, Nutmeg, Mace, Cloves, each two drams; Ginger, Cubebs,
Zedoary, Cardamoms, each an ounce; grains of Paradise, long Pepper, each half
an ounce: beat them, and put them in six quarts of Wine for eight days, then
add Sage, Mints, Balm, Motherwort, each three handfuls: let them stand eight
days more, then pour off the Wine, and beat the Herbs and the Spices, and then
pour on the Wine, and distill them.

Ano her. Take Cinnamon, Nutmegs, Cloves, Mace, Ginger, Cubebs, Cardamom,
grains of Pa adice, each an ounce and half; Galangal six drams, long Pepper
half an ounce, Zedoary five drams, bruise them, and add six quarts of Wine, put
them in a Cellar nine days, daily stirring them; then add Mints two handfuls,
then let them stand fourteen days, pour off the Wine, and bruise them, and
then pour on the Wine again, and distill them.

Quercetan has an Hysteric, Extract, In phar. doc. restit. cap. 25.
a greater and a less; use outwardly Fomentations, Baths, Baggs of hot Roots,
as Birthwort, Lovage, Valerian, Angelica, Burnet, Masterwort, Calamus, Madder,
Elicampane, Orris, and Herbs: as Mugwort, Balm, Motherwort, Savin, Pennyroyal,
Calamints, Organ, Dittany, Marjoram, Rue, Bettony, Rosemary, Lavender, Sage,
Stoechas flowers, Seeds of Smallage, Parsley, Rue, Carrots, Anise, Fennel,
Cummin, Lovage, Parsley.

Anoint with Oil of Lillies, Rue, Angelica, Bays, Cinnamon, Cloves, Mace,
Nutmeg. Or, Take Labdanum two ounces, Frankincense, Mastick, liquid Storax,
each half an ounce; Oil of Cloves, Nutmegs, each half a scruple; Oil of
Lillies, Rue, each an ounce; with Wax make a Plaster.

A Fume. Take Frankincense, Mirrh, Mastich, each a dram; Bayberries a dram and
half, Labdanum two drams, Storax Cloves, each a dram; Gum Arabic and Wine make
Troches, or Pessaries of the same.

Let the diet be warming, and the air, the meat of easy concoction, seasoned
with Anise, Fennel, Thyme. Avoid Milk-meats and raw Fruits.

Chap. 4. Of the moist Distemper of the Womb.
THis is commonly joined with a cold Distemper, and causes Barrenness, and is
from the same causes, as a cold distemper: for commonly cold things do moisten.
It is commonly in women that are idle.

The Signs.
They that have moist wombs abound in Courses, but they are waterish and thin;
the privities are wet, they have the VVhites, and desire not Copulation much,
and delight not in it; they retain not the seed: and if they conceive when the
child is big, they abort or miscarry.

The Prognostic. The Cure.
If it last long, it is hard to be cured. If it be much, they conceive not.

It is by Driers, and things that cure the cold distemper are good against the
moist: because all Healers have a drying power. Use Sulphur Baths and
Injections. Beware of Astringents, lest the evil humors be stopped, and the
disease increased.

Chap. 5. Of the dry Distemper of the Womb.
IN this the womb is hardened, of it self it is fleshy and soft, and moistened by
blood for Conception.

It is sometimes from the birth or old age, when they are past childbearing.
If it be from drying causes, they are barren before they are old.

The Causes.
Diseases and Medicines dry the womb, as Inflammations, Fevers, and when blood
flows not to it, nor goes to the bottom of it, by reason of the straitness of
the Veins, or Obstructions, as in Viragoe's, and such as never conceived: and
if they void any blood, it is from the neck of the womb, and not from the
bottom.

The Signs.
They void little seed, and are slow in Venery, the terms are few, the mouth of
the womb is dry, and they are slender, of a dry Constitution; their lower Lip
is always chapt, and blackish red.

This distemper is hard to be cured in any part, especially if it be old. The
Prognostic. The Cure.


Use Moistners; as Borage, Bugloss, Mercury, Mallows, Althaea, Violets, sweet
Almonds, Pistachaes, Pine-nuts, Jujubes, Dates, Figs, Raisins.

Of which are made Syrups, Conserves, Emulsions, Candies, etc.

Outward Remedies are made of the same, adding Time, Fenugreek-Seeds, Lillies,
Brank-ursine, Pellitory, etc.

Fomentations are made with Milk; and after bathing anoint the region of the
womb and the belly to the privities with oil of sweet Almonds, Lillies,
Lin-seed, Jesamin, fresh Butter, Hens and Goose grease.

Let the Diet be moistning, the Air moist, the meat fatning, of much
nourishment and small excrement. Leet sleep be a little longer than usual.
Great labor, anger, sadness, fasting, do hurt.

Chap. 6. Of Compound Distempers, and first of Cold and Moist.
THere is seldom a simple Distemper in the part, and commonly there is matter
which feeds it. It is usually cold and moist, which gathers excrements of that
sort, either in the whole body, or in the womb after the terms.

The Causes.
Are all things that breed cold and phlegmatic humors in the whole body or the
womb.

The Cure.
They conceive not, and are of an ill habit of body; the terms seldom flow
right, and they have sometimes the whites.

The Prognostic. The Cure.
It is harder to cure than a simple distemper.

The cold humor is in fault; therefore prepare it with Syrup of Mugwort, Mints,
Bettony, Hysop, with a Decoction proper.

As, Take Fennel roots an ounce, Valerian, Elicampane, Masterwort, each half an
ounce; Pennyroyal, Mugwort, Motherwort, Nep, Marjoram, each a handful;
Rosemary and Sage-flowers, each two pugils; Siler Montane, Fennel, Anniseed,
Parsnep-seed, each a dram: boil them, to ten ounces strained, add Sugar, syrup
of Mugwort two or three ounces, Cinnamon Water half an ounce: make a Portion
for three doses.

Then purge it with Agarick, Mechoacan, Turbith; and if other humors be mixed
with Phlegm, add Senna, and the like: or use Pills de tribus Aloephanginae,
Mastich, of Hiera with Agarick, Sine quibus. Or, Take Agarick a dram and half,
Senna two drams; infuse them in Mugwort-water: to three ounces strained, add
Diaphoenicon or Diacarthaemum two drams; strain and add syrup of Mugwort half
an ounce, Cinnamon Water half a dram.

After universal Evacuation, use Pessaries. As, Take Mercury, bruise it, and
put it in a bag of white Silk; anoint it with Butter or Honey of Roses.

Or, Take Benedicta laxativa three drams, Agarick two drams, Gith seed a dram,
Pease meal six drams, with juice of Mercury make Pessaries in a Sarsnet Bag.
Or, Take Hiera a dram, Agarick, half a dram, Bdellium a dram, with Honey make a
Pessary, or make it with powder of Agarick and Troches of Coloquintida, or five
sweats of Guajacum, China and Sarsa. As,

Take Guajacum a pound and eighteen ounces, infuse them in twelve pints of
water twenty four hours, then boil them to the consumption of the third part,
give six or eight ounces hot in the morning, and let her sweat.

Pour water to the relics, and boil them to the consumption of the third part
for an ordinary drink.

You may use China and Sarsa the same way, and because in a decoction some
strength is lost, and so great a quantity is tedious for women, you may distill
them and give a less quantity with things proper for the womb.

As, Take Guajacum a pound, or Sarsa eight ounces, Angelica, Elicampane, each
an ounce; Mugwort two handfuls, Dittany half a handful, add six pints of water
or wine, steep them two days, then distill them, and give two ounces of the
water.

Let her meat be roasted Birds, Hens, Capons, Partridges, Mutton, sweet
Almonds, Raisins. Let her abstain from salt and sharp things.

If these sweats are unpleasant, give them in the third and fourth Chapter
internal and external. As, Take Conserve of Marjoram, Rosemary, Bettony, each
two ounces; of Balm an ounce, Diamoschu dulcis, Diamargariton calid, each a
dram; ^^ndied Eryngus and Citrons, each half an ounce; with furup of Mugwort
make an Electuary; and use Baths to sit in mentioned.

Drying Spaw-waters are good to drink, or to sit in.

Let the diet be as in Chap. 3. and 4. give the flesh of wild Mountain fowl,
Pigeons, Hens, Capons, Mutton roasted and spiced, and old wine, and let her
exercise.

Of the hot and dry Distemper of the Womb with Choler.
Do as in Chap. 5. purge the Choler, whether it be from the whole body, or from
the Liver, with Syrup of Roses, Manna, Tamarinds, Rhubarbs, Senna, etc.

Chap. 7. Of the ill shape of the Womb, and first of the straitness of it and
its vessels.
THis is a Disease of evil conformation from Nature, when it can be stretched
out no further, this makes an abortion in the fourth or fifth month.

But it is wonderful in its natural shape when it will stretch according to the
proportion of the child, and after childbearing be as small as at first.

Of straitness of the vessels of the Womb.
This is usual, and hinders the flux of the terms and conception, it is in the
vessels of the womb, and of the neck thereof.

The Causes.
Are thick tough humors that stop the mouths of the veins and arteries: these
are bred of gross or much nourishment, when the heat of the womb is so weak
that it cannot attenuate the humors, these either flow from the whole body, or
are gathered in the womb.

Sometimes vessels are closer by inflammation or Schirrhus, or other tumor. 3.
They are stopped by astringent Medicines. 4. By compression. 5. From a Scar or
Flesh, or a Membrane that grows after a wound.

Stoppage of the terms shows straitness, The Signs.
which hinders conception: and this stoppage is known by crudities abounding in
the body, which are known by their signs. Sometimes thick phlegm comes from the
womb, if there was a wound before, or the Secundine was pulled out by force.

Stoppage of terms from an old obstruction by humors, is hard to be cured; The
Prognostic.
if it be from disorderly use of astringents, it is more curable: if it be from
a Schirrhus or other tumor that compresseth or closes the vessels, that cannot
be cured, the disease is incurable.

Obstructions are taken away by the means mentioned in the cold and moist
Distemper of the Womb: phlegm must be purged, The Cure.
and she must be let blood, as in stoppage of the terms.

After Universals; come to the obstruction with Medicines that move the terms:
these take away the cause, as in the Chapter of the cold distemper of the Womb.
Or,

Take Asparagus roots, Parsley roots, each an ounce; Madder roots half an ounce,
red Pease half a handful, Pennyroyal, Calamints, each a handful; Wall-flowers,
Dill-flowers, each two pugils; boil, strain, and add syrup of Mugwort an ounce
and half.

Or, Take Birthwort and white Dittany roots, each an ounce; Costus, Cinnamon,
Galangal, each half an ounce; Rosemary, Pennyroyal, Calamints,
Bettony-flowers, each a handful; Anise and Fennel seeds, each a dram; Saffron
half a dram, with Wine.

Or use Topics; as, Take Mugwort, Marjoram, Calamints, Mercury, Pennyroyal,
each two handfuls; Sage, Rosemary, Bays, Chamomil-flowers, each a handful; boil
them in water, foment the groins and the bottom of the belly: or let her fit in
a Bath up to the Navel; and then anoint about the groins, with Oil of Rue,
Lillies, Dill, etc.

Or use Pessaries and Fumes mentioned.

If straitness be from other diseases, cure them first.

Chap. 8. Of the opening of the Vessels of the Womb besides Nature.
THis when there is great bleeding.

The Causes.
The vessels are opened preternaturally three ways, by Anastomosis, Diaeresis,
and by Diapedesis, as in the Lungs. Anastomosis is from much blood which the
Liver does produce, and send out by the womb, as in some by the Nose.

For the blood being thin, hot, choleric and sharp, opens the mouths of the
vessels, and causes a flux.

Diaeresis is from much blood, when there is great motion, as when there is
long copulation with a strong man that has a great tool, or a hard travel, or
abortion, a fall or stroke; also when sharp humors corrode, or sharp pessaries.

The Signs.
Diapedesis is from the thinness of the vessels, and looseness and the thinness
of the blood, or from much moisture, or use of Baths.

Much blood is a sign the vessels are open, you shall know the causes that open
them thus: In Anastomosis the blood drops, and is thin, and there are signs of
much blood, or sharp and thin.

If there be a Diaeresis, the blood flows more, and there are clodders, and
there were causes that broke the Vessels, as sharp Suppositories.

Diapedesis is known when the woman is of a thin and loose habit of body, the
blood thin, or she has used much bathing.

If the Vessels open from much blood in a sound body, there is less dagger; The
Prognostic.
and it is easier cured then in a Cacochymy.

In an Anastomisis give things that thicken without slime, as Roses, Mirtles,
Medlars, Services, The Cure.
Pomegranate-peels and flowers, Sanders, Coral, Hartshorn, Cypress-nuts.

In Diaeresis give things that thicken with slime, Comfry, Plantane,
Gum-traganth, whites of Eggs, troches of Amber, Bole, Starch, Rice, Quinces,
sanguis Draconis, Sarcocol, and Izing-glass.

But because there are diverse causes, and these diseases are not cured but by
taking them away; we shall speak of them in the Chapter of immoderate terms.

Chap. 9. Of a double Womb, the wanting of a Womb, and evil shape of the Womb,
and strange things found in it.
Julius Obsequens says, that one woman had two wombs; and Bauhinus says, that
a Maid had her womb in two parts, as in Bitches.

Columbus says, that one wanted a womb, Lib. 15. anato.
but her privities were as in other women, and part of the neck of it hung out.

Worms in the Womb.
Lib. de morb. mul.
Hippocrates writes, that worms are found in the womb. And Gynaecea writes, it
is a sign that Nature is wanton, etc. And Joen de Tornamira writes, that he saw
a Woman that had an intolerable itching in her womb from the Ascarides; he gave
a Womb-clyster of the Decoction of Wormwood and Hiera, and she voided many
small worms, and was cured.

An Addition.
* Wheresoever foul humors stop in any parts it is no wonder if it breed worms,
if other things agree which are required for the breeding of them.

Fat and Hair found in a Womb.
Cent. obser. 5. obser. 49.
William Fabricius mentions, that in a dead woman the womb was taken out, and
it weighed eighty seven pounds, and was full of diverse humors: in the middle
there were hairs like yellow Wool.

An Addition.
* This was by Magic, or a humor lay there fit to breed this strange matter by
preternatural heat.

Stones bred in the Womb.
Lib. 4. de morb. mulier. c. 11. Lib. 5. epid.
Mercurialis doubts of stones being bred in it: but thinks it is clotted blood
like stones.

But it cannot be denied which many worthy Authors write. First Hippocrates
writes, that a Woman of sixty, after noon always was pained as one in travel.
After she had eaten many Leeks, she had one fit worse then the rest, and she
arose, and found something rough in the Orifice of her womb, and she fainted;
and another woman thrust in her hand, and took out a great stone, and the woman
recovered.

Aetius also says, Tetrab. 4. sermon. 4. c. 98.
Hard stones are bred in the Womb sometimes, etc.

Nicholas Florentine and Marcellus Donatus say the same.

Chap. 10. Of the Magnitude of the Womb increased, and first of the Inflation
of the Womb.
INflation is a stretching of the Womb with wind: it is called by some a windy
Mole. Math. de grad. in 9. Rhasis.
See Matthew de gradibus and Thadeus Dun, lib. miscel. c. 8.

This wind is from a cold matter, The Causes.
either thick or thin, contained in the Veins of the Womb, which overcomes the
weak heat of the womb. It is gathered there by cold meats and drinks, or flows
from other parts. Cold Air may be the cause also, if women that lie in expose
themselves to it. This wind is contained either in the Cavity of the Vessels of
the Womb, or between the Tunicles.

There is a swelling in the region of the womb, The Signs.
sometimes reaching to the Navel, Loins and Diaphragma; and as wind increases
or decreaseth, it arises or abateth. It is different from a Dropsy, because
it is never swollen so high.

And lest a Physician be deceived, and take it for a Conception; observe the
signs of women with child: for if one sign be wanting, you may suspect an
Inflation. Also in Inflation the tumor increases and decreaseth: but in
Conception it still increases. Moreover if you strike upon the Belly, there is
a noise, but not in Conception.

It differs from a Dropsy in the Womb: for there is no such heaviness, they
move more easily, and the Belly is not so swelled, there were causes that bred
wind, and things against wind do good.

It differs from a Mole: for there is in that a weight and hardness in the
Belly, and when they move from one side to another, they feel a weight that
moves which is not in this, of which Hippocrates. 2. De morb. mulier.
The feet and the face swell in the hollow parts; the color is bad, the terms
are stopped, there is wind, etc.

If the wind is without the cavity of the womb, there is more pain and larger,
nor is there a noise because the wind is in a straighter place.

The Prognostic.
It is neither a lasting nor a deadly disease, if well looked after. If it be in
the Cavity of the womb, it is easier discussed.

The Cure.
Give Hiera, Diaphoenicon, with a little Castor, sharp Clysters that also expel
wind. If it be in travel, purge not till she be delivered.

Bleed not, because it is from a cold matter: if it come after Childbearing,
and the terms were not sufficient after, and there is fullness of blood, open
the Saphaena.

After these give things mentioned in Tympany, that respect the womb. As, Take
Conserve of Bettony, Rosemary, each an ounce and half; candied Eryngus,
Citron-peels candied, each half an ounce; Diacymium, Diagalangal, each a dram;
Oil of Aniseeds six drops, with Syrup of Citrons, make an Electuary.

Or, Take Conserve of Rosemary, Balm, each three ounces; candied Citrons and
Oranges, each an ounce; Diacymium a dram, with syrup of Citrons make an
Electuary.

Or give the Woman Aqua vitae, or this, Take Angelica roots two ounces,
Masterwort, Elicampane, Orange peels, each six drams; Calamints, Pennyroyal,
Rue, Sage, Rosemary, each a handful; Cummin, Fennel, Aniseed, each half an
ounce; Juniper Berries a handful, Zedoary, Galangal, Cubeb, each half an ounce;
with good Wine distill them, give a spoonful or two. Apply outwardly a Cataplasm
of Rue, Mugwort, Chamomil, Dill, Calamints, Nip, Pennyroyal, Thyme, with Oil
of Rue, Cheir, Chamomil, and make Baths of the same, Bags of Milium, Salt,
Chamomil-flowers, Melilot, Bayberries, Cummin, Fennel-seed, or lay a Plaster
of Bayberries.

Let Clysters to expel wind be put into the womb. As, Take Calamints, Agnus
castus, Rue, each half an handful; Anniseeds, Costus, Cinnamon, each two drams:
boil them in Wine for half a pint.

Apply a Cupping-glass with much flame to the Breast, and over against the Womb.

Use Sulphur-baths and Spaw-waters inward and outward, for they expel wind.

If it come from cold after Childbearing, and she is not well purged by her
Terms; heat the womb, and purge, and give strong Wine.

Let the Diet be hot, cutting and attenuating, The Diet.
with things that expel wind, and little at a time.

Question. Whether the wind is in the Cavity when there is Inflation of the
Womb?
It is so by Experience, though some deny it, nor is there any cause why wind
should not be bred in the womb, as well as in any other part; both by reason of
the Excrements that come thither, and the natural heat that turns them into
wind: these also stretch the womb (though it be thick) as in Dropsies and
Conception. Also the retentive or altering faculty of the womb is never idle;
so that when it receives diseased and unfruitful seed, it suffers it not to
corrupt, but turns it into wind. As Hippocrates writes, When the Womb is
stretched by wind from the Belly, Lib. de not. pueri.
women think they have conceived.

Chap. 11. Of the Dropsy of the Womb.
THey are also deceived, and think they are with child, when there is water
that swells the womb: Ves. lib. 6. de corp. hum. Fab. Mar. Do de hist. me mira
l. 4. c. 21. Tetrab. 6.4. ser 4. c. 79.
this is a Dropsy of the womb. This water is either in the Cavity, or between
the Coats of the womb, or in its Vessels. Vesalius, Marcellus Donatus show that
water is in the Cavity: for it does not presently by its plenty or quality
force its passage out, because the Orifice is not always open, and Nature
gathers it by degrees, and is used to it.

Aetius says, There are sometimes Bladders of water in the womb. And
Christopher Vega says, that Leonora thought that she had gone 6 months, and
then voided sixty Bladders of water, and seven pieces of flesh, like that of
the Spleen in Membranes.

Lib. 4. obser. cent. 2. obser. 56. The Causes.
There is sometimes a Dropsy of the Womb with Conception, as Schenstius and
William Fabricius says of his own wife.

Are gathering of water from moistness mixed with the terms, and from an evil
Sanguification in the Liver and Spleen from their weakness, or from errors in
Diet; or from weakness of the womb, from hard travel, or often mischances, cold
air or water, or whatsoever hurts the heat of the womb.

Also stoppage of the terms does cause gathering of water; for the water uses
to be evacuated with them. Many take this for the only cause.

Sometimes the tunicles of the womb may be divided in some place, and water may
be gathered between them.

Hippocrates says, the terms are fewer, The Signs. 1. De morb. mulier.
and cease before the time: the bottom of the Belly swells, and the Paps are
soft, without Milk, and she thinks she is with child. By these you know it is a
Dropsy.

But because Doctors and Midwives are often deceived, you must distinguish this
from other Swellings.

When a woman is sound, and uses a sound man, the womb by degrees swells, and
the child moves in its time; but often there is a Dropsy with Conception
before or after: therefore in a Dropsy the tumor is equal, according to the
largeness of the womb and belly, and not pointed as in a woman with child.

Secondly, If the woman be in years, and has not conceived before, and has a
good color, it is a sign of a Dropsy rather then a Conception. If the tenth
month be past, and the child moves not, nor the Breasts swell, but are soft,
say, there is Dropsy of the womb. Thirdly, In a true Conception, women are
better after some months, and the Symptoms abate: but in a Dropsy they
increase still.

It is distinguished from a Mole by the weight in the bottom of the Belly.

From an inflation, because the Belly is stretched in that, and sounds being
stricken: but is soft in a Dropsy.

It differs from the Dropsy of the Belly, because the Face is pale or wane, in
that from the distemper of the Liver, there is thirst; but in the Womb-dropsie
she is of a good color, except the Liver be also bad.

It differs from Inflammation in the womb: for that is with a constant Fever,
and the Symptoms of it, and from other tumors which are harder: but in a
Dropsy of the womb, if the Belly be pressed, it yields.

You shall know whether it be from the fault in the womb principally, or from
some other part, thus: If the Woman be of a good color, and there were only
some diseases and causes that might hurt the womb, as abortion, hard travel,
stoppage of terms, or too many of them, then the womb is chiefly affected. But
if there be signs of a distemper in the whole body, or in the Liver or Spleen,
and the color is bad, it is consent from other parts.

You shall know whether the water be in Bladders or in the Cavity of the womb,
thus: If you find the Orifice of the womb closed, and there is little pain, it
is in the Cavity. But if the Orifice be open, and there is great pain, it is in
Bladders or without the Cavity.

The Prognostic.
If the humor in the womb be not corrupt, this disease is of long continuance,
but may be easily cured. It is easier cured in the cavity, then when it is in
bladders, and between the tunicles. A woman after Conception having a Dropsy
of the womb, her child dies, and she is in danger.

The Cure.
When it is from stoppage of terms and new, and the strength firm, open a Vein
in the Legs, otherwise bleed not.

Purge according to the Humor, with respect to the Womb, as in Chap. 6. of a
cold Distemper.

Then purge Water. Take Angelica and Madder roots, each half an ounce;
Calamints, Pennyroyal, Mugwort, Lovage, each a handful; Savin a pugil; boil
them in Wine, and sweeten it with Sugar, Or make Broaths with the same. Take
Dianisum, Diagalangal, each half a dram; Oil of Aniseeds, Cloves, each five
drops; Sugar three ounces, make Rouls.

Inject into the Womb as in Dropsies. Take Asarum roots three drams,
Pennyroyal, Calamints, each half a handful; Savin a pugil, Mechoacan a dram,
Aniseed, Cummin, each half a dram: boil them, and take six ounces strained; Oil
of Elder and Orris, each an ounce: make a Clyster. Or use Pessaries. Take
Agarick a dram, Coloquintida half a dram, Guidium ten grains, with Honey and
Wool make a Pessary.

Make Fomentations and Baths of Danewort, Mercury Elder, Pennyroyal, Organ,
Chamomil-flowers, Bayberries, wild Cowcumbers, Broom, Carrot, Rue-seeds. And
anoint after with Oil of Elder, Danewort, Orris, with drops of Oil of Angelica,
Anise, Caraway.

Sulphur Baths are good, and those of Niter, or the Plaster of Bayberries, or
Snails to the bottom of the Belly. Vomiting and Neesing break the bladders.
Give Clysters at the Fundament as in Dropsies. Take Mercury leaves, Danewort,
Soldanella, Mugwort, Motherwort, each a handful; Chamomil, Elder,
Broom-flowers, each a dram: boil, and to ten ounces strained, and juice of
Beets, Mercury, Danewort, each six drams; Boys urin an ounce and half, Hiera
six drams, Honey half an ounce, make a Clyster.

Let the Diet be drying, as in Chap. 5.

Chap. 12. Of a Tumor in the Womb, from Blood in the Veins.
THis Disease makes women think they are with chiid also. For blood long
detained in the Veins about the womb, stretches them outwardly, and twisteth
them, and the Veins in the substance of the womb are full and stretched, and
make it larger. But when the terms flow, it falls again, except there be a
Cachexy or Dropsy.

This is only from stoppage of Terms, and is cured by provoking them.

Chap. 13. Of Inflammation of the Womb.
IF the blood that comes to the womb, get out of the Vessels into its
substance, and grow hot and putrify, it causes Inflammation, either all over,
or in part, before or behind, above or below, on the right or left side.

The Causes.
Blood is the immediate Cause, which is pure or mixed; therefore the
Inflammation, is either an Erysipelas, Oedema or Scirrhus, as Phlegm,
Melancholy, or Blood abound. Blood is either sent to, or drawn by the womb. By
heat or pain it is sent to it, when it abounds: or it is hot or thin, and
when the blood is moved by hot Air, Exercise, Passions, anger or hot diet.

The Signs.
There is a tumor with heat and pain in the region of the womb, with stretching
and heaviness in the Privities; and if you put in your finger, you will feel the
heat, and she more pain; there is a Fever sometimes called Lipyra, when there
is cold without, and heat within. The tongue is dry and black, with watching,
doting, tossing to and fro, the breasts are pufft up and pained. There is
headache to the roots of the eyes, and a pain in the groyns, hips, midrif,
pleura and shoulders: short wind, and like a Pleurisy, with loathing,
vomiting, hickets. The belly is bound, the pulse is small, and often and weak,
but at first darting and quick. And Hippocrates says, If the Womb be inflamed,
the terms are stopped, 2. De morb. mulier.
and the neck of it is like a Spiders web with many small veins, etc.

If it be inflamed before, the pain is about the pubes, and the urin is stopped.
If behind, it is in the loins, and the belly is bound. If it be inflamed in the
bottom, the pain is toward the navel. If it be from pure blood, the Symptoms
are less: if from choler, stronger: the thirst is more, the watching greater;
if from melancholy, all are worse.

If it be all over the womb, it is dangerous, The Prognostic.
and few escape it. An Erysipelas in a woman with child is deadly, because
there is an abortion, and the Mother dies: the worse the Symptoms, the greater
is the danger. And it is safer to discuss an inflammation then to ripen it: if
it turn to a Schirrus it is lasting, and makes a Dropsy.

If it be not after abortion or a flux of blood, The Cure.
open a vein in the Arm, or cup and sacrifice the shoulders. Bleed not in the
foot, least you draw blood more to the womb; but afterward to derive, if it be
from terms stopped, you may. Gal. 2. ad glau. c. 2.
Galen says, You may divert the blood by bleeding in the arm, or cupping the
breasts, and you may derive it by opening the ankle-vein, and cupping upon the
hips.

If there be choler, purge it with Syrup of Roses, Manna, Rhubarb,
Diacatholicon; and use not strong movers of the Terms.

Use Alterers and Coolers, as Juleps and Emulsions, and provoke sleep, and if
there be dotage, give Narcoticks.

After the Universals use Repellers and Anodines. As, Take Housleek, Purslane,
Lettice, Venus-navel, Vine leaves, each half a handful; boil them in wine, add
Barley meal two ounces, Pomegranate-flowers two drams, boil a dram, with Oil of
Roses, make a Pultis. Or, Take Diachylon simple two ounces, juice of
Venus-navel and Plantane, each half an ounce; Oil of Roses an ounce, Sugar of
Lead a dram, make an Ointment in a leaden Mortar.

Make Injections of the same Herbs, or of Milk and Rose Water. Or, Take
Plantane, Venus-navel, Lettice, each a handful; red Roses two pugils, boil, and
add Oil of Mirtles an ounce, Rose-vinegar half an ounce, make an Injection.

Make Clysters of the same Plants in a small quantity, least they oppress the
Womb.

Take Althaea roots and ounce, Mallows, Violets, Lettice, each a handful;
Nightshade half a handful, Violets, Roses, each a pugil; sweet Prunes ten,
Linseed half a dram, boil them in Barley water, to six ounces, add Oil of Roses
three ounces, make a Clyster.

An anodine Fomentation. Take roots of Althaea, Mallows, and Violets, each a
handful; red Roses, Melilot, Chamomil-flowers, each a pugil; boil them for a
Fomentation.

Or use a Cataplasm of white Bread and Milk.

In the progress dicuss. As, Take powder of Althaea roots an ounce, Chamomil
and Melilot flowers, each two drams; Mugwort half an ounce, Barley and Bean
flour, each an ounce; boil them in sharp wine, add Hog's Grease, Oil of Chamomil
and Lillies, each an ounce; make a Cataplasm.

If the inflammation turn to matter ripen it. As, Take powder of Althaea roots,
Chamomil-flowers, Melilot, Linseed, Foenugreek, each an ounce; Figgs eight,
boil them, add yelks of four Eggs, and half a scruple of Saffron, make a Pultis.

After it is ripe, break it by motion of the body, coughing, neesing, cupping,
or by Pessaries. As, Take Figgs an ounce, Rue half a handful, boil them soft,
add Honey and Leaven, each half an ounce; Pigeons dung, Orris roots, each half
a dram; with wool make a Pessary.

After it is broken, the pain abates, then cleanse and heal the ulcer as in
Sect. 1. c. 8. of an ulcer of the womb. If it break about the bladder give an
Emulsion of cold Seeds, Whey, and Syrup of Violets.

Let the diet be cool, with Barley-water warm, Abstain from Wine; to the
declination of the disease, let the belly still be kept loose.

Chap. 14. Of a Scirrhus and Cancer in the Womb.
AN earthy matter left after an inflammation makes a hard tumor called a
Scirrhus, and sometimes it is without an inflammation. It is a proper Scirrhus
when there is neither sense nor pain; it is improper when there is a little
sense. It is sometimes as big as a man's head; Paraeus l. 23. c. 36.
sometimes the whole womb is a Scirrhus, sometimes only part of it.

The immediate Cause, The Causes.
is a thick earthy humor, as natural melancholy, when a thick humor is gathered
in the womb, there is a Scirrhus without inflammation aforegoing; this is usual
in melancholy women, and such as are not cleansed by their terms, or have the
Pica or green sickness, and are fifty years old.

Other humors sometimes breed a Scirrhus after inflammation, when cold
astringents have been used disorderly: for when the humor is fixed to the part
and hardened. The same may be from hot discussers, which send forth the thin
matter in an inflammation, and fasten the thick.

The Signs.
The tumor is to be felt, it yields not, and is without pain, the terms flow not
at first, or very little, and afterward there is a great flux of blood. If an
inflammation went before, and the part is heavy and burdened, it is a Sign of a
Scirrhus. She is unweeldy, sloathful; and you may know from what humor it is,
by the signs of the humors predominating in the body, and the part pained will
show you in what place it is.

The Prognostic.
A Scirrhus easily turns to a Cancer. And when the terms are stopped, there is a
Dropsy of the womb or belly. It is easier cured in the neck then in the womb
it self.

The Cure.
Moisten and heat the cold and dry humor, with Borage, Bugloss, Fumitory,
Succory, Epithymum, Polypody. Then purge with Polypody, Senna, black Hellebore,
and the like. As, Take roots of Althaea, Lillies, each two ounces; Mallows,
Violets, Althaea, Brank-ursine, each a handful; Mugwort, Calamints,
Chamomil-flowers, each half a handful; Foenugreek and Linseed, each half an
ounce; boil them for a Fomentation, or Bath, or to a Cataplasm, with Linseed,
Foenugreek, each an ounce; Figs six, Orris powder two drams, Saffron half a
dram, Hens-grease and Oil of sweet Almonds as much as is fit.

Or, Take Bdellium, Ammoniacum, Galbanum, each as much as you please: beat them
in a Mortar, with Oil de Been and Lillies, add Mucilage of Foenugreek, Linseed,
Figs, make a Liniment, or with Wax a Plaster.

Or, Take Oil of Capers, Lillies, sweet Almonds, Jesamine, each an ounce; fresh
Butter, Hens-grease, Goose-grease, each half an ounce; Mucilage of Foenugreek,
Althaea and Ointment of Althaea, each six drams; Ammoniacum dissolved in Wine
an ounce, with Wax make an Ointment.

Make Injections thus: Take Bdellium dissolved in Wine, Oil of sweet Almonds,
Lillies, Chamomil, each two ounces; marrow of a Veal bone, Hens-grease each an
ounce; with the Yelk of an Egg.

In a bastard Scirrhus, you may use Healers and Digesters better, and
Ammoniacum, and hotter Fats.

Internal Medicines, are Steel, etc. of which in Obstruction of the Womb, and
Scirrhus of the Spleen.

As for Diet, abstain from breeders of gross and slimy humors, and from hot
dryers.

Cancer of the Womb.
What may be said of this, is said before, only a Cancer may seize upon the
substance of the womb; but it is more usually in the neck of it.

Chap. 15. Of the displacing of the Womb, and first of the Ascent of it.
WHen the womb falls out of the Privities, it is called Procidentia uteri; this
is ordinary, But the ascent or going up of the womb is more unknown. Eustach.
rud. lib. 2. pract. c. 5.
Many grave Anatomists hold, That the womb does ascend, if sweet things are
applied to the Nose. If to the Privities, that it descends. If stinking Scents
come, the womb flies from them, and it is to be seen by breathing altered, and
by some meats that the womb greedily desires, and catches up.

6. De lo. off. c. 5.
Galen overthrows this Opinion, and says, that the womb does move after a
sort, and ascend; but it is very little, and not to be demonstrated: Nor can it
arise to the Stomach, it is tied with such strong Ligaments to its place; and
when it falls out the Ligaments are extended by moisture, and falling of it
down. And there is no reason why the Ligaments, though loose or wet, it should
go up so speedily, and come down again. For falling down is by degrees, and it
is not soon brought up again. And though it be enlarged in Conception, it is by
degrees and equally, not suddenly in one side. Nor as the Ligaments made very
loose in Conception, and the bottom of the womb is not tied, the Ligaments
being only on the sides.

But this cannot be denied, which women affirm, that they feel a body or ball
moving about the Navel, and a Physician or Midwife may feel it. Therefore let
us inquire what it is, if it be not a womb. That Body which you may feel stir,
is the Stones, and that blind Vessel which Fallopius found out, which he
compared to the great end of a Trumpet, called Fallopius his Trumpet. For the
Stones hang, and the body of the Trumpet is like a Pipe loose and moving, and
when they are full and swell with corrupt Seed and Vapors, they move to and
fro, and ascend as high as the navel. And the stones with the Trumpet make this
round tumor of the Womb, Antropogo. lib. 2. c. 34. The Causes.
which is felt in women, as Riolanus observes.

Whatsoever makes corrupt seed in the stones of a woman, and fills them with
evil vapors or wind, is the cause: of which in suffocation of the womb. For the
cause is like in both, only in suffocation the Symptoms are worse, because the
evil vapors are then more freely carried by the veins, arteries and nerves,
afflict the principal part.

The woman and others may feel a round body, and she finds a pain at her
heart, The Signs.
and short breath, without sleeping or doting, or other Symptoms, and there
were causes that disturbed the womb.

It is not dangerous, yet not to be slighted: The Prognostic.
for it may turn to the strangling of the womb, when these evil vapors move to
the noble parts.

Let the aim be at the corrupt seed, The Cure.
and vapors which must be discussed and evacuated, as in suffocation of the
womb.

Chap. 16. Of falling out of the Womb.
SOmetimes it falls to the middle of the thighs, The Causes.
or to the knees almost, or hangs a little out.

The Womb changes its place, when the ligaments by which it is bound to the
other parts are not in order. There are four, two above broad and membranous
that come from the Peritonaeum, and two below that are nervous, round and
hollow. Besides, it is bound to the great vessels by veins and arteries, and to
the back by nerves.

Now the place is changed when it is down another way, or when the ligaments
are loose, and it falls down by its own weight. It is drawn on one side, when
the terms are stopped, and the veins and arteries are full, those namely which go
to the womb: if it be a mole on the one side, the liver and spleen cause it, by
the liver-veins on the right side, or the spleen on the left, as they are
filled more or less.

It also falls down by the loosning of the parts, to which it is fastened: but
how that can be, it is not clear.

1. 2. De morb. mulier.
Hippocrates says, It comes from external causes, as from cold of the feet or
loins, from leaping or fear, cutting of wood, or running down a hill, and the
like, these make the ligaments moist and loose. Also it may be from cold after
childbearing, getting into the womb when the terms flow, sitting upon a cold
stone, and the like.

Platerus.
Others say, It comes from the solution of the connection of the fibrous neck,
and the parts adjacent, and that is from the weight of the womb descending:
this we deny not. But when the ligaments must be loose or broken. But women in
a dropsy could not be said not to have the womb fall down, if it came only
from looseness. But the cause in them, is the saltness of the water, which dries
more then it moistneth.

The Signs.
If there be a little tumor within or without the privities like a skin
stretched, or a weight felt about the privities, it is only a descent of the
womb: but if there be a tumor like a Goose-Egg, and a hole at the bottom, there
is at first a great pain in the parts to which the womb is fastened, as the
loins, the bottom of the belly, and the privities, and the Os sacrum, from the
stretching or breaking of the ligaments: but a little after the pain abateth,
and there is an impediment in walking. Sometimes blood comes forth from the
breach of the vessels, and the dung and urine are stopped, and a Fever and
Convulsion.

When it is near, it is easily cured; when old, The Prognostic.
it is hard to be cured, but not deadly, only it is troublesome and nasty. It
hinders conception, and keeps terms from flowing orderly. If it be with pain,
Fever or Convulsion, it is deadly, especially in women with Child. That which
comes from corrosion of the ligaments, is dangerous.

First put it up before the air alter it, The Cure.
or it be inflamed or swollen. Therefore first give a Clyster to remove the
excrements. Then lay her upon her back with her legs abroad, and thighs lifted
up, her head down, and take the tumor in your hands, and thrust it in without
violence.

If it be swollen by alteration and cold, foment it with the Decoction of
Mallows, Althaea, Line, Foenugreek-seed, Chamomil-flowers, Bayberries: and
anoint it with oil of Lillies, and Hens-grease. If there be an inflammation,
Roder a. casuo. de morb. mul. 1. 2. c. 17.
put it not up yet. It may be frighted in, by showing of red hot iron, and
acting as if you would burn it.

First, sprinkle upon it the powder of Mastich, Frankincense, and the like. As,
Take Frankincense, Mastich, each two drams; Sarcocol steept in Milk a dram,
Mummy, Pomegranate-flowers, Sanguis Draconis, each half a dram.

When it is put up, let her lie with her legs stretched, and one upon the
other, for eight or ten days, and make a Pessary like a Pear, of Cork or Spung
put into the womb, dipped in sharp wine or juice of Acacia, with powder of
Sanguis Draconis, Bole, Mastich, or the Countesses Ointment, with Galbanum and
Bdellium.

Apply a Cupping-glass with great flame under the navel or paps, or to both
kidneys, and lay this Plaster to the back. Take Opopanax two ounces, Storax
liquid half an ounce, Frankincense, Mastich, Pitch, Bole, each two drams; with
Wax make a Plaster. Or,

Take Labdanum a dram and half, Frankincense, Mastich, each half a dram; wood
Aloes, Cloves, Spike, each a dram; Ash colored Ambergris four grains, Musk
half a scruple, make two round Plasters to be laid on each side the Navel.
Make a Fume of a Snail skin salted, or of Garlic, and let it be taken in by a
Funnel.

Use astringent Fomentations of Bramble leaves, Plantane, Horstails, Mirtles,
each two handfuls; Wormwood two pugils, Pomegranate-flowers half an ounce, boil
them in wine and water. Or inject this with a Syringe. Take Comfrey-roots an
ounce, Snakeweed, Pomgranate-flowers, each half an ounce; Rupture-wort two
drams, Yarrow, Mugwort, each half an ounce; boil them in red Wine. Then use
Sulphur Baths.

To strengthen the Womb: Take Hartshorn, Bays, each a dram; Mirrh half a
dram, make a powder for two doses, give it with sharp Wine. Or, Take Zedoary,
Parsnep-seeds, Crabs eyes prepared, each a dram; Nutmeg half a dram: give a
dram in powder: but use astringents warily, lest you stop the courses, and
cause worse mischief.

If it fall out from evil humors that flow to the womb, and loosen the
ligaments, purge the body, and then use dryers, as the decoction of China,
Sarsa and Guajacum.

To keep it in its place, make Roulers and Ligatures, as for the Rupture, and
use Pessaries into the bottom of the womb, that may force it to remain: Lib. de
partu Caesar. sect. 6. cap. 3. and 4.
of which Francis Rousset has written at large, and shows that they neither
hinder Conception, nor bring any inconvenience; nay, that they help Conception,
and retain it, and cure this disease perfectly. And Gaspar Bauhinus confirms
the same in his Appendix to Rousset.

You may use Circles or Balls instead of Pessaries. As, Take roots of wild
Vine, make round Circles or Balls of them greater or less, as the neck of the
womb is. Then, Take Virgins Wax melted with white Rosin or Turpentine, dip the
balls in till they are fit, put one in the neck of the womb, that will hold in
being just fit: let it not be taken out till it fall out, and then put in
another, if she be not cured.

If it gangrene and sphacelate, cut it quite off; Lib. de partu Caes. sect. 4.
cap. 5. hist. 6. Ibid. sect. 4. cap. 5.
if she fear cutting, take it off by Ligature, of which Rousset who shows the
way, and says that it may be cut off without danger of life.

He tells also of the place where you must cut, and in Sect. 4. de partu
Caesareo, where the Ligature is to be made.

Let the diet be drying, and astringent, and glewing, as Rice, Starch, Quinces,
Pears, green Cheese. Avoid Summer-fruits. Let the Wine be astringent and red.

The Cure of the inclining of the Womb.
When it inclines to the sides, after Universals apply Cupping-glasses to the
other side, and let her still lie on the other side; and let the Midwife anoint
her finger with Oil of sweet Almonds, and draw it a little by degrees to the
other side.

Chap. 17. Of the Rupture of the Womb.
FEw Physicians have seen this, I never read of any; but once I saw it, of
which in my Institutions, lib. 2. part 1. cap. 9.

Chap. 18. Of Wounds, and breaking of the Womb.
The Signs.
IT is seldom wounded, by reason of the diverse defenses it has; but sometimes
the Chirurgions wound it in cutting out of the Child: of which Hollerius, inter
rara. no. 8. He speaks of a woman with child in Paris, that her child's hand put
forth at the Navel, and was so in travel 15 days, and both child and mother
were safe.

The Prognostic.
It is evident, if it be made by the Surgeon in cutting out of a Child; and
you may know it by the place, if it come otherwise. There is blood and matter
that flow out at the neck of the womb. There is more pain when it is in the
neck of the womb, then when it is in the bottom.

These wounds are cured, as appears by the Caesarean Birth or cutting: but they
are dangerous, by reason of the strange Symptoms, and the consent of the parts.

The Cure.
Use Consolidates or Healers: and if there be pain, Anodines or Pessaries made
of Wax-candles dipped in Wound-Oyntments. Or,

Take Wax, Turpentine, Goose-grease, Butter, each a Dram; Honey, Deers-marrow,
Oil of Roses, Bulls-grease, each two drams. Or, Take Frankincense, Mastich,
Ceruss, Galbanum, each half an ounce: mix them all with white Wine, then add
Pompholix an ounce, and with Wax and Oil of Roses, make an Ointment.

Make Injections or Clysters for the Womb of the Decoction of round Birthwort,
Cypress, boiled in steeled Water and sharp Wine, with a little Hydromel,
Agrimony, Mugwort, Plantane, Roses, Schaenanth, Horehound.

Chap. 19. Of Ulcers and Rottenness of the Womb.
THough the neck of the womb be only subject to Ulcers, as we showed: yet the
substance of the womb has been ulcerated, and it has been observed to rot,
when it has fallen out, and to fall away. As we said of a Woman at Avinion,
that after lived some time. And the Examples of Rousset show, that it may be
safely cut off.

Also a child dead in the womb, Lib. de part Caesar. chir. c. 76.
may cause an Ulcer, and diverse Histories witness in Abucasis, and Alexander
Benedictus, Mauritius, Cordaeus, and many others.

How these ulcers and rottenness of the womb are cured, is said in sect. 1.
cap. 8. where we spoke of Ulcers of the neck of the Womb; and cap. 10. of
Fistulaes of the Womb.

Chap. 20. Of the Diseases of the Stones, and Vessels of Procreation in Women.
IT is apparent by Histories written by grave and learned Men, that the Stones
of Women and their Seed-vessels are many times grievously distempered, when the
womb joined to them is not. Sometimes water is gathered about the stones, In
apprend. ad Roussetum 2. de partu Caesar.
as Gasper Bauhinus, John Schenkins write, and he has another History, Lib.
Obser. 3. from John Heintz, of a Maid that desired a little before she died,
that her body might be opened, to testify her innocence. In which, besides
other things remarkable, the stones were found swollen as big as a head of a
young child; bluish and spungy, much water came out of them, and that made her
Belly swell, and she taken to be with child: but the truth appeared, and her
Chastity testified.

THE FOURTH BOOK. THE SECOND PART.
Of the Symptoms in the Womb and from the Womb.
Chap. 1. Of Weakness in the Womb.
THere are many Symptoms from the Womb. Of those in the Womb: the first is
weakness, so that it cannot perform its actions.

The action of the womb is twofold: private and public. By its private action,
it makes its nourishment of blood that comes to it. By its public action, it
serves for generation. If the private faculty be hurt, and the nourishment not
well made, there is a superfluous moisture, and then weakness without other
faults of the Organ or unity divided.

The Causes.
The first Cause is distemper, when the manifest qualities are changed, or when
the natural heat is suffocated or dispersed; or when the occult qualities are
changed. Heat in the womb makes a distemper, if it be too much, by which the
womb sucks more then it can concoct; this is not properly weakness: but that
distemper is weakness, when the action is either not done, or weakly done. But
cold rather makes weakness in the womb, by which it cannot make the sufficient
quantity of nourishment, hence excrements are heaped up, and it cannot perform
its actions. Also a moist distemper makes weakness, by which it can neither
keep seed nor child. It is also weak from looseness.

The Signs.
Little desire of Venery, and no pleasure therein, argue weakness of the womb,
flux of Seed, often abortion, Part 1. sect. cap. 2. and 3.
pain in the Loins and Pubes, when the Terms are coming, farts from the Womb,
Headache, and the like.

The signs of a cold and moist distemper with or without matter, are already
declared.

The Prognostic.
It is a great disease, by reason of the diverse Symptoms in women that have
conception hurt. It is worst when it comes from dispersing and extinguishing of
the natural heat.

The Cure.
We have showed how distempers of the womb are cured: but the dispersing of the
Spirits and natural heat, is cured by things that hinder the loss of Spirits,
and strengthen the womb, as Spices, Cinnamon, Cloves, Nutmeg, Mace,
Diacalaminth, Aromaticum rosatum, Diaxilaloes, rosata Novella, Treacle,
Mithridate. Outwardly by Oil of Lillies, Nard, Lavender: and Astringents when
the womb is loose.

Things that help the womb in the whole substance, are in the Chapter of the
cold and moist Distemper, as Aqua vitae for Women. Or thus: Take Castor three
ounces, Saffron two ounces, extract them singular, add to both Extract of
Mugwort two ounces, of Angelica a dram, Magistery of the mother of Pearl a
dram, Oil of Cloves a scruple, of Angelica, and of Amber, and of Nutmegs, each
half a scruple.

Let her eat meat of much nourishment, and drink good Wine.

Chap. 2. Of the Itch of the Womb.
THis is more in old then young women, and must be distinguished from the
Frenzy of the womb: for here is only a desire to scratch the Privities, so that
they cannot sleep. Nor is it with desire of Copulation, as in the Fury of the
Womb.

It is a salt humor that is serous and adust that causes it, that is sent to
the neck of the womb, The Causes.
and the privities. How it comes there, I showed in Ulcers of the Privities.

It is known by her Relation, and often putting her hand to the Privities.

The Prognostic. The Cure.
It is more troublesome then dangerous, because it hinders sleep.

First, purge the whole Body, and if there are signs of Plethory, and strength
permits, bleed in the Arm. Then qualify the sharp salt humors with cold and
moist means, and remove them from the Privities. Foment with a Decoction of
Lettice, Plantane, Willow, Dock-roots; and then anoint with Galen's Cooler. Or
dip a Pessary in this Ointment, and put it in. Or, Take Alum, Niter, Sulphur,
each six drams; Staphisacre an ounce, with Rose-vinegar and fresh Butter, make
a Liniment.

If these will not Cure, use stronger, as the Ointment of Elicampane with
Quicksilver. Or Take black Soap, Stavisacre, each a dram; quick Brimstone half
an ounce, Quicksilver 2 drams, with Rose-vinegar and Hens-grease, make an
Ointment.

Let the meat be of good juice, cooling and moistning. Take heed of Spices,
sharp and salt meats.

Chap. 3. Of pain in the Womb.
THere is pain in the body of the womb, with other diseases sometimes, as the
Colick-pains woven in the bottom of the Belly, and in the Loins and Hips; and
is called the pain of the Womb. It is often in women with child, as the
inflammation of the womb. It is burning and beating, it binds the Belly, and
stops the Urin.

The Causes.
Solution of unity is the cause of all pains: and this is from the stretching of
the Womb and its Vessels, or corrosion. Stretching is from wind, or clotted
blood in the cavity of it, and when Nature cannot expel it by reason of the
straitness of the part, there is pain.

Also pain is from stretching of the vessels before the terms flow, when they
are close, and the blood thick, and this pain is increased by external cold,
especially after heat. Sometimes there is a gathering of humors about the womb,
when the terms flow, and are foul, and they get into the membranes, and stretch
them. The same may be from corrupt Seed, that stretches the vessels.

Or from sharpness and corrosion in the neck of the womb, The Signs.
when sharp humors flow through it, and twitch it.

The pain is manifest, but let us look at the signs of the causes. If it be
from clotted blood, there was a flux of the same, and the pain is fixed about
the orifice of the womb. If there were external causes, the patient will
relate. If it be from Seed, there is suffocation of the Womb.

The greater the cause is, The Prognostic. The Cure.
and the more vehement it works, the more is the danger.

If there be pain, and fear of fainting, look to that before the cause, with
Anodynes and Narcoticks if need be.

If it be from wind, see inflation of the Womb.

If it be from clotted blood, dissolve and evacuate it, with hot and
attenuating Medicines, made into Fomentations, Baths and Ointments. It is good
to apply Treacle to the region of the Womb, or put it in with Rue and Honey. Or
give a Clyster to the Womb, of Rue, Foenugreek-seed, and Oil of Rue and Orris.
Or give Treacle, and Cinnamon Water.

If the vessels of the womb are not open enough for the terms. See in the
stoppage of the terms.

If there be wind, make a Clyster thus: Take Mercury, Mugwort, Calamints,
Pennyroyal, each a handful; Chamomil and Melilot-flowers, each half a handful;
Faenugreek and Linseed, each an ounce; boil them; in a pint strained, dissolve
Hiera, Benedicta laxativa, each half an ounce; make a Clyster. Give Mugwort,
Zedoary-water, Essence of Castor, Treacle, or Woman's Aqua vitae, of which
before.

Make a Clyster for the Womb, thus: Take Mugwort, Calamints, Bettony, each half
a handful; Gith, Cummin, Carrot, Aniseeds, each a dram; Spike, Schoenanth,
Nutmeg, Cinnamon, each a dram; boil them in Wine.

Then fill an Ox bladder half full with Oil of Lillies and Dill, and apply it
to the belly.

Or, Take Oil of Lillies, Orris, each an ounce; distilled Oil of Angelica a
dram, Goose and Hens grease, each half an ounce; Mucilage of Line and
Faenugreek-seed made with Mugwort-water, each three drams; seeds of Cummin,
Carrots, Caraway, each a dram; with Wax make a soft Ointment. Or, Take
Pellitory two handfuls, Mercury a handful, beat them, add Chamomil-flowers,
Cummin, Anise, Carrots-seeds, each a dram; two yelks of Eggs and Oil of
Lillies, make a Cataplasm for the Belly.

Apply Plasters to the Navel, and Cuppingglasses with great flame to the
Region of the womb; or dry Fomentations of Oats, Milium, Anise, Cummin,
Carrot-seed in a Bag. And use Pessaries, as, Take Hearts Marrow, Turpentine,
Wax, Goose-grease, each three drams; Saffron a dram, yelks of Eggs seven, with
Oil of Lillies, make Pessaries.

If the humors and wind is malignant, mix Scorronera, Bezear seeds, and roots
of Angelica, water of Zedoary, Treacle, Mithridate, and the like in Suffocation
of the womb.

Chap. 4. Of the Diseases of the Womb, that come from sweet scents and stinks.
THere is a particular Symptom in the womb which breeds great admiration, that
it delights in sweet scents, and is offended with stinks. And it is certain:
for if Musk, Civit, or the like, be but put to the Nose of the woman that is
subject to fits of the Mother, they grow sick; and if the same be put to their
privities, and stinks to the Nose, the fit of the Mother cease.

It is hard to give the reason of this, many wise Men have given their opinion:
but they disagree among themselves, and satisfy me not, neither do I promise
to satisfy others, But it is probable to me that the womb is not delighted
with scents, as scents: for the privities have no smelling, and the sense of
smelling does not reach so far: but the quality by which it is well or ill, is
occult, and not to be explained, and to be separated from the odours.

If any ask what the quality is, I answer, There are many qualities in Nature
that are hid from our senses, and yet we cannot deny them, because we see their
effects, as the quality in a Dogs Nose, we cannot apprehend but the Dog,
perceives it.

But how these qualities come to the womb, Quomodo uterus been olentia recipiat.
is by no other way but by the open way by the privities, by which Spirits get
into the womb, and in the suffocation of the womb sweet things profit, because
they strengthen it by a peculiar quality to disperse the venomous air, and draw
down the spirits and humors. But if they be put to the Nose, Quomodo been
olentia hystericis noceant.
the womb consents by the Sympathy of the organ of smelling, and the brain with
it.

This is by the Nerves and Arteries, for the heart is presently refreshed with
a sweet scent, because it presently pierces into it being spiritual, and there
is a great consent of the womb with the brain and the smelling, as is seen by
the trial of Barrenness, by a Fume from Hippocrates.

5. Aphor.
But we must observe that sweet scents are acceptable to all Wombs, and stinks
are not, but the same Symptoms are not in all Women from them; for they who
have a Womb of a good constitution with no evil humors in it, endure sweet
things well, and delight in them, but they who are unclean, hate sweet things,
and osten fall into fits by them, because while the womb is delighted with that
sweet and hidden quality with which it has a peculiar Sympathy, the evil
humors that lie in the Womb (especially if there be any corruption from Seed)
and the Seed also are stirred, and when the Spirits fly up, they take the bad
humors with them, and send bad vapors to the heart which cause suffocation, and
others Symptoms. But when the same scents are put to the privities, the womb is
refreshed with them, and the Spirits are quiet, or move to the scents. And so
the humors (if there be any) are still, or else move downward. But stinks on
the contrary, by reason of their Antipathy with the Womb, voided by the
Spirits, and so the humors move downwards, and often there is an abortion
thereby.

What is spoken of sweet Scents, may be understood of all sweet things, and
this is our Judgment in a matter so difficult.

THE FOURTH BOOK. THE SECOND SECTION. Of the Symptoms in the Terms, and other
Fluxes of the Womb.
Chap 1. Of the Flux of the Terms.
BY Divine providence the blood which is voided every month, is kept in when
there is a Child. For if it be its Nature, it is not ill, but only superfluous,
till they conceive; nor is it more an Excrement then Seed and Milk.

The terms commonly begin at fourteen, and then the hair appears on the
privities, the breasts swell, and women begin to be lecherous, and the blood
can no longer stay in the Veins, but breaks out at the Veins of the Womb.

In some they begin at twelve, and they are very lustful commonly, and of
shorter lives; they continue till fifty; and some till sixty, and then stop. In
some they begin at seventeen or eighteen. And in some they stop before fifty,
according to the variety of Nature and Diet.

Nature does not send forth every day what is gathered, but stays till the
plenty offends, and does only once in a month, otherwise it would be filthy and
unpleasant, and hinder Conception. Nor do they flow at one time in all exactly:
but there are twenty two days, or at most thirty between the purgings.

In some they last three days, which was usual in the time of Hippocrates. In
some four or five, or more, as their Liver is greater, or their diet is higher
or lower.

Hippocrates says, they should bleed but a pint and half, or two pints: this
is is not alike in all, but differs in respect of age and diet.

As for the quality, it must not be too thick nor too thin, but of a middle
substance, without scent, of a red color, yellower in choleric persons: in
melancholic, black; in phlegmatic, whiter, and it must flow without any great
Symptom.

The passages are the veins of the womb, being double from the double branch on
both sides it, the Spermatick and Hypogastrick, that they may evacuate
superfluities from all parts.

And from this Description of a natural Flux, you may gather what is
preternatural.

Question. Whether can a Woman conceive, that never had Terms?
They are called by some Flowers, because they go before Conception, as flowers
do before fruit: but many have conceived that never had their flowers, being
hotter by Nature, as the Indians, that never had any Flowers; and Viragoes that
use more exercise: but if these have no more blood then will nourish their
body, they are barren.

If any thing abound, that is not required for nourishment of the parts, and is
so much, that Nature cannot endure it in the body, the Womb draws it to it when
it has conceived, to make up the child: of which hereafter.

Question 2. Whether Menstruous blood is only superfluous in quantity, or bad
in respect of quality?
Writers disagree about this. Some say it is bad in quantity and quality, and
venomous by the effects, as making Ivory obscure, and infecting
Looking-glasses, corrupting Wine, by a Vapor from the Body of a Woman that has
her Flowers.

Others say they offend only in plenty: for if it were venomous, it would not
be a whole month in the body, and it could not from the child, nor would Nature
make Milk of it.

Therefore menstruous blood only offends in quantity, and not in any manifest
or hidden quality. But it has strange qualities when it is mixed with bad
humors, or is kept too long in the Body to be corrupted, and cause great
Symptoms: but this is when it is mixed with bad humors, or is out of its
Vessels, and so corrupt.

Question 3. Of the Text of Aristotle 7. de hist. Animalium, cap. 2. and how it
is to be understood?
Aristotle writes thus, 7. De histo. any. c. 2.
Constantly every month some have their Terms: but most in the third; as if he
should say, Few women have their courses every month, but many have them every
third month. This is against Galen, and against experience. For it is certain,
that among six hundred women, scarce one has them every third month. Therefore
this is either an error in the Greek Text, or in the Translation, or great Men
do often lie, which is probable, and so did Aristotle in this of Physic:
therefore it is in vain to defend their Error.

Chap. 2. Of the Terms flowing too soon.
ORdinarily they begin at fourteen; but many have had them sooner. A child of
eleven days old had a bloody humor flowing, Her. saxonia vidit venetiis ser.
6. part 5. c. 16.
from the Privities. Another of five years old had every month a moderate flux.
Fernel. reports, that a Girl of eight years old had the terms: but are rare,
and for the most part very lecherous, and short lived.

Chap. 3. Of want and stopping of the Terms.
SOme Women have them not till eighteen or twenty. Some before, and then they
stop for a time without, either giving suck, or being with child. Some have
been without them three, five or seven months, and then they came again. This
is an evil constitution, or suppression of that which it ought to flow, from
the fault of the blood and stoppage of the passages.

The Causes.
When Terms are wanting, either blood is wanting, or stopped. It is wanting,
either because it is not made, or dispersed or turned to other uses, for nature
being more sollicitous to preserve the individual person, then to propagate the
species, spends it in preserving of the person.

Blood is not made from diverse causes: as age, cold constitution of Liver,
Heart, or a disease which distempers the bowels. Or often bleeding from great
Vessels, or from having many issues, which take from the blood.

It is spent other ways, as before ripe age, and when women are with child, or
give suck, or in hot Natures, and fat women, in whom it is turned to fat. It is
in vain to provoke Terms in these.

They are either external evident causes of stopping of the Terms, as too great
labor, troubles, sadness, fear; but these last do not only waste the blood,
but cool and corrupt it, and cause obstructions, 2. Epid. sec. 8. in fine.
as Hippocrates speaks of Phatusa the wife of Pytheus.

The proper causes are, the straitness of the passage, or evil conformation of
the parts through which it should flow. Or the closing of the womb, of which we
spoke, but I speak here of the vessels.

The usual cause of obstructions, is thick slimy humors, from the blood too
thick, or mixed with melancholy which comes with it to the veins of the womb,
and stops them.

This thick blood comes from a cold distemper of the stomach, liver and spleen,
from thick and gross food, and drinking cold water when the Terms flow. Lib. de
venae sec. adversus Erasistrat.
So thought Galen in his time of the Roman women that drank Snow-water, and had
few or no courses.

Straightness is when the body of the womb is made thicker, either by Nature or
other causes; as a cold and dry, or hot and dry distemper.

Thirdly, Straitness is from compression of the vessels by a Scirrhus or
hardness of the parts adjacent, as the straight gut, or by the stone in the
bladder, and the womb displaced.

Fourthly, The flesh may grow together by a membrane that grows to the vessels,
or a scar after a wound. Or after a mischance, when the veins annexed to the
Secundine, grow so together, that they cannot be opened: of which in the first
Question.

They are not the same in women and Virgins: The Signs.
for blood stopped in Virgins, goes to and fro, changes the color, and brings
Fevers, especially the white Fever or Green Sickness.

But in women it goes more to the womb, and brings Symptoms, loathing,
vomiting, and Pica.

Galen has other signs, as heaviness, 8. De lo. aff. c. 5.
a lazy pain in the loins, neck, and behind in the head, that reaches to the
roots of the eyes, from the spreading of the blood stopped through the whole
body. This laziness is chiefly in the thighs and legs, by reason of the veins
there consenting with the womb. And are of a green complexion, and hairy, with
a beard, and shrill voice.

You may know women with child, from such as want their Terms, only by proper
signs. First the women with child keep their color: but the other are pale and
ill-coloured; they are merry, the other sad. 2. Their Symptoms daily grow
milder: but in the other they daily grow worse. 3. You may feel the child move.
4. It is perceived in a month.

You shall know from what causes the terms are stopped, thus: If the Liver be
cold, there is no blood made that is superfluous, and there are signs of a cold
Liver, and you may know that blood is not sent to the Womb, when there is no
heaviness, pain, or tumor about the Womb, the Liver or Spleen are stopped.

The Prognostic.
If it be from Phlegm or Melancholy, which is often, there are signs of their
abounding, as laziness, paleness, seldom pulse, crude urin.

Hippoc. de morb. mulier. Gal. 6. de loc. aff. c. 5. Hippoc. 5. aphor. 23.
Hippocrates says, That if the Terms stop, there are diseases in the Womb,
Tumors, Imposthumes, Ulcers and Barrenness, and diseases in the whole Body,
Green Sickness, Leucophlegmacy, Dropsy, Vomiting of blood, Heart-ach, Cough.
And the longer they have been stopped, the harder they are to be opened. If the
blood stopped go out at the Nose, it is good.

If it have great Symptoms, there is fear of death.

You must not give Medicines to move the terms, to extenuate lean persons, nor
to such as want blood, and have a weak Liver: but they must be fed high.

Com. in 6. epid. 3. c. 29.
First, see if blood abound, and then (after a Lenitive) open a Vein, and let
that blood which is in the Veins, be drawn to the Womb. Galen took three pints
of blood at three times from a lean Woman, and cured her of an old stopping of
the Terms.

You must open the Ankle-veins, the first day the right, the next the left,
four or five days before the time. Or you may cup and scarrifie the Legs.

And bind the parts below, and rub them after general Evacuation, opening of
the Haemorrhoids does hurt, and so do Issues, because they draw from the Womb.

Hiera picra half an ounce, or Pills de Tribus, or Hiera simple, are good first.

Then prepare. As, Take water of Mugwort, Calamints, Maidenhair, each three
ounces; Syrup of the five Roots, and of Mugwort, each two ounces; make it for
two Doses. Or, Take opening Roots half an ounce, Madder, Burnet, each three
ounces; Mugwort, Bettony, Germander, Calamints, each a handful; red Pease half
a handful, flowers of Bugloss, Dill, each a pugil: boil and sweeten it with
Sugar.

For phlegmatic Bodies, take the Decoction of Guajacum, Sassaphras, Dittany for
fifteen days without sweating.

Then evacuate with Agarick, Mechoacan, Turbith, Scammony, Coloquintida, black
Hellebore. As,

Take Agarick two drams, infuse it in Mugwort-water two ounces, Oxymel an
ounce, strain, and the Extract of Mechoacan a scruple. Or, Take opening Roots
half an ounce, Mugwort, Bettony, each two pugils; Senna half an ounce, Agarick
two drams, Fennel and Aniseed, each a scruple; Galangal half a dram,
Rosemary-flowers a pugil, infuse them to three ounces and half, add syrup of
Senna an ounce and half, Cinnamon Water half a dram.

Or if they drink Wine. Take Turbith, Mechoacan, Agarick, each two drams; Senna
an ounce and half, Maidenhair, Balm, Rosemary, each two pugils; Cinnamon,
Galangal, each a dram: hang them in Wine, give six ounces with half an ounce of
Manna.

Or, Take Diaturbith with Rhubarb half an ounce, Mechoacan two drams, Agarick a
dram, Diarrhodon, Cinnamon, each half a dram: Steel prepared a dram, with
Raisons make an Electuary: give as much as a Walnut.

Or give Pills of Agarick foetida, and so continue purging and preparing, if
the matter be stubborn. Or, Take Agarick two drams, Madder a dram, with Syrup
of Mugwort, make Pills. Or, Take Aloes three drams, de Tribus one dram, with
juice of Savin make Pills.

If the stomach is foul, give a Vomit, lest it get into the veins.

Par. 1. sec. 2. ca. 2.
Then give provokers of the Terms which are hot and thin, about the time they
used to flow: they are three degrees in strength, and many sorts of Medicines
are made of them

A Powder. Take Cinnamon a dram, Amber a scruple, Saffron half a scruple. Or,
Take Troches of Mirrh, of Wall-flowers, each a scruple; Saffron five grains:
Or, Take Castor, Pennyroyal, each a scruple; with Wine or proper Waters.

Physical Wine. Take Madder-roots an ounce, Orris half an ounce, Balm,
Pennyroyal, Mugwort, Rosemary, each a handful; Wall-flowers half a pugil,
Cinnamon an ounce, Galangal half an ounce, with Wine, give four ounces.

Or, Take the Decoction of red Pease. Or, Take Smallage, Fennel-roots each half
an ounce; Mugwort, Bettony, Pennyroyal, Balm, each a handful; red Pease half
an handful, Juniper Berries half an ounce, Wall-flowers a pugil, boil and
sweeten it. Or, Take ten ounces of it with three ounces of Mugwort for three
doses.

Quercetan commends this: Take Gromwel-seeds, Anise, Misleto of the Oak, each
three drams; Dittany a dram, Saffron a scruple, bruise, and keep them twenty
four hours in Wine, then boil them; give four ounces for three days together.

Or make the Woman's Aqua vitae. Or, Take Balm, Bettony, Pennyroyal, Mugwort,
Nep, Motherwort, Dittany, each four handfuls; Wine thirty pints, distill them,
add three handfuls of each herbs, and distill them again, and add Fennel-seed,
Calamus, Cinnamon, Cassia lignea, Cardamoms, each half an ounce: distill them
again.

Or give Syrup of Calamints, Mugwort. Or, Take water of Pennyroyal, Savin,
Calamints, each four ounces; Syrup of Mugwort four ounces, Cinnamon Water an
ounce: give it at four times.

Rouls. Take Extract of Savin a scruple, of Angelica half a scruple, of
Elicampane six grains, Oil of Cinnamon five drops, of Cloves two drops, with
Sugar dissolved in Balm-water. Or make an Electuary of Steel six ounces, Cassia
lignea, Cinnamon, each two drams; Cloves a dram, Raisins two ounces, with Sugar
dissolved in Mugwort-water.

Or, Take Troches of Mirrh a dram, Extract of Gentian and Savin, each a
scruple; Castor half a scruple, make Pills: give two scruples, or give every
third day Pills of Hiera.

Use outward Medicines, but provoke not sweat by them.

Take Althaea and Lilly-roots, each two ounces; Birthwort an ounce, Mallows,
Mercury, Mugwort, Savin, Motherwort, Calamint, Pennyroyal, Marjoram, Bays,
each two handfuls; flowers of Chamomil, Lavender, Cheir, each a handful;
Foenugreek-seed an ounce, Juniper and Bayberries, each half a handful: boil
them in Water, foment with Spunges.

And then anoint with this: Take Oil of Lillies an ounce, of Lavender-seeds
stilled half a dram, Calamints and Gith-powder, each a dram; Storax Calamite a
scruple.

To Virgins that must take no Pessaries, give Fumes, with the head defended;
they will open the mouths of the vessels, and cut thick humors.

As, Take Mirrh, Bdellium, Storax, each a dram; Benzoin two scruples, Gallia
moschata, Ivet, each half a scruple; with liquid Storax make Troches.

Then use Clysters and Injections into the Womb with Purgers. As, Take
Calamints, Pennyroyal, each a handful; Gith-seed, Turbith, each a dram;
Coloquintida half a dram, boil it in Wine, inject it into the Womb.

If it be hot after it, inject the Decoction of Mallows with Milk or
Barley-water. And because the neck of the womb lies upon the strait gut, give
Clysters. Take Lilly-roots an ounce, Orris, Valerian, each half an ounce;
Mercury two handfuls, Mugwort, Savin, each a handful; Chamomil,
Lavender-flowers, each a pugil; Caraway, Gith-seed, each a dram: boil, add
Hiera and Benedicta laxativa, each half an ounce, Oil of Cheir two drams,
Electuary of Bayberries half an ounce.

If she be no Virgin, put Mercury bruised in a Bag for a Pessary, with
Centuary-flowers. Or Garlic beaten with Oil of Spike.

Begin still with the mildest, as Mugwort, Mercury, Pennyroyal, Marjoram, Rue;
and then add Mucilages and Juyces to loosen the womb: let not Pessaries lie
long, lest they cause a Fever.

If it be from a tumor, provoke not the Terms, but look to the tumor.

Let diet be hot and attenuating, of good juice, with Parsley, Savory,
Rosemary, Cloves, Cinnamon. Little sleep and much exercise.

Question 1. Whether are the other Causes of stoppage of the Terms?
Some say the blood going to other parts, is a cause; but it is rather
contrary, and the suppression of terms is cause of that. For the Veins of the
Womb are large enough to evacuate blood.

Others say, The strength of the womb is a cause which thickens the Vessels,
that they receive blood. But the Womb is made to receive it when it abounds.

Others accuse the strength, which is to be denied: but when it is so strong,
that it is too hot or too dry, and will not receive the blood, and that is a
sign of weakness. But there must be strength in the whole body, to cast out
superfluous blood, or there will be other mischiefs.

Question 2. What Veins must be opened when the Terms are stopped?
Authors disagree in this, as Aetius and Galen, Lib. de sang. miss. cap. 11,
18, 19.
who always speaks of the Ankle-veins: and most are of his mind, being it is
rational. For a Vein opened in the Arm, does rather revel from the Womb, then
draw the blood to it. But in the Ankle, brings it to its place, and opens
Obstructions, and does both lessen and bring blood to the womb, and move that
which is in the womb fixed.

Open the Ankle therefore twice or thrice, Lib. de sang. miss. adver. craesis.
rather then the Arm once. Therefore Galen commends Hippocrates, that he opened
a Vein in the Ankle in the Servant of Schimarg, though she had a Plethory.

But in other diseases of the womb, as Inflammation, dropping, or too many
terms, it is good to open a vein in the Arm. The Saphaena is opened by putting
the foot in warm water, before and after.

Question 3. At what time must a Vein be opened against the stoppage of the
Terms?
Galen says, It must be when Nature may be helped, be the blood moved: that
is, three or four days before the usual time of their coming, as if she had
been always in the full of the Moon, and they have been stopped some months.
Bleed three or four days before the full, to put Nature in mind of her duty,
and to make the blood run again.

Chap. 4. Of Fewness of the Terms.
IT is when they flow less then they use or ought to flow.

The Causes.
It is either from the blood, or in the expulsive Faculty in the passages. As if
blood be little, the terms are few and slow. If the retentive Faculty is weak,
and the expulsive strong, they come at due time, but in small quantity. If the
terms are slow, the fault is in the quality of the blood being too thick. Also
straitness of the passages may be a cause: for if they be not wide enough, the
blood cannot flow freely.

The Signs.
The patient will tell the disease: but the cause of it is to be found in the
Chapter aforegoing.

Few Terms from little blood is not dangerous: if they be stopped from thick
blood, The Prognostic.
there follow Diseases; as Erysipelas, Scirrhus, or Cancer.

See the Chapter aforegoing for the Cure, The Causes
and if it be from thickness of blood, it is often cured by a general purge for
the whole Body.

Chap. 5. Of Dropping of the Terms.
THis is a Flux, and lasts long, and there is pain.

The blood flows not conveniently at the due time and manner, and the privities
are always wet, as when the urin drops.

Are from the blood and the passages of it, The Causes.
and the retentive faculty; as when the blood is too thick and sharp, which
stir up Nature to let it out; and because it stretches the Membranes, there is
pain. Also the weakness of the retentive faculty is a cause.

The women declare it: The Signs.
but if it be from thick blood and sharp, and straight passages, there is a
stretching pain about the womb. If it be from crudity of blood, and weakness of
the retentive faculty, the blood flows without pain, and is not much felt.

It is troublesome to women; and if it last long, The Prognostic. The Cure.
causes Ulcers and Inflammations.

It is all in mending of the thick and sharp blood, and in opening the
passages, which are the two chief causes of it, of which we spoke at large.

If blood be superfluous, loose it not, nor open the Ankle-vein, lest you draw
it more to the Womb, but take away the Cacochymy.

If it be from weakness of the retentive Faculty, strengthen the womb with
Dryers and Astringents.

Chap. 6. Of the overflowing of the Terms.
IT is when it is too much or too long, and hurts any Woman, and brings
diseases: but a certain proportion of bleeding is not to be defined; but too
much is lost when the actions are hurt.

The Causes. Gal. 3. de symp. Causis, c. 2. and 5. aph. com. 57.
The immediate Cause is the opening of the Vessels, and the immediate Cause is
the blood in quantity or quality offending, or by its force or disorderly
motion.

Vessels are opened by Anastomisis, Diapedesis, Diaeresis or ruption, or by
Diaurosis or corrosion. Anastomosis is from a moist distemper of the Vessels,
which loosneth the Orifices: or from external causes, as Baths, hot and moist:
or use of Aloes.

The flux is seldom too great from a Diapedesis: for it is but a sweating
through. Ruption is from Plethory, when the terms have long been stopped, and
then break out, and when the blood is hot by Air, Baths, etc. The outward
causes are, falls, strokes, hard travel, great burdens lifted.

Erosion is from sharp blood or humor, or from Medicines that corode; as
Pessaries long kept. For this great Flux is chiefly from the Veins in the
bottom of the Womb.

The Signs.
The Flux of Blood is too great, when the strength abateth, and Cachexy follows,
with paleness, swollen feet, and the blood that comes from the bottom of the
Womb, is blacker and clotted. That from the neck redder and thinner.

The signs of the causes. If it be from much blood, there are signs of
plethory, and it easily clotted together. If the blood be sharp and choleric,
it is putrified in the womb, you shall know waterish blood by its color, and
the signs of that humor abounding: and if you dip a clout in it, and dry it in
the shade, you may see it. If the womb be too moist, such causes went before.
If it be from breaking of Veins, they will tell you of violence. If it be from
corrosion, it is little and slow, sometimes pure, sometimes serous.

It weakneth the whole Body, The Prognostic.
the Liver and Bowels, there is Swounding, the Whites, and paleness, and
Dropsy sometimes. That which has been long, is hard to be cured, and causes
death, and in an old woman it is deadly.

If there be fullness, abate the blood, Indications.
and keep it from flowing to the womb, revel it, repel, cool and astringe it,
that it may not flow so fast, and then amend the blood.

If it is from plenty of blood, The Cure.
open the Liver-veins in the right Arm; bleed little and often because it makes
better revulsion, and weakens not, open the Salvetella if there be weakness,
Gal. 5. aph. com. 50.
and cup the Back and Breast against the Liver, beneath the Paps, where are
Veins from the womb: cup not beneath, but in the Shoulders, or Back and Arm
with Scarification: but scarifie not under the Breasts.

Bind and rub the arms and shoulders, and temper and thicken the sharp thin
humors, with Decoctions and water of Plantane, Purslane, Sorrel, Knot-grass,
Shepheards-purse, Pomegranate-Syrup, and of dried Roses, Sorrel, Purslane,
Coral, Conserve of Roses, Bole, sealed Earth.

If it be urgent, use Narcoticks, Syrup of Poppies, Treacle, Philonium,
Laudanum.

If it still continue, it is fed with Choler, therefore purge it with Syrup of
Roses, Manna, Rhubarb, Senna.

If it be fed with serous blood, help the Reins that do not their duty, and the
Liver, and sweat with China.

You must not provoke urin, but use astringents. As, Take the juice of
Ass-dung, Syrup of Mirtles, each half an ounce; Plantane-water an ounce. Give
it her, and let her not know what it is.

Decoctions. Take Comfrey-roots, Tormentil, each two drams, Purslane, Plantane,
each a handful: boil them, add to six ounces Syrup of Currants, Quinces,
Mirtles, each six drams: give it at twice. Or, Take Syrup of Purslane, juice of
Nettles, each two ounces; Purslane-water four ounces, Troches of Amber, of
sealed Earth, each a dram; Boodstone half a dram: give two spoonfuls every
day.

A Water. Take eight pints of water, with Starch, Barley-meal, and Rice, dried
Roses a handful, juice of Yarrow, Plantane, each half a pint; Comfrey-roots and
all three ounces, Horstail, Blood-wort, each half a handful; Pears and Quinces,
Pomegranate-flowers, all Sanders, each half an ounce; Mastich an ounce. Distill
them, and give two ounces with half an ounce of Syrup of Roses or Purslane.

Electuaries. Conserve of Roses two ounces, Quinces an ounce and half, Troches
of burnt Ivory and sealed Earth, each a dram; Crocus Martis, Bole, red coral
prepared, Mastich, each half a dram; with Syrup of Mirtles make an Electuary.

Powders. Take Mastich, red Coral prepared each a dram; Pearl, Smaragds
prepared, each a scruple; Boodstone half a scruple, Bole half a dram, make a
powder.

Michael Paschal cured many with this Powder. Lib. de curat. morb. cap. 55.
Take two Egg-shells, burnt Frankincense, Mastich, each half an ounce; Pearl,
red Coral and Amber, each two drams; Boodstone, Smaragds prepared, each half
a scruple; Barley-flour two pugils, whites of four Eggs, with steeled water
make Cakes. Give from half a dram to a dram in powder, with Trotter-broath in
the morning.

Or give every day a dram of the powder of Mulberry-tree roots. Or, Ex
petrafores to.
Take plump Turtle drawn and plucked, wash it in Rose Water and red Wine, put an
ounce of Mastich in the belly of it, stick it on, and roast it, and bast it
with Vinegar of Roses. Then put it into a glass close luted, to be dried in an
Oven; then beat all of it to powder. Give a spoonful with Plantane-water, or an
astringent Decoction. Anoint the bottom of the Belly, Reins and Groyns, with
the dropping of it.

Or make Rouls thus: Take Bole half a dram, Magistery of Coral a dram, Pearl
prepared a scruple, Sorrel and Plantane-seed, each half a dram; Aromatiacum
rosatum, Traganth, each half a dram: with Sugar dissolved in Plantane-water,
make Rouls.

In the use of cold Astringents, take heed you stop not the Veins, and the heat
be cooled. If these help not, use Narcoticks, as Troches of sealed Earths, and
Amber with Opium: these astringe also.

Use no Pessaries, except the Veins in the neck of the Womb be open. As, Take
Snakeweed, Tormentil, each half an ounce; Pomegranate-flowers, Plantane-seed,
each two drams; Comfry-roots half an ounce, Frankincense, Mastich, each a dram;
Acacia, Sanguis Draconis, each two scruples; Boodstone, Starch, each a dram
and half; with the white of an Egg and Gum traganth dissolved in Rose Water,
make Pessaries with red Silk.

Womb-Clysters. Take juice of Yarrow, Solomons-seal, each two ounces; Mucilage
of Gum Arabic made in Plantane-water two ounces, make a Clyster.

A Fume. Take Frankincense, Mastich, each two drams; Mirtles, Labdanum, each a
dram; red Roses, Pomegranate-flowers, each half a dram; with Gum traganth make
Troches to be burnt.

Ointments. Take Oil of Mirtles, Quinces, each two ounces; juice of Plantane,
Solomons-seal, Horse-tail, each an ounce; boil the juyces away, add Bole,
Plantane-seed, Mirtle-berries, Ceruss, each half an ounce; with Wax make an
Ointment. Or use the Countesses Ointment to the Loins and Pecten.

Cataplasms. Take Quinces, Pearls boiled in red Wine, add Bole, Mastich,
Sanguis Draconis, Acacia, make a Cataplasm or a Cerot. Or, Take Sorrel and
Plantane-seed, Purslane-seed, Bole, Sanguis Draconis, each two drams;
Frankincense, Mastich, Mirrh, each three drams; Turpentine an ounce, with juice
of Plantane and Yarrow and Wax, make a Cerot after the Juyces are boiled away.

Fomentations are better than Baths: for they make the humors flow more. Let
them be astringent and cool. Or wash the Legs and Hips in cold water. Lay
Epithems to the Liver, Ointments, Cerots or Plasters.

If Choler offend, give Rhubarb and Conserve of Roses to evacuate the Cacochymy.

If blood flow from a vein broken, use Coral, Bole, Mirtles, Comphry, Acacia,
Hypocistis: or apply a Pultis of whites of Eggs, and astringent Powders.

If it come from a vessel corroded, use stoppers and glutinaters that are
slimy, as Dropwort-roots a dram, with a rear Egg.

Let the diet be as the Physic is. In a flux from plethory, eat little, and
that of little nourishment, and in other cases give things to close the
vessels. Sleep long, and use little Venery, little or no exercise. Anger hurts,
and other passions.

Question. Whether Frictions or Ligatures in the Legs may be made for Revulsion?
Hippocrates and Galen are misconstrued in his 8. Book of Blood-letting, and
they are not to be used in the flux of the Terms.

Chap. 7. Of the Terms-flowing with pain and Symptoms.
THe Symptoms are pain in the Loins or Thighs, Headache, biting at the mouth of
the Stomach, pain in the Belly and Loins, fainting.

They are as in suppression of Terms, The Causes.
but less vehement, and are in them that have not conceived. There is
obstruction, thick and gross blood, that stretches the vessels, and the blood
flows not orderly.

A little before the Terms, there is headache, The Signs.
biting at the stomach, pain in the loins, and bottom of the stomach, with
beating at the heart, and fainting. When the pain is from thick blood, it comes
forth in clodds, and the pain is worse than before. If it be from wind, it is
sudden, and stays not in a place, and there is rumbling in the belly.

The Prognostic.
Take heed it turn not to the stoppage of terms, if it be neglected. It is
greater in barren women and Virgins, then in those who have had children.

The Cure.
Take away the cause; if they be thick humors, evacuate them after they are
prepared: If sharp, temper them. These attenuate blood water of Grass-roots,
Maidenhair, Decoctions of the opening Roots, Syrup of Maidenhair, of the five
Roots, Treacle, and the like, in the stoppage of the Terms.

Against pain, use the Fomentations and Ointments in the Chapter of pain of the
Womb.

Chap. 8. Of evil discolored Terms.
THis is called the Terms depraved by bad humors, and so they are voided.

The Causes.
Blood is foul, either from evil diet, or evil humors, or stoppage of it. The
humors are phlegm, choler, or melancholy mixed with it, and then the Terms are
either pale, blew, green or black and stinking, or white and phlegmatic. They
are so from a fault in the stomach. The pale and yellow are from too great heat
in the Liver. The black are from the spleen disordered.

The Signs.
That blood which is natural, is different from the bad in color and substance:
it is like that of a new slain sheep, nor thicker nor thinner, and the bad
Terms come not seasonably, but sooner or later, of which Hippocrates. Lib. de
morb. mulier.
You may know by the color what humor predominates, and by the substance. The
phlegmatic and melancholy are long in coming, and the choleric waterish Terms
come quicker.

The more they differ from the natural state, The Prognostic.
the worse they are: black and stinking are worst. The mattery are worst of
all. If these flow seven, eight or nine days, she is cured: if they ulcerate
the womb, she is barren.

Hippocrates says, The Cure. 5. Aphor. 36.
they must be purged and prepared with proper things, as we showed in the
distempers of the womb. But take heed that you move not the Terms when you
attenuate: for that will melt the serous humors, and fix them more in the
vessels: use neither Vinegar nor sharp things.

After purging, consume the relics by sweat; if choler be in fault, that must
not be sweated out, discuss it with warm Baths and do so in melancholy. Use
Pessaries, Fomentations and Fumes to the womb.

Give Treacle, Mithridate, or the Decoction of Angelica-roots, if cold humors
are the cause.

Chap. 9. Of Terms coming before their time.
THese show an ill constitution. And it is a depraved excretion of the Terms
that comes for the time often: for sometimes they flow sooner, or twice in a
month.

The immediate Cause is hurt of the retentive and expulsive faculty, The Causes.
so that the blood flows not or sooner or later, or oftener: the cause why they
come sooner, is in the blood that stirs up the expulsive faculty in the whole
body, or in the womb: sometimes all causes meet; the blood is too much, or too
sharp and hot; and if the retentive faculty in the womb be weak, and the
expulsive strong and of quick sense, it is sooner.

A fall, stroke or passion are the evident Causes.

The Signs.
They will relate it: and the signs of the causes are these: If it be from much
blood, there are the signs of plethory; heat, thinness, and sharp humors are
known by the distemper of the whole. The weakness of the retentive faculty, and
looseness of the vessels is known from a loose and moist habit of body.

The Prognostic. The Cure.
It is not dangerous, but troublesome, and hinders conception.

If they come too soon from hurt in the faculty provoked by too much plethory,
Let blood, use a spare diet, and much exercise. If it be from sharp blood,
temper it by good diet, and Medicines, as in the choleric distemper of the
womb.

Use Baths of Iron-water, that corrects the distempers of the bowels, then
evacuate.

If it come from the retentive faculty, and looseness of the vessels, correct
the cold and moist distemper with gentle astringents.

If it be from a stroke or fall, cure it as the vessels opened are cured, of
which before.

Chap. 10. Of the Terms that come after their usual time.
WHen they stay longer then ordinary, and return without order at no set time:
the causes are little and thick blood, straitness of the passages, weakness of
the expulsive faculty, and dullness. Either of these causes may stop the Terms:
but if all meet, the disease is worse.

For if blood be not bred in such a quantity, that may prick Nature forward to
expel it, the purging of it is differed, till there be enough to stir up Nature
to expel it. If thick humors are in the blood, the passage stopped, and the
faculty weak, the Terms must needs be disordered, and the purging of them
differed longer.

If it be from want of blood, The Signs.
she has either lived poor in diet, or exercised too much, and she finds no
inconvenience by the want of her Terms. If it be from gross slimy blood, there
are signs of Cachochymy. The weakness of the faculty is known by the cold
distemper of the womb.

It is not so dangerous as stoppage of the terms, The Prognostic.
but it is bad enough in a plethorick or cacochymical body.

If little blood be, use a fuller diet, The Cure.
and exercise not. If blood be gross and foul, make it thin, and cut it, and
after Preparatives, let the humors mixed therewith, be evacuated. It is good to
purge presently after the Terms, and to use Calamints, and to purge often.

Also four or five days before the Terms, scarifie the ankles, and hold the
feet in warm water, rub the legs, apply Cupping-glasses without Scarification
to the inside of the thighs, and use Fumes and Pessaries.

Anoint the bottom of the belly with things to provoke the Terms. If there be a
numness, use things against the Palsy.

Chap. 11. Of the Terms voided another way.
SOmetimes they come out at the Nose, or are vomited up, or flow out by the
Haemorrhoid veins. 1. De morb. mul. 5. apho. 32. obser. medit. c. 15. Lib. 1.
de affect. mul. c. 7. The Causes.
Hence Hippocrates says, that a woman that vomits blood, is cured by having
her Terms, or by a Bloody Flux. Sometimes they are pissed forth. Dodonaeus
says, That they come out at the eyes like tears sometimes. Amatus Lusitanus
says, they will come forth at the Teats of the breasts, and at the navel, at
the little finger, or ring finger every month, as Mercatas observed thrice.

Are stoppage of the Terms from straitness of the vessels in the womb, or evil
conformation of the womb.

The Prognostic.
It is more troublesome then dangerous, and hinders conception. It is best when
they come out at the Nose: for it is a part that Nature uses to disburden her
self by.

The Cure.
First, Bring the blood to the womb again, and abate it. Open the ankle-vein
three days before she begins to bleed. Or cup the thighs, or rub them. Or use
Baths, Fomentations, Ointments, Womb-Clysters, Pessaries, and the like,
mentioned in Suppression of the Terms.

Chap. 12. Of the Whites.
IT is a foul excretion from the womb, white, and sometimes blew, or green, or
reddish, nor at a set time, nor every month, but disorderly, longer or shorter.
Before or after the Terms, and when they are stopped. Virgins seldom have this
disease, and women with child have it sometimes.

It differs from the running of the reins; for it is in less quantity, whiter
and thicker, and at a greater distance. It differs from night pollution, which
is only in sleep with the imagination of Venery.

The immediate Cause is an excrementitious humor, phlegm, choler or melancholy.
The Causes.
Sometimes it is like waterish blood. It is gathered in the whole body, or in
the stomach, liver or spleen. For they who have crudities in the stomach, are
subject to this disease. Sometimes the womb alone is distempered after often
mischances, or when the womb is very cold and moist.

This matter flows through the veins of the womb, or of the neck of it, which
use to carry blood, and Nature abuses them to carry excrements, especially if
they are bred in the womb.

The remote causes are whatsoever does breed bad humors; some have it after
strong purges, or long bathing.

Sometimes they are pale, sometimes blew, red, The Differences.
waterish, and green: sometimes slimy, or cold, or sharp, or stinking. In young
people it is reddish.

The face is discolored, the urin thick, The Signs.
there is loathing and heart-ach. If the humor be sharp and corrupt, there is a
Fever. If it be phlegmatic and much, the ligaments of the Womb are loose and
it falls out, thus Hippocrates, Lib. de nature. mulierum.
and there are, says he, swelled eyes, evil color, and short breathing.

If it be not bred in the womb, the humor is from a Cacochymy. If it be from a
fault in another part, the signs of that will appear. If it come only from the
Womb, there will be but little: If from the whole body, there will be more.

The Prognostic.
It is often, long with little inconvenience, but it must be looked to, lest it
be worse: for it often breaks ulcers, Cachexy, falling out of the womb,
Consumption, Fainting, Convulsions, when the matter is sent to the brain or
nerves. And the worse the humor is, the greater is the disease.

The Cure.
It must not be suddenly stopped, lest it go to the noble parts.

First, see whether it be from the whole body, or any part, or from the Womb it
self. If from the whole body, which is often, make general evacuation, and turn
the humors from the womb, and keep a good diet, lest they come again.

I allow not bleeding in the arm, if the terms be stopped; for they cause a
Cacochymy, which admits no bleeding. Moreover the mass of blood may be made
foul by them, therefore find out whether it comes from Cacochymy or Plethory.
And when it is most like to come from Cacochymy, bleed not.

Therefore if phlegm abound, which is most usual, after general purging, consume
the relics with Guajacum and Sarsa, and a drying diet, and by provoking Urin,
of which hereafter.

If sharp and choleric humors abound, temper them with gentle astringents, as
Succory, Endive, Sorrel, to prepare, purge with Rhubarb, Triphera Persica,
aggregative Pills, and Pills of Rhubarb. If it be melancholy, do as in
melancholy.

If it be water, cure it as Galen did the Wife of Boethus c. 8. lib. de
prognost. ad Posth.

If it be in the stomach, liver, or the like, prevent it from increase, and
because it is most about the stomach, give a Vomit, but not too strong. Then
strengthen the stomach with hot and dry Medicines. If Choler abound, the
Distemper is hot, and then cool it.

If it come from the Womb, do as I showed, from what cause soever it is. Baths
are good to evacuate and divert, and strengthen, and take away a moist
distemper, provided they are proper for the Constitution.

Use Dryers and Astringents. As, Take Conserve of red Roses four ounces, of
Succory two ounces, red Coral, Snakeweed, Tormentil-roots, Ivory, each two
drams; with Syrup of Mirtles make an Electuary.

Or, Take red Coral, Bole, sealed Earth, each an ounce; Pearl prepared, a
scruple, Mastich half a dram, Cypress-roots two scruples, Mace half a scruple,
with Sugar of Roses as much as all, make a powder. Or, Take Diarrhodon a dram,
Sanders a scruple, Coriander two drams, Mastich, Coral, each a dram; with Sugar
make Troches.

But use not these Astringents, till the Body be purged, lest the waterish
humors be stopped, and the Belly swell: but you may use hot Dryers safely, as
Treacle, Mithridate, with Conserve of Roses and Wormwood.

As, Take Conserve of Rosemary-flowers an ounce, Diacorus two drams,
Diarrhodon, Aromaticum Rosatum, each a dram; red Coral prepared a dram and
half, Treacle two drams, with syrup of Citron-peels, make an Electuary.

And left the womb be hurt with evil humors, inject the Decoction of Barley,
Honey of Roses and Whey, with Syrup of dried Roses. Or of Wormwood, Mints,
Motherwort, red Roses, Alum. And then use a Fume of Frankincense, Labdanum,
Mastich, Sanders, Nutmeg, red Roses.

Avoid crude and moist things, and Fish, Milk, and all sweet Meats, and Salt.
Forbear Suppers, drink red Wine: sleep and wake moderately, lie not upon the
Back, lest the Loins be heated, and the humors sent to the Womb.

Question. Whether are Diuretics good in the Whites?
Diuretics that provoke urin do also provoke terms; therefore the relics of
the humors would be carried by them to the womb, but these move the terms
secondarily: but if the Body be well purged, first they will not make the Flux
greater, but bring it out by urin.

Chap. 13. Of a Gonorrhoea.
THe running of the Reins may be in all women that are fit for a man; for it is
the flux of natural Seed. It is in men and women from the French Pox: but when
stinking humors do flow, it is not properly called a Gonorrhoea.

The Causes.
The chief cause is the weakness of the retentive faculty, and the looseness and
largeness of the Seed-vessels: the Causes of these are showed in the Gonorrhoea
of men.

The Signs.
The Woman will declare it, and the greatness and the color. For if it be
white, and little, and thick, and at distance, it is a true Gonorrhoea.

The Prognostic. The Cure.
If it continue, it brings a Consumption, and Barrenness.

The Cure of a Gonorrhoea and night pollution is Pract. 3. but I shall add
this, if it come from plenty of Seed, The Buds of the Salix or Willow, is good
with Wine. If it be from weakness of the retentive faculty, give Caster half a
scruple, and use Astringents to the Belly, Reins, and Stones; or a Bath of
Willow-leaves, Mirtles, Quinces, each two handfuls; Rosemary, red Roses, each a
handful; Cypress-nuts three ounces. Let her sit in up to the Navel. And apply
Bags of the same to the Loins, Kidneys, Privities; and anoint after with Oil of
Mastich and Mirtles.

Chap. 14. Of strange things voided by the Womb.
THere is matter often voided by the Womb, of which before.

And sometimes stones and gravel breed in the womb, Hippoc. 5. epid. letr. 4.
ser. 4. c. 98.
as Aetius and Peter Salius Diversus speaks of a Nun, that after a pain that no
Medicine could cure, voided a rough stone as big as a Ducks Egg, and then she
was at ease: but a foul Flux of the Womb followed, of which she died.

Worms.
Garcias Lopius writes, that he saw a woman, Lib. var. lect. c. 13.
that voided many Ascarides of the Womb.

THE FOURTH BOOK. THE THIRD SECTION. Of the Symptoms that befall all Virgins and
Women in their Wombs, after they are ripe of Age.
Chap. 1. Of Virginity.
IT is the integrity of Women's Privities not violated by Man: but what are the
signs of Virginity, is a Question. I think thus:

Question 1. Whether does the Hymen which is the sign of Virginity, appear in
all Women?
Some say there is no such thing, and if a Membrane be there, it is
preternatural, and a disease in the Organ, called the Closing of the Womb.

Some famous Physicians and Anatomists say, There is a Hymen, which is the sign
of Virginity. It is, they say, a Membrane wrinkled with Caruncles like
Mirtle-berries, like the bud of a Rose half blown: hence came the word
[Deflower.]

I think with the Ancients, that there is something in these parts that
distinguishes Virgins from Women, which is violated in the first Copulation:
many say they have it, and we may believe them. For it is certain, that there
is an alteration at first in Virgins, which causes pain and bleeding, which is
a sign of Virginity.

But what this is, it is not yet known manifestly. Some say, it is a nervous
Membrane, with small Veins which bleed at the first bout. Some say, there are
four Caruncles tied together with small Membranes. Some have observed a fleshy
Circle about the Nymphae with obscure little Veins, which makes the Membrane
not to be nervous but fleshy.

To be short. I suppose it to be certain, that the part which receives the
Yard, is not in them that have used a man, as in Virgins, nor is it alike in
all; and this has caused the diversity of Opinions in Anatomists. Moreover
this is not found in all Virgins, because some are very lustful, and when it
itcheth, they put in their finger, or some other thing, and break the Membrane:
sometimes the Midwives break it.

Question 2. Whether do all Virgins at the first bout our Copulation, bleed?
The Africans had a Custom to shut the Bridegroom and the Bride up in a
Chamber, Ex Leone Africans.
after they were married, till they prepared the Wedding-dinner. And an Old
Woman stood at the door, to receive a bloody sheet from the Bridegroom, that
she might show it in triumph to all the Guests, and that then they might feast
with joy. And if there was no Blood to be seen, the Bride was to be sent home
to her Friends with disgrace, and the Guests went sadly home without their
Dinner.

Some say from Experience, that some honest Virgins have lost their
Maiden-heads without bleeding, and that it is a certain sign of Virginity when
they bleed, and when they do not, they are not to be censured as unchaste. I
hold that young Virgins will bleed, but when they are in years, by reason of
the long continuance of the Terms, the parts are harder and longer; and if the
man's yard be small, there is no necessity of bleeding. Or if the Girl was
wanton before, and by long handling, has dilated the part, or broke it, there
is no blood after Copulation. Therefore Deuteronomy. chap. 20. the Law of Moses is
taken for that which happens often, and for the most part. And there can be no
more gathered from hence, but bleeding is an undoubted sign of Virginity. The
same may be said of the African Custom.

Question 3. Whether is the straitness of the Privities a sign of Virginity?
The Privities are straiter in some according to age, habit of body, and other
circumstances, and Virgins are straiter then Women that have been at it. But I
deny that straitness is a certain Argument of Virginity. For after many acts of
Venery, it may be made so strait by astringent Medicines, that Whores may be
taken for Virgins, as we showed concerning a Wench that was married, and to
appear a Virgin, she used a Bath of Comfrey-roots.

Question 4. Whether is Milk in the Breasts a sign of Virginity lost?
Some say, That there can be no Milk in the Breasts, till a woman has
conceived: and Virgins have neither the cause nor the end why milk is made. And
the terms stopped do rather corrupt then turn to milk. And though there be
always in the Breasts a faculty to make milk: yet does it not show its power,
but upon an object, and for some end.

Some say, That Virgins may have Milk, 5. Aph. 39. Gal. in com. Lib. 3. anat c.
4. com. in aphoris. lib. 5.39.
and urge this saying of Hippocrates, If any have Milk when she is neither with
Child nor Breeding, their terms are stopped. Galen is of the same opinion, and
thought it be seldom: yet he says it is possible. And Alexander Benedictus and
Christopher de Vega saw it.

We shall not contradict Hippocrates, and Experience: but there is a twofold
milk. The one of Virgins: the other of those that have brought forth or
conceived. The first is made of blood, that cannot get out at the womb, but
goes to the Breasts; and this is nothing but a superfluous nourishment of the
Breasts, that turns milk by the faculty of the Breasts, without the company of
a man or conception. The other is only when there is a child: of this Milk it
is true what Hippocrates writes, It is a certain sign of a Mole, Cit. loc de
morb. mulierum,
when great bellied women have no milk in their Breasts, And true milk in the
Breasts is a sign of a live child in the Womb.

These Milks differ in respect of the blood, and diversity of the veins that
bring it to the Breasts; and though both are white: yet that of Virgins is
thinnest nor is it so much, nor so sweet; this may breed in the Veins according
to Aristotle, from the superfluous nourishment of the Breasts: and if Virgins
have it, 1. De hist. any. c. 12.
they are not to be termed unchaste.

Chap. 2. Of the Green Sickness or white Fever.
THis is in Virgins fit for a man: it is called the Virgins Disease, and the
white Fever not; that there is always a Fever: but because their Face is
like people in a Fever. It is thus defined.

The Virgins Disease, is the changing of the natural color into a pale and
green with faintness, heaviness of body, loathing of meat, palpitation of
Heart, difficult breathing, sadness, swelling of the Feet, Eyelids and Face,
from depraved nourishment.

The ^auses.
The first Cause is stoppage of Terms: the next is the gathering of bad humors.
For when the way to the womb is stopped, the blood returns to the great Vessels
and Bowels, and choaks their heat, and stops the vessels, and spoils the making
of blood, and then there are crudities, which being brought to the habit of the
body, cannot be united perfectly to the parts, and cause a Cachexy, which is
the way to a Dropsy and Leucophlegmacy, and diverse Symptoms. The causes of the
obstructions of the Vessels of the Womb, are crude humors, and phlegmatic,
slimy blood, from evil diet, and drinking of Vinegar, or eating raw Corn,
Chalk, Ashes, Lime, Earth, Clay, and the like

There is a pale and green color, The Signs.
the Face is swollen, and the Eyebrows in the morning after sleep especially;
the Ankles swell, and the whole Body is loose, and moist from much water: the
Legs are lazy, the Pulse is little and often, in the Neck, Temples and Back.
The heart beats, the breath is short when they go up stairs, they loath meat.
Some have the Pica, or desire to eat absurd things. The terms are stopped, the
Hypochondria are swollen. Sometimes they vomit. If vapors fly to the Head,
there is thirst and headache: and if Melancholy be mixed, the animal actions
are hurt.

These are not all in all people: but most are in most, and in some all.

It it often turned to a Dropsy. The Prognostic.
Some after death have had a Scirrhus, hard Liver. Some die suddenly, the Heart
being oppressed. If the stomach be much afflicted, it is dangerous, and they
loath meat much. If it come from the womb alone, it is easier cured.

It is best to begin in the Spring or Summer: The Cure.
after a Clyster, open a Vein in the Ankle.

Then heat the thick cold humor, and make it thin; and because it is too much
to be purged at once prepare and purge often, and mix attenuaters and cutters
with your purges.

When the humors are above the stomach and Mesentery, it is good to vomit those
that can easily vomit, and to give Liver-Physick, or Spleen or Womb-Physick,
even as in Le^cophlegmacy, see the Chapter of Terms stopped. But in this Disease,
always consider the Liver, Spleen and Mesentery, the obstructions of which are
cured with things mentioned.

At first open the obstructions of these parts with some few things that
provoke terms, and after give more.

Thus: Take opening Roots an ounce, Madder, Eryngus, Orris, Elicampane,
Citron-peels dried, Sarsa, each half an ounce; Mugwort, Agrimony, Germander,
each a handful; Savin two pugils, Carthamus-seeds an ounce, Senna two ounces,
Mechoacan, Agarick, each half an ounce; Stoechas-flower two pugils, Fennel,
Aniseed, Galangal, each two drams: boil them to a pint and half, sweeten it,
and add Cinnamon Water three drams. Or infuse them all with Sea-wormwood half a
handful, common Wormwood two pugils. Or, Take Agarick, Pills of Rhubarb, each a
dram; Quercetan 's Pills of Tartar and of Ammoniacum, each half a dram; Spike a
scruple, Oil of Cinnamon three drops, Extract of Wormwood half a scruple, make
Pills: give a scruple an hour before meat. Or, Take juice of Mercury, clarified
Honey or Sugar, each an ounce; add Gith-seed, Senna, each two drams; Mechoacan
a dram, make a Mass; or give Conserve of Marigold-flowers.

Steel is an excellent Remedy after Preparatives, with proper Drinks or
Ingredients. And if the Vessels of the stomach are stopped, give a Vomit, and
then gross powder of Steel.

Hoc laudat Mercatus.
If the Mesentery be stopped; Take Diarrhodon, Diacurcuma, Agarick, each a dram;
Carthamus, seeds two drams, red Dock-roots, Carrot-seed, each a dram and half;
Cloves a dram, Steel prepared two ounces, with clarified Honey make an
Electuary: give two or four drams. If she vomit, stop it not.

If the Liver be chiefly stopped, let the Steel be finely powdered. And take of
it half a pound, add eight ounces of Wine in a glass, set it in the embers,
stir it, and let it boil twelve simmers, till you see it froath, and grow a
little thick; then pour the froath and all into another Vessel. Do thus four
times, and then let it be gently boiled, till it be thick as Honey. Then, Take
Parsley, Carrot-seed, Diacurcuma, Diarrhodon, each a dram and half; Cinnamon a
dram, Steel prepared six drams, with Honey make an Electuary: give three drams,
or five after exercise.

If the Spleen be stopped; Take Steel prepared a pound, wash it with Vinegar,
then strain it, and lay it on a Clout, and add powder of Cloves half an ounce.
Let them stand so a day and a night, then put them in a glassed Vessel, and ten
ounces of white Wine, Diarrhodon, Hart's-tongue, Senna, and Caper-bark, then
stir them, then set them in the Sun for a day, or in an Oven. Do this ten
days, till the Steel be melted in the Wine, and little or nothing at the
bottom. Give two ounces of this in the morning after purging and exercise.

Or, Take Steel prepared an ounce, Cinnamon, Aniseeds, each two drams;
Diamoschu without Musk a dram, Sugar an ounce, make a powder give a dram: drink
white Wine and Mugwort-water after it.

Steeled Wine. Take Steel in powder three ounces, Cinnamon half an ounce, white
Wine three pints. Set them in a close glass eight days in the Sun, stir them
every day. Give six or eight ounces four hours before dinner, for fifteen or
twenty days, and walk after it.

At first give a Steel-medicine to prepare. As, Take Steel-filings four ounces,
put it in an Iron Crucible or Ladle, then cast it into two pints of water of
Hops, Grass, Madder, Borage, or Spring Water: strain it, and do so seven times.
Then, Take so many ounces of new Steel, and cast it into water as before:
strain and add Syrup of Violets, Borage, or Honey of Roses four ounces; give
three ounces in the morning after exercise. Prepare thus three or four times,
and then use stronger.

After Steel use Scorzonera steept all night in Wine, give it in the morning.
This has cured Obstructions in many.

Mercatus.
Bezoar-stone, says Mercatus, opens Obstructions in my Experience, and resists
Venom: give six or seven grains.

Steel is best Spring and Fall, purge, and exercise before and after it, that
it may be better dispersed. Use Preparatives, Purges, and strengthners often,
and for a long time, and change the forms, lost the Patient loath them.

If water spread about the body cool the body, and make it heavy. Use sweats,
as Baths natural or artificial, of Mugwort, Calamints, Nep, Danewort, Sage,
Bays, Rosemary, Mercury, Ivy, Briony-roots, Orris, Elicampane.

After purging and opening Obstructions, all the Symptoms will vanish; if not,
see for the Symptoms of the Womb.

The Diet.
Let the Air be temperately hot. The Meat of good juice, and easy digestion.
Pot Herbs and green Fruits must be avoided, Fish, Milk, Lettice. Make Sauce
with Sage and Cinnamon. Drink Wine. Let Bread be well leavened, with
Fennel-seed. Drink no Water nor Broaths at first and in the declination of the
disease; use Exercise and Venery. Let sleep be moderate.

Question 1. Whether may the Woman in this Disease be allowed the absurd things
they long for?
They are Virgins or Women with child that long for such things, Virgins must
not be allowed them, as Chalk, etc. For they will increase the disease.

Women with child must be pleased with fair words, to abstain from them: but if
the appetite will not be allayed, rather grant them, then suffer an abortion or
mark upon the Child.

Question 2. Is Motion and Exercise good in the Green Sickness?
They are better then idleness which heaps up crudities, they raise the
languishing heat in the Bowels, and help the nourishment to be distributed:
therefore they are to be used before the disease be great, and in the
declination they discuss the humors.

But use moderation, lest you weaken the body, or choke them. First therefore
use Frictions, then watching, then more exercise after convenient purging.

Question 3. Whether is Venery good for Maids in the Green Sickness?
It is probable, and agreeable to Reason and Experience, that Venery is good.
Hippocrates bids them presently marry: for if they conceive, Hippocr. lib. de
morb. virgin. Lib. 1. ep. 2.
they are cured. John Langius says, This disease comes in the ripeness of age,
or presently after Venery heats the womb, and the parts adjacent, opens and
loosens the passages, so that the terms may better flow to the womb.

But if there be a great Cacochymy, take that away before she be married, and
then Venery may do more in Physic. But use it not in the vigor of the Disease,
nor in weakness.

Question 4. Whether is Blood-letting good in this Disease?
A Cachexy beginning with coldness of the whole Body, seem to deny bleeding;
and because the crude humors are in fault rather then blood. Lib. de morb. virg.
But Hippocrates advises bleeding at the first.

If it be a new disease, and comes from stopped terms, and blood abound that is
stopped, and not turned into another humor, you may boldly bleed, provided the
strength permit, and the passages be open. But in an old disease when crude
Phlegm abounds, bleed not, for it will increase the Disease.

Chap. 3. Of Symptoms from the Womb, and Mother-fits in general.
IT is not to be expressed what miserable diseases Women are subject to: both
Virgins and others from the womb, and its consent with other parts. For when
terms or blood are stopped, there are great Symptoms; and while they putrify, or
get evil qualities, the Symptoms are grievous, and almost unexpressible.

One woman may have diverse Symptoms from the womb at the same time, when the
seed and terms are mixed with other humors after they are corrupted, and there
is more sometimes, and such noble substance as seed and terms being corrupted,
are like poison. Gal. 6. de loc. aff. c. 5.


The consent with other parts, is from likeness of parts, nearness, or
connection of Vessels. And because the womb is membranous, it has a great
consent with the Membranes and Nerves. Also the parts adjacent are easily
infected. And thirdly, it has consent with all the Body by Veins, Arteries and
Nerves.

It consents with the Brain by the Nerves, and Membranes of the Back-marrow. It
consents with the Heart by the Arteries; with the Liver by the Veins, which are
great in the Womb, and therefore the blood and bad humors go back to the Liver.
It consents with the stomach by Anastomosis in the Veins of the Mesentery, and
by the Arteries through foul humors and vapors go from the womb to the
Mesentery and Stomach.

It consents with the Spleen by the Arteries; therefore many Women that had not
their terms enough in their youth, and have hot blood, are after
Hypochondriack, and a Physician can scarce distinguish these diseases of the
Womb and Spleen, nor cure them severally.

It consents with the Paps by Veins and Nerves, and the Heart, Diaphragma,
Head, Brain, and all the Organs of sense and motion; with the Liver, Spleen,
Stomach, Belly, Mesentery, Bladder, strait Gut, Back, Hips, Arms and Legs, and
causes Symptoms. As Galen says the Mother and Histerical passions in one
name, Gal. de loc. aff. c. 5.
but has under it innumerable Symptoms.

Chap. 4. Of Suffocation of the Womb.
IN this they seem to be strangled. And there are so many Symptoms at once,
that it is impossible to define it by one. Sometimes there is only short
breath; sometimes the animal actions are hurt, the whole Body is cold from a
malignant vapor sent up from the Womb.

The Causes.
The immediate Cause, is a vapor malignant and venomous, sent up by the
Arteries, Veins and Nerves that hurt the actions of the parts it goes to. This
vapor is like air or wind, thin and little, but very strong, to get presently
through the whole Body. It chiefly ascends to the Gullet, and causes choking,
as eating of Mushrooms, Hellebore, and other poisons. There is often short
difficult breathing, with Heart-ach, Vomiting, and Loathing. If the vapor go
first to the heart, the motion of it cease, and there is swounding, and she
falls down. If it go to the Brain, the animal actions are hurt.

When seed and terms corrupt in the Womb, with other bad humors, they breed
this evil vapor; because they are the best substance, and the beginning of
generation, they are worst when corrupted, especially seed to hurt the whole
Body.

Gal. cit. 1.
Sometimes it is in Women with child, when they have not their after-purging:
but evil humors are left, and corrupt in the Womb.

The chief cause of this humor, is in the trumpet of the womb and stones, the
body of which is hollow and loose, the stones being in Bladders, and have
hollowness full of water, which in hysterical women is yellow and thicker then
ordinary. Vesal. de corp. human. Fabr. lib. 5. c. 15.
This trumpet and the stones are often taken from the womb it self, when they
are swollen with corrupt seed, and humors, and wind, and reach to the Navel: of
which in the Chapter of Ascent of the Womb.

This disease is breeding sooner or longer, as the matter is more or less,
sometimes corrupt humors lie still, and if they be stirred, they send a venom
or vapor to the whole body. Now in women subject to this disease, sweet scents
to the Nose, or taken in, or anger, will move these humors and vapors.

They are according to the variety of the Symptoms and efficient cause, or
venomous humors: The Differences.
for corrupt blood especially seed, puts on another Nature.

That Suffocation is at hand, The Signs.
it appears by laziness, weakness of the Legs, paleness, sad countenance, and
the motion of something like a Ball in the Belly, with noise like Frogs,
Snakes, or Crows, so that some think it is devilish. There is also Belching,
Yawning, Yexing, short Wind, Heartbeating, Loathing, Dullness, Laughter at the
coming of the fit, from the vapor getting into the Membrane of the Breast, that
tickle them: some cry, some both laugh and cry.

These Symptoms increase when the fit comes, and the Jaws are closed, that she
seems to be choked, and sense and motion is gone or depraved. Some have
Convulsions, some hear what is done about them, but cannot speak: the pulse is
less, the whole body is cold, and the Eyes shut, as if they were dead.

When the fit declines, humors flow from the Privities, the Guts rumble, the
Eyes open, the Cheeks grow red, and the body warm, the animal actions return,
and the Patient sighs, and comes to her self.

It is known to be from corrupt seed, if the terms are in order, and short
breath, and low voice, Suffocation and Convulsions, and all Symptoms are then
more vehement, and at the end of the fit there flows a humor like seed out of
the privities. It is from the terms, if they be stopped, or flow not orderly; and
if there be a disease in the womb, it is neither from the seed nor the terms.

The Prognostic.
1. If there come Swounding, or a great Convulsion, or quenching of natural
heat, it is deadly.

2. Suffocation from corrupt seed, is more dangerous then that which is from
the terms mixed with melancholic humors.

3. The longer it lasts, and the worse the Symptoms, the more is the danger. It
cease in young Women when they begin to bear children.

4. The oftener the fit comes, the more you may fear the quenching of the
natural heat by weakening of the Heart often; and if she foam at the mouth, she
dies.

The Cure of the Fit.
In the fit you must discuss the malignant vapors that rise from the womb, and
turn it from the principal parts, and you must evacuate the matter that breeds
it, and prevent its return. Call upon her loud, pluck the hairs of her
privities and Ears, make strong Ligatures and Frictions, cup the Legs, and
Thighs, and Groyns: hold stinks to the Nose, as Partridge-feathers, burnt
hairs, Leather, Horn, Castor, Assa-foetida, Galbanum, Oil of Amber, Rue, the
warts on Horses legs dried, and the powder upon coals burnt, makes a Fume,
which if taken in the nose, suddenly raised them.

Apply sweet Scents to the Privities, as Civet, Musk, Gallia and Alipta
moschata, or powder of Cloves.

Or, Take Storax calamita, Benzoin, each a dram; Gallia moschata half a
scruple, make Troches with Gum traganth, and let the Fume be taken into the
Womb by a Fennel.

A Liniment. Take Storax, Benzoin, each a dram; Gallia moschata half a scruple,
Civet four grains, liquid Storax half a scruple, with Cotton put it into the
Womb.

Clysters to discuss wind, draw down the matter. Take the Carminative Decoction
a pint, Electuary of Hiera six drams, Benedicta laxativa an ounce, Oil of Rue
and Bayberries, each a dram. Use VVomb-clysters and Pessaries to women that
have known man. Take Electuary of Hiera and Diaphaenicon, each two drams;
Turpentine half an ounce, Honey of Mercury an ounce, Castor half a dram, with
Wool make a Pessary.

Oil of Tin applied to the Navel, does remove the fit.

Or Rue, Castor, and sneesing Powders. As Take white Hellebore half a scruple,
long Pepper and Ginger, each half a dram: or put Oil of Amber into the Nose and
Ears.

Apply to the Womb this: Take Oil of Rue, Bays, each two ounces; Cummin-seed,
Castor dissolved in Vinegar, each two drams; with Wax make a Liniment. Or use a
Plaster of Galbanum, Castor, and Assa-foetida.

A Compound distilled Water. Take Zedoary, Parsnep-seeds, Lovage-roots, each
two ounces; Mirrh, Castor, each half an ounce; Piony-roots four ounces, Misleto
of the Oak gathered in the wain of the Moon three ounces, and water of
Motherwort four ounces and half, Spirit of Wine a pint and half, steep them
eight days, distill and give a spoonful with Tile-flower or Mugwort-water, or
Oil of Amber some drops. Or, Take Castor, Assa-foetida, each a scruple; Pepper
half a scruple, with syrup of Mugwort, make Pills, give three.

The Cure out of the Fit.
First, prevent the seed from corrupting in the womb; and if it be corrupt,
evacuate it presently with Womb-Clysters and Pessaries; then disperse the
relics, and strengthen the womb. But first give a general Purge that is
gentle often, and use things that prevent the breeding of Seed.

Strengthen with Plasters and Ointments to the Region of the Womb. As, Take
liquid Storax two drams, Avens, Agnus castus seeds, Angelica, each half a dram;
Alipta moschata a scruple, Oil of Nard, Lillies, and white Wax, make an
Ointment. Or, Take seeds of Agnus castus a dram, all Sanders, each half a dram;
white Rose-powder a dram, Tacamahacca a scruple, Amber two scruples, Alipta
moschata half an ounce, with Turpentine, Labdanum and Wax, make a Plaster. If
she be a Virgin, let her be married.

If it be from Terms stopped, see in the Chapter of that.

This disease is neither from seed, nor blood, nor humors, if they be not
corrupted after a peculiar manner. If it be from the womb distempered, give the
Infusion of an ounce of Briony root in white Wine once in a week for a year, at
bed time: or this Hysterical Water.

Take Lovage-roots, Piony, Angelica, Zedoary, each an ounce; Misleto of the Oak
gathered in the wane of the Moon two ounces, Mints, Balm, Calamints, Bettony,
each a handful; Carrot, Parsnep-seed, Castor, each half an ounce; distill them
in white Wine and water of Motherwort after eight days infusion. Or, Take
Briony, Valerian, Spignel, Angelica-roots, each half an ounce; Balm, Calamints,
Pennyroyal, Bettony, each half a handful; boil them in Wine, add Syrup of
Mugwort an ounce: give it at thrice.

Vitriol of Iron one grain, with two grains of Sugar given in Wine some weeks,
is excellent.

Or, Take Cummin-seed, wild Parsnep-seeds, each a dram; give a dram in powder.
Or, Take Faecula Brionae two drams, Cummin-seed, Parsnep-seed, each a dram;
Amber half a dram, Cloves two scruples, Cinnamon a scruple, make a powder.

Pills. Take Castor a scruple, Assa-foetida half a scruple, Mirrh, Galbanum,
Sagapenum, each a scruple; with Honey of Mercury make Pills: take half a
scruple or a scruple often. Or, Take Treacle or Mithridate.

Apply Plasters or Liniments to the region of the Womb, thus: Take old Treacle
half an ounce, Agnus castus seeds a dram, Oil of Angelica and Cummin-seeds,
each two drams; with Plaster of Bayberries. Or make Ointments of the same.

Question 1. What preternatural disease is the Suffocation of the Womb properly?
Some say it is a cold distemper in quality changed; they say right, but
coldness is not the chief Symptom. Others say it is respiration hurt by
Syneope, or Convulsion. But it cannot be defined by one Symptom. For sometimes
the animal actions are hurt, and there is a Megrim, Delirium, Convulsion, and
sense and motion are gone.

Nor is it strange, that so small a vapor should bring such Symptoms, for it
has an occult venom in it which is strong, Gal. 6. de lo. off. c. 5.
for it goes many ways, and to many parts.

Question 2. What is the true Cause of the fits of the Mother?
I say it is the malignant vapors that fly up from the womb: for it does not
work by a manifest quality, 4. De lo. aff. c. 5.
but by a venom which Galen says is like that of a Torpedo, or Phalanx, or
Scorpion, which are little in bulk, but do great mischief, being enemies to the
vital spirits and heart, by which there is a coldness all over, and short
breath from the actions of the heart hurt. For when the heart is hurt, or the
vital Spirits, either suffocated or corrupted, there are no good animal Spirits
bred, and they not flowing to the nerves and muscles, hinder the motion of the
breast. Also this malignant vapor is an enemy to the animal Spirits, and makes
doting and Convulsions when it gets to the brain.

The Cause of these vapors are corrupt seed and terms, for while they are in
their proper vessels, they change not their nature. And the seed is not always
pure, but mixed with evil humors, and the seed vessels are sometimes swollen
and distempered. Moreover the corruption is from the womb in a peculiar manner:
for as Fernelius says, The place from whence comes life, is also the breeder
of the most deadly poison.

Question 3. It is good to give Wine in a fit of the Mother.
Hippocrates and Avicen quarrel about this. 1. De not. mulierum.
The first allows Wine, because they are weak, and nothing sooner refreshes.
But Avicen is for water, and forbids flesh, for they increase Seed and Blood.

But in the time of the fit, Wine is proper, and Avicen does not speak of the
fit, but of the diet out of the fit, when it comes from plenty of seed and
blood; nor will a little Wine in the time of the fit get presently to the Womb.

Chap. 5. Of the Frenzy of the Womb.
IT is a great and foul Symptom of the Womb, both in Virgins and Widows, and
such as have known man. These are mad for Lust, and invite men, and lie down to
them, and it differs from salacity, because in that there is no Delirium.

It is an immoderate desire of Venery, that makes women almost mad, or a
Delirium from an immoderate desire of Venery: it is without a Fever, and with
heat, and tends to madness. There are degrees in it, for modest women have it,
but will not for shame declare it, and die of Consumptions. Others will not
conceal it, but speak their thoughts bawdily, and follow men, and solicit
them shamelesly, as Hippocrates writes in his Book of Virgins Diseases.

The immediate Cause is plenty of hot and The Causes.
sharp Seed against Nature, but next unto that which is natural; it is a little
biting, swelling, and forcing Nature to let it out by lechery. The brain is
only hurt by consent, and the animal actions by an external error, or too
vehement object. The part first affected, is the womb in the Nymphae, which
grows hot, and swells, but the Nymphae are not properly the seat of Venery, but
the Clitoris, which was called by the same name anciently.

The heat and sharpness of Seed, is from the heat of the womb that breeds it,
from hot humors in the womb and hot blood.

The outward Causes, are hot meats spiced, strong wine, and the like, that heat
the privities, idleness, pleasure, and dancing, and reading of bawdy Histories.

The Signs.
They find their lust to boil at first, and for shame will not declare it: they
are sad and silent, and their eyes turn to and fro with lust, and if any speak
of Venery, they blush, and the pulse changes, when the brain consents,
reason is perverted, and modesty is overcome, then they prate, are lustful, and
angry; sometimes they cry or laugh without a cause: they follow men, and
solicit them for copulation. Some will lie with any one they meet.

The Prognostic. The Cure.
It is a sordid disease, curable at first: but if neglected, it turns to madness.

Let Virgins that have it, before reason is subverted, be in company with chaste
Maidens, or be married And be let blood to abate heat of blood and sharpness of
Seed very often, there is no better remedy.

Then temper and evacuate the humors, if they be adust, and there be madness,
use stronger.

Then have a Bath of Lettice, Willow, Water Lillies, Vine-leaves, Purslane,
Venus-navel, red Roses, Violets, Water Lillies. Let her sit twice a day in it,
and not sweat.

To take away the sharpness of the Seed, use Lettice, Violets, Water Lillies,
and things that quench seed by a secret quality, as Agnus castus Seed, Leaves
and Flowers of Camphire hereafter.

As, Take leaves of Water Lillies, Agnus Castus, Willow, each three handfuls;
Ltetice, Purslane, Venus-navel, each a handful; Lettice, Poppy-seed, the four
great cold seeds, each half an ounce; Dill-seed two drams, Water Lillies a
hundful, Violets half a handful, beat them with juice of Lemons, distill them
after twenty four hours, add to every pint a dram of Camphire, give an ounce.
Or, Take Agnus castus leaves, Rue, Willow, each two handfuls; Mints, tops of
Dill, each a handful and half; Water Lillies half a handful, Agnus castus
seeds, Hemp, Coriander, Lettice-seed, each half an ounce: beat them, and distill
them with water, add a pint of juice of Lemons, rectify it to half.

An Emulsion. Take Lettice, and white Poppy-seed, and the four great cold
Seeds, each half an ounce; water of Lettice, Water Lillies, Willow, each four
ounces; Syrup of Violets two ounces, Magistery of Coral a dram.

An Electuary. Take Conserve of Water Lillies, Violets, of Agnus castus tops,
each an ounce; of Roses half an ounce, red Coral, Smaragds, each a dram;
Coleworts and Lettice candied, each an ounce; with syrup of Violets and
Water Lillies, make an Electuary.

Or make Baths of the same. As, Take tops of Agnus castus, Lettice, Rue,
Water Lillies, Dill-tops, boil them, anoint with Oil of Lillies, Unguent of
Roses, with Camphire after that. Or lay a Plaster of Mercury and Marsh-lentils
to the Breast and Loins. Lay a Plate of Lead to the Back, and give a Pessary of
Juice of Plantane, Purslane, Gourds.

These that work by an occult quality, are fittest for Nuns that must not
marry: but they that will marry must forbear them, because they cause
Barrenness.

Let diet be thin, and of little nourishment, no Eggs, Beef is good, and fresh
Fish. Also Lettice, Purslane, Succory. Sleep little, think not of Venery,
labor, and avoid idleness.

Question. Whether is Camphire cold or hot, or does it quench Venery?
It is hot, because it burns flames, is thin, pierces, is sharp and bitter.
But it has cold effects, as curing of Burns and Inflammations, and hot
Headaches: but this is from the likeness of the substance, because it draws
hot vapors to it, and discusseth, as Linseed-Oyl that cures burns. Nor has it
a double substance cold and hot, that may be separated.

Exercit. 104. sect. 8.
Scaliger denies it by Experience, to quench Venery: but if it be taken often,
it does. He tried it but once.

Chap. 6. Of the Melancholy of Virgins and Widows.
IT is a Delirium with sadness, trouble and weeping, sometimes laughing,
without a Fever. It differs from others by the efficacy only of the efficient
cause: for it has diverse pains besides sadness, especially on the left side,
near the Heart in the Pap: this is by occasion at a distance.

The Cause is a melancholic Vapor from a melancholic blood in the vessels
near the Heart, The Causes.
that infects the animal Spirits, hurts the Fancy, and so the reason. For
melancholic blood abounding in the vessels of the womb, comes back to the
great Arteries about the Heart, by the Arteries of the womb, and infects both
vital and animal Spirits, and causes trouble of Heart and Delirium, while this
blood is quiet in the Arteries, there is no vapor that rises: but when it is
heated or stirred up by any cause, the Arteries about the Back and Spleen beat
more then ordinary, and the vapors arise and trouble the Heart.

They are sad, and full of thoughts, The Signs.
and trouble at the Heart, and cannot express their grief; all things are
tedious to them: they weep and laugh without a cause: they sleep little, and
with trouble and fear: they have a pain on the left side, and sometimes the
left Breast: their Jaws are dry. All which are the effects of a melancholic
vapor, and when that is discussed, all cease. If it be old, it turns to
Madness, and then they are first silent, then pratlers, and think they see
Ghosts.

At first it is easier cured: but if it last long, The Prognostic.
and she resist not imagination, and will not rejoice with her Gossips, it is
dangerous. They often despair and desire death, or hang themselves or drown
themselves. If the manners are changed, it turns to madness.

Observe what progress the disease has made. The Cure.
At first if blood be hot, open a Vein often in the Arm, if the terms be not
stopped. If they be, bleed in the Ankles some days before they use to flow.

Let her be merry, and prepare and purge Melancholy, thus: Take Borage and
Balm-water, each three ounces; Syrup of the Juice of Borage and Bugloss, each
an ounce an half. Mix them for two Doses, repeat them sometimes. Then purge
Melancholy. As, Take Senna six drams, Agarick a dram and half, Borage-flowers
and Violets, each a pugil; Citron-peels two drams, infuse them in Rhenish wine
for six hours, strain them, add Syrup of Violets an ounce. Or, Take
Scorzonera-roots two ounces, Borage an ounce, Balm a handful, Senna four
ounces, Agarick half an ounce, Citron-peels 6 drams, Zedoary two drams,
Cordial-flowers a handful, add half a pint of the juice of sweet-scented
Apples, and of Borage and Bugloss, steep them two days, then strain them, add
Sugar and half an ounce of Cinnamon, make a Syrup: give two or three ounces.

Also give Cordials, Confection of Hyacinths, Species Exhilerants, and
Confection Alkermes, to such as can bear it. Cure it as Melancholy, only the
matter comes from the womb; therefore still regard that it dry not the body too
much: The Prognostic.
but use a moistning Diet.

Chap. 7. Of an Epilepsie from the Womb.
THis Falling Sickness is worse then from other causes, because there are
greater Symptoms: for that malignant vapor does not only fall into the Nerves,
but the Veins and Arteries.

The same malignant vapor that causes suffocation, causes this: for when it
ascends by the Veins and Arteries, it begets other diseases: but when it gets
to the Nerves, or to the fountain of them, it causes the Epilepsie. In some
the whole body has a Convulsion; in others some part only, as the Eyes, Head,
Tongue, Hand or Leg, and the outward Senses are diversely taken. Some see not,
some hear not, some see and cannot speak: some dote, and think they see strange
things, some cry out, and know not why. All lose the sense of Feeling.

If the vapor be not very malignant, they return to their work after the fit,
as if they had not been ill.

It is known by what has been said: for here is not only a Convulsion, as in
other Epilepsies: but diverse Symptoms, as in Suffocation of the Womb. They
seldom foam at the mouth, because the Brain is not so shaken as to cause
foaming: nor is the vapor so fixed in the roots of the nerves, but they often
do hear.

It is grievous, and has grievous Symptoms: but it is not so bad as a true
Epilepsie. And if you give proper Medicines, it never returns.

The Cure of the Fit.
Use things as in Suffocation of the Womb or Mother-fits; as Rue and Castor are
good against both.

Also out of the fit, you must cure it as the Mother, using things that respect
the womb and the Head. As, Take Piony-roots, Scorzonera, Misleto of the Oak,
each half an ounce; Polipody of the Oak an ounce, Rue, Pennyroyal, Calaminths,
each a handful; Seseli, Piony, Agnus castus seeds, each three drams;
Carthamus-seeds bruised half an ounce, flowers of Rosemary, Sage, Stoechas,
Borage, each two pugils: boil them to a pint and half, strain and add juice of
Bettony, Yarrow, Mercury, Mugwort, Senna five ounces, Agarick, Epithimum, each
half an ounce; Rhubarb, Cloves, each two drams; Anise, Fennel-seed, each three
drams: boil, strain with Sugar, and half an ounce of Cinnamon, make a Syrup,
give two ounces.

And these Pills twice in a week, a scruple or a dram an hour before Supper.
Take Piony-roots, Senna, each half an ounce; Mugwort, Bettony, Rue, Yarrow,
each half a handful: boil them, clarify the Decoction, and juice of Mercury an
ounce, Aloes an ounce and half. Let it settle, pour off the clear, add Rhubarb
sprinkled with Cinnamon Water two drams, Agarick half an ounce, Mastich,
Epileptick-powder, each half a dram; with syrup of Mugwort make Pills.

To strengthen the Head and the Womb, and to mend its Distemper. Take Fecula of
Piony a dram, of Briony, Amber, Misleto of the Oak, each half a dram;
Bezoar-stone, Mans-skull, each a scruple: make a powder, give half a dram with
Scorzonera or Tile-flower-water, or with Sugar make Rouls.

An Electuary. Take Conserve of Balm, Tile-flowers, Rosemary, Lilly-convals,
Scorzonera-roots candied, each an ounce; Diamoschu dulce a dram, powder of
Agnus castus seeds and Piony-roots each two drams; with syrup of Scoechas.

Chap. 8. Of pain of the Head from the Womb.
MAny pains come from the Womb: but the chiefest and greatest are in the Head,
all over, or on one side, or in the Eyes.

Matter ascends to the Membranes of the Head by the Veins and Arteries from the
Womb. The Causes.
It is a vapor or humor from blood and humors; sometimes bad blood that is
thin, goes from the womb-vessels to the great Vessels, and gets to the Head,
and to the Membranes there, and causes a stretching ulcerated, or pricking, or
beating pain, when it is carried through the Arteries being full of blood.

They think their Head will be torn, The Signs.
and the Membranes, and it is behind in the Head, or when the terms flow, or
are disordered, from consent with the womb. If it be from a vapor, there is no
heaviness, and it cease presently. If from a humor, there is heaviness.

These pains are great, and cause watching. The Prognostic. The Cure.


We have spoken of the Headache: but here it is from the Womb; therefore
consider what humors offend in the womb, and let them be purged, and the
distemper of the womb amended as we showed in the Distemper of the Womb.

There is also a pain in the Loins, because bad humors go from the veins of the
womb and Arteries to the great Vessels, and so are sent by the Capillar-veins
into the Membranes, and stretch them, and cause pain (...) must have pr^^^^
Purges.

Question. In what part of the Head is the pain that comes by consent from the
Womb?
It is in the Crown before and behind: but chiefly behind, by reason of the
joining of the back with the womb: for the womb is nervous, and consents with
the Membranes of the brain by the Membranes of the Marrow of the back, and so
Nerves suffer with Nerves, either by communication of matter or pain, and
because the original of the Nerves is in the hinder part of the Head, women are
more pained there then men, because of the Womb.

Chap. 9. Of the Diseases of the Heart, and beating of the Arteries in the Back
and Sides from the Womb.
THe Heart beats, and the Arteries also, as we showed in the Green Sickness,
and it is by evil vapors sent by the Arteries to the Heart from the womb, that
arise from the terms and evil humors gathered in the womb: and this is known by
other Signs and Symptoms of a distempered Womb.

The Cure.
To discuss the malignant Vapors from the Heart, give Cordials, as in Chap. 3.
Of Palpitation of the Heart; as Aqua vitae, Cinnamon Water, and Epithems, Bags
and Liniments.

The Arteries also beat with the Heart, as in Widows on the left Hypochondrion
and Back, where there is a great Artery, and the Artery that beats in the back,
is part of the great Artery: they which beat in the Hypochondrion are the
lesser splenitick and mesenterick branches; therefore the beating is more in
the back then in the Hypochondrion: but both pulsations come from the same
cause.

The Causes.
The Inflammation of the Arteries is the cause of this beating, when evil humors
are sent from the womb into the great branches of the Artery, and there beat,
the Heart being over hot. Sometimes the motion of this Artery is all the body
over, and from a hot humor; the hot humors go to the heart, and cause a fever:
but because there is little putrefaction, it vanishes presently. If the heat
of the humors go to the brain by the arteries, there is madness. Some seek the
cause in the veins, and say that the arteries suffer from the blood too hot in
them.

You may feel it with your hand laid upon the Hypochondrion, The Signs.
and there are signs of a distempered womb, and melancholy from the womb, if
heat continue in the arteries, and go to the whole body, it consumes it.

It is seemingly a small disease, The Prognostic.
but it is not without danger, because it comes from a bad cause, that weakens
the bowels.

It is cured as melancholy from the womb, The Cure.
and stopping of the terms, and as Hypochondriack melancholy from the womb
which follows.

Chap. 10. Of the Diseases of the Spleen, and the Hypochondriack Disease from
the Womb.
SOmetimes the Spleen and the Hypochondria suffer from the womb, so that you
may doubt what disease it is.

It is from the womb by the arteries, The Causes.
the womb has two: one from the preparing arteries, another from the
Hypogastrick artery. That from the Hypogastrick goes almost to all parts of the
Abdomen, and most branches of the spleen: therefore when bad blood is bred in
the womb, and gets out of the arteries upward to the Hypogastrick artery, it
gets easily from thence to the coeliack artery and to the spleen, and the parts
adjacent in the abdomen; and the sooner, because Nature uses to send bad
humors to ignoble parts. These humors are gathered by suppression of Terms,
which though they seem to be only in the veins, yet they get to the arteries by
their Anastomosis. Therefore those women that have hot blood, and their terms
flowed not orderly in their youth, are splenitick and Hypochondriack in their
age.

The Signs.
It is known by a pain in the left side and breast to the throat, there is short
breath, often belching, the belly is bound: they are sad and solitary. When
thin blood grows hot, there is inflammation over all the body, and chiefly the
face which suddenly vanishes, and there are other signs of Hypochondriacks.
These cannot endure sweet scents to their nose.

The Prognostic. The Cure.
If it be not speedily cured, it turns to worse diseases, as the Schirrhus of
the spleen.

The blood is commonly too hot, therefore open a vein, especially when it is
from the terms stopped. You may also open the Haemorrhoids, and then purge gently
and often with Pills of Tartar by Quercetan, of Ammoniacum of Aristolochia or
Birthwort by Fernel; or give Steel and things as in the Hypochondriack
diseases, lib. 3. part 5. and in the Chapter of Terms stopped, and Melancholy
from the Womb.

Chap. 11. Of the Distemper of the Liver from the Womb, and of a Beard growing
by consent from the Womb.
THe Womb has many and great veins more then other parts. If then there be too
much blood in them, it easily goes back to the hollow vein, and choaks the heat
of the Liver, and so the Liver is distempered according to the humor. It breeds
crude and phlegmatic bood, which sent over the body, causes a Cachexy; and
what diseases come by the Liver, are by consent from the womb, as in stoppage
of the Terms and Green Sickness.

Hippocrates speaks of a woman's Beard in Phaetusa the Wife of Pythius, 6 Epid.
sec. 8. aph. 45.
for hairs have their beginning and growth from the relics of the nourishment
of the noble parts, that is from the excrementitious part of the blood. And if
terms be stopped, and vicious humors that use to be evacuated with them, are sent
over the body, they cause diverse Diseases and Symptoms, and among the rest the
body of a woman is made hairy, and she has a Beard, which is rare.

Chap. 12. Of the Diseases of the Stomach that come from the Womb.
SOmetimes from consent with the womb, the appetite is lost, diminished,
increased, or depraved, or there is Hickets, or vomiting, belching, pain or
heart-ach.

The Causes.
This is when malignant vapors, the way being large, rise from the arteries of
the womb, and go to the coeliack artery, and through the Hypogastrick. And if
they are hot, they cause thirst, if cold, they hurt concoction, and many times
cause strong symptoms from their malignity and occult qualities, whose causes
are not known. Hence it is that women desire absurd things, as these vapors get
into diverse parts of the stomach.

The Signs.
You may know when the stomach is affected by consent from the womb, because the
Symptoms abate and return again, when the vapor comes to the stomach: there are
also other signs of the womb distempered, and of the Spleen and Mesentery by
the vessels, of which the matter is sent from the womb to the stomach.

The Prognostic.
The Symptoms are worse when they come from the womb, then when they come from
the stomach first; nor are they curable, except the womb be first cured.

The Cure.
It is to be directed to the womb and stomach. For if it come only by consent,
and there is no disease by propriety, when you have cured the womb, the stomach
disease vanishes of it self, if you do but strengthen the stomach.

If the stomach be first affected, look only to that. Therefore first evacuate
the humors that stick in the stomach, as we showed in its Distemper with
matter, or the humors will be infected by the malignant vapors. A Vomit is here
proper.

To help the Womb, see for the Mother-fits and Suffocation, and for the Chapter
of the Distemper of the womb with matter, then strengthen the Stomach, thus:
Take Aromaticum Rosatum a dram, Extract of Angelica half a scruple, Oil of
Cloves, Cinnamon, each five drops; with Sugar two ounces, make Rouls. Or give
Pills of Aloes and Mastich often.

THE FOURTH BOOK. THE FOURTH SECTION. Of the Symptoms which are in Conception.
Chap. 1. Of the desire of Venery hurt.
THere are two Symptoms in women about copulation. The first lechery lost, when
she does not willingly entertain a man, or cannot long endure him; or if she
endures, she finds little or no pleasure, no more than if she were outwardly
handled. The other is too great lust as in Frenzy of the womb, when they cannot
be satisfied by many men.

Causes.
The defect of appetite in lust is from defect of seed, or when it is cold, or
there wants Spirits in the Seed-vessels. The causes of want of Seed are Lib. 3.
Par. 9. Sect. 2. C. 1. Sometimes it is from evil conformation of the
Seed-vessels.

Women discover this to their Husbands that go to the Physicians for counsel.
The Signs.


These women have not fruitful feed, The Prognostic. The Cure.
and therefore are barren.

For that, see Lib. 3. Of Barrenness of Men, where are Liniments and Ointments
for the Loins and Privities of women; but that she may take more pleasure, let
the man anoint the head of his Yard with Civet, or Hens-gall, or the gall of a
Pickrel.

Too much Letchery not of it self hinders Conception, but wandering Lust that
follows Letchery does.

The Causes are the same with those of Womb-Frenzy, as plenty of seed,
sharpness, and commotion, sharpness of seed from hot meat, and Medicines that
provoke lust, and sharp humors in the womb and seed.

Thus lust or lechery is abated by Medicines that extinguish the plenty of
seed, and allay its sharpness.

Chap. 2. Of Barrenness, and want of Conception.
Man or Woman may be lustful, and copulate, and yet there may be no conception,
or she may conceive too many, as Twins, or more, or have one conception after
another, which is called Superfoetation, or she conceives a Mole or Monster.

Conception is of fruitful seed spent by a man, and mixed with a woman's seed to
perfection for the making of a child by the retentive and altering faculty of
the womb; hence it is necessary that both seeds be fruitful, that is, hot, full
of Spirits, and well tempered, and a fit subject for a Soul, and that both
spend at a time, and there be mixed and retained together, to produce a child.

Also the sucking of the womb is necessary, and that it should lay it up and
embrace it, so that there be no space between the Seed and the Womb. Sometimes
the womb greedily snatcheth and embraces the seed, but does not keep it, but
lets it come forth two or three days after, or keeps it to no purpose, and
brings it not to action, as in a false conception or mole. Moreover, there must
be blood in readiness to get the child, or besprinkle it when it is first
formed, and to nourish it after.

Therefore if terms be wanting as in girls, or be stopped, or gone as in old
Folk, expect no Conception. If they flow not by reason of labor and too much
exercise, the conception is not hindered, if there be but blood enough to form
the child. Hence it is, that women that are brought in bed, conceive again
before they have their terms.

If all these be right, there is conception, otherwise she is barren, which is
an impotency of the womb, that keeps it from sucking in of the seed, or from
retaining, or from nourishing it, and bringing it into act.

The Causes.
The first is impotency in copulation, from the closing of the womb, of which
before: or other evil conformation of the privities, or an ulcer, or tumor in
the neck of the womb. The second is the breeding of unfruitful seed, from
distemper of the vessels and stones, or too tender and delicate a constitution.
In men at eighteen, in women at fourteen, and men seldom get children after
sixty, and women seldom bear them after sixty.

As for evil conformation to breed seed: Faelix Plat. lib. 1. obser. tit. de
vitalis motus defectu.
some have wanted Seed-vessels, or they were not in their places. Some women
are barren by the first Husband, and have children by the second, because there
must be a certain proportion between both seeds: and if they be wanting, they
are barren, which proportion is hard to be explained, and almost impossible:
for we must not stay in the first qualities, for there are occult qualities in
seed, by which they agree or disagree.

The third cause is, when the womb sucks not in the seed, nor receives it in a
right manner, as when the attractate faculty is hurt, or hindered by diverse
distempers of the Womb, or when a woman hates her husband.

Attraction is hindered by tumors or ulcers in the Womb, or by its being
displaced, 5. Aph. 46.
as Hippocrates: They who being too fat, and conceive not, the mouth of their
Womb is stopped up with the Cawl, and they conceive not till they are lean. But
the more probable reason of not conceiving, is the matter of the seed turning
into fat.

The fourth cause is, the retension of the seed hurt by a moist distemper, then
the Womb is weak, and the fibers are loose, so that it cannot contract it self
to retain; and the seed by reason of its sliminess, cannot stick there. Also if
the Womb be too thick, not fleshy and soft, and be not sprinkled with blood, as
it is in some by birth which makes them barren, and in some after they cease to
conceive.

If the orifice of the womb gape after hard travel and abortion, by which the
fibers are loosned and weakened, and the retention of the seed hurt. And if a
woman after Copulation cough, neese, cry out, dance, or be angry, or frighted,
the same may be.

The fifth cause of Barrenness, is the hurt of the altering faculty, which
brings in the form and act into seed: for if there be not a due proportion
between the womb and the seed, there is Barrenness, as Seeds are choked in
Marshy-ground, or die, or are burnt in dry and sandy ground: so man's Seed is
suffocated in a moist womb, 5. Aph. 52.
and dried up in a hot. Hippocrates speaks of the true proportion of the womb,
as it is fit to cherish this or that seed, thus: Women that have thick and cold
wombs conceive not, and they whose womb is too moist: for they quench the seed.
Nor do they conceive that have dry and burning wombs: for the seed is corrupted
in them for want of nourishment. They who are of a mean temper between these,
are fruitful.

The last cause of Barrenness, is want of Menstrual-blood, which is necessary
for the first formation of the child. Therefore Nurses that have much milk
conceive, because the blood is carried to the Breasts.

Therefore all these causes are reduced either to impotency in Copulation, or
distemper of the Stones and Seed-vessels, or evil conformation, or a cold and
moist distemper of the Womb, which cannot attract, detain, and alter the seed;
sometimes a hot and dry distemper that cannot nourish the seed, or from the
enlarging of the Orifice after Childbearing, or from Humors, or being
displaced, or the straitness of the Vessels, or want of Terms, or too many.

Hence we may gather, that barrenness is oftener from a fault in the women than
the men: for in men there is nothing required but fruitful seed spent into a
fruitful womb. But women besides the meeting of their own seed, must receive,
retain, and nourish the man's; and afford matter for the forming of the child,
in which diverse accidents happen, and any of these will cause Barrenness.

Mark also in these kinds of causes, that some do not properly cause
barrenness: but only hinder Conception for a time, as the closing of the womb,
smalness of the privities; these do not simply cause barrenness.

Some bring other external causes, Ioa. Anglicus cap. de steril.
as eating the heart of a Deer, or if she wear Jet about her, or if
Hart's-tongue be hanged about her bed: if she walk over the Terms of another, or
tread upon them unawares, or anoint with them, or put the juice of Mints into
her womb.

Some are born so, from a fault in the womb: The Differences.
others are not simply barren, but in respect of the man, and when they have
another Husband, are fruitful. Some are barren till the constitution of the
womb be changed. Some bring forth at first, and then by some fault grow barren.

How shall we know that a Women is Bar?

First, see if the fault be in the man or woman, The Signs.
Lib. 3. Of Sterility in Men. For women, see if they are apt to Venery or not,
or receive the Yard fitly. 2. Search if she has good seed answerable to the
man, or whether she has used quenchers of seed. You may know that she spends
little or no Seed, if she has little or no pleasure in the act. Unfruitful
Seed is known by a disease in the womb, a cold and moist distemper, the signs
whereof are mentioned; a foul body shows the same: for good seed cannot be made
of bad blood.

It is hard to find whether the two seeds have the right proportion, or the
womb agree with the man's seed. Yet temperate with temperate are very fruitful,
because they are both of a good constitution. But intemperate couples are
barren: but if one temper be good, it may mend the other, and she may conceive.

If it come from a Medicine that destroys the seed, she will tell. If
Enchantment be the cause, though they love: yet they cannot copulate. Or
whereas they loved each other, now they fall out without a cause.

Ask the woman how her womb does attract, retain, and cherish the seed. If it
have a tumor, or have matter or not? Whether there be a natural hereditary
imperfection? Enquire concerning her Family, if many were barren, whether she
has had hard travel or abortion? Whether the seed comes away presently after,
or at a distance, after some days; if so, then the woman's seed is unfruitful,
or there is a distemper in the womb that keeps it from cherishing the seed.

If the Terms be wanting, they are Viragoes, and have hair on their Chins, or
they are fat, and seed turns into fat; or they are very lean, because they want
blood.

5. Aph. 59.
Hippocrates proves Barrenness thus: Put a Fume (says he) under the coats of a
Woman, and let her be close clothed about, and if the scent come to the Nose,
she is not barren; and he bids you put Garlic cleansed into the womb, and if
she smell of it at the mouth she is fruitful.

The Prognostic.
A natural bad disposition that causes Barrenness is not curable; Hippocrates
says, 2. Prognos. 3.
That Barrenness from Ulcers is hard to be cured. A woman that conceives not
from disagreement with her husbands constitution, by another husband, or in
time may be cured, or some distemper that causes sterility may be mended by
Physic.

Take away the causes, The Cure.
amend the distemper of the womb, whether with matter or without matter, is to
be mended, which causes either no Seed, or that which is unfruitful, or not
convenient. See Part I. Sect. 2. Chap. 1.

The Medicines of an occult quality are best. As, Take Rocket-seed, Siler
montane, each half a dram; Ivory-shavings, Cinnamon, Nutmeg, each a dram; Musk
(in such as may) three grains, white Sanders three drams, make a Powder: give a
dram with Wine.

Or, Take Species Diamoschu, Diambra, each a dram; the Matrix of a Hare, a
Bores-stones, and the Yard of a Stagg, each half a dram; Nutmeg, Cinnamon,
Cloves, Rocket-seed, wild Parsnep-seed, each a dram; Musk, Amber, each four
grains; with Sugar as much as all, give two drams in Wine.

A Confection. Take sweet Almonds, Pistachaes, Pine-Nuts, Hazel-Nuts, each an
ounce; Citron-peels, Ginger, Cloves, Cinnamon, each half a dram; Rocket-seed
two drams: give a spoonful at bedtime.

Or make this March-pane. Take sweet Almonds four ounces, Pine, Pistachaes,
Hazel-nuts, each two ounces; Diambra, Diamoschu, each a dram; Ivory half a
dram, Cinnamon half an ounce.

An Electuary. Take Conserve of Rosemary six ounces, Dogs-stones candied two
ounces, Orobus, Schinks-reins, Bores-stones, Sows-wombs, Deers-privities,
Ivory, Turnep-seed, Fennel, Nettle-seed, Rocket, Clary, wild Mustard, each two
drams; Pine-nuts, sweet Almonds, each half an ounce; Diamoschu dulcis a dram,
Oil of Nutmeg by expression two drams, with Syrup of Bettony make an Electuary.
Or use Triphera without Opium.

Or use Baths, Insessions, Fomentations, Fumes, and Baths after Terms for five
days.

Take Briony, Masterwort-roots, Mercury, Mug-wort, Pennyroyal, Marjoram,
Bays, Sage, Motherwort, Juniper Berries and tops, make a Bath.

Or use Sulphur-baths of Alum, Niter, Bitumen: these do much good.

A Fume. Take Labdanum, Storax calamite, Benzoin, each two drams; Wood Aloes a
scruple, Musk six grains, with infusion of Traganth made in Rose Water, make
Troches.

Make Pessaries of green Mercury and Motherwort. Or, Take Mastich, Storax
liquid, each half an ounce; Balm, Nep, Mercury, each a dram; Cloves, Nutmeg,
each half a dram; Civet half a scruple, with Wax make a Pessary. After Baths
and Fumes, anoint the Pecten and Navel with this: Take Oil of Keir half an
ounce, Oil distilled of Marjoram a scruple, of Cloves half a scruple, of
Nutmegs by expression a dram, Storax liquid two drams, Civet and Musk, each six
grains; with Wax make a Liniment. After bathing, let her have a Bag upon her
Belly, of Balm, Calamints, Mints, Motherwort, and Wine. Let her wear Plasters
upon her Loins and Perinaeum, till the week before her Terms. As, Take the
Plaster for the Mother an ounce, Storax liquid, Caranna, each two drams;
Gallia moschata half a dram, Oil of Cloves half a scruple, of Nutmegs by
expression a dram, with Oil of Keir, make a Plaster. If the Womb be too loose,
and slippery, use Clysters of juice of Mercury, with Honey-baths, Pessaries,
Fumes, and other astringent Topics that strengthen.

If the mouth of the Womb gape, make a Decoction in Wine of Mirtles, Mastich,
Wood-Vines, Olives, Wormwood, Cypress-roots, Comfrey, Snakeweed, Cinquefoyl,
red Roses, Pomegranate, flowers, foment the Privities: or with powder of
Mastich, Frankincense, Alum, Wood-Aloes, make a Fume.

Other Diseases are to be cured, as before showed.

Let it be to increase seed, of much good juice. The Diet.
In the time of Copulation, avoid passions, anger, sadness, fear. Let love be
invited, and if it burn, there will many spirits fly to the Womb and Privities.

Chap. 3. Of Barrenness for the time and Conceiving seldom.
SOme Conceive the seventh, eighth, or ninth year after wedding: some
presently, but not after the first any more, or not in many years after.

If Virgins marry before fourteen, The Causes.
they conceive not; or if the constitution of the womb be bad, or the Seed.
Some conceive not from the disagreementt of Seeds, till their constitution be
changed.

They who want Terms, The Signs.
or have them disorderly, or are sickly, seldom or never conceive with child,
or have had hard travel, or a dead child. Some are weakened, so that after the
first child, they have no strength to conceive.

All these will be related: whether she be married too soon, or had hard
travel, or aborted, or had a dead child, or a Mole. If these were not, the Seed
and Womb have not a just proportion with the man's, but it may be altered by age.

The Prognostic.
If the womb be much hurt after hard travel, or any thing turn in it, or broken,
they seldom conceive again. And if a woman marry at a ripe age, and have no
remarkable Disease, and conceive not presently, she is not to be accounted
barren, because some private indisposition hinders Conception, which after may
be altered, and she may prove fruitful.

The Cure.
A woman that marries too young, after she has once conceived, and then
cease, must use Venery sparingly, till she grow older, that she may recover
the strength she lost in her first travel. And if a woman marry at ripe years,
and conceives not by reason of the dryness of her Womb, let her use Baths,
Fomentations, and emollient Pessaries. If she conceive not from weakness,
strengthen the Womb, and let her not use Venery often.

If Virgins be sick from seed retained or terms, let them marry. But if there
be a fault in the Liver or Spleen, or the whole body, that may be increased by
Venery, it is better that they be cured before they be married. And if they
cannot be cured, let them not be married.

If the Womb be distempered by Birth or a Disease, cure it as in diseases of
the Womb. If it be from a Mole or Flux of blood, cure it as it has and shall
be showed.

If it be from a dead child, first cleanse it with juice of Mercury, and then
put Treacle or Mithridate dissolved into the womb, or with a Pessary: or give
them outwardly.

Chap. 4. Of Conception, and Forming of the Child.
COnception is an action of the womb, after fruitful seed both male and female
is received, mixed and nourished, and its strength is stirred up to do its
office. Seed and Coema differ; seed is that which comes from both male and
female, but Coema is that which is mixed of both, and is called Conception,
which produces a child.

This Conception is presently when two seeds meets in the womb, in less then
seven hours after they are spent, if the heat of the Womb preserve them, Nature
is not idle a moment, but presently falls to conformation. Lib. de genit.
Therefore Hippocrates says, that the beginning of Conception is to be
reckoned from the day that the Seed is retained, and if she conceives not from
the weakness of the seeds or womb, the seed will fall out in seven days; for
Hippocrates says, Lib. de septim. partu. 3. De hist. any. c. 3.
That Conception and Abortion are judged in the same time, as a disease,
health, and death are judged. And Aristotle says, If seed remains within till
the seventh day, there is certain Conception.

As for Formation, the Soul lying in the seed, makes its own house, for all
acknowledge a forming faculty, and you must then suppose there is a substance
from whence this faculty flows. And though Aristotle says, that seed is a
living creature in power; not that there is not the essence of the Soul in the
seed, and that it is not a living creature in respect of the first act, but
because it is not come to the second act, for want of fit Instruments, which
being perfected, it has the second act and all its operations, which for
defect of Organs, it cannot produce.

There are diverse opinions of the time of Formation they are best that say the
membranes are first made, which wrap the child with the Navel-vessels, by which
it is joined to the Mothers womb, and receives nourishment for the child. Then
all other parts are made sooner or later, as the child requires for dignity or
necessity.

We intend here to speak of women's diseases. Therefore there are three things
required for the Formation of a Child. 1. Fruitful seed from both parents, in
which the Soul remains that has a forming quality to make its own habitation.
2. The Mothers blood is required to enlarge the Child to perfection. 3. There
is required a good constitution of the womb to nourish the seed, and stir the
concealed force. If these three be right, there is a child that is sound and
perfect, that will be born: but if any of these be wanting, there are Twins or
more, and other faults, of which in order.

Chap. 5. Of the Generation of Twins, and many Children.
NAture has ordained that a woman should conceive but one child, in these and
other Countries especially, and that every year; yet in many places she has
more, one had five at every birth, twenty at four lyings in. A Margaret the
Countess of Holsterne, in the time of the Emperor Henry the Seventh, had three
hundred sixty four at one labor. And another Countess in the time of Frederick
the Eleventh, had five hundred and fourteen children at once, being Boys: these
are so seldom, that they seem incredible.

I speak nothing of the Causes of such Monstrous Productions, but of Twins, or
Three, The Causes.
or Four. It is certain they are got at one time: and this differs from
Superfoetation, which is at many times. And you must not impute it to the
diverse Cells of the womb: for women have no such Cells, but only a Line that
divides the left-side from the right; but it comes from the division of the
seed into diverse parts, and the least forming force in the side is complete,
and makes a child of every part of it. And because the cavity of the womb
cannot admit so many parts of seed, being no bigger than a Bean; and if it do
admit them, how can the seed be divided at one copulation into so many parts? I
suppose that such women have naturally a larger womb, so that much seed is
divided. And as Twins are begot at the same time, so they have but one
Placenta, or part that receives the Navel-vessels of both, but they have their
several Coats.

It is hard to know whether a woman have conceived Twins, only their belly is
not even, The Signs.
but divided with seams and wrinkles; and the weight is commonly greater, and
the motion is not one not alike.

If a woman have two children, and be weak, The Prognostic.
she is in danger in her travel. Twins of one Sex are more lively then of both
Sexes. And one is by experience weaker and shorter lived then the other.

Chap. 6. Of Superfoetation.
IT is seldom that a woman has many children at diverse Copulations, but it is
sometimes, and is called Superfoetation, that is, a new conception after a
former. 5. Aphor. 15.
Though Hippocrates writes, That the mouth of the Womb after Conception is so
shut, that you cannot put in a Needles point, yet a woman with child may take
such pleasure after, that she may a little open the womb to receive seed again,
and draw it in, which may form another child.

The Causes.
Therefore the Cause is the pleasure the woman has, which opens the womb again
to attract seed. And it is necessary that the seed received, be in its proper
membrane, and peculiar receptacle.

The Differences.
These come sometimes sooner, sometimes later; sometimes the same day or the
following, sometimes longer after. Sometimes they have a third Superfoetation,
so that they have two living children, and one mischance.

The Signs.
It is known only by the motion of the Infant, when it is conceived long after
the first.

The Prognostic.
It is dangerous for the Mother, for fear of abortion, and for loss of much
blood by two births at no great distance of time.

The Cure.
It is best to leave the whole work to Nature, and women ought to take heed of
Superfoetation; therefore after they have conceived, let them meddle no more.

Chap. 7. Of the ill Formation of the Child.
IN the Formation of the child, there are diverse Symptoms. 1. In the weakness
of the child. 2. The parts are more or fewer to which you may refer
Hermaphrodites. 3. The parts are greater or less, as Dwarffs or Giants. 4.
There is some part out of place or shape, as Histories show abundantly.

You must find the Causes in the seeds, terms, The Causes.
womb, and error in Formation: the cause of these is the action hurt of the
forming faculty. This is not always from it self, but from the unfitness of the
matter, and fault in the place which keeps it from the intention: for actions
of active things are not but in a disposed patient. Sometimes there is an
extraordinary cause, as imagination, when the Mother is frighted, or imagines
strange things, or longs vehemently for some meat which if she have not, the
child has a mark of the color or shape of what she desired, of which there
are many Examples.

But I doubt whether all errors in Formation, depend together upon the
imagination; for the spirits and humors are troubled by the passions of the
mind, and so slow forceable immediately to the womb or other part, and this
disturbs the forming faculty in its work. Authoris sententias
Also the forming faculty being overcome with plenty of humors, or wanting
spirits that are gone another way, may by chance make an ill shape; therefore
the passions of the mind are the first causes of error in Formation, and
imagination helps by stirring up the appetite. These are the common errors of
Formation.

Others are determinate errors, not simply from the imagination by the passions
which have no determination to such a thing; but no other cause can be besides
the imagination, but how she directs the forming faculty for the producing of
such effects, it is hard to be understood, but there must be some imagination,
and the forming faculty, that it may impart the species sent from the external
senses to the forming faculty.

And this is the cause of the consent of the upper and lower faculties: for the
soul is the same in the whole body, and every where fitted with the same
faculties, but it does not exercise all in all parts, but by the proper
determinate Organs or Instruments.

And though the child has its soul, yet while it is in the womb, it depends
upon the soul of the mother, as the fruits partake of the life of the tree
while they are upon it, therefore it is probable, that whatsoever moves the
faculties of the soul in the mother, may move the same in the child: Hence it
is, that while the forming operateth in the seed and womb of the mother, if any
species be sent to the imagination of the mother which she strongly receives,
it may make an impression upon the child, yet every imagination cannot make
this impression, but that which makes a great admiration or terror in the
mother when the forming faculty is at work, as when she beholds one with six
fingers, she brings forth the like, or when she produces hair where it should
not be, or the likeness of a beast in any limb, or when she sees any thing cut
or divided with a cleaver, she brings forth a divided part, or a Hare-lip.

Chap. 8. Of a Child turned into Stone.
JOhn Albosius Doctor at Senon, and Simeon Provarcher of Lingo, Physician of
Senon, writ of this in French and Latin.

I shall give my opinion with others.

Two things are to be observed in this wonderful History; First, Why the Child
in the time of travail being dead in the womb, did not stink as is usual, or
kill the mother suddenly or was not cast out by degrees being rotten? Secondly,
By what force the child was turned into Stone?

For the first, The mother lived twenty eight years after she had this Child;
therefore it is not credible that the womb was so cold, that it might hinder
putrefaction, as some think. It seems more probable to be, that these questions
explanation depend upon one principle; for the cause that made the stones
hardness, kept the child from putrefaction, but what that is, it is obscure.

Many fly to the efficiency of the first qualities, others to dryness, others
to coldness, others to both. I acknowledge heat, cold and dryness to he helping
causes for breeding of Stones in man's body; but the chief cause is a Stone
breeding juice, or spirit, of which I have spoken at large.

The principles of Generation were weak in this child, and impure, and this
stone breeding juice, was mixed with the blood in the humors; hence it is, that
it was not born alive, as in a mole bred in the womb, which women have till
they are old and die with it, and yet it stinks not no more then stones bred in
most parts. But there is but this History of such a Birth.

Chap. 9. Of a Mole.
IT is flesh and mass without bones or bowels, gotten of an imperfect
conception instead of a child. The Latins call it a Mole from the weight,
because it is troublesome to women, as a Millstone in Latin called Lapis Moralis.

The Differences.
Sometimes it is unshapen flesh without bones, only full of veins, with a skin
over it, and nothing within, but like the Parenchyma of the bowels. Sometimes
it is membranous and fibrous, Pet. Salis diu. in annot. in altimarum.
without shape. Sometimes it is long, round, or like a quarry of glass, or like
a brute beast. Some have brought forth three Moles like men's yards.

Some are like congealed blood, or the Placenta of the womb, into which the
navel-vessels are inserted; some grow and are nourished, and some have an
obscure sense. Sometimes they are sent out alone, sometimes with or before the
child, of which there are many Histories. Some bring forth Monsters for Moles.

In is from the error of the forming faculty, but the Cause of that is obscure.
The Causes.
I suppose it is from both seeds, when the forming faculty is weak, and the
seed little and not good, and overcome by much blood, and can make only veins
and membranes, and not a whole child. Sometimes it is in Widows only from their
own seed and blood.

A Mole is sooner bred when the blood is impute, and unfit to nourish, and is
made when they copulate in the flowing of the terms that are unclean. It is
neither from heat nor cold principally, but from the error of the forming
faculty.

They are hard to be known before the fourth month, The Signs.
then they are known by such as can distinguish between the motion of wind and
a child. 2. If a woman turn from side to side, it falls like a stone to that
side she lies on, and is heavy. If it have any motion, it is trembling and
beating, with construction and dilation like a Sponge. If after the time that
the child should move, there be no motion, and the belly swells, and there is
no sign of a Dropsy, it is a sign of a Mole.

Thirdly, In women with child, there is Milk about the fourth month, but in a
Mole the breasts swell, but there is no true milk. 4. They are more pained and
faint, and have more pain in their back and groyns.

If it be with a quick child, it is hard to be known, but it is known by its
weight in the womb, which she perceives when she gets up to walk, or moves from
side to side; some are then strong and well colored.

It hurts the womb and whole body; The Prognostic.
if it be divided, it is less dangerous: when it is soft, it is cast out the
third or fourth month. Sometimes it ulcerates or tears the womb, and causes
great bleeding. Some have been cast out or drawn out without danger: some grow
old with them in, Fabr. cont. 2. obs. 55. The Cure.
and find no inconvenience but the weight.

To prevent, take heed of Venery in the terms, or before the terms, or when the
body is soul or obstructed, or the womb.

When it is, 1. De morb. mulier.
take it away presently with things that send forth a dead child. Hippocrates
shows the Cure in few words, First foment the whole body, etc.

Therefore if she be plethorick, let blood largely in the foot at diverse times.

Then purge often with strong Physic. Take Althaea, Lilly-roots, each half an
ounce; Althaea, Mercury, Pellitory, Brank-ursine, each a handful; Chamomil,
Melilot-flowers, each half a handful; Faenugreek and Lin-seed, each six drams;
boil them in Broth to a pint, add sweet Butter, Oil of sweet Almonds, Lillies,
each an ounce; make a Clyster, repeat it often.

To Conquer all Infirmities, Study my Sennertus, Platerus, Bartholinus and
Riolanus, of the last Editions.
Make Baths, Liniments, Fomentations, (then move the Terms) with Dittany,
Birthwort, Briony, etc. Take Briony, Birthwort, each half an ounce, Asarum two
drams, Rue, Savin, Mugwort, Dittany, Pennyroyal, Motherwort, each half a
handful; Elder and Chamomil-flowers, each half a handful; Line and
Foenugreek-seeds, each half an ounce; boil them to a pint, add Hiera an ounce
and half, Troches of Alkandal a dram, Oil of Rue and Keir, each an ounce and
half; make a Clyster, of the residents make a Cataplasm for the belly.

Or this Pessary. Take Troches of Mirrh, Galbanum, Opopanax dissolved in Wine,
each two drams; Sowbread-roots a dram, white Hellebore half a dram, with juice
of Rue.

Fab. cent. 2. obs. 52.
If these will not do, let the Midwife take it out with her hand, if it be half
rotten.

Or leave it to Nature which does it in time.

To stop the flux of blood after a Mole is taken out, use strings against
overflowing of the Terms. As, Take Plantane, Shepheards-purse, Brambles,
Oak-leaves, red Roses, each a handful, boil them in steeled Water, then take
Barley-bran two ounces, Pomegranate-flowers, Cypress-nuts, Pomegranate-peels,
red Roses, Comfrey-roots in powder, each an ounce; Frogs burnt, Bole, Sanguis
Draconis, each half an ounce; with the Decoction aforesaid, and a little
Vinegar, make a Cataplasm for the Region of the Womb. Take away pain with
Anodynes mentioned in pain of the Womb: keep up the strength with meat of a
good juice.

Question. Whether a Mole may be without the company of a Man, and without his
Seed?
To speak freely of this which many doubt; I suppose that many are made of a
weak man's seed, mixed with the woman seed, and much blood. But Histories
confirm that Widows have had them without man's seed, but not of the shape with
the others. And being voided, they melted being in the air, into water.

I think Virgins cannot have them but from wantonness, or in sleep they may
spend their seed; but because it is weak, and the blood necessary for
formation, neither is drawn by the womb, nor flows to it of its own accord, as
it does in those that have had children, and the vessels of the womb in Virgins
are straiter than in Widows, and others that have had children. Therefore
though the seed of Virgins flow into the womb, yet they cannot have a Mole for
want of blood, which is necessary for the forming of the same. This is to be
understood of Moles which are not vital, for vital Moles that have some life,
cannot be got in Virgins or Widows without the seed of Man.

Chap. 10. Of Monsters.
HIstories tells of many Monsters brought forth by women. We spoke of Worms,
Sect. 2. Chap. 8. They are like Toads, or Mice, or Fish. Par. 7. cap. 12. lij.
Gordonius says, it is usual in Lumbardy. Lycosthenes says, and others also,
That Serpents, Dogs, and other Monsters with parts like brute beasts have been
brought forth.

In appen. Franc. Ros. de par. Caes.
Gasper Bauhin speaks of one Anne Troporim, which 1575. brought forth two
Serpents with her child; In Harvest hot weather, she had drunk water in a Brook
in a Wood near Basil, where she thought she drank the Spawn of a Serpent; for a
little after that, her belly swelled, and three months after she was big with
child, and the Serpents grew as the Child did. Her belly was so big that she
carried it in a swathing band. She was delivered at last of a lean male child,
and (because they suspect Worms or Snakes from the gnawing and strange motion
she felt that year,) they put a basin of milk under her, and when they expected
an afterbirth, out came a Serpent which she saw, and perceived another coming
forth, they were an ell long, and as thick as a child's arm. Thus Bauhin, and he
speaks of others, if you please to peruse him.

A Monster is that which is either wholly, or in part like a beast, or that
which is ill shaped extraordinary.

Histories witness, that a Monster may be from humane seed, The Causes.
and the seed of a beast. It is seldom, for the forming faculty does not err
of it self, but is seduced by the imagination, or frustrated of its ends, from
a fault of the Spirits, the heat or matter. Therefore imagination is the cause
of Monsters. For Histories mention, That women with child, by beholding men in
vizards, have brought forth Monsters with horns, and beaks, and cloven feet.
The same is when Spirits or heat, seed or blood, are weak or little.

And though Doctors cannot cure Monsters, yet they are to admonish women with
child not to look upon Monsters, and to strengthen their spirits and heat, and
to keep the seed and blood right, and not to allow copulation in time of their
terms, lest any monstrous Birth should be from much and impure blood.

Chap. 11. Of false Conception, and Swelling.
FAlse Conception or Gravidation is, when the terms are stopped, and the belly
swells, and there are signs like those of a true Conception: then they think
themselves with child, and as Hippocrates says, They believe not to the
contrary till ten months are past.

The causes are wind in the womb, or water, Causae p. 1. s. 2. c. 10.
matter, or thick phlegm.

These are bred from sickly seed retained, upon which Nature works in vain: or
from a fault in the terms that corrupts the seed, and breeds bad humors. The
like appears in Virgins when they begin to have their terms, but it is
discovered by pain.

The terms flow not as in a true Conception, The Signs.
but in this there is pain of the head, loins, belly, and groyns, of which
Hippocrates says thus: 2. Prorrhet.
They have a false Conception without terms appearing, with a swollen belly,
have the headache, and there is no milk in their breasts, but what is like
water, and very little. Morveover the belly swells sooner then in a true
Conception; their color changes, their face and feet swell: they loath meat,
faint, and have a depraved appetite. The surest sign is the time of
childbearing being past.

The Prognostic. The Cure.
They are commonly barren, or have ulcers in their Privities.

It is cured by evacuation of the matter in the Womb with proper Medicines, as
in the Chapter of the Distemper of the Womb with matter, and of Inflation of
the Womb and Dropsy.

THE FOURTH BOOK. THE SECOND PART. THE FIFTH SECTION. Of the Government of
Women with Child, and preternatural Distempers in Women with Child.
Chap. 1. Of the signs of Conception.
IF she keep the seed, it is a sign she has Conceived, and a man may know that
the seed is kept, if he find in Copulation that his Yard is sucked and drawn by
the Womb, and the Privities are not moist. And if she perceives little or no
seed to come forth again, and grow chill and quiver, and perceive a twitching
in her Womb, from the great delight: and the mouth of the Womb closes, and the
Terms stop.

But they are deceived, when they count o reckon from the stoppage of the
terms. For some have their terms twice or thrice after they have conceived, and
some have them all along without hurt.

The chiefest sign of Conception is, when there is at first loathing of meat,
pewking, Pica or preternatural appetite and vomiting. And when they hate that
they earnestly affected, or faint when they think of them.

About the fourth month, the child moves, which is not in a Mole, the breasts
after that swell with milk, and the last are the surest signs. From the face
and urin there is no certainty.

5. Aphor. 42. and ibi. 48.
Hippocrates teaches us to know whether it be a Male or Female: If she be with
child of a Boy, she is better colored; but pale if of a Girl. And Boys lie on
the right side, and Girls on the lest in the Womb.

Chap. 2. Of the Government and Diet of Women with Child.
THe Diet is, either for such as are sound, or as have diseases.

5. Aphor. 12.
As for the air, Hippocrates says, If there be a wet warm winter with Southerly
winds, a dry spring with Northern winds, they who conceive in the spring abort
upon any small occasion. Or if they bring forth, their children are weak and
sickly, or die. Let her avoid all evil scents, as of Rue, Pennyroyal, Mints,
Castor, and Brimstone. Some cannot bear sweet scents, let them not look upon
terrible things, nor hear great noise of Guns.

Let meat be easy of concoction; let her eat Quinces to strengthen the child,
or sweet Almonds with Honey, sweet Apples, Grapes. Let her abstain from sharp
meats, very bitter or salt, and things that can provoke Terms, as Garlic,
Onions, Olives, Mustard, Fennel, Pepper, and all Spices. In the last months
Cinnamon is good. Summer fruits are naught for her, and all Pulse. When the
child is bigger, let her diet be more, for it is better for Women with child to
eat too much then too little, lest the child should want nourishment.

Let her drink moderately of clear Wine, not exercise too much, nor dance, nor
ride in a Coach that shakes her; let her not lift any great weights in the
first and last months. In the ninth month let her move a little more, to dilate
the parts, and stir up natural heat.

Let her abstain from Venery in the first months, lest there be a Mole or
Superfoetation, or the child be hurt, but she may use it moderately in the last.

She may bathe in the last months, once in a week to loosen the privy parts.
Let her avoid anger, sorrow, fear, and too much mirth.

Let her sleep, rather then to be watchful. Let the belly be kept loose in the
first month, with Pruens, Raisons, or Manna in Broth. And let her use Medicines
to strengthen the womb and the child.

An Electuary. Take Conserve of Borage, Bugloss and red Roses, each two ounces;
of Balm an ounce, Citron-peel, and Chebs Myrobalans candied, each an ounce;
Extract of Wood-aloes a scruple, Pearl prepared half a dram, red Coral, Ivory,
each a dram; precious Stones, each a scruple; candied Nutmegs two drams, with
Syrup of Apples and Quinces, make an Electuary.

Rouls. Take Pearls prepared a dram, red Coral prepared and Ivory each half a
dram, precious stones each a scruple; yellow Citron-peels, Mace, Cinnamon,
Cloves, each half a dram; Saffron a scruple, Wood-Aloes half a scruple,
Ambergreece six drams, with six ounces of Sugar dissolved in Rose Water, make
Rouls.

Apply strengtheners to the navel: of Nutmegs, Cloves, Mace, Mastich, Coral
made up in bags, or a Toast in Malmsey sprinkled with powder of Mints.

Chap. 3. Of the Cure of Women with Child in General.
THey have diverse chronick and acute diseases; as Fevers, Pleurisy, Quinzies,
or Inflammation of the Bowels, 4. Aphor. 31.
of which Hippocrates, (If a Woman with child have an acute disease, it is
deadly.) There is a double danger. 1. In respect of the Fever which Galen
says will be continual. Valor. l. 1. obser. hol. com. ad lib. 5. aph. 30.
2. In respect of the want of nourishment for the child. For if a woman with
child be fed, the Fever increases. If she have an Apoplexy, Epilepsie,
Convulsion, Cramp, she cannot bear it out. But acute diseases are not always
deadly in women with child.

They have sometimes intermitting Fevers, Coughs, from which they hardly are
freed before they are delivered.

Question 1. Whether must Women with Child use a sparing Diet?
If you give her a Diet at a long distance, the child will be starved. Gal.
cit. lo.
If you give her a full diet, and often the Fever will endanger both mother
and child.

Therefore be moderate and add something to the diet which the mother loved
before the Fever, for the child's sake, and for the Fever. Abate the diet in
the first months, let the diet be little, in the middle and last months, let it
be larger.

Question 2. Whether may a Woman with Child be let blood?
Hippocrates says, 5 Aph. 50.
If a woman with child be let blood, she will miscarry, and if the child be
older, the sooner. This is to be understood of great bleeding, which was pints
in his time, but now we go by ounces.

Therefore if bleeding be required in a Fever, or the like, and the woman with
child be in strength, you may boldly let blood upon these conditions. 1. That
you take not nourishment from the child, let it be a little, and you will take
more, do it the second time, lest you weaken. 2. Open not the foot nor the
Basilica, but the Mediana. 3. Before you bleed, strengthen the child by
applications to the navel. And if they abort in a Fever, Amat. Lusi. c. 5.
cur. 27. rod. a cast. 3. de morbmul.
you must impute it rather to the violence of the Fever, then to the bleeding,
and you used the necessary help for preserving the mother. But it is safer in
the first then in the last months, because the child needs a further diet.

You may also open a vein in a woman with child that has no disease, to
prevent abortion, when there is much blood, in the fourth or fifth month,
especially if they have no Fever, and are strong. As Celsus says, A strong
Child, and a lusty old Man, and a healthy Woman with Child, Lib. 2. c. 10.
may be safely let blood. And Hippocrates forbids bleeding only, lest the child
should want nourishment.

Question 3. Whether may a Woman with Child be purged?
You must not give strong Purges, lest their force which moves the humors,
should reach to the womb and cast out the child. Therefore you must not purge
women with child in all diseases, nor at all times, but only in the fourth
month till the seventh, and that sparingly: And if the matter swell and abound,
4. Aph. 1.
as Hippocrates shows. For the danger from the turgent matter is easily avoided
thereby; for it will be purged with more ease, then when it is fixed and quiet.
1. Therefore only purge in an acute disease. 2. From the beginning of the
fourth only to the end of the sixth. 3. Use no vehement Medicine, nor very
bitter, as Aloes which is an enemy to the child, and opens the mouths of the
vessels; nor Coloquintida, nor Scammony, nor Turbith, but use Caffia, Manna,
Rhubarb, Agarick, and Senna; but Diacydonium purgans is best with a little of
the Electuary of the juice of Roses.

If there be a chronick disease, she may also be purged safely, especially if
she be used to it, and strengthners be applied to the navel.

Question 4. Whether Purging or Bleeding is most dangerous for a Woman with
Child?
We showed in the last Question the necessity of purging, and its danger by the
great motion of humors, which if it reach to the womb, causes abortion,
because it causes pain in the belly, and provokes the terms. But bleeding
disturbs the humors less, nor does hurt any way, but by taking nourishment from
the child. And this you need not fear, if there be too much blood. Therefore
purging is more dangerous then bleeding.

Question 5. Whether it is lawful to cause an Abortion to preserve the Mother?
A Christian may not cause an Abortion for any cause, for it is wicked: and the
Gentiles in Hippocrates his time never allowed it, they would not hinder
Conception, much less would they destroy it when made. Nor must the mother be
preserved by the loss of the child; For we must not do evil, that good may come
thereby.

But if to preserve the mother, the Physician purge or bleed, and the abortion
follow, the fault is not in the Physician that intended it not, but in the
weakness of Nature, and of the Child; and is better to preserve the Mother,
then by neglecting the lawful means, let both die. Also the dead child must
presently be thrown out.

Question 6. Whether are Clysters, Diuretics and Sweats proper for a Woman
with Child?
Though women deny Clysters to them, yet if they have been used to them, they
may be given in a small quantity, such as only mollify and supple, nor do they
more hurt then Lenitives.

Diuretics or things that provoke Urine, are not safe, because they provoke
the Terms. You may not give gentle Sweats, for Nature will receive strength by
the casting off of her enemies. You must use Alterers that are proper, as this
Syrup. Take the juice of unripe Grapes about the beginning of September three
galons, add Pomecitrons or Lemons bruised half a pound: boil them till they are
soft, and strain them, and with half a pound of Sugar make a Syrup.

Chap. 4. Of the Symptoms that befall Women with Child in the first Months.
THey are loathing meat, Pica, or evil appetite, pewking, vomiting, belly-ach,
flux of the belly, tooth and headache, giddiness.

These all come from the stoppage of the terms, especially in a Cacochymy or
evil juice: for it goes to the stomach, and so to the head. First, They loath
meat, 5. Apho. 45.
which Hippocrates says, is a sign of Conception. And this is when the child
takes the purest blood, and leaves the impure, which gets into the mouth of the
stomach, and infects it, and hence comes the loathing of some sorts of meats.

Sometimes this cease of it self; but if there be danger of a Consumption in
the mother, lest the child should be in danger for want of food, give a gentle
Vomit or Stomach-Pills, with things that strengthen the Stomach. As, Take
Conser^^ of red Roses half an ounce, of Bettony an ounce, preserved Quinces
three drams, Aromaticum Rosatum half a dram, Pearl prepared half a scruple,
with Syrup of green Ginger and Quinces, make an Electuary.

Anoint the stomach with oil of Mastich, Mints, Quinces, Wormwood, Mirtles,
etc. Give astringents and powerful things with meat, and let it be roasted
rather then boiled.

Pica is when they desire strange and absurd things, as Coals, Ashes, etc. As
she that longed for her husbands flesh, and though she loved him very well; she
killed him, eat part, and powdered up the rest. Of this disease we spoke in the
third Book.

Juice of young Vine-leaves with Syrup of Quinces, is good against this, or the
water that drops in May from the Vines. This keeps the child from suffering by
the mothers appetite.

Or this Spirit. Take Citron-peels, Oranges, Piony-roots as much as you please,
and Malmsey, digest them some days, then beat the roots and peels, add more
Malmsey, and distill them.

The third is loathing and vomiting, from an evil vapor or humor in the
stomach from blood retained. If vomiting give her ease, stop it not, but leave
it to nature, it will cease after a month or two. If it be with trouble, give a
gentle Vomit, or strengthen the stomach, or give a little Rhubarb.

The fourth is pain of the belly, from wind and humors about the womb that go
to the guts, discuss them as in Chap. 3. Of the Cholick. Avoid moist
Fomentations, give Cinnamon Water, or spiced wine.

The fifth is a looseness which must be suddenly stopped, lest it cause an
abortion. First, Hippocr. 5. Aphor. 34.
give a gentle cleanser and strengthener, as Rhubarb with syrup of Roses
solutive, then Quinces at the first course at meals; and Rice, Starch, Almonds,
Conserve of Roses, Quinces. Apply to the navel a Pultis of Quinces, Mastich,
Nutmegs, Mace, Cloves.

The sixth is the Toothache, from a sharp humor from retention of the terms
that goes to the root of some tooth, and hurts the membranes. It cease
commonly of it self, yet if it be great, use a Plaster of Mastich and
Tacamahacca to the temples, and hold in the mouth the decoction of Fern-roots,
Cinquefoyl, Snakeweed, Sage, Mulberry-barks, etc.

The seventh is Headache, when the vapors from the terms stopped, ascend and
twitch the membranes of the brain, it must be repelled and abated with
Lenitives, of which in Lib. 1. Part 3. Sect. 1. Cap. 3. Of Headache.

The eighth of the Megrim, from the vapors disturbing the Spirits that go to
the head by the veins and arteries, or by the gullet. If it cease not, discuss
vapors, and strengthen the brain inwardly and outwardly as in Vertigo.

Chap. 5. Of the Symptoms in Women with Child in the middle Months.
THey are cough, heart-beating, fainting, watching, pains in the loins and
hips, and bleeding.

1. The cough is from a sharp vapor that comes to the jaws and rough artery
from the terms, or from a thin part of that blood gotten into the veins of the
breast, or falling from the head to the breast. This endangers abortion, and
strength fails from watching; therefore purge the humors that fall from the
head to the breast, with Rhubarb, Agarick, and strengthen the head as in a
Catarrh, and give sweet Lenitives, as in a Cough.

2. Palpitation of heart and fainting, is from vapors that go to it by the
arteries, or from blood that abounds, and cannot get out at the womb, but
ascends and oppresses the heart. Use Cordials as in Syncope inwardly and
outwardly.

If it be from too much blood, as in Plethory, open a vein.

3. Watching is from dry sharp vapors that trouble the animal Spirits. Then use
Frictions and wash the feet at bed time, and give Syrup of Poppies, dried
Roses, Emulsions of sweet Almonds, and white Poppy-seeds.

4. There is pain in the loins and hips from the weight of the child, or from
the terms stopped, or growth of the child, that stretches the ligaments of the
womb and parts adjacent; if there be Plethory, bleed. If it be from weight of
the child, hold it up with swathing Bands about the neck.

5. There is flux of bood at the womb, nose, or Hoemorrhoids from plenty, or
from the weakness of the child that takes it not in, or from evil humors in the
blood, that stir up nature to send it forth. Also the vessels of the Womb may
be broken or torn by motion, fall, cough, or trouble of mind. This is
dangerous, 5. Aphor. 60.
of which Hippocrates says, The child cannot be well, if it be from blood
only, there is less danger, so it flows by the veins of the neck of the womb,
for it takes away Plethory, or take not nourishment from the child.

If it be from the weakness of the child that draws it not, abortion often
follows, or hard travel, or she goes beyond her time. If it flow by the inward
veins of the womb, there is more danger by the openness of the womb. If it come
from evil blood, the danger is alike from Cacochymy which is like to fall upon
both. If there be Plethory, open a vein warily, and use astringents. As, Take
Pearls prepared a scruple, red Coral two scruples, Mace, Nutmegs, each a dram;
Cinnamon half a dram, make a powder, or with Sugar, Rouls: or give this powder
in Broth. Take red Coral a dram, Pearl half a dram, precious Stones, each half
a scruple; red Sanders half a dram, Bole a dram, sealed Earth, Tormentil-roots,
each two scruples; with Sugar of Roses and Manus Christi, with Pearl six drams,
make a powder.

You may strengthen the child at the navel. If there be Cacochymy alter the
humors, and (if you may) evacuate. You may use Amulets in the hands, and about
the neck. In flux of Haemorrhoids, beware of the pain. Let her drink hot Wine
with a roasted Nutmeg.

Chap. 6. Of the Symptoms that are in the last Months.
1. THe Urin is stopped from suppression of the neck of the bladder. Let her then
lie down, and let the bladder be fomented with a Bag of Pellitory,
Parsly-roots, Mallows, Linseed, and the like, or use the Catheter.

2. The belly is bound from a hot and dry Liver, when the child draws all the
moisture to it, or presses the guts. Let her then use Moistners, as Butter,
Mallows, Borage in Broaths; or that Clysters in a small quantity.

3. The veins appear in the hips and legs as varicous only, then keep them from
walking, and let their feet be laid upon a stool.

4. The legs swell from serous blood, but this goes away with the Afterbirth,
and is the signs of a female child; but if she cannot walk, foment with Lie
made of Vine branches and Wine, or with a Decoction or Organ, Pennyroyal,
Chamomile, Calamints. Or,

Take Bean and Lupine-flour, each two ounces; Tartar an ounce, Pidgeons-dung
half an ounce, with steeled-water and juice of Coleworts, make a Pultis. Rub
and wash the feet with salt water in which Chamomil, Organ and Dill were boiled.

5. The skin of the belly is cleft with stretching after the fourth month;
therefore use loosning Liniments to keep off deformity, as marrow of Veal, and
Sheeps-legs, Oil of sweet Almonds, Hens-grease.

6. The water gathered in time of being with Child, between the membranes that
hold the Child, comes forth too soon, because the membranes are broken by
leaping, or a contusion. This makes difficult birth, for that water was to
moisten the parts. Therefore let her keep a good diet, and strengthen the child
inwardly and outwardly.

Chap. 7. Of Weakness of the Child.
THis is either from weak seed, or little nourishment or bad, and causes many
diseases in the child.

To hinder abortion and death of the child, know rightly the weakness, as
Hippocrates says, 5. Aph. 53.
They that will abort, have first breasts that fall away, which is from want of
nourishment in the common veins of the womb and breasts, 5. Aph. 52.
Hippocrates has a second sign, which is this: If a Woman with child has much
milk flowing from her breast, her child is weak 3. Hippocr. 5. aph. 56.
If the terms flow often, the nourishment is taken from the child. 4. A mother
often and long being sick, shows that her child is weak, because her blood is
not good, and the bad humors with the blood go to nourish the child, which
makes him sick. 5. When the mother has a flux of the belly, the child is weak.
6. When it begins to move, and is scarce felt, it is weak.

If it be from these causes, take them away, and strengthen the child, first
seed the mother high with meats of good juice, and sweet Almonds steept in
Honey, Raisins, Quinces, outwardly thus: Take Malmsey three pints, dissolve it
in Oil of Nutmegs by expression half an ounce, add powder of Cloves, Rue, each
half an ounce; Rose, Sage, Marjoram, Penny-royal-water, each a pint; Aqua-vitae
three ounces. Dip Spunges in it, and apply them under the left breast, to the
armpits, hams, pulses, soles of the feet, and when they dry, wet them again.

Chap. 8. Of Crying in the Womb.
CHildren have sometimes cried in the womb, as Fabricius says in his Epistle
to his Brother James Fincel, and Weinridick of Monsters, writes thus: In this
City of Bressa a Child was heard to cry in the Womb three days before the
Travel; when he was a man, he was miserable with poverty and diseases, till he
died. Andreas Libavius writes the same, and others.

Some say, It portends evil to the Mother, or Child, or Country.

It is a voice by the expulsion of the air through the rough artery, The Causes.
and some air may in the cavities from vapors or spirits, as in eggs when
chickens pip in them. And if the child have a rough artery, lungs and breasts
which are the organs of breathing sound, and the child is strong, there is no
hinderance, but it may utter a voice. But something, whatsoever it is, must
stir it to make this noise.

THE FOURTH BOOK. THE THIRD PART. THE SIXTH SECTION. Of Symptoms that happen in
Childbearing.
Chap. 1. Of Childbearing in general.
WHen the Child can no longer be contained in so small a place, being grown,
and requiring more nourishment, it kicks, and breaks the Membranes and
Ligaments that held it, and the Womb by an expelling faculty, sends it forth
with great straining, and this is called Travel.

It is either natural or not natural, legitimate or illegitimate. The natural
is when the child comes with the head forward and heels upwards, with his hands
and arms to his thighs, and so the other parts easily follow, then the Amnios
is broken, and the water that was laid up in time of being with child flows
forth, and moistens the passages, then the child with more force breaks the
Acetabula, from which the Secundine is separated, and the other membranes are
broken, and the blood flows into the cavity of the womb, and the child gets out
by the expulsive faculty with such force, that it seems to fall rather then be
expelled, and the bones of the Privities must needs be divided.

That which follows the birth is above humane capacity, namely, The
transmiration of the Navel-vessels, and Lungs, and Heart in the Infant, and why
Nature ordered it, of which Galen elegantly in the 15th Book, Of the Use of
Parts, and 6th Chapter.

There is also a legitimate Birth, when it is according to the Law of Nature;
and an illegitimate, when it is before or after the time.

Hippocrates says, Lib. de septim. paren.
That a Birth in the seventh month is vital and legitimate. And it is sooner
from the strength of the faculty and matter fit for formation, yet it is
commonly weak, except the seventh month be complete

Of the eighth month Hippocrates says thus: None lives that is born in the
eighth month, because it cannot bear the two afflictions to follow, but the
reason of the Arithmaticians is better, that say, an even month is imperfect.

The ninth or tenth months are the best, Lib. de natura pueri Lib. Sapient.
as Hippocrates says; A Child is born in ten months at the farthest, and so
says the wisest Solomon. Some say that a child may be born in the 11th month,
and Peter Apponensis was so born; and some say, they have been born in the
fourteenth and fifteenth month: but rare things are not to be counted the Law
of Nature.

Generally Physicians agree with Hippocrates, though some dissent.

Chap. 2. Of Abortion.
IT is the exclusion of a child, nor perfect nor living, before ligitimate
time. This time is defined by Hippocrates, Lib. de carnib.
Whosoever Conceives, does it within seven days, but they are properly
Abortions that come before the seventh day; and though some are in the fifth
and sixth month that have lived, yet that must not derogate from the common Law
of Nature.

Some differences of Abortion are from the time and bigness of the child. For
that which is cast out is little and round, without distinction of members at
first, like a Grape. Sometimes as long as a finger, and members may be
distinguished. And sometimes the child is almost perfect.

The Causes.
The immediate Cause, is the expulsive faculty stirred up, and that is done by
three means from Galen, 3. De nature. fac. cap. 12.
from the weight, bigness and pain. There are more causes which we shall place
in two Ranks. The first is of the manner of the causes that provoke the
expulsive faculty. The other is that which finds out these ways by all the
causes.

The expulsive faculty is first provoked by the child being weak, either from
evil seed, or being dead. The child is weak for want of food, and from the
mothers diseases, either in her whole body, or in the womb, or parts adjacent
that consent, as Fevers, Inflammations, Fainting, Convulsions, Pain, Vomiting,
Neesing, Cough that move the spirits and humors, and shake the child, and stir
up Nature to expel it.

Also straitness of the womb causes Abortion, by which means it cannot contain
a great child. Also shortness of the Navel-vessels, which Frabricius first
observed.

The outward causes, are cold air after hot and moist, which gets into the
womb, and provokes it, and hurts the child. Cent. 2. obs. 50.
The Astrologers add the malignant aspect of the Stars: also too much or too
little meat. Great watchings, purging, and flux of blood by the Womb and
Haemorrhoids. Also violent motion, as leaping, carrying of burdens, strokes on
the belly or back. Also passions, as anger, fear, sorrow.

Also bleeding, purging, fasting, smell of brimstone or ashes, hoofs burnt, or
stink of the snuff of a candle.

If the breasts be less, The Signs.
or much milk flow from them, or she feel much and often pain about the belly
or loins, that go to the Pubes and Os sacrum, with a desire of thrusting forth
in the womb. If the child change its place, and if it fall lower when it was in
the middle of the belly, there is fear of miscarrying.

It is dangerous always, The Prognostic.
because it is with violence, there are also great Symptoms? they are in less
danger that have already brought forth a child; therefore the first is most
dangerous, and the mouths of the Vessels are torn, and they commonly become
barren. Abortion is most dangerous in the sixth, seventh and eighth month,
because the Infant being greater, causes greater pain, and breaks the
Ligaments worse.

To preserve from Abortion.
Consider the constitution before she is with child, and prevent every cause.
If it be like to come from Plethory before Conception, open a Vein, and after
Conception in the fourth or fifth month, in the Arm.

If it be from Cacochymy, purge the whole body, and purge the womb with
Pessaries, and strengthen it, of which in the cold and moist distemper of the
womb.

If she have conceived, open a vein before the time be used to abort; if there
be a Cacochymy purge gently at times. If there be a cold distemper of body by
phlegm that hurts the womb, give the decoction of China or Sarsa, with
strengtheners of the child.

Avoid the external causes of abortion, and if they have done hurt, help it
presently. Let not the belly be bound; if the child be weak, remove the causes
of weakness, and strengthen it. Use things that strengthen the womb and child,
as Coral, as Kermes-berries.

Or, Take Magistery of Coral a dram, Pearl prepared half a dram, Ivory shaved a
dram, Mastick half a dram, grains of Kermes a dram, Manus Christi with Pearl
two drams, make a Powder. If the Abortion be at hand, and the pains increase,
give this Powder with a rear Egg. Or, Take Conserve of red Roses two drams, red
Coral, and Mastich, each a scruple, give it presently.

Use the Countesses Ointment outwardly to the Loins, Reins, Pecten and
Perinaeum. Or, Take Oil of Roses, Mirtles, Mastich, Quinces, each two ounces;
Oil of Mints an ounce, Bdellium dissolved in Vinegar, liquid Storax, each two
ounces; Oil of Nutmegs by expression a dram, with Wax make an Ointment. Of the
same with Pitch, Rosin, Colophony, you may make Plasters. Let her hold a
Lodestone in her hand, or tie it to her navel, or wear an Eagle-stone under
her Armpits, or Coral, Jaspar, Smaragds, Diamonds. If these will not keep the
Child up, you must give over Astringents, and use Lenitives.

Question. Whether the straitness of the Womb, is the cause of Abortion?
Hippocrates, 1. de morb. says, Lib. de super lib. de steril.
That the Womb may cause Abortion, if they be windy, thick, great, or little:
And he shows in another place, That Abortion may be from the straitness of the
womb. And in another place he says, 3. De not. fac. c. 12.
If a woman in the third, fourth, or fifth month miscarry, often, and at the
same time, it is because the womb will not stretch. And Galen confirms the
same, and it stands to reason, for natural birth is when the womb cannot
contain the child for its growth. Therefore if it be preternaturally too
little, it is the cause of Abortion. And though Nature has made the womb to
hold the child, yet if it be not made large enough, it cannot contain it; so
the stomach is sometimes so strait, that it cannot hold an indifferent quantity
of meat, as others can.

Chap. 3. Of the Signs of Natural Birth, and the manner and government of such
as bring forth.
AT her time of her being to be delivered, let her take heed of astringents and
thickners, but let her eat meat of easy concoction, and of good juice, and sit
every fourth day in a hot Bath; Of Mallows, Foenugreek, Linseed, Mugwort and
Chamomil-flowers: and after let her back, loins, belly and privities be
anointed with the Mucilage of Althaea-seed, and Oil of Lillies, and let the
child be strengthened.

But when she has pains from the navel to the groyns, and in the back, then
the ligaments, and vessels are broken, by which the child grows to the womb.
And because the Womb violently strains to discharge it; the membranous fibers
are extended, and commonly there are very great pains, and throws, or the child
will not be born, and it is an evil sign when throws cease, because the
expulsive faculty is weakened. And let not the Midwife provoke throws till the
time.

When the Membranes are broken, the water flows out, that comes from the urin
and sweat of the child, first little, then more, then waterish blood, and the
orifice of the womb begins to open to let out the child. And before this time,
you must not provoke throws. Then let the Midwife put her finger into the
orifice of the womb, and she shall perceive something round and hard as an Egg.
Let her not lie on her back flat, but with her back up, that she may breathe
more freely.

After the child is born, you must press the blood in the Navel-vessels,
toward the navel of the Infant, and take heed that you lose not much blood in
cutting of the Navel-string, for it has destroyed weak children, and you must
labor to fetch out the Secundine with the child: and if it be in the womb,
anoint your hands with warm Oil, and put them into the womb, and fetch it out.

Chap. 5. Of Natural hard Travel.
THough Childbearing since Eves sin is ordained to be painful as a punishment
thereof, yet sometimes it is more painful then ordinary.

The first is from the mother, The Causes.
and the expulsive faculty. 2. From the Child. 3. From the passage. From the
mother, as when the womb is weak, and the mother is not active to expel from
weakness or diseases, or want of spirits, of which Hippocrates.

It is from the Birth when they are Twins or more, and both strive to go forth
at a time, 5. Aphor. 55.
or if the child stick to a Mole, or be so weak that it cannot break the
membrane, or if it be too big all over, or in the head only, or if the
Navel-vessels are twisted about his neck.

It is from the passages when the membranes are thick, the orifice too strait,
Fabric. cent. 3. obs. 57.
and the neck of the womb is not open sufficiently, as in such as labor of the
first child, or are very fat. The passages are pressed and straightened by tumors
in the adjacent parts, or when the bones are too firm and will not open, then
the mother and child are both in danger, or when the passages are not slippery,
or when they are broken too soon by reason of the thin membranes, or the water
flows forth sooner then it ought.

You may know hard travel by faint throws, The Signs.
that come at a great distance. And you must consider all things concerning the
Mother, Womb and child.

The Prognostic.
In hard Travel, the mother and child are in danger, and the Perinaeum sometimes
breaks with the skin from the Privities to the Arse-hole. If a woman be four
days in Travel, the child scarce escapes.

The Cure.
All things that move the Terms are good to make easy delivery, As Myrrh, white
Amber in white Wine or Lilly-water, two scruples or a dram, some give a drop of
Oil of Amber in Vervain-water, or a scruple of mineral Borax, or half a dram,
but begin with gentle things, as a spoonful of Cinnamon Water. Or, Take Cassia
Lignea, Dittany, each a dram; Cinnamon half a dram, Saffron a scruple, make a
Powder, give a dram. Or, Take Borax mineral a dram, Cassia Lignea a scruple,
Saffron six grains, give it in Sack. Or, Take Cassia Lignea a dram, Dittany,
Amber, each half a dram; Cinnamon, Borax, each a dram and half; Saffron a
scruple, give half a dram.

Or give some drops of Oil of Hazel in convenient Liquor, or two or three drops
of Oil of Cinnamon in Vervain-water, some prepare the secundine thus: Take the
Navel-string and dry it in an Oven. Take two drams of the Powder, Cinnamon a
dram, Saffron half a scruple, with juice of Savin make Troches, give two drams,
or wash the Secundine in Wine, and bake it in a pot, then wash it in
Endive-water and wine. Take half a dram of it, long Pepper, Galangal, each half
a dram; Plantane and Endive-feed, each a dram and half, Lavender-seed, four
scruples, make a Powder.

Or, Take Labdanum two drams, Storax calamite, Benzoin, each half a dram; Musk
and Amber-grease, each six grains; make a Powder, or Troches for a fume; Or use
Pessaries to provoke the Birth. Take Galbanum dissolved in Vinegar an ounce,
Myrrh two drams, Saffron a dram, with Oil of Orris make a Pessary. An Ointment
for the Pecten and Navel. Take Oil of Keir two ounces, juice of Savin an ounce,
of Leeks and Mercury, each half an ounce, boil them to the consumption of the
juice, add Galbanum dissolved in Vinegar half an ounce, Myrrh two drams, Storax
liquid a dram, round Birthwort, Sowbread, Cinnamon, each half a dram; Saffron a
scruple, with wax make an Ointment.

Also neesing provoke the Birth and Amulets, 5. Aphor. 35. Levi. Lemn. de oc.
not. mir. lib. 4. c. 12.
as a Snakes-skin about her middle, the Eagle-stone bound to her thigh.

If weakness be the cause, refresh her with Wine and sops to the nose, Confect.
Alkermes, Diamosc. Diamarg.

If there be Twins, let the Midwife order them with her hands, and help the
foremost.

If the passages be not slippery, use an emollient Fomentation, and Oil of
sweet Almonds, Hens or Ducks-grease, etc. If the belly be bound, give a Clyster
or Suppository.

When Medicine will not do it, Aetius tetra. 4. c. 23.
break the Membrane with the fingers dipped in Oil, or cut them.

When the Child is still-born, let the Midwife chew Spices, and blow in its
mouth, or drop Aqua-vitae in it, or anoint it with Honey.

Chap. 6. Of a vicious disorderly Birth, or difficulty preternatural.
IF the hand come not forth first, and the hands and feet are upwards, there is
an ill birth.

Hippocrates reckons two causes, The Causes.
the largeness of the womb, Lib. de not. pu.
and disorderly motion of the mother from pain, also the thickness of the
membrane, which when it cannot break with the head, it attemps to do with the
feet and hands.

The Signs.
The Midwife may perceive in what figure the child comes forth.

The Prognostic.
All disorderly coming forth is dangerous to mother and child, but there is
least danger when both feet come forth, this is called by the Latins Partus
Agrippinus.

The Cure.
Let the Midwife reduce it into the cavity of the womb when it comes not forth
right, and place it right.

When the feet cannot be thrust upwards, let the Midwife supple the parts with
Oil, and take hold of the arm, and help it, and give neesings.

Let her always labor to put the child in a right posture by moving it with
her hand, or taking the mother from the bed, and compose her in such a posture
as may bring the child into a right posture, and that soon.

Chap. 7. Of a slow Birth.
THis is when the Child is longer coming forth then ordinarily, Epistol. lo. 2.
29. epis.
of this Massa writes, That a Venetian Matron conceived of a husband of seventy
years of age, and brought forth a child in the fifteenth month blind, and
without hands, which lived five months. Consil. 85. ad christ. vuolcken.
Cardanus writes, That his father said, he was born in the thirteenth month.
And Mercurialis writes thus: That it was never seen or written, that a woman
had a live child four years in her belly, etc. but these are rare and
miraculous.

The cause is the weakness of the seed, and want of heat in the womb, which
makes the expulsive faculty weak.

Chap. 8. Of a Child dead in the Womb.
WHen at the time of Childbirth, there is pain and breaking forth of water,
which cease presently without delivery, the child remaining in the womb, then
the mother or child dies, or both.

When the travel is vehement from diverse causes, they may also cause no birth,
The Causes.
for either the more she may lose her strength, and the child not come forth,
or both may die.

And if the child be weak, and move little, or the mother may be weak, and the
child great, the travel is hard, and both die, or if the child come not forth
in a right posture.

Or if the passages are ill proportioned, Fabri. cent. 1. obs. 64. and 67.
as when the bones of the Pubes do not give way, or when there is Schirrhus, or
other tumor that straitneth the passages there is no delivery.

Or the child dies by a disease for want of nourishment, or a fall, stroke, or
leap, or passion in the mother.

Search if the child be living or dead, The Signs.
for if it be dead, it will hurt the mother by rotting; and if the mother die
and child be alive, take it out before the mother be buried.

A child is known to be dead, if the Mother and Midwife perceive no motion, but
it is raised by any strengtheners given, and when the mother moves from side to
side, it moves like a stone, or when the face and lips of the mother are pale,
and her extreme parts livid: and the breasts that were plump, are fallen; her
breath stinks, water and stinking matter flows from the womb; there is a
Fever, horror and fainting, or Convulsion; or if the Secundine come forth
before the Child.

The Prognostic.
If a dead child be not presently taken out, the mother is in great danger:
there are great Symptoms, and strange diseases, of which see Francis Rousset
and others.

The Cure.
When the child comes not forth in time, and is alive, it must be taken out by
the Midwife or Chyrurgion by cutting the belly and womb, of which in the
Chapter following. If it be dead, you must drive, or take it out before it
stinks, either by Medicines or Chyrurgery.

The Medicines are such as stir up the expulsive faculty, but they must be
stronger then before, because the motion of the child cease, as Take Savin,
round Birthwort, Troches of Mirrh, Castor, each a dram; Cinnamon half an ounce,
Saffron a scruple; give a dram with Savin-water.

Or, Take Borax, Savin, Dittany, each an ounce; Mirrh, Asarum-roots, Cinnamon,
Saffron, each half a dram; make a Powder, give a dram.

Purge first, and put her in an emollient Bath, and anoint about the womb with
Oil of Lillies, sweet Almonds, Chamomil, Hens and Goose-grease.

Foment to get out the child with a Decoction of Mercury, Orris, wild
Cowcumber, Stoechas, Broom-flowers. Then anoint the Privities and Loins with
Ointment of Sowbread. Or, Take Coloquintida, Agarick, Birthwort, each a dram;
make a powder, add Ammoniacum dissolved in Wine, Ox-gall, each two drams; with
Oil of Keir make an Ointment.

Or this Pessary. Take Birthwort, Orris, black Hellebore, Coloquintida, Mirrh,
each a dram powdered; add Ammoniacum dissolved in Wine, Ox-gall, each two
drams. Or make a Fume with Asses-hoof burnt, or Galbanum or Castor, and let it
be taken in with a Funnel.

If these will not do, use Chyrurgery. It is done with the hand only, or with
instruments, of which Aegineta and Aetius. Lib. 6. c. 23. terrab. sermon. 4. cap.
23.


Charles Stephens shows how to use the hand without instruments. When you know
the child is dead (says he) place the woman in the best posture, and tie her
so very fast, etc. see the rest.

John Bauhin takes the same course out of Schenks Observations. And because the
strength fails, Lib. 5. cap. 2. de disect. part. corpore human.
refresh her, and abate pain, cherish the torn parts, and prevent Symptoms.

To take away pain, and strengthen the parts, foment with the Decoction of
Mugwort, Mallows, Rosemary, Wormwood, Mirtles, St. John's Wort, each half an
ounce; Sperma Ceti two drams, Deers-suet an ounce, with Wax make an Ointment.
Or, Take Wax four ounces, Sperma Ceti an ounce, melt them, dip Flax therein,
and lay it all over the belly. In some Countries women will not permit these,
but leave all to God.

Chap. 9. Of the Caesarean-Birth.
THe belly and womb are cut sometimes to take out the child, and this is called
the Caesarean-Birth, and they that live are called Caesar: It is done in three
cases. 1. When the child is dead, and the woman alive. 2. When the woman is
dead, and the child alive. 3. When both mother and child are alive.

This is seldom, because either Medicines do it, or it is taken out by other
Chyrurgery, or the work is left to Nature. Enchirid. consul. medic. p. 188.
Mathias Cornax has a History of one that carried a dead child in her belly
four years, it was taken out by cutting the womb and belly, and the mother
lived, and conceived with child after: she fainted not at the time, and the
wound grew together without stitching; and her terms after came in good order,
and she had a lusty Boy till the second of June. The Surgeons that had cut her
before were sent for, and the old orifice was open, and the mother and the women
present, would not yield to the second cutting. Therefore her strength failed,
and the Chyrurgion took out a complete child, but it was dead.

There are more Histories of live children cut out of their mothers bellies
being dead. And Roderick a Castro says, Pin. lib. 7. hist. not. c. 90. Rod. a
Castry, lib. 4. de morbis mul. c. 1. Augen. lib. 5. epit. 2. 11.
That an Infant cannot live in the Mothers womb being dead, except it be taken
out at the very time of her departure, or while there are vital Spirits,
because when the motion and life of the mother ceases, the life of the child
also cease: yet is his Argument of no force, because the child has its
proper Soul, and if it be well, it may live a while in the womb without benefit
from the mother, as it does when it is delivered. But take heed it be not
suffocated in the womb, and keep the mothers mouth open, and let the Midwife
never move her hand from the Privities, Lib. 3. de disect. part. cor. hum. c. 1.
till the Chyrurgion have taken it out: and you may know that the child is
alive, when the mother is dead by its leaping. Charles Stephens shows the way
of taking out a dead child.

When a live child is cut out of the belly of a live mother, it is done only
lest the mother or child, or both should die.

And this may be done, and both preserved alive, which is plainly demonstrated
by Francis Rousset, in his Book of this subject, so that there is no doubt of
it. For first he shows the necessity of the Operation, and next the possibility
of it, showing that the muscles of the belly, the Peritonaeum and Womb may be
cut without hazard of life.

Thirdly, He confirms by History what he proved by reason, and shows that many
wounds of the muscles in the lower belly, Peritonaeum and Womb have been cured.

Fourthly, He propounds many more dangerous cases then the Caesarean Section,
which were not deadly in themselves. And then he shows the manner of the
operation, and how it is to be done. Therefore have recourse to his works, if
thou will learn it.

THE FOURTH BOOK. THE SEVENTH SECTION. Of the Government of Women in Childbed,
of the Diseases that come after Travel.
Chap. 1. Of the Government of Women in Childbed.
PResently after she is delivered, labor to make the Afterbirth follow, of
which in the Chapter following, then compose her in Bed, and give her good
Food. Let the Air be temperate, rather hot then cold. Let her beware of Cold
that it get not into the Womb, it will cause torment and inflammations.

If Travel be hard anoint the belly and sides with Oil of sweet Almonds,
Lillies, and warm Wine.

Let her meat be of a good juice and easy concoction, Hen-broath, and
Chickens, and Capons, Kid, Mutton, Veal, let her drink thin Wine if there be no
Fever, or Cinnamon boiled in water, the first days drunk warm: Let there be
no noise about her, and let her not rise too soon, avoid passions lest the
humors be stirred and fall into some part.

If she cannot or will not suckle her child, turn the milk from the breast by
repellers under the Armpits, as Unguent of Roses, Cerot of Sanders, dissolved
in Vinegar, and to the breasts apply a Cataplasm of Bean and Orobus-flour with
Oxymel, or foment the breasts with the decoction of Mints, Dill, Smallage; or
lay the leaves bruised upon them.

Before she goes forth, let her bathe with a Decoction of Lilly-roots,
Elicampane, Mugwort, Agrimony, Borage, Rosemary, Chamomil-flowers, Stoechas,
Faenugreek, Linseed, Citron-peels.

Chap. 2. Of the Secundine or Afterbirth, or a Mole that is left after
Childbearing.
THese stick in the bottom of the womb, or like a ball to another part, the
mouth of the womb being open or closed.

It is not safe to cut the Afterbirth from the The Causes.
Navel till both be come forth, therefore draw it out with breaking of the
Navel-string, this is retained, because it grows to the sides of the womb, or
is swollen by hard travel, or because the Navel-string is broken by the Infants
straining: or from cold air got in, or from a fright, or from her not having
throws fit to exclude it, or because she is impatient, and will not continue in
a due posture.

The Signs.
The Midwife will declare it, and the purgation is not, the belly swells, there
is a Fever, and heaviness, and pain in the belly; there is a stink and
loathing from stinking vapors, difficult breathing, Suffocation and Convulsion.

The Prognostic.
Many die from the retaining of it if it cannot come forth, when matter flows
from the womb, there is hope that they will rot and come away in sixty days.

The Cure.
First let the Midwife draw it gently with her hand, and use sneesing, then burn
Partridge-feathers to the nose, and Goats-hoofs, as in the suffocation of the
Womb.

Then use things that expel a dead child, Dittany, Oil of wood Heracleon after
Preparatives. Or, Take Marjoram, Chervil, Pennyroyal, each a handful; Savin
half a handful, Anise and Fennel-seed, each half a dram; Lovage and
Parsley-roots, each three drams; boil them in water for three draughts. Or,
Take Dittany, Troches of Myrrh, Borax, each half a dram; Saffron, Castor, each
a scruple; make a Powder. Or, Take round Birthwort, two scruples, Myrrh a
scruple, make a Powder, give it in Wine.

Make Pessaries of Mugwort, Mercury, Sage, Orris in Powder with Oil of Keir.
Or, Take round Birthwort, Savin, Briony, Ox-gall and Honey, and make a Pessary.

The stronger are of the Decoction of wild Cowcumber, Coloquintida,
Staphisacre, Hellebore, Honey, and gall of an Ox.

Fumes are made of Cassia lignea, Nard, Mugwort, Savin, Pennyroyal, Dittany.
Or, Take Myrrh, Castor, Galbanum, each half a dram; Opopanax, Cinnamon, each a
dram; with Honey make Troches for to be burnt.

Then foment the Belly with the Decoction of those Plants. Or, Take Lupine-meal
an ounce, powder of Wormwood half an ounce, Mirrh, Rue, each three drams; with
Ox-gall and Honey make a Cataplasm.

If it come not forth, give a Womb-clyster of the Decoction of Sage, Mugwort,
Mercury, Calamints, Pennyroyal.

If all fail, inject things to suppurate into the womb, and let it be turned to
matter, and come out by degrees, and inject strengtheners into the womb.

Of the Mole left after Childbearing.
You may know it by the signs of a Mole mentioned, she has no ease after
travel, there is pain in the navel, back and groyns, and much clotted blood
comes away, and yet she has no ease: the Cure is mentioned before in the Mole.

Chap. 3. Of the Purgation after Childbearing diminished or detained.
THis is not alike in all women, for in some women the blood is fresh, in
others it is waterish, choleric, or melancholic: And some bleed more then
others, according to the constitution and Country. It is either not at all, or
too much, or too little.

The Causes.
When they are stopped or lessened, the vessels are too strait, or the blood flows
another way, or it is too thick, or the vessels of the womb are pressed from
its position: the blood is drawn away by passions, fears, or goes hastily to
the breasts.

The Signs.
The just quantity is not to be defined: when it is stopped, the belly swells, the
pain is in the bottom of the belly and groyns; there is chilness and a Fever
after it, fainting, weak, swift, unequal pulse; there is soot in the urin.
Sometimes the belly inflamed, or she voids blew or black clodds or blood.

The Prognostic. Gal. 1. epid. com. 3. t. 21. The Cure.
It is bad of it self to have any thing left after Childbearing, and worse if
it stays long, and grows melancholic; therefore it is a cause of many
diseases.

First, endeavor to evacuate the blood from the womb by Frictions, Ligatures
and Cupping; if they will not do, open a vein in the foot.

Then open the passages with external and internal meats: anoint the Belly with
loosning Oils, or foment thus: Take Lilly-roots, Birthwort, Briony, Angelica,
each half an ounce; Mercury, Mugwort, Pennyroyal, Savin, Calamints, each a
handful; Tansey, Chamomil, and Elder-flowers, each half a handful; Faenugreek
and Linseed, each two drams; bruise them grossly, and put them in a bag, and
boil them in Water and Wine: lay it to the Privities and bottom of the Belly.

Give emollient Clysters; and if some days are past, purge with Agarick,
Rhubarb, Senna. Or, Take Lilly-roots, Althaea, each half an ounce: Birthworts
two drams, Pellitory, Mercury, Althaea, each a handful; Calamints, Chamomil,
Elder-flowers, each two pugils; Foenugreek and Linseed, each two drams; boil
them, to ten ounces strained, add Oil of Dill, Lillies, each an ounce, Hiera
simple half an ounce, Ointment of Sowbread three drams, make a Clyster.

Or give Pessaries that provoke the Terms.

Give things to melt and attenuate the blood. As, Take opening Roots three
drams, Bettony, Maidenhair, Endive, Schoenanth, each two pugils; Anise,
Fennel-seed, each a scruple; red Pease a spoonful: boil them to a pint and
half, add Cinnamon Water two drams, syrup of the five Roots three ounces; give
four ounces.

Chap. 4. Of too great a flux of blood after Childbearing.
THat is too much which makes weak.

It is blood abounding which has been gathered nine months in the womb. The
Causes.


It is thick, or spends the Spirits, and weakens. The Signs.
There is loathing of meat, pain the Hypochondria, belly-ach, weak and often
pulse, dark sight, noise in the ears, fainting and Convulsion.

It is dangerous when long, The Prognostic. Hippoc. 9. aphor. 55. The Cure.
and with fainting and Convulsion. Therefore observe the Pulse, lest she dye
suddenly.

See what strength she has, and stop it not suddenly. If it be not very great,
order a diet of roasted Hens, basted with red Wine, or Pomegranate, of Starch,
Almonds, Rice, Quinces, Conserve of Roses, steeled Water, and make Revulsions:
use gentle things and strengthen the loose passages.

Anoint the belly with Oil of Roses, Mirtles, cup under the breasts and sides
without scarrification. Apply a Cataplasm of red Roses, Bole and Rosewater to
the Liver.

Then use stronger, and give a higher diet often in small quantity, and give
Syrups to stop blood. As, Take old Conserve of Roses two ounces, of Tormentil
an ounce, of Quinces without species half an ounce, Bole, red Coral, each half
a dram; with syrup of Currants and Coral, make an Electuary.

Anoint the belly with the Ointment of the Countess, and other Astringents; or
use Astringent Fomentations: or let her take into the womb a Fume of Mastich,
Frankincense, red Roses, etc.

Then open a vein in the arm, and let blood by degrees. See Sect. 2. Chap. 6.
Of Overflowing of the Terms.

Chap. 5. Of the pains after Travel, and torments in the Belly.
THese are not in the body, and bottom of the womb, but in the vessels and
membranes, by which the womb hangs, and that goes to the sides and belly.

The Causes.
They are from a constant labor in travel, when the bottom of the womb is
pricked to send forth from cold air let into it, or clotted blood detained, or
sharp blood sticking to the womb, and pricking it.

The Signs.
They are in the womb it self, you may know if they came from cold by what has
been done, and clotted blood will manifest it self.

The Prognostic. The Cure.
They weaken much, and are very troublesome, therefore they must be abated.

First, take away the cause, or abate the pain, and make that which hurts the
womb fit to be evacuated by these Pills.

Take Cinnamon a dram, Saffron a scruple, Diacymini, Diagalangal, Zedoary, each
half a dram; make a Powder, give a dram in Pennyroyal or Cinnamon Water.

Or, Take of Cummin-seed steept in Spirit of Wine and dried again a dram,
Ameos-seed, and Ginger, each half a dram; Cinnamon a scruple, Castor half a
scruple, make a Powder. If she faint, add Cordial Waters. As, Take Diacyminum a
dram, Diamargariton frigid, Citron-peels, Zedoary, each half a dram; make a
Powder.

If she be choleric, or the humor thin and sharp, cure it as a Cholick from
Choler. As, Take Syrup of Violets, Borage, each an ounce; Mucilage of
Quince-seeds made with Violet-water half an ounce, water of Borage, Scorzonera,
each two ounces: give it at twice.

Extenuate the humors, and loosen the passages outwardly. Take Bean-flour,
Faenugreek and Linseed, each an ounce; Chamomil-flowers and Cummin-seeds, each
half an ounce; boil them in Oil of Lillies for a Cataplasm.

You may fume the womb with Decoctions of Herbs.

Chap. 6. Of the tearing of the Vulva to the Arse, and coming forth of the
Womb, Inflammation, Ulcer, Suffocation, and falling out of the Fundament.
THe tearing is in hard travel, Par. Secti^ 1. Cap. 1.
when the mother is tender, and the child great, of which before.

The womb comes forth from the violent extraction of the child or afterbirth,
which the ligaments are stretched. Part 1. Sect. 2. Cap. 15.
The Cure is mentioned, but you must not hinder the after-flux by astringents,
let her therefore rest, and lie on her back, with her feet drawn up, with
sweets to her nose, and stinks to the womb, so the womb will be retained, and
the flux continued; after this is past, you may use Astringents.

If there be Inflammation from hard Travel, hinder not the after-flux of blood
by Coolers.

If it turn to an ulcer, let the after-flux flow, and then cure it.

Suffocation after Childbearing, is from the stinking after-blood, which sends
up stinking vapors which kill many. It is cured by Friction of the legs,
Ligatures and Cupping with Scarification, applying stinks to the nose, as
Castor, Partridge-feathers burnt, Rue. And applying Sweets to the Privities.

You must cure the falling out of the Fundament from straining in Delivery, as
formerly showed.

Chap. 7. Of Watching, Doting, and Epilepsie of Women in Childbed.
THese are from the motion of the blood and humors when the after-blood flows
not kindly, and there is a Fever, of which in the first Book. And from vapors
sent from the womb, there is an Epilepsie, which is cured by Revulsion of
vapors and humors downwards, and perfect Evacuation of the After-blood, which
done, all these Symptoms cease.

Chap. 8. Of the Swelling of the Womb, Belly, and Feet after Childbearing.
IT is commonly from cold gotten into the womb, and the belly sometimes swells,
as if there were another child.

It is cured by hysterical or mother Fomentations, or with the skin of a new
slain sheep, and hard wine; if in Travel they keep a bad diet, or drink too
much, the humors go into wind, and if they fall into the Legs they swell, then
take heed of much drink: and after the flux is is past, make Evacuation with
things that expel wind. As, Take Coleworts and Chamomil, each as you please:
boil them in Wine, and foment the parts. Or, Take Wormwood, Southernwood,
Bettony, Calamints, Organ, Chamomil-flowers, Aniseeds, Rue, Caraway, as much as
will serve for a Fomentation for the Feet.

Chap. 9. Of Vomiting, Looseness, Belly bound, and not holding of Urine in Women
in Childbed.
THey cast up crude and indigested meat sometimes, Hip. 1. de not. mulier.
from weakness of the stomach by consent from the womb, or from the humors that
came to the stomach, from the parts near the womb, when the after-flux does not
flow, they sometimes vomit blood, or when it is disordered. For the blood not
getting out, goes to the great Veins and Liver, and in its hollow part, by
plenty and sharp it opens the Veins, and it gets into the Stomach. Sometimes a
Vein is broken from hard Travel.

Hip. 1. de morb. mul.
It is bad of what cause soever it comes: for the strength will fail, and there
will be no matter to make milk of, if the food be vomited. If other humors,
they may cause a Fever by their motion. If blood be vomited from a Vein of the
Liver broken or opened, a Dropsy is to be feared; therefore stop it,
whatsoever it be in this case. If it be of the meat, give that which will be
easily digested, that oppress not the stomach which must be strengthened.

If bad humors are vomited up, stop it not so soon, but cleanse with gentle
Medicines, and open the way by stool.

In vomiting blood make Revulsion to the lower parts by rubbing, cupping them,
or bleeding in the ham or ankle, and provoke the After-flux.

The Flux of the Belly is dangerous if it be great, for it weakneth, and
threatens to bring a Dysentery, or Tenasmus, or Neesing. Nor is it safe to
stop it presently, lest you stop the After-flux with it. If it be from food,
nor well concocted, let her keep a better diet, and let the stomach be
strengthened outwardly. If this will not do, give internal remedies, so that
they help the stomach, and hurt not the womb, as the Decoction of Barley, Syrup
and Honey of Roses. Give Clysters also to temper the sharp humors, and cleanse.

Or give Syrup of Roses, Pulp of Tamarinds, or Rhubarb. And Astringents of
Roses, Plantane, Tormentil, Quinces, Coral, and the like. If they be wholly
stopped, the belly must not be bound. But first give Rhubarb and Astringents
outwardly, and provokers of the Terms.

Also the belly is bound in women in Childbed, then give a Suppository of Soap
or Honey, and after four or five days, give emollient Clysters, and Manna or
Cassia.

If they cannot hold their Urin after hard Travel, use a Bath of Bettony, Sage,
Bays, Rosemary, Pennyroyal, Organ, Stoechas, and presently after anoint with
this: Take fat Puppy-dogs boiled in Oil of Worms, Lillies, and Foxes, till the
flesh fall from the bones, then take the Fatt, and add Frankincense, Storax
calamite, Benzoin, Opopanax, Mace, each a dram; Oil of Nutmegs by expression
half a dram, with Goose-grease and Wax make an Ointment.

Chap. 10. Of the Wrinkles of the Belly after Childbearing, and mending of the
largeness of the Privities.
AFter the fourth month, Women prevent wrinkles by carrying a clout upon the
belly, dipped in Oil of sweet Almonds, Jesamine, Oil of Lillies to loosen the
skin, that it may stretch better without clefts.

If the Belly be already wrinkled. Tetrabi. 4. Sermon. 4. 112.
Take Sheeps-suet, Goats-suet, Oil of sweet Almonds, each an ounce; Sperma Ceti
two drams, with Wax make an Ointment. After the flux is past, add Oil of
Mastich, or Roses, or make Aetius his Cataplasm.

Chap. 11. Of Fevers and acute Diseases in Women in Childbed.
THey have often continual Fevers. The first is the Fever of Milk about the
fourth or third day from the motion of the blood from the womb to the breasts;
it is not of many days continuance, and is not dangerous.

But take heed you mistake not a putrid Fever for a Milk-feaver, for labor
and pain sometimes inflame the humors, and cause putrefaction, and though the
Symptoms appear not the next day after delivery, yet there may be the
beginning of putrefaction from the heat of the humors in Travel, especially if
the after-flux be stopped, from which time you must count the beginning of the
diseases. For a Fever cannot be long concealed, nor the motion from Travel
last long: therefore it is probable the motion is ceased, and the Fever comes
of another cause, which I shall declare presently.

The Causes.
They are the stoppage of the After-flux, or the diminishing of it, or the foul
humors that were gathered in the time of being with child, and stirred in
Travel. Too great purging of the After-blood or Lochia signifies Cacochymy, or
a Fever that will come long after Travel. If the Lochia flow not in due time,
or be stopped, then the blood and foul humors go back to the great Veins and
Liver, Hippocr. 1. epid. tex. 21. The Signs
and make a putrid Fever, or inflame those parts.

A Fever from milk comes the fourth day, and there is heaviness of back and
shoulders, and the Lochia flow well, it not, there is the sign of a Fever. If
the humors putrify in the womb, there is foul stinking matter voided, the
belly is swollen, and is pained when touched. If the Fever be not from milk,
and the Lochia flow, it comes from bad humors, especially if when she was big
with child, she kept not a good diet.

A Fever from milk is without danger, The Prognostic.
and cease the eighth or tenth day: that which comes from suppression of the
Lochia or After-flux, is dangerous and often deadly, except there follow a flux
of the belly. If black stinking matter flow from the womb, they escape: If the
Fever come from a Cacochymy before Delivery, it is worse, because it argues
much humors, which Nature cannot discharge by the after-flux, and the strength
is dejected by hard travel.

A Fever from milk, requires only good diet, The Cure.
and sweating must not be hindered, for it cures. That which is from stoppage or
diminishing of the Lochia, must be cured by provoking the after-flux, or by
another evacuation instead of it; as purging, bleeding in the foot to provoke
the flux, or by scarifying the thighs and legs, after cupping, while the time
is, that the after-flux should be not afterward. For if that time be past, if
strength permit, open a vein in the arm, and bleed plentifully.

For purging: some purge them in a Pleurisy after the seventh day, Valor. lib.
5. obs. 10. merc. 4. de morb. mul. c. 11.
but beware by reason of the weakness after travel, and because Purges may
hinder the after-flux, which is dangerous, it is good to evacuate only by the
womb; but if the flux of blood cease, and Nature would purge something from the
womb, you may give a gentle Purge of Rhubarb, Cassia, Manna, Syrup of Roses,
Senna.

Alterers are thus to be ordered. Avoid too cold and sharp things, lest the
evacuation by the womb should be disturbed by cold things.

The Diet.
Let it be thin the first days of lying in, then thicker, and so increasing,
take heed of too much drink, especially of cold drink.

Question. What Veins are to be opened in Women that lie in, and have a
Pleurisy?
They have Symptomatical Fevers; also from inflammation of the Pleura, Jaws or
Liver, because some of the foul humors are sent to some private part, and make
an inflammation to which the Fever is joined, and the causes are as before
mentioned.

If there be a Pleurisy, she is in great danger. The Question is, Whether she
must bleed above or below? I say thus: First, This Fever is not properly
Symptomatical, but primary, and has the inflammation its associate, while
nature sends part of the matter to the Pleura or other part.

Secondly Note, That Nature is in an error while she sends the vicious humors,
which she should expel by the womb to the Pleura.

Thirdly Note, That the vicious motion of Nature is not to be helped therefore,
which should be done, if you should presently open a vein in the arm: but the
blood is to be voided by the womb which is Natures way.

Fourthly, If the Pleurisy be not abated by opening a vein in the ankle for
revulsion, but the Symptoms continue or increase, you must not continue to open
the veins beneath, because they evacuate not from the part affected, which is
necessary in such a dangerous disease. It is a sign that the matter is fastened
to the part, that it cannot again be brought to the womb by revulsion.
Therefore then you may open a vein in the arm on the same side, to evacuate and
drive the blood from the part or there about, or she will be in danger of death.

And fear not, that Nature will be taken from her ordinary motion toward the
womb thereby, for the vein that was opened in the foot, prevented that: and if
you fear any danger, you may prevent it by Frictions and cupping of the legs,
while you let blood in the arm.

And you may give Clysters, that may cause the humors moving upwards, to come
down, and loosen the passages of the womb, that blood may flow out the better.

As, Take Pellitory of the Wall, Mallows, Althaea, red Coleworts, each a
handful; Chammomil-flowers half a handful, Foenugreek and Linseed, each half an
ounce; boil them in Water, to a pint strained, add lenitive Electuary an ounce,
Diacatholicon or Cassia half an ounce, Oil of Violets two ounces, make a
Clyster.

If the Fever abate, and the time of the flux of the Lochia be past, give a
gentle Purge.

Cure the rest as an ordinary Pleurisy, only take heed that while the After
flux lasts, you give no binding Medicine.

Also she may have a Quinzy while she lies in, while the vicious matter flows
to the jaws. The Cure of which bleeding is to be done as in the Pleurisy, but
the rest is to be done as in the Quinzy.

And if the Liver be inflamed by the motion of the humors to it, you must bleed
as in the Pleurisy and Quinzy. Yet it is not so needful in the Arm as in the
Pleurisy, by reason of the greater distance of the Liver from the Arm, for the
Pleura and the Breast are nearer, and consent more with the Arms, but the Vein
in the Leg is near to the hollow Vein, as the distribution of the upper Veins
to the Arms.

The rest of the Cure of the Inflammation of the Liver, is in Lib. 3. only
observe that you must not use too great Coolers or Binders in women in
Childbed, but things that are of thin parts, lest the flux called Lochia or
After-blood, should be stopped.

THE FOURTH BOOK. THE THIRD PART. Of the Diseases of Women's Breasts.
THE FIRST SECTION. Of Diseases of the Breasts.
Chap. 1. Of the increased number of Breasts, and greatness extraordinary.
THough Nature has ordained two in all Women: Card. l. 8. c. 43. de rerum
varice Cabrol. obs. 7.
yet some have Breasts like Men: others have had two on each side that had Milk.

The figure of the Breasts is round pointed at the nipple a little, it ought
not to be soft nor hard, and of an indifferent bigness, and it is better they
be indifferent, though they hold not so much milk, lest they be subject to
Cancers and Inflammations, and when they are too big, they have not a temperate
heat.

The Causes of overgreat Breasts, is much blood, and the strength of heat
attracting and concocting it; these are remote causes, but the immediate cause
is the largeness of the passages and looseness, which is in the first
conformation, and furthered by idleness, much sleep, and few terms, and often
handling of the Breasts, by which the blood and the heat is drawn to the
Breasts.

The Cure.
It is easier to keep them from growing great, then to abate them when too big:
with good diet and Topics that repel by cooling, and binding, and drying. As,
Take Mirtle-leaves, Horstail, Plantane, Mints, red Roses, each a handful;
Pomegranate-flowers two pugils; boil them in red Wine and Vinegar, and with a
Sponge apply it to the Breasts, and let it dry: or apply Hemlock bruised with
Vinegar, Or, Take Powder of Comfrey-roots two drams, Pomegranate-flowers, red
Roses, Frankincense, Mastich, each half an ounce; Barley-flour, red Oaker, each
an ounce and half; with Rose Water, the white of an Egg, and a little Vinegar
make a Cataplasm. These may be laid to the Breasts, and under the Armpits, to
astringe the Vessels, and hinder the blood from flowing to them.

Hemlock, Henbane, and other Narcoticks are forbidden, because they weaken the
natural heat, and hinder the breeding of milk.

Dryers and Discussers are good in women that have great Breasts after weaning,
to consume the moisture. As, Take Bean and Orobus-meal, each two ounces and
half; Comfrey-roots in powder half an ounce, Mints three drams, Wormwood,
Chammomil-flowers and Roses each two drams: boil, and add two ounces of Oil of
Mastich, make a Cataplasm.

The Breasts are too little, when the Flux of blood to the Breasts, is hindered,
diminished, intercepted, revelled, or turned another way, or when the blood is
not drawn by the Breasts, as in a dry Liver-famine, much Labor, or in
Watchings, Fevers, and other diseases that consume the body. The same is when
the radical moisture of the Breasts is consumed.

You must remove the cause that breeds it, and often friction will attract
blood, and foment with warm water, in which Emollients have been boiled with
white Wine, and then anoint with Oil of sweet Almonds, or of Indian-nuts.

Looseness of the Breasts is cured by Astringents.

Chap. 2. Of Sweelling of the Breasts with Milk.
WHen the milk-carrying veins are too full, the Breasts swell all over, or in
part, and are pained by stretching and red. Sometimes the milk congealed, and
is a hard Tumor.

The cause is abundance of milk or blood that makes it, or the weakness of the
child that cannot suck, or because he is weaned.

It often cease without Remedies. Sometimes it is an inflammation, or the
milk hardens to a tumor.

The Cure.
You must hinder the breeding of much milk, of which hereafter, and consume that
which is bred; in women that give suck, the child will draw them, or a Puppy.
Or use a Glass to suck with: they which will not give suck, may use this: Take
Barley-meal, of Lentils, Althaea-roots, Chamomil-flowers and Mints, each half
an ounce; Agnus-castus-seeds two scruples: boil them in Wine, add a little
Vinegar, Oil of Dill two ounces, make a Cataplasm.

Chap. 3. Of Inflammation and Erysipelas of the Breasts.
SOmetimes the tumor in the breast is inflamed from blood, for though plenty of
milk cause an inflammation, blood is the immediate cause, for milk as it
corrupts and grows hot, increases pain, and so the blood staying in the small
capillar veins, being out of the vessels, is hot, putrid, and inflamed. There
are other causes, as strokes, falls, straitness of clothes, and other hurts of
the Breasts.

The Signs.
A hard and red swelling shows inflammation with beating pain, and a Fever.

The Prognostic.
These inflammations are commonly without danger, but because the Breasts are so
loose, and have many kernels, and little heat, they turn to Cancers and
Scirrhus.

The Cure.
If you fear a great flux of blood that will increase the inflammation, let
blood in a Plethorick body. But if it come from stopping of the terms or
after-flux, first open the vein in the ankle, and scarifie the legs, then (if
need be) open the arm.

If bad humors coming to the Breasts, nourish the Inflammation, give a gentle
Purge of Manna, Senna, and the like. If the blood be too hot, or mixed with hot
humors that help the motion of the blood. Use Alterers, as Lettice, Endive,
Purslane, Plantane, Water Lillies, and the like.

Use Repellers after these, To be a skilful Physician study my Sennertus,
Platerus, Riverius, Bartholinus, and Riolanus, of the last Editions.
but such as are weak and not too cold, as a clout dipped in Water and Honey,
with Oil of Roses applied to the Breasts. Or, Take Lettice, Purslane, each a
handful; red Roses half a handful: boil them in Water, add Vinegar two ounces,
make an Epithem.

Or, Take Nightshade, Lettice, each a handful: boil them, stamp them, and add
Barley-meal two ounces, powder of Chamomil-flowers half an ounce, Oxymel, Oil
of Roses, each a dram; make a Cataplasm.

When the beginning of the Inflammation is past, add Discussers with your
Repellers. As, Take white Bread crumbs, Barley-flour, each an ounce and half;
Bean and Foenugreek-flower, each half an ounce, powder of red Roses and
Chamomil-flowers, each two drams: boil them, add Rose-winegar an ounce, Oil of
Roses and of Chamomil, each an ounce; make a Cataplasm.

At length use only Discussers. As, Take Bean-flower, and of Lupines, and of
Foenugreek, and Linseed, and powder of Chamomil-flowers, each an ounce; make a
Cataplasm.

If the matter grow hard, use Emollients and Attenuates. As, Take Mallows a
handful, boil them till they are soft, add powder of Linseed, Althoea and
Chamomil-flowers, each an ounce: boil them again, add Oil of Jesamine an ounce,
make a Cataplasm.

If it tend to suppuration, lay a Plaster of Diachylon. Or, Take Mallows and
Althoea, each half a handful: boil them till they are soft, stamp them, and add
powder of Althaea-roots two ounces, powder of Line and Foenugreek-seeds, each
an ounce; Leaven half an ounce, add Ointment of Althaea two ounces, make a
Cataplasm.

When there is matter, and the Imposthume breaks of its own accord, it is well,
otherwise open it with a Lancet, or some sharp Medicine, and let out the
matter, and then cleanse it thus: Take Turpentine, Honey of Roses, each an
ounce; Mirrh a scruple. The ulcer will be hard to be cured, except you dry up
the milk in the other Breast, by reason of much blood that will flow thither to
breed milk.

Question. Whether the Inflammation of the Breasts be from blood alone, or from
milk also?
The inflammation and swelling in women in Childbed upon their Breasts, is
from the afflux of too much milk, and it is with redness and pain, and beating
or pulsation: and it is not only from blood, for tumors (as in other parts) are
seldom pure or unmixed, but there are other humors with it. Therefore it is
certain, that when blood is drawn by heat or pain, or comes of it self to the
Breasts, and begins to corrupt, the milk also may be corrupted.

Of the Erysipelas of the Breasts.
This Erysipelas is from fright or anger, and it turns presently to a Phlegmon,
and is cured as the Inflammation of the Breast.

Lay no cold astringent Repellers, or fat things, but things that sweat, as
Hartshorn, sealed Earth, Carduus must be given with Elder-water, to discuess
that thin blood that causes the inflammation. Apply outwardly hot a Pledget
dipped in Elder-water.

Chap. 4. Of the Oedoma of the Breasts.
THis flegmetick tumor is in chachectick women that have the white Fever; it
is cold and white, and pits, because the part is loose and spungy.

Are a loose tumor, almost insensible of pain, The Signs.
and the finger laid on, leaves a pit. It is larger when the Terms are at hand,
and abateth when they are past.

If it come from a Cachexy, The Prognostic.
and a disease of the womb, it is dangerous: but it commonly ends by
resolution, or dissolved.

The Cure is by dry and hot means; The Cure.
and if it is from a Cachexy or want of Terms, they must first be removed: then
use Topics that discuss, and resolve, and strengthen, let them be but
temperately hot, lest you discuss the thin, and leave the thick, which will
cause a Schirrhus.

Make therefore Fomentations of a Lixivium of Vine and Colewort-ashes, and
Sulphur, or a Decoction of Hysop, Sage, Organ, Chamomil-flowers. Then anoint
with Oil of Chamomil, Lillies, Bays. Or, Take Barley-flour four ounces, of
Linseeds, Faenugreek, Dill, Chamomil-flowers, each half an ounce; Althaea-roots
an ounce, with Oil of Chamomil and Dill make a Cataplasm.

Chap. 5. Of the Scirrhus of the Breasts.
IT is a hard tumor without pain, from melancholy gathered in the veins that
flows to the Breasts; or it is thick phlegm dried. Sometimes both humors are
mixed together, or more, which makes a bastard Scirrhus. And if burnt humors
abound most, it turns to a Cancer: and if melancholy be most, it is not a
Scirrhus, but a Cancer.

The Signs.
There are two signs of a true Scirrhus, hardness, and want of pain, if it be
fixed. It is sometimes white, sometimes black or blew, as the humor is. If it
be a bastard Scirrhus, there is heat and pain; and if they increase, it turns
to a Cancer, and the veins grow blew about, and begin to swell.

The Prognostic.
The bigger and the harder it is, the more hard it is to be cured. If hairs grow
upon a Scirrhus, it is incurable, and it easily turns to a Cancer.

The Cure.
After Universals, and the Cause is removed from the womb, or the whole body,
let the containing cause be softened, made thin, and discussed. But beware of
two things. First, That the thin parts be not discussed by too hot medicines,
and the thick left, for so it will be incurable, and as hard as a stone.
Secondly, That you ferment not the matter by moistning Emollients, so that it
turn to a Cancer.

The Ancients either used none, or a drying or a moistning medicine only. You
must either use Moistners and Emollients with Digesters by turns, Inst. l. 50.
Ja. 1. sec. 1. c. 6.
or mixed.

Foment with the Decoction of Mallows, Althaea, Foenugreek and Linseed,
Brank-ursine, and Chamomil-flowers. Then anoint with Oil of sweet Almonds,
Chamomil, Hens-grease, Veal-marrow, Ointment of Althaea. Or apply this
Cataplasm: Take Althaea, Mallows, Brank-ursine, Fennel-tops, each a handful;
boil them soft, stamp them, add Barley and Bean-flour, Linseed, powder of
Althaea-roots, Chamomil-flowers, each an ounce. Or lay on the great Diachylon
Plaster, and that of Frogs. Then sprinkle Wine upon a hot stone, and let the
Fume be received. And apply a Plaster of Ammoniacum dissolved in Vinegar.

If it be a Bastard Scirrhus, you may fear a Cancer. Then after Universals and
Bleeding, take away the disposition of the Bowels that breeds black humors.

If you fear a flux of humors, use Oil of Roses, and Juice of Plantane; and if
there be heat, stir them first in a Leaden Mortar, till they change their
color, then add Ceruss, Litharge, each three ounces, with Wax make an Ointment.

Chap. 6. Of the Glandles or Kernels in the Breasts being swollen, or of the
Scrofula and Struma in the Breast.
CElsus says, The Struma and Scrofula in the Breast, are rare.

It is from a thick humor, The Causes.
phlegm or melancholy. Struma is with pain sometimes, and is like a Cancer, or
seems to turn to a Cancer, but continues many years at a stand. But let the
cause be what it will, it comes from stoppage or disorder of the terms, by
reason of the great consent of the Womb with the Breast.

The Signs.
The Glandles or Kernels are to be felt, though not before, there is one great
unmovable tumor, and the rest are small.

The Prognostic.
It is hard to be cured for two causes: the earthiness of the matter, and the
deep lying of it. They which are near the skin, are easily dissolved.

The Cure.
After purging and bleeding: use Emollients and Discussers that are strong, as
in Scirrhus. Take Orris-roots three ounces, boil them in Oxymel, stamp them,
add Turpentine, Ointment of Althaea, each three ounces; Mucilage of
Foenugreek-seed an ounce.

Or, Take roots of Althaea two ounces, Briony-roots an ounce, Orris-roots half
an ounce: boil them soft in white Wine, stamp them, add Ammoniacum dissolved in
Vinegar, and Bdellium dissolved in Wine, each an ounce; with Pitch and Wax make
a Plaster. If it cannot be discussed, suppurate or cut it, but this is
troublesome and dangerous.

Chap. 7. Of the Cancer of the Breasts.
6. Aphor. 38.
HIppocrates says, That an occult Cancer is better not cured than cured; for
if cured, they presently die, but if not, they live long. Many women have lived
long with good order of diet, having a Cancer, as if they had no disease, so
says William Fabricius, Cent. 3. Obs. 87.
and that if the Cancer be not ulcerated, they may live forty years without
pain: and if you lay on Emollients and Suppuraters, they die in half a year.

The Breasts are spungy and loose, The Causes.
and therefore Cancers breed often there, but the Cause is from the Womb, when
they are of a hot and dry constitution with burnt blood, and when the terms
stop, and then the humors fly to the Womb and make a Cancer, either with, or
without a tumor aforegoing.

A Cancer that arises of it self, The Signs.
is hard to be discerned at first: for it is like a little tubercle, no bigger
than a pease, and grows up by degrees, and spreads out roots with veins about
it. And when the skin is eaten through, it is a stinking ulcer, and the lips
are hard, and the matter black.

It is hard or never cured, The Prognostic.
because the black humor that causes it, is very troublesome, and has a
peculiar malignity, which is fermented, and made worse with Emollients and
Suppuraters, which loosen the vessels, and dilate them, so that the humor flows
easier to the part, and the corrupt humors get easier to the parts adjacent,
and infect them.

A Cancer not ulcerated, is to be let alone, The Cure.
by the counsel of Hippocrates. But let blood, and purge melancholy often. But
use no Topics that may rot or provoke the part, but things that by experience
take away pain; as Nightshade-water, Snails boiled, and Frogs in Oil, and with
ashes of Frogs made into an Ointment, or Medicines of Lead.

As, Take Oil of Roses two ounces, juice of Nightshade-berries an ounce and
half, Ceruss washed, Sugar of Lead, each a dram; Pompholygos half an ounce, mix
them in a Leaden Mortar, till they are thick.

Or use Cray-fish-ashes, and the ashes of the inward rind of an Ash-tree, or
Herb Robert.

Lib. 2. De cur. vulner. C. 3. Cent. 3. Obs. 87.
Arcaeus teaches how to cut them out, and then burn the part, if they be deep
and ulcerated. But Fabricius shows, that you must burn after to consume the
relics, and stop the blood: after it is cleansed; Take Herb Robert, Verbascum
or Moulin, Scabious, Caprifolium, or Honey-suckles, Dill, Mans-grease, each
equal parts: burn them, take three ounces, and with six ounces of
Nightshade-water in a Leaden-Mortar mix them.

After cutting out the root, purge melancholy often, and provoke Terms or
Haemorrhoids, lest it return.

Give Treacle Mithridate, with juice of Borage, Sorrel, Cray-fish-broath, and
Asses-milk.

Ant. Chalmiteus.
This Water is good against all Cancers. Take Moulin-roots, Clowns all-heal,
each two ounces; Dropwort, Ceterach, Herb Robert, Agrimony, Tormentil,
Scabious, Avens, Flaxweed, each a handful; Nettle-seed three drams, Elder and
Rosemary-flowers, each a pugil; boil and sweeten it with Sugar. Foment, and
wash the Cancer with one part of it, and let the dreggs be applied as a Pultis,

Fuchsius his blessed Powder. Take white Arsenick that shines not like glass
an ounce, powder it; pour Aqua vitae upon it, and pour it off, add fresh Aqua
vitae every third day for fifteen days. Then, Take roots of great Dragons
gathered in July or August, sliced and dried in the wind, two ounces. Thirdly,
Take bright clear Soote of the Chimney three drams, make a powder. Keep it
close stopped in a glass, the older the better, use it not till after a year.

For a pallative Cure, keep it from increasing, and take away pain with this
Water. Take Scrophularia-roots and Herb Roberts, each a handful; Lambs-tongue,
Nightshade, Bugloss, Borage, Purslane, Eyebright, Bettony, each half a
handful; a Frog, and two whites of Eggs, with Quince-seeds and Foenugreek, each
an ounce; Rose and Eye-bright-water, each a pint; distill them in a Leaden Still.

Use not Cancers as other Ulcers, for Emollients, Lib. 6. c. 30.
Healers and Drawers exasperate and kill with great pain.

Chap. 8. Of Ulcers and Fistulaes of the Breasts.
AFter Universals, dry up the Milk, and if the Breasts hang down, bind them up,
that the humors flow not down, and move not the Arm on that side. Then cleanse
it with the Decoction of Rhapontick, Zedoary and Agrimony. Heal thus: Take
strong Wine five quarts, Rhois Obsoniorum, Cypress-nuts, each four ounces;
green Galls two ounces; boil them to the Consistence of Honey. If you fear a
Fistula, enlarge the Orifice, and take away the Callus, and heal it as an
ordinary Ulcer.

Chap. 9. Of straitness of the Passages of the Breasts.
WHen the Veins and Arteries are not wide enough to contain Blood to be turned,
there is no Milk.

They are stopped by thick humors, The Causes.
as the vessels of the womb are, the cause is the stoppage of the terms, or
hard tumors in the Breasts that stop or press.

When the nipple has no hole for the Child to suck, it is from the birth, or a
wound or scar after an Ulcer.

The Signs.
There is little milk, and the Breasts pine. If the Breasts swell, and milk
cannot be sucked out, the fault is in the paps, or the veins of milk.

The Prognostic.
An obstruction from gross humors may be cured. If it be from a Scirrhus or Scar
after an Ulcer, it is incurable, and so the Nipple born without a hole.

The Cure.
If it be from thick humors or blood, attenuate it with proper things, as
Fennel, Dill, Parsley, Anniseeds, Pease, Rocket-seed, or Earthworms made into
Caraplasms or Fomentations. Often rubbing of the Breasts, opens the Milk-veins.

Chap. 10. Of strange things bred in the Breasts.
HAirs, Stones and Worms have been found in the Breasts. A Worm breeds from
putrid blood, Bald. Ronsaeus miscel. epist. 10. Lib. de occult. na. mira. c. 12.
and is like a hair; the same may be in the back and navel, as I showed. And a
good Author writes, That a woman pained in her breasts, could not be eased till
Imposthumes broke, and worms came forth.

Levinus Lemnius saw Stones that grew in the Breast.

Chap. 11. Of the Diseases of Nipples.
THey are either wanting, or lie hid, one or both, which hinders giving suck.
If it be from the birth, it is scarce cured; as also when the Nipple is eaten
off by an Ulcer.

When they come forth first, Amatus Lusit. cur. med. cent. 5. cur. 31.
use a sucking Instrument, and then apply Puppy-dogs to suck.

If there be no hole from birth, or ulcer healed, it is incurable: if it be a
little, often sucking will enlarge it.

The clefts in the Nipples is an usual evil, and causes great pain in Nurses;
and if it continue long, it turns to foul ulcers, that they cannot give suck.

To prevent this evil, in the two last months of being with child, wear two
cups of Wax over the Nipples with a little Rosin.

They are cured thus with Oil of Wax, Mirtles, Ointment of Lead, Tutty. Or,
Take Tutty prepared a scruple, Alum half a dram, Camphire six grains, with
Capons-grease and Ointment of Roses make an Ointment. Or.

Take Pomatum an ounce and half, Mastich, a scruple, Powder of Gum Traganth and
red Roses, each half a scruple. Or,

Take Ointment of Lead, Pomatum, each half an ounce; Frankincense, Bole, each
half a scruple: mix them.

When the Infant is to suck, wash the Breasts first with white Wine and
Rose Water.

That the Child may suck without pain to the woman, let her have a Tin or
Silver Nipple, and cover it with the Pap of a new killed Cow, and let the child
suck that.

THE FOURTH BOOK. THE THIRD PART. THE SECOND SECTION. Of the Symptoms of the
Breasts.
Chap. 1. Of want of Milk, and not giving Suck.
THere are many Causes of want of Milk, either there is little Blood to breed
it, or the milk-making Faculty in the Breast that makes Milk, is not right, or
the Instruments for blood-making are distempered.

Sometimes the matter is consumed by a Fever or fasting, when they loath meat,
or from care or labor, evacuations, sweats, or loose belly. Or from weakness
of the Infant that cannot draw hard. Also sadness, fear and the like, may
hinder blood from flowing to the Breasts.

Milk is wanting when the Breasts are flaggy, The Signs.
and swell not, and little milk is sucked out. The signs of the Causes thus: If
it be from the Liver, there will be signs of its distemper: if from great
evacuation, that is known: the fault is known to be in the breasts, if as often
as they lie in, they have no milk, and the breasts are small and wrinkled; or
if Medicines to keep down the breasts, have been applied, she will tell you: or
if it be from weakness of the child, or passions of mind.

The inconvenience is little to the Nurse, The Prognostic.
but great to the Child; therefore get another Nurse, or cure her.

To breed milk, The Cure.
give things that breed much and good blood, of easy concoction. Medicines to
breed milk, are Fennel-roots, and all green things that heat, and are not very
dry, which are few, but infinite are they that hinder milk, as things hot and
dry, and cold things.

These increase Milk, Roots of Smallage, Seeds of Parsley, Dill, Basil, Anise,
Rocket, Earthworms washed in juice of Fennel and dried, or burnt in a pot a
dram or two, fasting for some mornings, or Crystal or Milk-stone a dram.

Compounds are: Take green Fennel, Parsley, each a handful; Barley two pugils,
red Pease half an ounce: boil them, and with Sugar sweeten them, or in
Chicken-broath. Or,

Take green Fennel six drams, Barley two pugils, boil them in Broth and strain
them. Or, Take Fennel-seed six drams, Anise a dram and half, Rocket-seed half a
dram: give a dram or two in Broth.

Or, Take Cows Udder sliced, dry it in an Oven, and powder it. Take half a
pound of it, Anise, Fennel-seed, each an ounce; Cummin-seed two ounces, Sugar
four ounces, make a Powder.

Hot Fomentations open the Breast, and attract Blood, as the Decoction of
Fennel, Smallage, or stamped Mints applied. Or, Take Fennel and Parsley green,
each a handful; boil and stamp them, add Barley-meal half an ounce, Gith-seeed
a dram, Storax calamite two drams, Oil of Lillies two ounces, make a Pultis.

A Dropax and Synapisme, or Plaster of Mustard, are good if often changed.

Chap. 2. Of too much Milk.
THis is when much blood flows to the Breasts, and the Mother will not give
suck, or weans the Child, for the Infant cannot suck it as fast as it breeds,
when there is much blood, and good breasts that cannot make Milk.

The Prognostic. Arist. 7. De hist. any. c. 12. The Cure.
If Milk be kept, and cannot be sucked out by the Child, these are swellings,
inflammations, pains, curdlings, and corruption. Children that suck much, if
they be full bodied, have a Convulsion.

The first coming of Milk is not to be stopped, but when there is more then the
Child can suck, it is abated with a slender diet of little nourishment, as
Barley, Pot-herbs-water. By letting blood, or cupping, or by Repellers to the
veins under the arms, above the breasts.

Mints, Calamints, Smallage, Agnus-castus, Coriander, Hemlock: to abate Milk,
Mints and Smallage are doubted.

Compounds. Take Smallage, Mints, Mallows, Mercur. Plat. Dioscor. dissentiunt.
each a handful; Foenugreek, Cummin-seed, each half an ounce; Chamomil,
Melilot-flowers, each a pugil; boil them, and foment, add a little Wine, or
make a Pultis of them with Bean-flour and Oxymel. Or, Take Cummin-seed, boil it
in Vinegar, and with a Sponge foment.

They which will not give suck, let them foment with this Decoction. Take
Mallows, Bays, Fennel, Smallage, Parsley, Mints, each half a handful; anoint
after with Oil Omphacine. Then take Turpentine washed with Wine and Rose Water
three ounces, Eggs two or three, Saffron a scruple, with Wax make a Plaster,
with a hole in the middle, repeat it always before Supper.

If you fear inflammation by too great a flux of Milk, repel with a Cataplasm
of Lettice, Water Lillies, Poppies, Housleek. Or, Take Turpentine washed with
Mint-water three ounces, Cummin-seed, Orris, Mints, each half an ounce; Saffron
a scruple, with Wax make a Cerot.

Chap. 3. Of Curdling, and other faults in the Milk.
IF it stay long in the breasts, the thin evaporates, and the thick remains,
and hardens the kernels; hence are hard tumors, because the cheesie part of the
Milk is apt to harden. Sometimes Milk is too thick or too thin, sharp, salt, or
the like.

The Signs.
The tumor from Milk curdled, is known by the plenty of Milk retained that make
clefts, and pain, and little tumors.

The Prognostic. The Cure.
If curdled Milk be strong in the Breasts, it easily turns to an Imposthume and
Inflammation.

To hinder curdling. Take Powder of Mints, Coriander-seed, each two ounces; Oil
of Dill an ounce; with Wax make a Liniment. Or, Take Oil of Mints, Chamomil,
Dill, Rue, each an ounce.

To dissolve curdled Milk; Take Fennel-roots, Eryngus, each an ounce; Mints a
handful, green Fennel half a handful, Aniseed a dram: boil them to a pint, add
Syrup of the two Roots and Oxymel, each two ounces.

Foment with the Decoction of Fennel, Dill, Southernwood, Chamomil,
Melilot-flowers, Fenugreek, Linseed, Parsley-seed, Smallage, or stamp them, or
Mints with Butter, and apply it. If it be hard, Take Mints, Colewort, Bran,
each a handful: boil them in Vinegar, and apply them.

Or, Take juice of Smallage, Dill, Coleworts, each a handful: boil them soft,
and bruise them, add powder of Mirrh, Orris, each two drams; Saffron a dram,
Oil of Rue an ounce, Vinegar an ounce and half, make a Pultis.

Chap. 4. Of Milk coming forth at wrong places.
MIlk has been known to come forth with the Urin, or by the Womb, by which
passage is the doubt; the short way is from the Breasts-veins to the
Epigastrick-veins, from the Epigastrick to the Hypogastrick, and so to the
Womb, rather then from the Pap-veins to the breast-veins, and so the
Hypogastrick, and so to the womb.

Chap. 5. Of strange things coming forth of the Breasts.
SOmetimes matter comes forth of the Nipples when they have long ulcers,
Schenkius lib. 2. ex observat. Bauhini. Amat. Lusit. cent. 2. cur. 21.
and after the ulcer is healed, it cease.

Sometimes the Terms have come forth of the Breasts at set Periods, of which
Hippocrates; When Blood comes forth at the Nipples, there is Madness. Amatus
Lusitanus knew two Noble Women that were so, and not Mad. And Hippocrates does
not speak of the Terms, but of other blood that is hot, and flies to the Head,
and causes Madness, and part of it goes to the Breast, and causes pain and
inflammation, which shows madness at hand.

It is cured by opening the Saphena in the Foot to revel the blood. The Cure.


Chap. 6. Of the change of color in the Nipples, and pain of the Breasts.
THe change of color in the Nipples, is not a sign of the loss of Virginity,
for they are blew in them that give suck; black in old women; and in them that
have known Venery, it is natural, and red as a Strawberry. Now because there is
a great consent between the Womb and Breasts, if the Womb be distempered, the
Nipples are discolored.

The pain in the breasts, is from stretching by much milk, and inflammation: or
from corrosion and twitching, from sharp matter, as in the Cancer and other
Ulcers.

The cause of the pain is known from the distemper. If it be from much milk, it
is a gentle pain. If from inflammation, it is stronger. If from a Cancer, it is
very great.

How these pains are cured, is showed in their Chapters.

A TRACTATE Of the CURE OF INFANTS.
THE FIRST PART. Of the Diet and Government of INFANTS.
Chap. 1. Of the Choice of the Nurse.
THE blood that nourished the Child in the Womb, is turned into Milk to nourish
him after he is born, because he can eat no solid meats. And because from
weakness or a Disease, the mother sometimes cannot suckle her child, she must
have a Nurse of good habit of body, and red complexion, which is the sign of
the best temper; and let her not differ much from the temper of the mother,
unless it be for the better: let her be between twenty and thirty, well bred,
and peaceable, not angry, melancholy, or foolish, not lecherous, nor a
drunkard. Let it not be after her first child, and let not her milk be too old
or too new, of ten months old at the most. Let her breasts be well fashioned
with good Nipples, that the child may take them with pleasure.

Let her keep a good diet, and abstain from hard wine and copulation, and
passions: these chiefly trouble the milk, and bring diseases upon the child. If
there be a bad humor from high feeding in the Nurse, let her take a gentle
Purge when she gives not suck, except the child be to be purged by the same.

Question. Whether is an Infant better nourished by the Mother or by a Nurse?
Some say by a Nurse: others say, The Mothers milk is more like the nourishment
it had in the womb, which is best, except she have a disease. For he that gave
her strength to conceive, travel, and bring forth, will give her strength to
play the Nurse, though she be weak. And honest women will be very obedient to
directions, for the good of the child they love so dearly: Lib. 12. c. 1.
of which Phavorinus.

Chap. 2. Of the Conditions of good Milk.
IT must be neither too thick nor too thin, for too thick cannot be concocted,
and the thin argues crudities. If it be dropped upon the nail, or a glass, and
falls not easily off as water, if it stick too fast, it is too thick.

Let the color be white, the more it differs from that, the worse it is. Let
it be sweet, not sour, salt, or bitter, or sharp. Let it neither smell burnt or
sour, for then it will easily corrupt in the stomach of the child.

Chap. 3. Of Curing the Faults in Milk.
THe usual fault is, when it is too thin by reason of plenty of Serum in the
blood: this nourishes little: and makes lean children that fall into a
Diarrhaea or Belly-flux. If it be too sharp, they are scabby.

Give hot and dry things, The Cure.
let bread be well baked with Anise and Fennel-seed, roast the meat, and give
Rice and sweet Almonds: avoid Fish, Sallets, Summer-fruits, much Broth, use
often exercise, and purge Serum or Whey, with Syrup of Roses and Mechoacan, or
Rhubarb, if it be hot or choleric.

If serous humors come from the distemper of the Liver, amend that, and let
cold and moist breasts be amended with things hot and dry.

Of thick Milk.
It is from gross diet and drink, or from a hot and dry distemper in the
breasts, that turns up the thin blood.

The Cure.
Give flesh of good juice, and easy concoction, Chickens, Kid, Veal, abstain
from gross food; use moistners and attenuaters, and if there be thick humors
with the blood, let them be evacuated.

Of the sharpness, ill taste, scent and color of the Milk.
There are diverse tastes, scents and colors in milk from variety of diet.
Therefore let a Nurse take heed of fried Onions, and all sour, salt and spiced
meats: and let her eat Sallets and Radishes, and the like. Let her not be
passionate. Milk also is sometimes salt, sharp, choleric, and melancholic.

This breeds dangerous diseases, as wringing in the belly, flux, watching,
leanness, trush, and falling sickness.

The Cure.
Correct the blood, and keep a good diet, beware of things that corrupt the
milk, as sharp, salt things: avoid anger, and other passions, and Venery. Good
Wine moderately taken by such as have used it, takes away the ill scent from
milk

If these will not do, purge the Cachymy or evil juyces, with Medicines proper
for the humors offending.

Chap. 4. Of the Diet and Government of newborn Children.
THe best color in a newborn child, is redness all over the body, that
changes by degrees to a Rose-colour; they who are white, are sickly, and short
lived. It must cry clear and loud, which shows the strength of the breath.
Observe all the parts, and figure, and passages diligently: let the Midwife
handle it gently. Roll it up with soft clothes, and lay it in a cradle, and
wash it first with warm wine; give it a little Honey before it sucks, or a
little Oil of sweet Almonds newly drawn, that if there be any filth contracted
in the stomach from the womb it may be cleansed, for there is black matter
yellowish in the guts, which if not voided, will cause an Epilepsie.

Keep it from cold air, and not too hot; nor in too great light, set not a
candle behind it at the head, nor let it see the Sun, least it be squint-eyed.
Let it not be frighted, nor left alone sleeping or waking, least it receive
hurt.

Let it sleep long, carried in the arms often, and give it the dug, but fill
not too much his stomach with milk. After four months, loosen the arms, but not
the belly, and breast, and feet, but keep them rouled from cold above a year.
Let it be often cleansed from the excrements of the belly and bladder, least
they cause itching, or pain, or excoriation.

A little crying empties the brain, and enlarges the lungs and stirs up
natural heat, but let it not cry too much, for to prevent Catarrhs and
Ruptures; but it does least hurt before sucking, and after concoction.

The first months, let it only suck as often as it will, so the stomach be not
overcharged. Give it change of breasts, sometimes the right, sometimes the
left. Afterward make a Pap of Barley-bread steept in water, and boiled in
Milk. Let strong Children have it betimes, and not suck an hour after, thus it
must be nourisht till it breeds Teeth.

Chap. 5. Of the Diet of an Infant from Breeding of Teeth, till it be Weaned.
WHen the Teeth come forth, by degrees give it more solid food, and deny it not
milk, such as are easily chewed. When it is stronger, let it not stand too soon
but be held by the Nurse, or put into a Go-chair, that it may thrust forward it
self, and not fall.

In places where bathing of Children is used, let it be washed twice a week,
from the seventh month, till it be weaned.

Chap. 6. Of Weaning of Children.
WEan it not till the Teeth are bred, lest when the eye-teeth come forth, it
causes Fevers, and ach of Gums, and other Symptoms.

The strong children must be sooner weaned than the weak, some in the twelfth,
some in the fifteenth month. It is good to wean them at a year and half, or two
years old, but give it not suddenly strange food, but bring it to by degrees
while it sucks.

It is best to wean in the Spring or Fall, in the increase of the Moon, and
give but very little Wine.

Chap. 7. Of Childrens Diet after Weaning.
FOr seven years the Diet must be such as nourishes and causes growth, 1.
Aphor. 13.
for Hippocrates says* They cannot endure to fast, especially if they be
^itty. Keep them from passions, sorrow, and fear, and cocker them not, but keep
them to reason. Let them play to temper the affection, but so as not to hurt
the body.

THE SECOND PART. OF Diseases and Symptoms of CHILDREN.
Chap. 1. Of Infants Diseases in General.
5. Aphor. 24.
HIPPOCRATES divides their Diseases according to their Ages; In new born
Children there are Ulcers in the Mouth, Vomiting, Coughs, Watchings, Fears,
Inflammation of the Navel, Aphor. 25.
Moistness of Ears. At Breeding of Teeth, the Gums Itch, and there are Fevers
and Convulsions, and a Loose Belly when they Breed the Eye-teeth. Aphor. 26.
When they are older, the Tonsils are Inflamed, the Vertebrae in the Neck are
luxated inwardly: they Breath short, they have the Stone, or round Worms, or
Ascarides, Warts, Satyrism or standing Yards, Strangury, Struma's, and other
Swellings.

They have other Diseases at other times, as Meazles, small Pox, the Ligament
of the Tongue is too short, chafing.

In the Cure, use not strong Remedies, nor bleeding, not purging, but
Suppositories and Clysters. As, Take Violet leaves, Mallows, each a handful;
flowers of Chamomil and Violets, each a pugil: boil them to four or five ounces
strained, add Syrup of Roses half an ounce, or six drams, Oil of Violets half
an ounce, make a Clyster.

If it need other Physic, give it to the Nurse, 6. Epid. c. 6.
for the purging force is sent to the milk, as Hippocrates says, If a Woman
take Elaterium or wild Cowcumbers, the Child is purged; but you must not give
these to the Nurse, but gentle things will pur^e the Infant, if the Nurse take
them.

Chap. 2. Of Fevers in Children Meazels, and Small Pox.
THey are subject to all sorts of Fevers, but they have chiefly a Fever from
milk which putrifies, and turns to choler, and inflames the humors. And when
the teeth break forth, the gums are inflamed, they have watching and itching
pain in the mouth, and then Fevers.

When Fevers come from corrupt milk, The Signs.
they expel no teeth, and there are signs of corrupt milk, belly-ach, many
stools yellow and green. A Fever from breeding of teeth, has its proper signs.

These Fevers cease when the cause is removed, but if corrupt milk last long,
The Prognostic.
it is dangerous.

A Fever from corrupt milk is commonly from choler; The Cure.
therefore give cold moist things to the Nurse, as Lettice, Endive, Emulsions
of the four great cold Seeds, Barley-cream. Give no Wine while the child is in
a Fever. Purge the Nurse gently, with Manna, Cassia, Lenitive Electuary, and
Syrup of Roses.

Give Alterers to the Infant, as Syrup of Violets, Sorrel, Citrons, Succory,
Endive-water, and of Violet with Sugar.

Anoint the Backbone with Mucilage of Quinces, Fleabane, with Oil of Violets,
and a little Wax, lay Astringents to the Stomach. As, Take Oil of Roses,
Mastich, each half an ounce; red Sanders, Coral, each a scruple; with Wax mix
it.

If the Fever come from breeding of it, abate the pain, and give the Alterers,
of which Chap. 14. Of Bleeding of Teeth.

Of Meazles and Small Pox.
Lib. 4. De fabr. c. 12.
There are Epidemical Fevers at certain times that cast out Meazles and small
Pox, of which before. The cause is not only from the impurity of the Terms, but
from the malignity of the Air, for they are more or less, as the Air is purer
or impurer.

Sometimes it is infectious, and the humors are so corrupt, that worms breed
under the scabs, and corode the bones and internal parts, as has been seen in
Bodies opened, dead of this Disease.

If the Disease be very infectious, before there is a Fever, it is good to
preserve by change of Air and Antidotes, when many die of it; but when few die,
it is not amiss to let them alone, lest they have it in a more dangerous time,
for most will have it: only give a gentle Purge, and fortify Nature, that she
may expel them.

If there be a Fever, use no more Preservatives, but labor to get them forth
by Medicines mentioned, and defend the eyes and throat, and prevent deformity
of which before.

Chap. 3. Of the Milkey Scab, Achores, and Favi.
THe Milkey Scab is at the first sucking, the Achores are after. The Achores
are scabs not white, and the white scab is not only in the face, but all over
the body. The Achores are only in the head, but they are cured alike.

They are all ulcers chiefly in the head, with holes that run with matter
constantly.

They come from excrementitious humors, The Causes.
waterish and sharp, mixed of thick and thin, very salt. Therefore they are
sometimes yellow, 2. De com. po. med. sec. lo. c. 8.
or white, or red, or black, but always salt, and biting and itching, that
makes them scratch. They are gathered in the womb, and from corruption of the
milk.

The Vulgar think they are healthful, The Prognostic. Hipp. lib. de sacro morb.
when they run, because Nature sends them forth, and if they strike in, they
causes Diseases and Epilepsies. They cure in time of themselves, but if the
matter be very bad, it pierces the skull.

Dry these not rashly, The Cure.
so they disfigure not the face, nor hurt the eyes. But drive them forth with
Scabious, Carduus-water and Cordials. Use no Coolers, nor Astringents, lest the
matter be struck in. Let the Nurse forbear salt and sharp, and spiced things,
and strong Wine. Prepare the humors with Borage, Succory, Bugloss, Fumitory,
Hops, Polypody and Dock-roots. Then purge with Senna, Polypody, Epithymum,
Rhubarb, and strengthen the Bowels. As, Take Conserve of Borage, Bugloss,
Violets, Fumitory, Succory, each an ounce; Succory-roots, and Citrons candied,
each half an ounce; Diarrhodon, Diamargariton frigid, Hartshorn, each a
scruple; with Syrup of Gilly-flowers, make an Electuary. Let the Nurse take
every day two drams. Or, Take Hartshorn prepared two drams, Magistery of Coral
a dram, Diamargariton frigid half a dram: give half a dram, or a dram of this
Powder. Let the child be purged with Manna or Raisons laxative.

If you fear great putrefaction under the scabs, and that will turn to a scald
head, or eat the skull; wash the head with Decoction of Mallows, Barley,
Celandine, Wormwood, or with Althaea-roots boiled in boys Urine, and
Barley-water. And then anoint with Oil of Roses, bitter Almonds, and a little
Litharge. Or,

Take ashes of Mirtles and Nut-shells, each a dram; Tutty a dram and half,
Butter washed with Rose Water an ounce. Or, Take juice of Beets, Celandine,
each an ounce; Hog's Grease two ounces, Sulphur a dram. Or, Take Ceruss,
Litharge, each two drams; Pomegranate-flowers and Agarick, each a dram; with
Oil of Roses and Vinegar, make an Ointment: or wash with Soap, and then with
the Decoction. When the skull is bare, use Honey of Roses and Spirit of Wine,
and after round Birthwort, and Balsom of Peru, and Turpentine with
Tobacco-water.

Chap. 4. Of a Scald Head.
IF Achores or Favi last long, or are ill cured, they turn to a Scald, which is
a scabby Ulcer that corrodes the skin, and stinks; it is called Tinea or Moth
which eats Garments, as this does the flesh. Achores are moist ulcers in the
head and body. Tinea is a dry ulcer in the head only.

The immediate cause is a salt and sharp humor, melancholic from the mothers
blood, The Causes.
or bad milk, it infecteth others, by the clouts or caps.

Some are like a bran or scurfe with scales, The Differences.
some are slimy, and when the scab is off, there appears red quick knobs of
flesh, like the insides of figs, some are malignant, some not, some new, some
old.

There are dry scabs in the head, The Signs.
yellow or ash colored, that run little, and that which is voided stinketh.

It is hard to be cured. If it be new, The Prognostic.
or the matter yellow, or the like, it is easier. An old Scald ash-colored and
black is stubborn: after cure, the hair will scarce grow there again, because
the skin is so hard; if it will not grow red after rubbing, there is no hopes
of hair coming again.

First, The Cure.
Take off the Scab with cleansers a little sharp, and because the humors make
the skin dry and thick, moisten with Hog's Grease upon Beet or Colewort-leaves.
Or, Take juice of Fumitory, Coleworts, Docks, Elicampane, each an ounce and
half; Litharge half an ounce, with Hoggs-grease, Oil of Rue, and Wax, make a
soft Ointment.

When the Child is of age and strong, make first universal evacuation with
Senna, Rhubarb, Agarick, then take off the Scab with Sulphur two drams, Mustard
half a dram, Stavisacre, Briony-roots, each a dram; Vinegar an ounce,
Turpentine half an ounce, and Bears-grease. Or beat Watercresses with
Hog's Grease and apply it, the scab will fall off in twenty four hours, continue
it.

After the scab is off, pull the hair out by the roots, with instruments or
medicines; commonly they use a pitched cap, and pull it off violently, which
bring away the hair. Or, Take Starch or Wheat-flour two ounces, Rosin half an
ounce, boil it in water for a Pultis, lay it upon the several Scalds, and let
it stick some days, then pluck it off suddenly. Then use Emollients that
correct the dry distemper.

Also use things to take the Excrements out that lie deep in the skin. As, Take
Roots of Althaea, Docks, Lillies, each an ounce; Mallows, Fumitory, Sage, each
two handfuls; boil them in Lie, add Vinegar, wash the head with it every day.
Then,

Take Ostratium, Sulphur, each half an ounce; Oil of Eggs, an ounce, with
Hog's Grease After that, Take Briony and Dock-roots, and Elicampane-roots, each
an ounce; Fumitory, Celandine, Scabious, each two handfuls; Chamomil and Balm,
each a handful; boil them in Lie, and wash the Head twice a day therewith, or
foment it, then rub the head wiph a course cloth, or with Oil of Staves-acre,
or of Radish till it grow red, to draw out the bad humors that lie deep.

Then use Tarr and Wax for a Cerot. Or, Take Saltpeter an ounce, Oxymel an
ounce and half. Or, Take quick Brimstone an ounce, white Hellebore,
Staves-acre, each two drams, with Hog's Grease.

It is not safe to use Arsenick, or Orpiment, or Mercury, or other poisons that
corrode, because it is so near the brain.

Chap. 5. Of Ptiriasis or breeding of Lice.
LIce are Creatures which breed in cloths that are constantly worn, but they
are chiefly in children from the excrements of the head.

All say, That filth and nastiness alone is the cause of Lice; but I think not,
for filth alone cannot do it without heat, for besides the first qualities,
there is a hidden force in the matter by which it is disposed to produce a
particular species; for Fleas and Worms will not breed of that matter which
breeds Lice, so it is in Plants.

Heat is the helping cause which raises the seminal force, and brings it into
act, and though the matter be putrid, it does not work upon it, but as it is
somewhat natural.

Excrements are not presently putrid, but there is in them a heat that can
raise forming force, and though there is some putrefaction, yet is it not so
great as to hinder the action, hence it is, that children and women that are
hot and moist have many excrements that are fit to breed Lice. Gal. oriba Ausc.


Some meats breed Lice, as Figs by their fat juice which does naturally tend to
the skin, and varieties of meats, and not cleansing nor combeing. The place
where Lice breed in children is the skin of the head, where they stick fast
with the hair, especialy if there be scabs.

The Signs are needless, they are manifest. The Signs. The Prognostic.


It is a filthy troublesome disease, many have them breed all over the Body,
and some have died by them. Sometimes the Lice leave them when they are about
to die.

To prevent breeding Lice, let children eat no food of evil juice, especially
Figgs, let the head be often combed and washed, and the matter purged that
breeds them, with hot dry thin medicines, that draw the matter out and consume
superfluous moisture.

The Cure.
Take heed of Mercury and Arsnick in children, but make this Lotion. Take round
Birthwort, Lupines, Pine and Cypress-leaves, each equal parts; boil them. Or,
Take Elicampane-roots two ounces, Briony half an ounce, Beets, Mercury,
Soap-wort, each a handful; Lupines a dram, Niter half an ounce, boil them for a
Lotion; then use this Ointment. Take Powder of Staphisacre three drams, of
Lupines half an ounce, Agarick two drams, quick Sulphur a dram and half,
Ox-gall half an ounce, with Oil of Wormwood: there are stronger, as white
Hellebore and Mercury, which are not safe.

Chap. 6. Hydrocephalus or Swelling of the Head.
WE spoke of this in the water without the Skull: Hydrocephalus is from water
gathered within the Skull, or in the Ventricles of the Brain, as when the
Child's head in the Womb hangs down, or when the Brain is very moist.

The Signs.
A tumor from water contained in the brain is less and harder then when it is
out of the skull.

The Prognostic. The Cure.
It is harder to be cured then when it is gathered without the skull, and is
often deadly.

They are many medicines mentioned that are good here to be used outwardly, and
to the nose and ears. As, Take Snails in their shells thirty, Marjoram,
Mugwort, each a handful, stamped, add Camphire a scruple, Saffron half a dram,
with Oil of Chamomil make a Pultis. Snuff this Water often: Take Nutmegs,
Cloves, Cubebs, each a scruple; Calamus, Frankincense-bark, each half a dram;
Marjoram-water three ounces, drop hot Oils into the Ears. If in twenty days
the water be not gone, open the skull, and let out the water by degrees, and
take heed of cold.

The tumor of wind in the skin of the head or membranes of the brain, is seldom
without water which breeds wind.

Use Discussers that make thin, as Chamomil, Rue, Organ, etc.

Chap. 7. Of Syriasis.
IT is from Aetius, a disease with a Fever, Tetra. 1. sermon. 4. c. 13.
or an inflammation of the membranes and the brain, so that there is a
hollowness of the eyes and forehead.

It is from phlegmatic blood that grows hot by putrefaction, and so becomes
like choler. The Causes.
The remote causes are hot weather, and milk full of wind, from the evil diet
of the Nurse. Such milk will make the child drunk, and cause the inflammation.

Heat of the forehead, and hollowness there, The Signs.
redness of face, a Fever, dryness, no appetite, watching. The hollowness in
the forepart of the head, is where the Sagital and Coronal sutures meet, for
there the bones are membranous, and grow at last hard.

It is dangerous, The Prognostic.
and counted deadly among women, and as often as this bone or membrane falls,
there is a pit, and the brain falls down, they commonly dye in three days.

The Cure.
First, give a Clyster of Syrup of Roses or Violets, then Coolers, of the juice
and water of Lettice, Guords, Melons; or apply a Pumpion split in two. But cool
not the brain too much, anoint with Oil of Roses. Or, Take Oil of Roses half an
ounce, Populeon an ounce, the white of an Egg, and of the Emulsion of cold
Seeds drawn with Rose Water two drams.

After the flux is stopped, and the Inflammation abated, use Discussers. As, Take
Oil of Chamomil an ounce and half, of Dill half an ounce, with the yolk of an
Egg.

Let the Nurses diet be cooling, or the milk be changed: let it not be vexed.

Chap. 8. Of Frights in the Sleep.
3. Aphor. 24.
HIppocrates says this is often; the cause is unclean vapors mixed with the
animal spirits that disturb them, and present horrible objects to the fancy.
They arise from the depraved concoction of the stomach, in full feeding
children, that eat more then they can digest. These vapors ascend not only by
the weasand, but by the veins to the head. It comes often from worms also, or
corrupt humors that gnaw the mouth of the stomach.

The Signs.
They grown in their sleep, and twitch, and being frighted out of sleep, they
cry, their breath is hot, and often stinking.

The Prognostic.
Cure it presently, for it is the forerunner of an Epilepsie.

Give good Milk and less, The Cure.
that the stomach be not overcharged. Let it not sleep presently after food,
but carry it about, till it is in the bottom of the stomach. Use Oil of sweet
Almonds, or Honey of Roses two spoonfuls to cleanse the stomach. Then
strengthen it with Magistery of Coral, or Confection of Hyacinths with Milk.
Or, Take Magistery of Coral a dram, Diaplerers a scruple, with Sugar dissolved
in Rose Water an ounce make Rouls.

Anoint the stomach with Oil of Nard, Wormwood, Mints, Mastich, Nutmegs. If it
be from a Fever, look to that; If from Worms, I shall after speak of it. Some
hang Coral and Wolves-teeth about the child's neck.

Chap. 9. Of great Watching.
A Child new born sleeps more then he wakes, because his brain is very moist,
and he used to sleep in the womb If you cannot make him sleep by singing or
rocking, nor the like, it is a Disease.

Are diverse in men and children: The Causes.
in these it is from milk corrupt in the stomach, from which sharp humors
arise, and disturb the animal Spirits, and infect them; and if there be sad
fancies, frights follow, of which before.

If it cries always, The Signs.
and cannot by any art be made to sleep, it is a sign of a disease of watching
which is dangerous, because children use to sleep much. And hence come
Catarrhs, Convulsions, Dryness and Fevers.

The bad milk must be amended, The Cure.
and the corrupt meat prevented. If it be from a Fever or Pain, remove them.
1. De tuen. c. 8.
Galen advises you often to change the bed and place. Sleeping Medicines are
not safe, but hurt, but are rather to be given the Nurse moderately, as sweet
Almonds, Lettice, Poppy-seeds.

Wash the Feet with Decoction of Dill-tops, Chamomil-flowers, Sage, Osiers,
Vine-leaves, Poppy heads. Cool not the head too much, nor use Narcoticks. These
are safe, Oil of Dill to the Temples, Oil of Roses, with Oil of Nutmegs, with
Poppy-seed, Breast-milk, Rose or Nightshade-water with Saffron.

In great dryness of the Brain, let the covering of the Cradles head be wet.

Chap. 10. Of Epilepsie and Convulsion.
IT is either by consent from parts below, when the milk corrupts in the
stomach, or from an ill quality in it from the Nurses bad diet, or from worms
in the guts, or from vapors, from bad humors that twitch the membranes of the
brain, as in the Meazles and small Pox.

It is sometimes from the brain first, as when the humors are bred in the brain
that cause it, either from the parents, or from distemper, or bad diet.

It may come from Toothache also, when the brain consents, and from a sudden
fright.

The Signs.
It is manifest. You shall know by the signs of the diseases, whether it comes
from bad milk, worms or teeth. If from a fright, the people will tell you. If
these all are absent, it is certain that the brain is first affected.

The Prognostic.
It is a great disease, and kills for the most part young children. But when in
older, Hippo. 58. Aph. 7.
and it comes at a distance, it vanishes by age. If it come with Pox or
Meazles, it cease when they come forth if Nature be strong enough.

Give this Powder to prevent it, The Cure.
to a child as soon as it is born. Take male Piony-roots gathered in the
decrease of the Moon a scruple, Magistery of Coal half a scruple, with
Leaf-gold make a Powder. Or, Take Piony-roots a dram, Piony-seeds, Misleto of
the Oak, Elkes-hoof, Mans-skull, Amber, each a scruple; Musk two grains, make a
Powder.

The Florentines burn behind in the head to dry the brain; and Celsas says, It
is the last Remedy. Lib. 3. c. 25. Lib. 3. c. 13.
Aeginta says, That children cannot endure such cruelty, for the pain and
watching would kill them. See Sylvaticus.

The best part of the cure in the Nurses diet, Sylvatic. contro. 87.
which must not be disordered. If it be from corrupt milk, provoke vomit, thus;
hold down the tongue, and put a quill dipped in sweet Almonds down the throat.

If it come from worms, give things that kill worms, with Piony-roots, and the
like. If there be a Fever, respect that also. Give Coral, Smaradgs, and
Elkes-hoof.

In the fit, give Epileptick-water, as Lavender-water, and rub with the Oil of
Amber, or hang a Piony-root, Elkes-hoof, or Smaradg about the neck.

Of a Convulsion.
This is when the brain labors to cast out what troubles it. The matter is in
the marrow of the back, and fountain of the nerves. It is a stubborn disease,
and often kills.

In the fit, wash the body, especially the backbone with decoction of Althaea,
Lilly-roots, Piony, Chamomil-flowers. And anoint with Man's and Goose-grease,
Oil of Worms, Orris, Lillies, Foxes, Ex Paulo Aegineta.
Turpentine, Mastich, Storax calamite. The Sun flower is good boiled in water,
for to wash the Child.

Chap. 11. Of Strabismus, or Squint-eyes.
THis is when they lie in the Cradle with their head from the light, or on one
side, and they still look toward the light, which causes distortion of the
eyes, or it may come from the Epilepsie, or by Birth

The Prognostic.
If by birth, it is not curable, nor if it come from an Epilepsie. If it come
from custom, and be new, it is curable.

The Cure. Lib. 1. par. 3. c. 43.
You must put a Candle on the contrary side, or a Picture, so long till the Eyes
come to be right.

Chap. 12. Of Pain in the Ears, Inflammation, Moisture, Ulcers, and Worms.
OF these in the first Book. But here we shall speak of Infants: The Brain in
them is very moist, and has many excrements which Nature cannot send out at
its proper passages; these get often to the ears, and cause pain, and flux of
blood, with inflammation and matter with pain.

The Signs.
In children pain and inflammation are hard to be known, they cannot relate it,
only it is known by constant crying, and feeling their ears, and will not let
others touch them; sometimes the parts about the Ears are red.

It is dangerous, because it brings watching, The Prognostic. Hipp. 1. prog.
c. 16. The Cure.
and Epilepsie: the moisture breeds worms there, and fouls the spungy bones,
and at length deafness incurable.

Presently allay the pain, but children must not have strong remedies. Only use
warm milk about the ears, Oil of Violets, or the Decoction of Poppy tops. To
take away moisture, use Honey of Roses, and Aqua Mellis, to be dropped into the
Ears. Or, Take Virgins Honey half an ounce, red Wine two ounces, Alum,
Saffron, Saltpeter, each a dram; mix them at the fire. Or drop in
Hemp-seed-Oyl, with a little Wine.

Chap. 13. Of the Thrush, Bladders in the Gums, and Inflammation of the Tonsils.
THese are from bad milk, or from foul humors in the stomach, for the mouth is
tender, and cannot endure the sharp milk, nor the vapors from the stomach,
because the coat is the same as in Lib. 2. Par. 1. Cap. 18.

The bladders in the gums are thus cured. Take Lentils husked, powder them, lay
it upon the gums. Or, Take Melium in flour half an ounce, with Oil of Roses
make a Liniment.

The inflammation of the Tonsils is more from eleven to thirteen, for then the
parts are harder, and hold the humors longer, and they cannot sweat out.

For Cure, keep the belly loose by Clysters, Hipp. 3. aph. 26.
or the like; use Repellers at first, then Resolvers with Repellers, and at
last Resolvers alone, but not too hot; in age, Gargles are best: in Infants
anoint with Honey of Roses, Mirtles, Pomegranates, Diamoron inwardly. Outwardly
use Oil of sweet Almonds, Lib. 2. Par. 1. cap. 22.
Chamomil, St. John's Wort, etc.

Chap. 14. Of Breeding of Teeth.
THis is a necessary evil in all children, and very great by reason of the
variety of symptoms joined with it. It is about the seventh month, first the
fore-teeth, then the eye-teeth, and last of all the grinders. First they feel
an itching in their gums, then they are pierced as with a needle, and pricked
by the sharp bones, whence is great pain, watching and inflammation of gums,
Fever, looseness and convulsions, especially when they breed their eye-teeth.

The Signs.
First, It is known by the usual time, as the beginning of the seventh month.
Also they put their fingers in their mouths to allay pain. 3. They hold the
nipple faster then before. 4. The gum is white where the tooth begins to come,
and there are diverse Symptoms mentioned before. The Fever that follows
breeding of teeth, comes from choleric humors inflamed by watching, pain and
heat.

The Prognostic.
The longer teeth are breeding, the greater the danger, so that many dye of
Fevers or Convulsions. They are best that have their belly loose: These have
no Convulsion, Hipp. lib. de dentitio.
and a Fever consumes the humors.

Hard breeding of teeth is from thickness of the gums; therefore mollify and
loosen them, The Cure.
rub them with the finger dipped in Butter and Honey, or a Virgin Wax Candle is
to be chewed upon. Or anoint with Mucilage of Quinces made with Mallow-water,
or with the brains of a Hare. Foment the cheek with the decoction of Althaea
and Chamomil-flowers, and Dill, or with juice of Mallows, and fresh Butter.

If the gums are inflamed, add juice of Nightshade and Lettice. Let the Nurse
keep a temperate diet inclining to cold, as Barley-broaths, or Water-grewel,
rear Eggs, Prunes, Lettice, Endive. Avoid salt, sharp, biting and peppered
meats, and Wine.

Chap. 15. Of Loosing of the Tongue, and of the Frog.
WHen the Tongue is tied, they cannot freely suck. This must be done by skilful
Artists; or use this Liniment. Take clarified Honey, and boil it up gently till
it may be powdered. Then take yolks of hard Eggs dried in a glass in an Oven,
till they may be powdered, a dram, Frankincense and Mastich, each a scruple;
burnt Alum fix grains, with Honey of Roses make a Liniment.

The Frog is when the veins under the tongue, are filled with bad blood; and if
phlegm sweat out, and stick in the passages, there is a tumor like Mushrooms
which causes stammering. It is cured thus: Take Cuttle-bone, Sal-gem, Pepper,
each a dram; burnt Sponge three drams, make a Powder, or with Honey a Liniment:
rub under the tongue. Lay under the chin a Plaster of Goose-dung and Honey
boiled in Wine, till the Wine be consumed.

Chap. 16. Of Catarrh, Cough, and difficult Breathing.
Lib. 1. Par. 2. c. 34.
WE have spoken of these before, but because Hippocrates reckons them in
childrens diseases, I shall touch upon them.

The Causes.
The general Cause of a Catarrh in a child, is a moist brain, and much milk that
burdens the stomach, from whence many vapors fill the brain; and if the brain
be full of excrements, it is easily dissolved or melted, either by heat or
cold, and goes to the nose, jaws or lungs, which cause a Cough or Asthma.
Moreover much food makes crudities in the first passages, and phlegmatic blood
is bred of crudity and thick chyle in the Liver. This is sent by the arterial
vein into the lungs, and pressing the Bronchia or pipes of the lungs, causes
difficult breathing and Asthma.

The Signs.
It is known to be from a hot humor, if it be thin, they often sneese, the face
is red, and the jaws; the breath is short, and the Nurse finds it in her
nipples. If difficulty of breathing come from the head, there will be cough and
snorting in breathing, and a noise in the lungs, when the air passes not
freely through them. If it come from the parts below, there is neither Catarrh
nor Cough, but hardness about the Liver, and a tumor.

The Prognostic.
In Children a great Catarrh with short breath is hard to be cured, because they
cannot take Physic.

First, let it and the Nurse keep a good diet, The Cure.
fill not the stomach with milk nor other diet; but let the Nurse forbear
sharp, salt, peppered, sour things, and things that fill the head with vapors.
And give her a Pectoral Decoction: Take Figs, Jujubes, each ten; Sebestens
thirty, Raisens stoned ten drams, Liquorish two drams, Maidenhair, Hysop,
Violets, each half an ounce: boil them in three pints of Water, to the
consumption of the third part. Let her take six ounces every morning.

Keep the belly open with Syrup of Roses, or Cassia, or a Clyster; with Oil of
sweet Almonds, with Sugar Candy, or juice of Fennel, with Milk, or hold down
the Tongue, and provoke Vomiting.

Give Syrup of Jujubes, Maidenhair. If the matter be thick, give Syrup of
Hysop, or Horehound, or an Emulsion of Oil of sweet Almonds, Pine-nuts,
Scabious-water. Or give a Lohoch of Diaireoes, Diatragacanth frigid, Penides,
with Sprup of Jujubes.

If it be hot, give Emulsions of the four great cold Seeds, with Mallows,
Pellitory, with Diatragacanth frigid.

To dry up the matter, lay outwardly a stuph of Hemp hot, and sprinkled with
powder of red Roses and Frankincense. Apply Basil and Marjoram to the Nose, to
make it sneese.

Chap. 17. Of the Hickets.
IT comes from corruption of the food in the stomach, or from milk filling it,
or from cold air: these hurt the expulsive faculty, and it is stirred up to
expel what is hurtful.

If it come from repletion of milk, The Signs.
the belly swells, and there is vomiting after. If from corruption of milk, the
Nurse has bad milk: the child cries, and is pained, and the excrements smell
of stinking milk.

The Prognostic.
Hickets is commonly, not dangerous in children, and cease when the cause is
taken away. If it be from a vehement cause, and goes to the nerves, there
follows a Convulsion, or Epilepsie, and death.

That from corruption of nourishment is cured by Vomit, with a feather dipped in
Oil, to tickle the throat; then strengthen the stomach with hot things. As
Syrup of Mints, Bettony, and fomet it with decoction of Mints, Organ, Wormwood;
then anoint with Oil of Mints, Mastich, Dill. Or, Take Mastich an ounce,
Frankincense; Dill-seed, each two drams; Cummin-seed a dram, with juice of
Mints and Flax, apply them to the stomach.

There is a disease like the Hickets in children from anger or grief, when the
Spirits are much stirred, and run from the heart to the Diaphragma forceably,
and hinder or stop the breath. Sometimes they have a shril voice, the Spirits
suddenly breaking forth, but when the passion cease, this Symptom cease.

Chap. 18. Of Vomiting.
IT is from too much milk or bad milk, or from phlegm that falls from the head
to the stomach, but this is seldom in children It is often from a moist loose
stomach, for as dryness retains, so looseness lets go.

If it be from much milk, they are better after vomiting. The Cure.
If it be from corruption of milk, that which is vomited is yellow, green, or
otherwise ill colored, and stinking: worms are known by their signs.

It is for the most part without danger in children, and they that vomit from
their birth, The Prognostic.
are the lustiest, for the stomach being not used to meat, and milk being taken
too much, oftentimes crudities are easily bred, or the milk is corrupted, and
it is better to vomit these up, then keep them in. If Vomiting last long, it
causes Atrophy.

When it is from too much milk, give it less; The Cure.
if it be from corrupt milk, amend it, as I showed. Cleanse the Child with
Honey of Roses; and strengthen the Stomach with Syrup of Mints, Quinces. Or,
Take Wood-Aloes, Coral, Mastich, each half a dram; Galangal half a scruple,
with Syrup of Quinces make a Linctus.

If the humor be sharp and hot, give Syrup of Pomegranates, Currants, Coral.

Apply to the Belly the Plaster of Bread, the Stomach-Cerot, or Bread dipped in
Wine hot. Or, Take Oil of Mastich, Quinces, Mints, Wormwood, each half an
ounce; of Nutmegs by expression half a dram, Chemical Oil of Mints three drops.
Coral half an occult propriety, therefore it is hung about their necks.

Chap. 19. Of the Torments or Pains of the Belly.
IT is often with the flux of the belly, and from milk alone that breeds wind
and sharp humors. When it is corrupted, it gets to the guts, and causes a
gnawing pain: worms staying in the guts, do the same.

The Signs.
They cry continually, hate the breast, and toss to and fro. If it be from wind,
it cease, sometimes the belly swells, and they break wind. If it be from
humors, it is constant: if it be tough phlegm, the belly is bound, and the dung
is slimy. If it be sharp, there is a flux yellow and green. If from worms,
there are signs of them, and of crudities and wind.

The Prognostic.
If this pain lasts long, they are weak, or have Convulsions or Epilepsie, it is
worse then from corrupt milk and worms, and is dangerous.

The Cure.
If it be from crude humors and wind, give a Clyster. Take Pellitory,
Chamomil-flowers, each a handful; boil them in Chicken broth, two, three, or
four ounces, add Honey of Roses an ounce, with the yolk of an Egg make a
Clyster. This may be given safely to a child of two months old. Or give Oil of
sweet Almonds, with Sugar Candy, and a scruple of Aniseeds; Heur. meth. ad
prax. l. 2. c. 26.
it purges new born Babes from green choler and stinking phlegm. If it be given
with Sugar Pap, it allays the crying pains of the belly.

Anoint the belly with Oil of Dill, or lay Pellitory stamped with Oil of
Chamomil to the belly. Or, Take Chamomil-flowers, Dill-tops, each a handful;
Faenugreek and Lineseed, each half an ounce; boil them in Wine, foment the
belly twice a day before meat.

If pain be from corrupt milk that is sharp, give Syrup of Roses, or Honey of
Roses, or Syrup of Succory, with Rhubarb, or a Clyster of the Decoction of
Bran, Pellitory, with Syrup of Roses. And use outwardly Oil of Roses, Dill and
Chamomil.

Chap. 20. Of puffing up of the Belly and Hypochondria.
WHen they suck too much, the belly is swelled under the ribs, for want of
concoction, and there are crudities in the stomach and wind, and also in the
parts adjacent.

The Hypochondria are hard, and puffed up, The Signs.
and there is straitness in the mouth of the stomach, and short breath.

It is easily cured with good diet. The Prognostic. The Cure.


Give a thinner diet, that the crudities may be concocted. Give no fresh
nourishment till the first be digested, then give Honey of Roses to purge. Or
the Decoction of Cardiaca, which is good for the heart and mouth of the
stomach: it opens obstructions, and cleanses phlegm. Or powder of Piony-roots,
Cummin-seed, Jesamine; or make it up with Honey, Oil of sweet Almonds, or Sugar
for a Liniment. Foment the sides with the Decoction of Cardiaca,
Chamomil-flowers, and Cummin-seed.

Chap. 21. Of the Flux of the Belly.
IT is, 1. From breeding of Teeth, with a Fever commonly, and the concoction
is hindered, and the nourishment corrupted. 2. From much watching. 3. From pain.
4. From stirring of the humors by a Fever. 5. When they suck or drink too much
in a Fever. Sometimes they have a flux without breeding of teeth, from outward
cold in the guts or stomach, that hinders concoction.

The Signs.
If it be from teeth, it is knwon by the signs in breeding of teeth: if from
external cold, there are sings of no other causes. If from a humor flowing from
the head, there are signs of a Catarrh, and the excrements are froathy. If
crude humors are voided, there is wind, belching, and phlegmatic excrements. If
they be yellow, gre n, and stink, the flux is from a hot and sharp humor.

The Prognostic. Hipp. lib. de dentitio. The Cure.
It is best in breeding of teeth, when the belly is loose; but if it be too
great, and you fear Atrophy, it must be stopped: if black excrements are voided
with a Fever, it is bad.

A sucking child needs not cure so much as the Nurse, you must chiefly observe
the condition of the milk and mend it, if not, change the Nurse, and let her
not eat green fruit, and things of hard concoction. If the child suck not, take
away the causes of the flux, with purges that bind after: as Syrup of Honey of
Roses, or a Clyster. Take the decoction of Milium, Myrobalans, each two or
three ounces; with an ounce or two of Syrup of Roses make a Clyster. After
cleansing, if the cause be hot, give Syrup of dried Roses, Quinces, Mirtles,
Coral, Currants, or the powder of Diamargariton, Coral, Mastich, Hartshorn, red
Roses, or powder of Mirtles, with a little Sanguis Draconis.

Anoint with Oil of Roses, Mirtles, Mastich, Or, Take red Roses an ounce,
Mirtles, Mastich, each two drams; with Oil of Mirtles and Wax make an Ointment.
Or, Take red Roses, Moulin, each a handful; Cypress-roots two drams, make a
Bag, boil it in red Wine, apply it to the belly: or use the Plaster of Bread
or Stomach-Oyntment.

If the cause be cold, and excrements white, give Syrup of Mastich and Quinces,
with Mint-water.

Use outwardly Mints, Mastich, Cummin. As, Take Rose-seeds an ounce, Cummin,
Aniseeds, Lib. 3. par. 2. cap. 5. and 6.
each two drams; with Oil of Mastich, Wormwood and Wax make an Ointment.

Chap. 22. Of Binding of the Belly.
IT is from a cold and dry distemper of the guts from birth in some. 2. From
slimy phlegm that wraps the dung, which sticks in the guts. This is from bad
milk, when the Nurse eats gross food, slimy and astringent, or drinks little.
3. It is from a hot distemper of the Kidneys or Liver, that dries the
excrements. 4. It is when choler does not stir up the guts to expel.

If it be from a dry distemper of the guts, The Signs.
it is hard to be cured: if it be from slimy phlegm, the dung is wrapped in it. If
choler comes not to the guts to provoke them to stool, the dung is white, and
the body yellow.

It is best in children to have a loose belly, The Prognostic. Hipp. 2. Aph.
53. The Cure.
and they are more healthful; for if it be bound, the belly is pained, and
there is a headache.

First take away the cause: if it be from a hot distemper of any bowel, or dry,
wash the child often, to moisten and cool it in a Bath of Succory and Lettice
boiled. In a cold distemper, use hot for the stomach, and in a dry, use moist
things, as Oil of Lillies, Dialthaea, Hens-grease, Butter. Let the Nurse avoid
astringent meats, as Quinces, Medlars, Beans, and use Emollients. If the child
be big, give juice or Decoction of red Colworts, with a little Salt and Honey.
If it be from slimy Phlegm, give Honey or Syrup of Roses, Correct the hot
distemper of the Liver and Reins, with Syrup of Violets, and Emulsions of the
four great cold Seeds. If choler come not from the Gall to the Guts, give the
Decoction of Grass-roots, Fennel, Sparagus, Maidenhair.

Give Clysters to cut and cleanse tough Phlegm. As, Take Althoea-roots, Mallows,
Pellitory, each half a handful; Foenugreek and Linseed, each a dram;
Chamomil-flowers a pugil: boil, and to three or six ounces, add three drams of
Cassia, Oil an ounce, and the yolk of an Egg.

To the Navel, apply Hens-grease, and Ox-gall. Or, Take Aloes two drams,
Ox-gall a dram, Scamony a scruple, with Butter make an Ointment. Fill a
Walnut-shell with it, and apply it to the Navel. Anoint the Belly with
Emollients. Take fresh Butter, Goose and Hens-grease, each half an ounce; Oil
of sweet Almonds, and Linseed, each two drams; Veal-marrow, Dialthaea, each two
drams; with Wax make an Ointment: Bran and juice of Danewort make a loosning
Cataplasm for the Belly. Only keep it from the Stomach, as you must do other
Cataplasm.

Chap. 23. Of the Worms.
Ex authore lib. 4. de morb.
IT is observed that children have had worms in their mothers belly, and voided
them after they were born. But they are chiefly bred by mixing milk with other
meats in a hot and moist constitution, and from sweet meats which worms love,
and Summer fruits: they are round and long, or broad and little.

The Signs.
Besides what is said in Lib. 3. Part 2. Sect. 2. Cap. 5. Worms are known to be
in a body, when there is much spittle, and a stinking breath, troublesome
sleep, gnashing of teeth, crying and bawling; a dry cough, loathing, vomiting,
hickets, want of appetite, or too much, thirst, a belly swelled, or bound, or
too loose, thick white urin with pain, when the belly is empty, and the worms
want food. There is a cold sweat over the face, and a high color, with sudden
paleness; sometimes a Fever and Convulsion which cease presently. These are
signs of round worms rather than of the flat.

Infants are often long troubled with worms without any great inconvenience,
The Prognostic.
sometimes there are great Symptoms. The long round worms are worst, and have
eaten sometimes the guts and belly through, with a Fever they are more
dangerous: few are better then many, and small then great; white are better
then those of other colors. The other Prognostics are mentioned in other
places.

Preservation.
It is better to prevent the breeding of worms, then to expel them, by eating
of meats of good juice, with Oranges and Pomegranates, and avoiding sweet, fat
and slimy meats, fish, milk, and Summer-fruits, and figs. Drink thin Wine, and
Grass and Sorrel-water with it, and with powder of Hartshorn.

Let the belly be kept loose, with Clysters for children: or give the Decoction
of Sebestens before meat, or of Wormwood and Scordium, but children will not
take bitter things; therefore give Grass-water, and juice of Lemmons or
Citrons, or a drop or two of Spirit of Vitriol.

When you know by the signs, The Cure.
that there are worms, kill and repel them with Powder of Coralline, Wormseed,
Hartshorn, or eight grains of Mercurius dulcis. Infuse them a night in
Grass-water, and cast away the substance of the Mercury, and give the Water.
Or, Take Wormseed two drams, Coralline, Hartshorn prepared, each a dram; roots
of Piony, Dittany, Magistery of Coral, each a scruple; make a Powder: or give
the Essence of Peach-flowers, or the Decoction of Fern-water half an ounce, or
an ounce. If there be a Fever, use colder, as juice of Lemmons, Pomegranates,
Oranges, Vinegar, Hartshorn, Bezoar, Confection of Hyacinth: or this Portion;
Take Grass-water four ounces, Syrup of Juice of Citrons an ounce, of Violets
half an ounce, Spirit of Vitriol two drops, give two spoonfuls.

Give bitter things at the mouth, and sweet at the fundament, as a Clyster of
Milk. Or, Take Raisons ten, Figs seven, boil them in water, take of it four
ounces, add Sugar an ounce and half, make a Clyster. Use varieties that the
worms may not be too familiar with one.

Apply Peach-leaves to the Navel bruised, or a Cataplasm of Ox-gall, Wormwood
and St. John's Wort. Or, Take Powder of Wormwood, Gith, Centaury, Wormseed,
Lupines, each half an ounce; with Oil of Wormwood, and Wax half an ounce, make
an Ointment. Or, Take Treacle half an ounce, with juice of Wormwood apply it to
the Navel: or make a Bath of Peach-leaves and Wormwood, put the child into it
up to the Navel. If there be a Fever, use colder things mentioned.

Chap. 24. Of the Rupture.
IT is from the Peritonaeum loose or broken, when the small guts fall into the
cods, from crying, cough, straining at stool, and from vehement motion, or a
fall. Sometimes the Peritonaeum is well, and a water falls from the belly into
the cods.

The tumor is visible: if it be from a gut, The Signs.
it is in one part only, as the right or left, and it may be felt, and the hole
also through which it fell. If from water, it is even all over, and there was
no cause of other Rupture.

It is easier cured in Infants then in elder persons, for it is safer, The
Prognostic.
but worse then that of water which goes away of it self when the water is
consumed.

Let the belly be kept open, The Cure.
let not the child cry. Avoid vehement motion, lay him upon his back, and
thrust it up gently, and apply this Plaster. Take Lambs-tongue, Sanicle, each
half an ounce; Lentills, and Lupines, and red Roses in Powder, each two drams;
Frankincense a dram, Alum half a dram, with the white of an Egg. Or, Take
Frankincense, Cypress-nuts, Aloes, Acacia, each two drams; Mirrh a dram, with
Izing-glass make a Plaster. Or apply Gum Elemni steept in Vinegar, till there
be a Cream at the top, and with Oil of Eggs make a Cerot.

Inwardly, Take Sanicle, Lambs-tongue, each half a handful; Agrimony a handful,
Comphry the greater half an ounce, boil them, to a pint strained, add Sugar,
give it often. Or give Powder of Mouse-ear, or Moonwort with Wine.

If it be from water, anoint with Oil of Elder, Bays, Rue, or apply a
Cataplasm of Powder of Beans, Foenugreek, Linseed, Chamomil-flowers,
Cummin-seeds, with these Oils.

Chap. 25. Of sticking out of the Navel.
IT is without Inflammation. 1. When is was not well tied, and too much left
that sticks out. 2. When the Peritonaeum is loose, and has water or wind in
it, from crying or coughing. 3. When the Navel is ulcerated, and the guts fall
into it: this is called properly Exomphalon.

The Navel yields to the touch, but in an inflammation, it is hard; there is
neither heat nor redness, and it lasts longer than an Inflammation.

The Signs.
If the Navel was not well cut, there will be too great a quantity, if the
Peritonaeum be not broken, but loose, the Navel starts not much out, and is not
greater by crying; if it be broken, the tumor scarce appears when he lies upon
his Back, but it increases by crying or walking.

The Prognostic.
If the Midwife did not cut the Navel well, it is more troublesome then
dangerous. If it be too large or ulcerated, at first it is easily cured, but
afterward it may cause a deadly Iliack passion, when the guts that fall in,
are inflamed.

The Cure.
When the Peritonaeum is loose, wind stretches the Navel; then use a Cataplasm
of Cummin, Bayberries, and Lupines powdered in red Wine, or a Bag of Cummin and
Spike boiled in red Wine. Then lay on an Astringent, and roll it.

If the Peritonaeum be broken, first put in the gut, then bind it close, after
you have laid on astringent Powders. Or, Take powder of Cypress-nuts,
Frankincense, Mirrh, Mastich, Sarcocol, Alum, Izing-glass, each a dram; with
the whites of Eggs make a Pultis, and give Medicines against Ruptures.

Chap. 4. Of Inflammation of the Navel.
IT is from pain, when it is not well tied, that draws blood to it. There is
redness, hardness, heat, and beating.

If it turns to an Imposthume, and breaks, The Prognostic. The Cure.
the guts come forth, and the child usually dies.

First abate pain. Take Mallows boiled and stamped two ounces, Barley-meal half
an ounce, Lupines, Foenugreek, each two drams; with Oil of Roses make a
Cataplasm. To repel Blood: Take Frankincense a dram, Acacia, Fleabane-seed,
each half a dram; with the white of an Egg make a Cataplasm. Hinder Suppuration
as much as may be: but if it does suppurate, Take Turpentine half an ounce, the
yolk of an Egg, and Oil of Roses two ounces.

Chap. 27. Of Falling out of the Fundament.
WHen the muscle that shuts the Arse-hole is loose, the Fundament comes forth,
the cause is moisture of the muscles after a flux, or straining at stool, in
Tenesmus or Needing, or when the belly is bound.

The people will tell you the causes, The Signs.
and you may see it.

The Prognostic.
It is easily cured, when it is from straining at stool, if it have not been
long out. If it be from great store of moisture, it is hard to be cured,
especially if there be a looseness of the belly, for then Medicines cannot lie
on.

The Cure.
First, put it up, if it be swollen, foment it with the decoction of Mallows and
Althaea, or anoint with Oil of Lillies, then keep it in with astringents. As,
Take red Roses, Pomegranate-peels and flowers, Cypress-nuts, each half an
ounce; Sumach, Frankincense, Mastich, each two drams: boil them in red Wine,
foment with a Sponge, then sprinkle on this Powder. Take red Roses and
Pomegranate-flowers, each half a dram; Frankincense, Mastich, each a dram;
allay it upon a clout, and lay it to the Fundament, See Lib. 3. Part 2. Sect.
1. Cap. 6.

Chap. 28. Of the Stone in the Bladder.
Lib. 3. par. 3. sec. 1. c. 6. and par. 8. sec. 1. c. 1.
THe stone in the bladder is usual in Infants, as that of the kidneys is in
elder people. How it is cured, we showed before. In Infants it is from gross
unclean milk made of tough meats, this too much taken in causes crudities fit
to breed the stone, or pap of Barley-meal and milk may cause it. There is also
a weakness in the Liver and Stomach, when they do not separate unprofitable
food, but much earthy juice remains in the chyle that breeds stones. Also a hot
distemper in the reins, by which the chyle is drawn to the bladder, and if
there be a native hereditary disposition to breed the stone, an earthy part is
in the humor, which makes the urine thick; this is in bigger Boys more then in
Infants.

They piss by drops, with itching and pain, the urine is stopped often, and that
which is pissed is like clear water white, or like milk or whey, sometimes
blood is pissed, and the yard often stands.

It increases daily, if it be not opposed, The Prognostic.
and cannot be cured without cutting, which is dangerous for young or old.

Prevent the breeding of it when you see the least disposition to it. The Cure.
Let the belly be always kept loose, and the Nurse eat no gross slimy food:
make a bath of the decoction of Althaea. Mallows, Pellitory, Parsley, Dill,
Foenugreek, Lineseed, then anoint the bladder with Althaea, Oil of Lillies and
Scorpions, and apply a Cataplasm of Pellitory, boiled with Oil of Lillies.

A Powder. Take Magistery of Crab's-eyes, Lib. 3. pra. decal. ves.
white Amber, Goats-blood prepared, each a scruple; with Parsley-water, give it
often. Or give two drops of spirit of Vitriol with half a dram of Cypress
Turpentine.

Chap. 29. Of Difficulty and Stoppage of Urine.
THere are many causes in ripe age that are mentioned, but in Infants they are
chiefly two causes: the thick humor that breeds the Stone, that makes a
Strangury and Dysury; and the Stone that stops the bladder.

It is voided by drops, and the child cries, The Signs.
and the Urine is thick, you may try with the Catheter if there be a Stone.

If it be not presently cured, The Prognostic.
it turns to the Stone: and all natural evacuation in Children being stopped is
dangerous.

The Cure.
It is as in the Stone, you must evacuate humors from the first passages with
Honey of Roses, Cassia, Turpentine, foment and anoint as before with
Grass-water, Rest-harrow, Dropwort-water, and decoction of red Pease. Or, Take
the blood of an Hare an ounce, Saxifrage-roots six drams, calcine them, give
from a scruple to half a dram, with white Wine or Saxifrage-water.

Chap. 30. Of not holding the Urine.
SOme piss not only in their sleep, but always, because the muscle that should
close the orifice of the bladder is weak, and when much water pricks it, it
suffers it to come forth, sometimes a stone in the Bladder hurts the Sphincter,
so that it cannot do its duty. The cause of weakness is a cold humor and moist,
from gross tough meats, from gluttony, and the like.

The Signs.
It cannot be known in Infants, but it may in elder children, that know they
ought not piss a bed.

The Prognostic.
If it come by custom, it turns to an habit, or a disease, and is hard to be
cured in ripe years: if it be from distemper, is easy to be cured.

The Cure.
Alter the cold and moist distemper, dry and consume the phlegm, let the Nurse
have a hot drying diet with Sage, Hysop, Marjoram, let not the child drink
much, keep the Belly.

Outwardly anoint the Region of the Bladder with Oil of Castus, Orris, and
other driers: make a Bath of Sulphur, Alum, and Oak-leaves, or use Sulphur or
Allum-baths: give this Powder. Take Hogs-bladders burnt, roasted stones of a
Hare, Cocks throats roasted, each half a dram; Acrons two scruples, Nip, Mace,
each a scruple, give half a dram with Oak-leaves-water. See Lib. 3. Part 8.
Sect. 2. Cap. 6.

Chap. 31. Of chafing in the Hips, called Intertrigo.
IT is the separation of the Scarf-skin from the true in the Hips, that causes
pain and unquietness.

It is from sharp Piss, The Causes.
when the clouts are not changed often: in such as are fat, to whom filth
sticks easily.

The skin is off, and it looks red. The Signs. The Prognostic.


It is troublesome by reason of the pain, and causes want of sleep, and
ulcerateth if it be not cured.

Change the clouts often, The Cure.
wash and cleanse the child often, sprinkle on this fine Powder. Of Litharge of
Silver, seeds and leaves of Roses, burnt Alum and Frankincense, or anoint with
white Ointment and Diapompholigos.

Chap. 32. Of Leanness and Fascination.
SOmetimes children and men grow lean; the elder from Fevers, Consumptions,
and other diseases; but children pine away, and the cause is not known, and
though they eat and perform other actions, they are not nourished nor grow.

The Causes.
The causes of Consumption in Infants, are little or bad milk by which no blood
is bred fit to nourish the body, so that they thrive not till they change the
Nurse.

The second is worms that sucks away the nourishment.

The third is worms about the body without, as in the Back, Arms, or Legs, and
all parts, these are very small, and breed in musculous parts, and stick in the
skin, and never come wholly out, but after rubbing in baths, they put forth
their heads like black hairs, and run in when they feel the cold air; they
breed of slimy matter shut up in the capillar veins, which turns to worms from
transpiration hindered.

The fourth cause in the opinion of people, is fascination or witchcraft,
either from the eyes of Witches, or by vapors, or by touch, or by words from a
Witch; these are alleged by many Authors. I neither allow nor plainly deny all
these ways of fascination, though it is not credible that a child should
suffer by words or looks only. I deny not but diseases may be sent from sick
bodies to others, as the Leprosy, the French Pox, Consumption, and the like,
and many infect Infants. And I believe that they may be hurt by Witches and
malicious persons by the help of the Devil and Gods permission, Bas. in hode
invidia.
as Basil the Great writes: for wicked people make a league with the Devil
that they may hurt such as they look enviously and angerly upon. And I add one
thing, A habit of body that is grown very excellent, is in most danger, as
Hippocrates says, When children come to be very healthful and fair, they fall
suddenly into a disease, and the vulgar not knowing the cause of it, impute it
to Witchcraft.

The signs of the causes, The Signs.
if they be lean from a Fever or other disease, it is easily known. If these
causes be not, view the Nurses milk: whether little, or her breasts flag
without milk, and that is the cause of leanness in the child, if she have milk,
see if it be not hot and dry, and choleric. And consider her Constitution. If
the milk be blameless, see if it be not from worms either in the guts or in the
skin; the worms in the skin are known by putting the child into a bath and
rubbing it, especially on the back with the hand, and with Honey and Bread, and
then you shall see little ash-colored or black hairs come out of the skin.

If there be no outward nor inward cause, you may mistrust a venomous vapor or
witchcraft.

If it be for want of milk, change the Nurse. The Prognostic.
If it be from worms in the skin, it is not hard to be cured; if it be from an
occult quality, or from witchcraft, it is hard to be cured, because we know not
the nature of the malignity.

If the Nurse have any disease, The Cure.
or be contrary to the constitution of the child, change her, kill and cast out
the worms. If it be from worms in the back, rub it, and anoint it with Honey
and Wheat-bread, and when their heads come forth, kill them with a Razor or
crust of bread. Do this often.

There are many superstitious things carried about against witchcraft, some
hang Amber and Coral about the child's neck, nor is it impossible that Plants
and Gems should have power against witchcraft. As, Briony-root, and Elks-hoof
are good against the Epilepsie, also there are Amulets against other Diseases.

If leanness be from a dry distemper of the whole body, there is no better
Remedy then often bathing in a Decoction of Mallows, Althaea, Branck-ursine,
Sheeps-heads, and the like, and anoint after with the Oil of sweet Almonds.

If he be hot and dry, add to the Bath Lettice, Endive, Violets, Poppy-heads,
and anoint after with Oil of Roses and Violets.

FINIS.
Other Physical Books lately Printed and to be Sold by George Sawbridge.
1. ORiatrick, or Physic unrefined; The Common Errors therein refuted, and the
whole Art reformed and rectified. Written by the Acute Philosopher and profound
Physician, John Baptista Van Helmont.

2. The New Dispensatory made by the College of Physicians, London, in Latin.
And the same Translated into English, by Nich. Culpeper.

3. Riolanus Anatomy.

4. Veslingus Anotomy.

5. Bartholinus Anatomy.

6. Riverius Practice and Observations, all Translated by Nich. Culpeper.

7. A Treatise of the Rickets, Being a a Disease common to Children; wherein is
showed, 1. The Essence. 2. The Cause. 3. Signs. 4. The Remedies of the Disease.

8. The Hidden Treasures of the Art of Physic, Fully discovered in Four Books,
by John Tanner, Student in Physic and Astrology.

9. Philosophia Muturata: Containing the Practice and Operative part in gaining
the Philosophers Stone. With a work Compiled by St. Dunstan, concerning the
same. And the Experiments of Rumelius, and Preparations of Angelo Sala,
Published by Lancelot Colson, Doctor in Physic and Chemistry.

10. Physical Considerations of the Matter, Origination, and several Species of
Worms: Whereby it does probably appear to be an Epidemical Disease, killing
more than either the Sword or Plague. Together with their various Causes, Signs
and Method of Cure, By William Ramsey, Doctor of Physic, and Physician in
Ordinary to His Majesty.

FINIS.

