LAWLES TYTHE-ROBBERS Discovered: Who make Tythe-Revenue a Mock-Mayntenance,
Being encouraged thereunto by the Defect of Law and Justice about Ministers
maintenance; and by the Cavills and pretended Objections against it.

WHICH Defect of Law and Justice is herein fully discovered, together with the
Frauds and Wrongs occasioned by that Defect, that they may be prevented by
better Laws, and more impartial Justice, now in Parliament-time, wherein
Remedies have always been most speedy and certain.

HEREIN The many Cavills and pretended Objections made against Tithes, and all
settled maintenance of Ministers are recited and confuted.

Herein also, Some Motives to the Higher Powers for speedy relief of Ministers,
by better Laws.

Together with Some humble Proposals of means for the rooting out and
preventing of those Frauds and Wrongs.

Seek judgment, relieve the oppressed.

Esa. 1.17. Be not deceived, God is not mocked.

Gal. 6.7. Ex malis moribus, bonae nascuntur Leges. Imprimatur,

Edm. Calamy.

LONDON, Printed for Thomas Newbery. in Cornhil near the Royal Exchange, 1655.

To the Right HONORABLE The High Court of Parliament of the Commonwealth of
ENGLAND, etc.
Honorable Sirs,
ALthough the many strong endeavors which have of late been used, to take away
or unsettle by law the public maintenance of the settled Ministry of this
Nation, have hitherto proved abortive: yet woeful experience tells us, that for
want of better Laws for the true payment thereof, that maintenance is, de
facto, very much impeached all the Nation over, both in City and Country; to
the utter undoing of many Ministers, their Wives and Families, whose cries are
gone up to Heaven, of which cries this is but an Echo: For remedy of which
crying grievance and oppression, the putting of all former Laws and Ordinances
for Tithes in force will not prove a plaster large enough, without better
Laws, as is herein clearly demonstrated.

Two things (I conceive) will be alleged against the ensuing Discovery: The
one is, that it teaches men to defraud in Tything: But the truth is,
Tythe-payers, as experience shows in all places, are not now to learn any of
those fraudulent practices, which are grown an Hereditary disease in many
Families being propagated from the unrighteous Father to the Son.

The other Objection against such Tracts as these, is, That they are but the
voice of Covetousness: But such cavillers are wilfully, ignorant: For this
cause touching Ministers maintenance is not cause of any private Interest; but
a cause which God himself by his Prophets and Apostles has asserted, and been
zealo^^ in, as Scrip^^^^ ^he^: And the Primitive Fathers (...) of the Church
have cried out against such (...) Ministers maintenance; which maintenance has
not only been asserted by Ministers, who may seem to seek themselves (this
Interest of Religion being mixed with their own Interest*) But has been
learnedly and zealously asserted by those which have been no Ministers nor
Preachers: yet men of Renown for godly wisdom in all Ages, who against their
own private Interest have (as their Books declare) asserted, and pleaded in
this cause: The Catalogue of their writings I need not rehearse, nor tell you,
how many Worthies have freely given up their estates in Impropriations to
advance and increase the liberal and certain maintenance of Ministers by
Tithes: And for further satisfaction to such as shall say that imputation upon
this Discovery, I hope they are convinced, that, Robbed People cannot be justly
aspersed with Covetousness, because they raise a Hue and Cry after Thieves,
and cry out for Law and Justice against them, and give evidence against them to
the Magistrate, describing their villainies in every Circumstance, which is the
chief aim of the following Discourse, which I humbly present to your Honors
wise and favorable Construction: And craving pardon for my boldness, in all
submission, I remain.

Your daily Orator at the Throne of Grace, Richard Culmer*

Lawless Tythe-Robbers discovered, etc.
CHAP. I.
THat good Laws have been occasioned by evil manners, and that evil manners
call for good Laws, to suppress and prevent them is an experimental, and
undeniable truth: that the evil manners, the unjust, fraudulent, oppressive
practices of Tythe-payers are now more then ever audacious, and the violence of
their oppressive carriage grown to that height and excess, that it can no
longer be endured, is known and felt by thousands, which wickedness former
Lawmakers were unacquainted with; whose Laws are now out-plodded. It is then
high-time to detect and set out their wickedness to the Magistrate, that it
may be speedily suppressed by good Laws; to this end and purpose tends the
ensuing Discovery of the Lawless Tythe-robber.

The only fundamental Law for the true payment of Tithes, is as follows in
the Statute of 2 Ed. 6.13. Every of the Kings Subjects shall from henceforth
truly and justly, without fraud, or guile, divide, set out, yield and pay, all
manner of their prediall Tithes, in their proper kind, as they arise and
happen in such manner and form, as has been of right yielded and paid, within
forty years next before the making of this Act, or of right or custom ought
to have been paid: and that no person shall from henceforth, take, or carry
away any such or like Tithes, which have been yielded and paid within the said
forty years, or of right ought to have been paid in the place or places
tytheable of the same, before he has justly divided and set forth for tithe
thereof, the tenth part of the same; or otherwise agreed for the same tithes,
under the pain of forfeiture of treble value of the tithes so taken or carried
away. And be it enacted by the Authority aforesaid, that at all times
whatsoever, as often as the said prediall tithes shall be due at the tything
time of the same, it to be lawful for every party to whom any of the said
tithes ought to be paid, or his deputy or servant to view. and see their said
tithes to be justly and truly set forth, and severed from the nine parts, and
the same quietly to take and carry away.

Now I shall make it appear, that notwithstanding this Law or any other Act or
Ordinance founded thereupon; The deceitful Tythe-payer has found out frauds
and evasions to make void the true intent of this L^w, and (without peri^ or
damage) to chea^ the Tythe-receiver. For the plain di^covery of these frauds, I
shall reduce them to three s^rts.

First, the craft used before the tithe is set out, to keep the Tythe-receiver
from seeing his tithes set out, that the Tythe-payer may defraud, and ^^eal a^
he list, in the tythe-receivers absence.

Secondly, the crafts they use at the time of Tything.

Thirdly, the frauds they use after the Tithes are set out.

First, the frauds which unjust Tyth-payers use before any tithe is set out, to
keep the Tythe-receiver from seeing his tithes justly set out. The substance of
the recited Law is, That the Tythe-payer must set out his tithes truly and
justly, and that he shall suffer the Tythe-receiver to see his tithe set out,
and to take it away: But although the Law says, he must suffer the
Tythe-receiver to see his tithes set out: yet the Law says not, no Tithe shall
be set out, but in the presence of the Tythe-receiver, or his assigns; or that
before the Tithe be set out, or things tythable, or any part of them be carried
away, notice shall be given by the Tythe-payer to the Tythe-receiver, when the
things tytheable shall be tythed, that the Tythe-receiver, or his Assignee may
be present, to see the tithe justly and truly set out: The Tythe-payer (who is
in possession of all the ten parts) is lost by the Law solely to himself, or
his assigns to set out the tithe before what partial witness he pleases to
take, and to do this in the absence of him to whom the tithes are due. The
Tythe-payer and none else has by law, to do with the setting out the tithe.
The Tythe-payers usually deny the Tythe-receiver to see his tithe set out. No
mean one say, You shall see no tithe set out on my ground; The Parson has
nothing to do by Law to meddle about the setting it out, pray keep off: I know
how to set out my tithe by Law, you shall not see it set out if you watch never
so long.

It is true, that if the Tythe-receiver, or his assigns wait day and night, or
happen to come casually at the instant when the Tythe-payer is about to take
and carry the things tythable ( I instance in Corn especially) Then indeed the
Law says, the Tythe-payer must suffer the Tythe-receiver to see the tithe set
out: but here is the freedom that the Tythe-payer has by Law to keep the
Tythe-receiver from seeing his tithe set out. The fraudulent Tythe-payers (not
being bound by Law to give notice when the things tythable are ready for
tything, or to set out the tithes in the Tythe-receivers presence) do watch and
take their opportunity day or night, to carry away their things tytheable, and
to leave what Tithes they list for the absent Tythe-receiver: Now they are
grown so cunning, that thereby they usually leave some tithe to prevent the
discovery of the true value subtracted, which would easily be known if no
tithe at all were left.

Now the shift used of purpose by the Tythe-payer to hinder the Tythe-receiver,
from seeing his tithes set out, are commonly these:

First, If the Tythe-receiver send to every farm, a waiter aboard the Ship (I
mean a man to look after his tithes which is grown now to an intolerable
charge) yet if the farmer have more plow-lands then one, he will of purpose
send out two or theee Carts at once into several fields, or places, knowing
that the servant cannot be present at diverse places at once.

2. If the Tythe-payers cart be come into the field and ready to lead the
corn, yet if the Tythe-taker happen then to come there, they will let the
wagon or cart stand empty all the while the Tythe-receiver is present and will
go home empty, if he stay long.

3 If the Tythe-receiver wait all day upon the Reapers and Binders, the
Tyth-payer will go home at night leaving all the sheaves lying abroad here and
there, but after supper or at midnight, when the Tyth-receiver is at home then
the Tyth-payers wagon comes out, and then leave what Tithe they list.

4 If the Tythe-payers be loading corn in the day time, in the Tithe-receivers
absence, If they see the Tythe-receiver coming at that instant, they load as
fast as possible they can, and as much as they can before he comes to them;
They tell him they have loaded but so many sheaves, or shocks (ten sheaves
heaped is a shock) when in truth they have loaded twice so many shocks or
sheaves as they acknowledge, and the Tythe-receiver must believe them, they
will not unload their wagon, nor suffer the Tythe-receiver to see it unloded,
when it comes home, they cannot unload till to morrow, or till after dinner,
etc.

5 If the Tythe-receiver desire the Tythe-payer to set out the tithe presently,
or to tell him, when he shall come and see the tithe set out, or when he will
tithe and carry his things titheable: The Tythe-payer will either answer with
silence, or will say, he will not carry until to morrow, or until the
afternoon, or until all the field be reaped or bound, etc. But the Tythe-payer
takes his advantage hereupon to defraud the credulous Tythe-receiver, and
before the time appointed carries his corn, hay, etc. and leaves what tithe he
list: when a Tythe-payer was reproved for this fraud and breach of promise:
^ush, said he, to his neightbour, do you think weel tell them when weel carry
our come, and let them see the tithe set out?

6 They have a trick to threaten and affright, the Tyth-receivers servant off
their ground; And while he goes home to complain, they carry their come and
leave what tithe they list.

7. If the corn be cocked or heaped in the Tythe-receivers absence the
Tyth-payer will not load in order, but loads a heap here and there disorderly,
and cross and cross the field out of order of purpose to keep the
Tythe-receiver from the knowledge of what they carried away.

8. The law not appointing the tithe heaps to be marked by a bough, or the
like; after they are set out for tithes: The Tythe-payers thereupon take
advantage in the Tythe-receivers absence to eye and note out such a heap for
tithe and leave it a while in the field, but they after take it away, and by
this trick they can sweat it was set out or noted out for tithe, and left for
tithe, though they had carried it away.

9 If the tithe be set out in the Tythe-receivers presence in one part of a
field, the Tythe-payer will not carry any corn where the tithe is set out, but
carry where no tithe is set out, in the same field or in another field in the
Tythe-receivers absence, of purpose to cheat the Minister.

10 They pick out all the worst and least sheaves, and heap them and set them
out for tithe, in the Tythe-receivers absence, and then they load the biggest
sheaves and best corn for themselves.

11 They fee their men that carry their corn and hay, etc. and they (in the
absence of the Tythe-receiver) truly and justly tell the heaps and bough out
the tenth, then comes another servant and pulls off the Tythe-mark, and then
instantly comes the wagon and takes up the rest of the corn that was tythed
out, only leaving here and there a little tithe (not half) to blind the
business; By this trick they can swear the tithe was truly set out and left.

12 They reap and bind nine shocks of great sheaves and load them before the
tenth be reaped or bound; and the Tythe-payer bids them reap or bind the tenth
the next shocke for tithe; They know their masters meaning, and that tenth
shock shall not be half so good as the nine that were carried away: yet they
are ready to swear the tithe was truly set out, and left.

13 They use in the tythe-receivers absence to set marks or boughs on every
heap in the field, if there be five hundred, and then presently bring wagons
and load and carry away the corn and leave here and there a little tithe: and
by this trick, though they steal half the tithe, they can swear that the tenth
was set out and marked out: for if all were marked out, the tenth heap or tithe
must needs be marked.

The second Order of frauds in Tything is, in the time of tything, though in
the Tythe-receivers pesence.

1 They will bribe the Parsons servants to wink at their unjust tything and
have defrauded much by this means.

2 They will not set out the tithe or tenth before they begin to carry their
sheaves or heaps, though the Tythe-receiver be present, but load the sheaves as
they lie here and there, or the shocks, till they come to the tenth, so the
Tythe-receiver must be present to tell every sheafe or heap as it is loaded,
and the Pitcher and Loader of the corn being two to one Tythe-receiver do
usually outface him, and swear and stare, they have not taken up half so many
as they have loaded: and upon this account the Parson, though he keep a hundred
men in the field in several places to see the tithe set out, yet all is in vain
by this trick.

3 They will leave a tenth shock in the tythe-receivers presence, or absence,
but it is a usual trick to load eight heaps of corn or hay, etc. in the best of
the field and afterward they drive the wagon to a poor weedy barren part of
the field, and there load a ninth shock and then and there set up a bough on
the heap next to the ninth: That tenth shocke not being so good as one sheafe
of the eight shocks, which the tythe-payer had loaded for himself: They face
it, if it be questioned, that it was the tenth, and stood next to the ninth
shocke they loaded.

4 If the tythe-receiver be suffered to see the corn tythed, before the
tythe-payer begins to carry any of the things tytheable, the tithe must be set
out as the heaps stand in order, right or wrong; I mean, though the tenth be
not half so good as any of the nine heaps; And the tythe-payers being in
possession, it is usual to pack all the heaps in a field before hand in the
absence of the Tythe-receiver so cunningly, that begin to tell in order which
way you will the tenth heap shall be the worst.

5 They put in some shocks more then ten sheaves, and only ten in the Tithe
shock, as when tithe wool is paid they pack two fleeces instead of one, for
tythe-payer: but the Tythe-fleece is scarce one fleece.

Now of late, these Tythe-craft-men begin a new trick in some place, against
custom, which has been to shock or heap their corn, and after to set out the
tenth shock justly: now they load up the sheaves, as they lie single about the
field, and the Pitcher, when he has loaded nine sheaves, eyes a little sheaf,
and throws it by for tithe all the field over, to be a prey for Swine and
Gleaners.

The third order of the frauds of Tything-craft is, after the tithe is set out
to hinder the Tythe-receiver from enjoying it.

1 The wicked Tythe-payer will carry his 9 parts, first, while the tithe heaps
are there, and if the tithe shock were justly set out, yet they will remove the
bough from the good tythe-shock, and so set it on a naughty shock, (contrary to
the Law of God, Deuteronomy. 14.27. and Chap. 12.17. Deuteronomy. 27.33.) and load the tithe
shock. And they use, after the tithe is set out, to pick out, good sheaves out
of the tythe-shock, and pack in refuse, and worse in the room of the good
sheaves.

2 After the tithe is set out in a field, and the Tythe-receiver absent, if the
reapers or binders be at work, and there be single sheaves abroad, not tythed,
nor shocked: The Tythe-payer coming to fetch his tythed corn, uses to load
many of those untythed sheaves; if the Tythe-receiver come and take them in
that act, they say presently, they took up but half a dozen odd sheaves, to
make up their load, when they have loaded half their load with untythed sheaves.

3. If the tithe be set out, and left all night in the field, then the unjust
Tythe-payer acts his deeds of darkness, of his black Art to the purpose:
sometimes they carry away the good tithe in the night, and fetch poor lodged
weedy mouse-ar'd corn out of another field, and lay it in their room of the
good tythe-heaps, sometimes they keep trash in a corner of their barn, and
fetch it out in the night, and put it in the room of the good tythe-heaps.

4 After the tithe is truly set out, they have a trick (especially in the
night) to take out of every tythe-sheaf, at least half of it, and then bind
the half-sheaves and heap them in number, as before, they were so gelded or
diminished.

It is ordinary to steal five sheaves out of ten sheaves, in this manner: said
one after tithes were set out in the Tythe-receivers presence, This shock is
too good for the Priest, and presently in the daytime took away diverse sheaves
of the shock, did unbinde the rest, made new bands, and bound the residue of
the sheaves into ten sheaves. I had the other year sixteen shocks in one field
left for tithe, and in the night every sheaf was so gelded, and but half left
in substance: every sheaf was unbound, and half-taken out, and rebound, heaped
and reboughed, and a wagon had been there in the night, as was evident, and
this near the Farmers house that had set out the tithes in the day time.

5 Though the tithe be justly set out, yet the Tythe-payer (taking advantage in
the absence of the Tythe-receiver, and coming first for his nine parts, loads
up, with his nine parts, whole tythe-shocks, that were boughed out; And though
the tythe-payers Wagon come immediately out of the field loaded wih his nine
parts, and having a tythe-shock or two loaded amongst his own: the tythe-payer
will d^ny and swear that he loaded nor carried away any tithe; Did you see me
or my man load the tithe? you must watch your corn; if thieves have been there
while you have been at dinner, or in the night, look you after them: we are not
bound to watch your tithe: so that the Tythe-receiver cannot prove that the
Tythe-payer had the tythe-heaps, all is lost, which act its hard to prove for
its lawful for the Tythe-payer to come, and be on his own ground at any time of
the day or night, and to load his corn there; none can say what have ye to do
there?

6 When the Tythe-payer has carried away his nine parts, he sends to the
Tythe-receiver to fetch away his tithe, which possibly he cannot do at that
time, his Wagon is loaded, it is night, etc. The Tythe-payer says, he must
manure his ground, and turns in his Cattle which spoil the tithe; this is
usual, enquire at Pluckly in Kent, etc.

7 The wicked Tythe-payers to cover their own sin and shame, use to encourage
the poor people (Gleaners and others) to steal tythe-corn, and they see it,
nod, and laugh at, etc. whereby, and by other causes, it is now grown to that
pass, that Tythe-robbing is made a sport off; And not only Tythe-payers, but
other people become Tythe-stealers, so that we are forced to watch our tithe
day and night after it is set out: One near me was taken in the night by a
Farmer, who saw him bundle up wheat-sheaves, and having them on his back; the
Farmer came to him and laid hold on him, and said it was his corn The thief
answered, By my troth, I thought it was a tythe-shock, for it stood alone, else
I would not have touched it for 100 pounds. And the false doctrine and practice
against this settled maintenance has so far prevailed, that people do openly
call those that gather the Tithes thieves and Rogues; and say, that they go
thieving about to take men's corn, etc. Thus we see into what times we are
fallen, wherein wickedness is so advanced by doctrine and practice, that light
is called darkness, and darkness is called light: honest men are called
thieves, and thieves are justified.

And as the frauds and wrongs are used where tithes are paid in kind; so it is
where there is a rate: a world of fraud in that also, besides refusal and delay
to pay it without law. The fraud is in the concealment of the number of acres:
the Landlords rent is for so many acres, and so many acres there are: But the
Tythe-payers have a trick to case themselves in Taxes to the State, to the
Poor, to the Church, etc. and to cheat the Minister. There is one number in the
Seff-book, an other in truth, and in the Landlords Lease.

And in bargains for things tytheable, as wood, fruit, etc. the true price is
concealed, and thereby the Minister defrauded.

These are the common frauds used and daily practiced against Ministers, as
daily experience, woeful experience, dear bought experience, has taught
thousands of Ministers and Impropriators, who have paid very dear for their
learning of this Art called Tything-craft, which since the Ecclesiastical Court
has ceased has been much improved by impunity all the Nation over, through
defect of law, to restrain and punish these frauds.

But it will be objected, that these frauds are not invited or caused for want
of law: For by Law (which is the mother of justice) the tythe-payer is to prove
that he has justly and truly set out and left his tithe without fraud or
guile: And therefore all these tricks will not gain him any thing, if he be
sued and made prove his tithe to be so set out, and left, and if he fail in
that it will be a gain to the Minister who shall recover treble damages.

To this I answer; first, that if the Tythe-payer did not intend to defraud,
why does he use these or some of these tricks, to conceal his unjust manner of
tything? etc. They that mean truly and justly, will (as much as in them lies)
provide things honest in the sight of all men; He that does evil hates the
light; that tithe-payer that of purpose endeavors to decline the seeing his
tithe set out by the tythe-receiver, is justly to be suspected; and daily
experience proves them fraudulent.

2 That proof never fails the Tythe-payer though the tithes were never so
unjustly set out and left: Ignorant and profane Atheists or malicious Enemies
to the Minister are they that are the chief witnesses against the Minister;
one that will trangresse for a morsel of bread, that will swear any thing to
please his master or neighbor: And they that are instruments of the
Tythe-payers thievery, and help load and carry away the stolen tithe, they that
are actors in the theft, and gainers by it, shall be witnesses for the
Grand-thief: (Ask my fellow if I be a thief;) Will not such sons, servants,
and neighbors, witness for the justification of the wicked Tythe-payer, the
principal occupier of the lands? and who can disprove them, seeing all was
done in the Tythe-receivers absence, and some tithes left for him?

3 For the treble damages, If the tithe be not wholly detained, or carried
away, there is seldom or never any proof of the true value of the tithes
subtracted the which Tythe-receiver must prove the value of that which his
servants never saw, and who can swear the number of acres without seeing them
measured? So that for want of proof the treble damages; (if any be conjectured)
come far short of the true single value of the defrauded tithes.

4 For further answer, suppose the Tythe-payers in a Parish be a hundred or two
(as more there are in some Parishes) suppose it be most apparent that they have
not left their tithes truly set out in the tythe-receivers absence, but no
direct proof of the matter of fact, on the Tythe-receivers part: Now the
minister or other Tythe-receiver must either set down with this loss or have
suits of Law against two hundred persons, to make them prove their just tything
according to Law: In Equiry Courts, the Tythe-payer will swear any thing in
his answer; He that makes no conscience to be a thief, will make no bones to
swear falsely; If trial at Law, the witnesses are commonly, as you have
heard; This is a sad straight a minister is in, either to lose his tithes, and
be undone that way, or to be a greater loser in paying costs also, he not being
able to prove a Negative.

5 And for final answer, if it could be proved against an hundred Tythe-payers,
that every one of them had subtracted their tithes to the value of 20 s. it
were better for the tythe-receiver to lose this 100 l. then to sue at law for
it: For though the Law gives the wronged Tythe-receiver treble damages: yet it
has proved a damage to the Tythe-receiver to right himself by the Statute of
treble damages: For that the costs are always included in the damages: so that
the costs in journeys, Law-fees, etc. in every one of these hundred suites will
come to more in value, then the treble damages which are given him: That in the
end it will appear, that it had been better for him to have lost his hundred
pounds in tithes, then to have sued for it; unless a Law be made for treble
costs as well as for treble damages.

CHAP. II.
ANd the frauds in tything and oppression thereby are not only occasioned by
the defect of the Laws for tithes, but through defect of Justice also, I mean
execution of Justice, according to the Laws that are now in being.

The Preamble of the Ordinance of Parliament for tithes made in the year 1644,
mentions that the Ecclesiastical Laws and Courts being down, many take
liberty thereupon to withold their tithes and duties; And to supply that
defect that Ordinance was made for Justices of Peace to relieve those that were
wronged in their tithes: yet many Justices of Peace have, and do utterly
refuse to act for the relief of oppressed Ministers, by virtue of that
Ordinance; some of them judge the settled Ministers of the Church of England to
be no Ministers, or Antichristian ones, or they are against tithes and all
settled Maintenance of Ministers as Antichristian, unlawful, etc. Yet their
ears are open to hear complaints against Ministers; some of those Justices
have yielded to act for Ministers, as wronged men but not as Ministers for
sooth, not as wronged Ministers. And some Justices will give summons for
witnesses, according to that Ordinance, but the witnesses not appearing, they
refuse to proceed further to enforce the witnesses to appear, alleging that
the Ordinance is only for summoning of witnesses; And, to my knowledge, upon
this occasion the Minister has lost all. And the Justice refuse to act by that
Ordinance for Ministers in sequestered livings, because the Ordinance that made
such Ministers capable of relief by that fundamental Ordinance is expired; And
Justices that did act by that Ordinance before the first Parliament was
dissolved, do refuse to act any further thereupon; alleging that only Acts of
Parliament are in force after the dissolution of Parliaments, and that
Ordinances are in force in Parliament time only. And although there were some
relief for oppressed Ministers by the Honorable Committee for plundered
Ministers, especially for those in Sequestered Livings; yet not one farthing
cost allowed, after great charges, in journeyes, counsel, Solicitors, orders,
etc. I heard a godly Minister of London say, that if a hundred subtracted
their dues, yet he could summon but six at once to that Committee, and that if
those six owed 405; The one half of that was expended in law charges, I heard
a Notorious defrauder of his Minister say to the Minister openly in the
streets, as he rode by him. Look how the Priests horse ears lowle, he goes so
often to London, and can get nothing; The want of justice and of conscience in
Juries is a very great cause of these wrongs done to Ministers and other
Tythe-receivers; There is a crying president of this at Sandwich in Kent, of a
verdict given against a poor Minister, against Law and Evidence; I heard no
mean Member of the Court say, he would not be in their case for a thousand
pounds: and I reproving one of the Jury for that unjust verdict, his only
answer was, that the Minister should have no tithes, though it cost him a
hundred pounds; I pity the poor Minister, who is not able to relieve himself.
But I wonder not that blind zeal against the cause of tithe should carry any
to such ways of oppression; And I know the great tythe-stealer of East-Kent
got at least 40 pound clear by a verdict at Maidstone Affizes in Kent, and
many other examples there are of this kind, and in other cases touching
illegal verdicts; Such Juries (in these days especially) presume to be Judges
not only of the fact, but of law it self, making themselves a Chancery, yea
doing more then any Chancery Court would practice, going contrary to law and
equity.

It is conceived to be high-time to think of some speedy and easy way to bring
Juries to a strict and severe account for illegal verdicts, which are most
crying oppressions; We shall need no Lawyers nor Laws, nor Parliaments to make
Laws, if Juries have the Law and equity in their arbitrary power.

Upon this account of defect of Law and Justice in point of Ministers
maintenance, no man need wonder at the increase of the frauds and wrongs acted
against Ministers in that case: Impunity alone begets iniquity, much more
profitable impunity; I have heard some say, openly in the Church, you may
preach, but you get no tithes of me but by Law, if they be your due, come by
them by Law; They know the length of the foot of the Laws too well.

CHAP. III.
ANd notwithstanding all these Frauds, Wrongs, and Oppressions are so notorious
in these men; Yet they strengthen themselves in their wickedness; Not only
through the defect of Law and Justice: but wax mad with reason, or in reasoning
for their wickedness. They justify their covetous, wilful, malicious, unjust
practices in this kind, with Cavills and pretended objections against tithes,
and all settled Maintenance of Ministers, with all the subtilty that can be
suggested unto them by that old Serpent, who changes himself into an Angel
of light, that he may more plausibly and powerfully, by his instruments,
oppress the faithful Ministers of the Gospel, enemies to his Kingdom of
darkness, and thereby suppress the Gospel it self; Those Cavills which I
have found suggested to them by others, and which I have heard the
Tythe-robbers allege, I shall briefly name and answer, that those Gainsayers
and doers against truth and righteousness, may be convinced, if not by the Law
of man, yet by the Law of God, and of reason and conscience, orb made
inexcusable before God and man.

Cavil 1 The Magistrate did not compel maintenance for Christ and his Apostles;
Their maintenance was freely given them, by believers, in obedience to Gods
word, without compulsion by the coercive Laws of men: Therefore magistrates
ought not to enforce Ministers maintenance in tithes or otherwise. This Cavil
I find in a Pamphlet (published by Mr. Charles Nicholls) called, the Hue and
Cry after the Priests; In that book he prints expressly, that ministers
maintenance settled by the Magistrate is unlawful, and none of Christ's
maintenance: And this is no conceit of Charles; he has learned it from the
founder of his faction, whose positon is. That for a Minister to crave any
tithes, and for any man, for all that either Laws or Magistrates can command
to pay any tithes, is a sin that abolisheth from Christ.

Answ. 1 This is an Antichristian doctrine, and practice in opposing the
Christian magistrate, in his acting for Christ, in supporting his ministers,
from which Charles and others (Pope-like) wholly excommunicats the magistrate:
Such men will not consider of, nor put any difference between the Church in
persecution under tyrants, as in the time of Christ, and his Apostles; and the
Church in prosperity, and rest under Christian Magistrates: No tithes were paid
under persecuting Jeroboam (2. Chron. 11.13. and Chap. 13.9.) does it therefore
follow that there were none due, or to be claimed in settled times, in the time
of David, Solomon, Ezechias? no tithes in Babylon, therefore no tithes after
the return from Babylon; So though in the times of the Persecution of the
Church there were no tithes, or settled maintenance established for Christ and
his Apostles, by the Magistrate: yet in the aftertimes of the prosperity of the
Church: as the Godly Magistrates of old took care for the Maintenance of those
that administered about holy things, and made Acts and Laws to enforce it (2 Chronicles. 31.4. Nehem. 13.6.) So after the Apostles times, when Kingdoms and
States became Christian, ministers were presently provided for in a public
settled way of maintenance, as Histories show; which maintenance continues to
this day in all Christian Kingdoms and Nations, and in this Nation especially;
by Glebes, and tithes, and other settled duties: And indeed then, and only then
is the Gospel the glory of any Nation, when the Christian Magistrate does
entertain it, and set it up and uphold it by upholding and Maintaining the
Ministers and Ministry of it: And that glory is gone, if the magistrate own it
not, or protect it not in the ministry of it; Such as Charles will not have
the Church receive any advantage by the Civil magistrates becoming Christians,
which is confuted, ( Isa. 49.23. Psalm. 72.10, 11. Isa. 60 10. Revel. 20.24.)
Such magistrates are said to be Nursing fathers and mothers to the Church: Such
fathers and mothers do not leave the child to it self, but do take care of it
and nourish it. We read ( Act. 9.31.) when the Churches had rest from
persecution, they were edified and multiplied: and would it not be much more
edified and multiplied if ministers and people had the power and assistance of
the Christian magistrate with them and for them, in the things of Religion? The
Magistrate doing actively and positively for the good of the Church; out of
their pious care to promote Religion, and the salvation of men's souls, and not
only to preserve outward peace and safety: Answer, 2. The Magistrate is for the
the punishment of them that do evil. ( Romans 13.1.) Is it not an evil, sin? a
sin of omission against Gods Law, not to allow maintenance to ministers, which
God commands both in the Law and Gospel? Therefore the Magistrate sins, if he
punish not that neglect of duty, thereby to enforce it; As he does in other
cases, as in relief of the poor, in taxes, and in other duties. Answ, 3.
Whereas Charles says, that people should maintain ministers freely, they
should be free in that duty to obey God only therein, God commands it to be
freely done, and therefore the Mngistrate has nothing to do to meddle with it,
to enforce it by coercive Laws: It is plain, that a duty commanded by the
magistrate may notwithstanding be done freely and willingly, ( Tit. 3.1.) Obey
Magistrates, be ready to every good work; The double command of God and man,
too, of them of whom God says, They are Gods, should move to more free,
willing, cheerful obedience, for conscience sake, ( Romans 13.5.1. Pet. 2.

2 Cavil. Charles (to animate people against Magistracy and Ministry) Prints
expressly, That tithes are an oppression and a bondage, and that selling of
Parson ages is selling of poor men's labors, and that tithes are the peoples
own estate.

Ans. Its evident, that tithes are no bondage, or wrong: because the paying of
them is not one farthing charg to any man, rich, or poor in the whole Nation.
The tithes neither belong to the State, nor to the Landlord, nor Tenant of the
Lands and Houses where those tithes arise, but they belong only to the Minister
and Impropriator, as their right and propriety, as has been proved before the
Honorable Committee for Tithes, by the godly-learned in the Laws, and is
manifested by several learned Treatises. When Kings of this Nation had the
Patronage of Rectories, If the Minister, Incumbent died, the Profits, the
tithes thereof went not to the State, but were sequestered, and kept for the
next Minister, to enjoy them. And Ministers have actual possession given them,
as freeholders, and, as freeholders, paid Subsidies, and sued at law as
freeholders. Its manifest, that the Purchasers of lands and houses, do not
purchase the tithes and duties that have and do issue out of those Lands and
Houses, as a Rentcharge due and payable to the Minister or Impropriator;
neither do they purchase the lands, tythe-free or duty-free: And the Tenant or
Farmer does not hire the tithes and duties of the Landlord, who, having no
right to them, has no power to let them, or to enjoy them himself. And there
is and has bin a consideration had of this Rentcharge of tithes in all
Purchases, Leases, etc. which would be a tenth part more in value and price, if
the Lands or Houses purchased or hired, were tythe-free: As is manifest in
tythe-free Lands, which are purchased and let at higher rates by a tenth part,
then Land or Houses charged with tythe-rent. Thus it has pleased God (who when
he gave the Land of Canaan to Israel did reserve the tithes to himself for his
Ministers, and made other provisions for them in Lands and houses) by his
special providence, to provide and establish in this Land, and in other Lands
and Nations a maintenance for his Ministers, by the free Donation and legal
settlement of Houses, Glebes and Tithes, given and established by those who have
been Proprietors and Possessors of Lands and Houses, and this establishment
has been made and continued by Law and Custom for many generations: as
heretofore, and of late especially, has been proved by ancient Histories and
Records; and this settlement of Ministers maintenance from good grounds, both
from the Law and Gospel also, which commands the liberal maintenance of
Ministers, such a maintenance, at least, as tithes amount unto, ( Gal. 6.6. 1
Cor. 9.2. etc.) Notwithstanding all this clear demonstration that tithes are
none of the peoples own; that the people have no right to them in the least;
yet it is strange to see how unperswaseable, people are to believe this truth
and how forward they are to embrace Charles Nicholls his false doctrine,
touching the peoples right to tithes; So that many people count it their duty
to detein their tithes, they think they do God and themselves good service, to
cozen the Tythe-receiver what they can: I have heard diverse say, It is no sin
to cozen the Parson what they can, and upon this account they say with scorn
and glorying, when they pay any tithes: We give the Priest (as they in scorn
call the settled minister) So much every year, we are at such charges to the
Priest; either glorying in their bounty and gifts, or rather grudging at their
payments of tithes, which are no more theirs then a Legacy is the gift of an
Executor, or a debt the gift of the debtor, or the rent the gift of the tenant
to the Landlord.

Answ. 2 Such as Mr. Charles Nicholls are Oppressors of godly Ministers by
abetting the witholding of settled maintenance: and oppressors of people too, by
causing them to be charged with costs in Law for the iniquity, to which they
entice them, and by drawing them from the orderly dependence upon their own
settled Pastor; to be at charge in needless journeyes, expenses, losses, by
neglect of Families at home, and by occasioning them to be at need less
charges touching ministers maintenance, when they may enjoy a competent means
of salvation under as able, nay, under a more able settled ministry, without,
any charge at all.

Cavil 3 Mr. Charles, to prove tithes oppression, says that the Landlord has
as much rent as the land is worth without tithes: therefore tithes are an
oppression: Answer, 1. If any such Landlord, the oppression is from the
Landlord, from the Landlords rent, not from the minister or Impropriator, or
their Rentcharge of tithes, of which both the Landlord and Farmer, the Buyer,
and Seller knew beforehand, before they bargained. Answer 2. This plainly
appears to be a quarrel picked not only against tithes or tythe-rent, but
against Landlords and Landlords rent. I hope, I need not cry out to Landlords
to look about them, and to look after these levelling Paradoxes; which are
vented by such fiery spa^ks; as Charles against them, to set all in combustion,
as heretofore in Germany, where, at first, a quarrel arose about tithes; It
was affirmed, that the paying of tithes could not stand with their Christian
Liberty, which stayed not there, but the next that was opposed was Landlords
rent, And Tenants rose up in arms against Landlords, Gentry, Ministry; So
that upon this occasion six hundred thousand were consumed by War, by fire,
and sword (as that famous Historian Sleyden, and others testify in the
Histories of those times.) One near me said, if it were in his power he would
sheath his sword in the bowels of all the Ministers in England: And I heard
him say, he desired the ruin of all the Ministers in England, and he knew not
how to do it, but by starving them out, by keeping away their tithes, and that
was his end in detaining my tithes, and not to enrich himself; he told me, he
was willing to pay them to any body, save the Minister. It was lately affirmed,
that forty thousand were ready to club down tithes

And to this purpose I cannot forget what I heard, in a tumult of such men, met
together in the Chequer-Chamber at Westminsler, when a known Atheistical
Leveller did attend the Committee of Plundered Ministers sitting in the next
room; about his refusing to pay his tithe: I heard it clamoured there, that
neither Tythe-rent, nor Landlords rent should stand long: And there is one
Barber who styles himself a Merchanttailer, who, a while since, p^^nted a
Pamphlet, entitled The storming and total routing of tithes which (as to their
warrantableness to be the maintenance of Gospel Ministers) will not be stormed
and routed out of the judgments and consciences of any godly wise, by such
confused, weak and childish assaults, and batteries of nonsense. That
Pampheleter Prints in the ninth page of that paper these words; The Landlord
and the Priest, or Parson are only Gentlemen; the rest are Slaves, who labor
for that which the other spend on their backs and bellies: This mutinous
expression puts me in mind of that proud seditious Tailor, called King John of
Leiden, who under pretense of Religion, Saintship, Inspiration, was a
Ringleader in ruining of thousands of Landlords, Ministers, and others that
followed not ^is pernicious ways against Government, and true religion; He had
fifteen wives, and came in the end to be hanged: for his seditious, rebellious
and bloody practices: Abad omen for Iheouran John, and for Master John Can,
who proclaims the public settled Ministers of England, Traitors by a roaring
voice from the Temple of Bacchus, where such Kannes are in use: but here we see
the Landlords, and the Ministers are the joynt-marks, at which these
Firelocks level in these days, wherein they only wanted a King John of
Leiden to head and Protect them in their mutinou ways, under pretense of
Saintship and Religion; But it is more then probable, that Landlords rent, and
Tythe-rent (like Hypocrates twins) will stand or fall both together; They being
due by equal right, grounded upon the word of God, and the Laws of the Nation;
By which Laws we have right unto, and do enjoy all that we have, upon sure
grounds of Justice and Equity: The Law being the just interpreter of every man's
right: Only the Laws for Tythe-rent come far short in many circumstances, as
to the certainty of enjoying tythe-rent, which notwithstanding the present
Laws, are subject to so many frauds and losses, that Landlords rent of 200
pounds per annum is more certain, and more sure to purse, then the Ministers,
or Impropriators of 400 pounds per annum in tithes: And if these Vultures that
prey on Tythe-rent, had once devoured that revenue, which belongs to others,
they would be so fleshed thereby, that in a short time, they would grow so
greedy, that they would prey on Landlords rent also; First the hedge, next
will be the field; First, the paring of the apple being gone, the apple it self
will not last long after; There being equal right in the people to either
Rents, and they that take away the propriety of tithes, will doubtless take
away all propriety, even the Freeholders nine parts also; Such men are laying a
foundation to bring in a Community, and to take away all propriety whatsoever.
Answer 3. I cannot but marvel, that Charles should lay this reproach upon
Landlords in England, that they are such oppressors, as to exact and take as
much rent of their Tenants or Farmers, as their Lands and Farms are worth
without tithes; when it is manifest, that thousands of Farmers in England,
above other Nations, have so good penny-worths, that they live plentifully, and
get fair estates out of their Farms, though they pay two rents, Landlords
rent, and Tythe-rent, besides other taxes and duties; Tenants and Farmers in
England are not as those in France and other Nations, they are not slaves, as
the Merchanttailer calls them, in his recited Pamphlet they do not wear Wooden
shoes and Canvas breeches.

Cavil 4 Saints are against tithes; therefore tithes are not to be paid:
Charles his words to this purpose are, Non-tythe-payers are Saints; honest men,
people of God, true brethren, etc. Answer, I have read in the Catalogue of the
Opinions, Errors, and Heresies of these times, that some hold, that Saints are
freed by Christ from all Laws, Covenants, Vows, paying of tithes, or debts:
Such brethren as join to wrong others, are brethren in evil; Saint Paul calls
such false brethren: Are they not salse that defraud their neighbors, that are
thieves? Are they not false that pretend to pay all their tithes justly and
truly; say, they have left their tithes justly and truly set out, yet, with
Ananias and Saphira, keep back part, nay, half, nay, more than half, yet
cunningly leaving some thyes to avoid the plain discovery of the value? Saint
Ananias, Saint Saphira, Saint Liar, Saint Thief, Saint Thomas Tythe-short,
Saint Robert Robminister.

In the seventh Century of the History of the Church we read touching the
corruption of those times, amongst three adminable things that fell out in that
age; one was, that whoredom was canonized, that is, notable Harlots were
counted Saints: Can those that rob their neighbor be honest men? and if not
honest, how Saints? Dishonest pretended Saints are no true Saints* but real
Hipocrites, who make Godliness a cloak for their covetousness,
maliciousness, etc. We should serve God in holiness, and righteousness; not
one without the other; The first thing in Godliness is to do justice, ( Mich.
6.8,) a religious Knave, is the worst of men, as that Devil that changes
himself into an angel of light, is the worst of Devils; Ahab, and Jezabel,
are become Saints on a sudden; they are very devout, proclaim a Fast: But all
was more plausibly to defraud honest Naboth of his propriety and estate: Saint
Ahab, Saint Jezabel: Of whose order of Saintship are unrighteous pretended
Saints, who for malice and lucre sake, oppress and ruin truly godly and honest
men, both Ministers and Impropriators, and therein incorporate themselves with
the avowed haters of God, and enemies to the very profession of Religion. The
greatest zeal in Religion in some, is how to cozen the Minister.

Ans. 2 The godly may err, their judgment, doctrine, and practice is no rule
to others further, then they are followers of Christ: The greatest heretics
have appeared to lead Saint-like lives, they have been accounted and canonized
for Saints; we have woeful presidents at this time of such Saints: I have heard
such Saints, extraordinary Professors say, that to deteine their tithes is no
sin, and at the same time affirm, that to save custom and excise is no sin,
that is all a man gets by his commodity, etc.

Answer, 3 Some are said to be godly, having only a form of godliness: but
deny the power of godliness, covetous, proud having a form of godliness, (1 Timothy 3.1.)

Cavil 5 The Saints will pay no tithes, or any settled forced maintenance,
because they make scruple of conscience, to pay it, they are conscientious men;
It goes against my conscience to pay tithes, therefore I Will pay none; this is
daily heard.

Answer 1 Many in the cause of Ministers maintenance, make scruple out of
pitiful weakness, opinion, passion, ignorance, superstition, and preposterous
zeal; I instance in Charles Nicholls, I appeal to all that shall read his
recited Paper, and the forenamed Merchant-tailer, and the Kentish,
Hartford-shire and other Petitions against tithes; Saint Paul himself
acknowledges this was his condition in his zealous acting; ( Acts 26.9.) I
verily thought with my self that I ought to do many things contrary to the
name of Jesus, etc. It was his opinion, and he afterward acknowledges he did
it ignorantly (1 Timothy 1.13.) Answer 2. Some pretend scruple to hide their
malice against the Ministry it self, as they did who hired Judas to betray
Christ, they made scruple to put the price of his blood into the treasury; He
that desired the ruin of the Ministry, before spoken of, said he kept his
tithes to starve them out, because he desired their ruin, I heard him speak
it, and two more were present and heard it: And the most scrupulous in this
matter, as Anabaptists, Brownists, Heretics of all sorts, are professed actors
for the ruin^ of the Public settled Ministry in England.

Answ. 3. Some pretend scruple to hide their covetousness, and if scruple
(whether pretended or real) were a sufficient plea to exempt them from
performance of duty, especially in money-matters, who would not make this plea
to save charges? as the Levellers do scruple to pay Landlords rent, for which
they have many colorable Cavils, as many, and as fair seeming objections, as
can be made against tithes; as no man ought to live on the sweat of other men's
brows. The earth has he given to the sons of men; The Saints must inherit the
earth, Landlords are no Saints, they are oppressors, proud, etc. Answ. 4.
Christ was scrupulous against all sin, he was holy, harmless, etc. yet he made
no scruple of Tythe-paying,( Matthew. 23.22.) and, more then that, he made no
scruple to pay Poll-money, though demanded of him against right ( Matthew.
17.27.) whereby he teaches Christians much more, not to scruple payments due
by humane law, and civil right: He commands to give unto Caesar, the things
that are Caesar's, as well as to give unto God the things that are Gods; Tribute
to whom tribute is due, Custom to whom Custom is due, ( Romans 13.)

Cavil 6 There is cause of this scruple: for tithes are a mere Jewish,
Levitical maintenance, a Ceremony: (This Charles affirms, and calls them the
mouldy-bread of Tithes.) And therefore Tithes (as all other Levitical
Ordinances, Types and Ceremonies) are ceased, and if we pay Tithes, we hold up
Jewish Ceremonies, and thereby deny Christ to be come in the flesh.

Answ. 1 This scruple might be cased if they would pay their ninthes instead of
their tenths. And (for mine own part) if their conversation speak such men
truly godly, in all other things, so that it does not appear that in this only
they strain at a knat, and in other things swallow a Camel (as many do) I would
be content with the elevenths, instead of the tithe, or tenth to ease them in
this scruple. Nay, if we could be certain of the fifteenth in kind without
fraud, it would be some comfort, but reduce the tenths to the fifteenths, the
unjust Tythe-payer will cozen and cheat as much, as when he pretended to pay
his tenths. Answ. 2 God that commanded tithes as maintenance for Ministers,
never repealed that law, never forbade paying of tithes: When tithes are named
in the New Testament, there is no mention made of the repealing of them: And
where there is no Law forbidding, there can be no transgression. Answ. 3. The
Word of God is so far from probibiting tithes as a Gospel maintenance; That the
payment of them is therein asserted and warranted: The immediate Prophet before
Gospel Times speaks for tithes, ( Mal. 3.8.) and calls non-tythe-payers,
robbers of God: And Christ himself, who is the sum of the Gospel, when he was
come into the world commended and commanded that duty of paying tithes ( Mat.
23.23.): As Paul, a Gospel-Preacher immediately after Christ's Ascension, does
also press such a maintenance for Gospel Ministers, as is agreeable to that
maintenance, which they had that did serve at the Altar (1 Cor. 9.6.) such a
maintenance as should be a partaking of all good things ( Gal. 6.6.) which is
most fitly done by tithes of all good things, which is a way of maintenance
that all the wit of Men and Angels cannot find out a more equal, just and
reasonable, which was first appointed by the Divine Wisdom, who thereby
stinted the niggardliness of the people, and the Ministers claims to a
certainty: And no other settled way can be found, which affords a proportion of
that equity, and justice: whereby God teaches men to live upon providence
(Tithes being the fruits of divine pleasure more or less) as God is pleased to
dispense; And thereby the Minister to fare a like with the people in want, and
abundance, in mean crops, and prizes, and in plentiful crops, and prizes;
which intent of God in Ministers mainterenance is not accomplished by any other
way of maintenance: If a rate or stipend for the Minister, the rate is the same
still, though the rent, crop or prizes of tytheable things be far less then,
when the rate was first set: or though double in value since the rate was first
established, whereof many instances may be given. Answer, 4 It is denied that
tithes were a Ceremony, a ^^dow of things to come; let any show, what the
paying one in ten rather then one in nine, or of one in eleven did typifie,
concerning Christ. Answer 5. Tithes were not paid, or payable to the Levitical
Priesthood only, or to those of the Tribe of Levi only: For Levi himself paid
tithes in Abraham, who paid tithes to Melchisedeck, whose Order is another
Order, a distinct Order, from the Order of the Tribe of Levi ( Genesis 14 Heb. 7.)

Answer 6 It is not denied, but that as tithes now are paid, they are made a
Ceremony and Complement, far more in show, and noise of words, such a value,
such Laws for tithes, etc. then the minister finds in substance, as it fared
with the poor naked destitute man, of whom we read in Saint James his Epistle.

Cavil 7. The Apostle says ( Heb. 7.12.) For the Priesthood being changed,
there is also a necessity of the change of the law; That is, of the Law for the
maintenance of the Priesthood by tithes, etc. which in the old law were paid
to Levites and Priests, which came of the lineage of Levi; of which our
Ministers do not come: Answer 1. It is true, that that law concerning the
maintenance of those Priests is abolished by Christ, and his Priesthood: But
it follows not from thence, that because that Priesthood, law and maintenance
due to those Leviticall Priests is abolished by Christ, a Priest for ever after
the Order of Melchisedeck; to whom tithes were due, and paid by Abraham, before
that law and Priesthood instituted; therefore all tithes and maintenance due
and paid to Mechisedeck, and in him to Christ, are altogether abolished as
Jewish: The quite contrary appears in that text of Scripture, wherein the
former clause, tithes are ratified, as appurtenances to Christ's everlasting
Priesthood, as well as to Melchisedecks, and therefore as due to his Ministers
under the Gospel, as to any Priests, and Levits under the law: Answer 2. If all
things given and prescribed to the Levitical Priests, and to the Israelites by
a general, or special Levitical law abrogated by Christ, does cease and become
unlawful, in its primitive and proper use, unto Christian Mininisters and
people now; because the Levitical Law and Priesthood is abolished: Though those
things given, and prescribed by those Levitical Laws had a Divine, Moral,
original, and use, before the Ceremonial Law given, or the Levitical Priesthood
instituted: Then what will become of the Seventh part of time, the Seventh day
Sabbath, as well as the tenth of increase, called Tithes? For the Seventh day
Sabbath, though it had a Divine and Moral original, and was prescribed by a
Moral Law, Exodus 20. was in some sort Ceremonial, and enjoined by Ceremonial
Law also; Exodus 1.14. Genesis 24.13. and is abrogated by the death of Christ, and
by the Resurrection of Christ upon the first day of the week, I say it is
abrogated, as it is Jewish, as to the precisu seventh day from the Creation,
and as to the rigor of the Jewish observance, and sacrifice, etc. on that day;
I say, it would follow upon consequence of this Cavil and Objection, that it
were utterly unlawful for Christians to observe the Lords Day, to render to God
the same weekly proportion of time for his public worship, as the Jews did:
and by the same reason, Gospel Ministers must have no houses given them, or
freely allotted them to dwell in, nor any land, because the Priests and Levits
had these established upon them by God, by his Levitical Law, with Cities and
Suburbs, and lands adjoining; Then no man must harbor, entertain, invite,
feast, or be liberal to a Gospel-minister; because the Israelites were enjoined
by the Levitical Law, to harbor, entertain Priests and Levits, to let them eat
and drink within their gates. Answ. 3. Saint Paul exhorting to maintain Gospel
Ministers liberally and certainly, in 1 Cor. Chap. 9. verse 3, etc. cites texts
of the Old Testamentour of the very Levitical Law, Thou shall not muzzle the
mouth of the Ox that treads out the corn; As they that did serve at the altar,
did live by the altar, even so, they that preach the Gospel, should live of the
Gospel, etc. This proves that Gods Commandments for the maintenance of his
Ministers, the Priests, and Levits in the Old Testament, are still in force, at
least so far, as they are Moral and Judicial, and may be urged by Gospel
Ministers: But Charles Nichols will not hear God speaking now in the language
of the Old Testament, about this matter of Ministers maintenance; he falls a
scoffing at Gods Word cited from thence, Mal. 3.8. he blaspheniously jeers at
my citing that text, in the title page of my Book; called the Ministers Hue and
Cry: calls me a wandering Jew, half asleep, and half aw^k, crying out, Will ye
rob God, etc.

Cavil 8 There is cause of scruple about Tithes, for, Tithes are an
antichristian Maintenance, therefore not to be paid by Christians. Answ. If by
Antichristian be meant (as the word signifies) Tithes are against Christ, or
contrary to Christ: I have showed and proved that they are not contrary to the
Word of Christ, neither contrary to Law or Gospel, but warrantable by the Word
of Christ: And they are not contrary to any thing in Christ, but agreeable to
him: Tithes being paid to Melchisedeck, of whose Order of Priesthood Christ
was, and of the Tribe of Judah, not of Levi. And that Melchisedecean Priesthood
of Christ is now in force, and that his Priesthood continuing, there is no
change of the Law, and upon this account, tithes are not Antichristian, nor
against Christ, but a maintenance payable to Christ in his Ministers, who
honor and serve Christ in his Melchisedecean Evangelical, and Eternal
Priesthood: Answ. 2. And if by Antichristian, be meant that tithes are Popish,
That is, that Tithes, as a maintenance for Gospel Ministers, are originally
established from the Pope of Rome (who is Antichrist:) Tithes are not
Antichristian in this respect also; if they be not against Christ, the Popes
allowing of them cannot make them Antichristian; no more then the Popes praying
makes prayer Antichristian; And (for further answer) it is plain by History,
that Tithes were asserted as due to Gospel Ministers, long before the coming
in of this the Antichrist, as may be found in the Writings of Irenaeus, Clemens
Alexandrinus, Tertullian, and other ancient Fathers, whose Writings are full of
assertions for Tithes; and yet they lived long before the reign of Antichrist.
Answ. 3. It is the subtilty of the old Serpent to call light darkness, and
darkness light, and to put sweet for sour, and sour for sweet, of purpose, to
draw men from light of truth into darkness of error, and to move them to
distaste the sweet ways of godliness, and to run into the bitter ways of sin
and death; to fright people out of Christ's ways, by calling Christ's ways
Antichristian ways, because the Pope and Papists teach and practice those ways
of Christ, or mix them with Popish dross, Superstition, Idolatry; should we not
pay our debts, because Turks and Papists pay their debts? should we neglect
Baptism, because Papists mix oil, cream, etc. in the water of Baptism? Master
Hawks of Essex, a Martyr, to whom a maraculous testimony was given at his
death, did not refuse to let his child be baptized with water, he only refused
to suffer the child to be baptized in those Antichristian mixtures with the
water: should the mixed binding or Printing the Apocrypha, with the Canonical
Scripture, in our Bibles, etc. cause us to reject the Scripture as
Antichristian; Yet upon this account, most of the Principles and Duties of the
true Christian Religion, are in these days called Antichristian Doctrines and
practices. The Trinity of Persons in the Godhead, that there are two natures
in Christ, Infant Baptism, That there is a Heaven or a Hell, all Antichristian
forsooth. The settled Ministers of England, Their Ordination, Maintenance,
Parochial Congregations, all Antichristian? Our Synagogues or Temples called
Churches, where we meet in public to worship God, though never so dedecent,
orderly kept, where Christ is truly worshipped, Christian Doctrine is truly
taught; Christ's Sacraments rightly administered, Christ's Discipline duly
executed, where no Antichristian Idolarous Monuments, no Antichristian
doctrines or practices: yet our Churches are called the Bawdyhouse of the Whore
of Rome, Antichristian Steeple Houses. The Bells, that are instrumental to call
people together, to serve Christ, they are called Antichristian Bimbomes: The
use of the prayer, which Christ has taught us is called antichristian, Schools
of Learning, Universities, all antichristian: Latin the language of the Beast:
The Magistracy antichristian; Our New-lights despise Government, and speak
evil of dignities, especially if they be zealous advancers of Religion, as of
Ministers maintenance, etc. By this Bugbear noise of antichristian, many are
scared into most antichristian ways of Heresy and Profaneness.

Cavil 9 It is antichristian to do contrary to Christ's command: when Christ sent
his Apostles to preach, he commanded them that they should preach freely ( Mat.
10.8.9, 10.) Freely ye have received, freely give, and take no scrip, etc.
Answer, 1 That command was to take no reward for miraculous Cures: Heal the
sick, cleanse the Lepers, etc. Then comes in freely, ye have received freely
give: But it is not spoken as to their ministerial labor: For Christ faith, (
v. 10.) The Labourer is worthy of his hire: their maintenance is as due to
them, as the hire to the Labourer ( Luke, 10.6.10.) Christ resolves thrice
together that the Laborers in the Gospel were worthy of comfortable
Livelihood, and not obliged to preach the Gospel freely; That recompense is
called hire and wages not free benevolence: as due to Ministers, as servants
and Laborers and Soldiers wages, which is not arbitrary; They are worthy of
double honor, etc. (1 Timothy 5.17.) Answer 2. Those Apostles whom Christ sent to
preach the Gospel could do Miracles, miraculous bodily cures: The Gospel, as a
precious plant, being newly planted was watered by miracles: but when plants
are grown diverse years men use not to water them: ministers now seldom do
miracles; (Their greatest Miracle is, that they dare undertake the ministry in
these times, and be faithful therein.) For, if people will not believe the
Scriptures and the miracles therein recorded: They will not believe though one
should rise from the dead, ( Luke 16.) they will not believe for miracles done:
And seeing those whom Christ sent could do miracles, and bodily cures, the
people that usually mind temporal and bodily things, would certainly and
liberally provide for those that cured them: Skin for skin, and all that a man
has will he give for his life. The miraculous Cures which Paul did, brought in
plentiful provision ( Acts 28.) Answer 3. Suppose that command of Christ,
freely ye have received, freely give, did concern the Apostles preaching also:
yet it was but a personal and temporary command, which concerned the Apostles
only, not a general and perpetual command, which concerns all Ministers and
Preachers; such a command, as, Abraham to sacrifice Isaac: To the rich man in
the Gospel, to sell all and give to the poor: If those commands were general
to all, as that what I say unto you, I say unto all, watch; then all should
sin that did not sacrifice their only son, then all should sin, that did
not sell all they have and give it to the poor; And if this command of Christ
to the Apostles when he sent them to preach were general and perpetual, and did
concern all Ministers, then all Ministers should sin that provided Gold or
Silver, or two coats, or shoes or or staves, because Christ forbade his
Apostles to provide those, when he sent them forth to preach. Answer 4
Ministers now have not freely received their abilities to preach, there liberal
Education Learning, Tongues, Arts, etc. cost them labor and watching, and it
was not of free cost, it cost their friends something.

Cavil 10. Christ, and his Apostles did practice this command of Christ; they
had no tithes, nor settled maintenance, and Paul, the Apostle had no tithes, nor
settled maintenance (1. Cor. 4.7.) but labored for his living: Answer 1 We
heard before in answer to the first Cavil; That Christ and his Apostles, Paul,
and others lived in times of persecution, when people that were converted were
few, and poor; not many rich (1 Cor. 1.); The poor receive the Gospel, etc.
And upon this account Paul would not be chargeable to the presecuted poor
Saints and Churches: And that he might not be a burden to them, he wrought, to
get his living: Answer 2 Christ and his Apostles lived while the Leviticall
Sacrifice, Altar, and Temple, were standing, and living, not dead, or deadly;
and therefore would not burden the people with double paying of tithes, to pay
tithes twice for one thing; One to the Leviticall Priests, and one to Christ,
and his Apostles. Answer 3. Paul had extraordinary gifts, he preached by
inspiration, he might labor and preach, which other Ministers, wanting those
extraordinary gifts, cannot, ought not to do; as Paul exhorts Timothy not to
entangle himself in worldly employments, but to read, etc.

Answer 4 Paul labored for special ends, one was to stop the mouths of the
false Apostles, that they might not glory over him, (1 Cor. 9.15. 2 Cor.
11.12.) The false Apostles gloried that they preached freely, (2 Cor. 11.12.)

Answer 5 Saint Paul did it that he might not hinder the Gospel amongst the
Corinthians (1 Cor. 9.12.) they being most of them Pagans, and some newly
converted all covetous (1 Cor. 4.12, 13. Chap. 7.30, 31. 1. Cor. 11.7, 8, 9.
Chap. 12 10 to 21.) he would not seem to abuse his power in the Gospel, in the
opinion of those covetous ones (1. Cor. 9.12) Answer 6. Paul. labored to make
himself an example (2 These. 3.7.) to quel those lazy busi-bodies, that left
their callings under color of godliness; Some to be hearers all the week
long and do go from house to house, talking to their brothers, and sisters of
the Christian Relion; as if that were a sufficient warrant to be idle,
busi-bodies, and leave their callings, and families; He labored also to make
himself an example, to quel those lazy busi-bodies, making Schisms and
Divisions in the Churches, under color of gifts and godliness: leaving their
particular callings, and turning Teachers without a special call and sending:
He labored, that they might not live idely, and charge the poor Saints, when
there was no need of them: Paul says plainly there, If any man will not work,
let him not eat; he intends not thereby, that all Ministers called to that
function should labor with their hands, nor that men of estates should use
handy crafts, etc. but his meaning is, that every one should take a course to
live in his calling and place, according to their duty, and not be idle: Rich
men, Magistrates, etc. have their work, to manage their places, and estates:
Ministers have their work, they must labor in the word, be Workmen, that need
not be ashamed, dividing the word aright. Answer, 7 Though Paul labored, yet
the other Apostles did not; and Paul did it not always, but only at Corinth (
Acts 18.23.) and Paul upbraids the Corinths, for suffering it (2. Cor. 11.7,)
he reckons it amongst his sufferings and abasing of himself, that he was put to
it, (1. Cor. 40.12. 2. Cor. 11.3. Paul says he had power to forbear working,
but would not abuse his power in the Gospel (1. Cor. 9.6.) and when he spoke to
the Thessalonions of his labors in this kind, he takes them off from making
his praise a rule, to urge this as a necessary duty to other Ministers, by his
example (2. These. 3.8.) and he took maintenance when he thought fit ( Phil.
4.16) and for final answer to this Cavil; we find that Saint Paul commands
the liberal maintenance of Gospel Ministers ( Gal. 6.6.) and (which is more)
he uses many arguments to persuade that maintenance, from Scripture and reason
(1. Cor. 9.3, etc.) so many arguments, and reasonings, for Gospel Ministers
liberal and certain maintenance, that may convince all gainsayers; and will
rise up in judgment against this crooked and perverse generation of
sacrilegious robbers of Gods Ministers, who are so far from maintaining them,
that they defraud them, of the maintenance, which is not at their charge; but
it is by Gods providence, bestowed, settled, and confirmed on them by others,
without any charge to the present generation of men. And it is my belief, that
Paul had a Prophetic spirit, and did forsee these times of withholding
Ministers maintenance, and did therefore provide so many Scriptures, and so
many convincing reasons for these times, that such covetous With-holders, and
defrauders of Ministers maintenance, might either be convinced, and converted,
or else have the greater condemnation.

Cavil 11. Saint Paul (by his own confession) would not be chargeable to the
poor Saints: But our settled Ministers are very chargeable to the poor farmers
and others: Answer 1. The poor if they had tytheable things were bound by Gods
law, to pay the tithes thereof, and they brought their turtle doves, etc.
according to their ability: Answer 2 The poor are bound to deal justly, as
well as the rich, and in other things do pay dues, according to their
proportion, as in Landlords rent, Tribute, etc. Answer 3. The poor Farmer is
not charged, by the Tythe-receiver; for the tithe which the Minister receives
of the Farmer, is not the Farmers, but the Minister right and propriety, as is
before manifested.

Cavil 12. The settled Ministry of England are all Antichristian Priests:
Therefore no true Christian ought to maintain them. Answer 1. This Cavil
about the Ministers of England being antichristian has bin fully answered long
since, and that ministry vindicated from that aspersion, and of late more
especially, in a book entitled, The vindication of the Presbyterian
Government, and more lately, and more fully, in a book entitled, Jus Divinum
Ministerii Evangelii, etc: wherein that Ministry is proved to be truly
Christian, and no way antechristian: The calling of those Ministers from
Christ; Their Ordination according to the word of Christ, their Doctrines and
Administrations all Christian: They abjure antichrist, pray against Antichrist,
preach against Antichrist, and against all his Antichristian doctrines, and
practices, withstood Antichrist to the loss of their lives, by Martyrdom,
under the tyranny of Antichrist; Answer 2. They have the seal of their true
Ministry by the conversion of many thousand souls to Jesus Christ, by
opening, their eyes, and turning them from darkness to light, and from the
power of Satan unto God: From this very ground the Apostle Paul argues the
truth of his Apostleship, and Ministry (2 These. 2.14. 1 Cor. 9.2.) It was the
seal of the truth of his ministry: Answ. 3. Who ever did read of true
conversion (ordinarily) under a falls ministry, or in a falls Church? Answer 4.
Where did those that cry out against the public settled Ministry of England as
antichristians receive their conversion from sin to God? Where had they their
eyes opened to turn from that, which they call antichristian darkness, to
Christian light, new light; which conversion they presume to be wrought in
them? Did they not receive it by, and from that ministry, which is now more
reformed then before? and therefore more assurance of the presence of Christ
and his graces in, and with this ministry and those Churches, which they call
Antichristian.

Cavil 13 The Pope challenges all things given to the Church, if we should pay
tithes, or rates, we should pay them to the Pope; and thereby uphold
antichrist: Answer 1 The Pope claims tithes and other lawful things; but his
claim does not take away their lawfulness in their own nature, no more then
the Devils claim of Divine worship from Christ, does disanull the divine
worship of God: Answer 2 Tithes are not paid in England to the Pope or Popish
priests, but (as we have showed) to the true Ministers of Jesus Christ; and to
others, that have right to tithes, as their propriety.

Cavil 14 Settled maintenance is a note of a false prophet: This Cavil Charles
Nicholls uses, in his title page: The Priests teach for hire ( Micah 3.11.)
They run greedily after the error of Balaam for reward: Answer 1 The Prophet
Micah speaks of false teachers, that made the people to err: they are coupled
with unrighteous Judges, who take bribes to wrest judgment: that judged for
reward, and these prophets that are said to teach for hire, are said to divine
for money; they were hired to teach false doctrine, and to utter lying
prophecies, to please and advantage those, that hired them: But our Ministers
settled maintenance is not their hire, from the State, to preach false doctrine:
The Christian Magistrate allows not such doctrine to be preached by these
Ministers: but in joyneth them to preach true doctrine: and punishes, not
rewards false teachers. Answer 2. Those texts of Scripture, which Charles
wresteth, for his own ends, against the public settled, maintenance of
Ministers, may fitly be applied to himself, that wilfully depends upon the
reward of particular persons, upon their free benevolence; such as he are
likely to run after the reward of Balaam; to preach perverse things, for
filthy lucre sake, to please and honor their benefactors, in their opinions,
practices, etc. least they should give them nothing.

Cavil 15. The Apostles lived upon contribution, upon what the people would
give them of free good will. Answer 1. This is answered before: The Apostles
times were times of persecution, and of poverty amongst the Saints, and
therefore is no rule in times of peace, and prosperity, and plenty under a
Christian Magistracy: Answer 2. The Apostles had the estates of believers of
ability laid at their feet to distribute them for the support of Ministers and
people, in those unsettled, persecuting times: If the Apostles practice in times
of persecution, must be a rule for Ministers maintenance in times, of the peace
and prosperity of the Churches; then the peoples practice in those times of the
Apostles, should be a rule to the people, now to sell their houses and lands,
etc. and bring the price of them to the Ministers. Answer 3. Will such as now
withold the maintenance which is the propriety of godly Ministers, by law and
right; Will such (I say) will such freely maintain godly Minister? Answ. 4.
This maintenance by free contribution, and alms, as it were, is in all
likelihood, and is found by experience an occasion, for Ministers to comply
with carnal wicked people, in a man-pleasing way for livelihood? It was
Jeroboams policy to have Priests dependant on his contribution, to be his
Trencher-Chaplains, these were ready to sacrifice to the golden Calves, which
the Priests and Levits, having a settled maintenance, refused to do: though
Jeroboam and his son persecuted them, and put base ones in their rooms (2 Chronicles. 11.13, 14, 15.) Answer 5. Will the Profane or Heretical Person freely
maintain a godly Orthodox faithful Minister? whose doctrine, reproofs, etc. are
very unpleasing to flesh and blood. Answer 6. Experience shows how godly
Ministers are maintained by free benevolence, where there is no settled public
maintenance; in many places, the godly are the poorest and fewest; and we see
many professors charity is but cold; upon this account many able and godly
Ministers, that have members of their Sacramental Congregations from diverse
Parishes, until the Parishes be fitted with a competent number of fit
Communicants, by the settled Preaching of the Gospel amongst them, by able and
painful Teachers: I say, upon this account many of those Congregational
Ministers do not subsist only by the contribution of their Congregations; but
have public settled maintenance, without which they could not comfortably
subsist, and provide for their families. Answ. 7. Those Ministers that have
been necessitated to live upon contribution, have and do find, That man's
nature is variable, and peoples minds are aliened from them upon no occasion,
they become such Ministers enemies, for Ministers telling them the truth: they
say, Hail Christ too day, and crucify him to morrow: Make a God of Paul, to
day, and stone him to morrow; willing to day to pull out their eyes to do him
good, and are ready to pull out his eyes to morrow; The free contribution of
such a variable nature is very uncertain, and is so found by daily experience.

Cavil 16. I find no precept in the Gospel for the paying of the tenth, or any
other certain rate, therefore i will pay none: If God had set down how much I
should pay, I would have paid it: I may pay too much, or too little, and so
sin. Answer 1. The Gospel requires a liberal and certain maintenance of Gospel
Ministers ( Gal. 5.6. 1 Cor. 9.3.) Answer 2. Gods Law for the maintenance of
those, that were his Ministers under the Law, is set down, in answer to this
cavil: Do ye not know that they which minister about holy things, live of the
things of the Temple? And they which which wait at the altar, are partakers
with the altar: Even so has the Lord ordained, that they which preach the
Gospel, should live of the Gospel, 1 Cor. 9.13, 14. This even so will satisfy
this pretended Scruple or Objection, It proves a liberal, and certain settled
maintenance for Gospel Ministers, by Tithes, Glebes, or otherwise. Even so,
which even so Master Can leaves out, when he cites this Scripture, in his
loud voice, and cry against the godly settled Ministry of England and their
maintenance: although he could not but be convinced in conscience that this is
the scope of the Apostle, to show that Gospel Ministers maintenance must be at
a rate answerable, to that which those enjoyed, that did minister about the
holy things of the temple: There is no commandment to vary or alter from the
same certainty, and proportion: God showing by this, even so, that he has no
less care of Evangelicall, then Leviticall Ministers, for their liberal
certain settled maintenance, not by the will, bounty, and pleasure of men, but
by a certain tenure, and establishment from God: even so, etc.

Cavil 17 Is printed expressly by Charles Nicholls, if people do not hear the
Parish Priest, they need not pay him tithes or duties; Hence the Caviller
says, I do not hear the Priest, therefore I will pay him no tithes; if I reap
none of his spiritual, he shall not reap my temporalls; and if he must be
partaker of all my good things, I must be instructed by him: (1 Cor. 9. Gal.
6.6.) Answer 1. This untrue and seditious position is not only vented by
Charles Nicholls and some others, to undo, and ruin all the Godly settled
Ministers of England, but to serve his own belly, to draw disciples after him;
Charles would have his stolen sheep fat, and have good store of wool on their
backs, such sheep are worth the drawing: if they pay the settled Minister no
maintenance, they will be the better able to pay Charles: This is worse then to
rob Peter, to pay Paul: it is to rob Peter, and Paul too, to pay Charles, to
pay Alexander the Copper-smith, to pay Diatrephes etc. But this assertion is
become very taking; and prevails very much, to overthrow the settled Godly
Ministry: Thus of old they that did run before they were sent did steal
Gods word, every one from his Neighbor ( Jer. 14.14. and 23.30) Diodate
expoundes it, they fraudulently take upon them to preach the word, and steal
from the called Prophets all authority, and credit; As the false Apostles
practiced against the true Apostle Paul, whereby he was put to it, to justify
his ministry, Answer 2 And this doctrine of Charles does not only tend to the
ruin of the Ministry, but to the loss of the souls of the people: for, upon
this account, many will hear no Minister at all, to save charges: if they hear
not the Minister, they say they are free from charges to the Minister; I know
diverse parishes, that have no Minister at all, to save charges; they may have
the Gospel preached to them; but they prize tithes above their souls; Gain is
their chief godliness; Answer 3. The people have no power to pay their tithes
to whom they please; no more then to pay their Landlords rent, or debts to
whom they please. For the tithes are not the peoples own, to give or pay, where
they please; They are not their own good things, their own temporal things.
Answer 4. Upon this account those that occupy lands in parishes, where they
live not (Out-dwellers) will pay nothing, to such Ministers, for the upholding
the preaching of the Gospol, in those parishes: the settled maintenance rising
out of those lands, yet the greatest part of the lands in many parishes is
farmed by Out-dwellers:

Cavil 18 If the Ministers would live as they should do, and preach, as they
should do, no man would refuse to pay them; they would pay them out of mere
reverence to their worth: as the thieves, that stole Mr. Gilpins horse when
they heard it was the horse of so holy a man, the thieves brought him his horse
again, and asked him forgiveness, etc. this objection I have heard, Answer 1
The most pious, able, painful Ministers, are most defrauded, by
unconscionable, profane, people, only because they are such Ministers: when
illafected are truly paid: Christ himself, who was holy, harmless, etc. was
betrayed by Judas for lucre sake: And Saint Paul, who led an examplary life,
and preached better then any Minister now living, and could work miracles, yet
he suffered hunger and thirst, and nakedness, had no abiding place, and was in
perils of robbers, in perils of false brethren, and put to work for his
living (1 Cor. 4.7. 2 Cor. 11.26. etc.

Cavil 19 If tithes were put into a common treasury, and more equally divided,
by stipends, I would willingly pay tithes: A. 1. It would be a vast charg to
gather tithes into a common treasury, neither minister, nor people would be
gainers by it; but that charge about collectors, treasurers, journeys,
attendance, must needs be loss to some: Answ. 2 We see how it fares with the
Ministers of the reformed Churches beyond the seas, in Holland, Palatine, etc.
The Protestant Princes have the tithes; the Minister a stipend, which is
generally so mean; that the people, after they have paid their tithes to the
State, are necessitated to add to the Ministers maintenance, out of their own
estates: as it was here in the Bishops time, before the Parliament, in many
parishes; the people paid tithes to Non-residents, whose Curates were a burden
to them besides, yet these people, now the Bishops Courts are down, not fearing
the present laws, do refuse to pay tithes only without any further charge to
resident, godly, painful preachers: who keep house amongst them, and bear the
burden of the parish, with them: In the Palatinate, before the sword entered
there, the Ministers condition was such, that a Pesant, or Yeoman, scorned to
marry his daughter to a Minister; their servants were thought good enough for
them; And how it fared in this kind with famous Scultetus, is famous: And this
was the immediate forerunner of the Palatine desolation, according to that of
old (2 Chronicles. 36.15.) Answer 3 It cannot be proved, that ministers maintenance
was equal of old; but the contrary, and there is just ground of inequality, in
many respects, as of place, City, or Country, of the Ministers deserts,
families, etc.

Cavil 20 Many do petition against tithes all the Nation over, therefore I Will
pay none: Answer 1 This rather argues for tithes; it was said, of the true
Religion: This Sect is every where spoken against, and we read in the Gospel,
that they all petitioned and clamoured against Christ himself; they all ctyed
crucify him: They cried out against Paul, this man is not worthy to live; but
there was nothing found in Christ, or in Paul, worthy of death, or of bonds:
Answer 2 Many petition against tithes merely out of ignorance, opinion,
passion, interest, for company, out of hatred to the Ministry it self, which
they desire to overthrow, but will not cry down the Ministry in plain terms,
but endeavor to bring their end to pass by unsetling ministers maintenance,
which would in a little time destroy both maintenance, and ministry; One that
came up to London to petition against tithes, being asked why he was so earnest
to have them down; he said, He should get 30 li. by the year, if tithes went
down: but being convinced, that if tithes went down, his Landlord would add
his Tythe-rent to the Land-lords-rent; he presently said, I will home again, as
fast as I can trudg; let them petition that will; A. 3. The Clamor and
Petitions of millions is not to be regarded, if it be can slesse, and against
right: Answ. 4. Neither magistrates nor people must follow a multitude to do
evil. They must not so much as speak in a cause to decline after many to
wrest judgment ( Exodus 23.3) it was the sin of unjust Pilate the Governor,
who delivered innocent Christ to be crucified only upon petition, and clamor;
and there was a law made by the Heathen Emperors, that no Christian should
suffer for clamours of the people against them: Answ. 5 Many Petitions have
been made for tithes upon better grounds of Scripture and reason, then the
contrary petitioners have or can produce; If both be compared, some of these
contrary petitions, having nothing but noise, not a word of Scripture-grounds
or inference of right reason, and these petitions from a very few in
comparison, though pretended from many, and they not of the best.

Cavil 21. Settled maintenance by tithes or otherwise, breeds contention: if
there were no maintenance settled, there would be no contention, between
Minister and People, no Lawsuits, etc. which hinders the Gospel. Answer 1.
This might have been objected against Gods Law for tithes; that God had settled
a contentious maintenance, which to say is Blasphemy. 2 Contentions arise not
out of the nature of tithes, but out of men's passions and infirmities: Those
that refuse to pay tithes are the cause of the contention; they necessitate
them, to whom tithes are due, to contend for their right, which is detained
from them: The Non-tythepayer, is the contentious person: The Tythe-receiver
only defends himself, when he endeavors to keep off the wrong in a legal way,
without which he must of necessity lose his righr, and be guilty of his own
wrong, and of the hardening of others in wickedness: There are two things
especially, about which, if the Minister would not meddle with, there would be
no contention (in all likelihood) between him, and the people; The one is his
maintenance. The other is, the sins of the people: let him meddle with none of
these two, he shall live without contention Answ. 3. Very many godly Ministers
have set down quietly, amidst their great wrongs, in these times, only to avoid
contention, lest thereby they should prejudice the Gospel; but I have found by
experience, woeful experience, that this forbearance has hardened men to be
more unrighteous, as soft fires harden some things; by bearing one injury,
wicked men are invited to do more injury: I know a Minister in Essex, that
remitted about 20 pounds due to him, for some tithes taken from him in harvest,
1652; and the same Tythe-robber carried away all his Tythe-corn in harvest,
1653; I hear of hundreds of examples in this kind. Answ. 4. Any other settled
maintenance, besides tithes, is subject to the like contention, as Rates,
Stipends, Augmentations, if they be not paid, they must be contended for, or
lost; which losing for want of lawful seeking after, the present Minister is
accomptable, not only for his being accessory to his own wrong, and defrauding,
but for the wrong done to his successors, and to the Church of God, which might
be benefited by that lost maintenance, if it had been contended for, for the
support of succeeding Ministers. Answ. 5. Tithes, and Rates are a maintenance
subject to contention, by reason, that people are emboldened to detein them,
through defect of law and justice: but if better laws were made, and speedy,
and impartial justice executed against that iniquity; so, that such unjust men
shall not only have cause utterly to despair of impunity, and gain; but be
certain of punishment, and loss; they will be necessitated to leave of that
Trade, which will undo them, and is the only occasion of the contention; and
tithes will be found to be no contentious maintenance; Answ. 6. The people by
their lawless contention, purposely endeavor an abolition by law, of their
payment of Ministers maintenance.

Cavil 22. Tithes will ease the land of taxes: There are ten thousand Parishes
in England, the tithes whereof will come to a vast sum: Answer 1 We must not
do evil that good may come thereof, oppression is evil, undoing Gods
Ministers, and thereby rooting out the Gospel, is evil. Answer 2. The propriety
of other men, the revenue of Officers, Land-lords-rent would ease the States,
in taxes, which should rather be born by any other revenue, then by the Revenue
of Ministers; we find in Scripture that the Priests lands in Egypt were not
sold, in time of extremity, when other lands were sold.

Cavil 23 I cannot profit by the Minister; Therefore I will pay him nothing:
Answer 1 This may be only a pretense to defraud him, a cloak for covetousness,
Answer 2 If the Minister be unfit, the Magistrate will remove him, if he be
fit, it is thine own fault, rhat thou profitest not by him, thy unjust hatred,
contempt, prejudice against him, hinders thy edification, by his labors.

Cavil 24 Tithes entangle Ministers in the world, and distract them in their
Studies, callings, duties, etc. Answer 1. Ministers of old looked after their
livelihood: Answer 2 Ministers setvants look after their tithes: Answer 3.
There is distraction in rates, it is found by experience that it is bad tything
out of peoples purses, though the rate be never so low, in comparison of the
tithe in kind, yet journey after journey to men of ability, still excuse upon
excuse, and in the end, after diverse years forbearance, the Minister is forced
to go to law, or lose all; if more particular laws for tithes inkinde, they
would trouble less then rate, or stipend; and tithes being in possession, are
ready money at all times, when the rate, or stipend cannot be had: From the
North the Miaisters write, that to live in a stipendiary way does obstruct them
in their studies, and distract them, abour their Provisions for themselves and
families; They write from thence what wearisome, and frustrate journeyes have
Ministers made for their stipends, long after they have been due, These
Northern parts can declare; There being a Commission from the late Parliament,
for the Propogation of the Gospel there, and their best care used to draw
Ministers maintenance into a common treasury; They (after much experience of
the manifold inconveniences thereof) were forced to devolve it again into its
old Channel.

Cavil 25. Tithes and a settled maintenance keeps up an idle ministry: Answer 1.
This is objected against Gods proceedings, who settled tithes and certain
maintenance for his Ministers of old. Answer 2 Idle ministers are to be thrust
out, like droanes; he that will not work, should not eat, only the labourer (
not the loyterer) is worthy of his hire: Answer 3 If the laborers wages be
arbitrary, he is commonly less industrious; he knows not what he shall have;
and (if he be conscientious) his certain good reward will make him more
industrious; This is Saint Paul's argument to move us to abound in the work of
the Lord, 1 Cor. 15.58.

Cavil 26 The Parson is rich enough, he can spare what I take; Answer 1 This is
the usual pretense of poor rogues; It is no sin to take from such a man, he is
rich enough, he is able to bear it; but Gods command is, Thou shall not steal:
he does not say, thou shall not steal from the poor, he does not say from the
rich thou may steal: thou may steal tithes.

Cavil 27 The Minister would be too rich, if all his tithes were truly paid
him: Answer. Compare Ministers maintenance now with the maintenance, which God
settled upon Ministers in Israel: They had forty eight cities, with their
Villages, Suburbs, and Fields ( Numb. 35.) besides tithes, offerings, etc.
Shall the Ministry of the letter be so plentifully, and certainly provided
for; and the Ministers of the spirit uncertainly, and illiberally; especially
in a Christian State where are already revenues of lands, tithes, etc. settled
without any charge to the present people of the Nation, for the maintenance of
such Ministers?

Cavil. 28 The Soldiers (whom God has owned in these times) are against
tithes: Answer 1. It is strange that Soldiers should be against paying tithes,
seeing the first tithes that ever were paid, that we read of, were paid by a
Souldter by Abraham, the Father of the faithful, at his victorious return, he
paid tithes of his spoils, and he paid tithes of all; and he paid them to the
first Minister we read of ( Gen 14. Heb. 7.) which act of Abraham, all that
profess themselves the children of Abraham, by faith, are to consider of,
especially Soldiers: Answer 2 Soldiers live not upon benevolence, they have a
certain pay, certain wages ( Luke 3. 1 Cor. 9.) Their Army Chaplains live
not upon benevolence, but have a certain liberal maintenance, a forced
maintenance, out of taxes; Now the word of God shows that Ministers are
Soldiers, they are all Officers, and therefore, are to have a liberal
certain pay. (1 Cor. 9.1 Cor. 10.4. 1 Timothy 1.8. 2 Timothy 2.3, 4. and chap. 4.7.)

Answer 3. The Example or judgment of any men in the world is no rule for us
to follow without, or against the word of God, which word, how it holds forth,
if not the necessity yet the lawfulness of tithes; as the maintenance of
Gospel Ministers, we have seen before. Answer 4 It is not the judgment of all
Soldiers, many Soldiers are of another judgment, men of that Calling,
Eminent for Wisdom, Valor, Place, and Authority: Answer 5 Suppose all
Soldiers were against us, for doing that which is our duty; we are not to sin
out of fear of fire or sword, he that will save his life, shall loose it:
Fear not them that can kill the body: but fear him that can kill both body,
and soul.

Cavil 29. I never promised the Priest to pay him, therefore I will pay him as
little as I can: This cavil has satisfied the little conscience of some, I have
lost many pounds by this suggestion of the devil; Answer 1. Right must be done,
though we never promise to do it: The not promising to do the duty, does not
justify the neglect of it; every duty of holiness, righreousnesse, and
sobriety may be excused upon this account, I never promised to pay excise,
custom, I never promised not to rob such a man, this is a thin cloak for
iniquity, and covetousness.

Cavil. 30. Lands and houses were worth but little when tithes were first settled,
I am content to pay my Tythe-rent, after the value of the land, when tithes
were first settled; but now land is worth treble the value: Answer. Tithes were
at first settled absolutely in Fee-simple, not with any limitation for time, or
value, of higher or lower prices.

Cavil 31. The Priest is covetous, looks after money, loves money, tells money,
keeps a Rate-booke, minds his tithes: Ministers should mind their book, and
Sermons, and God will provide for them, they should trust God, etc. Answer 1.
This accusation of the covetous Tythe-stealer, is only to hide his own
covetousness, and iniquity, to cry whore first. Answ. 2. This is a common and
falfe flander raised against the best Ministers, if they look after and demand
their own, their due, presently they are covetous, none covetous in the Parish
but the Priest for sooth: Answer 3. Ministers are not Angels to live without
food, and raiment; they ought to provide for themselves, and their families,
and may do it without covetousness, or the just imputation of covetousness,
for so doing, as other men that are not Preachers, when they look after their
rents, debts, dues, etc. are not to be accounted covetous therefore; The
Apostle, speaking of Ministers, tells us that in the calling, and office of the
Ministry, in the work of the Ministry, of the sower going out to sow, the
word, that sowing is sowing in hope, even of temporal things (1 Cor. 9.10,
11.) Ans. 4. Ministers (as all other men) must trust in God, and pray to God,
and depend upon Gods providence for their daily bread; for comfortable
subsistence in this world: but they ought to use the means, and not to tempt
God, by neglect of using the means, to get their daily bread, and to provide
for their families

Cavil 32 I would pay the Priest justly, if he would let me set out his tithe,
for him, by my self alone; If he would trust me with setting it out, but he
fares the worse, because he is so mistrustful, so jealous, that he has his men
at our heels all the harvest. Answer 1 This is a mere cavil of the fraudulent
Tythe-payer to pick a quarrel about this, only to have a color not to set out,
or carry away any tithe in the presence of those servants, that he may leave
what tithe he list, in their absence: Amswer 2. If the Tythe-receivers servants
attend not to see the tithe set out; the Tythe-payer, will be their own carvers
in their absence; Answer 3 Common justice and reason requires (though the law
does not) that he, whose propriety the tithes are, should by himself, or his
assigns, see and know that he has his own; and not be left to the will and
pleasure of the Tythe-payer, to pay him what he list, in his absence. Answ. 4.
They that mean honestly will rather desire, then refuse, or decline winesses to
attend them, to avoid suspicion, and contention,

Cavil 33 I do not believe tithes are due, therefore I will pay none; This is a
usual objection: Answer 1 The not-believing that a duty is to be done, is no
plea for the neglect of that duty; but an aggravation of that sin of ommission.
Answer 2. If men might be free from payments and duties for saying, they do not
believe they ought to do it, who would then pay anything; Says one, God has
not yet set it upon my spirit, to pay excize, to pray in my family, etc.
Therefore I desire to be excused: Answer 3. This is rather wilfulness, then not
believing, they will not believe that tithes are due, they will not be
persuaded, etc.

Cavil. 34 If the Priest would take the tenth child in the Parish and keep
it, I would think it equal to pay the tenth, the tithe of other things to
him: Answer 1 God never appointed his Ministers to whom he appointed tithes,
that they should upon that condition, take and keep the tenth child. Answer 2
Gods provision for his Ministers, which the Scripture holds forth, is for their
Livelihood and maintenance, not for their hinderance and charge: Answer 3
Ministers bear their proportion in parochial charges for the relief of poor
children, etc.

Cavil 35 We have gifted men enough, that will preach for nothing, that will
maintain themselves, and therefore we need not pay tithes: Answer 1 We have
cause to praise God for his gifts in any, and we are to pray that all the Lords
people were Prophets. Answer 2 Some are only pretended gifted men, and gifted
men in their own conceits, and of mere bold fancy undertake to preach
publicly, as experience shows, they may have good affections: but are not
able to divide the word aright, but speak only good words and matters, (if they
be orthodox) but little or nothing to the text in hand, and run over 100 theams,
in a Preachment; and that in a dull and silly manner; I could name diverse such,
yet they are cried up by those of their faction, for rare men; I have compared
the practice of such meetings to the milking of a goat, by one into a five, and
diverse standing about the five, and holding it up, to receive the milk: 3 And
these pretended gifted men, coming from their shops and trades, get some
pocket-sermons, which they either learn out of printed books, or have taken
in writing at the sermons of Godly able Preachers, these Sermons they preach up
and down, here and there, being Ambulatory, Journey-m^n, Vagrant Preachers,
wandering Stars: not being able to sit down with a people, as Pastors, in a
constant course of expounding, Cathechising, Preaching: etc. One of these
gifted men preached such a pocke^-sermon five times times, one after another in
several Parishes, and in every preaching had these words in the same passage
of his sermon (viz.) (Now the Lord has set it on my spirit to tell you) And by
the way, here I cannot but wonder how it can be conceived that itinerary
preachers should by their unconstant, unfrequent preaching amongst people, be
able to frame a people to a way of knowledge, faith, obedience, etc. I instance
in John Turner who has some of his pretended Congregation, in the Parish where
I live, above twenty miles distant from him; these neglect the public
preaching of the word, month after month, though they may enjoy it at their
own doors, or not far off elsewhere, yet they by their weak principles, not to
hear in our Churches, and their wandering star seldom appears in this Horizon.
I have compared them to the Inhabitants of Greenland (if any be) that see no
day, or Sun for diverse months.

4 If any such pretended, or really gifted men will take no tithe, its at their
pleasure; that argues nothing against Ministers settled maintenance, as Saint
Paul would not have his example, in not taking of the distressed Saints, made a
rule to all Ministers, 1 Cor. 9.

5 The false Apostles preached for nothing, as we have showed before; their
cheapness does not argue their worth, in life, or doctrine, as experience shows.

6 Some of these cheap men bring in a dear reckoning at last: I mean, they
creep into houses, and into purses too by degrees, and under pretense of long
prayers, devour widows houses, swallow down large incomes, and get good
estates.

7 Some of these men gifted, as they say, without liberal education in Arts,
Tongues, at Schools, Universities, etc. are mere dissemblers in concealing
their liberal education, that by this Jesuitical plot of extraordinary gifts,
pretended to be given them in an extraordinary way, they may allure people to
error, and overthrow Schools of Learning amongst us; and may overthrow an
able, learned, Ministry thereby; that there may be n^ne of emiment learning,
to convince the Learned gainsayers.

8 It will not profit a man to win the whole world, and lose his own soul. If
such teachers by weakness, error, etc. ruin thy soul, if thou losest that
upon this account, thou have made a losing bargain.

Cavil 36. The Priest is put upon us by others, by the Parliament, by the
Patron, against the will of the Parish. He was never chosen by us, though he be
sent to us by Authority, we do not take him for our Minister; and therefore
weel pay him nothing: Let them that set him on work pay him his wages, if
others provide us servants, let them pay them their wages.

Answ, 1. The Christian Church and State, that take care to have Ministers sent
to places, for the Propagation of the Gospel, take care and make provision for
such Ministers, without any charge to the people, or parish whether they are
sent; the settled, established maintenance of such preachers, is from the State,
by Houses, Glebes, Tithes, Augmentations, etc. The people, the parish is at no
charge for such Ministers wages, as is already proved: Tithes are not the
peoples, but the Ministers propriety: Answer 2 Those that choose their
preacher, which is not provided for, by the Christian Magistrate, by a public
settled maintenance, they cannot do it but at their own charge, it is their
private transaction, at their private charge.

Answer 3 The State knows the unfitness of Parishes, as yet to choose their
own Preachers in regard of deformation, that is left in them by the Prelaticall
government, and by the experience of what teachers the most Parishes approve of,
etc. Answ. 4 The people have a Negative voice, if they can show just cause
against a preacher, that is sent them, by a rational dissent, not by a wilful
causless opposition of Ministers sent unto them. Answer 5. The Scriptures
speaks of sending Ministers, and it reproves those that have itching ears that
heap teachers to themselves (2 Chronicles. 16.15. Math. 23.37. 2 Timothy 4.3.

Cavil 37 I would pay my tithes justly, if I paid them to an Impropriator that
pays money, and rent, for his revenue: but the Priest pays nothing, but prates
a little, etc. Answer. Some object this when they should pay tithes to the
Minister, where they live, and after removing to a parish, where an
Impropriator had the tithes, have refused to pay him, alleging that if the
Impropriaton did take pains for his tithes, as the Minister, or if he were a
Minister, they would pay him.

Cavil 38 The Priest is a Devilish Round-headed Priest, breaks down godly
Images, and Pictures, pulls down the Holy-cross, and Holy-water-font, refuses
to use the Common Prayer Book, to marry, to give the Communion to all, to pray
at the grave, to preach on Saint Christmas Day, etc. If he will not do his
duty, we need not pay him his wages: Let him do his Office and he shall have
his benefice; I will pay him no tithe, but a tithe halter, this I have often
heard: Ans. This is to persecute a Minister, for righteousness sake, for well
doing; This is to render evil for good: Christ himself, the great Shepherd of
the Sheep, and his Prophets and Apostles, were so dealt with for their
faithfulness in their places: So persecuted they the Prophets instead of
mainteining them.

These are the principal Cavills raised against Ministers maintenance, whereby
ignorant and wicked men, do blind, and harden their consciences against the
revealed and implanted light, and truth, for their own ends.

CHAP. IV.
IT is High-time then for the Christian Magistrate to take this cause into
speedy consider^^ion for the suppressing of these causlesse and wilful
oppressions, acted daily against Gods Ministers: And although the discovery of
the disease, the beholding of the man fallen amongst thieves, be motive enough
for compassion and relief: yet I shall lay down some further pressing arguments
for the speeding of that righteous and pious work: to this end,

First, consider that pious Princes in all ages, have advanced the settled
maintenance of Ministers by strict laws, and impartial justice, as Histories
show; they left not men only to their own conscience, and to the law of God;
even of old, besides Gods law, there were humane laws, for the certain
maintenance of Ministers (1 Chronicles. 31.4, 13. Nehem. 13.6.)

2 Consider how many godly Ministers have bin wearied out, and worried out, of
late years, and have been necessiated to leave their places, and shift for
themselves to prevent their utter undoing, as in time of Deformation ( Nehem.
13.10) They have spent their temporal estates, in spiritual livings, of a
real considerable value; but not so to them, by reason of these frauds:
Ministers have spent more in Fifts, Tenths, Taxes, etc. then they received in
all their Tythe-revenue, year after year: Some Ministers of worth have been
constrained to sell their books to buy bread: Mr. Perkins in his Treatise of
the Duty and Dignity of Ministers, seems to prophecy of these times; The
Ministry (says he) for the mast part yieleth nothing, but a plain way to
beggary; Diverse Ministers, who living frugally in places of 200 pound per
annum, yet through these frauds and oppressions from the people, besides taxes,
Fift-parts, etc. died so poor, that they left their wives, and children, to the
public alms of the Parish: and Impropriators undone by these frauds, and
constrained to yield up their leases: so that, if tithes continue to be paid,
as formerly, without better law and justice for their recovery, especially,
seeing these frauds increase more and more daily, it is humbly conceived, that
it were well to build Hospitals and Almshouses, in every City, and County, to
harbor and relieve decayed and undone Ministers and Impropriators, their
wives, and children; and upon this account, consider this oppression and ruin
is the more, by reason of the great, extraordinary charges to which Ministers
are put, now more then heretofore by providing so many servants, to look after
their tithes, in harvest especially; where two Tythe-lookers would serve the
turn before the first Parliament, when the Ecclesiastical Courts were in power:
now ten, nay twenty, nay a hundred are too few: whereby the Minister is at
excessive charges, which eats up all his profits: Yet these many attendants
cannot so attend the Tythe-payers, which will give no notice (though attended
upon) when he will tithe, and carry his Corn; but he will find a time to carry
it away day or night, so, as none of those servants shall know what tithe was
due: so that, it had been better for the Tythe-receiver to have no
Tythe-looker, but to leave all to the Tythe-payers unconscionable conscience
which (in some) is as wide as their great Barns great door.

3 Consider the crying sin of Oppression: If the wages of one labourer kept
back a short time cry, Deuteronomy. 14.14, 15 o what a loud noise do the cries of so
many hundreds of Laborers in Gods Harvest, make in the ears of the Lord of
Hosts, against these oppressors, and those that have power to relieve these
oppressed ones, and do not relieve them by Law and Justice.

4 Consider that if authority be wanting in so necessary Laws, and due
execution of Justice, they make the Nation guilty of such sins, as for want of
good Laws are practiced: For God has given authority to all Nations to make
Laws for the observation of his Divine Laws, which if authority neglect to do,
it sins; and inferiors sin in not following them with Petitions and
Importunities, for the making of such Laws; and this is one aim of this
Treatise, and was the aim of the weighty Petitions, from many parts of the
Nation, especially from the Renowned City of London, Worcestershire,
Hamp-shire, the Northern Churches, etc.

5 Consider that Ministers settled maintenance is their Propriety, as has been
proved; Oh let not such a president of taking away propriety be tolerated;
least it ruin all propriety: Tithes are said to be Gods propriety in some
respect, when those that withold them are accused by God himself; to be
robbers of God ( Mal. 3.8.) God gives them to his Ministers, they are paid and
payable to God, in his Ministers. It was a part of the Declaration of the
Parliament ( Declarat. 10. Jan. 1642) that their aim was to maintain propriety
and the free passage of justice

6 Consider Ministers layings out are certain, for clothes, food, etc. and for
the Public, for First Fruits, Tenths, Taxes, Fifts, Reparations, etc. These
are required and forced from Ministers by strict law and justice; I have known
Soldiers quartered on Ministers, for their not paying Taxes, when the people
had the Ministers tithes ten times in value in their hands; And Ministers in
that case imprisoned, for not paying taxes, and sequestered for fifts not paid,
when their tithes were generally subtracted, and are withheld to the value of
more then a hundred pounds, inquire at Great-chart in Kent, etc. Oh what
injustice is it to suffer them to be defrauded and thereby disabled to
discharge these duties! to command water, and let the fountain be taken away;
to exact the full tale of brick, and not see straw allowed, but what they can
catch, scrape, rake and scramble for: if this should continue, would it not be
construed a public fraud? oh let it not be said thy Princes are rebellious
and companions of thieves, ( Isa. 1.24.) The crimes of persons are grievous,
but those of a State are more grievous; The corruption of a member is not so
grievous, as the corruption of the whole body: The greatest Empires in the
world without justice are but great tents of robbers.

7 Consider that righteous laws and impartial justice, especially for the
relief of the oppressed, will protect and support the Higher Powers, better
then the sword will do, and uphold all good men's Love and Assistance to those
Powers.

8 Consider the times were very sad to Godly Ministers, under the long and late
Tyrrany of the Prelates; it was but at the beginning of the Parliament, the
Iron-teeth of these beasts were knocked out, and the iron yoakes which they put
upon Godly Ministers, pulled off: it is very strange the people should take
lawless liberty presently after, to put a Hogs-yoake on Ministers necks, and
to muzle the mouth of the Ox until they have made an ass of him.

9 Consider that this States Counsels, and Actions, in these destracted times
have aimed at, and effected the relief of thousands of oppressed ones, in the
three Nations; the relief of Creditors and Debtors, by providing a remedy
against all frauds in matters of debt whatsoever, relief against the frauds of
Meale-men, etc. Godly Ministers are the most oppressed party in this
Commonwealth, none more vilified, molested, defrauded, impoverished, then
they. 10 Consider Persons engaged in the prosecution of the great work of these
times, for the preservation of religion and liberties should be secured against
the enmity and revenge of those that maliciously, or ignorantly seek revenge on
such for their good affection; as has been done for well-affected Tenants
against ill-affected Landlords and for others, by the the Honorable Committee
for Indempnities; The case of Godly well-affected Ministers requires this
protection and relief but where is it? they have been and still are defrauded,
persecuted, ruined, for their good affection and zealous actings for the State,
and for Reformation: especially those Ministers that were sent out, at the
beginning of the Pa^liament, and did venture then all they had, even their
lives, for the State and for reformation, and for that cause have hitherto
suffered exceedingly from some people; especialy by these frauds and
oppressions, which the disaffected act against them, not only out of
covetousness; but more out of revenge against such Ministers, that first
opposed the Popish and Prelaticall ways, and brake the ice for Reformation; It
is a grief to see how such Ministers, continuing all along cordial to the
State and to reformation, are little regarded or secured from wrong;
notwithstanding all their faithfullness and suffering, and especially those in
sequestered Livings, who besides, their present want of relief by the Commitee
for Plundered Ministers, in point of maintenance, are subject, to every Patrons
pleasure at the death of the sequestered Incumbent, to be turned out, as
experience daily shows, being thrust out of their sequestered Livings, to the
hardening, and triumph of profane, ignorant, and superstitious, ill affected
people, who hate, and persecute such Ministers, for their zeal for God and the
State, their zeal for Gods house eats them up: They are devoured not only by
the openly profane, and disaffected; but now also by those, whose zeal eats up
the house of God, and the Ministers of God too: But the Christian Magistrate,
who is for the encouragement of them that do well, should not suffer any to be
discouraged, or to suffer in, or for well doing, but should relieve and uphold
them by his Authority against all opposition wrong, and persecution, acted
against them, for righteousness sake: else such men's lives are made bitter
unto them.

11 Consider, that for want of Law and Justice, to restrein this crying sin of
Oppression, many souls perish. The Devils Barns in Hell are filled, as full of
the damned souls of those, that have defrauded Gods Ministers of their
maintenance; as the Tythe-robbers Barns, Houses, Purses have bin, and are
filled with unjust gain:

12 Consider what a generation, and spawn of cheating unconscionable men is
propagated by these continued lawless frauds from father to son, from master to
servant, who are so fleshed with this constant, unjust gain, with impunity,
that they proceed, not only in these frauds, but to other frauds and
thieveries, by degrees, taking their rise from Tythe-robbing; whereby the
Country, especially, is much tainted with this generation of vipers, that it
is a rate thing to find a plain-hearted down-right-honest-dealing-man: The
best of many of them being as a briar, and the most righteous of them, sharper
then a thorn-hedge, as it was in the Prophet Micahs time, Micah 7.4.

13 Consider what an unjust scandal is brought upon godly Ministers, who should
be an example to their flocks; Such Ministers are cried up to have a Living of
such a certain revenue and value, and thereupon their Hospitality Liberality,
etc. is expected, accordingly: which expectation those Ministers not being able
to satisfy; hereupon, they are scandalized and cried up to be covetous, etc.
and thereby the reputation of such Ministers is much prejudiced, to the great
hinderance of the propagation of the Gospel by them, and their Ministry: For
though a Ministers good conscience be enough to himself; yet his good name is
necessary for the people for their edification.

14 Consider the duty of the Christian Magistrate is to seek the welfare and
prosperity of the Church above all other Interests, which welfare of the
Church, consists chiefly in the welfare of the Ministry thereof. The pious
Magistrates of Israel, were very forward to uphold the settled Maintenance of
Ministers, (a Chron. 31.4. Nehem. 9.38. and. Chap. 10.1.) and the Scriptures
show that God would have Magistrates, to be nursing fathers and nursing mothers
to the Churches of God, under the Gospel, and bring their glory and honor to
it: The Kings of the Isles, amongst others, are prophesied of, to do this, (
Esaias 49.23. and 60.9, 10. Psalm. 72.10, 11. Revel. 22.24.) and how can this be
done, but by Patronage, Laws, Statutes, Privileges, Charters, etc. for the
settling, upholding, countenancing of a liberal and certain Maintenance of
Ministers of the Church especially?

15 The Declaration of Parliament of the eight of June 1649, Promises a
liberal and certain Maintenance of all Ministers: I am afraid that the real
settlement of that liberal and certain Maintenance, in all places of the
Nation, out of the Church-Revenues, which were abused in mainteining
Abbey-lubbers, etc. and thereupon alienated, has been a sin, which has oried
loud against the Kings and Parliaments of this Land: For want of this
settlement, the Gospel has been hindered, and there has been much guiltiness
of the blood of souls, which have perished for want of an able Ministry: The
pious intent of those that gave that Revenue to God and his Service, originally
(though in an ignorant and superstitious way) has bin sacrilegiously abused;
Their zeal and forwardness, The stones and timber out of the ruined Abbeys,
Palaces; and Houses; and the stones out of the Lands belonging to Abbeys,
Bishopoicks, Deans and Chapters, will rise up in judgment against us, If now,
now in this golden time, and opportunity, this liberal and certain Maintenance
for Ministers, be not settled in all places of the Nation: It has been observed
by Histories, that suppressing of Tyranny has commonly brought in Anarchie; as
it had almost accomplished at this time in this Nation; If the Levellers had
prevailed, and the Government of the three Nations had not been settled: And as
it is in the State, so in the Church, seldom any Reformation of Idolatry and
Superstition, without Sacrilege: I question whether the Reformed Churches in
other Nations, and the States there have not something to repent of, upon this
account of Sacrilege. It is observed, that the Jews, before their Babylonish
captivity, were very Idolatrous: but afterward, after their return, fell to be
exceeding Sacrilegious, exchanged Idolatry for Sacrilege, ( Mal. 3.8, and 9.)

16 Consider the hindrance of the Propagation of the Gospel, by the frauds,
wrongs, and oppressions, acted against the Ministers of the Gospel. This sad
condition of the present settled Ministry, alienates the minds of very hopeful
Scholars from entering into the Ministry: Diswades Parents from disposing their
sons to that Calling? I heard a Scholar, at his Ordination in Blackfriars
lately, being asked why he entered upon that holy Profession, Whether for Gods
Glory, or for other respects? his answer was, that the times were such, so sad
for Ministers, that, that question might have been spared; Seeing there was now
nothing for Ministers, that intended to be faithful to aim at, in undertaking
that Holy Calling in these times, but only Gods glory. And experience tells us,
daily experience, that upon this arbitrary power, which people have in many
respects to illude the Laws, and to pay their tithes, in a great part, how, and
to whom they please, according as Ministers humor, and please them, or
displease them, the Gospel, and Reformation is thereby much hindered: Ministers
thereupon must comply, or be undone, we see a woeful compliance of many
Ministers, upon this account only, that Tithes may be well paid. They will hold
in with all Tythe-payers, and give them content in all things, swear and tipple
with them, to please and humor them; uphold Popish Holy Days, pray over the
dead; above all, they are careful to administer the Sacrament to all; though
never so ignorant or scandalous: one and all, like Hogs at the trough; Come,
and come all, said a Minister, lately in the next Parish Church: and another
near me, after he had set up his Altar and Rails, said openly in the Church,
immediately before the Communion, Come all up hither to the Manger of your
souls. And such Ministers, to comply upon this account, knowing the peoples
lawless liberty about their Tithes, are very wary how they reprove or oppose
their sins, either publicly, or privately; I shall never forget what a godly
Minister told me, touching a Non-resident, for whom he preached at Milton in
Kent: The Curate told the Non-resident, that such a chief man of the Parish
profaned the Sabbath exceedingly: Tush, said the Non-resident, Let him alone,
he pays his Tithes well, if you meddle with him, he knows what he may do, to
half undo me in my Tithes.

17 Consider that unless the Maintenance of Ministers be more certain, but
continue arbitrary (in a manner) as the case now stands, there must of
necessity follow thereupon an utter overthrow of a godly able Ministry, and
thereby the ruin of the Gospel it self, for want of a certain, liberal
Maintenance, for such Ministers: Mr. Stock (writing upon Mal. 3.) tells us,
that Julian the Apostate ruined the Church more then any persecuting Emperor
before him, for they overtherw Ministers only, but he overthrew the Ministry
it self, by taking away Tithes: and-thereby overthrew the worship of God; which
is all one with a liberty left to people, to take away, or withold the
Ministers maintenance. Lastly, consider the blessing of God, that comes on
those that make conscience of performing this Religious duty touching the
maintenance of the Ministers of God, whereby the worship of God is upheld (read
Deuteronomy. 14.22, 23, 28, 27. and Chap. 16.12. Prove. 3.9, 10. Mal. 3.11, 12). Think
of Abraham, the first Tythe-payer, as we have showed before* God blessed him
greatly, and he became great, and gave him flocks and herds, and silver and
gold, etc. And Jacob the next Tythe-payer, we read of ( Genesis 28.20.) God
blessed [him and his posterity, the children of Jacob, the children of Israel.
And on the contrary, consider the Curse that follows the neglect of this duty,
and the judgments of God upon those that deal not faithful therein; Those that
neglected this duty were cursed with a curse, they carried out much, and
brought in little, ( Mal. 3.12.) The holy Prophet Samuel speaks of King Saul's
taking the tenth of their seed, and of their Vineyards, and giving them to his
officers and servants (1 Samuel 8.15.) what became of him and of all his? ruin,
blood, and destruction followed them. The cry of the oppressed servants of God
comes up before God, who by this sin especially, is much provoked to wrath, and
to pour out his judgments against Princes and people, even whole Nations,
where Gods Ministers are misused, despised, oppressed: for this sin God sent
against Israel the King of the Caldees, who slew their young men with the
sword, etc. 2 Chronicles. 36.15. And what think we shall become of those States,
and private persons, who take away, or suffer to be taken away, that
maintenance of Gods ministers? especially, seeing there is a further obligation
now upon us, to uphold and pay it: Because men of ability have formerly, and of
late, out of their piety, charity, and bounty freely given and legally settled
Houses, Lands and Tithes upon ministers, out of their own proprieties and
estates, which they lawfully might do; and moreover, when they did give, and
settle that maintenance, they laid a curse upon those that should take it away
(as Histories show fully.) The Miseries of Germany began (as we have before
showed) with the denial of paying tithes: The Prince Elector Palatine took
away tithes, which were so settled upon Ministers; he took them away to
maintain wars, he lost all for near thirty years together: the Christian
world is full of such examples, and in this Nation in private families: I shall
only mention the sacrilegious practice of the late Bishops here (Archbishop
Laud especially) who hindered the maintenance of Godly Ministers which was
advanced by the buying in of Impropriations, which Godly people did purchase
and bestow for the maintenance of such Ministers: Those Bishops destroyed that
work and persecuted the Feoffees that were employed in it, and had ruined
them, had not the Parliament come on: (See the History of this, in the
History of Archbishop Lauds Trial) But this was the threshold of the Prelates
ruin; they had a vial of wrath poured upon them, which makes them know their
tongues for pain; They have since lost all, Honors, Maintenance, etc,

CHAP. V.
ALl this calls for some speedy means and remedies, to cure this Disease, to
take away these Frauds, Wrongs and Oppressions. Humble Proposalls for the
Propagation of the Gospel, and touching the nature, lawfullnesse, and right of
tithes have been incourged and received, from mean persons by the Higher
Powers of late; for this cause of Ministers maintenance is a Gospel-cause,
tending much to the Propagation thereof: It is a cause of public Interest,
which all men have some Interest in, and are bound to promote. Joseph, though a
slave in Egypt, made Proposalls to a great King for the common good to keep off
a Famine, and he found acceptance; I conceive the People-enslaved Ministers in
England, have cause and inducements now to do the like, to keep off a spiritual
famine, of the Word from all, and a temporal Famine, or want, from themselves.

1 Proposal. That no Tythe-payer may take, or carry away, any things tytheable
before the Tythe-receiver have notice, when the things tytheable are ready to
be tythed, so that the Tythe-receiver may see the tithes set out, if he will:
if some expedient to this purpose, be not found out, the laws for tithes, or
tytheing, are to little purpose. Before the Parliament, when the Ecclesiastical
Courts and Laws were in being, tithes were justly paid: People durst not carry
away their tithes; or any part of them, unless compounded for, or tythed out
by the Tythe-receiver, or in his presence, or in the presence of his assign,
or servant, who rode about in harvest, and asked the Tythe-payers to have the
tithe set out, who, knowing the danger, if they were sued in the
Ecclesiastical Courts, and to prevent further trouble, would deal fairly and
either bid the servant set out, and bough out the tithe himself, or else
appoint him to come at such a time and see it set out: which seeing the tithe
set out, by the Tythe-receiver, is a thing, just, reasonable, and possible: The
law should be imp^rtiall to all parties; for them to see they have their own,
and to be at liberty to in joy it, when they will; The Tythe-payers see they
have their own, their nine parts, why should not the Tythe-receiver, who is
the other party in this cause, see he has his own, his tenth part or tithes,
which are his propriety, and estate? It was one Proposal of the Officers of
the Army, in August 1652: That the Laws which are unjust and unreasonable
should be reformed: This is an unjust and unreasonable defect in the recited
Statute, for prediall tithes, paid in kind, that one party should see he has
his own; the other having no power by law; to compel the Tythe-payer, to let
him see he has his own, his tithes; Is it not unjust, and unreasonable, that
one party should divide and choose too, in the absence of the other party? as I
have said, by law, none but the Tythe-payer has to do, to set out the tithes,
and may do it in the Tythe-receivers absence: If there were money due to the
Tythe-payer, or goods to be divided between him and another, would the
Tythe-payer think he were justly dealt with, if he were hindered from seeing
the money told, or the goods divided? would he think that payment good, and
put up the money, not knowing it were the sum, that was due to him? Tithes
are as due, as money upon a Bond: The Customers suffer not Merchants to lade or
unlade their goods without their knowledge; They will know what custom is due
for them: Wayters are put a board to attend the Custom, the Ship-men have no
power to shift off those wayters and lookers after Custom, and in their
absence to convey away their goods, and pay what Custom they list. The
Customers will not leave it to the conscience of those that should pay Custom,
or leave it to them to account, and pay what custom they say is due, or are
ready to prove, by witnesses chosen by themselves; The Customers have Wayters,
and Witnesses of their own, to see that no goods be privately conveyed away,
before the value, and dues for Custom are known: But this intolerable charge
of Tythe-waiters, or Lookers after tithes is in vain, or may be in vain, at
the pleasure of the Tythe-payers, who have by law, power in their hands to
keep the Tythe-receiver from seeing what the things tythe-able are, and what
tithes are due, as has been demonstrated in Chap. 1. At this day in Ireland,
the Tenant pays two rents for his corn, the one is the Land-lords-rent, the
other Tythe-rent: The tenth sheafe is paid for Tythe-rent, the third sheafe for
Land-lords-rent: The Tenant, that pays these two Rents, puts his corn first
into a Reeke or heap in the corn field, where it grew, and when he carries
away the reeke or heap, to his Hag-yard, or Stack-yard; He first sends for the
Tythe-receiver and Landlord, or their assign; He dares not carry a sheafe,
out of the field to his house, but first they see they have their due. They are
not s^ffered to set cut these Rents themselves, or before witness of their own
providing, as in England.

2 Proposal It is humbly conceived that Doctor Gauden is a fit man to be
consulted with in this case: for that, he has published lately a book
entitled The Case of the Ministers maintenance by tithes, in which he
affirms, That he knows how to make that Maintenance, as quiet and casie a
Revenue as any in England.

3 Proposal That where rates of tithes are paid for land, by the acre, or for
houses; The Rate-receiver may sue at Common law, and may have power to measure
the acres, and enforce the Landlords or Tenants Lease in evidence: for who can
swear the number of acres, but by admeasuring the land?

4 Proposal That a Law may be made for treble costs, as there is for treble
damages for prediall tithes subtracted.

5 Proposal That Ministers heretofore put into sequestered Livings may be taken
into special consideration, and relieved by law, as Incumbents, according to
the late Ordinance of his Highness, the L. Protector, for Ministers that shall
hereafter be put into Sequestered Livings, and according to the Ordinance for
the popagation of the Gospel in Wales, whereby such Ministers are settled for
life, as Incumbents, etc.

6 Proposal That it may not be left arbitrary to Justices of Peace to act, or
not to act for the relief of Ministers in point of their maintenance.

7 Proposal It is humbly desired that some Order may be taken, how scandalous
Parish-Blerks may be proceeded against and removed, and others put in their
places, and receive the ancient dues: for some Parishes, for their own ends,
keep in bad ones, and some Parishes will not choose or have any such assistant
to the Minister and people, whereby the public worship is prejudiced: The
Parishoners in the mean time keeping to themselves the Ancient established
revenue of that assistant: And questionless, (to save charges) would have no
Minister also, if it were in their power.

To conclude, I doubt not, but the Lord of the Harvest, that sends Laborers
into his Vineyard, will direct The Higher Powers so to relieve his oppressed
Ministers, by law and justice, that they shall no longer cry out of violence,
and spoil, fraud and wrong, acted against them, for want of Law and Justice;
But that their maintenance shall no longer, no longer, be subject to such
sharkings, and frauds: Then will Godly Ministers be encouraged in the work of
the Lord (1 Chronicles. 31.4.) Then will their Labors be sweetened; Then will
Demetrius, Tythe-short, and their fellow Crafts-men, be confounded, when they
shall see, the hope of their unjust gain is gone: Then will the Devils Barns,
be more empty; when the Tythe-robbers shall cease their villainies, having no
liberty, nor opportunity, to defraud, and steal: Then will the peoples
causeless Gospel-hindering contentions with Ministers, about their detaining
Ministers dues, cease: when, by reason of Law, and Justice, they shall despair
of impunity, and gain, but be certain of loss by their iniquity, which
iniquity ceasing, contentions about it, will cease: Then will not Godly
Ministers be any longer a Cheating-stocke, and thereby a dirision, through
poverty, sordid necessity, and contempt thereby: Then will they live
comfortably, and not only be given to Hospitality, but be really hospital, and
be an example to their flocks, in works of charity: Then, may they educate
their children liberally, and follow their studies and callings quietly and
constantly, without distraction about maintenance; Then, there is no doubt, but
that faithful Ministers, being out of danger of revenge from ungodly people
for their faithfulness in their Ministry, will exercise their Ministry,
according to duty, boldly, and impartially without fear, or flatery, or daubing
for filthy lucre; and will be free from the blood of all men: And then shall
the Present Authority be truly styled; The Minister-protecting, and
Gospel-propogating Authority, to all generations.

FINIS.

