THE CURATES CONFERENCE; OR A DISCOVRSE BETWIXT TWO SCHOLARS; Both of them
relating their hard Condition, and consulting which way to mend it.

Interpone tuis interdum gaudia Curis. Printed in the Year, 1641.

THE CVRATES CONFERENCE; OR A Discourse betwixt two Scholars; both of them
relating their hard Condition, and consulting which way to mend it.
Master Poorest. WELL met good Master Needham.


Master Needham. I am heartily glad to see you here, how have you canvas'd the
course of the World this many a day good Master Poorest.


Mr. P. Good Sir, take the pains as to walk into Paul's Church, and we will
confer a little before Sermon begins.


Mr. N. With all my heart, for I must not so suddenly leave your company,
having not enjoyed your society this long time.


Mr. P. Good Sir, tell me, are you resident in Cambridge in the College still;
I make no question but the Universitie and your merits have preferred you to
some good Fellowship, Parsonage, or the like good fortunes.


Mr. N. Alas! good Master Poorest, this is not an age for to bestow Livings and
preferments freely, it is now as 'twas said long ago; Si nihil attuleris ibis
Jhomere for as, I tell you, it is pity to see how Juniors and Dunces take
possession of Colleges, and Schollerships and Fellowships are bought and sold
as Horses in Smithfield. But I hope you are grown fat in the Country, for
there is not such corruption there as there is among the Muses.


Mr. P. I Will deal plainly with you, I stayed in the Universitie of Oxford till I
was forced to leave it for want of subsistence. I stood for three or four
several Schollerships, and though I was found upon Examination sufficient, yet
I do seriously protest, that one time I was prevented by half a Bucke and
some good Wine, that was sent up to make the Fellows merry: and another time a
great Ladies Letter prevailed against all ability of parts, and endowments
whatsoever: a third time, the Warden of the College had a poor kinsman, and
so he got the major part of the Fellows on his side, for fear, and flattery,
that there were no hopes to swim against so great a stream; and so I was
forced to retreat into the Country, and there turn first an Usher, and at
last was made Curate under a great Prebend, and a double beneficed rich man,
where I found promises beyond performances; for my Salary was inferior by much
to his Cook, or his Coachman, nay, his Barber had double my stipend; for I was
allowed but eight pound per annum, and get my own victuals clothes and books
as I could; and when I told him the means were too little, he said that if I
would not, he could have his Cure supplied by another rather for less then
what I had; and so I was yoaked to a small pittance for the space of twelve
years.


Mr. N. Is It possible there should be such a concurrence of hard fortunes; It
was no otherwise in our Universitie, when I stood for preferment; for at first,
a Lawyers son had the Schollership, because his Father had done some
business for the College at Common Law; and a Doctor of Physickes son was
preferred in my place to a Fellowship, because his Father had cured the Masters
wife of a Timpany: and so finding all hopes gone there, I went home to my
friends, and so within a while after I was made a Minister, and served a Cure.


Mr. P. Where I pray you, is your Charge?


Mr. N. It is in a little poor parish hard by Pinchbacke in Lincolneshire,
where the Churchwarden is scarce able to give the Minister more then a Barley
Bagpudding to his Sundays dinner. Where are you placed?


Mr. P. I serve a Cure hard by Hungerford in Wiltshire; where my allowance is
so short, that was it not more for conscience to be in this my calling, I had
rather be a Cobbler, and sit and mend old shoes.


Mr. N. I protest, I think we Curates are worse dealt withal by the rich
double beneficed men, then the Children of Israel were by the Egyptians; for
though they made them work hard, yet they allowed them straw and other
materials, and good victuals; for they longed after the fleshpots of Egypt,
which proves they had them a long time; but we are lorc'd to work, and yet can
get nothing: and yet these should be either Fathers or Brethren to us, but they
were enemies to them; and yet they dealt better with them, then these do with
us.


Mr. P. They deal as bad with us as they do with their flocks. I mean their
parishioners, for they starve their souls, and pinch our bodies.


Mr. P. I wonder how these Lip-parsons would do, should there be but once a
general Consent of all the Curates to forbear to preach or read prayers but
for one three weeks, or a month only, how they would be forced to ride for
it, and yet all in vain; for how can one person supply two places at one time
twenty miles distance?


Mr. P. By my consent they should have for every Benefice, a wife, they should
have variety of pleasure, as well as of profit; but withal, I think that
course would quickly weary their bodies and purses too.


Mr. N. Wives, oh strange, no I would not live to see that day; for if they be
so fearfully covetous having but one, I wonder what they would be, having so
many.


Mr. P. Oh Sir, I tell you, they might by this course in time stand in no need
of Curates, nor Clerks neither; for if they could speak as much in the Church
as at home, they might serve the turn; and they are all Masters of Art, to
gather up the small tithes and Easter-booke as well as the Clarke.


Mr. N. Nay, now since we are fallen upon it, I Will tell you, our Parson has a
Living in London as well as here, and his wife is so miserably proud, that both
Livings will scarce suffice to maintain her, in so much that she takes out of
the Curates wages, as half of every funeral Sermon, and out of all Burialls,
Churchings, Weddings, Christnings, etc. she has half duties, to buy Lace,
Pinnes, Gloves, Fannes, Blackbags, Satin Petticoates, etc. and toward the
maintenance of a puny Servitor to go before her; nay, she pays half toward
the maintenance of a Coach, which she either gets from her husband, or else
from the Curate, by substracting his allowance at the quarter day; and what
more is, she made her Curate in London to enter into bond privately to her
husband, to leave the place at half a years warning; or else her husband the
Parson of the place, would not have granted him a License for the place.


Mr. P. Oh strange! is it possible that this old remainder of Popery should be
yet upheld by our Clergy, to have such Pope- Joanes to rule the Church. I have
heard say, there are three places in which a Woman never should bear any sway;
the Buttery, the Kitchen, and the Church; for Women are too covetous by nature
to keep a good house; and too foolish to rule a Church.


Mr. N. Alas! Master Needham, there is a necessity in this, for I think our
Parson has scarce wit enough to do it; and though he had, yet his wives
tongue would put him out of his wits, if he should not let her have her will.


Mr. P. What care I how she punished him, so that she did not entrench upon
our Liberties, but alas, she breaks her husbands back, and pinches our
bellies.


Mr. N. Such a piece of correction has our Parson too; for I bought but one
new cloak in six years, and that money, too was given me in legacy by a
good parishioner, and she* oh how she envied my felicity, and informed her
husband, that I waxt proud; and advised him to get another in my place.


Mr. P. Is It possible! and yet our shee-Regent is not unlike her, for she frets
fearfully to hear that a worthy Gentleman, who lives in the parish, loves me
so much; it galls her to the quick, if the Parishioners out of their loves
give me any thing to mend my Salary; oh she thinks all is lost that goes
beside her hands!


Mr. N. Well, but what does your great Parson with all his wealth? does he
keep good hospitality? or is he charitable to the poor, what is his name? Dr.
Proud.


Mr. P. Alas, nothing less; he wears Cassockes of Damask, and Plush, good
Beavers, and silk Stockings; can play well at Tables, or Gleeke, can hunt
well, and bowl very skilfully; is deeply experienced in Racy Canary, and can
relish a Cup of right Claret; and so passes the time away: what is your great
Overseers name?


Mr. N. Dr Harding. What goodness lodges in his Corpse?


Mr. P. Little or none, he is worse then yours; for he never comes to visit his
Parish, but Horseleech-like, he suckes them; he loves preying better then
praying, and forces his Parish to humility by oppressing them; he was a maine
Projector for two shillings nine pence ith pound, and looks like a piece of
Reezed Bacon ever since the plot failed; he is tormented with the yellow
Jaundies, and a wanton Wife, which are like two incarnate devils, will force
him to believe a hell before he comes thither.


Mr. N. It Is no great matter, it is but just that he that torments others,
should taste the same sauce himself.


Mr. P. I Will tell you what his Custom is, when he comes amongst us; he neither
prays nor preaches, the one I think he will not, the other I fear he cannot
perform.


Mr. N. Oh strange! how came he then by such Livings?


Mr. P. Easily enough, for its money that makes the Parsons Horse to go now
adays, for they may say to Parsons, as it has been of old said of books,
Quanti emisti hanc?


Mr. N. I Will assure you, I am afraid he is discontent at our Church Government,
as well as many other great Parsons; for they force and strictly enjoyne their
Curates to read all divine Service, which they never do themselves.


Mr. P. It Is a strange world, that they should flourish and flow in wealth for
doing nothing; and the poor Curates that do all, can get nothing; I Will tell
you truly, he has not given his Parish a Sermon this three quarters of a year.


Mr. N. I wonder how they can answer the Cannon which enjoynes them to Preach
once a month.


Mr. P. Pish, what do you talk to them of the Canons, they who can make new
ones, think they may slight the old ones; their Canons are like those Laws,
which caught flies, but could not hold hornets or great bees, they are the
Curates, who are set to be Canoniers, these endure the heat of the day, of this
once or twice a day preaching; alas, they say as the Priests did once to Judas,
What Is that to us, see you to that.


Mr. N. You speak truth, and I will maintain it, that our Doctor differs not
much from the Weathercocke on the Church Steeple; for as it is placed highest,
says nothing, is sounding brass, or some such metal, and turns as the
Wind; So he rules all the Parish, seldom preaches, is void of charity, and
turns in his courses every time; for sometimes, he is all for Ceremony,
sometimes indifferent, sometimes against them; he has made a terrible
combustion, where and how to place, the Lords Table; It stood in the Church,
anon it must be advanced into the Quire, then it must be East and West, and
presently after, North and South, covered, uncovered, rayled, without, rayles,
of this fashion, of that, of this wood, of another; may, he himself who was
the first that altered it, has now within this month or two, altered his
opinion, and placed it again in the body of the Church: oh sine Weathercocke.


Mr. P. Oh lamentable, that Curated should be shadows to such empty shells;
but our great Doctor, he is of another strain, he cares not much, I think,
whither there was any Table or Communion at all; so that he may receive his
Tithes, it is not so much to him whither it be an Altar or a Table, so that he
can get the gold that comes from it, he is so taken with covetousness, that so
he may get money, what cares he for either preaching or praying, I tell you,
he threatened a poor Widow, to put her into the Court, because (as he was
told) she had thirteen eggs in a nest, and yet gave him but one for tithe.


Mr. N. Well, our Master is as full of Law, as yours can be of covetousness:
he threatened one of his Parishioners for sneezing in prayer time, because he
hindered his devotion, nay, he made one jaunt it up a foot into the Arches
fourscore miles, because he desired to receive the Communion in his feat, my,
I protest, that the Parishioners when they hear he is going away, do usually
make him some feast, but it is for joy, that they shall be rid of him till next
Summer.


Mr. P. What is yours a good able Scholar?


Mr. N. Yes, he is Scholar good enough, but he preaches Christ out of
contention.


Mr. P. That Is something yet, but alas our Parson is as bad as one of
Saundersons Doctors; for he was made Doctor in Scotland, when our King was
there: (...) warrant you, that he knows not whither Saint Ambrose was a Greek
or a Latin Father.


Mr. N. Oh miserable!


Mr. P. Nay, he holds Greek for Heathenish, and Hebrew for Jewish Languages,
and Latin he says is the Language of Rome, and so holds ignorance best in
these: he scarce knows the difference betwixt Annus and Annas, or betwixt,
Anus or Anas: I have heard him read Opa. tenebr. for Opera tenebrarum, because
they were cut a little short, and said the Printers deserved punishment for
curtailing good Latin: I heard him also decline Senex for an old man, genetivo
Senecis, and was confident that he was right too.


Mr. N. Oh such Doctors had need to pray that Popery may come in again, for
then 'twas well when the Priest could read Latin, whither it was right or
wrong.


Mr. P. And yet he is laden with no less then a good Parsonage, a great
Vicaridge, two Prebendships, and another place worth fourscore pound by the
year; its impossible sure for him to preach, for telling his moneys.


Mr. N. Any of all those places would suffice you, or my self, but alas I
Wishers and woulders, you know how the Proverb runs: these optative Moods are
merely poor and beggarly.


Mr. P. I deal plainly with you, I was offered a place in the City of London,
but the name of it frighted me, it was at Saint Peter's i^h Poor, and I
thought, I had enough of poverty already, and so I refused it.


Mr. N. Just so was I offered to serve a Cure more North by far then this is,
but the name of it startled me, and turned aside all resolution toward it:
for it was at a place called Sterveling in Cumberland.


Mr. P. Nay, I Will tell you more Master Needham; I thought to have gone up to
London, had not our Doctors Curate there one Master Hand-little told me
plainly, that most Curates in London lived upon Citizens Trenchers, and were it
not that they were pitiful and charitable to them, there was no possibility
of subsistence; and that of late it went harder with them, then before, for
ever since the Parsons would have so inhanc'd their Revenues, the Citizens have
mainely withdrawn their purses, so that now the Curate must live upon his set
pittance, or else starve.


Mr. N. Well Master Poorest, I do not intend to stay longer in the Country,
for I will wait here in Town upon hopes a while.


Mr. P. Do as you please, but you will find the old Proverb true, London lick
penny.


Mr. N. I am resolved upon it, though I go to the three-penny Ordinary; my
Reason is, I do hear say, that there are great store of Clerks places about
London, that are good allowance for Scholars, some worth two hundred pound and
upwards per annum, I know some of the Parish Clerks are worth seven or eight
thousand pounds; oh their fees come in sleeping and waking: what think you of
the plott?


Mr. P. I marry such places are worth the while, but how should one catch them?


Mr. N. I Will assure you, it is a shame that such Mechanickes should live in such
state as they do, many of them are as greedy of Funerals as Vultures of dead
Carcasses, and they are most of them in an ill name for exacting most grossly
in their fees, hence is it that some of them rule the whole Parish; and Parson,
and all, you shall see them upon festival days, as well clothed as the
chiefest Citizens; their fingers as full of Rings of Gold, as an old Ale wife
that has buried four or five husbands, and their necks set as big with a
curious Ruff as any the proudest Dons in Spain, oh what pure rich night caps
they wear, and good Beavers; beside all this, they can have their meetings
usually in Tavernes of three or four pounds a sitting, when as poor Curates
must not look into a Red Lettice, under fear of a general censure.


Mr. P. Oh strange! I think it was well if Curates could turn Parish Clerks,
if it be as you say, it is the better course by far.


Mr. N. Come, come, I tell you, we are bound to look out for our selves, and
I know no more safer course then this, for most of the Clerks have trades to
live upon befide: but I hope their Charter will fail, and then others may come
into their places.


Mr. P. What say you Master Needham, how strong are you, will you go and show
me that pretry banqueting house for Curates, I meant the three penny Ordinary,
for I can go no higher.


Mr. N. I, I with all my heart, for I am almost at the same ebb: but lets hope
better; things will not always ride in this Rack.


Mr. P. Sir, I conceive plainly, that we Curates are but as the stalking
horses to the Clerks, for they get wealth by our labors.


Mr. N. Are you advised of that, you would say so indeed should you but see
some of their Bills, so much for Burialls, so much for the kneell, so much for
the grave, for the corpse more if coffined; more yet; if in such a Church, yard;
more then that, if in the Church; higher yet, if it be in the Chancell; beyond
all these, if buried with Torches, and Sermon, and mourning, with attendance;
but it is put upon the highest strain, if it be a stranger. Besides, for
Matriages by Banes, or by License, for making the Certificate; so for
Churchings, and diverse other ways, and nothing to the Curate all this while.


Mr. P. Well, I conceive it more then are I did, but now let us leave off
Discourse, and fall to our Commons, what a pretty Modicum I have here, sure
this Ordinary-keeper has been some Cook or Scullion in a College, how
dexterously the fellow plays the Logician, in dividing the meat* it is an
excellent place sure to learn Abstinence by, I promise you, I will visit this
house as my stock holds out. Its just one degree above Dining with Duke
Humphery, it is as good as a Preservative against surfets.


Mr. N. Oh good Brother, it is as fine a refreshment as may be; I hold it
wondrous good, for here a man shall be sure to rise from his meat as many
others use to sit down to it, with a stomach.


Mr. P. I Will tell you one thing, which I had almost forgotten, I was offered
the other day to go a Voyage to the East Indies, to be Preacher in a Ship.


Mr. N. Excellent well, oh refuse it not; it is far beyond living ashore for
ten pound per annum, I know you will find brave worthy Merchants, you cannot
want, if you undertake it.


Mr. P. I promise you, I had determined to have gone in one of his Majesty's
Ships upon our narrow Seas, but if the voyage be so good, I Will away (God
willing) next spring.


Mr. N. I Will tell you, what I intend if I miss of hopes this way here, to
solicit to be a Preacher to a Regiment of Soldiers, if there be any service
this next Summer; for we cannot be lower then now we are; I would have given
you Master Powest, one pint of Wine, but Ultra posse non est esse, as you know.


Mr. P. I am as willing to have done the like to your self, not having seen
you so long since, but my purse denies ability.


Mr. N. I must be gone at one of the clock, to meet with a Gentleman of the
Innes of Court, well good Brother, God bless us both, and send us better
times, and a happy meeting. Farewell.


FINIS.

