THE CRVELL TRAGEDY Or Inhumane BVTCHERY, of Hamor and Shechem, with other
their Adherents. Acted by Simeon and Levi, in Shechem, a City in Succoth a
County or Lordship in Canaan. Lately revived and reacted here in England, by
Fairfax and Ireton, upon the persons of Sir Charles Lucas and Sir George Lisle,
in Colchester, the 28. Aug. 1648. Presented to public view in Meditations,
discoursing the former, discovering the latter, and comparing the circumstances
of both, and Dedicated to the honored memory of the two last named Worthies.

By swearing, and lying, and killing, and stealing, and committing adultery,
they break out, and blood touches blood. Hosea 4.2. Printed in the Year 1648.

The Preface.
Gentlemen:
THough I am denied the liberty of the Pulpit, yet I cannot be denied the
freedom of the Press to publish these sad meditations upon the tragical end
of 2 of Englands VVorthyes: an Office (I must confess) that deserved to be
performed by an abler pen, but could not (I am sure have) been dictated from a
more honest heart; an heart more affected with the worthiness of their lives,
or more afflicted for the barbarous suddenness of their cruel deaths: I
forbear to remember what they were, it is recorded in each noble valiant breast;
nor would I have you doubt of what they are, crowned Conquerors in Heaven,
though murdered captives here on earth. Funeral Sermons ought to be, not so
much for the Encomium of the dead, as the benefit of the living, either by
instruction or conviction; which latter this piece especially labors to
effect: which I beseech God it may compass with that succes, that they, who
had an hand themselves, or abetted and countenanced others in this so bloody a
deed, being convinced of their cruelty, may be struck with remorse and horror
at the remembrance of so cursed a sin, which all good men cannot but abhor,
and so do I.

Farewell.
GENESIS 45.5.6.7.
CRuelty (though exercised upon an Heathen) is always odious, and butchery
upon cold blood (though committed upon ravishing, treacherous, hypocritical
Infidels) makes even Israel to stink (or be abhorred) among the Inhabitants of
Canaan, and the Perizzites. Genesis 34.30.

To have the swords of the chosen seed, sons of those Fathers whom God
loved, Deuteronomy. 4.37. of children elected by the Lord their God, to be a precious
People unto himself, above all people that are upon the earth. Deuteronomy. 7.6. of a
People, not more in number then any people, but the fewest of all people; Deuteronomy.
7.7. of them whom he called of his free grace, and mere love which he bare to
them. Deuteronomy. 7.8. That the swords (I say) of this chosen seed, of the sons of
such Fathers of the children so elected, of a people so few in number, and by
free grace, and mere love, so called: That their swords (I say once again)
should become the Instruments of violence; and that cruelty, murdering cruelty
should be deliberately consulted, and premeditately acted in their habitations,
was so horrid an inhumanity in the eyes and thoughts of the good old
experienced Patriarch, Jacob, and so detestable a fact in his apprehension,
that the remembrance therefore made such a deep impression in his soul as to
the day of his death could not be defaced; but on that day (as if but then
their swords had freshly been latcht into the Shechemites hearts, and the
Relation of that bloody act, even then pierced his soul) his last gasp almost,
breaths it self into this fatal, fearful prediction

The Text.
5. Simeon and Levy, brethren in iniquity; the instruments of cruelty are in
their habitations, (or their swords were instruments of violence)

6. Oh my soul! come not thou into their secret: unto their assembly mine
honor be not thou united; for in their anger they slew a man, and in their
self will they dug down a wall.

7. Cursed be their wrath, for it was fierce; and their rage, for it was
cruel: I will divide them in Jacob, and scatter them in Israel.

And divides it self by respiting commaes, or breath-recovering accents, into
these 7 particulars.

The Division.
1. A distinguishing appellation, Simeon and Levi.

2. A stigmatizing compellation, Brethren in iniquity.

3. An affirmative Position, charge, or impeachment, the Instuments of cruelty
are in their habitations.

4. an ingeminated conjuration Of his soul to abjure their secrets, Oh my
soul come not thou into their secrets. Of his honor to abjure their
Assemblies. Unto their Assembly, Oh mine honor be not thou united.


5. That conjuration grounded upon a cause arguing the deserved detestation of
two actions, the effect of a two fold affection.

1. Of their anger vented in the execution done upon their enemies: for in
their anger they slew a man. 2. Of their peevish perverseness, their battering
down a Wall, or forcing an entering into a City; and in their self-will they
dug down a wall.
6. A bitter imprecation, or dreadful execration,

Cursed be their wrath; for it was fierce. rage; for it was cruel.


7. A Prophetic divination, or fatal prediction of -- division among
themselves: I will divide them in Jacob. dispersion among others: and scatter
them in Israel.


In all which he expresses how cordially, and conscientiously, he abominated
so horrid a Tragedy as will be discovered in handling these particulars, unto
the exposition whereof I next proceed.

The exposition of the first particular.
The distinguishing appellation, Simeon and Levi. And why they named above all
the rest, it being evident that the other sons of Jacob were actors in the
design as well as they, and that in revenge too, Genesis 37.27? It is true, they
were actors in the work of revenge, but not the manner of acting: the coming
of sore self submitted and wounded men three days after a Treaty, and a
seeming reconciliation, when they thought themselves safe, and feared no such
revengefull act, the coming (I say) upon men at such a time, and in such a
condition and putting them to death in cold blood, was the sole design of
those two by name, and was (as the 25. verse plainly expresses it) acted by
them alone; and therefore in this definitive sentence which Jacob passed upon
that bloody fact, and the judgment which he pre-threatned should fall upon
the actors, by their proper names he distinguishes them two from the rest, and
points at them, that so it might be unquestionably evident that they were the
men.

The Observations.
1. Observe hence in the first place that in criminal causes of so bloody and
cruel a nature, a definitive sentence (whether of death, or of judgment) is
not to be pronounced (much less hastily executed) upon surmises or
suggestions; but only upon real evidence, for undisputable reasons, and upon
sufficient grounds.

2. In the records of such inhumane Tragedies and cruel executions, the
contrivers and actors may digito demonstrari and dici hi sunt, be poynted out
by name to distinguish them from others, and said of these are the men; Jacob
does so here, Simeon and Levi.

The Application.
The contrivees and principal actors (in the execution of Sir Charles Lucas
and Sir George Lyle, upon a bare surmise of having no Commission, and at best
but upon a disputable reason) having neglected the duty required in the former
observation, have purchased to themselves the guilt of Simeon and Levi, the
cruel murder of two worthy men, though submitted to mercy, and therefore in
our making mention of that inhumane Tragedy may be distinguished from others by
their proper appellation, and by name pointed at Fairfax, and Ireton, as
Simeon, and Levi, brethren in iniquity, which is the second particular.

The exposition of the second particular
2. The stigmatizing compellation, brethren in iniquity; brethren, not so much
in respect of their affinity or neerenesse of blood, as of the vicinity and
compliance of their affections in plotting the treachery, and likewise of the
conjuncture of, or equal readiness in their desires to effect so inhumane a
villainy; fratres in iniquitate, that is says one, similimi and conjunctissimi
scelere, puta feritate, audacia, dolo and crudelitate, they were linked in the
same bands of iniquity, alike possessed with a revengefull, fierce, crafty, and
cruel desire of blood, brethren in iniquity (that is) with the same degree of
affection, complotters, and contrivers of this violent bloody design.

The Observations.
1. There are commonly partners in contriving cruel designs, brethren that
will be ready to lay their heads together in plotting bloody villainy, and evil
actions shall not want associates, companions in their executions: As bonum, so
malum, is sui diffusivum, seldom is mischief agitated to perfection without
two heads; cast in thy lot among us, we will have but one purse, we will be
brethren, Pro. 1.14. is the insinuating policy of those whose designs are
violence, revenge, or blood: Witness the two Elders in the story of Susanna,
were it not Apocryphal, but in that which is Canonical, Bigthan and Teresh in
the book of Hester, 2.21. Jozachar, and Jehozabad, in the 2 of Kings 12.21.
and Simeon, and Levi, in the Text.

The Application.
And want there witnesses to this truth in our days? No Fairfax and treton
were the joint contrivers, and designers of the late cruel execution of his
Majesty's and Kingdoms two loyal Subjects at Colchester; though their death
were assented to by their Counsel of War, and acted by their Soldiers.

2. Brethren in iniquity, they are recorded to be, brethren they were, so far
the compellation might stand with their reputation and be for their credit, as
being a badge of honor; but in iniquity being added, it tends to their shame
and disgrace, and proves the brand of their infamy, charactizing their cruelty
and villainy: Foul actions deserve for their authors foul denominations, and
the contrivers of odious designs, are worthy to be stigmatized with odious
names.

If Jeroboam (to compass his ambitious ends) make all Israel turn Rebel; God
thinks fit to set this mark of disgrace upon his name. Jeroboam the son of
Nebat, who made Israel to sin, 1 Kings 16.26. and if Simeon and Levi (to
execute their revengefull ends) will be like in complotting a design of
cruelty, they shall be conjoined in a character demonstrating their villainy:
brethren in a plot of inhumanity Jacob stigmatizes with the compellation of,
brethren in iniquity: And this is done that so the generations to come, reading
the odiousness of such crimes in the disgracefulnesse of the authors
compellations or (nicknames) may be afraid of the brand, and if they would not
receive it, be so afraid of the sin as not to commit it.

The Application.
And now you that are Simeon and Levies parallels, are ye moved and startled
at this stigmatizing compellation? you should then have been moved by their
example and shame, and startled at the contriving and designing so parallel an
execution; since you have not been afraid to imitate Simeon and Levi, in the
transgression, I will not be afraid to imitate Jacob by this Transition,
Fairfax and Ireton, brethren in iniquity; yea and to charge you with the
impeachment charged upon them in the affirmative position, and the third
particular.

The exposition of the third particular.
The affirmative position, charge or impeachment; the instruments of cruelty
are in their habitations; that is all the infernal affections of their minds,
all the external Members of their bodies, and all the weaons of war that they
were furnished with, were wholely converted to the acting cruelty, all were
employed by them to this end to execute this bloody design.

What cruelty, and weapons! instruments of cruelty in the habitations of the
chosen seed! Yes, for it is here positively affirmed, that the instruments of
cruelty were in the habitations of the sons of Jacob, the faithful son of
God and godly grandchild of the Father of the faithful, Abraham.

The Observations.
1. The true seed of the promise, the chosen seed declared so by God himself,
may harbor intentions of, and proceed to be actors in cruel designs; witness
the occasion of these words of Jacob on his death bed, viz. the deliberated and
consulted murder of Hamor and Shechem, though concealed by deceitful
communications, parlies, or treaties, till by their submission to Siweon and
Levies desires, they had given them advantage and opportunity to effect the
same, which they made use of, and in cold blood, the third day after they had
them at their mercy with their swords, they fell upon them and slew them, who
had made themselves unable to resist or defend themselves by yielding to that
proposition, which they did believe had been made to no other end then to
effect a reconciliation in peace, love, and union: For this crafty dealing with
Hamor and Shechem, till they had got them to submit in a manner to their mercy,
and then in cold blood murdering of them, does Jacob charge them here with
this impeachment, positively affirming that the instruments of cruelty were in
their habitations, and that was the occasion of this his speech upon his death
bed, and is a proof of the truth of this observation that, men, who are
declared to be of the chosen seed, and that by the testimony of God himself,
may harbor intentions of, and proceed to be actors in cruel designs, and may
employ all the faculties of their souls and members of their bodies to effect
the same.

The Application.
And have we not them in our days who bear witness to this truth also, and
who may be truly charged with this impeachment? Yes, for that their hearts
(who seem to others, and report themselves to be the elect and chosen of God,
Saints, and holy ones) that their hearts (I say) may contrive mischief, and
with David's cruel man, Psalm. 140.2. imagine evil things, and harbor war
continually; but yet with their tongues talk deceitfully.

That the words of their mouths may be softer then butter, and more gentle
then oil, and yet their thoughts at that time be very swords forged for the
war, which is in their hearts.

When by craft they have got an advantage, that their feet my make haste to
execute premeditated revenge, and be swift in running to do mischief.

That their hands may be ever ready to shed blood, and their right hand the
right hand of falsehood, whilst it takes by the beard to kiss, smiting its
sword into the fifth rib to kill, 2 Samuel 20.9.10. In a word: That all the
affections of their souls, (though religiously seeming, but deceitful, be the
words of their mouths) members of their bodies, and swords by their sides (who
in our days are termed the chosen of God, Saints and holy ones) may prove
instruments of cruelty, is a truth fully justified by the late act of Fairfax
and Ireton, parallel to this of Simeon and Levi here, the putting to the
sword these two valiant Commanders. Sir Charles Lucas and Sir George Lysle in
cold blood, the third day after they had yielded themselves to their mercy, and
within two hours after notice given to them of death; and therefore we may
say of them that the instruments of cruelty are in their habitation. That's the
first observation.

But before I touch upon the second, it is requisite that we revive, and
consider the whole story.

Shechem the son of Hamor an uncircumcised Canaanite had wrought Villainy in
Israel. Genesis 34 7. committed that which was to the reproach of Jacob and his
sons, v. 14. both these by Jacob were past by with silence, and their
redress committed to the Lord, and by Sechem endeavored to be satisfied and
repaired: to this end Shechem desires a Personal Treaty (the sole means with
Gods blessing to effect a reconciliation, if without hypocrisy) Jacob consents
really, intending a reconciliation with Shechem, who entreated it with humble
submission; and with Hamor who had propounded it, with promise of a
considerable satisfaction: with his sincerity, and integrity had the matter
been ended peaceably, between them who had no other ends but love, peace,
union, and amity.

But the sonns of Jacob, pretending to embrace the motion, intend to compass
their premeditated revenge, and in Order thereunto begin their cruelty with
craft, and shroud their craft under the cloak of Religion: If you will submit
to our discipline, serve the God whom we serve, and receive on your Bodies the
badge or ensign of our Covenant, according to the Ordinance of God,
circumcision, then may we yield to your desires, otherwais know we cannot do
this thing; we cannot give our sister to an uncircumcised man Genesis 34.14. a
covenant intended not for the salvation of the soul, but the destruction of
the body.

The Fatherly affection to the son, and the intended conjugall affection to
the desired Wife, cause both Hamor and Shechem (waving the painfullnesse of the
execution) to embrace that condition themselves, and to persuade their people
thereunto; also they dissemble with them, as they themselves had been
dissembled with by Jacobs sons; common profit is pretended in order
thereunto; ( shall not their flocks and substance be ours? Genesis 34.23.) though
Shechems love was therein only meant (the hope of profit is the most powerful
motive to the common People, and the mention of commodity makes the vulger sort
proud to be prodigal of their skin and blood) therefore they also are content
to smart; and so all put the knife to their own fore-skins: and now Simeon and
Levi taking advantage of this submission to their mercy, and inability to make
resistance by reason the sorenes of the Shechemites own-given wounds, on the
third day took either of them his sword and went into the City boldly, and
slew every male, v. 25. This design taken in hand upon so just a cause but
carried on with such craft, dissimulation, and hypocrisy, and in cold blood so
barbarously executed, is by Jacob sharply reprehended in them, Genesis 34.30 and
here made a charge, impeachment, or affirmative position of their cruelty, the
instruments of cruelty are in their habitations: This premised, the second
Doctrinall conclusion will be this.

2 Doct. Though the uncircumcised Infidels, work villainy in Israel, Genesis 34.7.
and commit an act to the shame and reproach of the faithful promised seed,
Christians, Genesis 34.14. and afterward with humble submission sue for an
honorable reconciliation, in hopes by a Personal Treaty, to conclude all in
love peace, union, and amity, and thereupon yield themselves up to their mercy;
yet if Israel, Christians, Saints take advantage of such submission, and in
cold blood murder those uncircumcised Infidels, this charge may be justly put
in, and this impeachment drawn up against them, cruelty are in their
habitations, this is Jacobs charge against Simeon and Levi; yea although (which
is more) the design of the Shechemites were to possess themselves of the
flocks, substance, and all the cattle of Jacob, and all his sons, Genesis 34.23.

The Application.
This charge hen I must draw up, and this impeachment put in against fairfax
and Ireton, those principal actors in that riot, which in cold blood was
committed on the lives of those two worthy Christian Cavaliers, Sir Charles
Lucas, and Sir George Lisle, by their according to their own report) elected
selves, and holy Worthies, that Army of Saints, as the deluded, seduced,
blinded, or besotted people of this Land term them: For if that bloody fact
committed by Simeon and Levi, upon Hamor and Shechem, Infidels; For which yet
they might pretend some cause, and had a fair color, were by Jacob justly
condemned, and this charge put in against them, that cruelty was in their
habitations: Certainly I may be bold to put in the same impeachment against
Fairfax and Ireton, and declame against, that their bloody act as the
quintescence of cruelty, and putting to the sword, after a submission to mercy,
those two noble Christians, who had not injured them at all, much less in so
high a nature; who took up arms only to recover their own substance, and not
to possess themselves of theirs, and were gathered together in a body, to no
other end then by a Personal Treaty to compose all differences, satisfy all
public interests, and effect an happy reconciliation between the King and his
Subjects, and between the subjects themselves, that so the King might live in
glory and command, the subjects in plenty and obedience, and all in peace,
righteousness, and fitting liberty (which Fairfax, Ireton, and the rest of
their adherents pretended in all their Remonstrances and Declarations; in which
it is apparently they talked but deceitfully)

And shall men of these principles, taking up arms to these good and religious
ends, after they are over powered, and have yielded to the mercy of the Victors,
in cold blood be shot to death? and yet shall they that have been chief
plotters and actors, with their adherents and abettors be looked upon and
acknowledged the elect children, the chosen people? No, let them be pointed at
by their known appellations or proper names, Fairfax and Ireton, as being
prodigies of nature, stigmatized with their deserved character or proper
appelation, brethren in iniquity, as the shame branded shame of their Nation,
and charged with that impeachment (unto which themselves cannot but plead
guilty, and none that impartially compares the circumstances will acquit of as
innocent) this affirmative position, the instruments of cruelty are in their
tents or habitations, Psalm. 14. as the scorn of truly valiant soldiers: And
therefore here I conjure all that would not be thought to have a favor to, or
an hand in so foul an act, with their souls to abjure their secrets or
counsels, and with their bodies to avoid their companies, Assemblies,
Committees, or Counsels of war, as good old Jacob does teach them by his
example here; and so I come to the fourth particular.

The fourth particular expounded.
The ingeminated conjuration, Of his soul to objure their secrets, etc. Of his
honor to abjure their Assemblies etc.


1. Oh my soul come not thou into their secret, that is oh my soul, mind,
will and affections, I conjure you not to give the least connivance to the
impious results of such consultations, nay not to be so much as present, when
such wicked designs are discussing.

Observations.
A good man should conjure his spirit and inward man not to partake with bloody
men in their secretly contrived machinations and counsels; but to adjue and
utterly renounce all voted either Ordinances of close Committees, or Orders of
a Counsel of War, that tend to the execution of any cruel design.

2. Unto their Assembly, O mine honor be not thou united; that is, O my glory,
honor or reputation, if thou desiret to be preserved, I conjure thee to
abjure, renounce, utterly disclaim the companies of such bloody projectors, to
avoid the societies of such inhumane voters, and then to have no union with the
congregations or assemblies of such implacable and merciless Counselors: If
they account it their glory and honor to be an Assembly that can do what they
will without control; much good may it do them, but far be such honor from
me.

A good man as he will conjure his inward man not to consent to such bloody
machinations, nor affect such cruel counsels; so will he also conjure his
outward man not so much as to join it self with such companions, nor be an
instrument with their assemblies to effect such cruel actions; as he will not
join with them in the consultation or contriving of them, so neither in the
execution or effecting them, as the faculties of his soul shall not be
counselors, so neither shall the members of his body be actors of such foul
proceedings, as Jacob did conjure both here, O my soul, etc. unto their
Assembly, not to join with them either in thought, word, or deed, either in
inward affection or outward action, of which conjuration in himself, and as an
argument to provoke others thereunto: in the next whods he declares the ground,
cause or reason thereof, thereby to move in others a detestation or hatred of
two actions; the effects of a twofold passion, and the fifth partionlar.

The exposition of the first particular.
The double actions of a two fold affection, Of their anger, Of their
selfe-wilfull revenge.


Of their anger; For in their anger they slew a man, that is, being incenst for
the injury done unto their sister, and the reproach which thereby did accrue
unto themselves; in cold blood after submission to mercy they slew a man, Hamor
and Shechem the chief Commanders put for the rest of their subjects or
soldiers.

Observation.
Some natures are not satisfied but with the life blood of their injuers, nor
will some men's anger be reconciled, but hunt implacably for the life of its
object.

2. Of their selfe-wilfull revenge and in their self-will they dug down a
wall, that is wilfully bent upon revenge they prosecuted it with such violence,
that nothing was of force to hinder the executing thereof; a wall shall not
resist the fury of malice, but down goes that too before they will be
prevented: that is says one, in the night they brake down the wall of
Shechem, which stood betwixt them and the object of their revenge, and entering
at the breach did act that bloody tragedy; But I shall thus expound it, by
craft and policy having undermined, circumvented, Hamor and Shechem the two
stoutest Commanders, who by their valor were as a wall unto their City, and
whose undaunted courage, they durst not singly, and upon equal terms meet or
encounter, but now over powered by this crafty advantage, they dig them down,
that is as it is the nature of all cowards, they slay them and insult upon them
in their fall.

The Application.
And now how near a resemblance there was between the manner of Simeon and
Levies taking away the lives of Hamor and Shechem, and of Fairfax and Iretons
destroying those two valiant Commanders in Colch-ster; and what a vast
disproportion there was betwixt the causes that provoked both of them to so
cowardly, bloody an act, I shall leave it to any endued with common sense and
reason to judge; and I doubt not but it will be a powerful argument to provoke
all who will not be thought to have a favor to, or hand in so base and
unworthy an action to adjure the counsels or secrets, renounce the companies
or assemblies, and depart from the tents of such wicked worthless men, from
their souls detesting such cowardly cruelty, and such inhumane butchery, which
was so abominable in the sense and apprehension of the good old Patriarch Jacob
(though in his sons) that the consideration thereof caused him to convert his
last words to them, which should have been a benediction into a malediction;
cursed be their wrath for it was fierce, and their rage for it was cruel: and
to period his speech of them with a prophetic divination, and fatal
prediction against them, I will divide them in Jacob, and scatter them in
Israel, which contains the two last particulars,

The exposition of the 2 last particulars.
6. Cursed the their Wrath, Rage,
For it was Feirce, Cruel.


Cursed, that is, ill success may it have, may such a thing never prosper, or
be blessed by God or man; But may men for the future tremble at it as an
Anathema, and shun it as a Maranatha, a thing deserving the malediction of men,
and bitter curse of God.

Their wrath, their progress in passion, the cherrishing that humor, and
harboring that ill affection.

Their rage, wrath, hightned to a perfection, or the highest degree of passion;
for there are three degrees of passion.

The first is anger a sudden, but short collition of the humors.

The second is wrath, a continuance of the disturbance, and a countenancing of
the passion.

The last is rage, the discomposure degreed unto perfection by savouring and
feeding the passion, the effects whereof are executed with implacable cruelty.

Be angry but sin not, passionmay forcibly break in upon us, but we must not
cherish it till it prove wrath, muchlesse humor it to perfection till it
becomes rage, breaking out into cruel effects, that is to sin, and that
sin is here cursed: Cursed be their wrath their rage; cursed be their sinful
actions, not persons, the person bears the stamp, or image of God, therefore
hopes of reconciliation upon reformation; but sin defaceth that stamp,
deformeth that image, therefore cursed to prevent the committing thereof by
imitation.

Cursed be their wrath for it was fierce, violent in the increase, rage for it
was cruel, implacable at the full growth: Passio igitur dignasane
maledictione; these qualities render them worthy of a curse, and were the cause
of Jacobs cursing, as himself here testifies.

Good men are such lover of equity, that although they know they may justly
pronounce a malediction against the sin, yet they hold it convenient to produce
the cause, so good a man was Jacob, from whose rule not to digress.

The Application.
Let us consult those very men themselves, who were the Actors in that Tragedy
at Colchester: Say, ye the two heads of our new and new qualified Israel, ye
holy Leaders of that Army of Saints! may we not say cursed be your wrath for it
was fierce? did not your anger swell to that height in the prosecution of the
ends at which it aimed, that it would upon no terms admit of so much as a
Treaty, much less hearken to the honest means of reconciliation with them
till they had submitted to your mercy? and was it not then fierce? and after
they had submitted to your mercy, can you deny that your rage would not be
satisfied with any thing but their lives? and was it not then cruel? wrath thus
fierce in the increase, rage thus cruel in the full growth as certainly worthy
of a curse; Cursed then be your wrath for it was fierce, and your rage for it
was cruel.

And may the 7. particular Jacobs fatal predictions be fulfilled in you and
your assissinates for conclusion: may you be divided among your selves, may you
be dispersed amongst others, for the Lord may be said to pronounce this
sentence, as well against you that have more then justified Simeon and Levi by
imitations, as against them that set you down their own example for your
instruction: I will divide them in Jacob and scatter them in Israel; it is just
with God to divide them, thereby to make way for a mercy upon a Kingdom, who
so easily were united in their forces and affections to bring miseryupon a
Kingdom; and it is policy to disperse them, who in a body have contrived and
acted so many cruel designs, to the ruin and destruction of so many
families, lest they should again be gathered to an head, tali suo consilio
aliis perniciem machinentur, by such Counsels hatch and exercise the like
cruelties on others, to this, that they have executed on the forenamed valiant
Champions; to whose immortal honor, but the shame of the cruel contrivers and
actors of their death, I record this transition for the conclusion.

Fairfax and Ireton; Brethren in iniquity, the instruments of cruelty are in
their habitations, quarters, Tents, or Armies; or their swords are instruments
of violence: Oh my soul! come not thou into their secret, unto their Assembly,
Oh mine honor! be not thou united; for in their wrath upon premeditation they
slew Sir Charle Lucas, and Sir George Lisle, and in their self-will they
craftily undermined, and after submission to mercy, in cold blood cruelly
murdered those two valiant Commanders, who had by their incomparable valor and
undaunted courage, like a wall defended Colchester: Cursed be their wrath for
it was fierce, and their rage for it was cruel.

And what Jacob did foretell of them by way of prophecy; I will beg by way of
prayer for these; divide them Lord among themselves here in England, and
scatter or disband them among the Inhabitants of all his Majesty's Dominionsk,
that such a merciless pack of so cruel blood thirsty Tyrants may never gather
to an head again to destroy the people and disturb the peace of this thy
Israel. Amen.

And wheresoever they shall like Cain, their brother, and first murderer,
wander, let this still be presented to their thoughts, for a scourge unto their
souls.

Satia te sanguine Cyre.
They that delight man's precious blood to spill,
Their stomachs shall of their own blood have fill.
Thus I leave them to the vengeance of him who makes inquisition for blood; and
this in memory of our two murdered Worthies.

Epitaphium.
STAy! stay! oh mortal! contemplate the Dust,
Which Hence, expects to rise among the just
And Loyal souls; Lucas is this, this Lysle,
The Living Glory, dead, shame of this Isle:
But would Athenian like desire to know
What bloody hand did sign the cruel blow?
Fairfax and Ireton (prejudging Loyalty,)
Doomed them to dye by new found piety;
Such false Simeon and Levi showed,
When both their hands, in rage, in blood imbrew'd
Father and son, with Loyal Subjects, all
They murdered to make up one Funeral.
If F. with S. and I. be compared with L,
Judge whethers crime comes nearest unto Hell.
Prosopopeia.
Sleep honored Pair in peace, your wars are done:
Revenge! Awake! strike Tom and Ireton.
FINIS.

