A SERMON Preached in the Parish Church OF St. PHILIP and JACOB, IN THE City of
Bristol, ON Wednesday the 15th of July, 1691. BEING THE MONTHLY-FAST. By THOMAS
CARRY, M. A. Vicar of the Parish of St. Philip and Jacob, in the City of Bristol.

London: Printed by F. C. for Thomas Guy, at the Oxford Arms in Lumbard-street.
1691.

To the Right Honorable, Charles Earl of Maclesfield, Viscount and Baron of
Brandon, Lord President, and Lord Lieutenant of the Principality of Wales, and
Lord Lieutenant of the Counties of Gloucester, Hereford, and Monmouth, and of
the City and County of Bristol; and one of the Lords, of Their Majesty's most
Honorable Privy Council.
My Lord,
YOUR Approbation of this Sermon, when it came from the Pulpit, gives me
Confidence to Present it to your Lordship, now it comes from the Press, what
had the Honor of your Acceptance when it was Private, humbly claims your
Patronage now it is Public; I should not however Presume to Prefix your
Lordships great Name to this mean Discourse, did not your Goodness dispose you
to accept of a mean Offering, especially when it comes as the Expression of a
grateful Heart; although I am sensible, your Lordship is so far from being
taken with Flattery, that you cannot bear to hear your Due; yet I cannot but
Congratulate your Lordships hearty Zeal, and indefatigable Industry, in that
high Orb, in which you Act, for the Support of that Government, which God by a
Train of Remarkable Providence has Established among us!

May your Lordship Live, to see it fixed upon such solid Foundations, that it
may never so much as shake, much less tumble down.

My Lord, I have one Advantage by this Dedication, which I confess I am fond
of; that is, an Opportunity to give your Lordship a public Acknowledgment, for
the great Obligations you have laid on me, and to let the World know how much I
value my self on the Character of

My Lord, Your Lordships Most humble Servant, and Chaplain, Thomas Carry.

EZRA IX. 13, 14. And after all that is come upon us for our evil deeds, and
for our great trespass, seeing that thou our God have punished us less then our
iniquities deserve, and have given us such deliverance as this.

Should we again break thy commandments, and join in affinity with the people
of these abominations? would not thou be angry with us till thou had
consumed us, so that there should be no remnant nor escaping?


THE words are a part of Ezra's Prayer, the time when he Prayed was after the
return of the Jews from the Captivity in Babylon, and the free Exercise of
their Religion, after the second Temple was finished; the deliverance here
mentioned, is their liberty to return and to set up God's public Worship in
Jerusalem; the Sins he here mourns for, and prays God to Pardon, are the
Idolatry of the Jews, and their Intermarriages with the Heathens, after God had
given them so great a deliverance.

This good Man feared the Consequence of their great Ingratitude, he saw God's
end frustrated, and therefore expected greater Judgments; he observed no
Reformation after such a signal Providence, and therefore had just Reason to
believe, that God would bring them back again into that Captivity, out of which
they lately escaped. He acknowledges it is but fit, that God should inflict
more severe Judgments, when his Mercies do not draw to obedience, the design of
the whole, is to persuade the Jews to Repentance and Reformation, as a suitable
return to a gracious God, for their late Deliverance.

The words contain these five Propositions: 1. That Sin is the cause of all the
Miseries that do befall the Church and People of God; And after all that is come
upon us for our evil deeds and for our great trespass. 2. That God does not
punish his Church and People, according to the Merit of their Sins; Seeing that
thou our God have punished us less then our iniquities deserve. 3. That the
Deliverances of the Church and People of God come from him; and have given us
such Deliverance as this. 4. That great Deliverances do call for great
Reformation, by way of Thankfulness and Gratitude; This is employed throughout
the whole: 5. That Disobedience after a great Deliverance, does highly provoke
God to inflict more terrible Judgments.


Should we again break thy Commandments, and join in affinity with the people
of these abominations? would thou not be angry with us till thou had
consumed us, so that there should be no remnant nor escaping?

I shall all along apply these Heads, in order to persuade Men to Repentance
and Reformation, for the great Deliverance, we of this Nation have lately
received.

1. That Sin is the cause of all the Miseries that do befall the Church and
People of God; And after all that is come upon us for our evil deeds and for
our great trespass.

It was Sin, that carried the two Tribes Captive into Babylon for seventy
Years, destroyed their City and Temple, slew their Princes and Nobles, and laid
their Country desolate. Zedekiah did that which was evil in the sight of the
Lord his God, and humbled 2 Chronicles. 36. 12, 13.
not himself before Jeremiah the prophet, speaking from the mouth of the Lord;
he stiffened his neck, and hardened his heart from turning unto the Lord God of
Israel: Moreover, all the chief of the priests, and the people transgressed
very much, after all the abominations of the heathen, and polluted the house of
the Lord which he had allowed in Jerusalem: Therefore he brought upon them the
King of the Chaldees, who slew their young men with the sword, in the house of
their sanctuary, and had no compassion on young man or maiden, old man, or him
that stooped for age: he gave them all into his hand.

All these evils came upon the Church of the two Tribes, for their evil deeds
and for their great trespass, for their Idolatry in Worshipping strange Gods,
for their immoral Practices, in living worse then the Heathen, for the
corruption of their Hearts, and profaneness of their Lives.

And now to apply this home to our selves; It was for the Sins of this Nation,
that we were brought so near unto Destruction, God shook his Rod over us, to
show us what Punishment our Sins deserved, although in Mercy he did not lay the
Ax to the Root of the Tree; it was for contempt of God's Word and Worship, for
profaning his Holy Day, dishonouring his sacred Name, by Customary Swearing
and Cursing, for Drunkenness, Adultery, Pride, and Dissolute living, that we
were likely to loose our Religion, our Liberties, and our Properties; we
deserved these Judgments as much as ever the Jews did their seventy Years
Captivity in Babylon; the more reason then have we to praise God for our late
Deliverance: This brings me to the second Particular.

2. That God does not punish his Church and People according to the Merit of
their Sins; Seeing that thou our God have punished us less then our iniquities
deserve.

God temper's Mercy and Judgment together, he does not proportion the Stripes
to the Offense, he Corrects in Love, when he might justly Destroy in Wrath: the
obstinate Jews deserved, that God should utterly forsake them, their Sins cried
for a longer Captivity then of seventy Years; but it pleased God to restore
them again to their Native Country, and to erect a second Temple for his
public Worship: Yet many Neh. 9. 30, 31.
years did thou forbear them, and testifiedst against them by thy spirit in
thy prophets: yet would they not give ear: therefore gave thou them into the
hand of the people of the lands. Nevertheless, for thy great mercies sake, thou
did not utterly consume them, nor forsake them; for thou art a Gracious and a
Merciful God.

And now to apply this to ourselves; God has certainly punished us less then
our Sins deserve; it was not for any Righteousness in us, that God has so
Graciously delivered us, for we are a Rebellious and an Unthankful People, our
Sins were clamorous for greater Judgments then those, from which God has in
Mercy rescued us, God may justly say to us, as heretofore to the Jews: Not for
your sakes do I this, says the Lord God, be it known unto you: be ashamed
Ezekiel. 36. 32.
and confounded for your own ways, O house of Israel.

God has spared us to magnify his Grace in our Deliverance, he has
miraculously preserved us, to Demonstrate to the Antichristian World, that we
profess his true Religion, although we do not live up to it; it was more for
the Sins of the Papists, then for the Righteousness of the Protestants, that
God so providentially Appeared for us.

O what great Reason have we then to celebrate God with Praises! O how thankful
should we be for this unexpected Deliverance! God has done great Things for
us, and shall not we rejoice in God? He has Magnified his Mercy, and shall not
we Admire his Love? O give Thanks unto the Psalm. 118. 1, 2, 3.
Lord, for he is good: because his mercy endures for ever. Let Israel now say,
that his mercy endures for ever. Let the house of Aaron now say, that his
mercy endures for ever. Let them now that fear the Lord say, that his mercy
endures for ever.

That the Deliverances of the Church and People of God come from Him; and have
given us such deliverance as this.

The return of the Jews from their Captivity in Babylon, was God's Act; he put
it into the Heart of Cyrus, to issue out his Proclamation to rebuild Jerusalem,
and to Erect there a Temple to the Lord; God brought them down to Babylon, and
brought them up again.

And thus our Deliverance from two intolerable Evils, Popery in the Church, and
Slavery in the State, is God's Work; we may truly say of it, what the Magicians
of Egypt did of the unimitable Miracle, this is the Finger of God; we have
great reason to apply the Words of the Psalmist, this is Psalm. 118. 23.
the Lord's doing, it is mavelous in our eyes.

If ever any Deliverance had plain Characters, of a remarkable Providence
stamped upon it, this has; God so managed the whole, that every one may discern
his Hand in it, that does not affect wilful Blindness, it was so contrived in
every part of it, it came in such a time of Extremity, and was brought about by
such Unlikely and Improbable means, all things did so Conspire together for the
good of this Church and State, that if ever God has wrought Miracles in any
Age, since that of the Apostles, then was the time.

Let us not then impute our Deliverance to Chance and Fortune, or to our own
Wisdom and Endeavors, or to the Policy and Craft of Statesmen, or to the
renowned Instrument of it, that Illustrous Prince (whom God has in Mercy to
us, Exalted to the Throne) but wholly to the Providence of the Almighty: Let us
say with Daniel, Blessed be the Name of God for ever Dan. 2. 20, 21.
and ever: for wisdom and might are his, and he changes the times and the
seasons: he removes kings, and sets up kings: he gives wisdom unto the
wise, and knowledge to them that know understanding: He reveals the deep and
secret things: he knows what is in darkness, and the light dwells with him.

Here certainly we may apply the Words in the Song of Moses; How should one
chase Deuteronomy. 32. 30, 31.
a thousand, and two put ten thousand to flight, except their Rock had sold
them, and the Lord had shut them up? For their Rock is not as our Rock, even
our enemies themselves being judges.

Let us then regard God, as the sole Author of our Preservation, let us not so
much consider second Causes as the original Cause; let us conclude this Point,
with the Words of the Psalmist: If it had not been the Psalm. 124. 1, 2.
Lord, who was on our side, may Israel now say: If it had not been the Lord who
was on our side, when men rose up against us: Then they had swallowed us up
quick, when their wrath was kindled against us.

That great Deliverances do call for great Reformation, by way of Thankfulness
and Gratitude; This is implied throughout the whole.

Beloved Brethren, the late Deliverance of this Nation, is Great and
Remarkable, it should not only be Recorded in our Chronicles, but Written on
our Hearts; he that has no sense of it, has no regard for God or Religion; it
deserves to be Proclaimed with the lowdest Praises, our Hearts and Lives should
concur together, to demonstrate our Gratitude for it.

God intends his Mercies, as Obligations to Obedience, they are Arguments very
proper, to work on all that have any Ingenuity. Let us then live up unto that
holy Religion God has preserved among us; now being delivered out of the Hands
of our Enemies, let us serve our God, with humble and obedient Hearts; now we
are secured from the Fears of Popery, let us live as does become the Protestant
Profession.

Let us not be more zealous for the Rites and Ceremonies of Religion, then for
the Substantial and Indispensible Duties of it; let us not waste our Zeal upon
Triffles that cannot profit or edify Souls, and in the mean time loose those
essential Graces, without which we cannot be saved; let us not contend about
the Shell and part with the Kernel, the Life and Spirit of Christianity, the
Love of God and our Neighbor, let us all endeavor to exceed one another, in
practicing the substantial Duties of Piety, Justice, Sobriety, and Charity, and
then we shall not differ much about indifferent Things.

Peace and Unity, are the Glory of a Christian Church; this excellent Character
is given of the Primitive and Purest: The multitude of them that believed, were
Acts 4. 32.
of one heart, and of one soul: Love is the inseparable Badge, of a true
Disciple of Christ. By this shall all men know that ye John 13 35.
are my disciples, if ye have love one to another.

Internal Holiness, is absolutely necessary to Salvation, because without it no
man shall Heb. 12. 14.
see the Lord; let us then live in Peace, love one another, and honor the
Gospel with holy Lives, and then we shall answer God's end, in our great
Deliverance: when God promises Blessings to his People, he foretells them what
Returns he expects; then shall ye remember your own evil ways, and Ezekiel. 36. 31.
your doings that were not good, and shall loath your selves in your own sight,
for your iniquities, and for your abominations.

Let us consider the greatness of our Deliverance, that we may understand what
Obligations are laid upon us, to Repentance and Reformation.

God has preserved us from Captivity, under a mystical Babylon, from the Roman
Yoke, a Burden so Intolerable, that neither we or our Fathers were able to
bear it, we are secured from Egyptian darkness, and all those Oppressions the
faithful People of God would meet with in that Land.

We are Delivered from a Church, whose Doctrines contradict common Sense, the
most evident Principles of Reason, the plain Rules of Morality, and the known
Laws of Christ; a Church that Magisterially imposes upon men's Consciences,
makes as many new Articles of Faith as it pleases, and binds all under the
Penalty of Damnation, to an implicit Faith and Obedience to all its Decrees
and Rules.

A Church that pretends to an Universal Monarchy, to have Power to dispose of
all the Kingdoms of the World, to pardon Sins by Absolution, and to give leave
to Sin, by Dispensations.

A Church Idolatrous in the Worshipping of Images; the Adoration of a piece of
Bread; the Invocation of Saints and Angels, and veneration of holy Relics and
Crucifixes.

A Church that would Rob you of one half of the Sacrament, take one of the
Commandments out of the Moral Law, deprive you of the holy Scriptures, the Key
of Knowledge, impose Prayers in an Unknown Tongue, and take much pains to
increase Ignorance (as they call it) the Mother of Devotion.

A Church that teaches Doctrines not known in Scripture, that choke's Religion
with numerous and insignificant Ceremonies, and incourageth Sin by Pardons,
Indulgences, easy Penances, and Dispensations.

A Church whose Principles are Inconsistent with Human Society, and whose
Religion is as bad as none at all; because it indulgeth Sin, gratifies
Carnality, and makes Internal Holiness unnecessary.

A Church made up of Fraud and Cruelty; whose Arguments to propagate their
Faith are Prisons, Fagots, and Missionary Dragoons, that keeps no Faith with
such as they call Heretics, and think's it a meritorious Act to destroy them.

A Church that allow's the most wicked Methods, to carry on its own bad Cause,
among whom Murderers, are reputed Saints; and Men of Blood have their Names in
their Rubricks.

A Church that would in time, have devoured your Estates, seized your Lands,
corrupted your Blood, and inslaved you in Soul and Body.

Blessed be God, that he has preserved us from such a Church, he suffered
Popery to come to the Doors of our Churches, but would not permit it to enter
in; he suffered our Enemies to make a great Progress, and then blasted all in a
Moment; he delivered us 2 Cor. 1. 10.
from so great a death, and does deliver, in whom we trust, that he will yet
deliver us.

That Disobedience after a great Deliverance, does highly provoke God to
inflict more terrible Judgments: Should we again break thy commandments, and
join in affinity with the people of these abominations? would thou not be
angry with us, till thou had consumed us, so that there should be no remnant
nor escaping.

God has indeed been very Gracious unto us, he expects an impartial
Reformation from all orders and degrees of Men among us, his Mercies should
engage us to walk more Humbly and Religiously.

But if God's end is frustrated, if his Mercies are abused, if we still
dishonor our Holy Religion, by ungodly Practices, then the Mercy of God will
be converted into fury, he will Deliver us no more, but cast us off for Ever.

It was a lasting aggravation of the Sins of the Jews, that they rebelled
against that God, who had brought them out of the Land of Egypt, and from the
House of Bondage; it was a great aggravation of David's Sin, that God had done
such and such things for him, and yet he offended in the matter of Vriah: it
was an aggravation of King Solomon's Sins, that he forsook that God who had
Appeared to him twice, and it will be a terrible Aggravation of our Sins, that
such a great Mercy, such a wonderful Deliverance has not reduced us to
Obedience; God may justly say to us, as he did to the Incorrigible Jews; You
only have I known of all the Families of Amos 3. 2.
the Earth: therefore I will punish you for all your iniquities.

Let us not think our selves past all Danger, let us not put far from us an
evil Day. Alas! they are never safe, who are secure in their Sins; he who has
Miraculously Delivered us at one time, can easily Destroy us at another, if we
Repent not.

O let every one take up the Resolution of Holy David, I have sworn, and I will
Psalm. 119. 106.
perform it, that I will keep thy righteous judgments: let us all answer as the
Children of Israel did Joshua; The Lord our God Josh. 24. 24.
will we serve, and his voice will we obey.

God by his Providence speaks now to us, as once unto the Jews; O that there
Deuteronomy. 5. 29.
were such an heart in them that they would fear me and keep my commandments
always that it might be well with them, and with their children for ever! O
that my people had harkened Psalm. 81. 13. 14.
unto me, and Israel had walked in my ways! I should soon have subdued their
Enemies, and turned my hand against their adversaries.

I shall conclude all with the Profession and Exhortation of Samuel, Moreover,
as 1 Samuel 12. 23, 24.
for me, God forbid that I should sin against the Lord, in ceasing to pray for
you: but I will teach you the good and the right way. Only fear the Lord and
serve him in truth, with all your heart, for consider how great things he has
done for you, but if ye shall still do wickedly, ye shall be consumed both ye
and your king.

To God the Father, God the Son, and God the Holy Ghost, be Honor, Praise,
Love, and Adoration, henceforth, and for ever more.
FINIS.

