A DIARY AND Relation of PASSAGES In, and about DVBLIN: From the First of
August, 1647. to the Tenth of the same.

Brought this day, being the eighteenth of August, 1647. by Lieutenant Colonel
Arthur Culme, one in the present Expedition in IRELAND.

By Him presented to the Parliament.

LONDON, Printed for Godfrey Emerson, at the Swan in Little-Britaine, 1647.

A Diary and Relation of Passages in, and about Dublin; From the first of
August, 1647. unto the Tenth of the same.
FOR relieving of Trim (a considerable Garrison of ours twenty miles distant
from Dublin) besieged by Colonel Preston, the Rebels General of Lemster, with
his whole strength, Colonel Michael Jones Commander in chief of the Lemster
Forces, marched from Dublin the first day of August, 1647 with about 3800 Foot,
and two Regiments of Horse, two Demi-Culverins, one Saker, and four Saker Cuts.

That night the Army quartered at a Village called Swords, six miles from
Dublin, being something out of the Road to Trim, but leading toward the
Rendezvous apppointed for meeting with the Drogheda and Dundalke Forces, joined
with a Party of Horse and Foot expected out of the North of Ireland.

Monday the 2. they marched to Ballirothery, 6 miles from Swords.

Tuesday the 3. they marched over the hills of Holliwood, a mountainous
Country, to a place called the Naall, and that night to Gariston, where
Colonel Jones received intelligence of the advancing of the expected Supplies.

Wednesday the 4. the Army marched to the hill of Skreene, where they met with
Sir Henry Tichborne, with the Drogheda Forces, Colonel Moore, with those of
Dundalke Newry, and Carlingford, and Col. Conway with a party of the Northern
old British, all making up about 700 Horse, and 1200 Foot; and two pieces of
Ordnance.

Thither came from Trim Major Caduggen, and Capt. Arthur Grahem, informing that
the enemy had that morning burned his Camp about Trim, retyring to the old
lurking-place, called, Port Leicester, a great and secure fastness, about five
miles Westward from Trim.

The same day our Army marched to the hill of Tarragh, where they were drawn
up, and mustered 1500 Horse, and about 5000 Foot.

That night they quartered at the foot of the hill of Tarragh, at a place
called Dodistowne; here Colonel Jones called a Council of War.

Thursday the 5. the Army marched to a place called Scurloikstown, within one
mile of Trim, where that night they Quartered.

Friday the 6. they marched through Trim to a place called Trimblestowne, a
strong Castle belonging to the Lord of Trimblestowne, wherein the Enemy had a
Garrison.

This place Colonel Jones surrounded in view of the Enemy then encamping at
Port Leicester 2 miles off; thereby to draw him forth, if possible it might be,
to engage himself to fight.

Saturday the 7. a party of 50 Horse of ours was commanded out for discovering
of the Enemy, and observing his motion.

About ten of the clock that day, the Enemy was observed to move, and rising
from Port Leicester to cross the Country, and march toward Maynouth, a place
within 10 miles of Dublin: This confirmed the intelligence formerly given us of
the Rebels intending to come between us and home, and marching to Dublin for
surprising that place, in absence of our Forces engaged at the siege of
Trimblestowne.

Whereupon Col. Jones resolved to rise with the Army, and to follow the Enemy,
and had scarcely spoken the word for commanding Drums to beat, but (by especial
Providence) at the same instant, did the Castle beat a Parley, offering to
surrender it, if permitted to march away with Bag and Baggage, and Colors
flying; which, with advice of a Council of War, was assented unto, we
receiving the place, and placing therein a Garrison.

That night our Army marched back through Trim, and quartered at
Scurloikestowne aforesaid, therein (in four hours) marching as far as before
they had done in one whole day.

That night a Convoy with some provisions came from Drogheda to the Army.

That night a Commanded party of 500 Horse was sent out from our Army, with
Orders to follow the Enemy, and beat up his Quarters, if enquartered; otherwise
to follow him to Dublin, if marching forward; the Body of our Army being to
follow after with all possible expedition.

This commanded Party found the Enemy quartered behind a very great Bog, so as
no approach could be made to him; whereof Col. Jones being certified, he the
next morning advanced toward the enemy with the whole Army.

The Army marched through the strong Fastness of Deniga^, belonging unto
Westby, wherein was a Garrison of the Enemy that ^hot at our men in their
passing by, the Village we fired, but the Castle held out.

That day about 10 of the clock our Army came to a place called Linchesknocke,
within one mile whereof the Enemy was drawn up on Dungan hill, a place to him
of all advantages, being a high ground, whereunto adjoined a wood and a bog,
(their usual refuge in distress.) The enemy also stood possessed of great
ditches, within which he was, as in so many strong Works entrenched; hereunto
may be added the advantages of Wind and Sun.

The Enemy had lately before mustered 7300 Foot, and 1047 Horse; which number
of Horse appears by a Muster-Roll after found, in these words; Viz.

Mustered the 5 of August, 1647.
The Lord Genesis Troop, besides Officers 52 Col. Fitz Gerrald 49 The Major
General 50 Lievt. Col. Finglas 45 Major Butler 50 Cap. Fitz Gerrald 42
Colonel Cullen 34 Sir James Dyllon 36 Captain Davies 47 Major Dungan 44 Capt.
John Fitz Patrick 35 Colonel Preston 35 Captain Aylmer 26 Captain Plunket 28
Captain Harpoole 28 Earl of Fingall 41 Lord of Trimblestowne 36 Earl of
Westmeath 41 Cap. James Barnwell 35 Capt. John Butler 39 Sir Walter Butler 40
Cap. Grace 47 Cap. Edward Butler 34 Cap. Wash 44 Cap. Bagnall 45 Cap. Nugent 44
This list of 26 Troops, amounts to 1047 Horse, whereunto is to be added
the Lord Viscount Costelaghs party of about 300 Horse, and two of the Nugents,
with two Troops more, which came to the Enemy the night before the Battle.

Under the hill our Army was drawn up, the Enemies Cannon played hotly at us,
but with little loss, other then 1 horse, and two Men.

About 12. of the Clock the Armies joined the Battle, continuing about two
hours, our two wings of Horse with some foot, having broken both wings of the
Enemy, our maine body advanced and broke their's, whereupon about 3000. of the
Rebels betaking themselves to the Bog, they there drew up into a body. But
Colonel Jones commanding the Bog to be surrounded with Horse and Foot, our
Foot followed into the Bog, where they put to the Sword all not admitted to
quarter; such of the Rebels as left the Bog feil into the power of our Horse.

Of the slain there were upon the place reckoned 5470. besides those after
gleaned up, which were very many of the enemies Foot, there could not escape
above 500. being as they were environed; among those slain were 400. of
Collogh Kittaghes men. There was also put to the Sword without mercy, all
formerly of our party now found amongst the Rebels, and all English though
never of our party. The number of Prisoners (as appears in the annexed
Schedule) is of Colonells five, whereof (...) the Lieutenant General of
Lemster and the Earl of Westmeath: four Lieutenant Colonells, six Serjant
Majors, 32. Captains, 23. Lievtenants, 27. Ensigns, two Cornets, 22.
Sergeants, two Quarter Masters, two Gunners, the Clerk of the store, 13.
Troops, and 228. Common Soldiers: Preston their General hardly escaped with
the Horse, he lost his Carriages, and Cannon, being four Demy-Culverings,
each carrying 12. pound Bullet, and 64. fair Oxen attending the Train, which
are to us of very great use, we being till now in that kind very short
provided. There was also taken Prestons Cabbinet of Papers, much valued in the
discoveries therein made; all their Colors we have, which Colonel Jones
could not be persuaded to be brought into Dublin in Triumph, as savouring
(said he) of ostentation, and attributing unto men the glory of this great
work, due to the Lord only.

Of ours were some wounded, but not 20. slain; of note we lost only two
Cornets, and one Captain Gibbes, who overheated in the service died in
drinking ditch water.

Herein to give every hand in this glorious action the honor due, were more
then many more lines would suffice unto; In the general never did men carry
themselves with more resolution and gallantry, then did ours, both officers and
Soldiers, deserving much more encouragement then hitherto they have found,
most of them having scarce meat to eat, or clothes to put on.

All done, Colonel Jones commanded throughout the Army thankesgiving to be
given to the Lord of Hosts, who did that day wonderfully for his people,
appointing Tuesday the 17. of Aug. for a day of public thanksgiving, in all
the Churches of Dublin.

On the place where the Battle was fought did the Army that night Quarter.

Monday, August the 9. Colonel Jones called a Council of War, and Commanded
Colonel F^nnick, Governor of Trim, to place Garrisons in Denigan, and
Kilbrewe.

That day the Army marched to Maynouth, a strong Castle belonging to the Earl
of Kildare, which was summoned and surrendered by the Rebels, and by us
Garrisoned.

After this Victory the Enemy quit and burnt diverse of their Garrisons, viz.
the Naas, Siggnistowne, Harristowne, Collanstowne, Castle-Warning and Moyglare,
and much more had been gained of them, had there been pay and provisions for
our Army whereby the Victory might have been prosecuted, but in the want of
both, they were enforced to take homewards unexpectedly.

Tuesday the 10. Colonel Jones dismissed the Northern Forces that had joined
with him, engaging himself for their satisfaction, as soon as Treasure should
come over.

He also dismissed to their several Garrisons the Forces of Drogheda,
Dundalke, Newry and Carlingford, commanding Sir Henry Tichburne in his return
to summon the Nobbyr and other places near Drogheda possessed by the Rebels,
promising if occasion required, and that provision could be made for the Army,
to advance with his strength to their assistance.

That day the rest of the Army marched to Dublin, where wanting what might
content our hungry and wearied Soldiers, by providence of God, as our Army was
ready to enter the City, they were met with news of 1500.l. brought by
Captain Rich into the Harbor, borrowed by Alderman Walley, therein much
meriting of the public; this small sum, though otherwise very
inconsiderable, was yet something in the present distress, and is to be
valued as an earnest of the Lords care of his people, to whom he will in his
good time appear in a full deliverance.

There was little considerable pillage gained from the Enemy in this Victory,
that of best value was the Artillery and Oxen, which last Colonel Jones
purchased for the public use, from those hands whereinto they fell, unto whom
he stands engaged for satisfaction: as for pillage of greater value, little
was found, howsoever some have been pleased to speak of it largely, and
ridiculously, and if any thing had been in that kind gained more then ordinary,
it could not be imagined it should be of public advantage coming in, (and
that of due) into private hands.

This was the most signal Victory with greatest loss to the Rebels, that
ever was gained in Ireland since the first conquest thereof by the English, for
which the Lord make us truly thankful.

A list of the Prisoners taken at the Battle of Dungan-Hill, August 8. 1647.
5 Colonels.
The Earl of Westmeth Lieutenant General Berne Colonel warren Colonel Brown
Colonel Buttler
4 Lieutenant Colonels.
Lieutenant Colonel Synnett Lieutenant Col. Fitz Gerrard Lieutenant Col.
Cavanagh Lieutenant Col. C^uce
6 Serjant Majors.
Major Tafe Major Lawlor Major Gusak Major Gaffegan Major Synnett Major Berne
32 Captains
Michael Berne Arthur Cavanagh Darby Tool Martin Wolverston Edward Terrel
Christopher Nugent Edward Nugent Balthazer Nugent James Dempsye William Terrel
Roger Darcye James Fitz Gerrard Thomas Goghegan Charles Conner Henry Warren
Patrick Nettervile Teagh Connor Thomas Plunkett Lawrence Fitz Patrick Thomas
Gawlie Richard Nash Dominick Shortayle John Comerford William Furlong Arthur
Dillon Lawrence Tute Robert Preston Capt. of Horse Randol M. ^^^^der Captain
Goghegan Captain M. Donnel Captain Tafe Captain Rochford
23 Leivtenants.
Nicholas Terrel James Casye Garret Floid Edmund Bermingham Thomas Darcye
Christopher Goghegan Walter Mooney Donnough Dempsye Leonard Shortayle
Christopher Darcye Michael Gainer Rosse Goghegan Thomas Quiun Henry Dolton
Henry Neale Bryan Cavanah Terlogh Tool Robert Berne Walter Fitz Harris John
Roch Theobald Tool Rosse Dempsye James Barryals Fitz Gerrald
27 Ensigns.
James Fitz Simons James Terrel Teah Kelly Francis Fox James M. O. Kyre
Christopher Nugens Lawrence Dempsye Philip Cusack George Warren Andrew Goghegan
Oliver Lynack James Warren John Butler James Fitz Harris Victor While Jeffrey
Fitz Simons Owen O Heveran Edward Fitz Gerrald Robert Fitz Gerrald Lawrence M.
Donnel Phileme Nolan Patrick Kahor Authony O. Bryan Dannel Cowran Terlagh M. O.
Nully Evis M. Alexander Nicholas Quaitrel
2 Cornets.
Richard Talbott James Fitz Gerrald
2 Quarter Masters
James Walsh Richard Jones
2 Gunners.
Michael Walsh Philip Stafford
Clerk of the Store
John Hadger
22 Serjants.
Donnah Mynan John O. Meighan Moyle Murry Kavanagh Pierce Synne^ Teagh Gaffney
James Pursell Patrick Rowland Chire Kavanagh Morrough Kavanagh Garret Tool
Neile O Roirk Neale O Dolan John Darcye Patrick Farily Thomas Corlan Richard
Murphey Gerrat Terrel Manus O Ledan William O Moran Owen M. Caffrey John M.
Scallin Dudly Berne
13 Troopers. 228 Common Soldiers.
FINIS.

