A CUP OF SACK Pressed forth of the best Grapes gathered the last Vintage, in the
Loyal Converts new distempered Vineyard.

Which by frequent using, will make an old lame Capon-eater, able to shake his
legs, and dance as roundly and as nimbly; as a Boy of 18. years of age.

Published for the good of those that are so distempered through Malignant
humors;

a goblet or chalice

Who may be cured at a cheap rate.

LONDON, Printed by JANE Coe. 1644.

A Cup of SACK.
IN the vintage of the new distemper there are wines various, for different
pallats, but all Spanish; I shall not taste of every sort, nor present you with
all the gathering; but of each vessel that I have drawn, take a taste.

The first is number 12. and that at the first sight seems good to the eye. So
that the loyal convert himself confesses. That the piety of honest hearted
people was the first motive to weekly Lectures. The more wretches they who
went about to suppress and hinder them.

But then he drinks to deep of this cup, and that makes him fall to railing
against those weekly Lectures, for abusing that piety, When as it is well
known, that it was the silken Prelates and there greasy Doctors, and full fed
Parsons; and Vickers, that abused both those honest hearted people and the
Lectures too, and labored to suppress, and silence them. One of their fat
doctors told his parishioners (because they came not in so full a congregation
to hear him, as the Lecturer? that they left the shooemaker to follow, a
cobbler. And in his answer in the next Sermon, the Lecturer confessed that time
was when they might have their work well done at first, but now the Shoemakers
take there stitches so scurvely that the people are feign to come to the poor
cobbler to have them mended.

Oh says he: but these Lectures must please the people, and that thereafter as
their Lunaticke Doctrines wrought upon them; so their maintainence ebbed and
flowed. But their actions declared the contrary, for they did most of them
suffer, because they would not be men pleasers; Bishop-Wren would suppress
Lecturers at Norwitch: because they taught Gods word too plain, yet he liked
the simple reader there, that giving thanks for the recovery of one in the
town that had been gored with an Ox: read the Rubric for the Churching for
women (knowing no other ways how to do it) only in stead of childe-bearing
read Ox goring. And poor Mallet Lewis Hewes, and diverse more were put to
silence for curing those that were Lunaticke and possessed with devils, by
prayer and Eastings (...) The Prelaticall Priests so there one estate flowed,
they cared not how their consciences ebbed; nor how their poor peoples souls
were starved.

The next glass of this wine is pleasant to the palate, which made the
convert say; What more pleasing to the people then the preaching of liberty:
Betunder savor there were few such Lecturers put in by the people, Indeed the
lofty persons would sometimes force such upon the people; as perticularly,
Doctor Fuller at Cripplegate forced Huet upon the parish, and they must have
him or none, who would usually be at the playhouse when the congregation staid
for him at Church; and sometimes five or six messengers sent to him to an Ale
house (and sometimes to a suspected bawdy house) before he would come to them,
and such follower indeed would labor to sow pillowes under men's elbowes, and
preach liberty in sin, this is sweet wine but much distempred. And therefore
in this he says right, that liberty is enlarged by being pierced with
prerogative, and had they been let alone a little longer, they would have laid
claim to the greatest piece too, they began to overtop the crown.

But this distemper has such an opperation that his sight begins to fail nay
indeed he drinks himself stark blind, and cries out, oh by setting up
Lecturers, down goes Authority, and up goes privileges, down goes the Book of
Common Prayer, and up goes the spirit, down goes learning, and up goes
Revelation? And nothing will follow this but ignorance and Rebellion. Thus
poor purblinde simple people think to find heaven and salvation, in the Book
of Common Prayer, and have been always ready to pin their faith on the Bishops
sleeves, and were led on in ignorance, not knowing whither they were led; shall
we not go to the word revealed, shall we not seek to be guided by the Spirit
of God, shall we not have respect to the privileges of a believer, They would
have brought us to come to buy and beg pardons of them, as the Papists are
persuaded to do, and cared not how many souls they damned; as one Rivers a
notable Priest said, we by our learning must find out ways to keep the people
in ignorance, and prescribe rules to keep them in awe, else they will by too
much preaching, gain too much knowledge; But their distemper beginning to be
more calm, he says that the Bishops never lost themselves so much as in
putting down those godly Lecturers and in not taking care to set up better and
more Orthodox, then they suffered to be, which had they been careful for ought
I know they might have stood to this day: and England have continued in peace.
From numb. 12. I will give you a taste of the next, numb. 13. of which the
distemper of the opperation is very prelaticall indeed, and put the Bishop into
a high esteem of his calling: the wine pleases him well, he drinks all off
to the bottom; cocks his catercap, sets up his arms on his sides like a
Cavalier and says? Am not I a Bishop, do you not know me? will you go to take
away our government, before another be pitched upon; who had we neither
prescription nor continuance without intercession, nor the Authority of
Parliament; yet it seems not consonant to reason, nor policy to extirpate us,
or take away our government. The Spanish wine vapors in his brain: and he
thinks himself to be somebody; And indeed it is no wonder they were grown so
high, for Canterbury threatened to make the Church of England low, by a blow,
which should be given. But God be thanked the Presbiteriall government is
pitched upon, which brings prescription with it, for the Authority of
Parliament.

But he tells us, that liberty lies open to all schisms, sects, and heresies,
and that sectaries grow bold, and vent their giddy headed opinions without
controulment. And indeed the drunken priests had never more liberty, It is no
more but turning Cavalier, as there is good store of them in all the Enemies
quarters, and then he may drink, roar, swear, whore, at pleasure, teach
heresy, schism, Blasphemy, any thing; which if he can do personally he shall
be made a Captain, or Lieutenant at the least, of which Hastings has at the
least eight or ten in his garrisons and good store were driven out of Oxford
to follow the Army: And for those Malignant Clergy that were lest in Oxford:
Doctor Usher told these not long since; in a Sermon, that they might be
ashamed so to dishonor that Reformation, they intend to seek: by being so
deboist.

The next fort of this distempered wine, which is, Number. 14. makes the loyal
convert maudlin drunk, and he falls a crying, and says; Oh woe is me what
shall I do; why what is the matter man, why we have made many complaints
against the independents; and cannot be relieved: and we are afraid to
complain any more. Why what is the matter, what do they do to you. Why they
challenge us to despute with us in the open Churches, the most learned of us
all. And indeed now I remember the man speaks truth: they have bin often
challenged, Major Lilborne challenged the Archbishop himself to dispute with
him. And it should not be a shame for a Prelate to be pusled in dispute with a
lawman. But is this all that troubles him, and puts him in such a distemper, no
he says that when they are come home from hearing of a Sermon, they use to
pray to God for a blessing, at their own houses or lodging on what they have
heard. Indeed this may make our Enemies weak: for our prayers does us good but
them (...) prayers of the Church (do not mean of the separation only: I though
not exclude them neither,) is a strong Bulwark against the Popish (...)
Prelaticall Enemy. But to cool his stomach, he mixes the water of Dow river,
with his distempered wine, and tell us of prophinations there, which (through
the great distemper he was in, if he be guilty of) God forgive him, no doubt
they are wicked people in all parts of the Kingdom: but your Priests Jesuits
and friars sprinkile their holy water at Mass among you every day, and there
will a speedy course taken with those that are ^ound so superstituous here.
Then he tells us that many have been convicted of blasphemy: which is very
true, and Mr White has put out one centry: and there are almost ten times as
many upon record, and yet these are those he calls learned and Religious
ministers which are plundered, sequistred, and imprisoned and is there not just
reason for it: for they have not had the least share in the raising of these
Wars, and in bringing the guilt of all the blood thereby shed in this Kingdom
since the Wars began. But still weeping he cries out against heresy: (for
the Papists call Protestants heretics) Oh they turn Popery out of doors and
we shall go for company, or at least be forced to shroud our selves in corners,
as the sectaries did before, Oh the fear of this goes to the very heart of
them, that whereas they thought to have thrust out the Protestant Religion: and
all power put into their hands and to have settled Popery, that now they are not
only disappointed, but we have hope to, (not only settle but Reform) the true
Protestant Religion in great purity this breaks the heart of them: for now
their hopes are lost.

The next taste is number. 15. in which the Loyal convert undertakes to tell us
some (though weak) grounds of upholding Popery: and Prelacy.

1. That Episcopasie is a government coetaneous with this your almost outdated
Religion. But those Bishops were nothing coetaneous with our Prelates till
Popery made them so. In Phaochases time they began.

2. That the rubricke of Common Prayer is a book established by many Acts of
Parliament. So is the Mass book.

3. To be positived, obedient to the King is a duty commanded by Gods own
mouth, must we obey him, if he command against Gods commands.

4. That the Clergy are the Ministers of peace, therefore not to preach for
blood; yet they began this war; by contribution to the King against the Scots.

5. That those who have sworn canonical obedience to their ordinary, ought
not to take the Covenant against Popetry and Prelacy, as if the Prelates league
was more viled then our Covenants with God which bind us to it.

6. Those that have taken the oath of Allegiance, and the Protestations ought
not to resist the power of their Prince, which power is in Parliament, and
therefore the Prelates abused themselves and there own actions, are hereby to
be censured. These be his grounds whereupon he would traduce us to believe that
we are bound to submit to the Papists now in Arms against us. But God has
taught us better things, and to him will we trust.

Then coming to numb. 16. the destempered man having well drunk, and it may be
slept upon it too, raises us his senses with a fresh cup of sack, which makes
him prattle like a nimble Lawyer: pleading the Popish cause of the Enemy, even
they who one, and acknowledge the doctrine of the Church of Rome, which gives
up to understand that some have a dispensation, whereby there public
acknowledgement (for the present) is not exacteed at Rome, well the loyal
favorite pleades hard in their behalf.

1. That they may not be banished, because they have the Kings power, and he
that resists the power shall receive damnation, Romans 13. and to get the Kings
power, is to make him guilty of pergerie. A strange cup of wine, and yea this
was brude at Oxford, by the Loyal convert, surely since he turned Papist.

2. That the Papists may not be disinherited; because there is no law for it,
yet there is a law, because they rise, and join in Arms against the
Parliament.

3. That to take away the lives of those that are Romish Catholics is murder,
what may the Papists rob? spoil, steal, kill; raise, and continue Wars
against us, and to kill them in opposing them herein: is this murder? and is
this that which they do for the defense of the Protestant Religion, yet this is
the doctrine preached at Oxford, and printed there, by Leonard Lichfield
Printer to the University but a week or two since, Titled, the new istempered
Frst written by the Author of the Loyal convert.

And therefore to conclude making some use of his own words, where, O where are
you, most Royal Sovereign? where O where are you, the great Counsels and
grave senators of this fading Kingdom? where O where are you, the learned
College of the assembly of divines? where O where are you renowned citizens of
London? where, O where are you, the great Armies of the Kingdom: where, O
where are you all the Protestants of this languishing Island? Are ye all fallen
asleep? we perish, and is there none to awake you? open your eyes, unlocke your
ears, and molifie your hearts. Behold, Behold the miseries of your land, and
if compassion be not banished from the earth, pity, O pity the approaching
ruins, of this your groaning, this your native Kingdom. Hearen, O hark to the
sad complaints against these proul and insolent Papists, and prelates. And if
your hearts be not of Adamant, relent; and take speedy care for the settling of
this disquieted state.

Let the breath of this distempered Kingdom contracted into one extreme sigh,
move you to the speedy endeavors of a timely cure, examine her distempers,
Enquire into her constitution, and purge out that unhappy popery which does so
disquiet us. Let not popery crush us to pieces, nor the children of your mother
starve in the land of bread, and let not the foundation of your natural
Kingdom be longer dabled in unnatural blood to uphold them. Turn, O turn
your eyes upon her breaches, and let not strangers Lord it in her gates; how
many English, Irish, French, and Flemish papists, and of other nations among us
seek our ruin. For the mercies of that God, which has been merciful to you,
let not millions of Protestants be murdered, and massacred by them, with
millions of poor children that know not their right hand, from their left,
suffer not your wives, and daughters to be ravished and deflowred, but join as
one man, against the Common Enemy.

For the Lord and for his cause,
Up Protestants the Papists be upon you.

FINIS.

