(...) Or, A PRAYER-SONG; BEING Sacred Poems ON THE HISTORY OF THE BIRTH and
PASSION OF OUR Blessed SAVIOR, And several other choice texts of SCRIPTURE.

In two PARTS.

By Daniel Cudmore, Gent.

LONDON, Printed by J. C. for William Ley in Paul's Chain. 1655.

engraved title page (...) or A Prayer-Song. Being Sacred Poem^. On ye History
of ye birth ^ passion of our Blessed Savioiur. And several other choice texts
of Scripture. by Daniel Cudmore Gent.

And We are his witnsses of these things.

Acts. 5.32. engraved panel Behold a Virgin and

Matthew. 1.23. engraved panel This Jesus which is taken up into.

Acts. 1.11. engraved panel engraved panel engraved panel engraved panel
engraved panel Behold the man

John 10.5. engraved panel He is not hear but is risen

Mat 28.6. La Printed by I:C: for William Ley at Paul's Chain. 1655.



To his honored Friend HENRY WORTH Esquire;
Sir,
IN Italy they have a Proverb, that Paper blusheth not: intimating thereby, I
suppose, that what we are ashamed perhaps to tender in person, the pale
messenger of an Epistle will not blush to present. On these terms it is, that
(having usurped your Name in this Dedication, and being more happy (if in
either) in my Pen then Tongue, (and so more obliged to the Printer then to
Nature) I beg your pardon and acceptance. I am not ignorant what censures I
shall incur in this adventure; viz that the foundation indeed is good, as being
portions of Scripture; but the superstructure, wood, hay, and stubble, as being
not supplied with materials from those Hurams of Spirit and Learning; and so
rather apples of lead, than of gold, in these pictures of silver: that what
Socrates said in modesty of his Works, may be said in earnest of mine, That the
Paper is more worth then the Work. These Objections, and more than I can
anticipate, much less prevent, have pursued me to Sanctuary under the shadow of
your EAGLES wing, where I doubt neither of acceptance nor safety. Not that I
would make your Patronage an Asylum for Ignorance, or your Protection a Refuge
for inconsiderate Boldness: but that I know your Noble nature to be ever ready
to countenance the endeavors, and to protect the studies of Virtue and
Honesty; whereof as I shall still endeavor to be a constant embracer, so of
you always a true honourer: in token whereof, I humbly devote my self

From my Study in Tiverton this (...) of (...) Your obliged servant, Daniel
Cudmore.

To his industrious Friend, Mr. DANIEL CUDMORE.
I Dare presume to tell the bold-fac'd Times,
Divinity looks best, thus clothed in Rymes.
Of all the Factions that have crept of late
Into the bowels of our whining State,
None's like the Momusites; for every one
Studies to carp, nay scarce lets God alone.
Destroyed by tongues the tower of Babel lies;
Heaven grant we fall not by our Heresies.
Believe me, Friend, thy Labors show thou art
Indu'd with Wisdom; and thy serious heart
Has no outrageous Faction, but each line
Distilled from heaven, tells us that they are thine.
Go on with courage: though Religion lie
Now groaning under sad Deformity,
And at this time bears an Ecliptic stain,
'T will end in conquest, and shine bright again.
Jo. Quarles.

To the worthy Author.
GOod works are their own praisers: they that show
What it is to praise a work, praise what they know.
I Will tell thee, friend, thy labor was my pain
In reading; and that reading, was my gain.
I did not only read, but understood
What 't was I read; and therefore say, 'T is good.
And if my erring judgment have mistook,
Let the world judge my Judgment, not thy Book.
I Will therefore second what I said before:
It Is good, I Am sure it is good; and what needs more?
Ric. Harrison, Inte. Tomp.

To the ingenious Author, upon his Book.
TO praise thy work were but to work thy praise;
'T is Virtue that thou aimst at, and not Bays:
Thy Work is thy Encomium; therefore I
Will spend no time in Prodigality
Of flattering praise: but this in short I Will tell;
I read, I liked, I praised: and so farewell.
Charles Hubburt, Gr. Inn.

The Introduction.
Psalm. 90. 17 Prosper thou the works of our hands upon us; O prosper thou our
handiwork.


LOrd, thou without whose-blessing and success,
Our Wits degenerate to Wickedness;
Who if thou bidst not Write, that book may die
In shame, or prove the Author's Tragedy:
Who David 's tongue made as a ready pen,
When thee he praised the fairest of all men:
O make my pen as ready as his tongue,
In this my Euchodie and Prayer-song:
Refine my Wit, to Wisdom, in this Poem;
Accept the Dedication, speak the Proem.
Let Naaman love his proud Damascus streams,
And others hug their Heliconian dreams:
Those springs alone that flow from Sions hill
Shall drench my barren brain, and moist my quill.
But since all springs inspire not, but befool,
Unless thy Angel of Bethesda's pool
Descend and move them with his healing grace;
Unless thy Spirit move upon their face:
Oh would they now descend and so baptize
My childish fancy in these Mysteries:
Then should I sing thy Birth, as if my breast
With one of those thy Angels were possessed;
And write thy deeds, as if thou had afforded
Me what the Evangelists have not recorded:
So would I wail thy death, that some should think
Thy vinegar and gall my only Ink;
My Pen should be so tart, that it should tear,
And deeper pierce then did the Soldiers spear.
But thou who knew'st our weakness by the sense
Of a dear-purchased experience,
Have pity on my Ignorance, and daign
Some sparks of native wisdom here again;
That in this, men of a judicious head
If not thy Image, may thy footsteps read.
Yet let not the earth, thus by thy footsteps trod,
Be proud, but still remember 't is a clod;
Lest it thy praises curtal, and abridge
Thee of thy right, by Paper-sacriledge.
On the Nativity of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ.
Luke 2. 10 -- Behold, I bring you good tidings of great joy that shall be to
all people.

11 For unto us is born this day in the city of David a Savior, which is
Christ the Lord.


LEt none hence wonder that the souls vast nature
Is comprehended in so small a stature:
That wonder's crampt, that mirror here exploded;
For in this child there is comprised a Godhead.
But stay, do not the heavens crouch at his feet,
And beg the honor of a bearing-sheet?
Does not the Sun descend on earth to shine
And take his Palace, for a nobler Sign?
Does not the Moon, like some great maid of honor,
With all the troops of stars attending on her,
Sue for some office? No, blessed Child, my Muse
Does veil her crown, and humbly begs excuse:
A Quill from the Angel's wing that sung thy birth,
Were a fit Pen to carol forth our mirth.
Thou did divest thy self of much more glory,
That thou might clothe us with intransitory.
The Sun's too weak of luster, it would frown
Amongst the glories of a Martyr's crown;
And the dull glory of the azur'd stage,
But a poor Pageant to their equipage.
But may I draw the veil, and not deserve
TO have one eternal on my visive nerve?
'Twas not long since thy fiery-pointed eye
Did sparkle with consuming Majesty;
And is it all confined, comprised all
Within the circuit of this gellied ball?
'Twas not long since thou breath'dst in us our souls;
And since, thy breath did kindle burning coals:
And do we dare thy nostrils? hark, O wonder!
He cries, whom erst I Have heard to roar in thunder.
'Twas not long since such glory Moses drew
From see'ng thy back-parts none his face could view:
And can we see thy face? do not, w'implore,
Brandish destructive glory the row each pore.
'Twas not long since, at thy commanding word,
The world sprung out of naught, like Jonah's guord;
And since at Sinai's mount, did Israel cry,
Let not the Lord speak to us, lest we die.
And is the mighty Counselor so weak;
And he that gave the tongue, can he not speak?
And must their glories all be understood
To be wrapped up in humble flesh and blood?
A Series of wonders! which nor men
Nor Angels can nor comprehend nor pen:
Therefore as Angels humbly veil at it
Their Wisdoms crowns, let us our crowns of Wit.
That Spirit who conceived thee, he can teach
How to conceive a Wonder of this reach:
By him my soul a knowledge of thy worth
Brings forth as easy as thou were brought forth.
Hence then let us fetch our Epoche, and call
This blessed day the birthday of us all.
What did our carnal birth boot us? this morn
Redeems us who condemned were ere born.
O might I now, by virtue of thy birth,
Be born anew! 'twould add to this days mirth;
And the Angels who did at thy birth rejoice,
At mine in singing would lift up their voice.
Blessed Child! that met'st the heaven with a span,
Yet in a span art couched; that do contain
The earth in measure; Lord, yet it is thy pleasure
To be contained in an earthen measure.
The heaven of heavens cannot contain thy grace,
Nor art thou straightened in a little place.
Come then, take up my heart, and until death,
O make my breast thy blessed Nazareth.
On the murder of the Innocents.
Matthew. 2. 16. Then Herod when he saw that he was mocked by the wisemen, was
exceeding wroth, and sent forth, and slew all the children that were in
Bethlehem from two years old and under, according to the time which he had
diligently enquired of the wisemen.


1.
GOod Babes! of whom I may say true,
For Christ ye did an off ring fall,
And di'd for Christ, ere Christ for you;
Although none could his love forestal.
Blessed Infantry! your Sov'raign's tasters
To him of Herod's cup of Malice,
Ere Christ to finish his disasters,
Drank deep and free the final Chalice.
Blessed Innocents! with whom the case thus stood,
First circumcised, then baptized in blood.
2.
Sweet Saplings! who to spell the Branch,
Fall subject under Herod's rape;
Whose Boureauxes cut and blanch,
And rob you of your juice and sap.
You got (blessed Cyons) by this craft;
And you may bless cursed Herod's knife:
Being hence transplanted, you are ingraft,
And bourgeon on the tree of life;
Where each Herodian cicatrice does bloom
Like Aaron's rod: so may you bless your doom.
3.
Cursed Fox! Hell with thy brains did club,
Thus needlessly to back thy claim:
But could not blind rage spare thy Cub?
Must he fall too, before thy aim?
Foxes use prey abroad, but thou
(Although unwittingly) at home:
Ambitious madness asks not now
Whose't is thou prey'st upon, or whom.
Just! since thou have no bowels, that thy son
Should fall amongst the rest a slaughtered one.
4.
Thus Pharaoh (like our greedy The Arms of Rich. 3. who slew his brothers
children.
Hog,
Or of the kennel with this Fox)
Who more adored Anubis dog,
Then the plainness of Isis ox,
Once fearing Israel's increase,
Enjoined each one to drown each male,
Till Israel groaning for release,
Their prayers to their God exhale;
Till he descends, and in one fatal morn
Slew each Egyptian's, and the King's firstborn.
5.
But you whose doctrine, like the crabs,
Swims backward against the stream of Truth;
Speak, In what Lymbus are these babes,
Or all the Isra'litish youth?
Say, In what fold of Purgatory,
Purged in what streams of fire or water,
Are these Lambs whom this Fox did worry,
Or dog slew? what can fancy flatter?
Name me what canonized Saint and Martyr
Annexed this truth unto the Scriptures Charter.
6.
Peace, Rachel, peace; do not deplore
The murder of thy children, seeing
They Are not; yet are they not no more,
And than thou gav'st have better being:
VVeep not thy buds so soon do bleed
Almost, as thou did them disclose;
They should have grown here amongst weed,
Now flourish with their Jesse's rose.
Let Herod grieve for his son's death, and weep;
Thou have no cause; then do not sigh so deep.
On John the Baptist's being beheaded.
Mark 6. 27 And immediately Herod the king sent an executioner, and commanded
his head to be brought: and he went, and beheaded him in the prison,

28 And brought his head in a charger, and gave it to the damsel, and the
damsel gave it to her mother.


1.
THrice-happie morning star, that did fore-run
The Sun of righteousness his near approach;
As that Postilion precedes the Sun,
And ushers to the world his glorious Coach.
Blessed Prodrom! who by thou art of Philip 's wife
Did Christ fore-run in death, as well as life.
2.
Thrice-happie Jacob's Shiloh's Prolocutor!
Blessed Mercury to Jacob's glorious Star;
Our Savior's Harbinger, the Gentiles Tutor,
To show their expectation was not far;
Who in a purer stream then Jordan's flood,
At last baptized thy Baptism with thy blood.
3.
Cursed Herod! who as John Elijah's spirit
Had by a gracious influence bequeathed;
So thou, as by possession, did inherit
Thy father's rage, which here on John was breathed.
Had thou no Trophee to adorn thy birth,
But the Baptist's head? no triumph but such mirth?
4.
Bloody Herodias! that were so rough,
To recompense John's zeal with such requitals:
Was not thy Music spirited enough,
Not joined in consort with the Baptist's vitals?
Never was Music of so gross a crime
Arraigned guilty, since old Iubal's time.
5.
Vile Wretch! who thus would make rash Herod's oath
A Pander to a hot incest'ous Bed:
Neither did Thomyris that famous Goth,
As thou on John's, insult on Cyrus head.
Vile Monster! thus to nustle up thy daughter,
Even from her tender years, to blood and slaughter.
6.
Wretch'd Damsel! thou whose too too active feet
Were only swift to shed the harmless blood
Of the innocent: even so a dancing Fleet
Waits for her prey, while 't wantons on the flood.
Even so a Hawk does quaver in the air,
Before she souse: so danced thy wicked pair.
7.
Blessed John! as was Elijah, so were thou
Into a wilderness by fury banished;
Both forced by women, both pursued by vow,
Though both not in a fiery Chariot vanished.
Yet herein thou an equal share may plead;
Thou Art member'd to a far more glorious Head.
8.
Good God! how are we honored! that as John
Fore-ran to fit Christ's way before his face;
Even so our Savior, thy blessed Son,
Prepares our way, and fits our resting place:
O let us succeed, where we shall be no other
Then joynt-heirs with thy Son our elder brother.
On the woman of Canaan.
Matthew. 25. 28 Then Jesus answered and said unto her, O woman, great is thy
faith; be it unto thee even as thou will. And her daughter was made whole from
that very hour.


1.
GOod-woman! who could thus not only brook
A stern disdainful look,
But the disciples wrath, who held thy suit
Some clamorous pursuit;
As who would give no answer to a Cur,
But with a staff or spur.
Nay, though that Christ retorted thy Lord help,
With no relief but Whelp,
And whom thou hop'dst thy Advocate, we read,
Did thus against thee plead:
How heldst thou his denials of thy want
A prologue to a grant?
As if repulse were the proposed condition
To faith, before admission.
How by thy constancy was he esteemed
Then most propitious, when he farthest seemed?
2.
When he seemed deaf, how thy importuned prayer
To music tuned the air,
And with ingeminated violence,
Monopoliz'd his sense?
And when he seemed to thee no less then dumb,
How for thy faithful crumb,
He having with his bread supplied thy cause,
Dismissed thee with applause.
Denials made not thy affections froward,
Nor yet thy zeal a coward.
Thy quick-ey'd faith, smiles through his frowns did view,
And through his wrath love knew:
It through his threats an invitation saw,
Which by repulse did draw,
And in the sharp reproaches he avouch'd,
Discerned a welcome couched.
Let others hope of Force, and boast of Fortune;
When they shall fail, I gain when I importune.
3.
But how is Christ, but now so much estranged,
Now all to mercy changed?
And thou, at first a dog, art now inrol'd
One of his flock and fold.
For Faith's the mark by which his sheep are known,
And such said he is thine own.
Even so wise Joseph held the ten for Spies,
Though brethren in his eyes;
And Benjamin, whom he reputed chief,
Pursued was for a thief
But when he was disclosed, each threat of his
Is changed to a kiss;
And for his late experimental check,
Wept on his brothers neck.
So as we ought to fear God's hand that savours
Of peace, and suchlike favors:
So ought we not despair: God often does frown,
And seems then strange, when he intends to crown.
4.
Lord, what she here would for her daughter have,
I for my sister crave:
I for my soul, and she, the better I,
Does for her body vie.
That thou would dispossess my haunted twins
Of legions of sins;
Which though perhaps not devils, yet the spawns
Which here their father pawns.
I Will not pray, If thou can; for, Lord, I know it,
I know well thou can do it:
Although with him I Will pray, with tears and grief,
Lord help my unbelief.
Come, purge thy Temple; let it not thus stink
Like to a noysom sink.
Lord, if thou will not hear me, I will force
Thy mercy for remorse.
The unjust judge at length did hear her suit;
Why then 's the Judge of all the world so mute?
On the man healed at the pool of Bethesda.
John 5. 5 And a certain man was there, who had an infirmity thirty eight years.

6 When Jesus saw him lie, and knew that he had been now a long time in that
case, he says unto him, Will thou be made whole?

7 The impotent man answered him, Sir, I have no man when the water is troubled
to put me into the pool; but while I am coming, another steppeth down before me.

8 Jesus says unto him, Arise, take up thy bed and walk.

9 And immediately the man was made whole, and took up his bed and walked.


1.
AS one long wind-bound in the Cape of hope,
Until his gales
Kind Aeolus exhales,
Bans the too faithful Cable-rope,
And the Anchors, which of Hope true emblems are,
To him occasion matter of despair:
2.
So lay thy patience at Bethesda's pool,
The soul so waits,
Till death-divorcing straits
Shall waft her hence. So in a School,
A full-ag'd youth, more ripe then rich, waits long
Till wafted thence to the Academick throng.
3.
The Tide did serve thee often to thy will,
By the Angel moved,
Not by the Moon improved:
But gales of Love were wanting still,
To launch thee forth. So, far from Shore or Tide,
I Have seen a ship lie on her useless side.
4.
But who would not than thee much longer wait,
If thus assured
By Christ he should be cured?
And count all Physic but deceit.
The virtue of this pool's not worth thy strife,
Compared with Christ the Well, and Well of life.
5.
Oh who with Lazarus would not sustain
The pangs of death,
Even to their utmost breath,
So by Christ to be raised again?
Much more with thee who would not wait a time,
With faithful patience, to be healed by him?
6.
Lord, thus I well remember, when infected,
Expecting still
Aid from the Doctor's still,
Which yet in vain I long expected:
Yet evermore some passage intervenes,
And robs me of my hope of outward means.
8.
While thus I lay like an exposed elf,
While death upbraids
My hope of future aids,
My best Physician came himself.
Thus if thou come, let other Doctors stay,
And I will fee them after for delay.
9.
Lord, when my heart's thus troubled by thy Spirit,
Thy South nor North
Can hardly launch me forth;
Neither thy love nor wrath can stir it.
I Am anchored to the world: but call the rocks,
They Will come; but I stick fast in leaden socks.
On the Prodigal.
Luke 15. 20 And he arose, and came to his father: and when he was yet a great
way off, his father saw him, and had compassion, and ran and fell on his neck,
and kissed him.

21. And the son said unto him, Father, I have sinned against heaven, and in
thy sight, and am no more worthy to be called thy son.


1.
Foolhardy Prodigal! what, could not brook
The disc'pline of thy father's house,
But wander'dst like the errant spouse,
Even as a sheep that has her fold forsook,
Among the vagrant goats to brouze,
From the tuition of her shepherds crook:
When in a ragged fleece,
Each briar having snatched a piece,
He Is found and welcomed as his Child or Niece.
2.
Thus did thou rove and rome, thus were thou errant,
Thus did thou from thy Father range,
And leftst his Palace from some grange;
Thus thou embrac'dst a stranger for thy Parent;
Thy Native Land leftst for one strange,
Till Death arrests thee with a meagre warrant.
No Confessor or Flamine,
So can reduce, check or examine,
Like the Inquisition of exacting famine.
3.
Thy wine is turned to tears, thy robes to rags:
Thy Father did not get thy Portion
By griping us'ry or extortion;
That Is not the cause the have lavisht out thy bags,
Yet he wo'n't count thee an abortion,
Though his love draw thee not, but famine drags.
Thy cates are turned to husks,
To ordure thy Odours and Musks,
Thy Songs to whines, thy greets to churlish tusks.
4.
Let these inducements thy return constrain.
So Jacob kissed his lost son.
And David wandering Absolon;
So Mary having often sought in vain,
Found and embraced her holy One,
As thou shall be when thou returnst again.
The longing Soul of Kish
Never did for Saul more strongly wish,
Nor welcome him with a more joyful dish.
5.
'Twill be a Resurrection, no return.
So Abraham took his son reprieved,
The Shunamite so hers revived,
As thou shall be received as from thy urn;
So Naim's widow took retriv'd
Her sons life, when Christ did his death adjourn.
Dead Lazarus but kept
His grave four days, as Martha wept;
But thou have many years in darkness slept.
6.
Should any one thy Father now inform
Of a third brothers happy birth,
It would administer less mirth,
Than that thou art regular, late so enorm.
So Jacob blessed that happy dearth,
As he this famine. Let thy Brother storm:
Think why, where, what thou servest:
Death here is thy wages, for thou starvest;
Think on thy Fathers mercies, and his harvests.
7.
Against heaven and in thy sight I sin have wrought,
In such a Di'lect couch thy shrift;
Say of thy patrimonial gift,
I Have not one talent in a napkin brought;
Not one to testify my thrift:
Then weep the meaning of each laboring thought:
Say, thy dejected Spirit
Counts thee not of such worth and merit,
To serve him, and much less, much less to inherit.
8.
Lord, I Am a prodigal, far worse then this:
When he away but once did rome
Thou (we never read) invit'dst him home;
But thou have often wooed me with a Kiss,
Yet how unwillingly I come!
Then threatst me with a dearth far worse then his:
Yet I had rather whine,
Then sing; attend and feed with swine,
Then with the Lamb to sup, with thee to dine.
On the Woman taken in Adultery.
John 8. 3 And the Scribes and Pharisees brought unto him, a woman taken in
adultery; and when they had set her in the midst,

4 They say unto him, Master, this woman was taken in adultery, in the very act.

5 Now Moses in the law commanded us that such should be stoned: but what
say thou?

7 So when they continued asking him, he lift up himself, and said unto them.
He that is without sin, let him cast the first stone at her.


1.
VIle Phar'sees! who would make Christ's truth the Pander
T'accuse him but with a more specious slander
His Statute-book has no such Law
Which does vice both indulge and awe;
Nor made Law of that kind,
Which both does loose and bind:
Though your Law asks
Egyptian tasks,
Which you will not so much
As with one finger touch.
His Justice is too strict a Martial,
Which is to sin nor fond nor partial.
And since man is too weak to satisfy
His Father's wrath, the Lord himself will die.
2.
Yet your hypocrisy, false weights, and hins,
Neglect of truth and love, are greater sins;
Which ere digested into fact
He sees, and much more in the act.
Look how the woman's lust
Christ's mercy writes in dust,
Which the next wind
Blows out of mind.
And yet, whatever you claim,
Your malice does but aim
To stone our Savior in steed
Of the adult'ress, for the deed.
And though you for her sin do Law enforce,
Your sp'ritual adultery is worse.
3.
Your zeal may with her lust go hand in hand;
Both kindled were at one infernal brand.
Your zeal's a particle of light
Sprung from the gloomy Prince of night,
When in an Angel's shape
Of light, he acts a rape.
Your zeal is baud
T'envie and fraud,
As her Concupiscence
Was baud to this offense.
'T is not true zeal, but hot-brained zanie,
Which views each fault, squints through each crannie;
To carp at others failings, but still dallies
With her own self, nor sees her craft and malice.
4.
Although some blasphemously dare distrust
Christ's mother's honor, he is no friend to lust:
With Harlots though he eats and drinks,
He at their sin connives nor winks.
There Is nothing now obscene.
In Mary Magdalene.
Hell well enough
Knows he is sin-proof.
He may touch pitch, yet not
Receive thereby a blot;
And he with sinners may converse,
Yet never be tainted by commerce.
And though Physicians need an Antidote
Ere they to sick-men go, he wants them not.
5.
Even so would partial Judah Tamar stone,
Till Shame retarded Resolution:
The Serpent, while he would implead
Thus Eve, receives a bruised head.
As hist by guilt and blame,
Ye drop away for shame.
Seth's pillar stood
So, when the flood,
Wherein it late was drowned,
Was now departed round.
As stands the woman thus alone,
While you convicted all are gone;
Even so stood weeping Niobe, when all
Her hopeful sons did by Apollo fall.
6.
Thou Art free, as if thy sin were never committed;
Free as Susanna, by that Child acquitted:
Thou Art clear and clean from this offense,
White as Susanna's innocence:
And such as hers I dare
Say thy Accusers are:
Both Law enforce,
Without remorse:
As they were hurried thence,
So these, by Conscience:
Both out of malice, not true zeal,
For sentence unto Law appeal.
Thou Art cleared by him whom thou have grieved alone;
And who dares mention what thou ill have done?
7.
Her lust, deep in repentant tears is drenched
In waters which might Sodoms flames have quenched.
How bitterly flows from her brain
The former and the later rain!
Not only for this sin:
She does for all begin
To sigh and sob,
To groan and throb.
Were thus your malice rins'd,
You Had not been thus convinced.
Her tears your malice may confound;
They show how deep her sin is drowned
In the Seas depth. Nor does it need your stones;
Her fist, lo, beats her bosom till it groans.
8.
My soul's the woman, Lord, found guilty in
The sin of lust, and in the lust of sin:
And as the devil still conspires
With my affections and desires;
So joins with Conscience
To aggravate offense:
Both sue for sentence
Against repentance.
Lord, at one word of thine,
Their malice will decline.
No Ottacus on thy acquittance,
Will to thy court sue for admittance.
From sin and guilt thus cleared when I die,
I shall stand free, and none but thee and I.
On Mary Magdalene.
Matthew. 26. 6 Now when Jesus was in Bethany, in the house of Simon the leper,

7 There came unto him a woman having an alabaster-box of very precious
ointment, and poured it on his head as he sat at meat.


1.
Blessed Mary! whose repentant rheums
Were far more precious then thy Nard:
Thy tears nor age nor time consumes,
Which wastes and dries the richest Lard.
Thy Nard afforded rich perfumes;
Thy vocal tears each where are heard.
Thy Nard which on Christ's head did fleet,
Though grateful to him, was less sweet
Then were the tears wherewith thou bath'dst his feet.
2.
The rich ingredient which thy tears
Gave to thy Nard, surpassed all alms,
Though of continuance of years:
True tears are of themselves a balm,
Thy Nard forestalling both his ears,
Presents each groan a Mercy-psalm.
See, he accepts thy love and thee,
Nor does at all esteem't to be,
T'anoint the Anointed, a Tautologie.
3.
Do not esteem't an act uncouth,
False-hearted Judas, what she does.
So Eli marked Hannah's mouth.
And with her causlesly was wroth.
So Boreas chides the healing South:
So on the Church boors friend and froth.
Lov'dst thou the poor, yet were so speedy
To prosecute them, and so greedy,
To sell thy Master that was poor and needy?
4.
As Ice to Crystal is congealed,
That it nor sun nor fire can melt;
So seem our hearts and eye balls sealed
To hardness, that no grief is felt.
Our frost-bound hearts lie still concealed:
Let Love inflame, or Anger swell't:
Yet tears cannot blind, nor watery cries
Dissolve the gelly of our eyes,
No more then rain can melt the Crystal skies.
5.
Good-woman! who esteemed no paint
Like to a face blubbered with tears;
All other tinctures are but faint,
But these out-wear all age and years.
No Venus-mole bespeaks a Saint,
No beauty-spot like these appears.
And as the Moon's each thinner place
Shows somewhat dark, yet no disgrace:
True tears so never stain a beauteous face.
6.
For sin, hair-rending fingers ought
To be our only crisping-pins:
Although indeed our hair's too soft
To make a hair-cloth for our skins.
No powder is like ashes thought,
To roll our tresses in for sins.
Hair is the moisture of the brain,
And so are tears: then 'twere not vain
With Mary here, to mix them once again.
7.
Thrice-blessed Convert! from whose breast
Christ having seven devils cast,
Left not thy bosom unpossest,
But there the spirit of Grief placed.
The former made thee worse then beast,
The later gave thee rest at last.
Oh were I so possessed! these fits
Bespeak us best to b'in our wits:
No joy should chase it by removal-Writs.
8.
For Lazarus my outward man,
If sick, my Mary, Lord, can mourn;
Groan like a dove, throb like a swan,
Till thou have raised him from his urn:
But for her self she now and than
Can weep, but does her grief adjourn.
And yet we see, when thou do move
Women's devotions unto love,
Man ever does the weaker vessel prove.
On Peter's denial of his Master.
Matthew. 26. 74 And Peter remembered the words of Jesus, which said unto him,
Before the cock crow, thou shall deny me thrice. And he went out, and wept
bitterly.


1.
WHat, Peter, have denied thy Master
In his disaster?
Could not withstand, thou easy rock,
So small a shock?
Loor'd thy foundation from beneath,
At a maids breath?
Thou bear a Church? who were thy self
A sandy shelf,
Till Christ t'a rock confirmed thy gravel,
Which none could ravel.
Thee, rather then a rock, we style,
For thy inconstancy, A floating I Will.
2.
Weak fisher of men! if thus caught
At a maids draught:
How will thou hence oppose the harms
Of Mermaids charms?
If thee so much this common fry
Did terrify;
How will the huge Leviathan,
Or the Hurricane?
How wilt withstand that Polypheme,
That spouts a stream
Of fury on all Christian matters,
Disturbs your rivers, and pollutes your waters?
3.
If thou were put to such extremes
On tender streams,
How will thou stand it on those Seas
That know no pleas?
How wilt oppose those Zyphia's
And Remora's?
When Seas with angry winds do surge,
When tempests purge,
Unless that Christ arise, like that
Mount Ararat;
How quickly will the raging billows
Make Seas your Down-bed, and the Rocks your pillows?
4.
Are all thy promises so toward
So soon turned coward!
When of thy love there should be proof,
Thou stoodst aloof:
And yet thy fortitude, I wot,
Was more remote.
Was all thy valor but to attend
To see the end?
More fickle far then was the maid
Which thee betrayed:
She not denied her words, while thou
Did start aside like a deceitful bow.
5.
Look, Peter, look, thy Master's minion,
How Christ they pinion,
By Judas treason, and thy fear:
He Is captived here,
Whom (worse then Jewish rage and scorn)
Thou have forsworn.
Two have belied him even now
By perjured vow:
But thou have him denied far worse,
By oath and curse.
Hark, hark, how sprightly Chaunticleer
Proclaims thee coward for thy dastard-fear.
6.
Look with what glance thy Savior eyes
Thy perjuries:
Let it dissolve thy frozen fears
To melting tears.
Let Marah-waters be alone
Thy Helicone;
Not Sodom's lake, tears gross and thick,
But sharp and quick.
And as the Pontick Ocean's pride
Never ebbes by Tide;
Let tears never ebb, but ever rise,
Till they have got the custom of thy eyes.
7.
In Lot's wife's obelisk of salt,
Go read thy fault;
And let it all thy moisture season
To tears for treason.
But if thy holy sorrow lusts
For sharper gusts,
Christ's vinegar and gall would fitter
Thy grief imbitter.
With such intoxications whole,
Go drench thy soul.
Confess him with the penitent thief;
And as the have freez'd for fear, go melt for grief.
8.
Good God! our weakness will without thee,
Not only doubt thee,
But of thee make a flat denial,
On easy trial;
Nay, shall not only thus deny thee,
But shall defy thee.
If the rock could not withstand these floats.
Can empty boats?
If that such casks soon buoyed thy rock,
Like some light block.
Can we hold out, who of our selves
No anch'rage have, but only sands and shelves?
On the Passion and Death of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ.
Zech. 12. 10 And they shall look upon me whom they have pierced, and they
shall mourn for him, as one mourns for his only son; and shall be in
bitterness for him, as one that is in bitterness for his firstborn.


NOw has bright Phoebus, through his heat,
Drawn up a cloud of vapors, which do threat
T'obscure his glorious face; and therefore muster
Their pitchie beds, to smother up his luster.
God long has rebels nourished, who now further,
From damned rebellion proceed to murder.
Could not your sins be died enough in grain,
From all the Prophets, but from such a vain?
Could not the measure of your sins be filled
In murdering them, except their God you killed?
Was this to make your crimson, wool, (vile brood)
To bathe the Lamb thus in his crimson blood?
We do it by application, thus being done:
But meant you so in your intention?
Was your damnation of so gross a weight,
That naught could raise the scales t'an equal height,
But such an act as this? O cursed stir!
The Saw's in arms against the Carpenter.
Was It not enough thou were in flesh benumbed,
But when thy years t'a perfect age the had sum'd,
Blessed Vine, were thy ripe grapes smote by the rod,
And in thy Father's angry wine press trod.
Cursed Olivet! bear, hence, no fruit nor leaf,
Nor in thy vale be cropped a fruitful sheaf.
Unhappie mount, fatal to Absalon;
To David once, now to his glorious Son,
By Judah's fraud. Here David mourned and wept,
And Jesus here his mourning vesper kept.
Gethsemane! may neither dew nor rain
Hence die thy garden in a verdant grain:
For Jesse's Rose, plucked from thy teeming breast,
Was ravished hence by that rebellious beast.
Here roared the Lion; in this dismal grove,
The princely Eagle mourned like a dove.
As the condoling heavens, from the sky,
Weep blood, as Omen of some Prodigy:
So, in his passion, an excessive heat
Forced the row his blessed pores a bloody sweat.
Who by his word foiled hell, could not sustain
The weight of sin without this heavy pain.
And this proves true his moan in the sacred leaves:
I am sin burdened, as a cart by sheaves.
Here was the Lord of hosts surpised and taken
By Roman forces; here by 's friends forsaken.
Blessed Savior! what, could thou not command
A withering dryness on each treacherous hand?
Could thou send fire from heaven at his clause,
If I Am a man of God, to plead thy cause,
Twice following on the captains and their fifty;
And of thy vengeance were thou here so thrifty?
Did thou benight the Syrians eyes who came
To seize that Prophet, when he begged the same?
Yet did thy Majesty thus humbly stoop
To the surprisal of so small a Troop?
Accursed Judas! had Cham in the flood
So guilty been of treason and of blood,
H' had drowned the Ark, with all the rest. At first,
God with sterility, in part, the earth accursed,
For Adam's sin: and could we look for less,
For thy cursed sake, then total barrenness?
Abstract of wickedness! For if had Cain
His mother ravished, and his father slain,
Thou were more guilty, in just balance weighed,
Who have unnat'rally thy Lord betrayed.
Wretch'd Pilate! what, did not thy conscience grudge
Against thy tongue, when thou condemn'st thy Judge,
Who could have doomed thee, for thy horrid crime,
Unto the shameful Tree prepared for him?
But thus has God decreed: do thou not sentence
Thy hasty doom with a too late repentance?
Accursed Jerusalem! the bloody stage
Of wanton murder, and inconstant rage:
Fell not the just results of Hiel's guilt
On Aelius, who so vile a town rebuilt?
You would no king but Caesar: in conclusion,
Who but a Caesar was your just confusion?
Accursed Calvary! henceforward we
Will never curse from Ebal, but from thee.
May envious Mice hence gnaw thee from the Map:
For here the Branch was robbed of fruit and sap.
But why d' I curse? Each place a Gerizim,
By these his blessed pains, is made by him.
And my sin with the Soldiers, hand in hand,
Betrayed my Savior, and bid him stand.
Mine mocked, mine scourged him too: my sins in gross
Helped, with the Jews, to nail him on the Cross.
I know not whe'er my heart should dance or bleed
At this, this so accursed blessed deed.
O for a fancy at his shameful death,
To curse and bless these actions in a breath!
I should not call good ill, nor evil good;
For both are so, as they are understood.
And now, methinks, I see him on the Cross:
What shall I descant? what define or gloss?
Forgive my murdering Fancy; 't is no Jew,
Although it feign thee crucified in view.
I Will rise in spite of their confused swarms,
And beg the embracement of his outstretch'd arms:
Nor will I cease, till I Have that promise made
To me, which even now blessed Gismas had.
I Will kiss his lips, embrace his glorious neck;
But not unnail him fearing Peter's check;
Get thee behind me, Satan: for this favor
Does not of heaven, but of Satan savor.
I Will suck his crimson wounds, till I have found
My glutton-soul is tinctured from each wound.
I Will strive to outweep his wounds: and lest it breed
Distake I bleed not too, my heart shall bleed.
But lo, the Sun's eclipsed, withdraws his ray,
And all in mourning darkness clothes the day.
And durst the stars to shine? have they endured
To see the Star of Jacob thus obscured?
No, beauteous light (as if that now were furled
Heavens gaudy curtains) has forsook the world,
Not with the luster of a Comet fringed;
And the earth, as by an earthquake, seems unhinged.
At which (as frighted from that sweet repose)
The Saints that slept long in their graves, arose:
The Temple's veil 's rent from the top to the roof;
For why? its Type is rent and pierced through.
Now is well-nigh our Savior's soul extorted,
His body thus by wounds and nails supported:
Nor was his bodies weight so great, as were
Our sins, which he upon his soul did bear.
Hark, how his soul's expired with a cry:
Whose sin's so great, to cause a God to die?
Not his: for he appeals to the envious Jews;
Which of you can me of a sin accuse?
And even Pilate, Cesar's wicked groom,
Did clear his inn'cence ere he cleared his doom.
We sinned in the first Adam, and deprived
The second of his life, all, ere we lived:
But gracious mercy (as Rebekka's twins,
Jacob and Esau) strugled with our sins
In the womb of Eternity; and thus
Smooth mercy did supplant rough sin for us:
And thus the birth-right's ours, our title's good:
For Christ even now has sealed it with his blood.
Now has the Sun with more then common haste
(Scarf'd in his Sphere) descended Vesta's waste,
And (as hence frighted) of such acts as these
Has carried news to the Antipodes.
Here for a time though we in darkness grope,
Let Us not despair, as men being void of hope:
For, surer then the Sun will rise, though slain,
Our Sun of righteousness will rise again.
On the good Thief.
Luke 23. 43 And Jesus said unto him Verily I say unto thee, This day shall
thou be with me in Paradise.


1.
WHat shall I gloss,
Good Gismas, on thy Cross?
Why may it resemble not
To the tree of Elijah's Chariot?
By which,
To the highest pitch
Thou shall b' advanced of bliss:
Thy Jacob's ladder 't is,
Where Angels stand
At hand.
Thy Cross is but a type how Christ thy soul
This day will fix above each pole.
O happy punishment,
Beyond extent!
2.
Did Barabbas
Know who our Savior was,
He Would scorn his life: that Jewish favor
Would in his choice no relish find, or savor:
But begged,
By Conscience egged,
That he might spell him yet,
Their ears how would he fret?
Accuse that throng
Of wrong?
That Christ's blood spilt surpassed that deed of Cain,
'T would dye Jerusalem in grain;
That they had now gone further
Than he in murder.
3.
Good Thief, from whence
Knew'st thou Christ? not from Sense:
Pain 's no respirer: its extremes
No respite gives to think on serious Themes.
No, 't was
The wind of grace,
Which as it breathes on men
Where it does please: so when.
Which here did breath
In death:
So through a day so dark, that I might say
A lingering twilight 't were, no day;
I Have seen the setting Sun
Displayed anon,
4.
O happy time
Thou di'dst now for thy crime.
So have I seen a neighboring cloud,
The Row which the Sun seemed to look beetle-brow'd,
Ere night
Sunburned so bright,
As thou by suffering near
The righteous Phoebus here,
Thus grew'st acquainted,
Thus Sainted:
He of thy shame partook, thou of his glory;
Blessed change, beyond conceit or story!
Thy Cross each wise Invention
Styles thy Ascension.
5.
Laverna now
No longer has thy vow:
But he alone has thy belief,
Whose inn'cence suffers with thee as a Thief.
This craft
He thee has taught,
To rob hell of her aim.
Though Death not of her claim;
Not to redeem
esteem:
For thou giv'st Christ the praise, thy self the shame,
Though Dismas does blaspheme his name,
And, even in death, pants
His wicked taunts.
6.
Peace, Satan's martyr,
Though Christ nor law nor charter
Has broke, the Scriptures have not slumber'd,
Which have foretold that Christ must thus be numbered.
But if
The had been no Thief,
Christ had, to appease their pride,
With Barabbas thus di'd,
In equipage
Of rage:
But now thy theft 's in grain; thou do contract
Blood to 't, while thou approv'st their act:
And while thou should condole,
Do vex his soul.
7.
Did never read?
Good thief, lift up thy head;
With the eye of faith look, and condole
The Brazen Serpent on you cursed pole.
The grief
Thou were a Thief,
Did wound his soul more fierce
Then nail or spear can pierce.
How for thy deeds
He bleeds!
His bloody sweat, sweat through each gracious pore,
Claims but unfeigned tears, no more;
His giving up the ghost,
But sighs at most.
8.
Thy Scripture's, Lord,
Thy gracious Record,
That shining light which through the dark
Directs us in our race unto that mark.
But this
Thy passage is
A circumstance more ample
For precept then example:
We find this one
Alone,
Whose late repentance Christ in death vouchsafed:
Although thy wisdom has me taught
This Scene not to prorogue
Till the Epilogue.
On the Resurrection of our Lord and Savior Jesus Cnrist.
Matthew. 28. 5 And the angel answered and said to the woman, Fear not: for I
know that ye seek Jesus which was crucified.

6 He is not here: for he is risen, as he said. Come, see the place where the
Lord lay.


1.
ARise, my active soul, and run;
Keep measure with you dancing Sun,
Who seems as weary of his Sphere,
As thou to be confined here:
Look, how his sprightly beams do spark:
So David danced before the Ark.
How he descends his Chariot! he, in this,
Worships Christ's rising, as the Persian his.
2.
But why does Phoebus mount his head
So soon up from Aurora 's bed?
The the other night, when we, my soul,
Our Savior 's Passion did condole,
The frighted Sun forsook our clime
Two hours before his wonted time;
And therefore now the sooner gilds the heaven,
By two hours time, to make his course up even.
3.
But how rid Satan and his Legions
In triumph the row the infernal Regions?
The Spirits which Christ outcast, did come,
With Songs of triumph on his Tomb:
All mankind was proscribed; whom death
Did in conceit to hell bequeath.
Oh how death gloried that all now was safe!
And hell in triumph wrote his Epitaph.
4.
How did the Devil Man upbraid,
That Christ so weakly was betrayed?
And he who took not Angels seed,
But Abraham's, failed in the deed;
And by that seed spurned to his grave,
Whom he in mercy came to save.
That now the God of life was dead, this mirth
Had balm to cure the wounds made by his birth.
5.
But Satan, at the third days dawn,
Christ now has re-assum'd his pawn.
Thoughtst thou on his to insult, as once
Thou proudly did for Moses bones?
Thy two days triumph 's like the story
Of the Persian prisoners glory.
So thought the Gazites Samson safe, till day,
When he arose, and bore the gates away.
6.
Descend, damned spirits; as you began,
Howl on. The death of great God Pan,
At this Christ's conquest, we may call
Your ruin, Satan's second fall.
Come, King of terrors, yield thy trophies
On Heroes, Soldiers, and Sophies,
Unto our Savior; for thou art undone;
Thy Triumph 's but an empty Skeleton.
7.
My soul, that Christ was born, nay di'd,
Did not so much quench Satan 's pride:
But when he rose, this blessed morn,
Hell was confounded, Death forlorn.
Were 't not for what this day brings forth,
The rest had lost that solemn worth.
Hence, on this day let no foul spirit dare
TO ascend the Regions of our earth or air.
8.
Lord, as by thine I am assured
My bodies rise shall be procured:
So, let my soul feel 't here begin
Her resurrection too from sin.
Lord, it is too much she is thus confined:
But is she buried in this kind?
Oh raise her up: if thus thou please to do,
My heart (my bodies Sun) shall triumph too.
On the Ascension of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ.
Psalm. 24. 8. Lift up your heads, O ye gates, and be ye lift up ye everlasting
doors, and the King of glory shall come in.

9. Who is the King of glory? even the Lord of hosts he is the King of glory.


1.
YE blessed immortals,
Divide your glorious portals.
Who not dilates
The everlasting gates,
While that the King of glory mounts his throne?
Though by his own
Here nor received nor known:
We rather worry
The blessed Lamb of glory.
Your Wisdom knows him God's eternal Son.
2.
His work is ended,
Naught partial or suspended.
Blessed Angels too,
He purchased has for you
A nature fixed, which seemed before unfinished.
And of a worm
Though here he took the form;
It, since he di'd,
Is so much glorified,
His Godhead 's neither clouded nor diminished.
3.
'T is now no Shrine
TO his Godhead more divine:
His glorious flesh
He needs not now refresh
With food or rest, from hunger or from labor.
And if he here
Shone on the mount so clear,
As if the Sun
With rays his coat had spun;
How brighter shines he now than on mount Tabor!
5.
Since Christ so clear
Shines in his Manhood's Sphere,
That at its graces
Ye Angels hide your faces:
See in the Trinities transparent myrrour
How he 's instal'd,
And in his robes impall'd;
How he 's renowned,
And by his Father crowned
With gracious Majesty, and awful terror.
5.
At his return,
The Pearlie gates do burn;
Jerusalem
Shines with each kind of Gem;
The new Jerusalem with glory burnisht:
Naught here is built
With superficial gilt;
But all in gold
The City is inrol'd;
All thus against his blessed Ascension furnished.
6.
Of Precious stones
Are her foundations;
Her Pearlie streets
Do brandish beaming sheets,
Reflecting from the Lamb's most glorious face.
Here 's constant noon,
No need of Sun or Moon:
Our glim'ring Globe,
Decked in his azur'd robe,
Here an Eclipse were to the lowest Grace.
7.
How are we blessed!
That have so sweet a rest
Got by the care
Of such a Harbinger,
Who all things can command, all consummate.
The way to heaven
He has made plain and even;
And what with thorns
Was choked, his grace adorns
With rose-beds, and makes wide heavens narrow gate.
8.
As Olivet,
Some say, retains as yet
Thy foot 's last print,
That naught can close the dint:
Grave on my stupid soul (Lord) this days love,
Even at the mention
Of this thy blessed ascension:
Let her aspire,
Like an excentrick fire,
To thee her Center that art fixed above.
On Christ his Session at the right hand of God.
Mark 16. 19 So then, after the Lord had spoken unto them, he was received up
into heaven, and sat on the right hand of God.


1.
HOw well the throne
Becomes God's holy One!
How fit the Rod
Beseems the hand of God!
How meet the Crown
Befits him! 't is his own.
How well, meet, fit, his Throne, Rod, Diadem,
Deck him with glory; but he much more them.
2.
We wish Good luck
To thee with these: go pluck
Hell by the root;
Make it quake at thy foot:
To right thy Spouse,
Damn Death to a Charnel-house.
Good luck have with thy right. Oh how we bless
Thee and thy Father, for thy good success!
3.
With how sweet bliss
Do Grace and Glory kiss!
So Light and Heat
We see in Phoebus met.
By these 't is known
Thou not usurpst thine own.
Good luck have with thy right: we willingly
Submit unto thy yoke of Liberty.
4.
We, if we might,
Would not supplant thy right;
But yield as well,
As if nor heaven nor hell
Should crown or damn
With endless bliss or shame.
Our better Natures will this just embrace;
Nor can we other by instinct of Grace.
5.
Satan, as heir,
Long kept his steely Chair;
Nay, yet usurps
The unregen'rate corpse:
But when Christ claimed
His right, how was all maimed?
Our blessed Giant having run his course,
Now on the heavens rides, as on a horse.
6.
On man 's agreeing
With Hell, sin had its being;
And by this blot,
Death had her essence got.
Should Christ these things
Suffer as fellow-Kings?
No, if they stir in us while here we breath,
They 're the last pangs but of a dying Death.
7.
But how large Scenes
Has this Christ's act? What means
He to prorogue
His wished Epilogue?
And not concludes
Without more Interludes?
Is not the earths harvest ripe? has it so dull
In sinning been? yet are the Fats not full?
8.
Hell, Sin, and Death,
Which yet too strongly breath,
Seem to blaspheme,
As if they were Supreme,
Or their power here,
Some Interregnum were.
Lord, it is long since, long, since thy promise spoke,
These days I Will shorten, for my chosen's sake.
On Christ's Intercession with the Father for us.
Heb. 7. 25 Wherefore he is able to save them to the uttermost, that come unto
God by him; seeing he ever lives to make intercession for them.


1.
NOr is our Savior so much given
Unto the contemplation of himself,
That he forgets us now in heaven,
As, once, profanely thought that glutton elf:
But having traversed hence his journey,
He still remembers us amidst his glory;
He still remains our blessed Attorney,
Whereof the least act, on our true repentance,
Is able to reverse the strongest sentence.
2.
Hence, then, let 's Fortune fear, nor Fate,
Or what blear-eyed Star-gazers can rehearse;
Because we have an Advocate,
Who can each ominous presage reverse.
Let Satan never hence appeal
To heaven, in his wonted Dialect,
Lest he be doomed by Christ his zeal,
As who would make his Death of none effect;
And aimed to hinder him, lest he inherit
The dear-bought purchase which his death did merit.
3.
But if he dare us to attaint,
He Will strait be silenced at Christ's counter-suit,
As daring to accuse a Saint
To whom Christ will his righteousness impute.
You then, whose troubled souls do languish
In pining sorrow for your sins and follies,
Banish your fears, and calm your anguish;
Exult, and vent your joy in sprightly vollies:
Go, see him with your tears, and leave the trial
To him alone, whose Suit never found denial.
4.
If Artaxerxes took so kind
A handful but of water from a Peasant,
Present thy tears, and thou shall find
More gracious acceptance of that present.
And if thy sins so thick should crowd,
To fill heavens ears with a condemning matter,
And stand between you like a cloud,
Which not the winds of all thy sighs can scatter;
By him that sable cloud shall be dissolved,
Wherein the Sun of glory seemed involved.
5.
In vain let Satan henceforth wander,
Like to a base accusing Ottacus,
As daring to inform by slander
Him that is all ear and eye, concerning us:
Thus let us then forestal his malice;
Accuse our selves; let not that seem uncouth:
Who will not so; with Justice dallies:
But so we do his office, stop his mouth.
Our Case thus opened, if Christ intercede,
What envious boldness dares against us plead?
6.
What means that Man of sin, that rallies
The Saints as Christ's corrivals in this Function?
And if they were so near his allies,
How was it purchased? when was their Unction?
True, with him are the Saints coheirs;
But Christ did purchase it, and them elected:
And they to whom now Rome repairs,
If Saints, now by him reign, so here expected.
He is our elder Brother, and he sure
Enjoys his right of primogeniture.
7.
Then have our hands transgressed the warrant
Of heavens Laws? Christ pleads his hands bored through:
Or have our devious feet been errant?
He pleads his pierced, by a sufficient proof.
Or if our hearts have Ill invented,
Christ pleads his for us by the Soldier pierced;
All was on him by stripes indented:
He sues the Fine of all on him amerc'd.
In him our sins were scourged, bored, nailed, and racked;
Nor will his Father them again exact.
8.
Our sins but whisper to that cry
Which his wounds make; the sorrow and compunction
Of his perplexed Agony;
Nay, with our sins if hell howled in conjunction.
Our thanks he graciously perfumes;
Our supplications with odours balms;
Sweetens with myrrh repentant rheums;
With incense sanctifies our vows and alms.
Blessed be thy Father, and that sacred Unction.
That did consigne thee to this blessed Function.
On Christ his final coming to Judgment.
Revel. 5. 12 And the Sun became black as sackcloth of hair, and the moon
became as blood.

13 And the stars of heaven fell unto the earth, even as a fig tree casts her
untimely figs, when she is shaken of a mighty wind.

14 And the heaven departed as a seroll when it is rolled together, and every
mountain and island were moved out of their places.


1.
NOr here our Savior concludes
His act: these are his Interludes:
The eye of faith in these he asks,
As being an Interview of Masks.
But he upon a flaming stage,
In an Angelick equipage;
Now comes in person at the day of Audit,
When troops of angels shall trump forth his plaudit.
2.
When righteousness and equity
The pillars of his Seat shall be;
The elements together mixed,
And the two Poles of the world unfixt:
Whose Genius shall feel that story
Of the imagined Purgatory,
When wild Disorder, and amazed Confusion,
Shall be the Whifflers to a sad conclusion?
3.
But, Lord, how long will thou defer
To hear! Wilt still our hopes deter?
How long that Quaere wilt suspend,
Whether the world shall have an end?
Come, let thy judgment and thy mercy
Finish at length that Controversy.
Come, come away, our panting hearts are drumming
At thy approach, and yet thou seem not coming.
4.
Haste, Lord, descend, thy Saints to gather,
And to resign them to thy Father.
What will thou lose by that thy tender?
It Is no surprisal or surrender:
Thou 'lt be the King of glory still.
For who dares to oppose thy will?
Safe in thy Eden grows the tree of life:
Thou now not doubtst of Adam or his wife.
5.
But stay, my soul; what, can thou meet
Thy Judge with clean prepared feet?
Art thou not naked, or art clothed
As one to such a Lord betrothed?
If so, go meet thy coming Groom;
Thy wedding-day's the day of Doom.
But, Lord, we build, wed, feast; we vaunt and jet,
As 't were but now thou said, But th'end's not yet.
6.
As morning-light precedes the Sun,
Let grace thy glory here fore-run:
For glory never there will come,
Where grace has not prepared the room.
Give grace, Lord, and, with that, the sinew
Of strength and vigor to continue.
Thou have been (...), and begun to do;
But seem (...). be (...) too.
7.
O let not Hell upbraid thy power,
As his that 'gan to build that tower
He could not end. Finish at length
My Citadel with mighty strength.
Yet, faith and hope faint; joys are sorry,
Till grace be swallowed up of glory.
As grace, like Orphah, leaves me when I die;
Let Ruth-like glory fill my Naomi.
8.
Blessed God, I know we ought to pray,
Thy kingdom come, each day by day;
And should thy coming damn us all,
We durst but it a mercy call.
Thy time, dread Lord, 's the best; and thou
Long-suff'ring art, of old and now.
O let thy grace make way for glory; then
Thy kingdom come, thy will be done. Amen.
On the Joys of heaven after the day of Judgment.
2 Cor. 2. 9 Eye has not seen, nor ear heard, neither have entered into the
heart of man, the things which God has prepared for them that love him.


1.
GHess now the Scenes of every age
Upon one Stage
Re-acted, and all shifted clean,
Both Stage and Scene;
Each has his pay, and wafted home,
With Go or Come;
To act a better part, or worse,
With bliss or curse.
Both played have to my Fancies eye,
A Tragi-Comi-Comi-Tragedy.
2.
As heaven Astronomy confines
To Zones and Lines;
And with conceited Poles supports
The azure Courts;
And the row its fancied Zodiac,
Can Titan track;
And takes heavens length and breadth, if bid,
As the Angel did:
Their Jacob's staff no less can do
Then if they had got Jacob's ladder too.
3.
Yet all this serves but to advance
Gilt Ignorance:
So heavens joys by blind devotions
Are clothed in notions,
Which only gild our Nescience
With seeming sense.
Them we are forced to ghess by pleasures,
And earthly treasures:
Since though the Turkish Alcharon
Describes their Par'dise, ours can be by none.
4.
But could our Merlins, by discerning
And Lynx-ey'd learning,
Who can the starry Alphabet
In language set;
And though the clouds should blot their book,
Can the row them look:
Could they define the blessed mansions
B'yo^d these expansions;
I Would love their Art: Divinity
Should then be handmaid to Astronomy.
5.
As on their Babel of Conceit
They mount heavens height:
So, though its beauty and dimension
Befools Invention,
Transcends the Zenith of all mancie
Of Art and Fancy;
Yet since that faculty of soul
Does more inroll
Then 's seen or heard, we ghess those joys,
Though far above our knowledge, wish, or choice.
6.
To call them Riches, were not high,
But beggarly:
To call them Honors, were a vile
Inglorious style:
To call them Pleasures, were a gross
And tedious gloss,
These Joys by myriads of pitches
Exceed such Riches:
Though by such names the blessed Spirit
Describes those joys which now the Saints inherit.
7.
Since no man the heavens ever knew,
By Art or view;
Though some the Stars boast to describe,
By name and tribe:
As if when first the heavens were,
They had been there,
And knew them all as well as he,
His silver sky.
Not knowing these, so plain and even,
Who can define the non-apparent heaven?
8.
Lord, since more then I can conceive,
I must believe;
And far beyond my Fancies scope,
I still must hope:
Grant, what is conceived by my youth
Agree with truth:
And whatsoever does out-stretch
My Fancies reach,
She at forbidden fruit not glance,
But flag her wing in humble Ignorance.
On the Torments of Hell.
Luke 16. 22 And it came to pass that the beggar died, and was buried, and was
carried by the angels into Abraham's bosom. The rich man also died, and was
buried.

23 And in hell he lift up his eyes, being in torments, and sees Abraham afar
off, and Lazarus in his bosom.

24 And he cried, and said, Father Abraham, have mercy on me, and send Lazarus
that he may dip the tip of his finger in water, and cool my tongue: for I am
tormented in this flame.


1.
POor souls! whom endless flames do scorch,
Since that the earth flamed like a pendant Torch;
Since at the Trumpets final sound,
Our Jericho's high walls fell flat to ground,
And all was burnt: What Verse has tones
Sufficient to accent forth your groans?
2.
Should all the Poets add each Fury,
And of the Muses Nine make up a Jury,
And beg their Verdict to define
Hell 's miseries; they must the Suit decline,
Should they exhaust their Helicon,
And these should drain their Styx and Acharon.
3.
Let Wit excite her fruitless strife,
To limn Eternal Death unto the Life,
And in a Synod call the Quire
Or Arts, all served but to paint a fire;
Fire which but makes the brain to sweat,
As void of true description, as of heat.
4.
Reader, let thy Orpheus-like Fancy
Descend to Hell in some conceited Maney,
And with brisk Nectar oil the mouth
Of tortured Dives, which is parched with drouth;
All he could say how Furies wreak
Their rage, would be, I know not what to speak.
5.
Aetna's to this an idle tapor,
Vesuvius a thin incensed vapor;
Or as the Pyramids, whose spires
Mount only in proportioned shapes of fires:
No fire to these is worth a name;
Even Sodom's but the shadow of this flame.
6.
And what need Poets feign a Styx
Or Acharon, since floods of tears here mix
Into a Sea, which wildly lurks
In darkness, and confused waterworks;
Which all Hydrography no better
Can quote, then Xerxes the Hellespont could fetter.
7.
But cannot Dives from These drench
His thirst-parch'd mouth, and burning liver quench?
No: fire and water here are both
One element, which flaming streams do froth:
Both having purged the world so gross,
Meet in Hell 's furnace, to consume the dross.
8.
Lord since Hell 's pains exceed conceit,
Each gloss on them 's a naked counterfeit:
Our Fancies still have some remorse;
Let us the worst imagine, still 't is worse.
If heavens joys cannot draw me home,
Let these true terrors fright me till I come.
The second Part. On several occasions, and several texts of Scripture.
Psalm. 119. 37 O turn away mine eyes, lest they behold vanity.


1.
LOrd, what 's a Beauty! but a paint, at most,
Which with a breath's gone, 't is so vainly glost.
What beauty's died so deep in grain, that dolor,
Or age, or sickness, cannot blast its color?
Since there is within 't no principle to nourish
Its verdant vigor to a constant flourish,
Lord, let me think 't but a more specious worm,
And wink its beauty to an Antic form.
2.
Lord, what is a beauty! in it could I see
The Image which I lost in losing thee,
I Would court, and gaze, till through mine eyes that face
Reprinted on my soul that former grace.
Here Is no such form: although indeed some few
Think that in it we may thy footsteps view.
What Is beauty then, for which we so much brawl,
But flesh transparent the row a smoother cawl?
3.
Lord, what is a Beauty? Did a more divine
Saint dwell within't, I would adore the shrine;
My captived heart with zealous love should boil;
I Would count each beauty as this beauty's foil.
But since the soul, the better part, is tainted,
Can the outward part be free? must that be Sainted?
What Is beauty then, if it be void of grace?
Thy Philip's Blackmore had the fairer face.
4.
Lord, what is a Beauty! our fair Grannam Eve
Soon proved a strong Suadela, to deceive.
This treacherous White and Red has bred more war,
Then they did once 'twixt York and Lancaster.
Lord, let me think those eyes by the wanton Muse
Styled Stars, are Ignes fatui, to seduce:
Those Coral-lips, my credit would explode;
These Yv'ry teeth, my good report corrode.
5.
Lord, what is the world! Thou did not mean, I ghess,
Th'worlds for Impostures, either great or less;
Nor mean the lesser, whom thou made compleater,
Should be at all seduced by the greater.
Yet as they represent each others parts,
The greater too has its delusive Arts.
Since then they are objects both to tempt mine eyes,
O turn them from beholding vanities.
6.
Lord, what is the world? 't is but a turning Globe,
Which whirls us now on high, then low as Job;
Or a tossed ship, whose now-aspiring Mast
Seems for to boar the clouds, then back does cast
Her rolling passengers, to seek a Tomb
In some vast Sea-shell, or some fishes womb.
Then what is the world? a bubble it is at most;
With wind it is only full, with wind it is tossed.
7.
Lord, what is the world? I will not wish me blind,
Because mine eyes thus tempt me; though I find
A grave Bp. Hall.
one bid one, of one eye bereft,
Not to weep that loss, but that one yet was left:
Nor will mistake thee, when thou bidst not doubt,
If that mine eye offend, to pluck it out.
Lord, turn away mine eyes: all is one to me,
If so thou do, as if I did not see.
8.
Lord, what is the world? indeed the heavens aray'd
Are in thy Livery; we see displayed
In them thy glorious Coat; they each night story
In Starry characters their Makers glory.
But since a fly, worm, or the meanest elf,
If animate, excels the world it self;
Why then is the world by noble man thus held
In such esteem, that is by such excelled?
The Author's Epainicron to God, for his Recovery from a sharp Fever.
Psalm. 118. 18 The Lord has chastened and corrected me sore: but he has not
given me over unto death.

Isai. 38. 18 For the grave cannot praise thee; death cannot celebrate thee:
they that go down to the pit, canner hope for thy truth.

19. The living the living he shall praise thee, as I do this day.


1.
Lord, THough Scripture say,
A thousand years one day
Are unto thee; yet must I think again,
To thee appears
Each day a thousand years,
Till I thee thank for freedom from my pain.
2.
Late I was sick;
'Twere vain with Launcet's prick
To vent my blood corrupted too too long:
I looked for death,
As he that lay beneath
A threatening sword which by a thread was hung.
3.
The active strife
For hope or help of life,
Now failed me quite. And while the Doctor lingers,
How did I feel
A hasty Death to ceel
My falling eyelids with her Ycie fingers?
4.
The quick results
Within my fev'rish Pulse,
The minutes were by which the hours I counted;
Wherein delayed
The tarder Doctors aid:
So hours to days, and days to weeks amounted.
5.
To hold me home,
My last Viaticum
Was tendered, to sustain me in my journey:
Nor was I mute
For to present my suit
To the mediation of my sweet Attorney.
6.
Life's influence,
Scared from my outward sense,
Now to my hearts Metropolis was gone;
And in this strait,
My ready soul did wait
With nimble wing for dissolution.
7.
But like a brand
Plucked by thy gracious hand,
I have escaped the burning unconsum'd:
Though death by Fever
Did rage as bad as ever.
Caldee's King on the furnac'd children fumed.
8.
But as they, freed,
With one consent agreed
To praise thee for thy kindness and thy love:
So let me praise
Thy mercy all my days;
So shall this mercy not my judgment prove.
Temptation.
Ephesians. 6. 14 Stand fast therefore, having your loins girt about with truth,
and having on the breast plate of righteousness,

15 And your feet shed with the preparation of the Gospel of peace.

16 Above all, taking the shield of faith, whereby ye shall be able to quench
all the fiery darts of the wicked.

17 And take the helmet of salvation, and the sword of the Spirit, which is the
word of God.


1.
NOr was with Death my combat such,
But now I Am tempted all so much;
So that me thinks my Senses halt
'Twixt two; which was the worst assault:
Unless thou, Lord, who conquer'dst Death,
And lately crown'dst me with that wreath;
As thou have vanquished Hell too, I Am undone,
Unless thou finish what thou have begun.
2.
Is It not enough, by the sinister
Temptations of her whispering sister
My soul's seduced, with frailty clothed;
And to infirmity betrothed;
That th'easie soul by flesh is tempted,
Nor night, nor day, nor place exempted;
As if in slights she did the Devil ape,
And meant them no temptations, but a rape?
3.
Is It not enough, that by the fraud
of Hell, that makes the World her Band,
I Am by the World seduced; and Sense
Wooes, not refists its influence;
Whose very blessings are but Baits,
As if the air breathed naught but deceits:
So that we all might breathe our mourning thus;
False world, Imposture is thy Genius?
4.
But are we subject to the darts
Of hellish Fiends, which seize our hearts,
Like subtle Lightning's fierce inquests,
Which melts the gold within the chests?
As if they aimed t'usurp thy part,
Who only know and try'st the heart;
Into whose Closets they themselves convey,
Unless thou, Lord, vouchsafe to keep the key.
5.
Lord, gird my loins with truth, and dress
Me i'th'brest-plate of righteousness;
Let my feet be prepared, (my God)
And with the peaceful Gospel shod:
Shield me with faith, (the chiefest Spell)
To quench the fiery darts of hell:
Daign th'helmet of salvation, and the sword
Of thy blessed Spirit, Lord, which is thy Word.
6.
But I no more can wear this armor,
Then thy Delight and Judah's Par'mour
Could stout Readiness against him of Gath;
For such too are Hell's arms and wrath:
Nor can no more foyl with thy Word,
Then could that Turk with Castriot's sword:
I Am weak and ignorant; 't is thou alone
Must teach me both to fight, and put it on.
7.
But where is this Armor to be found?
No Cyclops frame it under ground.
He hopes in vain to win the field,
Who fights against Hell with Hell's shield:
Such Armours are but empty shrouds,
As thin and airy as the clouds.
Thou, who wilt crown our conquest, do impale
Our souls with these Arms, from thy Arsenal.
8.
Then if thou stor'st me with these Arms,
My soul shall need no other Charms;
If thou with these my spirit furnish,
They Will fright Hell with their very burnish;
Nor doubt I lest Hells arrows points
Should wound me the row these armors joints:
I then might send that answer, Let him scoff,
And boast at last, that puts his armor off.
Psalm. 62. 9 As for the children of men, they are but vain; the children of men
are deceitful upon the weights: they are altogether lighter then vanity it self.


1.
DRead Lord! we are all too light: the empty scale
Toward heaven mounts with a complaining tale:
The over-balanc'd one on Orcus knocks,
As if it means to rend the brazen locks
That prison vengeance; and it presses deep,
As if it thought Destruction were asleep.
2.
If thus our Case with dreadful Justice stand,
How shall we escape her the other armed hand?
Think we God is not with our ways acquainted,
And Justice's Sword no sharper then 't is painted?
The Lion's painted fiercer then he is:
But deeming Justice so, we judge amiss.
3.
Thus stands our Case: but if thy Mercy buoys
The o'er-balanc'd Scale in even counterpoize,
Then may we pass good, with a grain or two
Of thy dear blood, as often light Pieces do:
And then if Justice should be most extreme,
We should o'er-weigh with a declining beam.
4.
But since Sin's heavy too, how can agree
In truth this various levi-gravity?
Unless it be, that weighty things we fleight,
And overvalue things of slender weight.
Thus Scriptures justly their complaints may levy:
In weighty things we are light, in light things heavy
5.
But should thou weigh us as we are in our selves,
Vain as Inconstancy, and light as Elves;
Might thou not by the breath of thy displeasure,
Breath into naught at all our empty measure?
And might Belshazzar's doom with that same hand,
Not only on our walls, but foreheads brand?
6.
Dread Lord, the best are as the smalled dust
Within the balance: so thy Truth discust:
How can we then expect but to miscarry,
Weighed with the Shekel of thy Sanctuary?
Such, angry Justice soon to hell proscribes,
Who has quick eyes to judge, though none for bribes.
7.
If could our Churls with Gold, our airy Gallants,
With all their Glories, raise the stooping balance;
In sheets of Gold I Would clothe me; never check
At Honors Lure, but still obey its beck:
But Gold is vain, and Honor light; and they,
The more they are lined with these, the less they weigh.
8.
Thus should thou weigh what man amiss has don,
What man could stand it, but thy only Son?
Who was weighed in man's balance of deceit,
That we might be found of sufficient weight;
Who was out-weigh'd by thirty pence, that we
Might so pass current in thy Treasury.
Eccles. 5. 11 When goods increase, they are increased that eat them: and what
good is there to the owners thereof, saving the beholding of them with their
eyes?


GO, Worldings, set your eyelids on the rack;
Gaze on your wealth, until your eye-strings crack.
With too intensive views, all your delight
May weary, but never satisfy your sight;
No, though the windows of your eyes were glazed
With Multiplying-glasses while you gazed.
You that adore your heaps with admiration,
As does Astronomy a Constellation;
And if with the heavens you in love do join,
It Is 'cause they are of the color with your Coin:
Go hug your selves in your beloved condition;
You only have in use, I in fruition
These gifts of Fortune: Virtue may indeed
Them be without; but you do stand in need
Amidst your wealth; neither can you boast more
Of being rich, then I of being poor.
Now can my soul mount freely with her wings,
Not with the baggage clogged of earthly things.
Here parents may, by underserv'd removes,
Divest us of our birthright, and their loves:
So that all duty cannot induce their mind,
No, not to share their store by Gavel-kinde;
So leaving grief and poverty their portion,
As if their firstborn were but an abortion.
There Satan's Vouchers can nor dis-inherit,
Nor Justice cause divorce, where Christ's my merit.
As false, as sad, is that conclusion,
That thinks Gods blessing's with a birthright gone.
Come, worldlings, come, who wish to have no pledge
Of your salvation, but Achan's wedge;
I Will show you wealth, to which your gold is dross,
And all your Gallants bravery but moss.
Within you glorious curtains thou may find
A Carkanet of Jewels is enshrined.
Ascend, and tell me if a Pearl ere shone
In equal luster with you Jasper-stone.
The Jewels of a Monarch's Crown, the cost
Wherewith of old were Aaron's Robes imbost,
Were childish shells to these, true Midas dishes,
Which do but choke the owner with his wishes.
There Is the true Topaz, Iacinth, and Beryl;
What Jewel not? which thou without the peril
Of coveting may lust for: there is a Mine,
Which only if thou will desire, is thine.
It Is not Idolatry to be thus greedy,
But Piety: thrice-blessed are such needy.
Why do thou startle at this wealthy tender,
Which Thieves cannot rob, nor Fortune cause surrender?
Prove. 28. 13. He that covers his sin, shall not prosper.


1.
COver our sins!
Sees not bright Phosper
False Weights and Hins;
And can they prosper?
Sin may, like a false Nun,
Cloistered in darkness lie:
It may avoid the Sun,
Not God's revenging eye.
Some, yet, to cloathe their naked sin,
With Eve and Adam sow fig leaves;
And one to hide his Vices in,
Such webs as does the Spider, weaves.
But if could foolish sin avail to cover
The skies with these imaginary clouds;
Would not a quick-ey'd pendant vengeance hover,
To rend and pierce their artificial shrouds?
2.
Cover our sins
From God? From him
What wings or fins
Can fly or swim?
We Wizards need, nor Weirds,
No torturing extremes:
Truths Vouchers, flocks or herds,
Or walls will be, or beams.
What Medium's so gross, to exclude
God, who is all, whe'er in earth or sky?
Who Is in so close a Parlour mewed,
To shun his sight, who is all eye?
What darkness, but the God of light can scatter?
His searching wind does enter every cranny.
Justice puts off her Vizor, though some flatter,
It Is at wild aim if that her sword smite any.
3.
Cover our sins!
Since punishment
And vice are twins,
Though different.
Wrath takes sin by the heel,
As Jacob Esau once;
And makes it fall or kneel
T'hell, or repentant groans.
No eager hoof, or flipp'ry keel,
Can sin to safe Asylums bear;
Though hid within a winding eel,
Or in evasions couched it were.
Let Us not in private dare an evil fact,
Lest with a Cockatrices killing eye,
God make his Seeing and Revenge one act:
No time or place knew long immunity.
4.
Cover our sins!
Sees Isr'el's keeper
Only the skin,
And sees no deeper?
Ere done, he sees our deeds;
Much more when they are done:
He sees them in their seeds;
Much more when they are grown.
If we could hide us in the air,
Heaven is God's molten Looking-glass:
Should we for safety to hell repair,
Holl has nor covering nor case.
But if we so much lust to lurk and hide,
Let Us take Asylum in those blessed five clifts
Of that great Rock; let us nestle in his side:
Let us his Priesthood feed upon these fifts.
Psalm. 60. 2 Thou have moved the land, and divided it: heal the sores thereof,
for it shakes.


1.
Thou Have moved us, Lord; our troubled times resemble
An earthquake best; for so we quake and tremble.
The lofty fabrics of our beauteous Isles
Now lie confused, and heaped in ru'nous piles.
Lord, thou have moved us, as cornfieldsd we find
Decline their knotty stems before the wind.
2.
Yet thou can move worse then by Civil wars;
When thou shall move the world, when fixed stars
Like Autumn-leaves shall from the heavens drop,
When the feigned Poles shall fail to under-prop
Their massy weight: yet Lord, now, let thy love
And mercy move us, ere thy power thus move.
3.
Lord, thou have moved our land; it moved has
Been by the breath of thy provoked wrath,
Worse then that wind that would dispeople th'woods,
And make proud Masts to kiss the angry floods:
Yet since thy breath can kindle coals worse far
Then those of Juniper, untouched we are.
4.
Our land's a broken bone, by Discord burst;
Which timely set, may prove as strong as first;
But if delayed until a Gangrene seize it,
What art can cure it, or what hand can ease it?
When man's help fails, thou only can complete it:
None but thy hand, that broke the bone, can set it.
5.
W' are sick; no part in or 'twixt the head or foot,
But is dise as'd, sick both in branch and root:
But since most Doctors, while they cure, exhaust
The moisture radical, and spirits wast;
Let Us unto him, whose wisdom knows at length
To cure the wound, yet not to impair the strength.
6.
My heart bleeds, Lord, to think our Nation has
So few to stand betwixt us and thy wrath:
Our fins so heinous might most justly shame
The mouth of Mercy for to plead our name;
And Justice seems to plead, at Mercy vexed,
Bold Mercy cease thy chat, my turn is next.
7.
How gross is Nature's sin, that thus can move,
As here on earth, so war in heaven above?
Sets God against himself, can raise disputes
Betwixt his just and gracious Attributes.
Will not the angry heavens the world impeach
As true occasioners of this their breach?
8.
But thou, who both in one have reconciled,
That Mercy sat content, stern Justice smiled;
On thee the weight of all our sins was laid:
Oh do not us again with them upbraid.
Thou raz'dst not the partition wall in vain:
Oh do not suffer't to be built again.
On the Spring.
MY Sense is ravished, when I see
This happy Seasons Jubilee.
What shall I term it? a new birth,
The resurrection of the earth,
Which has been buried, we know,
In a cold Winding Sheet of snow.
The Winters breath had paved all over
With Crystal Marble th'world's great floor:
But now the earth is livery'd
In verdant suits, by April died;
And, in despite of Boreas spleen,
Decked with a more accomplished green.
The gaudy Primrose long since has
Disclosed her beauty by each path.
The floods, as freez'd for Chariot-proof,
Were planch'd over with a Crystal roof:
Now in their channels sweetly glide,
As Nyle, when they his banks divide.
The trees robbed of their leafie pride,
With mossie frize had clothed each side;
Whose hoary beards seemed to presage
To blooming youth their winters age:
But now invite to come and lie
Under their quilted Canopie.
Blithe Damon, like a jolly man,
Long since unto the mountains ran,
Where quietly he sits to pipe,
Whereat his lambs do seem to skip;
Then running to their dams, they tug,
With pleasant speed, the swelling dug.
Anon, let us to yon hawthorn steal,
And hearken how sweet Philomele
Grieves not so much at Tereus crime,
As joys to see the Summer's prime.
How to the Spring the whistling Thrush
His Sonnets sings on every bush!
The Sun late squinted from the sky,
And looked on us with half an eye:
But now with glad and golden cheer
Phlegon mounts up our Hemisphere.
Our blood's mild, as if by some art
W' had sucked some newborn infant 's heart.
In brief, quaint Nature seems here nice
In type to shadow Paradise.
Lord, all things bud, and shall I davour
Without the sunshine of thy favor?
VVilt never prime? have passed a doom,
That season never more shall bloom?
Inflict not on me such a dearth,
A greater curse then on the earth.
If did my sin in Tereus shape
Act on thy Philomel a rape;
My soul like Progne shall be just,
And on his brats revenge his lust.
Let Primrose-like Repentance rise,
Dew'd by the April of mine eyes:
Then will I not doubt but next thou
VVilt make each grace in order blow.
Psalm. 22. 9 But thou art he that took me out of my mothers womb: thou wast my
hope, when I hanged yet on my mothers breasts.

10 I have been left unto thee ever since I was born: thou art my God, even
from my mothers womb.


1.
LOrd, when the Ostrich leaves her forlorn eggs,
Nor eyed nor watched,
They by the sand are hatched:
The young soon use their wing-born legs,
And for themselves with eager speed can prey:
But Lord, thou foundst me in worse case then they.
2.
The Halcyon can promise on the flood,
That South nor North
Rage, till she have brought forth
Among the waves her sea-born brood:
But I was sent, young far on sea and land,
But found thus good to me nor sea nor sand.
3.
I was cast forth, like an exposed Elf,
As soon as born,
Most wretched and forlorn:
Until thou took'st me up thy self.
As if my Parents knew no other debt,
They owed their child, but only to beget.
4.
Like Moses, young, exposed to the floods,
Where I might weep
To the remorsless deep:
Left since, like Ishm'el, to the woods
Of this uncertain world, where I aside
Might wander, if thou had not been my guide.
5.
And as the earth (held by thy secret hand)
Hangs in the air;
There is no thread or hair
Supports the smallest dust or grain of sand:
So while some wonder how it is they fall,
To me 't is strange, Lord, how I stand at all.
6.
Blessed God, that took'st me from my mothers womb,
My heritance
Here, is not worth a glance;
In length and breadth all but a Tomb:
For as the have weaned me ever since my birth,
So still thou have weaned me from my mother earth.
7.
Yet though my friends have thrust me from my right,
As from their nest
The Eagles do divest
Theirs who cannot dare the sun by sight:
Yet this is still my glory, in all things,
The have born me the row, as 't were on Eagles wings.
8.
Wealth is no needful adjunct unto grace.
If riches are
The true undoubted stayre
That lead to glory, Jacob 's case,
In purchasing his blessing, were but poor:
For he lived mean, while Esan swelled with store.
9.
The blessing stood not in the promised land
So much indeed,
As in the promised Seed
Bequeathed by Isaac's blessing hand.
God's right-hand-blessing's seldom clods of earth,
But such as fear invasion, plagues, nor dearth.
10.
Yet here each birth-right's not a Type of heaven,
As Canaan was
TO Abraham 's seed; but as
The earth 's cursed often, as a curse 't is given:
But seldom (for w' are often deceived in ghessing)
The Earnest or the Appendix of a blessing.
12.
Lord, be 't all as thy wisdom has decreed,
Since the art my portion,
I fear no such extortion;
I pass by all, and bid God speed.
Let them go view their Landskips, while that I
Do with a better birthright please mine eye.
Job 7. 20 I have sinned; what shall I do unto thee, O thou preserver of men?


1.
LOrd, I have sinned: O weighty words! what more
Could Hell, if it repentant were, deplore?
It could but say, We merit thus to die:
Even so do I confess, even so have I.
Yet though my sins do bear an equal bulk
With some of Hell's, unequal is our mulct.
2.
Lord, I have sinned; to tell how much, there wants
A sea of Ink, as many Pens as plants
Grow on the teeming earth; and sheets as large
As are the heavens, to contain the Charge:
As many Items to the Charge amount,
Which none but thy Arithmetic can count.
3.
Lord, I have sinned: what shall I say? O brief
Yet full expression of sin and grief!
Thus humble Penitents vent much in little,
While Pharisees yet vent their frothy spittle
In self-applause. But in my grief this clause
I Will only vent, and then sit down and pause.
4.
Lord, I have sinned; when not? in life and function:
What time or age can plead a free dis-junction?
Not childhood: for sin soon outgrew that age,
And proved a Graduate in my Pupillage:
So that I justly may lament, that sin
And I were born unseparable twin.
5.
Lord, I have sinned: Nay, sleep, that locks my sense,
Can hardly bat that bold intruder thence:
Corruption still her sentinel does keep;
What Lullabee can rock her watch asleep?
Poets may feign at will; but she nor weighs
Dull Morpheus nor his bunch of leaden keys.
6.
Lord, I have sinned: but if I once were clear,
When wheels about that same Platonic year?
That I might hope, when my (now-tainted) duty
Might innocent appear in perfect beauty.
O for that Anniverse, to set me free;
Hence would I fetch my blessed Epoche.
7.
Lord, I have sinned: but were I free, where is found
That happy and no less then holy ground?
O might I know the place, there would I raise
And dedicate a Temple to thy praise.
But thy blessed wind, that breathes at list his grace,
Can breathe his Zephyres here in every place.
8.
Lord, I have sinned: and for my Irritavies
If thou should not vouchsafe me true Peccavies,
I still should sin: let others use their mind,
My El'gies burden still shall be, I Have sinned.
And since I cannot weep for each sin; till death,
I Have sinned should be the burden of each breath.
Mark 7. 21 For from within, out of the heart of men, proceed evil thoughts,
adulteries, fornications, murders,

22 Thefts, covetousness, wickedness, deceit, lasciviousness, an evil eye,
blasphemy, pride, foolishness.


1.
IF could some Delius with divided hands
Sound the Seas depth, and on his souls recorder
Imprint the wracks, huge rocks, and heaps of sands,
Which there lie scattered in confused disorder:
This could he do, by Natures's strength or art,
Yet none could sound the bottom of the heart.
2.
Should some Ship-master make's fore-split the Probe
Of Nature's secrets, and so bring to view
Land to make up a perfect earthly Globe,
Which Drake nor Kit Columbus never knew:
Yet, as in the great world, so in his own,
He must confess there 's yet much land unknown.
3.
The heart's a Sea for depth, like Sodom-lake,
Dead, thick, and gross; in it will sink no good:
The hearts land 's unknown; wherein what monsters make
Their hides and dens, few yet have understood.
The center may be purest earth; yet the heart
The bodies centre's the corrupter part.
4.
Our heart strings are the cords of vanity;
Their caverns are the devil 's lurking-holes;
No fit Triangle for the Trinity;
An habitation more fit for moles:
Their cauls the veils of damned Hypocrisy.
Thus is sum'd up man 's wretched Majesty.
5.
If thus the Sun within our firmament
Into a Meteor degenerate;
If thus the King within our continent
Let 's sin and lust usurp his Royal state:
If thus corrupted be the bodies leaven,
How shall we manchets be prepared for heaven?
6.
Whe'er Hell be in the earth's center, I suspend;
But in man 's center 's couched an Hell of sin:
Nor do so many lines to the center tend,
As in a wicked heart fiends make their Inn:
Which yet most know no more, then can be found
Where Arethusa winds beneath the ground.
7.
Lord, show me in the Mirror of thy Law
The horror of my heart by bright reflection:
In that thy Glass, there falsehood is nor flaw:
Though wickedly some scorn its true direction,
And whip the Tutor for his discipline;
Yet Lord direct me by that Glass of thine.
8.
Oh daign my heart with graces to perfume,
And th'rowly purge it from each noisome vapor,
Whose rank infection choaks each neighboring room,
And strives to damp my soul's aspiring tapor.
O make my heart strings, Lord, thy cords of love;
So mine according to thy heart shall prove.
1 Pet. 4. 18. If the righteous scarcely be saved, where shall the ungodly and
the sinner appear?


1.
IS then with fraud
The way to heaven straw'd?
And is it granted that our race
Is scattered with caltraps every pace?
Which if but trod on, pierce us to the ankles;
And more, no wound they give, but rankles:
So that it seems a venture
At all to enter.
The way to heaven's not damned with trifling burs,
But blocked and barricado'd with demurs.
2.
The world's no less
Than a vast wilderness;
Whence if heavens guides lead us not home,
Officious hell will seem to lend us some:
His fiery pillar of false joy he grants,
His cloudy one of Ignorance.
But to these who confides
To be his guides,
Is straightway swallowed in some dangerous gulf,
Or preyed by sin, as by some bear or wolf.
3.
Who look well in 't,
The world's a Labyrinth;
At each whose Maze who ever touched,
But found that damned Minotaur lay couched;
Who takes each yielding for a firm contract,
And proudly will each grace exact,
Till he have all deflowered,
And all devoured.
Let not thy Theseus Lord, be too remiss:
My soul, my Ariadne, shall be his.
4.
Is then each path
All thus scattered with wrath?
We hoped, amongst the Jewish scorns,
Christ from these ways had fetched his crown of thorns;
And from these Turn-pikes and these armed Rails,
Had daign'd to take his Cross and Nails;
And hence had fetched that dart
Which pierced his heart;
And triumphed had in conquest of these spoils,
And purged his highway of these snares and toils.
5.
W' are not withstood
By easy flesh and blood;
But Satan with our weakness wrestles,
The Prince of the air which in our Region nestles:
Nay we with these, like Gibellines and Guelves,
Do side and fight against our selves;
Fraud's Convoy, and Deceit
The Inn where we bait.
Though Christ have bought us heaven, without doubt
We both must sue for it, and fight it out.
6.
No Saint nor Martyr
Can boast of other Charter;
All at this Cross have Inn'd, as well
As Christ that went that way to heaven by hell.
Virtue's a narrow mean betwixt two Vices;
On each hand are deep precipices:
Let Us take (if guide we lack)
That bloody track
Which issued from that blessed Roe's five wounds,
When pierced and pursued by the Jewish hounds.
7.
It cannot be waved,
The righteous scarce are saved:
Shall not the wicked then be swallowed
Up in the mire wherein they thus have wallow'd?
If trouble ever do attend on grace,
Shall peace wait on a wicked case?
If scarce be saved the just,
Shall pride and lust?
If thus the case stood with that verdant tree,
How shall the stubble and the chaff go free?
8.
In sack and down
All thoughts of hell they drown:
Even so the Heart ends the controversy,
When he, pursued, flies to the Hunter 's mercy.
Even so the Sparrow, by the Falcon chased,
Did to the Stoick's bosom haste.
Each path with pleasure's paved,
With beauty engraved,
Until that footing fails them ere they think;
Oh then how quickly into hell they sink!
Grief for not grieving.
Psalm. 126. 6 They that sow in tears, shall reap in joy.

7 He that now goes on his way weeping, and bears forth good seed, shall
doubtless come again with joy, and bring his sheaves with him.


1.
IF ever any thing be heard or seen
That might provoke or raise my jocund spleen;
How could I wish my lungs were made of buff,
For clasps to hold me till I Have laughed enough?
But godly grief cannot one tear extort;
As if my senses all were made for sport.
2.
Have I sustained a trivial loss? how apt
My active senses are for to be rapt
To the highest strain of passion? I can gloss,
Heaven never could impose a greater cross.
My floodgate-sense can stand wide open at those;
But godly grief's against the stream; they close.
3.
If that I hear Death's universal doom
Has on my friend to execution come;
Methinks then had I at his funeral
All Argus eyes, I could supply them all:
But when one tells me what a Lethargy
Has seized my soul, I can nor moan nor cry.
4.
If little bigger then an atome fall
Into my eye, it smarts, though never so small:
But what is an atome to a mountain? such
Like sins I bear, yet start not half so much.
Why have I not within, through conscience,
A sense of pain, as outward pain of sense?
5.
If that the clouds some foggie mists have sucked,
They Will shower them back; what can their course obstruct?
The Moon by tides does purg the frothy main;
The poisoned Spring does clear it self again:
Yet I Am sin-tainted, and what motions urge me
Unto repentance, that should clear and purge me?
6.
Were I to live the old Methus'lem 's years
A living Conduit of incessant tears,
I could not vie a tear for every sin;
So vain and foolish all my youth has bin.
Yet the earth to bear our villainies may groan;
But I am dead and senseless of mine own.
7.
My Conscience, Lord, though I it light esteem,
Does with a secret issue closely teem:
Oh let her pregnant womb be now disclosed,
Till that disease or age have incomposed
My sense. I now should court it as my friend,
Which then, perhaps, may prove my foe i'th'end.
8.
Lord, wound me, or I die: for I, although
My case be deadly, am not sick enough:
O let me know I Am taken in Death's jaw,
Till I am quite digested in her maw.
For if any Conscience, like a Lethargy,
Stir not till the hour of death, I sadly die.
Ephesians. 4. 30 Grieve not the holy Spirit of God, whereby ye are sealed unto the
day of redemption.


1.
GRieve not the Spirit! can it be believed
The Spirit can be grieved?
Thought we God, void of passion, could be vexed.
Except we saw this text?
When Christ indeed was here is in flesh confined,
He wept and grieved we find;
But thought we that a Dove which has no gall
Could once be grieved, at all?
Oh I should groan 't, not measur 't in an Ode;
Sin grieves the holy Spirit of my God.
2.
Who would resist that sacred Dove that pecks
The conscience with checks?
Who would resist that Dove that helps to groan
In an accepted tone?
Who would resist that Dove whose harmless beak
Instructs us how to speak?
Who would resist that Dove whose in'cent feet
Show to walk as is meet?
Let not this Dove back to the Ark, and grieve
That we on earth will none of him receive.
3.
Here let him bring his Olive-leaf and rest,
And nestle in our breast.
O! never let us at his gracious billing
Once show our selves unwilling,
Until we new begotten are, and breed
Through his eternal seed.
O! let us never hence resist this Dove,
This blessed Bird of love.
This Dove at Mahomets ear never bill'd,
Though so he faign the Alcharon instilled.
4.
Think we, because some say, Doves have no gall,
God's vengeance feigned at all,
That we thus with his Spirit dare to dally,
As with our Friend or Ally?
Such wanton cruelty to Christ we dealt
When he among us dwelt;
Such entertainment he whiles here received,
When he among us grieved:
We could him to no other Inn bequeath,
But to his Grave; and to no Host, but Death.
5.
But let not sin usurp us; but the Spirit,
His right in us inherit:
And since he made the heart, let none abridge
Him of that privilege.
O let not sin be Porter still, which mocks
His sweet, his Patient knocks.
Delay, like that false Brother, cries, I go,
But means no less then so.
Who but a beggar for a slender pittance,
Would with such patience dance for an admittance?
6.
O let us open, lest his wrath break through!
We are not thunder-proof:
O let us open to his calls! such knocks
Even might awake deaf rocks:
Who might (enamored on his gracious gifts)
Divide their flinty clifts,
Lest he appear next in a Vulture 's shape,
TO act on our souls a rape:
Lest with his lightning he our bodies harrow,
Incinerate our bones, and drink our marrow.
7.
Lord, I am dull; O let thy Spirit pierce
Way for a quick commerce.
It Is wholesome Physic, Lord, to be soul-sick;
Health, to be pierced at quick.
When ere thou come, I Am either gone from home,
Or thou before I come:
Next, if denied, break the house, 't is thine, and I
Allow the Burglary;
And let thy holy wind, with quick inquest,
Enter, and raise his Earthquakes in my breast.
8.
Then purge thy Temple; let my flesh even long:
O give each pore a tongue,
To cry, Come blessed Spirit: let each mouth
Breathe, Rise, O North, come South;
Breathe on thy Spices, breathe, lest that thy garden,
Not blowed, or dew'd on, harden,
Like to that quondam-Nursery of thine,
Once-fruitful Palestine.
Thus by thy grace refreshed, in thy good time,
It flourish may, like Eden in its prime.
Psalm. 63. 4 For thy loving kindness is better then life it self.


1.
BEtter then life it self! what is life? what blindness
Prefers his life before thy loving kindness?
Were life possessed of all that feigned bliss
The Alchoran can promise after this;
Yet what were all these joys? what gust or savor
Had all these pleasures yet, without thy favor?
2.
Could man re-purchase, by some unknown price,
His ancient Manor, real Paradise:
Should he be re-saluted, The sole Lord,
And seisin given him by that flaming sword:
Could Man have all these joys, what were 't to be
At peace with Creatures, and at war with Thee?
3.
Should man be with that chosen vessel rapt
Up into heaven, and there in glories wrapped:
Should he with such a holy violence
As was Elijah once, be wafted hence:
Could man have these, without thy love what were it
To what Elijah and blessed Paul inherit?
4.
If the wings of our time of life did flag
Nothing below the age of crow or stag;
If in man's body fitly did condense,
An equal temper of the elements:
Yet what were life, without thine from above?
Or breath, without the breathings of thy love?
5.
Life is a noble thing, by God 't was breathed;
A jewel to man's carkanet bequeathed,
To cherish 't by instinct is all our strife,
All good 's included in the Name of Life
Yet if thy gracious Spirit not revive,
We but dead, and only seem to live.
6.
True, a live dog exceeds a lion dead;
But a dead dog excells a life that 's led.
Without thy favor, without thy direction:
Thy breath in us corrupts by sins infection.
Without thy love, each creature's both our Foe,
And all enjoyments turn to bitter woe.
7.
Except our money with thy stamp be coined,
Except our friendship with thy love be joined,
Except thy marrow do our dish imbellish,
Except our wine do savor of thy relish;
Our money, friendship, all our wine and sood,
Not current is, not true, not sweet, not good.
8.
Dear God! without thy love all creatures may
Match me; I live and am, and so are they:
No difference, without thy quickening presence,
There is 'twixt me, and unbelieving peasants.
If here thy love bear witness of thy choice,
I in thy loving kindness shall rejoice.
2 Pet. 3. 10. But the day of the Lord shall come as a thief in the night, in
the which the heavens shall pass away, with great noise, and the elements shall
melt with fervent heat; the earth also, and the works that are therein, shall
be burnt up.

11. Seeing then, that all these things shall be dissolved what manner of
persons ought we to be in all holy conversation and godliness?

12. Looking for and hasting unto the coming of the day of God, wherein the
heavens, being on fire shall be dissolved, and the elements shall melt with
fervent heat.


1.
Thus learned,
Let 's be fore-warned;
And thus astonished,
In time let 's be admonished.
In vain our brains we pump,
To tell the terrors of that trump:
Cloud-rending thunders are but soft,
Quiet as night, and silent as a thought;
Or as the noisless music of the Spheres,
To this sound that shall deaf our ears.
No vapors bellowing from the ground
At all are like this sound.
And if that Trump shall make
The dead to awake;
Where shall it drive
The alive?
If shall the senseless graves and the earth obey,
Shall we not quake and tremble worse then they?
2.
I wonder,
If that the Thunder
Makes beasts to flee
For safety to some tree:
Let 's think then with what terror
Shall that loud Trump wake sin and error!
How do we tremble if we meet
The eager flashes of a lightning sheet?
How do we wish to quench a burning City,
If possible, with tears of pity?
If with our fev'rish friend we fry
In hearty sympathy;
How shall we melt as fast
As the heavens wast,
When I and you
Shall view
The heavens to dissolve, the skies to swelter,
And stars in melting elements to welter,
3.
We count,
At Sinai 's mount,
When God propounded
The Law, all were confounded:
God 's thunder-rhetorick
With lightning flashed, made Nature sick:
Sinai like some Vesuvius seemed;
Its trembling womb with constant earthquakes teemed,
As if the feigned Cyclops there were under,
And there did forge and frame their thunder:
His Law God with such terror spoke,
It made the just to quake:
How will he then impeach
His statutes breach!
And sin how strict
Convict?
Shall they not feel those terrors of the Law.
Which they at Sinai only heard and saw?
4.
The torrid
Zone 's not so horrid
As some do feign;
Nor is the dog-stars reign:
Our wits foment more fuel
Then Nature gave; they 're not so cruel:
But who has so his thoughts indulged,
To think these flames less then they are divulged,
May fear to be cast from this burning frame,
Into an everlasting flame,
Among those contemners of that Prophet
Who did denounce that Tophet,
Whereon a forced belief,
Shame pain and grief,
Shall without end
Attend:
Where sighs shall serve but to blow up the flame,
And tears the oil, which shall foment the same.
5.
And thus
We now discuss,
The world of old
By Noah was foretold;
And as they at his Ark,
Some at our preparations bark:
The Atheist 's ready to ask whether
Our Christ and Mahomet will come together;
Since both have been expected long, to invest
Theirs in a Paradise of rest.
There 's none but both upbraids and pities
Wretch'd Sodom and her Cities:
Even they were thus surprised,
When unadvised
They reck'ned not
Just Lot.
And who knows Sodom 's fate, but counts it
The world 's future in a lesser volume writ?
6.
But ghess
To what distress
Was the old world brought,
Beyond conceit or thought,
When void of Ark or Boat,
They saw just Noah's Ark afloat!
Ghess one upon a rock that snores,
While the wild Sea has drowned all neighboring shores.
Anon awaking, casts his frighted eyes
Upon a ship which scorns his cries;
Now looks each minute for some wave,
To waft him to his grave:
Such even was their fate,
When they too late.
Like Pharaoh's host,
Were lost.
And now what saving knowledge will dissever
From serious thoughts, that dropsy and this sever?
7.
Oh how
Methinks I now
See that day dawn,
Tombs split, and graves to yawn!
Methinks I hear no noise,
But seems to accent forth that voice,
Some have let loose the Torrid Zone;
The sky 's one fiery element alone;
The earths veins and minerals run in one stream,
At the heavens all-dissolving beam:
All waters (as those that did drench
Divine Elijah 's trench)
The fire does seem to sup,
And swallow up.
What flames display
The day!
Now let nor Daedalus trust to his wing,
Nor Gyges walk invisibly in 's Ring.
8.
This we
May all foresee:
Hear we not rumors
Of war, revenge, and humors?
As if we would the earth 's fall
With flames of rage and lust forestal:
Some stars are fallen, and long since,
That they were flashie Meteors convince.
The fixed stars seem Planets, and, God knows,
Meet in conjunction but to oppose:
They who did pillars seem, and props,
Proved Egypts reeds to our hopes.
And if these are not signs
How the world declines.
I to just Zeal
Appeal.
Our Gospels sun in darkness has been urn'd,
And into blood the Moon our Church been turned.
9.
What men
Should we be then?
How faithful we
In measure and degree:
How watchful, wise, and wary,
He that comes, will come, and not tarry.
How ought we now to heaven exhale
Our timely sighs in a repentant gale?
How ought we now, against this day of fears,
Gods bottle fill with mourning tears?
That in this day, when air nor pool
Shall not refresh nor cool;
When waters shall not drench,
And much less quench,
Nor ought refresh
Our flesh:
We may be cheared by that North and South,
Which shall refresh our scorchings, cool our drouth.
10.
Dread God,
This Period
Cannot be far;
Though thou will send no star
Before thee now, as when
Thou did at first to those Wisemen:
Yet Wisemen now, with eyes as steady,
View in the east thy star there fixed already.
O send thy Spirit, by a privy Session,
TO arraign and sentence each transgression:
Let 's now condemn our selves, that we
May then b' absolved by thee.
O let 's now for each fault
Our hearts assault;
Our selves contemn,
Condemn:
Then shall that flame our joyful Bonefire be,
And that Trump sound our happy Jubilee.
On the death of that worthy ingenious GENTLEMAN, John Ayshford Esquire; Who
departed this life, May 19. (...) 54.
ANd art thou dead? nor can Religion raise
Thy body as immortal as thy praise?
Neither can quickening Virtue, as a sign
Thou lov'dst her, choose thy body for her shrine?
My grief 's too dull; I 'd in a serious plea
'Twixt Grief and Reason, melt into a Sea.
Come, in a weeping cloud let 's mix our tears,
Till they through his drop, as through Rispah's hearse;
And as Romes Emperor by a remote
Kind of excess, made ships in wine to float;
Let 's make our friends chest swim in pious Brine,
And riot more in tears, then he in wine.
Could after-ages know thee, with what flashes
Of love and praise would Wit adore thy ashes!
How would they for thy sacred dust explore,
As greedily as some for golden Ore!
How would they seek thy bones, (as some of old
Did Scanderbeg 's) to enamel them in gold!
All in remembrance that the time was, when
Thou liv'dst the Jewel and delight of men.
Youth could not wish society more sweet,
Nor graver age, more solid and discreet:
As fervent in Religion as any,
Yet knew to difference 'twixt Zeal and Zany.
A Gentleman, yet learned; rich, yet free,
Not out of lust, but liberality.
Poor Truth has lost a shoulder of support,
And innocence an arm for to retort
Her injuries: the poor, the lame, the dim,
Have lost a hand, a foot, an eye in him.
What can I more? w' have lost, by this remove,
A head of counsel, and a heart of love.
Reader, did know how worth? I need not borrow
Terms to persuade thee, then, to raise thy sorrow:
But if thou knew'st him not, or liv'dst remote,
I Am sure the have cause to weep thou knew'st him not.
Sic flevit Daniel Cudmore.

FINIS.

