TRVE NEWS FROM MUNSTER IN IRELAND, Being a Copy of a Letter sent to the
Countess of THOMOND in Northamptonshire. Cork the fourth of June 1642.

LONDON, Printed for Henry Seyle, June 16. 1642.

True News from Munster in Ireland, being the Copy of a Letter sent to the
Countess of Thomond in Northamptonshire.
Cork the 28 of May, 1642.
Right Honorable,
YOu may please to take notice, that (thanks be to God) the 20. of this
present, I arrived safe here, and this day Captain Constable will be here
dispatched to be ready for the first fair Tide to set Sail for Kinsaile, and
from thence to Limmerick where he might have been by this, had he not been
ordered to touch in these Ports. But now whether he will be able to relieve the
Castle of Limmerick or no is uncertain; In regard Limmerick men have built two
Block-houses upon the River, and placed Ordnance in each, the one at Cortebarck
on Munster side, the other on Thomond side, and chained up the River between,
as it is credible reported: there is Captain Coals ship and one more now in the
River; But the news is that they cannot relieve the Castle. The report here is
for certain that the Lord Muskry, and the Lord Roch are now at Limmerick; Their
success in these parts of late having not been so pleasing as they expected,
and Limmerick being now grown to a great strength, and the place intended for
the Enemies refuge: The Castle they much aim at, and no certainty whither it
be ours or no, it is much feared it will be very hard recovering of it. The
Lord President is not yet thoroughly recovered of his sickness, and many much
doubt that he will hardly ever recover, which would be a great loss in these
parts: Yet he is daily up, and this day has sent part of his goods to Dunraile
whither he intends to go the next week to dwell. The remainder of the 2000 men
came to Town yesterday, which has been no small comfort to the Lord President
and all the English in these parts, and a great discomfort to the Irish, For
surely they thought there would not have been any more aid sent into these
parts. It has been so long a coming; were here 1000 or 2000 more, the Lord
President would then speedily for Limmerick and these parts, were but these
Townsmen to be trusted and the Lord Muskeries Castle down, which I think will
be aimed at the next week, then it would be reasonable clear here. For the
passage by land from hence to Kinsaile, Bandon-Bridge, Mallogh and Dunraile is
without much danger, and likewise to Youghall, in regard the Earl of Barrimore
keeps all his Country in safety, out of which parts the Market is daily
supplied here.

On thursday last the Lord Inchiquin came hither, who told me that he had a
man with him some eight days since which came then out of Thomond; at which
time my Lord of Thomond was yet safe in his Castle at Bunratty, and that diverse
of the English Castles do yet hold out, but feared that provision grows short
with them: Some English have been forced to submit to the enemy and yield up
their Castles and so to Mass. One Castle called Inchecrony, where Anthony
Heathcot lived some twelve miles from Bunratty, where diverse English were, was
taken by the Shaneses and all the English put to death, only Heathcot and his
wife, for whom my Lord of Thomond ventured hard himself with one hundred men,
and brought them off to his own house at Bunratty. But his Lordships Park is
brok up by the Rebels, and all his stock droven from him. The Lord Inchiquin
has promised to go over the river into Thomond within three weeks at
furthest, and carry some five hundred men with him, which he hopes will make
reasonable good work in those parts.

The Lord Inchiquin doubts not, but if my Lord of Thomond had 2000 men in
Thomond, it would suffice there, the enemy being but weakly armed: and if the
Parliament have not ordered some for Thomond by this time, then the English
there must needs be in the miserablest case of any in Ireland, in regard
Limmerick is like to be the seat of these wars, Galloway for certain is out
but the Fort relieved.

Two Castles near adjoining have been by our Forces taken since my coming
hither, but the pillages in them very small; the one was rendered upon quarter,
the other shot down, where were slain some fifty men, women and children, not
any escaping, only some six or seven that escaped through a breach they made at
the West side adjoining to a Bogge: There were not any of our men lost, only
nine hurt, but there is hope of their recovery: This Castle was within a mile
and half of my Lord Muskeries, and he, (then there) though fled to Limmerick
since with his Forces, was by our soldiers expected: But surely he was very
weak in munition, or very cowardly, otherwise he would then have showed
himself. About the nineteenth of this month, the Lord Inchiquin and some
eighty Horse, with an hundred Musketeers, was set upon by four hundred of the
Lord Roches and Caudens ablest Forces, hard by the Lord Roches Castle, called
Castletowne; but it pleased God to bring the Lord Inchiquin off, and his
company without any loss, only one Horse; but there were slain of the Lord
Roches men about an hundred and forty, the rest they forced into the Castle,
burnt the outward gate, recovered two drums, two cellars, and some fifty
muskets. Since the Lord Inchiquin, and Mr. Iepson have burnt all the Lord
Roches Country, and Caudens. At present I have not else to trouble your Honor
withal, only with my earnest prayers for you and yours I humbly take leave
ever to remain

Your Honors most humble servant to be commanded Maurice Cuffe.

FINIS.

