The Cuckoo's-nest AT Westminster, OR THE PARLIAMENT between the two LADY-BIRDS,
Queen Fairfax, and Lady Cromwell, concerning Negotiations of ESTATE, and their
several I^terests in the Kingdom; sadly bemoaning the Fate of their Deer and
ab-hor'ed HUSBANDS.

Who buys a Cuckoes-Nest, hatched in an Air
That Is not far distant from Westminste^-Fayre?
The Hedge-sparrow that fed her 'tother day,
Is (for her kindness) now become her Prey;
O it is a precious BIRD, were in a Cage,
'Twould please both King, and People; cure this Age
That surfeits with Rebellion, and can have
No Help to keep her from Destructions Grave.
She Cuckoo's Treasons, Strifes; causes great Stir,
But must pack hence 'twixt this and Midsommer:
Though Goattam hedge her in with Pikes and Gun
She shall not escape us, though she flies, or runs;
For all the Birds with one consent agree,
To spring her for her base Disloyalty.
June 15th.BY Mercurius Melancholicus:

Printed in Cuckoo-time, in a Hollow-tree. 1648.

The Cuckoo's-nest AT Westminster.
WHo is it amongst us that has not heard these Cuckoes at Westminster? an
Ayrie of such Ominous Owly Birds, that the like was never before seen in this
Kingdom; that have kept a great cackling, and been long and Close sitters, but
have hatched nothing but Cockatrice eggs, vile Treasons, addle Ordinances and
the like to ensnare and enslave a freeborn People, making of them no better
then Hedge-Sparrows, to nurse up (with their wealth) the Bastard Isse of their
Pernicious Plots against King, Church and Kingdom; the Common People, that
willingly fed them, and lent them not only Hands, but Lives and Estates, being
now (for their great kindness) justly become a Prey to the Ravenous and griping
Claws of these Canniball Cu^koos (the Parliament and Army) that now are
devouring them, (after they have Pulled and Polled them to the bare skins)
are now feeding upon their flesh, and picking their very bones, Killing,
Destroying, and Robbing them: and if this be not enough to provoke the People
to Curse these unnatural Vipers, and to loath all future Parliaments to the
worlds end, I have lost my scenses; none will fear them, none will love them,
none will obey them, all will hate them, all will despise them, all fight
against them.

Let us now consider what manner of Birds these be: and we shall find them not
Kuck^es only, but other birds of Prey, as Vultures, Harpyes, Puttocks,
Ostriches, Owls, Martyns, D^wes and such like Ominous and unclean Birds that
with their huge Bodies and balefull Wings, have obscured our King; our Peace;
our Happiness, and hid all joy and comfort from us; these are all Birds of a
Feather, that sit in Counsel and conspire together against the Eagle, the
Phaenix, the Turkey, the Pea-hin, the Turtle, the Swan, the Canary, and
sweet-singing Nighting^^ll, who being all too credulous to believe the feined
bablings of these Sat- Decoyes, are now covered and entangled in their Nets
caught in their Pit-falls, and all their goods and feathers pulled from them by
Lime-twigg-Ordinances.

The^e Birds of Prey flock together at Westminster; and have for almost Eight
years roosted themselves there, even till they had de^yled their very Nests,
and were forced to fly abroad till they were cleans'd and yet sit brooding,
and hatching their pernicious Plotts and Treasons, Cocatrice Ordinances, bald
buzzardly Votes, contradicting Orders, and changling Declarations, both against
the Laws of Nature, Reason, Conscience and Religion, and have Usurped all Power
and Authority from and over their Lawful and undoubted Sovereign, doing their
utmost to deprive both him and his Posterity of their Hereditary Fights and
Successions* denying to acknowledge him for their Head, forbidding Adresses to
be made unto Him* or Messages to be received from Him, by which they have
changed and abandoned the National and Fundamental Laws of the Land (the only
ligaments and sinews of a Kingdom) being an Act* not only of the highest
Treason that can be; but a Crime that divests them of all their Privileges,
un-Parliaments them, and makes them all guilty of the abhorred sin of Perjury
in breaking Protestations, Oaths and Covenants, and liable to a just Censure,
and conviction of Theft, Treason and Rebellion; for which they can no otherwise
satisfy the King, Laws or People, but by the tribute of their Roundheads; too
slight a Recompense for such abhorred and Traiterous Crimes.

Therefore the People may now see (without spectacles) how grossly they been
disceived, and juggled out of their Lives and Estates; it is true the Parliament
at the first (convened by Royal authority) was a lawful and (for ought I
know) a conscienscious Parliament, and the whole Body (being aptly and
completely united together in the Members, without foreable dislocation, or
false Election) was questioness the highest indicature in, this Kingdom; But
since Edgehill Fight, this juncto (or Pretended Parliament, acting in open
Hostility, and fighting against their King.) abandoning their Head are no more
a Parliament, but the Body of a Parliament (without a head) a monster, a very
Cuckoos-nest* a combined medly o^ Traitors and Rebe^ls, and far different from
the Nature of a Parliament, (by reason of their Luciferian Pride, to be flung
down to hell) and to be diserted by all Loyal Subjects, as disjoynted, severed
and mangled in its members, (as deficient as their then General) incapable of
any just Act* but wading on in blood (by an u^urped, Treasonous, Tyrannical
and overawing Power, having no dirivation from the King, but their own* lusts,)
therefore no Subject whatsoever has any warrant (neither can they bind* the
Conscience of any) to yee^ld either Active or Passive obedience to any Act or
Ordinance, because they illegally Act, contrary to all Presidents of former
Parliaments, and Parliamentary Power, and are no longer the visible
Representatives of the Body Politic, and so must necessarily be guilty of all
the innocent blood shed these 6* years in this Kingdom, and still shedding in
most Counties in England, these Rebels (being so fleshed in Blo^d and Rapine,)
thy are resolved to go through-stitch in their abhorred Rebellion (though they
ruin 3. Kingdoms) by their inhumane butcheries, being rewarded with a large
sum for shedding blood in the City, encouraged and rewarded for murdering the
S^rey-Petitioners, the Kentish and Essex men, for delivering (in a legal way)
Petitions for redress of their seve^a^l agrievances: what can any rational
man think, but that they defer to murder their King* until such time as they
have first murdered and destroyed all his Loyal Subjects.

That when the Army could not have an opportunity to plunder the City, (as
nothing so sure as they intended it) they were hired by Martyn, Mildmay, Vein,
and the rest of that Nest to pick a Quarrel with the Country, that they might
Plunder and unundoe them (when then they had missed of their aim in the City)
as now they do in Essex, Kent, and all the Kingdom over* Killing* Plundering,
annd triumphing over all they are able to Conquer* so that between both Parties
(Royalists and Roundheads, as between the good and bad thief,) the poor
Coun^^ey must be crucified.

The chief fomentors that are Regicides, and most active in our destruction in
the upper House, are the Lord Say, Pembroke, Manchester, Kent, Warwick,
Denbigh, Stamford, Wharton, Gray, these always Cuckoo forth one Tune, no King,
no King; in the lower House are a nest of as evil birds, as ever hatched at
Tyburne, and these are Lenthall, Mildmay, Scot, Challoner, Martyn, Weaver,
Vein, Corbet, Cromwell, that cannot endure to hear the King so much as named
in the House; in the Synod of time-serving Priest-byters, there are Martial,
Burgess, Strong, Sedgwick, Vines, Love, Whittaker, Nigh, that draw altogether
in one yoke, against Monarchy, these teach Rebellion in stead of Divinity, more
Lies then Truth, more Blasphemy then sound Doctrine, and will have no King to
reign over them, except he be of the Royal Proginy of Mrs. Parliament, or the
Child of Reformation: in the Army there are another nest of Birds, but not of
the same feather, and these be the Elect forsooth, the Precious babes that are
hayl fellow with God Almighty, see strange Visions, and are possessed with
unerring spirits, that whatsoever they do, (tho never so impious and wicked,)
is lawful; and these are Peter's, Dell, Erbury, Knowles, Goodwin, Symson, etc.
The first rank of these are Oxen, and the latter Asses, which the Parliament
yoke in their Plow together, because they are forbidden it in the old Law, and
by that means avoid Idolatry; but their Drivers are more charitable then these
Beasts, for they but kill our bodies, and rob us of our goods, but these
Wolvish cattle slay our souls, take away our good Names* judge us, and
condemn us to Hell; these are the charitable Saints, that have the mark of
their brother Cain in their foreheads, Vagabonds that have no abiding places,
but are hurryed with every wind from one uncertainty to another, and are
constant in nothing but mischief; these are the running Plague-sores that
infect the whole Nation, and cause swellings and Risings in the Body of the
Commonwealth; these are those that sow discord among brethren, and though
(like Samsons Foxes) they are tied tail to tail, yet they carry a Firebrand
amongst them that burns up both Church and State in the mercyless and
consuming flames of an unnatural and bloody war; these are the disturbers of
our Israel, and hinderers of our Peace; old Foxes, and wild Boares that root
up our Vineyards, feeding themselves fat on the Ruins of others; these, in
stead of expelling out Papacy (but one Faction) have brought in five hundred
damnable Sects, and set them a^l to devour Episcopacie, to bring in blessed
Liberty to pull down Monarchy, and set up Aristocracy, by which means they
have advanced their Hypocritical, Diabolical and pernicious Treasons to this
very day: Are not these Cuckoes worthy of a Cage? surely they be: But I shall
leave this Nest of Fow^e Birds to the Peoples ordering, having told them where
it is, only desiring all Loyal People to secure their money from them, to
provide Arms for their own defense, and rather choose to die like men, then
live like slaves. But I will in stead of an Epi^ogue, give you a Dialogue to
cure your Melancholy*

The hie Toss, black Tom is dead,
come alost Iack-a-dandy,
Sir Samuel Luke shall be General,
and that is as good as can be.

POSTSCRIPT.
Enter Queen FAIRFAX and Madam CROMWELL. Qu. Fairfax. CHeer up Madam, he is not
dead, he is reserved for another end, these wicked Malignants reported as much
of my Noll, but I hope it is otherwise; yet the profane writ an Epitstaff (as I
think they call it) and abused him most abominably, as they will do me, or
you, or any of the Faithful Saints, if we but thrive by our Occupations in our
Husbands abscence, if we but deck our bodies with the Jewels gained from the
wicked, they point at us, and say, Those are Plunder; but tho Righteous must
undergo the scoffs of the wicked; but let them scoff on, I thank my Maker, we
lived before these holy Wars were thought on, in the thriving Profession of
Brewing, and could of my vailes of Grayns and Yest wear my silk gown, and gold
and silver Lace too, as well as the prowdest Mynx of them all; I am not ashamed
of my Profession Maddam.


Qu. Fair. Pray Mrs. Cromwell tell not me of Gowns or lace, nor no such toys?
Tell me of Crowns, Scepters, Kingdoms, Royal Robes; and if my Tom but
recovers, and thrives in his enterprise, I will not say Pish to be Queen of
England; I misdoubt nothing, if we can but keep the wicked from fetching
Nebuchad-nezzar home from Grass in the Isle of Wight; well, well, my Tom is
worth a thousand of him; and has a more kingly Countenance; He has such an
innocent face, and a harmless look, as if he were born to be Emperor over the
Saints.


Mrs. Crom. And is not Noll Cromwells Wife as likely a Woman to be Queen of
England, as you? Yes I warrant you is she; and that you shall know, if my
Husband were but once come out of Wales; it is he that has done the Work; the
Conquest belongs to him; besides your husband is counted a Fool, and wants Wit
to Reign; every boy scoffs at him: my Noll has a Headpiece, a face of brass,
(full of Majesty) and a Nose will light the woole Kingdom to walk after-him; I
say he will grace a Crown, being naturally adorned with Diamonds and Rubyes
already; And for my self (though I say it) I have a Person as fit for a Queen
as another.


Q. Fair. Thou a Queen; thou a Queen? Udssutt Minion, hold your clack from
prating Treason against me, or I Will make Mrs. Parliament lay her Ten
Commandments upon thee? thou a Queen, a Brewers Wife a Queen; that Kingdom
must need be full of Drunkards, when the King is a Brewer? My Tom is Nobly
descended; and no base Mechanic.


Mrs. Crom. Mechanic? Mechanic in thy face; thou art a whore to call me
Mechanic: I am no more Mechanic then thy self; Marry come up mother Damnable;
Ione Yggly; Must you be Queen? yes you shall; Queen of Puddle-D^ck, or
Billingsgate, that is fittest for thee: My Noll has won the Kingdom, and he
shall wear it in despite of such a Trollup as thou ar^* Marry come up here,
Mistress Wagg-tayle?


Enter a Servant running. Sir. O Maddam, cease your contention, and provide for
your safetyes* both your Husbands are killed and all their Forces pu^ to the
Sword; all the People crying like mad,


Long Live King CHARLES.


Omnes. We hope it is false; O whether shall we fly
Lest Vengeance overtake our ^y?

FINIS.

