Law Books lately Printed for J. Walthoe in the Temple Cloisters.
1 COke's Reports, with References to all the Ancient and Moder^ Books of the
Laws, in 11 Vol. Fol. 2. Dalton's Country Justice, with large Additions, Fol.
3. Cases argued and decreed in the High Court of Chancery, Fol. 4. A Collection
of the Orders relating to the Practice of the Courts of Chancery and Exchequer,
12mo. 5. The Law of Common and Commoners, or a Treatise showing the Original
and Nature of Common, 8vo. 6. The Method of Pleading by Rule and President,
8vo. 7. The Complete Sheriff, wherein is set forth his Office and Authority,
together with that of a Coroner. 8vo. 8. A View of the Penal Laws concerning
Trades, Professions and Traffic, and what Offenses are punishable in the Crown
Office, 12mo. 9. The Abridgement of the Statutes of King William, 8vo. 10.
Bridgman's Conveyances is now in the Press, and will be speedily published with
Additions. Fol. 11. Trials per Pais, or the Laws of England concerning Juries.
8vo.
A COMPENDIUM OF THE Laws and Government Ecclesiastical, Civil and Military, OF
ENGLAND, SCOTLAND and IRELAND, AND DOMINIONS, Plantations and Territories
Thereunto belonging, WITH THE Maritime Power thereof, AND Jurisdiction of
Courts THEREIN.

Methodically Digested under their Proper Heads.

By H. C. sometime of the Inner Temple.

LONDON, Printed by the Assigns of Rich. and Edw. Atkins, Esquires, for I.
Walthoe, and are to be sold by John Deeve, at Bernard's-Inn-Gate in Holbourn.
1699.

THE PREFACE. TO THE READER.
AT my first Entrance into the Study of the Laws of England, knowing Method and
Order conduce much to the enlightening of the Understanding, rendering things
more perspicuous, and comprehensive to the discerning Judgment, and sitting
them better for the retaining Memory; I resolved to observe a Regular Course,
and therefore searched for such Authors, and endeavored to make use of such
Means as might best correspond with my Design therein. But among the several
Treatises of the Laws and Government of this Kingdom, and Jurisdiction of
Courts heretofore written by several Eminent and Learned Men, finding none were
so complete, nor had that Beauty of Order and Uniformity at might be expected.
And the Lord- Coke in the Epilogue to his Fourth Institutets concerning the
Jurisdiction of Courts, desiring the Wise-hearted and Expert Builders would
amend both the Method, and Uniformity, and the Structure it self, where they
should find any Deficiency in the Architecture; and considering that great
Alterations have been made since by diverse Acts of Parliament and otherwise, I
was enduced to compile this. Methodical Compendium of the Laws and Government
of England, and the Dominions thereunto belonging, to direct and facilitate my
farther Studies. But the Importunity of some having prevailed with me to
promise (contrary to my first Intention and Inclination) to make it Public: If
it prove beneficial to others, it will surmount all the Ambition may be thought
to be in

Yours To the extent of his Power, H. Curson.

A Table of Contents.
Governments in General.
ORiginal of Government, Page 1 Law is General, Page 4 Law Eternal, ibid. ^aw
of Reason, Page 5 Divine Law, Page 6 Humane Law, Page 7 Fundamentals of the
Laws of England, Page 8
The Government of England.
The Government of England, Page 22 The King, ibib. Privy Council, ibid.
Ecclesiastical Government of England.
Ecclesiastical Government, Page 28 Convocation, Page 32 Executive Power in
Causes Ecclesiaical, Page 36 High Commission Court, Page 36 Court of Arches,
Page 39 Court of Audience, ibid. Court of the Faculties, Page 40 Prerogative
Court of Canterbury, ibid. Court of Peculiars, 41 Consistory Courts of
Archbishops and Bishops, 42 Court of the Archdeacon or his Commissary, 44 Court
of Delegates, 44 Laws and Constitutions Ecclesiastical, 45 Trials
Ecclesiastical in Civil Causes, 46 Trials, Ecclesiastical in criminal Causes,
46 Punishments by Ecclesiastical Courts, 47 Punishments Ecclesiastical peculiar
to the Clergy, 49
Civil Government of England.
Civil Government of England, 51 High Court of Parliament, 51, 535 Executive
Power in Temporal Affairs, 80 Court of the High Steward of Eng. 81, 539 High
Court of Chancery, 90 Court of extraordinary Jurisdiction, 93 Court of the
Star Chamber, 104 Court for Redress of Delays of Judgment in the King 's great
Courts, 108 Court of Kings Bench, 113 Court of Common Pleas Court, 121 Court of
the Exchequer, 127 Court of Inquiry to certify untrue Accounts in the
Exchequer. 140 Court of Equity in the Exchequer, 141, 544 Office of the Pleas
in the Exchequer, 142 Courts of Justices of Assize and Nisi-prius, 144 Court of
Justices of a Oyer and Terminer, 153 Court of special Justices of Oyer and
Terminer, 166 Money collected for the Houses of Correction, or for the Poor,
166 Colleges, Hospitals or Almshouses, or for charitable and lawful Purposes,
and Uses, 167 Court of Justices of Jail-delivery, 169 Court of Justices of the
Forest, 175 Court of Justices in Air, 193 Court of Justices of Trailbaston,
195 Court of Wards and Liveries, 196 Court of Ancient Demesne, 196, 559 Court
of Commissioners of Sewers, 198, 569 Court of Commissioners upon the Statute of
Bankrupts, 201, 573 Commissioners for Examination of Witnesses, 203, 578 King's
Swanherd, 204, 587 King's Aulnager, 205, 590 The Government of Counties in
England, 207 Court of the Sessions of the Peace, 210 Court of Inquiry of the
Defaults of Justices of the Peace, Justices of Assize, Sheriffs and
Under-Sheriffs, 222 The Execution of Laws in each County, ibid. Court of the
Tourn, 223, 595 Court Leet or View of Frankpledge, 224, 597 County Court, 228,
615 Court of the Hundred, 233, 630 Court Baron, 235, 632 Coroners Court, 237,
635 Court of Escheators and Commissioners for finding of Offices, 239, 635
Court of the Clerk of the Market, 241 Court of Pipowders, 246 Court of the
Dutchy-chamber of Lancaster at Westminster, 247 Courts of the County Palatin of
Chester, 251 Court of the County Palatin of Durham, 252 Royal Franchise of Ely,
254 Court of the County Palate. of Pembroke, 255 Franchise of Hexam and
Hexamshire, 255 Courts of the Cinque Ports, 256 President and Council in the
North, 258 The Wardens Courts in the East, West and Middle Marshes adjoining to
Scotland, 260 Court of Stannaries in the Counties of Devon and Cornwall, 261
Court of the Mayor of the Staple, 263
The Principality of Wales.
The Principality of Wales, 266 Court of the President and Council of Wales,
269 The great Sessions in Wales, 270
Military Government of England.
Military Government of England, 275 Court of Chivalry before the Constable and
Marshal, 279 College of Heralds, 283
Maritime Power of England.
Maritime Power of England, 287 Court of Admiralty, 292, 638 Navy Office, 295
Court of Commission by force of the Statute 28 H. 8. Cap. 15. 298 Port Courts,
298 Commissioners and others for Beacons, Signs of the Sea, Light-houses,
Sea-marks, and concerning Watches, 299 De Conservatore Treugarum, i. e.
Induciarum, etc. 302
Court of the King of England.
Court of the King of England, 308 Ecclesiastical Government of the King's
Court, 308 Civil Government of the King's Court, 312 Compting-House, 314 Court
of Green-Cloth, 315 The Knight Marshal, 320 Court of the Marshalsea, 321 Court
of the Palace, 322 Court of the Lord Steward, Treasurer and Comptroller of the
King's Houshlod concerning Felony, etc. 324 Court of the Lord Steward of the
King 's House, or in his Absence, of the Treasurer, Comptroller and Steward of
the Marshalsea, 325 King's great Wardrobe, 332 The Office of the Tents, 335 The
Office of the Robes, ibid. Military Government in the King's Court, 338 The
Band of Pensioners, 339 The Yeomen of the Guard, 340
Court of the Queen of England.
Government of the Queen's Court, 341 Ecclesiastical Government of the Queen's
Court, 341 Civil Government of the Queens Court, 342 Officers of the Robes,
ibid.
Government of Cities.
Government f Cities, 34^ Ecclesiastical Government of Cities, 344 Civil
Government of Cities, 345 City of London, 34^ The Ecclesiastical Government of
London, 347 The Civil Government of London, 34^ Court of Hustings, 351 Sheriffs
Court in London, 352 Court of Conscience, 354 Court of the Mayor and Aldermen,
356 Court of Orphans, 356 Court of Common Council, 357 Court of Wardmote
Inquest, 358 Court of Halmote, ibid. Chamberlain 's Court for Apprentices, 359
Court of the Conservators of the Water and River of Thames, 360 Court of the
Coroner in London, ibid. Court of the Escheator in London, ibid. Court of
Policies and Assurances, 361 Military Government of London. 363 Tower of
London, 365 Office of the Ordnance, 368 Office of the Warden of the Mint, 373
Office of Records in the Tower, 375 St. Katherine's, 378 Bridge, ibid. Custom
House, 379 General Post Office, 381 Law Study, 383 Inns of Chancery, ibid. Inns
of Court, 384 Mootings in the Inns of Court 388 Mootings in the Inns of
Chancery, 390 Keeping Christmas in the Inns of Court, ibid. Manner of holding
Parliaments in the Inns of Court, 392 Sergeants Inns, ibid. Call or Creation of
Sergeants, 393 The Judges, 394 College of Civilians in London, 396 College of
Physicians in London, 400 Gresham College in London, 402 Sion College in
London, 40^ Chartreux in London, 40^ Schools in London, 40^ Southwark, ibid*
City of Westminster, 40^ City of Norwich, 41^
Government of the Two Universitie^
The two Universities in England, 41^ Oxford, ibid* Cambridge, 42^
Government of Boroughs.
Government of Boroughs is England, 43^
Government of Villages.
Government of Villages in England, 43^ Ecclesiastical Government of Villages,
43^ Civil Government of Villages, ibid*
Islands adjacent to England.
Islands adjacent unto England, 43^ Isle of Man, ibid* Anglesey, 43^ Jersey
olim Caesarea, 437 Guernsey olim Servia, ibid* Insula Vectis or Vecta, 43^
Sorlings, 44^ Island Lindisfarne. 44^
The Government of Scotland.
Scotland, 445
The Islands near Scotland.
The Lesser Islands near Scotland, 459 Orcades, ibid. Schetland, ibid.
Hebrides, 460
The Government of Ireland.
Ireland, 463
English Plantations in Asia.
English Plantations in Asia, 491 Bantan, ibid. Bombaine, ibid.
English Colonies in Africa.
English Colonies in Africa, 492 Guinea, ibid. Tangier, ibid. English
Plantations in America. 492 Newfoundland, 494 New England, 496 New York, 500
New Jersey, 504 Pensylvania, 505 Mariland, 507 Virginia, 510 Carolina, 512
Bermudas, 515 Caribee Islands, 519 Barbuda, ibid. Anguilla, 520 Montserrat, 521
Dominica, 522 St. Vincent, 523 Antegoa, 524 Mevis or Nevis, ibid. St.
Christophers, 526 Barbados, 527 Jamaica, 530
See the Alphabetical Table at the End of the Book.

Finis Tabulae.
OF GOVERNMENTS, etc.
The Original of Governments.
OF GOVERNMENTS there can be but Three kinds, viz. One, or More, or All, must
have the Sovereign Power of a Nation: If one, then it is a Monarchy; If more,
(as an Assembly of Choice Persons) then it is Aristocracy; if All (that is, a
General Assembly of the People,) then it is a Democracy: And now in course we
are first to speak of,

The Monarchical Government, which as most resembling the Divinity, and
approaching nearest to Perfection, being esteemed the most Excellent, is of two
sorts, Regal and Political: The first sort,

Monarchy Regal was begun by Nimrod, who (after the World began to increase)
got unto himself a Dominion over others; and yet in Scripture he is not called
a King, but a Mighty Hunter before the Lord: So Belus did subdue the Assyrians,
and Ninus the most part of Asia; and so did the Romans usurp the Empire of the
World.

And thus having set forth the beginning of the Regal Government of Kingdoms;
which Law Regal was no other thing but the Pleasure of the Prince, as in the
First of Kings you may read more at large: We will now, as being more for our
purpose, declare how Kingdoms of Political Government were first begun, which
we may term,

Monarchy Political. St. Augustine in the 19th Book De Civitate Dei, says, A^
People is a Multitude of Men associated by the Consent of Law, and Communion of
Wealth: And yet such a People without a Head, is not worthy to be called (...)
Body; as in Natural things, the Head cut off is not called a Body, but a Trunk
Wherefore Aristotle in his Civil Philosophy says, Whenever One is made of
Many, among the same, One shall be the Ruler, and the other shall be the Rule^
And this Ruler thus raised and appointed in Kingdoms is called a King from the
Saxon word Koning, intimating Power and Knowledge, wherewith every Sovereign
ought especially to be Invested: And thus of a Multitude of People arises a
Kingdom, which is a Body Mystical. And in this Body Mystical, or Political, the
Intent of the People (like Blood in the Natural Body) is the first lively
thing; that is Politic provision for the Utility and Wealth of the same
People, which is imparted to the Head and members of the same Body, whereby it
is Nourished and Maintained; and by the Law, which comes from Ligando, of
Binding, this Mystical Body is knit and preserved together, and the Members and
Parts thereof, as the Natural Body by Sinews, do every one retain their proper
Functions: And as the Head of a Natural Body cannot change his Sinews, nor
withhold from his Inferior Members their peculiar Powers of Nourishments; no
more can a King, which is the Head of the Body Politic, change the Laws of
that Body, or withdraw from the said People their proper Substance against
their Wills.

And therefore it now follows, that we speak somewhat of the Fundamentals of
laws in General, and then descend to the particular Fundamentals of the Laws of
England; and afterward briefly declare the Executive Powers of the same. And
first of

Laws in General.
WHich are Four, that more properly belong to this our Business; (viz.) The Law
Enternal, The Law of Nations, Divine Law, and Human Law.

The Law Eternal.
LEx Aeterna is the Reason of the Divine Will, whereby God will ^ave all things
of him Created, to be moved and directed to a good End; and it is called The
first Law, and all other Laws are derived from it. And this Law Eternal none
may be able to know, as in himself, but the Blessed alone: But God of his
Goodness reveals it to all, in as much as is necessary for them, otherwise he
should bind his Creatures to impossible things, which to be in God is most
wicked to think. And God reveals this Law Eternal, or the Divine Will, to the
Rational Creature Three manner of ways, that is, First by the Light of Natural
Understanding, and then it is called The Law of Reason: Secondly, by Divine
Revelation, and then it is called The Divine Law: Thirdly, by Reason in the
Prince, or any other Secondary Pe son Governing, who has power to Impose a Law
upon this Subjects, and then it is called Humane Law, although it be Originally
instituted from God: And because whatsoever the Second Cause does, the First
does also by a more Noble manner; therefore the aforesaid Three Laws are called
in God, One Law Eternal; and this is that Law of which it is written, Prove. 8.
Per^me Reges regnant, Et legum conditores justa discernunt.

The Law of Reason.
LEx Rationis, which amongst Doctors is also called The Law of Nature, or Jus
Gentium, The Law of Nations, may be doubly considered, that is, either as it
respects all Creatures, even Irrationals, for all Irrational Creatures, not
hindered, do live and subsist under certain Rules to them set by Nature, they
also conserve their kind and by Instinct of Nature nourish their Young; and
things by Nature contrary to them they fear, and especially when alone it
respects the Rational Humane Creature, created to the Image of God: And it is
called The Law of Nations, for that it ought to be kept by all Nations, as well
among the Jews and Gentiles, as Christians. And thus, The Law of Reason is a
participation of The Law Enternal: From whence it is said in the Psalms,
Signatum est super nos Lumen vultus tui Domine, scilicet, Lumen Veritatis.

Divine Law.
LEx Divina, is a true Sign revealed to the Rational Creature of the Divine
Reason, Willing the Rational Creature, to be held or bound to do something, or
not do it, for obtaining Eternal Felicity, as are the Laws of the Old
Testament, which are called Morals, and the Evangelical Law; and sometimes it
is called, Law instituted by Man, but improperly nevertheless, when the Law is
for obtaining Eternal Felicity.

Moreover, besides The Law of Reason and Humane Law, it was necessary for the
Direction of Humane Life, to have the Divine Law, for Four Reasons: First,
Whereas Man was created to enjoy Eternal Beatitude, it was necessary that
besides the Law of Reason and Humane Law, he should be Directed to his End by a
Law Divinely instituted. Secondly, For the incertainty of Humane Judgment, that
he should be directed by a Law given by Divine Inspiration, from which it
appeared, that he might by no means deviate. Thirdly, Because the Judgment of
Man may not be of Interior Acts; therefore it was necessary to have a Law
Divine, which should rectify the Interiors, as well as the Exteriors of Men,
Fourthly, Because Human Law cannot punish every evil Act, it was necessary to
have a Divine Law, which should let no Evil go unpunished; and these four
Reasons are touched in this Verse,

Lex Domini immaculata convertens animas, Testimonium Domini Fidelis sapientiam
praestants Parvulis.

Humane Law.
LEx Humana sive Positiva, is a Law Deduced by Reason, from the Law of Reason,
and the Divine Law; and therefore in every Positive Law well Instituted, there
is somewhat of the Law of Reason, and the Divine Law, And Humane Law is a true
sign by Humane Tradition and Authority, immediately Constituted: And that Human
Law be Just, Two things are required; That is, Prudence and Authority, because
it is called Lex a ligando, but every Sentence of a Prudent Man does not bind
the Community or any of them, if he do not preside over them. And in the Law of
Men these Proprieties are required, viz. That they be Honest, Just, Possible,
according to the Custom of the Country, and convenient to the place and time;
Necessary, Profitable, Manifest; also that they be Ordained for no Private end,
but for the Common good; and Humane Laws not contrary to the Divine Law ought
to be kept also in Conscience, Et qui eas spernit Deo resistit.

From what has been said it appears, That the Divine Law respects the
Spiritual end, The Law of Reason the Natural end, and that Human Law may direct
to both; And the Law of Reason takes of Nature of the thing for a Foundation,
but Human Law, the public Expedience or Good.

Now of these Four Laws, all Laws in general consist and be sounded, if they
are good. And that we may show particularly, and more especially from whence
arise,

The Fundamentals of the Law of England.
WE must know that the Law of England, or Humane Law in England, takes its
Fundamentals from Six chief Principles: First, The Law of Reason. Secondly,
Divine Law. Thirdly, Diverse Customs of the Kingdom. Fourthly, Diverse Principles
called Maxims. Fifthly, Particular Customs in certain places. Sixthly, From
diverse Statutes of the Common Council of the Kingdom in Parliament; of which we
shall speak something in order.

And first, The Law of Reason is held in this as in all other Kingdoms; and the
Learned in the Laws of England make two Degrees of the Law of Reason,
(scilicet) Lex. Rationis Primariae, and Lex Rationis secundariae: Ex Primaria,
From the first are forbidden Murder, Manslaughter, Oppression of the Innocent,
Perjuries, Deceits and many such like. But the manner of punishing these sorts
of Offenses, is according to diverse Principles and Maxims or Statutes, to this
end especially ordained; and it is called the Law of Reason primary; For that
those things which are Commanded or Forbidden by that Law, are grounded upon
Reason also, without any other Law joined or opposed to it: The Law of Reason
secundary is likewise divided in two parts, That is, General and Particular;
The Law of Reason secundary General, is derived from that Law of Propriety
General, which is held throughout the World; From this are prohibited Thefts,
Disseisins, and many other, And it is called the Law of Reason Secundary, for
that it is founded not upon Reason alone, but from the Law of Propriety, and
the Reason derived from that Law; for because the Law of property says, Such a
thing is the proper Goods of such a Man; Therefore says Reason, grounded upon
that Law, that thing is not to be taken from him unjustly against his Will. And
the Law of Reason Secundary Particular, is that which is Founded upon diverse
General and Particular Customs, and diverse Maxims and Statutes, only had and
ordained in the Kingdom of England: As if a Distress dye, it shall not be
imputed to him who distrained; but to him who has the Propriety, because the
Defect is to be assigned in him, for that he did not pay the Rent: And Reason
is founded upon the Custom aforesaid, so that there need not be any Written Law
had thereof. And we find so many Secundary Reasons in the Laws of England, that
many are willing to affirms the whole Law of England, to be proved by Reason,
which notwithstanding is by no means to be affirmed, as by another Example.

By a certain Statute it is Ordained, That he who has abjured the Realm,
whilst he is in the public Highway, shall be in peace with our Lord the King
and not in any sort molested; and by the Custom of the Kingdom, he is to be
conducted from Town to Town, by the Constables, etc. to the Seaport, etc. Now
if he Escape, the Constable ought not to be charged to the King, because by
reason of the Statute, he could not keep him in safe Custody, or use any Force
or Imprisonment whereby he might be kept in safe Custody; and the Reason is
grounded upon that Statute. And some say, Robbery is to be prohibited from
Reason Primary, even before the Law of Property, for that it was not Lawful
even when all things were in Common, to take any thing from another by force,
or to throw him out of his Habitation; but that such Robbery is to be punished
with Death, is from the Custom of the Law of England. Also from the General Law
of Property aforesaid, by the Laws of England are excepted Birds, Wild beasts
and Beasts of Warren, in which by the Laws of England is no Property to any
One, unless they be Tame; yet nevertheless by the Laws of England in the Eggs
of Herons, and such like, Building in the Woods of any, is a Property. And for
that every Deduction of Reason in the Laws of England, proceeds from the first
Principles, or from somewhat from those Principles derived, no Man although the
most Wise, can Judge justly or Argue rightly in the Laws of England, if he know
not these Principles.

The Second Fundamental of the Law of England is Lex Divina, whereby to punish
the Transgressors against the Divine Law. The Law of England in many Courts of
our Lord the King does Inquire of Heretics: Also if any Statute be made or set
forth against them; as that none shall give Alms, it ought to be of no force;
also, Persons Excommunicated in the Laws of England may not Prosecute, nor have
Communication with others whilst the Excommunication is certified. And from the
same Fundamental the Law of England admits the Spiritual Jurisdiction of
Tithes, and other things which do of right belong to the Ecclesiastical
Jurisdiction, and receives Canonical or Ecclesiastical Laws, Quae non Excedunt
potestatem ferentis: so that in many Cases it behooves the Kings Justices to
Judge according to the Laws of the Church; As if the Law of the Church be, that
the Sentence of Divorce is not in force till it is affirmed upon Appeal, The
Judges of our Lord the King, shall form their Judgment according to the Laws of
the Church; And if A. B. and C. D. have Goods and Chattels jointly, and A. B.
by his last Will, give his part to E. F. the Ecclesiastical Judges are bound in
this case to adjudge this Will void.

The Third Fundamental of the Law of England, is the General Customs of the
Kingdom, which are diverse General Customs used and approved of in Ancient time,
throughout the whole Kingdom of England, and who attempts any thing against
them Works against Law and Justice; And these are properly called the Common
Law, and ought always to be determined by the Judges, whether a General Custom
or not, and not by the Country; and of these and other Principles or Maxims, a
great part of the Law of England depends; and therefore the King by his
Coronation Oath promises (inter alia) that he will faithfully observe all the
Customs of the Kingdom; and the Ancient Customs of the Kingdom, is the Original
and Foundation of diverse Courts in the same Kingdom; Whereof one is The
Chancery of the Kingdom, in which (inter alia) Writs original are obtained,
directed to other Courts of the King; another The King's Bench, in which are
handled all Treasons, Murders, Homicides, Felonies, and other things done
against the Kings Peace; another Court is called The Common Bench, in which
Common Pleas are handled; (That is to say,) of Lands and Tenements, Debts and
Chattels and such like; another Court is called The Kings Exchequer, in which
are handled diverse matters touching the King alone, as of Sheriffs, Escheats or
Receivers, Bailiffs and other the Kings Officers and the like; and these are
called Courts of Record, because those who preside as Judges ought to be
assigned by the Kings Letters Patent; and these Courts have many and diverse
other Authorities, of which we shall speak more hereafter in their proper
places, and likewise of diverse other Courts of inferior Authority in the
Kingdom of England: And although in diverse Statutes and Books, mention is made of
the Authority of these Courts; yet we have no written Law of their Institution;
for their Institution depends upon the Custom of the Kingdom, which has so
great Authority, that they may not be altered, or their Names changed or
altered, but by Act of Parliament. Also there is an Ancient Custom, which is
confirmed by the Statute of Marlebridge; That all shall do and receive Justice
in the Kings Court, and another, that none shall be put to Answer, or be
judged, but according to the Law of the Land; and this is confirmed by Magna
Charta: And there are other General Customs in the Kingdom of England, which
retain the force of Law, as that the eldest Son shall succeed the Father in the
Inheritance, and many more, not here to be recited.

From whence it appears, that Customs in the Laws of England may not be proved
by Reason alone, for how can it be proved by Reason, that the Husband shall
have the Wife's Land for Term of his Life, as Tenant by that Law, and that the
Wife shall have only the Third part, scilicet, that it shall be so done and not
otherwise? And it is certain, that the Law of Property is not the Law of
Reason, but a Customary Law, and ought to be accounted amongst the General
Customs of the Kingdom, and there is not any Statute or written Law of the
Institutions of the Customs of the Law of England, but according to the Skilful
in the Law of England: The Ancient Customs of the Law of England are of
themselves of sufficient Authority; and the Customary Law is the most firm Law,
provided such a Custom be not against the Law of God, or the Law of Reason.

The Fourth Fundamental of the Law of England consists of Diverse Principles,
which the Learned in the Law call Maxims, always esteemed and held for Law of
this Kingdom of England, which none Learned in the Law may contradict, because
every one of them gives Faith or Credit to it self; and whether a Maxim or not
is to be tried by the Judges, as before is said of General Customs of the
Kingdom, and not by the Country: And these Maxims are not alone taken for Law,
but also all other like cases, and all things necessarily following upon them,
are to be placed in like Law, and they are in the same force and strength in
Law as Statutes; and although all these Maxims might conveniently be numbered
amongst the aforesaid General Customs, since Ancient Custom is the sole
Authority, as well of these as those; yet because those General Customs are
diffused and known, they may easily and without study in the Laws be known, but
these Maxims are only known in the Kings Courts, or by those who are Learned in
the Law; and now for example sake we will mention a few of them, since to
declare them fully great Volumes would not suffice: And first, there is a
certain Maxim in the Laws of England, that no Prescription in Lands makes a
Right; also, that Prescription in Rents and Profits to be taken in the Lands of
another makes a Right; also, that the limitation of Prescription is generally
taken a tempore cujus centrarij Memoria hominum non existit, etc.

And further, there are many other Maxims, as in certain Actions, The Process
is by Summons, Attachment and Distress Infinite; and in some by Capias
Infinite, etc. and that there should be these diverse Processes in diverse
Actions, may seem expedient and reasonable; but that there should be these
diverse Processes had in the Law of England, and none other, cannot be proved by
Reason; therefore they must necessarily have their force from the Maxims
aforesaid, or the Ancient Custom of the Kingdom: And some Maxims seem to be
founded upon Reason Secundary; and therefore some may think they may be put
unto the first Fundamental of other Laws of England; as if any command a
Trespass, he is a Trespassor, etc.

And there are other Maxims and Customs, which are not so manifestly known, but
may be known by the Law of Reason; partly by Books of the Law of England, which
are called Year Terms, partly by Records in the Kings Treasury, and remaining
in the Kings Courts; and by a Book called the Register, and by diverse Statutes,
in which such Customs and Maxims are often recited. Vide Doctor and Student.

The Fifth Fundamental of the Law of England consists of Diverse particular
Customs, used in diverse Countries, Towns, Lordships, or Manors and Cities of
the Kingdom; which said particular Customs, because they are not against
Reason, nor the Law of God, although they are contrary to the aforesaid General
Customs, and Maxims of Law, yet they retain the force of Laws: And they ought
not always to be determined by the Judges, whether there be such a Custom or
not, unless in a few particular Customs sufficiently known and approved in the
Kings Courts, but ought to be tried by the Country: And of these particular
Customs I shall put a few for Example; As there is a Custom called Gavelkind in
Kent, where all the Brothers shall Inherit as the Sisters do at Common Law: By
Borough English, in the Town of Nottingham, the younger Son shall Inherit: In
some Countries the Wife shall have all the Inheritance of her Husband, in Name
of Dower, so long as she continues a Widow: And in some Countries the Man shall
have half the Inheritance of the Wife during his Life, although he has no
Issue by her: In some Countries the Infant may make a Feoffment at his Age of
Fifteen years: And in some Countries, when he can Measure an Ell of Cloth; yet
such Infant may not make Warranty, for if he do, it is void in Law, neither may
he in such case make a Release. Thus are held many other particular Customs.

The Sixth Fundamental consists of Diverse Statutes Ordained in Parliament, when
other Fundamentals of the Law of England are not sufficient; for it is to be
known, that although the Law of Reason may be assigned to be the first and
principal Fundamental of the Law of England: yet the Law of Reason is not of so
great force and efficacy in the Laws of England, that it alone being known, all
the Law of England is known: For besides the Law of Reason, he who desires to
know the Laws of England, ought to know the Custom of the Kingdom, as well
General a Particular, and the Maxims and Statutes of Law, or otherwise, although
h^ were the wisest of Men, he will understand but few things of the Truth o^
the Law of England.

From these things before contained it may be deduced, which often fall out,
That in one and the same case two or three Fundamentals of Law ought to concur
together before the Plaintiff may obtain his Right, as by Example may appear:
As if any afte^ Entry by him made into any Land with a strong hand, make a
Feoffmen^ for Maintenance, to defraud the Possessor of his Action; then the
Demandant by the Statute of 8 Hen. 6. cap. 9. shall recover his treble Damages,
according to what Damages shall be assessed by the Jury: In which case it
appears that such Entry is prohibited by the Law of Reason Secundary; but
that the Demandant shall Recover, his treble Damages, is by the aforesaid
Statute: And that the Damages shall be Assessed by the Jury, is by the Custom
of the Kingdom: And thus Three Fundamentals of Law concur in this case.

And it is to be noted, that there are many Customs, as well General as
Particular, and also Diverse Laws, called Maxims, which take not their force
from strong Reason, but from the Custom of the Kingdom: For by Statutes they
may be changed into the contrary, and what can be changed, can never be
affirmed to be the Law of Reason Primary: As for Example; How does it stand
with Reason or Conscience, That if one Bound in an Obligation to pay Money, pay
part of the Money, but takes no Acquittance, or lose it; by the Laws of England
he shall be compelled to pay that Money again, because of the General Maxim,
That in an Action of Debt upon Bond, the Defendant may not plead Nihil debet,
or Quod poecuniam solvit, nor otherwise discharge himself unless by
Acquittance, or other sufficient Writing amounting to a Discharge in Law; and
this to avoid the great Inconvenience which would follow, if every one by word
alone might avoid an Obligation.

And thus having briefly set forth the Fundamentals of the Law of England, we
shall proceed to the Government, and the Legislative and Executive Power of the
Laws of England.

The Government of England.
THe Government of England is (...) the first and best kind, viz. Monarchical
Political Government.

The King
BEing Supreme Governor in (...) Causes, and over all Persons, from Him is
derived all Authority and Jur^diction, He being Quasi Intellectus Age^^ Forma
formarum, etc. And from the King with the Advice of

His Majesty's Privy Council.
THat most Honorable Assemb^^ in the Kings Court or Palace, a^ others receive
their Motion. It is calle^ Concilium Secretum, Privatum, vel Cont^nuum Regis
Concilium. This is the Hig^ Watchtower, wherein the King an^ his Nobles
Counselors, survey all h^^ Dominions, and sometimes all the D^minions of the
World, Consulting the Honor, Defense, Profit and Peace (...) his People, and
their Protection from Violence or Injuries, either at home (...) from abroad.

And these Privy Counselors, by the Custom of the Kingdom (being part of the
Fundamental Laws of England, as before is mentioned) are such as the King
pleases to choose, and are made without Patent or Grant, being only Sworn,
that according to their Power and Direction, they shall truly, justly and
evenly Counsel and Advise the King in all Matters to be treated in His
Majesty's Council, and shall keep Secret the Kings Council, etc. And they are
so to continue during the Life of the King, or during the Kings Pleasure.

And these Lords of the Privy Council are, as it were, incorporate with the
King, in bearing the burden of his Cares; wherefore the Striking in the House
or Presence of a Privy Counselor, shall be grievously Fined: Conspiring his
Death by any within the Cheque-Roll is Felony, and Killing any one of them is
High Treason.

And although before the latter end of Henry the Third, Quod provisum fuit per
Regem and Consilium suum Privatum, Sigilloque Regis Confirmatum, proculdubio
Legis habuit vigorem, says Spelman; yet at present they take Cognizance of few
Matters that may well be determined by the known Laws, and Ordinary Court of
Justice.

The President of this Council was sometime called Principalis Conciliarius,
and sometimes Capitalis Conciliarius; and this Office was never granted but by
Letters Patent of the Great Seal durante been placito, and is very ancient, for
John Bishop of Norwich was President of the Council, Anno 17 Regi^ Johannis,
Dormivit tamen hoc Officium regnante magna Elizabetha. The Lord President is
said in the Statute of 21 H. 8. cap. 20. to be attending upon the King most
Royal Person; and the reason o^ his attendance is, for that of latter times he
has used to report to the King the Passages, and the State of the Business at
the Council Table.

Next to the President sits in Council, etc. The Lord Privy Seal, who
besides his Oath of a Privy Counselor takes a particular Oath of the Privy
Seal, which consists of four parts. First, That he justly exercise the Office
of Keeper of the King's Privy Seal to him committed. Secondly, Not leaving so
to do for Affection, Love, Doubt or Dread of any Person. Thirdly, That he shall
take special regard, that the said Privy Seal in all places where he shall go
to, may be in such substantial wise used and safe kept, That no Person without
the Kings Special Command or Assent, shall Move, Seal or Imprint any thing with
the same. Fourthly, Generally he shall observe, fulfill and do all and every
thing which to the Office of the Keeper of the Kings Privy Seal duly belongs
and appertains.

This is an Office of great Trust and Skill: That he put his Seal to no Grant
without Warrant nor with Warrant, if it be against Law, undue, or inconvenient,
but that first he acquaint the King therewith.

Upon the Lord Privy Seal are attendant four Clerks of the Privy Seal.

How the Kings Grants, Writings and Leases pass the three Seals, viz. The Privy
Signet, the Privy Seal and the Great Seal, and the Duties of the Clerk of the
Privy Signet and Privy Seal, and what Fees shall be paid, and where none at
all, etc. and many Articles concerning the passing of the Kings Grant, etc. you
may Read in the Stat. of 27 Hen. 8. This Officer is named in some Statutes,
Clerk of the Privy Seal, in others Garden del Privy Seal, and in the Stat. 34
Hen. 8. Lord Privy Seal.

By Stat. 11. R. 2. cap. 10. It is provided, That Letters of the Signet, nor of
the Kings secret Seal shall be from henceforth sent in Damage or Prejudice of
the Realm, nor in Disturbance of the Law.

It appears by Writs and Records of Parliament, that the High Court of
Parliament is resolved to be holden by the King Per advisamentum Consilij sui,
viz. by advice of his Privy Council.

Acts and Orders of Parliament for the Privy Council, and other things
concerning them in the Rolls of Parliament, you may Read in the Statutes and
Originals at Large, mentioned in Cokes 4. Inst. cap. 2.

No Lo^d of Parliament takes any place of Precedence in respect he is a Privy
Councellor, but under that Degree, such place a Privy Councellor shall take, as
is set down in Serie ordinum, tempore Hen. 7.

The King by advice of his Privy Council, does publish Proclamations binding to
the Subject, provided they be not against Statute or Common Law.

The Privy Counselors sit in order Bareheaded when the King Presides, and the
lowest declares his Opinion first, and the King last declares his Judgment, and
thereby determins the matter.

For their Precedence and Place, see the Statute of 31 H. 8. directing the same.

The time and place of holding the Council, is wholly at the Kings pleasure;
which is seldom or never held without the presence of One of

The Secretaries of State; of which, since the latter end of the Reign of H. 8.
there have been Two, both of equal Authority, and both styled Principal
Secretaries of State; these every day attend upon the King, and receive and
make dispatch of the Petitions and Desires of the Subjects at home, and for
Foreign matters.

The Sectetaries have the Custody of the Kings Seal called the Signet, which
gives denomination to an Office constantly attending the Court, called The
Signet Office, wherein Four Clerks prepare such things as are to pass the
Signet, in order to the Privy Seal or Great Seal.

The Four Clerks in Ordinary of the Privy Council, are to Read what is brought
before the Council, and draw up such Orders as the King and Lords shall direct,
and cause them to be Registered: And belonging to the Secretaries is,

The Paper-Office, where all Paper-Writings and public Matters of State, and
Transactions of Ministers abroad, and what passes the Secretaries is
transmitted and kept. And now we proceed to

The Ecclesiastical Government.
THe King being Chief Person, as being Persona Sacra and Mixta cum Sacerdote,
is the Supreme Bishop of England: For at his Coronation, by a solemn
Consecration and Unction, he becomes a Spiritual Person, Sacred and
Ecclesiastical, having both Corona Regni and Stola Sacerdotis put upon him.

He is Patron Paramount of all Ecclesiastical Benefices, to whom the last
Appeal in Ecclesiastical Affairs is made, and who alone has the Nomination of
all Persons for Bishoprics and Chief Dignities and Deaneries, and some
Prebends in the Church, etc. And next to the King are the Primates,
Metropolitans, or

Archbishops, one of Canterbury, the other of York, each of which have their
peculiar Diocese, besides a Province of several Diocesses; and these
Archbishops have the Style of Grace, with the Title of Lord prefixed in
speaking to them, and are termed Arch or Chief Bishops, it seeming requisite to
our Ancestors (according to other Christian Churches, since the first Nicene
Council) to have amongst a certain number of Bishops, One to be Chiefest in
Authority over the rest, for the remedy of General Disorders, or when the
Actions of any Bishop should be called in question, etc. And next under these
Archbishops are,

Bishops Twenty four, whereof Twenty one Bishops, with their Bishoprics or
Diocesses, are in the Province of Canterbury, and the other Three in the
Province of York, who are in Conformity to the first Times and Places of
Established Christianity, One of the Clergy Ordained in every City, to have the
pre-eminence over the rest of the Clergy within certain Precincts: And these
are likewise Lords in respect of their Baronies annexed to their Bishoprics,
and for easing the Bishop of some part of his Burden, as the Christians waxed
Great; or as in respect of the Largness of the Diocese in the primitive Times,
there were Ordained Chorepiscopi, Suffragan, or Subsidiary Bishops; so in
England are such Ordained by the Name of

Bishops Suffragans, or Titular Bishops, who have the Name, Title, Style and
Dignity of Bishops; and as other Bishops are Consecrated by the Archbishop of
the Province, each one to execute such Power, Jurisdiction and Authority, and
receive such Profits as are limited by the Bishop or Diocesan, whose Suffragan
he is. By Act of Parliament of King Henry the 8th, still in force, they are to
be only of several Towns therein named; and in case the Archbishop, or some
other Bishop desire the same, the Bishop is to present Two Able Men, whereof
the King chooses One, for any of the places named. And the next in the Church
Government is the

Archdeacon, who though a Presbyter himself, is so named for that he has Charge
over the Deacons, who are to be guided and directed by him under the Bishop;
and of these are Sixty in England. And next under them are

Deacons, or Deans, from the Greek (...), because anciently set over Ten Canons
at the least, which Canons were prudent and pious Pastors, placed in a
Collegiate manner at every Cathedral or Apostolic See, where they might not
only be ready to assist the Bishop in certain weighty Cases, but also fit
themselves for Government and Authority in the Church; and accordingly in every
Cathedral Church in England is

A Dean, and under him a certain number of Prebendaries or Cannons; and this
Dean is sometimes styled, Alter Episcopi Oculus, the other being the
Archdeacon; and of these Deacons are 26 Deans of Cathedral and Collegiate
Churches, and 544 Prebendaries. And next are

Rural Deans, or Archi-Presbyters, so called, because they had usually charge
over Ten Country Parsons, Presbyters or Priests, having the Guidance and
Direction of them; and of these are many in England. And in the last place are

Pastors, Presbyters or Priests of every Parish, commonly called Rectors,
unless the Praedial Tithes are Impropriated; and then they are called

Vicars, quasi Vice Fungentes Rectorum; and of these Rectors, or Parsons and
Vicars are about 9700, besides Curates, who for Stipends assist such Rectors
and Vicars, that have the Cure of more Churches than One.

Of all which, with their manner of Election, Consecration, Function,
Precedence, Privileges and Duties, etc. you may Read more at large in several
Authors, who have writ particularly thereof; to whom I refer, and proceed to
the first Great Wheel moved by the King and his Privy Council in the
Ecclesiastical Government, which is

The Convocation
BEing a National Synod, which the King (by the Advice of his Privy Council)
usually Convokes, for the Church Legislative Power; or for making
Ecclesiastical Laws, or consulting of the more weighty Affairs of the Church,
in this manner:

The King directs his Writ to the Archbishop of each Province, whereupon the
Archbishop directs his Letter to his Dean, citing himself peremptorily; and
then willing him in like manner to Cite all the Bishops, Deans, Archdeacons,
Cathedrals and Collegiate-Churches, and all the Clergy of his Province, to the
Place, and at the Day prefixed in the Writ: But directs withal, that One
Proctor sent for each Cathedral and Collegiate Church, and Two for the Body of
the Inferior Clergy of each Diocese may suffice.

The Dean Provincial accordingly directs his Letters to the Bishop of every
Diocese within the Province, Citing them in like manner to appear personally;
and the Cathedral and Collegiate Churches, and Inferior Clergy of his Diocese,
to send their Proctors to the Place, and at the Day appointed; also to certify
to the Archbishop, the Names of all so Summoned by them.

The Place where the Convocation of the Clergy was usually held, was heretofore
at St. Paul's Church; of latter Times in King Henry the Sevenths Chapel at
Westminster.

The Higher House in the Province of Canterbury, consisting of Twenty two
Bishops, of whom the Archbishop is President, sitting in a Chair at the Upper
end of a Great Table, and the Bishops on each Side of the same Table, all in
their Scarlet Robes and Hoods, the Archbishops Hood Furred with Ermin, the
Bishops with Minever.

The Lower House, consisting of Twenty two Deans, Twenty four Prebendaries,
Fifty four Archdeacons, and Forty four Clerks, representing the Diocesan
Clergy; in all One hundred Sixty six Persons.

Their Jurisdiction is to deal with Heresies, Schisms, and other mere Spiritual
and Ecclesiastical Causes, and therein to proceed Juxta Legem Divinam, and
Canones Ecclesiae; and as they are called, so they are often commanded by the
King's Writ, to deal with nothing that concerns the King's Laws of the Land,
his Crown and Dignity, etc. And the same is so Declared by Act of Parliament 25
Hen. 8. cap. 19. And what Cannons they make with the Royal Assent, are binding
upon themselves and all the Laity: But before the abovementioned Act, a Dism^
granted by the Clergy in the Convocation, did not bind the Clergy before the
Royal Assent.

The first Day of their meeting, the Upper House choose a Bishop for their
Prolocutor; and the Lower House (being required by the Higher) choose them a
Speaker or Prolocutor, whom by two Members they present to the Upper House, One
of them making a Speech in Latin, and then the Elect Person makes another
Speech in Latin; and then the Archbishop Answers in Latin, and in the Names of
all the Lords approves the Person.

Both Houses Debate and Transact only such matters as His Majesty by Special
Commission allows.

In the Higher House all things are first proposed, and then communicated to
the Lower House.

The Major Vote in both Houses prevails.

Out of Parliament time they usually assemble about Nine of the Clock in the
Morning: And first, the Junior Bishop says (in Latin) Prayers, beginning with
the Litany and Prayer for the King, etc. In the Lower House the Prolocutor says
Prayers.

The Parliament, when required, confirms the Consults of the Clergy, that the
People may be thereby induced to obey the Ordinances of their Spiritual
Governors.

The Archbishop of York, at the same time holds a Convocation for his Province
at York in like manner, and by Correspondence does debate and conclude the same
Matters with the Convocation for the Province of Canterbury.

Inter Leges Inae, Anno Domini 727, A Convocation of the Clergy is called Magna
Servorum Dei frequentia.

All the Members of both Houses have the like Privileges for themselves and
Menial Servants, as the Members of Parliament, and this by Statute.

Now they are required to subscribe Three of the XXXIX. Articles. Vide Stat. 13
Eliz. cap. 19. And the Canons ratified by King James, 1 Jac. 1. And for

The Executive Power in Causes Ecclesiastical.
THere are provided diverse Excellent Courts; the chief whereof for Criminal
Causes, was

The High Commission Court.
THe Jurisdiction whereof was Enacted 1 Eliz. That Her Majesty, Her* Heirs and
Successors, should have power by Letters Patents under the Great Seal, to*
Nominate and Authorize such person or persons, being Natural born Subjects to
Her Highness, as Her Highness, her Heirs or Successors should think fit, to
Exercise and Execute all manner of Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction within the
Realms of England and Ireland, or any other Her Highness Dominions, to Visit
and Reform all Errors, Heresies or Schisms, Abuses, Offenses and Contempts,
etc. which by any manner of Spiritual and Ecclesiastical Power, can or may be
lawfully Reformed, etc. And that such person or persons should have full Power
by Virtue of the said Act, and Her Majesty's Letters Patents, to Exercise and
Execute the Premises according to the Tenor and Effect of the said Letters
Patent.

And upon Declaration of this Act the Lord Coke raises two Questions: First,
What Causes should belong to this Court: Secondly, In what cases they may Fine
and Imprison? As to the first it is certain, That by the principal Clause of
Restitution in that Act, all Spiritual and Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction
heretofore exercised or used, or which might have been lawfully exercised or
used, were by the Authority of that Parliament annexed and united to the
Imperial Crown of this Realm. For whatever Power or Jurisdiction did belong to,
or was exercised by the Pope De facto, does now De jure belong to the King: But
by reason the Ecclesiastical Judges, before the making of that Act, ought to
have proceeded according to the Ecclesiastical Censures of the Church; and
could not Fine and Imprison, unless they had Authority by Act of Parliament:
Therefore the Lord Coke, by reason of the Clause i^ this Act, That the
Commissioners shall Execute the Premises, according to the Teno^^ of the
Letters Patent; which Clau^^ refe^s ^o the former parts of this Act viz The
Ancient Jurisdiction restore^ by this Act, ^a^th, the Commissione^ had not
power to Fine and Imprison.

This Commission was usually grante^ to persons of the Highest Quality i^
Church and State, so often, and for (...) long time, as the King did thin^ fit.

In Queen Elizabeth's Time, says the Lord Coke, it was Resolved, the Hig^
Commission should be limited to certia^ Enormities and Exorbitant Causes* And
many Presidents were brought (...) Prohibitions against their Authority (...)
Fine and Imprison, both out of the King's Bench and Common Pleas. B^^ this Court
being now Abrogated by the Statute of 16 and 17 Car. 2. cap. 11.

The Courts of the Archbishop (...) Canterbury come next in course, the Highest
of which is,

The Court of Arches.
SO called from the Arched Church of St. Mary in Cheapside, where this Court
has been usually kept, as appears by Record in Edward the First's time. The
Judge hereof is the Dean of the Arches, who under the Archbishop of Canterbury,
has Jurisdiction over a Deanery, consisting of Thirteen Parishes within
London, exempt from the Jurisdiction of the Bishop of London. Hither are
directed all Appeals in Ecclesiastical Matters, within the Province of
Canterbury. And to this Court belong diverse Advocates, all Doctors of the Civil
Law, Two Registers and Ten Proctors. The next Court of the Archbishop is,

The Court of Audience.
KEpt within the Archbishop's Palace, and medleth not with any manner of
Contentious Jurisdiction; but only with Matters pro forma, as Confirmation of
Bishops, Elections, Consecrations, and Matters of Voluntary Jurisdiction; as
granting the Guardianship of the Spiritualties, Sede vacant of Bishops,
Admission and Institution to Benefices, Dispensing with Banns of Matrimony, and
such like.

The Court of the Faculties.
THis is also a Court, although it holds no Plea of Controversy: (...)
belongs to the Archbishop, and his Officer, is called Magister ad Facultates.

And the Authority is raised by the Statute of 25 H. 8. cap. 21. whereby
Authority is given to the Archbishop and his Successors to grant Dispensations,
Faculties, etc. by himself or his sufficient Commissary or Deputy, for any such
matter heretofore had at the Sea of Rome, or by the Authority thereof.

The Prerogative Court of Canterbury.
THis is the Court where Testaments are proved, and Administrations granted,
where the Party dying within his Province has bona Notabilia within some other
Diocese than where he dies, which regularly is to be to the value of Five
pounds, but in the Diocese of London, it is Ten pounds composition.

By 16 Rich. 2. Rot. Par. not in Print, It is assented in full Parliament, that
the King may make his Testament, which before that was doubtful; and Hen. 4th
made his Testament, and his Executors refusing, Administration was granted by
the Archbishop of Canterbury, with the Testament annexed to the same.

When the King is made Executor, he Deputes certain Persons to take the
Execution upon them, and appoints others to take the Account.

The Probate of every Bishop's Testament, or Granting Administration of his
Goods, although he has not Goods but within his own Jurisdiction, does belong to
the Archbishop.

From this Court the Appeal is to the King in Chancery.

The Archbishop of York has the like Courts, and also the Court of Audience.

The Court of Peculiars.
THe Archbishop of Canterbury has a peculiar Jurisdiction in diverse Parishes
within the City of London, and other Diocesses, etc. and there are Fifty seven
such Peculiars within the Province of Canterbury.

It is an Ancient Privilege of the Sea of Canterbury; that wheresoever any
Manors or Advowsons do belong unto that See, that place forthwith becomes
exempt from the Ordinary and is reputed a Peculiar, and of the Diocese of
Canterbury.

And there are certain peculiar Juri^dictions, belonging to some certain
Par^shes; the Inhabitants whereof, are exem^^ from the Archdeacon's
Jurisdiction, an^ sometimes from the Bishops Jurisdictio^

And a Dean or Prebendary having (...) Rectory or Impropriation in anoth^^
Bishop's Diocese, has often a Court (...) Peculiars, held for him in that
partic^lar Parish.

Note, That there are some Deans (...) England without any Jurisdiction, on^
for Honor so Styled, as the Dean (...) the Chapel Royal, and Dean of the
Chapel of St. George at Windsor. Mo^^over some Deans there are without a^^
Chapter; yet enjoying certain Juri^dictions, as the Dean of Croyden, the Dean
of Battle, and the Dean of Bo^^ing, etc.

The Consistory Courts of Archbishops and Bishops.
THe Consistory Courts of every Archbishop and Bishop of every Dioce^^ in
Ecclesiastical Causes, is holden before his Chancellor in his Catheral Church
or before his Commissary in places (...) the Diocese, too far remote for the
Chancellor to call them to the Consistory.

From these the Appeals are to the Archbishop of either Province respectively.

By many Records in Hen. 3. and Edw. 1. It appears no Bishop could make a Will
of his Goods or Chartels coming of his Bishopric, etc. without the King's
License; wherefore the Bishops consented to give the King Six things, That they
might freely make their Wills. First, Their best Horse or Palfrey, with Bridle
and Saddle. Secondly, A Cloak with a Cape. Thirdly, A Cup with a Cover.
Fourthly, A Basin and Ewer. Fifthly, One Ring of Gold. Sixthly, His Kennel of
Hounds, for which a Writ issues out of the Exchequer after the Decease of
every Bishop.

The King by the Verdict of Twelve recovered 10000 Marks against the Bishop of
Norwich, for that he prosecuted against the Abbot of St. Edmundsbury, to appear
before him against the King's Prohibition; For which it was adjudged, That his
Temporalities should be seized, and his Body taken.

If an Alien or Stranger be presented to a Benefice, the Bishop ought not to
admit him.

The Court of Archdeacon, or his Commissary.
THis Court is to be holden, whe^^ and in what place the Archdeaco^ either by
Prescription or Compositio^ has Jurisdiction in Spiritual Cases with in his
Archdeaconry; and from hi^ the Appeal is to the Diocesan, and (...) is called
Oculus Episcopi.

And every Archdeacon has (...) Court and Jurisdiction, where small^^
differences arising within his Limits a^^ pleaded.

Also, the Dean and Chapter has (...) Court, and take Cognizance, of Caus^
happening in places belonging to the Cathedral.

Lastly, There are some peculi^^ Jurisdictions, the Inhabitants where^^ are
exempt sometimes from the Arc^deacon's Jurisdiction, and sometim^ from the
Bishops Jurisdiction.

The Court of Delegates.
THis Court is so called because Delegated by the King's Commission under the
Great Seal, to sit upon an A^peal to the King in the Court of Cha^cery in three
Causes. First, When (...) Sentence is given in an Ecclesiastical Court, by the
Archbishop or his Official. Secondly, When a Sentence is given in any
Ecclesiastical Cause in places exempt. Thirdly, When any Sentence is given in
the Admirals Court, by the order of the Civil Law.

And having spoken of Appeals in Ecclesiastical Causes, that you may know the
Resolution of the Judges, and Learned in the Ecclesiastical Law, in what
Causes, from what Courts, and in what time Appeals are to be made. Vide Lord
Dyer and Coke's 4 Inst. Ecclesiastical Courts.

The Laws and Constitutions Ecclesiasticali
THe Laws and Constitutions of the Ecclesiastical Government in England are:
First, General Canons made by General Councils, Arbitria Sanctorum Patrum, The
Opinions of Fathers, the Grave Decrees of several Holy Bishops of Rome. Next,
our own Constitutions made anciently in several Provincial Synods, either by
the Legates Otho and Othobone sent from Rome, or by several Archbishops of
Canterbury. All which are by the Statute of 25 Hen. 8. in force in England, so
far as they are not Repugnant to the King's Prerogative, or the Customs, Laws
or Statutes of the Realm: Then the Canons made in Convocations of latter times,
as 1 Jac. and confirmed by his Royal Authority: Also, Statutes Enacted by
Parliament touching Ecclesiastical Affairs: And Lastly, Diverse Customs not
written; and where these fail the Civil Law takes place.

Trials Ecclesiastical in Civil Causes.
THe manner of these Trials are first, a Citation goes out; Then they proceed
to Bill, and Answer; then by Proofs, Witnesses and Presumptions, the matter is
argued Pro and Con, and the Canon and Civil Laws Quoted; And then without Jury
the Definitive Sentence of the Judge passes, and after that Execution.

Trials Ecclesiastical in Criminal Causes.
THe manner of Trying Criminal Causes is by way of Accusation, Denunciation, or
Inquisition. The first, When some one takes upon him to prove the Crime. The
second, When the Churchwardens present, and are not bound to prove, because it
is presumed they do it without Malice, and that the Crime is Notorious. Lastly,
By Inquisition, when by reason of common fame, inquiry is made by the Bishop Ex
officio suo, by calling some of ^he Neighborhood to their Oath, or ^he party
accused to his Oath Ex officio. But by the prevailing part in the
Long-Parliament, this power was taken from the Church, the want whereof is one
main cause of the Libertinism and Debauchery of the Nation.

Punishments by Ecclesiastical Courts.
PUnishments inflicted by these Spiritual or Ecclesiastical Courts, according
to these Spiritual or Ecclesiastical Laws, are first, the party delinquent is
admonished. Next goes forth

Minor Excommunicatio, whereby he is Excommunicated or Excluded from the
Church, or at least from the Communion of the Lord's Supper, disabled to be
Plaintiff in any Suit, etc. and this commonly for Nonappearance upon Summons,
or not obeying the Orders of the Court: This power of lesser Excommunication
the Bishop may Delegate to any Grave Priest with the Chancellor. Then

Excommunicatio Major, is not only an Exclusion from the Company of Christians
in Spiritual Duties, but also i^ Temporal Affairs. And this commonly for
Heresy, Schism, Perjury, Incest, etc. and for the more Terror, (...) is done
by the Bishop himself in prope^ person; and being so Excommunicate a Man cannot
be in any Civil or Ecclesiastical Court either Plaintiff or Witness; and in
case any contin^^ Forty days Excommunicate, the King'^ Writ de Excommunicato
capiendo is granted out of the Chancery against him* whereupon he is cast into
Prison without Bail, till he has satisfied for the Offense. And then there is

Anathematismus inflicted upon an obstinate Heretic, whereby he is declared a
public Enemy to God, Rejecte^ and Accursed, and delivered over t^ Eternal
Damnation: And this is to b^ done by the Bishop also in his ow^ person,
assisted by the Dean and Chapter, or Twelve other grave Priests. An^ Lastly,
There is

Interdictum, whereby is prohibited (...) Divine Offices, as Christian Burial
(...) Administration of Sacraments, etc. i^ such a place or to such a people:
If this be against a people, it follows the^ wheresoever they go; but if
against the place only, then the people may g^ to Divine Office elsewhere; and
besides these general Censures of the Church, which respect Church Communion,
there is another touching the Body of the Delinquent, called

Public Penance, when the Delinquent is to stand in the Church Porch on a
Sunday, Bare-head and Feet, in a White Sheet bewailing himself, and begging
every one that passes by to pray to God for him, etc. and this by diverse
Writers appears to be the practice used by the Primitive Churches.

And this Punishment, if the Crime be not very notorious, may by the Canons of
the Church of England, be commuted to a Pecuniary mulct to the Poor, or to some
other pious Use.

Punishments Ecclesiastical peculiar to the Clergy.
TO the beforementioned Punishments, both Clergy and Laity are subject; but
there are Punishments to which the Clergy only are liable, as first,

Suspensio ab Officio, Is when the Minister for a time is declared unfit to
execute the Office of Minister. Then,

Suspensio a Beneficio, when the Minister is for a time deprived from the
profits of his Benefice; and these two Censures are wont to be for smaller
Crimes; Then

Deprivatio a Beneficio is for a greater Crime, wherein a Minister is wholly
and for ever deprived of the profits of his Benefice or Living. And Lastly,

Deprivatio ab Officio, when a Minister is for ever deprived of his Orders; and
this is called Depositio or Degradati^^ and is commonly for some heinous Crime
deserving Death, and is performed by the Bishop in a Solemn manner, pulling off
from the Criminal his Vestments, and other Ensigns of his Order; and this in
the presence of the Civil Magistrate, t^ whom he is then delivered to be
punished as a Layman, for the like Offense.

And this may suffice for a sho^^ view of the Ecclesiastical Government.

The Civil Government, etc.
A Brief Account of the Ecclesiastical Government having been given: In the
next place we are to Treat of the Civil Government, the first great Wheel moved
therein by the King and his Privy Council, Being

The High Court of Parliament.
BEfore the Conquest called the Great Council of the King, consisting of the
Great Men of the Kingdom. It was also called Magnatum Conventus, or Praelatorum
Procerumque Consilium, and by the Saxons Michel Gemot and Witenage Mote; after
the Conquest it was called Parliamentum, from the French word Parler, still
consisting of the Great Men of the Nation, as some hold, until the Reign of
Hen. 3. when the Commons also were called: The first Writs to Summon or Elect
them being said to bear date 49 Hen. 3. above 400 years ago; so that now this
High Court consists of,

The King, who being Caput, Principium and Finis Parliamenti, Sits there as in
his Royal Politic Capacity.

The Lords Spiritual; As the Two Archbishops, and Bishops being in number about
Twenty four, who sit there by Succession, in respect of their Baronies; and to
every one of these, Ex Debito Justitiae a Writ of Summons is to be directed.

The Lords Temporal; As Dukes, Marquesses, Earls, Viscounts and Barons, who sit
there by reason of their Dignities; and were in the Lord Cokes time about 106,
now near twice that number.

And every of these being of full Age, Ex Debito Justitiae ought to have a Writ
of Summons. And

The Commons of the Realm being Knights of Shires, Citizens of Cities, and
Burgesses of Buroughs; all which are respectively Elected by the Counties,
Cities and Buroughs, and none of them ought to be omitted; and these were in
number in the Lord Cokes time 493, now about 513 persons.

Spiritual Assistants, are Procuratores Cleri, who are so called as by the Writ
to the Bishop before mentioned appears; to Consult, and to Consent, but never
had Voices, as being no Lords of Parliament: And by the Treatise De modo
tenendi Parliamentum, they should appear cum praesentia eorum sit necessaria.

Temporal Assistants, Are all the Judges of the Realm; Barons of the Exchequer,
and of the Coif.

The King's Learned Council, and the Civilians, Masters of the Chancery, are
called to give their Assistance and Attendance in the upper House of
Parliament, but have no Voice; and their Writs differ from the Barons, being
Quod intersitis nobiscum, cum caeteris de concilio nostro, super praemissis
tractaturi, vestrumque Concilium impensuri.

Romulus Ordained 100 Sena^ours, which were afterward increased to 300; and of
that number were our House of Commons in Fortescue's time.

The Person Summoning is the King, or in his Absence the Custos Regni, or in
his Minority the Protector Regni does Summon the Parliament, which cannot be
begun, without the Kings Presence, either in Person, or Representation by
Commission under the Great Seal, or by a Guardian of England by Letters Patents.

The manner of Summoning a Parliament is in manner following: About 40 days
before their time of Sitting, the King cum Advisamento Consilij sui, Issues out
of Chancery Writs of Summons to every Lord of Parliament Spiritual and
Temporal, Commanding the Lords Spiritual in Fide and Dilectione; and the Lords
Temporal per Fidem and Allegiantiam to Appear, Treat, and give their Advice in
certain Important Affairs concerning the Church and State, etc. And the Warrant
is per ipsum Regem and Concilium.

And for Summoning the Commons, a Writ goes to the Lord Warden of the Cinque
Ports, for Election of the Barons of the Cinque Ports, who in Law are
Burgesses; and to every Sheriff in the 52 Counties in England and Wales, for
the Choice and Election of Knights, Citizens, and Burgesses, within every of
their Counties respectively; Two Knights for each County; Two Citizens for each
City; and One or Two Burgesses for each Borough, according to Statute, Charter
or Custom.

Persons Elected for each County ought to be Milites Notabiles, or at leastwise
Esquires or Gentlemen fit to be made Knights; they ought to be Native
Englishmen, or at least such as have been Naturalized by Act of Parliament: No
Alien or Denizen, none of the 12 Judges, no Sheriff of a County, no
Ecclesiastical person having Cure of Souls, may be a Parliament Man. And for
Legality of Sitting in Parliament, he must be 21 years old.

All the Members of Parliament both Lords and Commons, with their Menial
Servants and necessary Goods, are Priviledg'd during the time of Parliament
Eundo, Morando, and ad proprium redeundo; But not from Arrests for Felony,
Treason or Breach of the Peace.

If the King do not think fit the Parliament shall Sit at the day of Return of
the Writ, he may by Writ Patent Prorogue them till another day, as was done 1
Eliz.

At the day of Meeting of the Parliament, The King, and by his Direction the
Lord Chancellor, The Lord Keeper of the Great Seal, or some other by the Kings
appointment, Declares the Causes of Calling the Parliament; as in Ed. 3. time,
Sir Henry Green Lord Chief Justice, although the Lord Chancellor were present.
And when a Bishop is Lord Chancellor, he usually takes a Text of Scripture in
Latin and Discouses thereupon* And when a Judge, by way of Oration, he Declares
the Cause of Calling the Parliament.

The Lords in their House have power of Judicature. The Commons in their House
to some purposes have power of Judicature, and both together have power of
Judicature. But this will require a whole Treatise. 4 Co. Inst 23.

The Lords give their Voices from the Puisne Lord Seriatim, Content, or not
Content.

The Commons give their Votes by Yeas, and Noes; and if it be doubtful Two are
appointed, one for the Yeas, another for the No's, to number them; the Yeas
going out, and the No's sitting still as being content with their Condition;
but at a Committee although of the whole House, the Yeas go on one side, and
the No's on the other, whereby the greatest number will easily appear.

The Royal Assent to Bills passed both Houses, is given in this manner: The
King Sitting in his Throne of State, with his Crown on his Head, in his Royal
Robes, and the Lords in their Robes; The Clerk of the Crown Reads the Title of
the Bills, to which the Clerk of the Parliament according to directions from
the King, Answers; if a public Bill Le Roy le veut; if a private Bill Soit
fait comme el est Desire; or otherwise Le Royn s'advisera, being a absolute
Denial in a Civil way.

If it be a Bill for Money given his Majesty; then the Answer is, Le Roy
remercie ses loyaux sujets accept leur Benevolence, and aussi le veut.

The Bill for the King's General Pardon, has but one Reading in either House,
for this Reason, because they must take it as the King will please to give it:
so the Bill of Subsidies granted by the Clergy, assembled in Convocation for
the same Reason. When the Bill for the General Pardon is passed by the King;
the Answer is thus, Les Prelates Seigneurs and Communes en ce Parliament
Assembles, au nom de tous vos autres Sujets, remercient tres humblement votre
Majeste and prient Dieu vous donner en sante bonne Vie, and longue.

All Acts of Parliament before the Reign of Hen. 7. were passed, and enrolled
in Latin or French, now in English.

Most of our ancient Acts of Parliament run in this Style: The King at the
Humble Request of the Commons, with the Assent of the Prelates, Dukes, Earls
and Barons has Ordained or Enacted; After it was thus, The King by the Advice
and Assent of the Lords Spiritual and Temporal, and with the Assent of the
Commons does Enact: Of latter times it has been thus, Be it Enacted by the
Kings most Excellent Majesty, by, and with the Advice and Consent of the Lords
Spiritual and Temporal, and of the Commons; Although the words of the Writ, for
Summoning the Commons is only ad Consentiendum, and not ad consilium
impendendum; as it is in the Writ to the Lords.

The Adjourments are made in the Lords House, by the Lord Chancellor, to what
other Day, or Place the King thinks fit.

The Prorogations are made in the same manner, only a Prorogation makes a
Sessions, and puts an end to all Bills not passed the Royal Assent.

At the Dissolution of the Parliament the King commonly comes in Person,
sending for the House of Commons: After Speeches made, the Lord Chancellor by
the King's Command Declares the Parliament Dissolved.

The House of Commons is not prorogued or adjourned, by the prorogation or
adjournment of the Lords House; but the Speaker, upon signification of the
King's pleasure, by the assent of the House of Commons, does say, This House
does Prorogue, or Adjourn it self. But when it is Dissolved, the House of
Commons are sent for up to the Higher House, and there the Lord Keeper by the
King's Commandment Dissolveth them. And it may be observed, That as the
Parliament cannot begin without the King's presence, either in Person or by
Representation, so it cannot end without; Nihil enim tam conveniens est
Naturali Aequitati, unumquodque Dissolvi eo Ligamine quo ligatum est, Coke's 4
Inst. 28.

The Proceedings and Transactions, being referred to Authors, who have Written
thereof at large, we shall only mention some remarkable things concerning the
same. And first,

Any Lord upon just cause to be absent, may make his Proxy; but he cannot make
it but to a Lord of Parliament: And a Commoner may not make a Proxy.

King John, in the Thirteenth year of his Reign, sent Ambassadors to
Admiralius Murmelius, Great Emperor of Turkey, Sir Thomas Harrington and Sir
Ralph Nicholson, Knights, and Sir Robert of London, Clerk, Nuncios suos
Secretissimos, to offer to be of his Religion, and become Tributary to him, and
He and his Subjects would be his Vassals, and to hold his Kingdoms of him: But
that Infidel Great Prince, as a thing unworthy of a King to Deny his Religion,
and betray his Kingdom, utterly refused to accept. King John the next year
surrendered his Kingdoms of England and Ireland to Pope Innocent the Third,
paying 1000 Marks for them; which being afterward Demanded with Homage by the
Pope, Anno 40. Ed. 3. In full Parliament it was fully agreed, That Answer
should be Returned, That niether King John, nor any for him, could put Himself,
his Realm, or People, in any Subjection without their Consent; And that if the
Pope did attempt to gain it by Force, they would resist with all their power.

Rot. Parl. 4.2 Ed. 3. It is Declared in full Parliament, That they could not
assent to any thing in Parliament, that tended to the Disherison of the King or
his Crown, whereunto they were sworn.

By the Law and Custom of Parliament, when any New thing is Devised, they may
Answer, That they dare not Consent to it without Conference with their
Countries, Co. 4 Inst. 14, 34.

As every Court of Justice has Laws and Customs for its directions, some by
the Common Law, some by the Civil Law and Canon Law, some by Peculiar Laws or
Customs, etc. so the High Court of Parliament, Suis propriis Legibus, and
Consuetudinibus subsistit.

Informations were preferred by the Attorney General against 39 Members of the
House of Commons, for Departing without the King's License, whereof six
submitted to their Fines, and Edmund Plowden, the Learned Lawyer, pleaded, That
he remained continually from the beginning to the end of the Parliament, and
took a Traverse full of Pregnancy; and after his Plea was Sine die per demise
le Reign. In the King's Bench,

Upon Petition of Right to the King, either in English or in French, and the
Answer thereunto Fiat Justitia, a Writ of Error may be had directed to the
Chief Justice of the King's Bench, to remove a Record in praesens Parliamen^um.

An Act of Parliament must have the Assent of King, Lords, and Commons; but if
it want this Threefold Consent, it is not an Act, but an Ordinance.

Of Acts of Parliament some be Declaratory of the ancient Law, some be
Introductory of a New Law, and some be of both kinds, by addition of greater
Penalties, or the like.

In ancient Times all Acts of Parliament were in form of Petitions; and for the
several Forms of Acts of Parliament, see the Prince's Case, 8 Co. Rep. 20.

The Passing of a Bill does not make a Sessions, but the Sessions continues
till a Prorogation, or Dissolution.

And the difference between an Adjournment and Prorogation is, that after an
Adjornment all things stand as they did before; but after a Prorogation, al^
former proceedings not passed the Royal assent, are made null and void.

When a Parliament is called and does sit, and is Dissolved without any Act of
Parliament passed, or Judgmen^ given; then it is no Sessions, but a Convention,
Co. 4 Inst. 28.

A Bill was preferred An. 6 Hen. 6. that none should Marry the Queen Dowager of
England without license and assent of the King, on pain to lose all his Goods
and Lands. The Bishops and Clergy assented by content, so far as the same
swerved not from the Law of God, or of the Church; and so far as the same
imported no deadly Sin. The Act of Parliament is holden good and absolute; for
that the assent of the Clergy could not be conditionally, neither was it
against the Law of God, etc. as appears by Magna Charta, cap. 7. Confirmed by
32 Acts of Parliament, Co. 4 Inst. fo. 35.

Of this Court it is said, Si Antiquitatatem spectes est Vetustissima, si
Dignitatatem est Honoratissima, si Jurisdictionem est Capacissima, Fortescue.

-- Huic nec metas rerum nec tempora pono.

Virgil. King Henry the Eighth commanded Thomas Earl of Essex to attend the
Chief Justices, and know, Whether a Man that was forthcoming, might be
attainted of Treason by Parliament, and never called to answer. The Judges
answered, It was a dangerous Question, and that the High Court of Parliament
ought to give Examples to Inferior Courts, for proceeding according to
Justice, and no Inferior Court could do the like; and they thought the High
Court of Parliament would never do it. But being by express Commandment of the
King, pressed by the said Earl to give a Direct Answer; they said, That if he
be attainted by Parliament, it could not come in question afterward, whether
he were called, or not called to Answer, which was according to Law: Although
they might have made better Answer, since by Magna Charta, no Man ought to be
condemned without being called to answer. But, Facta tenent multa, quafieri
prohibentur.

By ancient Law, when any one was to be charged in Parliament with any Crime,
Offense or Misdemeanour, The King's Writ was directed to the Sheriff, to summon
and enjoin the Party to appear before the King in the next Parliament; or
otherwise it may be directed to the party himself, as appean by the Writs.

King Henry the Eighth being in Convocation ackowledged Supreme Head of the
Church of England, thought it no difficult matter to have it confirmed by
Parliament; but was secretly desirous to have the Impugners of it incur High
Treason; but having little hope to effect that concerning High Treason, sought
to have it pass in some other Act by words closely couched; and therefore in
the Act for Recognition of his Supremacy, the Title and Style thereof is
annexed to the Crown. Afterward by another Act, whereby many Offenses are made
High Treason; It is amongst other things Enacted, That if any person or
persons, by Word or Writing, Practice or Attempt to deprive the King or Queen,
or their Heirs apparent, of their Dignity, Title or Name of their Royal
Estates, should be adjudged Traitors: Whereupon many were put to death.

The Will of Richard the Second, whereby he gives Money, Treasure, etc. to his
Successors, upon condition that they observe the Ordinances and Acts made at
the Parliament in the 21th year of ^is Reign, is adjudged void, it being in
^estraint of the Sovereign Liberty of his Successors. And it is a certain
Maxim, That Leges posteriores, priores ^ontrarias abrogant.

The Acts of Parliament, or Petition of Right, may be Enrolled in any, or all
^ther Courts of Record.

Every Member ought to come, or ^e may be Fined; and the Sheriff, if he ^ake
not due Return of all Writs may ^e punished.

King Henry the Eighth projected in Parliament, No King or his Kingdom could be
safe without Three Abilities; First, To be able to Live of his own, and to be
able to defend his own Kingdom. Secondly, To assist his Confederates, else they
would not assist him. Thirdly, To reward his well deserving Servants. Now the
Project was, That if the Parliament would give all Priories, Monasteries, etc:
That for Ever in time to come, He would take care the same should not be
converted to private use, but employed to enrich hi^ Exchequer, for the
purposes aforesaid. To maintain 40000. Soldiers for strengthening the Kingdom,
The Subjects should not be burdened with Subsidies, Loans etc. That for 29
Lords of Parliament Abbots and Priors, he would create (...) Number of Nobles.
Now the Monasteries were given to the King, but (...) Provision for the Project
made by these Acts, only Ad faciendum populum, these Possessions were given to
the King an^ his Successors, to do therewith at his an^ their own Wills, to the
pleasure of Al^ mighty God, and the honor and pro^^ of the Realm. Now observe
the Cat^strophe in the same Parliament of Hen^^ the Eighth: When the Opulent
Prior^ of St. John's of Jerusalem was given t^ the King, he demanded and had a
Subsidy both of the Clergy and Laity: And the like he had in the 34th of Henry
the Eighth, and in the 37th of Henry the Eighth: And since the Dissolution of
Monasteries he Exacted diverse Loans, and against Law received the same.

If the King by Writ call any Knight or Esquire, to be a Lord of Parliament, he
may not refuse, for the good of his Country.

The Fees of Knights of Parliament is Four shillings per diem, Citizens and
Burgesses Two shillings, Coke's 4. Inst. 46.

The Parliament at Coventry, Anno 6 Hen. 4. for that in the Writs it was
Directed pursuant to the precedent Ordinance of the House of Lords, That no
Lawyer should be Elected; It was called Indoctum Parliamentum; and such
Prohibition was Null and Void, and the Ordinance afterward Repealed.

The Sheriff of Bucks was Returned Knight for Norfolk, and being afterward
served with a Subpoena, pendente Parliamento, had the privilege of Parliament
allowed him, 1 Caroli Regis primi.

Judges are not to Judge of any Law Custom, or Privilege of Parliamen^ they
being more properly to be learne^ out of the Rolls of Parliament Record^ and by
Presidents, and continual experience, than by or from any Man Penn.

Parliament, from Parler la Meant (...) called, because every Member ough^
sincerly Parler la Meant for the good (...) the Commonwealth, is the Highest
an^ most Honorable Court of Justice (...) England; consisting of the King, the
Lord Spiritual and Temporal, and the Commons consisting of Knights; Citize^ and
Burgesses; and in Writs and Judical Proceedings, it is called Comm^^ Concilium
Regni Angliae: It appears That diverse Parliaments have bee^ holden before and
since the time of the Conquest, which are in print, and many more appearing in
ancient Records an^ Manuscripts.

There have been in that time, and since the Conquest till the Lord Coke^ time
280 Sessions of Parliament; and at every Sessions diverse Acts made, n^^ small
number whereof are not in Print Cokes 1 Inst. 110. a.

The Jurisdiction of this Court is s^ Transcendent, That it Makes, In^largeth,
Diminishes, Abrogateth, Repealeth and Reviveth Laws, Statutes, Acts and
Ordinances, concerning Matters Ecclesiastical, Capital, Criminal, Common,
Civil, Marshal, Maritime, etc. And none can begin, continue or dissolve the
Parliament but by the King's Authority, Cokes 1 Inst. 110.

None can be sent out of the Realm, no not into Ireland against his will,
albeit by Order of Parliament, Cokes 2 Inst. 47, 48.

Trial by Peers, of Peers of Parliament, was very ancient and in the time of
the Conqueror, both for Men and Women; and anciently those that were not Lords
of Parliament were Judged in case of Treason or Felony, by the Peers of the
Realm.

By Authority of Parliament it was declared, That Urban the 12th was duly
elected Pope, Cokes 2 Inst. 274.

Few or none of the Acts made in Ed. 1. time have been Repealed, Cokes 2 Inst.
280.

Where Communitatem Angliae, and many such Words are taken for the Parliament;
and as there was a legal word Guidagium, being an Office for guiding Travelers
through dangerous passages, so the Laws of the Realm are ^o guide the Judges in
all Causes, Cokes 2 Inst. 526.

Cardinal Woolsey endeavoring to bring in the Civil Law, was the occasion that
but one Parliament was held from the 7th to 21th year of Hen. 8. Cokes 2 Inst.
626.

George Nobles, a Priest, Attainted by Verdict for Clipping the Kings Coi^ was
Adjudged and Executed at Tybur^ as a common person; and Merx (...) shop of
Carlisle, for Treason against Hen. 4. had Judgment as in case (...) High
Treason: But Cor Regis in manu D^mini, he was pardoned, Cokes 2 Inst. 63^

The Parliament at Oxford, 42 Hen. (...) was called Insanum Parliamentum 12 Ed.
2. The Parliament of Whiteband 5 Ed. 3. Parliamentum bonum, 10 R. (...)
Parliamentum quod fecit Mirabilia, 21 R. (...) Magnum Parlimentum, 6 H. 4.
Parl^^mentum indoctum, 4 Hen. 6. Parliam^^tum Fustium. 14 H. 8. The Black
Parl^^ment. 1 E. 6. Parliament' pium, and 1 Ma^^ Parliament' propitium,
Parliaments of Q. Pia, Justa, and Provida, 21 Jac. 1. Foelix Pa^^^amentum: And
the Parliament in the (...) year of King Chapter 1. Benedictum Parl^^mentum. The
Reasons of most of the Appellations appear upon Record, C^^ 3 Inst. 2.

It is Lex and Consuetudo Parliamen^^ That wheresoever the Parliament S^^
Proclamation should be made, forb^ing wearing of Armor, and all Plays and
Games of Men, Women or Children, Cokes 3 Inst. 160.

The Britons loved the Laws of England, and petitioned to have the Laws of
England in all cases of the Crown used in Wales: And now seeing there are
Sheriffs in Wales, the Writs for Election of Knights, Citizens and Burgesses
are directed to them, returnable in Chancery, Cokes 4 Inst. 241.

Every Lord of Parliament ought to have a Writ of Summons, sent to him out of
the Chancery at least 40 Days before the Parliament begin; and the Writ of
Summons to the Barons is, Quod intersitis cum Praelatis Magnatibus and
Proceribus super dictis Negotijs tractaturi vestrumque Consilium Impensuri; but
the Writ to the Assistants, as all the Judges, Barons of the Exchequer, of the
Coif, the Kings Learned Council, and the Civilians, Masters of the Chancery,
are different from the other; as thus, Quod intersitis Nobiscum, and cum
caeteris de Concilio nostro, (and sometimes Nobiscum only) super Praemissis
tractaturi, vestrumque Consilium Impensuri; and the Writs of Summons to the
Bishops, etc. you may see in Cokes 4 Inst. 4, 5, 6, 9, 10, 14, 47, 48, 50.

And at the Return of these Writs, the Parliament cannot begin but by the Royal
Presence of the King, either in Person, or by Representation, Cokes 4. Inst. 6.

The Writs of Summons are to be found in the Close Rolls, and the Forms of them
you may see in Cokes 4 Inst. 9, 10. Which Forms, as also the Forms of all other
original Writs, are not to be altered but by Act of Parliament; and where they
Issued out of the Chancery, and were Returnable in the Court of Parliament, the
Return thereof could not be altered, and Returnable into the Chancery: But by
Act of Parliament, 7 H. 4. cap. 15. They be now returned into the Chancery, and
kept in the Office of the Clerk of the Crown there; see the Statute of 4 H. 7.
cap. 15. and Cokes 4 Inst. 9, 10.

Who shall be Electors, and the Sheriffs duty in Electing, you may see in the
several Statutes, whereof some are mentioned in Cokes 4 Inst. 48.

If Erroneous Judgment be given in the King's Bench, it shall upon petition of
Right be brought into Parliament, to be reversed, or affirmed; and the
proceedings thereupon you may read in Cokes 4 Inst. 21.

None of the Judges of King's Bench, Common Pleas or Exchequer are Eligible,
because Assistants in the House of Lords, nor any of the Clergy, because of the
Convocation; but those who have Judicial places in other Courts are Eligible,
Cokes 4 Inst. 47.

Thorpe could not be Speaker, unless he were Knight of the Shire, Cokes 4.
Inst. 47. in the margent.

Tenants in ancient Demesne, not contributary to the expenses of Members in
Parliament; nor Chaplains who are Masters in Chancery, to Proctors in
Parliament, F. N. B. 507. Cokes 1 Rep. 25, 160.

A saving in an Act of Parliament, Repugnant to the Body of the Act is void,
Cokes 1 Rep. 47. Alton Woods's Case.

He who takes a Gift by Act of Parliament, shall not have other Estate than is
given by the Act, Cokes 1 Rep. 47, 48. Alton Woods Case.

An Act of Parliament, or the Common Law, may make an Estate void as to one,
and good as to another, which a Man by his breath or words cannot do, Cokes 1
Rep. 87. Corbet's Case.

The Statute of 27 Hen. 8. Extirpating and Extinguishing all the Estate of the
Feoffees, Non possunt agere seu permittere aliquid in prejudice of Cestuy que
use, Cokes 1 Rep. 132. Chudley's Case.

An Act of Parliament, may make Division of Estates, and therefore not like to
Cases at Common Law, Cokes 1 Rep. 137. Chudleigh's Case,

An Act of Parliament, is the Highest Conveyance, and a latter does take away a
former Act, Cokes 2 Rep. 46.

Parliamentum, Testamentum, Arbitramentum, to be construed according to the
intent of the makers, Cokes 3 Rep. 27. Butler and Baker's Case.

Of Statutes which concern the King, the Judges ought to take notice, Cokes 4
Rep. 13. Lord Cromwell's Case. The like of general Acts, Cokes 4 Rep. 76.
Holland's Case.

The of Stat 13 and 18 Eliz. concerning Leases by Deans and Chapters are
general Statutes, whereof the Court ought to take notice, although they be not
found by the Jurors, Cokes 4 Rep. 120. Davenport's Case.

Mistaking the word Districtionem for Destructionem, altering the sense of the
Statute of Gloucester, although but by one letter, adjudged it was matter of
substance, and the Writ could not be amended, Cokes 5 Rep. 45. Freeman's Case.

The Acts of 7 Hen. 7. and 3 Hen. 8. are perpetual Acts, for the word King does
include all his Successors, Cokes 6 Rep. 27. Case of Soldiers.

Although the Statutes speak only of the Party, yet Executors and Administrators
shall take advantage of it, Cokes 6 Rep. 80. Sir Edw. Phitton's Case.

Resolved in Englefield's Case, That by tender of the Ring according to the
Condition, the Uses were void, and the Estate vested in the Queen by force of
the Attainder, and of the Act, 33 H. 8. Cokes 7 Rep. 15.

In the case of the Prince, the King's Charter having the Force of Parliament,
is sufficient in it self without any other Act; for it is affirmed by
Parliament, by Stat. 9 H. 5. That it was agreed at the Parliament, 11 Ed. 3.
That the eldest Sons of the Kings of England were Dukes of Cornwall, and that
Duchy should remain to them, without being given else where, Cokes 8 Rep. Case
of the Prince, from 25 to 29.

In many cases the Common Law does comptrol Acts of Parliament, and sometimes
shall adjudge them void. For when an Act of Parliament is against common Right
and Reason, or repugnant and impossible to be performed, the Common Law shall
adjudge it void, Cokes 8 Rep. 118. Dr. Bonham's Case, and 128, 129, Case of the
City of London.

When an Act of Parliament makes any Coveyance good against the King or other
Person certain, it shall not take away the Right of any other, although there be
not any saving in the Act, Cokes 8 Rep. Sir Francis Barington's Case 138.

In case of Sentence of Deprivation of one, and Presentment, Institution and
Induction of another after, by relation of a General Pardon, all are restored
without Appeal or new Presentation, Admission or Institution, Cokes 9 Rep. Lord
Sanchar's Case.

In an Act of Parliament misnaming of a Corporation, when the express meaning
appears, shall not avoid the Act, no more than in a Will, Cokes 10 Rep 54 to
57. Case of the Chancellor of Oxford.

If an Act of Parliament were intended to Repeal a former Act, it could not be
by general and doubtful words, Cokes 10 Rep 138. the Case of Chester Mills.

It cannot be intended that a Statute made by Authority of the whole Realm,
should do any thing against Truth, Cokes 11 Rep. 14. Priddle and Napper's Case.

The Title of the Act is no part of the Act, as the preamble is; and Penal
Statutes shall be taken by intendment to remedy mischiefs, and suppress Crimes,
Cokes 11 Rep. 34. Powlter's Case.

Penal Statutes are to be followed (chiefly in Informations) strictly and in
terminis, according to the purview of the Act, Cokes 11 Rep. 56. Dr. Forster's
Case.

Where the Rule is, Leges Posteriores priores contrarias abrogant, countrarium
est duplex, Vide Cokes 11 Rep. 63. Dr. Foster's Case.

Statut' Praerogativa Regis says, The King shall have Annum Diem and Vastum,
which is as much as to say; he shall have the Trees, etc. to his own
disposition, Cokes 11 Rep. 83. Levis Bowles's Case.

By Stat. 4. Ed. 3.14. A Parliament shall be holden once a year, and oftener if
need be.

By Stat. 36 Ed. 3.10. A Parliament shall be holden every year.

By Stat. 5 R. 2. Stat. 2.4. Every Person and Comminalty having Summons of
Parliament shall come thither, in pain to be amerced, or otherwise punished;
and if the Sheriff does not Summon them, he shall be likewise amerced, or
otherwise punished, as has been used in times past.

What persons are to be Elected, Knights, Citizens and Burgesses, to serve in
Parliament; the manner of their Election and Levying of their Expenses, and the
diverse Acts of Parliament for regulating their Elections; you may see in the
Statutes at large.

By Stat. 6 Hen. 8.16. No Knight, Citizen, Burgess or Baron of any of the
Cinque Ports, shall depart from the Parliament without License of the Speaker,
and Commons in Parliament assembled, to be entered upon Record, in the Clerk of
the Parliaments Book, on pain to lose their Wages.

By Stat. 33. H. 8.21. The Kings Royal Assent by his Letters Patents under the
Great Seal, and Signed by his Hand, and notified in his absence to the Lords
and Commons assembled in the upper House, is, and ever was of as good strength
and force, as if the King were personally present, and had publicly assented
thereunto.

By Stat. 12 Car. 2. cap. 1. It Is declared, That the Parliament begun the 3d of
November 16. Car. 1. is dissolved, and that the Lords and Commons now sitting
are the two Houses of Parliament, notwithstanding any want of the Kings Writs
of Summons, or any other defect.

Stat. 16 Car. 2 cap. 1. The sitting and holding of Parliament shall not be
intermitted above three years; and now a new Parliament is to be called every
Three years, Stat. 6 W. and M.

Stat. 30 Car. 2. cap. 1. No Peer shall Vote, make Proxy, or Sit during any
Debate in the House of Peers, nor any Member of the House of Commons Vote, or
Sit there after their Speaker Chosen, till they first take the Oaths of
Allegiance and Supremacy, and Subscribe, and Repeat the Declaration in the Act
mentioned, between the hours of nine in the Morning, and four in the afternoon,
at the Tables in the middle of the said Houses, in a full House, in such order
as each House is called over; for which Declaration and other Matters see the
Statute at large: But now those Oaths by late Acts are altered, and others
appointed in their stead.

Tbe Executive Power in Temporal Affairs.
A Brief account having been given of the Parliament, in which is comprehended
the Legislative power, in Temporal Affairs: We are next to consider the
Executive power in the same, and that is generally in the King, he being the
Fountain of Justice, and Lord Chief Justice of England; and because he is
Caput, Principium, and Finis Parliamenti, by which the Laws are made, and
nothing can have the force of Law, without his consent given in Parliament, by
Le Roy le veut, therefore All the Laws of England are called the Kings Laws;
All the Courts of Judicature are called the Kings Courts; And all the Judges of
these Courts are called the Kings Judges.

And the High Court of Parliament, being the Highest Court of Judicature, all
other Courts and Person in England are subject to it.

The Court of the High Steward of England.
HIs Style is Seneschallus Angliae, which word Seneschallus has several
Derivations; yet as being applied to England; it is properly derived from Sen,
that is, Justice and Schale, that is, Governor or Officer; that is, Praefectus
seu Officiarius Justitiae. And this agrees well with his Authority and Duty,
to proceed Secundum Leges and Consuetudines Angliae.

This Office is very ancient, and was before the Conquest; For in an ancient
and Authentical Manuscript, Entitled, Authoritas Seneschalli Angliae, where
putting an Example of his Authority; says, Sicut accidit Godwino Comiti
Kanciae tempore Regis Edw' antecessoris Willielmi Ducis Normandiae pro
hujusmodi male gestis and consilijs suis (per Seneschallum Angliae) adjudicatus
and forisfecit Commitivam suam.

In the time of the Conqueror, William Fitz Eustace was Steward of England; and
in the Reign of William Rufus and Hen. 1. Hugh Grantsemenel Baron of Hinkley,
held that Barony by the said Office.

Of ancient time this Office was of Inheritance, and appertained to the Earldom
of Leicester, as it also appears by the said Record: Seneschalcis Angliae
pertinet ad Comitivam de Leicester, and pertinuit ab antiquo; That is, that the
Earldom of Leicester was holden by doing of the Office of Steward of England.
Other Records testified, tha^ it should belong to the Barony of Hinkley. The
truth is, That Hinkley was parcel of the Possessions of the Ear^ of Leicester;
for Robert Bellomont Ear^ of Leicester, in the Reign of Hen. 2 Married with
Petronilla, Daughter and Heir of the said Hugh Grantsemenel Baron of Hinkley,
and Lord Steward o^ England, and in her right was Steward of England: And so it
continued, until by the Forfeiture of Simon Montford, it came to King Hen. 3.
who i^ the 50th year of his Reign, created Edmond his Second Son Earl of
Leicester, Baron of Hinkley, and High Steward of England, which continued is
his Line, until Henry of Bullinbrook, So^ and Heir of John of Gaunt, Duke o^
Lancaster and Earl of Leicester; who was the last that had any Estate of
Inheritance in the Office of the Steward of England; since which time it wa^
never granted to any Subject, bu^ but only hac vice; and the reason was, for
that the Power of the Steward of England was so transcendent, that it was not
holden fit to be in any Subjects hands: For the said Record says, Es Sciendum
est quod ejus Officium est supervidere, and regulare sub Rege, and immediate
post Regem totum regnum Angliae, and omnes Ministros legum infra idem Regnum
temporibus pacis and guerrarum, etc. and proceeds particularly with diverse
exceeding High Powers and Authorities, which may well be omitted, because they
serve for no present use.

And albeit their Power and Authority have been since the Reign of Henry the
Fourth, but hac vice, yet is that hac vice limited and appointed: As when a
Lord of Parliament is Indicted of Treason or Felony, then the Grant of this
Office, under the Great Seal, is to a Lord of Parliament, reciting the
Indictment; Nos considerantes quod Justitia est virtus excellens and Altissimo
complacens, aeque prae omnibus uti volentes; ac pro eo quod Officium
Seneschalli Angliae, cujus praesentia pro administratione justitiae and
executione ejusdem in hac part facien requiritur, ut accepimus jam vacat: De
fidelitate, strenuitate, provida circumspectione, and indu^tria vestris
plurimum c^nfidente^ ord^n^vimus and constituimus vos ex hac causa and causis
Seneschallum nostrum Angliae ad Officium illus cum monibus eidem Officio in hac
part debitis and pertinentibus hac vice gerend', accipiend' and exercend'
dantes and concedentes vobis tenore praesentium plenam and sufficientem
potestatem and authoritatem, ac mandatum speciale indictamentum praedict', etc.
So that it appears that this great Officer is wholly restrained to proceed
only upon the recited Indictment. And he to whom this Offic is granted, must be
a Lord of Parliament, and his proceeding is to be Secundum Leges and
Consuetudines Angliae; for so is his Commission: And hereof you may read more
at large in Coke's 3 Inst. Chap. High Treason. Also at every Coronation he has
a Commission under the Great Seal hac vice, to hear and determine the Claims
for Grand Serjeanties and other Honorable Services, to be done at the
Coronation for the solemnization thereof: For which purpose the High Steward
does hold his Court some convenient time before the Coronation. See a President
hereof before the Coronation of King Richard the Second, John Duke of
Lancaster, then Steward of England (who in Claims before him was styled, Tres
Honorable Seignior Roy de Castile and Leon, and Seneschalle d' Engleterre,)
and held his Court in Alba Aula apud Westminster. die Jovis proxime ante
Coronationem; Quae quidem coronatio habita and solemnizata fuit die Jovis
sequente, viz. 16 Julij Anno 1 Ric. 2.

The first that was Created Hac vice, for the Solemnization of the Coronation
of Henry the Fourth, was Thomas, his second Son; and upon the Arraignment of
John Holland Earl of Huntingdon, the first that was Created Steward of England
Hac vice, was Edward Earl of Devon.

When he sits by force of his Office, he sits under a Cloth of State, and
such as direct their Speech unto him, say, May it please your Grace, my Lord
High Steward of England. The style of John of Gaunt was, Johannes filius Regis
Angliae, Rex Legionis and Castellae, Dux Aquitaniae and Lancastriae, Comes
Derbiae, Linconliae and Leicestriae, Seneschallus Angliae. And in respect his
Power, before it was limited, was so Transcendent, no mention is made of this
Great Officer in any of our ancient Authors, the Mirror, Bracton, Britton or
Fleta. It seems they liked not to treat of his Authority; neither is he found
in any Act of Parliament, nor in any Book Case before the 1st of Henry the
Fourth, and very few since: which has caused me to be the longer (says the
Lord Coke) in another place, to set forth his Authority and due proceeding upon
the Arraignment of a Peer of the Parliament, by Judicial Record and Resolution
of the Judges, agreeable with constant Experience.

As the Peers of the Realm that be Tryors or Peers are not sworn, so the Lord
Steward being Judge, etc. is not sworn; yet ought he according to his Letters
Patents to proceed Secundum legem and consuetudinem Angliae, Co. 4. Inst. cap.
4.

In Enditemene de Treason ou Felony ver^ un des Pieres del Realm, le Trial est
per s^s Pieres, quel manner de trial in Appel, nes^ grauntable; per que depuis
que cel Trial per ses Pieres, est le proper Trial que appertient al piere del
Realm, quant sur Enditement de Treason ou Felony il ad plead d^rien culpable,
Veions l'order and process d^cest Trial. Appiert An. 1. H. 4. fol. 1. and An 13
H. 8. fol. 11. que quant un Seigniour del Parliament serra arraigne de Treason
(...) Felony dount il est endite: Le Roy pers^^ Letters patents ferra un
graunde and sag^ Seigniour d'estre de grand Senescha^^ d' Engleterre pour le
jour de l'arraignment, qui devant le dit jour, ferra precept a son Serjaunt
d'Arms qui est appoint d^luy servire durant le temps de son Commission, a fair
venir devaunt luy 20 ou 18 Seigniours del Parliament a mesme la jour, Et puis al
jour, quant le Seneschalle serra south le drape d'estate sur l'arraignment del
prisoner, and ad fait lie son Commission, le dit Serjaunt retourna le dit
precept, and les Seigniours serront de ceo demaund' and quant ils ount apparus,
and serrount en lour places, le Constable del Tower serra demand a amesner al
Court son prisoner, quel serra conduct per luy al bar. Et donques le dit
graund Seneschal monstra a le prisoner la cause pour quel le Roy avoit assemble
la les Seigniours and luy, and commaundra luy de responder sauns ascun pavour,
and sur ceo causera le Clerk del Coron a lier l'Enditement a luy, and de luy
demander sil soit culpable ou nemy, a quel apres que il ad resp' de rien
culpable, Le dit Clerk demand' ouster de luy coment il voile este try: A quel
il peut dire per Dieu and ses Pieres. Et maintenant sur coe, Les Sergeants and
Attorney le Roy, deneront Evidence verse luy: A quel quant le prisoner
respondue; Le dit Constable serra command de retirer le dit prisoner del bar
a ascun lieu pour le temps que les dits Seigniors secretment parleront en le
dit Court ensemble. Et sur ceo les Seigniors se levent suis de lour places, and
consultant ensemble, and ceo que ils facent ils facent sur lour honors, sans
ascun se^rement d'estre minister a eux. Et quant eux touts ou les greinder part
de eux sont agrees, Ils returneront a lour places, and seeront. Et donque le
grand Seneschal demaundera del plus puisne Seignior aperluy, sil qui est
arraign, soit culpable, ou nemy, and issint del cestuy que est prochein al
puisne, and issint del remenant seriatim tanque il est peruse touts, and
chescun des Seigniors, respondra aperluy. Et donques le dit, Seneschal
remaundra pur le dit prisoner, qui serra reamesnus al bar, a qui le dit
Seneschal rehersera le Verdit and donera Judgment accordant. Et cest matter de
Trial, est done come semble per le Statute de Magna Charta cap. 29. qui est in
cest manner:

Nullus Liber homo capiatur vel imprisonetur, aut disseisietur, de libero
tenemento suo, vel libertatibus, vel liberis consuetudinibus suis, aut
utlagetur, aut exuletur, aut aliquo modo destruatur, nec super eum ibimus, nec
super eum mittemus, nisi per legale judicium parium suorum vel per legem
terrae; Nulli vendemus, nulli negabimus, aut differemus justitiam vel rectum.

Stat. 20 Hen. 6.9. Trial of Dutchesses, Countesses and Baronesses, for Treason
or Felony, shall be as Noblemen, Peers of the Realm, and not otherwise,
notwithstanding the Statute of Magna Charta, cap. 29. which mentions Men only
to be Tried by their Peers.

Mes null de ceux Statutes, ad este mise in ure d'extender a un Evesque ou Abbe,
coment que ils injoyent le nosme del Seignior de Parliament, car ils nont cel
nosme d'Evesque ou Abbe ratione Nobilitatis, sed ratione Officij, ne ont lieu
en Parliament in respect de lour Nobility, eins in respect de lour possession,
scil. L'auncient, Baronies annexes a lour Dignities. Et accordant a ceo, il y
ad diverse Presidents d'ont l'un fuist in temps le Roy Henry le 8. Et vide P. 10
E. 4. f. 6. Que un des Piers endite de Treason ou Felony: Peut si pleist al Roy
estre arraign de ceo en le Parliament, and donque les Seigniors Espirituels
ferront un Procurator pur eux. Eo que per le Canonical Leys, ils mesmes ne
doient condemner ascun a mort, Stamford 's Pleas of the Crown, fol. 152.

The High Court of Chancery,
CAlled Curia Cancellariae, because a^ some think the Judge of the Cou^sate
anciently Infra Cancellos, at the East end of our Churches, being separated per
Cancellos from the Body of the Church, as peculiarly belonging to the Priest,
were then^^ called Chancels. But others derive it ^^ther from the Power of the
Lord Chancellor; who is called Cancellarius a Cancellando, The highest point of
his Power being to Cancel the Kings Letter Patents, and damning the Inrollme^^
thereof, by drawing strokes through (...) like a Lattice, in several cases; as
whe^^ the King grants any thing upon fa^^^ Suggestion, or what by Law he cannot
grant.

And in the Chancery are two Court^ one of Ordinary Jurisdiction, Cora^^ Domino
Rege in Cancellaria; And th^^ other of Extraordinary Jurisdiction.

The Court of Ordinary Jurisdictio^^ proceeds according to the Right Li^^ of
the Laws and Statutes of the Real^^ Secundum Legem and Consuetudinem Angliae;
and has power to hold Plea (...) Scire facias for Repeal of the King (...)
Letters Patents, of Petitions, Monstra^^ de droits, Traverses of Offices,
Partitions in Chancery, of Scire facias upon Recognizance in this Court, Writs
of Audita Querela, to avoid Executions in this Court, Dowment in Chancery by
the Writ De Dote assignanda, upon Offices found, Executions upon the Statute
Staple, or Recognizance in nature of a Statute Staple, by the Act of 23 H. 8.
But Execution upon Statute Merchant is retornable into the Kings Bench, or
Common Pleas; all personal Actions, by or or against an Officer or Minister of
this Court, in respect of their Service, or Attendance there: But these, if the
Parties descend to Issue, this Court cannot try by Jury, but the Lord
Chancellor, or Lord Keeper delivers the Record by his proper Hands into the
Kings Bench to be tried there; because for that purpose both Courts are
accounted but one, and after Trial had, to be remanded into Chancery, and there
Judgment to be given; but if there be a Demurrer in Law, it shall be argued and
adjudged in this Court.

This Court is Officina Justitiae, out of which all Original Writs, and
Commissions under the great Seal do Issue, which great Seal is Clavis Regni,
and for these ends this Court is ever open. And for that, if any be wrongfully
Imprisoned in the Vacation, the Lord Chancellor may grant an Habeas Corpus to
do him Justice, which only other Courts can do in Term time; and also, may
grant Prohibitions in Term time or Vacation, which are not returnable; but if
not obeyed, then may this Court grant an Attachment upon Prohibition returnable
either in the Kings Bench or Common Pleas.

The Author of Novae Narrationes written about the time of E. 3. says, Curia
Cancellariae Regiae est Curia Ordinaria pro Brevibus Originalibus emanandu, Sed
non Placit is Communibus tenendis. The Proceedings of this Court remain in
Filacijs in the Office of the Petty Bagg.

Diverse Acts of Parliament give Authority to the Lord Chancellor to determine
diverse Offenses and Causes in the Court of Chancery, which is ever intended in
this Court, proceeding in Latin, secundum Legem and Consu^tudinem Angliae; and
the Defendant shall not be Sworn to his Answer, nor Examined upon
Interrogatories; but upon Issue joined it shall be tried in the Kings Bench, ut
in similibus Casibus solet. And thus having spoken somewhat of the Ordinary
Jurisdiction of this Court, we now come to treat of

The Court of Extraordinary Jurisdiction,
PRoceeding according to the Rule of Equity, Secundum Aequum, and Bonum. But
before we set forth the Jurisdiction and manner of proceeding therein, it may
not be thought improper to set forth and describe what this Equity is, and that
it may the better be understood, let us consider what leads thereunto, which
is first,

Synderesis; That is, a Natural power of the Soul, fixed in the higher part
thereof, moving to good, and abhorring evil; and the Divine Wisdom joyneth the
beginning of Secondary things; to the latter end of the first things, as an
Angel is Intellectual by Nature, and not made rational by Discourse; and to
this nature Man by Synderesis approaches, and is joined. Secondly,

Reason; For when Man was Created he received from God a double Eye, the
exterior of the Flesh, whereby he might see the visible things; and the
Interior of Reason, whereby he might know the invisible; to the end that, by
that of the Flesh, he might behold, know and avoid his visible Enemies, and by
that of Reason, be enabled to overcome his Spiritual Enemies, who war against
his Soul. And moreover* Reason according to the Learned is that power of the
Rational Soul which discerns between good and evil, the better by compa^^ng
the one with the other, which also chooses virtue and loves God: And Reason
is divided into two parts, the Superior and the Inferior; for the superior
part of Reason tends only to Divine Eternal things, and endeavors and
reasons, that this is to be done, or not to be done, because God has
commanded or prohibited it. The inferior part of Reason is declined, or bent
to the Government of temporal things; and endeavors or reasons to prove by
Humane Laws that this is to be done, o^ not to be done, or that it is honest o^
dishonest, or that it is expedient, o^ not expedient for the Commonwealth And
in the next place we come to consider and speak of

Conscience, Which is a word compounded of Cum and Scientia, and is as much as
to say Knowledge of one thing with another; and is thus said to consi^^ in two
things, Knowledge by himself* and Knowledge with another: In the first,
Conscience imports a certain natural Act, not of knowing only, but moving
also, and also inclines the Soul to prosecute good and to avoid evil; and in
this manner it is accounted the same as above in Reason, and is also conjoined
to the superior light of Reason, which is called Synderesis. Therefore St.
Jerome and others, call Conscience it self Synderesis, and then Conscience it
self is always right. In the second place, Conscience imports more properly
Knowledge with another thing, still with some particular Act; and thus
Conscience properly speaking, is no other thing than the applying of a certain
Knowledge to some particular Act, from whence it may be deduced, that from the
most perfect knowledge of some Law or Science, and the right application of that
knowledge to some particular Act, follows the most pure, perfect and best
Conscience; and if there be a defect in knowledge of the truth of that Law, or
in the application of the same to some Act, there follows thereof an Error,
or defect of Conscience. And as Synderesis delivers a universal Maxim or
Principle, in which it cannot Err, scilicet; That an unlawful thing is not to
be done; now it may be assumed that an Oath is unlawful, it being said Math. 5.
Ego autem di^^vobis non jurare omnino; But if any wi^^ hold from these words,
that an Oath is lawful in no case, he erreth in Conscience, because he has not
full knowledge of the truth of the said Gospel nor does confer that place of
Scripture with others, in which an Oath is allowed to be lawful: And the reason
why Conscience may Err in the aforesaid Assumption and the like, is, because
Conscience is formed from the Assumption of some particular Proposition or
Question, under universa^ Rules of things to be done; and as the light of a
Candle is put in a House, that they may see what things are i^ the House; so
God has placed Conscience in the middle of the Rational Soul, as a Light
whereby it may discern what is to be done, or not to be done; and now let us
proceed to describe

Equity, Which is Justice, weighing all circumstances tempered with the
sweetness of Mercy, which ought to be kept in every Law, and this he well
understood who said, Ipsae eteni^ Leges cupiunt, ut Jure regantur; and the
Wiseman says, Noli esse justus multu^^* otherwise Summa justitia, summa
inj^stitia fit.

But that we may more clearly declare what Equity is, It is to be known, that
because it is impossible to institute any General Rule of Law, which will in no
case be defective, therefore Legislators attend to that which happens in many
things, and not to particular cases, nor indeed can they, since to observe the
Sentence of Law in some Cases, is both against the Equality of Justice and
Common Good; so that in some Cases it is good, yea absolutely necessary
(praetermitting the words of the Law) to follow that which reason of Justice
requires. And to this end Equity is ordained, which is also called Epicaya,
scilicet, to moderate the Rigor of the Law, and it takes not away the very
Right, but that which seems to be Right, by general determination of Law. And
cases may happen in which the Law of God, and the Law of Reason, would be
violated by the observance of them; as in the Law of England there is a general
Prohibition, that it shall not be lawful for any Man to enter into the Ground
of another without Authority of the Owner, or of the Law; yet it is excepted,
That if Beasts by the Highway escape into another Man's Corn, he that drives
them may justify the Entry to fetch them out; and many other such like. And
thus it appears, That Equity rather attends the intention than the words of Law.

And thus having briefly set forth what Equity is, we are next to know that
this Court of Extraordinary Jurisdiction grounded thereupon, relieveth none but
such who are without remedy in other Courts; For nunquam decurriter ad
extraordinarium, sed ubi defecit Ordinarium.

This Court is Superior to the other Tribunals, that so the rigor of the Law
in them might be here moderated, and amended according to Conscience and
Equity; and proceeding by English Bill, the Witnesses are examined in private;
the Decrees in English or Latin; no Jury, but all Sentences given by the Judge
of the Court, much like to the Courts of the Civil Law; ^^binds the person
only, and not his Lands or Goods.

But referring the full proceeding an^ practice therein, to those Books a^^
Authors who treat thereof at large We shall next give a ^rief account of.

The Officers.
THe Lord Chancellor, or Lord Keeper of the Great Seal, is created Per
traditionem Magni Sigilli sibi, per Dominum Regem; And by taking his Oath
consisting of six Articles, the substance whereof is: That he shall well and
truly serve the King and his People in the Office of Chancellor or Lord Keeper,
Shall do Right to all People according to the Usages and Laws of the Realm,
Shall truly Counsel the King, and preserve and advance the Rights of the Crown;
And he is sole Judge in both of the before mentioned Courts in Chancery, being
Summum ambientis animi quasi solstitium, and is Magistratuum omnium Antistes.

And to the Lord Chancellor are twelve Assistants, called Masters (anciently
Clerici Cancellariae) of whom the chief is,

The Master of the Rolls, who has a Place of great Dignity, and is in the Gift
of the King; either for Life, or during the Kings Pleasure, and has Jure
Officij the gift of those considerable Offices of the Six Clerks in Chancery,
has the keeping of the Rolls, and the House of the Converted Jews, and in the
absence of the Chancellor, hears Causes, makes Orders by virtue of a Commission
with two Masters, and that Jure Officij. And the

Masters of Chancery, who are commonly Doctors of the Civil Law, are Assistants
to the Court and sit there by turns to show what is the Equity of the Civil
Law, and course of the Court, and what is Conscience: And these Masters ought
to be expert in the Common Law, to see the framing of original Writs according
to Law; which are not of course, whereupon such are called in ancient Authors
Brevia Magistralia. And next to these is,

The Clerk of the Crown, who by himself or his Deputy continually attends the
Lord Chancellor for special matters of State, and has a place in the higher
House of Parliament; he makes all Writs for Elections of Members of Parliament,
Sitting in Parliament upon Warrant directed to him upon the Death, or removal
of any Member, and all Commissions of Oyer and Terminer, Gaol Delivery, and
many other Commissions for distribution of Justice. And next is,

The Prothonotary of the Court, whose Office is chiefly by himself, or Deputy
to Expedite Commissions for Embassies. And then

The Clerk of the Hamper or Hanaper, sometime styled Warden of the Hamper,
whose Office is to receive all Money due to the King, For the Seals of
Charters, Patents, Commissions and Writs, and to attend the Keeper of the Seal
daily in Term time, and at times of Sealing, with Leather Bags now (but
anciently probably with Hampers,) wherein are put all Sealed Charters, Patents,
etc. And then delivers those Bags to the Comptroller of the Hamper.

The Warden of the Fleet is to take off the Prisoners sent from this Court for
Contempt to the King or his Laws, or that will not pay their Debts, etc. who
commonly Executes it by a Deputy.

The Sergeant at Arms, whose Office is to bear a great Guilt Mace before the
Lord Chancellor, or Keeper for the time being.

The Six Clerks, whose Office is to Inrol Commissions, Pardons, Patents,
Warrants, etc. that are passed the Great Seal; they were ancienly Clerici, and
afterward forfeited their Places if they did Marry. These are the Attorneys as
well for Plaintiff, as Defendant in every Suit in Court.

Two Examiners, Their Office is to Examine Witnesses upon Oath, and put their
Depositions and Answers to their Interrogatories in Writing.

Three Clerks of the Petty Bag, Their Office is to make all Patents for
Customs, Comptrollers, Conge d'eslire. First, Summons of Nobility, Clergy,
Knights, Citizens, and Burgesses to Parliament.

The Subpoena Office executed by a Deputy, is to Issue out Writs to Summon
Persons to appear in Chancery.

The Clerk of the Patents, or Letters Patents under the great Seal of England,
and may be executed a Deputy.

The Register of the Court, has under him Deputies, Two Registers for the
Court, Two Registers for the Rolls, Entering Clerks, and one Clerk of the
Reports, or keeper of the old Book.

The Affidavit Office granted by Letters Patents, where all Affidavits are
Filed, and may be executed by a Deputy.

The Cursitors are Twenty and four, who are appointed to several Shires, and
are to make out original Writs that belong to this Court, or Common Pleas, and
these are a Corporation within themselves, and many of them Execute their
Places by Duputies.

By Stat. 15 H. 6.4. none shall sue forth a Subpaena, until he find surety to
satisfy the Defendant his Damages and Cost, in case he do not verisie his Bill.

Three things are to be Judged in Conscience, by the ancient Rule (viz.) Covin,
Accident and breach of Confidence.

This Chancery is ever open, and never is or can be Adjourned, Cokes 2 Inst. 53.

In se Defendendo lies no Appeal; And when it is found so, the King must pardon
it of course; That is, in the Court of Chancery, The Pleas whereof be Coram
Domino Rege in Cancellaria. And there the Lord Chancellor upon the Record
certified to him in the Chancery, by a Writ of Certiorari, shall of course, by
force of the Statute of Gloucester cap. 9. Grant him his Pardon, without
speaking thereof to the King, Cokes 2 Inst. 316.

The ordinary power of the Chancery is very ancient; but no Court of Equity
there until Hen. 4. time: But since, The Chancellors attend upon the King to
decide matters in Equity, as the other Judges did, to decide Matters in Law.

The Chancellors in Edward the Thirds time, would come and sit in the Common
Pleas, and speak there to Matters in Law, Co. 2. Inst. 552, 553.

The Office of Keeper, same power with Chancellor, by the Statute of 5 Eliz.
cap. 13.

King Alfred, Anno Domini 872. gave a Pardon to Wolstan, which was enrolled in
the Court of Chancery, which Record Wolstan Vouched, Coke's 2 Inst. 554.

The Chancery cannot bind the Interest in Lands, but the Person only, 1 Co.
Rep. 139.

Therefore if Copyholder after Severance alien, there is no Means against him,
but by Decree in Chancery, and that cannot bind the Land, 4 Co. Rep. 25.
Copyhold Cases.

The Court of Star Chamber.
Coram Rege in Consilio suo.
HEld in a Chamber at one End of Westminster Hall, having the Sign of a Star
over one Door thereof, Anciently called Camera Stellata, The Chamber of the
Stars, Star Chamber, and the Starred Chamber, in respect of the Roof of the
Court, garnished with Golden Stars. Some have imagined, that it should be
called the Starred Chamber, because Crimina Stellionat' was there handled:
Others of the Saxon word Steeran, to Steer or Rule as does the Pilot; because
this Court did steer and govern the Commonwealth: Others, because it is full of
Windows: But the true cause of the Name was, because the Roof was starred.

This Court sat twice a Week in Term-time, viz. on Wednesdays and Fridays,
except either of those Days fell out to be the first or last Day of the Term,
then it sat not, but was constantly held the next Day after Term ended: But if
any Cause was begun to be heard in Term-time, and for length or difficulty
could not be sentenced within the Term, it was continued and sentenced after
the Term.

Diverse Acts of Parliament gave Jurisdiction to this Court, for to punish
horrible and enormous Crimes, and other exorbitant Offenses in Great Men; but
ordinary Offenses, and such as may be sufficiently punished by the proceedings
of the Common Law, this Court left to the ordinary Courts of Justice.

The proceeding in this Court wasby Bill or Information, by Examination of the
Defendant upon Interrogatories, and by Examination of Witnesses, and rarely Ore
tenus, upon the Confession of the party in Writing under his Hand; which he
again must confess freely in open Court, upon which Confession the Court did
proceed: But if the Confession was set down too short, or otherwise than he
meant, he might deny it, and then they could not proceed against him, but by
Bill or Information, which was the fairest way.

The Informations, Bills, Answers, Replications, etc. and Interrogatories were
(in English) Engrossed in Parchment and Filed up. All the Writs and Process of
the Court were under the Great-Seal. The Sentences, Decrees and Acts of this
Court were Engrossed in a fair Book, with the Names of the Lords and others of
the King's Council and Justices that were present, and gave their Voices.

In the 28th year of the Reign of Edward the Third it appears, that the
Retorns, Coram nobis, are in three manners: 1 Coram nobis in Camera, (which was
afterward called Camera stellata.) 2. Coram nobis ubicunque fucrimus in
Anglia, which is the King's Bench: And 3. Coram nobis in Cancellaria.

By the Statute of 3 Hen. 7. the Letter whereof follows: It was Ordained,
That the Chancellor and Treasurer of England, and the Keeper of the King's
Privy Seal; or two of them, calling to them a Bishop, and a Temporal Lord of
the Kings most Honorable Privy Council, and the two Chief Justices of the
King's Bench and Common Pleas for the time being, or other two Justices in their
absence, upon Bill or Information put to the said Lord Chancellor, or any other
against any person, for unlawful Maintenance, giving of Liveries, Signs and
Tokens, and Retainers by Indentures, Promises, Oaths, Writings or otherwise,
Imbraceries of his Subjects, Untrue demeaning of Sheriffs in making of Pannels,
and other untrue Returns, by taking of Money, by Injuries, by great Riots and
unlawful Assemblies, have Authority to call before them by Writ or Privy Seal,
the said Misdoers; and they and others by their Discretion, by whom the Truth
may be known to Examine, and such as they find therein Defective, to punish
them after their Demerits, after the Form and Effect of Statutes thereof, made,
in like manner and form, as they should and ought to be punished, if they were
thereof Convict after the due Order of Law.

Camerae Stellatae authoritatem prudentissimus Princeps Henricus Septimus, ita
Parliamentaria adauxit and Constabilivit nonnulli primum instituisse falso
opinantur.

But the Act of 3. Hen. 7. did not raise a New Court; for there was a Court of
Star Chamber before, and all the Kings Privy Council Judges of the same.

But By the Statute of 16 and 17. Car. 1. cap. 10. this Court is absolutely
Dissolved.

The Court for Redress of Delays of Judgments in the Kings great Courts.
THis Court is raised by the Statute of 14. E. 3. which follows in these
words:

Item, Because diverse Mischiefs have happened of late, that in diverse places as
well in the Chancery as in the King's Bench, the Common-Bench, and in the
Exchequer, before the Justices assigned, and other Justices to hear and
determine matters, the Judgments have been delayed sometimes by Difficulty,
sometimes by diverse Opinions of the Judges, and sometimes for some other Cause.
It is assented, established and accorded, That from henceforth at every
Parliament shall be chosen a Prelate, two Earls, and two Barons, which shall
have Commission and Power of the King to hear by Petition delivered unto them,
the Complaints of those that will complain to them of such Delays and
Grievances made, and they shall have power to come before them at Westminster,
or elsewhere, where the places or any of them shall be; the Tenor of Records
and Processes of such Judgments so delayed. and to cause the same Justices to
come before them, which shall be then present, to hear their cause and reasons
of such delays; which Cause and Reasons so heard by Good Advice of themselves,
the Chancellor, Treasurer, the Justices of the one Bench and of the other, and
other of the King's Counsel, as many and such as shall seem convenient, shall
proceed to take a good Accord, and make a good Judgment; and according to the
same Accord so taken, the Tenor of the same Accord, together with the Judgment
which shall be Accorded, shall be remanded before the Justices before whom the
Plea did depend, and that they shall give Judgment according to the same
accord: and in case it seems to them that the Difficulty be great, that it may
not well be determined without Assent of the Parliament, that the said Tenor or
Tenors shall be brought by the said Prelate, Earls and Barons in the next
Parliament, and there shall be a final Accord taken what Judgment ought to be
given in this case; and according to this Accord it shall be commanded to the
Judges before whom the Plea did depend, that they shall proceed to give
Judgment without delay.

Before the making of this Statute delay of Judgments was forbidden, both by
the Common Law and by Acts of Parliament. By the Common Law 1. It is required,
That Plena, and celeris, Justitia fiat partibus, etc. not plena alone, nor
celeris alone, but both plena and celeris. All Writs of Praecipe quod reddat
are, Quod just sine dilatione reddat, etc. All Judicial Writs are Sine
dilatione, etc. 2. There did and yet does lie a Writ De procedendo ad judicium,
when the Justices or Judges of any Court of Record, or not of Record delayed
the party Plaintiff, or Defendant, Demandant, or Tenant, and would not give
Judgment, and thereupon an Alias, Plur, and an Attachment, etc. does lie: And
the Words of the Writ be, Quia redditis Judicij loquelae quae est coram vobis,
etc. de quadam transgressione eidem A. perpraefat. B. illata, ut dicitur,
diuturnam cepit dilationem ad grave dampnum ipsius A. Sicut ex querela sua
accepimus: Vobis praecipimus, quod ad judicium inde reddend cum ea celeritate
quae secundum Legem and consuetudinem regni nostri procedas, etc.

Likewise when Justices or Judges of any Court of Record, or not of Record,
give Judgment, and delayed the party of his Execution, the party grieved may
have a Writ De executione Judicij; by which Writ the Justices or Judges are
commanded, Quod executioonem judicij nuper redditi, etc. de loquela quae fuit,
etc. per breve nostrum, etc. sine dilatione Fieri fac', and thereupon an Alias,
Plur', and Attachment, etc. do lie.

By the meeting together upon Adjournment of the Cause out of the Court where
the Cause depends, etc. all the Judges, etc. which now we call an Exchequer
Chamber Cause, Warranted by the Common Law and Ancient Presidents before this
Statute; and the frequent use of this Court of Exchequer Chamber has been the
Cause that this Court upon the Act of 14 E. 3. has been rarely put in ure.

By the King's Writ, comprehending Quod si difficultas aliqua intersit, that
the Record should be certified into the Parliament, and to Adjourn the parties
to be there at a certain Day, Si obscurum and difficile sit Judicium, ponantur
judicia in respect' usque magnam curiam. An excellent Record whereof you may
read in the Parliament holden at Westminster the Tuesday after the Translation
of St. Thomas Becket, Ann^ 14 E. 3.

Secondly, By Acts of Parliament, Nulli vendemus, nulli negabimus, aut
differemus, justitiam vel rectum.

That it shall not be commanded neither by the Great Seal, nor by the Little
Seal, nor by Letters, nor any other cause to delay Right; and albeit such
commandment come, etc. that by them the Justices surcease not to do Right in no
manner.

In diverse cases the party grieved, shall have an Action for unjust delay.

Toll moram, semper nocuit differ paratis. But seeing neither the Common
Law, nor any of the Acts of Parliament, do extend to Ecclesiastical Courts, it
is then demanded, What if an Inferior Ordinary will refuse, or delay to admit,
and institute a Clerk presented by the right Patron, to a Church within his
Diocese or the like, or delay, or refuse to give Sentence in a Case depending
before him? It is Answered, That the Archbishop of the Province, may grant his
Letters under his Seal to all and singular Clerks of his Province, to admonish
the Ordinary within Nine days, to perform that which by Justice is desired, or
otherwise to cite him, to appear before him, or his Official at a day in those
Letters prefixed, and to cite the party that has suffered such delay, then,
and there likewise to appear; and further to intimate to the said Ordinary,
that if he neither perform that which is enjoined, nor appear, he himself
without further delay, will perform the Justice required; or in the former of
the said Cases, the party delayed, may have his Quare impedit, but that is
thought not to be so speedy a remedy, Cokes 4 Inst. cap. 6.

The Kings Bench Court.
THis Court is so called, because anciently the King sat there sometimes in
Person upon a high Bench, and the Judges upon a low Bench at his Feet, to whom
the Judicature belongs in the absence of the King.

And the Pleas here are betwixt the King and Subject; As for Treasons,
Felonies, Breach of the Peace, Oppression, Misgovernment, etc. And moreover it
examineth, and corrects all Errors in facto, and in jure of all the Judges and
Justices of England, in their Judgments and Proceedings, and this not only in
Pleas of the Crown, but in all Pleas Real, Personal and Mixed, except only in
the Exchequer. And in this Court are

Four Judges. First, The Lord Chief Justice created by Writ thus, Mathis Hale
Militi Salutem, Sciatis quod constitu^mus vos Justiciarium Nostrum capitalem,
ad Placita coram nobis tenenda, durant^ been placito Nostro, Test me ipso ap^l
Westminst.

Three other Judges hold their Places by Letters Patents in these word, Rea
Omnibus ad quos Praesentes Litterae pe^^nerint Salutem, Sciatis quod
Constitu^mus Dilectum and Fidelem R.R. Militem, un^^ Justiciariorum ad placita
coram nobis ^^nenda, durante been placito nostro, Test^ etc.

These Judges and all the Officers of this Court have Salaries from the King,
and the Chief of them Liveries out of the great Wardrobe.

In this Court all young Lawyers, who have been called to the Bar are allowed
to Plead and Practice.

This Court may grant Prohibition to keep other Courts, both Ecclesiastical and
Temporal within their Bounds and due Jurisdiction.

The Jurisdiction thereof is General, and extends to all England, is more
uncontrolable than any other Court, because the Law presumes the King always is
present there in Person.

None may be Judge here but a Ser^eant, who upon taking his Degree is obliged
to wear a Lawn Coif under ^his Cap for ever after.

The King has wholly left matters of Judicature according to his Laws, to his
Judges; and albeit the Delinquent shall be Fined at the Will of the King, Non
Dominus Rex Camera sua, nec aliter nisi per Justiciarios suos Finem imponit.

Errors in the Kings Bench cannot be reversed, (except in certain particular
cases, by Stat. 27 Eliz. c. 8. wherein the ^urisdiction of the Court is saved)
but in the High Court of Parliament.

A Record brought into this Court cannot (as it were being in its Center) be
remanded back, unless by Act of Parliament; But Indictments of Fe^onies, and
Murders may be remanded, and sent by the Justices of that Court unto the
several Counties.

The Justices of the Kings Bench may grant a Nisi prius in case of Treason,
Felony, and other Pleas; but if they perceive an Indictment to be removed into
that Court by practice, or for delay, they may send it back again for Justice
to be done.

In this Court the Sentence is give^ by the Chief Justice, the others all (...)
the most part assenting. If they cannot agree, it is referred to a Demurrer i^
the Exchequer Chamber, before all the Judges of both Benches, and Chie^ Baron
of the Exchequer: And now (...) us speak somewhat of

The Officers.
THe Prothonotary records all Jud^ments, Orders and Rules of Cour^^ and all
Verdicts given, being not (...) Crown matters.

The Secondary is his Deputy for (...) said Cause, who keeps and mak^ up these
Records in Books, and alway^ attends the Court.

The Clerk of the Crown Frames (...) Indictments of Felony, Treason, M^ther,
etc. all manner of Appeals, a^^ is after to Record them and enter (...)
Verdict, and to make and keep the Records of these matters. And has (...)
Deputy.

The Clerk of the Exigents Frames (...) Process of Exigi facias, and Reco^^ the
Oulawry.

The Clerk of the Papers keeps all Rolls, Script Pleadings, and other things
which are not of Record.

The Custos Brevium Files all Writs Original and Judicial, after their Return
by the Sheriffs, and is chargable for the same if imbezled.

The Custos Sigilli Seals all Judicial Writs, Patents and Licenses issuing out
of the Court, and takes the Fee, and thereof makes Account.

The Attorneys which are for Plaintiffs, and Defendants in every Cause Frame
and make Pleadings.

The Marshal of the Court who either by himself, or his Deputy or Servants,
attends the Court to receive Prisoners committed to their Custody.

The Clerk of the Declaration, keeps and Files Declarations after they are
Engrossed, and continued on the Back, from the Term you Declare, till Issue
Joined.

The Clerk of the Rules makes all Rules, and Enters them and gives Copies, and
also Files all Affidavits, etc.

The Phillizers, one for each County, to make all mean Process after Original,
in proceeding to the Utlary.

The Clerk of the Errors allows (...) Writs of Error, and makes the Supersedeas
thereupon, and Transcribes the Records into the Exchequer Chamber.

The Cryers always attend the Court, to call Non-suits, give Oaths to
Wi^nesses, Jury Men at Trials, and d^ such other Business as the Court sha^^
direct, and at the end of every Term do attend the Court.

The Porter of the Court, who bring^ all Records into Court, when they a^^ to
be used.

This Court may Bail any person for any Offense whatsoever; and if a Free man
in any City, Borough or Tow^ Corporate be Disfranchised unjustly, albeit he
has not privilege in th^^ Court, yet this Court may relieve the party, as
appears in Coke's 11 Rep. Jam^^ Bagg's Case. Et sic in similibus.

H. P. Captus per querimoniam Merca^^rum Flandriae, and imprisonatus offert
Domino Regi Hus and Haut in plegio ad st^^dum recto, and ad respondendum
praedi^^^ Mercatoribus, and omnibus alijs qui v^^sus eum loqui voluerint, etc.
The French word Hus signifying an Elder-Tree, and Haut the Staff of a Halbert,
a^^ thought then to be Common Ba^ changed now to Do and Roo, and th^^ then
putting in Bail at one Man's Suit, was (in Custodia Mareschalli) to answer all
others that should Sue him by Bill, and this continues to this Day.

A Scire facias to Repeal a Patent of the King, may be brought in this Court.

In Ancient time when Pleas were holden in Parliament, when the Parties
descended to Issue, the Record was Adjourned into the King's Bench.

By Stat. 18 Ed. 3. The Oath to be given to Justices when they take their place
is to this effect, viz. To serve the King in their Offices, To warn them of any
Damage, do Justice, take no Bribe, give no Council where he is a Party,
maintain no Suit, nor deny Right (though by command from the King,) To procure
the Kings profit, and to be answerable to the King in Body, Lands and Goods, if
found in default.

By Stat. 10. H. 6. not in Print, The Justices, Sergeants and the King's
Attorney, shall be paid their Wages by the Treasurer of England at Easter and
Michaelmas, without any other Suit.

By Stat. 28 Hen. 8. All Attaints shall be taken in the King's Bench, and
Common Pleas, and not elsewhere.

Stat. 5 Ed. 3.12. If Outlary happen before Justices of Oyer and Terminer, and
the Justices be risen before the Party yield himself, he shall do it in the
King's Bench.

The Justices in this Court are the Sovereign Justices of Oyer and Terminer,
Gaol Delivery, Conservators of the Peace, etc. in the Realm, and Sovereign
Coroners of the Land: And therefore where the Sheriff and Coroners may receive
Appeals by Bill, a Fortiori the Justices of this Court may do it.

Out of this Court are other Courts derived in respect of the multiplicity of
causes which have increased.

Jurisdictio istius Curiae est Original^^ seu ordinaria, and non delegata: And
the Justices of this Court were called Anciently Justiciae, Justiciarij, Locum
tenentes Domini Regis, etc. And the Style of this Court is Anglia in the
Margent, and the Chief Justice was called Justicia Angliae, Justicia prima,
Justiciarius Angliae capitalis, and Justiciarius noster, capitalis, ad placita
coram nobis terminand^, and in diverse Acts of Parliament he is called, Chief
Justice of England.

The Kings Bench has Authority for Great Misprisions and Offenses, to Adjudge
and Inflict corporal Punishments, as Pillory, Papers and the like, Coke's 4
Inst. cap. 7.

The Court of Common Pleas.
THis Court is so called, because there are debated the usual Pleas, between
Subject and Subject, although not in respect of Persons, but in respect of the
Pleas, being Communia placita: And some say this Court as well as others, was
at first held in the King's House wheresoever he resided: But by Magna Charta
it is ordained, This Court should not be Ambulatory, but held at a certain
place, and that has ever since been in Westminster Hall.

And this Court is the Lock and Key of the Common Law in Common Pleas; for here
all Real Actions, whereupon Fines, Recoveries, and Common Assurances of the
Realms do pass, and all Real Actions by Original Writs are to be determined,
and all Common Pleas mixed, or personal, in diverse whereof this Court, and the
Kings Bench have a concurrent Authority.

This Court Regularly holds no Plea, but by Original Writ out of the Chancery,
and returnable into this Court; But in certain cases it holds Plea by Bill
without such Writ, as for or against persons privileged in this Court.

Also, without Original Writ, this Court may upon suggestion grant Prohibitions
to keep Ecclesiastical Courts within their Limits and Jurisdiction.

This Court, (but no inferior Court) may write to the Bishop to certify
Bastardy, or Legal Matrimony; so likewise upon ancient Demesne pleaded.

The Lord Chief Justice of the Common Pleas or Common Bench, holds his place
Durante bene-placito, by Letters Patent in this form, Rex, etc. Sciatis, quod
constituimus dilectum and fidelem, E C. Militem Capitalem Justiciarium de
Communi Banco habendum quamdiu nobis placu^^it, cum Vadijs, and Feodis ab
antiquo debitis, and consuetis. In cujus rei Testimonium has Literas nostras
fieri fecimus Patentes, Test, etc.

And the three other Judges have Letters Patent: Sciatis quod constituimus
dilect' and Fidelem, P. W. Militem, unum Justiciariorum nostrorum de Communi
Banco, etc.

The Jurisdiction of this Court is general, and extends throughout all
England: And for the Antiquity of this Court, Vide 6 E. 3. where a Fine was
levied in this Court, 6 R. 1. And none of the Judges of this Court may take Fee
of any but the King; and they ought to observe (and likewise all other
Officers) the Rule in Law, Nemo Duobus utatur Officijs. And now we come to

The Officers.
THe Custos Brevium, who is the Chief Officer of the Court.

The Three Prothonotaries, in whose Offices all Pleadings are Entered, and all
Common Recoveries Recorded, and Exemplified.

The Clerk of the Warrants, who enters all Warrants of Attorney, and inrolleth
all Deeds acknowledged before Justices of the Court.

The Phillizers, who have the several Counties of England divided amongst them,
and make all mean Process upon Original before Appearance.

The Clerk of Essoyns, who enters all Essoyns, and Exceptions in all Actions,
and prepares and marketh all Rolls for the Court.

The Clerk of the Utlaries, who makes all Capias utlagatum upon return of the
Exigents brought him: The Kings Attorney is Master of this Office.

The Exigenters appointed for several Counties, who make the Writs of Exigents
and Proclamations, upon the return of the Pluries Capias brought them.

The Clerk of the Supersedeas, who makes Writs to supersede the Utlary, upon
the Parties appearing to the Exigent.

The Clerk of the Juries, who makes Writs of Habeas Corpora Jur', and
Distringas Jur', for Trial of Issues.

The Chirographer, who makes the Indentures of Fines Levied.

The Clerk of the Kings Silver, who Enters upon Record the Money which the King
is to have upon Fines, for the Post Fines, according to the value of the Land,
as the same is rated upon the Writs of Covenant.

The Clerk of the Errors, who makes the Supersedeas upon the Writs of Error,
and does Transcribe the Records out of the Common Pleas into the Kings Bench.

The Clerk of the Treasury, who keeps the Rolls of the Court and makes Copies,
and Exemplifications thereof, and also all Records of Nisi prius, which are
after the same Term wherein Issue is joined.

The Proclamator of the Court, The Keeper of the Court, The Office of Inrolment
of Fines and Recoveries erected by Statute.

Four Cryers or Tipstaffs, Substitutes to the Proclamator.

The Warden of the Fleet, who by himself or his Deputy is to attend the Court;
That Prison being proper for all Commitments out of this Court.

The Pleaders are Sergeants of the Coif; none under that degree are admitted to
Plead at the Bar, nor to Sign any special Pleadings in that Court.

The Attorneys are many, being not limited.

In this Court all Civil Causes, Real or Personal are usually tried according
to strict Rule of Law; and Real Actions are Pleadable in no other Court.

The Proceedings in this Court are by Origin^l Summons, Attachias, Capias,
Alias Capias, Pluries Capias, Exigi Facias, and Proclamation into the County
where the Defendant dwells: And for their General Rule, see the Books at
large.

The King allows the Lord Chief Justice a Fee, Reward, Robes and Two Tun of
Wine: And to the Three other Judges, and to Four Sergeants he allows Fees,
Rewards and Robes to each.

The Clerk of the Supersede as holds his Place by Patent: The Phillizers are in
the Gift of the Lord Chief Justice, and hold for Life.

The Four Exigenters are in the Lord Chief Justice Gift, and are for Life.

This court has Jurisdiction for granting Prohibitions upon Suggestions, where
there is neither Writ of Attachment nor Plea depending, Coke's 4. Inst. 10.

And this Court has Jurisdiction for Punishment of their Officers and
Ministers.

The Court of the Exchequer.
IS so called (as some think) from the Chequer wrought Carpet Covering, the
great Table in that Court* Or else from the French Eschequier a Chess-board,
because the Accomptants in that Office were wont to use such Boards in their
Calculation; And the Authority of this Court, as all the other Courts before
mentioned is of Original Jurisdiction, without any Commission, not Instituted
by any Statute or Written Law, but have their Jurisdiction Originally from the
Ancient Customs of the Kingdom.

And this Court is divided into Two parts, (viz.) Judicial Accounts called
Scaccarium Computorum, and the Receipt of the Exchequer. Una Origo Utriusque
Scaccarij, Superioris, scilicet and Inferioris, sed quicquid in Superiori
computatur, in Inferiori solvitur': But before we proceed further it will be
necessary to declare

The Officers.
DOminus Thesaurarius Angliae, has his Office by delivery of a White Staff at
the Kings Will and Pleasure; In former times by delivery of the Golden Keys of
the Treasury: When Treasure failed the White Staff served to Rest him upon it,
or drive away importunate Suitors. The Office and Duty of the Lord Treasurer
appears by his Oath, Consisting of Eight Articles, for the due Execution of his
Office, and truly to Council and Advise the King; as in the 4th Institutes you
may Read more at large. And he has the keeping of the Kings Treasure, and
Records of the Exchequer; and has many Officers at his sole Appointment, has
the nomination of Escheators in every County, and is to appoint a Measurer for
Cloths; he with others joined with him, grant Leases of the Crown Lands, and
gives Warrants to certain persons to have their Wine Custom Free. The ancient
Salary of the Lord Treasurer was, 383 l. 7 s. 8 d. lately it has been 8000 per
Annum. The Office is sometimes Executed by Commission; and he is also Treasurer
of the Exchequer, by Letters Patent under the great Seal. And next to the Lord
High Treasurer is,

Cancellarius Scaccarij, who keeps the Seal, Et les Brev. usual in le
Chancery, en le Exchq', etc. sont pluis ancient que le Register. He is
sometimes under Treasurer, and Governor of the Court. Under the High Treasurer
is, The Comptroller of the Pipe, and many Officers are at his Appointment, and
these seldom sit in Court. But there is

The Lord Chief Baron, who is created by Letters Patent Quam diu se been
gesserit, and Answers the Bar, taken Recognizances for the Kings Debts, etc.
and with him commonly sit.

Three other Barons, who in his Absence supply his Place according to
Seniority. And there is also

One Cursitor or Puisne Baron, who administers the Oaths to the Sheriffs,
Under-Sheriffs, Searchers, Surveyors, etc. of the Custom-House.

And in the upper Exchequer are these under Officers;

The Kings Remembrancer, in whose Office are Two Secondaries, and Six others
who are Sworn Clerks; and his Office and Duty is; First, To Write Process
against all Collectors of Customs, Subsidies, etc. Secondly, He entre^h all
Recognizanees before the Barons, and takes Bonds for the Kings Debts, for
observing of Orders, or for Appearances, and makes out Process thereupon.
Thirdly, He makes out Process upon Penal Statutes, and enters all Informations
in this Office. Fourthly, He makes Bills of Compositions upon Penal Statutes.
Fifthly, He takes the Stalment of Debts, and enters them Sixthly, Into this
Office ought to be delivered all Conveyances, and all Evidences whereby any
Lands, etc. are granted to the King. Seventhly, There being a Court of Equity
holden in the Exchequer Chamber by English Bill; all the Bills and Proceedings
thereupon are entered in this Office. See the Statute of 5 R. 2. cap. 14. Stat.
1.

The Lord Treasurer's Remembrancer, whose Office is to make out Process against
all Sheriffs, Receivers, Bailiffs, etc. And for their Accounts and many other
things, as Estreat-Rules, all Charters and Letters Patent, whereupon any Rents
are reserved to the King; and formerly here were Two Secondaries, and Ten other
Sworn Clerks. If any Clerk make Process for any Debt paid, the Tallies whereof
are joined and allowed, he shall lose his Office, be Imprisoned, etc. He makes
Entry of Record of Sheriffs and Accomptants, paying their proffers at Easter
and Michaelmas, and makes Entry of keeping their days of Prefixion. The Green
Wax is certified into his Office, and by him delivered to the Clerk of
Estreats: All Accounts of Customers, Comptrollers, etc. are here entered to
avoid all delay and concealment.

The Clerk of the Pipe, the Original Institution of whose Office was from a
Conduit, or Conveyance of Water into a Cistern; For all Accounts and Debts to
the King are drawn from and delivered out of the Offices of the Kings
Remembrancer, and Lord Treasurers Remembrancer, etc. and charged in the Pipe:
So as whatsoever is in charge in this Roll or Pipe, is said to be duly in
charge. In the Patent of this Office he is called Ingrossator Magni Rot' in
Scaccario: Here are under him Eight Sworn Clerks. Here Accomptants have their
Quietus est, and Leases are made of Extended Lands.

Comptroller of the Pipe, He writes out Summons twice every year to the high
Seriff, to levy the Farms and Debts of the Pipe, and keeps a Comptrolment or
Roll of the Pipe Office Accounts.

Clerk of the Pleas, in whose Office all the Officers of the Exchequer, and
Privileged Persons, as Debtors to the King, etc. are to have their Privilege,
to Plead, and be Impleaded as to all matters at the Common Law: And the
Proceedings are accordingly by Declarations, Pleas and Trials as at Common Law,
because they should not be drawn out of their Court, where their attendance is
required. In this Office are Four Sworn Attorneys.

Foreign Opposer, to whom all Sheriffs repair to be opposed of their Green-wax,
and from thence is drawn down a charge upon the Sheriff to the Clerk of the
Pipe.

Clerk of the Estreats or Extracts, is every Term to receive from the Office of
the Treasurers Remembrancer, all Debts or Sums to be levied for the King's use,
and to make Schedules for such Sums as are to be charged.

Auditors of the Impressed are Two, who Audit the great Accounts of the King's
Customs, Wardrobe, Mint, First Fruits and Tenths, Naval and Military Expenses,
Moneys Impressed, etc.

Auditors of the Revenue are Seven; These Audit all the Accounts of the Kings
other Revenue that arises by Aids.

Auditors of the Receipts is a kind of Filazer, for he Files all Tellers Bills,
and Enters them. Secondly, He is a Remembrancer; for he gives the Lord
Treasurer a Certificate of the Money received the Week before.

Thirdly, He is an Auditor, for he makes Debentures to every Teller before
they pay any Money, and takes and audietth their Accounts; and keeps the
Black Book of Receipts, And the Lord Treasurers Key of the Treasury, and sees
every Tellers Money Locked up safe in the new Treasury.

Remembrancer of the first Fruits Executed by Two Deputies, they take all
compositions for First Fruits and Tenths, and make out Process against all
which pay not the same.

Clericus Nihilorum, makes a Roll of all such Sums as the Sheriffs upon
Process of the Green-wax return Nihil, and delivers that Roll into the Office
of the Lord Treasurers Remembrancer to have Execution done of it for the King.

Mareschallus, To this Officer the Court commits the keeping of the Kings
Debtors during the Sitting of the Term, to the end they may provide to pay the
Kings Debts, or be further Imprisoned; such Offices as are found Virtute
Officij, and brought into the Exchequer, are delivered to him to be delivered
over to the Lord Treasurer's Remembrancer. He also appoints Auditors to
Sheriffs, Escheators, Customers and Collectors for taking their Accounts.

Clericus Summonitionum, Clerk of the Summons.

Deputati Camerarij, which are Two, called Under-chamberlains of the Exchequer:
They cleave the Tallies written by the Clerk of the Tallies, and read the same,
that the Clerk of the Pell, and the Comptrollers thereof may see their Entries
be true; They also search for Records in their Treasury: And there are other
Officers as Clerk of the Parcels, Usher of the Exchequer, whose Office is
Executed by a Deputy, and four Under-ushers.

In the Lower Exchequer are these Officers.
THe Lord High Treasurer of England, of whose Office and Dignity we have spoken
before in the uppe^ Exchequer: And concerning the course of the Receipt in this
Exchequer, you may read more in Rot' Claus' 39 E. 3. M. 26.

The other Officers there are one Secretary. And next is

The Chancellor, who has a princip^^ power, not only in the Exchequer Court,
but there also, in the managing and disposing of the Kings Revenue.

Two Chamberlains, in whose Custody are many ancient Records, Leagues and
Treaties with Foreign Princes; The Standards of Moneys, Weights and Measures;
The Famous Books called Doomesday, and the Black Book of the Exchequer.

Four Tellers, Their Office is to receive all Moneys due to the King, and
thereupon to throw down a Bill through a Pipe into the Chamberlains or Tally
Court.

Clerk of the Pells, is to enter every Tellers Bill in a Parchment Skin, in
Latin Pellis, whence this Office has its name.

The Two Deputy Chamberlains, Sit in the Tally Court, cleave the Tallies and
examine each piece a part, as is said before in the Upper Exchequer.

Two Ushers, who take care to secure the Court by Day and Night, and all the
Avenues leading to the same, and are to furnish all Books, Paper, etc.

One Tally Cutter, who provides fitting Hazel, cuts them square and of full
lengths, and has dividend Fees with the other Officers, of the Party who sueth
it out.

The Four Messengers of the Receipt, are Pursuivants Attendants upon the Lord
Treasurer for carrying his Letter and Precepts to all Customers, Comptrolers
and Searchers, and all other His Majesty's Messages, where the Lord Treasurer
shall command them.

In case of any Pension given by the King, there is only 5 l. per Cent. paid to
all the Officers, for all public payments, not 5. s. for the Hundred pounds.

For all Moneys paid in by the King's Tenants or Receiver, it costs them but 6
d. or at most but 3 d. for every payment under 1000 l.

The Collectors and Receivers cost the King not above Two in the pound, and at
his Exchequer it costs nothing.

For the Course of the Exchequer, and Duty of the several Officers, you may
Read in the Authors, who have treated thereof more at large.

There is a General Statute concerning all the Courts of the King, made 2 Hen.
6. cap. 10. That all Officers made by the King's Letters Patents within his
Courts, which have Authority (ab antiquo) to appoint Clerks and Ministers
within the said Courts, shall be Sworn to appoint for whom they will answer,
and such as are sufficient, and will be Faithful and Diligent in their places.

In the same manner we have Ordained in the Right of the Barons of the
Exchequer, that we have expressly charged them in our presence, that they shall
do Right and Reason to all our Subjects, and that they shall deliver the People
reasonably and without delay, etc. And more of the Officers of this Court, and
their Duty, you may read in the Statutes at large.

Resolved in the Case of Auditor Provy, that if A. be indebted to B. and B. is
indebted to the King, that the King by his Prerogative may Levy his Debt upon
A. but this Levying ought to be of an immediate, and not of a mediate Debtor to
the Debtor of the King; As if A. be indebted to B. and B. to C. and C. to the
King, the King cannot Levy his Debt of A. for then it might be Levied in
infinitum; Quod reprobatur in Jure.

The Barons of the Exchequer are the Sovereign Auditors of England; for if a
Man Assign Auditors to a Bailiff, or Receiver to Account, and the Auditors will
not allow just and reasonable allowances, but will Commit the Bailiff or
Receiver to Prison, such Prisoner may have an Original Writ of Ex part talis
returnable before the Treasurer and Barons of the Exchequer for his relief.

If the Barons do not allow an Accomptant before them such just Demands as he
makes, he may have a Writ De Allocatione facienda, directed to the Treasurer
and Barons, Commanding them to allow the same.

Gifts by word of Mouth from the King, not allowable but void.

Neither is a Warrant under the Signet, sufficient to Issue any Treasure of the
King out of the Receipt, but it must be under the Great, or Privy Seal.

Whereas it is said, That the King may Distrain in all the other Lands of his
Tenant of whomsoever they are holden, it is thus to be understood; That the
other Lands must be in the actual Possession of the Kings Tenant, for he cannot
Distrain in those Lands in the Possession of his Tenant for Life, Tenant for
Years, or at Will, Coke's 4 Inst. cap. 11, 12, 13.

The Oath of the Barons of the Exchequer, expressing there Duties consists
upon Ten Articles: 1st That well and truly he shall serve in the Office of
Baron of the King's Exchequer: 2ly, That truly he shall charge and discharge
all manner of People as well Poor as Rich: 3ly, That for no highness, nor for
Riches nor for hatred, nor Estate of no Person or Persons whatsoever, nor for
any Deed, Gift nor Promise of any Person the which is made to him, nor by
Craft, nor by Engine he shall let the King's Right: 4ly, Nor none other Persons
Right he shall disturb, let or respite contrary to the Laws of the Land: 5ly,
Nor the Kings Debts he shall put in respite where that they may goodly be
levied: 6ly, That the Kings need he shall speed before all others: 7ly, That
neither for Gift, Wages, nor good Deed, he shall lain, disturb nor let the
profit or reasonable advantage of the King, in the advantage of any other
person, nor of himself: 8ly, That nothing he shall take of any person for to do
wrong, or right to delay, or to deliver, or to delay the people that have to do
before him, but as hastily as he may them goodly to deliver without hurt of the
King, and having no regard to any profit that might thereof to him be therein,
he shall make to be delivered: 9ly, Where he may know any wrong, or prejudice
to be done to the King, he shall put and do all his power and diligence that to
redress, and if he may not do it, that he tell it to the King, or to them of
the Council, which may make relation to the King, if he may not come to him:
10ly, The King's Counsel he shall keep, and lain in all things. And like to the
Chief Baron, the rest of the Baron are constituted by Letters Patent; and the
Patents of the Attorney General, and Solicitor are also Quamdiu se been
gesserit, Coke's 4. Inst. cap. 11, 12.

The Lord Chief Baron is Sworn by the Lord Chancellor, or Lord Keeper for the
time being; and in matters of Law, Information, and Plea he answers the Bar
and all Suitors. He ever gives Judgment in the Term-time only, and gives his
directions to the Remembrancer in this manner: If the King's Attorney say
nothing for the King, between this and such a day, for such a matter, enter
Judgment for A.B. Or, if the Party for nothing for such a matter, by such a day
enter Judgment for the King. Practick part of the Law, Court of Exchequer.

The Court of Inquiry, to certify untrue Accounts in the Exchequer.
THis Court Sits by Commission under the Great Seal, by force of the Statute of
6 Hen. 4. Directed and sent with the Tenor of the Account to discreet persons
in the County, where the Officers be to Enquire, and certify the profits by
them received; and if they be attainted of Fraud, they forfeit treble value,
and their Bodies to Prison, until they make Fine, and Ransom at the discretion
of the Judges.

In the Exchequer Wall is this old Verse Engraven.

Ingrediens Jani rediturus es aemulus argi. The Court of Equity in the
Exchequer.
THe Judges of this Court are the Lord Treasurer, Chancellor and Barons of the
Exchequer.

And generally their Jurisdiction is as large for matter of Equity, as the
Barons in the Court of Exchequer have for benefit of the King at the Common
Law. For all the

Proceedings both in this Court of Equity, and of that at the Common Law ought
to be touching the King; or otherwise, there lies a Prohibition, which appears
by the Register for all are Communia Placita, which are not Placita Coronae.

More of the Jurisdiction and Authority of this Court, you may see by the
Statute of 33 Hen. 8. and Coke's Instit. cap. 13.

The Office of Pleas in the Exchequer.
THis is the Office of the Common Law, and the Proceedings in most things
agreeable to the King's Bench, and Common Pleas.

Their Leading Process is Quo minus, or Subpoena; the Quo minus is like the
Capias, or Latitat to take the Body of the Defendant, and was anciently granted
to the Kings Tenants, or Debtors only.

But now the Practice of this Office is grown General in all cases almost by
the Subpoena, which being easier brings much into this Office, especially in
Wales, where the King's Writ runs not, only Capias Utlagatum.

There are Four Attorneys, and in their Declarations they always suppose the
Plaintiff to be Debtor to the King.

In this Office, all Officers of the Exchequer are to Sue and be Sued, and all
manner of Accomptants, and all Suits removed out of any Court of Record by the
King's Writ, or out of any Court at Westminster by the Red Book.

The Execution after Judgment, or Verdict, is by Fieri Facias, or Capias ad
satisfaciend', as in other Courts of Common Law.

The Defendant in some cases must put in Sureties upon Appearances to render,
if he be condemned, and this Bail or Recognizance must be taken before a Baron
in Court, and not otherwise.

First Fruits and Tenths were granted to the Crown by the Statute of 26 H. 8.
cap. 3. But the Clergy being discharged thereof Anno 1 and 2 Philip and Mary,
they were again reunited to the Crown 1 Eliz. cap. 4. but no Court revived. And
being under the Governance of the Exchequer, a New Office was created, and an
Officer, viz. Remembrancer of the First Fruits and Tenths. And more concerning
them, and the manner of Taxation of them, you may read Coke's 4th Inst. cap. 14.

The Court of Augmentations. Within the Survey and Governance of this Court
were all Lands belonging to Monasteries, and Purchased Lands; but Queen Mary by
her Letters Patent in the First year of her Reign dissolved it, and united it
to the Exchequer; as by the Articles thereof may appear.

The Surveyor General's Court is Dissolved, the Office only remaining.

So that in the Exchequer are Seven Courts: 1. The Court of Pleas, 2. The Court
of Accounts, 3. The Court of Receipt, 4. The Court of the Exchequer Chamber,
being the Assembly of all the Judges in England for Matters in Law; 5. The
Court of Exchequer-Chamber for Errors in the Exchequer; 6. The Court in the
Exchequer-Chamber for Errors in the King's- Bench, And 7. The Court of Equity
in the Exchequer, Chamber: of all which see the Books and Statutes mentioned in
Coke's 4 Inst. c. 13.

The Court of Justices of Assize, and Nisi prius.
THese Justices take their Names from the Writ of Assize, called Assiza Novae
Disseisinae, or Petit Brief de Novel Disseizin. And the Mirror says, That for
Expedition of Justice it was ordained by Ranulph de Glanvil; but by 26 Ass. 24.
it appears to be more Ancient. At the Common Law Assizes were not to be taken,
but either in Bank, or before ^ustices in Air: But by Magna Charta it is
Enacted, Quod Recognitiones de Nova, Disseisina, and de Morte Antecessoris, non
capiantur nisi in suis propriis Comitatibus, etc. And upon that Statute of
Magna Charta, the Letters Patent to the Justices are framed in these Words,
(viz.)

Rex, etc. Dilectis and Fidelibus suis R. M. uni Justiciariorum suorum de
Banco, and I.L. uni Justiciariorum suorum ad Placita coram nobis tenenda
Assign', Salutem: Sciatis, Quod Constituimus vos Justiciarios nostros una cum
hiis quos vobis associaverimus ad Omnes Assizas, Jurat', Certificat', coram
quibuscunque Justic', tam per diversa Brevia Domini Johannis nuper Regis Angl'
Patris nostri, quam per diversa Brev' nostra in Com' nostris South', Wiltes',
Dorset', Devon', and Cornub', ac in Civitate Exon', arranian' capiend'; Et ideo
vobis Mandamus quod ad certos dies and loca quos vos ad hoc provideritis,
Assis. Jurat', and Certificat', illas capiatis, Facturi inde quod ad Justitiam
pertinet secundum Legem and consuetudinem Regni nostri Angliae, Salvis nobis
amerciamentis inde nobis provenien'; Mandavimus enim Vicecomisibus nostris,
Com' and Civit' praed', quod ad certos dies, and loca quos eis Scire faciatis,
Assis. Jurat', and Certificat' illas una cum Brevibus Originalibus and omnibus
aliis ea tangen', coram vobis venire faciat'. In cujus rei Testimonium, etc.

By this Writ the Seisin and Possession was recovered, and became more
frequent, Quia non est aliud Breve in Cancellaria, per quod Querentes habent
festinum remedium, quam per Assisam. And after the Statute of Westminster was,
and thereby provided, Quod assignentur duo Justiciarij jurati, coram quibus,
and non aliis, Capiantur Assisae, etc. ad plus ter per Annum.

And Rot. Parl. 21 Ed. 1. Dominus Rex, etc. praecepit, quod de caetero
assignentur Octo Justiciarij Circumspecti and discreti ad Assisas, Jurat', and
Certificat' capiend', per Totum Regnum Angliae, and divides the Realm into
Eight parts.

Per Stat. de Finibus 27 Ed. 1. cap. 1. Justiciarij ad Assisas capiendas
assignati, deliberent Gaolas in Com' Illas tam infra Libertates, quam extra, de
Prisonariis quibus cumque. And Appeals of Murder, Robbery, Rape, etc. may be
commenced before Justices of Assize: And diverse other Powers and Authorities
are given to J^stices of Assize, and Jail-deliver; for which see the Statutes,
and Coke's 4 Inst. cap. 27.

Justices of Assize shall enquire for Non Returning, and False Return of
Sheriffs.

May hear and determine of Conspirators, false Informers, and wicked Procurers
of Dozens, Inquests and Juries, at the complaint of any without Writ, and
without Delay, and of Confederacies and Champerties, and Maintainers, Bearers,
and Alliances by Bond, etc. Of Defaults of Sheriffs, Escheators, Bailiffs, and
other Officers.

Justices of Assize may enquire of Defaults, etc. of Punishment of Victualers,
etc. which sell at unreasonable Prizes.

They have power to hear and determine riding and going Armed, etc. and to
punish Justices of the Peace, Sheriffs, Bailiffs, and others, for not doing
their Office in that case.

They may hear and determine Treason in Counterfeiting of Money, etc. They
shall do Execution of the Statute of 13 H. 3. of Riots done in their presence,
upon pain of an Hundred pounds, and by the Statute of 2 H. 5. Commissions shall
be Awarded to Enquire of the Default of the Justices of Assize, and of Justices
of Peace in that behalf.

They shall enquire of, hear, and determine all Offices contrary to the Statute
of 23 H. 6. concerning Sheriffs, Under-sheriffs, and their Clerks, Coroners,
Stewards of Franchises, Bailiffs, and Keepers of Prisons, for Extortion, and
for letting to Bail such as were not Bailable, or for denying Bail to them that
ought to be Bailed.

Justices of Assize shall take Bail of him that is acquitted of Murder; within
the Year to answer to the Appeal of the party; 5 Eliz. cap. 5. of Informers, 5
Eliz. cap. 4. of Laborers.

Justices of Assize, of Jail-deliver, and of the Peace, shall enquire of the
default of Coroners.

Justices of Assize, etc. shall enquire of false making of Leather, of Amending
of Highways, of Hunters in Parks, of Unlawful taking of Fishes, of Forgery of
False Deeds, against deceit in Linen Cloth, against Perjury, of Usury, and
many other things.

Justices of Assize twice in every year ought to proclaim the Statute of 32 H.
8. and other Statutes against unlawful Maintenance, Champerty, Embracery, and
unlawful Retainers; they ought to proclaim the Statute of Unlawful Games in
their Circuit.

See the Custumary of Normandy, c. 19. Coke's 4. Inst. cap. 27.

The Justices of Nisi prius were first Instituted by Stat. W. 2. cap. 30. Of
Issues joined in the King's Bench, and their Authority is annexed to the
Justices of Assize, and is by force of a Judicial Writ, and therefore we have
joined them under one Title. And this appears by the Writ:

REx Vicecomiti Salutem: Praecipimus tibi, quod Venire fac' coram Justiciarus
nostris apud Westm' in Octab' Sancti Michaelis, vel coram Justiciariis nostris
ad Assisas in Com' tuo per formam Statuti nostri inde provis. Capiend'
Assignatis, si prius die Lunae prox' ante Festum, etc. apud, etc. vene rint 12
tam Milites quam alios, etc. By the Statute of 7 R. 2. Nisi prius shall be
granted in the Exchequer, as well as elsewhere.

Of Issues joined in the Chancery, King's Bench, Common-Bench, and Exchequer,
the Chief Justices, or Chief Baron, or in their absence, two other Justices or
Barons of the said several Courts, as Justices of Nisi prius for the County of
Middlesex within the Term, or four days after each Term, shall severally Try,
etc. And for their several other Powers and Authorities, vide le Stat. and
Coke's 4 Inst. cap. 27.

And this Writ of Nisi prius is (so called, because the word Prius is before
Venerint in the Distring as, etc. which was not so in the Venire facias, upon
The Statute of Westminster. 2. cap. 30.) although the words of the Writ are Si prius,
etc. And albeit Justices of Assize have their Dignity and Authority much
increased, yet they retain their Original Name, although Assizes are now rarely
taken before them: For that the Common Action of Ejectment has Ejected most
Real Actions, and so the Assize is almost out of use.

Justices of Nisi prius have power to give Judgment in Assize of Darrein
Presentment, and Quare Impedit.

And that Commissions, and Writs of Nisi prius shall be awarded, etc. It is to
be observed, That there is but a Transcript of the Record sent to the Justices
of Nisi prius.

By the Statute of 27 E. 1. de Finibus, cap. 4. it is provided, Quod
Inquisitiones and Recognitiones capiantur tempore Vacationis, coram aliquo
Justiciario de utroque Banco, coram quibus placitum deductum fuerit.

See the Statutes of York, 2. E. 3. cap. 16. 4. E. 3. cap. 2. and the Statute
of 14. Ed. 3 cap. 16. which Statute does provide, That Nisi prius may be taken
in every Plea Real or Personal before Two, so that one be Justice of one of the
Benches, or the Chief Baron or Sergeant sworn, without any regard where the
Plea depended, and this stands yet at this day.

Concordatum fuit per totum Cocilium Regis, quod nullus Vicecomes aut Coranat'
fiat Justiciarius ad Assisas capiend' Gaolas Deliberand', Transgress' audiend'
and terminand', seu ad aliquod aliud officium Justic' faciend', eo quod debent
esse intendentes aliis Justiciariis. Which Statute is Declaratory of the Common
Law.

14 H. 6. cap. 1. Justices of Nisi prius have power in all cases of Felony, and
Treason, to give Judgment, as well where the Prisoner is acquitted, as where he
is Attainted, and to award Execution.

Where the King is a Party, a Nisi prius may be granted, if the King's Attorney
assent unto it.

In Appeal of Murder, Robbery, Rape, brought in the King's Bench; if the
parties be at Issue, a Nisi prius may be granted before Justices of Assize.

And if Appeal be brought before Justices of Assize, they have also power to
enquire and judge.

These Justices of Nisi prius were Instituted for two causes, viz. 1. Propter
intolerabilem jacturam Juratorum, and in exonerationem Juratorum. 2. Ad celerem
Justiciam in ea part exhibendam.

A Prohibition is grantable to Justices of Assize, Quod non caperent in patria
inquisitiones quae magna indigent examinatione.

By the Original Institution of Justices of Assize, and Nisi prius, the Trial
should be before Two at the least; for plus vident oculi, quam oculus,
especially in Pleas of the Crown, concerning the Life of Man.

The Justices of Nisi prius may grant a Tales de Circumstantibus, either when
but one or more appear of the principal Panel, or where Eleven do appear; and
all the Jury may be of the Tales de Circumstantibus, as it was upon a Tales at
the Common Law.

A Nisi prius may be granted in an Attaint.

In Trespass between the Duke of Exeter, and the Lord Cromwell; The Counsel of
the Duke moved for a Nisi prius, and for the Duke was a Praepotent Prince in
that Country, and the Venire facias being Returned, there was a great Rout in
the Hall, so as if a Nisi prius should be granted great Mischief might ensue,
therefore no Nisi prius was granted, 32 H. 6.9. Coke's 4. Inst. cap. 27.

The Court of the Justices of Oyer and Terminer.
THe Authority of these Justices is by Commission; and of these are two sorts,

The General Commission, which is so called, because it is General in respect
of the Persons, the Offenses, and Places, where the Offenses are committed, the
substance of which Commission is thus:

REx, etc. Fidelibus suis R.M. and aliis, Salutem, Sciatis quod Assignavimus
vos, and Tres vestrum, quorum aliquem vestrum vos praefat' R.M. and L.G. unum
esse volumus, Justiciarios nostros ad inquirendum per Sacramentum proborum and
legalium hominum de Com' nostris South', Wiltes', Dorset', Somerset', Devon',
and Cornub', and eorum quobilet ac aliis viis, Modis, and Mediis quibus melius
sciveritis, aut poteritis tam infra Libertates, quam extra, per quos rei
veritas melius scire poterit, de quibuscunque Proditionibus, Misprisionibus
Proditionum, Insurrectionibus, Rebellionibus, Murdris, Feloniis, Homicid^is,
Interfectionibus, Burglartis, Rop^^bus Mulierum, Congregationibus, and
Conventiculis illicitis, Verborum prolationibus, Coadiju^ ationibus,
Misprisionibus, Confederationibus, Falsis allegantiis, Transgressionibus,
Riotis, Routis, Retentionibus, Escapiis, Contemptibus, Falsitatibus,
Negligentiis and Concelamentis, Manutenentiis, Cambipartiis, Deceptionibus, and
aliis Malefactis, Offensis, and Injuriis quibuscunque; Necnon accessar'
eorundem infra Com' praed', and eorum quemlibet, etc. Et easdem proditiones,
and alia praemissa, (hac Vice) audiend', and terminand', secundum Legem and
Consuetudinem regni nostri Angliae, etc. As you may read at large in Coke's 4th
Inst. cap. 28.

The particular Commissions of Oyer and Terminer, are so called in respect of
particular Persons, Offenses, or Places for which they are granted, whereof you
may see Fresh Presidents in the Register; 1. Against the Bishop of Winchester,
and his Ministers; 2. De Nave fracta, if the Goods ought to be taken for Wreck;
3. Of diverse Oppressions, Extortions, etc. 4. For the Prior of Daventry; 5. For
the King in time of Vacation; of all which you may read there more at large.

And concerning Commissions of Oyer and Terminer, Ten Conclusions are to be
observed; 1. That they are not granted but before the Justices of the one
Bench, or of the other, or before the Justices Errant, and that for great and
horrible Trespasses of the King's special Grace, according to the Statute of W.
2.13 Ed. 1.

Commissions are like to the King's Writs, such only are to be allowed which
have Warrant of Law, and continual Allowance in Courts of Justice.

They cannot proceed upon any Indictment, but such only as are taken before
themselves.

They may upon Indictment found, proceed the same day against the party
Indicted; as in Hill. 2 H. 4. Rot. 4. Thomas Merx, Bishop of Carlisle, was
before Commissioners of Oyer and Terminer Indicted, Tried, and Adjudged for
High Treason all in one day.

And for other Conclusions and their proceedings therein, you may read more at
large in Coke's Fourth Inst. cap. 28.

If any Offense be prohibited by any Statute, and name not in what Court it
shall be punished; or if the Statute appoint that it shall be punished in any
Court of Record, in both these cases it may be heard and determined before
Justices of Oyer and Terminer.

The King may make a Commission of Association, directed to others to join with
the Justices of Oyer and Terminer, and a Writ of Admittance to the Justices of
Oyer and Terminer, to admit the others into their Society, which Writ is close.
There is also a Writ of Si non omnes directed to the Justices of Oyer and
Terminer, and to their Associates, the Forms of all which you may read in the
Register, and in F. N. B. And in all these Commissions, and Writs, the Justices
are directed with this Rule: Facturi quod ad justitiam pertinet secundum Legem
and consuetudinem Angliae.

If the Justices sit by force of the Commission, and do not adjourn the
Commission, it is determined.

Justices of Oyer and Terminer shall send their Records and Process determined,
and put in Execution, to the Exchequer at Michaelmas every year, to be
delivered there to the Treasurer, and Chamberlain, etc. to keep them in the
Treasury.

None of these Commissioners, or of Assize, or of Jail-deliver, or of the
Peace, or other of the Kings Commissioners, are countermanded by any New
Commission, unless it be showed unto them for so many as it is showed unto; or
that it be proclaimed in the County, or that the New Commissioners do sit and
keep their Sessions by force of the new Commission, whereby the former
Commission is countermanded. Concerning which see the Statute of 1 Ed. 6. cap.
17. Co. 4. Inst. 165.

Anno 1 Mariae, Stat. 2. cap. 2. Upon conclusion of her Marriage with Philip
the Son of the Emperor and Prince of Spain; It is provided, That the said
Prince shall not promote, admit, or receive to any Office, Administration, or
Benefice in the Realm of England, and Dominions thereunto belonging, any
Stranger or Persons not born under the Dominion and Subjection of the said most
Noble Queen, Co. 3. Inst. 225.

Judges, and other Officers in Courts, may be increased, or diminished as need
shall require; and at Entrance shall take an Oath to serve the King and his
People duly, Wingate's Abridgment of the Statute of 14 Ed. 3. Title Judgments,
fol. 303.

Association is a Patent sent by the King either of his own motion, or at the
Suit of the party Plaintiff to the Justices of Assize, to have other Persons
associated to them: And upon that Patent the King will send a Writ to the
Justices to admit them; and if there be Three Justices, and one dye, the King
may grant a Patent of Association, to Associate another to the Two; and a Writ
which shall be close to the other two to admit him; Terms del Ley.

Si non omnes, Is if those Associated or some of them cannot come, then the
King may make a Patent for other Justices, or for One Justice to be Associated
in his Room, to take those Assizes and Juries; And the Forms of these several
Writs of Association you may see in F. N. B. 412 to 418.

And if the King make Three Justices to take Assizes, and make them a Patent of
si non omnes, if one of them dye, the other two may proceed, F. N. B. 416.

And the King may make Association in Juries as well as in Assizes, as also in
Attaints, and also one Association after another; and any Association may be
made to a Sheriff in a Redisseisin; and although the Assize be discontinued,
yet if the other Re-attachment is Sued, the Association shall stand good and
the si non omnes; and a Re-attachment may be sued to revive those Assizes,
although there be several Adjournments; and the Associations and si non omnes,
shall serve for all the Assizes, F. N. B. 417, 418.

Bailiff in Magna Charta extends to any Judge or Minister of the King; and
Bailie le Roy is understood Justice le Roy, Coke's 1 Inst. 168.

Justices of Assize have also Commissions of Oyer and Terminer, of
Jail-deliver, and of the Peace, of Association, si non omnes throughout their
Circuits, so as they are armed with simple, yet ordinary Jurisdiction, they
sometimes being bounded with express Limitations, Facturi quod ad Justitiam
pertinet secundum Legem and Consuetudinem Angliae; And in former time according
to their Original Institution, and their Commission both the Justices joined,
both in Common Pleas, and Pleas of the Crown, Coke's 1. Inst. 263. a.

In ancient time, Prelates as well as other Noblemen were Chancellors,
Treasurers and Judges, being Expert and well Learned in the Laws of the Realm,
Coke's 1 Inst. 304, 8. Coke's 2 Inst. 98, 265.

Capitalis Justiciarius in Glanvil is taken for Custos Regni, who may name
Justices; and Original Writs shall bear Test under his name, which no Officer
may do whilst the King is within the Realm.

In the time of Ed. 1. Justices would not proceed in Case of the Death of Man
without the King's Writ.

By Magna Charta cap. 26. Nihil de caetero detur pro brevi inquisitionis ab eo,
qui inquisitionem petit de vita, vel de membris, sed gratis concedatur, and non
negetur. Breve inquisitionis, being the Writ Odio and Atia anciently called
Breve de bono and malo, by this Statute of Life and Member; which the Common
Law gave to a Man that was Imprisoned, though it were for the most heinous
Crime, for the Death of a Man, for the which without the King's Writ he could
not be Bailed; yet the Law favoring the Liberty, and Freedom of a Man from
Imprisonment, and that he should not be detained in Prison, until the Justices
in Air should come, at what time he was to be Tried, he might Sue out this
Writ of Inquisition directed to the Sheriff; Quod assumptis tecum custodibus
placitorum Coronae in pleno comitatu per Sacramentum proborum, and legalium
hominum de, etc. inquiras (inde appellatur Breve inquisitionis) utrum A.
captus, and detentus in Prisona, etc. pro morte W. unde rettatus (i. e.
accusatus existit) sit odio, and atia, etc. nisi indictatus vel appellatus
fucrit, coram Justitiariis nostris ultimo itincrantibus in partibus illis, and
pro hoc captus, and Imprisonatus. For by the Common Law, in omnibus autem
placitis de felonia, solet accusatus, per plegios dimitti, praeterquam de
placito de homicidio, ubi ad terrorem aliter statutum est.

But this Writ was taken away by a late Statute, viz. in 28 E. 3. because as
some pretended it became unnecessary, for that Justices of Assize, Justices of
Oyer and Terminer, and Justices of Jail-deliver came at the least into every
County twice every year; but within Twelve years after this Statute it was
Enacted, That all Statutes made against Magna Charta should be void, whereby
the Writs of Odio and Atia and De ponendo in Ballium are revived, and so in
like cases upon all the Branches of Magna Charta: And therefore the Justices of
Assize, Justices of Oyer and Terminer, and of Jail-deliver, have not suffered
the prisoner to be long detained, but at their next coming have given the
prisoner full and speedy Justice by due Trial, without detaining him long in
prison, Coke's 2 Inst. 42, 43.

A person examined may require a Copy of his Examination, take time to answer,
and put his answer in writing, and keep a Copy of it, Coke's 2 Inst. 51.

All causes ought to be heard and determined before the Judges openly in the
Kings Courts; the King having distributed his Judicial power to several Courts
of Justice, Coke's 2 Institutes 103.

If a prisoner be mute by act of God, The Judges who are to be of Council with
the prisoner ex officio, ought to enquire if he be the same person, and of all
other pleas which he might have pleaded; But if it be by his own Act, he is to
be forthwith put to his penance, Coke's 2 Inst. 178.

If the Prisoner Demur, and it be Overruled he shall be hanged, but not have
pain, fort and dure, ibidem.

Justices may punish any act done in deceit of the Court, 2 Inst. 215.

Judicis officium est Opus diei in die ipso perficere, according to the Statute
of W. 1. cap. 47. and not defer it, or prefer others upon any request or
importunity, Coke's 2 Inst. 256.

Sapientis Judicis est cogitare tantum sibi esse permissum quantum commissum
and creditum, Coke 's 4 Inst. 163.

By Stat. 4 Jac. 1. cap. 1. It is provided, that whereas in regard of some
difference, and inequality of the Laws, Trials and Proceedings in case of Life,
between the Justice of the Realm of England, and that of the Realm of Scotland;
It appears to be most convenient for the contentment and satisfaction of all
his Majesty's Subjects to proceed (with all possible severity) against such
Offenders in their own Country according to the Laws of the same, whereunto
they are Born and Inheritable, and by, and before the Natural Born Subjects of
the same Realm, if they be there apprehended. And by the next Clause is
provided, that Felonies committed by English Men in Scotland, shall be inquired
of, heard and determined before Justices of Assize, or Commissioners of Oyer
and Terminer and Jail-deliver, being Natural born Subjects within the Realm of
England and no other. And the like in another Clause, with an addition of
Justices of the Peace to be Natural born Subjects within England, Coke's 3
Inst. 226.

Justices of the King's Bench, Oyer and Terminer, Jail-deliver, and of the
Peace may enquire of, hear, and determine all Murders, and Felonies within the
Verge; because their Jurisdiction and Authority are generally through the whole
County, Coke's 4 Rep. 46, 47. Case of Appeals.

The Justices of Assiz^ have one Commission of Oyer and Terminer directed to
them, and diverse other Inhabitants of the Shires, whereunto their Circuits
extend, whereof each of the Justices of Assize are of the Quorum, for offenses
happening in their Circuits, which without this Commission they cannot do, Terms
del Ley, Cok's 4 Inst. En le Table.

The Statute of 2 Ed. 3. requires that no Commission of Oyer and Terminer be
granted, but before Justices of one Bench or the other; or Justices Itinerant,
and that for horrible Trespasses.

Where the Commission of Oyer and Terminer lies in case of Extortions, by
Under-sheriffs, Escheators, Clerks of Markets, Hunters in Parks, taking of
Goods not Wrecked, in vacancy of Bishoprics for Hunting in Parks, for Robbing
Piscaries, and in many other cases the Forms of Writs and Associations, and si
non omnes to them, Vide F. N. B. 243 to 251.

If the Trespass be not Enormis seu horribilis, a Writ of Supersedeas lies, or
Rev^ ation, Coke's 2 Inst. 419.

Upon an Indictment found by the Commissioners before the Term, a Special
Commission of Oyer and Terminer may be granted for them to proceed, although the
Court of Kings Bench be sitting in the same County: But it is best for the
Commission to bear Test after the beginning of the Term: But General
Commissions of Oyer and Terminer are suspended during the term or time the
Kings Bench sits in the same County; or if the Kings Bench be adjourned, the
General Commission may proceed, Coke's 3 Inst. 27. Coke's 4 Inst. 163.

The Kings Bench is more than Air; Therefore in Term time no Commissions of
Oyer and Terminer, or Jail-deliver by the Common Law may sit in the County
where the Kings Bench sits, for praesentia majoris cessat potestas minoris,
and therewith agrees 27 Ass. p. 1. But Carlisle and Erwing were Indicted and
Arrained in London where the Murder was Committed, before Justices of Oyer and
Terminer in the Term time, because in another County than where the Kings Bench
sit, Coke's 9 Rep. 118. Lord Sanchar's Case.

For Trial of Treasons Committed out of the Realm, etc. by Commissions
appointed by the King, etc. See the Statute of 26 Hen. 8. 33 Hen. 8. 35 Hen. 8.
5 and 6. of Ed. 6, etc.

If a Commission of Oyer and Terminer be discontinued or expired, etc. the
Indictments and Records shall be removed into the Kings Bench, as to their
proper Center, Coke's 2 Institutes 419.

The Courts of Special Justices of Oyer and Terminer.
THese Courts are Four in number, Raised by several Acts of Parliament, Two of
which, viz. That concerning Purveyors, and that concerning Misdemeanors of
Villains being obsolete We shall only give a Brief account of the Style, and
Nature of the other Two, referring their Jurisdiction and Proceedings therein,
to the Acts of Parliament themselves. And first of that concerning

Money collected for Houses of Correction, or for the Poor.
THis Court is Raised by the Statute of 39 Eliz. cap. 4. wherein is to be
observed, That their Proceedings, Judgments, and Executions shall remain good,
and available in Law, without any Redress to be had by Suit in any other Court;
as you may see more at large by the Statute, and Exposition thereof, in Coke's
Fourth Institutes. And the other is concerning,

Colleges, Hospitals, or Almshouses, for Charitable and Lawful purposes, and
Uses.
BY the Statute of 39 Eliz. cap. 6. The Lord Chancellor (or Chancellor for the
Duchy of Lancaster, for Lands in that County) may award Commissions to the
Bishop of the Diocese, and his Chancellor, and other persons of good and sound
Behavior; To enquire of all Colleges, Hospitals, and other places Founded or
Ordained for the Charitable relief of Poor, Aged, and Impotent people, Maimed
Soldiers, Schools of Learning, Orphans, or for such other good, charitable, and
lawful Purposes and Intents. And of all Lands, etc. given or appointed for
those uses: As also for Reparations of all Highways, Bridges, and Sea-Banks,
for Maintenance of Free-Schools, and Poor Scholars, and of Orphans, and
Fatherless Children, and such like good and lawful Charitable uses, and to
enquire of the Abuses, Misdemeanors, Mis-employments, Falsities, defrauding the
Trusts, Alienations, Misgovernments, etc. And to set down such Orders,
Judgments, and Decrees, that the same may be observed in full, ample, and most
liberal sort, etc. Which Orders, Judgments, and Decrees (not being contrary to
the Orders or Decrees of the Donors) shall be firm, and good, and are to be
certified by the Commissioners into the Chancery of England, or of the County
Palatine of Lancaster, etc.

And it is to be observed, that when any Act of Parliament does authorize the
Lord Chancellor or Keeper to make a Commission under the Great Seal, he may do
it without further Warrant, the King being party to the Act of Parliament.

But this Statute was afterward Repealed by 43 Eliz. 4. Saving for the
Excution of Orders and Decrees before made by Commissioners, according to the
Statute.

And by the Statute of 43 Eliz. 4. It shall be lawful for the Lord Chancellor,
or Lord Keeper for the time being, and for the Chancellor of the Duchy of
Lancaster (within that Precinct) to Award Commissions into any part of the
Realm, respectively to the Bishop there and his Chancellor (if any at that
time) and to other Persons of Good Behavior, Authorizing Four or more of them
to Inquire as well by the Oaths of Twelve, or more Lawful Men, as otherwise of
all Grants, Gifts, Augmentations, Limitations, and Appointments, and of all
Abuses and Misemployments of all Land, Tenements and Hereditaments, and of all
Goods and Chattels given, limited or appointed to Charitable uses, etc. See
the Statute at large, and 21 Jac. 1. cap. 1.

The Court of Justices of Jail-deliver.
BY the Law Ne homines diu detineantur in Prisona; but that they may receive,
Plenam and celerem Justitiam. The Commission of Jail-deliver was Instituted 4
E. 3. and by this Commission Goals ought to be delivered Thrice in the year,
and oftener if need be; and the Authority given thereby consists in these few
Words, Constituimus vos Justiciarios nostros ad Gaolam nostram Castri nostri de
C. de Prisonibus in ea existentibus, hac vice deliberand'.

And these Justices may arraign any man in that Goal upon any Indictment for
Felony, Trespass, etc. before Just^ces of Peace, though not found before
themselves, which Justices of Oyer and Terminer cannot do; and they may take a
Panel of a Jury Returned by the Sheriff, without making any Precept to him,
which Justices of Oyer and Terminer may not. To these Justices Commissions of
Association, Writs of Admittance, and Si non omnes (like as to Justices of Oyer
and Terminer are directed) and other Authorities, Jurisdictions, and
Privileges they have; of which you may Read at large Coke's 4 Inst. cap. 30.

By the Statute of 6 R. 2.5. Justices of Assize, and Jail-deliver shall hold
their Sessions in the chief Towns of every County, where the Shire Courts there
use to be holden.

By the Statute of 8 R. 2.2. no man of Law shall be Justice of Assize or Gaol
Delivery in his own Country; and the Chief Justice of the Common-Bench shall be
assigned amongst others to take Assizes, and to deliver Gaols; but as to the
Chief Justice of the King's Bench, it shall be as for the most part of 100 years
last past has been wont to be done.

By the Statute of 14 H. 6.3. the Sessions of the Justices of Assize and
Jail-deliver in Cumberland shall be holden (in the time of Peace and Truce) in
the City of Carlisle, and not elsewhere, according to the Statute of 6 R. 2 5.

By Stas. de Finibus levatis, cap. 3.27 E. 1. Justices of Assize presently
after the Assizes taken shall deliver the Gaols; but if one of them be a Clerk,
the other that is Lay, associating unto him one of the most discreet Knights of
the County, shall deliver the Gaols.

The Justices shall then also Enquire, Whether Sheriffs, or any other, have let
out by Plevin any Prisoners not pleviable, or have offended in any thing
against the Statute of Westminster. 2.13 E. 1. and shall punish them according to the
force of the said Statute.

By the Statute of 2 E. 3 2. Justices of Jail-deliver, and Oyer and Terminer,
procured by Great Men, shall not be made against the Form of the Statute of 27
E. 1. cap. 3. And Assizes, Attaints, and Certifications, shall be hereafter
taken before Justices commonly assigned, being good and lawful Men, and having
knowledge in the Law, according to the Statute of Westminster. 2.29 Ed. 1.

By the Statute of 4. E. 3.2. good and discreet Persons shall be assigned in
all Shires of England to take Assizes, Juries, and Certifications, and to
deliver the Gaols Three times in the year at least.

Justices of Jail-deliver shall have power to Deliver the Gaols of those that
stand Indicted before the Kee^ers of the Peace, which Keepers shall send those
Indictments before the Justices of Jail-deliver, who shall have power to
Enquire of, and punish Sheriffs Gaolers and others, which do any thing against
this Act.

Judges ought not to Deliver their Opinions beforehand of any Criminal Case,
tha^ may come before them Judicially; For how can they ^e indifferent, who have
delivered their Opinions before hand, without hearing of the party, Co. 3 Inst.
29.

By the Statute of 19 H. 7.10. the Sheriff of every County shall have the
keeping of the Common Gaol there, except such as are held by Inheritance or
Succession; Also all Letters Patents of the keeping of Gaols for Life or Years,
are annulled and void. Howbeit neither the King's Bench nor Marshalsea sh^^l be
in the custody of any Sheriff; and the Patents of Edward Courtney Earl of
Devon, and John Morgan, for Keeping of Prisons are excepted.

By the Statute of 6 Hen. 8.6. the Justices of the King's- Bench have power (by
their Discretions) to Remand as well the Bodies of Felons, as their Indictments
into the Counties where such Felonies were committed; and also to command the
Justices of Jail-deliver, of Peace, and all other Justices and Commissioners,
there to proceed and determine such Felonies in like manner, as if their Bodies
and Indictments had not been removed.

Justices of Jail-deliver may take a Panel of a Jury Returned by the Sheriff
without making any Precept to him, as Justices of Oyer and Terminer ought to
make, because a General Commandment is made to the Sheriff by the Justices of
Jail-deliver, to Return Juries against their coming.

They may deliver Suspects for Felony, etc. by Proclamation against whom there
is no sufficient Evidence produced to the Great Inquest* to Indict them, etc.
which Justices of Oyer and Terminer or Justices of Peace cannot do.

If a Man be Indicted before Justices of the Peace, and thereupon Outlawed, and
is taken and committed to Prison, the Justices of Jail-deliver may award
Execution of this Prisoner.

They may assign a Coroner to an Approver, and make Process against the
Appellee in a Foreign County.

They may punish those that let Men to Bail or Mainprize which are not Bailable
by Law, or suffer them to Escape.

By the Statute of 1 E. 6. In all Cases where any Person or Persons heretofore
have been, or hereafter shall be found guilty of any manner of Treason, Murder,
Manslaughter, Rape, or other Felony whatsoever; for the which Judgment of Death
should or may ensue, and shall be Repried to Prison without Judgment at that
time given against him, her, or them, found so Guilty, that those Persons that
at any time hereafter shall by the King's Letters Patents, be assigned Justices
to deliver the Gaol where any such Person or Persons found Guilty shall remain;
shall have full Power and Authority to give Judgment of Death against such
person so found Guilty and Repried, as the same Justices before whom such
Person or Persons was or were found Guilty might have done, if their Commission
of Jail-deliver had remained in force.

Justices of Jail-deliver shall send their Records and Process determined, and
put in Execution to the Exchequer at Michaelmas every year, to be delivered
there to the Treasurer and Chamberlains, etc. to keep them in the Treasury.

Justices of Jail-deliver may receive Appeals of Robbery and Murder by Bill;
but the Appellees must be in Prison before them. Co. 4 Inst. c. 30.

And more of their Jurisdiction and Authority you may read in the Statutes at
large.

The Court of Justices of the Forests.
THe word Forest is made by changing E. into O. from Feresta, (hoc est,)
Ferarum statio; it being a Mansion, or safe dwelling of all Beasts of the Wood,
and this Forest does consist of Eight things, viz. Soil, Covert, Laws, Courts,
Judges, Officers, Game and certain Bounds; of all which we shall speak somewhat
in order as they lie. And First of

The Soil of the Forest, which is Woody ground where there is good Covert, and
Fruitful Pastures; and it is not material that the Wood belong to the King or
another; And when the King will make a Forest, a Writ shall be Issued to the
Sheriff of the County where the Forest shall be, to Enquire what place shall be
fit to make a Forest, who thereupon shall take an Inquest and Inquire of the
content of the Place and the Bounds, and shall put the same Bounds in
certainty, and all he does he ought to return into the Chancery, and when the
King is thereof ascertained by such matter of Record, the King shall by Letters
Patents command the Sheriff to make Proclamation, That the place which he has
returned shall be afterward a Forest, and that none shall Hunt within those
Woods they being for his Pleasure to reserve the Wild Beasts, and Game to
himself: And this Forest is not necessarily to be made in every County. But in

The Grand Covert, and Woody Ground where the Beasts may have place of Defense
and Food, which are called Vert, and are to be preserved to the end that the
Game may have both Shelter, and Browze; And yet although such Commandment be made
by the King as aforesaid, it is no Forest until Wild Beasts are put there,
which sort of Wild Beasts are those which are herein after mentioned. And are
called

The Game of the Forest, consisting of Seven kinds, which by the Laws of
England are Beasts of the Forest, viz.

The Heart in Summer, The Hind in Winter, with their proceed which are thus
Termed; The Male, The first year A. Calf, The second A Brooket. The third A
Spayad, The fourth A Staggard, The fifth A Stagg, The sixth A Heart. And so
afterward the Female, The first year A Calf, The second A Brocketts Sister, The
Third A Hind.

The Buck in Summer, The Do in Winter, with their proceed thus Termed; The
first year A Fawn, The second A Pricket, The third A Sorel, The fourth A Sore,
The fifth A Buck of the First Head, The sixth A Great Buck.

The Hare Male, and Female, with their proceed which are called, The first year
A Leveret, The second A Hare, The third A Great Hare.

The Wild Boar whose proceed is Termed; The first year A Pig, The second A
Hogg, The third A Hogg-stear, The fourth A Boar, and after A Sanglier; And
these four kinds being wholesome Food for Man, are called Beasts of Venery, and
Venison.

But the other Three kinds as,

The Wolf, The Marton, The Fox, being Solivaga, and Nociva, are not called
Venison, although they are accounted Beasts of the Forest: And before it be a
perfect Forest, the King must appoint certain

Officers, Foresters, or Keepers, in Fee, or for Life, who by Charta de
Foresta, are to be as many as shall seem sufficient; Four Verderors, Twelve
Regarders, Agistators Four, Under Foresters Eight, The Wood-ward and the
Game-keeper, or Master of the Game of the Forest. The Forestor is made by
Letters Patents, The Verderors by Writ; How the Rest are made, and for their
Authority, See the Books at large. And next we shall briefly describe.

The Courts of the Forests which are Four, To be held within the Forests at
such places, times and in manner, herein after expressed, viz.

The Court of Attachments, or the Woodmote Court; This is to be kept before the
Verderors, every Forty days throughout the year, and thereupon it is called the
Forty-day Court: At this Court the Foresters bring in the Attachments de
Viridi, and Venatione, and the Presentiments thereof, and the Verderors do
Receive the same and Inrol them. But this Court can only Inquire and not
Convict: But it is observed, That no Man is to be Attached by his Body for Vert
or Venison, unless he be taken with the mayneer within the Forest, or otherwise
the Attachment must be by his Goods.

The Court of Regard or Survey of Dogs, is holden every third year for
Expeditation, or Lawing of Dogs.

The Court of Swanimote, is to be holden before the Verderors as Judges by the
Steward of the Swanimote, thrice in the year; and the Foresters ought to
present their Attachments at the next Swanimote Court; and the Freeholders
within the Forest are to appear at the Swanimote to make Inquest and Juries:
And this Court may Inquire De superoneratione Forestariorum, and aliorum
Ministrorum Forestae, and de eorum Oppressionibus Populo Nostro illatis; And
this Court may not only Inquire, but Convict also, but not give Judgment.

The Court of the Justice Seat, holden before the Justice in Air of the
Forest, who has Authority and Jurisdiction to hear and determine concerning
Vert and Venison, by force of Letters Patents under the Great Seal; whereof
there be Two, One for the Forests on this side Trent, the other beyond Trent;
by which Letters Patents the King does grant unto him,

Officium Guardiani, Capitalis Justiciarij, ac Justiciarij sui itinerantis,
omnium and singularum Forestarum, Parcorum, and Warrenarum suarum, cum suis
Pertinentijs quibuscunque ultra Trentam Existen', etc. Dantes and concedentes
eidem A. B. plenam Authoritatem, and Potestatem tenore praedictarum Litterarum
Patentium; Omnia, and omnimoda Placita, Querelas, and Causas Forestarum,
Parcorum, Chacearum, and Warrenarum praed', tam de Viridi Gram', quam de
Venatione, ac de alijs causis quibuscunque infra easdem Forestas, Parcos,
Chaceas and Warrenas, eveniend', sive emergen' audiend', and determinand',
habend', Occupand', Gaudend', and Exercend', Officio praed' cum pertin' per se,
vel per sufficient'. Deputatum suum sive Deputatos suos, suffic' durante vita
ipsius A. B. etc.

And this Court of the Justice Seat cannot be kept oftener than every Third
year, and other Justices in Air kept their Courts every Seventh year: And it
must be Summoned Forty days at least before the Sitting thereof; And one Writ
of Summons is directed Custodi Forestae Domini Regis vel ejus Locum tenenti in
eadem; And this Writ consists of two parts: First, To Summon all the Officers
of the Forest, and that they bring with them all Records, etc. Secondly, All
persons who claim any Liberties or Franchises within the Forest, etc. and to
show how they claim the same: And this Court of Justice Seat has Jurisdicton
to Inquire, hear and determine two things: First, All Trespasses within the
Forest, according to the Laws of the Forest: Secondly, All the claims of
Franchises, Privileges and Liberties within the Forest, as to have Parks,
Warrens, Vivaries, to be quit of Asserts, and purprestures, To cut down his own
Woods without view of the Forester, etc. And this Chief Justice may by the
Statute of 32 Hen. 8. cap. 35. make his Deputy.

And for Reparation to the Justice Seat, is a Writ of Regard directed to the
Sheriff of the County as follows:

REx Vic Salutem, Praecipimus tibi quod venire fac' certis die and loco quos ad
hoc duxerimus providend', Omnes Forestarios, and Regardatores de Sherwood, ad
Regard' faciend' in Forest' praed', ante adveni' Justiciariorum nostrorum de
Foresta, and loco Regardatorum nostrorum qui mortui sunt, and infirmi alios
Eligi fac' Ita quod 12 sunt in quolibet Regard' and Nomina illorum
imbrevientur: Et Forestar' debent Jurare quod 12 Milites ducent per totam
Ballivam suam advidendum omnes Transgressiones quae exprimuntur in Scriptis
Capitulorum quae tibi mittimus, and hoc non omittent pro aliqua re: Debent
etiam Milites jurare quod facient Regard' sicut debet fieri, and solet. Et quod
ibunt sicut Forestar' eos ducent ad praedicta videnda, Et si Forest' noluerint
eos ducere, vel aliquid forisfact'. Concelare noluerint, ipsi milites non
Omittent pro illis, quin forisfac' illud, videant and imbreviari faciant: Et
hoc pro nulla re demmittant. Et quod regard' fiat cira Fest' Beati Petri ad
Vincula prox. futur', Test, etc. For the Duty of Foresters, Verderours
Agistators, etc. in presenting Offenses in the Forest, Vide Ordinatio Forestae,
34 Ed. 1. and Coke's 4 Inst. cap 73.

Any person having right to make any claim may in person, or by Attorney the
first day of the Air Exhibit his Petition; But he shall be fined if he make
false Claim.

The other Writ of Summons is directed to the Sheriff of the County, and the
substance thereof is to Summon all Archbishops, Bishops, Abbots, etc. having
Lands, etc. within the Forest, and Four Men of every Village within the Forest,
and all others who ought to come before the Justices of the Pleas of the
Forest, That they be at Pickering Lance, etc. before Four Great Learned Men,
Justices in Air of the Forest, to do what thereunto belongs, and to bring
their Regards with all Attachments, etc. To which the Sheriffs make a full
Return, etc. And next we are to speak somewhat of

The Laws of the Forest, which consist chiefly of the Statute De Charta de
Foresta, and Ordinatio de Foresta, 34. E. 1. And Forest Laws of England, which
are certain and established by Authority of Parliament: Of which you may Read
in the Statutes at large.

And of Forests in England are Sixty nine; of so great Antiquity, that no
Record or History does mention their Beginnings; Except New Forest in
Hampshire, Erected by W. the Conqueror as Conqueror; And Hampton Court
Forest, Erected by Hen. 8. by Authority of Parliament: And now we come to speak
of

The Metes, and Bounds of the Forest according to Charta de Foresta, Hugh de
Nevill, and Bryan de Lisle were appointed Commissioners to Inquire what were
the ancient Metes, and Bounds of such Forests as Hen. 2. Or any King after him
had enlarged, which with diverse other Perambulations, and Deaforestations were
made, and are returned into the Chancery, and remain of Record in the Tower.

And a Perambulation of the Forest of Sherwood, was made the 9 of Sept. 30 Hen.
8. By Robert Brimesly, and Fifteen others Regarders of that Forest, which
Perambulation began from the King's Castle of Nottingham, and from thence
proceeding to Kingsbridge Meadow Gate, from thence by the Old Trent, unto the
Old Watercourse of Leen, etc. round the Forest. And now this leads incidently
to speak of

The Purlieus, which contains such grounds as H. 2. R. 1. or King John added
to their Ancient Forests over others Men's grounds; and which were Disaforested
by force of the Statute of Charta de Forest' cap. 1. and 3. and the
Perambulations, and Grants thereupon is derived from a French Adjective, and a
French Noun, viz. Pur, which signifies clear, entire and exempt and Lieu (that
is place) as a place clear and exempt from the Forest: And both of these
derived from the Latin adjective, and Noun, viz. Purus Locus. And the
Serambulation whereby the Purlieu is Deafforested is called in French Pourallee
i. e. Perambulatio. By this it appears, That Chases that never were Forests
cannot have any Purlieu, and consequently the case of 16 Eliz. Dyer 326. is
mistaken, for the Chase of Whaddon never was a Forest.

The Owners of the Soil within the Purlieu may at their will and pleasure Fell,
Cut down, Eradicate, and Stub up all Timber, Trees, Woods, and Under-woods, and
convert the same into Arrable Land, or dispose and enclose the same, as if the
same had never been Afforested.

The King's Ra^^gers may Re-chase with their Hounds any Deer out of the Purlieu
into the Forest again, and may present unlawful Huntings, and Hunters of the
Kings Deer within the Purlieu, as in the Night, or at unseasonable Deer, or by
one no Purlieu Man. As appears by the Rangers Oath, Coke's 4 Inst. cap. 73. And
where is no Purlieu, there are no Rangers.

The Kings Game or Deer are not marked, therefore Ranging out of the Forest,
and Purlieu (if any be) belonging to the King: Therefore the Abbot of Whitby
Huntting in Whitby Forest, adjoining to the Forest of Pickering, which belonged
to the Earl of Lancaster; The Sheriff being commanded to Summon the Abbot
before the Justices in Air, 8 E. 3. Rot. 42. He pleaded his Title to the
Forest, and that all Abbots of that place by their Grants might with Engines,
Netts, etc. take Wild Beasts.

By which it appears, That when the Kings Game range out of the Forest, they
are at their natu^al Liberty, Et occupanti conceduntur. And now a word of

The Drifts of the Forests by the Statute of 32 Hen. 8. all Forests, Chases,
Commons, Heaths, Moors and Wast grounds, within England and Wales, are to be
driven at the Feast of St. Michael yearly, or within 15 days after, or at any
other season or time of the year. And the end of these Drifts is, First, To see
if those who ought to Common do Common with such Cattle as by Prescription, or
Grant they ought: Secondly, That they do not Surcharge: Thirdly, If the Cattle
of any Stranger be there who ought not to Common at all.

A Forest being as it is described before, that which has Power to hold the
several Courts before mentioned; it is further to be observed, That if the King
having a Forest, grant the same to a Subject in Fee, the Grantee shall have no
Forest, because he has no power to make Justices, and Officers of the Forests
to hold Courts, etc. But if the King grant a Forest to a Subject with this
further, That upon request made in Chancery, he and his Heirs shall have
Justices of the Forest, Then the Subject has a Forest in Law. As the Duke of
Lancaster had the Forests of Pickering and Lancaster. And the Abbot of Whitby
had the Forest of Whitby in the County of York.

A Chase is where there are Keepers only, and no Court of Swanimote, but is
governed by the Common Law. And when a Forest is granted by the King to a
Subject (without the Power above mentioned to have Justice of the Forest,) Then
that which was a Forest before, shall be said to be a Chase; and a Chase is a
certain compass of Ground to nourish and maintain Deer granted by the King in
my own Land, and is not enclosed, but lies open.

A Park is Land enclosed, and stored with Wild Beasts, which may be had by
Prescription, as well as by Grant of the King; and a Park is always enclosed
with some Pale, Wall or the like, and is not open, for if it lie open, it is
cause of Forfeiture or Seizure.

A Warren is where one by Grant of the King, or by Prescription, does use to
have Pheasants, Partridges, Conies, and Hares, and no other Wild Beast, or
Vermin within certain of his Lands. And none may make a Warren but the King, no
more than they may make a Forest, or Chase, because it is a special Privilege
which belongs to the King only: But it may be had by Prescription. And in
every Warren is a Master, and Servants to attend for the safeguard of the
Beasts, and Birds of Warren; but there is no Court of Swanimote or other Court;
For Trespass done in a Warren is punishable by the Common Law; And the King may
grant to me Warren which he has in such his Demesne Land, And also which he
has in Lands of others; And may grant me Waren in my Lands for Conies and
Hares, and to an other that he have Warren there for Partridge, and Phesant;
And if the King grant that none shall Chase or Hunt any Beasts in my Land, it
is a good grant for Beasts of Chase, and Warren, and it is not a Warren; but a
Free Chase. And for other matters relating to Forest, Park, Chase, and Warren,
Vide compton's Jurisdiction of Courts and Coke's 4 Inst.

The Beasts of Park or Chase properly extend to the Buck, the Do, the Fox, the
Roe, the Marton, but in a common and Legal Sense, to all the Beasts of the
Forest.

The Forest and Chase differ in Offices and Laws, every Forest is a Chase, but
every Chase is not a Forest.

Beasts of Forest are properly a Heart, Hind, Buck, Hare, Boar, Wolf, ut supra
but legally all Wild Beasts of Venery.

There are both Beasts and Fowls of Warren, as Hares, Conies and Roes called in
Records Capreoli; Fowls of two sorts, Terrestres and Aquatiles; Terrestres of
two sorts, Silvestres and Campestres; Campestres as Partridge, Qu^il, Rail,
etc. Silvestres as Phesants, Woodcock, etc Aquatiles, as Mallard, Hern, etc Of
the Officers of Park, Forest, etc and Conditions annexed and causes of
forfeiture, See Coke's 1 Inst. 233. a. b.

Vivarium is taken for Waters where Fishes are kept, Coke's 2 Inst. 162.

It is not lawful for any Man to Erect a Park, Chase or Warren without a
License under the Great Seal of the King, who is Pater Patriae and Head of the
Commonwealth, for the Common Law gave no way to matters of Pleasure, (wherein
most Men do exceed) for that they brought no profit to the Commonwealth.

Unto a lawful Park three things are requisite. First, A Liberty either by
Grant of the King, or by Prescription. Secondly, Enclosure by Pale, Wall or
Hedge. Thirdly, Beasts Savages of Park.

By Stat. Westminster. 1. cap 20. Trespasses in Parks and Vivaries shall make good,
and high amends according to the manner of the Trepass, have Three years
Imprisonment, make Fine to the King, or otherwise find Surety no more to
Offend, or else to Abjure the Realm.

If one Hunt in a Park, or Fish in a Pond, although he kill no Deer, or take any
Fish; yet this is a Misfeazance within this Statute.

And this Act being Affirmative to the Common Law, the party may bring his
Action upon this Statute, or may waive the benefit of this Act, and bring his
Action of Trespass Generally at the Common Law.

If the Damages given be too small, the court may increase the Damages.

The King may pardon the Exemplary Punishments, Coke's 2 Inst. 200, 201.

To Steal a Tame Deer not known is no Felony, Coke's 2 Inst. 20.

The Office and Duty of Foresters, how to be executed by Deputy for a Woman; of
what a Forest does consist, Co. 4 Inst. 289. What pastes by Grant of a Forest,
See Coke's 4 Inst. 289, 314.

Forests called Walds and Buckholts; The several Courts of the Forest, Forests
Laws, The Beasts and Seasons of the Beasts of the Forests, Deafforestations,
Drifts of the Forests, Purlieus, Trespasses, etc. Vide Coke's 4 Inst.

Parks called by the Saxons, Deorfald of Herbage, and Pawnage in Parks.

The King cannot make a Forest or Park in other Men's Grounds.

Parks are not to be guided by Forest Laws, Coke's 4 Inst.

Where the Owners may cut down Woods in Free Chases, and where they must have
Common; And diverse matters concerning Forests, Chases and Warens, See Coke's 4
Inst.

By the Statute of 22 E. 4. The Owner of Woods in Forest, etc. ought first to
cut the Woods, and then to enclose.

By the Statute of 35 Hen. 8. They ought first to Enclose, and then within four
Months cut the Wood; And the Stature Westminster, De Malefactoribus in Parcis,
Charta de Foresta, and other Acts concerning Forests, etc. are General Laws
concerning all Persons, whereof the Court Ex Officio ought to take notice,
Coke's 8 Rep 137, 138. Sir Francis Barrington's Case.

If Fair, Market, Hundred, Leet, Park, Warren and the like are appendant to
Manors, or in Gross, and afterward they come back to the King, they remain as
they were before in Esse, not Drowned in the Crown, Coke's 9 Rep. 25. Abbot of
Strata Marcella.

If License be given to a Duke to H^nt in a Park; The Law for convenience
gives him such attendance as is requisite to the Dignity of his Estate. And
what shall be causes of Forfeiture of a Parkership, By cutting more than
necessary for Browse, or Misusing, Nonusing or Refusing his Office, etc. Vide
Coke's 9 Rep. 49, 50. Earl of Shrewbury's Case.

None can make a Park, Chase or Warren in his own Land without the Kings
License, and if he do in a Quo Warranto, they shall be seized into the Kings
hands: But a Man for his Pleasure may Hawk, Hunt, etc. in his own Land without
any License.

The King granted to another all the Wild Swans, between London Bridge and
Oxford, Coke's 11 Rep. 86, 87. the Case of Monopolies.

More concerning Forests, Game, etc. and the Discovery and Punishment of
Offenders therein; you may Read in the Statutes concerning Forests,
Deer-Stealers, Hunters and Game, etc. at large.

The Court of Justices in Air.
THey are Originally Instituted for the good Rule of the Subject, and for the
Ease of the Countries, and that such as had Franchises might claim them. They
were called Insticiarij in Itinere, or Itinerantes in respect of other Justices
that were Residentes: In the Black Book in the Exchequer, they are called
Insticiarij Deambulantes and, Perlustrantes.

Their Authority was by the Kings Writ in nature a Commission, And the Style of
their Court was, Placita de Juratis, and Assisis, and Coron' Itinere Johannis
de Vallibus, and Sociorum Justic' Itiner' apud Ockham in Com' Rutland' in
Crastino Epiphan' Dom' Anno Regni Regis Edw. 14.

They had Jurisdiction of all Pleas of the Crown, and all Actions Real,
Personal and Mixed, they Rode and held their Courts, from Seven years, to Seven
years; and first they began with Pleas of the Crown. But now by the Statute of
27 Hen. 8. cap. 24. All Justices in Air must be by Letters Patents under the
Great Seal.

In what County soever they came, All other Courts during the Air ceased, and
all Pleas in that County or arising there before any other, The Justices in
Air might proceed upon as the other might have done.

See the first part of the Institutes of their Antiquity, and Jurisdiction, and
the Causes wherefore they vanished away; And what Franchises, and Liberties,
ought to be claimed before them, See the Case of the Abbot of Strata Marcella,
Coke's Rep. Lib. 9.

Air Justices or Itinerant as we call them, were Justices that used to Ride
from place to place throughout the Realm to Administer Justice; And they had
anciently Authority to Grant Land seized, for Alienation without License as
Justices of the Forest, (who in Effect as to this purpose are Justices in Air)
may do at this day of Land Enclosed without the Kings License, Terms del Ley.

Justiciarij Itinerantes were so called in respect, that the Justices residing
at Westminster were Justiciarij Residentes, Air being Quasi Iter: And these
Justices were much like in this Respect to the Justices of Assize at this day,
although for Authority and manner of proceeding far different, and as the
Justices of Assize by many Acts of Parliament, and other Commissions increased
in power, so the Justices Itinerant vanished away, Coke's 1 Institutes 293. a.

The Court of Justices of Trailebaston.
FRom the Proceeding, being as quick as one might trail, or draw a Staff, and
having some Powers like that of Oyer and Terminer, being also vanished we shall
not further mention, but refer to Coke's 4 Inst. cap. 34.

Three new things which have fair pretenses are commonly hurtful to the
Commonwealth. First, New Courts. Secondly, New Offices either in Courts of
Justice, or out of them, which cannot be done but by Parliament. Thirdly, New
Corporations Trading into Foreign parts, and at home, which in the end produce
Monopolies, Vide Stat. Art. super Chartas cap. 1. where was the first ground of
raising the Justices of Trebaston or Trailbaston, who had such Authority as
Justices in Air; But albeit they had their Authority by Parliament; yet Error
upon their proceeding did lie in the Kings Bench: Which being known, and their
Authority fettered with many Limitations, they by little and little vanished,
Coke's 2 Inst. 540.

The Court of Wards and Liveries.
THis Court was raised by Authority of Parliament, 32 Hen. 8. cap. 46.
concerning the Authority, and Jurisdiction whereof, you may see the Statute,
and Coke's 4 Inst. cap. 35. To which I refer, it being now taken away by the
Statute of 12 Car. 2. cap. 24. The Revenue of Excise being settled in the Crown
instead thereof.

The Court of Ancient Demesne.
THis is in nature of a Court Baron, wherein the Suitors are Judges, and is no
Court of Record, For Brevia Clausa Recordum non habent.

All those that hold of these Manors in Soccage are called Tenants in Ancient
Demesne, and they Ploughed the Kings Demesnes of his Manors; and Plowed, Sowed,
Manured, and Managed all like necessaries to the Kings Husbandry; And that they
might apply themselves more freely to their Labors, They had Six Privileges:
1st, Not to be impleaded for their Lands out of the Manors; But by the Little
Writ of Right-close, directed to the Bailiffs of the Kings Manors, or to the
Lord of the Manors, if in the hand of a Subject: 2ly, Not to be Impannelled to
appear at Westminster, or else where upon any Inquest or Trial: 3ly, To be Free
of all Tolls for things concerning Husbandry, or Sustenance. 4ly, To be Free
from Taxes, and Tallages by Parliaments, unless specially named: 5ly, Of
Contributions to Expenses of Knights of Parliament: 6ly, If they be severally
distrained for other Services, they all may join in a Writ of Monstraverunt to
save charges.

And these Privileges remain, although the Manor be come to the hands of
Subjects, and although their Services of the Plough, is for the most part changed
into Money.

Lands in ancient Demesne may be extended upon a Statute Merchant, Staple or
Elegit, and regularly all general Statutes extend to ancient Demesne: But
Redisseisin, and some others do not lie in ancient Demesne, For which see
Coke's 4 Institutes cap. 58. and their Privilege does not extend to Personal
Actions, in which by common Intendment the Title of the Freehold cannot come in
debate.

The Demandant cannot remove the Plea, but the Tenant may for Seven Causes,
Vide Coke supra. Those Manors are called Ancient Demesne of the Crown, which
were in the hands of St. Edward the Confessor, or William the Conqueror, and so
expressed in Doomesday Book, begun in the 14 year of Will. the Conqueror 1081,
and finished in Six years; And against this Book for Trial of Ancient Demesne
lies no Averment. And therefore is like the Doom and Judgment at Doomes-day.

The Court of Commissioners of Sewers.
THeir Authority is by Commission under the Great Seal, Now grounded and
warranted by the Statute of 23 H. 8. cap. 5. where upon mentioning only some
Observations made by the Lord Coke, we shall briefly set forth their
Juisdiction, and Authority.

First, That the Commissioners shall be named by the Lord Chancellor, Lord
Treasurer, and two Chief Justices, or any Three of them, whereof the Lord
Chancellor to be one.

Secondly, Every Commissioner must take the Oath prescribed by the Act before
the Lord Chancellor or Justices of Peace in their Quarter Sessions, And ought
to have Lands, etc. of Forty Marks yearly, and no Farmer of Lands within the
Precinct of the Commission, unless he have Lands of Freehold worth 40 l. yearly.

Thirdly, The Avowry, or Justification for a Distress taken, shall be generally
that the Distress was taken by force of the Commission for a Lot, or Tax
Assessed by the Commission, or for such other cause.

Fourthly, There must be Six Commissioners to Sit by force of the Commission.

Fifthly, The Act of 23 Hen. 8. Does not extend to reform Nuisance by Sand
rising out of the Sea, and driven to Land by Storms: A special Provision is
therein made for the County of Glamorgan.

Sixthly, A Commission of Sewers shall continue Ten years, unless repealed; or
determined by any new Commission, or by Supersedeas.

Seventhly, That Laws, Ordinances, and Constitutions made by force of such
Commission, and written in Parchment, and Indented under the Seals of the
Commissioners, or Six of them, whereof one part to remain with the Clerk, and
the other in such Place as Six of the Commissioners shall appoint, shall
without the Royal Assent, or any Certificate stand in force.

Eighthly, That if any such Commission be determined by Expiration of Ten years
from the Test, Then such Laws so Indented, and Sealed shall stand in force for
a year after, and the Justices of the Peace, or Six, (whereof One to be of the
Quorum) shall have Power to Execute the same.

Ninthly, Upon granting a new Commission during that year, the Power of the
Justices shall cease.

Tenthly, The Commissioners not to make any Certificate, or Return of their
Commission, orany their Ordinances, Laws, and doings by force of the same.

Eleventhly, See an Alteration by the Statute of 13 Eliz. concerning Fees.

Twelfthly, Neither the Commissioners of Sewers, nor any other have any such
Absolute Authority; but their proceedings are bound by Law.

By Act of Parliament 3 Jac. 1. Walls, Ditches, Banks, Gutters, Sewers, Gates,
Causeys, Bridges and Watercourse in or about the City of London, where is no
Passage for Boats, nor the Water does Ebb, and Flow, are made subject to the
Commission of Sewers, which they were not before.

And of their Jurisdiction and Authority to Supervise all Walls, Sewers and
Gutters, etc. upon the Seacoasts, and else where, and to enforce all Persons
concerned to pay a proportionable part according to the Lands, or Estate they
have toward the Repair of them, and to that end to make Laws, and Ordinances,
and to force the Observation of them, Vide F. N. B. fo. 113, 114. Coke's 4.
Inst. cap. 62. And the Statutes at large.

And it is to be noted, that Sewer or Suera is derived from the word Sue, or
Issue, as the Lord Coke observes, and taken for a Sewer, Channel or Gutter of
Water.

The Court of Commissioners upon the Statute of Bankrupts.
THe name, and wickedness of Bankrupts, comes from Foreign Nations, for B^ruque
in French is Mensa, and a Banqueror or Exchanger is Mensarius in Latin, and
Rout is a Sign, or Mark metaphorically taken for one that has so spent his
Estate that nothing remains but the Mark, or mention thereof.

The Commission upon complaint made in Writing to the Lord Chancellor, is
granted under the great Seal of England, and their Jurisdiction and Authority
is declared and warranted by the Statute of 34 Hen. 8. being the first made
against English Bankrupts, and the Statute of 13 Eliz. 7. and 1 Jac. 1. cap.
15. and 21 Jac. 1. cap. 19, etc. And the Commissioners must pursue the Power
given by those Acts, or they are liable to the Action of the Party grieved; But
they may plead generally.

They have power to Examine the Offender upon Oath, and after he be declared a
Bankrupt, to Examine his Wife upon Oath, and Witnesses also, And have power to
break open any Houses, Ware houses, Chambers, Trunks, Chests, etc. of the
Offenders: For all which see Coke's 4 Inst. cap. 63. and the Statutes at large.

There is a Court called Curia Cursus Aquae apud Gravesend, and others like it
in private, Of which it belongs not to us to treat.

Commissioners for Examination of Witnesses.
COmmissioners and Examiners are not bound strictly to the Letter of the
Interrogatory, but ought to Explain every other thing which necessarily arises
thereupon, for manifestation of the whole Truth.

They ought not to discover to either Party, or any other, any of the
Depositions taken, before publication granted.

Nor ought to confer with either Party after the Examination begun, or take any
new Instructions.

They must take the Depositions Gravely, Temperately, and without Menace, or
Interruption in hindrance of the Truth, which are grievously to be punished;
And after the Depositions taken, must Read the same distinctly to the
Witnesses, and suffer them to explain themselves, and it is safe that the
Witnesses subscribe their Names, or Marks to the Paper-Book; But they must be
certified in Parchment.

Interrogatories ought to be Single, and Plain, Pertinent to the matter in
question, but in no sort Captious, Leading, or Directory.

In some cases the Courts of Common Law judge upon Witnesses, but they must
ever give their Testimony Viva Voce, as in Dower, if the Issue be whether the
Husband be alive or no.

Bracton says, an Alien may not be a Witness, but that must be understood an
Alien Infidel, for the Bishop of Rosse a Scot was admitted a Witness, and
Sworn, 4 Eliz. in the case of the Duke of Norfolk.

Witnesses, ought to come to be deposed untaught and without Instruction, And
should say from his Heart, Non sum doctus, nec Instructus, nec curo de
Victoria, modo ministretur Justitia, Coke's 4 Inst. cap. 64.

The King 's Swanherd.
Has been of ancient time by his Office Magister deductus Cygnoram, And or his
Authority you may Read in Rot. Patentium, Anno 11 H. 4. Part. 1 M. 14, etc. and
Coke's 4 ^nst. cap 66. But he has no Court. No Powl can be an Estray but a
Swan.

The King 's Aulneger.
AUlneger of Aulne in French, and that of Ulna. Ulnator: Is an ancient Officer
of the Kings Gift before any Statute; For in 14 Eliz. Sir Thomas Darlington was
by the Kings Letters Patents Aulneger of Broad Cloth, and had a Fee of the
King; for the Fee he had of the Subject was by the Statute of 27 E. 3.

Of ancient time no Custom was paid by the English, or Stranger but for Wools,
Woolfels, and Leather; In the Reign of E. 3. a great part of the Wool was
draped into Cloth, And it was adjudged notwithstanding, that because the Wool
was changed by the Labor, and Industry of Man into another kind of
Merchandising, no Custom should be paid for it.

The first Act of Parliament that gave any Subsidy of Cloth was Anno 23 Ed. 3.
(not Printed) viz. 14 d. of Lieges, and 21 d. of Strangers, for every Cloth of
Assize, and 2 s. 4 d. of Lieges, and 3 s. 4 d. of Strangers, for every Cloth
of Scarlet, and the reason of granting these of Broad Cloth was, Quia jam
Magna Pars Lani Regni nostri in eodem Regno Pannificitur, etc. And for further
satisfaction of the King for Customs of Wools, Anno 27 E. 3. A Subsidy was
granted to the King, his Heirs and Successors (over the Customs thereof due)
viz. of every whole Cloth of Assize not Ingrained 4 d. the Half Cloth 2 d.
every whole Cloth Ingrained 5 d. the Half Cloth 2 d. 1/2, The whole Cloth of
Scarlet 6 d. The Half Cloth 3 d.

The Aulnegers Fee is granted by Act of Parliament, viz. for the Measuring of
every whole Cloth of Assize of the Seller, a Half penny, and for the Half
Cloth One farthing, and no more, and for Cloth less, or not to be sold, nothing.

Nota, Consuetudines, and Custumae, Customs and Subsidies are taken as
Synonima's.

In Hillary Term Anno 2 Jac. 1. Upon Suit to the King by the Duke of Lenox; a
Question being moved, whether new Draperies, as Frizadoes, Bays, etc. were
within the aforesaid Statute; It was resolved by the Judges, That all new made
Drapery made wholly of Wool, as Frizadoes, Bays, Northern Dozens, etc. are to
yield Subsidy, and Aulnage according to the Statute of 27 E. 3. But Fustians,
Canvas, Sackcloth, etc. made merely of other Stuff are not to be charged
therewith.

The Government of Counties in England.
FOR the Civil Government of Counties, the King makes choice of some of the
Nobility, Clergy, Gentry, and Lawyers, Men of Worth, and Parts, who have their
usual Residence in the County, so many as the King pleases to keep the Peace
of the County: And these by the Commission under the Great Seal are called

Justices of Peace, at first Styled, Wardens of the Peace; and such whom the
King most confideth in, in, or does respect, are made Justices of the Quorum,
so called from those words in the Commission, Quorum A.B. Unum esse volumus;
which imports, that some business of more importance may not be transacted
without the presence or concurrence of one of them.

One of the principal Justices of the Peace and Quorum, is by the Lord
Chancellor made Custos Rotulorum; so called, because he has the custody of the
Rolls or Records of the Sessions, and is to bring them to each Quarter Sessions.

Every Quarter of the year these Justices meet at the Chief or Shire Town,
where the Grand Inquest or Jury of the County is Summoned to appear, who upon
Oath are to Inquire of all Traitors, Heretics, Thieves, Murderers, Money
Coiners, Riots, etc. Those that appear to be guilty, are by the said Justices
committed to Prison to be tried at the next Assizes, when the Judges of
Westminster come their Circuits beforementioned.

Every County being subdivided into Hundreds, so called at first either for
containing one Hundred Houses, or an Hundred bound to take Arms; or Wapentakes,
(so called from touching a Weapon, as the manner at this day is in Sweden at
their solemn Weddings, for their chief Witnesses to lay all their Hands upon a
Lance or Pike) every such Wapentake, or Hundred, has commonly a Bailiff, a
very ancient Officer, but now of small Authority: Also Officers called
High-Constables, at First ordained by the Statute of Winchester, 13 Ed. 1. for
Conservation of the Peace, and View of Armor; they disperse Warrants, and the
Orders of Justices of the Peace, to each Petit Constable.

There are also in every County Two Officers called Coroners, whose Office is
to Inquire by a Jury of Neighbors, how and by whom any Person came by a
Violent Death, and to enter the same upon Record, which is a Matter Criminal,
and a Plea of the Crown, and thence they are called Crowners, or Coroners.

These are chosen by the Freeholders of the County, by virtue of a Writ out of
the Chancery, they were Anciently men of Estates, Birth, and Honor.

Every County has also A Clerk of the Market, whose Office is to keep a
Standard of all Weights and Measures exactly according with the King's
Standard, and kept in the Exchequer; and to see that none other be used in the
same County, to Seal all Weights and Measures made exactly by the Standard in
his custody, and to burn such as are deficient.

And these Justices and Officers have every of their several and respective
Courts within the County; of which we shall briefly say somewhat particularly,
and First of

The Court of the Sessions of the Peace.
BY Act of Parliament 1 E. 3. cap. 16. the King Wills, That for the better
Keeping and Maintenance of the Peace, Good Men and Lawful be Assigned in every
County to Keep the Peace. And thus began this Subordinate Government, for the
Tranquillity and Quiet of the Realm, which no part of the Christian World can
parallel: But referring the Reader to several Acts of Parliament, and Authors
who have Treated of their Jurisdiction and Authority both in and out of
Sessions: We shall only make some short and brief Remarks and Observations
thereupon. As, First,

He that is named in the Commismission of the Peace under the Great Seal, is
certainly a Justice of Peace; Such of these in whom the King more particularly
confideth are called Justices of the Quorum.

Their Office and Duty is to be considered, that some Things cannot be done
without Two Justices, and in some cases One or Two must be of the Quorum; and
when a Statute appoints a thing to be done by Two Justices; if the Offense be
against the Peace, one may grant a Warrant to bring the Offender before these
Two Justices, or may take Bail for his Appearance at the next Sessions; or he
may bind him to the Good Behavior, and so to appear at the next Sessions, but
he may not determine the Matter alone. And whatever one Justice may do, may
ever be done by more.

And they may be punished for their Neglect.

Any Justice may require any number of Men to assist him in his Duty, for
apprehending all Felons, Murderers, and the like, and such as are able must
obey them, or they may be bound to the Good Behavior, or Fined for their
Disobedience. But he cannot give Warrant to break open any man's House, to
Search for a Felon, or stolen Goods, upon a bare Surmise.

A Justice of Peace may do all that a Constable or Private person may do,
touching Keeping the Peace by Common Law.

They are in the Room of the Ancient Conservators of the Peace, and have the
same power they had.

Where a Statute gives a power in general of any Offense, and does not mention
where it is to be done, it cannot be done out of the Sessions of the Peace; but
if it give power to do a Special thing, it may be done out of any Sessions.

They must act cautiously in Execuing the power given them by Acts of
Parliament, and see that they strictly pursue it; and therefore must observe
the words of the Statutes, which are penned diversely, and consider if they are
not Repealed.

The Justices have power in small Offenses, or Trespasses, to appoint such
Recompense as he shall think fit; and if he judge him unable, or if he do not
make, and pay such Satisfaction, he may order him to be Whipped; and for the
second Offense he may order him to be bound to the Good Behavior, or send him
to the House of Correction.

If the Offender be able, he must bear the Charge of himself, and those who
convey him to Prison, or otherwise the Justice may give Warrant to levy it upon
his Goods.

Any one Justice may compel a Man to take Crack'd-Money, and may determine all
Defaults about Money, 19 H. 7.15. 17 E. 4.1. 6 W. 3.

There must be Two or more about dividing of a Wood, being appointed thereunto
by the Sessions upon the Lord's Complaint, 35 H. 8.7. 13 E.

Any Justice of Peace may require such as are between 15, and 60 years of Age,
to be Sworn to Keep the Peace.

There must be Two Justices, one Quorum, to give the Sheriff, and his Bailiffs,
and Deputies their Oaths, and this Exi officio without Commission; otherwise of
a Special Bailiff. See 27 Eliz. 12.

Recognizances must be Certified next Assizes, or Sessions, 5 and 6 Ed. 6 25.

A Supersedeas out of Chancery is to be certified at the Sessions, together
with the Recognizance.

A Certiorari brought before the Day, will discharge the Recognizance; and this
Writ of Certiorari comes from the Chancery.

If any Officer have a Warrant from a Justice of Peace, and shall have a
Supersedeas from the Chancery, or King's Bench, or any Justice of Peace of the
County, and yet urge the party to find Sureties, he may refuse to give it, and
if he arrest him he shall have False Imprisonment against him.

An Alias Capias, or Exigent awarded against one Indicted of Trespass, or the
like, upon Surety found in Chancery, may be stayed from thence, or the Sheriff
commanded not to arrest him; or if he be arrested, to take Sureties and let him
go. So, when he has given Sureties.

Two Justices, Quorum unus (some say one Justice) may grant a Supersedeas.

The Certiorari to remove the Record is in it self a Supersedeas, but a Man may
have a Supersedeas to the Sheriff also.

Supplicavit is a Command out of Chancery, or King's Bench, to bind some one to
the Peace, or Good Behavior; concerning which Seven things are observable.
Vide Shepherd's Justice 224.

Mittimus is the Warrant to send the Prisoner to Gaol, and it must be in
Writing under Hand and Seal, unless it be by Order of Sessions: The Cause must
be expressed, otherwise it will not be the same Offense in him who suffers an
Escape: If it be without Bail, or Mainprize, and yet the Cause expressed is
Bailable, other Justices may Bail him.

The Conviction of Offenders by the Common Law is by Indictment and Jury; For
Trial by Examination and Witnesses, is not allowed but where it is at the
Discretion of the Justices, or so directed by Statute.

Justices of Peace ought to be cautious; for they may be Punished either in the
Sessions, or by Justices of Assize.

Their Reward is 4 s. per Diem for themselves, and 2 s. per Diem for their
Clerks, to be paid with their Charges in some Cases out of Fines levied by the
Sheriff, besides several Fees, and other Allowances. Vide Shepherd's Justice.
They shall not be punished for Ignorance, etc.

The Sessions is a Court where the Justices sit for Execution of their Office;
and there are Two kinds of Sessions.

The General, or Quarter Sessions, for General Execution of their Commission
over all their Limits, and kept Quarterly, viz. In the first Week after
Epiphany, The first Week after the Clause of Easter, The first Week after
Translation of St. Thomas the Martyr, being the 7th of July, And the first Week
after St. Michael (or more often, if need be,) And in this Court the Justices
are Judges, of whom there may not be less than Two, whereof one of the Quorum:
And they ought to sit at the most Principal and Chief Towns, and where it has
been usually held. And all things done before them are of Record, against which
no Averment lies. And for their several Powers and Jurisdictions, besides what
is mentioned before, you may read the Statutes and Authors at large, who treat
thereupon; To whom we refer, and pass on to their Power in

The Special Sessions, which is of Special use, for Ridding the Gaols, and
other purposes; And herein they may take as much, and as little business upon
them, as they please, and have (unless in some particular cases) the same Power
as in their Quarter Sessions. And this Special Sessions may be kept at any
place, and held at any time, and as long as the Justices think fit, and may be
kept by One Justice, or more, who have like power in many cases with the
Justices in or out of their Quarter Sessions; of which you may read more in
Authors at large.

And this Special Sessions is also sometimes called Statute Sessions, It being
enjoined by several Statutes, that they with the Constables of every Hundred do
meet, and that Masters and Servants do appear, for deciding Differences, Rating
Servant's Wages, and bestowing of People are fit to Serve, and Refuse, or
cannot get Masters in Service: And now a word or two of their manner of

Proceeding, which in an ordinary way lies in Three things: 1. Information, 2,
Hearing and Trial, 3. In giving Judgment and doing Execution.

By Information the Judges of these Courts take knowledge of Offenses, either
by presentment of Public Officers, as Stewards of Leets, Supervisors of
Highways, Constables, or the like: And these are not sent to the Grand Jury to
be found by them, but are a Perfect Information of themselves, to which the
party accused must answer. And the Information given by the Jury, is Two ways,
either by Indictment or, Presentment; and the Justices are to receive in this
such Indictments they ought but none other; and they must ex officio see they
are well drawn.

A Justice may present Defaults, as of Highways, etc. upon his own View-And
any Man may Inform against Offenders without danger: But these Common Informers
must be allowed of Record, and if once turned out, are never again to be
admitted; and must prosecute within the time limited by the Statute of 31 Eliz.
and must bring his Informations in the same County, and to these ends must be
sworn, 21 Jac. 1.4. And now we proceed to

Hearing and Trial, in which are included the Calling the party, his Appearance
and Defense. The Process for Calling the party upon Indictments for Treason, or
Felony, is 1. Capias, 2. Alias Capias, 3. Exigi facias. If for Indictments of
Lesser offenses, a Venire facias, and if Sufficient then Distringas, and
Process Infinite. But if Nihil habet be Returned, then Capias, Alias, Pluries,
and Exigi facias.

The Process upon any Indictment, or Presentment for an Offense against a
Statute, shall be such as the Statute shall direct; otherwise, the Ordinary
Process of the Common Law. There are other Processes, as Freri Facias, and
Capias after Judgment, for doing Execution, 5 amp; 6 Ed. 6.14. and in some
cases Elegit. See 31 Eliz. 7.

But touching Process Three things must be observed; 1. That no Process Issue
but upon Inquisition of Twelve Men, or Return of a Sworn Officer, some Special
Cases excepted; 2. They are not granted upon Suggestion by Word, or Writing; 3.
Nor may Process Issue, but Sedente Curia; And sometimes the party comes in by

Recognizances, which are to be Certisied to the next Sessions after they are
taken, when and where the Appearance of the party, or his Default of Appearance
is Recorded and Certified. And Bail is to be taken Quando stat indifferenter,
but not otherwise.

The Justices cannot Award Process upon Recognizance forfeited, but must
certify the same, and the cause of Forfeiture into some of the Courts of
Record at Westminster, That Process may Issue from thence.

Supersedew from above, must be brought by the party at the Sessions, for if he
send, it will scarcely be allowed.

If one be bound to appear at the Quarter Sessions, he must appear there, If at
the Sessions; he may appear at any Sessions, Dalt. J.P. 237.

Certiorari coming before the day to remove the Recognizance into the Chancery,
or Kings Bench, will discharge the appearance, Dalt. J. P. 237.

After Appearance the Party must either confess, and submit to the Fine, or
Traverse the Charge, and if so he must be bound to Prosecute it, unless it be
Tried presently, which must be by Pety-Jury. And this is called an

Arraignment or Trial, and if they pass for the King, And find him guilty of
the offense, or he confess it, or stand out an Utlary, so that it come to a

Conviction, Then are the Justices to give Judgment, and see Execution done
according to Law, In which they must observe these Rules. First, In giving

Judgment, They must adjudge Men according to Law, For where the Law appoints
a Corporal, they may not inflict a Pecuniary Punishment, Et sic e converso.
Neither may the change the Degree of Punishment: They have power to inflict
Corporal Punishments, as Death, cutting of the Parts of the Body, Burning or
Marking, Imprisoning, Whipping, Stocking or Cucking Stool, and Pecuniary
Punishments, as loss of Offices, Lands or Goods, Fines or Issues, Amerciaments:
In fame, as to Brand a Man that is Perjured, that his Testimony afterward
shall be of no Credit; They may not set a Fine, or Amerciament but Sedente
Curia, and all Fines must be reasonable, Where the Stature appoints a Penalty,
no other can be imposed, neither may the Justices mitigate it after the Party
is Convicted by Confession, or otherwise; But if the Party Indicted before his
Conviction come into Court, and Protest his Innocence; yet Quia noluit
placitare, etc. he puts himeself to the grace of the Court, the Justices
may, and do usually Impose a Moderate Fine, and by Order forbear the
prosecution. Other Judgments being rarely or more seldom given, or Executed by
Order of these Courts, or the Sessions; But the Pillory, Whipping, or Fine, The
Execution of the two first being commonly known, we shall only speak of The

Fine which, if it be at Common Law, has Imprisonment incident, till it be
paid, yet in such Case the Justices, may take a Recognizance for Payment of it,
and deliver the Party out of Prison, or they may cause the Clerk of the Peace
to Estreat all Fines, and Amerciaments, by Indenture into the Exchequer, for
the Sheriff to levy, and they are to keep one part of the Indenture themselves.
Thus having giving a Short view of the Jurisdictions, and Proceedings of these
Justices in their Sessions, I refer all other Matters concerning them, and
their Authority to the Authors, who have written largely upon that Subject.

The Court of Inquiry of the Defaults of Justices of Peace, Justices of Assize,
Sheriffs, and Under-sheriffs, etc.
THis Court is raised by the Statute of 2 Hen. 5. And is a Court only of
Inquiry touching the Execution of the Statute of 13 Hen. 4 cap. 7. concerning
Riots, Routs, and unlawful Assemblies, And they are to certify their Inquests
incontinently into the Chancery, As by the said Statute more at large
appears, See 19 Hen. 7. cap. 13.

For the Execution of Laws in each County.
THe King every Michaelmas Term, upon nominating six by the Justices Itinerant,
Three whereof are Struck out by the Lord Chancellor, Treasurer and Judges, out
of the remaining three; about Crastino Animarum yearly pricks one fit person
for Sheriff of each County, (except for Westmoreland and Durham) which are
Hereditary, who is to Execute the Kings Mandates, and all Writs directed to him
out of the Kings Courts, Impannel Juries, bring Causes and Criminals to Trial,
and to see Sentences both in Civil and Criminal Affairs Exectuted, To attend,
and Guard the Itinerant Judges twice a year while in their County, with great
Pomp, and Feasting at the Assizes, and has attendant on him his Undersheriff,
Clerks, Stewards of Courts, Bailiffs of Hundreds, Constables, Gaolers,
Sergeants, and Beadles, with a Train of Servants on Horseback in rich Liveries,
at the Reception of the Judges. He Collects all public Profits, Fines, etc. of
the County. And for Exercising his Judicial Power has these Courts.

The Court of the Tourn.
THe Tourn called anciently Shiregmote, Is a Court of Record holden before the
Sheriff, The ancient Institution whereof by King Alfred was before Magna
Charta, To hear and determine all Felonies (Death of Man excepted) and Common
Nusances. See the Charter of William the Conqueror: Magna Charta and Exposition
thereupon, the second part of Coke's Institutes, and Coke's 4 Institutes, cap.
53.

The Style of this Court is, Curia Visus Franc' pleg' Domini Regis apud B.
coram Vicecomite in Turno suo; And seems to have its Denomination from the
French Tour (i. e.) Ambitus, circuitus, And is as much to say as, The Sheriffs
Course, or Perambulation; For which and the Articles Inquirable there, See
Greenwoods Jurisdiction of County, Courts, and other Authors at large, and
Coke's 4 Institutes cap. 53. And this Court is said to be Schola Insigniendi
Juvenes, A School to Instruct young Men in the ancient Laws of the Kingdom.

The Court of Leet, or View of Frankpledge.
THis is a Court of Record, at the first derived and taken out at the Tourn,
because the people did undergo great trouble in traveling to the Sheriffs
Tourn; Leets, or Views of Frankpledge were granted to Lords of Manors, within
certain Precincts; yet this Court in whose Manor soever it is kept, is still
accounted the Kings Court, because the Authority is Originally apertaining to
the Crown, and thence derived to inferior persons, And whosoever has the Leet,
has the same Authority within the Precinct, as the Sheriff has within the
Tourn. And Lep or Leet is a Saxon word from the Verb Zelepian, (z) being added
Euphoniae gratia, i. e. Convenire to assemble together, unde Conveutus.

And the Style of this Court is, Curia Visus Franc' pleg' tent' apud B. coram
A.B. Seneschallo.

This Court of the Leet, as likewise the Tourn, are Instituted for the Common
Weal; As for Conservation of the Kings Peace, Punishment of Common Nuisance, as
for selling Corrupt Wines, and Victuals, etc. And by diverse Acts of Parliament,
the Jurisdiction of this Court has been increased, to the end the Subject
might have remedy, and Justice at his own Door. And therefore the Steward ought
to be knowing in the Law, for Ignorantia Judicis, est calamitas Innocent is: Of
the Antiquity and Jurisdiction of this Court which is very ample, you may Read
more at large, Coke's 2 Institutes, Magna Charta, cap. 17.35. and 4 Institutes
cap. 54,

There are Three things to be considered in holding of Tourns, or Leets.

1st, Time which must be twice in a year, viz. within one Month after Easter,
and one Month after Michaelmas, at the Tourn after Erst, No Actions Popular
are to be inquired after, etc But only to take their Suit who are Suitors,
which at the Sheriffs Tourn are all Men from 12 to 60 years of age within the
County, (Ecclesiastical Persons, Peers, and Women excepted) and at the Leet the
like Persons within the Precinct, which is called Suit Real, by Reason of their
Allegiance to which they are Sworn to be true, and Loyal to the King; and to
take the view, etc. And at the Tourn, or Leet after Michaelmas, then to inquire
of such things which are inquirable there.

2ly, The place where the Leet is to be holden, and that must be within the
Precinct, or Liberty in Loco debito, and cosueto, and if it be done otherwise,
whatever is acted in it is void.

3ly, The Persons who are all Freeholders within the Precinct, or Liberty, and
are obliged to come by the Service of their Fees, and all others of fit age,
except the persons above mentioned to be excepted.

The Sheriff in the Tourn, or Steward in the Leet, as Judge has a double
Authority: 1. Election of Officers: 2. Punishment of Offenders, And this
Punishment of Offenders is in a twofold manner, and in it are to be respected.
1. Actus Curiae for Punition of Offenses in Curia, where the Sheriff, or
Steward as Judge, may punish by Fine; without Inquiry by the Country, etc. As
if a Juror sworn refuse to make Presentment, depart without giving his Verdict,
or refuse to be Sworn, the Steward may impose a reasonable Fine upon him: 2.
Actus Patriae for Punishment of Offenses Extra Curiam, where the Jurors who are
sworn have peculiar Cognizance, and have Authority to Present and to Assess
Amerciaments, for them.

And the Sheriff, or Steward by the Statute of 18 Ed. 1. may Inquire of several
Misdemeanors from the highest Treason, to the lowest Trespass, though not here
punishable; He may also Impannel a Second Jury, to Enquire of the Defaults and
Concealments of the First, and so Fine them for their offense. And for default
of Resiants, he may compel a Stranger coming within the view, to be of the
Inquest. And the Officers he has Election of are.

The Bailiff, who is to Collect the Rents, and Profits of the Manor, or
Liberty, and Give a true account thereof, and to execute all the Precepts of
the Court.

The Constables who are chosen, and are to see the public peace kept, Watch
and Ward observed; Learn the Contents of the Statute of Winchester made against
Rogues, etc. And to punish such as play at unlawful Games.

The County Court.
THe Style of this Court is, Bucks Curia prima Comitatus E.C. Militis,
Vicecomiti Com. praedict', Tent' apud B. etc.

And the next Court is Curia secunda E. C. etc. And soforth of the rest.

Of the Jurisdiction and Authority of this Court you may Read in the Statute of
Magna Charta cap. 35. The Suitors are Judges, except in a Redisseis in the
Sheriff is Judge, and a Writ of Error lies upon his Judgment; And being no
Court of Record, It holds no Plea of any Debt, or Damages to the value of
Forty shillings or above, Nor of any Trespass Vi and armis, because a Fine was
due thereby to the King; But of Debt, Detinue, Trespass, and other Actions
personal above Forty shillings, The Sheriff may hold Plea by force of a Writ of
Justicies, for that is in nature of a Commission to him, and is Vicountiel and
not returnable; And the Sheriff may before any County Court, award a Summons to
his Bailiff, returnable within two or three days at his Discretion, to Summon
the Defendant by his Goods, etc. to answer, and if the Bailiff return Nihil,
and the Plaintiff remove the same by a Pone, into the Common Pleas, that Court
shall not grant a Capias, for the nature of the Writ does not warrant a Capias,
and the Sheriff could not grant the same, neither does the Writ of Justicies
alter the nature of the Court of the County, for therein the Sheriff is not
Judge, but the Suitors; and upon a Judgment given therein, a Writ of False
Judgment does lie, and not a Writ of Error. And in diverse Real Actions a Writ
of Justicies does lie, as in Breve de Admeasurement of Dower, of Pasture, De
Nuisance, etc. As by our Books may appear. And Pleas ought not to be hence
removed (without cause,) as appears by the Writs of Pone, Recordare, The Writ
of False Judgment, Accedas ad Curiam, which are yet in use.

In this Court upon the Exigent after Quint' Exact', The Coroners give
Judgment, Ideo Utlagetur per Judicium Coronatoris; But by this Judgment No
Goods are forfeited before the Outlary appear of Record, and that is the
Reason, that no Man can Claim the Goods of Outlaws by Prescription, neither
shall such an Outlawry disable the party till the Exigent be returned.

This Court is holden at any place within the County, except in Northumberland,
Sussex and Chester, where it is limited to be held at certain places by
Statute; And is to be holden once every Month, counting 28 days to the Month.

No Fine can here be inposed, because it is no Court of Record: But a Man may
be there amercied for Contempt, or Disturbance of the Court, In the presence of
the Court.

And in this Court are these Officers.

The Sheriff who is Elected yearly, Crastino Animarum by the Statute of 9 E. 2.
and 14 E. 3. cap. 7. And his Letters Patents bear date commonly the sixth of
November. unless in case of necessity: And before the next County day after his
Election, and Discharge of the old Sheriff, he ought to depute.

A County Clerk, who according to Fleta ought to be Endued with Circumspection,
Fidelity, Providence, Humility, Peace, and Modesty, Expert in the Laws and
Customs of his Country, and of ability to direct the Bailiffs, and other
Ministers in Dubious Things. He may not Practice as an Attorney at the same
time, nor Act without consent of Suitors; he must Depute honest able Bailisss
to Execute the Process, and Precepts of the Court, and after Plaints entered
(which must be in full County Sedente Curia, Except in case of Replevins) he
must Issue sufficient Precepts directed to his Bailiff to Attach, or Warn the
Defendants to appear at next County Court, and at the Adjournment of every
Court, must appoint a day certain for the next Court; To the intent the Country
may know when to Resort thither, to hear the King's Exigents, and Proclamations
read.

The Coroner is a Principal Officer, being chosen in this Court by a Writ De
Coronatore eligendo directed to the Sheriff, whereupon he is chosen by the
Freeholders, or Suitors in full Court, and is there published; and afterward
his Election certified into the Chancery by the Sheriff, and the County Clerk
Administers to him an Oath for due Execution of his Office: then he Sits there
with the Sheriff every County Court, where Exigents and Proclamamations being
proclaimed five County days, Once in open Sessions, and once at the Church
Door, If at the fifth County day the Defendant appear not, the Coroner gives
Judgment, That he be out of the King's Protection, and out of the Aid of the
Law. A Man being then said to be Outlawed as it were Extra Legem positus,
because he is supposed to be once Sworn to the Law; But a Woman is said to be
waved, ( Waviatur) because she was never Sworn to the Law.

The Attorneys may do all things in the Name, and as the Act of him who gave
them the Authority, as if he did it himself, For he is Aliorum Negotiorum
Gestor, and Qui per alium facit, per seipsum facere videtur. And these ought to
be honest, and just, according to their Oath. And ought not to delay their
Clients, (Argenti gratia) not demand Moneys otherwise than is allowed them by
the Court.

The Bailiffs are Servants and Ministers of the Law, and by Consequence to the
party at whose Suit he is to distrain, And therefore ought to be True,
Vigilant, and not exoculated with Bribes; Ought to be contented with the Fees
allowed, for if they Extort more, or commit any Error contrary to their
Precept, they forfeit Forty shillings, by the Stature of 27 Eliz. No Bailiff,
or other Person, ought to take a Distress or Execute Process, till he be Sworn,
but now Experience shows the Contrary. King Alfred hanged Judge Arnold for
saving a Bailiff from Death, who had robbed the People by Distress, and for
Extorting of Fees.

The Court of the Hundred.
AS the Leet was derived for the Ease of the People out of the Tourn; So this
Court of the Hundred for the same cause was derived out of the Court of the
County; And is (in nature) a Court Baron, where the Suitors are Judges, and is
no Court of Record.

The Style of this Court is, Curia E. C. Milit is Hundredi sui de B. in Com'
Bucks, Tent', etc. coram A. B. Senceschallo ibidem.

Officers Incident to this Court, are chiefly the Constables of the Hundred
commonly called,

The Chief Constables, so named, because the Constables of Towns are called
Petit Constables; The Constables of the Hundred are Created by the Statute of
Winchester 13 E. 1. And their Authority thereby limited to five things: 1st,
To make view of Armor: 2ly, To present before Justices Assigned all such
Defaults, they see in the Country about Armor: 3ly, Defaults of Suits of
Towns: 4ly, Of Highways: 5ly, To present such as lodge Strangers in uplandish
Towns, for whom they will not Answer.

And these disperse all Warrants of the Justices of Peace to the Petit
Constable; and diverse other Authorities are given to them, and the Petit
Constables by Acts of Parliament, which they must strictly observe; For that no
Officer constituted by Act of Parliament, may Prescribe as the Officer by the
Common Law may.

Term. 2 Car. Regis, Fortescu of Bucks Plaintiff, and the Sheriff of the same
Defendant, The Plaintiff had diverse Hundreds granted to him for Life, Reserving
a Rent which the Sheriff disallowed, and put in Bailiffs of his own; And the
Attorney General was commanded to avoid the like in other Counties, for that
they were against Law, and belonged to the Office of the Sheriff.

And this division of Counties into Hundreds is very Ancient, and thought to be
so called at first, either for containing an Hundred Houses, or an Hundred Men
bound to bear Arms, and has (commonly a Bailiff an Ancient Officer, but now of
small Authority, And if there be a Bailiff of a Liberty, Or a Sheriff's Bailiff
of a Hundred Wapentake, or Tything, which has not Lands or Tenements
sufficient within the County, there lies a Writ De Ballivo Amovendo, by the
Statute of 4. E. 3. cap. 9.

The Court Baron.
THe Style of this Court is, Curia Baronis A. B. Militis Manerij sui praedicti,
(having the name of the Manor written in the Margent) Tent' tali die, etc.
coram C.D. Seneschallo ibidem; And being call Barons Court is the same as to
say, Freeholders Court.

This Court is incident to every Manor, and is of Two natures: The First by the
Common Law, and the Suitors thereof are Judges, although the Plea be holden by
force of a Writ of Right, and this is called a Court Baron, and may be holden
from Three Weeks, to Three Weeks: The Second is a Customary Court, and that
does concern Copyholderss, And therein the Lord or his Steward is Judge.

And for as much as the Title, or Estate of the Copyholder is entered in the
Roll, whereof the Steward delivers him a Copy, he is therefore called
Copyholder.

And as there can be no Court Baron without Freeholders, So no Customary Court
without Copyholders; And a^ there may be a Court Baron of Freeholders only, and
then the Steward is Register; So their may be a Customary Court of Copyholders
only, and then is the Lord or his Steward Judge.

And when the Court Baron is of this Double Nature, The Court Roll contains
matters appertaining to the Court Baron, as also to the Customary Court.

For the Antiquity f this Court, it is to be observed, That by the Laws and
Ordinances of King Alfred, and others, It appears, That the First Kings of
this Realm, had all the Lands of England in Demesne; And Les grand Manors, and
Royalties they Reserved to themselves, and of the Remnant, they (for the
Defense of the Realm) Enfeoffed the Barons, (under which Name are comprised all
the Nobility,) with the like Jurisdiction the Court Baron now has.

And this Court was first Instituted for the ease of the Tenants, and for the
ending of Suits for Debts and Damages under Forty shillings: And this Court may
be held at any place within the Manor, unless a Lord who has Two or Three
Manors, has usually kept at one of them Courts for all the said Manors.

For the Customs, and manner of Proceeding in this Court, you may Read more at
large in Coke's 1 Inst. sect. 73. Greenwood of Courts, Shepheard's,
Courtkeepers guide, etc.

The Court of the Coroner.
THe Coroner Coronator, is so called, because he deals principally with Pleas
of the Crown, Or Matters concerning the Crown; And as appears by the Writ De
Coronatore Eligendo, he is Eligible by the Freeholders of the County, and after
he is Elected, the Sheriff gives unto him his Oath duly to Execute his Office;
and being thus Eligible (as the Sheriff and Conservators of the Peace were in
ancient Times,) they continue notwithstanding the Demise of the King. And of
these are Fout in every County; But in the Twelve Shires of Wales, and Cheshire
are but Two, and sometimes Six in a County, and sometimes but one.

The Court which he holds is a Court of Record, And as the Sheriff in his
Tourn may Inquire of all Felonies by the Common Law, except the Death of Man;
So the Coroner can Inquire of no Felony but the Death of Man, and that super
visum Corporis; He may also Inquire of the Escape of the Murderer, of Treasure
Trove, Deodands, and Wrecks of the Sea.

Besides his Judicial place, he has also Authority Ministerial as Sheriff,
etc. When there is just Exception* to the Sheriff, Judicial Process shall be
awarded to the Coroner for the Execution of the King's Writs; in which case he
is Locum tenens Vicecomitis, and in some especial Case the King's Original Writ
shall be directed to him.

In ancient time none might have this Office but a Knight, and he must have
sufficient Lands within the County, whereof he may answer all People: But more
concerning this matter you may see in Coke's 4 Institutes cap. 59.

And besides these General Coroners of Counties, there are Special Coroners of
Liberties, and Privileged Places, who have the like Jurisdiction, and Power
within those Places, as the other have in the County, Vide Stat. de
Coronatoribus, 3 and 4. E. 1.

When any person has Murdered himself, or is Felo de se, The Coroner goes to
view the Body, and makes out his Warrant to the Bailiffs of the Liberty to
Summon a Jury, And further.

For the manner and method of keeping this Court; See Greenwood of Courts, and
others who treat thereupon.

The Court of Escheators and Commissioners for finding of Offices.
THis Office is in the Gift of the Lord Treasurer, who grants it by Deed, and
he is to continue in his Office but one year, or Once in Three years, and are
One in every County.

And this name Escheator comes from the word Escheata, a word of Art derived
from the French word Eschear (i. e.) excidere or accidere to happen, and
signifies properly when the Lands by accident Fall to the Lord of whom they are
Holden; And then we say the Fee is Escheated.

And this Escheat happens Aut per defectum Sanguinis, For the default of
Heir, Aut per delictum Tenentis, for Felony, and by Judgment Three ways, Aut
quia suspendatur per Collum, Quia abjuravit Regnum, Aut quia utlagatus est, And
therefore such as are Hanged by Martial Law in furore Belli, forfeit no Lands.

He ought to be seized of Forty Marks Land, Except in Cities, and Counties
Palatine.

In case of Treason or Felony he may find an Office Virtute Officij.

If he sit by force of a Writ, he ought to take the Inquest within a Month
after he deliver the Writ, and he ought to Return the same within a Month after
he takes it either by Writ, or Virtute Officij.

All Offices found before him, or Commissioners ought to be by Oaths of Twelve
Men, every Juror to have Lands of the yearly value of Forty shillings in the
same County, and ought to be Indented, and one part Sealed by them, and the
other by him, which is to remain with the Foreman of the Jury, and they to be
taken in good Towns, etc.

He or the Commissioners, can take no Inquest of any, but such are Returned by
the Sheriff.

If he or the Commissioners, deny any Person to give Evidence to any Inquest
taken before him, he shall forfeit Forty pounds. If he or they refuse to take a
Verdict of the Inquest they forfeit One hundred pounds to the Party grieved.

An Office found before Commissioners is as forcible, as if it had been found
before the Escheator himself.

The Escheator ought to take no Fee but of the King: But if he find an Office
by Writ for the King, he shall have a Fee of Forty shillings by the Statute of
23 Hen. 6. But if such Lands exceed not in value Five pounds, then he shall
take but Fifteen shillings: And if it be found that Lands are holden of a
Subject, he ought to take no Fee at all.

And the Escheators may make Deputies that are able, For all which see more in
the Statute de Escheatoribus 29 E. 1. Coke's 4 Institutes cap. 43. etc.

The Court of the Clerk of the Market.
THe Clerk of the Market is to this day called Clericus Mercati Hospitij Regis:
And keeps a Court, and Inquireth after Weights, and Measures whether they be
according to the King's Standard, and for that Purpose he makes Process to
Sheriffs, and Bailiffs to Return Pannels before him, etc. And he is to deliver
Estreats of such things as concern his Office into the Exchequer.

He can hold no Plea, but what was holden in the Reign of E. 1. and at this day
there is not so much occasion for him, or his Authority since Justices of
Assize, Justices of Oyer and Terminer, Justices of Peace, and Sheriffs in their
Tourns, and Lords in their Leets, may Inquire of False Weights, and Measures.

Of Wine, Ale, Beer, Corn and Grain there ought to be but One Measure, and of
all other Merchandise, per totum Regnum, De Ponderib' vero, sicut de Mensuris.

But notwithstanding diverse Statutes, there are two kinds of weights used in
this Kingdom, one called Troy weight commanded by the Statute, And is thus
deduced, 24 Corns of Barley dry, and from the midst of the Ear make a penny
we^ght, 20 penny weights an Ounce, and 12 Ounces a pound Troy, a Grain contains
20 Minutes, a Minute contains 24 Droits, a Droit contains 24 Blanks, Twelve
Grians of Fine Gold make a Caract, 24 Caractes an Ounce, and 12 Ounces a pound.
By this Troy weight are measured according to Law, Pearls, Precious Stones,
Gold, Silver, Bread, Wheat and such like.

And this kind of Weight the Apothecaires do or ought to use, although by other
Divisions, and Denominations, Their least Measure is a Grain,

20 Grains make a Scruple maked 3 Scruples make a Dram marked 8 Drachmes make
an Ounce marked 12 Ounces make a Pound marked lb
Another called Avoir du Pois, A Pound of this consists of 16 Ounces, Every
Ounce of 20 Penny weight, Every Penny weight 21 Grains and 9/10 of a Grain; It is
called Avoir du Pois, because thereby they have full Measure; By this are
weighed all Physical Drugs, Wax, Pitch, Tarr, Iron, Steel, Lead, Hemp, Flax,
Flesh, Butter, Cheese, and diverse other Commodities, and especially every
Commodity subject to Wast; And thereof an 112 Pounds are called an Hundred
weight.

There was another weight called Auncel weight, by Scales fixed to a Beam or
Staff, and by the Hand or Forefinger, wherein was much Deceit, and therefore
abolished by several Statute.

Measures of Troy, are of Three kinds, viz. Of Things that are Dry, Of Things
Moist or Liquors, and Of Longitude, Latitude, and Profundity.

Of Dry things 4 Grains make a Penny weight, 20 Penny weight an Ounce, 12 Ounces
a Pound or Pint, 2 Pints a Quart, 2 Quarts a Pottle, 2 Pottles a Gallon, 2
Gallons a Peck, 4 Pecks a Bushel, 4 Bushels makes a Comb, 2 Combs a Quarter, 6
Quarters make a Weigh, and 10 Quarters a Last.

Of Liquors 12 Ounces make a Pint or Pound, and 2 Pints a Quart, and 4 Quarts a
Gallon of Wine, which is 8 Pounds Troy weight, 18 Gallons make a Rundlet, 31
Gallons and a Half make Half a Hogshed, 42 Gallons make a Tierce, 63 Gallons a
Hogshead, 84 Gallons a Puncheon, 126 Gallons a Pipe, or Butt, and 252 Gallons
make a Tun of Wine: Of Ale and Beer 8 Gallons is a Firkin, 16 Gallons is a
Kilderkin, 32 Gallons is a Barrel, 63 Gallons is a Hogshead.

The Wine Measure is smaller, than the Ale and Beer Measure, and holds
Proportion as 4 to 5, So that 4 Gallons of Beer, are 5 Gallons of Wine; And the
Measure of Dry things is greater than the Wine, and lesser than the Ale and
Beer Measure, so that the Gallon of this Measure being about 8 Pou^^s Troy
weight, is in proportion to the Wine Gallon as 33 to 28, and is in Proportion
to the Beer Gallon, as 33 to 35.

Of Longitude, Latitude, and Profundity 3 Grains of Barley make an Inch, 4
Inches make a Handful, 3 Handful make a Foot, 1 Foot and make a Cubit, 2 Cubits
a Yard, 1 Yard and an Ell, 5 Foot a Geometrical Pace, 6 Foot a Fathom, 16 Foot
and make a Perch, Pole, or Rod, 40 Perch make a Furlong, 8 Furlongs make a
Mile, which according to the Statute of 11 Hen. 7. ought to be 1760 Yards, or
5280 Foot; That is 280 Foot more than the Italian Mile; 60 Miles, or more
exactly 69 English Miles and, make a Degree, and 360 Degrees, Or, 25020 Miles,
Compass the whole Globe of the Earth.

For Measuring of Land, 40 Perch in Length, and 4 in Breadth, make an Acre, so
called from the German Acker, and that from the Latin Ager, 30 Acres ordinarily
make a yard Land, and 100 Acres are accounted an Hide of Land.

By the Stat. of 7 Hen. 7. The Chief Officer of ever City, and Borough shall
take for Sealing of every Bushel a penny, of every other measure a Half penny, of
every Hundred weight a penny, and every Half hundred weight a Half penny, of
lesser weight a Farthing.

The Clerk of the Market ought not to take any Common Fine, nor to Claim any
thing for Examining or Viewing of Measures Sealed, or other Measures: Of which
see more in the Statute, and Coke's 4 Inst. cap. 61.

The Court of Pepondres, Vulgarly Pipowders, Curia Pedis pulverisati.
THis Court is incident to every Fair, and Market, as a Court Baron is to a
Manor; and is so called for that Justice for advancement of Trade is as Speedy
as the Dust may fall from a Man's Feet, Their Proceedings being De hora in
horam.

And this is a Court of Record, to be holden before the Steward of the Court,
and the Jurisdiction thereof consists in Four Conclusions. 1st, The contract
or cause of Action must be in the same time of the Fair or Market. 2ly, It must
be for some matter concerning the same Fair, or Market complained on, heard and
determined. 3ly, It must be within the Precinct of the Fair, or Market. 4ly,
The Plaintiff must take an Oath according to the Statute of 17 Ed. 4. cap. 2.
But that concludes not the Defendant.

And there may be a Court of Pipowders by Custom, without a Fair or Market, and
a Market without an Owner; And this Court of Pipowders by Prescription may be
extended to all Contracts, Bonds, Actions of Trespass, and upon the case, and
no Writ of Faux Judgment; but a Writ of Error lies here, and in the Ordinary
Court of Pipowders incident to a Fair or Market: And this Court by Prescription
may be used either by way of Grant, or Confirmation. For all which see in
Coke's 4 Institutes, and Greenwood of Courts.

The Court of the Duchy Chamber of Lancaster at Westminster.
KIng Ed. the 3. in full Parliament Ann. 50. E. 3. Erected the County of
Lancastar a County Palatine by Letters Patent, and Honored his Son J. Duke of
Lancaster therewith for Term of his Life.

It is called Comitatus Palatinus a County Palatine, a Comitatu, and Palatio
Regis, because the Owner be he Duke, or Earl, etc. Has in that County Jura
Regalia, as fully as the King had in his Palace; And he may have his Chancery,
and Writs under his Seal, for the Office of the Chancellor to Depute Justices,
as well touching Pleas of the Crown, as all other Pleas, and Execution of
Writs, and making Officers, and Servants, and all other, as by the Letters
Patents above mentioned, granted in Parliament appears: And the King may Erect
a County Palatine without Parliament by his Letters Patents; But now by the
Statute of 27 H. 8. cap. 24. several of those Jura Regalia are taken from them,
and recontinued, and annexed to the Crown: And all Writs are now to be made in
the King's Name, but the Test in Name of him who has the County Palatine; And
they shall have Forfeiture of Lands, and Goods for High Treason, which
Forfeiture accreweth by the Common Law; But Forfeitures given after the
Erection of the County Palatine by an Act of Parliament, they shall not have.

Justices of Assize, of Jail-deliver, and of the Peace are, and ever since the
Erection have been Assigned by Commission under the Seal of the County Palatine
of Lancaster.

Fines were levied with 3 Proclamations, etc. before the Justices of Assize
there, or one of them, and all Recoveries to be had of Lands there, are to be
had in the Court of the County Palatine at Lancaster, and not at Westminster.

All Lands, etc. Parcel of this Duchy given to the King by the Statute of
Monasteries, Chantries, etc. are still within the Survey of the Duchy.

Lands within the County Palatine should pass by the Dukes Charter without
Livery of Seisin, or Attornment, But of Lands parcel of a Manor annexed to the
Duchy without the County Palatine, there ought to be Livery of Seisin, and
Attornment of Tenants, and in the same Degree is it in the King's Case.

The Proceedings in this Court of the Duchy Chamber at Westminster, is as in a
Court of Chancery for Lands, and other Matters within the Jurisdiction of the
Court by English Bill, etc. and Decree. But this Chancery is not a mixed Court,
as the Chancery of England is, partly of the Common Law, and partly of Equity,
but admitting only some small mixture of the Common Law in some Cases: And in
some Cases they are led by their proper Customs, and Prescriptions respectively.

The Process of this Court is by Privy Seal, Attachment, and Commission of
Rebellion as in the Chancery.

The Officers of this Court be the Chancellor, The Attorney, The Receiver
General, Clerk of the Court, The Auditors, Surveyors, The Messenger.

There is an Attorney of the Duchy in Chancery, and another in the Exchequer;
And there are Four Learned in the Law, Assistants, and of Council with the
Court.

The Seal of the Duchy of Lancaster remains with the Chancellor at
Westminster, And the Seal of the County Palatine remains in a Chest in the
County Palatine, under the safe Custody of the Keeper thereof.

All Grants and Leases of Lands, Offices, etc. in the County Palatine of
Lancaster, shall pass under that Seal, and no other: And all those out of the
County Palatine, and within the Survey of the Duchy, under the Seal of the
Duchy, See the Statute of 27 Hen. 8. cap. 24.

For the great Royalties, Privileges, etc. the Duke of Lancaster had, for him,
his Men and Tenants, which are necessary to be known by all concerned in those
Possessions, and other matters concerning the same: See Coke's 4 Institutes 36.
and Books and Records their recited: And the Statute of 16 and 17 Car. 1. c.
10. For dissolving the Court of Star Chamber, and annulling and making void the
like Jurisdiction excercised in the Court, called the Court of the Duchy of
Lancaster, held before the Chancellor and Council of that Court, etc.

The Courts of the County Palatine of Chester.
THis is the most Ancicent, and most Honorable County Palatine remaining at
this Day, with which Dignity the King's Eldest Son has been of long time
honored; And this is a County Palatine by Prescription.

Within this County Palatine, and the County of the City of Chester, there is
and aciently has been a principal Officer called the Chamberlain of Chester;
who time out of mind, has had the Jurisdiction of a Chancellor; and the Court
of Exchequer at Chester is, and has (time out of mind) been the Chancery Court
for the said County Palatine, whereof the Chamberlain of Chester is Judge in
Equity; He is also Judge of Matters at the Common Law within the said County,
as in the Court of Chancery at Westminster, for the Court of Chancery is a mixed
Court.

There is also a Vice-Chamberlain, which is the Deputy of the Chamberlain; And
also the Justice called the Justice of Chester, who has Jurisdiction to hear
and determine Matters of the Crown, and of Common Pleas, Of Fines, and
Recoveries levied, and suffered, as well within the County Palatine, as of the
City of Chester; For which and much more concerning the same, See Coke's 4
Institutes cap. 37. and the Statute of 16 and 17 Car. 1. c. 10. For disabling
the Court of Star Chamber; and Annulling and making void the like Jurisdiction
exercised in the Court of Exchequer, in the County Palatine of Chester, held
before the Chamberlain and Council of that Court.

The Courts of the County Palatine of Durham.
THis is also a County Palatine by Prescription, parcel of the Bishopric of
Durham, and raised soon after the time of the Conqueror.

Here is a Court of Chancery, which is a mixed Court both of Law, and Equity, as
in the Chancery at Westminster; But herein it differs from the rest, that if
any Erroneous Judgment be given either in the Chancery upon a Judgment there
according to the Common Law, or before the Justices of the Bishop, a Writ of
Error shall be brought before the Bishop himself, and if he give Erroneous
Judgment thereupon; a Writ of Error shall be sued Returnable in the King's
Bench.

If the Bishop do wrong within his County Palatine, for that he cannot be Judge
in his own Cause, Justices shall be Assigned to hear and determine the Cause,
as was done in the case, when Richardus de Hoton Prior Dunelm' queritur de
Anthonio Episcopo Dunelm', alleging several Plaints against the Bishop,
whereupon. Issue was Joined, and Verdict given against the Bishop; And by that
Record which was Termino Paschae 30 E. 1. it appears, the Bishop had within the
County of Duresme Regalitatem suam: And more concerning the same you may Read
in Coke's 4 Institutes cap. 38.

The Royal Franchise of Ely.
KIng Henry the first, of the Rich Monastery of Ely made a Cathedral Church,
and of the Abbey made a Bishopric, and for his Diocese Assigned him the County
of Cambridge, which was before within the Diocese of Lincoln, And this King
Henry the first granted to this new Bishop, and his Successors Jura Regalia
within the Isle of Ely; But the Priory, and Convent were by Henry the eighth
suppressed, and instead thereof a Dean, and Prebendaries raised to be the
Chapter of the Bishop, and a Grammar School for a Master, and 24 Scholars.

This Royal Jurisdiction the Bishop has by Prescription granted upon the said
Grant, as well in Pleas of the Crown, as in Common Pleas before his Justices of
his Liberties, and other Matters, Vide Coke's 4 Instituets cap. 39.

The County Palatine of Pembroke.
THis was an ancient County Palatine within Wales, and the Earl was Comes
Palatinus, and had Jura Regalia, and all things belonging to a County Palatine,
but the Jurisdiction thereof was taken away by the Statute of 27 Hen. 8. cap.
26. It being then in the King's hands.

The Franchise of Hexam and Hexamshire.
THis was sometime parcel of the Possessions of the Archbishop of York, and
claimed by him to be a County Palatine, And at the Parliment, 2 Hen. 5.
resolved that Hexamshire was a Franchise, where the Kings b Writ went not. And
in the Statute of 33 Hen. 8. It is named a County Palatine, but by the Statute
of 14 Elizab. cap. 13. It is declared no County Palatine, or Franchise Royal.

The Courts of the Cinque Ports.
BY Doomesday-Book it appears, that the privileged Ports were but Three at
first, viz. Dover, Sandwich and Rumney; afterward Two more, Hastings and Hythe,
were added to them by the Conqueror.

And these have several Privileges, as to be free from Burdens, and Charges,
and many others; and every of these send Two Burgesses to Parliament, by Name
of Barons of the Cinque Ports; and although Two more, viz. Winchelsey, and Rye
be added, yet they hold their former Names of Cinque Ports. These lying toward
France, Antiquity provided, they might be securely kept, for performance
whereof they have a Governor by his Office, called Lord Wardon of the
Cinque Ports, who is Admiral also, and has the Jurisdiction of the Admiralty
amongst them; He is also Constable of Dover Castle, of whose Jurisdiction as
Constable, vide Stat' Artic' super Chartas, and Coke's 2 Inst. 556.

There is a Diversity between the Principality of Wales, the Counties Palatine,
and the Cinque Ports: For Wales was no part of England, but Counties Palatine
are parcel of the Realm of England; but divided in Jurisdiction, and the
Cinque Ports are parcel of the County of Kent, and yet Ubi Breve Domini Regis
non currit, but have not Jura Regalia: And therefore regularly no Writ of Error
did lie of a Judgment in Wales; otherwise it is in the Counties Palatine. A.
Judgment here of Lands in Wales, or in the County Palatine is void; but a
Judgment given here of Lands in the Cinque Ports is good, if the Privilege be
not pleaded, for they are part of the County. And in the Cinque Ports are
Diverse Courts; as first,

The Court before the Constable of the Castle of Dover; And there be other
Courts before the Majors and Jurators within the Ports themselves; and another
called Curia Quinque Portuum apud Shepway.

If any of the King's Courts write to have a Record in the Cinque Ports, or for
doing any thing within the same, the Writ is directed Constabulario Castri de
Dover, and Guardiano Quinque Portuum.

And all Plaints against the Barons of the Cinque Ports, ought to be determined
at Shepway before the Warden of the Cinque Ports.

And if an Erroneous Judgment be given in the Cinque Ports before any of the
Mayors and Jurats, it is to be Redressed before the Constable of Dover at the
Court at Shepway, which Court was raised by Letters Patents of Edward the
First. Vide more in Coke's 4 Inst. cap. 42. and Records there cited.

The President and Counsel in the North.
THis Counsel was raised by H. 8. by his Commission giving them two Authorities
under one Great Seal; For the King having suppressed Monasteries of 200 l. per
Annum by Act of Parliament 27 H. 8. Insurrection was raised by Lord Hussy, and
20800 Men in Lincolnshire, whom Charles Brandon Duke of Suffolk appeased; and
afterward of 40000 Men more commanded by Sir Robert Ask, whom the Duke of
Norfolk dispersed; and afterward a Great Commotion was raised in Lancashire,
Westmorland, Cumberland and Northumberland, whom the Earl of Derby quieted; and
diverse other Rebellions being raised, and overcome and appeased, the King
intending to suppress the Great Monasteries, which he brought to pass in 31 H.
8. for preventing future Dangers, By Commission 31 H. 8. gave power of Oyer and
Terminer, De quibuscunque Congregationibus, Transgressionibus, Riotis, Routis,
etc. per quae Pax, etc. in Com' Ebor', Northumberland, Westmorland, Durham,
Com' Civitatis Ebor' Kingston super Hull, and Newcastle super Tinam gravetur,
etc. secundum Legem, etc. vel aliter secundum Sanas Discretiones vestras, etc.
Necnon quascunque Actiones Reales, seu de Libero Tenemento, and Personales,
etc. audiend and terminand'. But afterward the said Commission being adjudg'd
to be against Law, First, For that the Clause Secundum Sanas Discretiones
vestras being Resolved by the Judges, 6 Jacobi primi, to be against Law; and,
Secondly, the latter Clause was then also so Resolved; For that Actions Real
and Personal were not to be heard and determined by Commission, but Secundum
Legem, etc. to the end their Authority should not be known, they procured their
Commission, should not give them any Authority, but wholly to refer to Private
Instructions given them, not to be Enrolled in any Court; whereof King James
being informed, did give Order their Instruictions should be Enrolled for the
Advantage of the Subjects.

This Commission has had continuance, therefore the Lord Coke thinks it worthy
of some Establishment by Parliament.

Henry the Eighth likewise raised a President and Council for the Western
parts; but they of Devon and Cornwall opposed it: Et sic Commissio illa cito
evanuit.

Likewise no doubt is that there has been a President and Councl of York De
facto; but what Jurisdiction they had is the Question. But now the Courts are
Dissolved, the Jurisdiction being taken away by the Statute of 17 Car. 1. cap.
10.

The Wardens Courts in the East, West and Middle Marshes, adjoining to Scotland.
THey proceed according to Marsh Law, or Borders Law; but their Jurisdiction
was increased by Statutes, and confined to Northumberland, Cumberland,
Westmorland, and Newcastle upon Tine.

But since King James was Monarch of both Kingdoms the said Courts are
vanished, and Hostile Laws on both Sides by Authority of Parliament, in either
of the Kingdoms, are Repealed.

The Court of Stannaries in the Counties of Devon and Cornwall.
Is so called a Stanno; and the Style of this Court is, Magna Curia Domini
Regis Ducatus sui Cornubiae apud Crokerenton in Com' Devon', coram A. B.
Custode Stannariae dicti Domini Regis in dicto Com' Devon'.

The Lord Warden has Jurisdiction of all the Tynn in Cornwall and Devon, and is
guided therein by Special Laws, by Customs, and by Prescriptions Time out of
mind: And the Officers be the Steward, Under-Warden, etc.

By Exposition of the Charters of 33 E. 1. Made and Declared in Parliament Anno
50 E. 3. it appears, that all Tynners, and Workers in the Tynn-Works, should be
Free, so that they should not Answer for any Matter or Thing arising within the
Stannaries before any other Judge or Officer, but only before the Warden of the
Stannaries, (Except for Pleas of Land, Life, or Member) and should not depart
from their Work, for the Summons of any the King's Officers, except of his said
Warden of the Stannaries; and shall be quit of all Tallages, Tolls, Stallagiis,
and aliis Custumis, in Towns, Ports, Fairs, and Markets within the said County,
De bonis suis propriis.

Upon any cause of Complaint ministered the same is to be redressed by
Appellation, First to the Steward of the Stannary-Court where the matter lies;
Then to the Under-Warden of the Stannaries, and from him to the Lord Warden,
and for want of Justice at his hands, to the Princes Privy Council.

For the Laws, Jurisdictions, etc. of this Court, see more in Co. 4 Inst. c.
45. and Records, etc. there cited.

It was Resolved 4 Jac. 1. in Camera Stellata, That Stannum Tynne, otherwise
White Lead, nor Black Lead, nor any other base Metal did belong to the King, by
his Prerogative, as Gold and Silver do, albeit there may be tried out of the
base Metal Gold and Silver; but that is as the seed or strength of the base
Metal, which being Extracted becomes Defective.

There be Five kinds of Base Metals, viz. Aes, sive Cuprum, (because it was
found out, as some hold, in Cypro) Copper; Stannum, Tynn; Ferrum, Iron Plumbum,
Lead; and Orychalcum, Latin. Polybius 209 years before Christ wrote, That this
Island was abundantly stored with Tynn. Britanni qui juxta Belerium
promontorium incolunt Mercatorum usu, qui eo Stanni gratia navigant humaniores
reliquis hospites habentur; hij ex terra Saxosa cujus venas sectati effodiunt
Stannum igne eductum in quandam Insulam ferunt Britannicam juxta, quam Vectam
vocant: Ex hiis Insulis Mercatores emptum Stannum in Galliam Portant, inde
diebus fere triginta cum equis ad fontem Eridani fluminis perducunt, Coke 's 4
Inst. cap. 45.

The Court of the Major of the Staple.
THis Court is guided by the Law Merchant, which is the Law of the Staple, and
is holden at the Wool-Staple in Westminster; and there also are Two Constables,
and a certain number of Correctors, to do that which pertains to their
Office, as in other Staples is accustomed.

And though it be more ancient, is warranted by Parliament 27 Ed. 3. Whereby it
is Ordained, That

The Staple of Wools, Leather, Woolfells and Lead shall be holden at Newcastle
upon Tine, York, Lincoln, Norwich, Westminster, Canterbury, Cicester,
Winchester, Exeter and Bristol. For Wales, at Caermardyn; and for Ireland at
Deuelin, Waterford, Cork, and Droghoada. And that such as shall be carried out
of the Land, shall be brought to some of the said Staple-Towns, to be weighed
by the Standard, and the Customs paid. But from such of the said Staple-Towns
which are not Port Towns, the said Staple Commodities shall be sent to the next
respective Port Towns, as from Westminster to London, etc. there to be weighed
again by the Customers.

Item, That in every Town where the Staple is Ordained, shall be a Mayor chosen
yearly by the Comminalty, who has knowledge in the Law Merchant, and Two
convenable Constables, who have power to keep the Peace, arrest the Offenders
in Staples for Debts, Trespass, and other Contracts, and them to Imprison and
punish after the Law of the Staple, and a Prison appointed for that purpose.

The Mayors, Sheriffs, and Bailiffs of the Towns where the Staple is, or
joining to the Staple, shall be attending to the Mayors and Ministers of the
Staple, for Executing their Commandments upon grievous Forfeiture; and one Lord
or other of the most Sufficient where the Staple is, shall be assigned to be
Aidant to the Mayor and Ministers of the Staple, to justify the Rebels that
cannot be justified by the Mayors and Ministers of the Staple, and to redress
all Complaints, etc.

The Bounds of the Staple at Westminster, shall begin at Temple Bar, and extend
to Tuthill. In other Cities and Towns, within the Walls; and where there are no
Walls, through all the City or Town.

By the Statute of 27 Ed. 3. the Major of the Staple may take Recognizances of
Debts under the Seal of the Office, but not with the Seal of the Party.

By the Statute of 23 H. 8. the Major of the Staple at Westminster, and
Recorder of the City of London, in the absence of the Two Chief Justices out of
Term, have power to take Recognizances of Debts, according to that Statute, and
this is in the Nature of a Statute Staple; but it has besides the Seal of
those that take it; the Seal of the Party.

By the Statute of 36 Ed. 3. Merchant Strangers may sue before the Major of the
Staple, according to Law Merchant, or at the Common Law.

By the Statute of 8 H. 6. cap. 17. there are in England Five Staple
Merchandises, viz. Wool, Woolfells, Leather, Lead, and Tyn.

The Mayor and Constables are sworn in Chancery, to do lawfully that which
pertains unto them.

That Staple comes from the French Estape, signifying a Mart, or Market; and
for other Matters concerning the Staple, see Coke's 4 Inst. cap 46. and the
Statutes, and Records there mentioned.

The Principality of Wales.
WALLIA, Wales, by the Saxons called (...), Wales, unde Wallenses, Walli (i.
e.) Exteri seu Per^grini. The Britons calling Englishmen Saisons. They are of
the Posterity of the ancient Britons, Inhabiting on the West part of Great
Brittany. This was sometime a Realm, or Kingdom, Governed per Regulos suos.

But Jure Feodali the Kingdom of Wales was holden of the Crown of England, and
thereby (as Bracton says) was Sub potestate Regis, and so continued until the
11th Year of King Edward the First, when he subdued the Prince of Wales, and
Executed him for Treason. Whereof Fleta (who lived in those days) speaks
thus: Et unico Malefactori plura poterunt infligi tormenta, sicut contigit de
Davide Principe Walliae, cum per Edwardum Quinque Judiciis mortalibus
torquebatur, suis namque Meritis exigentibus, Detractus, Suspensus,
Dismembratus fuit, and combustus, cujus caput principali Civitati, quatuorque
Quarteria ad quatuor parts Regni in Odium tradit deferebuntur suspendendum.

And in the 12th of E. 1. by Parliament it is declared,(speaking in the Person
of the King, as ancient Statutes were wont to do) Divina Providentia quae in
sua dispositione non fallitur, inter alia, suae dispensationis munera quibus
nos and Regnum nostrum Angliae decorari dignata est, Terram Walliae cum Incolis
suis prius nobis Jure Feodali Subjectam, jam sui gratia in Proprietatis nostrae
Dominium Obstaculis quibuscunque cessantibus Totaliter and cum Intergritate
convertit, and Corona Regni praedicti tanquam partem corporis ejusdem annexuit
and univit. Yet this Wise and Warlike Nation, was long after this not
satisfied; especially for that taking part with their Rightful Liege Lord King
Richard the Second, In Revenge thereof many severe Laws were made against them
in the Reigns of H. 4. H. 5. etc.

And they were never in quiet, till H. 7. their own Countryman (as descended
from Owen ap Meredith, ap Theodore, who Married Katharine Daughter of France,
and Dowager of King Henry the Fifth, and was by Commission found to be Lineally
descended from Cadwallader King of the Britons) obtained the Crown. And yet not
so really Reduced in his time, as in the Reign of his Son King Henry the
Eighth, when

The Principality of Wales, and Dominions thereof, was by Act of Parliament 27
H. 8. Incorporated and United to the Realm of England: And it is thereby
Enacted, That every Subject born in Wales, should enjoy the Liberties, Rights
and Laws of this Realm, and have Knights of Shires, and Burgesses of
Parliament, etc. One Knight for each Shire, and One Burgess for each Borough,
and the Laws of England used in Wales. Vide le Stat.

And this Principality consists of 12 Counties, whereof Eight (viz.)
Glamorgan, Anglesey, Carnarvan, Pembroke, Merioneth, Flint, Carmarthan, and
Cardigan, by Statutum Walliae, were Erected 12 E. 1. And the other, (viz.)
Brecknock, Radnor, Denby, and Montgomeroy, by 27 H. 8. Besides the Shire of
Monmouth, and other Lordships, and Manors in the Marshes united to Salop,
Herefordshire, and Gloucester.

The Court of the President and Council of Wales.
THis is a Court of Equity before the President and Council there, Warranted by
the Statute of 34 H. 8. cap. 36. with Reference to Presciption before, in these
Words:

There shall be and remain a President and Council in the said Dominion, and
Principality of Wales, and the Marshes of the same, with all Officers, Clerks
and Incidents to the same, in manner as heretofore has been used, who shall
have Power to hear and determine by their Wisdoms, and Discretions, such Causes
and Matters as be, or hereafter shall be assigned to them by the King's
Majesty, as heretofore has been accustomed. They sit by force of the King's
Commission and Instructions, and proceed as in a Court of Equity by their
Wisdoms and Discretions; Herefordshire, Worcestershire, Shropshire, and
Gloucester, are included within this Commission, pretending that these Four
Shires are within the Marshes of Wales.

This Court is now Dissolved.

The Great Sessions in Wales.
BY the Statute of 34 H. 8. It is Ordained, That there shall be Sessions holden
and kept Twive in every Year. in every of the said Shires within the Dominion
of Wales, which shall be called The King's Great Sessions in Wales.

The Justice of Chester should hold those Sessions in the Shires of Denbigh,
Flint and Montgomeroy; and have nothing but his old Fee of 100 l. for the same.

That the Justice of North Wales shall likewise hold the Sessions for the
Shires of Carnarvan, Merioneth, and Anglesey, and shall have Fifty Pounds
yearly of the King for his Fee.

That one Person Learned in the Laws appointed by the King, shall be Justice of
the Shires of Radnor, Brecknock, and Glamorgan, and shall hold the said
Sessions there, and shall have Fifty Pounds yearly of the King for his Fee.

That one other person Learned in the Laws, and appointed by the King, shall be
Justice for the Shires of Carmarthan, Pembroke, and Cardigan, and shall keep
the Sessions there, and have the like Sum of Fifty Pounds yearly of the King
for his Fee.

The said Justices shall have several Letters Patents, and Commissions for
their Offices under the Great Seal of England, to be Excercised by themselves,
or their sufficient Deputies, according to the purposes and intents in their
Ordinance specified.

These Justices may hear and determine all Pleas of the Crown, as the Chief
Justice and other Justices of the King's Bench may do in their places, and
elsewhere in the Realm of England; and all Pleas of Assize, and all other Pleas
and Actions, Real, Personal, or Mixed, as the Chief Justice of the Common Place
in England, or other Justices of the same Place, may do in the Realm of England.

That open Proclamation being made in the Shire-Towns Fifteen days before of
the Time, and Place they intend to keep the said Sessions, the said Sessions
shall be held and continued for Six days together, according to the former
Custom heretofore used in North- Wales.

The Seals devised for each Division, to be kept by the Steward and Chamberlain
of each Division.

Four Judicial Seals to be in the Custody of the Four Justices respectively,
and the Test of Process Judicial shall be in the Name of the Justice who shall
pass it.

Fines, Concords, Recoveries, etc. taken before the said Justices within their
Authority respectively, without any Dedimus potestatem, as before the Justice
of the Common Place in England.

There shall be Justices of the Peace, and Justices of Quorum, and Custos
Rotulorum Commissionated by the King in Every of the said Counties, not
exceeding Eight in a County; and those, or two of them in each County, whereof
one to be of the Quorum, may keep their Sessions Four times in the Year, or
oftener if urgent occasion requires, and have like Authority, and Fees as
Justices in England, Sheriffs, Escheators, Coroners, Constables of Hundreds,
and other Officers, and their Courts to be had, and holden as in England. Vide
le Statute.

Rodry Maure King of Wales, who died Anno 877, in the time of Alured King of
England, and left Three Sons, Mervyn, Anarawd, and Cadelh, Divided his Kingdom
into Three parts; Guyneth, which the English call North-VVales, the Latins
Venedotia, he gave to Mervyn, or as some say to Anarawd; Powisland, in Latin
Powisia, which some call VVest-VVales, he gave to Anarawd, or as some say to
Cadelh; and Deheobarth, which the English call South Wales, and the Latins
Demetia, he gave to Cadelh, or as some say to Mervyn: The First was the best,
because the Quietest, the Second often Invaded by the English, and into the
Third Incursions were often made by the English, Norman, and Fleming.

The Division of this Kingdom, brought in time such Division amongst these
Princes, that it was never quiet till it came under one Monarch and King again:
For the Royal Dignity of a Monarch, or King, from whence all other Subordinate
Dignities Tanquam Lumen de Lumine are derived, without any Diminution, will
suffer no Division, Regia dignitas est Indivisibilis and quaelibet alia
derivativa Dignitas est similiter indivisibilis.

King Edward the Third in the 17th year of his Reign, by Charter Established in
Parliament, created his Son Son (called the Black Prince) Prince of Wales, in
these words: De Concilio Praelatorum Comitum Baronum and Communiam in Generali
Parliamento nostro apud Wesmonaster' die Lunae in Quindena Paschae proxime
praeterito convocato Ipsum Edwardum Pricipem Walliae fecimus and creavimus. Et
dictum Principatum sibi dedimus and concessimus, and per Chartam nostram
confirmavimus ac ipsum de dicto Principatu, ut ibidem praeficiendo praesidiat
and praesidendo dictas parts dirigat and defendat per sertum in Capite and
Annulum in Digito aureum, ac virgam argenteam investivimus juxta morem,
Habendum and tenendum de nobis sibi and Haeredibus suis Regibus Angliae
imperpetuum, etc.

And in the same manner, is the Noble and primary County Palatine of Chester,
granted to him at the same time with the same words, Sibi and Haeredibus suis
Regibus Angliae, which import a limited Fee; and that by his decease, or
attaining to the Crown, these Dignities might be Extinguished in the Crown, to
the end the King for the time being, might have the Honor and power to create
his Heir apparent Prince of Wales, and Earl of Chester, as he himself had been
by his Progenitors.

But otherwise it is in the Case of the Duchy of Cornwall, Vide Coke's 4 Inst.
cap. 48. that being without Creation and ever since 11 Ed. 3. the First
begotten Son of the King is ever Duke of Cornwall.

And this may suffice for a Short Survey of the Principality of Wales. And now
proceed to

The Military Government of England.
THe King has the Sole Supreme Government, Command, and Disposition of the
Military Power of England, both by Land and Sea; As is at large declared in
Parliament, Anno 14 Car. 2. And

By Land, the next under the King is the Generalissimo (when in being) of all
his Majesty's Forces in his Three Kingdoms, Horse, and Foot in Say, as well
within Garrison, as without.

These Forces in the late King Charles the Seconds time, consisted of 4
Regiments of Foot, The King's Regiment 24 Companies and near 1700 Men, The
Dukes Regiment 720 Men, Another Regiment 600 Men, And the Earl of Craven's
Regment of 960 Men, And the Earl of Oxford's Regiment, consisting of 8. Troops,
about 500 Horse besides Officers.

There were likewise in King Charles the Seconds time, Three complete Troops of
Horse for his Lifeguard, The Kings Troop 200 Horse, The Queens Troop 150
Horse, and the Duke of Yorks Troop 150 Horse.

The rest of his Majesty's Forces in constant pay were disposed under several
Governors in several Garrisons, of which there are about Thirty two, and in some
of them, the King had 500 Men in constant pay.

The pay of a Colonel of Horse 12 s. per diem, A Colonel of Foot 20 s. per
diem, and other Officers proportionably. Each of the Life-Guards 4 s. per diem,
And each Trooper 2 s. 6 d. per diem, Each Foot Soldier in London 10 d. per
diem, Each Foot Soldier in Garrison 8 d. per diem.

These Forces were afterward much increased, but no Orders are yet settled by
Act of Parliament for these Land Forces, as there are for Sea Forces. But now
they are settled by Act of Parliament to be 7000 natural born Subjects, The
Officers included.

Besides these Forces before mentioned the Standing Militia of the Kingdom is
settled in the King, by Acts of Parliament Tempore Car. 2. to be Governed,
Ordered, and Enlarged from time to time, as his Majesty shall see occasion.

For Government of these the King by Commission, Creates diverse of the Peers of
the Kingdom. Lieutenants of the several Counties, with power to Arm, Array, and
Form into Companies, Troops, and Regiments, and to conduct upon occasion of
Rebellion, or Invasion, and employ there Men so Armed within their respective
Counties, or into any other County as the King shall direct, To give
Commissions to Colonels, and other Commissionated Officers, To present to the
King the Names of Deputy Lieutenants, To charge ay person with Horse,
Horsemen, and Arms, or Foot Soldiers and Arms within the said County
proportionable to their Estates, with limitation that no person be charged with
a Horse, unless he has 500 l. yearly, or 6000 l. personal Estate, or with a
Foot Soldier unless he has 50 l. yearly, or 600 l.personal Estate; Those that
have meaner Estates are to join Two or Three together, to find a Horse, or
Horseman, or a Foot Soldier.

The said Horse, or Foot to Muster once or twice a year, and each Horseman
while he serves to have 2 s. a day, and each Foot Soldier 12 d. per diem.

They have likewise power to levy a Fourth part of the Tax of 70000 l. per
Mensem, for Ammunition; And in case of Marching against an Enemy, they have
power to cause every Man so charged, to allow each Soldier a Months pay, which
the King is after to pay, before they be charged, with another Months pay.

In 1588, Upon the Muster made by Commission from Queen Eliz. in expectation of
the Spanish Invasion, there were found to be Three Millions, and of those fit
for War about 600000 Men.

In all times of danger, some are set to watch at every Beacon, to give notice
in a few Hours to the whole Kingdom.

There were anciently many Castles in all parts of England; But Inland Castles
have been either demolished, or willingly suffered to decay, that Rebels, or
Invaders might have no Shelter, or the Invaded any Refuge to Fly to, whereby to
occasion any Lingering.

And now we come to the Military Courts, amongst which the chief is

The Court of Chivalry before the Constable and Marshal.
THis Court is called Curia Militaris, and the Marshal Court, wherein the Lord
Constable, and Earl Marshal of England are Judges; And is the Fountain of the
Martial Law.

Constable Is compounded of two Saxon words, Cunning, per contractionem King,
and Stable, id est, Columen. q. Columen Regis anciently written Coningstable.

Marshal, Likewise of two Saxon wards, Mare for Equus, and Stale for Curator.

The Jurisdiction is declared by the Statute of 13 R. 1. To the Constable it
appertains to have Conusance of Contracts, and Deeds of Arms, and of War out
of the Realm, and also of Things that touch War within the Realm; which cannot
be determined, or discussed by the Common Law, with other Usages and Customs to
the same pertaining, which other Constables have duly and reasonably used in
their time, joining to the same that every Plaintiff shall declare plainly his
Matter in his Petition, before that any Man be sent for to answer thereunto;
And if any will complain, that any Plea be commenced before the Constable, and
Marshal that might be Tried by the Law of the Land, the same Complainant shall
have a Privy Peal of the King, without difficulty directed to the said
Constable, and Marshal to Purcease in that Plea, till it be discussed by the
King's Council, if that Matter ought and of right pertains to that Court; Or
otherwise, to be Realm of England, and also, that they Purcease in the mean
time.

For Trial by Battle between the Lord Morley, and the Earl of Sarum, and diverse
others there cited, See Coke's 4 Inst. cap. 17.

In an Appeal between Upton and Down 8 Hen. 6. after Battle joined, the King's
Writ out of the Chancery Issued to the Sheriffs of London, as follows:

REx etc. Vic' London salutem Praecipimus vobis firmiter injungentes quod
quasdam Listas and Barras de Maremio fortes and satis sufficientes pro quodam
Duello inter Joh. Upton Appellantem and Johan' Down Defend' Secundum Legem
Armorum die Lunae prox' futur' apud Westsmithfield in Suburb' Civitatis praed'
Deodanti perficiend' contra diem praed' nostris Sumptibus and Expensis erigi;
construeri and fieri fac' in Omnibus prout in Ultimo Duello ibidem facto fact
fuer' and quod terra inter Listas praed' cum sabulo sufficienter and Equalitter
cooperiatur Ita quod aliqui Lapides Grandes, aut arena infra easdem Listas
minime inveniantur quovis modo: Et de omnibus and singulis paecuniarum Summis
quas circa praemissa aplicaveritis nos vobis in computo vestro ad Scaccarium
per praesens madatum nostrum debitam allocationem habere faciemus, etc.

And by a French Manuscript Entitled, Modus faciendi Duellum Coram Rege Bone
Foy and Droit and Ley de Arms voet quel Apellant encourge mesme pain que le
Defendant deveroit sil soit Convicte and discomfit, And this seems to be
consonant to the Law of God, Deuteronomy. 19, 18.

They proceed according to the Customs and Usages of the Court, and in cases
omitted according to the Civil Law, Secundum Legem Armorum, and therefore upon
Attainders before the Constable, and Marshal, no Land is Forfeited, or
corruption of Blood wrought.

It was resolved in the Reign of Queen Eliz. in the Case of Sir Francis Drake,
who struck off the Head of Dowty, in Partibus transmarinis; That his Brother
and Heir might have an Appeal. Sed Regina noluit constituere Constabularium
Angliae, etc. and ideo dormivit Appellum.

The Proceeding, and Sentences here is upon Witnesses or Combat, and not by
Jury; and after Sentence in this Court in Case of Arms, the party grieved may
Appeal to the King.

What Judgment shall be given, when either party is vanquished, and when Trial
by Battle shall be for things within the Realm, before the Justices of the
King's Bench, or Common Pleas, Vide Coke's 4 Institutes cap. 17. Crompton's
Jurisdiction of Courts, Fol. 82.

The effect of the Grant of the Office of Constable, is in few words, Officium
Constabularij Angliae unacum Omnibus Feodis, proficuis, comditatibus, and
Emolumentis quibuscunque Offico, praedicto qualitercunque pertinentibus, and ab
antiquo debitis and consuetis.

And now as in some respects incident to this Court, as being created by the
Earl Marshal, we shall in the next place speak somewhat of.

The College of Heralds.
OF this Collegiate Society are Three Styled Reges Armorum, Anglorum, Kings at
Arms, the principal of which is called

Garter, Instituted by King Henry the 5th, whose Office is to attend the
Knights of the Garter at their Solemnities; To Advertise them of their
Election, And to call them to be Installed at Windsor; To cause their Arms to
be hung upon their Seats there; To carry the Garter to Kings and Princes beyond
Seas; for which purpose he was wont to be joined in Commission with some
principal Peer of the Realm, and to Marshal the Solemnities and the Funerals of
all the Higher Nobility of England. The next is

Clarencieux, So called from the Duke of Clarence, to whom he first belonged,
which Dukedom Escheating to King Edw. the 4th, by the Death of his Brother
George Duke of Clarence; he made this Herald a King at Arms, and named him
Clarencieux in French, and Clarentius in Latin.

His Office is to Marshal and dispose the Funerals of the Lesser Nobility, as
Baronets, Knights and Gentlemen, on the Southside of Trent, and therefore
sometimes called Surroy, or Southroy. And then

Norroy or Northroy, whose Office is to do the like on the Northside of Trent;
And these Two last are called Provincial Heralds.

These by Charter have power to visit Noblemens Families, to set down their
Pedigrees, to distinguish their Arms, to appoint Men their Arms and Ensigns,
and with Garter to direct the Heralds. And next are the

Six Heralds anciently belonging to Dukes have been sometime named Dukes at
Arms, and are thus called, and ranked, Windsor, Richmond, Chester, Sommerset,
York and Lancaster; Their Office anciently was to attend Dukes in Marshal
Execution, now to wait at Court, attend public Solemnities, Proclaim War, and
Peace, etc. And perhaps named Heralds from the German Here, and Healt; that is,
The Armies Champion, to denounce War, or offer Peace, as the Feciales of the
Romans did.

These wait by turns upon the Kings at Arms, and have part of their Fees; And
of these anciently were many, as likewise of Pursuivants. But now there are but

Four Pursuivants named Rouge Cross, Rouge Dragon, Portcullice and Blewmantle,
from such Badges heretofore worn by them as is throught.

These King's Heralds, and Pursuieants were anciently Crowned, and had their
Creation from the Kings Hand; But of later times the Earl Marshal has had a
Commissions for every particular Creation by Letters Patents; The manner
whereof, you may see in the Present State of England.

They were incorporated by King Richard the 3d, and afterward had another
Charter of Privilege, by King Edward 6th, in the Third year of his Reign.

The Duty of the whole College is to Marshal and Order Coronations, Marriages,
Christnings, Funerals, Interviews, Feasts of Kings and Princes, Cavalcades,
Justes, Tournaments, Combats before the Constable, and Marshal, etc. Also,
they take care of the Coats of Arms, of the Genealogies of the Nobility, and
Gentry, and whatsoever concerns Honor is their Care and Study; They are
Tanquam sacrorum Custodes, and Templi Honoris Aeditui.

All these receive Annual Stipends out of the Exchequer; Are all to be
Gentlemen at least, and the Six Heralds at their Creation are expressly made
Esquires by the King.

When Capias, or Exigent are awarded against a Peer, or Baron, he may have a
Writ to command that they Sue out no other Process against him, than what they
ought to have against Lords, and Great Men, which come to the Parliament by the
ancient Laws, and Customs of England.

Edmond Dein Court of Langley in Com' Lincoln'; By Letters Patents from Ed. 2.
had License to Assign his Surname, Arms, and Possessions, which 19 E. 2. he
accordingly did: But the Lord Hoc Tempore Edw. 4th Granting his Name, Arms, and
Dignity over without the King's License, the same was in Parliament adjudged
void.

The Grant of Earl Marshal of England by Letters Patents of Rich. the 2d, and
other Grants thereof, you may see more at large, Coke's 4 Institutes cap. 17.

The Maritime Power of England.
ALL the King's Maritime Forces, are under the Command of the

Lord High Admiral of England, so called from Amir in Arabic, and (...) in
Greek; that is, Praefectus Marinis, A compound word from the Eastern Empire,
introduced into England after the Wars in the Holy Land, by King Richard or
King Edward the first.

His Patent was anciently Angliae Hiberniae and Acquitaniae Magnus Admirallus:
But now it is Angliae and Hiberniae and Dominiorum and Insularum eorundem
Villae Calesiae and Marchiarum ejusdem, Normandiae, Gasconiae and Acquitaniae
Magnus Admirallus, and Praefectus Generalis Classis and Marium dictorum
Regnorum: And this Office for the Great Trust and Honor, is usally given to
the King's younger Son, near Kinsman, Or one of the Principal Nobility.

He has power to Commissionate a Vice Admiral, a Rear-Admiral, All Sea
Captains, And also Deputies for particular Coasts, Coroners, Commissioners, and
Judges for the Court of Admiralty, to Imprison, Release, etc. and sometimes to
confer Knighthood on such as deserve it at Sea.

To him by Law and Custom belong Penalties, and Amerciaments of Transgressors
at Sea, on the shore in Ports and from the first Bridge, on Rivers toward the
Sea; Also the Goods of Pirates, Felons, or Capital Faulters condemned, Outlawed
or Horned; All Waifs, Strays, Goods, Wrecks of Sea, Deodands, a share of lawful
Prizes, Lagon, Jetsam, and Flotsam; that is, Goods lying in the Sea, on the
Ground, Goods Floating on the Sea, and Goods cast by the Sea on Shore, not
granted to Lords of Manors adjoining to the Sea; All great Fishes, as
Sea-Hogs, and others of Extraordinary bigness called Royal Fishes, Except
Whales, and Sturgeons.

To the Crown of England belongs the Sovereignty of the Narrow-Sea round the
Island of Great Britain, whereof by Ancient Right it has had Possession in all
times, and King Edgar styled himself Sovereign of the Narrow-Seas.

In Testimony whereof the Swedes, Danes, Hollanders, etc. were wont to ask
leave to pass the British-Seas, and to take Licenses to Fish therein: And to
this day Strike Sail to all the Ships of War belonging to the King of England,
as often as they pass by any of them; thereby acknowledging his Sovereignty
according to an Ordinance made at Hastings in Sussex by King John, about 450
years ago.

To maintain this Right, Protect Trade, and Defend their Kingdoms; The Kings of
England have Ships of War for Strength, Beauty, and Sailing, Surpassing all
other in the World; of these, such as Ships then were King Edgar is said to
have 3600; And the late King Charles had 7 of the First Rate, 9 of the Second
Rate, 22 of the Fifth, and 18 of the Sixth Rate, besides 30 Fireships, and
several Small Vessels, for Tenders, and Victuallers.

The Royal Sovereign Built by King Charles the first 1637, being of the First
Rate, was in Length by the Keel 127 Foot, in Breadth by the Beam 47 Foot, in
Depth 49 Foot, her Draught of Water 21 Foot, Burden in all 2072 Tunns, and
1492 Tunns besides Guns and Tackle, has 6 Anchors, the biggest 6000 l. weight,
and the least 4300 l. weight, 14 Cables, the greatest 21 Inches compass, and
weighs 9000 l. weight, the least 8 Inches compass, weighing near 1300 l.weight,
18 Masts, and Yards, the Main Mast 113 Foot long, and 38 Inches Diameter, the
Main Yard 105 Foot long, and 23 Inches Diameter, and her Main Top 15 Foot
Diameter; Had 10 several sorts of Sails, Her greatest called the Main Course,
contained with her Bonnet 1640 yards of Canvas Ipswich double, The least called
the Foretop Gallant Sail 130 yards of Canvas. The complete suit cost 404 l. The
weight of Sea store in point of Ground Tackle and other Cordage, 60 Tuns, 800
and odd Pounds.

She carried a Long boat of 50 Foot, a Pinnace of 30 Foot, and a Skiff of 27
Foot long.

The weight of her Rigging 33 Tun, She has 3 Tires of Guns, 44 in the Upper,
34 in the Second, and 22 in the Lower Tire, in all 100 Guns.

She carried Officers, Soldiers, and Mariners, in all 850 Men.

The charge for Victuals, Ammunition, Wages, Wear, and Tear every Month at Sea
costs 3500 l.

The Charge of Building a First Rate Ship, with Guns, Tackle and Rigging, does
usually amount to 62432, the lesser Rates Charge is proportionable, A Second
Rate carries from 56 to 80 Guns, A Third Rate from 58 to 70 Guns, A Fourth Rate
from 40 to 60 Guns, A Fifth Rate from 24 to 32 Guns, A Sixth Rate from 6 to 18
Guns.

The Lord High Admiral may fitly be reputed Viceroy of the Maritime Kingdom of
England; Nam in Mari sunt Regna distincta idque Jure Gentium sicut in arida
Terra.

The Vice Admiral, is an Officer to whom next under the High Admiral it
belongs, to see the Royal Navy kept in good Repair, The Wages of Mariners, and
Shipwrights duly paid, and the Ships provided of all things necessary.

The Lord High Admiral does appoint in diverse parts of the Kingdom Vice
Admirals, with their Judges and Marshals, by Patent under the Great Seal of the
Admiralty; These do Exercise Jurisdiction in Maritime Affairs within their
Limits, and if any be aggrieved by their Sentence, or Decree, he may Appeal to
the High Court of Admiralty, and of these round the Coasts, are about 22 in
England and Wales.

The Lord High Admiral has Courts for the Maritime Affairs, whereof the
Principal is at London and called

The Court of Admiralty.
IN this Court Erected as some hold by Edward the Third, The Lord Admiral has
a Lieutenant, called Judge of the Admiralty, who is commonly some Learned
Doctor of the Civil Law. Because

The Proceeding is in all Civil Matters according to the Civil Law; The Sea
being without the Limits of the Common Law, and by Libel they Proceed to the
Action, the Plaintiff giving caution to prosecute the Suit, and to pay what
shall be adjudged against him if he fail therein, The Defendant also giving
Security, or Caution as the Judge shall think meet, that he will appear in
Judgment, and pay that which shall be adjudged against him, and that he will
ratify whatever his Proctors shall do in his name.

Besides the Civil Law, The Laws of Rhodes and Oleron are here used, The former
for their Excellency being Incorporated into the Volumes of the Civil Laws, And
Oleron being an Island in the Bay of Aquitain, belonging to the Crown of
England, King Richard the first, there Compiled such Excellent Laws for Sea
Matters, that in the Ocean Sea Westward, they had almost as much Repute as the
Rhodian Laws in the Mediterranean, and these Laws were called La Rool de Oleron.

Many Statutes and Ordinances were made by King Edward the Third, and other
Princes and People, as at Rome, Pisa Genoa, Marseilles, Barcelona, and Messina,
yet that Fragment of the Rhodian Law, still extant, holds the Preeminence in
Maritime Affairs.

The Customs and former Decrees of the English Court of Admiralty are there, of
Force for deciding Controtroversies. And under this Court there is also

A Court of Equity for determining Differences between Merchant and Merchant.

In Criminal Affairs, which is most commonly about Piracy, The Proceeding in
this Court was by Accusation, and Information, by a Man's own Confession, or by
Eye -- witnesses he was found Guilty before he could be Condemned; But that
being found inconvenient, there were two Statutes made by King Henry the
Eighth, that Criminal Affairs should be Tried by Witnesses, and Jury, and that
by Special Commission from the King to the Lord High Admiral, wherein some of
the Judges of the Realm are ever Commissioners, and the Trial according to the
Laws of England directed by those Statutes as is herein after mentioned.

Between the Common Law of England, and the Civil Law, there seems to be
Divisum Imperium; For in the Sea so far as the Low Water mark is counted Infra
Corpus Comitatus adjacentis, and Causes there arising determinable by the
Common Law: yet when the Sea is full, the Admiral has Jurisdiction there also
(so long as the Sea Flows) over Matters done between the Low Water mark, and
the Land, as appears in Hen. Constables Case, Coke's 5 Rep. fol. 107.

But for these Limitations, and Jurisdictions of the Court of Admiralty, see
the Statutes above mentioned, And the Statute of 13 R. 2. and 15 R. 2. and 27
Eliz. cap. 11. Coke's 4 Inst. cap. 22.

And for regulating his Majesty's Navies, Ships of War, and Forces by Sea, Vide
le Statute of 13 Car. 2. cap. 9.

And now as pertinent hereunto, we shall say somewhat of

The Navy Office.
THe Treasurer is to Receive out of the Exchequer by Warrant from the Lord High
Treasurer of England, and pay all charges of the Navy by Warrant from the
principal Officers of the Navy, his Salary is 220 l. 13 s. 4 d. besides 3 d. in
the pound of all Moneys paid by him.

The Comptroller of the Navy, who is to Attend and Comptrol all Payment of
Wages, To know the Market Rates of all Stores belonging to Shipping, To Examine
and Audit all Treasurers, Victuallers, and Store-keepers Accounts, etc. his
Salary 500 l. per Annum.

The Surveyor of the Navy, whose Office is generally to know the State of all
Stores, and see the wants supplied, to find Hulls, Masts, and Yards, and
Estimate the value of Repairs, by Indenture to charge all Boat-swains, and
Carpenters of his Majesty's Navy, with what Stores they receive, and at the end
of each Voyage to State and Audit their Accounts, his Salary 490 l.

The Clerk of the Acts is to Record all Orders, Contracts, Bills, Warrants, and
other Transactions, by the Principal Officers and Commissioners of the Navy.

The Commissioners of the Navy, whose Office is as above specified, and Salary
to each is 500 l. yearly.

Two other Commissioners to be at Portsmouth, and Chatham, always in readiness
to give Orders for better Management of his Majesty's Affairs in his Yards, and
Storehouses; Salary to each 350 l.

Each of these Officers abovenamed, have Two Clerks and some more, all paid by
the Treasurer of the Navy: All hold their Places by Patent from the King, and
most of them during pleasure.

The King has for his Navy Royal, and Stores, Four Great Yards or
Storehouses, (viz.) at Chatham, Deptford, Woolwich and Portsmouth, where his
Ships are built, Repaired, and Laid up, after their Voyage. In which Yards are
employed Diverse Officers, of which Six are principal; The Clerk of the Check,
Salary about 180 l. per Annum; Store-Keepers, Salary 286 l. per Annum, Master
Attendants, Two at Chatham 100 l. per Annum; Master Shipwright, Salary about
113 l. per Annum; Clerk of the Comptooll 100 l. per Annum; Clerk of the Survey
140 l. per Annum; The Charges of their Clerks, and Instruments are included in
their Salaries.

His Majesty has Diverse Rope-Yards, as at Chatham, Deptford, VVoolwich and
Portsmouth; where are made the Cable, and Cordage for his Navy.

In time of War the King has a Yard at Harwich, where out of War is continued
An Officer at 100 l. yearly.

This whole Navy Office is governed by The Lord Admiral, whose Lieutenant
Admiral has Salary 20 s. per diem, and 10 l. per Mensem for each Servant,
whereof he is allowed 16.

The Lord Admiral's Secretary has a Salary from the King of 500 l. per Annum.

All the Under Officers, as well those in Yards, as those belong to Ships, hold
their Places by Warrant from The Lord High Admiral of England.

The Ordinary Charge of the King's Navy in time of Peace is scarce 70000 l. per
Annum, besides the Building of Ships, Setting out Fleets, etc. which some years
even in Peaceable Times amounts to 12 or 1300000 l. more, as may easily be
computed.

The Court of Commission by force of the Statute of 28 H. 8. cap. 15.
THis Court must be held coram Admirallo Angliae seu ejus Locum tenente, and
Three or Four such other substantial Persons as shall be Named by the the Lord
Chancellor.

Their Jurisdiction is to hear and determine all Treasons, Felonies, Robberies,
Murders, and Confederacies, committed or done upon the Sea, etc.

These Offenses shall be heard, and determined according to the Common Law; and
therefore some of the Judges of the Realm are ever in Commission.

The Mischief before making this Statute you may see Co. 3 Inst. cap. Piracy,
Vide Co. 4 Inst.

The Port Courts.
A Port-Mote, is a Court kept in Haven Towns, or Ports, and thereof takes his
Name Curia Portus.

Portus a portando, Est locus in quo Exportantur and Importantur Merces; and
they are Portae Regni, The Gates of the Realm. Hitha, and Heda, often in
Doomsday is taken for a Haven, or Port, anciently written Hafne, and now Haven,
and hereof comes Queen-Hith in London, and Lambhith.

Every Haven is within the Body of the County, whereof see more in Coke's 4th
Institutes, Court of Admiralty, and the Statute of 43 Eliz. cap. 15.

Commissioners and others for Beacons, Signs of the Sea, Light-Houses,
Sea-Marks, and concerning Watches.
BEacon is from the Saxon Bechan, which is Signum dare, and we use the word to
Becken at this day.

Before Edward the Third they set Stacks of Wood in High Places; but in his
time Pitch Boxes, as now they be, were set up, and this is properly called a
Beacon.

Light-Houses, Ignes Speculatorij seu Lumen Maritimum, are properly to direct
Seafaring Men in the Night when they cannot see Marks, and these also Signa
speculatoria sui Pharus, unde Versus.

Lumina Noctivagae tollit Pharus aemula Lunae.

Sea-Marks, as Steeples, Churches, Castles, Trees, and such like for direction
of Seafaring Men in the Day time, are called signa Marina, or Speculatoria, or
signa Nautis; whereof Virg. 5 Aeneis,

Hic viridem Aeneas frondenti ex ilice Metam,
Constituit signum Nautis pater unde reverti,
Sciverit and longos, ubi circumflectere Cursus.
At the Common Law none could Erect any of these Three, but the King; It being
done ever by the King's Commission under the Great Seal; But of later times by
Letters Patents to the Lord Admiral, he has power to Erect the same.

By the Act of 8 Eliz. the Master, Wardens, and Assistants of Trinity-House of
Deptford Stroud (a Company of the chiefest and most expert Masters and
Governors of Ships) shall and may lawfully from time* to time, at their will
and pleasure, and at, their costs, Make, Erect, and Set up such, and so many
Beacons, Marks and Signs for the Sea in the Sea-shoars and Upland places near
the Seacoasts, or Forelands of the Sea, only for Sea Marks, as to them shall
seem most meet, whereby the Dangers may be avoided, and Ships the better come
to their Ports: And all such beacons, Marks, and Signs so by them to be
Erected, shall be continued, renewed, and maintained from time to time, at the
Costs and Charges of the said Master, Wardens, and Assistants.

If any cut down, etc. any Beacon, etc. by the Statute of 8 Eliz. 13. he shall
incur the Penalty therein mentioned; which if he be not able to pay, he shall
be ipso facto convict of Utlawry.

Vide Coke's 4. Inst. cap. 25. The Transcript of a Manuscript. Ordination,
which has been observed for Watch to be kept in the County of Norfolk from
Lyme to Yarmouth; and it is very probable the like has been done by like
Authority in other Maritime Counties. Vide Stat. 5 H. 4. cap. 3. Watches to be
made in the Sea Coasts in places of Danger through the Realm, by the Number of
People, and in manner they were wont to be made in times past.

De Conservatore Treugarum (i. e.) Induciarum and Salvorum Regis Conductuum.
BY 2 H. 5. Conservatorum Induciarum and salvorum Regis conductuum was Praised,
and Appointed in every Port of the Sea by Letters Patents; His Office was to
Inquire of all Offenses done against the King's Truces, and fafe Conducts upon
the Main Sea (out of the Counties, and out of the Liberties of the
Cinque Ports) as Admirals of Custom were wont.

It concerns the Jurisdiction of diverse Courts, especially the Court
beforementioned upon the Statute of 28 H. 8. and of the Court of Admiralty, to
know the Rights of Leagues and Ambassadors, as far as the Laws of England
Extend unto.

All Leagues, or Safe Conducts are, or ought to be of Record Enrolled in
Chancery, that the Subject may know who may be in Amity with the King, and who
not; who be Enemies, and can have no Action here, and who in League, and may
have Actions Persona^ here.

In all Treaties, the Power of the one and the other ought to be Equal.

A League may be broken by Levying of War, or by Ambassador, or Herald.

Bryan 19 E. 4. held, if all the Subjects in England would make War with a King
in League with the King of England, without the Assent of the King of England,
yet such a War was no breach of the League. See 2 H. 5. cap. 6. in the Preamble.

But in the Duke of Norfolk's Case, 14 Eliz. the Question was, Whether the Lord
Herise, and other Subjects of the King of Scots, who without his Consent had
wasted and burnt diverse Towns in England, and Proclaimed Enemies, were Enemies
in Law within the Statute of 25 E. 3. the League being between the King and
Scotland, and Resolved they were Enemies.

And in the Bishop of Rosse's Case, Anno 13 Eliz. The Question being, An
Legatus qui Rebellionem contra Principem ad quem Legatus concitat Legati,
Privilegiis gaudeat, and non ut Hostiis Poenas subjaceat; and Resolved he had
lost the Privilege of an Ambassador, and was subject to Punishment.

Ambassadors were called Orators afterward Legati a legando, Nuntij a
n^nciando; and afterward Ambassiatores, or Embassatories and, sometimes Agents.

For, Omnis Legatus est Agens, sed Omnis Agens non est Legatus.
In Sam. Palach's Case, 12 Jac. 1. affirming himself to be Ambassador of Mula
Sedan, King of Morocco, mentioned Coke's 4 Inst. cap. 26. It was Resolved there
could be no Ambassador without Letters of Credence from his Sovereign to
another who had Sovereign Authority; and although in his Letters of Credence he
be termed an Agent, or Nuntius, yet in such Case he is Ambassador or Legate.
And it was likewise Resolved, That Ambassadors ought to be Free, and Safe in
every place by the Law of all Nations; yea, although they be Ambassadors of our
Enemies, or a Banished Man be sent to the place from whence he is banished. And
in the Case of Cardinal Poole, fled to Rome from Henry the Eighth, the Pope
sent him Ambassador to the French King; the King of England Demands him (as a
Traitor) from the King, notwithstanding he was sent Ambassador; sed non
praevaluit.

But if a Sovereign Ambassador, being Prorex, commits here any Crime which
is contra jus G^ntium, as Treason, Murder, Adultery, etc. he may be punished as
another private Alien, and not remanded to his Sovereign but of Courtesy: And
so of Contracts that be good Jure Gentium he must answer here; but if any thing
be Malum prohibitum by an Act of Parliament, Private Law, or Custom of this
Realm, which is not Malum in se Jure Gentium, nor contra Jus Gentium, an
Ambassador residing here shall not be bound by them; but otherwise it is of the
Subjects of either Kingdom. Vide Information upon the Statute of 19 H. 7. cap.
1. Coke's 4 Inst. cap. 26. concerning Prohibited Goods brought hither. See more
in Palach's Case, Where one may not be Indicted of Piracy, for taking the Goods
of the Subjects of an Enemy Prince, solo Amici, and where The Court of
Admiralty shall have the Jurisdiction, and where not. And now a word or two
concerning

Leagues, of which are four kinds: I. Foedus Pacis, and that a Christian Prince
may have with an Infidel, Si fieri possit quod ex vobis est, cum omnibus
hominibus Pacem habeatis; 2. Foedus Congratulationis, sive Consolationis. And
this a Christian Prince may make with an Infidel, as David did with Hanon, I
Chron. 19.2. 3. Foedus Commercij, sive Commutationis Mercium. And this also may
be made with an Infidel, as King Solomon did with Hiram, and Joshua did with
the Gibeonites. 4. Foedus Mutu^ Auxilij. And this cannot be done with an
Idolater, Jehosaphat King of Judah made Foedus mutui auxilij with Ahab King of
Israel, an Idolater: For Ahab said to Jehosaphat, Veni mecum in Ramoth Gilead;
cui ille respondet, Ut ego and tu, and sicut populus tuus sic and populus meus
tecum erimus in Bello. In which War Ahab was slain, and Jehosaphat in extreme
danger.

But seeing Foedus Pacis, and Foedus Commercij may be with an Infidel, Pagan,
and Idolater, and those Leagues are established by Oaths, whether the Infidel
or Pagan may Swear by False Gods, seeing he thereby offends the True God by
giving Divine Worship to False Gods. St. Austin moved by Publicola resolves,
That he who takes the Credit of him that swears by False Gods, not for any
Evil but Good, does not join himself that Sin of Swearing by Devils, but is
partaker of those Lawful Leagues wherein the other keeps his Faith, and Oath:
But if a Christian should any way induce another to Swear by them, herein he
should grievously sin; And the League in these Cases is warranted by the Word
of God, Et per Praxin Sanctorum in Sacra Scriptura, all incidents thereunto are
permitted.

In ancient time no Ambassador came into this Realm before he had Safe Conduct:
For as no King can come in without the King's License, or Safe Conduct; so no
Prorex, etc. which represents a King's Person can do it. For Safe Conducts
see the Writs in the Register, and the Statute of the 15th, 18th and 20th of
Henry the 6th, with all Incidents thereunto. King Henry the 7th, that Wise
King, would not in all his time suffer Lieges Ambassadors of any Foreign King
or Prince within his Realm, nor he any with them; but upon occasion used
Ambassadors.

Every Ambassador ought to have Four Qualities,

Nuntie sis verax, tacitus celer, atque fidelis.
And of him another says,

Foederis Orator, Pacis via, Terminus Irae,
Semen Amicitiae, Belli fuga, Litibus hostis.
The difference between a League, and Truce is, that a Truce is a Cessation
from War for a certain time; A League is, a perfect striking of Peace.

It Is said 9 E. 4. That a League between Two Kings, without naming of
Successors, does not extend to Successors; notwithstanding by our Law, Rex non
intermoritur.

See more of this, and Ambassadors to the Pope and General Councils, etc. Co. 4
Inst. cap. 26.

The Court of the King of England
IS a Monarchy, or Commonwealth within a Monarchy, consisting of
Ecclesiastical, Civil, and Military Persons, and Government. And for

The Ecclesiastical Government of the King's Court.
IS a Dean of the King's Chapel, chosen by the King, and acknowledges no
Superior but the King: For as the King's Palace is Exempt from all Inferior
Temporal Jurisdiction, so is his Chapel from all Spiritual; His Fee is 200 l.
per Annum, and a Table. And,

By the Dean are chosen all other Officers, (viz.)

A Sub-Dean, or Praecentor Capellae, Fee 100 l.

Thirty Two Gentlemen of the Chapel, whereof Twelve are Priests, and one of
them is Confessor to the Household, whose Office is to Read Prayers every
Morning to the Family, to Visit the Sick, to Examine, and prepare Communicants,
to Inform such as desire Advice in any case of Conscience, or point of
Religion, etc.

The other Twenty Gentlemen, called Clerks of the Chapel, are with the
aforesaid Priests, to perform the Office of Divine Service, in Praying,
Singing, etc. One of these being well skilled ^n Music is Master of the
Children, whereof there are Twelve in Ordina^y, To instruct them in the Rules
and Art of Music for service of the Chapel; Three other of the said Clerks
^re Organists, to whom upon Sundays, Collardays, and other Holydays, are ^oyned
the Sack-Buts and Cornets, be^onging to the King's private Music. Their Fee to
each is 70 l. per Annum.

Four Vergers, so called from the Silver Rods they carry in their Hands; Also a
^erjeant, a Yeoman, and a Groom of the Chapel.

The King has also his Private Oratory, where some of his Chaplains read
Divine 8ervice unto him on Workingdays every Morning and Evening.

Twelve principal Feast-Days in the Year are called Offering-Days, viz.
Christmas, Easter, Whitsunday, and All Saints, called Houshold-Days, upon which
the Besant or Gold to be Offered is delivered to the King by the Lord Steward,
or some other of the principal Officers; then New Years-Day and Twelfth-Day,
upon the latter of which are offered Gold, Frankincense, and Myrrh in several
Purses. Lastly, Candlemass, Annunciation, Ascension, Trinity Sunday, St. John
Baptist, and Michaelmas-Day, when only Gold is offered. These Offerings made by
the King to God ( In Signum Speciale Dominij) after Divine Service, or at the
Offertory, he being attended by the Principal of the Nobility, with their
Collars of the Garter, did anciently belong to the Archbishop of Canterbury's
Disposal; But now are to be Disposed by the Dean of the Chapel amongst the
Poor.

The Lord High Almoner, who is the Bishop of London for the time being,
disposes of the King's Alms; and besides all Money allowed by the King, has
all Deodands and Bona Felonum de se for that purpose. And under him is

A Sub-Almoner, Two Yeomen, and Two Grooms of the Almonry. The High Almoner
has no Fee, his Sub-Almoner has Fee 6 l. 6 s. 10 d.

The Clerk of the Closet, or Confessor to His Majesty, who is to attend at the
King's Right Hand during Divine Service, to Resolve all Doubts concerning
Spiritual Matters, to wait on His Majesty in his private Oratory, or Closet,
and his Fee is Twenty Nobles. And there is

A Keeper of the Closet, whose Fee is 5 l. per Annum. The King has also

Forty Eight Chaplains in Ordinary, (besides the Extraordinary) who wait by
Turns, Four every Month.

Anciently at Court were Sermons in Lent only, and that in the Afternoons in
the open Air by Bishops, Deans, or principal Prebendaries: And them also
appointed by the Archbishop of Canterbury. Now on Ashwednesday in the Morning
begins the Dean of the Chapel to Preach, on each Wednesday after one of the
Chaplains. Every Friday the Dean of some Cathedral, or Collegiate Church. On
Good Friday the Dean of Westminster; on every Sunday a Bishop, and on Palm
Sunday an Archbishop, On Easter Day the Lord High Almoner.

The Civil Government of the King 's Court.
THe Lord Steward, is the Chief Officer of the King's Household, to whom is
committed the State of the King's House, and all his Commands in Court to be
obeyed; He has Authority over all, except those of his Majesty's Chapel,
Chamber and Stable.

He is a White Staff Officer, and by his Office without any other Commission
Judges of all Treasons, Felonies, Bloodsheds, within the King's House, or
within the Verge, which is 12 Miles round the Tunnel of the Court (only London
by Charter is Exempted.) And this Jurisdiction of the Verge, has from ancient
time been executed by the Lord Steward with great Ceremomony, in the nature of
a peculiar King's Bench, and that not only within, but without the King's
Dominions.

The Lord Chamberlain is the next Officer, who has Oversight of all the
Officers belonging to the King's Chamber; except the Precincts of the King's
Bed Chamber, which is wholly under the Groom of the Stole, and all above
Stairs, who are all Sworn by him (Or by his Warrant to the Gentlemen Ushers to
the King) Has the Oversight of all the Officers of the Wardrobes, at all his
Majesty's Houses, and of the removing Wardrobes, of the Tents, Revels, Music,
Comedians, Hunting, Messengers, Trumpetters, Drummers of all Handicrafts, and
Artisans, Heralds, Pursuivants, Sergeants at Arms, Phisicians, Apothecaries,
Chyrurgeons, Barbers, etc. and Chaplains, although himself be a Layman; Also
the charges of Coronations, Marriages, Entries, Cavalcades, Funerals, etc. His
Fee is 100 l. yearly, and 16 Dishes each Meal, with the Appurtenances; And most
of the Places before mentioned are in his Gift or Disposal.

The Master of the Horse, is the Third Great Officer, And has now the ordering
of the King's Stables, and Races and Breed of Horses, and has Power over
Escuries and Pages, over Footmen, Grooms, Riders of the Great Horse, Farriers,
Smiths, Coachmen, Sadlers, and all other Trades working to the King's Stables;
To all whom he (or by his Warrant the Avenor) gives an Oath to be True and
Faithful: He has the charge of all Lands, and Revenues appointed for the
King's Breed of Horses, and Charges of the Stable, and for Litters, Coaches,
Sumpter horses, etc. He only has privilege to make use of any Horses, Pages,
or Footmen, belonging to the King's Stables. At Solemn Cavalcades he Rides next
the King, and leads a Leer Horse of State; His Fee is 666 l. 16 s. 4 d. yearly,
And a Table of 16 Dishes each Meal.

Under these Three principal Officers of his Majesty's Household, are almost all
other the Officers and Servants.

The Compting House.
SO called because Accounts for all Expenses of the King's Household are there
daily, The Lord Steward, The Treasurer of the Household, The Comptroller, The
Cofferer, The Master of the Household, The Two Clerks of the Green Cloth; And
the Two Clerks Comptrollers, who also make Provisions for the Household
according to the Law of the Land, and make Payments, and Orders for well
Governing of the Servants of the Household.

And the Cofferer is to pay the Wages of the King's Servants below Stairs, and
the Lord Chamberlain above Stairs, Vide 39 Eliz. cap. 7. And he is accomptable
in the Exchequer for about 40000 l. And in the Compting House is.

The Court of Greencloth.
SO called of the Green Cloth whereat they sit, and is composed of the Persons
last above mentioned, whereof the Three first are usually of the King's Privy
Council.

To this Court being the first and most ancient Court of England, is committed
the Oversight of the King's Court Royal, for Matters of Justice and Government,
with Authority for maintaining the Peace within Twelve Miles distance,
wheresoever the Court shall be, and within the King's House, the Power of
correcting all the Servants therein that shall any way offend.

The Treasurer of the King's Household, in the absence of the Lord Steward, has
Power with the Comptroller, and Steward of the Marshalsea, to Hear and Determine
Treasons, Felonies, and other Inferior Crimes committed within in the King's
Palace, and that by Verdict of the Household; He bears a White Staff, and his
yearly Fee is 124 l. 14 s. 8 d. And a Table of 16 Dishes each Meal.

The Comptrollers Office, is to Comptrol the Accounts, and Reckonings of the
Green Cloth; and his yearly Fee is 107 l. 12 s. 4 d. And bears a White Staff,
and has 16 Dishes each Meal.

The Cofferer is a principal Officer, and has special charge over other
Officers of the House for their good Demeanor and Carriage, and is to pay the
Wages to the King's Servants, and for Provisions by the Direction of the Green
Cloth; He has a Fee of 100 l. yearly, and a Table of 7 Dishes daily.

The Master of the Household is the next Officer, who is to Survey the Accounts
of the House; His Fee 100 Marks, and 7 Dishes daily.

Two Clerk's Comptroller's are to Tolt and Allow all Bills of Comptrolment,
Parcels, and Brievements. And the

Two Clerk's of the Green Cltth are to Sum them up; And the Fee to each of
these Four Clerks is, 48 l. 13 s. 4 d. And between them, Two Tables of 7 Dishes
to each Table.

The rest of the Compting House, being less considerable we pass over, And come
to give a brief Account of the Officers, or persons in the several Offices. As
first in the

Acatery is a Sergeant, a Clerk, Purveyors, Yeomen, In all Twelve.

Poultry a Sergeant, a Clerk, Yeoman, Grooms, Purveyors, in all Ten.

Bakehouse a Sergeant, Clerk, Yeomen, Grooms, and Pages, in all Eighth.

Woodyard, a Sergeant, a Clerk; Yeomen, Grooms, and Pages, in all Eight.

Scullery a Sergeant, a Clerk, Yeomen, Grooms, and Pages, in all Twelve.

Lardour a Sergeant, Clerk, Three Yeomen, Three Grooms, Two Pages.

Pastry a Sergeant, a Clerk, Yeomen, Grooms, and Children, in all Eleven.

Pantry a Sergeant, a Yeomen, Grooms, Pages.

Cellar a Sergeant, a Gentleman, Yeomen, Grooms, Purveyors, Pages, in all
Twelve.

Buttery a Gentleman, Yeoman, Grooms, Pages, Purveyors, in all Eleven.

Pitcher-house a Yeoman, Grooms, Page, and Clerk, in all Five.

Spicery Three Clerks, and a Grocer.

Chandlery a Sergeant, Two Yeomen, Two Grooms, and a Page.

Wafery a Yeoman, and a Groom.

Confectionary a Sergeant, Two Yeomen a Groom, and a Page.

Ewry a Sergeant, a Gentleman, Two Yeomen, a Groom, and Two Pages.

Laundry a Yeoman, a Groom, Three Pages, and a Draper.

Kitchen Three Clerks to the King, and Two to the Queen; The chief of these
Clerks has a Fee and Diet equal to an Officer of the Green Cloth; A Master
Cook to the King, A Master Cook to the Queen, A Master Cook to the Household,
each of these Three a Table of 5 Dishes, Six Yeomen, Seven Grooms, Five
Children, in all Twenty six Persons.

Boiling House a Yeoman, Two Grooms.

Scalding House Yeoman, Grooms, and Pages, in all Six.

Harbingers Office, a Knight, Three Gentlemen, and Seven Yeomen Harbingers; The
Knight Harbingers Office, is by Letters Patent under the Great Seal of England
during Life, So often as the King goes broad either in England or beyond Seas; He
does by himself or his Deputy provide and appoint all Lodgings and Harbingage
for all Great Persons. All Noblemen, Bishops; All his Majesty's Servants, and
Attendants, and for all other his Liege People, for Ambassadors, and
Foreigners, etc. His Salary 20 Marks per Annum. and 10 s. per diem. Out of the
Exchequer, besides Fees for Honor given by the King, and Homage done to his
Majesty and diverse other Perquisites.

Porters at Gate, a Sergeant, Two Yeomen, Four Grooms, Clerks of the Carriage,
Two Yeomen Cart Takers, Six in Number, Surveyors of the Dresser Two, one above
Stairs and another below; Marshals of the Hall Four, Sewers of the Hall Five;
Waiters of the Hall Twelve, Messenger of the Compting House One; Bellringer
One; Long Cart Takers Four; Wine Porters Eight; Woodbearer One; The Cock of the
Court One.

Besides the aforesaid Officers b^low Stairs, there are also under the Lo^d
Steward, all the Officers belonging to the Queens Kitchen, Cellar, Pantry, etc.
And to the Kings Privy Kitchen; and to the Lords Kitchen together with
Children, Scourers, Turnbroachers, etc. In all Sixty eight.

These Officers according to their Degrees, are named Lords, Knights, Esquires,
Sergeants, Gentlemen, Clerks, Yeomen, Grooms, Pages, or Children, and these
Succeed each other, as they Outlive those next Degree above them.

As likewise from the Pastry to the Acatery, as the Clerk of one Office dies
the next succeeds; And as the Clerk of the Avenary, Spicery, or Kitchen dies;
The Clerk of the Acatery succeeds, and from thence to be one of the Clerks
Comptrollers; Then Clerk of the Compting House; Then Master of the Household;
Lastly Cofferor of the Household, Higher than which he cannot rise by Succession.

Although the King pays but the ancient Fees, which at first were above Ten
times the value; Yet the perquisites in many Offices make sometimes a place of
10 l. worth near 500 l. per Annum.

The Knight Marshal
CAlled Mareschallus Hospitij Regis, has Jurisdicton and Cognizance of all
Crimes within the Royal Palace, where one of the Parties is the Kings Servant;
He is one of the Judges of the Court called, The Marshalsea, or Marshals Seat
of Judicature, which is held in Southwark, and has a Prison belonging to the
same. Upon Solemn Occasions he Rides before the King with a Short Baston, Tipped
at both Ends with Gold, and has Six Provost Marshals, Or Virgers in Scarlet
Coats to wait on him, and to take care of the Royal Palace, That no Beggars,
Vagabonds, Common Whores, Malefactors, etc. come within or near: And now we are
led to speak of the Marshals Court before mentioned. And called.

The Court of the Marshelsea.
THis is an ancient Court of Record, Ordained to determine Suits between those
of the King's House, and others within the Verge.

The Judges are the Steward and Marshal of the King's House, who have
Cognizance of all manner of Pleas of Trespass within the Verge, so as either
party be of the same House; and of all other Actions personal wherein both
Parties are the King Servants, and this is the proper Jurisdiction of the
Marshal's Court. And a Man shall have Amercement in an Action brought against
him in the Court of the Steward and Marshal, when he is not of the Kings House,
when the Trespass or Contract was made, or when the Plaintiff was not of the
Kings House at that time, F. N. B. 141.

Error in this Court, for that neither of the parties was of the Kings House at
the time of Suit brought, or for that it is not shown, that the Plaintiff nor
Defendant were of the Kings House at that time or afterward, and every other
Cause of Error there, shall be amended in the King's Bench, 5 and 10 E. 3. c.
3. And having taken some short remarks upon the Marshalsey we come next to

The Court of the Palace.
CUria Palatij was Erected by King Charles the First, By his Letters Patents
dated the 2d of July, Anno Regni sui sexto; And made a Court of Record, called
the Court of the Kings Palace at Westminster, For the Trial of all Personal
Actions between Party, and Party; The Liberty whereof extends 12 Miles round
Whitehal, which Jurisdiction was confirmed by King Charles the Second.

The Judges of this Gourt are the Stewards of the Kings House, and Knight
Marshal for the time being, and the Steward of the Court, or his Deputy, being
always a Lawyer.

This Court is kept every Friday in th Court House on St. Margarets-Hill in
Southwark, and may be held in any place within the Jurisdiction.

The Proceeding is by Capias or Attachment, which is to be served upon the
Defendant by one of the Knights Marshals Men, who takes Bond with such
Sureties for the Defendants Appearance at the next Court as he will be
answerable for; The Process may may be had at several places within the Liberty
of the Court, appointed by the Steward which every Marshals Man can help you to.

The Defendant upon Appearance must put in Bail to Answer the Condemanation of
the Court, which if he neglect to do, the Plaintiff may have the Bond for
appearance assigned over to his use.

The next Court after Ball put in, The Plaintiff ought to Declare, and set
forth the cause of his Action, and so afterward proceed to Issue and Trial by
Jury, according to the course of the Common Law, and that in Four or Five Court
days.

They hold Pleas of all manner of Personal Actions; as Debt, Trespass, Battery,
Slander, Trover, and all Actions of the Case, etc. But usually, if the Cause be
considerable as (above Five pound) they carry the Cause away by an Habeas
Corpus cum causa into the King's Bench, or Common Pleas.

The Fees of the Palace Court, or Marshalsea, as granted by the Letters Patent,
You may see at large in the Complete Solicitor.

The Court of the Lord Steward, Treasurer, and Comptroller of the Kings
Household concerning Felony, etc.
THey, or any of them have Authority to Inquire by 12 Sad Men, and Discreet
Persons of the Cheque Roll; If any Servant in the Cheque under the State of a
Lord make any Confederacies, Compassings, Conspiracies, or Imaginations with
any Person, or Persons to Destroy or Murder the King; Or any Lord of this
Realm; Or any Person Sworn to the King's Council; Or the Steward, Treasurer or
Comptroller of his Household, And if it be found, then to be put to Trial by 12
other Sad Men of the Household, and no Challenge to be allowed but for Malice;
And if they are found guilty, then to be adjudged Felony, Vide le Statute, 3
Hen. 7. cap. 14.

The Court of the Lord Steward of the King's House: Or in his Absence of the
Treasurer and Comptroller, and Steward of the Marshelsea.
THey, or Two of them, whereof the Steward of the Marshelsea to be One, by
virtue of their Offices without any Commission, Have Authority by the Act of 33
Hen. 8. cap. 12. The said Steward of the Marshalsea being from time, to time
appointed by the Lord Great Master, or Lord Steward for the time being; And
whether the King be removed from his Palace House, or Houses, or not removed
before such Offense, Inquired of, Tried, Heard, and determined, the said
Officers shall have a power to Inquire by Verdict of the King's
Houshold-Servants within the Cheque Roll, of all Persons slain within the
King's House, or where he shall abide, before the Coroner of the King's
Household, And all Officers named in the Act upon Precept to them have Power to
Summon 24 Persons, Yeomen of the Household, to Enquire of Treasons, Misprisions
of Treasons, Murders, Manslaughters, or other Malicious Strikings where Blood
is, or shall be shed against the King's Peace; Upon the Presentment,
Inquisition, or Indictment found and certified by the Coroner, The Judges, or
Two of them, (whereof the Steward of the Marshalsea to be one) shall make
another Precept to the Clerks, and other Officers of the Household, who have
thereby power to warn another Jury of 24 Gentlemen of the King's Chamber, and
other Servants of the Household at a Day, Place; and under a pain therein
appointed, to appear (whereof the Judges or Officers before whom they shall be
returned, shall cause 12 without Challenge to be allowed, (except for Malice)
To try the Offenders, and if they are Found Guilty of Treason, Murder, or
Manslaughter, they shall have Judgment of Life, and Member, and other
Forfeitures as if Tried by the Common Laws of the Realm; If Guilty of Strking
whereby Bloodshed, Then to have his Right hand stricken off, Imprisonment
during Life, and Fine and Ransom at the Kings Pleasure, The Execution to be
done in the Solemn manner by the Act directed.

A Crier, to be appointed from time to time to call Juries, make Proclamations,
and do other things belonging to the Crier of the Court.

The Coroner to be appointed from time, to time by the Lord Steward.

Trial of Peers, as has been used.

The Privileges, and Authorities of the Marshalsea Court within the Verge
saved.

The Limits and Bounds of the said House or Houses, to be for these offenses
within all the Edifices, Courts, etc. within the Porters Ward, or within 200
Foot of the Standard of any Gate or Gates of the said Houses.

This Act extends not to any Nobleman, or other Person that shall Strike to
correct his Servants, or any of the Council, or other Head Officers Striking
with their Hand, of small Strick in Executing their Office.

To Steal the Kings Goods, or entering his House to Steal, shall be Felony, Vide
le Statute at large.

The Servants in Ordinary above Stairs.
THe Groom of the Stole, (that is, according to the Greek, from whence the
Latin and French derive it) Groom, or Servant of the Robe, or Garment; he
having the Honor to present, and put on His Majesty's first Garment or Shirt
every Morning, and to order things of the Bedchamber.

The Gentlemen of the Bedchamber, consisting of the prime Nobility of England;
Their Office in general is, To Wait a Week in every Quarter by, Turn in the
King's Bedchamber, there to lie by the King in a Pallat-Bed all Night, and in
the absence of the Groom of the Stole to supply his place. Moreover they Wait
on the King when he eats in private; for then the Cup Bearer, Carver, and
Sewers do not Wait. The Fee to each is 1000 l.

Of these are Fourteen, or more; Then there is The Vice-Chamberlain, The Keeper
of the Privy-Purse, Treasurer of the Chamber: He pays Riding, and Lodging
Wages, as the Lord Chamberlain shall direct.

The Master of the Robes belonging to His Majesty's person, who is to have the
ordering of all His Majesty's Robes; as those of Coronation, St. George's
Feast, Parliament, and of all His Majesty's Wearing Apparel; of his Collar of
Esses, Georges, and Garters beset with Diamonds and Pearls.

Grooms of the Bed chamber ought to be Twelve, these are to be under the
Degrees of Knights: Their office is to Attend in the King's Bedchamber, to
Dress and Undress the King in private, and the yearly Fee to each is Five
hundred pounds.

Pages Six, whereof one is Keeper of the King's Cabinet Closet.

Gentlemen Ushers of the Privy-chamber; These Wait one at a time in the Privy
Lodgings, etc. and are Four.

Gentlemen of the Privy Chamber in Ordinary, Forty eight Quarter-Wainters by
Turns; Their office is Twelve every Quarter to Wait on the King's Person within
Doors, and without, so long as he is on Foot; and when the King eats in the
Privy Chamber they wait at the Table, and bring in his Meat: they Wait also at
Reception of Ambassadors, and every Night lie Two of them in the King's
Bedchamber.

A Gentleman of the Privy Chamber by the King's Commandment only, without any
written Commission, is sufficient to Arrest any Peer of England, as Cardinal
Woolsey acknowledged; These wear Cloak, and Sword.

Grooms of the Privy Chamber in Ordinary, Six, all Gentlemen of Quality. These
(as all Grooms) wait without Sword, Cloak, or Hat.

Gentlemen Ushers, daily Waiters in the Presence Chamber, Four; The First
whereof has that considerable Office of the Black Rod, and in the time of
Parliament is to attend every day the Lord's House, and is also Usher of the
most Honorable Order of the Garter. Their office is to wait in the Presence
Chamber, and to attend next to the King's person, and after the Lord
Chamberlain, and Vice Chamberlain to order all Affairs, and all Under Officers
above Stairs, are to obey these.

Gentlemen Ushers, Quarter Waiters in Ordinary, Eight; These wait also in the
Presence Chamber, and are to give Directions (in the absence of the Gentlemen
Ushers, Daily Waiters) to the Grooms and Pages, and other Under Officers.

Gentlemen Waiters, Six; Cupbearers, Five; Carvers in Ordinary, Four; Sewers to
the Person in Ordinary, Four.

Esquires of the Body in Ordinary, Six; Their office is to Guard the King's
Person by Night, to Set the Watch, and give the Word, and keep good Order in
the whole House by Night, as the Lord Chamberlain, and his other Officers, are
to do by Day.

The Sewers of the Chamber, are Eight.

Groom Porter; his Office is to see the King's Lodgings furnished with Tables,
Chairs, Stools, and Firing; To furnish Cards, Dice, etc. To decide Disputes
arising at Cards, Dice, Bowlings, etc.

Sergeants at Arms, Sixteen; all Gentlemen, or Knights, attending upon His
Majesty. There are also Four other Sergeants at Arms, whereof one attends the
Lord President of Wales, another the Speaker of the House of Commons, and
another the Lord Lieutenant of Ireland*

Physicians in Ordinary, Four; one assigned to the Queen, and one to the
Household; besides Twelve more, who are not the King's sworn Servants, nor have
Fee.

Master and Treasurer of the Jewel-House, and Three Under Officers called
Yeomen and Grooms; Their office is to take charge of the Gold, or Silver Gilt,
Plate for the King and Queens Table, of all Plate in the Tower, of Chains and
loose Jewels not fixed to any Garment.

The Master of the Ceremonies Fee 200 l. One Assistant Fee 120 l. and One
Marshal.

One Geographer, One Historiographer, One Hydrographer, One Library Keeper, One
Poet Laureat, One Public Notary.

The King's Great Wardrobe.
THe Master, or Keeper of the Great Wardrobe, is an Office of great Antiquity
and Dignity, High Privileges, and Immunities were conferred by King Henry the
Sixth, confirmed by his Successors, and enlarged by King James, the first who
ordained this Great Officer should be an Incorporation or Body Politic for
ever.

His Office is to make Provisions for Coronations, Marriages, and Funerals; To
furnish the Court with Beds, Hangings, Carpets, and other Necessaries; To
furnish Houses for Ambassadors at their first Arrival here, Presents for
Foreign Princes, and Ambassadors, Clothes of State, and other Furniture for
the Lord Lieutenant of Ireland, Lord President of Wales, and His Majesty's
Ambassadors abroad; To provide all Robes for the Foreign Knights of the
Garter, for the Officers of the Garter, Coats for Heralds, and Pursuivants at
Arms, Robes for the Lord Chancellor, Lord Treasurer, etc. Rich Liveries for the
Two Lord Chief Justices, All the Barons of the Exchequer, All the Officers of
those Courts, All Liveries for His Majesty's Domestic Servants, All Linen for
the King's person, etc.

In which there is ordinarily Expended yearly about 25000 l. besides all
Extraordinaries, as Coronations; Funerals, etc.

His Salary, in compensation of all Ancient Fees, is 2000 l. per Annum. This
Office is now kept in the Savoy. Under the Master is

A Deputy, whose Salary is 200 l. A Clerk, whose Salary in compensation of all
Fees, and Allowances, is 300 l. per Annum.

To this Office have been lately added by Patent (during pleasure) A
Comptroller, and Surveyor, Salary to each 300 l.

Belonging to this Office are diverse Tradesmen, Artificers, and others to
number of about Forty; all sworn Servants to the King.

Besides the Great Wardrobe the King has diverse Standing Wardrobes at
Whitehall, Windsor, Hampton Court, the Tower of London, Greenwich, etc.
Whereof there are diverse Officers.

And Lastly, There is a Removing Wardrobe, which attends upon the Person of the
King, Queen, and Children, Ambassadors, Christnings, Masks, Plays, etc. at the
Command of the Lord Chamberlain, who has the disposing of the Vacant places.
Here are six Officers, one Yeoman, two Grooms, and three Pages.

The Salary of the Yeomen 200 l. each Groom 100 pounds, and each Page 100 Marks.

To All these together is allowed six Dishes each Meal.

All Movables belonging to this Office are at length Divided into Three parts,
whereof the Yeoman has one for his own use, the Grooms another, and the Pages
the Third part.

The Office of Tents, etc.
IN this Office of Tents, Toyls, Hays, and Pavilions, are Two Masters, Four
Yeomen, one Groom, one Clerk Comptroller, one Clerk of the Tents.

The Office of the Robes.
BEsides the Master beforementioned there is one Yeoman, three Grooms, one
Page, Two Surveyors, one Clerk, and Persons of several Trades.

Faulconers.
MAster of the Hawks, and other Officers under him about London, and other
Places belonging to the King, in all Thirty Three.

Huntsmen.
MAster of the Buck-Hounds, a Sergeant, and Thirty Four others; one Master of
the Otter-Hounds; one Master of the Harriers, and Five under him.

Messengers.
OF the Chamber in ordinary, two Clerks of the Cheque, and Forty others.

Musicians in ordinary, Sixty Two.

Trumpeters in ordinary, and Kettle-Drummers, in all Fifteen.

Drummers and Fifes, Seven.

Tradesmen, one or two of all sorts.

Watermen, Fifty Five.

Comedians, Seventeen Men and Eight Women.

Keeper of Birds in St. James's Park, one:

Keeper of the Volery, and Sergeant Painter, one of each.

With diverse other Officers and Servants under the Lord Chamberlain, to serve
His Majesty upon Extraordinary occasions.

Many of these Offices and Places are of good Credit, great Profit, and Enjoyed
by Persons of Quality.

Officers under the Master of the Horse.
FOur Querries (from the French Escurie, a Stable) of the Crown-Stable, and
Eight of the Hunting-Stable; Their Office is to attend the King in Hunting, or
Progress, or on any occasion of Riding abroad, to help His Majesty Up and Down
from his Horse. Fee to each of these is 20 l. yearly, the ancient Fee; but have
100 l. yearly Allowance for Diet, besides Lodgings, and two Horse Liveries.

Avenor, from Avena, Oats; Fee 40 l. This Place, with all the following, is in
the Gift of the Master of the Horse

One Clerk of the Stable, Four Yeomen, besides Four Child Riders, Yeoman of the
Styrup, Sergeant Marshal, and Yeoman Farriers, Four Groom Farriers, Sergeant of
the Carriage, Three Surveyors, A Squire and Yeoman Sadler, Four Yeomen
Granators, Four Yeomen Purveyors, A Yeoman Peck-man, A Yeoman Bill-maker, Four
Coach-men, Eight Litter-men, A Yeoman of the Close Wagon, Sixty four Grooms of
the Stable, whereof. Thirty Grooms of the Crown-Stable, and Thirty four of the
Hunting, and Pad-Stable, Twenty six Footmen in their Liveries, to Run by the
King's Horse, etc.

The Clerk of the Market, who within the Verge is to keep a Standard of all
Weights and Measures, and to burn all False Weights and Measures; And from the
pattern of this Standard are to be taken all the Weights and Measures of the
Kingdom.

The Military Government in the King's Court.
THe Horse Guards, Life Guard, or Guard of the King's Body, consisting of Five
hundred Horsemen, all or most of them Gentlemen and old Officers, commanded by
their Captain, who is at all times of War, or Peace, to Wait upon the King's
Person, as often as he Rides abroad, with a considerable number of those Horsemen
well Armed, His pay is 30 s. per diem. These Horse have been divided into Three
parts whereof 200 under the Command of the Master of the Horse, and 150 under
another Officer, and the other 150 Commanded by another Officer; The Pay to
each of these Officers 20 s. per diem.

Under the Captains of the Guards are Two Lieutenants, a Coronet, a
Quartermaster, and Four Brigadiers. The Horsmens Pay is 4. s. per diem.

The Band of Pensioners.
FIrst Instituted by King Henry the Seventh, and chosen out of the Best and
most Ancient Families of England, not only as a Faithful Guard to the King's
Person, but to be as a Nursery to breed up hopeful Gentlemen and fit them for
Employment, Civil, and Military abroad, or at home; as Deputies of Ireland,
Ambassadors, Counselors of State, Captains of the Guard, Governors of Places,
and Commanders in Wars both by Sea and Land. Their Office is to attend the
King's Person to, and from his Chapel, and all public Solemnities; A Peer of
the Realm is usually Captain, whose Pay is 1000 l. per Annum; his Lieutenant
200 l. yearly, his Standard Bearer 200 l. yearly, Clerk of the Cheque 120 l. 1
s. 3 d. yearly, and Forty Gentlemen Pensioners, Fee to each is 100 l. yearly; a
Gentleman Harbinger to provide Lodging for them, his Fee 70 l. 11 s. yearly.

These Wait one Half by Quarter; Upon Extraordinary occasions, All are
Summoned; Their ordinary Arms are Gilt Poleaxes; their Arms on Horseback in
time of War, Curassiers, Arms with Sword and Pistol. They are not under the
Lord Chamberlain, but their own Officers, and always Sworn by the Clerk of the
Cheque, who takes Notice who are absent from their Duty.

The Yeomen of the Guard.
ARe at present 100 Men in daily Waiting, and 70 more not in Waiting; as any of
the 100 dye, his Place is filled out of the Seventy; these are chosen of the
best Men under Gentlemen, and of Larger Stature than ordinary, for they were
formerly to be six Foot high. Their Office is in their Coats and Caps, one Half
with Harquebusses, and the other Half with Partisans, to wait upon the King in
his Standing Houses, Forty by Day, and Twenty to Watch by Night, and about the
City, to Wait on the King's Person abroad, by Water or Land.

Their Captain's Fee is 1000 l. yearly; the Lieutenant 500 l. Ensign 300 l.
Clerk of the Cheque 150 l. Four Corporals 150 l. each.

The King has many other Inferior Officers; which over-passing, we come now to

The Government of the Queen's Court
IS suitable to the Consort of so Great a King, Splendid and Magnificent: And
has all Officers, and a Household apart from the King; For Maintenance whereof
there is usually settled 40000 l. per Annum, and is as follows:

The Ecclesiastical Government of the Queens Court.
THe Lord, or Grand Almoner; He has Superintendency over all the
Ecclesiastics belonging to the Queen.

One Confessor to the Queen, and Four Almoners.

One Treasurer of the Chapel, Two Preachers, Four Clerks of the Chapel, and
Four Boys.

Sixteen Chaplains Diverse belonging to the Music, and Two Vergers, or Porters.

The Civil Government of the Queen's Court.
THere is a Counsel consisting of Persons of Great Worth and Dignity; A Steward
of the Revenue, A Keeper of Her Majesty's Great Seal, A Chamberlain, Master of
the Horse, A Vice-Chamberlain, A Principal Secretary, and Master of Request, A
Treasurer, and Receiver General, Attorney General, Solicitor General, A
Surveyor General.

Six Gentlemen Ushers of the Privy Chamber, Two Cup-bearers, Two Carvers, Two
Sewers, Five Gentlemen Ushers daily Waiters, Ten Grooms of the Privy Chamber,
Seven Gentlemen Ushers, Quarter Waiters.

Six Pages, attending at the Back-Stairs, Four Pages of the Presence.

Officers of the Robes.
A Surveyor, Proveditor, Clerk, Yeoman, Groom, Page, Tailor, and Brusher.

Twelve Grooms of the Great Chamber, One Porter of the Back Stairs.

A Master of the Queens Barge, and Twenty Four Watermen.

The Grooms of the Stole, Lady of the Robes, and of the Privy Purse, Seven
Ladies of the Bedchamber, One Keeper of the Sweet Coffers, Six Maids of
Honor, and A Governess, or Mother of the Maids.

Six Chamberers, or Dressers, A Laundress, A Sempstress, A Starcher, A
Necessary Woman.

These are all paid by Her Majesty out of her own Revenue.

There are besides Diverse other Officers Below Stairs belonging to the Queens
Table, and Stable, paid by the King, for which is allowed 20000 l. more.

The Prince of Wales, and other the King's Children, have likewise their
Courts, or Households apart; But these being not certain, no certain Allowance
or Settlement is of them, but are rather at pleasure: And therefore I shall not
particularize them, but refer to Chamberlain's Present State of England.

The Government of Cities.
ALthough every City is within some of the Counties herein before mentioned;
yet each of them are like a little Commonwealth, Governed by Laws, and Customs
Ecclesiastical Civil, and Military, within themselves; And this by Charter, or
Privileges granted and cofirmed to them by several Kings of this Realm. And
there is for

The Ecclesiastical Government of Cities.
A Bishop, every City being or having been a Bishops See, and has a Cathedral
to which belong a Dean, A Chapter, A Treasurer, and Prebendaries, who have
Lands and Revenues belonging to them for their Maintenance; and though the
Bishopric be dissolved, the City remains, as Westminster and Cambridge, which
was anciently reputed a City. And for

The Ecclesiastical Government of Parishes there is a Rector, or Vicar for
every Parish, who is to have the Cure of the Souls of his Parishioners, every
one of which, has a Parsonage, or Vicaridge-House, and a Competent allowance
of Tithes for their Maintenance. And there is for

The Civil Government of Cities,
A Mayor, who is the King's Lieuetenant, chosen by the Citizens, and approved
by the King, and is for one year as a Judge, to determine all Matters within
his Jurisdiction, and to Mitigate the Rigor of the Law: And next in Government
of Cities are the

Two Sheriffs, who are Judges in Civil Causes within the City, and to see all
Execution done whether Penal or Capital, To Execute the Kings Mandates within
the City, etc. And might rather be called State Reeves, or Port-Reeves, (i. e.)
Urbis vel Portus Praefecti.

The Mayor, Sheriffs, and Aldermen of every City, may make Laws called

Bylaws, for the Government of the City, provided they are not Repugnant to
the Laws of the Kingdom.

And these have several Courts which have Jurisdiction in all Civil, and
Criminal Causes, only with Restraint that all Civil Causes may be removed from
their Courts to the Higher Courts at Westminster: But of all these we shall
speak more at large, when we come to treat of the City of London, and other
Cities in particular, which may serve for an Example, or Pattern of all the
rest. And therefore we shall begin with

The City of London.
LOndon, so called as some conjecture from the British word Longdin, signifying
in the Saxon Tongue Shipton, or Town of Ships: But others derive it otherwise,
And therefore not to insist thereon, Nam utere tuo Judicio, nihil impedio; It
was Built as some Write 1108 years before the Incarnation of our Savior; In
the time of Samuel the Prophet, Is in length about 7 Miles and half, and about
2 Miles and half in breadth: Has above 500 Streets, and Alleys, and 15000
Houses within the Walls, which may not be accounted above a Sixth part of the
whole City.

The Cathedral Church of St. Paul, was Built, or begun by Ethelbert King of
Kent, about Anno Christi 610, and is the only Cathedral of that Name in Europe:
Besides this, there are 130 Parish Churches, besides Chapels, which is double
the number to be found in any other City in Christendom.

The Ecclesiastical Government
OF London is, as before mentioned of Cities in General, By a Bishop, and was
in the time of the Britains by an Archbishop, but by the Saxons, the
Archiepiscopal See was removed to Canterbury, for the sake of St. Austin, who
first Preached the Gospel there to the Heathen Saxons, and was there buried,
since which, there have been 100 Bishops to the present Bishop there.

To this Cathedral belongs a Dean, a Chapter, and 30 Prebendaries, maintained
in like manner before mentioned in the General Government of Cities.

The Ecclesiastical Government of Parishes is as before mentioned, by a Parson,
Rector or Vicar, To have cure of Souls in every Parish, who have a Parsonage,
or Vicaridge-House, and a competent Allowance in Tithes, which was anciently
besides the Tithes of Tradesmen's gains, and mortuaries, etc. 3 s. 5 d. in the
pound Rent, which they paid by a Half every Sunday and Holiday; Afterward by
25 Hen. 8. It was ordained, and afterward confirmed by 27 Hen. 8. and 37 Hen.
8. That 2 s. 9 d. in the pound should be paid for the Rent of all Houses,
Shops, etc. to the Parson, with power to the Lord Major, to Imprison any Person
should refuse to pay the same.

The Civil Government
OF London is by a chief Magistrate anciently called The Prefect of London, In
the Saxons time Portegreeve, by the Norman's Bailiff or Bailiffs, till King
Rich. the First, Anno 1189, changed the name of Bailiff to Mayor, which is now

The Lord Mayor, and is a Citizen, yearly chosen by the Citizens, and approved
by the King, unless sometimes for Disloyalty, their Privileges, and Franchises
are taken from them; and a Guardian set over them, as was done by Hen. the
Third, and Ed. the First.

He is usually Knighted by the King before the end of his Mayoralty, if he had
not that Honor before; His and the Sheriffs Tables are open to all comers, and
for his Grandeur is allowed^ 1000 l. for his Sword-bearers Table; His Domestic
attendance is very. Honorable, and has Four Officers reputed Esquires by
their places, ( viz.) The Sword Bearer, Common Hunt, who keeps a Kennel of
Hounds, Common Crier and the Water Bailiff; There is also the Coroner, Three
Sergeant Carvers, Three Sergeants of the Chamber; A Sergeant of the Channel;
Four Yeomen of the Waterside; One under Water Bailiff; Two Yeomen of the
Chamber; Three Meat weighers; Two Yeomen of the Wood-wharfs, most of which have
their Servants allowed them, and have Liveries for themselves.

Upon the Death, or Demise of the King, he is said to be the Prime Person of
England; On the day of the Kings Coronation, he claims to be chief Butler, and
to bear the Kings Cup amongst the Highest Nobles of the Kingdom.

His Authority reaches not only over all the City but part of the Suburbs, and
on the River of Thames Eastward, as far as Yendale or Yenleete, and Westward as
far as Colney Ditch above Stanes Bridge, and keeps several Courts in the
Counties adjacent to the Thames for Conservation of the River, and Punishment
of Offenders therein, And there are

Two Sheriffs of London, who are also Sheriffs of the County of Middlesex, and
are Annually chosen by the Citizens from among themselves in the Guild Hall
upon Midsumer day, approved by the King, and then upon Michaelmas Eve Sworn,
and presented to the Barons of the Exchequer, to be allowed by the Barons and
Sworn; If the Persons so chosen refuse to hold they incur a Penalty, unless
they will make Solemn Oath they are not worth 10000 l.

Twenty six Aldermen, Preside over the 26 Wards of the City; When any of these
die, The Lord Mayor, and Aldermen choose another out of the most substantial Men
of the City, and if any so chosen refuse to hold, he is commonly fined 500 l.

All the Aldermen who have been Lord Mayor, and the Three eldest, who have not
yet arrived to that Honor, are by their Charter Justices of Peace; And this
City of London is Camera Regis Reipublicae, Cor and totius Angliae Epitome.

To the Lord Mayor, and the City of London, belong diverse Courts of Judicature,
amongst which the chief is,

The Court of Hustings.
DOmus Causarum, Hus, being in the Saxon Tongue House, and Dhing Things; It is
the Highest Court of London, And is holden before the Lord Mayor and Sheriff,
or now in the Sheriffs absence, Six Aldermen, which sit in Court there every
Tuesday, although that it may not seem to Vary from the Command of St. Edward the
Confessor, that it should be holden every Monday, it is still written to be
holden on the Monday; And has Cognizance of all Pleas Real, mixed, and
Personal; For the Rule in the Register is, Quodlibet breve quod tangit Liberum
Tenementum in London dirigitur Majori sive Custodi and Vicecomitibus, Et ^lia
Brevia tantum Vicecomitibus.

By Fleta lib. 28 and 48. It appears, that the name or Court is not
appropriated to London only, for the King has his Court in Civitatibus Burgis
and Locis Exemptis sicut in Hustingis London, Winton, Lincoln, Eborum, and apud
Shepway ubi Barons and Cives Recordum habent, etc.

One Week the Judges sit upon Pleas Real, The next upon Actions mixed, or of any
other nature, So that all Lands, Tenements, Rents, and Services within London,
and the Liberties and Suburbs thereof, are Pleadable at Guild Hall in two
Hustings, one called Husting de placito Terrae and the other Husting Commun'
Placitorum.

And if a Man be impleaded in the Common Pleas of Lands in London; The Tenant
shall say the Lands are in London, and time out of mind, etc. every one has
been impleaded for them, within the City in the Hustings.

But since Real Actions have grown out of use by trying Titles by Ejection^
firmae, The ancient Customs and Practice of this Court are much declined.

The Sheriffs Court in London.
THe Two Sheriffs keep each of them a Court of Record within the City, by
Prescription, or Custom where they hold Plea of all personal Actions, and have
belonging to these Courts Two Prisons, called Compters, the one in Wood-street;
The other in the Poultry.

They hold Two Court-days each in every Week, That for Wood-street on
Wednesdays and Fridays, And that for the Poultry Compter on Thursdays and
Saturdays.

In Plaint of Debt, the Custom is, the Sheriffs Ore Tenus send to the Sergeants
to Summon, or Attach the Defendant without Warrant, and upon Nihil Returned
within the City, the Sergeants by Commandment from the Sheriff have used to
Attach; and Arrest the Defendant, to have his Body at the next Court, before
the Sheriff at the Guild Hall.

They certify their Records in that manner, but the usual practice is to enter
an Action in the Office for that purpose at one of the Compters, which Action
must be carefully entered, for it is the Original of that Court, by which you
declare, and from which there can be no variance: And when an Action is entered,
the Sergeant may Arrest the Defendant and bring him into Custody, until he find
Bail to answer the Condemnation, which Bail is taken by one of the Clerk
Sitters at the Compter who constantly attend.

The Plaintiff ought to declare the first Court after the Defendant is
Arrested; although further time is usually given, Ex gratia Curiae per mot';
But if the Plaintiff have no Attorney the first Court, a Nonsuit may be had by
the Defendant.

If the Defendant be a Freeman he has four defaults; But they are allowable
only in Debt, Account, or Covenant broken, and not otherwise.

If the Defendant be in the Compter he is brought to the Bar by a Duci facias,
which is but the Sheriffs Mandate, made by the Clerk of the Papers.

They have in each Court a Steward or Judge who is Learned in the Laws, and
besides their particular Customs, their Proceedings are generally according to
the Common Law at Westminster; But of their particular practice, Vide Complete
Solicitor and others.

There is also in London a Court of Chancery or Equity held before the Lord
Mayor, which is commonly called

The Court of Conscience.
WHerein they do proceed by English Bill, Answer, Replication, and Rejoinder,
much like the Proceedings in the High Court of Chancery.

And the Custom of London is, when a Man is Impleaded before the Sheriff, The
Mayor may send for the Parties, and for the Record upon Suggestion of the
Defendant, and Examine the Parties upon the Pleas, and if it be found upon
Examination that the Plaintiff is satisfied, The Mayor may award the Plaintiff
shall be Barred; But by no Custom he can Examine after Judgment, 10 Hen. 6.14,
15.

Also there is a practice called Marking of a Cause before the Lord Mayor,
which is after a Verdict given for the Plaintiff in the Sheriffs Court, the
Defendant may get the Cause marked by one of the Clerks in the Lord Mayor's
Court, to stay Judgment and Execution until the matter be Examined in Equity,
where the Lord Mayor does oftentimes mitigate the Damages or give the Defendant
time to pay it, etc. This Court is held Mondays, Tuesdays, and every day, if
the Lord Mayor please to sit.

The Court of the Mayor and Aldermen.
THis is a Court of Record consisting of the Lord Mayor, Recorder, and Twenty
three Aldermen, whereof the Two Sheriffs are part; And their Proceedings is by
Arrest of the Body, or Attachment of the Defendants Goods, and in that case
much like the other Courts of Common Law.

By the Statute of 43 Eliz. cap. 12. They have power to correct Errors used for
default of good Governance, etc. in the City.

The Court of Orphans.
THe Mayor, and Aldermen by Custom have the Custody of Orphans within the City;
And if they commit the custody to another Man, he should have a Ravishment of
Ward, if the Orphan be taken away, And they shall have custody of the Lands and
Goods of such Orphans.

A Recognizance may be acknowledged, in this Court before the Mayor and
Aldermen to the Chamberlain for Orphans, and he being a sole Corporation, the
Recognizance and Bond made to him and his Successors concerning Orphans shall
by Custom go to his Successors.

Executors, or Administrator are to Exhibit true Inventories before the Lord
Mayor and Aldermen, and give Security by Rocognizance, or the Court may commit
them to Prison till they do it.

If the Father advance any of his Children by part of his Goods, that shall bar
him to demand any further, unless the Father under his Hand, or by Will
declare, it was but in part of Advancement, and then that Child putting his
part in Hotchpot with the Executors, and Widow may have a Third part of the
whole, and this the Civil Law calls Collatio Bonorum; How the Goods of a
Freeman shall be divided, See Coke's 1 Inst. Sect. 207.

The Court of Common Council.
THis is held by the Lord Mayor, Aldermen, and Commonalty, Resembling the High
Court of Parliament; The Commonalty being chosen out of every Ward, constitute
the Lower House, and Represent all the Commonalty of the City.

Here they make Acts for the better Government of the City; For the Execution
of the Laws and Statutes of this Realm, Pro Bono publico, and for the better
advancement of Trade and Traffic; Provided such Constitutions be not contrary
to the Laws of the Realm: And these being made by Mayor, Aldermen and
Commonalty, do bind within the City, And they of the Common Assembly do give
their Assent by holding up their Hands.

The Court of Wardmote Inquest.
THis Resembles the Country Leets, Every Ward being as a Hundred, and the
Parishes as Towns; And in in every Ward there is an Inquest of Twelve, or more
Sworn every year to Inquire of and present Nusances, and other Offenses within
the Ward.

The Court of Hallmote.
THis is as much as to say, The Court of the Hall, being the Court which every
Company in London keeps in their Halls, which was anciently called, The
Hallmote, or Folk Mote.

The Chamberlain 's Court for Apprentices.
BEfore the Chamberlain all Indentures of Apprentices are, or ought to be
Enrolled, and if they be not Enrolled, and if they be not Enrolled the
Apprentice may refuse to Serve, and Sue out his Indenture in this Court at his
Pleasure, and be discharged of his Master.

The Chamberlain is Judge in all Complaints, either of the Servant against the
Master, or Master against the Servant, and punishes the Offenders at his
Discretion.

In this Court are all Apprentices made Free; And that may be Three manner of
ways; By Service as are Apprentices; By Birthright as being the Son of a
Freeman, which is called Freedom by his Fathers Copy, or by Redemption by Order
of the Court of Aldermen.

The Court of the Conservator of the Water, and River of Thames.
THe Lord Major of London for the time being, is the Conservator or Governor of
the River of Thames, and the Issues, Breaches and Lands overflown from Stanes
Bridge, to the Waters of Yendal or Medway; And has Authority for punishment of
such as use unlawful Netts, or Engines in Fishing, or take Fish under Size, or
unseasonably, etc. 4 Hen. 7. cap. 15.

And in all Commissions touching the Water of Lee, the Lord Mayor shall be one,
3 Jac. cap. 14.

The Court of the Coroner in London.
THe Mayor is Coroner within the City, And this Court is holden before him or
his Deputy, See Coroner before in the Counties.

The Court of Escheator in London.
THe Lord Mayor is also Escheator within the City; And this Court is holden
before him or his Deputy, Vide Escheator before in Counties.

The Court of Policies and Assurances.
THis Court Sits by Force of the Commission under the Great Seal, Warranted
by Act of Parliament, Ann. 43 Eliz. cap. 12. there being an Officer, or Clerk
to Register Assurances.

The Jurisdiction of which Court you may read in that Act of Parliament being
for Encouragement of Trade: The Judge of the Admiralty, Recorder, Two Doctors
of Civil Law, Two Common Lawyers, Eight Merchants, or any five of them to
determine all differences concerning Assurances, as they shall think fit
without Formalities of Pleadings; And to Commit to Prison without Bail all such
as disobey their Decrees; And to that end they are to meet once a Week at the
Assurance Office, and not to take any Fee. If any be grieved by their Decree,
he may Exhibit his Bill in Chancery for Re-examination of that Decree.

The Lord Mayor is Chief Judge at the Court, or Sessions of Gaol Delivery, held
Eight times in the year, or oftener, at the Sessions House in the Old Baily, for
the City of London and County of Middlesex, for the Trial of Criminals, and
has power to Reprieve Condemned persons.

The Tradesmen in London are divided into Corporations or Companies, and are so
many Bodies Politic; of these, Twelve are called Chief Companies, and he that
is chosen Lord Mayor, if he be not before, must be made Free of one of these
Companies, viz. Mercers, Grocers, Drapers, Fishmongers, Goldsmiths, Skinners,
Merchant Tailors, Haberdashers, Salters, Ironmongers, Vintners, Cloth-Workers:
All which Companies have Assembling places called Halls, and each of them has
a Master chosen Annually from amongst themselves, and Subordinate Governors
called Wardens or Assistants; And these in their Companies exactly correspond
to the General Government of the City. Several of our Kings have (to honor
some of these Companies) taken their Freedom of it, as VII several Kings had
been of the Tailors Company, whereof the last of these Seven being King Henry
the 7th, gave them the Name and Title of Merchant Tailors; And the late King
Charles the Second was made Free of the Grocers.

There are near LX other Companies, or Corporations, All enjoying large
Privileges by the Charters of several Kings, and have Fair Halls to meet in.

The Military Government in London.
HIs Late Majesty King Charles the Second, after his Restoration, sent a
Commission of Lieutenancy appointing several Persons His Lieutenants, giving
them the same Power in London, the Lord Lieutenants have in their respective
Counties. And in pursuance of that Commission, the Regiments then in being were
New settled in this manner, viz. Six Regiments of Trained Bands Commanded by six
Citizens Knights, and their Lieutenant Colonels all Knights, and six Regiments
of Auxiliaries; In these Twelve Regiments were 20000 Men: Then there were
Listed Two Regiments of Horse, each consisting of five Troops, in all 800
Horse: But in case of need, in London, and within the Liberties may in a Few
days be Raised 40000 Men.

There is in Southwark One Regiment of Trained Bands, Fifteen Hundred Men. In
the Hamlets of the Tower Two Regiments, in all Three thousand Men: Then
Holbourn Regiment, and Westminster Regiment Two thousand each; and in case of
Necessity they can Raise 20000 more.

The Artillery Company, is as a Nursery of Soldiers, and has been so for
above 60 years; the late King Charles (when Prince of Wales) Listed himself
therein, and the Duke of York did the like at the same time, who after the
Restoration took upon himself the Command thereof; and under him was a Leader
who Exercised them every Tuesday Fortnight, and the other Tuesday the Exercise
was performed by the several Members of the Company, who are there Trained up
to Command.

Of this Society are many of the Nobility, also the Lord Mayor, and most of the
Aldermen: All the Commanders of the Trained Bands and Auxiliaries here Exercise
Arms. This Company consists of 600 Men.

Their Officers are A Leader, Two Lieutenants, Two Ensigns, Two Sergeants, A
Provost Martial; Four Gentlemen of Arms, etc. They have also a Court Martial,
consisting of A President, A Vice President, a Treasurer, and Twenty four
Members of the Company. On the Second Tuesday in February, at a General
Rendezvous every Year the Officers are Elected.

For the Security and Defense of this Famous City, and River, there has been
anciently diverse Fortresses: But the most Eminent and Chief is that called.

The Tower of London.
WHich is not only a Fort or Citadel to command, and defend, both City, and
River; but also A Royal Palace, where our Kings with their Courts have
sometimes Lodged, A Royal Arsenal, where are Arms, and Ammunition for 60000
Men, The Treasury for the Jewels and Ornaments of the Crown, The only Mint for
coining Gold and Silver, The Great Archive where are conserved All the Records
of the Courts at Westminster, The Chief Prison for the safe Custody of Great
Persons that are Criminals; and if the great Extent thereof within the Walls be
considered, and its Authority over the several Hamlets without, and the many
high Privileges and Liberties belonging thereunto, it may rather be Reputed a
City, than a Citadel.

The Governor of this Important Fortress is the Constable, or Lieutenant of
the Tower; Who is High Steward of a Court there held by Prescription, of Debt,
Trespass, and other Actions of any Sum Greater or Lesser, and has a Deputy;
Before the late Act might refuse a Habeas Corpus, may give Protection to all
Debtors belonging to the Tower within the Realm of England; has Privilege to
take Unam Lagenam of all Wine-Ships that come; Is Virtute Officij, to be in
Commission of the Peace for the Counties of Kent, Surrey, and Middlesex, and
(as some hold) to be Custos Rotulorum of the County of Middlesex: His Salary is
200 l. per Annum.

His usual Fee for every Prisoner is 20 l. at Entrance, and 3 l. a Week for an
Esquire; For a Knight 5 l. a Week; For a Baron, or above, 50 l. at Entrance, to
whom the King allows 10 l. Weekly, whereof Two part goes to the Prisoner, the
other Third part to the Lieutenant for Lodgings and Diet, and 50 l. to the
Lieutenant upon the Prisoners discharge.

The Gentleman Porter of the Tower holds his Place by Patent, and at the
Entrance of a Prisoner has for his Fee Vestimenta Superiora, or a Composition
for it.

The Gentleman Jailer is put in by the Lieutenant of the Tower, his Fee is 41
s. of a Gentleman, 5 l. of a Knight.

Forty Warders of the Tower accounted the King's Domestic Servants, and Sworn
by the Lord Chamberlain of His Majesty's Household, or by the Clerk of the
Cheque.

The Tower is not within any County or Parish (only a small part some account
to be in Middlesex) but is a Liberty of it self, exempt from all Taxes to the
King, Church, or Poor. It has

A Parochial Church, exempt from all Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction of the
Archbishop, and is a Donative bestowed by the King without Institution or
Induction. And there are

Thirteen Hamlets of large Extent belonging to the Tower, whose Train-Bands are
all bound to Assist the Constable or Lieutenant of the Tower, which are called
The King's Company, and are to Wait on the King's Person in time of Need, and
to go no further than the King. And within the Tower is kept

The Office of the Ordnance.
BEing the grand and standing Magazine of the principal Preparatives,
Habiliaments, Utensils, and Instruments of War, as well by Sea as Land, for the
Defense, and Safety of the Kingdom, and consequently has Influence in the
Navies, Forts, Castles, and Armies thereof; having the Superintendence,
Ordering, and Disposing as well of the Grand Magazine lodged in the Tower, as
at the Minories, Woolwich, Chatham, Windsor, Portsmouth, Plymouth, Hull, and
elsewhere: And is under the Government of

The Master of the Ordnance, under whom, The Administration and Management of
the said Office is committed to the Principal Officers following, viz.

The Lieutenant of the Ordnance, who in the absence of the Master of the
Ordnance, is to Impart all Orders and Warrants directed to the Office, and to
see them duly Executed, and to give Order for Discharging the Great Ordnance
when required, upon Coronation Days, Days Festival, Triumphs, etc. As also to
see the Train of Artillery fitted with all its Equipage, for Motion upon any
occasion.

The Surveyor is to Survey all the Ordnance, Stores, and Provisions of War in
the custody of the Store-keeper, which he is to see so distinguished, and
placed as shall be best for their Preservation and Safety, for a decent View
and a ready Account; to allow all Bills of Debt, and to keep Check upon all
Laborers and Artificers Works, and to see that all Provisions received be
good, and serviceable, and duly proved with the Assistance of the rest of the
Officers, and the Proof Masters, and marked with the King's Mark, if they ought
so to be.

The Clerk of the Ordnance is to Record all Orders, and Instructions given for
the Government of the Office, as likewise all Patents and Grants, and the Names
of all Officers, Clerks, Artificers, Attendants, Gunners, Laborers and others
who enjoy the said Grants, or any other Fees from the King for the same; To
draw all Estimates for Provisions, and Supplies to be made, and all Letters,
Instructions, Commissions, Deputations, and Contracts for His Majesty's
Service; To make all Bills of Impressed; and Debentures for the payment and
satisfaction of the respective Artificers and Creditors of the Office for Work
done, or Provisions received; and Quarter-Books for the Salaries, Allowances,
and Wages, of all Officers, Clerks, and other Ministers belonging to the said
Office; and also to keep Journals, and Liegers of the Receipts, and Returns of
His Majesty's Stores, that nothing be Bought, Borrowed, Given, Received, Lent
or Employed without due Record thereof, to serve as a Cheque between the Two
Accomptants of the Office, the one for Money, the other for Stores.

The Storekeeper is to take into his Custody all His Majesty's Ordnance,
Munitions, and Stores thereunto belonging, and to Indent and put in Legal
Security for the safe keeping thereof, and to make Just and True Account, from
time to time, to Receive no Provisions whatsoever, that are manifestly
inserviceable, or before they have been Reviewed by the Surveyor; nor to Issue
any proportion of Ordnance, etc. but what is agreed upon, and signed by the
Officers, according to the appointment of the Master of the Ordnance, grounded
upon the Order of the King, or six of the Privy Council, or the Lord Admiral
for Matters concerning the Navy: Nor to Receive back any Stores issued till
they have been Reviewed by the Surveyor, and Registered by the Clerk of the
Ordnance in the Book of Remains; To look that all His Majesty's Storehouses be
well Repaired, and well Accommodated, and the Stores kept in such order, and
luster, as is fit for the Service and Honor of the King.

The Clerk of the Deliveries is to Draw all Proportions for Delivery of any
Stores and Provisions, and to be present at the Delivery, and by Indenture to
Charge the particular Receiver of the King's Munitions, whether Captain,
Gunner, or other, and to Register as well the Copies of all Warrants for
Deliveries, as the Proportions delivered, whereby to discharge the Store-keeper.

The Treasurer, and Paymaster of the Office, was formerly an Appendix to that
of Lieutenant of the Ordnance:

But the late King Charles Erected it into a particular and distinct Office,
and granted the same (as all the other beforementioned are,) by Letters
Patent; And there are other Subordinate Officers, which likewise hold by
Patent, as

The Master Gunner of England, who is to teach all such as desire to Learn the
Art of Gunnery, and to oblige every Scholar by Oath not to serve any Foreign
Prince or State (without leave,) nor to Teach any other the said Art, but such
as have taken the said Oath; and to certify the Master of the Ordnance the
Sufficiency of any person Recommended to be one of the King's Gunners, and his
Ability to discharge the said Duty.

The Keeper of the Small Guns, who has the charge and custody of the King's
Small Guns, as Muskets, Harquebusses, Carabines, Pistols, etc. with their
Furniture.

There are many other Inferior Officers, and Ministers Attendants and
Artificers, as Clerks, Proof-Masters, Messengers, Master Smith, Master
Carpenter, Master Wheelwright, Master Gunnsmith, Furbusher, etc. which for
Brevity are here omitted, as likewise the King's principal Engineer:

The Master of the Ordnance has a Superintendency, and Jurisdiction over all
the King's Engineers, Employed in the several Fortifications of the Kingdom,
most of whom have their Salaries, and Allowances payable in the said Office, to
which they are accountable, and from whence they receiev their particular
Orders and Instructions, according to the Directions and Commands given by the
King, and signified by The Master of the Ordnance.

Nota, The several sorts of Cannon seem to be denominated from the Rapacious
kind of Creatures whose Names they bear; as Faulcons, Faulconets, Sakers,
Culverins, from the Latin Coluber, Basilisks, Griffons, Dragons, etc.

The Office of the Warden of the Mint.
WHere is minted all the Bullion that is Minted in England, although the King
may set up a Mint in any other Place of the Kingdom. In this are diverse Persons
of Quality and Worth, whereof the principal is

The Warden of the Mint, who is to Receive the Silver, and Gold brought in by
Merchants or Goldsmiths, or others; to pay them for it, and to Oversee all the
rest; his Fee is 100 l. per Annum. And next is

The Master Worker, who Receives the Bullion from the Warden, causes it to be
Melted, delivers it to the Moneyers, and receives it from them again when
Minted, and has an Allowance by the Pound weight, but no set Fee. And next is

The Comptroller, who sees all the Money be made according to the Just Assize,
to oversee the Officers and Comptrol them, if the Money be not as it ought to
be; his Fee is 100 Marks, and these three last above hold by Patent of the
King. The next is

The Assay-Master, who weighs the Bullion, and sees it be according to the
Standard; his Fee is 200 Marks.

The Auditor to take the Accounts, and make them up.

The Surveyor of the Melting, who is to see the Bullion cast out, and not to be
altered after it is delivered to the Melter, which is after the Assay-Master*
has made Trial thereof.

There are moreover A Clerk of the Irons, A Graver, A Weigher, A Teller,
Melters, Blanchers, Moneyers, and other Officers belonging to the Mint.

The Office of Records in the Tower.
IS of Venerable Antiquity, and the Keeper, and Deputy dignified with Special
Trust. The Keeper has a Salary of 500 l. per Annum, and is properly in the
Gift of the Master of the Rolls, and afterward His Majesty has usually by
Letters Patents Confirmed it.

As the Chapel of the Rolls and Petty-Bag Office fill, the Records are sent
hither by a Writ formed for that purpose; and these Records (amongst other
things) contain the Foundations of Abbeys and Religious Houses; as The Chapel
of the Rolls contain those of their Dissolution, and the Donation of the Lands,
of which many Families are now possessed; The Leagues and Treaties with Foreign
Princes; The Achievements of this Nation in France, and Foreign parts; The
Original of All Laws, that have been Enacted or Recorded until Richard the
Third; The Homage and Dependency of Scotland upon England; The Establishment of
Ireland in Laws and Dominions; The Dominion of the British Seas, totally
excluding French, and Dutch, to Fish therein without License from England,
proved by Records before the Conquest; The Interest of the Isles of Man, and of
Jersey, Guernsey, Sarke, and Alderney, the Four last being the Remaining part
of the Norman Possessions; The Title of our Kings to the Realm of France, and
how obtained; And all that our Kings, and Princes have till that time Done or
Confirmed at home or abroad; Tenures of all the Lands in England, Extents of
Manors, and Lands, Inquisitions Post mortem, being of great Advantage upon
Trials of Interest or Descent, Liberties, and Privileges granted to Cities,
Towns Corporate, or private Men; as Court Leets, Waifs, Estrays, Markets,
Fairs, Free Warrens, Felons Goods, etc. Or what else could come to the Crown or
pass out of it, Writs, Pleadings, and Proceedings as well in Chancery as at
Common Law, and in the Exchequer, Inspeximus, Inrolments, etc. Deeds, and
Contracts, between party and party; and, The Just Establishment of all the
Offices in the Nation; The Metes and Bounds of all Forests, with the Rights of
the Inhabitants therein, and many other; And therefore in the Petitions of the
Commons in Parliament 46 E. 3. said to be perpetual Evidence of every man's
Right, and the Records of the Nation.

These Records are reposited in the place called Wakefield Tower, being many
Cart Loads; Thus distinguished, Rotuli Patentium, Chartarum, Parliamentorum,
Clausarum, Finium, Scotiae, Vasconiae, Franciae, Hiberniae, Walliae,
Normanniae, Almaniae, Oblatae, Liberatae, Extractae, Perambulationes, Forestae,
Scut', Rotul', Marshal', Romae de Treugis Chart', and Patent' fact' in Partibus
Transmarinis Patent' de Domibus Judaeorum Protection' de Perdonation', etc.
Stapulae, cum multis aliis, Depicted lately upon every Press belonging to each
King's Reign, and very easy to be brought forth for use.

This Office is to be open from 7 till 11 in the Morning, and from 1 till 5 in
the Afternoon on all Working-days, only in December, January, and February they
open an Hour later in the Morning, and shut up an Hour earlier at Night.

All Records since Richard the Third, are yet in the Chapel of the Rolls.

The Money allowed by the King for the Maintenance of all these Officers, and
keeping thls Vast Structure in Repair, amounts to a vast Sum.

Saint Katherines.
NEar the Tower is St. Katherines, which has a Royal Jurisdiction for the
Ecclesiastical Causes, and Probate of Wills, and belongs to the Queen; from
whom if any will Appeal it must be to the King in his Chancery, who thereupon
Issues out a Commission under the Great Seal; as in Appeals from the Arches or
Prerogative.

The Bridge
Surpasses all others in Europe; It has 19 Arches, 20 Foot between each Arch,
is 800 Foot in Length, 60 High, and 30 Broad, and has a Drawbridge almost in
the Middle, Built 1209, in the Reign of King John.

The Charge of keeping it in Repair is so Great, that our Ancestors thought
fit to have a Large House, a vast Revenue in Lands, and Houses, and diverse
Officers to be apart for the constant Care and Repair thereof. The Principal
whereof are the

Two Bridgmasters chosen yearly out of the Body of the Liveries, upon
Midsummer-day, after the Sheriffs and Chamberlain.

The Bridge over the River Lee at Stratford was built an Hundred years before,
and being the first Arched Stone Bridge seen in England, gave it the Name of
Stratford-Bow.

Not far below this Famous Bridge, is the place for Receipt and Management of
all Impositions laid on Merchandises Imported, and Exported into and from this
City, which is called

The Custom-House.
WHerein are Employed a great Number of Officers; whereof the First and Chief
are

Six Commissioners, who have Charge of all His Majesty's Customs in all Ports
of England, Salary to each is 2000 l. a year. And these have many

Deputies Customers, Collectors, Comptrollers, Surveyors, Searchers, Waiters,
etc. in the Port of London, and in all the Out-Ports.

Collector of Subsidies, or Customs Outward, Fee Two hundred seventy six
pounds; Collector of Customs Inwards, Fee Four hundred sixty six pounds
Thirteen shillings Four pence; Customer Inwards, Fee Sixty two pounds Six
shillings Eight pence; Customers of Cloth, and Petty Customs, Fee Two hundred
seventy seven pounds; Customers of the Great Customs Two, Fee Fifty pounds a
piece; Comptroller of Customs Inwards, and Outward, Fee Two hundred fifty five
pounds; Comptroller of Cloth, and Petty Customs, Fee One hundred pounds;
Surveyors of Customs Inwards, and Outward, Fee Three hundred pounds; Surveyor
General, Fee Five hundred pounds; Comptroller of the Great Custom, Fee Thirty
pounds; Register of the Seizures, Fee One hundred and six pounds; Chief
Searcher, Fee One hundred Twenty pounds; Five Under-Searchers, Eighteen King's
Waiters, Fee to each Fifty two pounds; Surveyor of the Out-Ports, Fee Two
hundred and Fifty pounds. The Perquisites to each of these Officers are very
considerable, and to some more than their Salaries.

In all the Out-Ports the King has the like Officers, who all Receive Salaries
likewise out of His Majesty's Revenue.

The General Post Office.
THe King by Letters Patent does Constitute his Postmaster General, who keeps
one General Office in the City of London, from whence Letters, and Packets are
dispatched.

Monday to France, Italy, Spain, Flanders, Germany, Sweden, Denmark, etc. and
to Kent.

Tuesday to the United Netherlands, Germany, etc. and to all Parts of England,
Scotland and Ireland.

Wednesday to Kent only, and the Downs.

Thursday to France, Spain, Italy, and all Parts of England and Scotland.

Friday to the Spanish and united Netherlands, Germany, Sweden, Denmark and to
Kent.

Saturday to all Parts of England, Scotland and Ireland.

And the Answers of these Letters are Received in the said Office in due
Course, and dispersed from thence according to the Directions.

This Office is managed by a Deputy, and other Officers to the number of
Seventy seven Persons, who give their actual Attendance.

Upon this Grand Office Depends 182 Deputy Post-Masters in England, and
Scotland, Most of which keep Regular Offices in their Stages, and
Sub-Post-Masters ink their Branches; And also in Ireland another General
Post Office for that Kingdom, which is kept in Dublin, consisting of 18 like
Officers, and 45 Deputy Post-masters.

The Postmaster General keeps for Transport of Letters to France Two
Packet-boats, to Flanders Two, to Holland Two, to Ireland Three, at Deal, Two
for the Downs, which he Maintains at his proper Charge.

And the Market Towns of England are so well Appropriated to the Respective
Postages, that they have an easy, and certain conveyance of Letters in due
Course of the Mails every Post.

The number of the Letters Missive in England, though formerly inconsiderable,
yet are now so great that the Office has been Farmed at 30000 l. a year.

The Charge of Letters here is Less, and the Expedition Greater, than in any
Foreign Country.

A Letter of a Sheet of Paper costs 2 d. for 80 Miles, Two Sheets 4 d. and an
ounce 8 d. and in 24 Hours the Post goes 120 Mile, and in Five days an Answer
may be had from a place 300 Miles distant.

And for Riding Post you pay only 3 d. a Mile, and 4 d. to the Post Boy at
every Stage.

For Study of Law.
IN London, are the Colleges or Houses of the Municipal, or Common Law
Professors, and Students, Which are Fourteen, still called Inns; the old
English name for Houses of Noblemen, Bishops, or Men of Extraordinary Note, The
lowest of which as being heretofore Preparatory to the other, and therefore may
properly be placed first are,

The Inns of Chancery.
WHich are Eight, and may probably be so called, because there dwelt such
Clerks as did chiefly Study the forming of Writs, which regularly appertain to
the Cursitors, which are Officers of Chancery; The first of these called
Thavies Inn, was begun in the Reign of King Edward the Third, and since
Purchased by Lincolns Inn, as was also Furnivals Inn; Then in Holbourn is
Bernards Inn, Then New Inn, St. Clements Inn, Cliffords Inn, anciently the
House of the Lord Clifford, Staple Inn belonging to the Merchants of the
Staple, and Lions Inn, anciently a Common Inn with the Sign of the Lion.

Heretofore many were entered here before they were admitted of the Inns of
Court; But they are now taken up with Attorneys, Sollicitors, and Clerks who
have their Chambers apart, and their Diet at a very easy Rate in a Hall
together, where they are obliged to Appear in Grave Long Robes, and Black knit
round Caps; These belong all to some Inns of Court, who send yearly their
Barristers to Read to them.

The Inns of Court
SO named as some think, for that the Students therein are to serve; The Courts
of Judicature are Four.

The Two Temples Purchased by some Professors of the Common Law above 300 years
ago, and called the Inner and Middle Temple in relation to Essex House; which
was also a part of the House of the Knight's Templers, and called the Utter
Temple, because Seated without Temple Bar.

Lincolns Inn, belonging anciently to the Earls of Lincoln. And

Greys Inn belonging to the Noble Family of the Greys.

These Societies are no Corporations, nor have any Judicial Power over their
Members, but have certain Orders among themselves, which have by consent the
force of Laws; For Lighter Offenses they are only Excommuned or put out of
Commons, and for Greater they lose their Chambers and be expelled the House,
after which they are not to be Received into any of the other three Societies:
And these also at Chapel, Hall, or Courts of Judicature, Wear a Grave Black
Robe, and Cap, and at other times walk with Cloak and Sword.

They have no Revenues being not enabled to Purchase, But defray the Charges of
the House, with what is paid at Admittances and Quitrents for Chambers,
Pensions, and other small Duties.

The whole Company of Gentlemen in each Society, may be divided into Four
parts; Benchers, Utter Barristers, Inner Barristers, and Students.

Benchers are the Seniors, to whom is Committed the Government of the House,
And out of those is yearly chosen a Treasurer, who Receives, Disburseth, and
Accompteth for all Moneys belonging to the House.

Utter Barristers are such, who for Learning and Standing are called by the
Benchers, to Argue in the Society Doubtful Cases, which are called Moots from
the Saxon Mote, or French Mot, a Word, and whilst they Argue, Sit Uttermost on
the Form's or Benches, which they call the Bar.

Out of these are chosen Readers for the Inns of Chancery, belonging to the
respective Inns of Court where in Term time, and Grand Vacations, they argue
Cases in the Presence of Attorneys and Clerks.

Inner Barristers are all the Rest, who for want of Learning or Time are not to
Argue; and yet in a Moote before the Benchers, Two of these Inner Barristers do
for their Exercise, Recite by heart the Pleading of the same Moot case in Law
French, which Pleading is the Declaration at large of the same Moote Case, the
one taking the part of the Plaintiff, the other of the Defendant.

They divide the year into three Parts, That is, the Two Learning Vacations,
which begin the first Monday in Lent, and the first Monday after Lommas-day,
and continue Three weeks and Three days each; the Term Times, and the Dead or
Mean Vacations.

The Exercises of Study in these Learning Vacations, are the greatest, which
are in manner following:

The Benchers appoint the eldest Utter Barrister to Read amongst them openly in
the Hall, whereof he has notice half a year before; He then the first day
about 8 of the Clock chooses some Statute, whereupon he grounds his whole
Reading for that Vacation, and Declares such Mischiefs, and Inconveniences as
were unprovided for before the same Act, And then recites certain Doubts he
has devised, that may grow upon the Statute, and declares his Judgment
therein; After which, One of the younger Utter Barristers repeateth One
question propounded by the Reader, and by way of Argument endeavors to prove
the Readers Opinion to be against Law, and after him the Senior Utter
Barristers, and Readers one after another according to Seniority do declare
their Opinions in the same; and then the Reader who did put the Case,
endeavors to confute Objections laid against him, and to confirm his own
Opinion; After which the Sergeants, and Judges (if any be present) declare
their Opinions; Then the youngest Utter Barrister again rehearses another
Case, which is prosecuted as the former was: And this Exercise continues daily
about three or four Hours.

Out of those who have Read once in the Summer Vacation, and are Benchers, is
chosen always one to Read in Lent, who observes the like manner of Reading as
before is Expressed.

In the mean Vacation after Dinner Cases are Argued, and after Supper, Mootes
brought and Pleaded by the Inner Barristers, in the Presence of the Utter
Barristers.

Mooting in the Inns of Court.
IN these Learning Vacations after Supper (or Drinking on Fasting Nights) in
the Hall the Reader, with one or two of the Benchers comes in, To whom one of
the Utter Barristers propounds some doubtful Case, which being argued by the
Benchers, and afterward by him that moved the Case; The Benchers sit down on
the Bench at the upper end of the Hall, whence they are called Benchers, And
upon a Form in the Middle of the Hall sit Two Utter Barristers, and on each
side of them sits one Inner Barrister, who in Law French declares to the
Benchers (as Sergeants do at the Bar in the King's Courts to the Judges) some
kind of Action: The one being as it were Retained for the Plaintiff, The other
for the Defendant; Then the two Utter Barristers Argue such Questions as are
disputable within the Case, after which the Benchers do likewise declare their
Opinions, how they take the Law to be in those Questions.

In these Mootings the Junior argues first, as do the Judges in the Exchequer
Chamber, and Sergeants in open Courts of Judicature.

The Inner and Utter Barristers Plead here in Law French, and the Benchers in
English, and at the Readings, The Readers Cases are put in English.

Mootings in Inns of Chancery.
IN the Learning Vacation each Utter Barrister, who is a Reader in the Inns of
Chancery, go with Two Students of the Inn of Court, to the Inn of Chancery,
where he is appointed to Read, and there meet him commonly Two of each Inns of
Court, who sitting as the Benchers do in the Inns of Court at their Mootes,
they hear and Argue his Case.

In the Term time the only Exercise of Learning, is Arguing and debating Cases
after Dinner, and Mooting after Supper, as in the Vacation time.

The Keeping Christmas in the Inns of Court.
IF there be a sufficient number of Students to keep a Solemn Christmas, then
the Students before Christmas hold a Parliament, and certain of them are
appointed to be Officers in Imitation of the Kings Court, as Comptroller of the
Inner Temple, so of the Middle Temple, styled Lieutennant of the Tower, and
Treasurer, etc. These bear Rule during the time of Christmas, and are to
behave themselves with that Port and Gravity, as if they (as perhaps they may
afterward) were so in the Kings House.

At such time they have diverse Divertisments, as Feasting every day, Singing,
Dancing, Dicing, which is allowed to all Comers, and is so Excessive, that the
Butlers Box usually amounts to above 50 l. a Day and Night, With which and a
Small Contribution from each Student, are the great Charges of the Christmas
defrayed.

When their Treasure is great they sometimes create a Prince, giving him such
Title they think fit, And he has all Officers, and a Court Suitable to a Great
Prince, and many of the Prime Nobility and Great Officers of State have been
Entertained by him, with Feasting, Enterludes, etc. As was sometime done with
Great Magnificence by Sir John Lort, by the Title of Prince de la Grange.

From All Saints-day to Candlemass, each House usually has Revells on Holy
days, that is, Music, and Dancing, and for this is usually chosen some young
Student to be Master of the Revels.

The Manner of holding Parliaments in the Inns of Court.
EVery Quarter the Benchers cause one of the Standing Officers of the House, to
Summon a Parliament, which is an Assembly of the Benchers (which are called the
Sage Company) in a place called the Parliament Chamber, Where they treat of
matters for good Ordering of the House. Here are the Readers for Lent and
Summer Vacation Elected; The Treasurer chosen; Auditors appointed, To take the
Accounts of the old Treasurer; Offenses committed by any of the Society
Punished, etc.

In the Four Inns of Court are about 800 Students.

The Sergeants Inns.
THe Common Law Student, when he has been admitted of some Inn of Court, where
he is first called a Moote Man, and after about Seven years Study an Utter
Barrister, and after Twelve years more, and having performed his Exercises is
chosen a Bencher, and sometime after a Reader; He then wears a long Robe
different from other Barristers, and is in Capacity to be made Sergeant, when
the King please to call him, and when he is arrived to that Degree, he has his
Diet and Lodging in one of those Two Inns called Sergeants Inn, And these are
called Servientes ad Legem Sergeants at Law, and are as Doctors in the Civil
Law, Only Doctoris appellatio est Magisterij, Servientis vero Ministerij; And
therefore Doctors of Law are allowed to Sit within the Bar, in Chairs covered,
whilst Sergeants stand without the Bar bare Headed, Only their Coifs or Caps
on: And,

The Call or Creation of Sergeants.
IS, when the number of Sergeants is Small, The Lord Chief Justice of the
Common Pleas, by the Advice and Consent of the other Judges, makes choice of 6
or 8 more, or less, of the most grave, and learned of the Inns of Court, and
presents their Names to the Lord Chancellor, or Keeper, who sends by the Kings
Writ to each of them, to appear on such a day before the King to Receive the
State and Degree of a Sergeant at Law; at the Time appointed; They being
habited in Robes of Two Colors, viz. Brown and Blew, come accompanied with the
Students of the Inns of Court, and attended by a Train of Servants and
Retainers in certain Peculiar Cloth Liveries to Westminster Hall, there in
Public take a Solemn Oath, and are Clothed with certain Robes and Coifs,
without which they may no more be seen in public, and making their Count at
the Common Pleas Bar, and causing Rings to be distributed amongst the Officers,
and Clerks of the Court, they afterward Feast the great Officers and Persons
of the Kingdom in a Magnificent manner, and give Gold Rings to the Princes of
the Blood, Archbishops, Chancellor, and Treasurer of Forty shillings value, to
Earls and Bishops, Rings of Twenty Shillings value, to other Officers, Barons,
Prelates, etc. Rings of less value. And, out of these are chosen

The Judges
WHen any Judges are wanting, The King by Advice of his Counsel makes choice of
some of these Sergeants to supply his or their Places, and Constitutes him, if
Chief Justice of the King's Bench by Writ; But if others, then he or they are
Constituted by Letters Patents Sealed by the Chancellor, who Sitting in the
Middle of the rest of the Judges, in open Court by a Set Speech Declares to the
Sergeant, or Sergeants there brought in, the King's Pleasure, and to the People
the Kings Goodness in providing the Bench with such Able, Honest Men, and
causes the Letters Patent to be Read, and being departed, The Chief Justice
places him on the Bench Junior to all the rest, and having taken his Oath,
well and truly to serve the King and his People in the Office of Justice, To
take no Reward, To do equal and Speedy Justice to all, etc. he Sits to the
Execution of his Office; And now being a Judge has thereby great Honor and a
Considerable Salary, besides Perquisites, for each one has at least 1000 l. a
year from the King, and now besides his Sergeants Habit he has a Cloak put
over him, and closed on his right Shoulder, and instead of his Caputium lined
with Lamskins, it is now lined with Minever, or De Minuto vario, only the Two
Lord Chief Justices, and the Lord Chief Baron of the Exchequer, have their
Hoods, Sleeves and Collars, turned up with Trim.

To these Two Sergeants Inns belong the Twelve Judges and about Twenty six
Sergeants.

The College of Civilians in London,
CAlled Doctors Commons, being Purchased by Dr. Henry Harvy long since Dean of
the Arches, for the Professors of the Civil Law in this City, where Commonly
the Judge of the Arches, The Judge of the Admiralty, And the Judge of the
Prerogative, and diverse other Eminent Civilians Presiding, and having their
Diet and Lodging there in a Collegiate Manner: It was usually known by the name
of Doctors Commons, which being consumed in the late Dreadful Fire, and now
Rebuilt at the Charge of the said Doctors, they now keep their Courts and
Pleadings there every Term, which begins and ends almost at the same time with
that at Westminster. Those that are allowed to be*

Advocates, and plead in these Courts are all to be Doctors of the Civil Law,
in one of the Universities of England, who upon their Petition to the
Archbishop of Canterbury, and his Fiat obtained are admitted by the Judge of
the Court, on condition, not to Practice one whole year after his

Admittance, which is in this manner;

Two Senior Advocates in their Scarlet Robes, with the Mace before them,
conduct him up to the Court, with Three low Reverences, and Present him with a
short Latin Speech, and the Rescript of the Archbishop; Then the Oaths of
Allegiance, and Supremacy, and some other prescribed by The Statute of the
Arches being taken, he is Admitted by the Judge, and a Place or Seat in the
Court assigned him, either a Dextris, or Sinistris, which he is always to keep
when he pleads.

The Judges, and all the Advocates in these Courts, when they plead, always
wear their Scarlet Robes, with Hoods lined with Taffata if they be of Oxford,
or White Miniver Furr if they be of Cambridge, and all Black Round Velvet Caps;
and the Proctors wear, or ought to wear Hoods lined with Lambskin, if not
Graduats; But if Graduats, Hoods, according to the Degree.

There are diverse other Civilians, whereof some not Advocates, are Chancellors
to Bishops or Commissaries: The Vicars Generals, and Chancellors are appointed
by the respective Archbishops, and Bishops by Letters Patent under their Seals,
and Confirmed by the Dean, and Chapter of the respective Cathedrals.

The Proctors are persons that Exhibit their Proxies for their Clyents, and
make themselves parties for them, and draw and give in Pleas, or Libels and
Allegations in the behalf of their Clyents, produce Witnesses, prepare Causes
for Sentence, and attend the Advocates with their Proceedings. And their

Admittance is also by the Fiat of the Archbishop, Introduced by the Two Senior
Proctors, and are allowed to Practice immediately after their Admission; They
wear Long Black Robes and Hoods lined with White Furr, Taking the Oaths now
Enjoined by Act of Parliament.

All Process in the Court of Arches, runs in the Name of the Judge thus:
Robertus Wiseman Miles LL. Dr. Almae Curiae Cant' de Arcubus London',
Officialis Principalis; and Returnable in the Comman-Hall at Doctors Commons.

The Title of the Judge of the Admiralty is, Supremae Curiae Admiralitatis
Angliae Locum tenens Judex sive Praesidens: The Writs and Decrees run in the
Name of The Lord High Admiral; and the Court held also in the Common Hall at
Doctors Commons.

The Title of the Judge of the Praerogative Court is, Curiae Praerogativae
Cant' Magister Custos sive Commissarius; And all Citations and Decrees run in
the Name of the Archbishop.

The Judge is attended by the Register, who sets down the Decrees and Acts of
the Court, and keeps the Records of all Original Wills, and Testaments of
parties Dying, having Bona Notabilia, in the place called the Praerogative
Office, where (for a moderate Fee) any one may Search for, and have a Copy of
any Testament or Administration, since the Rebellion of Wat Tyler and Jack
Straw.

Upon Appeals to the Court of Delegates, the Judges are appointed by the Lord
Chancellor under the Great Seal Pro illa vice, which Court is also kept in the
same Common Hall the day after the Praerogative in the Afternoon. The
Citations, and Decrees there run in the King's Name: And from thence of course
lies no Appeal; but the King of his mere Praerogative Royal does many times
grant A Commission of Review.

The College of Physicians in London
BY Charters and Acts of Parliament of Henry the Eighth, and since, have
certain Privileges, Whereby no Man though a Graduate in Physic in Oxford, or
Cambridge, may without License under the said College Seal, Practice Physic
in London, or within seven Miles thereof, nor in any other part of England, (in
case he has not taken any Degree in Oxford or Cambridge) whereby they have
power to punish Offenders, make Bylaws, purchase Lands, search Apothecaries
Shops, in and about London, are freed from Offices and bearing Arms, may
practice Physic or Chyrurgery, not only in London, but in any other part of
England.

This Society had anciently a College in Knight-Rider-Street, the Gift o^ Dr.
Linacre, Doctor to King Henry the Eighth, afterward had their College in Amen
Street, Endowed by Dr. He^vey, with his whole Inheritance, which being consumed
in the late Dreadful Fire: The Fellows having purchased Ground, have now Raised
a Magnificent Structure in Warwick Lane. And of this College is

A President, Four Censors, and Eight Elects, who are all Principal Members of
the Society, one of which is chosen yearly to Preside.

The Four Censors have by their Charter Power to Survey, Correct, and Govern
all Physicians, or others that shall practice Physic in London, or within
seven Miles of the same, and to punish Offenders as they shall see cause. For
all which see the Statutes mentioned in Coke's 4 Inst. fo. 251.

In Rot. Pat. 32 H. 6. M. 17. it is Recorded, That the King with Assent of his
Council, assigned certain Physicians, and a Chyrurgeon, to Administer in and
about his person Potions, and other parts of Physic, and to moderate his Diet.
To which they were every one commanded to be Attendant. Whereby it appears, No
Physic ought to be given to the King without Warrant, and that by Advice of
his Privy Council, and no other Physic than what is set down in Writing, and
that ^hey may use the Aid of Chyrurgeons Named in the Warrant; but no
Apo^hecary, they being to prepare all things themselves.

The Science of Physic by the Statute of 32 H. 8. is Declared, to contain the
Knowledge of Chyrurgery.

If one of the Mystery of a Physician take a Man in Cure; and give him such
Physic that he dye within three days thereof without any Felonious intent^ and
against his Will, it is no Homicide.

But Britton says, If One, not of the Mystery of a Physician, or Chyrurgeon,
take upon him the Cure of a Man, and he dies of the Potion, or Medicine; this
is Covert Felony.

Gresham College in London.
BUilt by Sir Thomas Gresham, and Endowed by him with the Revenue of the Royal
Exchange, by him Built; before which he gave one Moiety to the Mayor and
Commonalty of London upon Trust, That the Major and Aldermen should find Four
able persons to Read Divinity, Geometry, Astronomy, and Music there, and to
Allow each of them Fair Lodgings, and 50 l. a year; and the other Moiety to the
Company of Mercers upon Trust, to find Three able Persons to Read Civil Law,
Physic, and Rhetoric, and to have Lodgings, and the like Allowance. These
several Lecturers are to Read in Term time every Day, except Sundays; In the
Forenoon in Latin, and in the Afternoon the same in English: The Music Lecture
only in English.

There is also a Mechanic Sort of Lecture for Natural Philosophy, Instituted
by Sir John Cutler, with a Salary of 50 l. per Annum, to be Read at the time
and place where the Royal Society shall meet.

Syon-Colledge in London.
THis was Founded by Thomas White Doctor in Divinity, for the use of the Clergy
in London, and Liberties ^hereof, and a part thereof for Twenty ^oor People,
for which he gave Three Thousand pounds, and for the Main^enance of the poor
People 120 l. yearly for ever, and 40 l. yearly for a Sermon in Latin at the
beginning of ^very Quarter, and a plentiful Dinner ^or all the Clergy that
shall meet ^here. There was a Spacious Library ^uilt by John Sympson Rector of
St. Olaves Hartstreet, and well furnished with Books.

The Chartreaux in London.
THis was heretofore a Convent of Carthusian Monks, called in French Des
Chartreaux. It is called Sutton's H^^pital also, and consists of A Master, o^
Governor, A Chaplain, A Master, and Usher to Instruct 44 Scholars, beside^ 80
Decayed Gentlemen, Soldiers, an^ Merchants, who have all a plentif^^
Maintenance of Diet, Lodging, Cloth and Physic, etc. The Scholars fit for the
University have Twenty pound^ yearly allowed them for Eight year after they
come to the University (...) and others fitter for Trades have a considerabl
Sum of Money to bind them out Apprentices. And they have all Officers expedient
for such a Society; as Physician, Apothecary, Steward, Cooks, Butlers, etc. who
have all Competent Salaries:

This vast Revenue was the Gift of an ordinary Gentleman, Mr. Thomas Sutton,
Born in Lincolnshire, and was of such Account, that by the King's Letters
Patents, Persons of the Highest Quality; as the Archbishop of Canterbury, Lord
Chancellor, Lord Treasurer* and Thirteen others are Governors, and Overseers
thereof.

Schools in London
ARe St. Paul's, Founded An 1512. by John Collett Dr. of Divinity and ^ean of
St. Paul's, for 153 Children to ^e Taught gratis; There being a Master, Usher,
and Chaplain, who have ^arge Stipends, and the Master, Wardens, and Assistants
of The Company of ^ercers in London have the oversight ^hereof.

And diverse other Schools which are ^ndowed; as Merchant-Taylors,
Mercers-Chappel, etc. which for brevity sake I ^mit.

The Arms of the City of London ^re Argent, A Cross Gules, with the Sword of
St. Paul, not the Dagger of William ^alworth, as some have conceited; ^or this
Coat did belong to the City before Walworth slew Wat Tyler, as ^earned
Antiquaries affirm.

Southwark.
THis Borough was granted by King Edward the Sixth by Lett^ers Patents to the
Major, Commonal^y, and Citizens of London, and is cal^ed the Bridge-Ward,
without (and Governed by One of the 26 Aldermen of) London; It has nothing
Remarkable, but that it pays more in a Subsidy to the King, and Musters more
Men than any City in England, except London.

The City of Westminster.
THE Ancient, Stately Abbey Church here, was Founded by the Pious King Edward
the Confessor, and richly Endowed, afterward Rebuilt by King Henry the Third
with that rare Architecture now seen* Wherein are most Magnificent Tombs, and
Monuments of our Kings, Queens, and Greatest Nobles; To the East End of which
is added A Chapel by King Henry the Seventh, which for curiou^ Artificial Work
without, and within* For a Monument of Massy Brass most curiously wrought, is
scarce to be paralleled in the whole World.

This huge Fabric stands where first was the Temple of Apollo, and afterward
King Sebert the First Christened King of the East Saxons, who first Built St.
Paul's Church in London, Built here likewise this Church to St. Peter.

It takes the name from this Monastery, which Minster signifies, it being
called Westminster in respect of the East Minister, not far from the Tower of
London.

This Monastery 30 Hen. 8. was Surrendered to the King, who Erected thereof a
Dean and Chapter, Anno 33 Hen. 8. It was raised to a Bishop^ick, and Tho.
Thurlby made the first and last Bishop thereof. Queen Eliz. Converted it into a
Collegiate Church, and therein placed a Dean, Twelve seculiar Canons, or
Prebendaries, Pety Canons, and others of the Quire to the number of Thirty; Ten
Officers, belonging to the Church, as many Servants belonging to the Collegiate
Diet; Two Schoolmasters; Forty Scholars; Twelve Alms-men with plentiful
Allowance for all, besides Stewards, Receivers, Registers, Collectors and other
Officers, The Principal whereof is the High Steward of Westminster, who is
usually one of the Prime Nobility.

The Dean is entrusted with the Rega^ia at the Coronation, and Honored with a
place of necessary Service at ^ll Coronations, and with a Commis^ion of the
Peace within the City and Liberties of Westminster.

The Dean and Chapter invested with all Jurisdiction, both Ecclesiastical and
Civil, not only within the City, and Liberties of Westminster; but within the
Precincts of St. Martins le Grand, and in some Towns in Essex, Exempted in the
one from the Jurisdiction of the Bishop of London; And in the other from that
of the Archbishop of Canterbury.

It has a Royal Jurisdiction for Ecclesiastical Causes, and Probate of Wills,
and a Commissary from whom is no Appeal, but to the King in his Chancery; Who
thereupon Issues out a Commission of Delegates under the Great Seal of England.

When the Convocation is Adjourned from St. Paul's (for the convenience of being
nearer the Parliament) to Westminster: The Bishops first declare, (upon a
Protestation made by the Dean there,) that they intend thereby not to violate
that High Privilege, viz. That no Archbishop, or Bishop may come there without
leave of the Dean first obtained.

There is also a fair public Library, free for all Strangers to Study both
Morning and Afternoon, always in Term time.

Within this City are Twelve Wards; Out of which are Elected One Burgess, and
One Assistant in every Ward, and out of these Twelve, Two are Elected yearly on
the Thursday in Easter Week, to be Chief Burgesses, and so to continue for the
year ensuing; These Burgesses have Authority by Act 27 Eliz. To Hear, Examine,
Determine, and Punish according to the Laws of the Realm, and lawful Customs of
the City of London, Matters of Incontinency, Common Scolds, Inmates and Common
Annoyances, and to commit such Persons as shall offend against the Peace, and
thereof give knowledge within Twenty four hours to some Justice of Peace within
the County of Middlesex.

Next the Abbey Church stood the Palace Royal, and usual Place of Residence of
the Kings of England, who ordinarily held their Parliaments, and Courts of
Judicature in their Dwelling Houses, and many times sat themselves in the said
Courts of Judicature, as they do still in Parliament: But after the Parliament
was divided into two several Houses, which was about 50 Ed. 3. The Commons
assembled in the Chapter House of the Abbot of Westminster, until 1 Ed. 6.
which gave to the King Colleges Chauntries, Free Chapels, etc. The King being
thereby Possessed of the Ancient Beautiful Free Chapel of St. Stephen, Founded
by King Stephen, which had Revenues of the old yearly value of 1085 l. It
afterward served for the House of Commons.

A great part of this Huge Palace was in the time of Hen. 8. destroyed by Fire,
what remained has still been Employed for the use of the Parliament and Courts
of Judicature; The Great Hall where those are kept Built by King William Rufus,
or by Richard the Second as some hold, being for all Dimensions not to be
equalled by any Hall in Christendom.

Radulphus de Ingham Chief Justice of England, a very poor Man being Fined
before him at 13 s. 4 d. in another Term moved with Pity, caused the Record to
be rased and made 6 s. 8 d. For which he for his Fine made the Clock to be
heard into Westminster Hall, and the Clock-house which cost 800 Marks, Tempore
Ed. 1. and continues to this Day.

Anno 37 Hen. 8. The King's Manor of Westminster, was made an Honor.

The City of Norwich.
THis is an Ancient City, For in Ancient Manuscripts it appears, That In
tempore Steph. Regis de nova Fundata and ut Villa populata Communitas fact^.

And it is highly commended for many things, Quod suis Opibus Frequentia,
Aedificiorum Elegantia, Templorum Pulchritudine and Numero (Paraecias enim plus
minus 30 complectitur,) Civum sedulitate in Principem fide in Exteros
Humanitate inter Celebrrimas Britanniae Urbes merito connumeranda, etc.
Moenibus Validis (in quibus crebrae dispositae Turres and Undecim Portae)
undique Obsepta nisi ad ortam qua Flumen (cum sinuoso flexu 4 Pontibus pervium
Septentrionalem urbis partem interluerit) profundo alveo and praecipitibus
Rupis defendit; It is preferred before all the Cities in England, except
London, has above 30 Parishes, and is as large within the Walls as London; it
had within it and the Liberties Six Religious* Houses, and One Hospital,

Anno 27 Hen. 8. The Bishopric of Norwich becoming void by the Death of
Richard Nick, commonly called the Blind Bishop, The King nominated the Abbot of
the Monastery of St. Bennets de Hulmo in the County of Norwich, to be Bishop of
Norwich. And afterward 4 Feb. 27 Hen. 8. It was Enacted by Authority of
Parliament, That such Person as should be Elected and Consecrated Bishop of
Norwich, should have, and enjoy, united to the said Bishopric the Monastery of
St. Bennets; And all Manors, etc. belonging to the same. And should be Abbot of
the said Monastery of St. Bennets, and have the Dignity of the said Abbacy
United, Incorporated, and Knit to the said Bishopric.

For the Courts of Justice in this City, we have Treated of the like in London,
and therefore shall only mention an Act of Parliament concerning the
Jurisdiction thereof, 2 R. 2. N. 39. Not in Print; Whereby it is Enacted for
the Citizens of Norwich, That if their Customs, and Usages heretofore used, or
hereafter to be used be Difficult or Defective in part, or in all, Or that the
same need any due amendments for any matter arising, whereof Remedy was not
aforetime had; That then the Bailiffs and Twenty four Citizens of the same
City, so therefore yearly to be Chosen, or the greater part of them, shall from
henceforth have Power to Ordain such Remedies as are most agreeable to Faith
and Reason; and for the most Profit, the Good, and Peaceable Government of the
same Town, and of Strangers thereto repairing as to them shall seem best; So as
such Ordinance be profitable for the King* and his People.

By the Statute of 14 Hen. 4. The Merchants and Artificers of Worsteds in
Norfolk, may sell their single Worsteds to any Place, or Persons in Amity with
the King notwithstanding any Inhibition, or Liberty to the contrary.

In the time of King Edward the Confessor, there were 1300 Citizens within this
City, and they paid 20 l. to the King, and 10 l. to the Earl; And besides these
20 s. and Four Prebendaries, and Six Sextaries of Honey, a Bear, and Six Dogs
to Bait him; Now it pays 70 l. to the King, and 100 l. to the Queen, and a
Palfrey, and 20 l. of White Rent to the Earl.

It is a County of it self, and has Two Sheriffs, and large Liberties without
the Walls; See the Statute of 33 He^. 8. How many Attorneys should be at
Norfolk; See Rot. Parl. 18 Ed. 1. f. 5. Concerning the ancient Liberties of
this City.

Burgi and Civitat' Fundat' and Aedificat' sunt ad Tuitionem Gentium and
Populorum Regni, and idcirco obsi^vdri debent, cum omni Liberate Integ^itate
and Ratione.

The Beautiful Cathedral was begun by Herbert Bishop of Norwich, Anno 9
Willielmi Rufi.

The Strong Castle called ^^anch Flower Environed with the City, but no part
thereof, but of the County of Norwich, was not Built by Bigott Earl of Norwich,
for we find a Charter of King Stephen. Rex, etc. Sciatis me Dedisse in Feode
and Hereditate Willielmo Commiti Warren Filio meo Castellum Norwici cum Toto
Burgo, etc.

And Reef de W^et Earl of Norwich, Defended this Castle against William the
Conqueror, who was driven out of England, and Traveled with his Wife to
Jerusalem, Vide Coke's 4 Inst. cap. 52.

The Two Universities in England.
THese are the Two Eyes, or Luminaries of the Kingdom, and are now Styled
Universities; A Professione Universalium Scientiarum and Artium Liberalium A
University being properly an Incorporation, under one Government of many
public Schools, ordained especially for the Study, and Profession of Divinity,
Civil-Law, and Physic, as also Philosophy, and other Liberal Arts and
Sciences. And of these Universities, the first and most ancient is thought to be

Oxford.
QUasi Ousford Isidis Uadum, From the name of the Chief River Isis whereon it
is Seated; It lies in 51 Degrees, 42 Minutes Latitude, and above 22 Degrees
Longitude, almost the same Climate with the Famous University of Athens, and
was a place for public Studies above 900 years ago, and much Augmented by the
Learned Saxon King Alured; And is an ancient City, consisting of Two sorts of
Inhabitants, viz. Students and Citizens living one amongst another; yet wholly
Separate for Government Laws and Manners* The University, next under the King
being Governed by

The Chancellor, who is commonly some of the prime Nobility, Elected by the
Students in Convocation, to continue Durante Vita: And is to take care of the
Government of the whole University, To maintain the Liberties and Privileges
thereof, To call Assemblies, To hear and determine Controversies, Call Courts,
Punish Delinquents; etc. And next to him in Dignity is,

The High Steward nominated by the Chancellor, and approved by the University,
and is also Durante Vita; and to Assist the Chancellor, the Vice Chancellor and
Proctors upon their Requests, in the Execution of their Places; Also to hear,
and determine capital Causes, according to the Laws of the Land, and
Privileges of the University, so often as the Chancellor shall require him. And
the Third Officer is,

The Vice Chancellor, who is commonly the Head of some College nominated
yearly by the Chancellor; And in the Chancellors* Absence may do almost
whatever the Chancellor might do, if present; Moreover he takes care that
Sermons, Lectures, Disputations, and other Exercises be performed, That
Heretics, Fanatiques, Nonconformists, Panders, Bawds and Whores, etc. be
expelled the University, and Converse of Students, That the Proctors, and other
Officers, and public Servants of the University perform their Duty, And that
Courts be duly called, and Law Suits determined without delay; In a word, that
whatever is for the Honor or Profit of the University, or may conduce to the
Advancement of good Literature, may be carefully obtained. And Fourthly,

The Two Proctors chosen every year out of the several Colleges by Turns;
These are to Assist in the Government of the University, and particularly in
Scholastic Exercises, taking Degrees, in Searching after, and Punishing all
Violators of Statutes, or Privileges of the University, all Night-Walkers,
etc. They have also the Oversight of Weights, and Measures, that the Students
may not be wronged. And next is,

The public Orator, who is to write Letters according to the Orders of the
Convocation, or Congregation, And to make Solemn Harangues at the Reception of
any Prince, or Great Person. And then is,

The Custos Archivorum, who is not only to Collect and Keep the Charters,
Privileges, and Records that concern the University; But also is to be always
ready to produce them before the Chief Officers, and to Plead the Rights and
Privileges of the said University. And Lastly is,

The Register of the University, who is to Register all Transactions in
Convocations, Congregations, Delegacies, etc. And besides these are certain
public Servants as,

The Six Beadles, so called from the High Dutch Briton, or Low Dutch Bidden, To
Summon, Admonish, or Pray. Three of these are called Squire Beadles, carry
large Maces of Silver Guilt, and the other Three are Yeomen Beadles, and carry
large Silves Maces Un-guilt; Their Office is always to Wait on the Vice
Chancellor in Public, doing what belongs to his Place, and at his Command to
Seize any Delinquent and carry him to Prison, To Summon any, To publish the
calling of Courts, or Convocation^, To conduct Preachers to Church and
Lecturers to Schools, etc. And upon more Solemn occasions, is a Seventh called

The Virger, from the Silver Rod which h^ carries, who with the other Six walks
before the Vice Chancellor, and is ready to observe his Commands, and to wait
on Grand Compounders, etc.

The other public Servants, of lesser note we shall not mention.

The Students in Oxford anciently (as now in most Universities beyond Seas)
without any Distinction of Habit lived in Citizens Houses, and had Meeting
places to hear Lectures and Disputes; After that, were diverse Houses for
Students only to live together called Inns from the Saxon, or Hostells from the
French. And now

Halls where every Student lived wholly upon his own Charges. And of these were
formerly Two hundred, and in them as Armachanus writes 30000 Students, until

Colleges were by the Bounty of diverse Kings, and other Patrons Endowed with
Revenues, to maintain such Students as by Merit, and Worth should be chosen
from time, to time, in Lodging, Diet, Clothes and Books, with large Salaries;
For Professors to Instruct them, for a Head to Govern them according to certain
Statutes, and Ordinances made by the said Patrons, and Founders. And the first
of Colleges, Endowed in Europe are University Baliol, and Merton, all made
Colleges in the 12th Century after Christ. The other 15. Colledge's, viz.
Christ's Church, St. Mary Magdalen, New College, All Souls, Corpus Christi,
Queens College, St. John's, Trinity College, Brazen Nose, Oriel College,
Wadham, Lincoln, Exeter, Jesus, and Pembroke College, are of lesser Antiquity:
And these Colledge^ have within their own Walls Lectures, Disputations, All
Professions, and Liberal Sciences, Read and Taught, and in some of them public
Lectures for all Comers, and large Salaries for the Readers; In so much as they
seem so many complete Universities: And are not Inferior to some in our
Neighboring Countries.

The Halls where Students live of their own Means (only Excepted some Annual
Pensions annexed to One or Two of them) are in number Seven, viz. Magdalen
Hall, Edmund Hall, Alban Hall, New Inn, Gloucester Hall, St. Mary Hall, Heart
Hall.

The whole number of Students in Oxford, that live upon the Revenue of the
Colleges are about 1000; And of other Students about twice as many, besides,
Stewards, Manciples, Butlers, Cooks, Porters, Gardiners, etc.

The Discipline in these Colleges, and Halls, is, First all that intend to
take any Degree, are to take their Diet and Lodging, and have a Tutor,
constantly in some College or Hall; then they are to perform all Exercises, to
be Subject to all Statutes, and to the Head of the House: Next they are to be
Subject to the Chief Magistrate of the University: To perform public
Exercises, and to be subject to the public Statutes thereof; To suffer
themselves to be shut up by Night in their Houses; They are never to be seen
abroad out of their Chambers, much less out of their Colleges, without their
Caps and Gowns (which is no where else observed but in Spain,) their Gowns are
all to be Black, only the Sons of the Higher Nobility are herein Indulged, and
all Doctors are Honored with Purple, or rather Scarlet Robes.

The Degrees taken in the University are only Two, viz. Batchelour, and Master
anciently as well in Divinity, Law, and Physic, as in Arts. But now the
Degrees in those three Professions are Batchelours, and Doctors, The time
required by Statute for taking the aforesaid Degrees, is Four years Study to be
a Bachelor, and Three years more to be Master; To take the Degree of Doctor of
Divinity, the Student must first take the Degree of Master of Arts; Then after
Seven years more he may be Bachelor, and Four years after that Doctor in
Divinity. Three years after Master of Arts, the Student may be Bachelor, and
in Four years more Dr. of Laws, and the like for Dr. of Physic: The Exercises
required for taking these Degrees are many, and difficult; yet not such but
they may be performed in less time by any of good Ability.

In the before mentioned Three Professions, and in the Arts there Proceeds
Masters, or Doctors yearly about 150, and every Lent about 200 Batchelors of
Arts.

At the Act, or time of Completing the Degree of Master, both in the aforesaid
Three Professions, and Arts, which is the Monday after the 6th of July yearly;
there are usually great Solemnities, not only for public Exercise, but also
Feastings, Comedies, and a mighty concourse of Strangers from all Parts to
their Friends, then completing their Degrees; whereby, and by the fet Fees, it
costs a Doctor about 100 l. and a Master of Arts about 20 or 30 l.

Many Privileges have been granted to the Universities by Charter of diverse
Kings, Favorers of Learning; As by Charter of King Edward the Third, The Mayor
of Oxford is to obey the Orders of the Vice Chancellor, and to be in subjection
to him.

The Mayor with the Chief Burgesses of Oxford, and also the High Sheriff of
Oxfordshire, every year in a Solemn manner take an Oath given by the Vice
Chancellor; To observe and conserve the Rights, Privileges and Liberties of
the University of Oxford.

And every year on the day of St. Scholastica, (being 10 February,) a certain
number of the Principal Burgesses, Publicly and Solemnly do pay each one a
Penny, in token of their Submission to the Orders and Rights of the University.

By Charter of Hen. the Fourth, It is left to the choice of the Vice
Chancellor, whether any Member in the University there Inhabiting, accused for
Felony, or High Treason shall be tried by the Laws of the Land, or by the Laws
and Customs of the University, Though now where Life or Limb is concerned, the
Criminal is left to be Tried by the Laws of the Land.

No Student of the University may be Sued at Common Law for Debts, Accounts,
Contracts, Injuries, etc. but only in the Courts of the Vice Chancellor, who
has Power as aforesaid to Determine and Punish Delinquents; To Imprison,
Inflict Corporal Punishment, To Excommunicate, To Suspend, and to Banish.

The Universities are Subject to the Visitation, or Correction of none but the
King, or whom he please to Commissionate.

The Chancellor, and in his absence the Vice Chancellor, is not only in Place,
but in all Affairs of Moment (though concerning the City it self) Superior to
the Mayor of the Town.

All Members of the University are subject to the Vice Chancellor, and his
Judicial Courts; which are Ruled wholly by the Civil Law.

By the Statute of 13 Eliz. The Two Universities are Incorporated (albeit they
were ancient Corporations before.) All Letters Patent, Liberties, Privileges,
etc. granted to either of the Universities are Established, and Confirmed.

King James the First Honored both Universities, with the Privilege of
sending each Two Burgesses to Parliament.

The Terms in Oxford begin the First on the 10 of October, and ends the 17 of
December, and is called Michaelmas Term; Second called Hillary or Lent Term,
begins the 14 of January, and ends the Saturday before Palm Sunday; The Third
called Easter Term, begins the 10 day after Easter, and ends the Thursday
before Whitsunday; The Fourth is called Trinity Term, beginning the Wednesday
after Trinity Sunday, and ends after the Act sooner or later, as the
Vice Chancellor, and Convocation think meet.

There are besides in Oxford many stately publick-Schools, The famous Bodleian
Library, which for a Noble, Lightsom Fabric; number of choice Books, curious
Manuscripts, diversity of Languages, Liberty of Studying, Facility of finding
any Book, may equal the Famous Vatican. The Curious Architecture of the
Theater, The Excellent Printing Presses, The Public Physic Garden, etc. are
not for our purpose further to describe.

Cambridge.
WHat has been said of Oxford, may suffice for the University, and Town of
Cambridge; which if she will, in Complaisance at any time give place to Oxford,
yet at the same time, she will Challenge it before any other University in the
Christian World. But in some few things she differs from Oxford, as for that,

The Chancellor is not so (Durante Vita) but may be elected every Two years,
Aut manner in eodem Officio durante Tacito Consensu Senatus Cantabr': He has
under him a Commissary, who holds a Court of Record of Civil Causes, for all
Privileged Persons under the Degree of Master of Arts, where all Causes are
Tried, and Determined by the Civil and Statute Laws; and by the Customs of the
University.

The High Steward is chosen by the Senate, and holds by Patent from the
University.

The Vice Chancellor is chosen yearly by the Senate on the 3d day of November,
Out of Two Persons nominated by the Heads of the several Colleges, and Halls.

The Two Proctors are chosen every year as at Oxford, according to the Circle
of the Colleges and Halls. There are also,

Two Taxers, who with the Proctors have care of Weights and Measures, as Clerks
of the Market. There are also,

Three Squire Beadles, and one Yeoman, Beadle.

The Students here have no Houses but what are Endowed: For the Colleges, and
Halls differ only in name. And these Houses, Endowed are but Sixteen, viz. St.
Peter's College, Clare Hall, Pembroke Hall, Corpus Christi College, alias
Bennet College, Trinity Hall, Convile and Cains College, Kings College,
Queens College, St. Katherines Hall, Jesus College, Christ's College, St.
John's College, Magdalen College, Trinity College, Emanuel College, Sussex
and Sidney; But these are generally so large, that the number of Students is
commonly little different from those of Oxford.

Degrees at Cambridge are usually taken as at Oxford, Except in Law, and
Physic, whereof after Six years they may take the Degrees of Batchelour, and
after Five years more, that of Doctor.

The first Tuesday of July is always. Dies Comitiorum, there called the
Commencement; Wherein the Masters of Arts, and the Doctors of all Faculties,
complete their Degrees respectively, as the Batchelours of Arts do in Lent,
beginning at Ashwednesday.

Many Privileges have been likewise granted by several Kings to this
University, As every Michaelmass-day, The Mayor of the Town, at the Entrance
into his Office, takes a Solemn Oath before the Vice Chanceller to Observe, and
Conserve the Privileges, Liberties and Customs of the University: Also on
Friday before St. Simon and Jude at a Magna Congregati in St. Mary's Church,
The Mayor brings with him Two Aldermen, Four Burgesses, and Two of every
Parish, to take their Oaths before the Vice Chancellor, for the due search of
Vagabonds, Suspected Persons, etc. At the same are Sworn 14 Persons for the
University, and Fourteen for the Town to look to the Paving, and Cleansing of
the Street.

The University has also a Court Leet, held twice every year, wherein are
presented all Nusances, etc.

The Terms in Cambridge, begin Lent Term, the the 13 of January, and ends the
Friday before Palm Sunday, Easter Term the Wednesday after Easter Week, and
ends the Week before Whitsuntide; Trinity Term the Wednesday after Trinity
Sunday, and ends the Friday after the Commencement, and Michaelmass Term begins
the 10 of October, and ends the 16 of December.

Cambridge lies in 52 Degrees, 20 Minutes Northern Latitude.

Both these Universities are Two easy days Journey from the Capital City of
London, and about the like Distance from each other.

The Government of Boroughs in England
ANd other Towns Corporate, Is much after the same manner with Cities. In some
there is a Mayor, in others One or Two Bailiffs, who have equal Power with the
Mayor and Sheriffs, and during their Offices they are Justices of Peace within
their Liberties, and have there the same Power that other Justices of Peace
have within their County.

The Government of Villages in England.
IN every Village is a Government Ecclesiastical, and Civil; which if only
observed, might render the whole Kingdom Happy. And first the

The Ecclesiastical Government of Villages.
THe Parson or Vicar, who has Curam Animarum, The care of the Souls of his
Parishioners, For which he has the Tithes, Glebe, and Church Offerings. And
has under him,

The Churchwardens and Sides Men, To take care of the Church and Church
Assemblies.

The Overseers of the Poor, To take care of the Poor, Sick, Aged, Orphans, and
other Objects of Charity. And Lastly,

The Clerk to wait on him at Divine Service. And for

The Civil Government of Villages.
THe Lord of the Manor or Soil, who from the Crown immediately holds or
mediately holds Dominium Soli; Is said to have in him; The Royalty as if he
were a little King; and has a kind of Jurisdiction, and a Court Baron incident
to the Manor, and sometimes a Court Leet, by Grant from the King to which the
Inhabitants owe Suit and Service, and where smaller Matters (as Escheats upon
Felonies, or other Accidents, common Nusances, etc. Admitting of Tenants,
passing of Estates, Reliefs, Herriots, Hunting, Hawking, Fishing, etc. or other
matters Of which you may see more at large in the Description of the
Jurisdiction of these two several Courts) may be heard and determined. And
under the Lord is

The Constable, or Headborough, Chosen yearly by the Lord or Steward in the
Leet, to keep the Peace in case of Quarrels; to search any House for Robbers,
Murderers, and others who have broken the Peace; to raise Hue and Cry after
Robbers; to seize Offenders, and keep them in the Stocks or other Prison, till
they can bring them before some Justice of Peace, to whom the Constables are
subservient upon all occasions, either to bring Criminals before them, or to
carry them by their Command to the Common Prison.

Thus having in a Brief and Methodical manner described the Constitution of the
English Government; For the Excellency thereof, we may wel^ conclude with the
Poet,

O Fortunatos nimium bona si sua Norint
-- Angligenas.
THE ISLANDS Adjacent to ENGLAND.
CAlled by Heylin, The Sporades not (as he says) that they are so named in any
Author, but being many, he thought fit to include them under that general Name.
The Chief of which are

The Isle of Man.
INsula Euboniae modo Manniae, has been an ancient Kingdom, as appears by
Walsingham, page 287. and Coke's Reports, Lib. 7. fol. 21. Calvin's Case. And
yet we find it not Granted, or Conveyed by the Name of a Kingdom; Sed per Nomen
Insulae, etc. cum Patronatu Episcopatus. The Patronage of the Bishopric of
Sodor, being a Visible Mark of a Kingdom, Est nempe Jus ipsius Insulae, ut
quisquis illius sit Dominus, Rex vocetur; cui etiam fas est Corona Aurca
Coronari, Walsingh. 17 R. 2.

This Island was taken from the Britains by the Scots, and from them regained
by Edwin King of Northumberland. Afterward the Norwegians seized it, from whom
Alexander the Third wrested it; and about the Year 1340. William Montacute,
Earl of Salisbury, descended from the Norwegian Kings of Man, won it from the
Scots, and afterward sold it to W. Lord Scroope, who forfeiting the same for
Treason to King H. 4 he granted it to H. Percy Earl of Northumberland, who
being 5 H. 4. Attainted of Treason, In 7 H. 4. it was by Parliament Enacted,
the King should have the Forfeiture of all his Lands and Tenements. And
afterward 7 H. 4. the King granted the Isle, cum Patronatu Episcopatus unto
Sir John Stanley, first for Life, and afterward to him and his Heirs. Sir John
had Issue Sir John Stanley Knight, who had Issue Sir Henry Stanly, Lord
Chamberlain to King Henry the Sixth, who Created him Lord Stanley. He had Issue
Thomas, whom King Henry the Seventh Created Earl of Derby, to him and the Heirs
Male of his Body, etc. Vide Co. 4 Inst. cap. 69.

The Laws and Jurisdiction of this Isle differs from other places; For they
call their Judges Deemsters, which they choose out of themselves: And they
determine all Controversies without Process, Pleading, Writing, or any Expense
at all. If any Cases be ambiguous, or of greater weight, it is referred to
Twelve, which they call Claves Insulae. They have Coroners (quos Annuos vocant)
who supply the Office of Sheriff: But although the King's Writ runs not into
this Island, yet his Commission extends thither for Redress of Injustice, and
Wrong. The Bishop was Instituted by Pope Gregory the Fourth, is under the
Archbishop of York, being annexed to that Archbishopric by King Henry the
Eighth, but has neither Place nor Voice in the Parliament of England. In hac
Insula Judex Ecclesiasticus citat, definit, and infra Octo dies parent, aut
carcere intruduntur.

The People are a Religious, Industrious and True People. They have peculiar
Laws or Customs; For if a Man steal a Horse, or an Ox, it is no Felony, because
he cannot hide them; but if he steal a Capon, or Pigg, he shall be hanged, etc.

In this little Kingdom are Two Castles, Seventeen Farishes, Four Market Towns,
and many Villages.

It is situate against the South part of Cumberland, from which it is distant
21 Miles; Is in Length 30 Miles, in Breadth 15, but in some part only 8 Miles.
The Soil is abundant in Flax, Hemp, Oats, Barley, Wheat; and Bishop Merrick
writing to Cambden, when he was composing his Britannia, says, Our Island for
Cattle, Fish, and Corn, has not only sufficient for it self; but sends store
into other Countries. The chief Towns are Balacurri, and Russin, or
Castle-Town, the Seat of the Bishop. On the Hill Sceaful may be seen England,
Scotland, and Ireland; Here are also, bred the Soland Geese. The People speak a
Mixture of the Norwegian, and Irish Tongues.

Anglesey
IS accounted a Shire of Wales, bordereth on Carnarvanshire, is in Length 20,
in Breadth 17 Miles, containing in former times 360 Towns, and Villages, the
chief whereof are 1. Beaumaris toward Wales, 2. Newburg, 3. Aberfraw, on the
South Side.

This Island for its abundant Fertility is called Mam Cymri, i. e. Mother of
Wales. It was once the Seat of the Druids, first Conquered by Suet onius
Paulinus, and united to the English Crown by the Valor of Edward the First.

Jersey, olim Caesarea.
IS in Compass 20 Miles, and sufficiently strong, by reason of the dangerous
Seas. It contains 12 Towns or Villages, the Chief being St. Hillary and St.
Malo, and four Castles. The Ground is plentiful in Grain and Sheep, most of
them having four Horns, of whose Wool our Jersey Stockings are made.

Gernsey, olim Servia,
IS distant 20 Miles from Jersey, to whom it is much Inferior in respect of
Fertility, and Largness; but more commodious by reason of the safe Harbors. It
contains 10 Parishes, the Chief being St. Peter's, the Port or Haven, and
Market Town.

These Islands of Jersey and Gernsey lie both nigh unto Normandy, and Bretaign,
and did in ancient time belong to the Duchy of Normandy. But Henry the First
Overthrowing his Elder Brother Robert, united the Duchy of Normandy, with
these Isles, to the Kingdom of England. And although King John lost Normandy, and
Henry the Third took Money for it; yet these Isles continued Faithful to
England, the possession thereof being a good Seisin of the whole Duchy.

Concerning the Judicature and Customs of these Isles, it appears by Records
in the Tower, Quod Rex Johannes constituit 12 Coronatores Juratos ad Placita
and Jura ad Coronam spectantia, custodienda, Et concessit pro securitate
Insularum, Quod Ballivus de caetero per visum Coronatorum poterat placitare
sine Breve de Nov. Disseisinae facta infra Annum, De Morte Antecessorum infra
Annum, De Dote similiter infra Annum. And now they have a Governor appointed
by the King of England, and Twelve Assistants selected out of every several
Parish. And for the most part they proceed according to the Customs of
Normandy: Although the King's Writ runs not into these Isles, yet his
Commission under the Great Seal does. But the Commissioners must judge
according to the Laws and Customs of the Isles.

Insula Vectis, or Vecta.
THe Isle of Wight is esteemed part of Hampshire, from which it is severed by a
dangerous Straight of the Sea. It contains 20 Miles in Length, Twelve in
Breadth, and is Governed by the Laws of England, as the other Shires have been;
the Soil is answerable to the Husbandman's Expectation; The Sheep bear fine
Wool, and the Trees store of Fruit. Here are One Forest, Two Parks, and 36
Towns and Villages, the Chief being Newport, Yarmouth, and Brading.

The Island is strongly situated, being Inaccessible toward France; but
because the North-shoar is Level, it is fortified on that side with Three
Castles, viz. Yarmouth, Cows, and Sandhead Castle; and in the Midst of the
Island is Carisbrooke Castle, wherein has sometimes been Armor for 50000 Men,
and in every Village a Great Piece of Ordnance.

This Isle was taken from the Britains by Wolphur King of Mercia, and hereof
King Henry the Sixth Crowned Henry Beauchamp, Earl of Warwick, King, and he was
after named Primus Comes totius Angliae; sed cum illo Novus hic and insolitus
Titulus omnino evanuit.

The Sorlings.
CAlled by the English, and Belgians, Scilly Islands; by Antonine in his
Itinerary, Sigdoles; by Solinus, Silyres; by some Greek Writers Hesperides, and
Casterides, are situate against the Western Cape of Cornwall, from which they,
are distant 24 Miles. They are in Number 145, of which 10 only are of
Estimation, viz. 1. Armath, 2. Agnes, 3. Sampson, 4. Scilly, 5. Bresar, 6.
Ruso^, 7. St. Helens, 8. St. Martins, 9. Arthur 10. St. Mary's, Chief of all
the rest, being 8 Miles in compass; sufficiently Fruitful, and strengthened with
a Castle, called Stella Maria by Queen Elizabeth.

These Islands are stored with Grass, Grain, and Lead; which last was once
carried hence into Greece. Hither the Roman Emperors Banished Condemned Men to
Work in the Mines. These were subdued to the English Crown by Athelstane.

The Island Lindisfarne, Or
LEndisfarne, situate near the River Lied, called also Holyfarne, or Holy
Island, on the confines of Northumberland; Has one Castle, one Church, one
Parish, and a safe Haven, defended by a Blockhouse.

It was in ancient time a Bishops Seat, after Translated to Duresme, and is
Governed by the Laws of England.

It was called Holy Island, for that many Religious Men in times past retired
thither, being a Solitary place.

There are diverse other Islands, as Denny, Londay, and Chaldey in the Severn
Sea; Thanet, and Sheppey, near Kent; Farne Isle, near Lindisfarne, and Cockat
Islands near Northumberland; and many others of small account.

A COMPENDIUM OF THE Laws and Government OF SCOTLAND, WITH THE ISLANDS
Thereunto belonging.

Anno Domini 1699,

SCOTLAND
IS so called from Scotti, Scitti, or Scythi a People of Germany, over whose
Northern Bounds the Name Scythia did once extend. These seized on a part of
Spain next to Ireland, and Anno 424. on the West part of this Country. It is
the rest of the Isle of Albion, or Great Britain; in Length from Dungesby-Head
to the South parts of Gallway 250 Miles, in Breadth from Aberdeen to the Isle
of Mule 150 Miles; has no place distant from the Sea 62 Miles, and ends like
the sharp point of a Wedge. It was anciently called Calidonia, and sometimes
Albania; now by the French l'Escosse, by the Italians la Scotia, by the
Spaniards la Escocia, and by the Germans Schotlandt; and is separated from
England by the Rivers Tweed, and Solway, and the Cheviot Hills, in the midst
between which, were

The Borders sometimes extended to Edinburgh, and Sterling in Scotland; and at
other times were enlarged, and took in Cumberland, Northumberland and
Westmorland in England, and were Secured or Defended by three Officers in each
Kingdom; called Lord Wardens of the Marshes. But now by the Marriage and Union
of the two Kingdoms, The Officers and Wars, which were the cause of them, are
extinct.

Scotland was for many Ages Governed by its own Kings, (but with diverse
considerable Alterations) till the year 1602, it was to our great satisfaction
united to England for ever; and does still remain under it, Governed by a
Viceroy called Lord Commissioner.

Here were formerly two Populous Nations, the Scots before described, and the
Picts, who were indeed very Britains, who Fled into the Northern parts (which
are still almost Free) when the Romans entered the Scuth parts of Britain: These
using the ancient Customs of Painting their Bodies, after the rest were more
Civilized, were by the Romans called Picts: They Swayed here a long while alone
till the year 424, when the Scots set footing in Britain, with whom they
contracted a League against the Britains; but after, Warring among themselves,
Kenneth King of Scots, vanquished Dunsken King of the Picts, and thereby
extinguished both their Kingdom, and Name Anno 839. After James the 6th, being
the 36th King, united the Crown of England and Scotland.

Their chief Commodities Cattle, Course Clothes, Frizes, Fish, Lead Oar, Iron,
Saltpetre, Linen Cloth, Train Oil, some Hides, and Tallow.

The Country is divided into the High-lands, and Low-lands. The first Rude, The
other of like Ingenious Disposition, and Language almost with the English;
these being the Offspring of the Saxons; and the High-landers The true Scots;
who speak the Irish Tongue, and call both the Low-landers, and English, Saxons.

The Gospel was first Preached here by Palladius Anno 431. They are now
Protestants, and those chiefly Presbyterians. Their Language in the South parts
a corrupt English, and on the North, and West parts a Dialect of the Irish.

The Division is into two Parts, viz.

1. High-land or North Scotland, somewhat the larger of the Two, the Seat of
the old Scots 170 Miles long, and 130 broad, divided into 13 Counties, viz. 1.
Cathness, Chief Towns-Wick, and Catness. 2. Strathnavern, Chief Town Strathy.
3. Sootherland, Chief Town Dornock. 4. Rosse, Chief Town Tayne. 5. Murray,
Chief Town Elgen. 6. Loquabrea, Chief Town Innerlochy. 7. Broad-Alben, Chief
Town (...) 8. Athol, Chief Town Blaire. 9. Buquihan, Chief Town Stanes. 10.
Mar, Chief Town Aberdeen. 11. Mernis, Chief Town Bervy. 12. Anguis, Chief
Towns Dundee, and Brechin. 13. Perth; Chief Town Perth; the Chief Town of the
whole Aberdeen.

2. Lowland, or South Scotland, bordering on England; The Seat of the old Picts
156 Miles long, and 110 broad, divided into 22 Counties, viz. 1. Lorn, chief
Town Dunstafag. 2. Cantire, chief Town Kiltan. 3. Argile, chief Town Innerera.
4. Lennox, chief Town Dunbarton. 5. Menteith, chief Town Dunblain. 6.
Strathern, chief Town Abernethy. 7. Fife, chief Town St. Andrews. 8. Sterlin,
chief Town Sterlin. 9. Lothien, chief Town Edinburgh. 10. March, chief Town
Coldingham. 11. Tivedale, chief Town Jedburg. 12. Twedesdale, chief Town
Pebles. 13. Cledesdale, chief Town Glascow. 14. Cunningham, chief Town Irwing.
15. Kile, chief Town Air. 16. Carrick, chief Town Bargenny. 17. Galloway,
chief Town Kircowbrig. 18. Niddesdale, chief Town Dumfrees. 19. Annandale,
chief Town Annand. 20. Eskedale. 21. Eusdale, and 22. Isle of Arran.

Edinburgh is the Chief of the Kingdom, and Seat of the former Kings.

These Provinces are divided into Sheriff-doms, which are Hereditary, and into
13 Diocesses for Ecclesiastical Government by Malcolm 3d Anno 1072. And into
the two Arch-bishopricks of St. Andrew and Glasco, Ann. 1478. St. Andrew having
8 Bishops under him, and Glasco 3. The Archbishop of York, before that time
being Metropolitan of Scotland: And Palladius Anno 411, was sent by Celestinus
Bishop of Rome, to be their first Bishop.

The chief Rivers are two, viz. 1. Spey, and 2 Tey.

The chief Hills are those of Cheviot, and Albany.

The chief Lakes, 1 Lomond, 2 Nessa, and 3 Tay.

The miraculous things. 1. The Lake of Mirton, part of whose Waters Congeal
only. 2. The Lake of Lennox, 24 Miles round, in which are 30 Islands, one of
them driven with every Tempest, and 3. the Deaf-stone 12 foot high, and 33
Cubits thick.

The Archbishopricks two, Bishoprics 12, and Universities 4.

The Arms Sol, a Lion Rampant Mars, with a double Tressure Counterflowry, added
upon making the perpetual League with France.

Barbarons were the Feides here, and the Custom changed into Mercheta Mulieris,
by Malcolm Conmer, at Request of his Wife, Sister to Edgar Atheling.

Scotland was an Heptarchy, but now a Monarchy; King James the first,
endeavored in Parliament to make a Union of both Kingdoms: But the Judges
Resolved, That Anglia had Laws, and Scotia had Laws: But the new Erected
Kingdom of Britannia should have no Laws; and therefore, till there was a Union
of the Laws, there could be no Union of the Kingdoms.

The mighty and ancient Kingdoms of England, and Scotland, were anciently but
one; and as their Religion, and Language was one; so there was one kind of
Government, and one Law, which Ruled both, with many Unanimous Agreements
between them, which evidently appears, by many Proofs.

First, That the Laws of Scotland are divided as the Laws of England, into the
Common Laws, Acts of Parliament and Customs; their Common Laws being
principally contained in two Books, One called Regiam Majestatem, because it
begins (as does Justinian's Institutes) with those words, And agrees in
substance with our Glanvil, and most commonly de Verbo in Verbum, and many
times our Glanvil is cited therein. The second Book is called Quoniam
Attachiamenta, it beginning with those Words.

Secondly, The Descent of the Crown of Scotland, and of Lands to Subjects, is
the same with England.

Thirdly, They have the like High Court of Parliament, consisting of Lords
Spirituals, Lords Temporal and Commons. But of latter times, the Lords
Spiritual choose eight Temporal Lords, and the Lords Temporal eight Spiritual
Lords. These Sixteen make choice, of eight for Counties, and eight of Cities,
and Buroughs, in all 32; But whatsoever is agreed upon by them, the King or
his High Commissioner does allow or disallow, by moving of the Scepter, etc.

Fourthly, They have the same Degrees of Nobility, as, Dukes, Marquisses,
Earls, Viscounts and Barons.

Fifthly, The same great Officers as Chancellor, Treasurer, Lord Privy Seal,
Secretary, etc.

Sixthly, The same Ministers of Justice, as Sheriffs, Coroners, etc.

Seventhly, The same Laws for the most part, appropriated unto England, viz.
Tenant by the Curtesy, because they had Laws as England had.

Eighthly, The like Writs as De Recto, Assisa de Novel Disseisin, Mort de
Ancestor, de Guard, de Ideot' inquirend', Replegiar', Attachm', etc.

Ninthly, They agree with Magna Gharta, concerning Ward-ships.

Tenthly, With Charta de Foresta, for it is lawful for Bishops, Earls and
Barons, coming or returning through the Kings Forests, at the Kings Command to
kill own or two Beasts, in the sight of the Forester; Or otherwise in his
Absence to blow his Horn, that he appear not to take it Thievishly.

Eleventhly, The Lord of whom the Land is holden per Antiquius Feoffamentum
shall have the Wardship of the Body.

Twelfthly, The Sheriffs should cause the Acts of Parliament, to be proclaimed
as heretofore in England.

Thirteenthly, The Sheriffs there have Inheritance in their Office, as
sometimes in England, and still in Cumberland they have.

Fourteenthly, The same Vocables of Art, are used in both Kingdoms.

But by reason of their Acts of Parliment, which in many Points have altered,
diminished and abrogated, many of the old, and made new Laws, and other
Proceedings, the distinct Kingdoms, as they now stand, have many different
Laws, Coke's 4 Inst. 345, 346.

By the Statute of 1 Jac. 1.2. An Authority is given to certain Commissioners
of both Houses of Parliament, to Treat with certain Commissioners of Scotland,
concerning the Settlement of an Union and Peace between the Kingdoms of England
and Scotland.

By the Statute of 4 Jac. 1. Laws of Hostility, and the dependences thereof
between the two Nations of Scotland, and England are Repealed.

Felonies Committed by English Men in Scotland, shall be Tried in Cumberland,
Westmorland or Northumberland, before Commissioners and Jurors of England; for
which see more in the Statute.

By the Statute of 7 Jac. 1.1. If an English Man shall commit Felony in
Scotland, and then fly into England, the Justices of Assize or one of them, the
Justices of Gaol Delivery in their Gaol Delivery, or four of them, or the
Justices of Peace in Sessions, or four of them, may send the Offender into
Scotland, to be Tried.

By the Statute of 19 Car. 2. cap. 13. Twelve persons to be nominated by the
King, shall be Commissioners for this Kingdom; who, or five, or more of them,
after the 10th of January 1667, and before the 25th of March 1688; and so from
time to time may meet at such place in England as the King shall appoint, with
Commissioners for the Realm of Scotland; and Treat and Determine concerning the
Liberty of Trade between the two Kingdoms, by suspending Impositions, etc.
charged since the 25 of March, in 12 year of the Kings Reign; upon Commodities
of the Growth or Manufacture of either Kingdom, or of any of the English
Plantations, or other Commodities Exported out of England into Scotland; their
Determinations to be reduced into Writing, under the Hands and Seals of the
Commissioners, and being Ratified by the King, shall be in force for a year,
from the Date of such Ratification, or to the end of the next Session of
Parliament.

By the Statute of 22 Car. 2. cap. 9. Persons to be nominated by the King under
the Great Seal, or so many of them as shall be appointed to be of the Quorum,
shall have power to Treat with Commissioners, to be Authorized by the
Parliament of Scotland, concerning an Union of the Realms, and such other
Matters as they shall think fit, for the Kings Honor, and Good of both
Kingdoms. Their Proceedings to be reduced into Writings or Instruments
Tripartite, one part whereof to be presented to the King, another to the
Parliament of England, and a third to that of Scotland: Provided that nothing
to be agreed on by them, shall be of force till confirmed by Act of the
Parliament of England.

By the Statute of 4 Jac. 1.1. He that is once Tried in Scotland, shall not be
called in Question again for the same Offense.

By the Statute of 2 Ed. 4.8. Merchandise carried into, or brought out of
Scotland, or the Isles thereof, shall be first brought to Berwick, in pain to
forfeit the same.

As the Law has wrought four Unions. 1st, The Union of both Kingdoms, under
one Natural Liege Sovereign King, being so acknowledged by the Act of
Recognition. 2ly, The Union of Liegeance and Obedience of the Subject of both
Kingdoms, due by the Law of Nature to their Sovereign. 3ly, The Union of
Protection of both Kingdoms, equally belonging to the Subjects of either of
them. 4ly, The Union of the three Lions of England, with that one of Scotland
United and Quartered in one Escutcheon.

So the Law does make four Seperations. 1st, England and Scotland remain
several and distinct Kingdoms. 2ly, They are Governed by several Judicial, or
Municipal Laws. 3ly, They have several distinct and separate Parliaments. 4ly,
Each Kingdom has several Nobilities; For albeit a Postnatus in Scotland, or
any of his Posterity be the Heir of a Nobleman of Scotland, and by his Birth
Legitimated in England, yet he is none of the Peers or Nobility of England, for
his Natural Ligeance and Obedience due by the Law of Nature, makes him a
Subject, and no Alien within England: But that Subjection makes him not Noble
within England, for that Nobility had its Original by the Kings Creation and
not of Nature. More of which matter you may Read at large hereafter in Ireland:
And that the highest and lowest Dignities, as a King, and that of a Knight are
nevertheless universal, Coke's 7 Rep. 15. Calvin's Case.

In ancient time part of Scotland (besides Berwick) was within the Power, and
Ligeance of the King of England; yet was Governed by the Laws of Scotland.

The Case in 42 Ed. 3.2. Rules it, That so many as were Born in that part of
Scotland, that was under the Ligeance of the King, were no Aliens, but
inheritable to Lands in England; yet was that part of Scotland in another
Kingdom governed by several Laws: And certainly, if they were Natural Subjects
in that Case, when the King had but part of Scotland, when the King has all
Scotland, they shall be Natural Subjects, and no Aliens.

Barwick is no part of England, nor Governed by the Laws of England; yet they
that have been Born there, under the Obedience of one King, are Natural Born
Subjects and no Aliens.

There were sometimes in England, whiles the Heptarchy lasted, seven several
Crowned Kings, of several and distinct Kingdoms; but in the end the West Saxons
got the Monarchy, and all the other Kings melted (as it were) their Crowns, to
make one Imperial Diadem for the King of the West Saxons over all: Now when the
whole, was made the actual and real Ligeance and Obedience of one King, they
were all Natural born Subjects, and capable of, and Inheritable unto any Lands
in any of the said Kingdoms. Of all which matters and things last above
mentioned, you may read at large in Coke's 7 Report, Calvin's Case.

By the Statute of 4 Jac. 1. For Repeal of Hostile Laws, It is Enacted, That no
Englishman shall be sent out of England into Scotland, for any Offense done in
Scotland, until the Realms be made one in Laws and Government.

There was a Proclamation the 20 of October. 20 Jac. 1. concerning the Kings
Style of Great Britain, wherein all Judicial, and Legal Proceedings are
excepted, Cokes 4 Inst. 345.

The Lesser Islands near Scotland
ARE the Orcades or Isles of Orkeny in number 32, Situate against the North
Cape of Scotland: The chief being Pomonia, whose prime Town is Kirkwal,
honored with a Bishops See, and strengthened with two Castles; It is stored
with Tinn and Lead, and called by the Inhabitants Mainland. The 2d Hotlands or
Oceti, the Inhabitants Bibacissimi sunt, tamen non inebriantur.

These Isles in Solinus time were not Inhabited, being overgrown with Rushes:
Now are they Populous, and Fertile, were first discovered by Julius Agricola,
and first possessed by Normans, or Norwegians who surrendered them to Alexander,
King of Scotland 1266. They speak the Gothish Language.

Schetland lies two days Sailing North of Orcades, and is supposed to be the
Thule of the Ancients.

The Hebrides, because Situate West of Scotland, in number 44. The chief Ila
24 Miles long, and 16 broad, Plentiful in Wheat, Cattle and Herds of Red Deer:
The Isle of Sky 40 Miles long; Iona famous for Sepulture of the Kings of
Scotland: Mula 25 Miles bigger than the other. The People both in Language and
Behavior resemble the Wild Irish, and are called Redshanks.

A COMPENDIUM OF THE Laws and Government OF IRELAND, WITH THE ISLANDS Thereunto
belonging.

Anno Domini 1699,

IRELAND.
FROM Erinland, signifying in their Language a Western Land, lies on the West
of England and Wales, in length from the North parts of Antrim, to the South
parts of Cork 285, in breadth from the East parts of Down, to the West parts of
Mayo, 160 Miles long; Anciently called Juverna, Hibernia, Overnia, Jernia,
Scotia minor, Bernia and Vernia, now by the Natives Eryn; by the Welsh,
Yverden; by the Germans, Irlandt; by the Italians, Irlanda; and by the French,
Irlande.

The first Inhabitants came out of Britain, were anciently Rude and Barbarous,
having little Law or Government. First, partly Conquered by the Saxon Monarchs
of England, Then by the Norwegians, not long after by Henry the Second of
England, till by little and little it was wholly Reduced to England, and still
remains so; Governed by a Viceroy, call the Lord Lieutenant or Deputy of
Ireland, whose Seat is at Dublin.

They received the Christian Faith by St. Patrick, Anno 335, and are both
Protestants and Papists: Their Language is a Dialect of the Old British,
intermixed with Norwegian, Danish and English; The English is also frequently
used among them, and in some places a Mongrel Speech between both: Their chief
Commodities, are Cattle, Hides, Tallow, Butter, Cheese, Honey, Wax, Furs, Salt,
Hemp, Linen Cloth, Pipe-Staves, Wool, Frizes, etc.

This Country is divided into Four Great Provinces, Anciently Kingdoms, viz.

1. Ulster Ineol. Cui-Guilly, on the North, the Seat of the old Robogni,
Darnij, Volentij, Venicnij and Erdini; 116 Miles long, and 100 broad: It
contains Ten Counties, viz. 1. Antrim divided into Nine Baronies, the chief
Towns Carrick-fergus, Belfalst and Antrim. 2. Londonderry or Colerain, divided
into Five Baronies, chief Towns Londonderry and Colerain. 3. Dunnagal or
Tir-Conel, divided into 5 Baronies, chief Town Dunnagal, and Balishannon. 4.
Tyrone, divided into Four Baronies, chief Towns Dungannon. 5. Fermanagh,
divided into Eight Baronies, chief Town Enniskilling. 6. Cavan, divided into
Seven Baronies, chief Town Cavan. 7. Monaghan, divided into Five Baronies,
chief Town Monaghan. 8. Armagh, divided into Five Baronies, chief Towns
Charlemont and Armagh. 9 Down, divided into Eight Baronies, chief Town Down and
Newry: And 10 Louth often reckoned in Lemster, divided into Four Baronies,
chief Towns Drogheda, Dundalk and Louth, the chief Town of the whole is
Londonderry.

2. Connaught, Incol. Connauhty, on the South-west of Ulster, bordering on the
Western Ocean; The Seat of the old Gangani, Auteri and Nagnatae, 130 Miles
long, and 84 broad. It contains Six Counties, viz. 1. Letrim, divided into Five
Baronies, chief Towns Letrim and James Town. 2. Slego, divided into Six
Baronies, chief Town Slego. 3. Mayo or Majo, divided into Nine Baronies, chief
Towns Mayo or Moy, and Killalore. 4. Roscommon, divided into Six Baronies,
chief Towns Athlone, Roscommon and Boil. 5. Galway, divided into Seventeen
Baronies, chief Towns Galway, Tuam and Clonefart: And 6 Thomond or Clare (often
reckoned in Munster,) divided into Eight Baronies, chief Towns Clare and
Killalow; The chief Town of the whole, is Gallway.

3. Leinster, Incol. Leighnigh, on the East of Connaught, and South of Ulster,
The Seat of the old Briguntes, Menapij, Cauci and Blani, 112 Miles long, and 70
broad. It contains 11 Counties, viz. 1. Longford, divided into Six Baronies,
chief Town Longford, 2. West Mead, divided into Eleven Baronies, chief Town
Molingar. 3. East Mead, divided into Eleven Baronies, chief Towns Trim and
Athboy; (these three made the Province of Mead.) 4. Dublin, divided into Six
Baronies, chief City Dublin, the Metropolis of all Ireland, Seated on the
Liffie, Built by Harfager the first King of Norway, and after the English
Conquest, was Peopled by a Colony of Men from Bristol. 5. VVicklow, divided
into Six Baronies, the chief Town VVicklow and Arcklow. 6. Kildare, divided
into Eight Baronies, chief Town Kildare. 7. Kings County, divided into Eleven
Baronies, chief Town Phillips Town. 8. Queens County, divided into Seven
Baronies, chief Town Martborow or Queens Town. 9. Kilkenney, divided into
Eleven Baronies, chief Towns Kilkenny and Thomas Town. 10. Catherlagh, divided
into 5 Baronies, chief Town Catherlagh: And 11. Wexford, divided into Eight
Baronies, the chief Towns Wexford and Ross; The chief Town of the whole, is
Dublin.

4. Muuster or Mounster Incol. Mown, on the South of Leinster and Connaught,
The Seat of the old Ulterni, Coriandi, Luceni, Velibori, and Vodij, 135 Miles
long, and 120 broad. It contains Five Counties, viz. 1. Tipperary, divided into
Fourteen Baronies, the chief Towns Clonmel, Cashel and Tipperary. 2.
Waterford, divided into Six Baronies, chief Town Waterford and Dungarvan. 3.
Limerick, divided into Nine Baronies, chief Towns Limerick and Kilmalock. 4.
Kerry, divided into Eight Baronies, chief Towns Dingle and Ardfeart: And 5
Cork, divided into Thirteen Baronies, chief Towns Cork, King-sale and Youghil;
In this lies the County of Desmond, divided into Two Baronies, chief Town
Bantry, chief Town of the whole is Limerick, but many reckon Cork.

The Rivers. 1. Shannon. 2. Barro. 3. Shure and Black-water.

The Soil is Fertile, if improved by Industry. Amongst other Prerogatives, no
Venomous Serpent breeds here, according to the Verses,

-- Illa ego sum, etc.
The chief Loughs are 1. Lough-Earne, 2. Lough-Neagh and Lough Corrib; the last
26 Miles long, and in breadth 4 Miles, has 20. Ilets abounding in Pine Trees.
The Mountains, 1. Knock Patrick, 2. Sliew-Bloemy, 3. Curlew Hills.

The Archbishops here are 4. Bishops. 19. Universities.

The Arms Azure, an Irish Harp: Or, Stringed Argent; King James the first First
Marshalling them with the Arms of England, as the first Absolute King thereof,
although Henry the eighth was declared King in Dublin, by an Irish Parliament:

In each of the Counties is a Sheriff, and Justices of the Peace; and they are
Governed by the Laws of England, and Statutes Enacted at our English
Parliaments; But the Deputy has now Power to Asemble the States here, and make
what Laws the necessity of the time requires.

King John in the 12th year of his Reign went into Ireland, and there by advice
of Grave and Learned Men, whom he carried with him, by Parliament de comuni
omnium de Hibernia consensu, Ordained that Ireland should be Governed by the
Laws of England, which of many of the Irishmen according to their own Desire,
was joyfully accepted and obeyed; and by many the same was soon after
absolutely refused, preferring their Brehon Law, before the Just, and
Honorable Laws of England, Co. 1 Inst. 14.1.

By Poyning's Law, made by Authority of Parliament in Ireland, Anno 10 H. 7.
all the Laws and Statutes of this Realm of England before that time made, do
extend to Ireland, so as now Magna Charta does extend to Ireland, Co. 2. Inst.
2.

Resolved by all the Judges in England, That for a Treason done in Ireland, the
Offender may be Tried by the Statute of 35 Hen. 8. in England, because the
Words of the Statute be; All Treasons committed out of the Realm of England;
and Ireland is out of the Realm of England, Coke's 3 Inst. 11.

Albeit Ireland be a distinct Kingdom, and out of the Realm of England to some
purposes, as Protections, and Fines levied, etc. yet to other intents, is as a
Member of, or belonging to the Crown of England. And therefore a Writ of Error
is maintainable here in the King's Bench, of a Judgment given in the King's
Bench in Ireland; so as the Judges did construe that part of the Statute of 25
Ed. 3. Making it High Treason to bring in false Money into this Realm,
Counterfeit to the Money of England; not to extend to Money brought out of
Ireland, Coke's 3 Instit. 18.

The Irish being Descended from the Ancient Britains, now have the same Laws
with us in England; therefore I shall not write of the Jurisdiction, or
particular Courts of Justice there, they being the same in England; But take
Notice, That King John, and also Henry the Second, the Father of King John, did
Command at the Request of the Irish, That such Laws as he had in England,
should be of Force in Ireland, and hereby Ireland being a distinct Kingdom, was
to have Parliaments holden there as in England: And thereupon in the Reign of
King John a Parliament was holden there, as by Record appears, Co. 4 Inst.
349.

King Henry the Second, when he had Conquered Ireland, sent thither that
Treatise fairly Written in Parchment, Entitled Modus tenendi Parliamentum, for
better holding of Parliaments there, Coke's 4 Inst. 349.

And sometimes the Kings of England have called the Nobles of Ireland, to come
to the Parliaments of England, Coke's 4 Inst. 350.

And by Special Words the Parliaments of England may bind the Subjects of
Ireland, Co. 4 Inst. ibid.

And seeing good Acts of Parliament made in England since the Reign of King
John, extended not to Ireland, unless it were especially named, or by General
Words included a Right profitable Act was made at a Parliament holden in
Ireland, Anno 10 Hen. 7. before Sir Edward Poynings, then Deputy or Pro-Rex in
Ireland, and thereupon called Poyning's Law, That all Statutes late made in
England concerning the public Weal, should be accepted, used, and executed in
Ireland, Co. 4 Inst. 351.

In what manner a Parliament is to be holden in Ireland, and how Bills offered
to the Parliament there, shall be first Transmitted hither under the Great Seal
of that Kingdom; and having received Approbation here, shall be returned
hither, to be preferred to the Parliament, and several Questions and Doubts
Resolved concerning this matter, Vide Co. 4 Inst. 353.

By the Statute of 3 Hen. 2. all Persons having Lands, Tenements, or Offices
Ecclesiastical, or Temporal, shall Reside upon the same; and those that have
Castles must there reside, and repair, and fortify them. And if they Depart,
they must appoint some able to supply their room, or the Governor may dispose
half their Living to such Defense, Co. 4 Inst. 356.

At a Synod holden by St. Patrick in Ireland, it was unanimously agreed, That
Irish Priests should have Wives, Co. 4 Inst. 356.

There is an Ancient Record concerning Ireland, necessary to be Explained; In
these Words:

REX Thesaurario Hiberniae, Solutem. Cum Edwardus primogenitus noster terram
Hiberniae habeat and teneat de dono nostro cum omnibus pertinentiis suis, adeo
libere and quiet sicut eam in manu nostra teneremus, per quod charissima filia
nostra Alianora Consors dicti filij nostri Aurum suum tam de finibus quam
sponte Oblatis in terra Hiberniae habere Debet, sicut charissima Consors nostra
Alianora Regina Angliae Aurum suum habet de eisdem in Regno nostro Angliae.
Vobis mandamus, etc. quatenus praefat' Consorti filij nostri praedicti Aurum
praedictum de finibus and sponte oblatis, and etiam de quibuscunque aliis
finibus praedictis habere facias in forma praedicta. Et hoc, etc. In cujus,
etc. Test Rege 29 die Februarij, Anno 52 Hen. 3.

By this Record first it appears, that as the Law was taken at that Day by
Gift of King Henry the Third, his Eldest Son Prince Edward was Lord of the
Dominion, and Lordship of Ireland. Secondly, That albeit the Wife of Prince
Edward was not Queen in Name, but had the Effect of it; therefore she should
have a Duty, called Aurum Reginae, as well as the Queen of England, being but
Lady in Ireland.

For albeit the Kings of Ireland were (until the Statute of 33 Hen. 8.) styled
by the Name of Lords of Ireland; yet was he Supremus, and absolute Dominus, and
had Royal Dominion, and Authority, and that his Consort was in rei veritate
Regina, or else she could not have had Aurum Reginae.

Albeit this Royal Dominion, and Land of Ireland was of ancient time permitted
to be granted De facto, to the King's Sons beforementioned; yet by the Law,
the King by his Letters Patent could not grant so Royal a Member of his
Imperial style to any, no more than he could do of the Kingdom of England, Co.
4 Inst. 357.

What was the Duty of Aurum Reginae, and when due, Vide 4. Coke's Inst. 358.

At a Parliament holden in Ireland by Howel Duke of Clarence, Lieutenant there
Anno 40 Edw. 3. called The Statute of Kilkenny, The Brehon Law (which was the
Irish Judges Law,) is no Law, but a Lewd Custom crept in of later times, and
never was the Law of the Ancient Britains, from whom they are descended, Co. 4
Inst. 358.

The Pro-Rex there has been sometime called, Custos, Warden, Lieutenant, Chief
Justice, Deputy of Ireland, Coke's 4 Inst. ibid.

If an Archbishopric, or Bishopric in Ireland be void, then the Chapter shall
Sue to the King in England, to go to Election; and after Election made, they
ought upon Certificate thereof made to the King, to obtain his Royal Assent to
this Election; and thereupon a Writ shall be directed out of the Chancery here,
to the Chief Justice of Ireland, or his Lieutenant, rehearsing all this matter,
and commanding him to take Fealty of the Bishop, and to restore him to his
Temporalties. But now the Course is in Ireland, to make such Writs there in the
Name of the King: But the King Names the Archbishops, and Bishops there, as he
does in England, and then the Chapter choose him whom the King Names, and
thereupon Writs are made of Course, Coke's 4. Institutes 359.

And whereas some have Divided this Kingdom into the English Pale, and Wild
Irish, let Oblivion bury it, for now all are reduced to Obedience and civil
Behaviour^: So as a Man may justly say of the Old Britains,

Sunt in Bello fortes, and in Pace fideles. And whereas some have said the
Crown of England had the Country of Ireland by Donation from the Pope, the
following Record will manifest the Truth therein.

Altitonantis Dei largiflua Clementia, qui est Rex Regum, and Dominus
Dominantium, ego Edgarus Anglorum Basileus, omniumque rerum Insularum Oceani
qui Britanniam circumjacent; cunctarumque Nationum quae infra eam includuntur
Imperator and Dominus, gratias ago ipsi Deo Omnipotenti Regi meo, qui meum
imperium sic ampliavit and exaltavit super regnum patrum meorum; Qui licet
Monarchiam Totius Angliae adepti sunt a tempore Athelstani, qui primus Regum
Anglorum omnes Nationes quae Britanniam incolunt sibi armis subegit, nullus
tamen eorum ultra fines Imperium suum Dilatare aggressus est. Mihi tamen
concessit propitia Divinitas cum Anglorum imperio omnia regna Insularum Oceani
cum suis ferotissimis Regibus usque Norvegiam maximamque partem Hiberniae, cum
sua Nobilissima Civitate de Dublina Anglorum regno Subjugare quos etiam omnes
meis imperiis colla subdere, Dei favente gratia, Coegi. Quapropter and ego
Christi gloriam and laudem in regno meo exaltar^, and ejus servicium
amplificare devotus deposui. Et per meos fideles fautores, Dunstanum, viz.
Archiepiscopum Ayelyolanum ac Oswaldum Archiepiscopos, quos mihi patres
spirituales and consiliatores eligi, magna ex part disposui, etc. Facta sunt
haec Anno Domini 964, Indictione 8. Regni vero Edgari Anglorum Regis 6 in Regia
urbe quae ab incolis Ocleayeceastrie nominatur in natale Domini festivitate
Sanctorum Innocentium feria 4, etc. Ego Edgar Basileus Anglorum, and Imperator
Regum gentium, cum consensu and principrim and Archiepiscoporum meorum hanc
meam munificentiam signo meo corroboravi. Ego Alfrye Regina consensi and Signo
Crueis confirmavi. Ego Dunstan Archiepiscopus Dorobor' Ecclesiae Christi
consensi and subscripsi. Ege Osticel Archiepiscopus Eboracenses Ecclesiae
consensi and subscripsi. Ego Alferic Dux. Ego Buthnod Dux. Ego Arigdary Dux.

And what Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction the Archbishop of Canterbury, had in
Ireland in ancient time, before it was Subject to the Crown of England, you may
read in Cambden's Britannia p. 735, and 765. as namely in the Consecration, and
Confirmation of their Bishops, by reason of his Primacy in Ireland, Co. 4 Inst.
360.

King Henry the Second at a Parliament holden at Oxford, Created his Son King
John, King of Ireland. But succeeding Kings wrote themselves Domini Hiberniae,
till 33 Hen. 8, in which year he took upon himself the Style of King of
Ireland, being so Declared at a Parliament in Dublin, Coke's 4 Inst. 360.

Certain it is, that whilst the Liberal Sciences in Europe lay Buried in
Darkness, their Luster did shine forth clearly in Ireland. Thither did our
English Saxons repair, as to a Mart of good Literature; whence of the Holy Men
of those times we often read, Amandatus est ad Disciplinam in Hiberniam, Co. 4
Inst. 360.

In the Book of Magna Charta is an Ordinance for Ireland, concerning diverse
Matters, Entitled, Ordinatio pro statu Terrae H^berniae.

By the Statute of 17 Ed. 1 cap. 1. The King's Officers in Ireland, shall
purchase no Land there without the King's License.

King's Officers in Ireland shall make no Purveyance there, but by Writ out of
Chancery there, or in England, and that in time of Necessity only, and by the
Advice of the Council there.

All kind of Merchandises may be Exported out of Ireland, except to the King's
Enemies, and if any Officer restrain them, he shall satisfy double Damages to
the party grieved, and be also punished by the King.

The Fees for every Bill of Grace in Ireland under the Seal of the Justice
there, shall be Four pence for the Bill, and Two pence for the Writing thereof.

The Marshals Fee for a Prisoner, when he shall be Delivered is Four pence.

No Pardon of the Death of a Man, or other Felony, or for flying for the same,
shall be granted by the Justices there, but only at the King's Command, and
under his Seals.

No Officers there shall receive any Original Writ, which is not Sealed by the
Seal of Ireland, or by the Exchequer Seal there, of things concerning that
Court.

The Justices of Ireland shall not Delay, or Adjourn Assize of Novel disseisin
there, save only in the County where he is, and while he shall remain there.

By the Statute of 34 Ed. 3.17. all kind of Merchandise may be Exported, and
Imported out of, and into Ireland, as well by Aliens, as Denizens.

Persons who have Lands, and Possessions in Ireland, may freely Import and
Export their Commodities thither, and from thence, without Impeachment.

By the Statute of 1 Hen. 6.3. all Irish Men shall avoid the Kingdom, except
Graduates, Beneficed Men, Lawyers having Inheritance in England, and English
Parents, Religious Persons, Professed Merchants, Burgesses, and other
Inhabitants of good Fame, and Persons Married in England, and all they shall
find Surety for their Good Behavior.

No Irish Man shall Inhabit here in the Universities, or elsewhere without a
Testimonial, under the Seal of the Lieutenant or Justices of Ireland,
(Testifying that he is of the King's Obeisance) to be Delivered to the
Chancellor here, in pain to be punished as a Rebel.

No Irishman shall be Head or Governor of any Hall, or House.

By the Statute of 2 Hen. 6.8. Irishmen coming to live in England, shall give
Surety for their Good Behavior; viz. in the Universities to the Chancellors;
in Counties to the Justices of Peace; and in Corporations, and other Liberties,
to the Head Officers respectively.

By the Statute of 16 and 17 Car. 1.30. an Act for a speedy Contribution and
Loan, toward the Relief of the King's Distressed Subjects of the Kingdom of
Ireland. See the Statutes at large.

An Act for the Speedy and Effectual reducing of the Rebels in Ireland to their
due Obedience, to the King and the Crown of England; and certain other
Additional Acts were made for the same purpose, and for the Sale of Forfeited
Lands there.

By the Statute of 32 Car. 2. cap. 2. The Act made 18 Car. 2. Entitled, An Act
against Importing Cattle from Ireland, and other parts beyond the Seas, and
Fish taken by Foreigners, is revived, and Power given not only to Constables,
and Officers, but to every Person whatsoever, in any place whatsoever, to take
and seize the Cattle, and Goods Imported, contrary to the said Act; And that
such Seizer shall have the Benefit given by this Act.

The other Acts concerning Ireland made in England, and the diverse Acts made in
Ireland, you may see in the Books of the Statutes of either Kingdom at large.

The Rule, Quando duo jura concurrunt in una persona aequum est acsi in
diversis, holds not in Personal things; that is, when two Persons are
necessarily and inevitably required by Law; For no man can now say, That the
King of England can make War, or League with the King of Scotland, or King of
Ireland, etc. there being but One Head of both; and as Liegance of the Subjects
of both Kingdoms is due to their Sovereign by one Law, and that is the Law of
Nature: So there is a Union of Protection of both Kingdoms equally belonging to
either of them; although in other respects they are distinct Kingdoms. For and
Earl or Baron of Ireland is not a Peer, or of the Nobility of this Realm, as
appears by the Book 8 R. 2. where in an Action of Debt, Process of Outlawry
was awarded against the Earl of Ormond in Ireland, which ought not to have been
if he had been Noble here.

But there is a diversity worthy of Observation, for the highest and lowest
Dignities are Universal; For if a King of a Foreign Nation come into England by
leave of the King, (as it ought to be) in this case he shall Sue and be Sued by
the Name of a King; And a Knight shall be so named wheresoever he received that
Dignity, Co. 7 Rep. Calvin's Case.

If a King come to a Christian Kingdom by Conquest, he having Vitae and Necis
potestatem, may alter the Laws of that Kingdom at his pleasure; but until such
alteration, the Ancient Laws of that Kingdom remain. But if a a Christian King
Conquer the Kingdom of an Infidel, there ipso facto the Laws are abrogated, and
in that case, until certain Laws be established, the King by himself, and such
Judges as he shall appoint shall judge them, and their Causes according to
Natural Equity, in such sort as Kings in ancient time did their Kingdoms,
before any certain Municipal Laws were given: But if a King have a Kingdom by
Title of Descent, for that by the Laws of that Kingdom he does Inherit, he
cannot change those Laws of himself, without Consent of Parliament.

Also if a King have a Christian Kingdom by Conquest, as King Henry the Second
had Ireland, after King John had given to them (being under his Obedience and
Subjection) the Laws of England for the Government of that Country, no
succeeding King could alter the same without Parliament. And in this case,
whilst the Realm of England, and that of Ireland were Governed by several Laws,
any Born in Ireland was no Alien to the Realm of England. And in case of a
Conquest of a Christian Kingdom, as well those that served in the Wars at the
Conquest, as those that remained at home for the Safety and Peace of their
Country; and other the King's Subjects, as well Antenati as Postnati, are
capable of Lands in the Kingdom or Country Conquered, and may maintain any Real
Action, and have the like Privileges there, as they may have in England, Co. 7
Rep. 17 Calvin' Case.

Ireland came to the King's of England by Conquest; but who was the first
Conqueror has been a Question.

The Lord Coke says, he had seen a Charter made by King Edgar in these Words:
Ego Edgarus Anglorum (...), omniumque, Insularum Oceani, quae Britanniam
cirumjacent Imperator and Dominus, gratias ago ipsi Deo Omnipotenti Regi meo,
qui meum Imperium sic ampliavit, and exaltavit super Regnum Patrum meorum, etc.
mihi concessit propitia Divinitas, cum Anglorum Imperio omnia Regia Insularum
Oceani, etc. cum suis ferocissimis Regibus usque Norvegiam, maximamque partem
Hiberniae, cum sua Nobilissima Civitate de Dublina, Anglorum Regno subjugare,
quapropter and ego Christi gloriam and laudem in Regno meo exaltare, and ejus
servitium amplificare devotus disposut, etc. Yet for that it was wholly
Conquered in the Reign of King Henry the Second, the Honor of the Conquest of
Ireland is attributed to him; and his Style was, Rex Angliae, Dominus
Hiberniae, Dux Normanniae, Dux Aquitaniae, and Comes Andegaviae.

It is evident by our Books, that Ireland is a Dominion separate and divided
from England. And 2 R. 3.12. Hibernia habet Parliamentum and faciunt Leges, and
nostra Statuta non ligant eos, quia non mittunt Milites ad Parliamentam; which
is to be understood, unless they be especially named; sed Personae eorum sunt
Subjecti Regis sicut Inhabitants in Calesia, Gasconia, and Guyan.

Concerning their Laws, Ex Rotulis Patentium de Anno 11 Regis H. 3. there is a
Charter which that King made, beginning in these Words: Rex, etc. Baronibus,
Militibus, and omnibus libere Tenentibus, Salutem. Satis ut credimus vestra
audivit discretio, Quod quando bonae memoriae Johannes quondam Rex Angliae
Pater noster venit in Hiberniam, ipse duxit secum Viros discretos, and legis
peritos, quorum Communi consilio, and ad instantiam Hibernensium Statuit and
praecepit Leges Anglicanas in Hibernia, ita quod Leges easdem in scripturas
redactas reliquit sub Sigillo suo ad Scaccarium Dublin'.

So as now the Laws of England became the proper Laws of Ireland: But because
they have Parliaments holden there, whereat they have made diverse particular
Laws, and for that they retain unto this day diverse of their Ancient Customs,
The Book 20 H. 6.8. holds, That Ireland is governed by Laws and Customs
separate and diverse from the Laws of England. A Voyage Royal may be made into
Ireland, which proves it a distinct Dominion.

In the Statute of 4 H. 7. cap. 24. Of Fines, Provision is made for those that
be out of this Land; and it is holden in Plowden's Commentaries in Stowel's
Case 375. That he that is in Ireland, is out of the Land, and consequently
within that Proviso, Co. 7 Rep. Calvin's Case.

But he is no Alien that is Born within the King's Obedience; And no Man can be
Alien to the Subject, that is no Alien to the King. Non potest esse Aliegena
Corpori, qui non est Capiti, Non gregi, qui non est Regi.

If an Irish Man dwelling in Ireland has Lands in England, he shall be
chargable for the same to all intents, as if an English Man were Owner thereof,
and dwelt in Ireland: But if Irish Men or Men of the Isles of Man, Jersey,
Guernsey, etc. have Lands within England, and dwell here, they shall be subject
to all Services and public Charges within this Realm, as an English Man shall
be, Co. 7 Rep. 26. Calvin's Case.

A COMPENDIOUS DESCRIPTION OF THE English Plantations IN ASIA, AFRICA AND
AMERICA

Anno Domini 1699,

English Plantations IN ASIA.
BAntan or Banda, Situate near the Molucco's in the East Indies, abounding
more in Nutmegs, than any other Island of India, and for that cause much
frequented; but this Trade is now taken from us by the Dutch: The chief Town is
Nera. Here the Christian Faith has taken deep Root, according to the Church of
Rome; The English have a Colony at Surrat, and Fort called the Fort of St.
George, etc. which are not for our purpose more to describe.

Bombain, Is also under the English Government, but being of no great account,
we shall no further describe it.

The English Colonies in Africa.
GUinea in Terra Nigritarum does acknowledge the English Government. It
extends from Sierra Leona, in the 10th Degree of Longitude to Benin in the
30th: Here is neither Town or Castle, except Mina Built by the Portugals. This
is a Country very Fruitful having Mines of Gold, The Juice of a Tree as Strong
as Wine, and much abounding in Rice, Barley, Ivory and Guinea Pepper.

Tanger, Did here formerly belong to the English, but the Mole and Castle is
now Demolished.

The English Plantations in America.
THis Immense Country may be properly called a New World, being discovered by
Christopher Columbus, Anno 1492. The ancient Fathers, Philosophers and Poets
being of Opinion, That the places near the North and South Pole were not
Inhabitable, by reason of the Extremity of Cold, and the Middle part, because
of Excessive heat, and thought it a great Solecism to believe the Earth was
round: For holding which Opinion, It Is said Pope Zacheus was so Zealous against
Bishop Virgil, That he Sentenced him to be cast out of the Temple and Church of
God, and to be deprived of his Bishopric for this perverse Doctrine, That there
were Antipodes, or People whose Feet are placed against ours; although this
discovery of America has fully confirmed these Opinions, and the yearly
compassing the World evidenceth, the necessity and certainty of Inhabitants
living on all Parts of the Earthly Globe.

But the particular Discoveries and Voyages into the several parts of America
being not for our present purpose, I shall proceed to give some Relation of the
Discovery, Plantation and Government of those Countries, and Islands in the
West Indies, which are in the Possession of the English at this day; and
intending to begin from the North, and proceed South toward the Equinoctial
Line. The farthest as being North is.

Newfoundland.
CAlled also by some Estotiland, Situate between 46 and 53 Degrees North
Latitude. Has South Terra Corterialis, North, the Streights called Fretum
Davisij from John Davis an Englishman, who endeavored by the North of America
to find a more quick passage to Cathai and China, Sebastian Cabot first
attempting it Anno 1527. Who is said to be the first discoverer of this
Country, not then known to be an Island; and Sir Martin Frobisher seconded him
in 1576, who made three Voyages, and called a great Promontory there, Queen
Elizabeth's Foreland, and the Sea running by it, Frobisher's Streights, on the
other side of these Streights, lies Groenland, and not far distant Friesland.

This Island is Esteemed as big as England, The North part being more Inhabited
than the South, though that be fitter for Habitation; within 50 Leagues of the
Shore is a Bank, or Ridge of Ground many Hundred Leagues long, in breadth
(where broadest) only 24: About it are certain Islands, which Calvert called
Baccaloes, for the great number of Codfish; of which, one Man may catch One
hundred in an hour, the Sea Coasts abounding likewise with Salmons, Herring,
Thornbacks, Oysters, Muscles with Pearls, and the Island with Bears and Foxes.

After the first discovery, the business of Trading thither was laid aside for
many years, in the mean time the Normans, Portugals and Britains of France
resorted to it, and changed the Names which had been given by the English to
the Bays and Promontories, but the English not willing to Relinquish their
Pretensions in 1583. Sir Humphrey Gilbert took Possession thereof, in the Name
and by the Commission of Queen Elizabeth, forbidding all other Nations to use
Fishing, and intended to have settled an English Colony there, but being Wreckt
in his Return, the settling of the Colony was discontinued till 1608; when John
Guy a Merchant of Bristol, in 23 days Sailed from thence to Conception Bay in
Newfoundland.

By Jus Gentium or the Law of Nations, whatever wast Country is discovered at
the charge of any Prince; It is the right of that Prince, who was at the charge
of the discovery; now this Country being among others in that part of America,
which has been discovered at the charge of the Kings of England; King James
the first by Letters Patents Anno Dom. 1623. Granted unto Sir George Calvert,
afterward Lord Baltimore part of Newfoundland, which was Erected into the
Province of Avalon, where he settled a Plantation; and erected a stately House
and Fort at Ferriland, where he dwelt sometime, which since his Death, is
descended to the present Lord Baltimore.

New England.
WAs first discovered by Sebastian Cabot in 1497, and in 1584 Mr. Philip
Amadas, and Mr. Arthur Barlow, were the first who took Possession of it for
Queen Elizabeth. The next year Sir Richard Greenvil conveyed an English Colony
thither, under the Government of Mr. Ralph Lane, who continued there till the
next year, and then returned with Sir Francis Drake into England, who is by
some accounted the first discoverer thereof; It has New France North, and
Virginia South, North East, Norumbegia, and South West Novum Belgium, on other
parts it has Woods, and the Seacoast Situate between 40 and 41 Degree of
North Latitude, In the midst of the Temperate Zone; yet is the Clime more
uncertain, as to Heat and Cold, than those European Kingdoms, which are in the
same Latitude. The Air is Clear, Healthful, and agreeable to the English, well
watered with Rivers, having variety of Beasts, Tame and Wild, with several
sorts of Trees and excellent Fruits. The Commodities it Yields, are Rich
Furs, Flax, Linen, Amber, Iron, Pitch, Tar, Cables, Masts, and Timber to Build
Ships, with several sorts of Grain, wherewith they drive a considerable Trade
to Barbados; and other English Plantations in America, supplying them with
Flower, Biscuit, Salt, Flesh and Fish, and in return bring Sugars and other
Goods: To England they Trade for Stuffs, Silks, Cloth, Iron, Brass and other
Utensils for their Houses. The Weights and Measures are the same with England.

Though the Planting of this Country by the English, was designed by diverse;
yet it lay much neglected till a small Company of Planters, under the Command
of George Popham, and Captain Gilbert were sent over, at the charge of Sir John
Popham in 1606. to begin a Colony in the Northerly part of this Country, but
that design in Two years expiring with its Founder; soon after some Honorable
persons of the West of England, commonly called the Council of Plymouth, being
well informed of several Navigable Rivers, and Commodious Havens with other
places fit for Traffic and Planting, obtained of King James the first a Patent
under the Great Seal, of all that part of North America called New England;
from Forty to Forty eight Degrees of North Latitude. In 1612, It was Cantoned
and Divided by Grants into many lesser parcels, according as Adventurers
presented: But afterward for want of good Conduct, they were by degrees in a
manner destitute of Laws and Government. In 1610, One Mr. Robinson a
Presbyterian, or Independent Preacher, and several English then at Leyden in
Holland, Entreated King James to grant them Liberty under his Royal Authority,
to place themselves in some part of New England, and obtaining a Patent or
Grant, they Sailed from Plymouth in England, to the Southern parts of
New England, there laying a Foundation for a new Colony, naming their Town New
Plymouth; after which things were very prosperously and succesfully carried on
in New England till An. 1636. The Indians committed many Outrages upon the
English and Dutch, whereupon all the Colonies unamimously falling upon them,
suppressed them in 1637.

The English possess many potent Colonies, being since very numerous and
powerful, and are Governed by Laws of their own making (having several Courts
of Judicature, where they meet once a Month,) so they be not Repugnant to the
Laws of England. Every Town sends two Burgesses to their Great and Solemn
General Court. The Government both. Ecclesiastical and Civil, is in the Hands
of the Independents or Presbyterians: The Military part of their Government, is
by one Major General, and three Sergeant Majors, to whom belong the 4 Counties
of Suffolk, Middlesex, Essex, and Norfolk; They have several Towns, whereof
Boston is the Metropolis, likewise Dorchester, Cambridge, Beautified with two
Colleges, and many well Built Houses: Reading, Salem, Berwick, Fraintree,
Bristol, and many others, having most of them Names of some Town in Old England.

New York.
FOrmerly named New Netherland, being part of that New England which the Dutch
once possessed. It was first Discovered by Mr. Hudson, and sold presently by
him to the Dutch, without Authority from his Sovereign the King of England in
1608. The Hollanders in 1614 began to plant it there, and called it New
Netherlands; but Sir Samuel Argall, Governor of Virginia, routed them; after
which they got leave of King James to put in there for Fresh Water in their
passage to Brasile, and did not offer to plant till a good while after the
English were settled in the Country. In 1664. His late Majesty King Charles the
Second sent over Four Commissioners to Reduce the Colonies into Bounds, that
had before Incroached upon each other, who Marching with Three Hundred
Red-Coats to Manhades, or Manhatees, took from the Dutch their Chief Town, then
called New Amsterdam, now New York, and August 29. Turned out their Governor
with a Silver-Leg, and all the rest, but those who acknowledged Subjection to
the King of England, suffering them to enjoy their Estates and their Houses as
before; Thirteen days after, Sir Robert Carr took the Town and Fort of Aurania,
and Twelve Days after that the Fort and Town of Arosapha, then De la Ware
Castle, Manned with Dutch and Sweeds; so that now the English are Masters of
Three handsome Towns, Three strong Forts, and a Castle, without the loss of one
Man. The first Governor of these parts for the King of England was Colonel
Nichols, one of the Commissioners.

This Country is blessed with the Richest Soil in all New England. I have heard
it Reported (says an Author,) That one Bushel of European Wheat, has yielded
One Hundred in a Year.

The Town of New York is well seated both for Trade, Security, and Pleasure, in
a small Isle called Manahaten, at the Mouth of the Great River Mohegan, which
is very commodious for Shipping, and about Two Leagues broad. The Town is
large, built with Dutch Brick alla Moderna, consisting of above Five hundred
Houses, the meanest not valued under One hundred Pounds. To the Land-ward it is
encompassed with a Wall of good thickness, and Fortified at the Entrance of the
River so as to Command any Ship which passes that way, by a Fort called James
Fort. It has a Mayor, Aldermen, a Sheriff and Justices of Peace for their
Magistrates. The Inhabitants are most English and Dutch, and have a
considerable Trade with the Indians, for Bever, Otter, Raccoon Skins, with
other rich Furrs; Likewise for Bear, Deer, and Elk-Skins, and are supplied with
Venison and Fowl in the Winter, and Fish in the Summer by the Indians at an
easy Rate.

The Province of New York, formerly contained all that Land which lies in the
North parts of America, betwixt New England and Maryland, the Length toward
the North is not fully known, the Breadth is about 200 Miles. The Principal
Rivers are Hudson's River, Raritan River, and De la Ware Bay. The chief Islands
are Manahaten Island, Long Island, and Staten Island.

Manahaten Island, so called by the Indians, lies within the Land betwixt 41
and 42 Degrees of North Latitude, and is about 14 Miles long, and two broad.
New York is seated on the West of this Island, having a small Arm of the Sea,
which divides it from Long Island on the South.

Long Island runs Eastward above 100 Miles, and is in some places 8, 12, or 14.
Miles broad, Inhabited from one end to the other, having an Excellent Soil for
all English Grain; the Fruits, Trees, and Herbs, very good. In May you may see
the Woods and Fields so curiously bedecked with Roses, and a multitude of other
delightful Flowers, as equal, if not excel many Gardens in England: There are
several Navigable Rivers which run very swift, and are well furnished with
Variety of Fish, as the Land is with all sorts of English Cattle, besides Deer,
Bears, Wolves, Raccoons, Otters, and Wild Fowl in abundance.

Hudson's River runs by New York Northward into the Country, toward the Head of
which is seated New Albany, a place of great Trade with the Indians, betwixt
which and New York, being above 100 Miles distance, is as good Corn Land as the
World affords. It was reduced to his Majesty's Obedience by Colonel Nichols,
and a League of Friendship concluded between the Inhabitants, and the Indians,
by whom they have never been since disturbed, but every Man has sat under his
own Vine, and has peaceably Reaped and Enjoyed the Fruits of his own Labors.

New Jersey
IS part of the Province of New Albion aforementioned, and is Subdivided into
East and West Jersey. East Jersey lies between 39 and 41 Degrees of North
Latitude, being about 12 Degrees more to the South, than the City of London. It
is bounded on the South-East by the Main Sea, East by that vast Navigable
Stream called Hudson's River, West by a Line of Division which separates it
from West Jersey, and North upon the Main Land, and extends it self in length,
on the Seacoasts, and along Hudson's River, 100 Miles and upwards.

The Proprietors of this Province, Anno 1682. Published an Account of the
Situation, Conveniences and Product thereof, for Encouragement of such who had
an Inclination to Settle there. Which you may read in Burton's Description of
America, fol. 99.

The Constitutions of this Country were made in the time of John Lord Berkley,
and Sir George Carteret, the late Proprietors thereof, in which such Provision
has been made for Liberty in matter of Religion and Property in their Estates,
that under the Forms thereof this Country has been considerably increased.

Pensylvania
BY Letters Patent Dated the 4th of March 1680. King Charles the Second, in
Consideration of the Faithful Service of Sir William Pen, Deceased, did Grant
unto William Pen Esquire, Son and Heir of the said Sir William Pen, all
that Tract of Land called Pensylvania, as the same was Bounded on the East by
De la Ware River from 12 Miles distance of New Castle Town unto the 43 Degree
of Northern Latitude, with other Boundings and Limits therein mentioned. And
all Powers, Pre-eminence, and Jurisdictions necessary for the Government of the
said Province. And by other Letters Patent Dated April the 2d, 1681. did
Publish and Declare his Will and Pleasure, That all Persons settled or
inhabiting within the Limits of the said Province should yield all due
Obedience to the said William Pen, his Heirs and Assigns, as absolute
Proprietors and Governors thereof; as also to the Deputy or Deputies, Agents
or Lieutenants, Commissioned by him or them. Whereupon William Pen taking
upon him the Government in a Letter from Philadelphia, the then intended Chief
City, Dated 16 Aug. 1683. gives a full Description of the Province and the
Soil, Air, Seasons, and Produce thereof. The Planted part of the Province being
cast into six Counties, viz. Philadelphia, Buckingham, Chester, New Castle,
Kent, and Sussex, containing then about 4000 Souls: Two Assemblies had then
been held with such Concord and Dispatch, that in Three Weeks time at least
Seventy Laws were past. And for the Well-Government of the Counties, Courts of
Justices are Established in every County, with proper Officers; as Justices,
Sheriffs, Clerks, Constables, etc. Which Courts are held every. Two Months; but
to prevent Lawsuits there are Three Peacemakers, chosen by each County Court,
in the Nature of Common Arbitrators, to hear and end Differences betwixt Man
and Man. And Spring and Fall there is an Orphans Court in each County, to
Inspect and Regulate the Affairs of Widows and Orphans.

The Government of the Natives is by Kings, which they call Sachema, and those
by Succession, but always of the Mothers side; For Instance, the Children of
^im who is now King will not succeed, but his Brother by the Mother, or the
Children of his Sister, whose Sons, (and after them the Children of her
Daughters) will Reign; for no Woman Inherits. This they do, that their Issue
may not be spurious.

Every King has his Council, and that consists of all the Old and Wise Men,
and also the Young, without which Assembly nothing of moment is undertaken.

The Justice they have is Pecuniary, even for Murder it self: And it is agreed,
That in all differences between the Natives and English, Six of each side shall
end the matter.

The Chief City Philadelphia; In the Center of which is a Square of Ten Acres;
at each Angle, is, or was intended Houses for public Affairs; as a Meeting
House, Assembly, or State-House, etc.

Maryland.
THis Province is bounded on the North with Pensylvania, on the East by De la
Ware Bay and the Atlantic Ocean, on the South by Virginia, from whence it is
parted by the River Patowmeck. Chesapeack Bay is the passage for Ships, both
into this Country and Virginia, and runs through the Middle of Maryland, being
found Navigable near Two hundred Miles into the Land, into which fall diverse
considerable Rivers. The Climate is very agreeable to the English Constitution,
especially since the clearing of the Ground from Trees and Woods, which
formerly caused much unhealthfulness; neither is the Heat extreme in Summer,
being much qualified by the Cool Winds from Sea, and the refreshing Showers;
and the Winter so Moderate, as does no way Incommode the Inhabitants. It is
seated between 37 Degrees, and 40 Degrees of Northern Latitude, and was
discovered at the same time with Virginia.

The Country is generally Plain and Even, the Soil rich and fertile, Naturally
producing all such Commodities as are found in New England; as to Fish, Fruits,
Plants, Roots, etc. The chief Trade of the English hither is Tobacco, which is
not inconsiderable, since 100 Sail of Ships have in One Year Traded hither from
England, and the Neighboring English Plantations.

It is divided into Ten Counties, in each of which a Court is held every Two
Months for little Matters, with Appeal to the Provincial Court at St. Mary's,
which is the Principal Town, seated on Saint George's River, and Beautified
with several well Built Houses.

This Province was granted by Patent to the Right Honorable the Lord
Baltimore, and to his Heirs and Assigns, with many Civil and Military
Prerogatives, and Jurisdictions; as conferring Honors, Coining Money, etc.
paying Yearly as an acknowledgment to His Majesty and Successors, Two Indian
Arrows at Windsor Castle upon Easter Tuesday.

The Lord Baltimore has his Residence (when there) at Mattapany, about 8 Miles
distant from St. Mary's, where he has a pleasant Seat, though the General
Assemblies, and Provincial Courts are kept at St. Mary's; and for Encouraging
People to settle here, His Lordship, by the Advice of the General Assembly,
Established a Model of excellent Laws, for the Ease and Security of the
Inhabitants, with Toleration of Religion, to all that profess Faith in Christ,
which has been a principal Motive to many to Settle here.

Virginia.
DIscovered, with others, by Sebastian Cabott 1497; after was Visited by Sir
Francis Drake, and called Virginia by Sir Walter Rawleigh, in Honor of his
Mistress Queen Elizabeth.

In 1603 some Persons at Bristol, by Leave from Sir Walter Rawleigh, who had
the Propriety thereof, made a Voyage hither, who Discovered Whitson's Bay in 41
Degrees; and afterward in 1607. Sir John Popham, and others, settled a
Plantation at the Mouth of the River Sagahador, the Captain James Davis
choosing a small place almost an Island to sit down in, where having heard a
Sermon, and read their Patent and Laws, and Built a Fort, They Sailed farther,
Discovering a River, the Head whereof they called Fort St. George, Captain
George Popham being President.

After the first Discovery, Virginia cost no small Pains and Experience before
it was brought to perfection, with the loss of many English Lives. In the Reign
of King James the First, a Patent was granted to certain Persons at a
Corporation, who were called The Company of Adventurers of Virginia. But upon
several Misdemeanors and Miscarriages, in 1623 the Patent was made void, and
has since been free for all His Majesty's Subjects to Trade to. It is situate
South of Maryland, and has the Atlantic Ocean on the East; The Air is good,
and Climate agreeable to the English, since the clearing it from Woods; The
Soil very fruitful, but Tobacco is their chief Commodity, and the Standard
whereby all the rest are prized.

This Country is well Watered with many great and swift Rivers, that lose
themselves in the Gulf or Bay of Chesapeak, which gives Entrance into this
Country as well as Maryland, being a very large and capacious Bay, and running
up into the Country Northward above 200 Miles. The Rivers of most account are
James River, Navigable 150 Miles; York River, large, and Navigable above 60
Miles; and Rapahanok, Navigable above 120 Miles. Adjoining to these Rivers are
the English settled for the Convenience of Shipping, having several Towns, the
chief whereof is James Town, commodiously seated on James River, very neat and
well beautified with Brick-Houses, where are kept the Courts of Judicature, and
all public Offices which concern the Country. Next to James, is Elizabeth
Town, well built, and seated on the Mouth of a River so called. Likewise the
Towns of Bermudas, Wicornoco, and Dales-Gift.

The Country is Governed by Laws agreeable to those in England; for the better
observing whereof, those parts possessed by the English, are divided into the
Counties of Caroluck, Charles, Gloucester, Hartford, Henrico, James, New Kent,
Lancaster, Middlesex, Nausemund, Lower Norfolk, Northampton, Northumberland,
Rappohanock, the Isle of Wight, and York. In each of which Counties are held
petty Courts every Month, from which there may be Appeals to the Quarter Court
at James Town.

The Governor is sent over by the King of England.

Carolina.
SO called from the late King Charles the Second, is a Colony not long since
Established by the English, and is that part of Florida adjoining to Virginia,
between 29 and 36 Degrees of North Latitude; On the East it is washed with the
Atlantic Ocean, and is bounded on the West with Mare Pacificum, or the
South Sea; and within these Bounds is contained the most fertile and pleasant
parts of Florida, which is so much commended by the Spanish Authors. Of which a
more ample Account cannot be given, than what an English Man who Lived, and was
concerned in the Settlement thereof, Delivered in these Words:

This Province of Carolina was in the Year 1663. Granted by Lettes Patent of
His late Majesty King Charles the Second, in Propriety unto the Right
Honorable Edward Earl of Clarendon, George Duke of Albemarle, William Earl of
Craven, John Lord Berkley, Anthony Lord Ashley, (after Earl of Shaftsbury) Sir
George Carteret, (after Lord Carteret) Sir John Coleton Knight and Baronet, and
Sir William Berkley Knight. By which Letters Patent, the Laws of England are to
be in force in Carolina: But the Lords Proprietors have power, with the Consent
of the Inhabitants, to make By Laws for the better Government of the said
Province; so that no Money can be Raised, or Law made, without the Consent of
the Inhabitants, or their Representatives. They have also power to appoint and
empower* Governors, and other Magistrates, to grant Liberty of Conscience,
make Constitutions, etc. with many other great Privileges, as by the said
Letters Patent will more largely appear. And the said Lords Proprietors have
there settled a Constitution of Government, whereby is Granted Liberty of
Conscience, and wherein all possible Care is taken for the equal Administration
of Justice, and for the lasting Security of the Inhabitants, both in their
Persons and Estates, by the Care and Endeavors of the said Lords Proprietors;
and at their very great Charge Two Colonies have been settled in this Province,
the one at Albemarle, in the most Northerly part, the other at Ashley River,
which is in the Latitude 32 Degrees odd Minutes.

Care is taken by the Lords Proprietors, That no Injustice be done the Natives,
(who are here in perfect Friendship with the English,) in order to which is
established a particular Court of Judicature, to Determine all Differences.

The Lords Proprietors do at present Grant to all Persons that come to Inhabit
there, several reasonable Advantages to all Conditions of Men, and sell their
Land to any after the Rate of 50 Pounds for 1000 Acres. The manner of
Purchasing is, The Party seeks out a place to his mind, (not possessed by any
other) then applies to the Governor and Proprietors Deputies, who thereupon
Issue out their Warrant to the Surveyor General, to measure him out a
Plantation; who making Certificate, That he has Measured out so much Land
appointed, a Deed is prepared of course, which is Signed by the Governor and
the Lords Proprietors Deputies, and the Proprietors Seal affixed to it, and
Registered, which is a good Conveyance in Law, of the Land therein mentioned to
the Party, and his Heirs for ever.

Thus having Traveled the Main Land of America we must Cross the Seas, and
take a View of the Islands belonging to the Crown of England in the West
Indies. The first being

Bermudas,
OR Summers Islands, which are a Multitude of Broken Isles (some write no less
than 400) situate directly East from Virginia, from which they are distant 500
English Miles, and 3300 Miles from the City of London, so named from John
Bermudaz a Spaniard, after Summers Islands, from the Shipwreck of Sir George
Summers there.

The Island of more Fame and Greatness than all the rest, and to which the Name
of Bermudaz is most properly ascribed, is situated in the Latitude of 32
Degrees and 30 Min. North. The Air is sound and healthy, very agreeable to the
English Bodies, the Soil as fertile as any, well Watered, plentiful in Maize,
of which they have Two Harvests yearly; that which is sowed in March being cut
in July, and what is sowed in August is mowed in December. No Venomous Creature
is to be found in this Isle, nor will Live if brought thither; and besides
these Advantages, it it so fenced about with Rocks and Islets, that without
knowledge of the Passages, a Boat of Ten Tun cannot be brought into the Haven,
yet with such knowledge there is Entrance for the Greatest Ships. The English
have since added to these Natural Strengths such Artificial Helps by Block
Houses, Forts and Bulwarks in convenient places, as may give it the Title of
Impregnable.

It was first Discovered rather Accidentally than upon Design, by John Bermudas
a Spaniard about 1522, and thereupon a Proposition made in the Council of
Spain, for settling a Plantation therein, as a place very convenient for the
Spanish Fleet in their Return from the Bay of Mexico, by the Streights of
Bahama; yet was it neglected, and without any Inhabitants, till the like
Accidental coming of Sir George Summers, sent to Virginia with some Companies
of the English by the Lord De la Ware in 1609, who being Shipwrecked on this
Coast, had the Opportunity to survey the Island, which he so well liked, that
he Endeavored to settle a Plantation in it at his Return in 1612. The first
Colony was sent over under Richard More, who in Three years Erected 8 or 9
Forts in convenient places, which he planted with Ordnance. In 1616 a New
Supply was sent over under Captain Tucker, who applied themselves to sowing of
Corn, setting of Trees brought thither from other parts of America, and
Planting that gainful Weed Tobacco. In 1619. the Business was taken more to
Heart, and made a Public Matter, many Great Lords and Persons of Honor being
interested in^ it; Captain Butler was sent thither with 500 Men. The Isle was
divided into Tribes or Counties, a Borough belonging to each Tribe, and the
whole reduced to a settled Government both in Church and State, according to
the Laws of England. After this, all succeeded so well, that in 1623 there were
said to be 3000 English, and Ten Forts, whereon were planted Fifty Pieces of
Ordnance, their Numbers since increasing daily, both by Children born within
the Island, and Supplies from England.

All the Isles together represent an Half Moon, and Enclose very good Ports; as
the Great Sound, Harrington Inlet, Southampton, and Paget's Bay, with Dover,
and Warwick Forts, having their Names from the Noble Men, who were Undertakers
therein. The greatest Isle is called St. George five or six Leagues long, and
almost throughout not above a quarter or half a League broad. The Air is almost
constantly Clear, (Except when it Thunders and Lightens) is extreme Temperate
and Healthful, few dying of any Disease but Age; so that many remove from
England hither only to enjoy a long and healthful Life, and after having
continued there, are fearful of Removing out of so pure an Air. The very
Spiders here are not Venomous, but of diverse curious Colors, and make their
Web so strong, that oftentimes small Birds are entangled and caught therein.
Their Cedar Trees are different from all others, and the Wood very sweet.

In 1685. the Governor hereof was Sir Henry Heydon.

The Caribee Islands
NExt present themselves, so called in General, because Inhabited by Canibals
or Man-eating People, at the first Discovery, as the word Caribee imports. They
ly extended from the Coast of Paria to the Isle Porto Rico, many in number, 27
of them known by proper Names. In Nine whereof the English are concerned, viz.
Barbuda, Anguilla, Montserrat, Dominica, St. Vincent, Antegoa, Mevis or Nevis,
St. Christophers, and Barbados.

And first in

Barbuda.
Situate in 17 Degrees of North Latitude, of no great Extent, not above 15
Miles long, lying North-East from Montserrat. The English are reckoned between
4 and 500 Men, who find thereupon conveniently to subsist. The Soil is Fertile,
and well stored with Cattle and Sheep, and may produce other Commodities, if
well Managed, but subject to one great Annoyance, as well as some other of
these Islands, that the Caribians of Dominico, and other places, many times
commit great Spoils in it; The Enmity and Aversion which these Barbarians have
conceived against the English Nation in General being such, that there hardly
passes a Year, but they make Irruptions into one of these Islands; and if not
timely Discovered, and Valiantly opposed, kill all the Men they meet, Ransack
the Houses, and burn them, and if they get any of the Women and Children, carry
them Prisoners to their own Territories, with all the Booty they have a mind to.

Here is the Sensible Plant, and Sensitive Trees.

Anguilla.
SOmetimes called Snake-Island from its shape, is a long Tract of Land of about
30 Miles long, and 9 broad, winding almost about near St. Martin's Island,
whence it is very plainly perceived. There is not any Mountain in it, the
Ground lying even and low; where it is broadest there is a Pond, about which
some English have settled themselves in Number 2 or 300, and where they Plant
Tobacco, which is highly esteemed by those who are good Judges in that
Commodity. The Island lies in 18 Degrees and 20 Minutes on this side the
Aequinoctial. Before the Discovery of America there were not to be found in
these parts any Horses, Kine, Oxen, Sheep, Goats, Swine, or Dogs; but for the
better Convenience of their Navigations, and supply of their Ships in case of
Necessity, they left some of these Creatures in several parts of this Newfound
World, where they have since multiplied so exceedingly, that now they are more
common, as well on the Continent, as the Caribees, than in any part of Europe.

Montserrat.
REceived that Name from the Resemblance of a Mountain therein, to that of
Montserrat near Barcelona in Spain, and has retained the Name ever since. It
is of a small extent, not above Three Leagues long, and as much broad, so that
it seems almost round. It lies in the Latitude of 17 Degrees on this side the
Line, full of Mountains, whereon grow-plenty of Cedar, and other Trees; the
Valleys and Plains being very fertile.

It is chiefly inhabited by the Irish, with some English. There is in it a very
fair Church of a delightful Structure, Built by the Contributions of the
Governors and Inhabitants. The Pulpit, Seats, and all the Joyners and
Carpenters Work within it, are of the most precious and sweet-scented Wood,
growing in the Country.

Dominica.
LIes in the Latitude of 15 Degrees and 30 Minutes, judged to be 13 Leagues, or
40 Miles long, and not much less in breadth where broadest. On the West side of
the Isle is a convenient Harbor for Ships. It is very Mountainous in the
midst, which Encompasses an Inaccessible Bottom, where from the Tops of certain
Rocks may be seen an infinite Number of Vipers, Dragons, and other dreadful
Venomous Creatures, whom none dare approach to. Yet there are many fruitful
Valleys, producing several Commodities, but especially Tobacco, which is
planted by the English.

St. Vincent
IS 16 Degrees North from the Line, and is about 24 Miles long, and 18 broad,
wherein are several high Mountains, between which are very fruitful Plains,
yielding abundance of Sugarcanes, which grow Naturally without Planting. It is
well Watered with Rivers, and has several good Harbors and Bays for Shipping.
The English have here some Plantations, but they are neither very considerable
nor powerful herein. It being the most Populous of Caribeans of any possessed
by them, who have here many fair Villages, where they dwell pleasantly, and
without any disturbance; and though they are Jealous of the Strangers that Live
about them, and stand on their Guards when they come to their Roads, yet they
do not deny Cassavy Bread, Water, Fruits, and other Provisions growing in their
Country, to them that want them, taking in Exchange Wedges, Hooks, and other
Implements of Iron, which they much esteem.

Antegoa
LIes in the Latitude of 16 Degrees and 11 Minutes between Barbados and
Desiderado, in length about 20 Miles, and much of the same breadth; The Access
to it is dangerous, by reason of the Rocks which Encompass it. It was conceived
heretofore, that it was not to be Inhabited, upon Presumption that there was no
Fresh Water in it, but the English, who have Planted themselves in it, have met
with some, and make Ponds and Cisterns to supply that Defect, it being
Inhabited by 8 or 900 Persons. The Commodities this Isle affords area Sugar,
Indico, Ginger, and Tobacco; It abounds in Tame Cattle; and all sorts of Fish,
among which the Shark Fish deserves Remark.

M^vis, or Nevis.
IN 17 Degrees 19 Minutes North of the Line, not above 18 Miles round, in the
midst whereof is one only Mountain, which is very high, and covered with Trees
up to the very top, about which all the Plantations are settled, beginning from
the Seaside to the very highest part of it. It has within it diverse Springs
of Fresh Water, whereof some are strong enough to make their way into the Sea;
One Spring has the Waters so Hot and Mineral, that from the Force of it there
are Baths made, found very beneficial in several Diseases. The English who
planted themselves there in 1628. and are still Possessors thereof, being now
about 3 or 4000 Inhabitants, drive a very handsome Trade with Sugar, Ginger,
Tobacco, and Cotton, which they Exchange for other Conveniences It is best
Governed of any of the Caribee Islands, impartial Justice being administered,
and all Debauchery and Immorality severely punished by a Council of the most
eminent and ancient Inhabitants. There are Three Churches erected for the
Service of God: And for the Security of Vessels in the Road, there is a Fort
wherein are several Great Guns planted that Command at a distance, which
likewise all the Commodities impor^ed for the use of the Inhabitants are
disposed, and from thence distributed to those that have occasion for them. It
is indifferent Fruitful, and has store of Deer, and other Game for Hunting.

St. Christophers.
SO named by Christopher Columbus, who finding it very pleasant, gave it his
own Name, which the shape of the Mountain likewise inclined him to; for it has
on its upper part, as it were upon one of its Shoulders, another lesser
Mountain, as St. Christopher is painted like a Giant, carrying our Savior upon
his, as it were a little Child. It is situated 17 Degrees and 25 Minutes on
this side the Line, and is about 25 Leagues in Compass, the Soil being Light
and Sandy, is apt to produce all sorts of the Country Fruits, with many of the
choicest growing in Europe. It lies highest in the midst, by reason of some
very high Mountains, out of which arise several Rivers, which do sometimes so
suddenly overflow, through the Rains falling from the Mountains, that the
Inhabitants are thereby surprised. The whole Island is divided into Four
Cantons or Quarters, Two whereof are possessed by the English, and Two by the
French; but so separated, that People cannot go from one Quarter to the other,
without passing over the Lands of one of the two Nations. The English have more
little Rivers in their Division; The French more of the Plain Country, fit for
Tillage. The English exceed the French in Number, but the French have Four
Forts, and the English only Two; and to prevent Differences between the Two
Nations, each of them have a Guard upon the Frontiers of their Division, which
is renewed every Day.

Barbados
IS the most Considerable Island the English have amongst the Caribees, and
lies in 13 Degrees and 20 Minutes on this side the Equator, and though not above
24 Miles long, and 15 broad, yet was many years ago accounted to have above
20000 Inhabitants, besides Negro Slaves, who are thought a far greater Number.
In the Reign of King James the First, a Ship of Sir William Curteens returning
from Fernambuck in Brasile, being driven by foul Weather upon this Coast,
chanced to fall upon this Island, and Anchoring before it, staid sometime to
inform themselves of the Nature thereof, which was so exceedingly overgrown
with Woods, that they could find no Champain or Savana's for Men to Live in,
nor any Beasts, but a multitude of Swine, which the Portugals put ashore long
before for Breed, if they should at any time be cast on that Shore in foul
Weather, and the Fruits and Roots that grew there afforded so great plenty of
Food, as they multiplied abundantly, so that the Natives of the other Islands
use to come hither to Hunt. This Discovery being made, and Advice given to
their Friends in England, other Ships were sent, and having cut down the Woods,
and cleared the Ground; they planted Potatoes, Plantain, and Maize, which with
the Hogs-flesh they found served to keep Life and Soul together, and their
Supplies from England coming slow and uncertain, they were often driven to great
Extremity: But in the Year 1627. when they had more Hands, and having Tobacco,
Indico, Cotton, Wool, and Fustick Wood to Trade with, some Ships were Invited
with hope of Gain to Visit them, bringing for Exchange such things as they
wanted, as Working Tools of Iron and Steel, Cloths, Shirts, Drawers, Hose
Shoes, Hats, and more Planters; so that in a short time they grew very
Considerable, especially when their Sugarcanes were grown, and they had
Learned the Art of making Sugar. The Inhabitants, which consist of English,
Scotch, Irish, with some few Dutch, French and Jews, were Calculated lately to
be above 50000, and the Negroes about 100000. So that they can in a short time
Arm 10000 Fighting Men, which with the Natural Advantage of the Place, is able
to Defy the most potent Enemy, as the Spaniards have found to their Cost,
having in vain Assaulted it several times.

It has only one River, or rather a Lake, which runs not far into the Land,
yet the Country lying low and level; they have diverse Ponds, and are supplied
with Rainwater, by making Cisterns in their Houses. The Air is very hot for 8
Months, and would be more insupportable, were it not for the cool Breezes,
which rise with the Sun, and blow still fresher as that grows higher, but
always from the North-east, except in the Turnado, and then it chops about to
the South and hour or two, and after returns as before. The other 4 Months are
not so hot, but like the Air of England about the middle of May, and though they
Sweat, find not such Faintnes^ as in England in August; neither are they
Thirsty, unless over heated with Labor, or strong Drink; their Bread is made
of the Root of a small Tree or Shrub, which they call Cassavy, and account it
wholesome and nourishing.

The Chief Towns in this Isle are St. Michael's, formerly called Bridge Town.
Little Bristol, St. James, and Charles Town, with other Parishes of less Note,
and several Bays on the Seacoasts.

The Government is by Laws agreeable to those in England; for which they have
Courts of Judicature, Justices of Peace, Constables, Churchwardens, and the
like. The Island is very strong, as well by Nature as Art. It is divided into
11 Precincts, wherein are 14 Churches or Chapels, the whole so filled with
Houses, that it may almost seem one Great Town.

Jamaica.
Situate in 17 or 18 Degrees of Northern Latitude, it is shape somewhat Oval,
being about 170 Miles long, and about 70 broad, in the midst whereof runs a
continued Ridge of Mountains, so that some have compared the Island to a
Saddle. From hence flow diverse fresh Springs, which cause many Rivers, to the
great Refreshment of the Inhabitants. The Island is divided into 14 Precincts,
or Parishes Named, Port Royal, St. Catherines, St. John's, St. Andrews, St
David's, St. Thomas, and Clarendon, etc. many whereof are well Inhabited by the
English, that have there very good Plantations, whose Number is not certainly
known; but according to Survey taken, and returned into England some years
since, there were about 1700 Families, and more than 15000 Inhabitants in the
forenamed 14 Precincts; and in the Four Parishes on the North-side of the
Isle, that is, St. Georges, St. Mary's, St. Anne, and St. James, above 2000
more; all which are now extremely increased, even to Double, if not Treble that
Number; The great Encouragement of gaining Wealth, and a pleasant Life inviting
abundance of People, to Transplant themselves from Barbados, and other English
Plantations every year, so that in a small time it is like to be the most
Potent and Rich Plantation in all America. And besides the aforementioned
Number of Inhabitants, there are reckoned to belong to Jamaica of Privateers or
Buccaneers, Sloop, and Boat-men, which Ply about the Isle, at least Thirty
Thousand stout Fighting Men, whose Courage is sufficiently discovered in their
daily Attempts upon the Spaniards in Panama, and other places; which for the
Hazard, Conduct, and Daringness of their Exploits, have by some been compared
to the Actions of Caesar and Alexander the Great.

The Laws of this Island are as like those of England, as the difference of
Countries will admit; They having their several Courts, and Magistrates, and
Officers for Executing Justice on Offenders, and Hearing and Determining all
Civil Causes between Man and Man.

ADDENDA, OR, A SUPPLEMENT OF Things omitteed in the Impression of the Book, To
be Added To The Respective COURTS, in the PLACES after-mentioned WITH
REFERRENCES To the same COURTS In the Book before contained.

By the Author.

Anno Domini 1699.

ADDENDA, OR A SUPPLEMENT Of Things omitted in the Impression.
In the High Court of Parliament.
THE manner of Debates or passing of Bills into Acts, is thus. It is the
Practice of each House to debate not only of what the King has proposed, but
of any other Lay-matters, unless their Sovereign shall expressly forbid the
same, as heretofore has sometimes been done.

It is free for any Man of the Parliament, or not of the Parliament, to get a
Bill drawn by some Lawyer, and give the same to the Speaker, or Clerk of the
Parliament to be presented at a time convenient, and this Bill may be put first
either in the Lords House or the Commons House.

Whatever is proposed for a Law, is first put in Writing, and called a Bill;
which being read commonly after Nine of the Clock in a full Assembly, it is
either unanimously Rejected at first, or else allowed to be Debated, and then
it is committed to a certain Number of the House presently nominated and called
a Committee. After it has been amended, and twice read two several Days in the
House, then it is Engrossed, that is, written fair in Parchment, and read the
third time another Day, and then if it be in the Lords House, the Lord
Chancellor, in the Commons House the Speaker demands if they will have it put
to the Question, Whether a Law or no Law? If the Major Part be for it, there is
written on the Bill by the Clerk, Soit Baille aux Communes, or Soit Baille aux
Seigneurs, retaining still in this and some other things about making Laws, the
Custom of our Ancestors, who were generally skilled in the French Tongue.

Note, That when the Speaker finds diverse Bills prepared to be put to the
Question, he gives notice the Day before, That on the Morrow he intends to put
such Bills to the Passing or third Reading, and desires the special Attendance
of all the Members.

Note also, That if a Bill be Rejected, it cannot be any more proposed during
that Session.

A Bill sent by the Commons up to the Lords, is usual (to show their Respect)
attended with Thirty or Forty of the Members of the House: As they come up to
the Lords Bar, the Member that has the Bill, making three profound Reverences,
delivers it to the Lord Chancellor, who for that purpose comes down to the
Bar.

A Bill sent by the Lords to the Commons, is usually sent by some of the
Masters of the Chancery, or other Person, whose Place is on the Wooll-sacks
(and by none of the Members of that House) and they coming up to the Speaker,
and bowing thrice, deliver to him the Bill, after one of them has read the
Title, and desired it may be there taken into Consideration; if aftewards it
pass that House, then is written on the Bill, Les Communes o^t assentez.

When any one in the Commons House will speak to a Bill, he stands up
uncovered, and directs his Speech only to the Speaker; then if what he delivers
be confuted by another, yet it is not allowed to answer again the same Day,
lest the whole time should be spent in Debate. Also if a Bill be debating in
the House, no Man may speak to it in one day above once.

If any one speak words of Offense to the King's Majesty or to the House, he is
called to the Bar, and sometimes sent to the Tower. The Speaker is not allowed
to persuade or dissuade in passing of a Bill, but only to make a short and
plain Narrative, nor to Vote, except the House be equally divided.

After Dinner the Parliament ordinarily assemble not, though many times they
continue sitting long in the Afternoon.

Committees sit after Dinner, where it is allowed to speak and reply as often as
they please.

Note, By Death or Demise of the King, the Parliament is ipso facto dissolved.

Anciently, after every Session of Parliament, the King commanded every Sheriff
to proclaim the several Acts, and to cause them to be duly observed; yet
without that Proclamation, the Law intending that every one has Notice by his
Representative, of what is transacted in Parliament; of later times since
Printing became common, that Custom has been laid aside.

See before in High Court of Parliament, Page 51.

To the Court of the High Steward of England.
BUT now by Stat 7 W. 3. Upon the Trial of any Peer or Peeress, either for
Treason or Misprision, all the Peers who have Right to sit and Vote in
Parliament, shall be duly summoned Twenty days at least before every such Trial
to appear at every such Trial; and every Peer so summoned, and appearing at
such Trial shall Vote in the Trial of such Peer or Peeress so to be tried;
every such Peer first taking the Oaths mentioned in the Act of Parliament made
1 W. and. M. Entitled, An Act for Abrogating the Oaths of Allegiance and
Supremacy, and Appointing other Oaths. And subscribing and audibly repeating
the Declaration mentioned in the Act made Anno 30 Car. 2. Regis, For disabling
Papists to sit in either House of Parliament.

Provided that neither the Act, nor any thing therein contained be construed to
extend to any Impeachment or other Proceedings in Parliament in any kind
whatsoever.

Provided also, That the Act, nor any thing therein contained shall any ways
extend to any Indictment of High Treason, nor to any Proceedings thereupon for
Counterfeiting the King's Coin, his Great Seal or Privy Seal, his Sign Manual,
or Privy Signet.

See before in The Court of the High Steward of England. Page 81.

Of the Power and Authority of the Protector and Defender of the Realm and
Church of England during the King's tender Age.
And Guardian, etc. of England in the King's Absence.
FOR his Authority, Place and Precedence, See Rot. Parl. Anno 1 Hen. 6. Nu. 26
and 27. 2 Hen. 6. Nu. 16. 6 Hen. 6. Nu. 22, 23, and 24. 8 Hen. 6. Nu. 13. 11
Hen. 6. Nu. 19. 32 Hen. 6. Nu. 71.

The Lord Coke in his 4th. Inst. Cap. 3. says, The surest way is to have him
made by Authority of the Great Council in Parliament.

Richard Duke of Gloucester Uncle to King Edward the 5th. (and afterward King
by the Name of Richard the 3d.) was by the Council then Assembled made
Protector of King Edward the 5th and his Realm during his Minority.
Holinshead's Chron. fol. 1363.

And for the Government of the Realm and Surety of the Person of King Edward
the 6th. his Uncle Edward Earl of Hertford was by Order of the Council and the
Assent of his Majesty appointed Governor of his Royal Person and Protector of
his Realms, Dominions and Subjects, and so proclaimed the 1 st. of February,
Anno 1547. by an Herald at Arms and Sound of Trumpet through the City of
London in the usual places thereof.

And on the 6th. of Feb. Anno 1547. the said Earl of Hertford Lord Protector,
Adorned King Edward with the Order of Knighthood, remaining then in the Tower,
and therewith the King standing up, called for Henry Hubblethorn Lord Mayor of
the City of London, who coming before his Presence, the King took the Sword of
the Lord Protector and Dubbed the said Hubblethorn Knight Holinshead Chron. fo.
1614.

The King when he intends to go, or is in remotis out of the Realm, appoints a
Guardian, etc. of England by Letters Patent under the Great Seal. Or in respect
of some Infirmity or other urgent Occasions, has sometimes by Commission under
the Great Seal of England appointed certain Lords of Parliament to represent
his Person, he being within the Realm.

The Patent of the Office of a Guardian of England, recites his speedy going
beyond Sea, or in remotis, or urgent Occasions, and the Causes thereof. Nos
quod pax nostra tam in nostra absentia quam praesentia inviolabiliter
observetur, and quod fiat communis Justitia singulis conquerentibus in suis
actionibus and querelis, de fidelitate dilecti and fidelis nostri Edwardi Ducis
Cornub. and Comitis Cestriae, filii nostri primogeniti plenarie confidentes,
constituimus ipsum Custodem dicti Regni nostri ac locum nost um tenent' in
eodem Regno quamdiu in dictis transmarinis partibus moram fecerimus, vel donec
inde aliud duxerimus. (And this is that Capitalis Justiciarius mentioned in
Magna Charta Cap. 1. when the King is extra Regnum) with a Clause of Assistance.

But yet if any Parliament is to be holden, there must be a Special Commission
to the Guardian, to begin the Parliament and to proceed therein: But the Test
of the Writ of Summons shall be in the Guardian's Name.

A Parliament was holden Anno 5 H. 5. before John Duke of Bedford Brother and
Lieutenant to the King, and Guardian of England, and was summoned under the
Test of the Guardian or Lieutenant.

By Stat. 8 H. 5. Cap. 1. It was Enacted, That if the King being beyond the
Seas, cause to summon a Parliament in this Realm, by his Writ under the Test
of his Lieutenant, and after such Summons of Parliament gone out of the
Chancery, the King arriveth in this Realm; That for such Arrival of the same
King, such Parliament shall not be dissolved, but the Parliament shall proceed
without new Summons.

In 3 E. 4. a Parliament was begun in the presence of the King, and prorogued
until a further day, and then William Archbishop of York the King's Commissary
by Letters Patent held the same Parliament, and Adjourned the same, etc. The
Cause of the said prorogation was for that the King was enforced to go in
person to Gloucestershire to Repress a Rebellion there.

The King's Person may be represented by Commission under the Great Seal, etc.
as before is said to certain Lords of Parliament, authorizing them to begin the
Parliament. Both the Guardian and such Commissioners do sit on a Form placed
near the Degrees that go up to the Cloth of Estate. Coke's 4th. Inst. Cap. 1.
fo. 6 and 7.

To the Court of Equity in the Exchequer-Chamber.
BY the Statute of 33 Hen. 8. Cap. 39 the Judges of this Court have full Power
and Authority to discharge, cancel and make void all and singular Recognizances
and Bonds made to the King for Payment of any Debt or Sum of Money, or for
performance of Conditions, etc. upon showing the Acquittance, etc. or any Proof
made of Payment and performance; also to cancel and make void by their
Discretion all Recognizances made for any Appearance or other Contempt. And
that if any Person of whom any such Debt or Duty is demanded, allege, plead,
declare, or show in the said Court sufficient Cause and Matter in Law, Reason
and good Conscience in Bar, or Discharge of the said Debt or Duty, and the
same Matter sufficiently prove in the said Court, then the said Court shall
have Power and Authority to judge and allow the said Proof, and clearly acquit
and discharge such Person and Persons. Also Lands chargeable to the King's
Debts in the Seisin and Possession of diverse and sundry Persons, the same shall
be wholly and entirely, and in no wise severally liable to the payment of the
said Debt and Duty: But in the said Act of 33 Hen. 8. All manner of Estate,
Rights, Titles and Interests as well of Inheritance as Freehold, other than
Joyntures for Term of Life are excepted.

J. S. holds Lands of the King by Fealty and yearly Rent, and makes a Lease
thereof for Years to A. B. pretends that J. S. leased the same to him by a
former Lease; Albeit there is a Rent issuing out of these Lands to the King,
yet neither A. nor B. can sue in this Court by any privilege in Respect of the
Rent, for that the King can have no prejudice or Benefit thereby: For whether
A. or B. does prevail, yet must the Rent be paid: And if this were a good Cause
of Privilege, all the Lands in England holden of the King by Rent, etc. might
be brought into this Court.

But if Black-acre be extended to the King for Debt of A. as the Lands of A.
and the King leaseth the same to B. for Years, reserving a Rent; C. pretends
that A. had nothing in the Land, but that he was seized thereof, etc. this Case
is within the Privilege of this Court, for if C. prevail, the King loses his
Rent.

The King makes a Lease to A. of Black-acre for Years, reserving a Rent, and
A. is possessed of a Term for Years in White-acre, the King may distrain in
White-acre for his Rent. Yet A. has no Privilege for White-acre, to bring it
within the Jurisdiction of this Court.

Some are of Opinion, that a Court of Equity was holden in the
Exchequer-Chamber before the Stat. of 33 Hen. 8. And then it must be a Court of
Equity by Prescription; for we find no former Act of Parliament that does
create and establish any such Court: And if it be by Prescription, then
Judicial Presidents in Course of Equity must guide the same. As to the
Jurisdiction, certain it is, that there has been of ancient time an Officer of
the Exchequer called Cancellarius Scaccarii, of whom, amongst other Officers of
the Exchequer, Fleta says thus: Officium vero Cancellarij, est Sigillum Regis
custodire simul cum controrotulis de proficuo Regni. And the Mirror says,
Perjure est per la ou il fuit Chancellor del Exchequer vea a tiel a fair luy
Acquittance de tant que avoit pay al Eschequer de la deit le Roy south le Seal
del Exchequer ou delay fair Acquittance de tiel jour tanque a tiel jour, etc.
His ancient Fee is 40 Marks, Livery out of the Wardrobe 12 l. 17 s. 4. d. in
toto 39 l. 10 s. 8 d. See 15. Hen. 8. Cap. 16.

The Exchequer has a Chancellor and Seal, and the Writs usual in the Chancery
in the Exchequer to seize Lands, are more ancient than Praerog. Regis.

Hereunto it is collected, that seeing there has been timeout of mind a
Chancellor of the Exchequer that there should also be in the Exchequer a Court
of Equity.

In Rot. Par. 2 Hen. 4. we find a Petition of the Commons, That no Writs or
Privy Seals be sued out of the Chancery, Exchequer, or other place to any Man
to appear upon a Pain, etc. to answer, etc. contrary to the ordinary Course of
the Common Law. Whereunto the King answered, That such Writs should not be
granted without Necessity.

Anno 3 Hen. 5. the Commons petitioned, That all Writs of Subpaena and Certis
de Causis, going out of the Chancery and the Exchequer might be Enrolled and
not Granted of matters determinable at the Common Law on Pain of Forty Pounds.
The King's Answer was, That he would be advised.

See before in Court of Equity in the Exchequer-Chamber. Page 141.

The Court of First Fruits and Tenths Ecclesiastical.
A Court of First Fruits and Tenths was raised by Stat. 32 Hen. 8. Cap. 45.
Officers constituted of Chancellor, Treasurer, King's Attorney, Two Auditors
and Two Clerks, Authority given them to compound for First Fruits, Bonds taken
therefore should be of like force as a Statute-Staple: But this Court was
dissolved by Queen Mary, Parl. 1. Sess. 2. Cap. 10.

These were granted to the Crown by the Stat. of 26 H. 8. Cap. 3. But all the
Clergy were Exonerated and Discharged thereof afterward, Anno 2 and 3 Philip
and Mary, Cap. 4.

The Statute of 26 Hen. 8. revived, and First Fruits and Tenths of the Clergy
reunited to the Crown Anno 1 Eliz. Cap. 4. But no Court is revived, but
First Fruits and Tenths to be within the Rule, Survey and Government of the
Exchequer, and created a new Office and Officer, viz. a Remembrancer of the
First Fruits and Tenths of the Clergy, who takes all Compositions for the said
First Fruits and Tenths, and makes Process against such as pay not the same.

First Fruits, or Annates, Primitiae are the First Fruits after Avoidance of
every Spiritual Living for one whole Year, except Vicaridges not exceeding Ten
Pounds, and Parsonages not exceeding Ten Marks, but all are to pay Tenths.

Ecclesiastical Livings were sometimes valued by a Book of Taxation made in 20
E. 1. which remains in the Exchequer; and by another Taxation in 26 Hen. 8.
which also remains in that Court. And according to that latter Taxation are
the Values of Ecclesiastical Livings computed for the First fruits and Tenths.

What is of Record concerning First Fruits we will thus briefly relate.

2 Ed. 3. Rot. Claus. m. 4. The King forbids H. P. the Pope's Nuncio to
Collect First Fruits, etc.

Parl. 1. R. 3. N. 66. That the Pope's Collector be willed no longer to gather
the First Fruits of Benefices within this Realm, being a very Novelty, and that
no Person do any longer pay them.

Rot. Par. 4 Rich. 2. Nu. 44. The Commons do petition that Provision may be
made against the Pope's Collector for Levying the First Fruits of
Ecclesiastical Dignities within the Realm. The Answer of the King in
Parliament, is, There shall be granted a Prohibition in all such Cases where
the Pope's Collectors shall attempt any such Novelties. For, note, They were
not so ancient with us as is pretended.

Rot. Par. 6 R. 2. Nu. 50. Upon Complaint made by the Commons in Parliament:
The King wills that Prohibitions be granted to the Pope's Collectors for
receiving of First Fruits.

6 Hen. 4. Cap. 1. Against First Fruits by Archbishops and Bishops to the Pope,
terming it an horrible Mischief and damnable Custom.

Rot. Par. 9 Hen. 4. Nu. 43. It is Enacted, That the Pope's Collectors should
not from thenceforth levy any Money within the Realm for First Fruits of any
Ecclesiastical Dignity by any Provision from Rome upon Pain of the Statute of
Provisors; but this is omitted out of the Print of 9 Hen. 4. Cap. 8.

19 E. 3. Tit. Jurisdiction 22. The Bishop of Norwich had by Prescription time
out of mind, First Fruits within his Diocese of all Churches after every
Avoidance. But these also were given to the Crown by the Statute of 26 Hen. 8.
Cap. 3.

Tenths Ecclesiastical, Decimae, these are the Tenth part of the Value of all
Ecclesiastical Livings yearly payable to the King, his Heirs and Successors by
the said Satute of 26 Hen. 8. and 1 Eliz. to be valued as is abovesaid.

These the Pope (as the Canonists hold) pretended to have De Jure Divino, as
due to the High Priest, by pretext of these Words; Praecipe Levitis atque
denuncia, cum acceperitis a filiis Israel Decimas quas dedi vobis, Primitias
earum offerte Domino, id est, decimam partem decimae, ut reputetur vobis in
Oblationem Primitiarum tam de areis, quam de torcularibus and universis quorum
accipietis Primitias offerte Domino, and date ea Aaron Sacerdoti. But the
Parliaments in 25 Hen. 8. and 26 Hen. 8. were not of Opinion that these Tenths
did belong to the Bishop of Rome, as by the several Preamambles thereof
appears, which we have added; for that we have endeavored to show (as the
Lord Coke says) the several Claims and Pretenses of every thing whereof we
have treated. And King Philip and Queen Mary yielded not these Tenths to the
Pope, but (as has been said) by Authority of Parliament discharged the Clergy
thereof: Which they would never have done, if they had taken them to be due to
the Pope de Jure Divino. And the Bishop of Norwich could not have prescribed to
have First Fruits within his Diocese, if they had been due to the Pope de Jure
Divino: and the rather for that Anthony de Beck, for whom the Prescription was
made, was a Retainer to the Court of Rome, made Bishop of Norwich by the Pope
See the Statutes at large, and Coke's 4 Inst. Cap. 14.

By Statute 26 Hen. 8. Cap. 17. Farmers of Spiritual Persons shall not be
compelled to pay First Fruits and Tenths for their Lessors.

By the Statute of 27 Hen. 8. Cap. 8. Every Spiritual Person at his Entry into
Specialty for the Payment of his First Fruits shall have Deduction of the Tenth
part thereof, in respect of the Tenth which shall be by him payable that year.

Where the last Incumbent leaves the Tenth unpaid, the Successor may Distrain
the said Incumbents Goods found upon the Benefice, and keep them until the
Incumbent (if Living) or (if Dead) his Executors, Administrators, or other
Owner of the said Goods shall satisfy the Arrears; which if not done within 12
days the Goods may be Appraised upon Oath, and Sold for the satisfying thereof,
together with reasonable Costs, and in Case there be no Distress, the Successor
may prosecute the Incumbent (if Living) or (if Dead) his Executors,
Administrators, or other Owner of his Goods, by Bill in Chancery, or Action of
Debt, for the Recovery of the same.

By Stat. 32 Hen. 8. cap. 22. If a Bishop or any of his Deputies will make Oath
that they cannot Levy a Tenth, they shall be discharged thereof upon their
Account in the Exchequer, which Court shall also have Power to Examine the Truth
thereof by Witnesses or otherwise, and also to Issue out Commissions, and to
receive Certificates for that purpose.

If it be Certified into the Exchequer by Commission or otherwise, that any
Spiritual Promotion is omitted out of the Original Certificate of Tenths, which
ought to have been there inserted; That Court shall have power to enter it into
the said Original Record, to the end it may from thenceforth be chargable
therewith.

By Stat. 32 Hen. 8. cap. 47. The Bishop of Norwich and his Successors shall
Collect the Tenths of all Spiritual Promotions within his Diocese,
notwithstanding the Statute of 27 Hen. 8. (not Printed) which did Exempt them
from the Collection thereof.

By Stat. 34 and 35. Hen. 8. cap. 17. The Ten^hs and Pensions reserved upon the
Patents of the Five new Bishops of Chester, Gloucester, Peterborough, Bristol
and Oxford, shall be paid in the Court of the First fruits and Tenths, and not
elsewhere. But note, That the Court was afterward annexed to the Exchequer by
diverse Acts of Parliament, and Patents of Hen. 8. and Queen Mary.

By Stat. 2 and 3 Ed. 6. cap. 20. The penalty for default of Payments of
Tenths, shall be the Forfeiture of that only Benefice out of which the same is
due, notwithstanding the Statute of 26 Hen. 8. cap. 3.

By Stat. 7. Ed. 6. cap. 4. The Collectors of Tenths shall before Midsummer
next give good Security, to save the Bishop harmless against the King.

The Bishop shall have the last day of May for the payment of Tenths, and for
making Certificates for such as have refused to pay them, notwithstanding the
Statute of 26 Hen. 8. cap. 3.

If a Benefice be void, so that no Tenth can be there received, the Bishop
(upon Certificate) shall be discharged thereof, and then the King shall have it
levied upon the Glebe by way of Seizure.

The Patent of a Collector of Tenths, shall be good no longer, than during the
continuance of the Grantor in the Sea.

By Stat. 1 Eliz. cap. 4. The First Fruits and Tenths, restored to the Crown
the Statutes prescribing the Grant and Order of them recontinued; The Statute
of 2 and 3 Philip and Mary, (by which they were taken away) repealed: and they
shall from henceforth be within the Survey of the Court of Exchequer.

All Advowsons of Vicaridges, incident to any of the Queens Impropriations,
shall be re-setled in her, notwithstanding any Act done by Cardinal Pool, or
Grant made by Queen Mary; saving unto all Persons (except such unto whom such
Grants have been made) their Right and Interest into, or out of such
Impropriations.

Pensions, and all other yearly Payments shall be paid as before the Act of 2
and 3 Philip and Mary.

All Persons in Arrear for those Duties shall not be answerable for them to the
Queen.

If an Incumbent continue in the Benefice half a year after the last avoidance,
and die, or be legally ousted before the end of the year, He, his Executors,
Administrators or Sureties, shall only pay the Fourth part of the First fruits,
if he live out the year and die, or be ousted within Six Months after the year,
only half the First Fruits shall be paid: And if he live out the year and half
and die, or be ousted within one year, only the quarter thereof shall be paid.

Discharge of First Fruits and Tenths, heretofore granted by any of the Queens
Predecessors to the Universities, or the Colleges in them, or to those of Eaton
and Winchester, shall remain good notwithstanding this Act; Also the Dean and
Canons of Windsor, shall be from henceforth discharged thereof.

All Grants of Impropriations belonging to the Arch-deaconry of Wells shall
remain good notwithstanding this Act; yet the said Arch-deaconry, and all
Spiritual Promotions Assigned to it, shall from hence forth pay First Fruits
and Tenths.

All Impropriations, and other Profits or Emoluments, Ecclesiastical, which
were formerly within the Survey of the Duchy Court of Lancaster, shall be
recontinued notwithstanding this Act, or that of 2 and 3 Philip and Mary.

The Revenues of Hospitals and Schools, shall not be charged with the Payment
of First fruits, or Tenths notwithstanding this Act.

By Stat. 28 Hen. 8. cap. 11. The year in which the First Fruits shall be paid
to the King, shall begin immediately after the avoidance or vacation of the
Benefice.

In the time of Hen. 8. There were 3 new Courts erected (amongst others) viz.
Those of the Augmentations, First Fruits and Tenths, and General Surveyors: But
these were afterward annexed to the Exchequer, by diverse Acts of Parliament,
and Letters Patents of Hen. 8. and Queen Mary. Nevertheless in some of these
Acts there remains yet somewhat in force; As you may see in the Statutes
concerning Courts.

By Stat. 1 Mary Parl. 2.10. The Queen may by her Letters Patents Alter,
Dissolve or Reduce into one or more the Courts of Augmentations, First Fruits
and Tenths, Wards, Surveyors and the Duchy; or may annex any of them together,
or unto any other Court of Record; or erect of the same any other new Court or
Courts.

Provided, That nothing in the said Letters Patent to be contained, shall
charge the Subject otherwise than as he ought to have been charged, before the
Second day of this Parliament, and that the Officers of the said Courts shall
not hold Plea, but only where the Queen is party against any of her Subjects.

Provided also, That if the Queen shall annex any of the said Courts to the
Exchequer, all things within the Survey of the said Court or Courts so annexed,
shall be ordered the Exchequer way, saving to all persons their Offices, Rents,
Annuities, and Fees to be paid out of any of the Queens Courts, where shall be
sufficient Revenue to answer the same. Vide le Statute.

To the Court of Ancient Demesne.
IN the Book of Doomes-day it self, it appears that it was made in the time
of the Conqueror.

And as Tenants in Ancient Demesne are careful to preserve their Privileges;
so the Lord is as careful to preserve his Seigniority, and the Tenure of his
Tenancy in Ancient Demesne. And therefore, if the Tenant Levy a Fine, or suffer
a Recovery in the Court of Common Pleas, etc. whereby for a time the Land is
become Frankfee, the Lord by a Writ of Disceit, may not only restore himself to
his true Seigniority, but utterly avoid the Fine, and restore his Tenant
against the Recovery, and his own Fine to the Land again in his former Estate;
and the Reason thereof is, for that the Recovery or Fine was not suffered, or
Levied before a Competent Judge in the Right Court, which ought to have been in
the Court of Ancient Demesne: And therefore, after the Reversal in the Writ of
Disceit, it is now Tanquam coram non Judice, and the Parties to the Fine, or
Recovery shall be Fined and Imprisoned pro deceptione Curia.

But if in a Writ of Right Close in Ancient Demesne, the Demandant makes his
Protestation to Sue in the nature of Assize of Mortdancester, the Tenant Pleads
in Abatement of the Writ, and the Writ by Judgment is abated; the Demandant
brings a Writ of false Judgment, wherein the Writ is affirmed to be good; the
Court of Common Pleas shall proceed as the inferior Court should have done;
and although that Judgment be given to recover the Land in the Common Pleas; yet
the Land is not Frank-see but remains Ancient Demesne, because the beginning
and foundation thereof was in Ancient Demesne.

They may Levy a Fine in Ancient Demesne, which by Custom is said to be a Bar
of an Estate Tail; but certainly that will not hold.

If the Tenant remove the Plea, for the cause mentioned in the Recordare, he
may come into the Kings Court, and Assign other Cause: And Twenty, if he has,
to maintain the Jurisdiction of the Kings Court, Coke's 4 Inst. cap. 58.

All those Manors which were in the Hands of St. Edw. the Confessor, were
caused to be Written in Doomes-day Book, Sub Titulo Regis, and all the Lands
holden of the said Manors, are held by Tenure of Ancient Demesne.

And the Tenants shall not be Impleaded out of the said Manors, and if they be,
they may show the Matter, and abate the Writ. But if they Answer to the Writ,
and Judgment be given, then the Lands become Frank-fee for ever.

And Tenants in Ancient Demesne which held their Lands by Soccage; That is, by
Service with the Plow, are called Sockmans, That is, Tenants or Men that hold
by Service of the Plow, or Plowmen, for Sock signifies a Plow. Terms del Ley.

All the Lands that are in the Kings Hands are Frank-fee, and Pleadable at the
Common Law, F. N. B. 35.

The Manor it self, and the Demesne Lands within the Manor is Pleadable at
Common Law; and a Man ought to Sue his Action for the Manor, and for the Lands
which are Parcel of the Manor at the Common Law, and in the Common Pleas, F. N.
B. 24.

But if a Man Sue for Lands holden of the Manor in the Hands of a Free Tenant,
he ought to Sue the Writ of Droit Close, directed to the Lord of the Manor, and
there he shall make his Protestation, to Sue in the same Court, the same Writ
in the nature of what Writ he will Declare: And if false Judgment be given, the
Tenant or Demandant may Sue a Writ of false Judgment, F. N. B. 24.

But he, who holds in Ancient Demesne by Copy of Court Roll, at the Will of
the Lord, who is called Tenant by base Tenure, (and anciently Tenure in
Villenage,) if he be ousted of his Lands, he shall not have this Writ of Droit
Close, but ought to Sue by Bill in the Court of the Lord of the Manor, and
shall make Protestation to Sue there in nature of what Writ he will; but he
shall not have a Writ of false Judgment or other Remedy, but to Sue to the Lord
by way of Petition, F. N. B. fo. 26, 27.

And when the Writ of Droit Gloss comes to the Lord or his Bailiffs, he ought
to hold a Court, and if he will not hold it, The Demandant may Sue a Writ out
of Chancery commanding him to hold it, and thereupon an Attachment directed to
the Bailiff, returnable in the Kings Bench or Common Pleas, whereupon he shall
recover Damages or the like, against the Bailiff.

And if the Lord oust his Tenant that holds in Fee, he may have a Writ of Droit
Close, or an Assize, or other Writ at Common Law, against the Lord for those
Lands, F. N. B. 26.

No Lands are Ancient Demesne, but Lands holden in Soccage. And

By this Tenure is intended, that the Tenants shall do the Service of the
Plow^, viz. To Plow and Till the Lords Lands, to Mow the Lords, Meadows, and
such like Services as are for the maintaining of the Kings Sustenance or
Victuals, and his Subjects. And for such Services the Tenants have diverse
Liberties and Privileges in Law, as to be quit of Toll and Taxes, if not
charged upon Ancient Demesne, To be free from Charges of Knights of Parliament,
and not to be put on Enquests out of their Manors, unless they have other
Lands, etc. And if the Lord Distrein for other Service or Customs than they are
used to do, they may have a Monstraverunt, F. N. B. fo. 30, 31.

The Lord shall not answer to Attachment upon the Monstraverunt, before the
Court be certified by the Treasurer, and Chamberlain of the Exchequer, whether
the Land be Ancient Demesne, F. N. B. 35.

The Lord shall have a Writ of Disceit against him, who levieth a Fine of
Demesne Lands, and he who is Tenant shall avoid the Fine; But if he Release to
him in Possession it shall bind, F. N. B. 216.

Lands in Ancient Demesne may be extended, by the Statute de Mercatoribus, 13
E. 1. Coke's 2 Inst. 397. And upon Statute Staple. And general Statutes extend
to it, Coke's 4 Inst. 270.

Fine in Ancient Demesne by Custom Bars an Estate Tail, Coke's, 2 Inst. 207,
270.

The Jurisdiction extends not to personal Actions, Coke's 2 Inst. 224, 270.

The Demandant in a Writ of Droit Close, cannot remove the Plea out of the
Lords Court for any cause, etc. nor can the Tenant remove the Plea out of the
Ancient Demesne, if not for Causes which prove the Land to be Frank-fee, and
not Ancient Demesne; And when the Court is removed by Recordare, he ought to
show some Special matter to prove the Land to be Frank fee, and not Ancient
Demesne; otherwise, the Plea shall be sent back unto the Lords Court: But to
show a Fine levied in the Kings Court of the same Land, or a Recovery had upon
a Praecipe quod Reddat, is a good cause to prove the Land to be Frank-fee, etc.

Tenants in Ancient Demesne may make Attorneys, Coke's, 2 Institutes 700.

Ancient Demesne, Tryable by Book of Doomes-day, Coke's 4 Inst. 270.

In a Replevin, Writ of Mesne, Writ of Ward, in Account against Guardian in
Soccage, Ancient Demesne is a good Plea for the Appearance and Common
Intendment, that the Realty does come in Debate; so in Account against a
Bailiff. For it is brought for the Issue and Profits of the Land, which is
Ancient Demesne, which ought to be determined in the Court of Ancient Demesne.
And in Assize brought by Tenant by Elegit, Ancient Demesne is a good Plea. For
the manner of Proceeding and Trial, See Coke's 5 Rep. 105. Alden's Case, 105.

If Ancient Demesne be pleaded of a Manor and denied, it shall be Tried by the
Record of the Book of Doomes-day in the Exchequer. But if Issue be taken, that
certain Acres are parcel of the Manor which is Ancient Demesne, it shall be
Tried by Jury, for it cannot be Tried by the same Book, Coke's 9 Rep. 31. Case
of the Abbot of Strata Marcella.

If a Man Levy a Fine of Land in Ancient Demesne to another at Common Law; now
the Lord shall have a Writ of Disceit against him who levied the Fine, and him
who is Tenant and thereby he shall make void the Fine, and the Conusor shall be
restored to the Possession, which he has given by the Fine. But if the Conusor
after the Fine Release to the Conusee by his Deed being in Possession, or by
his Deed confirm his Estate in the Land, then the Conusee shall retain and have
the Land, notwithstanding the Fine be avoided, Coke's 10 Rep. 50. Lampet's Case.

In a Praecipe if one plead, That the Manor of D. is Ancient Demesne, and the
Land in Demand is parcel of the Manor, and so Ancient Demesne, The Demandant
cannot say, That the Land in Demand is not Ancient Demesne, for the same is the
conclusion upon the precedent proposition, viz. The first, That the Manor is
Ancient Demesne. The second, That the Land in Demand is parcel of the Manor,
for Sequitur Conclusio super Praem^ssis, and therefore cannot be denied, Coke's
11 Rep. 10. Priddle and Napper's Case.

The like in Case of Tithes ibid.

Neither the Lord of Ancient Demesne, Nor of a Court Baron, Nor the Sheriff in
the County Court, when the Plea is holden by Writ of Right, Justicies,
Admeasurement, etc. are Judges, but the Suitors who by the Common Law are the
Judges of the Court, Coke's 6 Rep. 12. Jentleman's Case.

The Writ of Droit Close is directed unto the Lord of Ancient Demesne, and
lies for these Tenants who hold their Lands by Charter in Fee-simple,
Fee-Tail, for Life, or in Dower, if any of them be Ousted or Disseized, he, or
his Heir may Sue this Writ, F.N.B. 23, etc.

If any Land in Ancient Demesne be in variance between the Tenants, then the
Tenant so grieved shall have against the other a Writ of Right Close, after the
Custom of the Manor, and that shall be always brought in the Lords Court; and
thereupon he shall Declare in the Nature of what Writ he will, and this Writ
shall not be removed but for a great Cause, or Non power of the Court, Terms
del Ley.

If the Lord in Ancient Demesne confirm the Estate of the Tenant, to hold by
certain Service at the Common Law, although the Estate of the Tenant be not
changed, nor any Transmutation of the Possession; yet the quality of his Estate
is changed; for the Tenant shall not be afterward Impleaded by Petit Writ of
Droit. And the Land by the Confirmation is discharged from the Customs of the
Manor, Coke's 9 Rep. 140. Beaumont's Case.

Monstraverunt is a Writ that lies for Tenants in Ancient Demesne, who hold by
Free Charter (but not those Tenants who hold by Copy of Court Roll, Or by the
Rod according to the Custom of the Manor at the Will of the Lord.) And it is
directed to the Lord, commanding him not to Distrein his Tenant to do other
Service; And if the Tenants cannot be in quiet, they may have an Attachment
against the Lord, to appear before the Justices, and all the names of the
Tenants shall be put in the Writ, although but one of them be grieved, F.N.B.
31, 32, 33, etc.

The Lord shall not be put to Answer to the Writ of Attachment upon the
Monstraverunt, before the Court be certified by the Treasurer, and Chamberlains
of the Exchequer, whether the Manor be Ancient Demesne; And it therefore
behooves the Plaintiff to Sue forth a Writ, directed to the Treasurer and
Chamberlain for that purpose, Fitz. Herb. N. B. fo. 31. to 35.

If a Lord in another place out of Ancient Demesne, Distrein his Tenant to do
other Service than he ought, He shall have a Writ of Right, called Ne injuste
Vexes, and it is a Writ of Right Patent, which shall be Tried by Battle or
Grand Assize, Terms del Ley.

See before in Court of Ancient Demesne, Page 196.

To the Court of Commissioners of Sewers.
SEwers seems to be a Word compounded of two French Words, Seoir to Sit, and
Eau Water, for that the Sewers are Commissioners that Sit by Virtue of their
Commission and Authority Grounded upon diverse Statutes, to Enquire of all
Nusances and Offenses committed by the Stopping of Rivers, Erecting of Mills,
not Repairing of Banks and Bridges, etc. and to Tax and Rate all whom it may
concern, for the amending of all defaults, which tend to the hindrance of the
free passage of the Water, through the old and ancient Courses. See the Statute
of 6 H. 6. cap. 5. and 23 H. 8. cap. 5. for the form of their Commission.

Commission is as much in the Common Law, as Delegate in the Civil, and is
taken for the Warrant or Letters Patent, which all Men using Jurisdiction
either Ordinary or Extraordinary, have for their Power to hear and determine any
Matter or Action. Yet this word sometimes extends more largely than to matters
of Judgment, as the Commission of Purveyors, etc.

And all Commissions are grounded upon the Words in Magna Charta: Terrae Legem,
And have this Clause, Facturi quod ad Justitiam pertinet secundum Legem and
Consuetudinem Angliae.

And no new Commission can be raised but by Statute Coke's 2 Inst. 51, 54, 57.

The King may send his Commission to Repair a Bridge, F. N B. 281.

Legal Commissions have their due Forms as well as Original Writs, and
therefore cannot be newr famed without Act of Parliament: The like of Oaths,
Coke's 2 Inst. 478, 479.

Rumney Marsh in Com. Kanc. containing 24000, Acres Is at this day, and long
time has been governed by certain Ancient, and equal Laws of Sewers, made by a
Venerable Justice Henry de Bathe, in the Reign of Hen. the 3d, from which Laws
not only other parts in Kent, but all England receive Light and Direction: For
Example, The General Act of 23 Hen. 8. cap. 5. in the Clause which gives power
to the Commissioners to make Statutes, Ordinances, and Provisions, etc.
necessary and behoveful after the Laws and Customs of Rumney Marsh, in the
County of Kent, or otherwise by any means or ways, etc.

Both the Town and Marsh of Rumney took their name of one Robert Rumney, which
Robert (as it appears by the Book of Doomes-day,) held this Town of Odo
Bishop of Baieux, wherein he had 13 Burgesses, who for their Service at Sea,
were discharged of all Actions and Customs of Charge, except Felony, Breach of
the Peace, and Forestalling.

The Lord Mayor has Jurisdiction for the time being, for the Conservation and
Rule of the Water, and River of Thames, and the Issues, Breaches, and Lands
over-flowed, etc. from the Bridge of Stanes, unto the Water of Yendal and
Medway: And in all Commissions touching the Water of Ley, The Mayor of London
shall be one.

By Stat. 3 Jac. cap. 14. Sewers that fall into the Thames, shall be Subject to
the Commission of Sewers, Coke's 4 Inst. cap. 62.

The Commissioners ought to Tax all, who are in danger to be endamaged for the
not repairing equally, and not he who has the Land next adjoining to the River
only.

And Walmesley Justice held, and it was not denied by any, That if the Owner of
the Land were bound by Prescription to Repair the River Bank, that yet upon
such Commission Awarded, the Commissioners ought not to charge him only, but
ought to Tax all who had Land in danger: And to this purpose the Statutes
concerning Sewers were made, See the Statute of Hen. 6. cap. 6. In which the
Commission of Sewers is formed and specified, and other Statutes, and Coke's 5
Rep. Rooke's Case, and 10 Rep. 139, Keightly's Case.

And this Commission of Sewers is a Court of Record, Coke's 6 Rep. 20.
Gregorie's Case.

See Coke's 10 Rep. The Case of Chester Mill, Keightly's Case, and Case of the
Isle of Ely, upon the Commissions of Sewers, and the several Acts of Parliament
concerning the same, where you may Read more at large of this matter.

See before in the Court of Commissioners of Sewers, Page 292.

To the Court of Commissioners, upon the Statute of Bankrupts.
THE first Statute made against Bankrupts, was against Strangers, viz. against
Lombards, who after they had made Obligations to their Creditors, suddenly
escaped out of the Realm without any Agreement made with them. It was therefore
Enacted, 51 Ed. 3. That if any Merchant of the Company knowledge himself bound
in that manner, that then the Company shall answer the Debt; so that another
Merchant which is not of the Company, shall not be thereby Grieved or
Impeached; neither do we find either any Complaint in Parliament, or Act of
Parliament made against any English Bankrupt, until the aforesaid Statute of
34. Hen. 8. when the English Merchant had rioted in three kinds of Costliness,
viz. Costly Building, Costly Diet and Costly Apparel, accompanied with neglect
of his Trade and Servants, and thereby consumed his Wealth.

He is called in Latin Decoctor a Decoquendo, for consuming his Estate in
Riotous and Delicate Living.

The Law provideth, That the Commissioners upon the Statute of Bankrupts ought
to have Three qualities, viz. Wisdom, Honesty and Discretion; Which if it be
observed, it is the best means for the due Execution of the said Statute, and
the Life of these Laws does consist in the due Execution thereof: And for such
Commissioners, if any Action shall be brought against them, etc. for doing of
any thing by force of the said Statutes, they may plead Generally, and not be
driven to any Special Pleading, Coke's 4 Inst. cap. 64.

By Stat. 34. Hen. 8. cap. 4. The Lord Chancellor, Treasurer, etc. might take
Order with the Bankrupts Bodies, Lands and Goods, for the payment of their
Debts; but this was altered by Stat. 13 El. 7. 1 Jac. 15, etc.

And by the said Statute of 13 El. 7. It is Enacted, That if any Person
(Subject or Denizen) exercising Trade does depart the Realm, conceal him, or
her self, take Sanctuary, suffer him or her self to be Arrested, Outlawed or
Imprisoned without just Cause, to the Intent to Defraud Creditors, being also
Subjects born, he shall be Deemed a Bankrupt.

And that the Lord Chancellor or Keeper upon a Complaint in Writing against
such Bankrupt, may appoint Honest and Discreet Persons to take such Order with
the Body of such Bankrupt, wheresoever found, and also with the Lands (as well
Copy as Free) Hereditaments, Annuities, Offices, Writings, Goods, Chattels and
Debts, wheresoever known; which the Bankrupt has in his own Right, with his
Wife, Child or Children, or by way of Trust to any Secret use; and to cause the
said Premises to be Searched, Rented, Appraised and Sold for the payment of
the Creditors, Ratably according to their Debts, as in the Discretions of such
Commissioners, (or the most part of them) shall be thought fit.

Such of the Commissioners as Execute the Commission, shall (upon the Bankrupts
request) render him an Account, and also the Overplus (if any be) unto him, his
Executors, Administrators or Assigns.

The Commissioners have Power to Convene before them any Person accused, or
suspected to have any of the Bankrupts Goods, Chattels or Debts, or to be
Indebted unto him, and for Discovery thereof, to Examine upon Oath or otherwise,
as they (or the most of them) shall think fit.

The Person refusing to Disclose or Swear, or Demanding, or Detaining any of
the Bankrupts Lands, Goods, Chattels or Debts, not justly shall forfeit the
Double.

By Stat. 1 Jac. 1. cap. 15. Any Creditor shall be received, to take his part,
if he comes in within Four Months after the Commission Sued out, and pay his
part of the Charge; otherwise, the Commissioners may proceed to Distribution.

If any Person be suspected to detain any part of the Bankrupts Estate, and do
not Appear or send some lawful excuse, at next Meeting after warning given him,
or appearing, refuses to be examined upon Oath; The Commissioners by Warrant
shall cause him to be Arrested, and if he still refuse, shall Commit him until
he Submit.

If a Bankrupt grant his Lands or Goods, or Transfer his Debts into other Men's
names, except to his Children upon Marriage (they being of Age to consent,) or
upon valuable Consideration, the Commissioners may (notwithstanding) sell them,
and such sale shall be good.

By Stat. 21 Jac. 19. In the distribution of the Bankrupts Estate, no more
respect shall be had unto the Debts upon Judgments, Recognizances, Specialties
with Penalties, or the like, than to other Debts.

Another Man's Goods in the Bankrupts Possession and Disposition, shall be also
distributed by the Commissioners, as the Bankrupts own Goods.

No Purchaser shall be Impeached for this or former Acts, unless the Commission
be sued forth within Five years after he becomes Bankrupt.

By Stat. 13 and 14 Car. 2. cap. 24. None that adventure in the East India, or
Guinea Company, or put Money into any Stock, for Carrying on the Fishing Trade,
and receive their Dividend in Goods, which they Sell or Exchange, shall by
reason thereof only, be liable to the Statutes of Bankrupt.

Much more of this matter you may Read in the Statutes above mentioned, and
other later Statutes concerning Bankrupts at large.

See before in Court of Commissioners upon the Statute of Bankrupts. Page 201.

To the Court of Commissioners for Examination of Witnesses.
THe Commissioners albeit named by the Parties reciprocally, ought to stand
indifferent, and do their utmost endeavor to find out by due Examination the
whole Truth, and to suppress no part thereof, for their Authority is to that
end merely, and wholly from the King by force of his Commission.

There may be Propriety, but no Superiority amongst Commissioners.

Witness, Is derived of the Saxon word Weten i. Scire, Quia de quibus sciunt,
^testari debent. Et omne Sacramentum debet esse certae Scientiae.

In Latin a Witness is called Testis a testando, and testari est Testimonium
perhibere; unde Regula juris, Plus valet unus oculatus Testis, quam auriti
december: Testis de visu praeponderat alijs.

And Oath ought to be accompanied with the fear of God, and Service of God for
the Advancement of Truth, Dominum Deum tuum timebis, and illi soli servies, and
per nomen illius jurabis.

Testis falsus non erit impunitus.

Nocte dieque suum gestat sub pectore Testem.

Vox simplex nec probationem facit, nec praesumptionem inducit.

Testibus deponentibus in pari numero, dignioribus est credendum.

Tessemoignes ne poent testify le negative, mes l'affirmative.

Allegans contraria non est audiendus, verum vero consentiens est falsum nec
vero nec falso.

Juramentum est indivisibile, and non est admittendum in part verum, and in
part falsum.

Allegans suam turpitudinem non est audiendus, Coke's 4 Inst. 279.

Antiquity did add hijs Testibus in the Continent of the Deed, after the In
cujus rei Testimonium written with the same Hands the Deed was, which Witnesses
were called, The Deed read, and then their Names entered. And this is called
Charter Land, and by the Saxons Bookland, which Clause of hijs Testibus
continued until and in the Reign of Hen. 8. but is now wholly ommitted.

Before Stat. 12. Ed. 2. cap. 2. Process should be awarded against the
Witnesses, and therefore that Statute was but in Affirmance of the Common Law;
But the delay therein was great, And sometimes (though rarely) the Exceptions to
those Witnesses being found true, they were not to be Sworn at all, neither to
be joined to the Jury nor as Witnesses; As if the Witness were Infamous, as
Attainted of False Verdict, or Conspiracy, at Suit of the King Convict of
Perjury, Forgery, Felony or Praemunire, or by Judgment lost his Ears, or stood
upon the Pillory or Tumbrel, or been Stigmaticus whereby they become Infamous
for some Offenses, Quae sunt minoris Culpae sunt Majoris Infamiae. If a
Champion in a Writ of Right become recreant, he thereby loses Liberam Legem,
becomes Infamous and can be no Witness, or if a Witness be an Infidel, or non
sanae memoriae, or not of Discretion, or a Party interested, or the like.

But a Man may be challenged to be of a Jury, that cannot be challenged to be a
Witness; and Witnesses cannot prove a Negative; of all which you may Read more
in Coke's 1 Inst. 6. a. b. Coke's 2 Inst. 662.

When Trial is by Witnesses, regularly the Affirmative ought to be proved by 2
or 3 Witnesses: But when it is by Verdict of 12 Men, There the Judgment is not
given upon Witnesses, or other kinds of Evidences; But upon the Verdict, and
upon such Evidence as is given to the Jury, they give their Verdict.

Bracton says, There is Probatio duplex, That is, Viva, as by Witnesses, Viva
Voce; and Mortua, as by Deed, Writings and Instruments.

And many times Jurors are (with other matter) much induced by presumption,
which is of three sorts, Praesumptio Violenta, which is many times Plena
probatio, Praesumptio probabilis, which moves little, and Praesumptio levis seu
temeraria, which moves not at all.

If all the Witnesses to a Charter, or Deed be Dead, then violent presumption
which stands for a proof, is continual and quiet Possession.

A Wife cannot be a Witness, for or against her Husband, for they are Duae
animae in carne una; And in some Cases Women by Law are wholly excluded to bear
Testimony.

A Party cannot be Witness against the Usurer. And he that Challenges a Right
to the thing in Demand, cannot be a Witness for that he is a Party in Interest,
Coke's 1 Inst. 6. a. b. 25. a.

Witnesses Viva voce, whereupon Jurors try matter of Fact, are much better
Courses than the Conscience of one particular Man, Guided by Paper Proofs,
Coke's 2 Inst. 111.

Bracton says, Post intervallum temporis Accusator non erit audiendus, nisi
dicere potest se fuisse justis rationibus impeditum.

In Misprision of Treason, there ought to be two Witnesses as well upon Trial,
as upon Indictment.

By Stat. 1 and 5 Ed. 6. None shall be Indicted, Arraigned, Condemned,
Convicted or Attainted of any the Treasons aforesaid, or other Treasons unless
accused by two lawful Witnesses, Coke's 3 Inst. 24, 25.

One may not be Accuser by hearsay, ibidem.

No Act of Parliament, Ancient Author, Book Case, or Record, That in Criminal
Cases the Party accused should not have Witnesses Sworn for him, Coke's 3 Inst.
79.

In some Cases, as in Dower, etc. The Courts of Common Law Judge by Witnesses,
but they must ever be Viva Voce.

An Alien (if not Infidel) may be a Witness; and how Examiners and Witnesses
ought to behave themselves, See Coke's 4. Inst. 278, 279.

Proof is intended Trial by Verdict, and an Extent and Appraisement ought to be
per Sacramentum duodecim and not by the Sheriffs; But if the Sheriff upon a
Fieri facias Sell all the Interest the Defendant had in the Land, the Sale is
good notwithstanding misrecital of the Term; The like if he do not take upon
him to recite the Term, otherwise than pro Termino diversorum annorum ex tunc
ventur' it is good, Coke's 4 Rep. 74.

No proof allowed by Law, but the Verdict of 12 Men, Coke's 5 Rep. 108. Sir
Henry Constable's Case.

If it be generally spoken of proof generally, although there be many proofs in
Law; yet it shall be of the best proof, and that is by Jury; See more of
General Expressions in other Cases, Coke's 6 Rep. 20, Gregories's Case.

If a Man be bound to prove a thing, he ought to prove it by the principal
proof in Law, and that is by Jury, Coke's 11 Rep. 39. Metcalf's Case.

Trials per Primos Juratores and alios, Et per Primos only; By Jury with
Witnesses adjoined, See Coke's 9 Rep. 32. Case of Abbot of Strata Marcella, and
Statutes and Books there mentioned.

Where Witnesses not appearing shall forseit Issues, See Stat. 12 E. 2. And
where convenient Charges being tendered they shall forfeit 10 l. See Stat. 5 El.
9.

Besides the 10 l. shall forfeit such Damages for Recompense as the Judge shall
think fit, ibid.

Witnesses upon Statute of Bankrupts allowed their Charges, See Statutes
concerning Bankrupts.

Null Justice, Null Minister le Roy, etc. Ne eit power a Mitter Frank home
Serement fair sans le Comandment le Roy, Coke's 2 Inst. 44.

By Stat. de Marlebridge, Nullus possit distringere Liberae Tenentes suos ad
respondendum de aliquibus ad liberum Tenementum suum spectantibus, nec jurare
faciet contra voluntatem suam, Coke' 2 Inst. 142, 143.

A new Oath cannot be imposed upon any Judge, Commissioner, or other Subject,
without Authority of Parliament, or by Common Law, Time out of mind.

By Stat. Articuli super Chartas. Vicecomites non permittant quod Laici in
Balliva sua convenient, ad aliquas recognitiones per Sacramenta sua faciendum
nisi in Causis Matrimonialibus and Testamentarijs, Coke's 2 Inst. 600.

Persons proceeded against Ex Officio, ought to have the Cause made known to
them before their Examination, that it may appear whether the Cause be of
Ecclesiastical Cognizance, for otherwise they ought not to Examine them upon
Oath, Coke's 2 Inst. 618.

Clergy Men better able to take Juramentum Calumniae; for concerning the
Testimony of Witnesses in the Ecclesiastical Court, the Act of Articuli, etc.
above extends not unto; but if in a Penal Law the Jurisdiction of the Ordinary
be saved, as by 1 Eliz. in case of hearing Mass, or 13 Eliz. for Usury or the
like, neither Clerk nor Layman, shall be compelled to take Juramentum
Calumniae, because it may be an Evidence against him at the Common Law upon the
Penal Statutes.

The Oath Juramentum Calumniae, was warranted by Act of Parliament.

It is an High Contempt to Minister an Oath without Warrant of Law, to be
punished by Fine and Imprisonment.

A Christian may not induce an Infidel or Idolater to Swear by false Gods, but
may take his Credit by so Swearing to a good end, Coke's 4 Inst. 155.

No Ecclesiastical Person shall tender the Oath Ex Officio, or any Oath whereby
the party shall be compelled to Accuse or Purge himself, See Statutes Title,
Crown 162.

The 2 Houses of parliament being either of them Courts, may take voluntary
Oaths, Coke's 2 Inst. 536.

The Lord Coke says, I wonder so little consideration is had of an Oath as I
daily observe; Cum jurare per Deum, actus Religionis sit; Quo Deus testis
adhibetur, tanquam is qui sit omnium rerum Maximus, etc. Coke's 4 Rep. 95.
Slade's Case.

Jurare in propria causa est Saepenumero hoc Seculo praecipitium Diaboli ad
destruendas miserorum animas ad infernum, Coke's 4 Rep. 95. Slade's Case.

See before in Commissioners for Examination of Witnesses. Page 203.

To the King's Swanherd.
BY Stat. 1 Jac. 1.27. Every Person Convicted by his Confession or 2 Witnesses,
before 2 or more Justices of Peace, To have killed, or taken any Pheasant,
Partridge, Pigeon, Duck, Heron, Hare or other Game, or to have taken or
destroyed the Eggs of Pheasants, Partridges or Swans, shall by the said
Justices be Committed to Prison without Bail, unless he pay 20 s. to the use of
the Poor for every Fowl, Hare and Egg; And after one Months Commitment, to give
Sureties in 20 l. each never to offend; Vide Statutes for Preservation of the
Game.

All White Swans not marked, which have gained their Natural Liberty, and are
Swimming in an Open and Common River, may be seized to the King's use by his
Prerogative; Because Volatilia (Quae sunt ferae naturae) alia sunt Regalia,
alia Communia. And so Aquatilium alia sunt Regalia alia Communia. And as a Swan
is a Royal Fowl, and all those the Property whereof is not known, do belong to
the King: So Whales and Sturgeons, are Royal Fishes, and belong to the King;
But the Subject may have property in White Swans not marked, as in his own
private Waters, And if they go out of those private Waters into Open and Common
Rivers; yet Eousque nostra intelliguntur quandin habuerunt animum revertendi.

The like are Cervi, Pavones, Columbae, and hujusmodi.

Resolved, That every one who has Swans within his Manor (that is to say)
within his private Waters has a property in them: For a Writ of Trepass was
brought of wroungful taking his Swans, scilicet, Quare Cygnos suos, etc. 2. One
may prescribe to have a Game of Swans within his Manor, as well as to have a
Warren or a Park. 3. He who has such a Game of Swans, may prescribe that his
Swans may Swim within the Manor of another. 4. A Swan may be an Estray, and so
cannot any other Fowl, Coke's 7 Rep. 16. Case of Swans.

The Custom of the County of Bucks, is for him who has property of Swans in
the Thames to have two Cygnets, and Owner of the Land where the Swan builds,
shall have one Cygnet.

If one ^ave a Cock and the other a Hen, the ^ygnets of them, shall be equally
divided between them.

None can have a Swan-mark called Cygni-nota, but by Grant of the King, or of
his Officers thereto authorized, or by Prescription; and if a Man has a
Swan-mark, and has Swans swimming in an open River, lawfully marked therewith,
they belong to him ratione Privilegii, and he may grant such Swan-mark over:
But if he has not Five Marks per Annum, he forfeits his Swan-mark.

The King may grant Swans unmarked, and by consequence a Man may prescribe to
have Swans unmarked in such a place.

In some Creatures which are ferae Naturae, a Man has Jus Proprietatis, and in
others, Jus Privilegii; and there are three kinds of Property, 1. Absolute, 2.
Qualified, 3. Possessory. Of all which you may read in Coke's 7 Rep. 16 to 18.
Case of Swans.

By Stat. 22 Ed. 4.6. None (but the King's Son) shall have any Mark or Game of
Swans of his own, or to his use, except he has Lands and Tenements of Freehold
worth Five Marks per Annum besides Reprizes, in pain to have them seized by any
having Lands of that Value, to be divided between the King and the Seizor.

See before in The King's Swanherd. Page 204.

To the King's Aulnager.
NOte, by Stat. 12 Ed. 3.3. No Clothes made beyond Sea, shall be brought into
the King's Dominions, on pain to forfeit the same, and to be further punished
at the King's Will.

By Stat. 11 Ed. 3.5. Cloth workers of strange Lands, which come into the
King's Dominions, shall have the King's Protection, dwell where they please,
and have convenient Franchises granted unto them.

By Stat. 17 E. 3. Stat. 1.4. Clothes shall not be forfeit for want of Measure,
but the Aulnager shall measure them, and fix a Mark thereunto, expressing what
each Cloth contains.

By Stat. 3 R. 2.2 the Aulnager shall not feal a pieced Cloth, in pain that
the Owner shall forfeit the Cloth, and the Aulnager his Office.

By Stat. 17 R. 2.2. No Cloth shall be sold before it be measured and sealed
by the Aulnager, upon the Pains contained in the Statutes thereof made.

By Stat. 4. H. 4.24. the Aulnage may be let to Farm by Improvement, according
to the Discretion of the Lord Treasurer and barons of the Exchequer,
notwithstanding the Statute of 17 R. 2.

And much more of his Office, and Duty and Measuring, Regulating and making of
Clothes, etc. you may read in the many diverse Statutes concerning the same.
Vid. the Statutes concerning Drapery.

See before in the King's Aulnager. Page 205.

To the Court of the Sessions of the Peace.
A Justice of Peace may make a Warrant to bring the Party before himself, but
if the Warrant be any Justice, then the Constable may carry the Party before
whom he will, Coke's 5 Rep. 59. Foster's Case.

Where Stat. 8 H. 6. speaks of Justices of Peace, Justices of King's Bench
are within the Statute, because they have the Sovereign and Supreme Authority
in such Cases.

Stat. 5 H, 4. Enacts, That no Justice of Peace shall commit any to Prison, but
only in the Common Goal, saving to Lords and others who have Goals, their
Franchises in such Case: Therefore Justices of Peace offend in committing
Felons, etc. to the Compters in London, Coke's 9 Rep. 118, 119. Lord Sanchar's
Case.

A Justice of Peace upon the View of the Force may commit, but he ought to make
a Record of it, Coke's 8 Rep. 120. Dr. Bonham's Case.

Justices of Peace may commit Vagrants to Prison, if they will not serve; and
they may command the Goalers to set 'em at liberty without any other Writ, F.
N. B. 374.

Justices of Peace shall be made of the most sufficient, by the Advice of the
Chancellor and King's Council, without taking others dwelling in Foreign
Counties, except Lords Justices of Assize, and the King's Chief Steward of
Duchy Lands in North and South, St. 2 H. 5. Cap. 2.

18 H. 6. None, except Men Learned in the Law, or inhabiting Corporations,
shall be Justices of peace, unless their Lands be worth 20 l. per Annum.

Justices in Middlesex not compellable to keep their Sessions more than twice
in the Year, but may keep them oftener, Stat. 14 H. 6. Vid. the Statutes
concerning Justices of Peace.

Sat. 5 and 6 W. and M. Certiorari to remove Indictments shall not be out of
the King's Bench before Trial, and from before Justices of General or Quarter
Sessions of Peace, unless upon Motion of Council and Rule in open Court, and
the Party indicted find two Manucaptors before one or two of the Justices in
the County in 20 l. to plead to the said Indictment in the King's Bench, and at
their own Charges to procure the Issue joined upon such Indictment to be tried
at next Assizes after the Certiorari returnable: Or, if in London, Westminster,
or Middlesex, then next Term, or Sitting after Term, unless the Justices
appoint some other time, of which Notice must be given. Costs against the
Prosecutor of the Certiorari, if he be Convicted. In Vacation time Writs of
Certiorari shall be granted by any Justice of King's Bench, the Justice and
Parties Name being indorsed, and finding Sureties.

If upon any Indictment for not repairing Highways the Title may come in
Question, upon Affidavit thereof a Certiorari may be granted to remove it into
King's Bench upon Sureties found. Vid. Washington's Abridgment of Statutes, 152.

Justices of Peace shall deliver their Indictments to the Justices of
Jail-delivery; And Justices of Jail-delivery may take a Panel of a Jury
returned by the Sheriff, without making any Precept, which Justices of Oyer and
Terminer ought to make. Coke's 4 Inst. 168.

For the Institution of Justices of the Peace, and their Duty and Authority,
and of what they may inquire, See the Stat. 4 H. 7. and Coke's 4 Inst. 170 to
183.

Justices of Peace, Sheriffs in their Tourns, and Lords in their Leets, may
enquire of false Weights and Measures, etc. Coke's 4 Inst. 273.

If the Commission of Sewers determine, the Justices of Peace have Power to
execute for one year. Coke's 4. Inst. 276.

By Stat. 2 and 3 P. and M. 18. a new Commission of the Peace, or Jail-delivery
for the whole County, shall not be a Supersedeas, to a former like Commission
granted to a City or Town-Corporate, being no County.

Those who desire to see more of their Institution, Jurisdiction and Authority,
may read thereof more at large in Dalt. Just. Coke's 4 Inst. and other Authors
who treat thereof, and in the Statutes at large.

See before in Court of the Sessions of the Peace, Page 210.

To the Court of the Turn.
THIS Court of the Turn is the King's Leet through all the County, and the
Sheriff is Judge. And whosoever has a Leet, has the same Authority within the
Precinct, as the Sheriff has within the Turn.

From this Court are exempted only Archbishops, Bishops, Abbots, Priors, Earls,
Barons, all Religious Men and Women, and all such as have Hundreds of their own
to be kept, who are not bound to appear, except for some other Cause, but only
in the Bailywicks where they dwell. Stat. Marleb. 10.25 H. 3.

By Stat. 31 Ed. 3. Sess. 1.15. Every Sheriff shall hold his Turn yearly, one
time within the Month after Easter, and another time, within the Month after
Michaelmas, on Pain to lose his Turn for the Time.

This Court is appertaining and incident to the Office of the Sheriff, and
ought not to be reserved therefrom, and the Sheriff is to appoint Clerks under
him, in his Court, such as he will at his Peril answer for; but he cannot
prescribe to take any thing for the keeping of his Turn, because he is an
Officer removeable. And by Magna Charta Chap. 35. he is to keep his Turn in
the Hundred at the usual Place.

It was Enacted by Stat. 1 Ed. 4. That all Indictments and Presentiments taken
before the Sheriff in his Turn, or County, shall be delivered to the Justices
of the Peace at the next Sessions, in Pain of 40 l. who shall Arraign, Deliver,
make Process, and proceed thereupon, as if they were taken before themselves,
and shall deliver indented Estreats of the Fines to the Sheriff, to be levied
to his own use. And here, if the Sheriff levy any Fine, or commit any to
Prison, by color of any such Indictment or Presentment, or otherwise than by
Warrant from the Justices aforesaid, he shall forfeit 100 l. Howbeit Sheriffs
of London shall not be restrained by this Act, nor such as have had Fines
formerly granted unto them. Coke's 5 Rep. 112. Mallorie's Case.

But this extends only to Proceedings upon lawful and sufficient Indictments,
and does not make any insufficient Indictment good, Coke's 9 Rep. 26. Case of
the Abbot of Strata Marcella.

See more in Court Leet, County Court, and Hundred-Court.

See before in The Court of the Turn. Page 223.

To the Court Leet, or View of Frankpledge.
BY Stat. de Visu Franc. 18 Ed. 2. before mentioned, and diverse other Statutes,
the Court of the Leet may enquire of several Offenses; and amongst the things
whereof the Steward of the Leet has Cognizance, and wherewith the Jury is to
be charged, some are such as may be there enquired of, as High Treason, Petit
Treason, Felonies, Burglaries, Wilful Burners of Houses or Barns adjoining
thereunto, by Night; or Stacks of Corn, Robbers of Churches and Chapels,
Takers of Doves out of Dovehouses or young Pigeons, or Hawks out of their Nest
in the Night, or Fishes out of Ponds, Stews or Trunks, in the Night, Stealers
of Tame Deer, marked Swans, or Peacocks; Breaking of Prison by Felons, Rescuers
of Felons, and the like; and their Accessaries before and after the Felony
done. Of all which the Jury must make Presentment, and this Presentment is to
be transmitted to Superior Courts, as to the Justices of Jail-delivery, or
Justices of Peace in their Sessions.

And other things whereof this Court has perfect Cognizance, and that may be
enquired of, and punished here in this Court, are, 1. By Common Law, as the
Defaults of Officers and Suitors in doing their Suit to this Court; as if any
living within the Precinct of the Lawday, be not returned of the Decenary, or
being returned, does not appear: Or, if any above Twelve years of Age have
lived within the Leet, and had not taken the Oath of Allegiance, he was to have
been presented here. And if any such Person had come to this Court, the Steward
ought to have given him this Oath. If any Customs or Profits, as Treasure
Trove, Waif, Estray, or Wreck be withheld from the Lord of the Leet; or if any
claim any Royal Franchise, or levy any new Franchise, or abuse any old
Franchise within the Leet. All common and popular Nusances or Grievances done
to the Kings Subjects, by Purprestures made in any Land, Wood or Water, by
Walls, Hedges, Ditches, or Houses, made up or broken down, by straightning,
turning, stopping, surrounding, or otherwise hurting the common Ways, Bridges
or Waters; by poisoning or corrupting the Air by laying of any Carrion or
Filth, by selling of corrupt and unwholsom Provision, or by the breaking of the
due Assize of Bread, Beer, etc. By Erecting Cottages, and suffering Inmates, by
not scowring Ditches, or not repairing Highways and Bridges, and the like. And
for all these, be the Offend or one Man, or a whole Parish, he or they may be
Amerced; and the Jury may order the Reforming of them under a Pain. And all
great Affrays, Outcries and Bloodsheds, and such like popular Trespasses, which
are Trespasses by the Common Law. Riots, Routs, and unlawful Assemblies at the
Common Law, are punishable in this Court; and for this the Offenders are to be
Amerced according to Discretion; but this must be reasonable, and the
reasonableness tryable and avoidable by Plea or Judgment of the Court in which
the Suit depends. Evil Members, and persons of ill Behavior that are dangerous
to the Neighbors, as Malefactors in Parks, such as take Doves by Engines, such
as are common suspected Thieves, or that are the common Messengers of Thieves,
the common Drunkards, the common Haunters of Alehouses or Taverns, not having
whereon to live; Nightwalkers and Day-sleepers, that live idly, that have no
Estate, yet fare well; Eves-droppers, common Hedge-breakers, common Peace
breakers, Railers and Sowers of Discord between Neighbors, Keepers or Haunters
of Bawdy-houses, common Scolds, common Barretors, common Usurers, Innkeepers,
who do commonly entertain Thieves and suspicious Persons, knowing or suspecting
them to be so; and such as do remove Bounds or Landmarks between Parishes,
Hundreds or Counties, but not such as remove Bounds between Persons only. These
last the Steward of this Court heretofore might have bound to the Peace or Good
Behavior, but at this day he can only by the Presentment of the Jury Amerce
them, or make way to have them bound to their Good Behavior by a Justice of
Peace. Constables, Tythingmen, Haywards, Aleconners, Bailiffs, and such like
Officers, which are chosen and sworn in this Court, if any such being chosen,
refuse the Office, and to take the Oath, or accepting, does not execute his
Office duly, or misbehave himself therein, as if Constables and Tythingmen do
not take care of Watch and Ward, keeping the Peace, raise Hue and Cry, and
pursue it for the apprehending Felons, when any Felony is done, or raise Hue
and Cry when none is done; or do not punish Rogues and the like, or Tythingmen,
Chief Pledges, Surveyors of Highways, Searchers and Sealers of Leather, and
such like Officers as do not their Duty. All that Rescue Persons or Things,
taken in a course of Law; as Rescuers of Persons Arrested; or Goods or Cattle
Distreined; Pound-breakers and the like. The lack of Stocks, Pillory and
Tumbrel, Cucking-stool, or Common Pound. All that use Deceit in Buying and
Selling, that Sell false Wares for good, especially if it be that which is to
be Eaten or Drunk; That Sell by false Weights and Measures, Innkeepers,
Victuallers, Brewers, Bakers, Fishers, Poulterers, or Fishmongers, that Sell
that which is unwholesome for Food, or Sell at unreasonable Prices; Bakers and
Brewers that do not keep the Assize of Bread and Beer, and Millers that take
excessive Toll. Forestallers, Regrators and Ingrossers, may be punished in this
Court by the Common Law. And Usurers as Enemies to Trading. But in these and
such like Cases, the Penalty of the Statute cannot be Imposed; for Stewards
have no Power by the Statutes, but it is punished here as an Offense at the
Common Law, before the Statute which does remain still, and for these the
Offender is to be amerced.

2. By Statute Law are punishable Tanners, Curriers, Shoomakers, Searchers and
Sealers of Leather; such as offend about Fish, Malt, Archery, Guns, Unlawful
Games, Artificers and Laborers, Musters, Highways, Horses, Hostlers and
Victuallers, about the price of Wine, Pheasants, Partridges, Tracers of Hares,
Hunting in Corn, about Cottages and Inmates, about Drinking and Drunkenness,
Watering of Hemp where Cattle Drink, about Rogues, Crows, etc. Of all these and
some others, this Court may Inquire by Authority of diverse Acts of Parliament;
for all which see Shepheard's Court-keepers Guide, Coke's 4 Inst. and other
Authors, and the Statutes at large.

The Articles to be enquired of by the Leet, by 18 Ed. 2. were inquirable
therein by the Common Law.

This Court cannot take Indictments of any Felony, for the death of a Man, or
in any other case where it has not Cognizance; And if it do it is void, and it
seems the Judge may be punished for it; Neither can it take a Presentment of an
offense done against a Parish, or against a Man. The like of Presentiments of
any thing, which is not within the Jurisdiction of the Court.

The Jury in this Court may make Bylaws, and enquire of the breach of them, as
they have been used to do. And for Cawseys, Highways and Bridges, the greater
part may bind the rest without consent, 44 Ed. 3.19.

But no By-Law can be made to Imprison Refusers; but Distress, and Action of
Debt in this Case, is the proper Remedy for a Penalty Imposed, or Breach of a
By-Law, Coke's 5 Rep. 64. Shepheard's Court-keepers Guide, cap. 39.

The manner of Summoning this Court, Proceeding therein, and Adjournment, and
Discharging thereof, you may see in Kitchins Court Leet, Shepheard's
Court-keepers Guide and other Authors.

Visus Franc' Pleg' i. e. Libere Fide jussores, was instituted for the keeping
of the King's Peace, that every Freeman at his Age of 12 years, should in the
Leet (if he were in any) or in the Tourn take the Oath of Allegiance to the
King, and that Pledges or Sureties should be found, for his Truth to the King,
and to all his People, or else to be kept in Prison: This Frank-pledge
consisted most commonly of ten Households, which the Saxons called Theothung; in
the North parts they call him Tenementale, in other places of England Tything,
whereof the Masters of the Nine Families who were bound, were of the Saxons
called Freeborgh, which in some places is to this day called Freebarow, i. e.
Free Surety, or Frank-pledge. And the Master of the 10th Household, was by the
Saxons called by diverse Names, viz. Theothungmon, to this day in the West
called Tythingman and Tihenheofod, and Freoborher i. e. Capitalis plegius,
chief Pledge; and these* Ten Masters of Families, were bound one for another
Family, that each Man of their several Families should stand to the Law, or if
he were not forth coming, that they should answer for the Injury or Offense by
him Committed, De eo autem qui fugam ceperit, Diligenter inquirend' si fuerit
in Franco Plegio, and Decenna, tunc erit Decenna in misericordia coram
Justiciarijs nostris, quia non habent ipsum Malefactorem ad rectum, Bracton
Lib. 3. Fo. 124.

Hereby it appears, That the Precinct of this Frank-pledge was called
Decenna, because it consisted most commonly (as has been said) of Ten
Households, and every Man of these several Households, for whom the Pledge or
Surety are taken were called Decennarij, because every particular Person in the
Kingdom was of one Decenna or other, which names are continued as Shadows of
Antiquity to this day; Ordeine fuit ancientment, que null ne demurrast en le
Realm, sil ne fuit en dizein and plevy de Frank hommes, appent aux vise de
viewer un fois per an' Frank Pledges and les Plevys, etc.

By the due Execution of this Law, such Peace was Universally holden within
this Realm, as no Injuries, Homicides, Robberies, Thefts, Riots, Tumul^s, or
other Offenses were Committed; so as a Man with a White Wand, might before the
Conquest safely have Ridden with much Money about him, throughout England
without any Weapon, Coke's 2 Inst. 73.

In the Leet or Tourn, the Suitors might be compelled to be Sworn as well for
the King, as between Party and Party; for they are not Liberae tenentes in
respect of Tenure, but do their Suit in respect of Resiance; Also the Leets and
Tourns are the Courts of the King, and of Record, and the Court Baron, and
Hundred Court of other Lords, are not Courts of Record, Coke's 2 Inst. 143.

The Oath of Allegiance then and there taken to the King is thus expressed by
Britton cap. 12. Voillons nous que trestouts ceux de 12 ans, desouth nous
facent le serement que ils serr' Foial and Loial, and que ils ne serr' Felons
ne aux felonies assentaunts. And in cap. 24. to this effect; You shall Swear,
That from this day forward you shall be True and Faithful to our Sovereign Lord
King E. and his Heirs, and Truth and Faith shall bear of Life and Member, and
Terrene Honor, and you shall neither know nor hear of any Ill or Damage
intended unto him, that you shall not Defend. So help you Almighty God, Et les
Seints.

But this is now obsolete, being altered by several Statutes. See Coke's Rep.
Calvin's Case.

The Court of the Tourn of the County, and of the Leet or View of Frankpledge
are very Ancient; for of the Tourn you may Read among the Laws of King Ed.
Statutum est quod ibi (scil' apud le Folkmote) debent populi omnes, etc.
convenire, and se Fide and Sacramento non fracto ibi in unum, and simul
confederare, etc. ad defendendum Regnum, etc. Una cum Domino suo Rege, and
Terras suas, and honores illius omni fidelitate cum eo servare and quod illi,
ut Domino suo Regi intra, and extra Regnum vniversum Britanniae fideles esse
velint, etc. Hanc Legem invenit Arthurus (qui quondam fuit inclytissimus Rex
Britonum) and ita consolidavit and confederavit Regnum Britanniae universum
semper in unum: Hujus Legis Authoritate, expulit Arthurus praed' Saracenos and
inimicos a Regno; Lex enim ista diu sopita fuit, donec Edgarus Rex Anglorum,
qui fuit avus Edwardi Regis, illam excitavit, and erexit in Lucem and per totum
Regnum firmiter observari praecepit: Et hujus Legis Authoritate Rex Etheldred'
subito uno and eodem die per universum Regnum Danos occidit.

And because this Court, or View of Frankpledge or Leet, was by the King
divided and derived from the Tourn, and granted to the Lords to have the view
of the Tenants, and Resiants within their Manor, etc. so as they should have
the same Justice, as they had before in the Tourn, without any charge or loss
of Time; from thence came the Duty in many Leets to the Lord de Certo Let,
toward the charge of obtaining the Grant of the said Leet.

So likewise, and for the same Reason were Hundreds, and Hundred Courts divided
and derived from the County Courts; and this the King might do, for the Tourn
and Leet, are both the King's Courts of Record: And as the King may Grant a Man
to have Power Tenere placita, within a certain Precinct, and before certain
Judges, and in a manner Exempt it from the Jurisdiction of his Higher Courts of
Justice, so might he do in Case of the Tourn, and Hundred Courts; So as the
Courts and Judges may be changed, but the Laws and Customs, whereby the Courts
proceed, cannot be altered. And as the County Court, and Hundred Court are of
one Jurisdiction; so the Tourn, and Leet be also of one and the same
Jurisdiction: For Derivativa potestas est ejusdem jurisdictionis cum Primitiva.

But both of the Tourn and the Leet this may be truly said,

Tempora mutantur, and nos mutamur in illis. Quodque vera institutio istius
Curiae evanuit, and velut umbra ejusdem adhuc remanet: Habemus quidem Senatus
consultum, sed in Tabulis repositum, and tanquam Gladium in Vagina reconditum,
Coke's 2 Inst. cap. 35. Of Hue and Cry, One being an Expression of the other,
for Huer in French ( unde Hutesium) is to Hoot or Shout, in English to Cry:
There be two kinds, one by Common Law, or for the King, as when any Felony is
Committed, or any Person Dangerously Wounded or Assaulted, and offered to be
robbed either in Day or Night; The Party grieved, or any other may resort to
the Constable of the Town, and acquaint him with the Causes describing the
Party, and telling him which way the Offender is gone, and require him to raise
Hue and Cry; And the Duty of the Constable is to raise the Power of the Town,
as well in the Night as in the Day, for the Prosecution of the Offender; and if
he be not found there, to give the next Constable warning, and he the next
until the Offender be found, and this was the Law before the Conquest.

The Life of Hue and Cry is fresh Suit.

Thamar, The Daughter of King David being violenty Ravished by her Brother
Amon, The Text says of her, Quae aspergens cinerem capiti suo, Scissa talari
tunica, impositisque manibus super caput suum, ibat ingrediens, and clamans. 2
Regum, cap. 13. Verse. 19.

Hue and Cry by force of Acts of Parliament is in diverse Cases; As if a
Watchman does Arrest a Night-walker, and he disobey and fly, the Watchman may
make Hue and Cry. 2. Si quis. Forestarius, Parcarius, aut Warrenarius in
balliva sua Malefactores aliquos invenerit vagrantes ad damnum ibidem
faciendum, etc. 3. If Welshmen Outlawed or Indicted of Treason or Felony, fly
into Herefordshire, they shall be apprehended, etc. or else pursued by Hue and
Cry, and Forfeiture upon those that do not pursue. 4. Hue and Cry shall be
levied upon takers of Carriage within the Verge of the Staple, of that which
pertains to the Staple. 5. Where a Man is Robbed; Upon Hue and Cry, etc. What
remedy he shall have against the Hundred, etc. And how, and in what manner the
Hue and Cry shall be made in that Case, See the Statutes and Coke's 7 Rep. fol.
6 and 7. And this Robbery must be done in the Day time, and not in the Night;
otherwise, the Party grieved shall not have his Action: So note, a diversity
between a Hue and Cry at Common Law, or for the King; And a Hue and Cry by
Statute, where the Party grieved is to have his remedy by private Action. Note,
Also a Diversity in the Prosecution at the Common Law, or for the King, and by
the Statutes which give the Party remedy; for a Prosecution to the next
Constable is good by the Common Law; but so it is not by the said Statutes,
which give the Party grieved his Action, Coke's 7 Report, fo. 7 and 8.
Milbourn's Case.

So the Prosecution at the Common Law, is a good excuse upon an Indictment at
the King's Suit; But note, That it is no Bar to the Parties Action.

Where Hue and Cry either by the Common Law, or by force of any Statute, is
Levied upon any Person, the Arrest of such Person is lawful, although the Cause
of the Hue and Cry be feigned, and if the Cause be feigned, he that Levied the
same shall also be Arrested, and shall be Fined and Imprisoned. But common Fame
and Voice is not sufficient to Arrest a Man in Case of Felony, unless a Felony
be done indeed.

Mandatum est Gulielmo de Haverbul Thesaurario Regis, quod Civitatem Lond'
capiat in manum Regis, eo quod Cives ejusdem Civitatis non levaverunt Hutesium
and Clamorem pro morte Magistri Guidonis de Arterio and aliorum inter fectorum
secundum legem and consuetudinem Regni. Test Rege apud Woodstock, 22 die
Augusti, 30 Hen. 3. Coke's 3 Inst. cap. 52*

Hue and Cry has been used in some Cases by the Ancient Laws of this Realm:
For the Author of the Mirror Writing of the Ancient Laws before the Conquest,
under the Title Des Articles des viels Roys ordeins, says, Ordeine fuit que
chescun del Age de xiv. ans, and oustre de mortels pecheors ensuivre de Ville,
and Ville a Hue and Cry.

Et inter Leges Regis Canuti; Si quit Latroni obviam dederit, eumque nullo
edito clamore abire permiserit, quanticunque fuerit Latronis vita aestimata,
extremum solvat denariolum, aut pleno and perfecto jurejurando de facinore
nihil habuisse cogniti confirmato. Sin quis proclamantem audierit, neque vero
fuerit insecutus, suae in Regem contumaciae, (ni omnem criminis suspicionem
diluerit) poenas dato.

Bracton, of Hue and Cry, says, Statim and recenter investiganda sunt vestigia
Malefactorum, and sequenda per ductum carectae, passus equorum and vestigia
hominum, and alio modo, secundum quod consultius and melius fieri possit.

And in legal understanding Hue and Cry is all one. In Ancient Records they are
called Hutesium and Clamor, and may be by Horn, and by Voice, Avec Hue and Cry
de Corn and de Bouche. And by Stat. Westminster. 1. Cap. 9. it is called Cry de
pais, or Cry of the Country. And he that goes not at the Commandment of the
Sheriff or Constable at the Cry of the Country, shall be grievously fined and
imprisoned.

And diverse Acts of Parliament have been since made concerning* Hue and Cry, as
the Stat. De Officio Coronatoris, where it is said, Et omnes sequantur Hutesium
and vestigium, si fieri potest; and qui non fecerit, and super hoc convictus
fuerit, attachietur, quod sit coram Justiciariis de Gaola, etc. 28 Ed. 3. and
27 Eliz. Coke's 2 Inst. fol. 172, 173.

By Stat. Westminster. 2. Cap. 13. Indictments in Tourns ought to be found by Twelve
at the least, and the Jurors to put their Seals to the Inquisitions or
Indictments.

And by Stat. 1 Ed. 3. these Indictments are to be by a Roll indented, whereof
one part is to remain with the Indictors, and the other part with him that
takes the Inquest.

And this Act does extend to Presentiments of Indictments, not only in Tourns,
but in Leets also, and the like, of what Quality, Ability and Livelihood
Indictors in Tourns and Leets ought to be, See the Statute of 1 R. 3. Cap. 4.

But now by Stat. 1 E. 4. the Power of Sheriffs is taken away, save only to
take Presentiments and Indictments, and deliver the same to the Justices of the
Peace at the next Sessions, as before is mentioned, Coke's 2 Inst. 387, 388.

In ancient time the King's Courts, and especially the Leets, had power to
inquire of, and punish Fornication and Adultery, by the Name of Letherwite, and
it appears often in the Book of Doomsday, That the King had the Fines
assessed for those Offenses, which were assessed in the King's Courts, and
could not be inflicted in Curia Christianitatis.

Concerning Letters Patent granted for Searching or Surveying of Wine, Ale,
Beer, or other Victual, and concerning the well making of Malt, packing of
Hops, garbling of Spices, Drugs, etc. you may read more at large in Coke's 4th.
Inst. Cap. 54. and Statutes there mentioned.

The Constables or Petti constables are chosen by the Common Law at the Leet or
Tourn, and are by the Common Law Conservators of the Peace, and may take Surety
of the Peace by Obligation, and are as ancient as Tourns or Leets be. Coke's 4
Inst. Cap. 54.

It appears by Stat. 18 Ed. 2. before mentioned, That it ought to be enquired
at the Leet, if all the Chief Pledges with their Decenners (that is, the other
Nine) appear; by which it appears, That the tenth Principal Man was the Chief
Pledge.

And the Word Decenners is the same with the Ancient Doziniers, as you may see
more fully in Coke's 6 Rep. 77, 78. Bullen's Case.

See more in the Court of the Tourn, and after in the County Court and Hundred
Court.

See before in the Court Leet. Page 224.

To the County Court.
AMong the Laws of St. Edward the Confessor, it is thus recorded, Verum quod
modo vocatur Comitatus olim apud Britones temporibus Romanorum in Regno isto
Britanniae vocabatur Consulatus, and qui modo vocantur Vicecomites tunc
temporis, Vice-consules vocabantur; ille vero dicebatur Vice-consul, qui
Consule absente, ipsius vice supplebat in Jure and in Foro. Wherein may be
observed, That the Romans called Consulatum, which we now call Comitatum, and
Consul, what the Saxons afterward called Shireve, a Word compounded of two
Saxon Words, viz. Shire and Reve, Shire, Satrapia or Comitatus, coming of the
Saxon Verb Siram, i. e. partiri, for that the whole Realm is parted, and
divided into Shires. And this Shireve being Deputy of the Consul or Earl, was
therefore by the Romans called Vice-Consul, as we at this day call him
Vice-comes, i. e. Vice-comitis, that is, instead of the Earl of that County,
who in ancient time had the Regiment of the County under the King. For it is
said in the Mirror Cap. 1. Sect. 3. That the Earls of the Counties had the
Custody and Guard of the Counties; and when the Earls left their Custodies or
Guards, then was the Custody of Counties committed to Viscounts, who therefore
are called Vicecomites. And whom the Romans called Senatores, the Saxons
sometimes, and we now call Aeldermen, or Earls; Non proper aetatem, sed propter
sapientiam and dignitatem, cum quidam adolescentes essent, jurisperiti tamen,
and super hoc experti.

The Shireve is called Praefectus, because he is the Chief Officer to the King
within the Shire; for the Words of his Patent be, Comisimus vobis custodiam
Comitatus nostri de, etc. And he has triplicem Custodiam, viz. 1. Vitae
Justitiae, for no Suit begins, and no Process is served but by the Sheriff.
Also he is to return indifferent Juries for the Trial of Men's Lives, Liberties,
Lands, Goods, etc. 2. Vitae Legis, he is, after long Suits and chargeable, to
make Execution, which is the Life and Fruit of the Law. 3. Vitae Reipublicae,
he is Principalis Conservator pacis, within the County.

Marculphus says, This Office is Judiciaria dignitas; Lampridius, That it is
Officium digniatatis. And Fortescue, Cap. 24. says, Quod Vicecomes est nobilis
Officiarius, and is thus chosen: Every year the Morrow after All Souls Day, all
the King's Counselors meet together in the King's Exchequer, as well the Lords
Spiritual and Temporal, as all other Justices, all the Barons of the Exchequer,
the Master of the Rolls, and certain other Officers, where all these with one
common Assent do name of every County Three Knights or Esquires, whom among
other of the same County they take to be of good Disposition and Fame, and best
disposed to the Office of Sheriff of that County: Of the which Three the King
chooses one, whom by his Letters Patent he appoints Sheriff of the County
that he is chosen of, for the year then following; but he, before he receive
his Patent, shall swear upon the Holy Gospel, among other Articles, That he
shall well and faithfully and indifferently exercise and do his Office all that
year; and that he shall receive or take nothing of any other Man than the King,
by color, or mean of his Office.

In the Romans time, and before, he was a Minister to the King's Courts of Law
and Justice, and had then a Court of his own, which was the County Court, then
called Curia Consulatus, as appears by these Words, Ipsius vices supplebat in
Jure and in Foro.

This Realm being divided into Shires and Counties, and those Shires into
Cities, Boroughs and Towns, by the Britons; King Alfred's Division of Shires
and Counties, being but a Renovation, or more exact Description of the same.

The Sheriff is Balivus, and his County called Baliva, which is thus derived:

Bailiff is a French word, and signifies an Officer concerning the
Administration of Justice of a certain Province; and because a Sheriff has an
Office concerning the Administration of Justice within his County or Bailywick,
therefore he calls his County Baliva sua.

For Example, When he cannot find the Defendant, etc. he returns, Non est
inventus in Baliva mea.

In the Statute of Magna Charta, Cap. 8. some hold, that Balivus signifies any
Judge. And in 10th. of Hen. 4. it is holden, That Bailie le Roy is understood
Justice le Roy: And in the Mirror it is holden, That the Stature does extend to
every Justice, Minister of the King, Steward, etc. and all comprehended under
this Word Bailiff, Coke's 1* Inst. 168. a. b.

Curia Comitatus, in Saxon, Scypegemoce, i. e. Comitatus Conventus, ejus duo
sunt genera, quorum alterum hodie le County Court, alterum le Tourn del
Viscount, olim Folkmore vulgo nuncupatur: So as many times Turn' Vicecomit is
is expressed under the name of Curia Comitatus, because it extended through the
whole County; and therefore in the Red Book of the Exchequer, amongst the Laws
of King H. 1. Cap. 8. De Generalibus Placitis Comitatuum, it is thus contained,
viz.

Sicut antiqua fuerat institutione formatum, salutari Regis Imperio vera est
recordatione firmatum Generalia Comitatuum Placita certis locis and vicibus,
and definito tempore per singulas anni provincias convenire debere, nec ullis
ultra fatigationibus agitari, nisi propria Legis necessitas, vel commune Regni
commodum saepius adjiciant. Intersint autem Episcopi, Comites, Vicedomini,
Vicarii, Centenarii, Aldermanni, Praefecti, Praepositi, Barons, Vavassores,
Tingrevii, and caeteri terrarum Domini diligenter intendentes, ne malorum
impunitas, aut gravionum pravitas, vel judicum subversio solita miseros
laceratione confiniant: Agantur itaque primo, debita verae Christianitatis
jura; secundo, Regis placita, postremo, causae singulorum, etc. Debet enim
Sherysmote ( i.e. The Sheriff's Tourn) bis; Hundreda and Wapentachia, ( i.e.
The County Courts) duodecies in anno congregari.

By the Laws of King Edward before the Conquest, the first which succeeded King
Alured, it is thus Enacted, Praepositus quisque, 1. Vicecomes, Saxonice Geresa,
Anglice Sheriff, ad quartam circiter septimanam frequentem populi concionem
celebrato, cuique jus dicito aequabile, litesque singulas cum dies condicti
adveniant dirimito.

Hereby it appears, that common Pleas between Party and Party were holden in
the County Court every Month, which agrees with Magna Charta and other
Statutes, and continues at this day.

And by Stat. 2 E. 6. Cap. 25. It is provided that no County Court shall be
longer deferred than one Month from Court to Court, Coke's 2 Inst. 69, 70, 71.

In the County Court, though the Plea be holden therein by a Justicies, the
King's Writ, yet it is no Court of Record, for of a Judgment therein, there
lies a Writ of false Judgment, and not a Writ of Error, Coke's 2 Inst. 140.

By Stat. Gloucester, cap. 8. Purview est ensement, que les Visconts pled' en
Counties les Plees de Trespass, auxy come ils soilent estre Pledes. Et que null
neit desormes Briefs de Trespass devant Justices, sil ne affirm per foy, que le
biens emportes vailent 40 s. al meins, etc.

En County Courts is there put for an Example, for the Hundred Court and the
Court Baron being no Courts of Record, are also within this Law.

Writs of Trespass are there put also for an Example, for Debt, Detinue,
Covenant, and the like. But if the Trespass be Vi and Armis, where the King
upon the Conviction of the Defendant, shall have a Fine, there the Sheriff in
his County cannot hold Plea of it; for no Court can assess a Fine, but a Court
of Record, because a Capias to take the Body is incident to it: For it is a
Rule in Law, Quod placita de transgressione contra pacem Regis in Regno Angliae
vi and armis factis secundum legem and consuetudinem Angliae, sine Brevi Regis
placitari non debent.

Neither shall he hold Plea of Trespass for taking away of Charters concerning
Inheritance or Freehold; for it is a Maxim in Law, Quod Placita concernent'
Chart', seu script' liberum tenementum^ tangentia in aliquibus Curiis quae
recordum non habent secundum legem and consuetudinem Regni Angliae sine Brevi
Regis placitari non debent.

And as inferior Courts which are not of Record regularly cannot hold Plea of
Debt, etc. or Damages but under 40 s. so the Superior Courts that are of or
Damages regularly, unless the Sum amount to 40 s. or above. Ne dignitas
Curiarum illarum vilesceret, and ne materiam superaret opus.

Now as the Superior Courts ought not to incroach upon the Inferior, so the
Inferior Courts ought not to defraud the Superior Courts of those Causes that
belong to them. For Example, If in the County Court, or other Inferior Courts
they shall divide a Debt of 20 l. into several Pleints under 40 s. in this case
the Defendant may plead the same to the Jurisdiction of the Court, or may have
a prohibition to stay that indirect Suit; for as an ancient Record says,
Contra jus commune est, petere integrum Debitum excedens summam 40 s. per
diversas querelas, per parcellas, scilicet 39 s. 11 d. ob. q.

The Maxim of the Common Law is, Quod placita de catallis, debitis, etc. quae
summam 40 s. attingunt, vel eam excedunt, secundum legem and consuctudinem
Angliae sine Brevi Regis placitari nondebent:

And these Words, sine Brevi Regis, are material Words; for by the King's Writ,
the Sheriff in the Country Court may hold Plea of Goods, debt, etc. above the
Value of 40 s. and by force of the King's Writ of Justicies, he may hold Plea
of an Obligation of what Sum soever; For Example, of 1000 Marks, the which Writ
is in the nature of a Commission to the Sheriff to hold Plea of Debt above 40
s. The words of which Writ are, Rex Vicecom', salutem: Praecipimus tibi quod
Justicies, A. quod just and sine dilatione reddat B. mill Marcas, quas ei
debet, ut dicit, etc. ne amplius inde clamorem audiamus pro defectu Justiciae.
By force of which Writ he may hold Plea of the same, and the Process therein is
Attachment by his Goods, etc. but no Capias, and although the Power of the Court
by this Writ is in this particular enlarged, and the Words of the Writ to the
Sheriff are quod Justicies, etc. Yet is not the Jurisdiction of the Court as
concerning the Judicature thereof altered, for those Words of the Writ do not,
nor can make the Sheriff Judge of that Court, in that particular Case, for that
were to alter the Juristiction and Judicature of the Court, whereof by the
Common Law the Suitors be Judges, which cannot be altered but by Act of
Parliament: The Plaintiff may remove this Plea without Cause showed, but the
Defendant cannot without showing of Cause.

Also by force of a Justicies to the Sheriff, he may hold Plea of a Trespass Vi
and Armis. See the Register and F. N. B. diverse forms of Writs of Justicies in
many Actions.

The Sheriff may also hold Plea in a Replevin of Goods and Chattels, above the
value of 40 s. For if it be by Writ the Words of the Writ be Rex Vicecom' etc.
Praecipimus tibi quod just, and sine dilatione replegiari facias B. averi^
sua, Or Bona and Catalla sua, quae D. cepit and injuste detinet, ut dicit, etc.
ne amplius inde clamorem audiamus pro defect^ Justiciae. By force of which Writ
which is in nature of a Commission, the Sheriff may deliver the Beasts, or
Goods and Chattels of what Value soever. And if the Replevin be by Plaint in
the County Court, the Sheriff by the Statute of Marlebridge, may hold Plea of
what Value soever.

The like Writs in the nature of a Commission directed to Sheriffs, are the
Admeasurement of Pasture, Recaption, Nativo habendo, and many others.

The said Words Vailent 40 s. al meins, have received this Construction, that
the same must so appear to be of Value in the Plaintiffs Count; for it is not
sufficient that it appears by Verdict the Sum is under 40 s. For Example, if
the Plaintiff count in Trespass, Debt, Detinue, Covenant, etc. to the damage of
40 s. and the Jury find the Damages under 40 s. yet the Plaintiff shall have no
Judgment, albeit in truth the Case de jure belonged to the Inferior Courts.

And it appears by this Act, that the County Court has no Jurisdiction to
hold Plea de Plagis and Maihemiis, of Wounds and Maihems; but those Pleas must
be determined in the King's Higher Courts; but of Battery (without wounding or
maihming) this Act proves that the Country Court has Jurisdiction.

Albeit this Statute speaks only of the Execution of the Body, yet might he
have had at the making of this Act a Fieri Fac', and afterward by the Stat. W.
cap. 45. he may have an Elegit, for this Branch being in the Affirmative, does
not restrain the Plaintiff to take any other Remedy, Coke's 2 Inst. 311, 312,
and 313.

In all Writs directed to Sheriffs concerning the County Court, the King says,
In Comitatu suo; and in all Returns of Exigents made by him, he says, Ad
Comitatum meum tentum, etc. and the Style of the Court proves the same also.
And by Stat. 33. H. 8. cap. 13. it is provided, That the Sheriff of Denbigh
shall keep his Shire-Court at the Shire-Hall in the said County, etc. by which
(as by many other Parliaments it appears) That the County or Shire Court, is
the Court of the Sheriff, although the Suitors be there Judges in some Cases.

And as the Custody of the Entries and Rolls thereof do belong to the Office of
the Sheriff, he shall answer for them as immediate Officer to the Court. And
therefore the Sheriff shall appoint Clerks under him in his County Court, for
whom he shall answer at his Peril. The same Law is of the Sheriffs Turn,
Coke's 4 Rep. 191. Mitton's Case.

Resolved, That if the Plea be holden by Writ or without Writ, the Suitors are
Judges. The Reason why the Writ is directed to the Lord or Sheriff, is because
the Court Baron is the Lord's Court, and the County Court is the Sheriff's
Court. And in case they hold Plea by force of the King's Writ, it does not
change the Nature and Jurisdiction of the Court. For as these without Writs are
not Courts of Record, so when the Plea is holden by Writ, the Courts are of the
same Nature. For upon a Judgment given in both Cases, a Writ of false Judgment
lies, and not a Writ of Error. But it is true the King may create a new Court,
and appoint new Judges in it; but after the Court is established and created,
the Judges of the Court ought to determine Matters in the Court. And therefore
neither the Lords of Ancient Demesne, nor the Court Baron, nor the Sheriff in
the County Court, when the Plea is holden by Writ of Right, Justicies,
Admeasurement, etc. are Judges; but the Suitors, who by the Common Law are the
Judges of the Court. But in some Cases the Sheriff is made Judge by Parliament,
as in the Redisseisin by the Stat. of Merton, cap. 3. And all his proceeding by
force of that Act, is of Record; and a Writ of Error does lie of a Judgment
given against him, Coke's 6 Rep. 11, 12. Jentleman's Case.

In some Actions the Defendant shall be fined in one Court, and but amerced in
another, and yet the Offense shall be all one, as in a Writ of Recaption, if it
be brought in the Common Pleas, and Judgment be there given, the Defendant
shall be fined and imprisoned. But if the Writ be brought in the County Court,
and the Defendant be convict before the Sheriff in the County, the Judgment
shall not be, Quod capiatur, quia nulla Curia, quae Recordum non habet, potest
imponere finem, neque aliquem mandare carceri, quia ista spectant tantummodo ad
Curias de Recordo; and therefore in such cases he shall be only amerced, Coke's
8 Rep. 60. Beecher's Case.

By Stat. W. 1.33. 3 E. 1. No Sheriff shall suffer Barretors, or Maintainers of
Quarrels, or Stewards of great Lords, or other (unless Attorney for his Lord)
to make Suit, or to give Judgment in the Counties, or to pronounce them, if he
be not required so to do by all the Suitors, and Attorneys of the Suitors there
present, in Pain that both the Sheriff and they shall be grievously punished by
the King.

By Stat. 19 H. 7.24. the Shire Court for Sussex shall be holden, one time at
Chichester, and the next at Lewis, alternis vicibus, in pain, that the Court
otherwise kept, and the things therein transacted, shall be void.

By Stat. 2, 3 E. 6.25. County Courts shall be adjourned from Month to Month
and no longer.

The Sheriff of Northumberland shall keep his County Court at Alnwicke, and not
elsewhere, Stat. 2, 3 E. 6.25.

This Court is incident to the Office of Sheriff, and cannot be divided from it
by Letters Patent, or otherwise, but by Act of Parliament, Coke's 4 Rep. 33.
Mitton's Case.

See the Court of the Tourn, and the Court Leet, and after in the Court of the
Hundred, and Court Baron.

See before in The County Court, Page 228.

To the Court of the Hundred.
AFter King Alfred had divided the Realm into Shires, called so from the Saxon
Scyran, signifying to cut, he divided the Shires into smaller Parts called
Lathes, of the Word Gelathian, which is to Assemble together; Others, Tythings,
because there were in each of them Ten Persons, whereof each one was Surety or
Pledge for the others good a bearing; Others, Hundreds, because they contained
Jurisdiction over one Hundred Men or Pledges dwelling in Two, Three or more
Parishes, Boroughs or Towns, in which he appointed Administration of Justice
severally among them of the same Hundred.

In Stat. of Marlebridge cap. 11. hundredum is taken pro Visu Franci Plegii, so
as the Sense is, That he who has Tenements in the Town, and in some other View
of Frankpledge of some other Lord, or in diverse Views of Frankpledge he shall
not need to come to any other, but where he is conversant, and Hundreds there
are named, because Sheriffs keep their Tourns in every Hundred.

If a Man has a House and Family in two Leets, he shall be taken to be
conversant where his Bed is.

If a man has a House and Family in Two Hundreds, yet he shall do his Suit to
the Tourn or Leet where his Person is commorant, Coke's 2. Inst. 122.

A Man may have a Writ to the Sheriff for discharging him from coming to the
Sheriff's Tourn, or Hundred, or Leet, or other Place, than in the Leet or
Precinct of the Hundred where he dwells; and if the Sheriff distrain him to
come contrary to the Statute of Marlebridge, cap. 10. and a Writ be delivered
to him, he shall have an Attachment against the Sheriff.

All the Tenants in Ancient Demesne may have this Writ: And if a Man be
distrained to do Suit twice in the Year appertaining to the Leet, he shall have
a Writ upon Magna Charta, but it is otherwise of the Hundred, because Suit is
there from There Weeks to Three Weeks, Vide F. N. B. 356, to 360.

Articuli super Chartas, 28 E. 1. Bailywicks and Hundreds shall not be let to
Farm at overgreat Sums whereby the People may be overcharged to make
Contributions to such Farms. See the Statute, and in Court of the Leet and
County Court.

See before in The Court of the Hundred, Page 233.

To Court Baron.
THE Court Baron is so called because amongst the Laws of King Edward the
Confessor, it is said, Barons vero qui suam habent Curiam de suis hominibus,
etc. taking his Name of the baron who was Lord of the Manor, or for that
properly in the Eye of the Law, it has relation to the Freeholders, who are
Judges of the Court. And in Ancient Charters and Records the Barons of London,
and the Barons of the Cinque Ports signify the Freemen of London, and of the
Cinque Ports, Coke's 1 Inst. 58. a.

The Lord of a Manor that has a Court Baron of common Right, and by Course of
Law, all Pleas therein are determinable by Wager of Law, and yet by
Prescription the Lord may prescribe to determine them by Jury.

In a Writ of Right Patent directed to the Lord of the Manor, Plea shall be
holden of Freehold, and the Court in that Case may give an Oath; for there is
the King's Writ of Praecipe quod reddat, Coke's 2 Inst. 143.

Before the Statute of Marlebridge, cap. 22. Lords would distrain their Free
Tenants to come and show their Deeds, especially the Original Deed whereby they
might know, by what Rent and Services the Tenancy was held of them, and
obliquely many times perusing the Deeds (which are the Secrets and Sinews of a
Man's Land) brought in question the Title of the Freehold it self. Another
Mischief was, That the Lords of Court Barons, Hundreds, etc. where the Suitors
were Judges, would constrain them to swear between Party and Party; both which
Mischiefs are taken away by the said Statute, Coke's 2 Inst. 142.

Fines for Beaupleader are yet paid in some Court Barons, Coke's 2 Inst. 123.

Copyhold Lands cannot be transferred but by Surrender into the Hands of the
Lord, according to the Custom of the Manor, Coke's 4 Rep. 25. Copyhold Cases.

Severance by the Lord; shall not destroy the Estate of the Freeholder, ibidem.

The Grantee having but one single Copyhold, cannot hold Court, Coke's 5* Rep.
27. Copyhold Cases.

Underwood and Herbage may by Custom be granted by Copy. And when a Copyholder
shall allege Custom, and when and how he ought to prescribe, See Coke's 4 Rep.
31, 32. Copyhold Cases.

The Attorney in surrendering a Copyhold, ought to pursue the Custom strictly,
Coke's 4 Rep. 76. Comb's Case.

No Steward or Deputy-Steward of any Leet or Court Baron shall make Benefit to
the Value of 12 d. or more, by color of any Grant made of the Profits of such
Court, in Pain to be disabled to be Steward in any Court, and to forfeit 40 l.
between King and Prosecutor, Stat. 1 Jac. 1.5.

Of the Diversity of Customs of Manors, and other Matters concerning this
Court, you may read at large in Coke's 4 Rep. Copyhold Cases, Shepherd's
Court-keeper's Guide, and others.

If a customary Tenant, who is out of the Realm, shall not be bound by Nonclaim
upon a Fine which is a matter of Record, a fortiori, he shall not be bound by
Nonclaim upon a Descent, which is a Matter in Fact, Coke's 8 Rep. Sir Richard
Letchford's Case.

See before in The Court Baron, Page 235.

To the Court of the Coroner.
STat. 3 H. 7. gives the Coroner a Fee of Thirteen Shillings and Four Pence
super visum corporis of the Goods of the Murderer, Coke's 2 Inst. 176. See in
County Court.

See before in Court of the Coroner, Page 237.

To the Court of Escheator.
BY Stat. W. 1. cap. 24. No Seizure can be made of Lands or Tenements into the
King's Hands, before Office found; But if the Sheriff seize Lands by
Commandment of the Justices, then is the Sheriff excused, though the Justices
therein did Err; and if he did of his own Head, then had the Party Remedy by
Assize against the Sheriff, and therefore the Party was required to sue out a
Writ to the Justices to certify if the Seizure were by their Commandment.

If the Escheator takes an Office virtute Officii, he may seize the Land; but
if of his own Head he seize the Land without Office, that Seizure is color
Officii, and an Assise is maintainable against him; and sic de caeteris, Coke's
2 Inst. 206, 207.

Upon the Assise the Party shall recover the Land and double Damages, and the
Escheator shall be in the grievous Mercy of the King, ibid.

Where before Stat. 34. E. 3.36 E. 3. and 8 H. 6. the Party grieved by any
Office, might have had his Travers, or Monstrans de droit by Common Law, and
where he was driven to his Petition, and how relieved by those Statutes, See
Coke's 2 Inst. 688. Coke's 4 Rep. 54, 55.

A Termer could not traverse an Office by the Common Law; but if it were found
in the Office, he might have a Monstrans de droit; and so of others that had
but Chattels Real.

Where there is double matter of Record to entitle the King to a Chattel
Personal, as an Attainder, and an Office that the Person attainted was
possessed of a House, the Office may be Traversed, because Chattels Personal
are Bona peritura, and cannot abide the delay of a Petition, Coke's 2 Inst. 689.

By Stat. Lincoln de Escheatoribus, the Escheator cannot seize before Office,
ibidem.

Houses and Lands which lie in Livery, and whereof there is Profit presently
taken, the Party by finding the Office, is out of Possession. But of Rents,
Commons, Advowsons, and other Inheritances incorporeal, which lie in Grant, it
is otherwise, Coke's 2 Inst. 694.

Upon Attainder of Felony the King cannot be Entitled without Office; but if a
special Office were found that the Husband had nothing but in Right of his
Wife, there the Heir was not put to his Petition, Coke's 1 Rep. 50. Alton
Wood's Case.

Tenant for Life or Years of a Manor, shall have an Escheat, Coke's 2 Inst. 146.

See before in The Court of Escheator Page 239.

To the Court of Admiralty.
THERE is a Felony punishable by the Civil Law, because it is done upon the
High Sea, as Pyracy, Robbery or Murder, whereof the Common Law did take no
notice, because it could not be tried by twelve Men. If this Piracy be tried
before the Lord Admiral in the Court of Admiralty according to the Civil Law,
and the Dilinquent there attainted, yet shall it work no Corruption of Blood,
nor Forfeiture of his Lands; otherwise it is if he be Attainted before
Commissioners by force of the Stat. 28 Hen. 8. And Pirate comes from the
Greek, (...), which signifies a Rover at Sea. Vide Coke's 1 Inst. 391. a.

If any Injury, Robbery, Felony, or other Offense be done upon the high Sea,
Lex terrae extends not to it, therefore the Admiral has Conusance thereof;
and may proceed according to the Marine Law by Imprisonment of the Body, and
other Proceedings as have been allowed by the Laws of the Realm, Coke's 2 Inst.
51.

The like of things done in a Foreign Kingdom, which shall be tried before the
Constable and Marshal, ibid.

Wreck, are such Goods only which are cast and left upon the Land by the Sea.
Flotsam is when a Ship is sunk, or otherwise perished, and the Goods float upon
the Sea. Jetsam is when a Ship is in danger to sink, and for lightning the Ship
the Goods are cast into the Sea, and afterward, notwithstanding the Ship
perishes. Lagan, or rather Ligan, is when the Goods so cast into the Sea, and
afterward the Ship perishes, and such Goods so cast, are so heavy that they
sink to the bottom, and the Mariners, to the intent to have them again, tie to
them a Buoy or Cork, or such thing which will not sink. And none of these are
called Wrecks, unless by the Sea put upon Land. And so Flotsam, Jetsam and
Lagan being cast upon the Land, shall pass by the Grant of Wreck, Coke, Part
5.106. Vid. Terms del Ley.

Wreck of Sea therefore is when the Goods are by the Sea cast upon the Land,
and so infra Comitatum, whereof the Common Law takes Conusance; but the other
three are all upon the Sea, and therefore of them the Admiral has
Jurisdiction, Bracton lib. 3. cap. 3.

When Wreck is claimed by Prescription (as by Law it may be) the Pleading is
Bona Wreccata super mare and ad terram project'.

The Soil upon which the Sea flows and ebbeth, scil. between the high Water
and low-Water-Mark, may be Parcel of the Manor belonging to a Subject; and yet
resolved in Lacy's Case, Trin. 25 Eliz. That when the Sea flows, and has
plenitudinem maris, the Admiral shall have Jurisdiction of every thing done
upon the Sea between the High-Water-Mark and Low-Water-Mark, by the ordinary
Course of the Sea, as of Felony, etc. Yet when the Sea does ebb, the Land may
belong to a Subject.

The King shall have Flotsam, Jetsam and Lagan, when the Ship perishes, or the
Owners of the Goods are unknown.

A Man may have Flotsam and Jetsam by the King's Grant, and Flotsam by
Prescription, as before is said.

Resolved that the Stat. of Westminst. 1. cap. 4. by which it is Enacted, That
of Wreck of the Sea it is agreed, That where a Man, Dog or Cat escape alive out
of the Ship or Vessel, not any thing within them shall be accounted Wreck; but
the Goods shall be saved and kept by the View of the Sheriff, Coroner, or
King's Bailiff, etc. So that if any sue for those Goods, and can prove that
they belonged to him, or that they perished in his keeping within a year and a
day; they shall be restored to him without delay, etc. was but a Declaration of
the Common Law. And therefore all that which is provided as to Wreck, extends
also to Flotsam, Jetsam and Lagan.

The Common Law gave all these three, as also Estray, Treasure-Trove, and the
like, to the King; for when no Man can claim Property in Goods, the King shall
have them by his Prerogative: But Wreck may belong to the Subject by Grant from
the King, or by Prescription.

Flotsam, Jetsam and Lagan, so long as upon the Sea, do not belong to the King,
but occupanti conceduntur, eo quod constare non possit ad quam regionem essent
applicanda.

And Wreck as well as Estrays of an Infant, Feme-Covert, Executrix, a Man in
Prison, or beyond Sea, if proclaimed, and none claim them within a Year and a
Day, are bounden by the Law, Coke's Rep. lib. 5.106, 108. Sir Henry Constable's
Case.

Rex pro salute animae suae, and ad malas consuetudines abolendas concessit,
quod bona in mari periclitata, non perdantur nomine Wrecci, quando aliquis homo
aut bestia vivus de navi evaserit. Veies le Stat. W. Primer Cap. 4. And Coke's
2 Inst. 167, 168.

The Sheriff ought to sell bona peritura within the Year. And the Subject must
prove his Property in them within the Year and Day: But the King may claim when
he will, and make proof.

If Treasure be found in the Sea, the Finder shall have it at this day. But
otherwise it is now of Treasure. Trove upon Land. See Coke's 2 Inst. 168.

If Wreck be not rightfully seized, but taken by wrong-doers, the Party may
have a Commission of Oyer and Terminer to enquire of them.

Wreck shall be tried before the King's Justices at Common Law, Coke's 2 Inst.
168. Coke's 4. Inst. 134, 154.

The Coroner is to enquire of Wreck, Coke's 4 Inst. 271. and 3 Inst. Title
Appeals.

FINIS.
AN ALPHABETICAL TABLE.
A
ARchbishops and Bishops Consistory Courts, Page 42 Archdeacons Court, Page 44
Aulnager, Page 205 Admiralty Court, Page 292, 638 Aldermen and Mayors Court,
Page 356 Anglesey Isle, Page 436 Anguila, Page 520 Antegoa, Page 524
B.
BArons Court, Page 235 Band of Pensioners, Page 339 Bridge, Page 378 Bantam or
Banda, Page 491 Bombaine, Page 491 Bermudas Islands, Page 515 Barbudas I. Page
519 Barbados I. Page 527
C.
Convocation, Page 32 Court of Arches, Page 39 Court of Audience, Page 39 Court
of the Faculties, Page 40 Court of Peculiars, Page 41 Consistory Courts of
Archbishops and Bishops, Page 42 Court of the Archdeacon or his Commissary,
Page 44 Court of Delegates, Page 44 Civil Government of England, Page 51 Court
of the High Steward, Page 81, 539 Chancery High Court, Page 90 Court of
extraordinary Jurisdiction, Page 93 Court of the Star Chamber, Page 104 Court
for Redness of Delays, Page 108 Court of Kings Bench, Page 113 Common Pleas
Court, Page 121 Court of Exchequer, Page 127 Court of Inquiry to certify
untrue Accounts in the Exchequer. Page 140 Court of Equity in the Exchequer,
Page 141, 544 Court of Justices of Assize and Nisi prius, Page 144 Court of
Justices of Oyer and Terminer, Page 153 Court of special Justices of Oyer and
Terminer, Page 166 Colleges, Hospitals, etc. for charitable and lawful
Purposes and Uses, Page 167 Court of Justices of Jail-delivery, Page 169 Court
of Justices of the Forest, Page 175 Court of Justices in Air, Page 193 Court
of Justices of Trailbaston, Page 195 Court of Wards and Liveries, Page 196
Court of Ancient Demesne, Page 196, 559 Court of Commissioners of Sewers, Page
198, 569 Court of Commissioners upon the Statute of Bankrupts, Page 201, 573
Commissioners for Examination of Witnesses, Page 203, 578 Court of the Sessions
of the Peace, Page 210, 591 Court of Inquiry of the Defaults of the Justices of
the Peace, Page 222 Court of the Tourn, Page 223, 595 Court Leet or View of
Frankpledge, Page 224, 597 County Court, Page 228, 615 Court of the Hundred,
Page 233, 630 Court Baron, Page 235, 632 Coroners Court, Page 237, 635 Court of
Escheators and Commissioners for finding of Offices, Page 239, 635 Court of the
Clerk of the Market, Page 241 Court of Pipowders, Page 246 Court of the
Dutchy-chamber of Lancaster at Westminster, Page 247 Courts of the County
Palatin of Chester, Page 251 Court of the County Palatin of Durham, Page 252
Court of the County Palate. of Pembroke, Page 255 Courts of the Cinque* Ports,
Page 256 Court of Stannaries in the County of Devon and Cornwall, Page 261
Court of the Mayor of the Staple, Page 263 Court of the President and Council
of Wales, Page 269 Court of Chivalry before the Constable and Marshal, Page 279
College of Heralds, Page 283 Court of Admiralty, Page 292, 638 Court of
Commission by force of the Statute 28 H. 8. Cap. 5. Page 298 Commissioners and
others for Beacons, Signs of the Sea, Light houses, etc. Page 299 Court of the
King of England, Page 308 Civil Government of the King 's Court, Page 312
Compting-House, Page 314 Court of Green-Cloth, Page 315 Court of the
Marshalsea, Page 321 Court of the Palace, Page 322 Court of the Lord Steward,
Treasurer and Comptroller of the King 's House concerning Felony, Page 324
Court of the Lord Steward of the King 's House, or in his Absence, of the
Treasurer, Comptroller and Steward of the Marshalsea, Page 325 Court of the
Queen of England, Page 341 Civil Government of the Queens Court, Page 342 Civil
Government of Cities, Page 345 Civil Government of London, Page 348 Court of
Hustings, Page 351 Court of Conscience, Page 354 Court of the Mayor and
Aldermen, Page 356 Court of Orphans, Page 356 Court of Common Council, Page 357
Court of Wardmote Inquest, Page 358 Court of Halmote, Page 358 Chamberlain 's
Court for Apprentices, Page 359 Court of the Conservators of the Water and
River of Thames, Page 360 Court of the Coroner in London, Page 360 Court of the
Escheator in London, Page 360 Court of Policies and Assurances, Page 361
Custom-House, Page 379 Call or Creation of Sergeants, Page 393 College of
Civilians in London, Page 396 College of Physicians in London, Page 400
Chartereux in London, Page 404 Cambridge City, Page 426 Civil Government of
Villages, Page 431 Carolina, Page 512 Caribee Islands, Page 519 St.
Christophers, Page 526 Court of First Fruits and Tenths, etc. Page 548
D.
DIvine Law, Page 6 Delegates Court, Page 44 Durham County Palatine Court, Page
252 De Conservatore Treugarum, i. e. Induciarum, etc. Page 302 Dominica Island,
Page 522
E.
ENgland's Government, Page 22 Ecclesiastical Government of England, Page 28
Executive power in Causes Ecclesiastical, Page 36 Executive power in Temporal
Affairs, Page 80 Exchequer Court, Page 127 Air Justices Court, Page 193
Execution of Laws in each County, Page 222 Escheator 's Court, Page 239 Ely's
Royal Franchise, Page 254 Ecclesiastical Government of the King's Court, Page
308 Ecclesiastical Government of the Queen's Court, Page 341 Ecclesiastical
Government of Cities, Page 344 Ecclesiastical Government of London, Page 347
Ecclesiastical Government of Villages, Page 431 English Plantations in Asia,
Page 491 English Colonies in Africa, Page 492 English Plantations in America,
Page 492
F.
FUndamentals of the Laws, Page 8 Forest Justices Court, Page 175 Franchise of
Ely, Page 254 Franchise of Hexam and Hexamshire, Page 255 First Fruits and
Tenths Ecclesiastical, Page 548
G.
GOvernments in General, Page 1 Government of England, Page 22 Government
Ecclesiastical of England, Page 28 Government civil of England, Page 51
Jail-deliver Justices Court, Page 169 Government of Counties in England, Page
207 Great Sessions in Wales, Page 270 Government Military of England, Page 275
Government Ecclesiastical of the King 's Court, Page 308 Government civil of
the King's Court, Page 312 Green-cloth Court, Page 315 Government Military of
the King's Court, Page 338 Government of the Queen's Court, Page 341 Government
Ecclesiastical of the Queen 's Court, Page 341 Goveonment civil of the Queens
Court, Page 342 Government of Cities, Page 344 Government Ecclesiastical of
Cities, Page 344 Government civil of Cities, Page 345 Government Ecclesiastical
of London, Page 347 Government civil of London, Page 348 Government Military of
London, Page 363 General Post Office, Page 381 Gresham College in London, Page
402 Government of the two Universities, Page 415 Government of Boroughts in
England, Page 430 Government of Villages in England, Page 430 Government
Ecclesiastical of Villages, Page 431 Government civil of Villages, Page 431
Guernsey olim Servia, Page 437 Government of Scotland, Page 445 Government of
Ireland, Page 463 Guinea, Page 492 Guardian of England, Page 540
H.
HUmane Law what, Page 7 High Commission Court, Page 36 High Court of
Parliament, Page 51, 535 High Stewards Court, Page 81, 539 High Court of
Chancery, Page 90 Hundred Court, Page 233, 630 Heralds College, Page 283
Hustings Court, Page 351 Halmote Court, Page 358 Hebrides Islands, Page 460
I.
JUstices of Assize and Nisi-prius Court, Page 144 Justices of Oyer and
Terminer Court, Page 153 Justices of Jail-deliver Court, Page 169 Justices of
the Forest Court, Page 175 Justices in Eyre's Court, Page 193 Justices of
Trailbastons Court, Page 195 Inns of Chancery, Page 383 Inns of Court, Page 384
Inns of Court manner of keeping Christmas, Page 390 Judges, Page 394 Islands
adjacent unto England, Page 433 Jersey olim Caesarea, Page 437 Insula Vectis or
Vectae, Page 439 Ireland, Page 463 Jamaica, Page 530
K.
KING, Page 22 King's Bench Court, Page 113 King's Swanherd, Page 204, 587
King's Aulnager, Page 205, 590 King of England's Court, Page 308 Knight
Marshal, Page 320 King's great Wardrobe, Page 332 St. Katherine's, Page 378
Keeping Christmas in the Inns of Court, Page 390
L.
LAws in General, Page 4 Law Eternal, Page 4 Law of Reason, Page 5 Law Divine,
Page 6 Law Humane, Page 7 Law fundamentals, Page 8 Laws and Constitutions
Ecclesiastical, Page 45 Leet Court, Page 224 Law study, Page 383 London, Page
346 Lindisfarne, Page 441
M.
MOney collected for Houses of Correction or for the Poor, Page 166 Mayor of
the Staple's Court, Page 263 Military Government of England, Page 275 Maritime
Power of England, Page 287 Marshalsea Court, Page 321 Military Government of
the King's Court, Page 338 Mayor and Aldermens Court, Page 356 Military
Government in London, Page 363 Mootings in the Inns of Court, Page 388 Mootings
in the Inns of Chancery, Page 390 Manner of holding Parliaments in the Inns of
Court, Page 392 Man Isle, Page 433 Mariland, Page 507 Montserrat, Page 521
Mevis or Nevis, Page 524
N.
NAvy Office, Page 295 Norwich City, Page 411 Newfoundland, Page 494 New
England, Page 496 New York, Page 500 New Jersey, Page 504 Nevis or Mevis, Page
524
O.
OFfice of Pleas in the Exchequer, Page 142 Office of Tents, Page 335 Office of
the Robes to the King, Page 335 Officers of the Robes to the Queen, Page 342
Orphans Court. Page 356 Office of the Ordnance, Page 368 Office of the Warden
of the Mint, Page 373 Office of Records in the Tower, Page 375 Oxford, Page 415
Orcades, Page 459
P.
PRivy Council, Page 22 Prerogative Court of Canterbury, Page 40 Punishments by
Ecclesiastical Courts, Page 47 Punishments Ecclesiastical peculiar to the
Clergy, Page 49 Parliament High Court, Page 51, 535 Pipowders Court, Page 246
Pembroke Palatine's Cuort, Page 255 President and Council in the North, Page
258 Principality of Wales, Page 266 President and Council of Wales Court, ibid.
Port Courts, Page 298 Parliament-holding in the Inns of Court, Page 322 The
Palace, ibid. Post Office General, Page 381 Physicians College in London, Page
400 Plantations in Asia, Page 491 Plantations in Africa, Page 492 Plantations
in America, ibid. Pensylvania, Page 505 Protector of England, Page 540
Q.
QUeen of England's Court, Page 341
R.
ROyal Franchise of Ely, Page 254 River of Thames Conservator's Court, Page 360
S.
Star Chamber Court, Page 104 Swanherd, Page 204, 587 Sessions of the Peace
Court, Page 210 Stannaries Court in the County of Devon and Cornwall, Page 261
Lord Steward 's Court, Page 324, 325 Sheriffs Court in London, Page 352
Sergeants Inns Page 392 Sergeants Call or Creation, Page 393 Sion College,
Page 403 Schools in London, Page 405 Southwark, ibid. Sorlings, Page 440
Scotland, Page 445 Scottish Isles or the Lesser-Islands near Scotland, Page 459
Schetland I. ibid.
T.
Trials Ecclesiastical in civil Causes, Page 46 Trials Ecclesiastical in
criminal Causes, ibid. The Tourn, Page 223 Tower of London, Page 365 Tangier,
Page 492
V.
UNiversities, Page 415 Virginia, Page 510 St. Vincent, Page 523, 260
W.
WItnesses Examination by Commissioners, Page 203 Wardens Courts, etc. Page 260
Wales, 266 Wardrobe of the King, 332 Wardmote Inquest, 358 Westminster City,
406 Wight Island, 439
Y.
YEomen of the Guard, 340
FINIS.
ERRATA.
PAge 14. line 11. read Escheators. p. 17. l. 31. r. the. p. 21. l ult for of
the Laws of England, r. of the Jame. p 25. l. 11. the Comma at without Warrant.
p. 57. l. 4. r. Roy. p. 69. l. 4. r. Martial. p. 74. l. 23. r. The Stat of. p.
78. l. 1. r. Sess. 2. cap. 4. p. 102. l. 20. r. by a Deputy. p 114. l. 12. r.
Westminster. p. 133. l. 4. r. Auditeth. p. 136. l. 13. r. 2d. p. 141. l ult. r.
4. Instit. p. 171. l. 10. r. plevisable. p. 182. l. 7. r. circa. l. 3. for
nolucrint r. v^l^^rint. p. 185. l. 22. r: belong. p. 190. l. 15. r. nor. p.
193. l. 19. r. of a Commission. p. 201. l. 24. r. Banque. p. 307. l. 15. dele
in. p. 209. l. 18. dele and. p. 225. l. 27. r. Easter. p. 243. l. 10. r.
Drachme. l. 17. r. Avoir. p. 275. l. 15. r. Pay. p. 276. l. 21. r. were
heretofore. p. 279. l. 13. r. scale. p. 280. l. 5. r. seal. l. 7. r. surcease.
l. 13. surcease. 281. l. 4. r. fact', l. 16. r. Foy, p. 291. l. 3. r. 62432.
pounds. p. 298. l. 19. r. 4 Instit. 147. p. 301. r. Lynne. p. 302. l. 6. r.
Raised. p. 303. l. 24. the Comma at concitat. p. 304. l. 27. r. Foreign p. 306.
l. 23. r. to that Sin. p. 307. the Comma at Tacitus. p. 327. l. 26. r. stick.
p. 350. l. 21. r. Camera Regis, Reipublicae Cor, totius Angliae Epitome p. 353.
l. 6. dele and if they be not Enrolled. p. 407. l. 13 r. secular. p. 411. l.
17. for ortam r. ortum. p. 463. l. ult. r. called. p. 464. l. 24. r. Belfast.
p. 468. l. 8. r. Universities one. p. 476. l. 27. r. Ego. p. 486. l. 6. r.
Alienigena. l. 19. r. 25. p. 510. l. 27. r. as. p. 564 r. Plea. p. 565. l. 4.
r. F. N. B. 27, 28, l. 7. r. 100. p. 570. l. 29. r. new framed. p 579. l. 15.
r. Testmoignes l. ult. r. Bokland. p. 607. l. 25. r. Letae.


