A CURB FOR SECTARIES AND BOLD PROPHECIERS: By which Richard Farnham the
Weaver, James Hunt the Farmer, M. Green the Feltmaker, and all other the like
bold Propheciers and Sect Leaders may be bridled and kept within their own
beaten way, And the Sacred and weighty work of the Ministry be reserved to
men, whom education fits, God calls, and good order in our Church prefers
thereunto.

A matter very considerable in these present times?

Do men gather grapes of thorns, or figs of thistles?

Math. 7 16. LONDON, Printed, 1641.

To the zealous but misled followers of Preachers in Corners.
SIRS,
THe English Proverb says, None is more bold then blind Baiard, and the
comparison holds well, making Zeal joined with ignorance like to mettle in a
blind Horse, which renders him mischievous, rather then useful. The Pharisees
said, they saw, but were indeed blind Leaders of the blind, till both fell
into the ditch; and God fired Jerusalem for their misled Zeal. Beware of
following their like. As of old, so in these latter days, there are false
Prophets says Saint Paul, Their methods and sleights are subtle to deceive
you, their skill very shallow and mean to inform you. The wiseman has his
eyes in his head, and sees this. And if you will not put your garment to a
Botcher, nor trust your sick body to be cured by a Quacksa^ver; Will you
submit your souls guidance to them, whom your itching ears, and self will, and
blind humor affects? A Prophet or son of a Prophet would have more to say:
but the glass following, if you have eyes to see, may give you a sight of your
Leaders defects, and your own fancies.

A Curb for Sectaries and bold Propheciers.
Every man is not fit to take upon him the Ministry.
SAint Paul, a Master builder in Gods house, having spoken of bringing men to
everlasting life by the Ministry of men, says, Who is sufficient for these
things? 2 Cor. 2.16. The question implies, that it is not an easy matter to be
fitted for this sacred work.

In many respects therefore a singular care is to be taken, what persons be
admitted to so great a charge: and that,

2 The titles given them show, as the excellency, of them, to see that they
were good: and seeing Deacons must first be tried, and then Minister, if they
be found faithful; much-more must Workmen of higher place not have hands laid
suddenly upon them, nor run before they be sent, nor take a calling upon them,
unless a Titus or Timothy, put in place to that end, ordain them, and appoint
them to the work.

3 The treasures which God intrusts them to communicate to others are comprised
in the sacred Scriptures, Paul, who is sufficient for these things? let us look
into the particulars.

Of skill in the first Table requisite in the Clergy.
In the first place, the knowledge of God and his worship, and all the
circumstances thereof, cannot soundly and truly be taught but by those whom
Gods spirit enables thereunto, and pious education has fitted for the work.

2 The performances of man to man, of Kings, of subordinate Rulers, In the
second Table.
spiritual and temporal, in all degrees; the subjection required of al
inferiors; all duties commanded concerning preservation of our persons, modest
and chaste behavior, true dealings in possessions and outward goods, truth in
our ordinary speech, and witnessing in cases of difference, the not desiring
and coveting in heart, what is not ours. These all with their circumstances
have so many cases of conscience belonging unto them, and to be discussed
concerning them, that large volumes scarce serve so to unfold them but that
other cases will still be emergent. And in cases of conscience.


In Politics.
So that, 1 policy and government of States and Kngdomes. 2 Christian carriage,
conversation in Heaven, and civil deportment of all private persons, in all
callings and places, of all trades and professions for all things generally
concerning them, Ethics.
and for many particulars, are not so left to natural reason, and humane
discretion, but that they may borrow their best rules from Scriptures.
Oeconomicks.
So that the government of a people, and whole Country, private men's own
Religious behavior, and pious ordering their families may be learned from the
holy Scriptures laws, and the practice of Moses, David, and sundry other
Saints of God, who for their circumspect walking both in private and public
life be greatly renowned. 3 Seeing in the old Testament we have Gods laws amply
described in Moses, Skill in law of diverse kinds is grounded on Gods Law.
and further opened and enlarged in the Prophets, and the New Testament
afterward, the equity and ground of many of those laws of God are of use for
trial of all kind of Laws, whether natural, civil, Canon, or common Law,
which in several Nations have their use. None of all these may be repugnant
to Gods Law, but subordinate thereunto with reference to the condition of
several Nations.


3 The Old Testament comprehends in brief the History of the World for almost
4000. years; Skill in History requisite in the Clergy.
it declares the creation, and man's defection, the Worlds drowning and
reparation; how Gods Truth was progated and the Church enlarged; what was the
practice, and faith of Gods redeemed people; how many oppositions and malicious
persecutions befell them by the Edomites, Moabites, Ammonites, Philistines,
Egyptians, Assyrians, Babylonians, Persians, Grecians, and others, and how God
plagued these Nations for their mischievousnesse and cruelty: The New
Testament unfolds the History of Christ our Saviors life and death, the
planting of the Christian Church, the doctrine of the holy Apostles after
Christ's Ascension. In these are many weighty points to be discussed, some
variety in circumstances to be reconciled, and the sweet harmony of both
Testaments to be explaned?

Skill in Chronology.
4 How frequently is the account of times recorded in the old Testament, and
sometime in the new? That we might not confine it to the old, as a matter then
only considerable; The holy Ghost has rolated the times of Gods mercies and
judgments on the World, as a light and luster to story, as a preserver of
order, and confirmer of certainty in Narration, and Man ought seriously to
consider the same. For the Husb and man is not more observant of fit seasons,
for his Country affairs, then God has been of due times in his dealings
with men, and managing matters in the field of the World for man's good.

In Geography.
5 Who can well understand the dispersion of Noah's sons, and their children,
and the speeches often running upon them, and the places of their habitation,
and how they came to entermeddle with Gods people? Who can rightly distinguish
of the Rivers, Mountains, and Cities mentioned in sacred Writ, if he be not
acquainted with Geographie?

In the deep secrets of Prophesiers.
In Gods Book there are many prophecies, which declare deep and hidden secrets
by expressions excellent and much surpassing the ordinary strain. Many of
these are to be searched into and cleared, as by other plainer Scriptures, so
by the Histories of the World, which before Christ's time were of vast
comprehension, and of far greater since, in regard of the Gospells
entertainment, or abuse and rejection now in many more parts of the world. What
knowledge, what study, and meditation is together with the assistance of Gods
spirit required for the opening of these prophesies, which are rich and
comfortable treasures left to GODS Church?

In the knowledge of nature.
7 For the clearing and explaning many Scriptures it is requisite to have good
skill in many natural matters; not only because the wisdom and power of the
Creator is seen to be wonderful in the Creatures, but also because God often
in Scripture speaks of the Eagle, Ravens, Stork; of Cedars, Vines, Algu^^^ims;
of Dromedaries, Badgers, and Lions of diverse kinds* of the Leviathan and the
Tannin or Diacon of the Sea, and of many other matters in nature which are
often made use of for man's information: and therefore it is expedient that these
matters should be made brown.

In the Hebrew and Greek tongues, etc.
8 Seeing the old Testament is written for the most part in the Hebrew tongue,
and some few passages in the Chaldee, it must necessarily be that there are
some difficulties in our Translations, which cannot be perfectly looked into
without the knowledge of these tongues. There are also some objections of men
erroneous on both hands, which cannot possibly bessolved without very good
skill in these tongues. Rare French and German words cannot be well known, but
of the skillful French and German, nor rate Hebrew words but of the learned
Jews; And seeing the Hebrew tongue is now no where purely spoken, nor extant
unmixt, but in the Bible, some hard words in this tongue are to be known by
the tongues most near to the Hebrew, as the Syriack and Arabic: for a word
seldom used in Hebrew may be more frequent in them. And for the new Testament
it is written in the Greek tongue, which is very copious and elegant, and has
many words of ambiguous use and signification. It has also some Latin words
as Denarion and Taberne, and some Hebrew and Syriack, as Corban, Maranath^, and
diverse others: What study for skill herein is requisite? Besides in the New
Testament be many forms of speech borrowed from the Old, many Hebraismes, many
short and deep speeches inexplicable without conference with some special
clauses of the Old. And how often in many passages of both Testaments is
mention made of the customs, manners, and conditions of several Nations in
the World, of their Gods and Idolatrous worship?

In Rhetoric.
9 How many lofty and brave strains of Eloquence, in Esaias and the Prophets, in
Paul and the Revelation, would seem strange and be unknown? how many admirable
and sublime carriages of speech and figures far beyond the best Heathen
Orators would be unobserved; did not the art of Rhethorike begun of old and
perfected in these latter times, and applied to sacred use, lend her helping
hand?

In Logic.
10. How often should we err in the context of Scripture, what improbable
deductions would thence be strained, how many sound proofs for necessary
Doctrines and conclusions would be unobserved, had we not together with the
spirit of GOD, which is the principal, the use of Logic all Rules, as a good
accessory? Gods providence protects his servants, yet do they gird on their
swords in their journeys, and the Spirit of God does lead us into all sacred
truth, yet Art is not to be refused to keep us from being surprised by
spiritual thieves. But some object, Answer. Speak to the Jews, Indians,
Spantards, and others among us, as the Apostles did to several Nations, though
not educated to their tongues, and we will much the rather credit your ability
to teach us the truth (which you pretend Artists miss of) in our own tongue.

Besides, the question is not whether you by the spirit (which you presume to
have) can by it alone do more, then others by art alone, but whether more then
others, who have the spirits assistance as well as you; and also education at
some Gamaliels feet, as Paul had. Gods Spirit knew, how to make use of Art,
when Moses brought up in the Egyptian learning was called to the Government of
Israel, when Aholiah and Bezaleel were chosen for the work of the Tabernacle,
when Jubals invention was taken in to the furnishing of David's Quire. Did ye
know Art, or the right use of Art, ye would not dis-esteem it.

In the ancient Fathers.
11 How many passages in the ancient Fathers of the Christian Church acquaint us
with Gods goodness to his servants, show the Heresies reigning in their days,
and their Arguments against the same? How often do they open difficulties in
Scripture, in which we, had they not gone before us, might have erred? Do not
they declare how far they were from Papisticall superstitions and errors on
the one hand, and from fanatical fancies and groundless opinions on the other
hand? Object. Answer. Pope of his Chair, and have an unerring certainty, throw
the first stone at them. Remember Michaiahs accusers, and the horns which smote
him. Go not about to take the moat out of their eye, if ye have a beam in
your own. Give the ancient Fathers their due, and know that there is good use
of them.

In controversies of diverse kinds.
12 How large is the field of Polemicall Divinity and Controversy? How
necessary is it to have the Arguments of Papists. Atheists, Turks, and several
Sectaries well answered? Why should misprisions in History, Prophesies,
tongues, cases of conscience and the like, go unconfuted to the great
prejudice of Christian truth? Why should not the abuse of Logic and other Arts
be called to account by such as have the true use thereof? Let then Polemicall
skill and School Divinity rightly managed have its due place and esteem.

Of this large extent are matters to be studied by the Clergy, things
Spiritual, Temporal, Eternal, treated on in Scripture, are within their
task. In regard whereof I propound these questions to any indifferent Reader.

1 Whether persons, educated in Manuary Trades, and spending their time
therein, can possibly attain to so different kinds of knowledge, and be able
to confirm truth and answer doubts: which professed Students (suppose but of
equal parts) cannot attain without long continued education, direction,
practice? 2 Seeing our Land by Gods blessing is better provided for with a
learned, Religious, painful Clergy, old and young, then ever heretofore, then
any land in the World: are they well advised, who will be taught by such as
leap from the Shop-board to the Pulpit, rather then by them, whom education
fits, and God and authority calls to the work? 3 Whether Colleges and Schools
now, as of old the Schools of the Prophets, be not of singular use to fit
several persons for the manifold knowledge required in the Clergy? 4 Seeing
one man cannot excel in all these kinds of knowledge, First, because man's
life is short and Art long, Secondly, God has made men of different capacities
and abilities, whether some of the Clergy are not to be directed to one study,
some to another, some fitted for higher, some for lower employments and places?
As in the Apostles times, all were disposed of according to their different
gifts, 1 Corenth. 12. 5 Whether a general knowledge in all these kinds be not
of good use in every Clergy man, that upon occasion of doubt or difficulty he
may know to what book or man, having exact skill in that kind of knowledge, he
may have recourse for resolution? 6 Whether, because it is not fit any man should
war upon his own cost, provision of means has not been well made, and may
well be augmented (as times differ) for encouragement and maintenance of
Students, and learned men in those several kinds. 7 Seeing teachers of
ordinary congregations are to apply themselves to their hearers capacity, and
to have as milk for babes, so strong meat for more able Christians: whether
good benifices have not been well by our forefathers allotted them, and whether
it be not pity they should be diverted or impaired, And the Clergy put to
suit for them? 8 Whether seeing exact skill in sacred Histories and matters of
the Church, in several tongues, in controversies, and the like, being somewhat
removed from popular capacities and men of meaner parts, and yet most necessary
to be by serious study attained, such as excel therein may not be well
provided for, by some of the Dignities, Prebends, and other the like
preferments in our Church? 9 Whether some men of singular natural parts, and
having got by education and practice a great measure of knowledge above
mentioned, and being men very religious, conscionable, and grave, are not
fitted by God for giving counsel and advice in the greatest matters among Gods
people, as Eliazer did to Joshua, Nathan to David, Johojada to Ioas, Jehosua to
Zorobabel? 10 Whether some Clergy men eminent for skill and government by gods
blessing on their education, learning, and practice, as the Apostles were by
Gods extraordinary gift, may not be thought fit to govern, direct, and inform
others subordinate to them, and to order both Clergy men and their means for
the good of the Church, as did the Apostles, and their successors after them.
I have done, and leave all to the wisely considerate. More might have been
said of the bounds of the Clergies skill, more questions annexed: But this
little may inform such as will see; such as put out their own cies what salve
can cure? God help them; his good Spirit guide us all.

FINIS.

