A CURTAIN-CONFERENCE, Being a Discourse betwixt (the late Lord Lambert, now)
John Lambert Esquire and his Lady, As they lay a Bed together one night at their
House at Wimbleton.
Related by the Lady Lambert to Tom Trim, her Gentleman Usher, (one well
acquainted with all her Secrets) and now by him Printed for public
satisfaction.
LADY. O My Dear Heart, my Love and Joy, my own sweet Jonny, why so sad?


LAMBERT. Jonny! I thou may well call me so, for I have made it appear to
all the world (For all I was accounted a Grand Politician) that I am but a
Jonny.


LA. Prithee be of good cheer, (dear Chuck) and receive a little comfort from
the embraces of thine own dear Wife, who has a long time, as a desolate widow,
mourned for want of thee.


LAM. Sweet Jonny, dear Chuck, and what not? am I not full enough of grief
already, but thou the wife of my Bosom, must (like the wife of Job) add unto
mine afflictions, by flouting me with such ridiculous Titles, as Jonny and
Chuck, which in plain English is no more then Fool or Chicken.


LA. It Is a wonder to me (sweet heart) that you are thus transported with
passion; I did not expect such strange kind of greeting after so long absence:
I pray be contented with Gods providence, you know that the Saints must suffer
afflictions in this world.


LAMB. Saints! what do thou tell me of Saints, who am as much a Saint as my
horse; For all my zealous pretense to Religion, I expect my Portion in in this
world, and let who will take the other for me.


LADY. Why? but (my Joy) pluck up thy heart, thy case is not so bad yet, but it
may alter for the better: Thou may become a Lord again in time, although thou
art now but J. Lamb. Esquire And as for me, I think I may deserve the name of a
Lady as long as I live by the virtue of Old Nolls breeches: But he is dead and
gone, and I am here, and who knows but I may once more live under a Protector,
which may chance to be thy self, for all the Parliament is now Rampant?


LAMB. Away fool, away, I have not patience to hear thee longer building
castles in the air, and like the poor Cavaliers, flattering thy self with vain
hopes, which are never likely to come to pass. I confess I ever thought to
make my self great: And all my actions under what pretense soever, were
directed at the Butt of mine own Interest; And when I turned out the present
Parliament, I did believe I had laid a good Foundation to my own Ambition, and
thought my self but a step or two below the Sovereignty; but my waxen wings
were so frozen, by the frigidity of the Northern climate, that I could not move
them, but was forced to fall to the ground, and now must suffer disgrace for my
aspiring desires, being made a laughing stock before the whole world. But it
does not grieve me so much to be Jeered by the Cavaliers (of whom I deserve no
otherwise) as to be flerted by such silly Rogues as the time-serving
News-mongers, who are the Heliotropes that turn about with every Bastard Sun
that shines in the Firmament of Government. But some say Col. Hewson must be
hanged for murder if he be caught: And faith I think it good Policy for me to
hang my self: For so I shall not only cheat CHARLES STVART, but the Parliament
also of their revenge, and then I shall be rancked with Alderman Hoyle in
Montelions Calender for the next year: For notwithstanding the Act of
Indemnity, I fear I shall be fetched over the Coals, ere it be long, and Col.
Berry will not escape them for all they are the Badge of his gentility.


LA. But hold, my dear, be not so desparate as to entertain such thoughts, but
hope the best: Besides, it is not your condition alone, but diverse others are
clouded as well as you, and some eminent persons, as Sir Henry Vane, and the
Lord Fleetwood.


LAMB. Sir Henry Vane is now become Vain Sir Henry, his wisdom has deceived
him, as well as mine did me. And to say truth, the wisest of men may miss it
sometimes. But as for Fleetwood, he is but a Fool, and I never esteemed
otherwise of him; For my intention was to make a Stalking-horse of him, or (if
you will) a Stirrup whereby to mount into the Saddle of Supremacy: But I was
disappoynted by the activity of Sir Arthur Haslerig and his accomplices whose
subtilty I never dreamed of: But as for the City I never was in fear of it: For
a verier Fool then Fleetwood is able to keep them under, so long as a Red-coat
remains in it. Yet, to speak as I think, if they had but a resolute Lord Major,
they would bite, as well as bark. And now I speak of the Lord Major, I would I
were in his Coat: For notwithstanding he has lost as fair opportunities as
possibly could be desired to free the City from slavery, yet, I could find a
way whereby still he might assert his Declaration of December. 20. yea, and bring
it to pass, in spite of this cantell of a Parliament now sitting at
Westminster.


LA. But good Husband, since you are so wise in the affairs of others, I
wonder why you were so slur'd in your own concerns: You might have played Have
at All, and fought with Monck, or you might have declared for a Free
Parliament, and so have made not only the City, but the whole Nation your
Friends: Nay, had I been as you, before I would have submitted to the mercy of
mine enemies, I would have renounced all my former actions, and have declared
for CHARLES STVART.


LA. In Troth wife, thy pride and haughtiness has ever been a Spur to my
ambitious attempts; and it had not been amiss if I had made use of thy help
in the prosecution of them, since at a dead lift, there is no wit like the wit
of a woman: But now thou speak of CHARLES STVART, I was advised by a wise
man, as soon as I had turned out the Parliament, to send for him in; the refusal
of which Council I now too late repent: I confess (dear wife) that any of
these ways might possibly have prevented my ruin; Or I might have asserted
Liberty of Conscience, and then all the Sectaries in the Nation, viz. Quakers,
Anabaptis^s, etc. would have flocked unto me as Bees to their Hives: And I
should have been looked upon as another John Baptist, and forerunner of Jesus
Christ, by the Fifth Monarchy party, who exspect his personal Reign on Earth,
the time of his coming being so near, that Major General Overton, looks every
day for his Landing at Hull. But what the Devil do I talk of what I might have
done, since now I am undone? I should rather think of some way to avoid the
storm impending over me: But there is now no means left whereby I might help
my self, but merely to rely on the mercy of the Parliament, which I hope to
find, being comprised within the late Act of Indemnity. But some may wonder why
those that Engaged with Booth, should lose their Estates as Rebels, and
Traitors, and that I and my Confederates, who really effected, what Booth and
his party but barely attempted, should notwithstanding hold our own, as if we
never had offended: Why, I must tell thee, wife, that there is great reason it
should be so: For as the Jsraelites spoiled the Egyptians, so it is lawful for
us, who style our selves the Saints, and people of God, to rob and ruin the
Cavaliers, with all that adhere unto them: And although we are divided into
many Factions, each striving to be greater then other; yet, since we are
Brethren, as Simeon and Levi were, we ought not to prosecute one another to the
deprivation of Life or Estate. But for all this I know not what the Parliament
means, no more then they know what Monck means, in coming to wait on them with
an Army at his Heels. He is a cunning Fox, and had need look well to himself,
or they will Lurch him in the End, as well as they have me. I fear I shall go
to Lobs pound very shortly, and, it may be to the Gallows after: But it is good
enough for me; I might have taken time by the fore-lock, If I had looked well
about me: They say every dog has his day, and so I had mine, if I could have
made good use of it. But I find Morpheus is ready to lock up my senses, and to
give a little rest to my restless mind: wherefore I say no more, but Let him
who thinks he stands, a fall beware,
Since Craftiest Knaves are caught in their own Snare.



LONDON, Printed for W. L. the Commonwealths Fortune Tellers.


