THE ARRAIGNMENT OF UNBELIEF, AS The Grand Cause of Our National
Non-establishment: Cleared in a SERMON to the Honorable House of Commons in
PARLIAMENT, at Margarets Westminster, upon the 28th. of May, 1645. being the
Day of their Public Fast.

By JOSEPH CARYL, late Preacher to the Honorable Society of Lincolnes-Inne,
now Pastor at Magnus near the Bridge, London.

PSALM. 78. Ver. 32, 33. For all this they sinned still, and believed not for
his wondrous works.

Therefore their days did he consume in vanity, and their years in trouble.

LONDON, Printed by G. Miller for Giles Calvert, at the Black-spread-Eagle at
the West end of Paul's, M. DC. XLV.

May 28o. 1645.
ORdered by the Commons assembled in PARLIAMENT, that Sir Robert Harley and Sir
Peter Wentworth do from this House give thanks to M. Caryl and M. Ford, for the
great pains they took in the Sermons they preached this day at the entreaty of
this House at St. Margarets Westminster (it being the day of Public
humiliation) and to desire them to Print their Sermons; And they are to have
the like privilege in printing of them, as others in the like kind usually
have had.

H. Elsynge, Cler. Parl. D. Com.

August 5. 1645.
I appoint Giles Calvert to print this Sermon.

Joseph Caryl.

TO THE Honorable the House of Commons Assembled in PARLIAMENT.
WHen I was called by your voice to prepare this Sermon, your affairs were much
unsettled, and so were the hearts of most about them. This (besides the
everlasting usefullnesse of the subject) was one special motive leading me to
this Text and these Meditations; It has pleased God, since that, to shine very
graciously upon your Counsels, and to prosper Those Heroes who act abroad by
your Orders and Authority, with amazing successes: which raise this hope, that
God instead of punishing, is healing our unbelief; as also that (possibly) this
Sermon has had (through his blessing) a hand in helping on the cure. When the
woman touched Christ by faith, he quickly perceived that virtue was gone out of
him: while we cannot but perceive that much virtue is gone out from Christ, in
giving our late Victories; may we not conclude, that some body has touched
him? Faith may justly be surnamed Long-hand, it can reach to Heaven. And one
battle won by the hand of faith reaching Heaven, is more glorious then a
thousand by an earthly naked sword. We read (Number. 21. 14.) of an ancient record
(of which there are now no remains but that mention) whose Title Page, is, The
Book of the wars of the Lord. And why the wars of the Lord? Surely, because
the Lord engaged for his people in those wars. What ever else may, the
actings of holy faith will engage the Lord. Act faith, and then the records of
these times (on your side) shall bear thus to all posterity, The Book of the
wars and counsels of the Lord. If these words preached have had, or printed,
shall yet give any advantage toward such a Title of your Acts and Monuments, in
the great work of our National establishment, you have the desires and ends,
which lie next to the glory of God, in the heart of,

Sirs, Your humble servant in the work of the Lord, Joseph Caryl.

Erratum. page 38. lin. 15. for proofs read reproofs.

A SERMON PREACHED To the Honorable House of COMMONS at Westminster, upon the
28th day of May, 1645. the day of their solemn monthly Fast.
ISA. 7. 9. the latter part of the verse. If ye will not believe, surely ye
shall not be established.
AT the beginning of this Chapter we read a war prepared, and a strong
confederacy entered against Judah and Jerusalem: It was told the house of
David, saying, Syria is confederate with Ephraim, ver. 2. It is worth our
consideration, who were joined in confederacy, and against whom; Syria and
Ephraim, are confederate against Judah. The Syrians were professed enemies to the
Jews, they had no civil relation to them, and their religion was at furthest
distance: but Ephraim was near to Judah, both in religion and civil relation;
and yet Syria and Ephraim (that is, the revolted ten Tribes) ioyn together, and
mingle their forces and counsels to invade Judah, who held forth the true
worship of God. Whence note,

That mungrell corrupt professors of true religion, will join with open
enemies, against those who are zealous and faithful professors of true
religion. We see at this day Syria confederate with Ephraim, loose libertine
Protestants mixed with Papists, against those who are close-covenanting, and
close-walking Protestants. And there is a clear reason for it; corrupt hearts
seek their own ease, and therefore will easier join with those who are more
loose, then with those who are more strict then themselves: Ascents and
improvements in holiness pinch corruption; nature had rather go backward, then
come onne in religion, and thinks we have gone beyond all reproof, if we keep
pace with our forefathers, and tread in their steps.

Syria is confederate with Ephraim.

This report being brought to Ahaz the King of Judah, his heart was moved, and
the heart of his people, as the trees of the wood are moved with the wind. We
are ready to imitate, as the sinful actions, so the passions of Princes; when
Magistrates and Leaders are afraid, the people seldom take courage. His heart
was moved, and the heart of his people: All Judah shakes from head to foot,
they shake within as well as without, their hearts were moved. The heart (as
Astronomers tell us of the highest sphere,) is the primum mobile, the first
mover, whose motion turns all the spheres of this lesser world (man) If the
heart be moved with fear, all the members of the body move with fear; if the
heart be moved with joy, all the members of the body move with joy: This
moved-heart is opposed to a fixed-heart (Psalm. 112. 7.) his heart is fixed. The
heart is like quicksilver, if you can fix that, you have fixed all; if that
flee, all flees.

His heart was moved, and the heart of his people.

When they were in this fit and fever of fear, shaking at the very heart,
behold the goodness of God (ver. 3d.) Then said the Lord unto Isaiah, Go forth
now to meet Ahaz, and say unto him; Take heed, and be quiet, fear not. Two
things I will note from this, in passage.

First, That God is acquainted, not only with our outward distractions and
troubles, but with our inward fears and perturbations. He knows the stirrings
of every heart: if your hearts do but pant at any danger, the Lord observes it.
And then.

Secondly, That as soon as the Lord sees a wound in the spirits of his people,
he presently provides a Physician, and sends a plaster. As soon as ever it was
said, their hearts were moved, God raises up his Prophet, and puts a healing
reviving word in his mouth to strengthen and settle them again: Go forth now to
meet Ahaz, and say unto him, Take heed, and be quiet, fear not, etc.

As the Lord gives them counsel not to fear, so he shows them reason why they
should not. First, from the persons who appeared so dreadful, ver. 4. They are
but two tails of smoking firebrands. As if he had said, You look upon these
men as a devouring fire, or unquenchable flames; but I assure you they do but
smoke, and they are but brands, and they are but tayls of brands, they have
almost consumed themselves; they are but brands ends, and they are smoking
rather then burning. As that phrase in the Gospel, smoking flax, notes the
lowest degree of grace which Jesus Christ will not quench or put out: so here,
smoking firebrands, note the least degree of remaining power, or malice almost
spent and going out, not in regard of desires, but abilities to do mischief.

Again, As the Lord shows their power, so near extinct that they could do no
great hurt; so he declares his own will that they should not, verse. 7. For thus
says the Lord, It shall not stand, neither shall it come to pass. There Is no
reason we should run for fear, when we are assured the counsels of our enemies
shall not stand: They are confederate, but they shall be broken: they have
taken counsel, but it shall not stand, neither shall it come to pass. The
counsels of men stand or fall at the pleasure of God. The opposition of all
creatures cannot hinder one of his counsels, and all their endeavors cannot
produce one of their own. Though a conclave of Achitophels (every one an
Oracle) should lay a design, yet it is at the will of God whether it shall
succeed. The policy of man is no match for God: thus says the Lord, it shall
not stand. Not stand! why? who is able to throw it down? by whose hand shall it
fall? Syria and Ephraim are mighty in power, as well as deep in policy, shall
their counsels be made void? The Prophet Amos knowing the weakness of Jacob,
questions (chap. 7. 2.) By whom shall Jacob arise, for he is small? And the
Prophet Isaiah, knowing the strength of Syria and Ephraim, might question, By
whom shall these fall, for they are great? Yes, says God, I assure you how
great so ever they are, they shall not stand; I can reckon up the greatest of
their strength, and the top of their confederacies, The head of Syria (that is,
the chief power and strength of Syria) is Damascus (the mother City) and the
head of Damascus is Rezin (the King of Syria) and in threescore and five years
shall Ephraim be broken that it be not a people; And the head of Ephraim is
Samaria (I can tell you likewise what strength Ephraim has, and who is the
strongest person there) The head of Samaria is Remaliahs son: I can soon cast
up all the power of your enemies, I can go to the very head of it, it is but
Damascus, and Rezin, and Samaria, and Remaliahs son, this is the outside of
their strength. We may quickly see an end of all worldly perfections, both in
power and policy. Now, that which is secretly implied and couched in this
contemptuous account of Ephraims and Syrias strength, is, that Judah had such a
head, as they were not able to reach, such forces as they were not able to tell
over, much less to triumph over. It is as if he had said, You see the head of
Syria, and the head of Ephraim, but the head of Judah is Jerusalem, and the
head of Jerusalem is Jesus Christ: Who is able to reach the head of Judah,
which is Jerusalem, while that has Jesus Christ for the head of it? who is
Rezin, or Remaliahs son, put into the balance with Jesus Christ?

The Prophet having brought them this message, not to fear, and strengthened it
with these reasons, concludes all with an Epiphonema, in the words of the text,
If ye will not believe, surely ye shall not be established: As if he had said,
I have brought you as good news as you can desire, should the Lord have sent
you down a blank from Heaven, and bid you write the wishes of your own hearts
in this condition, and engaged his own faithfulness and allsufficiency to
perform them, what could you have requested that I have not offered? could you
frame any more suitable mercies, as your case stands, then these? that your
enemies shall fall, that their counsels shall not stand, that their projects
shall not come to pass? yet let me tell you, ye may obstruct these blessings,
and deprive your selves of this promised deliverance; your unbelief may weaken
the arm of your salvation, and re-inkindle these smoking brands into a
consuming flame; your unbelief may shake your kingdom, more then your fears
have hitherto shakt your hearts, If ye believe not, surely ye shall not be
established.

The words are diversely read: The margin of our Bibles gives them thus out of
the Hebrew; Do ye not believe? it is, because ye are not stable: As if he
should say; What! after the report of these gracious promises, do ye persist in
your fear still? are you yet in your trembling fit? ye are unbeleeving sure,
and therefore ye are unstable. An unbeleeving heart, must needs be (when put to
it) a trembling heart.

The Septuagint give us another sense; If ye believe not, ye shall not
understand: according to which translation, the text is often cited by the
Ancients, to prove that the Jews did not therefore understand the Scripture,
because they did not believe: faith is the light, as well as the strength of
the soul; and they who are shut up in unblief, are usually shut up in
ignorance: Our reading suits the Prophets message, and bears fair with the
Grammatical construction of the text, If ye will not believe, surely ye shall
not be established: though ye have heard of much good, you shall not taste a
drop of it; though God has infinite strength for you, yet he will not put
forth the least of it, except ye believe. There is an elegant Paronomasia
^^^phil (...) cr^d^d^^, fi^it, in n^phal, tabile, statum esse. (...)
in the Original: That word which in the active Conjugation signifies to
believe, signifies to be established in the passive.

If ye believe not.] Unbelief is of two sorts; either, first, an impotencie or
inability to believe; or secondly, a crookedness or perverseness of
disposition against the means of believing: understand this text of the latter.
Again, unbelief may be taken either in general, in reference to the whole
revealed will of God; or secondly, in particular, in reference to some special
manifestation of it. The Jews, to whom the Prophet here speaks, were all
believers in the former notion, but many of them proved unbeleevers in the
latter; even as on the other hand, the Ninevites, who were unbeleevers, in
respect of the general word, proved believers, in regard of that special
revelation by the Prophet Jonah.

Surely ye shall not be established:] That is, ye, in your politic capacity,
as a Kingdom and Commonwealth, shall not be established.

Two points arise from the words; the first I shall but touch in general: take
it thus;

Promises of mercy from God include man's duty,

Acts of spiritual duty, and acts of corporal and civil duty. Deliverance
and establishment are promised to King Ahaz and his people; but they cannot
enjoy either, except they believe. The Lord made glorious promises for the
restoration of Israel, and concludes them all with this asseveration, I the
Lord have spoken it, and I will do it (Ezekiel. 36. 36.) nevertheless he adds
(ver. 37.) Thus says the Lord God, I will yet, for this, be enquired of by the
house of Israel to do it for them. What the Lord will do, we must believe he
will do, and we must pray that he would do it: These are acts of spiritual
duty. And these are not all, when the Lord promises, we must not only set our
hearts awork to believe and pray, but we must set our hands awork, to labor
and do.

While Jacob was traveling to Padan-aram, the Lord appears to him in a vision
at Bethel, and thus encourages him: Behold, I am with thee, and will keep thee
in all places whither thou go, and will bring thee again into this land; for
I will not leave thee, till, I have done all that I have spoken to thee of,
Genesis 28. 15. And when upon the discourteous usage of his uncle Laban, he
meditated a departure from him; the Lord gives him his Passe-port (chapter 31. 2)
Return unto the land of thy fathers, and I will be with thee. How might Jacob
at the appearance of any danger have pleaded these promises, and rested under
the shadow of them for protection? Lord, I have thy word, surer then the
foundations of Heaven and earth, for my safety; unless thy truth, or thy power
fail, I cannot miscarry; let Esau threaten and muster all his forces against
me, let earth and hell enter league and associate themselves against me; here I
sit under the banner of those gracious promises which thou have displayed over
me; I will not trouble my self, Lord, thou stand charged to keep me from all
anoyance. But does Jacob make this use of the promise? Nothing less. He
believes, but he is not careless; he trusts in God, but he neglects not
himself; though God had said, I will keep thee whither soever thou go, yet
he labors to keep himself; read, how upon the approach of his bloody brother,
he sends presents to appease him, how he divides his flocks and family, to make
resistance or escape him. That of Paul (Acts 27.) is eminent to this purpose;
where, with his weather-beaten companions in that voyage, having been in great
stresse at sea, he steps forth (ver. 22.) to revive their fainting spirits,
with a comfortable message; Be of good cheer, for there shall be no loss of
any man's life amongst you, but of the ship; For there stood by me this night
the Angel of the Lord, whose I am, and whom I serve, saying; Fear not, Paul,
thou must be brought before Caesar; and lo, God has given thee all those that
sail with thee. Paul's faith closes fully with this promise (ver. 25.) I believe
God, that it shall be even as he has told me: Yet at the 31 verse, when the
ship-men, under color of casting out Anchors, were about to escape in the
cock-boat, Paul says to the Centurion and the Soldiers, except these abide in
the ship, ye cannot be saved; Not saved, Paul! where then is the word and
promise of thy God, upon which thou did even now so confidently pronounce
safety to us all? If we run out of the way of God, we run out of the word of
God: To rely upon the word, and then go out of the way of God, is not faith,
but presumption: Providence will not serve our negligence, neither will the
promise keep us, except we keep the condition of the promise: If ye believe
not, surely ye shall not be established. Observe secondly;

Without believing there is no establishing: Unbelief is a bar in the way of
promised blessings.

I (says the Prophet) have made you large promises, but take heed ye do not
straiten the hand of God, in giving out the mercy promised. As faith stops the
severest threatenings of destruction, so unbelief stops the sweetest promises of
deliverance. Jonah prophesies (chap. 3. 4.) Yet forty days, and Nineveh shall
be overthrown; but the faith of Nineveh overthrew that prophecy; the City
stood, and the prophecy fell; Why? The people of Nineveh believed God, and
proclaimed a fast, etc. ver. 5. What faith can do to a prophecy of judgment,
the same can unbelief to a promise of mercy, overthrow it.

The Psalmist assigns this to the unbelief of the works of God, as well as of
his word (Psalm. 78. 32, 33.) They believed not his wondrous works, therefore
their days did he consume in vanity, and their years in trouble. But are not
the days of all men consumed in vanity? Is not man at his best estate
altogether vanity? Yes: but here was a special vanity, and somewhat more
poenall and judicial lay upon that generation, for their unbelief, then lies
upon mankind, as the fruit of sin in general. And what was that? even the
evil threatened in the text; they could not be established: God lets them wander
forty years in a wilderness, up and down, forward and backward, now in hope,
anon in fear; now in joy, anon in sorrow; now a success, by and by a
disappointment. They looked for Canaan, but to Canaan they could not come; they
looked for a settled condition, but God kept them upon uncertainties; they went
toyling about the wilderness to seek a passage out, yet most of them found
none, but at the door of the grave: this was the spending of their years in
vanity; and they spent them thus, because of their unbelief. The land of Canaan
was so much promised to the Israelites, that it was called the land of promise,
yet unbelief kept them out forty years. The Apostle is as plain (Heb. 3. 19.)
So we see, they could not enter in, because of unbelief: Their unbelief built a
wall between them and Canaan; it locked up the passages so fast, that they
could not enter in. And as it blockt up the way against the unbeleeving
Israelites, so against Moses, the Captain and conductor of Israel: he must
deliver up his leadingstaff, and resign his Commission to his servant Joshua,
he must die on this side Jordan: The reason is given (Numb. 20. 12.) And the
Lord spoke unto Moses and Aaron, saying, Because ye believe me not, to
sanctify me in the eyes of the children of Israel; therefore ye shall not
bring this Congregation into the land which I have given them.

The Prophet Jeremiah (chap. 17. 5.) pronounces a curse upon the man, that
trusts upon man, and makes flesh his arm, and whose heart departs from the
Lord. The Apostle expounds whose heart that is (Heb. 3. 12.) Take heed lest
there be in any of you an evil heart of unbelief, in departing from the living
God. An unbeleeving heart, is an heart departing from the living God. The
antithesis in the Prophet (ver. 7.) confirms that exposition; Blessed is the
man that trusts in the Lord, and whose hope the Lord is. Hope and trust are
the contraries to unbelief. But what is the portion of this unbeleeving heart?
No good I warrant you. The sixth verse assures us so, He shall be like the
heath in the desert, and shall not see when good comes. As unbelief locks
sin upon our souls, sorrows and judgments upon our bodies, so it locks our
souls out of eternal, and our bodies out of temporal salvation. An unbeleever
shall not see when good comes, that is, he shall not taste or enjoy good when
it comes. So Elisha told that unbeleeving Lord, when in the name of the Lord
he had promised plenty in Samaria; Behold, thou shall see it with thine eyes,
but shall not eat thereof, 2 King. 7. 2.

That text of the Apostle carries a show of opposition against this truth. Romans
11. 32. God (says he) has concluded them all (sc. Jews and Gentiles) in
unbelief, that he might have mercy upon all: It seems then that mercy rather
comes in then is shut out by unbelief. God has concluded them all in unbelief,
that he might have mercy upon all, as if God intended to make his advantage and
opportunity of showing mercy to that people, by finding them in an unbeleeving
condition.

I answer; There is a twofold mercy; First, the mercy of vocation; Secondly,
the mercy of salvation; when the Apostle says, that God concluded or shut them
all up in unbelief, that he might have mercy upon them all, he means it of the
mercy of vocation: The Gentiles in their time, were all unbeleevers, then God
called them; and the Jews at this time are unbeleevers, they deny obedience to
the Gospel, yet God will call them again; the calling of the Jews hereafter
(as heretofore the calling of the Gentiles) shall be of free grace; there was
no preparation in the one, there shall be none in the other, to move God to
call them to the knowledge of Jesus Christ. God calls us to faith, when we have
no faith: He calls to believe, while we are in unbelief: The mercy of vocation
prevents faith; God does not call men because they are believers, or because
they have faith, but he calls them to believe, he calls them unto faith. So
the Apostle arguing about that great mercy of justification (Romans 3. 19.)
shows how the Lord stops every mouth, and makes all the world become guilty
before him. God does not justify any person because he is guiltless or holy;
but that he may be guiltless and holy: He does not justify any man because he
is free from sin, but that he may be free from sin. Thus the mercy of
vocation prevents our faith, and the mercy of justification prevents our
righteousness and obedience: God justifies the ungodly. But in giving the
mercy of salvation, whether it be temporal or eternal salvation, God looks
upon a people or a person believing; and therefore makes promises for faith to
act upon, that we may be saved, that we may be established.

A second objection rises against this point, from that speech of Christ, in
the close of the Parable of the unjust Judge and the importunate Widow, where
assuring his elect who cry unto him night and day, that he will avenge them
speedily, he adds, Nevertheless, when the Son of man comes, shall he find
faith on the earth? that is, he shall not find faith on the earth: and yet
then he comes upon a gracious design, the deliverance of his elect; It seems
then that unbelief or want of faith, does not hinder mercy, for this great
mercy shall be given in, when faith shall not be found to believe it: See here
a plentiful harvest of comfort, and yet at the same time a dearth of faith;
none to be found upon the earth.

I answer, first, The words import only a great declining of faith in those
times, not a total decay of it.

Secondly, The intent of those words is not to bring unbelief into any credit,
but only to support and cherish the faith of some few, in the appearing of much
unbelief and despondencie in others: For in hard times we hear frequently such
complaints as these: Do ye not see, how the hearts of men fail, how their
spirits are down, how they give up all for lost? Faith was never so low as now,
and therefore surely we must shortly be lower then we are; this prevailing
reign of unbelief among us, is a sad argument that evils shall reign over us
too: thus the heart misgives.

To releeve such, our Lord Christ says, Nevertheless, when the Son of man
comes, shall he find faith on the earth? As if he had said, though all ought
to increase and strengthen faith in darkest times, both in themselves and
others, yet let no man despair, because some, or many do not believe: for as
their unbelief shall not make the faith (that is, the faithfulness or
faith-word) of God without effect (Romans 3. 3.) so neither shall it make the
faith of other men without effect. Yea, in this sense, the less faith, the
more hope. When you see the spirits of most drooping, their flesh trembling,
and their hands hanging down; This looks most like the time wherein Christ will
come to avenge his elect, and do great things. And those Saints, in whom faith
bears up its head in such times, may use the general unbelief of their
brethren, as a strong advantage for their own faith; and representing it to God
in prayer, may plead thus, Lord, faith fails exceedingly, very few of thy
oppressed people do, or can be persuaded to believe that thou will help them;
why, therefore Lord hasten in help now, come to our succor; Is not this the
day of thy coming? for thou shall scarce find faith on the earth to believe
thou will come.

Thirdly, Though Christ will come at last to releeve his people, when little
faith is to be found among them, yet it shall be best with those in whom he
finds most faith: and woe to those who neglect the raising of their faith,
because they hear Christ will come when faith is down. The freeness of his
grace, in helping an unbeleeving generation, will be no excuse, but a reproof
of their unbelief. Our duty to believe is not the less, because his goodness
to those who believe not, is so great: yea, they who (to put themselves into a
posture for deliverance) cast away their faith, are clothed with presumption:
And though Christ may establish those who, through weakness or want of faith,
cannot believe, yet surely they shall never be established, who, through
boldness with, or wantonness upon his grace, strive not to give him glory in
believing.

To clear which, I shall now proceed to give you some demonstrations of this
point, why unbelief is the bar and stop of blessings. This appears;

First, From the greatness of the sin of unbelief; Every sin, in the
nature of it, is a bar in the way of mercy, Ier. 5. 25. Your iniquities have
turned away these things, and your sins have withholden good things from you.
But unbelief is a huge mountain, and when once we have removed the mountain of
unbelief, all other mountains will quickly become plains and valleys before us.
Unbelief is a sin of a very high stature; a sin of the first magnitude; it
is a spiritual wickedness, and therefore a great wickedness. There is much
dispute among the learned, whether unbelief were not the first sin, that
which opened the door to let in every sin? I believe we shall not wrong
unbelief, in giving it precedencie, or in affirming, that as unbelief now shuts
the door, and keeps out mercy; so unbelief opened the door, to let in misery
upon the world: it was faith, respecting the threatening of God, which the Devil
laid his first siege against, and against which he first prevailed: Man had
never eaten the forbidden fruit, had he believed death was in the morsel.
Hence unbelief is called a provocation: To be provoked, is more then to be
displeased: Provocation notes the highest act of displeasure, and therefore
that sin which is a provocation, is one of the highest sins. A day of
unbelief is a day of provocation, Heb. 3. 8. Harden not your hearts, as in the
provocation, in the day of tentation in the wilderness. Now what was the
provocation of that day? or by what did the people provoke God at that time?
Was it the making of a molten Calf, and falling down before it? Was it the
joining themselves unto Baal-Peor, and eating the offerings of the dead? Was
adultery or unclenenesse acted in the day of that provocation? All these are
provoking sins, yet none of these denominated that day, a day of provocation;
unbelief gave the name to that day: For the Israelites provoked God at the red
sea (Psalm. 106. 7.) and that was before they made their idol calfe to worship
it, and before they fell into those bodily abominations and defiled themselves;
their fear and murmurings storied (Exodus 14.) were but the overflowings of
their unbelief, and these provoked God at the red sea.

Again, The greatness of the sin appears, from the many provisions which God
has made against it. God has even studied the prevention, or the cure of this
sin: He has appointed faith, many helps, much assistance, he has prepared
many antidotes against, many remedies for unbelief. Now look how much the more
provision God makes to keep us off, or pull us out of any sin, by so much the
greater is that sin, if we fall into, or continue in it. When God gives many
charges against a sin, and sets many bars in the way to stop us from it,
and yet we break through all, this mightily aggravates a sin, and makes it out
of measure sinful. For the cure of unbelief, we have not only the Word of God;
but secondly, the Promise of God; and thirdly, the Covenant of God; and
fourthly, the Oath of God; fifthly, all elder and later experiences, the mighty
works which God has done, the signs which he has given, the wonders and
miracles which he has wrought. Hence, after Christ had preached and done many
wondrous works among his countrymen, it is said, Mark. 6. 6. that he marvelled
at the unbelief of the Jews: unbelief is a mavelous sin, and, which makes
it most mavelous, Christ marvelled at it. We read not that Christ marvelled
at any other sin of that generation; he marvelled not at their adulteries, or
oaths, or hypocrisy, etc. why then does he marvel at their unbelief? Not
because it is a sin above, or besides the nature of man, nor because it was a
rare sin, a sin he had not seen before (Unbelief is as level to our
sinful nature, and as daily acted, as any sin whatsoever) The reason then of
this marvel, was, the strange course which those men ran, and all do, in
acting their unbelief: They overrun and slight the word of God, the promise
of God, the Covenant of God, the Oath of God, all the works, the wonders,
marvels and miracles of God; is not this a mavelous sin which breaks through
all these? Lastly, Unbelief is a very great sin, for, it is the mother of most
sins, and the sweetner of every sin; many sins had never seen the light,
and all sin would be gall and wormwood, bitterness in the acting, did man
believe it would be (as it will be) bitterness in the end: Unbelief gilds over
that poisonous pill, and wraps it up in sugar, and so man takes it down as a
sweet bit, as pleasant bread, with death, and hell and all.

If then a great sin be a bar to blessings, unbelief must; which was in
order the first sin, which is in kind a spiritual sin, in degree one of
the greatest sins, a provoking sin, a mavelous sin, a mother sin, a
promoter of sin.

Secondly, Unbelief is a stop in the way of blessing and establishment, because
it diverts us from the fountain of blessings, from him who only can establish,
from him who bears up the pillars of Kingdoms when they shake and totter: If
not, then, where and who is he? (Job 9. 24.) show me the creature, man or
Angel, that can do these things. The Apostle describes unbelief to be a
departure from God (Heb. 3. 12.) That which carries us away from the fountain,
carries us from the waters: that which carries us from the Sun, must needs
carry us from the light. If then unbelief carry us away from God, who is our
fountain, who is our Sun, who is all good, and who has all good, how, or
where, or by whom shall we be either comforted or established? Is it possible
to gain by deserting him, who is our treasure? upon what coasts shall we trade
to fraught our vessels, when we have loosed and set sail from Heaven? As that
Disciple said unto Christ, Joh. 6. 68. when he questioned them, Will ye also go
away? Go away, says Peter; Lord, to whom shall we go? Thou have the words of
eternal life: Where shall we mend our selves? where shall we have life, if we
go from thee, who have the words of eternal life? So may we say, to whom shall
we go, when a dying distressed Kingdom lies upon our hands? where shall we get
help, or strength, or deliverance, if we depart from God, the living God, the
God who gives and preserves the life both of persons and nations?

Thirdly, The stability of a people is founded upon promises, but unbelief
attempts to shake the promises, and more, to make them of none effect. Though
we have precious promises, laden and enricht with blessings, yet we can do
nothing with them, nor make any earnings out of them, except we set faith to
work upon them: Nothing can fetch out the sweetness of a promise, but faith;
nothing can suck those breasts, or draw water out of those wels of salvation,
but faith; faith makes a living out of a word of promise; but unbelief will let
us die and starve in the midst and throng of all the promises; yea, unbelief
(as to us) destroys the promises, and cuts the sinews of them, so that they
cannot stir hand or foot to help us. Yet further, unbelief (as much as in it
lies) turns all the promises into fallacies, and the truth of God into a lie:
Faith feeds upon the goodness of the promises, and unbelief devours the truth
of them: Surely they shall never receive the good of a promise, who deny and
destroy the truth of a promise.

A fourth reason is this; Unbelief destroys all former mercies, therefore
certainly unbelief will hinder future mercies: by unbelief God loses all the
favors he has bestowed upon us; when we believe not what is to be done, we
unbeleeve all that God has done. He that having been pardoned his sin, does
not believe that God will pardon him still, unbeleeves that he was ever
pardoned. It is so in the case of temporals: And can we think he will bestow
new favors, where he has lost those he has bestowed? God will never trust
that, which distrusts him. The seven lean kine of Pharaoh, eat up the fat kine;
though we have had seven fat kine, and full ears of corn; though God has given
us seven full mercies, seven great deliverances, yet unbelief will swallow them
all at a bit (as it were) and yet be as lean and empty as before: We see it
clearly in that passage of the people of Israel, Exodus 14. 11. God had wrought
a great deliverance for them, he had brought them out of Egypt with a strong
hand, and they had seen the wonders of God ten times there; but as soon as ever
they came to the red sea, unbelief seized upon them: Oh, they should never
overcome that difficulty, never get past that danger: What does this their
unbelief? even what I have said, it devoured all former mercies: Nay, it not
only took away former mercies, but turned them into afflictions and crosses, so
we may enterpret their complaint, Because there were no graves in Egypt, have
thou taken us away to die in the wilderness? wherefore have thou dealt thus
with us, to carry us forth out of Egypt? for it had been better for us to serve
the Egyptians, then that we should die in the wilderness. See how angry they
were at former mercies, how they prefer bondage before deliverance: Wherefore
have thou dealt thus with us, to carry us out of Egypt? Can we judge a people
who are angry with former mercies, fit to receive new mercies? Such is the
language of unbelief at this day: How many in their distresses, when they are
brought as it were unto the red sea, wish that this Reformation had never been
begun; it had been better for them to have served their old taskmasters,
both in spirituals and in temporals, then to endure such hardship, then to run
such hazzards, and be at such cost, to free themselves? they look upon all the
wonders which God has wrought, as matters of their sorrow: We see what we have
brought our selves to, O that we had suffered any thing, rather then what we
suffer.

Fifthly, Unbelief robs God of his honor: and that which takes glory from God,
must needs hinder mercy from man: we can never enrich our selves by robbing
God; unbelief is a God-robbing sin; and it robbes God of that which is most
precious to him: unbelief is a bold sin, it goes into Gods Cabinet, and takes
away his chiefest jewel, it takes away that which he says he will not give
away, his glory. The glory of God, is nothing else but Isa. 42. 8.
that reputation which he has in the world, (I speak not of his essential
glory, which he has from all eternity, and shall have, whether men believe or
no; but I speak of his extrinsecall, manifestative and declarative glory) this
unbelief obscureth and casts a vail upon, yea steals quite away. You know a
man's glory is gone when his credit is gone; if a man be in such a condition,
that no man will believe him, or take his word, or give him credit, that man
has lost all his honor and reputation in the world: Now unbelief makes God of
no credit in the world; let him speak what he will, let him give his word, his
hand, his covenant, his seal, his oath, he has no credit among unbeleevers. It
is said of the old Saints (Heb. 11. 2.) that by faith they obtained a good
report: There is no grace brings so much honor to man as faith does; and I do
assure you, there is no grace brings God so much honor as faith does; by faith
God himself obtains a good report among the Saints: His Name is great among
those who are of great faith: Gods Name is up, when our hearts are up in
believing; and his Name is down, when our hearts are down in unbelief. He that
receives the testimony of God, sets to his Joh. 3. 33.
seal that God is true; but he that will not receive the testimony of God, he
(as much as he can) has set to his seal that God is false. The Apostle
quaeries, Romans 3. 3. What if some did not believe? shall their unbelief make
the faith of God without effect? His denying question implies, that this was
the attempt of unbelief, even to make the faith of God, that is, the
faithfulness of God of none effect: It is as if he should say, This is it
which these by their unbelief would do, or to do which, there is a tendencie in
unbelief; God does and will right himself in honor, show himself faithful,
though all the world should prove liars and unbeleevers: But no thanks to
unbelief; that would put the highest dishonor upon God, even that of falsehood
to his own word, and unfaithfullnesse to his people. Consider this, can we
thrive by endamaging God? or is it probable God will increase our comforts,
while we are decocting and wasting his honor?

From all these considerations, the point is clearly demonstrated, that
unbelief is the stop of public blessings, and therefore I conclude for the
truth of it, That Without believing there can be no establishing.

Hence learn, first, how excellent and useful a grace faith is: Some think
little of employing faith in any business beyond the line of the justification
of a sinner: But (as the Saints of old) so we may make other improvements of
it. For as by faith the walls of Jericho were shaken and fell down (Heb. 11.
30.) so by faith the walls of Jerusalem may be settled and raised up. As by
faith those ancient Worthies subdued Kingdoms: so by faith, at this day, we may
establish Kingdoms. We must not only go to prayer by faith, but to counsel by
faith, and to war by faith; by this grace we may wax valiant in fight, and
turn to flight the Armies of the aliens, ver. 34. When Jehoshaphats Armies went
forth to battle, his military Oration had but this flower of holy rhetorique
in it, Believe in the Lord your God, so shall you be established; believe his
Prophets, so shall you prosper, 2 Chronicles. 20. 20. The prosperity of our worldly
affairs, as well as of our heavenly, depends upon, and flows from the actings
of our faith.

In the next place, Give me leave (Honorable and beloved) to be an informer
this day against the Kingdoms greatest enemy, and the hinderer of our National
establishment. It was the custom of the Jews (as some of the Learned have
observed from the story of Naboth (1 King. 21. 10.) upon the day of their
solemn fast, to accuse and charge notorious offenders. How many things and
persons have been, and still are suspected, yea charged with (that notorious
offense) the shaking of this nation, while that which is most guilty, is not
thought on at all by many, and not enough thought on by any: I mean, and I Will
name it, unbelief. And I mean not only unbelief abroad and at large, but your
own, in whose ears I chiefly speak this day, and into whose hands, that great
and noble work of establishing this shaken, and of uniting this divided Kingdom
is committed. Though it be uncomely for me to charge you, yet it is the duty of
this day, for you to enquire of your own hearts, whether your own unbelief has
not impeded that long prayed for, and long waited for effect and issue of your
counsels, the establishment of this Nation.

This Nation has been long in counsel, and yet it is not established; long in
action, and yet it is not established: We have prayed long, fasted long, and
yet we are not established. I have the text and my point to warrant, if I
accuse and arraign unbelief as the cause of all this.

Why, what has unbelief done, or who has seen it doing this evil? Unbelief is
an invisible enemy, and therefore a more dangerous enemy. But though it be
invisible in its nature, yet it is not only visible, but palpable in its
effects: as holy faith also is. Hence, as faith is called effectual faith, and
prayer effectual prayer, because these break forth and operate in glorious
effects: so unbelief may be called effectual unbelief, because it breaks forth
and operates in lamentable effects. And whatsoever is, or can be looked upon as
a cause of our continued troubles and shakings, is without any strain or
slander reducible to unbelief, as the cause of those causes, and therefore the
cause of those effects.

First, Some say, we are not established, because we are so divided. And are
not our divisions the fruit of our unbelief? Hearts not joined in faith to God,
cannot join, or not firmly join to one another in love. They that go off from
God (and every act of unbelief in us, is a step from him) seldom keep close to
one another, Faith is the cement and soder of affection.

Secondly, If it be said, we are not established, because still so unreformed,
sin abounds still, and therefore trouble abounds still, I grant it. But
whence is it that sin abounds? I must set that also upon the head of
unbelief. It is unbelief which protects sin, and keeps it alive,
notwithstanding the sentence of death has gone out so often against it: Though
it has so often (in these sin-mortifying duties of prayer and fasting) been
carried out to execution. Sin laughs at all our days of sorrow and
humiliation, at our fasts and prayers, while unbelief backs and stands to it.
For as faith is a shield to the new-man, which quenches all the fiery darts of
the Devil: so unbelief is a shield to the old man, which quenches all the holy
darts of the Spirit. The word cannot wound a sinner, while he is armed with
unbelief. Sin will save its skin, much more its heart, till faith sets it
naked to the strokes and smitings of the word.

Thirdly, If it be said, Surely we are not established, because we are grown so
careless, so cold and formal in those Kingdom-establishing duties, fasting
and prayer. Many neglect to keep them, as counting such days lost out of the
calendar of their lives: But most are negligent in keeping them, and have
turned the whole business into a mere bodily exercise, or the hanging down of
their heads for a day: This neglect to keep fasts, and negligent keeping of
them, is so gross and notorious, that it makes many hearts to bleed while they
think of it. Hence some have thought it most safe, to move for the
supersedeating of these duties, fearing that such settled fasts will but more
unsettle the Kingdom, and rather provoke the Lord, then pacify him toward us.
Reasons may be given for the laying down of these Monthly, and the keeping
only of occasional fasts: though in one sense our monthly fasts are
occasional, the great occasion why they began, continuing to this day. But how
sad is it, to consider that this should be given as a reason, That we have laid
down these fasts, because we are weary keeping them, or are grown formal in
keeping of them. To break off from such a duty, upon these terms, is a
lamentation, and will be one: What? have we fasted away the tenderness of our
hearts, and our sensiblenesse of Gods hand? have we prayed away our zeal for
God, and our love to communion with him? this is dreadful.

But how dreadful soever it is; this (which God forbid) if it be so, must be
charged upon unbelief. Why do any neglect fasts? it is, because they do not
believe it will quit cost to observe them; they believe more gain is to be got
by working in their callings, and more comfort will come in by letting
themselves out in pleasures: and therefore they will not forbear their labors,
or abridge themselves for a day of their pleasures. No man will afflict his
body (as in such days he must) much less his soul (as in such days he ought)
unless faith show him a benefit, which will bear his charge, and comforts,
which will swallow up his sorrows, in doing them.

And whence is it, that many who appear outwardly in these duties, are so
formal, rather personating the faster and petitioner, then being fasters and
petitioners? is it not from unbelief? They who have slight thoughts of a duty,
must needs act it slightly.

And whence is it, that prayer and fasting are at any time successelesse and
ineffectuall? is not this from unbelief? Praying without believing, is a taking
of Gods Name in vain, and (in regard of any fruit) a vain help for man. Prayer
without faith, is nothing but a noise of words, mere babbling: it is but
speaking, not praying. In the sixth of Matthew, Christ reproves those, who
thought to be heard for their much speaking. We shall surely be heard if we
pray but a little, but we shall never be heard how much soever we speak. And if
faith be mixed in the duty, how long soever we continue speaking, how many
words, yea repetitions soever we use in it, Christ will not call it much
speaking, but much praying: Though he reproved much speaking, yet he neither
did, nor ever will reprove much praying: Now unbelief makes that which is
commonly called praying, how much soever it is, to be but much speaking: And
for that (because Christ is not in it) neither man nor nation shall be heard.
The establishing of an unsettled Kingdom, calls (as for the highest and purest
motions of reason in counselling, so) for the holiest and most spiritual
motions of faith in praying: But as unbelief darkens the light of reason, that
it cannot see, or holds it in unrighteousness; so it clips the wings of
prayer, that it cannot ascend, or returns it answerlesse.

Fourthly, Should it be said, Instruments have been unfaithful, they have not
acted up to the highest, either of their abilities, or of their duties, and
therefore surely we are not established: Then, I must return unbelief as guilty
of this unfaithfullnesse. Want of faith is the cause of all the
unfaithfullnesse that ever was in the world; the very root of apostasy both
from God and man. Faith keeps the heart steady, and will see us die, rather
then offer a thought of withdrawing from a known duty: Faith blasts all
tempting objects; yea, it out-bids all tempers, showing greater good in doing
our duty, then the world can offer us for omitting or falling off from it;
showing us greater evil in neglecting our duty, then the world can threaten us
with for doing or coming up to it. When Paul began to be jealous of his
Thessalonians (1 Ep. 3. 5, 6, 7.) Lest by some means the tempter had tempted
them, he presently sent a messenger to them, to know how their faith did; and
as soon as the messenger returned, bringing good tiding of their faith; namely,
that their faith was in heart, and in good plight, Paul was comforted; he knew,
as long as their faith stood, they would stand against all temptations; he
might turn them loose into the world, they would take no hurt. A believer is
the greatest conqueror. This is the victory that overcommeth the world, even
our faith (1 John 5. 4.) and that which betrays us into the hand of every
temptation, is unbelief: It makes men act basely, and render themselves
prisoners to every promise of preferment, or hope of profit, to every
whispering threat of danger, and fear of loss. Where unbelief reigns, it
either divides the man, or amazes him: either it makes him an hypocrite with
two hearts, or a coward without a heart: And between those who have two hearts,
and those who have no hearts, the best work in the world may soon miscarry.
Unbelief nurses ignoble emulations, undue ambitions, base covetousness; it
moves to self-seeking, caries to self ends, makes the spirit poor and private;
it bids us shift and comply with all humors, and advises to follow, not the
reason, goodness, truth or justice of an undertaking, but the successes or
advantages of it.

Fifthly, Some charge our unsettlement upon unresolvednesse, fearfullnesse and
want of courage, in carrying on the work. If so, These also (I see by their
complexion) are the children of unbelief: for that is it, which causes a man
to hang like a meteor in the air, between Heaven and earth, not knowing which
way to move. They who have little faith, have much fear, and they who have no
faith are in a readiness to be all fear, to be slain by fear: so were they of
whom the Prophet Jeremie speaks (chap. 22. 1.) They are slain, and not by the
sword: Fear saves the enemy a labor; courage in battle is usually flatted by
unbelief; and though some may show valor who have no faith, yet faith is the
truest spring and support of valor; By faith they waxed valiant in fight, Heb.
11. Courage in counselling and reforming fades also and dies away by unbelief:
Unbelief makes a man afraid of displeasing any one, but God: It speaks as the
messenger to Micaiah, (1 King. 22. 13.) Let thy word be like one of them, and
speak that which is good. Many have given counsel before, suiting both the
humor and design of the King; therefore said that messenger, do thou vote with
them too, let there be no dissent among the Prophets, speak that which is good;
that which is pleasingly good, (he meant) no matter whether it be justly or
truly good; else it may go ill with thee, thou may be cast in prison, and
fed with the bread of affliction, and the water of affliction. With such words
as these, will unbelief (if it be admitted to speak its mind) prepare the
heart for counsel every morning: It tells such fearful stories, or lying
prophecies rather, as will not let a man speak or act beyond his own interests.

When Hezekiah made that bold reformation, removing the high places, breaking
the Images, cutting down the groves, and breaking in pieces the brazen serpent
that Moses made (and was now made an Idol) calling it Nehushtan: to the record
of those noble acts, the Holy Ghost affixes the character of the agent, He
trusted in the Lord God of Israel, 2 King. 18. 4, 5. What difficulty or danger
will not trust in God, carry man through, in Gods way: And sutely it carried
Hezekiah through very great ones in that his zealous reformation. What visions
of fear and danger might unbelief have represented to Hezekiah? What! remove
the highest places? it may remove you from your high place: will you cut down
the groves? that act may cut down your life: will you break the Images,
especially that famous one, the Brazen serpent? take heed it be not the
breaking of your Kingdom: Do you not know how your people are engaged to these
courses? I grant they are superstitious, but this nation will not easily part
with them, if you will be so strict in reforming, you may embroil all: Consider
what the Kingdom will bear, enquire how the City will take this, and how the
country; it is wisdom to look to your own peace, and to follow safe counsels,
as well as right or holy counsels. How did the faith of Hezekiah triumph over
these discouraging base suggestions? And if ever any have been or shall be led
into captivity by their power, resolve it, that man was first captivated by
unbelief.

Sixthly, Some charge our non-establishment, upon our carnal confidence, our
trusting in an arm of flesh; They will tell us, we have made an Idol of the
Parliament, an Idol of our Armies, we have leaned so much upon our staves, that
we have broken some of them, cracked others, and endangered the rest.

If this be a true charge, I must lay it, as all the former, upon the back of
unbelief. They who believe God too little, do always believe man too much;
that which makes God but as a man, will quickly make man as a God whereas
faith, while it causes us to be so diligent in the use of means, as if God
would do nothing for us, causes us so to withdraw our trust from the means, as
if God were to do all for us; faith shows us as much need of God in our
fulness, as in our wants. It is a hard thing to depend upon God, in the
weakness and want of means, but it is harder to depend upon him in the
fulness and strength of means. This is the noblest act of faith: And though
(we know) in Heaven sense will swallow up faith, yet on earth faith ought to
swallow up our sense; When we see, and hear, and enjoy most of the creature, we
should be as if we heard, and saw, and enjoyed nothing of the creature, but
lived upon God alone. Observe this instanced in two great Kings: Asa had an
Army of men that bare targets and spears, out of Judah three hundred thousand,
and out of Benjamin that bare shields and drew bows, two hundred and fourscore
thousand, 2 Chronicles. 14. 8. A gallant Army: Yet when Zerah the Ethiopian came
against him with a more numerous Army, Asa cried unto the Lord his God, and
said, Lord, it is nothing with thee to help with many, or with them that have
no power, ver. 11. But are six hundred thousand men no power? Asa's faith saw
no power in this complete Army, that he might see all power in God, and engage
him in the battle; We rest on thee, let not man prevail against thee. He makes
nothing of his Army, in case of victory, while he made nothing of it in case of
an overthrow: Let not man prevail against thee.

That of Jehoshaphat is yet more full, who had an Army of eleven hundred and
threescore thousand fighting men (besides his Garrisons) for the field, as
appears upon his muster-roll, 2 Chronicles. 17. 14, 15, 16, etc. yet when the
Moabites and the Ammonites made war upon him, he prays thus (chap 20. 12.) O
our God, will thou not judge them? for we have no might against this great
company that comes against us, neither know we what to do, but our eyes are
upon thee. What, had he no might? knew he not what to do, when he had 1160000
men in the field? No, not he: He had no eye to see these or any thing, but God;
and therefore says, Our eyes are (not upon our Armies, but) upon thee. In this
faith of the creatures nothingnesse, and the all-sufficiencie of God, he
prevailed over the Ammonites, as Asa had done before over Zerah the Ethiopian.
We then receive most by humane helps, when we expect least; unbelief either
takes our hearts off from God, or (which is as dangerous) divides them upon the
creature; for when we lean upon two, of which one is infirm, we shall not stand
by that which is strong, but fall by that which is weak: faith bids us use
means, and unbelief bids us trust it: And though faith will trust some means,
in regard of their faithfulness, yet it will trust none, in regard of
effectualnesse. As God calls for all our obedience, so for all our confidence;
confidence in man is ever accompanied with jealousies upon God; such
confidences God rejects, and therefore we have not, we cannot prosper in them.

Should this inquisition be enlarged, and the lot cast to find out every
accursed thing, which has obstructed the influences of Heaven, from making
this Land a quiet habitation, I might with like ease and cleernesse resolve
them all into unbelief; and therefore I leave unbelief under the guilt of this
grand charge, The Kingdoms enemy, the hellish vapor which continues this our
long Churchquake, and State-quake; or in the word of the text, The stop of our
establishment.

Let me then a while call in the help of faith, as the noblest expedient for
the cure of all our evils? It is said (Joh. 7. 37.) that, In the last day of
the feast, Jesus stood and cried, saying; He that believes on me, out of his
belly shall flow rivers of living water: Will it not be seasonable, in this
great day of your Fast and solemn humiliation, to lift up a voice for faith,
and cry out, saying, If ye believe, surely ye shall be established? Set faith
awork, in every work, let it be an ingredient in all your counsels, in all your
actions. Ye act but as men, not as the people of God, as a Roman, not as a
Christian Senate, without faith. As by faith Abel offered God a better
sacrifice then Cain his brother; so by faith, one offers the Church, the state,
better advice then his neighbor. When you prepare arms and Armies, arm your
selves with this shield. Faith is the best weapon, It will quench the fiery
darts of men, as well as the fiery darts of the Devil; if your Armies were
weak, faith would recruit and strengthen them; now they are strong, faith will
continue and increase them: when your affairs are at a stand, faith will put
them in motion, faith is a friend at a dead lift. If there be but a little meal
in your barrel, and a little oil in your cruze, faith will lead you into the
storehouses of Heaven, and show you all the treasures and riches which are
laid up there. As Hezekiah led the Ambassadors of Babylon from chamber to
chamber, and showed them all the riches and provisions of his royal house,
both for peace and war; so will faith (but upon better principles) take you
by the hand, and lead you from one attribute of God to another, and show you
all fulness of all things, there unsearchable riches of mercy, here
unchangeable faithfulness, there infinite strength, and here purest exactest
wisdom to improve and manage it: We can never be at a loss while we can
believe, for that will find out help for us, when sense can see none, when
reason and policy can project none.

If Information be desired, how or when we act by faith toward public
establishment, take it thus.

First, Faith acts in the strength, upon the truth and goodness of a promise.
Promises are the air and element in which faith breathes and lives. Faith
languishes, unless fed and dieted by divine engagements; it relishes no fare,
but of Gods own providing; it must have a promise in the word, or a promise in
the works of God to rest upon. The works of God have a promise in them, as well
as the word of God, and are therefore the objects of faith, not only as faith
notes the believing of what is done, but also as it notes the believing of what
is to be done; In which sense we are to understand that reproof of the Jews,
Psalm. 78. 32. They believed not his wondrous works. They did believe, the
history of his works, namely, that such things as are there recorded, were
done; They could not but believe that God had wrought wonders for them in
Egypt, that he had drowned Pharaoh in, and brought them safe through, the red
sea: they saw these things, their senses were witnesses; but yet they did not
believe the prophecy or promise, which was vertually in those works, namely
that God would do more wonders for them, till he had finished and accomplished
their deliverance: That history of their bringing through the red sea, had this
prophecy in it, that they should be brought safe to Canaan; but they did not
believe the voice of this prophecy: When God gave them water out of the rock,
this work promised, that he would give them meat out of the clouds, if they
needed it; but this they believed not: Hence the same Psalm reports their
unbelief, under this notion, ver. 19, 20. They spoke against God, they said,
Can God furnish a table in the wilderness? Behold, he smote the rock, that the
waters gushed out, and the streams overflowed; Can he give bread also? Can he
provide flesh also for his people? When the Lord heard this (language of
unbelief) he was wroth. Then faith moves in the highest region of holiness,
when it sees all to be done, in what is done; when it reads meat promised in
waters given; and conquers a Goliath in the conquest of a Lion: when a slain
Leviathan is its food in the wilderness. And thus the Lord directs the faith
of his ancient people (Deuteronomy. 7. 17.) to outwrestle the greatest dangers, If
thou shall say in thine heart, these Nations are more then I, how can I
dispossess them? thou shall not be afraid of them, but shall well remember
what the Lord thy God did unto Pharaoh, and unto all Egypt, etc. Hence the
reason why the people of Israel provoked God at the red sea by their fears and
murmurings, is thus given (Psalm. 106. 7.) They remembered not the multitude of
thy mercies.

If then (at any time) you think your selves scanted in promises, send back
your thoughts to those many experiences, both of elder and later dates: The
invincible Navy in 88. overcome; the secret Powder Plot discovered and blown
up; your yesterday protections, deliverances, successes, victories, should all
be served up to the table of your hearts, for faith to feed upon, and nourish
it self up into a holy confidence, That he who has delivered you from so great
a death, and does deliver, will yet deliver you, that thanks may be given by us
all in this behalf.

Secondly, As faith acts upon the truth and goodness of a promise, so always
by the justice and holiness of a rule. No man can act that by faith, which is
either unlawful to be done, or is done unlawfully. Faith acts in the eye of
God, and therefore must act holily. Faith tells us that God has no need of our
sins, to promote his cause, and that we must not lie for God.

Thirdly, He that acts by faith, will look that his end be as good as his rule.
As faith will not do evil that good may come of it, so neither will it do good
that evil may come of it, or that such a private personal good may come of it,
as is over-balanc'd with public general evils. Faith never drives a trade
(knowingly) for it self, with wrong to the common stock.

Fourthly, Faith carries with it cheerfullnesse opposite to worldly sorrow,
courage opposite to worldly fear, resolvednesse opposite to base neutralitry,
zeal opposite to lazy lukewarmenesse, boldness opposite to sinful modesty,
and a sober confidence of success, or an assurance that our labor shall not
be in vain, opposite to all heart-sinking doubts, and despondencies of spirit.

Thus he does, who acts by faith, and all this, faith will do; yet, not every
faith; True faith will do the former three, but the fourth is a task for strong
faith. It was the Apostles caution, Romans 14. 1. Him that is weak in the faith
receive, but not to doubtful disputations. The works of God put us as hard
questions as his word. The disputes of providence are often very hard disputes:
A weak faith may soon be overmatch by them. But where faith is strong and
vigorous, it will unty all those knots, resolve all those doubts, run through
all that work, with ease. That must needs keep our souls steady, and make us
unwearied in the work of the Lord, which fetches in constant supplies, and
feeds our lamp with oil as fast as it spends, which wipes off our sweat, and
causes us to act in his strength, who can do all things.

But were it not better to fear always, then to be so high slown in faith?
were it not better to prepare for the worst times, then to be confident of
good, or better?

I do not counsel any to slacken their preparation for evil and worser times,
while I stir up your minds to believe and wait for the best. Sit down as
often as you please, and prepare for death, for sword, for famine and for
spoiling; Sit down, and commune with your own hearts upon your beds about these
things: Put the case to your selves, and act the part of sufferers under
hardest pressures: Think what to do if the sword were at your breasts, and the
fire in your houses. But in the midst of your preparations for evil, take heed
of casting away the hopes of good. An evil heart of unbelief, is seven fold
worse then all the evils that can fall upon you.

And though (all the unkind distractions and divisions at home, with the
oppositions abroad being considered) the way of faith lies very much up-hill,
yea up mountains and craggy rocks, yet know, There is no danger so great, or
exigent so dreadful, which can be a plea for unbelief. If any people might
have been excused for their unbelief, the people of Israel might; for they had
an Army behind them, the sea before them, and the mountains on either side, so
that the enemy said, I will pursue, I will overtake, I will divide the spoil,
my lust shall be satisfied upon them, I will draw my sword, mine hand shall
destroy them (Exodus 15. 9.) yet their unbelief is taxed as a provocation. Never
speak of the greatness of danger to lessen faith: for dangers are the element
of faith; among them faith lives most, because among them faith finds most
promises. When we have least of the world about us, we have most of the word
about us; and when we have most of the world against us, we have more of the
word for us. Faith has best food in famine, the fullest table in a
wilderness. Faith (like the Horse (Job 39. 19.) rejoices in its strength,
(for it is the strength of God) and goes out to meet the armed men. Faith
mocketh at fear, and is not affrighted, neither turns back from the sword.

A second sort manage the objection further: We know God is able (be the
difficulties never so great) to deliver, but we are not acquainted with his
will: How then can we act faith? how can we be confident as you would have us?
We, indeed, may say as he in the Gospel, Lord if thou will, thou can make us
clean: thou can settle and establish us: But we are uncertain of his will,
though we are sure of his power.

To these I answer: First, That howsoever the uncertainty of the will of God be
usually held forth as a plea for doubting and unbelief; yet most doubt and are
unbeleeving upon suspicion of the power of God: For when faith is up, and acts
strongly upon this point, that God is able, it seldom doubts about his will.
We have a great instance of this, Numb. 11. 19. when God promised Moses to
spread such a table in the wilderness, that all the Israelites should eat
flesh, not only one day, or two days, or five days, or ten days, or twenty
days, but even a whole month: Moses begins to argue, ver. 21. The people,
amongst whom I am, are six hundred thousand footmen, and thou have said, I
will give them flesh that they may eat a whole month (As if Moses had said;
Lord, I pray consider your words, are you able to make good your promise?)
shall the flocks, and the herds be slain for them to suffice them? Or shall the
fish of the sea be gathered together for them to suffice them? What is the
meaning of these questions? even that Moses himself doubted whether God could
perform this, whether God had not out-promised his own power. That it was so,
is seen clearly by the answer that God makes, ver. 23. And the Lord said unto
Moses, Is the Lords hand waxed short? Thou shall see now whether my word shall
come to pass or not. The hand of God is the power of God, and the shortning of
his hand, the shortning of his power. Is Gods power shortened? Moses his
question intimated that it was: So Isa. 59. 1. The Lords hand is not shortened
that he cannot save: Now as in Commonwealths, good Laws show ill manners (for
Laws are medicines, applied by wise Magistrates, to cure the several
distempers of a people) so good counsels and proofs show the evil which is in
the heart of man. When God asks the question, Is my hand shortened? when he
says, My hand is not shortened, we may gather, Moses and the Jews had an
apprehension that Gods hand was shortened, that his power was not so great as he
had reported.

Again, If it be not doubting of the power of God; why do we believe least when
dangers are greatest? in little dangers we believe God is willing; why not in
greater dangers? surely, because then a greater power is required; so that the
stick is at the power of God, though usually his will be pretended. When
Abraham, that mighty giant in believing, had overcome this difficulty, that God
was able, nothing stood in his way, Romans 4. 19, 20. Being not weak in faith, he
considered not his own body now dead, neither yet the deadness of Sarah's
womb, he staggered not at the promise of God through unbelief, but was strong
in faith, giving glory to God, and being fully persuaded, that he who had
promised, was able also to perform. Observe, he does not say that Abraham was
fully persuaded God was willing to perform what he had promised; Abraham's
faith acted most, to assure and settle him that God was able to perform: And
as soon as he gave glory to God by believing him all-sufficient, his faith had
no stop. So the holy Ghost expresses the other great trial of his faith (Heb.
11. 19.) when he was called to sacrifice his son, he was in a great strait;
but in what was his faith most tried? It was about the power of God; God had
promised him a son, and in that son a great blessing to himself and all
Nations; Now, the text says not, that he doubted not of the will of God, but
he accounted that God was able to raise him up from the dead: from whence also
he had received him in a figure: when he was settled in that, he never staid at
the offering up his son. And if we search our hearts to the bottom, we shall
find that our doubtings reflect most upon the power of God, and we shorten his
hand, though we commonly say, we are uncertain of his will.

I answer secondly, to those who say they doubt of the will of God, and not of
his power, that though we cannot directly and positively affirm, God will do a
thing because he can do it; yet there is a mighty argument to help faith out,
that God will do a thing when we are assured that he can: Where there wants
power, faith cannot work at all. When the woman in Samaria bespake the King (2
King. 6. 27.) Help, my Lord O King; the King answered her, If the Lord do not
help thee, whence shall I help thee? out of the barne-floor, or out of the
wine press. As if he had said, There Is nothing in the barn, nothing in the
wine press; and I cannot make corn or wine. What could this woman expect
further? Where power is at an end, faith is at an end too: But seeing the power
of God is never at an end, therefore our faith in coming to him needs not.

Thirdly, God has expressed himself in Scripture, as much, yea more, for his
willingness, then for his power to help; therefore we need not make our
uncertainty of his will the reason of our unbelief, when we say, we are assured
of his power: God has said, He is Almighty; etc. but there are not only words
importing that God is willing to help his people, but promises and oaths that
he will (Ps. 50. 15.) Call upon me, and I will deliver thee, Eze. 33. 11. As I
live, says the Lord God, I have no pleasure in the death of the wicked (that
place is meant primarily of a civil death, a death in trouble) but that the
wicked turn from his way and live. Yea, God has manifested a willingness to
help a people, which his power has not seconded; but he never manifested his
power, when his will did not concur: that most passionate exclamation, O
Jerusalem, Jerusalem, How often would I have gathered thee! etc. Implies a
general willingness in Christ to gather Jerusalem, yet Christ did not act his
divine power effectually for their gathering.

Lastly, I say to such, though we may not argue that God will do a thing
because he has power; yet we may argue from the power of God, that a thing
shall be done, if he has already expressed any willingness to do it, and made
any offers or assayes toward the doing of it. The Apostle would have the weak
brother received (Romans 14. 1.) upon this ground, He shall be holden up. (verse.
4.) He affirms confidently, that He shall be holden up; what does he ground
this confidence upon? upon the will of God? No, upon his power, For God is able
to make him stand: But how could the Apostle argue thus peremptorily from the
power of God that the thing should be done? He gave intimation before of the
willingness of God, for he had said in the close of the third verse, God has
received him; I see God has favored this man, though he be weak, therefore
because I see he is one, on whom God has bestowed some mercy already, I will
therefore argue confidently, that mercy shall be perfected; he shall stand,
because God is able to make him stand, for he has received him. We may argue
thus for the public; This Kingdom shall be holden up, for God is able to make
it stand: How so? God has received it: Do ye perceive no breakings forth of
the love of God to his people in this Kingdom? Has he done nothing which
intimates he has received this people? Surely, he has, therefore we may
argue; God is able to make us stand; therefore we shall be holden up, for God
has received us.

A third objection is thus raised: You will have us believe that we shall be
established, but I pray show us a word for our faith: Can you give us any
promise? Isaiah here brought a promise immediately from Heaven, he told the
people from the mouth of God, that they should be established; can you do so
too? Faith is a wise grace; Faith loves not to build upon the sand, much less
to build castles in the air; Faith must have a sure foundation, and nothing
will serve faiths turn, but the word of God; It will not build upon the bare
word of all the Preachers in the world; As the great Mathematician said; Show
me a place where I shall set mine engine, and I will shake all the earth; so
says faith, Give me but a sure word whereupon I may fix my foot, I will carry
any thing; but where is that word to be found? what is the text, chapter and
verse, that England shall be established? or have you any extraordinary
revelation, that it shall?

It Is granted, We have no such revelations as Isaiah brought to Ahaz and his
people; but we have that which serves faiths turn sufficiently; and so much as
amounts to a particular promise. I may say, There is as much ground in
Scripture for faith to build on, for the present temporal salvation of this
distressed Kingdom, as any man at first has, or had in Scripture to believe
his eternal salvation. I clear it thus; Suppose we coming to a man lying in
the state of nature, and under trouble of conscience for his sin, should
offer him Christ, and pardon, and he should say, Show a promise which belongs
to me: What promise could we tender him? could we bring one, with his name
literally in it? does any promise speak explicitly, Thomas, or John, do thou
believe, and thou shall be saved? There is no such word for the salvation of
any man. There are promises of three sorts in Scripture. First, Promises of
free grace, that God will justify the ungodly, and pardon sin, for his own
Names sake. Secondly, Promises of grace, that God will give faith, repentance,
love, and a new heart, etc. Thirdly, Promises unto grace, that if we believe
and repent, we shall be saved. Promises of these three sorts, are all we have
to build our faith upon for eternal salvation; and these we, or any other
Nation that is under the same condition, has to build assurance upon for
temporal salvation. There are promises of free grace to Nations, that God will
deliver and save them for his own Names sake: such a promise we have, though
the Name of England be not expressed in it. Again, there are promises of grace
to Nations, that God will pour out a spirit of repentance and humiliation upon
them, and cause them to return. Lastly, we have promises unto grace, that if a
people call upon God, repent and turn from their evil ways, they shall be
delivered, If my people which are called by my Name, do humble themselves, and
seek my face, and pray, and turn unto me, I will hear in Heaven and deliver,
etc. 2 Chro. 7. 14. These promises were made not only to the people of Israel,
but to all people who are the Israel of God. Say not then, this stops your
faith, ye cannot believe establishment, because ye want a promise of
establishment; these promises are ours, as well as this was Jerusalems.

These objections and stumbling blocks being thus (I hope) answered and removed
out of the way of faith: let your faith gird up her loins, and rejoice like a
giant to run her race.

Act faith for the Kingdom, as you would for your own souls. Is it not a duty,
to believe when you pray and seek God about temporals (in their degree and
kind) as well as when about spirituals and eternals in theirs? Has not God
given his people sometimes as clear evidences, as strong assurances that their
prayers have been heard about temporals, as about eternals? What if we should
not be under the influences of those promises which are made unto grace, to a
repenting, reforming people: yet faith has footing enough in those which are
made of grace, to give give repentance and reformation to a people, and in
those of free grace, that God will save for his Name sake, though a people are
generally impenitent and unreformed. A probability of prevailing, is a
sufficient ground both for praying and believing. The Prophet Joel (chap. 2.
14) persuades that afflicted people to fast and pray (in that he persuaded them
to believe) upon this offer only, Who knows if he will return and repent?
Nineve is carried up to believe by the same argument (Jon. 3. 9.) Who can tell,
if God will return? A peradventure from God, is better then an absolute promise
from any creature. So long as God has not said, he will not, though he has
not said he will, let us venture; God has not yet forbidden prayer, but
rather bespoken it in the hearts of his people: God has not yet declared by
any work of providence against England, as he did against Judah by his word
(Jer. 15. 1, 2.) Though Moses, and Samuel stood before me, yet my mind could
not be toward this people; cast them out of my sight, and let them go forth,
such as for death to death, etc. No, he has rather declared his willingness,
if not his resolvednesse to deliver, to save, to settle, to establish us: His
heart seems to work toward us, let our faith work toward him; yea, let our
faith have a perfect work, and then (I doubt not) but God will perfect all our
works, If we believe, surely we shall be established.

Lastly, If a shaking Kingdom be established by believing, then, how precious
are believers! Are they not the bases and pillars of a state? Job puts the
question concerning wisdom (chap. 28. 12.) Where shall wisdom be found? and
where is the place of understanding? The depth says, It is not in me, and the
sea says, It is not with me, ver. 14. Should I put such a quaerie about the
point in hand, Where shall the stability of the Nation be found? and what is
the place of its strength? Your sea would say, It is not in me, and your ships
would say, It is not in us; your Garrisons in fortified Cities, and your Armies
in the open field, your correspondencies abroad, and your counsels at home,
would, or must all bring in their disclaimers, and say, Strength is not in us,
in us establishment is not to be found. Where is it then? the text answers,
Faith is our strength, establishing is by believing: Believers are establishers.

And if they be so useful, let them be as acceptable: It is but equal, that
they who do the public so much good, should receive good from the public: I
am sure it is not safe to let them be discouraged, by whom our safety is
established, much less is it safe to let them fall, by whom (in their
capacity) Kingdoms stand, or to cast them down, who (by the rule of Divine
politics) are state-upholders* Stephen is described (Act. 6. 8.) A man full of
faith and of power (where says is, power is not far off) yet this man was
stoned (chap. 7. 59.) How sad a spectacle was it to see a man stoned to death,
whose life was (like a foundation or cornerstone) establishment to the whole
building.

Ob. But many pretend faith, who have no conscience.

Ans. I am no advocate for such, for their faith is vain, and they are yet in
their sins. And yet (I conceive) it is better for a supposed faiths sake to
spare some, who (in the issue) will be found to have no conscience, then for
conscience sake to afflict any, who (in the issue) shall be found to have real
faith. It is our Lords warning to all, and it is a dreadful one (Mat. 18. 6.)
Who so shall offend one of these little ones, that believe in me, it were
better for him, that a mil-stone were hanged about his neck, and that he were
drowned in the depth of the sea. A little one believing, or one believing
though but a little (I mean little, in regard of the degree, not of the object)
(I say, such a little one believing) is a great one in the eye of Christ; an
offense given to such a scarce discernable believer, may bring very discernable
wrath upon his offenders.

And if Christ take it thus ill, when a little one believing in him is
offended, will he not take it worse, when a great one, an Abraham, a Stephen, a
Paul in believing is offended? Where there is greatest faith, there is greatest
worth, and tenderest endearments to Jesus Christ. When we see faith budding out
and flourishing in noble and generous fruits of holiness, when faith has so
purified the heart, that it keeps hand and life pure, and acts visibly; surely
a mil-stone is not heavy enough, he shall have a mountain of mil-stones strung
together, for his neck, who knowingly and willingly offends such a one.

Ob. But whatsoever their faith is, they differ in opinion, and will not meet
us in the same practice.

Ans. Holy love, must and will bear much, where it sees holy faith. Charity
(says the Apostle, 1 Cor. 13. 7.) believes all things; I am sure it believes
this, That they who indeed believe in God, cannot continue to be hurtful to
any society of men. And though I nothing doubt, but that a good man may do very
ill, and may very justly suffer for it too; yet of how narrow a use are those
excellent graces of love, of meeknes, of humility, of patience, of
self-denial, if they are not (among other uses) to be laid out and bestowed in
a brotherly, hearty, gracious, amicable compliance with, bearing of, and
condescension unto those, who having obtained like precious faith with us, do
yet differ in some things which concern order, they maintaining order amongst
themselves, and peace with others?

I hope there is a good stock of charity yet among us, none of which shall be
lavisht out in symbolizing with the ignorant and profane, or admitting them to
a participation in special gospel-priviledges; nor will it all (I am
persuaded) be laid out (though that is like to be costly to charity) in
admitting those of competent knowledge, and unblameable carriage in their
lives, who yet evidence little (if any thing) of the life of faith: But (when
the former charge is defrayed) charity will have a fair remainder in bank for
those (to whom it is very due) who are unquestionably eminent and active in
faith, though in some things they be found to differ in judgment, or in
practices thereon depending.

As to bear all differences would make charity blind, so not to bear some
would make her more then lame. I know (Honorable Senators) your wisdom will
easily find and discern the limit-stone, between liberty, and libertinisme,
between the humors of men, and their consciences.

How desirable is it, that all the Churches should have, as one mind, so one
way, that they should all mind and do the same thing? How pleasant, how
blessed a sight were it, to behold not only unity of spirit, but uniformity of
practice in all who call on the Name of the Lord Jesus Christ, both their Lord
and ours? But how woeful a sight will it be, (if ever it should be seen) that
with whom we agree in every doctrine of faith, in the substance of worship and
government, and in many forms; that from them we must irreconcileably break,
till we can be uniforme? What a woeful dearth of Gospel-love will be found
amongst us, i^ after all our former sufferings together, our praying and
fasting together, we should upon these terms fall a vexing one another? If
after we have poured forth our cries, our groans, our sighs, our tears
together, in private chambers, and solemn assemblies before the Lord; if after
we have poured out our blood together in the high places of the field before
the enemy; if (I say) after all this, we shall on these terms, (I say not,
cruelly pour out the blood of one another, but so much as) unkindly move a
cry, a groan, a sigh, or draw a tear from one another, what a woeful dearth of
Gospel-love will be found amongst us? Would it not also argue that there is
some accursed thing, some provocation amongst us, if, after the Lord has given
us such clear light to pull down the pillars of Babylon, he should yet give us
up to such thick darkness, that with our own hands we should (upon such
dissents) pull down any, who are pillars in Sion?

FINIS.

