A SERMON Preached before the Worshipful MAYOR of Bridgewater, And several
other Members of that Ancient CORPORATION, in the County of SOMERSET. At a
Lecture Designed for Reformation of Manners. By John Cumming M. A. Minister of
the Gospel in Shepton-Mallet, in the same County.

Because thine Heart was tender, and thou did humble thy self before God; I
have even heard thee also, says the Lord. 2 Chronicles. 34.27. Should thou help
the Ungodly, and love them that hate the Lord? Therefore is Wrath upon thee,
from before the Lord, 2 Chronicles. 19.2. Proponamus oportet finem summi boni, ad
queminitamur, ad quem omne factum nostrum dictumque respiciat, veluti
navigantibus ad aliquod Sidus dirigendus est cursus. Vita sine proposito vaga
est, Sen. Printed for Tho. Brown, Bookseller in Shepton-Mallet, 1699.

To the Right Worshipful, GEORGE BALCH, Esquire; MAYOR of Bridgewater.
Honored Sir,
YOU know, that a Life full of Virtue, constant and equal in the Profession and
Holy exercises of Religion, is what our blessed Lord has recommended to his
Disciples, as the way to eternal Happiness; and how unbecoming a Christian it
is to give loose reins to his own Corruptions, or take pleasure in those that
do so.

Hence it is, that no occasion has presented, since You were called to a
Public and Honorable Station, to do GOD and your Country Service, but you
have embraced with Zeal, and managed with Prudence.

As God has preserved his Covenant in your House, and recommended the Religion
you Profess, by the Pious Example of so worthy a Father, so neither the Vanity
of the World, nor the influence of a degenerate Age, has had any power on You,
to do any thing unworthy of your Self, of your Family, or of Religion.

This watchful Conduct no doubt, has fixed the eyes of the People on You, and
captivated their Hearts.

Go on Sir, in your Zeal for GOD, in your generous tenderness of the good of
Mankind; in your watchfulness over your Self, in your special Respect to such
as Fear God, and in your Holy disdain, and contempt of Sinners; And let this be
your Motto, Valiant for the Truth.

Nothing but your Zeal for God, and Ardent wishes for the Reformation of our
degenerate Age, could move You to Request the Publishing of the following
Discourse, (and I doubt not but it was Your leading the way that provoked
others to join with You in the same Request) which Request I have now yielded
to, after some struglings with my self to commit to the Public, what I fear
has not much more to Recommend it, but Your candid Interpretation, and the
charity of the Auditors, before whom it was delivered.

However Sir, the Friendship wherewith You are pleased to Honor me, with a
faint hope, that Providence may design Benefit to some by it, has ventured its
fortune in the world.

If it may in the least Answer the design for which it was intended, the
awakening any to a Zeal for God, his Truth, and that Reformed Religion we
Profess, I shall bless God that ever it was Preached or Published, how little
soever it does please the Curious, or what Censures soever I incur on its
account.

I leave it therefore, Sir, such as it is, to the providence of God, and under
Your Vmbrage. And that God may Honor, and set You more and more to do him
Service, and multiply his Blessings of all sorts upon Your Family, is the
Prayer of

SIR Your much Obliged and Faithful Servant, John Cumming.
Shepton-Mallet, June 19. 99.
Rev. II. 2. And how thou can not bear them which are evil.


IT is an undeniable Demonstration of the absolute Perfection of the Divine
Being, and among other things, of his Essential Holiness, That on the one hand,
he loves the righteous, and looks with Complacency upon the upright, Psa.
11.7.146.8. and on the other hand, he is of purer Eyes, than to behold
Iniquity; nay, he hates all the workers of Iniquity, Hab. 1.13. Psa. 5.5.

God stands in need of nothing out of himself, (being Perfection it self) to
make him happy, or to add to his Joy and Pleasure; yet he is pleased to delight
himself with the derided and imperfect Holiness of his Creatures. He is pleased
with the rude Draughts of his own Image, and takes Complacency to magnify
himself, his Justice, Holiness and Mercy, in the way of Righteousness.

But he cannot deny himself, whatever Sinners do; nor is he a God, whatever
sinners think, that has pleasure in wickedness. No, he is Holy and Just; Evil
dwells not with him, neither shall the foolish stand in his sight. His
essential Righteousness is such, that as he loves Righteousness and the
Righteous, so he hates Wickedness, and the wicked as such.

All this is undeniable from the due Consideration of the divine Perfections,
from the Revelation of God's Will contained in the Scriptures, from his
Approbation and Commendation of the Righteous, and his Displeasure, and
declared Abhorrence of the ungodly; and finally, from the great rewards laid up
in store for the one, and the heavy Judgments threatened to, and infallibly
inflicted on the other.

From all we may see, how tender God is of, and zealous for his own glory. And
that it is in his will and pleasure, That rational Beings, especially such as
espouse Religion and Christianity, should herein resemble and imitate him, you
may learn, (amidst other things) from the words of the Text; the Commendation
of the Angel of the Church at Ephesus, I know thy Works, and thy Labor, and
thy Patience; and how thou can not bear them which are evil.

There are many things commended in this Angel and Church; but that which I
shall confine my self to at present, is, that part of the laudable Character,
which respects a Zeal against Sinners as such, And how thou can not bear them
which are evil.

In speaking to which Words, I shall meddle no further with the Context, than I
judge absolutely necessary, to show the Connection and Dependence. Let me only
put you in mind, that valuable Interpreters look upon these seven Churches of
Asia, (to which you find Epistles directed in this and the following Chapter)
as typical of the state of the Church, from the Infancy of Christianity to the
end of the World. And if so, then each Church, or the Church in its several
Periods, may learn from these Epistles, what is of the greatest Concern, with
respect to Faith and Manners; more especially, what with relation to Men's
Actions is praiseworthy and rewardable, and what reproveable and liable to a
Divine Censure.

This being premised, let us hasten to the words which are a part of the
Commendation of the Angel, and Church of Ephesus. I shall not enter upon the
dispute, whether the Term Angel is to be taken for any particular, superior
Minister, in this and the other Churches; or collectively, for all the
Ministers in them. It shall suffice at present, to acquaint you, that the word
(...), signifies no more than a Messenger; and this is common to all Ministers
to be God's Messengers.

Now the Character of this Messenger or Messengers, and probably of that
Church, whose Angel or Angels he or they were, is as follows, I know thy
Works, and thy Labor, and thy Patience, And how thou can not bear them which
are evil, and so forth. Though it is one Branch of this Character, I design to
insist upon; yet, because of the coherence, I must briefly consider the Verse
from the Beginning, I know thy works, etc.

Here you have, 1st. The Person speaking: I, He that holds the seven Stars in
his right hand, who walks in the midst of the seven golden Candlesticks; as
in the preceding Verse. This was Jesus Christ the (...) find by consulting the
first Chapter throughout. The Person is expressed in your Translation, but in
the original couched or employed in the verb (...). 2dly. What is affirmed of
him, I know thy Works, and thy Labor, etc. I know. Now this Knowledge may have
different Acceptations, as it respects Works in general, or such as are good or
bad in particular.

I. As it respects Works in general, it signifies Christ's Omnisciency: And so
the meaning of the Phrase, I know thy Works, (which we have in the Front of
every one of the seven Epistles) I say, the meaning will be, That Jesus Christ
had a full Knowledge or Comprehension of all the Works of this Angel or Church,
whether good or evil; and so of all the others: Nothing was hid from him. And
this was a manifest Proof, 1st. Of his Divinity, and consequently that his
Knowledge was omniscience, and his Testimony beyond all exception. 2dly. That
the greatest Fear and Reverence were due to him, as the Searcher of Hearts, and
Witness of all Actions: But then,

II. As the Knowledge of Christ respects particular good Works, it signifies
not only Omniscience and a full Comprehension, but an Approbation and
Commendation; and so the Word is to be taken in this Verse. Christ not only
knew, but he approved and commended at large the Works of the Angel and Church
of Ephesus. Therefore it follows, that they were good and praiseworthy; for
the Holy and Just one, though (...) things, approves or commends nothing but
what is approveable and commendable.

III. As the Knowledge of Christ respects particular evil works, it signifies
Omniscience together with Aversation: As he knows, delights in, approves and
encourages good works; so he knows, hates and witnesses against those works
that are evil. As all things are naked before him, so of all Men in general,
and of the good and bad in particular; he can say, I know thy Works. And as the
Works are good or bad, so he approves or disliketh them, so he commends or
reproves; I may say, so he rewards or punishes the Workers.

3. What is approved and commended in this Angel and Church; and indeed,
approveable and commendable in any other, either Church, Angel or Christian,
according to his respective capacity. Good works in general, and labor,
patience, and a zeal and warmth for God, and against Sinners as such, in
particular. I know thy Works, and thy Labor, and thy Patience; and how thou
can not bear them which are evil. That by Works here, we are to understand
good Works, appears by the following particular induction; thy Labor, thy
Patience; and how thou can not bear them which are evil, and so forth. One
commendable branch whereof was, 1. Labor, that is, an active endeavor and
diligence to propagate the Gospel. 2. Another was Patience in suffering, or in
bearing the Cross for the Gospel. Some think, There is here a Hendiadys; and
that thy Labor, and thy Patience, signifies only thy Patience in Labor:
(...). But this makes no difference, both Senses level at the same Scope. The
3d. part of the commendable Character, and what we are now to speak to,
follows: And how thou can not bear them which are evil. I know, that is, I
approve, how thou can not bear them which are evil. So the Context will
warrant us to understand it. I know how thou can not -- Now it may be said of
one that he cannot do, not only that which exceeds his natural Power, but
what he cannot do without Reluctance, Abhorrence, or with any Delight or
Pleasure. So here, Thou can bear, that is, Thou can not patiently bear: Or,
it is a great grief and trouble to thee to bear: It is against thy Mind and
Heart, or such a thing as thou can with patience endure. Them which are evil,
that is, scandalous Sinners; Persons erroneous in Judgment, or lewd and wicked
in Life and Coversation. So the stream of Interpreters run, Grot. Cluv. Med.
Par. Now, what is approved and commended; and is indeed, approveable and
commenble in all Christian Churches, Kingdoms, Commonwealths, and particular
Christians in their several Spheres, is a Zeal and Warmth for God and Religion,
and against Sin and Sinners as such. I know, how thou can not bear them which
are evil.

From the words thus considered and opened, I shall lay down this position, as
a foundation to build upon.

Doct. It is not only a laudable Character, but the indispensable Duty of all
Christians, especially of such as are entrusted with Government in a Christian
Church, Kingdom or Commonwealth, to discover a Zeal for God, and a Holy
Indignation against Sinners as such. I know, how thou can not bear them which
are evil.

To illustrate and confirm this Position, (so self evident and agreeable to
Scripture in all its parts, and the Character and Practice of the greatest
Saints and Reformers) I shall take the following particulars under
consideration; or show,

1. What is employed in that Zeal for God, and Holy Indignation against Sinners
as such, set forth in the Text by not being able to bear them which are evil.
2. That such a Zeal is not only commendable, but the Duty of all Christians;
especially of Christian Rulers, whether Civil or Ecclesiastical. 3. What means
are to be used in order to the Conscientious performance of this Duty; or the
discovery of a Zeal for God, and a Holy Indignation against Sinners as such.

These particulars contain the Substance of the Doctrine; and will, if duly
handled, give you the Scope and drift of the Text. I shall therefore hasten to
their Consideration, and that in order to a practical Application of the whole:
Thou can not bear --

1. Then consider we what is employed in that Zeal for God, and Holy Indignation
against Sinners as such, set forth here by not being able to bear them which
are evil; or such as are erroneous in Judgment, or profane and wicked in their
Lives. Thou can not, etc. This implys, 1. A great concern for the Glory of
God, and the Advancement of his Kingdom in the World: Or which is the same, a
valiant appearance for the Truth, and the Honor and Glory of God. The Glory of
God is sullied and underminded, and his Kingdom overthrown by the profaneness
and licentiousness of Sinners, as far as in them lies. Such Sinners in their
works deny his Being, and reject his Government. In their Works they deny him.
Tit. 1.16. They say in their Hearts, There is no God. Psalm. 14.1. They deny him
Honor and Obedience, though he is their rightful Lord. They will not have him to
Reign over them; nay, they War against Him. Now, who has any concern for Gods
Glory, or Kingdom, but must discover his Zeal, and a Holy Indignation against
such Sinners? What should be so dear to a Christian, as the Glory of God, and
the honor and advancement of his Kingdom? Do not I hate them, O Lord, that
hate thee? And am not I grieved with them that rise up against thee? Ps.
139.21. The Glory of God is the end of our being. It deserves the slower and
strength of our Affections: We are taught to give it the preference in our
Devotions: And we are to seek it in the first place in all our Actions. It
naturally follows then, That we should be greatly concerned for it; and
consequently filled with the greatest Indignation against the invaders thereof.
God's Enemies as such ought to be ours also: And nothing more discovers our
Love to God, than that we cannot bear them which are evil; that is, them that
are ungodly and enemies to him.

2. A real hatred and abhorrence of Sin. The Wicked, Ungodly and Profane are
hateful, not as Men, but as Sinners and Rebels against their Maker. And what
makes them hateful unto God, should make them unsufferable to all that bear
his Image. He that really hates the Sin, will never indulge and cherish the
Sinner. I will not know a wicked Person, says the Holy David, Psalm. 101.4. He
that works deceit, shall not dwell in my House. I will early destroy all the
Wicked of the Land, that I may cut off all wicked doers from the City of the
Lord, ver. 7. and 8. ibid. Thus a gracious Soul in his respective capacity,
whether a private Person, Magistrate or Minister, cannot bear them which are
evil. According to his abhorrence of Sin, his Indignation manifests it self
against the Sinner; either by a seasonable reproof, a withdrawing from his
Society, a refusal to comply with him, some testimony of dislike, or bringing
the Offender to Justice, by shame or punishment. Thus a Holy Indignation
against Sinners as such, discovers the cursed nature of Sin, and how hateful it
is to a gracious Soul. And e contra, a connivance at the Sinner, argues some
respect unto the Sin. It was Jehosaphat's foul blot and blackest spot, that he
loved them that hated the Lord. 2 Chro. 19.2. should thou help the ungodly,
and love them that hate the Lord? Therfeore is wrath upon thee from before the
Lord.

3. All lawful endeavors to reform, or in case of obstinacy to restrain
Sinners in their courses: Who would not desire and endeavor the Reformation of
Sinners, if possible? Under the old and severest dispensation, the very Cities
to be destroyed, had first peace proclaimed to them. If there is the least hope
of Reformation, by ^^hortation, Reproof or otherwise; how happily are such
endeavors used? He that turns a Sinner from the evil of his way, saves a
Soul from Hell. And to this end we should neither spare our prayers, nor our
most earnest endeavors, every one in his place and Station. But if this will
not do, as we regard God's Honor, our own Duty, the good of Sinners, or the
happiness of Mankind, we must labor to restrain and suppress growing
wickedness, every one according to his place and station: For no plague so
spreading and dangerous as Sin: No evil so threatening to the private and
public; to Families, Churches and Kingdoms. It is a cursed and bitter root,
the reproach of any People, an Evil attended with dreadful consequences and
effects. It therefore highly concerns every one to endeavor to restrain the
course and spreading thereof. This should be the great care and work of Masters
in their Families, of Ministers in the Churches, of Magistrates in the
Commonwealth, and of all Persons in their several places. And how much good
might be done, if all did join hand in hand in this Work? Then should we glory
not in the empty Name of the Reformed, but in a happy Reformation. The plague
would stop, and Sinners would appear as Thieves and Robbers, were they on all
hands pursued with the hue and cry. When all in their several places set up
their standard against Wickedness and profaneness, when Ministers use aright
the Keys of Doctrine and Discipline, and live down Sin; when Christians testify
against, and arraign it on all occasions; and Magistrates are a terror to evil
works; and as Ministers of God and Divinely appointed Revengers execute Wrath
upon incorrigible Sinners and evil Doers: Then there may be some hope of a
Reformation; then may it be said of all, That they are Zealous for God, Valiant
for the Truth, and Active to restrain and stop the torrent of growing
Wickedness: Or as it is in the Text, that they cannot bear them which are evil.

Who but such as delight in devastations can stand unconcerned to see a
devouring Fire, spread and consume all before it? In such a case, what hands
are at work? What endeavors used? All bring their Buckets and offer their
Service. And is not the danger as great, or greater, when Sin breaks in upon a
Land as a Flood? When it runs as Lightning, and kills like the Plague? When it
spreads as a Gangrene, and eats like a Cancer? In a word, when Iniquity
abounds, and the number of Sinners is daily increased, Who should not then
stand in the Gap, and appear for God? Who should not endeavor to bind up the
hands of Self-murtherers, and to restrain the course of such Sinners, as are
not only thorns and briers in the sides of the Church, but a plague unto the
World? Surely when Sinners turn obstinate and resolute against Reformation,
it is high time for such as fear God to appear for him, and manifest a Zeal for
his Glory. And should they not, considering how good their Cause is, be as
active for God, as others are or can be for the Devil? Methinks all Christians
should be ambitious of the Character of the Text, Thou can not bear them
which are evil.

Thus a true zeal for God, discovers not only a Concern for his Glory, and a
Hatred of Sin, but stirs up to all lawful and possible Endeavors to reform or
restrain Sinners in their wicked Courses. So much at least is emplyed in not
being able to bear them which are evil.

II. Consider we, That such a zeal is not only commendable, but the Duty of all
Christians; especially of Christian Rulers, whether Civil or Ecclesiastical.
All Christians in general, in their several places, are bound by their
allegiance, to declare their Love and Loyalty to God, and their hatred of his
Enemies, It is good to be zealously affected always in a good thing, Gal. 4.18.
And what better thing than the pursuing of Gods Glory in the reformation of
Sinners: Moreover, this zeal for God, is one of the Effects and Discoveries of
true Repentance, or a godly Sorrow, 2 Cor. 7.11. Yea, what zeal? It is a Frame
most contrary to a lukewarm and Laodicean Spirit, than which nothing is more
hateful unto God: And therefore, Sinners of such a temper, are called to this,
instead of all other Duties; and that, because indeed a pious and regular Zeal
leads to all other holy Performances. Rev. 3.19, Be zealous therefore.

This was that which made Phinehas famous to all Generations, and gained him
the Covenant of an everlasting Priesthood: He was zealous for his God, and
against these bold Sinners Zimri and Cosbi, Numb. 25. verse 8, 15. This seems
to have been Elijah's Boast, or matter of glorying; he pleads it twice before
God in a Breath; I have been very jealous, (surely it was his Zeal that made
him so) for the Lord God of Hosts; for the Children of Israel have forsaken thy
Covenant, 1 Kings 19. ver. 10, 14. This was that which gained the highest
Character from the Spirit of God to David, Asa, Jehosaphat, Hezekiah and
Josiah, above all other Kings; they zealously advanced a Reformation. This is
the great Glory of the promoters of Reformation in any and all Ages; and an
Argument of the greatest sincerity and faithfulness in Gods Service. It is what
the Religious Nehemiah (and the same may be said of other Reformers) took much
comfort in, in his Reflections upon, and Examination of his former Life.
Remember me, O God, (says he) when he had been reforming and cleansing the
People, and manifesting his zeal against the profanation of the Sabbath.
Nehem. 13.31. What shall I say? It was one of the great and crying sins of
Judah; and what forced such floods of tears from the fervent Prophet Jeremiah,
That the people bent their tongues for lies, but were not valiant for the truth
upon the Earth, Jer. 9.3. Surely then to be zealous for God, is a duty
incumbent upon all, high and low, that espouse the interest of God and Religion.

But that Christian Rulers, whether Civil or Ecclesiastical, should more
especially discover a zeal for God, and the reformation of Sinners; that they
should in their respective places, endeavor to cast off all evil doers from
the City of the Lord; will further appear by considering, that,

I. Their function and places call them to appear in a more eminent manner for
God. Such are God's mouth unto, and his representatives among the people: God
has raised them unto honor above others, and invested them with Power and
Authority, in order to instruct, rule, reform and punish Sinners. It is their
work, and the very design of their office, to stop the current of Profaneness,
to promote Righteousness, to discountenance Sin, and maintain the power of
Godliness.

Therefore they are to lay themselves out for God. The Minister to reprove,
rebuke, exhort with all Authority: And the Magistrate to maintain justice and
good order, and to distribute rewards and punishments: For he is the Minister
of God, a Revenger to execute Wrath upon him that does evil. Hence it is, he is
said not to bear the Sword in vain, Romans 13.4. Let such Rulers consider the
great end of Providence, in calling them to Authority over and above others;
and they need no more to discover or prompt them to their duty to be zealous
for that God, by whom they rule, and to whom they must be accountable, for the
faithful discharge of their places: For to bear patiently them which are evil,
to encourage or connive at Sinners; what is it, but to contradict the end and
great design of their Office?

II. By not opposing and appearing zealously against spreading wickedness, they
involve themselves in the guilt of the abominations and sins committed in the
places where they Live and bear Rule. Malum qui non prohibet cum potest, Jubet;
says the Moralist; he that suffers Sin to be committed, when it is in his
power to hinder it, is equally guilty with the acter: And the guilt is so much
the greater as any is in authority or power to do God Service. A Ministers
People, is in a manner his Family; and a People within a Magistrates
Juridiction, is his also. If it is in their power therefore to command good
order, and reform the one or the other, and they do it not; what is this but to
encourage sinners in their wickedness? Is it not to become public Patrons of
Sin, and consequently to contract public Guilt? Elie's great Sin was, that
when his Sons made themselves vile, he restrained them not. Therefore says the
Lord, I will Judge his House for ever, 1. Sam. 3.13 how far this concerns all
in Authority, who also are Fathers in their several places, let them consider.
I am sure, he paid dear for his negligence, and it is recorded for admonition
to others.

III. Much may be done to restrain growing Impiety, and prevent impending
Judgments, when Men in authority perform the duty of their places. Sinners are
greatly discouraged when they see others brought to shame or punishment, and
that there is no transgressing with Impunity. The zeal of two such Witnesses,
as a Religious Magistracy and Ministry, does not only torment, but terrify the
boldest Sons of Belial. And for encouragement, Acts of Justice are a Sacrifice
acceptable unto God, and sometimes as an atonement for the most crying Sins; as
in the case of Phinehas. But supposing a People incorrigible and equally
regardless of the Authority of religious Magistrates and Ministers, (which is
the saddest case, and the worst that can be supposed) yet what comfort will it
prove unto such Rulers that they have done their duty? It is not of them that
Sin grows, or Sinners multiply? They stood in the Gap, and their great
Affliction was, that the Sons of Belial were too hard for them. But however, as
faithful Witnesses, and in some sense Martyrs, they shall have their Souls for
a prey. God is not unfaithful to forget their labor and zeal for his Glory.

IV. A hatred of Sinners, and a restraint of Profaneness makes Rulers a
public blessing unto any People. By righteousness a Nation is exalted, and Sin
is not only a reproach, but a sore and threatening evil. Then it is, The wicked
walk on every side, when vile Men are exalted Psalm. 12.8. Then sinners
multiply, and sin appears bare faced: And the consequence is, such Rulers are a
visible Judgment, and a Curse upon the People: They are given in wrath and not
in mercy. On the contrary, religious Rulers are a public Blessing, as pillars
on which the happiness of a People stands firm and unshaken. The Earth and all
the Inhabitants thereof are dissolved; I bear up the Pillars thereof, (says
the royal Psalmist) Psalm. 75.3. Were it not for Government, all things would
soon come to ruin and dissolution: Not only the throne, but the happiness of
Mankind is established by Righteousness. Blessed art thou, O Lord, When thy
King is the Son of Nobles, and thy Princes eat in due Season, Eccles. 10.17.
That is, when the Rulers are Religious, then these Mountains bring peace,
quietness, happiness, and many blessings unto the People. Piety and
Righteousness are always attended with many other blessings. Happy is that Land
where Ministers are burning and shining Lights, and the Magistrates Peace and
Righteousness! It were an easy matter to prosecute this Argument. God
commands Rulers to strengthen the hands of the Righteous, and be a terror to
all workers of Iniquity. He encourages them in their duty, and engages
himself for their safety and reward: He places them in the most honorable
post to carry on the work of Reformation, and advance his Kingdom: He
intrusteth them with the execution of his Laws, and the cure of Souls: He
superviseth how they use their Authority for him: He commends their zeal, and
frequently and visibly punishes their negligence, and so forth. All these
heads might be largely spoken to, but I shall stop: From what has been said, I
humbly suppose, it is the plain and undeniable duty of all Rulers, Civil and
Ecclesiastical, to discover a Zeal for God, and the Reformation of Sinners. But
lest the time should fail, I proceed to show.

III. What means are to be used in order to the conscientious Performance of
this Duty of discovering a Zeal for God, and a Holy Indignation against Sinners
as such, Thou can not bear, etc. I acknowledge, that notwithstanding all
means that can be used by men, and even by religious Magistrates and Ministers,
it will be found difficult to carry on a Reformation; especially when sinful
Habits are rooted, and Sinners hardened in a great measure through a custom of
sinning, a general Example, worldly Advantages, the Encouragement of the times,
or the Prejudice of a profane Education. In such Circumstances, Reformers must
expect to meet with great Opposition, and many Discouragements. As they cannot
bear them which are evil, so Sinners can as little bear a Restraint, and coming
under the Power of Religion: They love their Lusts better than their Souls, and
nothing enrages them more than, to be forced to cut off their right Hands, and
pluck out their right Eyes. And (alas!) such is the Corruption of depraved
Nature, that not a few, whose Examples have a great Influence, set up as
Champions for, and Patrons of Sin and Profaneness. All this must be owned, and
is matter of Lamentation. But yet notwithstanding, such as fear God, must not
be discouraged, or neglect their Duty, Via Virtutis ardua est, sed jucunda. The
way of virtue is strait and uneasy, but yet the pleasure of the Duty surmounts
all Difficulties. And if it is the Duty of all in their places, and especially
of Rulers, Civil and Ecclesiastical, to discover a zeal for God, and a Holy
Indignation against Sinners as such, (as you have heard it is) Then is it their
Duty also to use all lawful means, appointed for the Reformation of Sinners.

And the first that I would recommend to all in general, is a personal
Reformation. By the Blessing of God, this will prove a powerful and convincing
Argument. I am sure, it is most improbable, that they should prove Instrumental
to reform others, that take a sinful Latitude themselves. Such do but harden
Sinners in their wickedness, even, when they plead most zealously for a
Reformation. They that would reform others must lead the Way. They must begin
first at home, and discover their Sincerity, Zeal and Authority, in the
Reformation of themselves and their Families, or such as have any Dependence
upon them: Then may they appear boldly for God abroad, and none to make them
ashamed; otherwise they must expect to hear, Medice cura teipsum.

More especially the religious, Example of Christian Rulers, Magistrates and
Ministers, will be found to have great Influence, Regis ad exemplar totus
componitur Orbis. The same holds true of suborninate Rulers in their places.
The Experience of all Ages affords us sufficient Proof hereof. We read not of
any Holy Magistrate or Minister, but has done something, nay, much good in his
place; or of any bad ones, but have done much hurt. Examples are of greater
Force than Precepts. They have a strong Influence and a secret power over the
Consciences and Minds of Men. Where they are good, they make Sinners their own
Accusers and Judges. He that is impartial, watchful and severe over himself,
has great authority when he reproves sin in others. And if they are not
hardened, he is most likely to prevail with them.

But to think, that God will honor any one to reform others, that hates to be
reformed himself, is next to the expecting a Miracle in the most unlikely way.
What recommended the Christian Religion in all ages, was next unto the Grace of
God, that the Propagators thereof led the most innocent and holy Lives
themselves, Non magna loquimur, sed vivimus. Our good Examples will call loudly
to Sinners, if we say little or nothing. And it is a most certain Discovery of
a zeal for God, and a holy Indignation against sin, when we dare not allow it
in our selves.

A 2d. mean is, To manifest our Hatred of Sin, and our religious Displeasure
with Sinners, on all occasions. They have but little zeal for God, or love to
Him, that smile upon sin, or cherish Sinners in their Wickedness. It is fit the
world should know, (as well as God and our own Consciences) that we look upon
sin, as a sore and malignant Evil, an Affront to God, and a Rebellion against
his Law; and on Sinners, as enemies to the righteous Government of the World.
And if so, how can we but frown upon the one, and testify and declare against
the other? A froward Heart shall depart from me, I will not know a wicked
Person, Psalm. 101.4.

If Sin and Sinners have not our Hearts, it savours of Hypocrisy to favor them
with our Countenance. And it excuses not here, (how common and plausible
soever the Objection, or rather Pre^^^^^) That Sinners are above us in quality,
or such as may not regard our Dislike of their Ways; nay, that will sin the
more, to add to our Displeasure.

I say, this excuses not the neglect of our duty, for we are bound to testify,
(at least so far for God) that Sinners of what Rank soever may know, that we
dare not sin at their rate. And this may be done several ways, either by
silence, by a gentle reproof, by discovering some dissatisfaction, by bearing
our testimony, by removing from, or avoiding the Society of Sinners, and so
forth: And all this without venturing on the Cross, further than we are
commanded to do, and what I humbly suppose is the duty of all in general, that
would appear to have any zeal for God, or his Kingdom. But if the Laws of a
Land allow it, I think we ought to go yet further; even so far as to arraign
Sin, and bring incorrigible Sinners to shame or due Punishment by our
testimony, if no other private Methods are like to reclaim them. Our
Faithfulness to God and his Interest, calls for no less at our Hands, what
Inconveniences soever seem to attend the Performance of our Duty. It argues
too much, either of a mean or carnal spirit, to consult here with Flesh and
Blood, or to be swayed by Interest, Custom, or Example. We are to do our duty,
and trust our God. Whatsoever deserves our Hatred and Displeasure, therefore
ought not to have our Connivance, far less our Countenance and Encouragement.

A 3d. mean is, Earnest Prayer to God, and Humiliation for the sins of the
Place and Land where we live. They discover but little zeal for God's Glory and
Kingdom, or concern for the danger of impenitent Sinners, that live securely,
and restrain prayer in a time of great Provocation. What! a zeal for God, and
yet not lament and bewail his Dishonor? Any zeal for, or regard to an angry,
provoked God, and yet not pray unto him! Any Pity to, or concern for endangered
and self-destroying Sinners, and yet not lift up a Petition for them! How
inconsistent are these things? Methinks, if neither the Honor of God, (of all
others the most powerful Motive) or Pity unto Sinners, incite and awake us to
Prayer and Humiliation, in a time of great Provocation, our own Danger should
do it; which we may see, when we read, that they only escape, and are marked,
and sealed in the Day of God's Visitation, that sigh and cry for all the
Abominations that be done where they live, Ezekiel. 9.4.

It is possible, that all our Zeal and Endeavors cannot put a stop to the
strong current of Profaneness. But this calls us so much the more to
Humiliation and Prayer. And this we are called to, and can do. We can bewail
that which we cannot amend. We can humble and afflict our selves, and wrestle
with God by Prayer, when there is no hope to prevail with Sinners. And what can
we do less than mourn over the Violation of God's holy Law, and the Folly,
Madness, and Danger of Sinners, that hasten their own ruin, and the Judgment
of the Lard wherein they live? Surely, our Zeal, if we have any, will bring us
to our Knees; and if we cannot bear them which are evil; yet, as they are Men,
Charity calls us to lift up our Prayer to God for them. If not for their
Reformation, (supposing they are incorrigible) yet for the averting of God's
Wrath and Judgment, under which the righteous also may groan and suffer with
them.

Hitherto I have offered nothing, but what I think binds all Christians in
general, that would manifest any zeal for God. But since, not only all
Christians as such, are bound to discover a zeal for God, but Christian Rulers,
Civil and Ecclesiastical, in a more especial Manner; therefore I think I am
called, to touch also at the means to be used by them as such. And,

I. As to civil Rulers or Magistrates, Their Zeal for God, Order, and the
Advancement of Reformation, (the great End of their Authority and Power) should
methinks make them Lovers of those that are good, and a terror to the evil.
Such in their several Places, whether supreme or subordinate, are God's
Ministers, and in a Christian Commonwealth, entrusted with the Execution of
the Laws of God and the Land. The Law is equally a Protection, and Rule to them
in the way of their Duty, They are God's Ordinance for good, and to execute
Wrath upon him that does evil, Romans 13.1, 2, 3. If then they have any zeal for
God, any regard to Justice, any sense of their own Duty, or any Dislike of, or
Displeasure against those which are evil, They must look to it, that the Laws
be not broken or condemned. God's Laws are holy and unalterable, and civil
Constitutions grounded upon them, are necessary and binding, and of great
Force, because of their Correspondency, and Agreement with the former. Now what
good Magistrate can suffer both to be trampled underfoot? The highest Powers
(with the supreme Magistrate, where there is any) makes Laws in order to be
inviolably observed, and not broken at will, or set at naught. And subordinate
Rulers are appointed for, and generally entrusted with their Execution. If the
former be good Men themselves, the Laws they make are so in like manner. And if
the latter are such as do their Duty, then the Laws have all their Force. And
is not this the great End and Design of Magistracy?

Wicked Men fail not to show and manifest their zeal. If placed in Authority,
they carefully look to it, that such as the Statutes of Omri were, be kept,
that the Hands of Sinners be strengthened, and so forth. Woeful Experience
attests this. And should not Christian Rulers then, and such as would be
accounted good Men, and a Blessing to their Country, show their zeal in seeing
good Laws put in Execution, and encouraging such as fear God? It is their place
to weild the Sword of Justice, to strengthen the Hands of the righteous, to
discourage Sin by Authority, and to bring obstinate Offenders and Transgressors
to Punishment.

If they fail herein, they defeat the End of Government, they enervate the
Laws, and strengthen the Hands of Sinners. What shall I say? It is by their
Faithfulness and Zeal, that they become public Blessings, that they gain
respect with God, and good Men, that they credit and strengthen the Laws
wherewith they are entrusted; and in fine, are in any probability to promote
the Reformation of Sinners, or hinder the spreading of Impiety and Profaneness.

On the contrary, their Indifferency or Partiality makes them a public
Nuisance, Judgment and Curse. How then does it concern them, to discover a
zeal for God, and by their own Example, and the due Exercise of their Authority
to give force unto the Laws, the Execution of which they are entrusted with?
Thus they appear at once to be good Men, and good Rulers, and may by God's
Blessing do much to destroy the Miseries, and stop the current of Profaneness.

II. As to Ecclesiastical Rulers or Ministers; such are to discover their Zeal,
and answer the End of their Office, by the right use of the Sword of the
Spirit, which is the word of God. Their great Work is to use this Sword, so as
to reach the Consciences of Sinners.

Of all Men they should be (...), haters and discouragers of them which are
evil: Not that any outward coercive power belongs to them, or that any
pretended zeal can warrant them to move out of their own spiritual sphere. No,
their Weapons should not be Carnal, but Spiritual; And their Zeal for God and
Charity to Souls sufficiently discovers it self in the conscientious discharge
of their Ministerial Office. This the Apostle Paul sums up in a few words, 2 Timothy 4.2. Preach the Word, be instant in season, out of season, reprove,
rebuke, exhort with all long suffering and doctrine. And this one rule
observed, with a holy life, and the exercise of that discipline against
Offenders that the Scriptures Warrant, will be a sufficient and practical
proof, that they cannot bear them which are evil.

These Rulers are, its true, to be meek and gentle to all, but their meekness
is so to be tempered with zeal, that they appear not in the least to connive at
Sin, far less encourage it, and strengthen the hands of Sinners.

Then they are faithful Witnesses, and Champions for the Kingdom of God, when
they cannot bear them which are evil: That is, when they labor to convince and
convert Sinners; and by the Key of Discipline, deprive the Ungodly and Profane
of Christian Privileges. So shall their Lord and Master approve their Zeal,
and Reward their Labors and Fidelity. Thou can not bear them which are evil.

So much of the heads proposed for the clearing of the Doctrine; A few words
more of the promised Application, and I shall conclude. The liberty I have
taken to enlarge already, together with the short prescribed time allowed,
confine me to do the less here, and leave the more for you. Some things I must
hint at, and these I shall comprize, and shut up in an Address to three sorts
of Men; all bound to discover a Zeal for God, and the Reformation of Sinners. I
mean Civil Magistrates, Ecclesiastical Rulers, and all Christians as such in
their respective Places and Relations.

I. I make bold to address to Civil Magistrates; not presuming to dictate, or
teach them their duty, but as a Christian, a Minister, and one that breathes
after, and prays for the advancement of Reformation and Righteousness, to put
them in remembrance.

You Christian Rulers then, high and low, of what denomination soever, know,
That it will be your Glory, and what will add to the luster of your Crown, to
deserve the Approbation of the Text, that you cannot bear them which are evil.
I know, how that, etc.

I beseech you, let the Glory of God, the Necessity of Reformation, the Sense
of your own Duty, the threatening Clouds that hang over our Land, and the great
danger, and growing number of bold Sinners, stir up your Zeal, and awake you
unto Righteousness.

You see, That the Age is become so degenerate, and alas, under a profession of
Religion; and where Christianity is established by Law, that the very name of
Reformation, as well as the thing, is become suspected and hateful! We seem to
be ashamed and afraid of that which our Fathers gloried in. Atheism and
Profaneness break in upon us like a Flood: And it is to be feared, that all (a
heavy Curse, and Gods righteous Judgment upon us) flows in a great measure
hence, That so few call for, or execute Justice, and plead for Truth: Or that
Judgment is turned into Gall, (to speak in the Language of the Prophet, Am.
6.12. and the Fruit of Righteousness into Hemlock. Impiety and Profaneness
have been so long countenanced in this Land, that Sinners are not only
multiplied, but become impudent and resolute against a Reformation. So that in
the way of second Causes, nothing is like to restrain the general Corruption,
but either a sweeping Scourge with the Sword of Vengeance, or the zealous
Execution, and right Use of the Sword of Justice.

What can prevent the terrrors of the Lords Wrath, but that such as are called
Gods, and bear the Sword, execute Wrath upon him that does evil, if there is no
other way to reform him? How singular are our helps and advantages to advance a
Reformation? We have excellent Laws, grounded upon the law of God, sufficiently
plain and full against Profaneness.

And now the highest Powers call for the execution of the Laws. To this purpose
we have had (by Divine Providence) of late years, somany Laws and Proclamations
for the suppressing of Profaneness.

What remains then, but that all you who are entrusted with the execution of
the Laws, approve your selves to be Ministers of God; and that every Sin that
falls within your Cognizance, run upon the point of the Sword? Methinks, your
zeal for God should make you spend your most angry looks on the boldest, and
most daring Sinners, and bring such as fear not God, to tremble before you his
Vicegerents. Ah, shall the Sword of Justice rust in your hands, while Sinners
are hardened (...) ^^^^nity? Shall the best Laws prove a dead, or rather a
killing Letter, for want of being put in Execution? Shall Nurseries of
Profaneness grow up before the eyes of Christian Magistrates, and these also
called the Reformed? God forbid.

He that rules over Men, must be Just, ruling in the fear of God, 2 Samuel 23.3.
Awake then you Ministers of a jealous God, and make the Sinners of our Israel
ashamed, nay tremble before you. You have an opportunity put in your hands to
do God Service, singular Means and Encouragements. You have the Law on your
side: You have your Inferior Officers, and the Command of all the People to
attend your Motions.

Awake then, let not our Sabbaths be prophaneed any longer: Let not the Name of
God be blasphemed: Let not the Holy Laws of the Lord, and the good
Constitutions of our Land, be dareingly broken and trampled under Foot: Let not
our Taverns and Alehouses be more frequented and full than our Churches. Let
not roaring Debauchees, Atheists, corrupters of Youth, and profane Varlets,
boast of Impunity: Let not the Enemies of God and Godliness find Protection or
Encouragement under Christian Rulers. In a word, let not all that is Sacred, be
turned into Ridicule, to the Scandal and Wounding of Religion, the disgrace of
Government, the grief of all sincere and zealous Christians, the joy of Devils
and Sinners, the increase of Abominations, and the hastening of sore Judgments
upon our Land. Discite Justitiam moniti. Be Wise (...), O ye Kings, be
instructed, ye Judges of the Earth. Serve the Lord with Fear, and rejoice with
Trembling, Psalm. 2.10, 11. What shall I say? Let there be an accomplishment of
the happy Prophecy in our Days; I will make thy Officers Peace, and thy
Exactors Righteousness, Isa. 60.17.

II, A few words to Ecclesiastical Rulers: I mean all Ministers of the Gospel,
and Pastors of Christian Churches, let me as a remembrancer recommend to such,
That they be ambitious of the Character of the Angel of the C. of Ephesus, Thou
can not bear them which are evil. Surely, this is best done by Preaching and
Living sin down. None but Angels of Darkness do cherish Profaneness, or
encourage the Profane. Consider, Revd. and dear Brethren, it is not a blind
Zeal, or for Trifles, that will credit the Ministry, or glorify God. Piety,
Meekness, Moderation and Charity, not Strife, Contentions, Wars and Fightings,
become the Messengers of the Prince of Peace, the meek and loving Jesus, who
smartly reproved the precipitant Zeal of his Disciples, that in their Anger
would command fire from Heaven; saying, ye know not what spirit ye are of, Luke
9.54, 55. Woe to them that spend themselves for Circumstantials and useless
Ceremonies, and would fire Church and State for the Tithe of Mint, Anise and
Cummin, and yet in the mean time pass over the weightier matters of the Law,
Judgment, Mercy, Faith, and the love of God, Mat. 23.23. and Luke 11.42. While
Men contend for the shadow, the substance is lost.

Some (alas) see no need of Reformation; all their Cry is Schism, Schism. And
all because there is not a constant Communion externally, even in the most
unnecessary and needless, irksome, and troublesome, if not sinful things. They
that harp so much upon this string, consider not how secretly they wound, and
reflect upon our Rulers, that would establish, or allow, which you please, a
Schism by Law, the Spiritual Fathers, the right Reverend Bishops also
concurring, and not so much as bearing their Testimony to the contrary. But
such restless Spirits would do well to go yet to School, and learn the right
and true Notion of Schism. If they will not learn from the Scriptures, to which
they have been so rationally, and frequently referred, yet methinks they being
of the Communion of the Church of England, should regard the Judgment of some
of the greatest Men, and Lights of that Body in this Point. The Men I shall
name, (and the most learned and valuable Doctors are of their mind) are such as
they cannot reasonably except against; and by the evidence of two Witnesses
(instead of many that might be produced) they may see an end put to the Strife.

The first is the Learned and Reverend Chilling worth, In his Preface to the
Author of Charity maintained, his Words are these, Neither is it always of
necessity Schismatical, to separate from the External Communion of a Church,
though wanting nothing necessary: For if this Church, supposing to want nothing
necessary, require me to profess against my Conscience, that I believe some
Error, though never so small and Innocent, which I do not Believe, and will not
allow me her Communion but upon this condition; in this case, the Church for
requiring this condition is Schismatical, and not I, for separating from the
Church.

To this let me add the Conclusion of his Preface, Let all Men (says he)
believe the Scripture, and that only; and endeavor to believe it in the true
sense, and require no more of others: And they shall sind this not only a
better, but the only means to suppress Heresy, and restore Unity. For he that
believes the Scripture sincerely, and endeavors to believe it in the true
sense, cannot possibly be a Heretic. And if no more than this were required of
any Man to make him capable of the Churches Communion, then all Men so
quallified, though they were different in opinion, (and I add, consequently
worshipped in different places and postures) yet notwithstanding any such
difference, must be of necessity one in Communion. So far this Learned Man, who
had a true Notion of Schism.

The other is the very learned Dr. Stilling fleet, late Bishop of Worcester,
his cool and unbyassed thoughts you have. Iren. chap. 6. page 117. Where any
Church (says he) retaining Purity of Doctrine, requires the owning of, and
conformity to any unlawful or suspected practice; (mark that) Men may lawfully
deny Conformity to, and Communion with that Church in such things, without
incurring the guilt of Schism; read page 119. to the same purpose. And that
this was the Drs. settled Judgment not in his younger years only, appears from
many other places of his learned Writings. Discourse of Idol. of Rome, page 7.
We are sure (says he) that wilful Ignorance, or choosing a worse Church before
a better, is a damnable sin, and unrepented of, destroys Salvation. Again, page
39. That Church is to be judged purest, that has the best grounds; and
consequently, it is of necessity to Salvation, to embrace the Communion
thereof. And in his rational Account of the Prot. Relig. p. 291. Lesser
Societies cannot in Justice make the necessary Conditions of Communion narrower
than those which belong to the Catholic Church, (i. e.) Those things which
declare Men Christians, ought to capacitate them for Communion with Christians.
Again, ibid. The main End of the Christian Society, being the Promotion of
God's Honor, and Salvation of Men's Souls, the primary Obligation of Men
entering into it, is the Advancement of these ends to join in all Acts of it, so
far as they tend to these Ends: But if any thing come to be required directly
repugnant to these Ends, those Men, of whom such things are required, are bound
not to communicate in those lesser Societies, where such things are imposed,
but to preserve their Communion with the Catholic Society of Christians.
Again, page 331. He that separates only from particular Churches, as to such
things as concern not their Being, is only separated from the Communion of
those Churches, and not the Catholic. And therefore supposing that all
particular Churches, have some Errors and Corruptions in them, though I should
separate from them all, (that is no doubt from those Errors and Corruptions in
them) I do not separate from the Communion of the whole Church, etc. And the
reason he subjoyns, I declare the grounds of my separation to be such Errors
and Corruptions, which are crept into the Communion of the Churches, and
imposed on me in order to it. I withal declare my readiness to join again, if
those Errors and Corruptions be left out. So much, and I think enough from our
learned Dr. and Bishop.

O that Ministers would discover their zeal for God, in contending not for the
shadow, but the substance, not for silver Shrines and delusory Trifles, but for
the Faith once delivered to the Saints, as Jude ver. 3. Then they would no
longer sow Pillars under Men's Armholes, nor make the Hearts of the righteous
sad, nor strengthen the Hands of Sinners, but spend and be spent to carry on a
happy reformation to the glory of God; that is, they would no longer bear them
which are evil.

III. Once more, a Word to all Christians as such in their respective places
and relations. Be exhorted Christians to put to your helping hand, as you have
any Zeal for God, or Love to religion, to advance the reformation of a sinful
and degenerate Age. Let Parents teach and inspect their Children, and Masters
of Families their Servants; And let all consider one another to provoke to love
and good Works, Heb. 10.24. There is a great Emphasis in the (...) of that
Text, or word translated, Provoking. It signifies a provoking with fervor and
zeal, smartness and sharpness. Now Christians, be thus zealous for God, and
valiant for the Truth; throw water on the Fire wherever it breaks out round
about you.

You must not mind your own things only, but those also of others, and more
especially, what the Honor and Glory of God are most concerned in.

You must not only Pray, Praise, Love and Fear God your Selves, but you ought
to pity Sinners, that hasten not only their own Ruin, but a common Calamity.

And in order hereunto, if you cannot by your zealous Endeavors, pluck these
Brands out of the Fire, or prevail with them to consider the evil and fatal
consequences of their ways; you are called in the next place highly to Value,
and zealously to Encourage all reforming Magistrates, and facilitate their Work
to them, and all Officers of Justice under them; and to prize a Powerful,
Faithful, and Laborious Ministry. These means God usually blesses, to convert
and do good to Souls; if Christians were thankful for them and conscientious
to improve them to the best advantage, how much good might be done? What shall
I say? Christians, let every one in his place, be valiant for the Truth, Lovers
of such as love and fear God, and Haters of all that hate him in his Laws and
Kingdom. Them that honor God, he will honor, and they that despise him, shall
be lightly esteemed, 1 Samuel 2.30.

Thrice blessed are and shall they be, of whom the Searcher of Hearts shall
approve, in this Life, in Death or Judgment, in the words of the Text, I know,
how you cannot bear them which are evil.

Now to our High, Holy, and Jealous God, who deserves our zealous Appearance
for him, and will reward the Love and Labors of his Servants, to the Father,
Son and Holy Ghost, be all Glory, and the Kingdom for ever. Amen.

J. C.

FINIS.

