A TRVE RELATION OF The SCOTS taking of Cocket Island: Where they have taken The
Garrison. The Governor. 70 Officers and Soldiers. 7 Pieces of Ordnance. All
their Ammuni^ion.


And have placed there a Garrison of their own men.

And of their proceedings at the siege at Newcastle, and their propositions
sent to Col. Glenham, to deliver up Newcastle to them, and Col. Glenhams answer
to it.

With other passages concerning the Sheelds and Tinmouth Castle, and other
proceedings made known to the Parliament February 12, 1644.

By Col. Curfet, Commander in the Scots Army.

London Prin^ed for Andrew Coe, according to order, MDCXLIV.

TO the end that this Relation may not he mistaken, it is to be understood
that Colonel Curfet came from Barwick on Sunday the 4 of February, at which
time the condition of the Scots Army was according to this Relation which is
here published: since which time, what they have done, we are not yet certified.

A true Relation of the Scots taking of Cocket Island: and the Scots taking of
Newcastle.
WHereas there are twenty thousand Scots already in England, and there are
twelve thousand more mustering in Scotland, they have already possessest
themselves of all the East part of Northumberland: and the Forts and Castles
between Barwicke and Tinmouth. They have taken the Isle of Cocks and the
Garrison thereof, with seventy Commanders and other common Soldiers: seven
pieces of Ordnance, and all their ammunition, and have placed a Garrison of
their own men therein.

The Inhabitants of that County come into them daily, and the more because the
Centrie of the Country join with them and take the Covenant, so that indeed
all Northumberland is pretty well reduced to the obedience of the King, and
Parliament; Newcastle, Tinmouth, and the Sheelds only excepted, which it is
very probable by this time are in their hands too, especially Newcastle.

The Scots lie quattered about Morpeth, Seaton, Hepam: Ogle Castle; Prude, and
those parts about Newcastle: and have laid a strong siege about Newcastle also:
and ly close under the very Walls, the Malignants are for the most part all of
them gone into Newcastle, when they first heard of the Scots approach, whether
they carried such treasure and other goods as they most esteemed: There is no
certainty whether General King be in Newcastle or not, but the Scots had
besieged it eight days: which is to this time above a fortnight: There are a
great number in the Town; but they wish that all Newcastles Army was there,
that they might make short work with them, for they did not expect the taking
of Newcastle to be much troublesome to them.

General Lesley sent a Messenger to the Town to the Governor thereof: to
require to the delivery thereof to him: for the use of the King, and
Parliament, and that for their so doing, the Town should be free from plunder,
and themselves in person secured; with other propositions as was by the
General thought fit.

The Messenger having delivered his Message to Col. Glenham, who received it in
the name of the Town, the Town was summoned, and a parlie was held concerning
the same, and it was agreed upon, that an answer should be returned to Gene^ll
Les^ey: to desire him only to grant five days respite, and then a full answer
should be given him.

This answer being brought to General Lesley he was very willing to condescend
thereunto, and the more rather because he had not then his murdering pieces
ready, by reason the illness of the ways hindered them, but by that time (at
the farthest) he expected them, resolving that if they would not deliver up the
Town the^y would storm it, but it was then believed by the Scots Army that it
would be surrendered to them, so that there is no question but that by this time
it is in their hands.

And as for the Shields they are not yet taken, but being only but houses they
do expect that it will be no great matter to take them, they can do it when
they list, The greatest matter next unto the taking of New castle Town, i^
Tinmouth Castle.

They are not yet over Tyne, but in case they are forced by any occasion to
stay before Newcastle, they intend to leave a strong siege there and to march
into the Bishopric of Durham.

They do carry themselves so sivelly and orderly that the Country do even
admire them, taking not the worth of a penny from any man but what they pay
fully for, and they are not come unprovided, for every soldier has 2 or 3
pieces in his pocket, and there has thousands come in to them, and taken the
Covenant, and their Army does exceedingly increase.

The Ships that were laden in the channel with malignants goods, were stopped in
by 4 Parliament Ships which the vice Admiral appointed to ly before Tinmouth,
but the last week about Thuasday and Friday there fell such storms that our
ships could not ride there, but were forced to sale away from thence for fear
of being shipwrackt, at which time they took their opportunity, and saled out of
the channel, and have carried away their fraught, it is supposed for Holland.

POSTSCRIPT.
Colonel Curfet is very confident that Newcastle is before this time in the
hands of the Scots, and that they are in the Town, after which they intend to
take the Shields, and so to fall upon Tinmouth Castle, without which there is
no passage for ships to bring us coals: and in the interim to send another
party toward Durham.

This is Published according to Order.

FINIS.

