AN EXPOSITION WITH Practical Observations CONTINUED UPON The Twenty-second,
Twenty-third, Twenty-fourth, Twenty-fifth, and Twenty-sixth Chapters of the
Book of JOB: BEING The Sum of Thirty-seven Lectures, delivered at Magnus near
LONDON Bridge.

By JOSEPH CARYL, Preacher of the Word, and Pastor of the Congregation there.

ISAYAH 40.8. The Grass withers, the flower fades: But the word of Our God
shall stand for ever.

LONDON: Printed by M. Simmons, and are to be sold at her house in
Aldersgate-streete the next door to the Gilded Lion. 1655.

TO THE CHRISTIAN READER. TO Those especially of this CITY, who yet continue
to promote this WORK.
AS the Apostle Peter (writing to all the Saints) said, This second Epistle, so
I may say (and have learned, I hope, to say it without boasting or comparing)
This seventh Epistle Beloved) I now write unto you, in all which my desire is
to stir up your pure minds by way of remembrance, that ye may be mindful of
the words which were spoken, and of the troubles which were endured before, by
this (Great Example of suffering) Holy and patient Job. And though seven, being
a perfect number, might hint me a fair pretense to sit down and do no more,
yet I am further from thinking what I have done perfect, then I am from
desisting (in reference to my own intention) to perfect (according to that
measure of light which shall be given in) what is yet to do. It Is A General
mercy, that in an Age wherein the sword has been called out to do and has
done so much, there has been not only leisure, but encouragement for The pen
to do this little. And it is your special honor, who still promote this, or
any work of this kind, that while ye have been engaged in so great a charge
for the maintaining of a War, and the preserving of peace, ye have not
excused your selves in this point of charge. And (possibly) it will be no
dishonor to this Age in future Ages, nor to This Nation in Foreign Nations,
to see or hear, that our spirits have neither been hurried nor skarred by
wars and changes into an indisposition or incomposednes for works of such
seriousnes and retirement. What Daniel prophesied of the building of the Wall
of Jerusalem whether literal or mystical) is true of this Paper-wall (which is
no stranger to Jerusalem) it has been built in Troublous Times. Eccept the
Lord build both house and wall, they labor in vain that build in calmest
times; and where the Lord builds (though by weak and unskillfull hands)
labor shall not be vain in stormy times; it shall neither be labor in vain,
because unfinisht for use; nor shall it be labor in vain, because unvsefull
when it is finished. The blessing of God (and without that nothing can)
delivers all our honest labors from these two vanities, and his bounty
delivers them from a Third. For while we are steadfast and unmovable, always
abounding in the work of the Lord, as we may have a strong confidence that our
labor shall not be in vain to others, so a full assurance that it shall not
be in vain to our selves. Plaine-hearted Jacob laboring in the integrity of
his soul for Laban, only in keeping sheep, though his wages (as envying that
he thrived so fast) was changed ten times, yet he thrived the faster, and he
who came over Jordan with his staff, became two bands. To be sure we can never
want either pay or reward for that work which is a reward and can pay it
self. And though, I know (and cannot but thankefully acknowledge Honored Sirs)
that this long continued work has been an occasion of Considerable expense to
you; yet I much believe that it will not prove any thing of loss to any of
you. There is (says Solomon) that scatters and yet increases, and there is
that withholdeth more then is meet and it tends to poverty. They that
scatter to do good, sow what they scatter; and that which is sown in a right
soil increases to a harvest. They that withhold what they have, more then is
meet, shall not hold what they have, but meet with poverty. As that which is
given in charity, for the releife of the poor, so that which is given in a due
tempered liberality for the use of the public, is lent to the Lord, and he
will surely repay all that he has borrowed. Therefore give a portion to seven
and also to eight (whether indigent persons, or pious uses) for ye know not
what evil shall be upon the earth. If evil come upon the earth, they will be
found the best husbands of their goods, who have laid up most in heaven; and if
good continue upon the earth, they will not find any miss of what is so laid
up. I write this, not as either fearing an abatement of my own private
interest, nor as hoping or looking after an increase of it: but only as a
grateful testimony of what ye have freely done for the carrying on of this
work, and as an argument that in so doing ye have not done either unwisely or
unprofitably for your selves.

As for this piece of the work now given in to your hands, and published to
the view of others, I shall only say, That herein ye have an end of the
Controversall or disputative part of this Book. Jobs friends have now finished
their last reply upon him, and Job has finished his last answer to them. For
though he continues speaking five whole Chapters longer, yet he speaks,
rather to the general state of the Question, then to any of their particular
objections, as may appear hereafter (if God give leave) in the Explication of
that large and patheticall discourse. And it was well, that his Opponents would
make an End somewhere, and leave what they had offered to the judgment of
equal and indifferent moderators. Which may be a just rebuke upon many in this
Age, who will dispute and draw the saw of contention everlastingly; as if they
thought it a dishonor, when they have said all, to say no more, or were
resolved never to be satisfied, how much or how often so ever they have been
answered. Moderate and modest disputing tends to healing, but the itch of
disputing (which an Honorable and learned Knight, deceased, would have
engraven upon his Tombe-stone) leaves nothing but a scabby soarenes upon the
minds of men, and does rather widen differences then compose them. Abner
(either grieved or wearyed with the tedious protraction of a civil war)
called to Joab (Captain General of David's Army) shall the sword devour for
ever? know thou not, that it will be bitterness in the end, how long shall it
be ere thou bid the people return from following their brethren? We have but
too much cause to call and cry upon some Leaders in the Scholasticall War,
Shall your tongues and pens devour for ever? know ye not that it is unpleasant
to many in the way, and is like to be bitterness to more in the end? When will
ye return from following your Brethren? Eliphaz, Bildad, and Zophar followed
their Brother Job long, but they gave it over at last, and returned from
following him. Though, I confess, there is a necessity of contending, and that
(as the Apostle Jude exhorts) earnestly, both by speech and pen, for the faith
once delivered to the Saints; Yet there are many contentions, which it had been
well if they had never been begun, or at least quickly ended. And when men
revile and blaspheme rather then argue, It is best to take up that Counsel
which good Hezekiah gave in commandment concerning Railing Rabsakeh, Answer
them not. Solomon has given us the full state of this duty in a seeming
contradiction, while in one verse he forbids us to answer a Fool, and in the
next bids us answer him. The fool must be answered according to his folly, but
the answer must be framed and drawn up by the strength of reason and wisdom;
that is, the fool must be made to see his folly, lest he grow up and be
confirmed in his opinion, that what he says is true, because he is not showed
the error of it; yet, The fool must not be answered according to his folly,
that is, if he speak or write vainly and revilingly, showing rather the
frothynes of his wit, or the overflowing of his gall, then the sobriety and
soundness of his Judgment, he that answers him must not conform either
speech or style to his, lest he be like unto him; The answer which we give to
another, bears the image and is the measure of our selver; And our
ill-mannaging of a matter renders us as bad as others, though our opinion be
better. Our Master Christ being reviled reviled not again, we his Disciples
and followers ought to imitate him, and not to render evil for evil, or
railing for railing, but contrariwise to bless. While we are called to
contending, let us do it fayrely and heartily; Christ would have us show love
and tenderness to our brethren, as well as zeal for Him and his Truth. They
cannot but do so, who stand up for truth purely as it is the truth of Christ,
rather then as it is their own opinion. And (though I am loath to be
suspicious, yet) I greatly suspect, that the reason why many cast so much dirt
and dishonor upon the persons of their Brethren, while they appear as
Champions for the Truth, proceeds from a secret desire to procure honor to
their own persons rather then the advancement of Truth. Peace and truth are a
blessed pair, and were we more for peace we should sooner find out the truth;
But so long as men contend rather for a party or an opinion then for truth,
rather for victory and the Mastery then for truth, rather for honor (I had
almost said humor) and interest then for truth, as we are sure not to meet
with peace, so we are extremely hindered and puzzled in seeking out the truth.
The most probable way to keep down some ill-sented opinions, is to lay down
all disputes about them; especially, now, when most if not all Controversies on
foot, have been sifted to the branne. What therefore remains but that we
wait for light and conviction from heaven, looking how the holy Spirit of
truth and peace, will state and determine those points upon the consciences of
men; And I am fully satisfied that if all would suffer their consciences to
answer and reply rather then their conceits and parts, most of our disputers in
this age would (like Jobs friends) dispute no more. O That we could a while
leave arguing with and answering one another (especially railing upon and
scoffing at one another) and fall to praying for and loving one another,
according to the utmost tedder of Gospel-love. For as love is the complement or
fullfilling of the whole Law of God, the scope or intentional end of the
Commandment, so it would be the conclusion or finishing and determining end of
all the Controversies which arise or are started among men. And I conceave that
(in most points of difference) a severe and Magisteriall imposing of an opinion
upon others in way of dispute, is as bad and as un Gospel-like, as to impose it
upon any by way of power.

Beloved and Honored Friends, ye may perceave how far my joy, for being
arrived at the end of this dispute between Job and his friends, has
transported me to press for at least an amicable carrying onne, if not an end
of all our disputes; and that (as the Apostle advises) speaking the truth (and
for the truth or Truthing it) in love, we may grow up into him in all things,
which is the head even Christ; From whom the whole body fitly joined together
and compacted by that which every joint supplyeth, according to the effectual
working of every part, makes increase of the body to the edifying of it self
in love. Love is a knitting, and therefore an increasing grace. That which
uniteth many in one, must needs edify That One, which is the result of such a
union. As faith is that Grace by which we receave all from God, so love is that
Grace by which we conveigh and divide good among our selves. There is not the
least joint in the mystical body of Christ, but gives some supply to the
whole, because love is the ligament of it. As we can want nothing while (as the
Apostle Jude exhorts) we keep our selves in the love of God, (whether we
understand him of the love of God to us, or of our love to God, makes no
difference as to this matter) so we can hardly want any thing, while we keep
our selves in the love of one another. That all who love the Lord Jesus Christ
in sincerity, may, by the presence and influence of the Spirit of love, not
only keep themselves, but increase in the love of God, and in the love of one
another, till we are fully grown up in him in all things, which is the head
even Christ, is the wish and prayer, as it ought to be the endeavor of all and
of him who would

SIRS The 18th of the Third Month commonly called May. 1655. Serve you
Faithfully in love JOSEPH CARYL.

ERRATA.
PAge 51. l. 5. for 34. r. 24. p. 72. l. 30. for Arms r. Arm. p. 75. for
turpa, r. te^ra. p. 245. for honestes, r. hosts. p. 422. l. 11. supple, but.
p. 447. l. 36. supple, life. p. 480. l. 5. supple, or. p. 498. l. 7. for man,
r. man's p. 672. l 36. for 6. r. 8. p. 784. l. 29. for Zeph: r. Zech.

AN EXPOSITION WITH Practical Observations UPON The Twenty-two, Twenty-three,
Twenty-foure, Twenty-five, and Twenty-sixe Chapters of the Book of JOB.
JOB, Chap. 22. Verse. 1, 2, 3, 4. 1. Then Eliphaz the Temanite answered and
said,

2. Can a man be profitable unto God, as he that is wise may be profitable
unto himself?

3. Is it any pleasure to the Almighty that thou art righous? or is it gain to
him that thou make thy ways perfect?

4. Will he reprove thee for fear of thee? or will he enter with thee into
judgment?


ELIPHAZ now enters his third and last contest with Job; in which some tell us
that he behaveth himself like a man who seeks Victory rather then Truth: who
though he has been sufficiently answered, yet will not seem to be overcome;
yea that he takes up the same weapons to maintain this third, with which he
maintained his two former Encounters; The first in the fourth and fifth
Chapters, and the second in the 15th. as if he were resolved to contradict,
though he could not confute the reasons wherewith Job had made his defense.

But as such a carriage as this in Disputation is altogether vain in it self,
so it is most uncomely in a wise and godly man; who ought not to refuse truth
and reason though spoken by an Adversary, but rather modestly to sit down and
confess his own error and mistaking: And therefore though Eliphaz in this
answer or triplication does but roll the same stone, and move upon the same
hinge in general; still adjudging Job to suffer for his sin, and to be
punished as an evil doer; yet he puts all into a new method, and varies the
scene or manner of his argumentation, which may be reduced to this form; as
if Eliphaz had said: O Job! if thou suffer all these evils for some cause
(as certainly thou do, for these things could not come by chance, but by the
wise disposure and providence of God) then that cause or reason for which thou
suffer, must either be found in God or in thy self: If thou say the
reason is in God, and that he does it by his prerogative, thou do rashly
intrude thy self into his secrets, and art over-bold or curious in searching
into his hidden counsels; and when thou have made out thy conjectures, we may
as easily deny as thou do affirm: but if thou have recourse to, and
refl^ctest upon thy own self for the cause of thy sorrows and sufferings,
surely thou can find out or pitch upon nothing else but thy sinfulness and
abounding transgressions, which while thou refusest to acknowledge, thou do
but harden thy heart against God, and growest impatient under the rebukes of
his afflicting hand, therefore I admonish thee to repent, etc. This seems to be
the sum of that whole discourse which Eliphaz gives in this Chapter, as will
further appear in the explication of the parts.

Again we may contract his scope and give it in this brief; Job having
constantly affirmed against his friends, that God equally afflicts the
righteous and the wicked: and having said (which might have gained respect to
what he was about to say) that he pleaded for God (Chap. 21.4. As for me, is
my complaint to man, or for man, no, it is to God, or in Gods behalf.) Hereupon
Eliphaz taxes him with this presumption, as if he would needs undertake to be a
patron for God, and so to bring him in some advantage, or to stand him in
stead, for the maintaining of his cause; therefore he begins his speech with
this chiding expostulation; Can man be profitable unto God? or (suppose thou
were (which I shall presently disprove) as thou have often boasted, righteous,
yet) is it any pleasure to the Almighty that thou art righteous?

This seems to be the intent of the whole Chapter, in which we may further take
notice of two distinct parts. The first is reprehensory, Eliphaz reproves and
rebukes Job sorely, to the end of the 20. verse.

The second is hortatory; Eliphaz moves Job earnestly to repentance, in which
he coucheth many Promises, and gives Assurance that it shall not be in vain,
from the 20th ver. to the end of the Chapter; Acquaint now thy self with him,
and be at peace, thereby good shall come unto thee, etc.

The first part, his reprehension begins at the second verse.

V. 2. Can a man be profitable unto God?
There are three readings of these words. First thus, Can a man be compared to
God? Numquid Deo comparari potest homo etiam cum perfectae fuerit scientiae.
Vulg.
Some labor much in the defense of this reading, but I shall not stay upon it.
For though it be a truth that man cannot be compared to God, how wise or how
good soever he is. What Is the wisdom or the goodness of man to God? Yet the
Original Text does not freely yield it self up to that translation which
bears this truth.

2. Master Broughton renders thus. Can the humane wight teach the Omnipotent?
that word which we render to be profitable, he, Quidam verbum (...) pro docere
exponunt in utroque hamistichio. Merc.
to Teach; The Chaldee Paraphrase favors this translation, and some render it
so in both parts of the verse; Can a man teach God, As he that is wise may
teach himself? If a man should be so bold to take upon him to teach God, would
God regard his teachings? but I shall pass by this also, especially
considering that Eliphaz had no reason to tax Job with such a Presumption, as
if he had taken upon him to direct God how to order his affairs; when as Job
himself ( Chap. 21. v. 22.) had strongly repressed and condemned such a
boldness. Shall any teach God knowledge? Job having so lately exalted God
above man's teaching (as was showed in opening that verse) it is not probable
that Eliphaz should reprove him, as conceiting himself wise enough to teach
God: Or that he thought Job either had done, or was about to do that which
with his last breath almost, he confessed no man could do.

The third is our reading, Can a man be profitable unto God? Can a man? he does
not mean an ordinary weak, sickly, frail man; but a man, yea any man at his
best: the word here used notes a man in his health, strength, and glory; a man
in the flower and perfection not only of his natural abilities, but in the
richest furniture and array of his acquired, yea inspired abilities. Take this
man, a man of these atttainments, a man thus accomplished, and Can he be
profitable to God? For as when the Psalmist says ( Psalm. 33.17.) A horse is a
vain thing to save a man; By the horse there, we are not to understand a
lean, poor, weak, slow-paced horse, or a strong, swift horse unmanned; Such a
horse indeed is a very vain thing to save a man by; Such a horse may do a man
more hurt then help when he comes into danger; but the Psalmist means a horse
of the greatest strength, courage, and swiftness: A horse exactly manned, and
taught all his postures, even such a horse is a vain thing to save a man.
Again, when the Scripture says, Christ came to save sinners, we must not
understand it of lesser, lower, or of the ordinary sort of sinners only, but
even of the highest and the greatest, for such Jesus Christ came to save as
well as the least of sinners. So here when it is said, Can a man be profitable
to God? we must expound it of the highest, of the learned, of the holiest, of
the best of men; Can a man be profitable unto God? The word is El, The strong
God; Can the strongest man be profitable unto the strong, the mighty, the
omnipotent, the Almighty God? Can he be profitable? Can he bring any advantage,
gain, or profit to God? Should he reason with unprofitable talk (says
Eliphaz. Chap. 15.3.) or with words that bring in no Profit? A word of the same
root, signifies a Treasurer, who is a keeper of public Profits ( Esaias 22.15.)
Go, get thee unto this Treasurer, even unto Shebna. Can a man be profitable?
Thus Eliphaz reproves Job for insisting so often upon his own innocence, as if
that were an Advantage to God? As if he had said, how holy or righteous soever
any man is, the Lord receives no advantage by him. So that Eliphaz (it seems)
apprehended Job trusting or boasting of somewhat in himself, as if he had
thought God his debtor, or that he had done somewhat for which God was
beholding to him. And upon this ground, that God is debtor, or beholding to no
man; Eliphaz undertakes Job: And though his supposition was false, yet his
position was true, and gives us this profitable observation, That the best of
men cannot oblige God, or merit any thing at his hand.

That which is our duty to do, cannot merit when we have done it. We cannot
oblige either God or man by performing our own obligation. Thus Christ argues,
Luke 17.7. Which of you having a servant ploughing or feeding Cattle, will say
unto him by and by when he is come from the field, go and sit down to meat?
And will not say unto him, make ready wherewith I may sup, and gird thy self,
and serve me, till I have eaten and drunken, and afterward thou shall eat and
drink. Does he thank that servant because he did the things that were
commanded him? I trow not. So likewise ye, when ye have done all these things
which are commanded you, say, we are unprofitable servants, we have done that
which was our duty to do. Where Christ proves, that because the servant had
done no more then was his duty to do, therefore he did not merit in doing it.
When you have done all that is commanded you, say ye are unprofitable
servants. He that does all those things that are commanded him, is a man
indeed, a man of worth, a man of men, yet (let that be granted that he reaches
to the utmost line of the Command) he is an unprofitable servant, he has but
done his duty.

There is another Parable in this Gospel of Luke that seems to be somewhat
opposite to this ( Chap. 12. v. 36, 37.) And ye your selves be like unto men
that wait for their Lord when he will return from the wedding, that when he
comes and knocks, they may open to him immediately. Blessed are those
servants, w^om when the Lord comes, he shall find so watching, that is, at
their work. Watching is not meant here of a bare waking, or not being asleep,
for a man may watch, in that sense, and yet be as bad as a sleeper: To be found
awake, and yet idle, to be found awake yet doing nothing, is as blameable as to
be found asleep: So that to be found watching, is to be found intent upon, and
laboring in the work of the Lord. Blessed be those servants whom when their
Lord comes he shall find so watching) what will he do? Verily I say unto you,
that he shall gird himself, and make them to sit down to meat, and will come
forth to serve them. In the 17th Chap. Christ says; If a servant have been
hard at work in the service of his Lord, even as a man that is come from Plow,
or from feeding his Cattle, yet his Master does not say to him, sit down to
meat, but first bids him gird him self and serve him, and afterward go to
meat. But here it is said, the Lord presently girds himself, and makes his
servants sit down to meat, and will come and serve them: so that here he
speaks, as if the Lord were much beholding to these servants, whereas before
he speaks of them as unprofitable servants, to whom he was not at all
beholding.

For the clearing of these two Parables, we are to distinguish them by their
scopes. The scope of the Parable in the 12th Chapter is to show, that the
diligent servant shall receive much from the hands of the Lord, or that the
labor of the diligent servant shall not be in vain, or unprofitable to him.

But the scope of the Parable in the 17th Cha. is to show, that the most
diligent servant cannot do any thing that is profitable unto his Lord. He may
do that which may be profitable to himself, but he can do nothing that can be
profitable to his Lord, that is the scope of the 17th Chapter, which falls in
fully with the Text, and Observation that I am now upon. There is a wide
difference between these two parables. To show what a diligent servant may
expect, is one thing, and what the most diligent servant can challenge or
require is another. For indeed those servants in the 12th Chapter, to whom the
Lord administers the Supper, or to whom he ministers at Supper, must say that
they are unprofitable servants to the Lord; though they are to acknowledge (to
the praise of their Lord) that his service has not been unprofitable unto
them, and they must say so upon these Considerations.

First he is their Lord, they his servants, not their own (1 Cor. 6.20.) Ye
are bought with a price, ye are not your own, therefore glorify God in your
bodies and in your spirits which are Gods. God is the owner of our bodies and
spirits, our selves are the Lords. Now if we our selves, our bodies, and our
spirits are the Lords, then much more are our services his. If the person be
another, all the work done by him must be his too.

Secondly, the house wherein these servants are feasted is the Lords. The whole
fabric of heaven and earth is his house, He has set it up to entertain and
feast his people in.

Thirdly, All the cheer and good things with which the Lord feasteth his
servants (all the comforts which grace holds out in this life, or glory in the
next life) are of his own provision, the whole furniture of the Table is of
his cost and charge, therefore they are obliged to their Lord, not their Lord
to them; he is indeed profitable unto them, but they are not profitable unto
him: They by their sloth and idleness might deserve to be sent supperlesse
and hungry to bed, but by all their pains and diligence they could not deserve
their Supper; Can a man be profitable unto God?

Secondly, Observe, That God is absolutely Independent and Perfect in him self.

If there be an impossibility that man should be profitable unto God, then he
is Self-sufficient, and altogether Independent, in reference to man: He that
cannot receive any addition is perfect in himself, and he that is
self-sufficient, needs not: to receive any addition from another, is an
argument of imperfection. And seeing God neither receives, nor can receive any
thing from another, he must needs be perfect in himself. David (Psalm. 16.2.)
speaking of himself (as the type of Christ) says, O my soul, thou have said
unto the Lord, thou art my Lord (that is, thou art my Portion and my All) but
my goodness extends not to thee, I am not able to do any good which
reaches to thy benefit, or increases thy happiness, for thou art mine. In the
50th Psalm the Lord asserts this his own independency; If I were hungry, I
would not tell thee, for the world is mine and the fullness thereof. If I had
any hunger (that is, any defect upon me) I need not go to the creature to ask
a supply, I could supply my self if there were any need, but there is none: The
Lord is infinitely above all hunger, above all wants and defects whatsoever. He
indeed threatens Idolaters, that he will famish all their gods (Zeph. 2.11.)
Idols shall be hungry, they shall be famisht, and have none to administer any
thing to them. This the Lord does, when he with-draws their respect and
worship, that name and reputation which once they had in the world from them;
worship is the food of Idols, that keeps livelesse Idols (as it were) alive,
and therefore falls gods are famished, when their false worship is cast down;
but who can famish the Lord? If I were hungry, etc. I would not tell you; Can
man be profitable unto God?

But it may be objected; Cannot a man be profitable to God? is man no
advantage, no help to him? why then ( Judge. 5.23.) Sings Deborah, Curse ye
Meroz, said the Angel of the Lord, curse ye bitterly the inhabitants thereof,
because they came not to the help of the Lord, to the help of the Lord against
the mighty. It should seem then that the Lord had need of the help of these
inhabitants of Meroz, and if they had come forth, it had been an advantage to
him, why else were they cursed for not coming forth to the help of the Lord?

I answer, man is said to help the Lord, when he helps in the Lords cause.
Personally the Lord needs not my help, but the Lord may be helped
relatively, in his Cause, and in his people. Thus we help the Lord, when we
help man, when we help the Church, and people of God; It is our honor as well
as our duty, to help his People, and give assistance in his Cause; This the
Lord takes so well at our hands, that he reckons it as help given to himself.

Again, if we consider the help as given to the Lords people, we are not to
conceive that the Lord needed the help of these men of Meroz, as if he could
not help them himself without the assistance or aid of man. For when he sees
that there is no man, then his own arm brings salvation, Isa. 59.16. It Is the
duty of man to come forth and draw his sword in the Lords quarrel against the
mighty, but the Lord needs not the sword of man to subdue the mightiest.

Secondly, It may be objected; Cannot man be profitable unto God? he speaks of
the Church of the Jews, in such language as implies them a profit to him.
Exodus 19.5. Now if ye will obey my voice indeed, and keep my Covenant, then
shall ye be a peculiar treasure unto me above all people. And is there no
profit in a treasure? Again, Deuteronomy. 32.9. The Lords portion is his people, Jacob
is the lot of his inheritance. Has a man no profit by his portion? no
advantage by his Inheritance? Now if the Lords People be his Portion, his
Inheritance, his Treasure, his peculiar special treasure, how then can it be
said, they are no profit, no advantage to him?

I answer, the Lords people are his treasure, not because they enrich him, but
because he has a high esteem of them. The Lords People are his treasure, not
because they profit him, but because he protects them: If I say to a man, you
shall be a treasure to me; I may do it, not because I expect any profit from
him, but because I have a high esteem of him, and resolve to protect and defend
him as I do my own portion and treasure; In this sense does the Lord say of his
People, Ye are my treasure. We esteem treasure, and treasures are under
protection, lest any take them from us. Thus the Lord speaks of his People, not
that he has any profit or gain by them, as men who ordinarily have Portions
and Inheritances in Fields or Houses which are their stock and livelihood.
Indeed there is a Revenue which the Lord has by his People as they are his
portion; that is, a Revenue of glory and honor, not a revenue of profit. But
if you say glory and honor is profit, and an advantage to man, is it not then
an advantage to God to be glorified by man?

I answer, It is no advantage to God when he is glorified by man. Our
glorifying of God does not add any glory to him that he had not, but it is only
the setting forth of that glory which he had; there is no increase of his
fulness by all the honor and glory that the creature gives him. We are
commanded to glorify God. ( Matthew. 5.16. Let your light so shine before men,
that they may see your good works and glorify your Father which is in heaven.)
But God does not receive any additionall glory by us, how much or how clearly
soever our light shines before men. A candle adds more light to the Sun, then
all the creatures in the world can add to the glory of God, when they have
studied his glory, and labored to glorify him to the utmost all their days.

Thirdly, that of David may be yet objected, Psalm. 4.3. The Lord has set apart
for himself the man that is godly. And is so, then it seems he intends to make
some profit of him; it is an allusion unto those that vend wares: A Merchant
looks upon this and that commodity, and then says this is for my turn, this I
like, set it apart for me. Seeing then the Lo^d sets the godly apart for
himself, it sounds as if he meant to make some gain or advantage by him.

I answer, the meaning of that Scripture is not, that God sets a godly man
apart as one that he gets profit by, but as one that he intends to bestow mercy
upon; or he sets him apart for service, not for gain; The Lord serves his own
ends by the service of man every day, and sets apart the godly man for his
special service.

Yet a little further, I shall demonstrate that a man cannot be profitable to
God.

First, God had all perfection before man was, therefore man cannot profit God.
Psalm. 90.2. From everlasting, and to everlasting thou art God, shat is, thou
art infinite in glory and excellency from everlasting. God was God as much
before there was a creature, as he has been ever since the creatures were;
therefore creatures add nothing at all to him.

2. All the goodness and profitableness of man comes from God, therefore no
profit goes unto God from man: that is the Apostles argument, Acts 17.25. where
he shows that man cannot advantage God, no not by worship. He is not worshipped
with men's hands as though he needed any thing. What, do you think God calls
for your worship, because he needs your worship? or as if he could not tell
how to be without your worship? Nothing less; Seeing he gives to all life and
breath and all things. He that gives all things to all men, needs nothing of
any man: here is the Apostles argument, the Lord gives out all things, life,
breath, and all comforts whatsoever to all men, therefore he needs nothing of
any man, no not the worship of any man. 1 Cor. 4.7. The Apostle assigns that
reason against boasting: What have thou that thou have not received, wherefore
then do thou boast? When do men boast? even when they think they have done
God a good turn. What have thou that thou have not received? therefore why do
thou boast as if thou had not received it. What can he receive of us from
whom we receive our all? And though we must return all to him in a way of
thankfulness and duty, yet God needs not that we should return any thing to
him in a way of largess or supply.

3. Take this demonstration of it; they who live much in God, even they (upon
the matter) need little or nothing of the creature; they (upon the matter) are
Independent as to the creature who depend fully upon the Creator. The good or
evil of this world is not much to them, who are much with God. They have but
little to do with the creature, and can do well enough without the creature. (
Hab. 3.17.) Although the figtree shall not blossom, neither shall fruit be in
the vines, the labor of the Olive shall fail, and the fields shall yield no
meat; the flock shall be cut off from the fold, and there shall be no herd in
the stalls; yet I will rejoice in the Lord, I will joy in the God of my
salvation. As if he had said, what if all creature comforts are taken away from
me, I can live upon God alone. The life of a Believer is much above the
creature, how much more is the life of the Creator? The Apostle (2 Cor. 6.10.)
speaking of himself, says, as having nothing, and yet possessing all things.
If Paul by the high actings of his faith and dependencies upon God could say he
possessed all things, while he was as having nothing in the creature. Surely
God has all, when he has nothing of or from the creature; He may say in the
strictest sense, having nothing (of these things) and yet possessing all
things. Lay these two observations together.

First, That the Creature cannot oblige God.

Secondly, That God is Independent, absolute, perfect without the creature, and
the result of both will rise up in these eight conclusions.

First, this will follow, That we should not murmr, nor be discontented with
our Estate whatsoever it is, why? we are not profitable unto God, we have
deserved nothing at his hand. Discontent arises from pride, from an opinion
that we are not answered according to our worth; we should never be
discontented, were we convinced that we are altogether worthless. Do but sit
down in this thought that man cannot be profitable unto God in any state, and
then be discontented with your state if you can.

Secondly, If the creature cannot be profitable unto God, Then, all that God
does for man, yea for Angels, proceeds from his free grace. We give him
nothing aforehand, nor any thing afterward, therefore it is grace before, and
grace after grace in all. We receive grace when we have no grace, and we
receive more grace when we have it; yet by the grace we have we do not deserve
to receive more; As we received the first grace, merely of gracc, so we do the
second. No man is aforehand with God; if any think they are, let them show
their Bills, what they have brought in, and it shall be acknowledged. Romans
11.35, 36. Who has first given, and it shall be recompensed to him again? For,
of him, and through him, and to him are all things, to whom be glory for ever,
Amen.

Thirdly, If man cannot be profitable unto God, then as none should dare to
come to God in their own worthiness, so none should fear to come to God
because of their unworthiness. We should not be discouraged, though as yet dead
and fruitless, though vain and unbelieving; The worst of men should not keep
off from God, because they are unprofitable, seeing the best cannot profit him.
If we have don much it is nothing to the Lord: and if we have done nothing, it
is no bar to the Lords doing much for us. God will not turn us back because we
bring him nothing, nay he invites us to come without any thing ( Esaias 55.1.) Ho
every one that thirsts come to the waters, buy, etc. Here is buying, but for
what? for profit? no, but come buy wine and milk without money and without
price. God does not expect any profit; there is a kind of buying, but its not
for money, nor for money worth. As the Lord sometimes sells his people, so he
always sels his graces and comforts, for naught (Psalm. 44.12.) Thou sellest
thy people for naught, and do not increase thy wealth by their price. That
is, thou leavest thy people under miseries and afflictions, by which it does
not appear that thou gettest any honor. Now as the Lord does sometimes sell
his people, so he also sells his mercy and grace to his people (as to any
desert of theirs) for naught; he sells without money and without price,
therefore be not discouraged if you have nothing of your own of any worth to
present unto him. Say not, Wherewith shall we come before the Lord? The poorer
you come in your own thoughts, the richer you shall return; For he fills
the hungry with good things, but the rich he sends empty away.

Fourthly, If man cannot be profitable unto God, then our gifts and parts, yea
our holiness and graces do not make us necessary unto God. God may say unto
the great Ones of the Earth, I have no need of you, and to the rich I have no
need of you, and to the wise, I have no need of you; yea he may say unto the
godly and to the holy, I have no need of you neither. There is no creature
necessary to God, seeing he cannot only (as we say) live, but live in the
heights of happiness without the Creature.

Fifthly, If no man can be profitable unto God, then whatsoever God requires of
us, he aims at our profit, and not at his own; all is for us, or for our good,
which will appear more fully in the opening the n^xt clause; He that is wise
may he profitable to himself. The Lord has designed all our wisdom and
obedience to our own benefit: So Moses spoke to the people of Israel (Deu.
6.24.) The Lord commanded us to do all these statutes, to fear the Lord our
God for our good always, that he might preserve us alive, as it is at this
day. It is not for the Lords good, but it is for our good that he commands, and
we obey. And as the Lord commanded all things in the Law for our good, not for
his own: so he commands us to believe the Gospel not for his good, but for our
own; he is not to be saved by it, it is we that are to be saved by it. He does
not call us to work as men do their servants, that he might play the good
husband, and get some profit by keeping us hard at labor. Indeed the Lord
keeps his servants hard at labor night and day, they must be continually
upon duty: But he does it not (as I may say) to play the good husband, to
increase his stock by it, but it is for our profit. That which Christ speaks (
Mar. 2.27.) about the Sabbath, is true of all other the commands of God, we are
apt to think, that God requires a seventh day, because it is for his profit
and advantage; no says Christ, the Lord has not an eye to himself, but to
man; The Sabbath was made for man; that is, for man's advantage, that he might
look heaven ward, that he might work in the things which concern his own
blessedness, therefore has the Lord appointed him a resting day. The Sabbath
was made for man, and not man for the Sabbath.

Sixthly, Then our disobedience cannot hurt God, our sinn^ cannot disadvantage
him, impair his blessedness, o^ diminish his glory. As man's obedience is no
profit, so his disobedience is no disprofit to God. Sinners shall be punished,
as they who have wronged and dishonored God, they shall be dealt with as such:
But really, all the sins of the world do not bring any damage or
disadvantage to God; Elihu is express to this point, in the 35. Chap. of this
Book, verse. 6, 7. If thou sinnest, what do thou against him? (Every sin is
against the mind of God, but no sin is against the happiness of God) or if
thy transgressions be multiplied, what do thou unto him? is God impaired by
it? Surely no, God does not loose a pinn from his sleeve (as I may say) by all
the sins committed in the world; He has no dependence at all upon our
obedience for his blessedness; our sins cannot hurt him, as our obedience
cannot help him, which Elihu shows in the next verse; If thou be righteous,
what give thou him? or what receives he of thine hand?

Seventhly, hence see the honor of God, that has made so many creatures, and
man especially of whom himself has no need, that has so many to serve him,
and yet needs none of their services. Give God this glory: We think those men
are very glorious and honouurable who have but as much of the creature as will
serve their turn; all creatures are the Lords, yet he is not necessitated to
serve his turn by any of them.

Eighthly, then, see what an obligation lies upon us continually to bless God,
to be thankful to him, to walk humbly with him, who gives us so many profits,
when as we do not profit him at all. God prizeth that highly by which himself
has no benefit; he prizes the actings of faith and holiness highly, but he
has no advantage by them: God gives us profit by these, though himself be not
profited, though he is not the better by any thing we do, yet we are the
better; The Lord binds himself by promise, that the least good we do in
sincerity shall have a good reward; He that gives but a cup of cold water to a
Disciple in the name of a Disciple, shall not lose his reward. But if we give
thousands of Gold and Silver to poor Disciples, what profit has God by it?
And yet though none of the profit comes to his hand, yet he reckons it as if
all were put into his hand. All the charity and compassion showed to his
people, Christ takes to himself ( Matthew. 25.) In that ye have done it unto
these, ye have done it unto me. Christ had no need of alms, of visiting or
clothing, yet he counts it as done to himself, when we do it to any of his.

Can a man be profitable to God? as he that is wise may be profitable to
himself? Some give the meaning of the words thus: Does it follow, that a man
can be profitable unto God, because a wise man may be profitable to himself?
our reading reaches the same sense. Can a man be profitable unto God, as he
that is wise may be profitable to himself? It does not follow, because A man
may profit another man, or profit himself, that therefore he may profit God.
That Is the sum of the argument. (...) Intellexit prudens fuit, per Metonymiam
faelix prosper fuit, quod prudentibus omnia feliciter cedant; prudentiam
faelicitas fere sequitur.


As he that is wi^e. The word in the root of it signifies to Understand, to be
Prudent; and by a Metonymie to be happy, or to prosper, because usually
affairs succeed well and prosper in the hands of wise men; and happiness
usually follows wisdom; therefore to be wise, and to be profitable, are
signified by one and the same word in the Hebrew. So in this Text, He that is
wise is profitable to himself, that is, his affairs shall prosper. We find
this Title prefixed to diverse Psalms, Maschil, Maschil, intelligens prudens,
carmen erudiens ode didascalica. In titulis Psalmorum ter and decies legitur.
which is as much as A teaching Psalm, a Psalm making wise, a Psalm for
Instruction. This Title is given those Psalms, which as they have some
extraordinary matter, so usually they are Psalms of complaint under
affliction; and the reason of that is, because there is much instruction in
correction, much light of holy knowledge is to be had in the School of the
Cross: therefore usually those Psalms that describe the afflictions of the
Church, are called Maschil, Psalms of Instruction. Schola crucis, Schola lucis.
Luth.


He that is wise, and instructs: or he that is wise as having received
instruction, may be profitable to himself. All wisdom is not profitable to
man, for there is a wisdom of which the Scripture says, that God will
destroy it; a man cannot profit himself by that; and there is a wisdom which
is earthly sensual and devilish (Jam. 3.15.) A man (be he never so wise
according to this wisdom) shall not profit himself by it. There are a sort
of wise men whom the Lord will take in their craftiness (1 Cor. 3.19.) and how
can such profit themselves by their wisdom? There are wise men whose thoughts
the Lord knows to be but vain, that is, unprofitable, therefore these cannot
profit themselves: Then what is that wisdom which Eliphaz means when he
says, He that is wise may be profitable to himself?

I answer, The wise man here intended is not the man that is politickly wise,
worldly wise, carnally or craftily wise, but the man spiritually wise, his
wisdom will bring him in profit. He that is guided by holy and godly
wisdom, shall reap the benefit and eat the fruit of it. We have such wisdom
described ( Psalm. 111.10.) The fear of the Lord is the beginning of wisdom,
a good understanding have all they that keep his Commandments; he does not
say, a good understanding have all they that know his Commandments, for many
may know the Commandments, and yet not have a good understanding; but they
have a good understanding indeed that do his Commandments. And when the
Psalmist says, The fear of the Lord is the beginning of wisdom, the word
Beginning signifies not only the first step or entrance into a thing, but the
head or hight of it; so that Beginning is as much as chief, or principal, the
best wisdom, the chief, the top wisdom, the head wisdom, or the head of
wisdom, is the fear of the Lord. Job gives the same description of wisdom, in
the last words of the twenty-eighth Chapter, Behold the fear of the Lord that
is wisdom, and to depart from evil that is understanding. Would you know
what is true wisdom, it is the fear of the Lord: would ye know who is wise?
The godly man is the truly wise man, yea he is the only wise man.

But then it may be questioned, May a wise man be profitable to himself? Does
not the Apostle say ( Romans 14.7.) None of us lives to himself, etc. Then how
can a man be wise to himself? And does not the Apostle give the rule (2 Cor.
5.15.) Christ dyed for all, that they which live should not henceforth live
unto themselves: If we may not live to our selves, how then does he say here,
that the wise man is profitable to himself? He that is profitable to himself,
lives to himself, does he not?

I answer, First, the wise man must not make his own profit the end or the
design of his wisdom, but he may look upon his own profit as that which will
be the issue, frui^, and cons^quent of his wisdom. A carnal man looks to and
loves his work for the rewards sake: A godly man may look to and love his
reward for the works sake. ( Prove. 9.12.) If thou be wise thou shall be wise
for thy self, that is, the fruit or the good of thy wisdom will drop into thy
own bosom. A wise man may look for his advantage in the end of his work,
though he is not to make his own advantage the end of his work. We are not to
make either temporal or eternal advantages, the end of our wisdom; but we may
look upon them as fruits and effects that God leads us to by the exercise of
wisdom.

Secondly, I answer, a wise man cannot be profitable to himself as the founder
of his own happiness, or as having a sufficiency in himself to make himself
happy; but a wise man may be a means or an instrument of his own happiness;
and walking in the way of wisdom, he walks in the way to his own happiness.
Thus he that is godly wise, or that fears God, may be profitable to himself.

Hence Observe, He that is truly wise, godly and holy, shall find fruit and
benefit by it.

The Apostle (1 Timothy 4.8.) assures us that Godliness is profitable for all
things. The greatest gain in the world is Godliness, It has the promises of
this life and of that which is to come. Whatsoever drops out of any promise of
the Gospel, falls into the lap of a goly man; the promises are his, and
therefore the good of the promise is his. When the promises open at any time,
and give forth their virtue, they must needs give it forth to him that is wise,
to him that is godly, for godliness has the promises. When the Apostle had
rebuked a sort of men that made godliness only a stalking-hors to get gain,
he presently adds, But Godliness is great gain, if a man be content with what
he has. Godliness it self is great gain, if we have no more, but godliness
brings in gain, abundance of gain, besides it self. ( Matthew. 6.35.) Seek
first the Kingdom of God, and the righteousness thereof, and all these things
shall be added (or cast in as an advantage) to you. The Apostle ( Romans 6.21.)
puts a kind of holy scorn upon sinners, come, tell me, What fruit had you of
those things whereof you are now ashamed? What fruit have you by your folly,
pride, worldliness, envy, what fruit have you found in these things? Bring me
in an account of your gain by trading in any sin. The end of these things is
death; there is no great profit in that. But now being made free from sin, and
become servants to God, ye have your fruit unto holiness, and the end
everlasting life. Here are fruits good store, and all good fruits both for here
and hereafter. We can never want fruit our selves, while we are bringing forth
fruit unto God: All obedience is attended with a blessing, and though as was
touched before, we cannot be the founders of our own blessedness, nor must we
merely design our own happiness, or aim at our own pro^^^ (...) that is
mercenary service) yet we may look at our own happiness and profit, yea and
Lay up for our selves a good foundation, as Paul advises rich men (1 Timothy
6.1^.) We then make the best of our riches, when we lay up for our selves a
good foundation. But can a man lay a foundation of his happiness in his
riches? what a rotten foundation will that be? what hay and stubble (in this
sense) will gold and silver be? What Is the meaning of it then when the Apostle
says, Laying up for your selves a good foundation?

I answer, we do it by the right improvement of riches (for he speaks there to
rich men) not that we can lay any foundation to build upon beside Jesus Christ,
for other foundation can no man lay then that which is laid, even Jesus Christ;
but when our hearts are not glued to the creature, but we use them in a holy
manner, here is our laying up a good foundation. A godly wise man may look upon
his right improvement of worldly riches, as an effect of the grace and love of
Christ dwelling in his heart; and thus he may be said to lay up for himself a
good foundation. And further, a believer may look upon his worldly profits as
a fruit of the same grace, the Lord having promised that he will bless and
provide for him, so that every way a wise man may be profitable to himself.
Thus Eliphaz has at once asserted a possibility for a man to be profitable to
himself, and denied any possibility that a man can be profitable unto God,
which he further explaines in the next words.

Verse. 3. Is it any pleasure to the Almighty that thou art righteous? Or is it
any gain to him that thou make thy way perfect?
In the former Verse Eliphaz denied in general that God receives any benefit
from man: In this third Verse he speaks the same thing, but somewhat more
distinctly, denying first that he receives any pleasure which might add to his
blessedness, or secondly any gain which might add to his abundance. Is it any
pleasure to the Almighty that thou art righteous? Is it any gain to him that
thou make thy way perfect? As if he had said. Is the blessedness of God
increased by thy righteousness? Or does the perfection of thy ways augment
his treasure? Is he either the happier or the richer by any thing thou art or
can do? That Is the scope and sense of the words in general.

Is it any pleasure? The word which we Translate Pleasure, signifies the will,
(...) Notat voluntatem cum complacentia, vel acquiescentia.
and because it is so great a pleasure unto man to have his will, therefore the
same w^rd signifies both pleasure and the will. So the word is used ( Psalm.
1.2.) Blessed is the man whose delight is in the Law of God; that is, whose
will is there, or who takes pleasure in the Law of God, his will being resolved
into the will of God. Then we take pleasure and delight in a thing when we
conform to it, or close with it. The judgment of God is so expressed upon
Coniah (Jer. 22.28.) Is this man Coniah a despised broken Idol? Vas in quo non
est voluntas.
Is he a vessel wherein there is no pleasure? A Vessel for the lowest use, as
it is interpreted, ver. 21. A vessel in which there is no complacency, it is
only for necessity. So the word is taken also ( Prove. 3.15.) He is more
precious then Rubies, all the things thou can desire (or have pleasure in)
are not to be compared to him. And again, ( Isa. 58.13.) If thou forbear to
do thy pleasure upon mine holy day. What is the pleasure of a carnal man upon
the Sabbath, upon the holy day of God? It is to do his own will, and not the
will of God. If thou forbear to do thine own pleasure, that is, thine own will
upon my holy day. Thus here, Is it any pleasure to the Almighty that thou art
righteous? (...), etc. Sept.
The Septuagint Translate somewhat differently, What cares the Almighty if thou
art unblameable in thy ways? Thus a man usually speaks of that wherein he has
no pleasure, What care I for it? Is it any pleasure, etc.

That thou art righteous. Righteousness is twofold: First of Justification
(so some understand it here) Is it any pleasure to the Almighty that thou art
justified? Or secondly there is a righteousness in Conversation, so most
understand it here; Is it any pleasure to the Almighty that thou art holy?
Which is the same with the latter clause of the Text, That thou make thy way
perfect.

Further, the word signifies to plead our own justice, as well as to have a
justice or righteousness of our own. And thus it may be Expounded in this
place. An oblectationi est omnipotenti quod justificas te? Jun.
Is it any pleasure to the Almighty that thou art righteous, that is, that Thou
do justify thy self or (as Mr. Broughton) pleadest justice. Do thou
justify thy self, or stand upon thine own integrity, and then think to
please God, Se justificare non tam est justum esse quam contendere and conari
adversus calumnias and scelera sibi objecta and ex ratione coram judice
respondere.
or to carry the day against man, upon those terms? Is it any pleasure to the
Almighty? That word fully hits the design of Eliphaz, it signifies both
Almighty and All-sufficient, one that has all in his own compa^^, that needs
not go out of himself to fetch in any supplies or aid from abroad. He is
self-sufficient, and he has a sufficiency for all others. Is it any pleasure
to this Almighty one, that thou do thus justify thy self?

Or is it any gain to him that thou make thy way perfect? As it is no
pleasure, so no gain. The second Verse before opened clears the mind of this
clause. What there he calls profit, is here called gain, in different words:
And the word here used is rendered indifferently both gain and profit. ( Genesis
37.26.) When Joseph was cast into the pit, Judah said, What profit is it to
slay our Brother, let us sell him; let us make gain of him that way, slaying
him will be no profit to us. And as it signifies gain, so covetousnes, and the
reason is because covetousnes has gain for its object, covetousness provokes
men to seek gain. Jethro (Exodus 18.21.) gives council that Magistrates should
be Men fearing God and hating covetousness, or hating gain, that is not only
all covetous practices, but inordinate desires of gain, for these lead into
unlawful ways of gain, even to the perverting of Justice.

Is it any gain to him that thou make [thy way] perfect? That is, thy life,
thy conversation, thy course; what though thou strivest after the highest
seize of grace, the purest purity of life, is this any gain to the Lord?
The Septuagint render, That thou make thy way simple. The simple, sincere,
plain way is the perfect way. The perfection of our way is the simplicity,
sincerity, and uprightness of it.

Another reads, Is it any pleasure to the Almighty that thy way is undefiled,
Or clean, that thou do sweep and wash thy way, so that there is no spot to
be seen upon it. ( Psalm. 119.1.) Blessed are the undefiled or perfect in the
way. The several parts of this Psalm begin with a new Letter, Alphabetarius
est hic Psalmus, ostendens parvulos ab ipsis statim elementis and pueritia,
infarmandos esse ad pietatem. Hilar.
according to the order of the Hebrew Alphabet, intimating that it ought to be
learned even of Children, as one of the Ancients infers from it. The undefiled
in the way are such (properly) as have been holy or pure from their youth, such
as did never corrupt their ways. Timothy is said from a Child to learn the
Scriptures. Suppose thy way thus perfect, that none could tax thee with any
gross sin, even from thy Childhood, could this be any gain to the Almighty?

There is yet another Translation, Aut an lucro quod integras asseris vias
tuas. Iun.
which implies not only the study of holiness, but a boasting in holiness,
Is it any pleasure to the Almighty that thou do justify thy self? Or is it
any gain to him that thou do affirm thy ways are perfect? So it falls in
with the third rendering of the former clause.

For the understanding and further clearing of these words, I shall draw them
forth into distinct Propositions, which will be as so many Observations from
the Text. It may seem a very Paradox to assert that it is no pleasure to the
Almighty that a man makes his way perfect, therefore take the sense first in
three Affirmative Propositions, and then in three that are Negative.

First, The Lord has pleasure in us as we are righteous in Christ. Yea he
loves to hear us boast of this righteousness, and glory in it; and the more we
do so, the more pleasure he takes in it. ( Isa. 45.25.) Surely shall one say,
in the Lord have I righteousness, even to him shall men come, etc. In the Lord
shall all the seed of Israel be justified and shall glory. The seed of Israel
are righteous in the Lord, and glory in that righteousness; yea the Lord is
pleased to hear them glorying in that righteousness, for that is the
righteousness of his Son, in whom he is well pleased, (Mat. 3.^7.) And because
the Church is clothed with this righteousness, therefore she is called The
Lords delight, (Isai. 62.4.) Thou shall no more be called forsaken, neither
shall thy Land any more be termed desolate, but thou shall be called Hephzibah,
and thy land Beulah, for the Lord delights in thee. Thou shall be called my
delight, or my pleasure is in her. The word of the Text, the Lords pleasure is
in the Church, and therefore the Lords pleasure is in the Church, because the
Church is adorned and beautified with the righteousness of Jesus Christ; this
is it which causes the Lord to call his Church Hephzibah, My pleasure is in
her. When Eliphaz enquireth, Is it any pleasure to the Almighty that thou art
righteous? We may answer, the Lord has pleasure in this righteousness, and as
he tells the Church, so every particular Believer, his delight and pleasure is
in him.

Secondly, God takes pleasure also in us as we are righteous in Conversation.
David (Psalm. 147.10, 11.) gives a clear proof of it both in the negative and in
the affirmative. The Lord delights not in the strength of a Horse, he takes
not pleasure in the legs of a man. The Lords delight is neither in Horses nor
in men, neither in their strength, nor in their beauty: wherein is the Lords
pleasure then? The next words show us where, He takes pleasure in them that
fear him and hope in his mercy. This Scripture seems to speak directly
contrary to Eliphaz in Job, he says, Is it any pleasure to the Almighty that
thou art righteous? But David says, The Lord takes pleasure in those that
fear him; therefore we must not understand Eliphaz in this sense, as if the
Lord had no delight or contentment at all in the holiness of his people, as if
it were all one to him whether they are holy or unholy: There is a Generation
who say, that all actions are alike, and that it is all one before God, whether
men be righteous or unrighteous, whether they do good or evil: woe to them that
understand this Scripture in such a corrupt sense, for the Lord does not only
hate iniquity, but he is Of purer eyes then to behold any iniquity. He has no
pleasure either in unrighteousness, or in the unrighteous, but both
righteousness and the righteous are his pleasure. There are three things which
I shall touch for the confirmation of it.

First, the Lord cannot but take pleasure in his own Image: Now that
righteousness which is implanted in us, and put forth by us, the
righteousness of our natures and of our actions, as we are regenerate, is
nothing else but the Image of God renewed upon us. Seeing then God cannot but
take pleasure in his own Image, therefore it is a wickedness to think that God
takes no pleasure in a righteous man or in his righteousness.

Secondly, as this righteousness is the image of God in us, so it is the very
workmanship of God upon us ( Ephesians. 2.10.) For we are his workmanship; we are
so not only first in our natural capacity, as we are men, and secondly in our
civil capacity as such or such men, high or low, rich or poor, but also (which
is the thing intended by the Apostle) in our spiritual capacity as Saints. Thus
we are the workmanship of God, created in Christ Jesus unto good works, which
God has before ordained that we should walk in them. The same Apostle says
again, He that has wrought us for this self same thing is God, (2 Cor. 5.5.)
Is it possible that God should have no pleasure in his own works? We read in
the first of Genesis, that when he had made the world, the Lord saw all that he
had made, and behold it was very good. God has an All-seeing eye, he always
beholds all things, but when it is said, he saw all that he had made, this
imports a special act of God, after the manner of men, who strictly view and
behold what they have done, delighting in it; Thus the Lord saw all that he had
made, he (as it were) came to view his own work, he saw and behold it was very
good, he took pleasure in it. Now if God took pleasure in that structure and
fabric of the world, the first Creation, how much more does he take pleasure
in that holiness which he has wrought in the hearts of his people, which is a
second creation? and that is a more curious and noble structure then this
visible world is. The new Creation is more excellent then the old. Therefore the
Lord cannot but delight in a righteous person for he is his workmanship. What
Job (Chapter 14.15.) assures himself of, is most true in this respect. Thou will
have a desire to the work of thine hands. Job speaks there of his outward man:
my body (he means) was made by thee, it is the work of thy hands and thou will
fetch it back again, thou will redeem it from the dust. Whatsoever has the
workmanship of God upon it, he has pleasure in it as it is his work, and a
special pleasure in that, which (as any work of Grace is) is his special work.

Thirdly, this Consideration shows that the Lord must take pleasure in a
righteous person, because he bears the form of his will revealed in his word.
Holiness is our conformity to the will of God: Now the Lord cannot but take
pleasure in those who conform to his will. Samuel tells Saul (1 Samuel 15.22. and
there he uses this word in the Text) Has the Lord as great delight in
Burnt-offrings and sacrifices, as in obeying the voice of the Lord? God gave
thee a word, a Command, to which he expected thy conformity, but thou have
thought to please the Lord with Sacrifices, which he commanded thee not, this
was thy mistake and thy folly. We honor God when we do his will, surely then
he must needs take pleasure in those that do it. Man takes pleasure when he
can have his will (though it be a corrupt and sinful will) fulfilled: It
cannot but be a pleasure to God when his holy will is fulfilled, or done on
earth as it is in Heaven. Thus we see the second Propnsition cleared, for the
understanding of these words, That as the Lord takes pleasure in those who are
righteous by the imputed righteousness of his Son, so even in those also who
are reghteous by the Implanted righteousness or holiness of his spirit.

Thirdly, God takes pleasure to see a sincere and upright person justify
himself, or plead his own justice against all the false accusations and
suspicions of men. The Lord likes it well to hear a man who is falsely accused,
to stand up and maintain his own innocence, yea it is our duty, and we are
bound in conscience to maintain our own innocence. So David in the seventh
Psalm and in the eighteenth Psalm justified himself against Saul. And thus Job
all along in this Book justified himself against the opinion of his friends;
in this sense God takes pleasure, when we are so righteous in all our dealings,
and perfect in all our ways, that we dare encounter whosoever speaks the
contrary, and can wash off all the aspersions which either misguided and
mistaken friends, or professed Enemies cast upon us. You have now had those
three affirmative Propositions for the understanding of the Text. Take three
more in the Negative.

First, God has no pleasure to see us justify our selves before him, or to
plead our own righteousness with him, yea he is extremely displeased at it.
This some conceive the chief thing which Eliphaz aimed at. Is it any pleasure
to the Almighty that thou do justify thy self? No, thou do highly
provoke him in doing so, to plead with or to justify our selves before God
that we are righteous, is worse then all our unrighteousness, for this
overthrowes the whole design of the Gospel, which is (1 Cor. 1.29.) That no
flesh should glory in his presence, but be that glories, let him glory in the
Lord. And ( Romans 3.19, 20.) The Law convinces all, That all the world may
become guilty before God, therefore by the deeds of the Law there shall be no
flesh justified in his sight. God will have every mouth stopped, or cry guilty,
and therefore for any one to open his mouth and justify himself before God,
is to overthrow the Gospel. They are ignorant of the righteousness of God, who
go about to establish their own righteousness (Romans 10.3.) And as God has no
pleasure in them who boast of their righteousness to justify themselves
before him, so

Secondly, God has no pleasure in them who boast of their own righteousness,
and contemn others. Though a man may assert the righteousness of his
Conversation against all them who question it; yet God resents it highly when
any proclaim their own righteousness to the despising of others. Christ speaks
a Parable against those (in the 18th of Luke, v. 9, 10, 11.) who trusted in
themselves that they were righteous, and despised others. Two men went up into
the Temple to pray, the one a Pharisee, the other a Publican: The Pharisee
stood and prayed thus with himself, God I thank thee that I am not as other
men are, extortioners, adulterers, unjust, or even as this Publican. Here was
one that advanced his own active righteousness, and he did it with the
contempt of another, I am not as this Publican. The Lord takes no pleasure in
this, yea the Lord is highly displeased with this. And ( Isa 65.5.) the Prophet
represents the Lords indignation against this pharisaicall spirit in dreadful
eloquence, Stand by thy self, come not near to me, for I am holier then thou.
Thus they pleaded their righteousness in contempt of others. These (says the
Lord) are a smoke in my nose (that is, greevous, and displeasing) a fire that
burns all the day.

Thirdly, God has no pleasure at all in any of our righteousness, either in
the righteousness of our Justification, or the righteousness of our
Sanctification, as the least addition to his own happiness. The reason of it
is, because (as was showed from the former Verse) God is self-sufficient, and
has no dependence at all upon the Creature: So that what pleasure soever the
Lord has in the righteousness of our Justification, or of our Sanctification,
we cannot put it to this account, that we add any thing to his happiness.

All the pleasure which God takes is in himself, or in the fulfilling of his
own good pleasure in Christ. And therefore the work which Jesus was to do on
Earth, is called the pleasure of God (Isa. 53.10. Deus nullis rebus quae extra
ipsum sunt tangitur aut mutatur.
) It pleased the Lord to bruise him, he has put him to grief, when thou shall
make his soul an offering for sin, he shall see his seed, he shall prolong his
days, and the pleasure of the Lord shall prosper in his hand. That pleasure of
the Lord was the work which the Lord put into his hand, or which he gave him to
do, even the bringing about his eternal purpose, for the recovery of lost man;
that is a work in which the Lord takes pleasure, so much pleasure, that the
Prophet calls it His pleasure. And thus the Apostle speaks ( Ephesians. 1.5, 6.)
Having predestined us to the adoption of Children, by Jesus Christ, according
to the good pleasure of his own will, etc. The good pleasure of God is only
in his own will, that is his pleasure. The Lord delights to see his will
accomplished in the saving of sinners, as well as in the obedience of Saints,
that is a part of the good will of God: why does he take pleasure in the
obedience of Saints, even because his own will is done. It Is not any thing in
us that does it. So when he saves us, the pleasure which he takes is in the
fulfilling of his own will, rather then in our salvation. Is it any pleasure
to the Almighty that thou art righteous?

Verse. 4. Will he reprove thee for fear of thee? Or will he enter with thee
into judgment?
The Question is to be resolved into this negative, He will not reprove thee
for fear of thee, etc.

Will he reprove thee? (...) arguit redarguit, corripuit, judicavit.
The word signifies first to argue or dispute, and so to convince by the
authority of reason.

Secondly, to plead, so to convince by evidence of the Law and fact ( Mich.
6.2.) Hear ye O Mountains the Lords Controversy, and ye strong foundations
of the Earth, for the Lord has a controversy with his people, and he will
plead with Israel. The Mountains and the strong foundations of the earth, are
the great men of the earth, or Magistratical powers, with these the Lord
threatens a Controversy, and that he will plead or argue his cause with them.

Thirdly, it signifies to argue or plead not with words only, but with blows,
to reprove with correction. Job 5.17. Happy is the man whom thou correctest.
The word which here we render reprove, is there rendered to correct, which is
reproving by blows.

Fourthly, Some translate it to evidence, to evince, and determine: Thus it is
said ( Genesis 20.16.) that Abimilech reproved Sarah, that is, gave evidence that
she had a husband: And Abraham's Servant said ( Genesis 24.44.) She that says to
me, both drink thou, and I will also draw for thy Camels, let her be the woman
whom the Lord has appointed for my Masters Son. That is, let this token be an
evidence to me, that it is she whom thou have appointed for his wife. Some here
take it so, Will God evidence or determine concerning thee, by thy fear, or
the worship which thou give him, That thou art righteous. We express it
fully enough, Will he reprove thee for fear of thee?

Or will he enter with thee into judgment? Both these expressions are of the
same sense; and these words [for fear of thee] may be read in the close of the
Verse, Will he reprove thee, or will he enter with thee into judgment for fear
of thee?

Fear may be taken here two ways: Either first Actively, or secondly
Passively.

Take it Actively, and so it notes the Fear of Job, Putasne te plecti ob
religione^ tuam.
Will he reprove thee because of thy Fear? And then by his Fear we are to
understand his Religiousnesse or Holiness; so Mr. Broughton, Would he reprove
thee for thy Religion?

Take this Fear Passively, An de religione tua argueret te? Iun.
and then it implies a Fear which God himself might be thought to have of
him; as if Eliphaz had said, God is not afraid of thee. The Prophet says (
Isa. 51.12.) Who art thou that thou should be afraid of a man, etc. Quis vel
hoc desipiens sentiat, quod Dominus ex timore nos arguat and ex metu judicium
suum contra nos proponat. Greg.
Much more may we say, who or what is man that God should be afraid of him? One
of the Ancients following this Interpretation, professes that no fit or comely
sense can be given of these words, but concludes that Eliphaz spoke very
foolishly and grossly, or as a man forsaken and left of God: For (says he) can
any one imagine such a thing as this, that Job should have a thought that God
was afraid of him? But we may very well accommodate the sense in either of
these Considerations of Fear, whether Actively, or Passively, and judicious
Interpreters carry it both ways. Let us weigh it a little in both.

P^tasne, quod ille te affligat, quia^ religi^sus sis and Dei timeus ac integer
ut d^ te ipse predicas, minime vero, quiu potius quod sis irreligiosus. Merc.
First Actively, as Fear is taken for the Fear which Joh feared, that is, for
his religion and worship, or the exercise of it, then the meaning is this, Do
thou think that God does punish thee for thy goodness, or because thou art
righteous? No, it is because thou art irreligious: Is not thine iniquity great,
and thy sin infinite? As he speaks out in the n^xt words, Do thou think that
God punishes thee for thy holiness? No, he can find sins enough to do it for.
And Eliphaz might speak to such a sense (I conceive) because Job pleaded his
integrity so much; as if he should say, Never think that God afflicts thee for
thy holiness, or righteousness, but rather acknowledge thy sins and thy
wickedness to be the cause of thy afflictions, Are not thine iniquities
manifest?

There is a truth in this, God does correct many who fear him, but he does not
correct any one for fearing of him; many holy persons are afflicted, but no man
was ever afflicted for his holiness. God has made many promises to the godly
man, that he will reward him, and do him good. Say to the righteous it shall
be well with him. Godliness is profitable for all things, having ^he promises
of this life, and of that which is to come. Therefore no man needs fear that
God will hurt him for his holiness: though a holy man may receive many rods
and scourges from God, yet holiness never received the least scourge from God.

Numquid ex timore tuo judicabit te? Deus quando te judicabit, non respiciet ad
timorem tuum tantum and connivebit ad mala quae feceris. Hoc fine subijcit,
nonne malum tuum amplum est? ostendit autem nullam pietatem hominis esse
perfectam, ut mae justus judicari a deo possit. Coc.
Again, as fear is taken Actively for Religion, or for holiness, the sense may
be given thus, in pursuance of the fourth signification of the word Reprove,
before ^xplained, When God comes to judge thee, or when he declares what thou
art, he will not look to thy fear only, to thy profession of Religion, and
holiness, and overlook or wink at thy sins; and therefore he presently
subjoynes, Is not thy wickedness great? Hereby arguing, that no man's piety is
so perfect, that thereby he can be accounted just or righteous in the sight of
God, or that a man's profession, yea and practice of Religion is of no value,
either to escape the punishment of his sin, or to deserve a reward at the hands
of God. Some expound that ( Psalm. 50.8.) in a parallel sense to this, the
Original word being the same. I will not reprove thee for thy Sacrifices (which
is the same with Fear in the Text, according to this Interpretation, being put
for all outward worship or religiousnesse) or for thy burnt-offrings
continually before me; For those words, to have been, which our Translators
supply, may be left out, and the sense remain perfect: Or if those words be
continued, then the negative particle not, is (as in many Scriptures it is) to
be reassumed out of the first part of the Verse, and the whole read thus, I will
not reprove thee for thy sacrifices, or for thy Burnt-offrings not to have been
continually before me. That is, I will not charge thee with a neglect of
outward duty or worship, the inward and spiritual (of which he speaks, ver. 14.
Eliphazo propositum est ostendere quod religio hominis non prosit ad demerendum
deum, vel peccati paenam evadenda^. Coc.
) being that which is most pleasing unto me. Now as to the paraleling of this
place in the Psalms, with the sense of Job's Text now under hand, we must read
them thus, I will not judge thee for thy Sacrifices, that is, when I determine
concerning thy righteousness, I will not do it by having an eye to or
respecting thy Sacrifices, thy religious course and exercise of holiness, though
thou have bin much yea even continually conversant in them; I shall only argue
and declare thee righteous as thou trustest in me and by Faith take hold of
my Covenant. Thus as the Lord is conceived saying in the Psalm, I will not
judge or declare thee righteous for thy Sacrifices, so here Eliphaz, will he
(that is certainly he will not) judge or declare thee righteous for thy fear?
And so the latter part of the Verse may receive the same Exposition, Will he
enter with thee into judgment, namely for thy fear? Will God deal with thee
upon the account of thy piety? And when he comes to justify thee, will he
impute that to thee? Or when God enters into judgment with thee, will he
suffer thee to present thy fear, thy piety, or goodness to him, and so thereby
answer his plea, or take away the action which he brings against thee? When God
enters with us into judgment, we may boldly plead our interest or Faith in the
Mediator, but we must not plead our fear, the Grace or Holiness either of our
persons, or of our services.

Thus we see the Doctrine of the Text according to this Exposition, and the
Active signification of the word Fear, carries in it the very life and spirit
of the Gospel. All the worth and merit of our works as to righteousness, is
nul'd and laid prostrate, and we taught to glory in nothing but the free gift
and grace of God by our Lord Jesus Christ.

Secondly, As Fear is taken passively, Will he reprove thee for fear of thee?
That is, is God afraid of thee, does he pick quarrels with thee for fear of
thee? Or seek occasions against thee when there is none? only lest thou
should stand in his way, or be a detriment to him. This appears plainly to
be the sense of our Translators.

Whence Observe, God is above the fear of the Creature.

As in the former Verse God is above any advantages or hopes that the Creature
can give him, so he is above the fear of any hurt that the creature can do
him. As the goodness or righteousness of man cannot benefit the Lord, so the
wickedness and sinfulness of man cannot at all impair the eternal glory and
happiness of the Lord. Though the wickedness of man be a darkening to the
manifestations of his glory (and for that wicked men shall be judged) yet as to
his essential glory all the wickedness in the world cannot darken that, nor be
the least abatement to it. Will he reprove thee for fear of thee? No, man
cannot hurt the Lord by all his wickedness, and therefore

The punishment which God lays upon wicked men is not after the manner of
men. God does not punish as man punishes.

Eliphaz here speaks of that which is often indeed a true ground among men why
they reprove or punish other men. Some reprove others upon a vain fear of
them, and some upon a just fear of them. Why did the Jews accuse and reprove
Christ? Was it not for fear of him? at least they pretended a fear, why else
were they so hasty to have Jesus Christ brought to judgment? ( John 12.47,
48.) Then gathered the chief Priests and Pharisees a Council, and said, what
do we? for this man does many Miracles, if we let him thus alone, all men will
believe on him, and the Romans shall come and take away both our place and
Nation. They Crucified Christ for fear (though it was but a vain fear) that he
would be the ruin of their state; the Romans must needs come and destroy them
if they let him alone. Fear makes men cruel, and they are most ready to hurt
others, who continually suspect hurt from others. It has been an ancient
Observation, that Cowards are murtherous and revengefull; while a man fears
that such a man will be his ruin, he ruins him if he can, and removes that
out of his way which he supposes standing in the way of his own safety. Why
did Pharaoh give Command to slay the Male-Children of the Jews, and oppress
that people? It was upon a vain or cowardly fear, Come let us deal wisely
with them, lest they multiply, and it come to pass that when there falls out
any war, they join also with our enemies, and fight against us, and so get
them up out of the Land, (Ex. 1.10) It is said at the 7th verse of that Chap.
that the children of Israel were fruitful and (God fullfilling herein his
promise made to Abraham) increased abundantly, and multiplied and waxed
exceeding mighty, and the Land was filled with them. When God thus cast a
gracious eye upon them, Pharaoh and his Councellers cast a jelous eye upon
them; and began to suspect their multiplying might at last diminish him, that
their rising might prove his ruin. Therefore upon reason of state he must find
out a way to suppress and keep them under as slaves and bondmen, whom his
Ancestors received as welcome guests, and had to that day, enjoyed as faithful
friends. Pharaoh being captivated with this fear, saw no way to free himself,
but by taking away the freedom of that whole People. As some through the
prevalency of their own fears dare not do justice, so others through the
prevalency of fear do that which is unjust. Take one instance more, why did
Herod (Matthew. 2.) send out to slay all the Children? It was for fear of the
King of the Jews, he was afraid of Christ, and therefore that he might murder
him, he gave that horrible sentence to slay all the Infants. Again, some
reprove and judge upon a due fear, for as Tirants and wicked men are full of
fear because full of cruelty, and have suspicious thoughts that others will
wrong them, because they have a mind to wrong every man: so just and righteous
Magistrates when they see evil working, they must reprove and punish it lest it
spread to the endangering of the public Peace. This is a just fear, and such
as becomes a man, even a man of courage and integrity; such may fear that if
seditious spirits be let alone, Verissimum est illud, quod inter argumenta^dum
assumit Eliphaz, ex timore frequenter nasci aut vehementius accendi solere
severitatem in irrogando supplicio Pined.
they will undermine a whole Nation, and destroy thousands. A Magistrate
reproves and Judges Thieves and Murderers out of fear that if they increase no
man shall live quietly. Such as either openly or secretly contrive evil against
a Nation, the Magistrate from a just ground of fear deals with them and
reproves least they should disturb or infect the whole.

But the Lord does not reprove any man for fear of him, he is of such infinite
strength and stability, so far out of the reach of all the plots and
contrivances of the wicked, that he needs not call them to account lest they
should hurt his state, pull him out of his Throne, spoil his Kingdom, or get
his Dominion from him; the Lord is not afraid of any of these things, but the
true reason why the Lord reproves wicked men, is, because he hates their
iniquities, and is a God of truth and judgment. Though Magistrates may punish
not only out of the love of Righteousness and Judgment, but because they fear
a State may be ruined if they do it not, yet the Lord has none of this fear,
in regard of his State, but he does it merely out of love to justice, and as a
hater of wickedness.

He reproves man because he has sinned against him, not because he is afraid
of him, as Eliphaz shows in the words which follow.

JOB, CHAP. 22. 5, 6, 7, 8, 9. Is not thy wickedness great, and thine iniquity
infinite?

For thou have taken a pledge of thy Brother for naught, and stripped the naked
of their clothing.

Thou have not given water to the weary to drink, and thou have with holden
bread from the hungry.

But as for the mighty man he had the earth, and the honorable man dwelt in it.

Thou have sent widows away empty, and the arms of the fatherless have been
broken.


IN this Context Eliphaz intends to show the true reason why God reproved Job,
and entered into judgment with him; it was not (as was said at the 4th Verse)
either because God was afraid of him, or because he feared God, but it was for
his wickedness, as Eliphaz (though mistaken) concluded against him; as if he
had said, God does not punish thee because he is afraid of thee, but because he
loves justice, and hates iniquity, Is not thy wickedness great, and thine
iniquity infinite? That Is the scope of these words, which we may fitly call
Job's Indictment, and this Indictment is laid down first in general words,
verse. 5. Is not thy wickedness great, and thine iniquity infinite? And here
Job is not charged with wickedness and iniquity barely, but under a twofold
aggravation.

1. Great. 2. Infinite.
Secondly, We have his Indictment drawn ont into particular Charges, or a
spefication of some notorious sins given against him in the Verses following.

This particular Charge consists of two heads.

First, Sins against man; Secondly, Sins against God; His supposed sins
against man, contained in the words now read, are of two sorts; First, Sins
of commission, or of the evil which he had done; Secondly, Sins of omission,
or of the good that he had not done. The evil which he charge him to have
done, is twofold; first, an act of injustice, taking a pledge, in the sixth
verse; secondly, an act of uncharitableness, stripping the naked, in the same
verse.

Both which evils, or miscarriages toward the honest poor are aggravated (
ver. 8th) by his undue connivence at the wicked rich; as he was too severe
against the poor, so he was over-favourable toward the great, and mighty; But
as for the mighty man he had the earth, and the honorable man be dwelt in it;
as if he had said; Thou did never set thy self to do justice upon the great
ones, be they and do they what they will, they have the earth, thou did
never put forth or exercise thy power to suppress and oppose their
insolences, thy edge was turned only against inferior ones; Thou tookest a
pledge from the poor, and have stripped the naked of their clothing.

His sins of omission are expressed in the 7th verse; Thou have not given
water to the weary, thou have withholden bread from the hungry; and in the 9th
verse, Thou have sent widows away empty, and the arms of the fatherless have
been broken: Which may be either taken thus; Thou have broken their arms, or
thou have not given thy help, and assistance to restore, and relieve them when
broken. Thus we have a light into the meaning of these five verses, as they are
a charge of sin upon Job.

Verse. 5. Is not thy wickedness great?
The question may be taken two ways; either conjecturally, and doubtingly, or
assertively, and affirmingly. Usually in Scripture such questions are resolved
into assertions and so diverse Interpreters resolve this here; Is not thy
wickedness great? That is, I conclude against thee, that thy wickedness is
great, and that thy iniquities are infinite; so Mr Broughton renders;
Doubtless thy evil is great. Others conceive it more clear to the mind of
the Text, that this question should be interpreted conjecturally; Non tam haec
ei ex professo obijcit, quam cogitandum ei relinquit, number haec fecerit. Merc.
Is not thy wickedness great? That is, may we not suppose, that thy
wickedness is great? may we not from (at least) probable grounds think thus
of thee? And that, First, from the general state of man by nature, man's heart
being sinful he may sin, and sin (as it were) without bounds, greatly.
There is no man (says Solomon, 1 Kings 8. 46.) that lives, and sins not;
Solomon puts it as a parenthesis in his prayer, but it is such a parenthesis,
as hoocks in all man kind, it takes all in, Who is there that sins not? so
( Pro. 20.9.) Who can say I am clean from my sin? Now upon this general
ground Eliphaz might suppose, Is not thy wickedness great? All men have this
in their nature, and have not thou made improvement of it in thy life? All men
being sinful by nature, art not thou extremely sinful in practice?

Again, He might make the supposition upon this ground, his present condition,
or his affliction; thou art greatly afflicted, thy afflictions are not of an
ordinary sise, or measure, therefore is not thy wickedness great? and thine
iniquity beyond the ordinary measure? Upon this common rule he might suppose
his sin very great; for usually God does proportion, and measure out
punishments by our sins. Thy sufferings are very great, therefore are not thy
sins great too? Thus he might speak conjecturally upon both these
considerations; And yet if we consider how positively he speaks of particulars
at the 6th and 7th verses, etc: Thou have taken a pledge of thy brother for
naught, and stripped the naked of their clothing, etc. He gives us but too
much ground to think, that he did more then barely conjecture, while he said;
Is not thy wickedness great?

The word which we render wickedness, (...) malum tuu^ vox Hebraea pertinet ad
improbitate^ quandam and impudentiam, contra jus and aequum omnia conculcantem.
is by some specially expounded of that wickedness which has a kind of
impudence in it, and which does not only break, transgress, or step over the
Law, but spurns against it; every man that sins steppeth over the Law, over
the line, but there are some that kick at it, some who trample upon it, yea
they would destroy it; so some highten the emphasis of the word.

Again, the word is rendered by others as signifying the evil of punishment in
this part of the verse, and not the evil of sin; Is not thy affliction
great, therefore thy iniquity is infinite. Malitia in sacris interdu^ est
afflictio, aerumna, vexatio, pro malo paenae non culpae accipit. Rab: Lev:
The Greek word ( Matthew. 6.34.) answers this, Sufficient to the day is the
evil thereof, that is, the trouble, and the sorrow of it: ( Amos 3.6.) Is
there any evil in the City which the Lord has not done? So here, Is not thy
evil great, thy evil of punishment? therefore thy iniquity is infinite. But I
rather fix it upon the former: though the word sometimes signifies the evil of
affliction, yet here I shall take it for the evil of sin, or as we
translate, wickedness, which denotes not ordinary but great sin; for though
every wicked man be a sinner, yet every sinner is not properly a wicked man.

Further, wickedness in the former, and iniquity in the latter part of the
verse, may be thus distinguished; wickedness specially respects those acts by
which we hurt, and wrong others, iniquity, those in which we pass by or
neglect the duty which we owe to others; Malitiam dicit plurimam, sed
iniquitates infinitas, quia in pluribus peccat homo omittendo quam committendo.
Aquin.
and therefore Eliphaz calls his wickedness great, but his iniquities
infinite; because sins of omission are more in number then sins of
commission; Man fayles oftener by not doing the good required, then by doing the
evil forbidden. Nature can easier forbear that which it likes, or pleases
it, then be conversant in that which it likes not, or with which it is
displeased.

Is not thy wickedness great? The word signifies both magnitude and multitude,
and it may be taken both ways here, for great in bulk, and great in number.

But it may be said, whose wickedness is not great? or is any sin little?
Why then does Eliphaz fasten this upon Job, Is not thy wickedness great?

I answer, first, that it is unbecoming any man, to say his finnes are little;
we should not little, or lessen our sins, or have low thoughts of them; as
we ought not to have low thoughts of any of the mercies of God, but to think
them all great to us, yea too great for us; so we should not have light
thoughts of any of our sins, but judge the least of them great, and the
lightest of them heavy; yea even too great and too heavy for us to bear. Nor
does any thing more greaten a man's sin, then his opinion that it is little.

Secondly, I answer, that indeed no sin is little; in the least sin that
ever was committed, there is a greatness, as committed against the great God,
as it is a breach of the Law, and an abuse of the love of the Great God.
Nevertheless, though every sin, thus considered, is great, yet comparatively
some sins are but little, and sins being weighed one with the other, we may
give this distinction of them into little and great, light and heavy. And as
some Godly men are faithful and fear God above many, so some wicked men are
sinful and dishonor God above many. Is not thy wickedness great?

Hence note; It Is our duty not only to take notice of our sins, but of the
greatness and degree of our sins.

Eliphaz does well to put Job upon that inquiry, Is not thy wickedness Great?
Though he did ill so groundlesly to suspect, much more to conclude that it was
so. When Moses (Exodus 32.31.) interceded for the people, after they had made
the golden Calfe, he makes report of their sin to God in the fullest
aggravation of it; O, this people have sinned a great sin, and have made them
Gods of Gold; he does not only confess in their behalf, that they had
sinned, but they had sinned greatly, They have (says he) sinned a sin, that is
more then to do a thing that is sinful, and which is yet more, They have
sinned a great sin, and which is most of all, they (though they have been
taught and have professed that God made them) have made them gods of Gold.
David makes this the ground why he did beg pardon of his sin ( Psalm. 25.11.)
Pardon mine iniquity for it is great. As we are to look upon the greatness
of sin, to humble our souls with godly sorrow, so we are to look upon the
greatness of sin when we sue to the Lord for pardon; pardon my sin for it
is great; our very senciblenesse that our sin is great, is a prevayling
argument with God to pardon it; and our insenciblenesse that our sins are
great, gives the greatest stop to the pardon of them. And as every sin has
the more need of pardon, by how much the greater it is, so God will have the
more glory in pardoning it, by how much the greater it is. The great wounds,
and sicknesses of the Patient have the more need of curing, and if a Phycitian
cure a great wound, or sickness, he has the more honor by the cure. Now that
we may take the truest measure of our sins, we must look upon them, first in
their nature and kind, of what sort they are, and to what they relate in their
commission; secondly, in their circumstances, when, how, and in what manner
they have been committed. That sin which is but little in the nature of it,
may be a very great one in the circumstances of it. As there are some mercies
which we receive from God, little in their kind, yet great in their
circumstances, and very obligeing; so are our sins. Some finnes are very
horrid in their own nature, they lay the conscience wast, and eat out the
very principles of Godliness, such are Atheism, Blasphemy, and Idolatry. The
sin of the people of Israel in making Gods of Gold, how detestable was it? a
golden God, what an ugly sight is that? and indeed there are many sins which
by how much they have the more external beauty and glory upon them, the more
ugly and filthy they are. Other sins are small in their kind, yet by
additionall considerations they swell into an immense vastness, and become out
of measure finfull.

For Instance, first to sin against light, that is, not only to commit a
known sin, but to commit it knowingly. (It Is possible, that while we know
such a thing to be a sin, yet to do it unknowingly, or not to know that we
have done it; He that knows it is a sin to tell any untruth, may yet tell
one and not know it: But) when we do that which is a known sin, and likewise
know that we do it, then we have no cloak for our sin.

Secondly, To sin against many received mercies, greatens it exceedingly;
Thus the Lord aggravates the sin of David, I have done thus, and thus, for
thee, and if this had been to little, I would moreover have given thee such and
such things; Wherefore have thou despised the commandment of the Lord to do
evil in his sight, 2 Samuel 12.8, 9.

Thirdly, It greatens sin when continued in after warnings, and renewed
admonitions; He that being often reproved hardneth his neck, shall suddenly be
destroyed, and that without remedy, (Prove. 29.1.) The Greatness of his
punishment, (he shall be (not afflicted, but) destroyed) the quicknes of it (he
shall suddenly be destroyed) the irrecoverablenes of it (and that without
remedy) all these with one consent vote the greatness of that sin, whatsoever it
be in its kind, which is persisted in after persuasion to desist and depart
from it. The Church is commanded to pass her extremest censure upon that
offending brother, who having been told his fault; first, by that brother alone
whom he has offended; secondly, by him and two more associated as witnesses;
thirdly, then, by the Church gathered in the name of Christ. ( Matthew. 18.16,
17.) But if be will not hear thee, then take one or two more, that in the
mouth of two or three witnesses, every word may be established: and if he shall
neglect to hear them, tell it to the Church: but if he neglect to hear the
Church, let him be unto thee as a heathen man and a publicane. It is dangerous
enough to sin against a rule, but it is more dangerous to sin against a reproof;
especially against the reproof of a whole Church.

Fourthly, When we sin in the sight of judgments upon our selves, or others,
whether for the same, or other sins: This is as if a theife should steal
before the Judge, or under the gibbet, while he sees others arraigned or
executed for stealing. It is very evil to sin against judgments threatened,
but it is far worse to sin against Judgments executed. That wrath which is
revealed from heaven against all unrighteousness to the ear in the word of
God, should stop us from sin, much more that which is revealed to the eye in
the works of God.

Fifthly, When we sin against our own promises not to sin, when our own
words condemn us, as well as the word of God, this staynes every sin with a
double guilt.

Sixthly, The greatening of a sin is from the repeating of it after it has
been repented of. To fall into any sin out of which we have risen, makes our
fall the more grievous; when a sinner lickes up his own vomit, when he builds
again the things which he had destroyed, he makes himself a transgressor
indeed. They who repent not cannot expect mercy, what remains then for them
but a certain fearful expectation of Judgment, who repent of their
repentings?

Seventhly, Sin is greatly increased when acted with deliberation; to be
hurried into a sin though great, is not so great as to do a less evil
consultively, or to advise upon it and do it; some sin for want of advice,
many sin against advice, and not a few sin with advice, that is, advisedly.
It Is hard to find out a way to give them comfort, who sin with counsel. They
who are wise to do evil, or who do evil as a piece of their wisdom (such
every deliberate action is esteemed to be) will be found the greatest fools.
All sin is folly, but those sins have most of the fool in them, which we
think, we do wisely. In all these cases, we may well say to any man, as
Eliphaz here to Job; Is not thy wickedness great?

And thine iniquity infinite. (...) perversitas and non finis iniquitatibus
tuis. Heb. (...). 70. Rebellio aeterna. Vatabl.
The word which we translate iniquity, implies perverseness, or frowardness
in sinning; Is not thine iniquity infinite. The Hebrew is, There is no end to
thy iniquity, or thou do commit iniquity without end. The Septuagint render
it thus; Are not thy iniquities so many that they cannot be numbered? are they
not innumerable? Another thus; Is not thy rebellion eternal? And so the sense
reaches either the multiplication of acts, or the continuation of time. Our
reading is comprehensive of both; Is not thine iniquity infinite?

But how could Eliphaz make such a supposition as this? seeing there is nothing
infinite but God, and it is altogether impossible that there should be two
infinites. The heavens cannot hold two Suns, much less can the world hold
two infinites. God is The only Infinite; therefore sin is not infinite as
God is infinite; First, that is infinite which is without end; secondly, that
is infinite which is without bound, in both God is infinite; As he had no
beginning, so he shall have no end or period of his being; He is infinite in
reference to duration or time; and he is infinite in reference to place or
extent; He fills heaven and earth; and the heaven of heavens cannot contain
him. The Hebrew phrase in the Text, without end, answers our translation,
infinite; for infinite is that which has no bounds or end. So then in a strict
and proper sense, there is nothing infinite but God. And infinity runs
through all the titles of God, he is infinite in power, infinite in wisdom,
justice, righteousness, and mercy; It remains then to be further considered,
how we may understand this question, Is not thine iniquity infinite?

I answer, sin is not infinite properly, yet in a vulgar sense, sin may be
called infinite, for according to common acception, we call that infinite which
is very great, or which exceeds all ordinary bounds, though not all bounds;
only that is properly infinite which exceeds all bounds, but we usually say,
that is infinite which exceeds ordinary bounds. Thus some men's sins only are
infinite. For though every sin be a breaking of the bounds which God has set
us, either in excess or in defect; yet they who sin after a common rate or
proportion of sinning, may be said to keep their bounds in sinning. For what
the Apostle speaks of some trials and Temptations (1 Cor. 10.13.) the same
may be said of some sins and transgressions, that they are common to man. But
they who sin (as the Prophet speaks) with a high hand, or with both hands
greedily, they who draw iniquity with coards of vanity, and sin as i^ were
with cart-ropes, these do not only break the everlasting bounds of the Law,
but the ordinary bounds of sin. Their sins are not common (in the act, though
the principle be) to man; They sin as few men ever sinned, they sin like
devils rather then like men, and therefore (under this notion) their sin is
deservedly called infinite.

Secondly, We may say, that sin has an infiniteness in it in reference to the
object, God, and so not only a great sin, and many sins, but small sins, or
any one sin may be said to have an infiniteness in it, because it is
committed against an infinite God. And hence it is that nothing can expiate
sin but what has an infiniteness in it; the least sin, calls for the blood
of Christ to take it away, which blood has a kind of infinity in it; for
though the sufferings and blood of Christ were not properly infinite, because
they were the sufferings of the humane nature, yet the divine nature shed forth
an infinite worth and value upon his sufferings; and therefore we are said to
be redeemed (or purchased) by the blood of God (Act. 20.28.) that is, by the
blood of that person who is God, though the humane nature only was capable of
having blood shed. Thus we may say, that the least sin, with respect to the
object is infinite, God himself being offended and wronged by every sin.

Thirdly, As this infiniteness may be considered in reference to the extent of
any one sin (that reaching as high as God) so to the number, or rather to the
numberless of our sins. There is an Arithmeticall as well as a Geometrical
infinity in sin. Thus the Septuagint (as was said before) render the Text; Are
not thine iniquities innumerable? That has a kind of infinity which cannot be
numbered; but cannot our sins be numbered? are they infinite in number?

I answer, sins may be considered two ways: first, in their species and
kinds; secondly, in their acts, if we consider sins in their species and
kinds, so they are not innumerable, for it is possible to number up all the
several heads, divisions, and kinds of sin; but if we consider sin in
reference to acts, so every man's sins are innumerable; yet this innumerablenes
of sins in reference to acts, may be considered either absolutely, or as to us.
The acts of sin, are not absolutely or in themselves innumerable, but as to us
they are innumerable: they are more then any man can number. John says, ( Rev.
7.9.) After this I beheld, and lo a great multitude, which no man could number
(besides those that were sealed of every Tribe,) of all Nations, and kindreds,
etc.) This great multitude was not in it self without number, but as to man's
arithmeticke it was, no man could number it. The hairs of our head, and the
sands of the Sea, are numerable to God, but to us innumerable. David (Psalm.
40.12.) speaks first of innumerable evils, and then of innumerable sins;
innumerable evils compass me about, mine iniquities have taken hold upon me,
so that I am not able to look up: they are more then the hairs of my head,
therefore my heart fails me; when he says, they are more then the hairs of
my head, his meaning is, they are innumerable; I can no more tell the sum of
my sins, then the sum of my hayres. Christ to assure his Disciples in time
of their afflictions and sufferings, that he will take care of them, tells
them; The very hayres of your head are all numbered, (Mat. 10.30.) As if he had
said, seeing God takes care of those inconsiderable (not parts, but) excrements
of the body, surely then he will take care of those more noble parts of your
bodies, and most of all of that most noble part of you, (which is your all)
your souls. The hayres of our heads are innumerable to us, but God numbers
them. The sins of our hearts and lives are all numbered by God. Thou tellest my
wanderings, (says holy David, Psalm. 56.8.) he means it of his wanderings by
persecution, and it is as true of his wanderings by transgression. But what man
knows the errors or wanderings either of his heart or life ( Psalm. 19.12.) He
that has fewest sins, has more then he can number; and therefore every man's
sins are to him, in number infinite.

Fourthly, Iniquities may he called infinite in reference to the will, or the
spirit of him that commits those iniquities: those sins are without
bounds, to which man would never set a bound. The natural man would never end
sinning, therefore his sins are without end, or infinite. The Prophet ( Jer.
13.27.) speaks reproveingly to that people in the name of the Lord; I have
seen thine adulteries, and thy neighings, the lewdness of thy whoredom, and
thine abominations on the hills in the feilds; woe unto thee, O Jerusalem, will thou not be made clean, when shall it once be? As if be had said; O Jerusalem,
thou have no will to be made clean, or thou would never be clean, if thou
might have thy will; When shall it once be? The time is yet to come when
thou would have it to be so; thou have a mind to pollute thy self still,
but no mind to wash thy self from thy pollution. The sins of a person or
people are then infinite, or without end, when they discover that they have no
mind to leave sinning. A godly man's desires to do good are infinite, and so
are the desires of a wicked man to do evil. This Prophet had spoken to
Jerusalem in the same language ( Chap. 4.14.) How long shall vain thoughts
lodge in thee? when will thou be weary of these lodgers, when will thou bid
these guests be gone, whom thou have thus long bid welcome? The Church of God
does sometimes suffer evil to lodge very long in her, even in the midst of
her, as it were, at her very heart; but the world lodges or lies
(continually) in evil (1 John 5.19.) and there (as it is the world) it will
lie for ever, soakt and steept in evil. Some give this as one reason to
justify the infiniteness or everlastingnesse of the punishment that is laid
upon impenitent sinners in hell. The damned are under endless sufferings,
because they would have sinned without end; Vellet sine fine vivere ut posset
sine fine peccare. Greg.
A wicked man would live long, yea he would have no end of his life here, he
would live ever, that he might sin ever; therefore the Lord gives him a
life, not such a one as he would have, but such a one as he deserves to have,
which is indeed a death for ever. They dye eternally for sin, who would have
lived eternally in sin. Take a Scripture or two more to illustrate this way of
the infinity of man's sin, ( Jer. 8.5.) Why is this people of Jerusalem
slidden back, by a perpetual backsliding; they hold fast deceit, they refuse
to return; Here are three phrases noting this one thing. First, They hold fast
deceit; secondly, They refused to return; thirdly, Their's was a perpetual
backsliding, or as some read it, an eternal rebellion, an obstinate
rebellion, a strong and mighty rebellion; the Seventy call it, an impudent
shameless rebellion: all these are proper Epithites of that obstinacy, and
setlednesse of resolution, which is in the heart of man by nature to continue
in sin; yet there is a further rendering of the words, which as the Original
will bear, so it has an elegancy in it, Why is this people of Jerusalem
slidden back by a conquering, or a prevailing backsliding? A perpetual
backsliding has conquest or triumph attributed to it upon a twofold
consideration; first, in reference to other sins; final obstinacy, or
impenitency lifts up its head above all other sins, and sits as King among
them; impenitency under any sin committed, is greater then the sin committed;
not to repent of the evil we have done, is worse then the evil which we do.
Impenitency seals the soul under condemnation. Repentance conquers sin, but
impenitency is the conquering sin. Secondly, it is called a triumphing or
conquering sin, because it seems (as it were) to carry the day against the
mercy and goodness of God, that is a sad conquest indeed; not that any sin,
no nor impenitency for sin, exceeds the mercy and goodness of God; for his
thoughts of mercy are as high above our acts of sin, as they are above our
thoughts of his mercy, and that is as high as the heaven is in comparison of
the earth. ( Isa. 55.9.) But the mercy of the Lord is said to be overcome by
perpetual backslidings, because the Lord will not be merciful to such; thus
final impenitency may be called a triumphing or conquering sin, seeing the mercy
of God seems to yield unto it; They will not humble themselves to seek mercy,
yea they slight and despise mercy, therefore they shall not find mercy. The
Prophet Jeremie represents the LORD thus expostulating again with the Jewish
Nation ( Chap. 5.22, 23.) Fear ye not me, says the Lord, will ye not tremble
at my presence, which have placed the sand for the bound of the Sea by a
perpetual decree that it cannot pass it, and though the waves thereof toss
themselves, yet can they not prevail, and though they roar, yet can they not
pass over it; but this people has a revolting and rebellious heart, they are
revolted and gone. The words, as I conceive, have these two things in them;
first, that the Lord is to be feared who does such things, who sets bounds to
the Sea, etc. Secondly, that the wickedness of man's heart is admirable, or
rather that we are to be astonished at the wickedness of man's heart, which is
more boisterous and disobedient, then the raging waves of the Sea. The Lord
sets bounds to the waves of the Sea, which waves in their own nature are
altogether boundless; liquid waves have no bounds of their own, yet the Lord
having put bounds to them, they are kept in bounds; The sand bounds the Sea, so
that though the waves thereof toss, they cannot prevail, though they roar
they cannot pass over; but this people have revolted, and are gone; As if he
had said, I the Lord have put a bound to the Sea, I have also set a bound to
the wickedness of man's heart; what is that? my Word, my Law. The Law of God is
a moral bound to stop and keep in compass the raging waves of man's
corruption. God does not always put an external bound by sword and judgment
to stop men whether they will or no from sin, but he always puts a moral
bound to stop them; this is supposed in the Text, I put a bound to the Sea, to
the Sea also of man's heart, to the wickedness that is there, but this people
are revolted and gone, they have broken all my bounds, even that perpetual
decree of my righteous Law. Now as when the Sea breaks its bounds, the waters
flow infinitely, there is no stopping them; so when the heart of man breaks
bounds, revolts and is gone, he sins infinitely, he makes no end of sinning.
By these Scriptures we may understand in what sense the iniquities of wicked
men may be said to be infinite; though nothing is infinite in a strict and
proper sense, but God himself.

Is not thy wickedness great, and thine iniquity infinite? But has Job given
Eliphaz any just occasion of this surmise, that his sin was in this sense
infinite? Did he ever observe either wickedness in general, or those
particular wickednesses which he presently enumerates, taking a pledge, denying
relief of the poor, stripping the naked, etc? had he seen any of these
evils acted by Job? certainly he had not; Job was a man of another frame of
life then these things import; these black lines and colors would never make
the picture of Jobs heart or life; this is as ill a draught of a man as could
be made; yet Eliphaz puts all this upon Job, at least by supposition; is it not
thus? but what reason had he for this supposition? none but this, the
greatness of his affliction; the infinite troubles that were upon him; God set
no bounds to Jobs sorrows, therefore he thought Job had sinned beyond all
bounds.

Hence observe; We are ready to judge their sins great, who are the greatest
sufferers.

Though we know nothing by them, though we can charge nothing upon them, yet
this thought rises naturally in us, when we see any under great and
extraordinary sufferings, surely they are great, and extraordinary sinners. The
worst of sinners never suffered more in this world, then the best of Saints;
Witness those Jewish Worthyes, whose torments are reported by the Author to the
Hebrews (Chap. 11.37.) and as these were adjudged to suffer, because they were
thought the worst of sinners, so, doubtless, many who saw them suffer thought
them such, though they knew nothing done by them to make them such. Read also
this Spirit ( Luke 13.2. Act. 28.4.) This has been formerly observed from
other passages in this book, and therefore I only touch it, and pass away.

Again, Eliphaz seems to take Job off from the wrong ground of his
sufferings, and tells him, though he looked to other reasons, yet the true
reason was the greatness of his wickedness, and the numberlesnes of his
iniquities.

Hence observe; That few think of, or hitt upon any other cause of suffering
but sin.

Sin is so much and so often the cause of suffering, that we do it no wrong to
suspect it as the cause of all sufferings; and it is indeed one kinds of cause
(causa sine qua non) of all our sufferings; so that we can hardly wrong sin by
this suspicion, but we may easily wrong both God and man by it. When the blind
man came before Christ, his Disciples asked him, saying; Master, who did sin,
this man or his parents, that he was borne blind; they could hit upon nothing
but sin, why the man was borne blind, ( Joh. 9.2.) But at the third verse,
Christ answered, Neither has this man sinned, nor his parents; he vindicates
both from this suspicion. What man was this? and who were his parents, that
they sinned not? were they clean from sin? not so neither, but the meaning
of Christ is this, neither has this man sinned, nor his parents, so, as that
either his sin or theirs should be reckoned the special cause why he was borne
blind. There was somewhat else in it, which the Disciples took no notice of,
nor did they understand. Christ does not deny but that a man's own sin, and
the sin of his parents may be a cause of blindness; but neither the one nor
the other was the cause in that man's case; as if Christ had said; Can you
think of nothing else why a man is afflicted but only his sin? There are
many other causes of suffering besides that. The cause why some suffer, is the
trial of their graces. The cause why many suffer, is to bear witness to the
truth, and to encourage others both in the profession of it, and in
persecutions for it. And Christ particularly assigns another cause of the
sufferings of the blind man, That the work of God might be made manifest in
him: That the work of God in his power and mercy might be seen in restoring
this man to his fight, therefore was he borne without the power of seeing. The
blindness of that man was an occasion to make a very glorious discovery of God.
Much of God had not been so eminently seen at that time, if that man had
always seen. Many are cast down upon beds of sickness, or into a state of
poverty, that the work of God in raising them up to health and plenty may be
made manifest. The design of God looks beyond the sin of man in the
afflictions of most men, yet man seldom looks beyond it.

Thirdly, Note from the whole verse; That we are more ready to judge the sins
of others great, then our own.

Is not thy wickedness great, and thine iniquities infinite? Eliphaz might
have said as much of himself and his own sin; and it had been but a duty to
have done so; we should not aggravate the sins of others, nor extenuate or
lessen our own, we should not set the sins of others in open light, nor
provide coverings for our own, yet most commonly we run the contrary course:
we have a favorable opinion, and excuses ready for what we have done, while we
have hard thoughts of, and give harsh censures upon what others do; our own
sins we can call moats, and the sins of others beams. The better any man is,
the better he judges others, and the worse of himself; Paul spoke no
complement, while he said, that he was less then the least of all Saints, and
the chief of sinners; usually they who are the severest observers and
censurers of others, either flatter, or have not well observed themselves.

Fourthly.

Forasmuch as Eliphaz seeing Job under great sufferings, says to him; Is not
thy wickedness great? The counsel in it self was seasonable.

Hence observe; That in time of suffering, it is good both to put our selves
and others upon inquiry about our sins.

So the Prophet ( Lam. 3.39, 40.) Why does a living man complain, a man for
the punishment of his sins? Let us search and try our ways, and turn again
to the Lord; times of afflictions should be times of inquisition, when the Lord
is smiting, we should be searching; when we have received many wounds, it is
time for us to be suspecting our selves of many sins; and the counsel of
others is not to be rejected, when seeing us in sorrow, they advise us to
consider what our sins are, how great, and how many. For though we should be
tender in pressing those who are under the load and burden of affliction, with
the burden of their sins, yet they who are so, shall do well and wisely to
press it upon themselves.

Fifthly, Whereas Eliphaz says; Is not thy wickedness great, and thine
iniquity infinite? and in the next verse, concludes upon it; Thou have taken a
pledge from thy brother for naught, etc. All which were but conjectures and
suspicions.

Observe; That suppositions and conjectures are no fit grounds, upon which to
build a judgment concerning the faultines of others.

We must not Censure upon, I hear so, I suppose so, I think so, but upon, I
know it is so; many have run into great sin by judging the sins of others
Great. Judge not (says our Savior, Matthew. 7.1.) that ye be not judged. He
speaks not against all judgment, but either, first, against severe and harsh
judging, or secondly, against false judging, or thirdly, against inconsiderate
and rash judging. When we judge without due ground, not knowing the why or
wherefore of our Judgment, take heed of such judging, that ye be not judged,
that is, lest having judged others unduely, ye receive your due in Judgment.
Eliphaz had nothing upon knowledge to charge Job for, yet while he questions,
Is not thy wickedness great? He does more then seemingly conclude that his sin
was very great, and his iniquities infinite. And in the next verse in stead of
querying, he comes to peremptory concluding;

Verse. 6. For thou have taken a pledge from thy brother for naught, and
stripped the naked of their clothing.
Now begins the special charge, or indictment, now he innumerates several
sins; As if he had said; What do thou stand looking for matter, or reasons
why thou art thus afflicted, here are the reasons, I will name them to thee;
Thou have taken a pledge fram thy brother for naught. Thus Eliphaz powers upon
him, and discharges whole volyes of deadly shot, but all at random, and
besides the mark. Before, he spoke in the third person, he speaks now in the
second, thou, thou, thou art the man, thou have taken a pledge. Again, Eliphaz
had formerly dealt with Job as an hypocrite; he then granted that he had some
shows of holiness, and some appearance or counterfeit of goodness at least,
now he denies that; now he pulls off his visour or mask, and objects against
him barefaced. Before he charged him with falsenesse of heart, while he
professed and practiced Religion; but now he objects such practices against
him, as no man does who has but a profession of Religion. He objects those
crimes against him which are proper to profane open sinners, to common
oppressors, who raise themselves upon the ruins, and enrich themselves by the
spoils of their weaker brethren; These are sinners not only against the Law of
God, but light of nature; these are acts not only of impiety, but of cruelty,
inhumanity, and tyranny.

Thou have taken a pledge from thy brother for naught. Job was a Magistrate,
and this would have aggravated his sin exceedingly, if it had been true; for
any man to oppress another is very wickedness; but for a Magistrate who is
set up to be a protector, a releiver of others, a helper of the freindlesse,
and a Judge of the widow, for him to carry himself thus, for him to oppress
and grind the faces of the poor, is most tyrannical. Tyrannus est, qui ita
dominatur, ut ad proprium commodum and utilitatem omnia conferat. Arist. lib.
4. polit. and 1. Ethic.
Thus Aristotle defines a Tyrant; He is one that rules so as to turn all to
his own private benefit or profit; he that governs so, governs for himself;
Whereas true government seeks and respects the good of others. Just governors
are a general blessing, and their aim is the common, not their private
wealth. Thus Eliphaz renders Job a very tyrant, who when he should be a
nursing-father to his Country, proves a devourer of it, and when he should
provide bread for those about him, he takes their bread, yea their blood from
them, and gives them a stone.

Thou have taken a pledge from thy brother for naught. There are three
aggravations of his supposed sin in these words.

First, That he took a pledge.

Secondly, That he took it of a brother.

Thirdly, That he took it for naught.

Thou have taken a pledge] The Hebrew is no more then this, Thou have pledged.
In Hebraeo simplex est verbum (...) quod est pignorare aut pignus accipere idem
est obligare.
The word signifies also to bind, or fasten a thing as with a coard, and the
reason is, because a pledge given is an obligation, a ty or bond to perform
the promise made, or pay the debt contracted. A promise is an audible bond, but
a pledge is a visible bond. It is no sin in it self to take a pledge, no
more then it is a sin to buy, sell, or to engage a man any other way, to
perform a bargain, or repay a debt. The Law of God published by Moses allowed
the taking of a pledge, what is it then which Eliphaz charge upon Job as
sinful in taking a pledge? I conceive there are two things which show
sinfulness in taking a pledge, and that both are employed here.

First, He intimates that Job did not wait to receive a pledge at the hand of
his brother, but he did as it were rush in upon him, and took the pledge; for
so tender was the Lord in reference to the poor of his People, or to those
that should be in need to borrow of their brethren, and so give a pledge for
security; that he gives this special order ( Deuteronomy. 34.10.) When thou do
lend thy brother any thing, thou shall not go into his house to fetch his
pledge (it was not unlawful to receive a pledge from his brother, but to go
into his house was against the Law) but thou shall stand abroad, and the man
shall bring it out to thee. Some conceive that this was the sin charged upon
Job; Thou have taken a pledge from thy brother, thou have not according to this
express Law of God tarried for it; and supposing that Eliphaz and Job lived
before the giving of that Law, yet the light of nature teaches, that we should
not press a man, or pull his pledge from him, but that the borrower should go
into his house, and bringing his pledge, deliver it up freely with his own
hand into the hand of the lender. It is an affliction to have need to borrow,
Ipsa pignoris etymologia, docere hominem videtur pignus non tam propria manu
auferendum ab invito and misero debitore, quam accipiendum non nisi ipsius
debitoris manu oblatum: pignus enim appellatum est a pugno, quia res quae
pignori dantur, manu traduntur. Cajus
and therefore the borrower should be so tenderly dealt with by the lender as
not to add affliction to him. It is a courtesy to lend to him that is in need,
but as some in giving, so most in lending spoil all the courtesy of it; while
they lend their money, they snatch or gripe at their security; whereas the old
Law said (the equity whereof, though not the formality, remains to this day)
Thou shall not go into thy brothers house to fetch his pledge, but thou shall
stand abroad and the man shall bring it out to thee. Some Critticks tells us
that this is signified in the Etymology of the Latin word, which signifies a
pledge. Namely, that the lender should not take but receive it from the hand of
the borrower. It is the duty of borrowers to pay: The wicked borrows and
pays not again, (Psalm. 37.21.) The Apostles rule to the Godly is; Owe no man
any thing but to love one another, (Romans 13.8.) Now, as it is the duty of the
borrower to pay, so of the lender to be moderate, and not to exact or impose
heavily upon him, for the assuring of his payments. As he that buyeth should be
as if he bought not, so he that lends should be (in this respect) as if he lent
not; He should lend with so much mildness and meeknes of spirit, as if he
gave, rather then lent; or as if (the contrary whereof Solomon found in his
experience, Pro. 22.7.) himself the lender, were servant to the borrower. Job
is charged first with failing in this; As if he had over eagerly pressed upon
his brother for a pledge; Thou have taken a pledge from thy brother.

Secondly, The taking a pledge from a brother, may be expounded of withholding
a pledge when it is called for, or of the not restoring it, when the Covenants
are performed. This is not only to take it, but to take it away; suppose the
pledge has been given into a man's hand, yet if he will not restore it, or give
it back out of his hand when called for, but make excuses, or delays, This is
to take away the pledge. And thus some make out the sin of the Text; Thou have
taken a pledge; that is, thou have swept it quite away, thou have refused to
restore the pledge, when that which was borrowed upon it, has been in due time
tendered to be paid or restored. The Prophet Ezekiel (Chap. 18.14, 15, 16.)
numbers the contrary practices among those Negatives, for which the Lord
declares himself much pleased with the son of a wicked father; A son that
sees all his fathers sins, that he has done, and does not such like; that
has not eaten upon the mountains, neither has lift up his eyes to the idols
of the house of Israel; that has not defiled his neighbors wife, neither
has oppressed any; that has not withholden the pledge, neither has spoiled
by violence, etc. he shall not dye for the iniquity of his father, he shall
surely live. Here sinning in the matter of a pledge, is pitched upon
withholding it, not upon taking it. For though a man have a pledge fayrely
delivered up to him, though he do not rush into the borrowers house, and there
be his own carver, taking what himself lists to secure that which he has
lent, yet if he withhold the pledge when it is required, and desired to be
returned upon promised satisfaction made, this is very sinful and oppressive.
Some when they get a good thing in their hands, they are loath to part with it,
and will have a device to prove it forfeited by the borrower, when indeed, it is
only coveted by the lender.

Hence note; That violently to take or unjustly to detain the pledge committed
to us, is to act the part of the oppressor.

That Law which says; Thou shall not steal, does as much forbid the detaining
in our hands, as the laying of our hands upon that which is our neighbors. And
he that withholds the pledge when the debtor is ready and offers to redeem it,
is like him that withholdes the debt when the lender desires him, and he is
able to repay it. Thou have taken or withholden a pledge. That Is thy sin.

Secondly, There is a further aggravation of sin in the words respecting the
person from which the pledge was taken; A Brother: Thou have taken a pledge
from thy brother. This adds to the sin; we should be kind to all, but
especially to a brother. A brother, may be taken either strictly for one next
or near by birth or blood, a brother by consanguinity: such are in the most
proper sense, our brethren and our own flesh. Or the word brother may be taken
in a large sense, for any that are near to us, as being either of the same
profession of Religion with us, or living in the same Cit^^, society, or under
the same Government with us. These are our brethren and our own flesh too. And
so the Prophet calls them even when pinched with hunger and nakedness, the
more to move the bowels of our compassion toward them, ( Isa. 58.7.) When thou
see the naked, that thou cover him, and that thou hide not thy self from thy
own flesh; As richly clothed as thou art, and as naked as they are, thine
own flesh they are. When Eliphaz says, Thou have taken a pledge from thy
brother, he takes in brethren under all distinctions. This he adds to highten
Jobs sin; Thou tookest a pledge from thy brother.

Hence note; That as it is unjust and uncharitable to wrong any man, so most of
all those that are near to us.

To wrong a brother of any latitude or degree is sinful, and still the nearer
the brother is, the more sinful it is to wrong him: the sin which a man
commits against himself is therefore greatest of all, because a man is nearest
to himself; so in proportion the nearer any one is to us in any relation, the
more we sin in wronging him. The Apostle puts it under that notion; If a
brother or a sister be naked, and destitute of daily food, etc. Jam. 2.15. And
again, 1 John 3.17. Whosoever has this worlds good, and sees his brother
have need and shuts up his bowels of compassion from him, how dwells the
love of God in him? That is, the love of God does not at all dwell in him, or
at best it dwells very poorly and undiscernably in him. To see strangers yea
enemies destitute and not relieve them, is uncharitable; but to see a brother
or a sister, and chiefly a brother or a sister in spiritual relation (for of
such I conceive the Apostle speaks particularly, in those places, I say, to
see such) destitute and not to relieve them, this is highest uncharitableness.

Again, Some render thus, (not thou have taken a pledge from thy brother, but)
Thou have taken thy brother for a pledge. This speaks yet louder, and is a sin
of a blacker color then the former; thou have not only taken thy brothers
pledge, but himself, his very person for security or for payment. But what is
it to take a man's brother for a pledge? In pignus accepisti fratres tuos. Sept.
or how was that done? These ^wo things may be in it, either first more
generally thou have imprisoned him. As ( Mat. 1^.28.) it is said of the cruel
Creditour that he took his brother, and cast him into prison till he should pay
the utmost farthing: now though all kind of imprisonment be not sinful, not
only as to the law of Nations, but as to the Law of God; yet cruel
imprisonment is very sinful; Thou have taken thy brother for a pledge: Thou
have not spared his person when he had not a purse to pay thee; Thou have (as
it has been said among us) made dice of his bones. Some would never pay, were
it not for fear of a prison; but to put and detain a poor man in prison when
he has nothing to pay, is not only unchristian, but barbarous and inhumane.
Or secondly (which was used in ancient times) Thou have taken thy brother for a
pledge, that is, thou have made him thy slave: To be cast into prison is a
slavery, and a man may be made a slave, yet not imprisoned. And though it may
be a duty (when we have nothing else to satisfy it with) to work out a debt,
yet it is a very high severity to force a debtor to pay with his work. We
read how the poor widow came to Elisha the Prophet, and bemoaned her case to
him, (2 King. 4.1.) Thy servant my husband is dead, and thou know that thy
servant did fear the Lord, and the creditour is come to take unto him my two
sons to be bondmen; This is to take a brother for a pledge; The Prophet
seems to aim at this while he describes those hypocritical fasts among the
Jews ( Isa. 58.6.) Is not this the fast that I have chosen, to loose the bands
of wickedness, to undo the heavy burdens, and to let the oppressed go free,
and that ye break every yoke; To fast and not to reform, is to mock God
rath^r then to humble our selves. Here are the true fruits of fasting. And they
all run into the point in hand, the avoiding and turning from all injurious and
vexatious dealings with our Brethren. First, the bands of wickedness, that is,
of oppressing Laws or pinching Contracts. Secondly, heavy burdens, either of
services or taxes; From these the oppressed should be freed, and every yoke
imposed, by these or any other way of grievance, broken from off the necks of
our brethren.

There is yet one word more, very considerable in the Text, for the hightning
of this sin.

Thou have taken a pledge of thy brother for naught; or without cause; This
word was opened ( Chap. 1.9.) where Satan suggests against Jobs sincerity, does
Job serve God for naught. And again ( Chap. 2.3.) where the Lord asserts and
vindicates the sincerity of Job against Satan's calumniations; Thou movedst me
against him to destroy him without cause; That is, thou had no cause to move
me so against him; he is no such mercenary servant as thou have maliciously
pretended. Thus here; Thou have taken a pledge of thy brother for naught, or
without cause; that is, without any necessary cause, there was no reason thou
should take a pledge from thy brother when thou tookest it; thou might
have trusted him, but thou would not any further then thou had full
security put into thy hand, or rather then thou did take it into thy hand,
whether he would or no. As if he had said; Thou would not relieve thy
brothers poverty, upon the promises which God makes to those who charitably
relieve the poor; thou would neither take Gods word, nor trust thy brother
in any case, further then thou did see him; unless he would put into thy
hand, thou would not put into his. True charity must and will make some
ventures; Cast thy bread upon the waters (says Solomon Eccl. 11.1.) A good man
is a Merchant and will trust his bread where he has no more assurance of a
safe return, then the Merchant has of his Ship and Lading from the winds and
waters.

Thou have taken a pledge of thy brother. Again, Without cause or for naught,
may have this meaning, thou did oblidge thy brother to restore that which
really and indeed he never received from thee; thou did put a debt to thy
brothers account which he never made by borrowing. Solent divites fingere se
creditores and alioe debitores.
David complains of such kind of unkind usage ( Psalm. 69.4.) They that hate
me without cause, are more then the hayres of my head: They that would destroy
me, being mine enemies wrongfully, are mighty: then I restored that which I
took not away; That is, which I took not away, either as borrowed of them, or
as stolen from them. I was neither a debtor, nor a theife, I had nothing of
theirs in my hands, yet I was forced to restore. This is the worst sort of
taking a pledge for naught.

Thirdly, For naught; That is, when there was no reason to take so great a
pledge of thy brother, the thing which thou did lend him was but some trifle,
yet thou would have a pledge of thy brother for it; thou would have great
security for an inconsiderable debt; that is the course of many oppressors, by
lending a little they will have much to secure it. And this is to take a pledge
from a brother for naught, there should be some equality between the debt and
the security, he that lends a trifle, a small matter, and requires great
assurance, takes a pledge of his brother for naught. So that all unreasonable
and unequal demands for security, either taking (where charity bids us trust)
from the poor, or taking it (where in justice we should not take any thing)
when nothing was lent, or when there is no reason we should take so much; any
of these harsh and injurious practices, is the taking a pledge of our brother
for naught.

Hence observe; That the less cause we have to do any evil, the greater is
the evil which we do.

But has any man a cause to do any evil; he has not; by cause I mean a
provocation; there is no cause for which we should do any evil, but there may
be many provocations or temptations to do evil; Peninah provoked Hannah sore
to make her fret (1 Samuel 1.6.) It was not for naught or without cause that
Moses his passion was stirred, and that he spoke unadvisedly with his lips, the
murmuring and complainings of that unsteady people provoked his Spirit. (Psalm.
106.33.) Now the less provocation, the greater always is the sin; as to
sin against admonition, or against any of those means that might keep us
from sin, makes the sin greater, so when there is no occasion leading us unto
sin. This was one reason of greatening the sin of our first parents in eating
the forbidden fruit; why did they eat? were they ready to starve? were they in
any streights? had they not the whole garden before them? did they not eat the
forbidden fruit without cause, or for naught? Solomon says ( Pro. 6.30.) Men
do not despise a theife, if he steal to satisfy his soul when he is hungry;
for though to steal for mere hunger does not take away the sinfullnes of the
fact, yet it does much abate it; because the man is provoked to do it for the
supply of his present and pressing need; But for a rich man (who has no need)
to steal, for a man to steal who is not hungry, how sinful is it! Our
greatest necessities cannot wholly excuse our sin, but to sin where there is no
necessity, does greatly increase our sin. Saul thought he should come off
without blame, when he had so much to say for his rash sacrifice (1 Samuel
13.12.) I said the Philistines will come down upon me to Gilgal, and I have
not made supplication unto the Lord; I forced my self therefore, and offered a
burnt offering. But does Samuel approve this plea? We have his resolution in
the next verse; Thou have done foolishly, thou have not kept the Commandment
of the Lord thy God. Though Saul found himself under a moral force to do what
he did, yet that did not free him either from guilt or punishment when he
ventured to do it. David smarted for numbering Israel, though Satan stood up
against Israel, and provoked David to number them (1 Chronicles. 21.1.) What shall
we say then of those, who do more then David altogether unprovoked by Satan,
who rather tempt themselves, then are tempted unto evil? As the Good we do is
so much the better, so the evil we do is by so much the worse, by how much we
do it the more freely and unconstrained. Thus Eliphaz aggravates the first
Instance of Jobs supposed wickedness. To take a pledge from a man in the manner
expounded, is not only illiberal, but sinful; To take a pledge from a brother
in distress is more sinful, but to take a pledge of a brother for naught, is
a degree of sin, which has many degrees of sinfullnes beyond both the former.
Eliphaz has yet but begun Jobs Indictment, this is the first Crime objected; A
second, and a third, and more are following. Thou have taken a pledge of thy
brother for naught, And stripped the naked of their Clothing.

It may be questioned; If they were naked, how could they be stripped of their
clothing? he that is naked has no clothes to be stripped of. Nudus nec a centum
viris spoliatur.
It Is gone into a Proverb, A naked man cannot be stripped by a hundred men; he
that has nothing, can loose nothing. How then is it said here; Thou have
stripped the naked of their clothing?

I answer; The naked, are not here to be taken strictly for such as have no
clothes at all, but for those who have but few clothes, or for such as are but
meanly and thinly clothed; any that are poor and low, any who are in want, may
be numbered among the naked. It Is frequent, as in Scripture, so in Common speech
to express those as being quite without that of which they have but little.
Quaedam etia^si vera non sint propter similitudinem eodem vocabulo comprehenja
sunt; sic qui male vestitum and pannosu^ videt nudum se vidisse dicit Sen. l.
5. Ben: cap. 13.
We say of a man that has but a little knowledge, he is an Ignorant man; and
of a man who has but a little learning, that he is an Illiterate, or an
unlearned man. Thus we may say of a man that has but little store of clothes,
little store of the world about him, that he is naked, that he has nothing.
The Apostle uses this Language (1 Cor. 4.11.) Even to this present hour, we
both hunger, and thirst, and are naked, etc. not that the Apostles went about
without clothes, but they were but mean in their Apparel, poor in their
Appearances, and that he calls nakedness. So the Apostle James in the second
Chapter of that Epistle, verse. 15. If a Brother or a Sister be naked, etc. He
does not mean it only of such as have never a ragg to cover their nakedness,
but of such as are ill furnished with clothes. The Lord threatens his own
People ( Deuteronomy. 28th from the 4th ver. to the 48th) in case of their
disobedience, with this affliction; Because thou servedst not the Lord with
gladness of heart in the abundance of all things, therefore thou shall serve
thine enemies in hunger, and in thirst, and in nakedness, etc. That is, thou
shall not have thy Wardrobes stored and filled with change of raiment, but thou
shall feel and be pincht with want and poverty. So here; Thou have stripped the
naked of their clothing; That is, those that were ill clothed, thou have
uncloathed, and in stead of releiving their wants, thou have increased them.

And thus the words may allude to the taking of a Pledge, about which Eliphaz
spoke before; Thou have stripped the naked of their clothing; That is, thou have
taken a pledge from thy neighbor, and stripped him quite of it. Therefore the
Law provided against this oppression ( Exodus 22.26.) If thou at all take thy
neighbors raiment to pledge, thou shall deliver it to him before the Sun go
down, for it is his Covering. The breach of which Law is discovered and
reproved ( Amos 2.8.) And they lay themselves down upon clothes laid to
pledge; That is, they detained them all night, whereas they should have
delivered them before the going down of the Sun. And thus their sin is
aggravated in that it is said in the next words, that they did this by every
Altar. It was their sin to make many Altars. And this increased their sin, that
they durst do acts of wrong to men, where they pretended to worship God.
Chaldeus legit lectulos oppigneratos Vel certe pro illo ipso vestimento quo and
se operit interdiu, atque noctu etiam jacons se contegit.
The like Law is given about the Pledge, Deuteronomy. 24.6. No man shall take the
upper, or the nether millstone to pledge, for he takes a man's life to pledge;
That is, he takes the thing away without which he cannot live; If his millstone
be taken away from the Mill, how shall he grind his Corn, to make bread,
which is the Staff of life? And again at the 13th verse of the same Chapter,
the Law is renewed in reference to raiment; In any case thou shall deliver the
pledge again before the Sun goes down, that he may sleep in his own
Raiment and Bless thee, and it shall be Righteousness unto thee before the Lord
thy God. Thus we may conceive Eliphaz speaking here, though not eying that
express Law, yet from the Common light of nature, which teaches that the poor
and naked should not be stripped of that little provision and small pittance
which serves only to protect them from cold and starving.

Further, By these words; Thou have stripped the naked of their Cloathing] We
may understand not clothing only, but all the necessaries of this life, any
thing which is of such concernment to our lives as our Clothes are; for as
bread in Scripture is put for all the necessaries of this life; So is
Clothing. Esa. 3.6. When a man shall take hold of his Brother, saying; Thou
have Clothing; Be thou Ruler over us, etc. Thou have clothing, that is, thou
have goods, thou have an Estate, thou can make provision for us; there
Clothing is put for all outward Conveniences, as in other Scriptures Bread
is. So that according to the extent of this interpretation, Thou have stripped
the naked of their Clothing, takes in all sorts of bodily grievances put upon
the poor.

Hence observe.

That to oppress the poor is the highest and greatest oppression. It is our
duty to Cloth the naked, how great then is their sin who strip the naked of
their clothing? it is sinful and unjust violently to take clothes from him
that has greatest variety of clothing, we may not rob the rich, what is it
then to take from them who have not? ^oe (as we say) to rob the Hospital.
Solomon (Prove. 28.3.) tells us of an oppression which is very grievous, and that
is the oppression of a poor man, which is true both actively and passively,
when the poor man is the oppressor, it is so, it is so also when the poor man
is the oppressed. Solomon intends both, for he makes the poor to be the
oppressed, and a poor man the oppressor. The poor man that oppresses the
poor is as a sweeping rain, which leaves no food. It Is worse with the poor
when the poor oppress them, then when the rich oppress them, the rich may
oppress them much, but they come not so near, as when a poor man oppresses;
for as the imbecilitie of the oppressed poor man can give him no help, so the
necessity of the oppressing poor man will show him no mercy. Nothing does more
harden the heart of a man then his own want, and he has little feeling of
another misery, who is under the feeling of his own: He that has nothing
takes what he can get, and his own hunger devoureth all. The rich man
oppressing the poor is a dashing rain, the great man oppressing the poor is
a thundering rain, but the poor man oppressing the poor is a sweeping rain.
As they who never knew poverty, so they who know it most, have the least stock
of pity for the poor. Such are a sweeping rain indeed. There is a
refreshing, a fatning, a filling rain, which the Lord sends upon the thirsty
Earth, this produces store of food. It raines corn and wine, milk and
butter; There is also a sweeping rain that takes away food, and destroys the
fruits of the Earth. Such a rain is a poor man oppressing the poor. Want is
the greatest spoyler.

Secondly, We may expound the Text thus; And stripped the naked of their
Clothing; That is, Thou have stripped them till they are naked; for in Scripture
we find the denomination to be taken from the End of the action, or that
which the action tends to. As to Illustrate it a little ( Esa. 47.2.) Take the
milstones, and grind meal. Now we do not grind meal, but whole Corn to
make meal. So ( Esaias 44.15.) He baketh Bread; Now we do not bake bread, but
dough, that it may come to be bread, when it is bread once it needs no more
bakeing. So ( Dan. 2.21.) He gives wisdom to the wise; that is, he gives
wisdom to those who before were rude, and so makes them wise. Thus here, the
denomination of the act is given from that to which the act has a tendency,
Thou have stripped the naked, not that they who are naked indeed can be stripped,
but thou have stripped them, and so made them naked. This very phrase is used (
Hos. 2.3.) Lest I strip thee naked, says the Lord to the Church, that is, lest
in stripping thee I leave thee naked, lest I take away all the good things with
which thou art Encompassed. So here, Thou have stripped the naked of their
Clothing; That is, thou have stripped them till thou have made them naked.

From this learn; That there is such a Principle of unnaturalness in the
nature of man, as to take away all, and leave nothing.

We find more then Clothes taken away by some, they go closer then to the
clothing (as the Lord complains, Mic. 3.3.) Who eat the flesh of a People,
and flay their skin from off their backs; There Is oppression and cruelty in
blackest colors, they will not leave them so much as their skin upon their
backs. Skin is natural Clothing, as Garments are Artificial Clothing.
These took away not only the clothing which art, but that which nature had
provided and put upon them, they flayed their skin from off their backs. Yet
we are not to conceive that they were so cruel to pull off their skin, but
because they would have all to their very skin, therefore they are said to take
skin and all. They who are so unmercifull, that they will not leave a ragge to
cover the skin, are justly charged with that unmercifullness, which will not
leave so much as their skin to cover their flesh, yea, (as it follows in the
same place) that they would gnaw their bones, they will have all, Clothes, skin
and bones, from another, rather then not have enough for themselves. Cruelty
joined with Covetousness, knows no bounds.

Eliphaz having thus showed some of those particular evils, which he supposed
Job had done, proceeds to show what Good he had not don. Sins of omission
render a man as foul and vile, as sins of commission do. He that does not the
good which he ought and can, does evil.

Verse. 7. Thou have not given water to the weary to drink, thou have withheld
bread from the hungry.

Thou have not given water to the weary.


Water is a very Common thing, and the word which is here used takes in all
natural waters, the whole Element of water. Seeing then water is not under lock
and key, but lies open to all comers, how comes it to be any man's gift? I
answer, first, If we understand the words literally and strictly, yet sometimes
and especially in some places to give a cup of water to drink, or a bucket of
water to wash in, is no small charity to a wearied traveller. But secondly (I
conceive) Job is taxed with not giving water, to show his refusing to do the
smallest charity. So we find it expressed ( Matthew. 10.42.) when Jesus Christ
would assure us that the least office of love or respect which we do to a
distressed Saint, to a Believer upon that account as he is a Believer, Non
inania in eos etiam levia quae sub frigidae aquae nomine designat officia esse
decerint. Hilar.
shall be rewarded, he gives it in this language; Whosoever shall give to
drink to one of these little ones a Cup of Cold water only in the name of a
Disciple, verily I say unto you, he shall not lose his reward. As by one of
these little ones, he means any, the least of Believers, or righteous Persons;
so by the gift that he speaks of, water, or Cold water, a Cup of Cold water, he
means the least of favors. Cold water is a cheap commodity, and a little
cold water, only a cup of it, cannot (as some things cannot because they are
worth so much) be prized, because it is worth so little, yet he that gives but
this little thing, this (almost) nothing in the name of a Disciple, he shall
not lose his reward. So here to set forth the hardness of Jobs heart (as
Eliphaz conceived) he puts it in these terms, Thou have not given water, (no
not cold water) to those that are weary; As if he had said, thou have not only
denied a feast, or a banquet of wine, which might put thee to some cost and
charges, but thou have denied then, water, cold water, which is not chargeable
at all, which does not so much as put thee to the cost of a little fire to heat
it, or of any ingredient to mix with it, thou have denied them this cheapest
charity. -- venit vilissima rerum Hic aqua, Horat. Sat: 1.
An old Poet (speaking of a place where water was sold) says; That which is
lowest prized, a thing of no price, water, is sold here. Thus far have thou,
O Job, (says Eliphaz) fallen below the Law of love; Thou have not given water;
And to whom did he not give it. The next word answers that Querie, To the weary.

That is, thou have not given water to them to whom it does most properly
belong, or who had perfect need of it, the weary, the thirsty. There are some
to whom we may very well refuse to give water, or any other refreshment of
nature; they have enough, if not too much already, not only in possession, as
the rich, but in use or abuse rather, as the intemperate and the drunken; To
give water to such is to power water into the Sea; but thou have not given it
to the weary, not to those who are like the dry and parched ground.

In that the matter of charity is placed in water, observe; That charity is
accepted, and uncharitablenes condemned in the smallest matter.

It is not the quantity of the gift, but the affection of the giver, it is not
the quantity of that which is denied to be given, but the heart of him that
denies it, which the Lord takes notice of: be it much or be it little that is
given, if it be given with an honest and willing mind, the Lord accepts it,
and be it much or be it little that is denied, if it be denied with a churlish
and uncharitable spirit, the Lord is displeased with it: and the less that is
which is denied, the more sinful is the denial, and the more is the Lord
displeased with it. When crusts or crumbs of bread, which fall from our Table,
are denied, when a cup of cold water is denied, how cold is charity? and is it
not crumbled into a lesser nothing then those crumbs? We should honor the Lord
with our substance, and our charity should not only have cost in it, but
liberality in it, how do they honor God with their substance, who will hardly
give to him (that is, to his poor) the shadow of their substance? If the Lord
should command us to give some great thing, to testify our charity, should we
not do it? how much more when he says give but water to the weary for my
sake, and I account you charitable.

Secondly, Note; That Churlish and hard hearted Persons stick at small matters
as well as at great.

It is supposed ( Acts 5.15.) that the very shadow of Peter was healing to the
sick. There are some so hard-hearted, that they would hardly bestow their
shadow upon the poor to do them good. It troubles them to part with the least
Imaginable Benefit, or to do the least Imaginable courtesy, not only great
things, but small things, even the smallest things, the chippings of their
loaf, the parings of their apple, yea the very husks which their swine eat
(as the letter of the Parable concerning the prodigal intimates, Luke 15.16.)
are stuck at as too much for them who have nothing. And thus the heart of a
wicked man is stated to the whole business of obedience; his heart is as much
against obedience in a small matter, as in a great, he is so far from
swallowing the camel of holy duty, that he strains at the very gnats of it;
and if a man's spirit be against obedience it self in its own nature, if his
spirit be unsuitable to it, let it be a duty of the least or lowest degree, he
cannot but stick at it. The servants of Naaman the Assyrian said to him; Had
the Prophet bid thee do some great matter, would thou not have done it? how
much more when he says unto thee, Wash in Jordan and be clean. There is a
reason why we should rather do small things then great as to the outward act,
but, I say, if the spirit of a man be crosse-grayn'd and lie against the duty,
he is as unfit and as back-ward to do a little as to do a great deal; he
will not so much as give water to God or man, or if he do give it, he does not
give it with a heart let out in love to God, or in compassion to the most needy
man. It is a hard matter with him to give or do at all, but it is an
impossible matter for him to give or do with a ready or cheerful mind. Thus
the Covetous man, the hard-hearted worldling cannot give so much as water: a
worldly man never thinks that himself has enough of the world, and he never
thinks that others have too little, when he is full he thinks all others are
full enough too. Such narrow-hearted creatures the Prophet Isayah describes (
Chap. 32.6, 7.) who as they practice hypocrisy and utter error against the
Lord, so they practice oppression and utter cruelty against man, to make empty
the soul of the hungry, and to cause the drink of the thirsty to fail. The
Instruments also of the Churl are evil. What Instruments does he mean? Some
say, the instruments of his commerce, his weights and measures, he pincheth the
poor there, that is true, those instruments of the churlish Merchant or
Tradsman are evil. Yet we may rather expound it more largely for all the
means, whether persons or things, whether agents and underofficers, or
courses and devices, which the churlish man uses as instruments to compass
and bring about his purposes; all these savor of himself, they are evil,
that is, false, treacherous, and lying in wait to deceive. For (as it follow)
He devises wicked devices to destroy the poor with lying words, even when the
needy speaks right, or (as we put in the margin) when he speaks against
the poor in Judgment.

Thirdly, Note; That a little is much reckoned upon by those that are in need,
or have nothing.

Water is a welcome mercy to the thirsty, to the weary, to those who are ready
to dye with heat and travel. The rich man in hell would have been glad of a
drop of water to cool his tongue. Sicera the General of Jabins Army, beggs of
Jael, to give him a little water, for (says he) I am thirsty. (Judge. 4.19.)
The full soul loathes the hony-Combe, that which is sweet and delicious the
full stomach loathes it, but they that are weary, hungry and thirsty, a piece
of bread, a Cup of water, how pleasant! how sweet! Such are glad of any thing,
who are in want of all things. Much is little to them who have much, a little
is much to them who have but little. The weary will thank you more for water,
then the wanton will for wine. The weary asked but for water to drink, and
could not get it, thou would not give it.

Fourthly, Eliphaz describing a wicked man, fixes most upon this sin, his
unmercifulness to the poor. And there is a general truth in it.

That to be without Compassion to the poor, is the mark of a wicked man. They
who have found the compassion of God to their own souls (as every godly man
has) cannot shut up the bowels of their compassion toward the pined body of
man. The Apostle John puts the question (1 Ep: 3.17.) How dwells the love of
God in him, that does so? The love of God, either as taken for the love of God
to us, or for our love to God, dwells not in him, in whom there dwells no
love to man. Now, if the love of God dwell not in a man, God dwells not in
him, and if God dwell not in him, Satan does; and what can he be called but
wicked, in whom the wicked, or the evil one dwells? Thus the wicked Edomites
dealt with the people of God, when they were wearied in their March through the
Wilderness. We read the children of Israel thus bespeaking the Edomites
(Numb. 20.17, 18, 19.) Let us pass I pray thee through thy Country, we will not
pass through the fields, or through the vineyards, neither will we drink of the
water of the wells, etc. we will put you to no trouble, no charge, we will be
content with the common waters which we find abroad, this is all that we
desire when we shall be weary and thirsty in our travells. And Edom said unto
him, Thou shall not pass by me, least I Cut thee off with the sword: And the
Children of Israel said unto him, we will go by the high way, and if I and my
Cattle drink of thy water, I will pay thee for it, I will only (without
doing any thing else) go through on my feet. See what a spirit Edom was of;
when Israel put it to the lowest, we will drink none of the water of your
wells, or if we do we will pay for it; No, Edom was so hard-hearted, that he
would neither give, nor sell them water; they shall not have it either of free
cost, or for money; thus uncompassionate was he toward a People that were
traveling, that were weary and thirsty. The Inhabitants of Tema are commended
for their tenderness to men in distress ( Isa. 21. 14.) They brought water to
him that was thirsty, they prevented with their bread him that fled; They gave
water and bread unasked; The wants of the distressed moved them, though they
made no motion for the supply of their wants. They act most like God who
prevent us with their favors. Even the light of nature leads to it. How
unnatural then are they who deny water to them who being weary and thirsty
beg for it! The mercy of God by Jesus Christ is highly Commended to us upon
this Consideration, that he gives it not only in bounty, but in Compassion,
there is not only liberality, but there is a pity in it: therefore he says (
Matthew. 11.28.) Come unto me all ye that are weary and heavy laden, and I will
give you rest. To give ease and refreshment to those that are weary and heavy
laden, has not only bounty and liberality, but Pity and Compassion in it. (
Psalm. 136.23.) Thanks to God who has remembered us in our low Estate. It is an
act of grace for God to remember us in our highest Estate, in our most
flourishing Estate, but to remember us in our low Estate, then to give us in
refreshings and Comforts, this is a clearer act of Grace. As it is said ( Ps.
68.9.) Thou O God, did send a plentiful rain, whereby thou did confirm
thine inheritance when it was weary. As the goodness of God is most seen in
giving water to the weary, so is the wickedness of man in denying it. Eliphaz
urges Job further with this uncharitableness.

And thou have withholdden bread from the hungry. He gave no water, and he
withheld bread. The word is sometimes rendered to hide, to deny, Verbum (...)
significat, abscondere, negare, fraudare. Subtrahebas ei si habebat, and
prohibebas si non habebat, i. e. nolebas ei panem dare. D^us. Esurientium
substraxisti fructum panis. Ambr.
and sometimes to deceive a man of that which is due to him. Our translation
(Thou have withholden) carries that sense in it; Properly we are said to
withhold only that from a man which he has a right to; Thou have withholden
Bread from the hungry. As hunger and thirst are put for all manner of
Extremity; so bread and water are put for all manner of supplies generally.
The Greeks and some Latins Interpret this strictly of a morsel of bread,
Thou have withholden a morsel of bread, as the rich man in the Gospel did,
Lazarus desired but the crummes that fell from his Table, but could not get
them. So here, thou have withholdden not only a full Table, but a morsel of
Bread; This latter clause and the former are of the same sense, yet from that
word withholden, which Implies a wrong done to the poor, note first; That the
poor have a right in what rich men have.

And if they withhold all from them, they shall be condemned, not only as
uncharitable and illiberall, but as oppressors and unjust; not only as not
having given them relief, but as not having done them right. ( Prove. 3.27.)
Withhold not good from them to whom it is due, when it is in the Power of thy
hand to do it. A thing is due upon a double account; first, by the Law of
Justice; secondly, by the Law of Love: I conceive here that the Proverb is to
be understood of a dueness, not by the Laws of Common Justice (as if a man
have his brothers Estate in his hand, he cannot withhold it from him without
transgressing the Law of Justice) but of a dueness by the Law of Love, or more
strictly by the Law of Charity: thus it is a duty to do good to those that are
in want; it is not only a favor that we show to them when we relieve them,
but there is a duty in it which we owe to God, who has commanded that their
poverty should be supplied by the plenty and abundance which he has given to
others. If therefore it be demanded, who are they to whom this doing of good is
due? I answer, not only they to whom thou art endebted in Justice, witness thy
hand and seal; but even they to whom thou art endebted in charity, witness
their want and need. The poor have a right to what we are able to give, and
can conveniently spare; yea sometimes their right may lie somewhat beyond the
line of our convenience. So then there is a point of Justice in it, as well as
of charity in releiving the poor; and if (as the next words in Solomon imply)
it be sinful to delay them till to morrow, it must needs be a wickedness to
deny them for ever. Therefore the same Solomon (Prove. 22.2.) speaking of the
poor and the rich puts them together; The rich and poor meet together, the
Lord is the maker of them all; Now the Lord is the maker of the poor and of
the rich, not only in their natural constitution, as they are men consisting
of body and soul, (so indeed he has made the poor as well as the rich, and
they are both alike the work of his hands) but the Lord is the maker of them
in that capacity or state wherein they are, he makes the rich man and the poor
man, that is, he makes the one rich, and the other poor, he (...) the maker
of them both, and Solomon (I conceive) puts that in to show first, that poor
men should not envy the rich man, why? for the Lord has made him rich; why
should thine Eye be Evil, because the Lords Eye is good?

And again, that the rich man should not despise the poor, or withdraw the
bowels of his Compassion from them, the Lord could have made thee poor too if
he had pleased, therefore be Compassionate toward them, for the Lord is the
maker of you both. And this answers that objection commonly given by some, why,
are not my goods my own, may I not do with them as I please? I have not stolen
them, I have wronged no man in the obtaining them; it is well when men can say
thus, that they have done no wrong in getting riches: but this is no argument
(how justly soever any man has got his Estate) that he should keep it all to
himself, and not give a portion to those that are in want. The rich man
withholds what is due to the poor, when he withholds releife from them. It is
true your Estate is your own, it is yours, no man can challenge or claim it
from you; I, but God can claim it from you; you are possessors and masters of
your Estate in reference unto men, but you are but Stewards and Servants of
your Estate in reference unto God. Now a Stewards buisinesse (you know) is not
only to receive and lay up the Estate of his Lord or Master, but it is his
buisines also to pay or lay out according as he receives command or order from
his Lord; thus it is in this Case; Rich men are but Stewards to the Lord in
reference to all that they have; Therefore as they receive from him, and
partake of the fullnes of the Earth which is his (for the Earth is the Lords
and the fullnes thereof) so they must issue it according to his order and
command: Now he has left a standing order for all times, that the rich should
distribute to the necessities of the poor and hungry. Rich men must not think
themselves Stewards only to receive in, but also to pay out what their Lord
calls for, and therefore as they would give a good account of their Stewardship
at the great Audit day, let them take heed how they withhold bread from the
hungry. I might show further, that the rich are not only obliged to give, or
that it is their duty to give, but that they ought to give cheerfully and
readily, not upon constraint (2 Cor. 9.7.) that they ought to give liberally
and bountifully, no^ with restraint, and that they ought to give sincerely, not
thinking thereby either to merit at the hand of God, or to get the praise of
men.

Secondly, From the matter of this charge, Thou have withholden bread from the
hungry, we may observe, That Not to do good, or the omission of doing good to
the poor, renders us culpable as well as the doing or Commission of that which
is evil or injurious to them.

Not to relieve the poor is a sin as well at to injure or oppress the poor,
yea not to relieve has injury and oppression in it. The reason of it is
clear from the former point, because the poor have a right to so much of a
rich man's estate as is a releife of their pressing necessities, to preserve
them from perishing. And every man must acknowledge that to deny any man his
right (by what title soever that right arises) is to oppress him. Nor is it
enough to give them good words (which yet is more then some will give) unless
we do them good. ( Jam. 2.15, 16.) If a Brother or a Sister be naked, and
destitute of daily food, and one of you say unto them depart in peace, be
warmed and filled, yet notwithstanding ye give them not those things which are
needful to the body, what does it profit? Though you give them good words, yet
if you give them no supply, what does it profit? We may understand it two
ways.

First, What does it profit the poor? Can they feed upon your good words? or
will your good words cloth them? what does it profit them if ye say be fed
and be clothed, if you give them neither food nor raiment.

Secondly, What profit is it to you who say so? will God take it well at your
hands, that you have spoken kindly to the poor, when you did them no
kindness? therefore withhold not thy hand, etc. And if it be so great a sin to
withhold our bread from the hungry, what is it to take their bread from them?
Eliphaz having thus taxed Job with neglect of the poor, he proceeds in the
next verse to tax him with an undue and partial respect to the rich. As he
was rigid to to them who had nothing, so he was indulgent to those who had
enough, if not more then enough, before.

Verse. 8. But as for the mighty man he had the Earth, and the honorable man
dwelt in it.
There is a twofold Interpretation of these words: Some understand them so, as
if this mighty man here meant had been Job himself, and then the sense is thus
rendered; All these evils were done by thee, and these good things not done,
when thou wast a man in power, and so had no need to do any such evil, and
had power enough in thy hand to do good. Infortitudine brachij tui
possidebas terram et potentissimus obtinebas eam. Vulg.
The Vulgar translation reads it (according to this Exposition) personally of
Job; In thy might thou did possess the Earth, and being most powerful thou
did dwell in it. That is, thou wast a man in power, thou had all in thy
hand, thou had water and bread enough when the poor wanted it, thou can not
say that thou wast necessitated to keep the pledge, or strip the naked, but
thou in thy greatness and might did oppress them; this interpretation
(though I assent not to it) aggravates his sin exceedingly, for the more power
any one has in his hand, the greater is his sin, as in the Evil which he
does, so in the good which he does not, or leaves undone; yea it may be said
that we do evil more then they who do it, when we have power in our hand
to hinder them from doing it, and do not.

But secondly, take the words as they import the partiality of Job; The mighty
man had the Earth; thou have been over-kinde and favorable to him, how hard or
churlish soever thou have been to others.

The mighty man. The Hebrew is, The man of arm; and it is usual in Scripture
to call a strong man, a mighty man, Vir brachij, est vir dignilate, opibus
authoritate potens. Bold.
or a man in Authority, a man of arm. (Ezekiel. 22.6.) Behold the Princes of
Israel Every one of them were in thee to their power to shed blood; The Hebrew
is, they were to their arm; that is, as far as they could reach forth their
arm, or to the utmost of their power to shed blood, that is, to do mischief
and wrong, to afflict and vex others even unto death, or the shedding of their
blood. They who are evil know not how to bound themselves in doing evil; if
they want not power, they seldom want will to do it more and more. Thus the
Prophet reproves that perverse generation; Behold thou have spoken and done
evil as thou could (Jer. 3.5.) That is, to the utmost Extension of thy
ability and opportunit^. As those Princes shed blood to their arm, or as far
as they could reach out their power; So did this people; And as the power of
man, so the power of God is Expressed by his arm ( Job 40.9.) Have thou an arm
like God? Can thou thunder like him? That is, have thou power like God? (
Esa. 30.30.) The Lord shall cause his glorious voice to be heard, and shall
show the lighting down of his arm, with the Indignation of his anger, and
with the flame of a devouring fire; The revenging power of God, like a bird of
prey, hovers over the heads of wicked men, but at l^st it lights down, and (as
the word rather signifies) rests upon them.

Again, Some understand here by the arm of the wicked man, those who are his
Instruments, those who serve him, or whom he uses to supplant or suppress
others, and reach his own ends by; Such may well be called the arms of mighty
men, the arms of the men of the Earth. Evil men have their seconds or
Instruments to do evil. Upon this Consideration it was said anciently; An
nescis longas regibus esse inanus?
Do not you know that Princes have long arms; the meaning is, they have
Agents and Servants in the several parts of their Dominions, who are their
hands or arms, both for protection of those who are peaceable, and to take
revenge upon the rebellious. We commonly say of a Servant that is discreet and
faithful, he is his Masters right hand. The mighty have many helpers, many
arms and hands to carry on their designs, and to do their wills.

As for the mighty man, or the man of arms, he had the Earth. This stands in
opposition to what was spoken before, the poor man could not get a drop of
water, nor a crust of bread, but the mighty man he had the Earth; As if he had
said; O Job, thou being in power did pass away great possessions to the
mighty, thou gave both thy sentence and assistance, that they should have the
Earth, but thou would not help the poor so much as to a piece of bread, or
a cup of water; The mighty man had the Earth; he speaks Indefinitely, as if
all the Earth were his. Wicked men are called men of the Earth (Psalm. 10.18.)
To judge the fatherless, and the oppressed, that the men of the Earth may no
more oppress.

But it may be objected, Is not every man a man of the Earth? As Adam the first
man was of the Earth, Earthy; so all men are of the Earth, Earthy; why then is
it then said of a wicked man, that he is a man of the Earth, as if any man were
of another Pedigree or extraction?

I answer; A man of the Earth is put in opposition to a man of Heaven, to a man
that has his Estate, or hope, or portion in Heaven; the Saints have their
Conversation in Heaven, and though they live upon the Earth, yet they are not
men of the Earth; Carnal men are Earthly-minded, they mind the Earth, and
that's both their hope and buisines; they are not only Earth in their
Constitution, but Earth in their affections, therefore they are called men of
the Earth; these men had much of the Earth in their possession, as well as they
had all of it in their affections and desires. The mighty man he had the Earth.

Observe hence; That Evil Magistrates in Power are more ready to favor great
men, then to relieve poor men.

Eliphaz knew that Job was a Magistrate, a man in Power, and he supposes that
under his government, the poor got no bread, but the mighty men had the Earth,
they had favor to have and do what they lift. It is very Common with the men
of the world to be very free to those that are of the world; they are like
those Clouds which we may observe sometimes blown over the dry Land, and
emptying themselves into the Sea. The mighty that had store before, have more,
and the poor, who had nothing, have nothing at all; Men love to bestow
kindnesses upon them only to whom they are like, or whom they love. A good man
helps those that are good, and wicked men care for none but such as themselves.
Wicked men are called Oaks (Zech. 11.2.) Howl ye firr trees for the Cedar is
fallen, (that is, the great man is fallen) because all the mighty are spoiled;
howl O ye Oaks of Bashan, for the forest of the vintage is come down. The
Chaldee Paraphrase says, Howl ye Governors of Provinces: And he calls these
Governers, Oaks; first, because of their strength; and, secondly, because of
their fruit. What fruit do Oaks bear? only acornes; and who are fed with
acornes? only swine; Acornes are but hogg^ meat; he gives the allusion thus;
wicked men in power, bear fruit, but it is only for swine, that is, for
wicked men, they bestow the tokens of their bounty, the overplus of their
plenty, upon hoggs and swine, that is, upon carnal and sensual men, Parietes
vestites auro, homines vest nudatis? panem postulat homo, and equus tuus aurum
sub dentibus mandit. Ambros.
they have nothing for the People of God, for those that are the true objects
of charity; they make their horses fatt, their dogs fatt, none are lean but
Gods poor. Thus one of the Ancients reprehends those great ones of his time;
Ye cloth the walls of your houses with gold, with Arras hangings, and ye let
the poor go naked; the poor ask bread, and ye give it them not; it may be
your horse chewes a golden Bitt, and the poor man has not a Bitt of Bread.
The spirits of carnal men are carried out from that which is their duty, they
care not how profuse and lavish they are to those who suits with their own
hearts; the poor have nothing, while the mighty man has the Earth. Thus
Eliphaz reproved Job, though indeed it was otherwise with him, as appears in
the defense which he afterward made for himself against these gross
insinuations. And as to this particular he answers ( Chap. 29.17.) I brake the
Jaws of the wicked, and plucked the spoil from between his teeth; he indeed
pulled the earth from the mighty, or the mighty from the earth; though Eliphaz
here said, The mighty had the earth, and The honorable man dwelt in it.

Acceptus vel elevatus facie habitabat in ea. Hebr.
The Hebrew is, The man whose face is lifted up; which phrase is Interpreted two
ways.

First, Passively; Secondly, Actively. Passively thus, the man who is lifted up
by others, that is, who is respected, who is reverenced according to his place
or worth; Hebraei principem vocant Nasi quasi elevatu^ facie and ab alijs
acceptum.
All which agree with our rendering, the honorable man; And in the Hebrew,
Princes and great ones are expressed by that word which signifies to lift up the
face, because such are lifted up above others, and are much respected by
others. So the word is used ( Genesis 19.21.) See (says the Angel to Lot) I have
accepted thee; The Hebrew is, I have lifted up thy face, that is, I have
respected and honored thee by granting thy request.

Secondly, It may be taken actively, The man that lifts up the face dwells in
the Earth; What is it to lift up the face? Acceptor personarum habitabat in ea.
Pagn.
it is to Accept Persons in Judgment, to accept him that has the worst cause,
and to reject him that has the best cause for private ends. As if Eliphaz had
said; He that respects persons, that is, who perverts justice, he has the
Earth; and so here seems to be a description of all sorts of wicked men
flourishing in Jobs time and under his wing. Some oppress openly; the mighty
man; (...) est habere respectum personarum sc: quod pauper sit aut dives aut
nobilis aut honoratus. (...) Habitare sedere.
the man of arms comes by main force and obtaines the earth, or the riches and
fatnes of the earth; Others oppress secretly and cunningly, they accept
persons, and are biased in Judgment by their own interest and advantages; The
man of this strain dwelt in it.

The word notes two things. First, to continue, he dwelt there, thou let'st him
abide, whereas if he had come into the Land thou should quickly have rooted
him out. Secondly, The word signifies not only to dwell but to sit, and to
sit, in Scripture Language notes authority or dominion, he dwelt or sat in it,
that is, he was the man in authority, he had the power, and the great places
of government were entrusted in his hand. From both these observe; First, That
evil Magistrates are apt to pervert Justice, in favor of those who are great
in power.

Favor should be showed according to the Justnes of men's causes, and not
according to the greatness of their persons. But usually the mighty men have
the Earth, all goes on their side, and the honorable man dwells there, be sits
safe and quiet, well and warm. This is so commonly seen, that it is become a
Proverb, Potentis est turpa; pauper ubique jacet.
The mighty man has the whole earth for his house to dwell in; the poor man
lies every where, but seldom dwells any where. The wicked are said to have
their portion in this life, they would have the Earth to themselves, and they
shall have nothing but Earth. So the Prophet describes them ( Esaias 5.8.) Woe
unto them that join house to house, that lay field to field, that there may be
no place, that they may be placed alone in the midst of the Earth. Man is
naturally a sociable Creature, and it may seem strange that he should desire to
be alone in the midst of the Earth: Therefore by his desire to be alone, we
must not understand a strict lonenes, or solitarines, as if rich men had a
mind to live alone, so as to have none about them or with them, but the
meaning is, they would have none in power but themselves, none in possession
but themselves; they are unwilling that any should have an estate but
themselves, they would have all others to be their underlings and tenants,
their servants and villains to till their ground and gather in their
revenewes, they only would be Freeholders, all others must hold by their Copy,
and do them homage. If the greatest man in the world were turned alone into
the world, he would have but an ill being of it, therefore the meaning of the
Prophet is, that they would be placed alone in the midst of the Earth to
command and rule, all others must serve them. And they whose pride, ambition,
or covetousness provokes them to dwell thus alone in the earth, shall find
nothing, beyond this earth, but fire to dwell in.

Secondly, Observe this; That for a Magistrate to favor men because of their
greatness and power, is an utter departure from his duty.

The poor man should have the Earth, that belongs to him, as well as the rich.
The mean man's right to his little is as good, as the mighty man's to his great
deal. Justice gives every man his own, without respect to the Owner.

Thirdly, Consider the words as a charge brought against Job, he being a man
in Authority, and in place.

Then, Note; He that lets wicked men oppress or wrong others, when he is
invested and entrusted with power to hinder them, betrayeth his trust, and
loses the ends of his investiture.

The Lord charge Eli (1 Samuel 3.13.) because of the great Iniquity which his
Sons committed; but it might be said, What was their sin to him? Yes; it lay
in his power to hinder them; for Eli was the chief Magistrate in Israel, and
therefore the Lord concluded; I will judge his house for ever, for the Iniquity
which he knows, because his Sons made themselves vile, and he restrained
them not; But did not Eli restrain them? there is a restraining:

First, By way of Council and advice; and in this sense Eli did restrain them
( Chap. 2.23, 24.) He said unto them, why do ye such things, for I hear of
your evil dealings with all the people; nay my Sons; for it is no good
report that I hear, ye make the Lords people to transgress. Thus he put a
moral stopp in their way, showing the heinousness of their sin, and
dehorting them from it; but Eli being a man in Power and Authority, might have
gone another way to work with them, he might have punished them for their
sin. And because he did not, here was Elies sin; and this is suggested as
Jobs sin, He was a man in Power, yet he winked at those violent ones, and
let them carry all in the Earth, when as he might have mended the matter, by
checking their insolences, and doing the poor right. This is charged on
Thiatira in reference to the neglect of using their Church Power, ( Revel.
2.20.) Notwithstanding I have a few things against thee, because thou suffer
that woman Jezabell, that Calls her self a Prophetess, to teach, and to seduce
my Servants to commit fornication, etc. That Angel sufferd her; how did he
suffer her? he did not use that Power that Christ had Committed to the Church,
to admonish, to reprove, to cast out, he did not stopp that seducing
Prophetess by a due Exercise of Spiritual Power, but sufferd her to seduce
uncontrol'd. The more Power we have to prevent or remove either Spiritual or
civil Evils, the greater is our sin when it is not done: if Eliphaz had not
supposed Job a Magistrate, he could not have laid this burden upon him, or
have represented him in fault, because the mighty man had the Earth, and the
honorable man dwelt in it, oppressing the weak, and vexing those of low
degree.

Eliphaz goes yet one step further in the prosecution of this charge, and
Arraignes him for another Crime, and that a very great one; The mighty man had
the Earth, the honorable man dwells in it; But

Verse. 9. The widow thou have sent empty away, and the arms of the fatherless
have been broken.
As if he had said; Thou did fill the full with good things, but the hungry
thou have sent empty away; The honorable have been provided for, but they who
were destitute of all friends, found no friendship at thy hands, unless the
breaking of their own arms.

Thou have sent widows away empty. (...) verbum dimittendi violentiam quandam
affert, ut sit idem quod eijcere extrudere, expellere?
There is somewhat considerable in the nature of the word, which we render
sent; for it implies a putting away with a kind of violence; thou have cast
them out, or bid them be packing; thou have put them off with rigor and
distaste. As if he had said, Thou have not only let them go from thy house
unreleeved, but thou have reviled them and thrust them away because they asked
releife. So we may expound it by that ( Genesis 3.23, 24.) And the Lord God sent
him (that is, Adam) forth, from the garden of Eden, to till the ground from
whence he was taken. What this sending forth was, is expressed in the next
verse, So he drove out the man. Such a sending away is here intended, thou
have sent widows away (as we speak) with a witness; thou have chide or rated
them out of thy presence. As it is said of Gallio (Acts 18.16, 17.) That he
cared for none of those things, and he drove them from the Judgement-seate.
Thus thou have sent widows away.

Complutenses
Further, In the Chaldee Language; the word signifies to stripe, or to pluck off
the very skin. This is yet more tyrannical, Thou have sent them away spoiled
and stripped, or as it follows in the Text, empty. Thou have sent widows away
etc. It was not the mighty man, nor the great ones of the earth, that he is
charged to deal thus unkindly or rather cruelly with, but the widow; that
hightens the sinfullnes of his tyranny. This very word by which a widow is
expressed in the Hebrew, (...) a verbo (...) quod est colligare, ergo ligata
dicitur per contrarium intellectum quia jam soluta viro. Significat etia^
habere linguam colligatam, i. e. ^bmutescere aut mutu^ esse, quod mortuo viro
non valeat loqui and litigare, quamvis contra aequu^ and jus rapinam bonorum
suorum patiatur. Rab: Mord.
as well as her condition, calls for help and pity. It comes from a root
that signifies; either to bind, or to be silent; taking it, in the first
signification, to bind, the widow may be so called for two reasons. First,
because the widow is (as it were) bound about with afflictions, and sorrows,
she has many troubles about her, as so many bonds, from which she cannot
free her self without running into many other troubles. Secondly, The widow is
so called, by the rule of contrary speaking; bound, that is, not at all bound,
but free or loosed from her husband. Thus the Apostle speaks ( Romans 7.1, 2, 3.
1 Cor. 7.39.) her marriage knot is un^yed by death; If her husband be dead,
she is loosed from the law of her husband, she is left to her self, and her
own dispose alone. Take the word in the second fignification, to be silent; A
widow is so called because she seldom has that natural, and never has that
civil liberty or freedom of speech, which her husband had, and therefore she
needs others to speak for her, or must speak her mind by others; her self
being either unable, or disabled to speak in her own case, or to speak for
her self. This being the widows state, he has the greater sin who deals
unkindly with her. What? Thrust away the widow, whose heart is bound about, yea
and thrust thorough with many sorrows; What? thrust away the widow, who is
unable to manage her own cause, and defend her self in her right? yet this
thou have done. Thou have sent widows away Empty.

That is, without any help or comfort. A radice (...) quod est effundere vel
evacuare.
The word is used to signify the emptines of a vessel (2 King. 4.4.) It is
used also concerning the Dreamer; who thinks that he has eaten, but when he
awakes his soul, (that is, his stomach) is empty (Isai. 29.8.) So we may
expound the word Racha (Mat. 5.22.) He that says to his brother Racha; which
some understand, not of a man that wants wit or honesty only, but wealth or
plenty. And then to call a man Racha, Erat ergo contumeliosu^ verbum discere
fratri Raka i. e. Vocare pauperculum and bonis omnibus exhaustum.
is to upbraid him both with poverty and simplicity. As if it should (in
disgrace) be said to him; Thou poor snake, thou silly fellow, what do thou
talk, thou who have so little wit, thou that art not worth a groate? In the
Story of Jephtah (Judge. 11.3.) such a sort of men are spoken of as his ayders
and assistants; Then Jephthah fled from his brethren, and there were gathered
together vain men to Jeptah, and went out with him. Some translate, Heb:
Vacui. non ut putat Vatablus, Otiosi sed, ut alij inopes and bonis exhausti.
poor men were gathered together, and went out with him. Vain men, are
usually idle fellows, and vagabonds; and we may conceive his company or
followers to have consisted of poor men rather then of vain men. And in that
sense the word is used ( Neh. 5.13.) Even thus be he shaken out and emptied;
That is, impoverished and reduced to nothing. And thus also the low estate of
Jesus Christ is expressed ( Phil. 2.) He empted himself, namely, of his
divine glory and splendor; that is, he showed not his Majesty whilst he was
in the flesh, but covered and veiled it, and was in appearance as a poor empty
man, having voluntarily made himself of no reputation, though he were Lord
over all. Such was the emptines, in which these widows were sent away by Job,
as Eliphaz accuses him. And this act may have a threefold interpretation.
First, they were sent away empty; that is, not filled or releived by thy
charity; thou did not open, either thy heart or thy hand to supply their
necessities, or to make them up in what they wanted, and humbly desired.

Secondly, Thou have sent widows empty away; That is, thou have given them no
relief by thy Justice; some widows beg merely for our Alms, others bring
their case and cause to the Magistrate or man in Authority, for help against
their oppressing adversaries. In the 18th of Luke, the importunate widow, says
to the Judge, Relieve me against my Adversary; I beg not your charity, but
your Justice; The widow is sent away empty, when her suite is not heard. We
may understand Eliphaz either way, that when the widow sued for her right, she
found no Justice; and when she came for an alms, she found no charity.

Thirdly, We may interpret it yet higher; Thou have sent widows away empty;
That is, widows came to thee full or in a good condition, but thou have emptyed
them by oppression, and taken away what they had. Covetous Magistrates care not
how or of whom they get it, so they can get it; They empty the widows purse,
yea widows houses to fill their own. Christ reproved the Pharisees for this (
Mat. 23.14.) Woe unto you Scribes and Pharisees, for ye devour widows houses;
ye eat them out of house and home, Tradunt se ad tuendum majoribus, deditias
se divitum faciunt. Illud grave est, quod hac lege tueri pauperes videntur ut
spoliant; hac lege defendunt miseros ut miseriores faciant defendendo. Salvian.
Lib. 5to de provid.
either by living upon them, or by taking away their livings. We may
understand Eliphaz in this sense also; Thou have sent widows away empty; that
is, widows came to thee for protection, and thou did promise it, but then to
make thy own market upon them and serve thy self, thou have oppressed them,
they came to thee to do them right, and thou have undone them by
unrighteousness. It is ill enough to deny widows charity, it is worse to deny
them Justice, but it is worst of all to undo them by unjustice; yet those two
Horse-leaches, pride and covetousness will not forbear to draw from the widow.
Some rich men undertake the widows cause, only to enrich themselves by the
spoils of the widow; and for this reason they promise help to those who are
in misery, that they may make them more miserable, in stead of helping them,
Thou have sent widows away empty. Thus Job was supposed to have dealt with
widows.

See next how Eliphaz charge him for his dealings with the fatherless.

And the Arms of the fatherless have been broken. These two desolate names
are often found alone, Duo ista nomina in quantum, despectui humano in tantum
miserecordiae divinae exposita. Tertull. l. 1. ad uxor. c. 8. Per viduam and
pupillum omne genus miseroru^ hominum significatur. Pined.
but oftener as one in Scripture; the widow who is disjoined from her husband,
and the fatherless, who are bereaved of their parents, are commonly joined
together. And these two names are taken in Scripture, either strictly, or more
largely; strictly to signify only such persons as have either l^st their
husbands or parents; Largely, and so the widow and fatherless, signify any
that are in distress, or need our charity: Because the widow and the
fatherless stand often in need of charity, therefore these names in Scripture,
signify any that need our charity. While the Prophet says ( Hos. 14.3.) With
thee the fatherless finds mercy; We are not to straighten his sense only to
Orphans, but to any that are in distress; he that is a father may be called
fatherless, and the child that has a father may be called fatherless, when
extremely needing the help either of God or man. And so the word widow must
be understood ( Rev. 18.7.) where Babylon boasts, I sit as a Queen, and am
no widow; that is, I am neither friendlesse nor helpless; or as the next words
seem to expound it; I shall see no sorrow; which is usually the widows
portion. Thus in the Text by the widow and the fatherless, we must understand
not only those who are formally so, but all in affliction, who are
equivalently so.

The arms of the fatherless have been broken. In the former part of the
verse, he says; Thou have sent the widow away empty; charging the sin
personally upon Job; here he only says; The arms of the fatherless have
been broken; As if he did not place the fault directly upon him; yet some
translate it so; Thou have broken the arms of the fatherless; making it Jobs
act; However our rendering lays fault enough upon him, and leaves him in
particular without excuse, while it speaks only in g^nerall; The arms of the
fatherless have been broken. For it is as if he had said; thou have permitted
their arms to be broken; And if he should object; what if the arms of the
fatherless have been broken? what is that to me? Yes; you being in place and
power, and having strength in your own hands to preserve the fatherless, if
the arms of the fatherless have been broken, the sin must lie at your
door: Every man is guilty of all the evil, which he has power and a call to
hinder, and does not hinder.

The arms of the fatherless. Arms may be taken either properly, or
figuratively; The arm properly is a noble and most useful Limb of the body,
we are not to understand it so here, as if he had broken the natural arms of
their bodies; A man's arm is broken when his power is broken, though his skin
be not so much as touched. So then,

Per brachia robur divitiae, facultates quae Orphano pro brachijs and manibus
esse possunt, intelliguntur.
By the arms of the fatherless, we are to understand whatsoever is the
strength, or makes for the defense of the fatherless. The arm (as was touched
in the former verse) is put for strength, because the arm has much strength
and activity in it for the defense and use of the whole body. The estate, the
friends, the kindred, all the means, helps, and ayds which are subservient to
the good and protection of the fatherless, are by a figure called the Arms of
the fatherless; These arms, says Eliphaz, Have been broken.

(...) confringere contundere.
The word notes an utter breaking, a breaking to pieces; To break, as a thing is
broken in a Mortar with a pestle. This breaking may be also considered two
ways; 1 Non subveniendo. 2 Detinendo substantiam ipsis a parentibus relictam.
either as done by a positive act, or by a negative act; that is, by
withholding that help which might preserve them from breaking. The arms of
the fatherless are broken by denying them protection as well as by exercising
oppression upon them. Thus we see what a bill of indictment is here drawn up
against J^b, how he is charged with crimes, which are not only against the
light of Scripture, but even against the very light of nature, even with those
crimes which his hand was far from, and his heart further from, with those
crimes which he did not only forbear to practice, but which his soul did
abhor.

Hence observe; That the most innocent persons, are often charged with the
foulest and sinfullest crimes.

Job was so clear in his own conscience from this accusation, that he not
only professes openly that he never did, but imprecates a like vengeance upon
himself if ever he had done it ( Chap. 31.21.) If I have lift up my hands
against the fatherless, when I saw my help in the gate, (that is, when by
reason of my great power and authority in the place of judgment I could easily
enough have done it, no man daring to oppose or hinder me, but all rather
being ready to countenance and assist me in it, if (I say) when I had these
advantages over the fatherless, I did ever break their arms) then let mine
arm fall from my shoulder blade, and mine arm be broken from the bone; As if
he had said, if I have done this thing, let a divine and visible retaliation
point me out for the man, let all the world see and read my sin in my
punishment, and my injustice against man in the most discernable judgments of
God upon my self. Thus free and innocent was Job, and yet thus accused. And
indeed if to accuse were enough, there is no man in the world could be innocent
or free. Who is there of so unspotted a conversation, that may not be spotted
with accusation? who while his conscience is pure, may not have much dirt cast
in his face?

Secondly, Eliphaz accuses Job of all this, not because he knew it to be so,
but because he thought it was so. Whence note (which has formerly been touched
at) That to charge any man upon surmise with things that we cannot prove, is a
high breach not only of charity but of justice.

The Lord reproves Jobs three friends in the last Chapter of this Book,
because they had not spoken of him the thing that was right; and as they had
not spoken the thing that was right of God, so not of Job. They pitched upon no
reason why they condemned him so much, but only because he endured so much.
They concluded him a man of sin, because he was a man of sorrow. The Apostle
gives us the true genius of charity (1 Cor. 13.3, 4.) Charity believes all
things; not that charity is so credulous as to take up every thing for truth
which is scattered by any common and ungrounded report; that is no commendation
in any man, much less is it the commendation of a godly man; therefore when
the Apostle says, Charity believes all things, the meaning is, Charity
interprets every thing in the best sense which it will bear; and makes the
fairest construction which every man's case and condition will admit. And again
at the 5th verse; Charity thinks no evil; that is, it thinks no evil of
others; As a godly man will not maintain evil thoughts, or suffer them to
lodge within him, in reference to any sin which himself is tempted to
commit. So a charitable man, will not maintain or Iodge evil thoughts of
others, in reference to any sin which he can only suppose that they have
committed. Again, as charity thinks no evil, that is, it does not plot evil
against others; so thinks no evil, by a rash surmising it of others. Thus,
charity believes all is well, and thinks no evil. How uncharitable then are
they, yea, how unjust who believe all is ill, where they know of none, and
think the worst of them in whom they never saw any thing, but what was good?
It is not enough for a man to say he does not judge his brother maliciously, he
ought not to judge him ignorantly. Though to speak or judge ill of another,
because we wish him ill, be the greater sin, yet barely to speak or judge
ill of another, by whom we know no ill, is very sinful: And then it is most
sinful, when we do it not only as not knowing any evil they have done, but
because we know, hear, or see the evils which they suffer. It Is dangerous as
well as improper to make the hardest and harshest dealings of God with any man,
the ground of our hard and harsh thoughts of him.

Thirdly, Consider who they were whom Job is supposed to have oppressed; they
were not the great ones, not the mighty men of the earth, but the fatherless,
and the widow.

Whence note; That the poor are usually the subject of oppression.

The greater fish in the sea of this world devour and live upon the lesser;
The strong should support the weak, and they who are upper-most should uphold
those who are under them. But because the weak and the underlings may most
easily be oppressed, therefore they are most usually oppressed. As Covetousness is
cruel, so it is cowardly, and dares not meddle with its match. God in reference
to Spiritualls, fills the hungry with good things, and the rich he sends
empty away, (Luke 1.53.) Ungodly men, in reference to temporals, would send the
rich away empty, if they could, but they are so far from filling the hungry
with good things, that they take away all the good things they can from the
hungry, they care not if they starve the hungry, if they make the poor poorer,
and take all from them who have but little.

Fourthly, Job having been a Magistrate, and so (by his place) a Minister of
Justice, is strongly pressed with the doing of injustice.

Whence note; First, That they who have power, may easily, though not always
justly, be suspected for the abuse of it.

To have a power in our hands whereby we may do good, is a temptation to do
evil. It Is hard to keep power within its bounds, and to rule that, by which
others are ruled. The Prophet ( Isa. 1.10.) calls the rulers of Sion, rulers of
Sodom, because they ruled like them, or rather worse then they, eating up the
people, under their charge, rather then feeding them, and vexing those whom
they undertook to govern, and to be a Shield unto against the vexations of
others.

Secondly, Note; That as oppression is a sin in any man, so it is most
sinful in those who have power in their hands to releeve the oppressed.

Such act not only contrary to a common rule, but contrary to their special
duty; by how much we have the more obligation not to do a thing, by so much we
sin the more if we do it.

Thirdly, Note; That as it is very sinful in Magistrates to wrong any man, so
it is most sinful to wrong them, or to deny them right, who have most need of
it, the widow, and the fatherless.

Magistrates are called Gods; And God who has honored them by putting his
name upon them, expects that they should honor him, by imitating or acting
like unto him. What a Magistrate does he should do like God, he should do it
so that every one may be convinced that God is in him and with him of a truth.
As God takes care of the widow, and of the fatherless, so should he. God is
known by this Title; A father of the fatherless, and a Judge of the widow, is
God in his holy habitation (Psalm. 68.5.) That is, in Heaven; for that is the
habitation of his holiness, and of his glory, there he dwells, Judging for the
widow, and the fatherless; And as that is the special business (as it were)
of God in Heaven, so they who are Gods on earth, ought to make it their
special business to judge for the widow and the fatherless. Hence we find
the widow and the fatherless commended by name to the care of the Magistrate;
The fatherless have no natural parents living, or none near of kin
remaining to maintain and defend them, therefore the Magistrate, who is (pater
patriae) the common father of his Country, should be their Foster-Father. They
who want power are the charge, and should be the special care of those in
power. Thus they are commanded ( Psa. 82.3, 4.) Defend the poor and
fatherless, do justice to the afflicted and needy, deliver the poor and
needy: rid them out of the hand of the wicked. Here Is their work; and the
neglect of this work (how busy so ever Magistrates are about other work) is
often complained of aloud in Scripture, as a crying sin, as a sin that
ruins Nations, and draws down public Judgments upon a people. ( Isaiah
1.17.) Cease to do evil, learn to do well, seek Judgment, relieve the
oppressed, Judge the fatherless, plead for the widow: And at the 23 verse;
They judge not the fatherless, neither does the Cause of the widow come unto
them. Again ( Jer. 5.28.) They judge not the Cause of the fatherless. It is a
sin not to judge any man's Cause, not to judge the Cause of the richest, of the
greatest; yet it is more sinful not to judge the Cause of the widow and the
fatherless. And when he says; They judge not the Cause, etc. the meaning is,
they judge not the Cause of the fatherless impartially and righteously. And
indeed, he that does not judge righteously, does not judge at all; and when the
Prophet says, They judge not the Cause of the fatherless, it is as if he had
said; Among all the Causes that lie unjudged, this is the Cause, that God takes
most notice of, and is most displeased with the neglect of it, even when the
Cause of the fatherless is not pleaded, or judged. All are forward enough to
plead the Cause of the rich; but when the Client is poor, and appears (in
forma pauperis) his cause seld me finds any but a poor and formal pleading. We
read ( Acts 6.1.) That there was a great murmuring of the Grecians against the
Hebrew^s, because their widows were neglected in the daily Administration.
Church Officers (in their capacity) as well as State-Officers (in theirs) ought
to have a careful eye upon widows that are in want. And the Apostle James
(Cha. 1.27.) sums up (as it were) all Religion into this one duty; Pure
religion and undefiled before God, and the Father is this, to visit the
fatherless and the widow; Not as if this were indeed all religion, or the all
of religion: but as when the Spirit in Scripture, has to do with profane
persons, or mere moral honest men, who place all religion in civil
righteousness and works of charity, then he calls them to first Table duties,
or to the sincere worship of God, so when the Spirit is speaking to those who
place all their religion in worship, or in first Table duties, neglecting the
duties of charity and righteousness, then we find all religion placed in second
Table work, in giving every man his due, in compassion to the poor, in
helping the helpless, in feeding the hungry, in clothing the naked, in
comforting the sorrowful, and by name the fatherless and the widow. This is
pure religion to visit the fatherless and the widow; That is, this is the
practical part, or the true practice of religion, without which all religion
is vain; Therefore when the Apostle had said ( v 21.) Receive with meeknes the
engraffed word: Lest any man should stay there, and think he had done enough
when he had been a bearer, he adds, Be doers of the word; That is, look to the
practical part of religion, be diligent in the duties of love to men, as well
as in those of the worship of God.

Take these two inferences from the whole verse.

First, Seeing God takes so much care of the widow and the fatherless, Let
the widow, let the fatherless trust in God. They who receive peculiar promises
from God, should put forth suitable acts of faith toward God. Faith cannot
work without a word, and where it has a word it ought to work. We have both
put together in the present case ( Jer. 49.11.) Leave thy fatherless children
I will preserve them alive, and let the widows trust in me: As if God had
said, if none will take care of them, I will, I will take care of them, I will
be a father of the fatherless, a husband to the widow, leave that care to me.
Therefore let the widow and fatherless trust in God; A word from God is a
better and a bigger portion, then all the wealth of this world.

Secondly, Seeing the Lord is so jealous over them, and so ready to take their
part against all their adversaries, this should provoke them to be full of
zeal for God; God stands up for their protection, therefore they should stand
up for God their protector and patron. How careful should they be to please
him, who is so watchful to preserve them? Special promises call for special
obedience, as well as for special faith; The more God engages himself to do
for us, the more should we engage our selves (in his strength) to do for him;
None have more reason to be rich in faith and love to God, then the poor and
fatherless.

Thus far we have examined the Indictment, or Charge which Eliphaz brought
against Job; now see, what he inferres upon it, here is thy sin, and there is
thy punishment.

JOB, CHAP. 22. Verse. 10, 11. Therefore snares are round about thee, and sudden
fear troubles thee;

Or darkness, that thou can not see, and abundance of waters cover thee.


THese two verses have variety of expressions, but the intendment of all is one
and the same, Snares and fears, and darkness, and abundance of waters,
signify all manner of evils; All these are upon thee, because thou have sent
widows away empty, and have suffered the Arms of the fatherless to be broken;
because thou have done these things, therefore Snares are round about thee.

Some render the Original Text to another sense, (...) non significat
illationem aut convenientiam consoquentis ad antecedens sed convenientiam
aptitudinemque antecedentis ad consequens. Coc:
not as bearing an effect of the former words, not as if he had been punished
with these evils for those sins, but as if these evils had caused him to
sin; and so the words are expounded, as a kind of scorn; as if Eliphaz had
said, When thou did those things, no doubt snares, or fears, or darkness, or
waters came upon thee, thou was forced by suffering these evils, to do all
this evil, wast thou not? was it not because thou wast pressed with snares and
fears and darkness and waters, that thou did oppress the widow and the
fatherless? All which Questions are reducible to these plain Negations. Thou
wast not pressed with any of these perplexities upon thy self, to oppress the
poor; there was no snare, no nor any fear near thee, darkness did not
hinder thy sight, nor did the waters of affliction cover thee; Thou have not
been thrust upon sin by these temptations, nor constrained by the moral
violence of any incumbent necessity, but have done it freely: to sin even in
this manner and at this hight, has not been thy refuge, but thy choice; Thou
have not acted these iniquities by any instigation either from persons or
providence, but upon thine own election. This is a fair sense and a mighty
reproof; seeing (as was lately noted) every evil we do is by so much the
worse, by how much we have had the less provocation, or solicitation to do
it.

But I rather take the words as we render them to express the sad effects and
fruits of his sin; As if Eliphaz had said; Because thou have taken a Pledge
of thy brother for naught, etc. because thou have sent widows away empty, and
the arms of the fatherless have been broken, therefore snares are round about
thee, etc. The words may have a threefold Allusion.

First, To the besiedging of a City, snares are round about thee, Hostile
aliquid and obsidionale significat.
thou art now hemde in on every side with-troubles; as Christ threatens
Jerusalem; Thine enemies shall cast a trench about thee, etc. A trench is but a
great snare to catch men, as men catch birds and vermin in snares. Or

Secondly, The Allusion may be to Imprisonment, thou art compassed with strong
walls, and shut in with gates, thou art shackel'd with iron snares.

Thirdly, The words may allude to hunting and fowling, in such disports nets
and snares are set to take the intended game. Snares are often spoken of in
Scripture, to intimate or set forth the afflictions and sorrows that entrap
and hold the sons of men. So that to say, Snares are round about thee, is no
more but thus, troubles are round about thee; and these snares are sometimes
set by the hand of man, sometimes by the immediate hand of God. Good things are
often made a snare to the undoing of evil men, and evil things are often made
a snare to the troubling, though not to the undoing of good men. But I shall
not prosecute this allusion, having spoken of it at the 18th Chap: v. 6, 7, 8.
where Job complains that God had taken him in his snare; as also in the 19th
Chapter at the 5th verse.

And sudden fear troubles thee. We may understand this fear; first, for the
passion of fear, or for fear within: Secondly, for the occasion of fear,
which is fear without. Sudden fear troubles thee, that is, the appearance or
apprehension of some terrible thing causes thee to fear. Passio pro objecto
and materia suni in omni idiomate familiare. Sanct.
Fear is often put in Scripture for the thing feared, for the object of fear,
or for that which causes fear. Thus also hope is put for the thing hoped for,
and vision for the thing seen, or the object of the vision.

Thirdly, Some expound fear in the Text, for that special fear which rises
from guilt, or for terror of conscience. Sudden fear troubles thee; That is,
thy conscience flies in thy face and affrights thee; thy fear flows not from
any outward troubles that threaten thee, or from wants that afflict thee, but
from those wickednesses which have been committed by thee; thy conscience
vexes and tormenteth thee, not only with fear, but with sudden fear; fear
rusheth upon thee unexpectedly, violently, like an armed man. Sudden fear
troubles thee. Taking fear in all or any one of these interpretations.

Note.

Sudden fear surprizeth securest sinners. When they shall say peace and
quietness, then sorrow and anguish come upon them as pain upon a woman in
travel, and they shall not escape. The Prophet in vision ( Zech. 5.1.) Saw a
flying roll; That flying roll was the Curse; And it was called a flying roll,
to note the speedy and sudden coming of those judgments that were written in
it; They came not only upon the spur, but upon the winge. They came flying;
Flying is a swift motion, and that motion is applyd to judgment, when once God
gives it a Commission to come. Hence also ( Deuteronomy. 32.41.) the sword is called
a lightning sword, or a sword that has lightning in it; If I (says the Lord)
whet my glittering (or lightning) sword. The sword of the Lord is as Lightning;
it has burning and swiftness in it; divine vengeance comes as Lightning. It
is called also the overflowing scourge ( Isa. 28.15.) It Is a scourge because
the lashes of it cause much smar^ and pain, and it is an overflowing scourge,
to note the suddennes of it; The scourge comes in like a mighty flood.

Again, This suddennes of fear, or of things feared, may have reference unto
the security of wicked men, who though they have often heard of dangers, and
judgments have been threatened upon them, yet they always come suddenly upon
them, because they never prepare for them. To such as are unprepared, evils
are always sudden, how often soever they have been warned of them. As to him
that is prepared, death is never sudden, though he dye (as we vulgarly phrase
it) a sudden death. So he that is unprepared for death, dies suddenly, though
he dye that which we commonly call a lingering death. Thus death and judgment
shall come suddenly upon all ungodly men. It shall be (says Christ, Matthew.
24.37.) as in the days of Noah, they were eating and drinking, they were
marrying, and giving in marriage, till the day that Noah entered into the Arc,
and knew not till the flood came, and took them all away. But did they not
know of the flood, till the flood came; assuredly they did, for Noah foretold
them of and preached the coming of the flood, a hundred and twenty years
before it came. ( Genesis 6.3.) My spirit shall not always strive (I will not
always be contending) yet his days shall be an hundred and twenty years;
That is, he shall have an hundred and twenty years warning, all that time the
old world had warning of the flould, and Noah preached upon that Text all that
time; yet the flood came upon them (says the Text) and they knew it not; that
is, they regarded not what Noah said; they took no thought neither to prevent
the flood, nor to prepare for it. The Author to the Hebrews tells us, that Noah
by faith being warned of God of things not seen as yet, moved with fear,
prepared an Ark to the saving of his house, by which he condemned the world
(that is, the then world, of unbeleefe and hardness of heart) and became heir
of the righteousness which is by faith (Heb. 11.7.) He had a holy fear in
him, and a faith also; a faith that the thing should be done, and a fear of
God who threatened to do that thing. Thus by faith being moved with fear, he
prepared an Arc for the safety of himself and of his household. Why did not
the rest also make preparation? they did not believe, nor did they fear.
Christ rebuked hi^. Disciples in the storm at Sea ( Matthew. 8.) with, why are
ye fearful, O ye of little faith; The old world might have been rebuked,
with, why are ye fearelesse, even because ye are of little, or rather of no
faith at all. Unless dangers threatened be believed, they are never feared, and
unless they be both believed and feared, they are never avoided. Whenever
the Lord of such servants shall come, he comes in a day, when they look not
for him, and in an hour that they are not aware of (Matthew. 24.50.) that is, he
comes suddenly. What can come more suddenly upon any man, then that which he
looked not for, nor was at all aware of. Thus he shall come to cut them
asunder, and to appoint them their portion with hypocrites; There shall be
weeping and gnashing of teeth. Sudden fear troubles thee;

Verse. 11. Or darkness, that thou can not see, and abundance of waters cover
thee.
Some render this verse by way of interrogation; Aut autu solus tenebras non
videres and tanta scelera impune ferres?
Shall thou not see darkness? and shall not the abundance of waters cover thee?
shall thou only not see darkness, and pass unpunished for such monstrous
wickednesses? As if he had said; thou seem to wonder, that darkness is upon
thee, thou make strange of it, that floods or abundance of waters cover thee.
But have thou not deserved and called forth these Judgments, by many sinful
provocations?

Others render this Text, not as a Question, but as a direct Assertion; Thou
thoughtest, that thou should, or thou had a conceit, that thou should
never see darkness, nor any trouble coming upon thee, thy heart was lift up in
hope of Impunty; thou did persuade thy self, that God had as high an opinion
of thee, as thou had of thy self, or thou have flattered thy self in thy
sinful way, and thou thoughtest that God would have flattered thee also.

But I shall rather (as we) connect it with the former verse, carrying on the
same intention; Or darkness, that thou can not see.

Darkness may be taken, either properly, or improperly; darkness properly taken
is that of the air by the withdrawing of the Sun; This is not here intended.
Darkness improperly taken is that of our state; and it is twofold. First,
Internal, which is indeed ignorance, or the darkness of the mind; As if he had
said, Darkness veyles the eye of thy understanding, that thou can not see,
either the hand of God upon thee for thy sins, or those thy sins which have
caused God to lay his heavy hand upon thee. Thy understanding is darkened, that
thou can not see; This intellectual or internal darkness is twofold.

First, Natural or inbred, every man has naturally so much darkness in him,
that as he cannot see the truths that are in the word of God, so he cannot see
the intendment of the works of God.

Secondly, Judiciary, or inflicted ( Isa. 6.9.) Go and tell this people,
Stupidus esplane nisi tua scelera harum tuarum calamitatu^ aquae more
inundantium and obruentium causam esse vides. Merc:
hear ye indeed, but understand not: and see ye indeed, but perceive not. Make
the heart of this people fat, and make their ears heavy, and shut their eyes.
What were these eyes and ears that were to be made heavy and shut? Surely,
they are to be understood, not of Organicall, but of intellectual ears and
eyes. But who was to shut these eyes? A holy Prophet. And how was he to shut
them? By prophesying or speaking to them in the Name of the Lord. The proper
work of the Word is to open the eyes, and enlighten the mind. But when a
people have long shut their own eyes against, or only dallyed with (that
transcendent mercy) the light, then God (which is the severest judgment) shuts
their eyes, and darkens them with light. Of this Judiciary darkness, some
interpre^ the present Text, as if Eliphaz had said; there is a worse plague
upon thee, then all those spoken of, even blindness and confusion of mind, so
that thou can neither see what brought thee into them, nor how to find thy
way out, but art as a man under water, or in the dark, amuzed in these thy
afflictions, not knowing what to do, or which way to turn thy self.

Secondly, Darkness taken improperly is External, so a state of sorrow and
affliction, is a state of darkness. As before snares, so here darkness, notes
any troublesome condition, or the trouble of any man's condition. And when to
darkness, this is added, Darkness, that thou can not see, it may import the
greatest degree of darkness, even darkness in perfection, or as the Scripture
speaks, thick darkness, yea, outer darkness. There is a darkness in which we
may see, a darkness which has some kind of light in it, but when darkness is so
thick that we cannot see, that is, that we cannot see any thing in it, (as we
commonly say of extreme darkness, it is so dark, that a man cannot see his
hand) then it is perfect darkness. Light is not (properly) seen, but it is the
medium or means by which we see; much less is darkness seen, it being
properly that which intercepts and hinders sight; yet it is rare to meet with
darkness which has not some mixture or tinctures of light, or with such darkness
as in which nothing at all can be seen: yet such was this metaphorical
darkness, with which he supposed Job was muffled up. I have more then once in
other passages of this Book, met with and explained this term, showing how
and why afflictions and troubles are expressed by it, and therefore I shall not
now stay upon it. Only here take notice, Gentiles idem sentire gustiebant dum,
non eosdem in prosperis, quos in adversis adibant deos. In prosperis quidem
sole^, Jovem opulentu^ Minervam, Mercurium, Apollinem, hos omnes quasi lucis
and secundarum rerum largitores: at in adversis tellurem, Neptunum and alios
malorum depulsores, nocte multum potentes, quasi tenebrarum ipsi domini essent.
Bold.
That the old Heathens had such conceptions of darkness; And therefore being in
a prosperous state they had recourse to the Sun, to Jupiter, Minerva,
Mercury, their Idol-Deities, as the dispensers of light and comfort; but being
under sufferings and sorrows, they made their applications to the Earth, to
Neptune, and others, whom they vainly believed, were Rulers of the Night and
Lords of darkness, as if these could command and chase away all evils from
them. Scripture Language is full of such Descriptions about men in sorrow.
Darkness, that thou can not see; And abundance of waters cover thee.

(...) quamvis multitudine^ aut inundatione^ significat cum celeretate quadam
and strepitu.
The word rendered abundance, signifies a company or troop of waters, which
meet and march together, even as horses prepared for battle, and ready to
give the charge. So the word is translated (2 Kings 9.17.) A Watchman from the
Tower said, I see a company. And that was Jehu with his troops, who came
marching furiously with the revenge of God in his hand upon the house of Ahab.
And so Ezekiel. 26.10. By reason of the abundance of their horses, their dust
shall cover thee; thy walls shall shake at the noise of the Horsemen, and of
the Wheels, and of the Chariots. Read the same use of the word ( Isa. 60.6.)
The multitude (some read the inundation) of Camels shall cover thee; They shall
come in such abundance, that they shall come like a flood, and shall be as the
gathering of many waters. Troops of Horses and Camels rush together as many
waters; And waters rush and throng together, even as many horses. Thus, here
abundance, or an Army of waters come in upon thee and cover thee. Waters in
Scripture frequently signify afflictions, ( Isa. 43.2.) When thou passest
through the waters (that is, through great afflictions) I will be with thee.
(Psalm. 18.16.) He drew me out of many waters; That is, out of many
afflictions. ( Psalm. 66.12.) We went through fire and water, but thou
broughtest us forth into a wealthy place. Fire and water, note all sorts of
afflictions, hot and cold, moist and dry. And some conceive that water in a
metaphorical sense is so often used in Scripture to signify affliction;
because water in a proper sense did once afflict the whole world. As the
general Judgment upon the world at the last day shall be by fire, so the
first general Judgment upon the world, was by water; it was a flood of
waters, by which the Lord destroyed the old world. Likewise Pharaoh and his
Host of Egyptians (which was the second most Eminent Judgment, that ever was
in the world) were overwhelmed by the waters of the red Sea. Thus Moses sang (
Exo. 15.4, 5.) Pharaohs Chariot and his host has he cast into the Sea, his
chosen Captains also are drowned in the red Sea; The depths have covered them,
they sanke into the bottom as a stone. And again, ( v. 10.) The Sea covered
them, they sanke as Lead in the mighty waters. Water being the Element and the
Instrument, which God has so often used in his angry dispensations toward
sinful men, it may emphatically express any dispensation of his anger. Yet if
we consider the very nature of the thing it self, it carries significancy
enough to be the Emblem of saddest and soarest affliction.

First, There is in water a swallowing power; as water is easily swallowed, so
it swallows all up. Man cannot subsist in it when it is most peaceable, and he
can hardly escape out of it when it is enraged. Sorrow and affliction are
swallowers also; unless mercy appear and moderate them, they drown and
overthrow all. The Apostle uses that expression when he advises the
Corinthians (2 Ep: 2.7.) To forgive and comfort the incestuous person, whom,
according to his advice, they had formerly Excommunicated or cast out from
fellowship in the Church; Lest (says he) such a one should be swallowed up
with overmuch sorrow. Sorrow of any sort, even sorrow for sin may possibly
have an excess, or an over-muchnes in it; and when ever it has so (beyond the
end for which it serves, for sorrow is not of any worth in it self, but as it
serves to a spiritual end, When (I say) sorrow has such an excess, then) not
only the comforts, but the gifts and usefullnes of the person sorrowing, are
in danger to be swallowed up by it.

Secondly, Water does not only swallow up, but enter in; while it covers the
body, it fills the bowels. Thus affliction like water, fills within as well as
covers without. David complains that his affl^ctions did so ( Psalm. 69.1.)
Save me O God, for the waters are come in unto my soul. Not only have these
waters sweld over me, but they are soakt into me. Inward or
soule-afflictions, as well as outward, and bodyly afflictions, are set forth by
waters. ( Psalm. 109.18.) As he clothed himself with cursing, like as with his
garment, so let it come into his bowels (or within him) like water, and like
oil into his bones. Liquids penetrate, so do afflictions.

Thirdly, As the water is not man's proper Element, he lives and breathe in the
air, not in the water; So affliction is not our proper Element, though it be
due to our sin, yet it is not proper to our nature. Man was not made to live
in affliction, as the fish was made to live in the water; and therefore as it
is said; The Lord does not willingly afflict nor grieve the Children of men,
(Lam. 3.33.) It Is (as it were) besides the nature of God, when he afflicts the
children of men. So it is said ( Heb. 12.11.) No chastning for the present
seems to be joyous, but grievous. Man is out of his Element when he is under
chastnings. He was made at first to live in the light of Gods countenance, in
the smiles and embraces of divine love. As man is out of his way when he sins,
so he is off from his end when he suffers; He was not designed for the
overwhelming choking waters of sorrow and judgment, but for the sweet
refreshing air of joy and mercy. It often proves a mercy in the event to be
covered with these waters; To be covered with them, that we may be washed by
them is a mercy, but only to be covered with them, especially (as Eliphaz here
says Job was) to be deeply covered with them, is a deep and soar affliction.
Abundance of waters cover thee.

Hence note; That as God has treasures of mercy, and abounds in goodness, so
he has treasures of affliction, and abundance of wrath.

As God has abundance of waters sealed up in the Clouds, as in a treasury, and
he can unlocke his treasury and let them out whenever he pleases, either to
refresh or overflow the Earth; so he has abundance of afflictions, and he
can let them forth, as out of a treasury, when he pleases. And as we read (
Ezekiel. 47.) that the waters of the Sanctuary, those holy waters were of several
degrees; first, to the Ankles, secondly, to the knees, then to the Loins, and
then a river that could not be passed over, abundance of waters. Thus also the
bitter waters, the waters of affliction are of several degrees: some waters of
afflictions are but Ancle-deepe, they only make us a little wet-shod, there
are other waters up to the knees; and others to the Loins, and others we may
rightly call abundance of waters, a Sea of waters; I am come into deep waters
(says David, Psalm. 69.2.) or into depth of waters, where the floods overflow
me; And having said ( Psalm. 42.6.) O my God, my soul is cast down within
me; He adds in the next words ( v. 7.) Deep calls unto deep at the noise
of thy water-spouts: All thy waves and thy billows are gone over me. Where, by
deep to deep, by waterspouts, by waves and billows, he elegantly sets forth
his distress, in allusion to a Ship at Sea in a vehement storm and stresse of
weather; when the same wave upon whose back the vessel rides out of one deep,
plungeth it down into another; Thus the afflicted are tossed and overwhelmed
in a Sea of trouble, till they are at their wits end, if not at their faiths
end.

Take two or three Deductions from all these words laid together. We see, by
how many metaphors, the sorrows of this life are set forth, even by snares, and
fears, and darkness, and waters.

Hence note; First, That as God has abundance of afflictions in his power, so
he has variety of ways and means to afflict the sons of men; either for
the punishment of their sin, or for the trial of their graces.

If one will not do it another shall; if the snare will not, fear shall, if
fear will not, darkness shall; and if darkness will not, the waters shall, and
if waters of one hight will not do it, he will have waters deep enough to
do it; abundance of waters shall do it; he has variety of ways to deal
both with sinners and with Saints

Secondly, Consider the inference which Eliphaz makes, Therefore snares etc.
are upon thee; That Is, because thou have done wickedly in not releeving and in
oppressing the poor, therefore snares have entangled thee. This (though false
in Jobs particular case, yet) is a truth in General. And it teaches us, That,
There is an unavoydable sequel between sin and sorrow. Look upon sin in
its own nature, and so the sequel is unavoydable, sin is big with sorrow;
as affliction burdens the sinner, so sin is burdend with affliction. Sin
has all sorts of affliction in its bowels; and we may say of all the evils
that afflict us, they are our sins. Sin is formally the transgression of
the Law, and sin is virtually the punishment of transgressors. Many (I grant)
are afflicted for trial of their graces (as has been showed before) but grace
had never been thus tried if man had not sinned. Sin is the remote cause of
all afflictions, and it is the next or immediate procuring cause of most
afflictions. Would any man avoyde the snare, let him fear to sin; would he
avoid fear, let him fear to do evil; would he keep out of darkness, and
not be covered with abundance of waters, let him take heed he drink not
iniquity like water, let him have no fellowship with the unfruitful works of
darkness. God tells the sinner plainly what portion he is to expect; Say woe
to the wicked, it shall be ill with him; for the reward of his hands shall be
given him, (Isa. 3.11.) We may as well hope to avoid burning when we run into
the fire, or dirtying when we run into the mire, as to escape smarting when we
run into sin.

Yet more distinctly, we may consider all those evils comprehended under
those words in the Text, Snares, darkness, etc. either in reference to wicked
men, or to the Saints. Snares and darkness upon the wicked, are the issues of
divine wrath. While these sad dispensations are sent out and meet with Saints,
they are the issues of divine love. For though a godly man may provoke God to
anger, and find by many evidences that God (as to his actings) is angry with
him, yet as to his person he always loves him. And therefore (as a wicked man's
Table is made his snare, so) he is assured that his snare shall be made to him
a Table, that his darkness shall work light, his evils good to him. He is
also assured that the Lord will d^liver him out of these snares, and cut the
coards of the wicked. ( Psalm. 129.4.) That he will deliver him from fear,
from darkness, and bring him up out of the abundance of waters which cover him,
as David speaks ( Psalm. 32.6.) For this (that is, because thou art so gracious)
shall every one that is godly pray unto thee in a time when thou may be found
(The Hebrew is, in a finding time, which according to our translation, notes
the season when God may be found, as the Prophet speaks ( Isa. 55.6.) Yet it
may be well expounded for the time when trouble finds, that is, takes hold of
the godly man. And so the word is used ( Psalm. 116.3.) The pains of hell gat
hold of me (we put in the Margin) found me. In which sense the word is used
also, Psalm. 21.8. Thine hand shall find out, (that is, take hold of, and
apprehend) all thine enemies, thy right hand shall find out those that hate
thee. Now in this finding time, either when God may be found, or when trouble
finds a godly man, he (setting himself to pray) has this promise, surely in
the floods of great waters, they (that is, the floods of great waters, by which
are meant, great dangers) shall not come nigh him, (that is, the Godly man) to
hurt or drown him. Sometimes prayer keeps the flood off, and always prayer
delivers the Godly man out of the flood. Wicked men have no mind to come nigh
God with their hearts (and so some enterpret the latter part of this verse in
the Psalm) nor will God admit them nigh unto himself, in the floods of great
waters. And the floods of great waters shall not (which is the scope of our
reading) come nigh the Godly man for his hurt, when he draws nigh to God in
prayer with his heart.

Thus we have seen the sins of Job drawn out into a Charge, and the
Judgment of Eliphaz upon it, what the event, the sequel, or Issue of those
sins, was snares and fears, and waters and darkness.

There is yet one thing further, that I shall here take notice of from the
constant course of Jobs friends in dealing with him. We see that still they
charge him with sin, and still insist upon it, that all his afflictions and
miseries were the fruits of his sin. Job (as has appeared in opening
several passages of this Book) has as often disproved their inference, and
denied that his sufferings were caused by his sin, at least not by any such
way of sinning, as they charged him with. Laboring also much to inform them
that God has many other reasons why he afflicts his people, and that God might
take liberty to afflict him, though he were no such kind of creature as they
rendered him; yet notwithstanding all he could say, either to purge himself or
better conform them, they persevered in the same opinion, both concerning his
person, and the cause of his afflictions.

Whence Note; It is hard to convince those who are under a mistake, whether
about persons, or doctrines.

Error is as binding upon the conscience, and as strongly embraced by the
affections, as truth is; For it binds and is embraced, not in the name of an
error, but in the name of truth. And men are therefore wedded to, and in love
with their own conceptions, because (how monstrous and hard-favoured soever in
themselves, yet) nothing is more beautiful in their eye then they. No man
(faith the Apostle) ever hated his own flesh, but loved and cherished it. The
flesh of our minds (such are all false principles and positions) is more loved
and cherished by us, then the flesh of our bodies. Besides, when men have once
taken up an opinion, they think it a dishonor to lay it down again. It Is
rare to find a man that will yield up his Judgment, though it be a misguided
one, or acknowledge that he is in an error, though he begins to take some
knowledge, or at least some suspicion of it. A light intimation or only the
Appearance of a probability will amount to a proof against either persons or
doctrines which we like not; but the clearest demonstrations will hardly raise
a Jealousy against what we like. Let Job say what he will in his own case, he
cannot be believed by his friends, and his friends will say again what once
they had said, though it had been more then once before fully answered. The
present age has given us sad experiences of this thing. For, as many have been
unstable and tossed to and fro with every wind of (false) doctrine, so others
have been stubborn and unmoved from their errors, though the strongest winds
of truth have breathed, yea blown hard upon them. And those prejudices which
have (with so much severity) been taken up by brethren against brethren; how
do they remain, in many minds, as mountains, unmoved to this very day?

I know not which is worse, unsetlednes in the truth, and an easiness to let it
go, or tenaciousnesse in an error, and a hardness to let it go. Nor do I well
know which is worse, a readiness to take up hard thoughts of our brethren, or
an un-readines to lay them down. Were the laws of love to man, and zeal for
God observed, these extremes would always be avoided. Pure zeal for God
would fix us in the truth, and make us more easy to be brought off from our
most applauded errors. True love to man, would cause us to examine every ground
of suspicion against a brother twice, before we do indeed suspect him once;
And it would cause us to rejoice in any appearance of his innocence, whereby we
might discharge our own Spirits of all suspicions concerning him. Our love (as
the Apostle prays, Phil. 1.9.) ought to abound in knowledge and in all
Judgment. That is, we ought to love Judiciously as well as affectionately or
sincerely. So that, true love will not over-looke the faults of another, nor
will it approve against light. Yet true love is ready to entertain any light
offered, that grounds of suspicion may be removed, and we restored to a right
understanding of our brethren.

JOB, CHAP. 22. Verse. 12, 13, 14. Is not God in the height of heaven? and
beholds the height of the Stars how high they are.

And thou say, How does God know? can he judge through the dark cloud?

Thick clouds are a covering to him, that he sees not, and he walks in the
circuit of heaven.


IN the former part of this Chapter, we have found Eliphaz charging Job with
those heinous crimes, injustice and uncharitableness toward man; in these
three verses he proceeds to charge him with a higher crime, even
irreligiousnesse and impiety against God; as if (at least) Job doubted, if not
denied the providence of God about what is done here below, or affirmed that he
neither rewarded the righteous according to their good, nor punishes the
wicked according to the evil which they have done. That Is the scope of this
context, in which we may observe.

First, A twofold truth held forth.

Secondly, A wrong suggestion of two errors, as arising from those truths.

Thirdly, An endeavor to prove and make good, what he had wrongfully suggested.

The two truths are contained in the 12th verse; first, God is in the height of
heaven; secondly, The Stars are very high; these are clear truths; from these
Eliphaz makes a wrong suggestion, as if Job upon those grounds of Gods being in
the height of heaven, etc. had pleased himself with this conceit, that God
could not (at such a distance) take notice of what passes among, or is acted
by men in this inferior world.

(Ver. 13.) And thou say, how does God know? can he judge through the dark
cloud? As if he had said, God being in the height of heaven, cannot know, much
less judge concerning the state of things here below; Why what should hinder?
He tells us what in the 14th verse, where (which was the third thing) he
endeavors to prove his suggestion; Thick clouds are a covering to him that he
sees not, that is the first proof: and then we have a second, in the latter
end of that verse, God has other things to do then to mind what is done
here, he has higher businesses and employments then to look upon us who are
creeping upon mole-hills, and engaged about a heap of earth; for, he walks
in the circuit of heaven; that is, there lies his great work, he has enough
in a nobler Sphere to employ himself in; and therefore surely, thou think,
that God takes no care at all, or not such special care about the affairs and
ways of men. This is the sum and scope of these three verses. They are a new
charge of impiety upon Job, as shutting up or restraining the providence of God
to the things of heaven alone; and we see how Eliphaz frames arguments and
proofs of the point for Job, which (as will appear afterward) never came
into his heart.

Now though Eliphaz misapplyed all this to Job, yet herein he fully characters
and clearly paints out the spirit of carnal men, for such secure themselves in
their evil ways upon this presumption, that God takes no notice of them, or
that he has something else to do then to trouble himself with what they are
doing.

Ver. 12. Is not God in the height of heaven?
Nonne deus sublimior est coelo? Pagni: Nonne deus coelum alium tenet? Tygur:
Nonne deus in sublimitate coelorum? Mont: Deus sublimitas coelorum. Hebr:
There are diverse readings of these words; first, thus; Is not God higher then
the heavens? A second thus; Does not God possess the high heaven? The
Original may strictly be renderd; God the height of heaven; that is, God is
above all heavens: we render well; God is in the height or sublimitie of heaven.

This Question; Is not God in the height of heaven? is taken three ways.

First, Some read it as an Exhortation given by Eliphaz to Job, to draw off the
motion of his thoughts, and most of all the settled bent of his heart from those
inferior things, his losses and troubles, his sorrows, pains, and sicknesses;
he would divert his mind from these worldly sorrows, and raise it up to
heavenly enjoyments, Is not God in heaven? As if he had said, Why stand thou
poring upon things below? Why dwell thou so much upon thy dunghill, and thy
present poverty, God is in the height of heaven, consider him there. This is
both a safe and a very spiritual way to ease our minds of all the troubles and
sorrows which we meet with in this world; could we but ascend in Spirit to
the height where God is, could we by an eye of faith look to him, live upon
him, and in him, all burdens would be light, and pressures easy to us.

Secondly, This question may be taken as a plain assertion or affirmation, and
it is of the same value and signification with this, God is in the height of
heaven, there he is, and from thence he beholds all the children of men, their
ways and works.

Thirdly, Is not God in the height of heaven? May be understood not as the
question of Eliphaz, and so his affirmation, but as the question of Job, and so
his supposition. As if Eliphaz apprehended Job thus speaking in his heart;
Annon deus est (inquis) in altitudine coeli? Jun.
Is not God (say thou) in the height of heaven? or, do not thou, O Job,
say thus; God is in the height of heaven; I grant that he is there, but I deny
that he is there in thy sense, or according to thy opinion. He is not
concluded, or shut up there, he is not so in the height of heaven, but that he
minds what is done upon the earth, yea in the very depths of hell. As if he
had said; Thy thoughts and conceptions of God are too strait and narrow; Thou
speak much below God, while thou say he is in the hight of heaven. While
thou confinest God to heaven, thou make him like thy self on earth.

From these words in the two former Expositions, Observe; That the hight of
heaven, or heaven above, is the place of Gods special residence.

Heaven is my throne (says the Lord, Isa. 66.1.) the throne is the seat of a
Prince, there he declares his power, and his state; his glory shines from his
throne. A Prince looks like a common man when he is abroad in the world, but
when upon his throne, then the rays of Majesty break forth, and he appears as
he is. Thus the holy Prophet begs a gracious look of the Lord from heaven (
Isa. 63.15.) Look down from heaven, the habitation of thy holiness, and of
thy glory. Heaven is called the habitation of Gods holiness, and of his glory,
because his holiness and glory shine forth more in heaven, then upon the
earth; little of the holiness of God is discovered to us here, though so much
of it breaks forth here as causes the heart of carnal men to quarrel with it
continually. Nor are any able with these eyes, or rather with these hearts to
bear the glory of God, or endure his holiness. When but some extraordinary
glimpses of these appeared to Esayah, he cried out, Woe is me, I am undone (or
cut off) because I am a man of unclean lips, and I dwell in the midst of a
people of unclean lips, for mine eyes have seen the King, the Lord of H^sts,
(Isa. 6.5.) As God is of purer eyes then to behold iniquity, so man is of
impurer eyes then to behold the glory and holiness of God in clear
manifestations of it, and therefore heaven is the seat, the habitation of his
holiness, and of his glory. Hence we may take two further inferences.

First, That our hearts, and our eyes should be lifted upwards; the whole
currunt of Scripture speaks of God as above in heaven. And that is the reason
why the Apostle ( Col. 3.1.) exhorts, Set you affections on things above, and
not on things here below; And as on things above, so most of all upon God who
is above. Sursum corda.
The old word was, Lift up your hearts; and David says in prayer, ( Psalm.
25.1.) I lift up my soul to thee. And again, ( Psalm. 123.1.) Unto thee lift I
up mine eyes, O thou that dwell in the heavens. Yea our Lord Jesus Christ
himself when he prayed ( Joh. 17.1.) Lift up his eyes to heaven, and said,
Father the hour is come, glorify thy Son, etc. The eye lift up to heaven is
a sign of the heart lift up to heaven, and that corporeal visible action,
serves to fix our most spiritual affections upon the invisible God. It Is
indeed an easy thing to lift the eyes up to heaven, but it is very hard, yea
impossible, without a divine assistance to lift up the heart to heaven; the
heart of a profane worldling mudds so much in the earth, that he seldom lifts
up so much as his eyes to heaven; and how much or how often soever a hypocrite
lifts up his eyes to heaven, yet still his heart muds in the earth. The eye
looks upward naturally, but if ever the heart look upward, it is a work of
Grace.

Secondly, Then serve the Lord with reverence and holy fear, in in all your
addresses to him, and appearings before him. We reverence those who are on
high on earth, and shall we not reverence him who is higher then the highest?
him who is in the hight of heaven? While Christ bids us say, Our Father which
art in heaven, he teaches us, as to pray with confidence, because God is our
father, so to pray with reverence, because he is a father in heaven, ( Matthew.
6.9.) The Preacher ( Eccl. 5.2.) makes this an argument why we should be taken
up in high thoughts of God, why we should speak in a reverentiall manner both
of him, and to him; Be not rash with thy mouth, and let not thy heart be hasty
to utter any thing before God. He puts (as it were) a double bridle upon man in
his drawing near to God; first, upon his mouth, Let not thy mouth be rash; and
secondly, upon his heart (for the heart will talk at random as well as the
mouth, yea the heart will talk more at random then the mouth can; and there is
praying with the heart alone as well as with the heart and mouth together,
therefore says he) Let not thy heart be hasty to utter any thing before God;
Why? for God is in heaven, and thou art upon the earth, therefore let thy words
be few. Here are indeed two arguments to enforce this composure of spirit;
first, the highness and Greatness of God; secondly, the lownes and vileness of
man. Consider God is above, and thou art below, not only in regard of place,
but of state and dignity, of power and majesty. The being of God in heaven,
notes not only a power of sovereignty to command us, but a power of ability
both to punish and to provide for us, to punish our rashness, and to supply all
our wants wherewith we acquaint him, and humbly mention before him; therefore
Be not rash with thy mouth, and let not thy heart be hasty, etc. The same
Solomon in the same book, allegorically describing the declined decrepid
condition of man, says of the old man, that he is afraid of that which is high
(Eccl. 12.5.) Young men will be clambering and ascending, but old men are
afraid of that which is high, they dare not go up a high steep place, least
their strength or breath should fail, or least their brain should turn, and
they through giddines tumble down. Old men love to keep upon level or even
ground, and are afraid of that which is high. Surely both young and old, have
reason to be afraid of him that is high, to have reverentiall thoughts of God,
who is in the high^ of heaven, higher then the heavens. The distance of man
from God, as God is in heaven and man on earth, is great, and the dissimilitude
of man to God, as God is holy and man corrupt, is far greater; either of
these Considerations single is enough, but both these laid together, is
abundantly enough to keep the heart in an humble selfe-abasing frame before
the Lord.

2ly, Taking these words, Is not God in the hight of heaven? As the supposed
speech of Job, thou say God is in the hight of heaven; that is, confined to
heaven, so, that he looks no further, but thou art deceived, God is not locked
up in heaven, he looks to all things here on earth. As the earth is the Lords,
and the fullnes of it, as to right and propriety, so the earth is the Lords
with all the fullnes of it, as to care and providence. Though there be a
distinctnes in the manner or manifestation of his being in heaven and on earth;
yet he is as truly and as much on earth as he is in heaven.

Hence note; God is omnipresent, or every where.

Though we are to adore and worship God as in heaven, yet we must not shutt up
God in heaven; as he is in heaven, so he is upon the earth also, he is with us,
yea he is in us, he is in all places, not circumscribed by any, nor limited to
any place. God is present in all places, and fills all places with his
presence, only he does not declare his presence alike in all places. The Lord
appears where and as he pleases, but he cannot be otherwise or otherwhere
then he is, and that is every where. While the Psalmist queryed, Whether shall
I go from thy presence? He was so far from imagining that any such place
could be found, that in the very next words he concludes God to be every
where, by an enumeration of all places, ( Psalm. 139.7, 8.) If I ascend up to
heaven, thou art there; if I make my bed in Hell, behold thou are there. (Hell
stands in utmost opposition to heaven, as heaven in Scripture Language is the
highest, so hell is the lowest place; now says David, If I make my bed in
hell, thou art there) If I take the wings of the morning, and dwell in the
utmost parts of the sea, even there shall thy hand lead me, and thy right hand
shall hold me; That is, there I shall find^ thee efficaciously present with me.
The Lord having said ( Isa. 66.1.) Heaven is my throne, presently adds, and the
earth is my footstool; So the earth is called, because its situation in
nature is below the heavens, his throne is there, his footstool is here. (
Jer. 23.23, 24.) Am I a God at hand, says the Lord, and not afar off? Can
any hide himself in secret places, that I shall not see him, says the Lord?
do not I fill heaven and earth, says the Lord? All these expostulating
questions, are resolved into this one position. God is every where; And though
some read the first, not as a Q^estion, but as an Assertion, Thus; I am a God
at hand, and not a God afar off, yet the sense is the same; God therein
affirming, that he is ever near us, and never afar off from us wheresoever
we are. Though God be in those places which are furthest off from us, as well
as in those that are near at hand, yet God himself is never afar off from
us, but always at hand. When Solomon had set up the Temple, (1 King. 8.27.) He
was sure of the presence of God in it; and therefore did not speak doubtingly,
but admiringly, when he asked, But, will God indeed dwell on earth? (that is,
will God manifest himself gloriously on the earth?) behold the heaven, and
heaven of heavens cannot contain thee, how much less this house that I have
builded? Solomon knew that heaven could not contain, that is, limit God, much
less could the house which he had builded. Yet the Lord made the Temple
another heaven to himself, it was as his second heaven, there the Lord had a
kind of glorious residence, beyond what he had in any other part of the world;
Now the Assemblyes and Congregations of the Saints are in a special manner the
dwelling place of God, and his second heaven; He dwells so much in the Churches
that he seems not to dwell at all in any part of the world beside (2 Cor.
6.16, 17.) I will dwell in them, and walk in them. Wherefore come out from
among them, and be ye separate says the Lord, and touch not the unclean
thing, and I will receive you. God who is in all the world, dwells only in and
with his people. They who separate from whatsoever is unholy, have him nearest
them who is altogether Holy. To conclude this point, we may make use of that
distinction of the Schools to clear the difference how a corporal substance,
and a spiritual, as as also how a spiritual created and uncreated substance,
may be said to be in a place. All bodies are in place circumscriptively,
spiritual substances created, Angels and souls of men are in place
definitively: We cannot draw a line about an Angel, as about the body of a
man, yet the Angel is so in this place, as not in another: but God who is a
spirit, and uncreated, is in place repletively, that is, he fills all places
where he is, but is not limited by any place where he is, He is (as some have
not unfitly spoken) a Sphere whose center is every where, and whose
circumference is no where. This is a mystery which indeed we are not able to
comprehend by reason, but we must take it down by faith. The Lord is in the
height of heaven, yet so there, as he is not shut up there.

But if any shall yet querie, How is the Lord every where? how is he in heaven,
and in earth? is it so as the Sun may be said to be every where? the Sun is
seated in heaven, yet is by way of communication on earth, the Sun by light,
heat, or influence is all the world over, in some degree or other, yet the
Sun moves only in his Orb. Or is God so every where as a Sovereign Prince,
who though in person he reside here or there, yet in power and Authority he is
every where within his own Dominion? I answer, No; These allusions are far
below this truth. God is every where, not only as the Sun by light, heat,
and influence, not only as a Prince, by his power and Authority, but (as we
speak) in person, and in his Essence. Further, the Lords presence in all
places is not as that of the air, which is more every where then the Sun;
the air is every where filling all places, and so encompassing all bodies, as
if it made them all but one Great body; yet that part of the air that is in
one place is not in another, for the air is divisible. Divina essentia est
tota intra omnia and tota extra omnia, nusquam inclusa aut exclusa omnia
contineus, a nullo contenta, nec propterea immistu rebus aut rerum sordibus
inquinata. August: Epist. 55. ad Dard:
But we must not take up any such apprehensions of God, for as he is every
where, so he is wholly every where; God cannot be divided or parted as the air
is and may. The Divine Essence (as one of the Ancients has expressed this
astonishing mystery) is whole within all things, and whole without all things,
no where included, no where excluded, containing all things, contained of
nothing, yet not at all mingled with the nature of these things, nor defiled
with their pollutions. That which the Philosopher speaks of the soul of man,
(That it is all in the whole body, and whole in every part of the body) comes
nearest this mystery. Some quarrel at that expression about the soul, yet
there is a truth in it. The soul is indivisi^le, much more God, wheresoever he
is, he is all and altogether; he is every where, and every where all. So he is
in the height of heaven, and so he is on earth below.

But if God be every where, why does Christ teach us to pray, Our father which
art in heaven, (Mat. 6.13.) And when the Heathen made that scoffing demand,
Where is now their God? Why did David Answer, Our God is in heaven, (Psalm.
115.2, 3.) To these and all other Texts of like import, we may answer; heaven
is not there spoken of as bounding the presence of God, but as guiding the
faith and hope of man. In the morning (says David, Psalm. 5.3.) will I direct
my prayer unto thee, and will look up. When the eye has no sight of any help
on earth, then faith may have the clearest visions of it in heaven. And while
God appears so little in any Gracious dispensation for his people on earth,
that the enemy begins to scoff, Where is now your God? Then his people have
recourse by faith to heaven, where the Lord not only is, but is glorious in
his appearings. From whence as he sees how it is with us, so he seems to have
a kind of advantage to relieve us.

But as some Scriptures seem to confine God to heaven, so other Scriptures
seem to deny that he is every where on earth. Thus Moses said to the people of
Israel (Numb. 14.42.) Go not up for the Lord is not among you. And again (
Deuteronomy. 7.21.) Thou shall not be affrighted at them, for the Lord thy God is
among you; with some the Lord is, with others the Lord is not; and he is with
the same persons at one time, not at another; How then can it be said, that the
Lord is every where present? I answer, when Moses says (and many other Texts
which speak in the same form) that God was sometimes with his people, and
sometimes not; we are not to understand it at all of a local presence, or
absence, but of a favorable presence or absence. Thus God is with some
persons, and not with others; thus he is sometime present with, sometime absent
from the same person. It was this favorable presence for which Moses did so
earnestly entreat the Lord ( Exodus 33.15.) If thy presence go not with us,
carry us no further; That is, unless thou please to be with us, to prosper our
way, and protect us in it, let us stay where we are. This presence of God is a
high favor indeed, and God is thus present but in few places (comparatively)
of the whole earth.

Once more, those Scriptures may seem to imply that God is so in heaven, that
he is not also upon the earth, which speak of his coming down from heaven to
earth, ( Genesis 11.5.) And the Lord came down to see the City and the Tower
which the Children of men builded. Whence some may infer, if he came down to
see the City, then he was not there before, and if so, then he is not
universally present in all places. Again, ( Genesis 18.20, 21.) And the Lord
said, because the cry of Sodom and Gomorrah is great, and because their sin
is very grievous, I will go down now, and see whether they have done
altogether according to the cry of it which is come unto me, and if not, I will
know. This passage yields the same difficulty and objection; To both which we
may add that of David (Psalm. 14.2.) The Lord looked down from heaven upon the
children of men, to see if there were any that did understand; He does not say,
God was among the children of men here below, but being in heaven (as a man
standing upon a high place or Tower) he looked down.

I answer, These Texts speak of God after the manner of men, or they speak
thus, not to teach us, how God knows what is done on earth, but to confirm,
and assure us that the Lord does clearly and certainly know whatsoever is done
by or among men on earth, even as clearly and certainly as a man knows any
thing by his view upon the place. God knows all things presently, without
searching, though never so secret, and all things certainly without enquiring,
though never so doubtful. God neither ascends, nor descends; He does not come
down by any motion, but he comes down to our apprehension. He shows us after
our way, that he knows, because we cannot conceave his way of knowledge. If I
would assure another man that I certainly know such a thing, I tell him, I came
from the place, I saw it, or I beheld it with my own eyes; now that is all that
is intended, when it is said, The Lord came down from heaven to behold, and see
the Tower of Babell, and the condition of Sodom; Or it is, to admonish all
Magistrates and Judges, that they pass no sentence of punishment either upon
places or persons, upon bare hearesay and reports, but that they first inform
themselves fully of the matter of fact, as Job professed his course was in all
legal proceedings ( Chap. 29.16.) The cause which I knew not I searched out.
Thus we see notwithstanding all these apparances from Texts of Scripture to
the contrary, That this Scripture-truth stands firm, The Lord is so in the
height of heaven, that he is every where also here upon the earth.

From which take these two Deductions.

First, Seeing the Lord is every where present, we should be every where holy.
For where soever he is, he is the holy Lord; That was the charge which God gave
to Abraham; Walk before me, and be upright; As if he had said, Wheresoever
thou walk, walk as having me present with thee, and be upright in my
presence. I (says David, a type of Christ, Psalm. 16.8.) have set the Lord
always before me, he is at my right hand, I shall not be moved. He that by
faith eyes God continually as his protector in trouble, shall not be moved with
any evil that he suffers, and he that eyes God by faith as his pattern in
holiness, shall not be moved from doing that which is good. This thought, The
Lord is at our right hand, keeps us from turning either to the right hand or
to the left. It is said of Enoch, that he walked with God, (Genesis 5.22.) and
though the History of his life be very short, yet it is said of him a second
time ( ver. 24.) That he walked with God. He walked so much with God, that he
walked as God, he did not walk (which kind of walking the Apostle reproves, 1
Cor. 3.3.) as men. He walked so little, like the world, that his stay was
little in the world. He was not (says the Text) for God took him. He took
him from the world to himself, or (as the Author to the Hebrews reports it)
he was translated that he should not see death, for he received this testimony
that he pleased God.

Secondly, It follows; if God be every where present, That the godly are
never out of the reach of God to help them, and that the wicked are never out
of the reach of God to punish them.

( Isa. 43.2.) When thou passest through the waters I will be with thee, and
when thou walk through the fire, thou shall not be burnt. The presence of
God is the protection of Saints in the evil which they suffer; and they who
do evil cannot be hid from his punishing presence. There is no running from
God. It is said of Jonah (Chap. 1.3.) That he fled from the presence of God.
Whether fled he? The Text says he fled to Sea, but did not God find him
there? He fled from the commanding presence of God, but he fell into the angry
presence of God. We have a large description in the 9th of Amos, how carnal
men hope to shift out of the hand of God. I (says the Lord) will slay the last
of them with the sword, though they dig to hell, thence shall my hand take
them. We read what wise counsel the servants of the King of Benhadad gave him
after he had been defeated by the King of Israel (1 King. 20.23, 24, 25.) Their
Gods are Gods of the hills, therefore they were stronger then we, but let us
fight against them in the plains, and surely we shall be stronger then they.
Make thee an Army like the Army that thou have lost, horse for horse, and
Chariot for Chariot, and we will fight against them in the plain, and surely
we shall be stronger then they, and he hearkened to their voice and did so. Why
did they desire to fight them upon the plain? they thought God was a God of
the hills and not of the valleys, but ( ver. 28.) A man of God said to the King
of Israel, thus says the Lord, because the Assyrians have said, the Lord is
God of the hills and not of the valleys, therefore will I deliver this great
multitude into thy hand. As if he had said, however you deserve not in the
least, that I should own you, or assist your cause, yet that I may confute the
blasphemous and derogatory principles of these Syrians, I will give you a
second victory against them, even in the valleys, where they suppose they have
you at an advantage, and shall deal with you beyond the extent of my power and
Territory. Though God had no cause to respect the honor of the Israelites, yet
he could not forget the honor of his own name, which was obscured by those
superstitious Syrians. The most received Doctrine and Divinity of the Heathens
confined their Gods to certain places, some to this City, and some to that,
some to the hills, and some to the plains, some to the Sea, others to the
Land. It Is said that the same night in which Alexander the Great (of whose
Conquests Daniel Prophesied) was borne, that the Temple of Diana at Ephesus was
burnt to the ground. And the Heathens gave this as the reason of it, because
Diana was absent from her Temple, being gone to assist at the birth of
Alexander; implying that their Goddess was so in one place as she could not
attend what was done elsewhere. Such were the gross conceits which they had of
their Gods, and they imagined the God of Israel to be such a one as their own.
The veriest Idolater in the world presumes his God as good as any is. But
Jehova the living God has taught us to say, Who is a God like unto thee? and
our experiences have sealed to it, that there is none like the God of Jesurun,
who rides on the heavens for thy help, and in his excellency on the skies
(Deuteronomy. 33.26.) And we have learned to comfort our selves in all places and
streights, in this assurance that he is the God of the hills as well as of the
valleys, of the Sea, as well as the dry Land, and that he is as truly present
in the lowest depths as in the highest heavens. Is not God in the height of
heaven?

And behold the height of the Stars how high they are. The Hebrew is, Behold
the head of the Stars; The head of a man is the highest part of him, and the
head of any thing is the top of it. Behold the head or height of the Stars
how high they are; Stars are high, but God is higher; many creatures are
high, but God is high above all creatures. The creature is strong, but God is
stronger, the creature is wise, but God is wiser, the creature is glorious, but
God is infinitely more glorious; The glory, wisdom, strength, and highest
height of the creature, is but a glimpse of what God is. The Stars are high.
I shall not enter into an Astronomicall Discourse about the Stars, or the
height of Stars. I shall not meddle with a Jacobs staff, to take the
elevation of the Stars, no need of such Discourse here, all that is intended
by Eliphaz, is a proof that God is infinitely exalted in his highness and
majesty above the Stars.

Behold the height of the Stars how high they are. This word behold in
Scripture is often applied to things of wonder; To say, behold, is not a
calling for the bare act of the eye to see the height of the Stars, but it
calls for a work of the mind, duly to consider of, and to wonder at their
height. Some creatures, especially the heavenly, are not only useful, but
wonderful; and it is as hard to understand them, as it is comfortable to enjoy
them. The Hebrew word for Heaven comes from a root which signifies to amaze
and astonish; And indeed there are natural wonders and mysteries enough in the
heavens to astonish any considering man. And the true reason why we are no more
astonished at them, or do no more admire them, is because we do so little
consider them. We often see or look upon the Stars, but we seldom behold
them. And therefore David says ( Psalm. 8.3.) When I consider the heavens, the
work of thy fingers, the Moon and the Stars which thou have ordained; what
is man that thou art mindful of him? As the beholding and consideration of our
own works will make us ashamed, because they appear so bad, so the
consideration and beholding of the works of God will make us astonished, because
they appear both so good and great. Behold (says the Apostle, 1 John 3.1.)
what manner of Love the father has bestowed upon us, that we should be called
the Sons of God; even this transcendent Love of God in our Adoption is passed
by as a small matter by those who will not take the pains (or rather the
pleasure) and leisure to behold and consider the manner of it. No mervaile if
the power of God in making the highest Stars be passed by as a low thing, by
those who do not behold, that is, diligently consider them.

Behold the height of the Stars how high they are. We are called to consider
this.

Hence note; That it is our duty to contemplate the excellency of the creature.

God has not only given us the book of the Scripture, but of the creature,
and we must attend to the reading of this as well as of that, even to the
reading of every lease and line of it. There are four great leaves of this
book. First, the heavens; secondly, the earth; thirdly, the Sea; fourthly, the
air. These are the four great leaves of this book of the creature; in every
one of which we should labor to be expert Scholars, and spel out the name and
mind of God in them. For though (as I said before) beholding notes wondering,
yet we must not behold them to wonder at them, like children; but we must
behold them to learn somewhat from them, or to be instructed by them as men.

Behold the Stars. First, In their number; As God said to Abraham (Genesis 15.
5.) Look now toward Heaven, and tell the Stars if thou be able to number
them; and he said unto him, so shall thy seed be. It Is matter of wonder that
God should make so many of those eminent Lights, that he should set up so many
flaming torches in heaven for man to see his way, and work by on earth. That
God who has spread this Canopie over our heads, should also embroyder it with
such a multitude of Golden spangles, which render it as much our delight, as it
is our duty, to behold them.

Secondly, Behold the Stars in their order, they move by rule, they keep
their ranks, none of them go out of their place, or forsake their station.
They who are skilled in the motion of the Stars, know where to have them a
hundred year hence. In the 5th of Judges, it is said, The Stars in their
courses fought against Sissera.

Thirdly, We should consider the Stars in their magnitude, what vast bodies
they are; Some of them are bigger then the whole body of the earth (as
Philosophy teaches us) though, to appearance not bigger then the blase of a
Candle, nor broader then the palm of a hand.

Fourthly, Consider also the difference of the Stars in their greatness, and
magnitude, they are all great, but not all of a greatness, not all of one
size. Astronomers divide the Stars into six magnitudes. We should likewise
observe, and wonder at their light, which is their glory: the light of the
Stars is the glory of the Stars, and so the more light any Star has, the
more glory it has. Thus one Star differs from another Star in glory (1
Cor. 15.41.) But I shall not stay upon these things, having insisted somewhat
largely upon them at the 9th Chapter, v. 9. Whether I refer the Reader. Only
note here that as the Stars of heaven are of several degrees; God has not
levelled them, either in light or magnitude: so he has diversely distributed
the light of parts, and gifts, of understanding, and knowledge, of estate and
power, to and among the children of men here on earth. It Is good for all, that
all are not alike; The universe could not be either so beautiful, or so
orderly, if every particular had the same beauty, or were of the same order.
And he that cannot be content to have less, and to be lesser then another, is
altogether unfit, not only to be as great, or to have as much as another, but
to be or have any thing at all. Nor is any man more fit to be more then he is,
then he that can rejoice while another is more then he.

Secondly, Note; The creature leads us to God.

That Is the tendency and scope of all that is here asserted. Eliphaz calls not
Job to the meditation, or contemplation of the Stars to leave him there. Some
study the heavens much, but their lives are earthly; they study the Stars,
yet there is nothing but dirt in their hearts, and the reason is, because they
study the Stars, for the Stars sake, and not for Gods sake, and make the
Stars their end, not their way, or as Stars, to lead them to God. This is
the reason why many Astronomers and Philosophers, who busy their heads and
minds much in speculation about the nature of the heavenly bodies, know not at
all what it is to have their conversations in heaven, or to mind the things
that are above. We should so behold the glory of the Stars, as from thence
to infer, that God is much more glorious, yea, that, these things which were
made glorious, have no glory in comparison of that Glory which made them. Plato
taught his Scollers to say; The earth is beautiful, the heavens are more
beautiful, but God who made the earth, and the heavens, is more beautiful
then both. The visible creature shows the invisible God ( Psalm. 19.1, 2.) The
heavens declare the glory of God, and the firmament shows his handy work.
But O how glorious is the invisible God, who has made such visible creatures?
and what a work-Master is he who has set up such a work? ( Romans 1.20.) The
invisible things of him from the creation of the world, are clearly seen,
being understood by the things that are made, even his eternal power and
godhead. The things that are made, carry us to the maker of them, and they tell
us, that none but he who has an eternal power and godhead, could possibly
make them. The Heathen thought the Sun, Moon, and Stars, to be Gods,
therefore certainly there is very much of God, much of the glory and power of
God to be seen in them. And Job says (which does plainly show that in nature
it is so, Chap. 31.26.) If I beheld the Sun when it shined, or the Moon
walking in brightness, and my heart has been secretly enticed, or my mouth
has kissed my hand, this also were an iniquity to be punished by the Judge,
for I should have denied the God that is above. That is, if I have been enticed
to worship the Sun, or Moon, as ravished with their beauty (for it is so far
from being a sin, that it is a duty to behold the Sun when it shines, and the
Moon walking in brightness, but so to behold them as to adore them, or do
obeisance to them, (which was the custom of the Heathen, expressed it seems
among them by kissing their hand, as we do at this day in token of respect and
reverence to men above us) this is an iniquity even that gross iniquity of
Idolatry, or worshipping the creature in stead of or more then the Creator, who
is blessed for evermore. Now (I say) inasmuch as these creatures have so much
of God in them, that many Heathens have mistaken them for God, how will it
condemn us of dullness and stupidity, if we be be not led to God in the
knowledge and beholding of them? For as to make these creatures Gods, so not to
see God in these creatures, is to deny the God that is above.

Thirdly, While we behold the Stars of heaven, it should exceedingly both
humble us and make us thankful, for whose use, comfort, and accommodation in
this life, God set up those Glorious Lights. God did not make them for his own
use, he had no need of them, he was from everlasting without any of these
creatures. The Stars are nothing to him; The Sun is nothing to him; yea in
that state of glory where we shall enjoy God for ever, we shall have light
without Sun; so that these lights were made for our use, and for ours only
while we are walking in the dark vale of this present world. Now, while we
behold the height of the Stars how high they are, and consider for whom as
well as by whom they were made; even for us, for poor us, who are but dust and
ashes: This should at once lay us low in humblenes (looking upon them as an
honor to great for us) and raise us up in thankfullnes, because the benefit
and comfort of them is so great to us. Thus David speaks in that excellent
prophecy of Christ ( Psalm. 8.3.) When I consider thy heavens the work of thy
fingers, the Moon, and the Stars, which thou have ordained, what is man that
thou art mindful of him, and the son of man that thou visitest him? As if he
had said, thou have made all these creatures for man; see what a heaven, what
stars God has framed, and set up for man. Lord, what is man that thou art
mindful of him? Thus behold the height of the stars, how high they are; as
to lead thee unto God, and to admire his highness, so to be humbled at thy own
baseness, and to be thankful for his benefits.

Eliphaz having laid down these two Propositions, God is on high, and the
Stars are high, proceeds to make an inference from both, which he forms up
(by way of supposition) from Jobs own mouth.

Verse. 13. And thou say, how does God know?
As if Eliphaz had said, thou art so far from making that right improvement
which thou ought of these truths, that the Lord is in the height of heaven,
and that he has made those high and glorious lights in heaven, that indeed
thou do quite pervert his meaning in making them; Thou say, how does God
know? In stead of honoring God who formed these lights, thou art darkning his
honor, and ecclipsing the light of his omniscience. For whereas thou should
have said, seeing God is on high, and has made the Stars, which are so high,
surely nothing can be hid from his knowledge, Thou say, How does God know?
And there is a twofold saying of this; first, a saying with the tongue;
secondly, with the heart; The vain heart of man has many sayings, and this
among the rest, Dicis 1 verbis prolatis 2 mentis cogitatione and falsa
persuasione.
How does God know? (Psalm. 14.1.) The fool has said in his heart, there is no
God. And he that says in his heart, How does God know? speaks as foolishly as
that fool does, who says, There is no God. To deny that or doubt whether God
knows all things, is not only to doubt but to deny that God is at all; He is
not God who knows not all things.

And thou say, how does God know? The conjunctive particle And, is here put
as a causal, And thou say; that is, therefore thou say, how does God
know? So the sense is more clear, Is not God in the height of heaven, etc. He
is. And what then? The use thou make of it is this; Thou say, how does God
know? so the particle is used ( Genesis 49.16.) He saw that rest was good, and he
gave his shoulders to the burden, etc. that is, therefore he gave his
shoulders to the burden.

Thou say, How does God know? We may answer; First, Negatively, Not by
sense, as we; eyes and ears are ascribed to God improperly in Scripture; nor
does God know by discourse, drawing one thing from another; but in the
Affirmative, he knows intuitively, he knows every thing nakedly in it self.

Again, Some read, What does God know? how far does his eye extend? what are
the objects of his knowledge? To this we may answer, God knows all things;
even the hearts of all the children of men; There are no secrets to God. But
whether we expound it of the manner or matter of divine knowledge, the sense
is the same, either an affirmation that God did not know all things, or at
least a doubt whether he did or no. Thou say, How does God know? But where,
and when did Job say this? Job might challenge Eliphaz; bring your proofs and
witnesses against me; why do you impute such thoughts to me, and frame such
imaginations in my breast? certainly Job never spoke this, and as surely Job
never thought this; yet Eliphaz puts it directly upon him. What was his ground?
Existimabet haec consequi ex Jobi dictis, quasi necesse sit eum qui dicat
improbos prospere agere, existimare etiam deum res humanas noncurare. Merl.
only as the former crimes of uncharitableness and injustice, his breaking
the arms of the fatherless, etc. were fastened upon him, because of the
fears, snares, and darkness, in which he was; as if he must needs have done
those evils, because he endured so much evil. Jobs sufferings were great, and
therefore according to the Logic of Eliphaz, his sins must needs be very
great. So here, he has only this to prove his supposition, that Job said, How
does God know? because Job had said, that God does sometime prosper wicked men,
and afflicts the righteous. As if he who says, that God suffers wicked men to
prosper in this life, must needs also say, that God regards not the things of
this life; so that Eliphaz seems to speak thus; We have heard thee saying,
that the wicked prosper, and that the godly are afflicted; what need we any
further witness, that thy opinion is, God neither takes notice nor care of the
things here below. Out of thine own mouth we condemn thee as Guilty of this
blasphemy, That, Thou say, How does God know?

Hence observe; First, That good men are sometimes charged with saying and
doing the worst and vilest things.

Thus (1 King. 21.13.) Naboth was accused of blaspheming God and the King.
Christ himself was taxed with blasphemy more then once, ( Matthew. 9.3.) And
behold certain of the Scribes said within themselves, this man blasphems.
There they did not openly aver it, but they said it within themselves. At
other times they spoke it openly, ( Joh. 10.33.) The Jews answered and said,
for a good deed we stone thee not, but for blasphemy, because thou being a man
make thy self God. And again ( Matthew. 26.65.) He has spoken blasphemy, ye
have heard his blasphemy. To speak or do well and hear ill was the portion of
Christ, and may be the portion of the holiest of those who are Christ's.

Secondly, Note; That when men are heated in dispute, they are apt to make
false inferences from the tenets and sayings of their opposers.

Eliphaz says, Job denied providence, whereas Job adored it; that he denied
Gods knowledge of the good and evil done in the world, because he maintained,
that good men receive evil, and evil men good in the world. When we deny
transubstantiation, or that the bread is changed into the very substance of the
body of Christ; Papists infer, that we deny, that Christ spoke truly, when
at his Last Supper he said, This is my body; and they will hence force it upon
us, that we say, God is not omnipotent, because we affirm that it is
inconsistent with the nature of a true humane body (such as Christ has now in
heaven, though glorified and spiritual) to be in many places at once. For as
some deny the omnipresence of the divine nature, so Papists affirm the
omni-presence of the humane nature, And (say they) while we deny this, we deny
the omnipotency of God. Others charge us that we make God the author of sin,
and that, according to our tenet, all the impiety and wickedness that is in
the world, lies at his door; because we affirm, That God has passed an
Eternal absolute and unchangeable decree concerning all the sons of men. When
all other arguments fail, how usual is it to make the divinest truths guilty
of the most uncomely and ugly consequences that are imaginable.

Further, Thou say, How does God know? Take it either of the inward or of
the outward saying, either of the tongue or of the heart, saying so; Eliphaz
would prove from it, that certainly Job was a wicked man. And his inference had
been true, if he could have proved it true, that Job had said so.

Hence observe; That to have evil thoughts, or to speak evil of God, is the
character of a wicked man.

He that is good, must needs both think, and speak good of God. David does
often aggravate the wickedness of his enemies, from the language of their
hearts and tongues, ( Psalm. 10.11.) He has said in his heart, God has
forgotten, he hides his face, he will never see. And again ( Psalm. 144.7, 8,
11.) Send thy hand from above, rid me and deliver me out of great waters, from
the hands of strange children, whose mouth speaks vanity, and their right
hand, is a right hand of falsehood. If the mouth speaks vanity, the hand is
full of falsehood; we may even feel deceit in their hands, whose mouths
speak any kind of vanity, but especially this, which is the vainest vanity of
all, How does God know? or surely God does not know. Such the Psalmist rebukes
( Psalm. 94.4, 5.7.) How long shall they utter and speak hard things? What
things were those? The next words show us; They break in pieces thy people,
etc. yet they say, the Lord shall not see, etc. understand ye brutish, among
the people, he that formed the eye, shall he not see? There is no greater
argument of brutishnes and ignorance, then to question the knowledge of God; or
to say, How does God know?

And (which is the same in other words) can he judge through the dark cloud? As
if Job had further argued thus; I am safe enough from the knowledge of God, for
as he is high above me, so there are dark clouds between him and me; Can he
judge through the dark cloud? My opinion is he cannot. For knowledge goes
before judgment; Si non novit ergo nec judicare potest, ad rectu^ enim
judicium requiritur cognitio causae.
He that knows not certainly, can never judge rightly. Justice is pictured
blind, in reference to persons, but not in reference to things or causes;
Justice must take no notice of this or that man, whether he be great or little,
high or low, a near friend or a stranger; Justice is blind as to all these
considerations, and knows no man; but Justice must know every man's case and
cause; unless man know that, how can be judge? and if God know not that, how
can he judge? He must have light to see what is done, before he pass Sentence
upon what is done; therefore, Can he judge through the dark cloud? Surely he
cannot. Thus the Atheist concludes indeed; and thus Eliphaz represents Job
concluding in his own heart; there is not only a great distance between God
and me, not only is he in the height of heaven, and I below on earth, but
there are many gloomy clouds between him and me; As he is high above me, so
there are such impediments in the way that he cannot see me. The Vulgar reads,
Et quasi per caliginum judicat. Vulg.
He judges as through darkness. Now the best of Saints see God through a Glass
darkly, or in a ridle (1 Cor. 13.12.) And secure sinners think that God sees
them only through a cloud darkly, or (as Eliphaz speaks) through a dark
cloud; he knows not clearly, but dimly. To judge through a cloud, is to judge
of things confusedly, not distinctly, by guess or conjecturally, not exactly
or face to face. This is all the sight which an evil heart allows God (if he
allow him any) concerning his ways and actions. They who do things which
cannot abide the light, are willing to believe that all they do is in the
dark. Theirs are works of moral darkness, and therefore they please themselves
with thinking that their works are hid either in natural or artificial
darkness. It is said of the Lord in Scripture ( Psalm. 97.2.) Clouds and darkness
are round about him, while judgment and righteousness are the habitation of
his throne; but these imagine that God cannot proceed in judgment and
righteousness, because clouds and darkness are round about him. It is said (1
King. 8.10, 11, 12.) The cloud filled the house of the Lord, so that the
Priests could not stand to minister because of the cloud, for the glory of the
Lord filled the house of the Lord. Then spoke Solomon, the Lord said that he
will dwell in the thick darkness. Read Exodus 20.21. Deuteronomy. 5.22. Psalm. 18.11.
God is light (says the Apostle, John 1 Ep: 1.) and he dwells in light which
no man can approach unto (1 Timothy 6.16.) How then can he be said to dwell in
thick darkness? I answer; those Scriptures which say that God dwells in darkness,
that clouds and darkness are round about him, teach us, that God and his ways
are much hid from us; we are not able to look up to him, or see clearly what
he does, much less can we see what his counsels are. The clouds and darkness
which are about him, do not hinder his sight of us, but our sight of him. Our
darkness is no darkness to him, but his darkness, yea his light is darkness to us.
Again, God is said to dwell in a cloud, to reprove our boldness and curiosity,
who are too apt to pry into what is not to be known, and to neglect our duty
in what we know, or to neglect the knowledge of our duty. God has some
reserves in counsels; some of his providence are wrapped up in clouds. He will
be trusted and honored in what he is not seen or known. Not to know these
things is indeed our nescience, but not our ignorance, and not to seek after
the knowledge of these things, is our duty not our sloth. Thus God who dwells in
light, dwells also in a cloud; for he dwells in light that no man can (no nor
ought to) approach unto. We may come near his light by faith, but we cannot
come near his light by knowledge. There is such an infinite, such an
overcomming light in God, that it is a darkness to us; the most Eagle-like eyes
of a humane understanding are not only dazzel'd, but quite blinded with his
brightness. Now as no man can judge through this light of God, so some men are
ready to say (and thus Eliphaz brings in Job saying) that God cannot judge
through dark clouds, through clouds and darkness. Nor does Eliphaz bring in Job
saying thus only by way of doubt or question, but by way of averrement and
resolution in the next verse.

Verse. 14. Thick clouds are a covering to him, that he sees it not.
This verse is but an explication of the 13th, Can he see through the dark
cloud? There he puts the question, here he gives a peremptory answer, he cannot
certainly; for, Thick clouds are a covering to him, that he cannot see. The
Hebrew for thick clouds is but one word, (...) nubes dictae sunt a densitate a
radice (...) densum esse. q d. sicut nos latet deus, ita deum latent nostra,
coelestia, illi tantum patent.
which in the root, signifies Thickness, or, to be thick. Some clouds have a
kind of thinnes in them, and are as it were transparent. Others are more
gross and opacous, quite hindering and intercepting our sight of all that is
beyond them, with these (says Eliphaz) thou O Job, vainly conceitest, that
the sight of God also is intercepted, so that, as we cannot see God, so God
cannot see us; A veil of thick clouds seclude his sight. Nor is this the only
reason why thou art overcome with this ignorant persuasion. Thou have a second,
which though possibly thou would conceal, yet will not I, and this is it
Thou also say,

He walks in the circuit of heaven.] As if thou had said, suppose God can
see through the thick cloud; and so my former reason should fail, yet I know
well enough that the Great God of heaven has other matters to meddle with,
other affairs to busy himself about, then to trouble himself with me. He
walks in the circuit of heaven; we are not to take walking as a mere motion,
but as walking notes employment, he walks in the circuit of heaven, that is,
he is wholly taken up there. When the Lord asked of Satan, Whence come thou?
he answered, Hoc verbo videtur connotari studium inquirendi Pisc:
From going to and fro in the earth, and from walking up and down in it. Now
what does Satan when he walks up and down the world, does he walk like an
idle vagrant that has nothing to do? does he walk with his hands in his
pockets, as having no business? does he walk merely to take the air, or to
take his pleasure, to see, and be seen? no, when Satan walks about the world,
his walking is working, he goes about to tempt, to try, to lay snares and
baits, to catch and captivate the souls of men. So here when it is said, God
walks in the circuit of heaven, the meaning is, his business, yea even his
whole business lies there; He has enough to do in heaven, and therefore has
no leisure to attend what is done on earth. That Is the scope and tendency of
these words which Eliphaz fastens upon Job; He walks in the circuit of
heaven. We are sure enough of him. The words carry the same sense, with that
speech of the whorish woman ( Pro. 7.18, 19, 20.) Come (says she) let us take
our fill of love till the morning, let us solace our selves with loves. But the
young man might possibly object, your husband will come home, and that will
spoil all. No, (says she) never fear it, he is far enough out of the way;
The good man is not at home, he is gone a long journey; He has taken a bag of
money with him, and will come home at the day appointed; That is, he will not
come home till the day appointed, he has great business abroad, and he has
carried money enough with him to bear his charges till he has don his
business. He is riding and running in a far Country and minds not home, nor
has he the least suspicion of what we do at home. Thus when the sinner is
about to depart far from his duty, he puts or conceives God far from him.
He walks in the Circuit of heaven. From the General scope of Eliphaz in the
13th and 14th verses, Observe; First, Carnal men frame conceptions of God like
themselves.

Thus the hypocrite is described ( Psalm. 50.21.) Thou thoughtest that I was
altogether such a one as thy self. Not that he thought God was a man, but that
God had such thoughts of good and evil, as man has. As if what is right in
man's eyes, were so in the eyes of God also; or as if what did not displease
man, were pleasing, or not much displeasing unto God. When the Lord says (
Esaias 55.8.) My thoughts are not your thoughts, nor your ways my ways; he does
plainly intimate, that they did begin to frame thoughts of God like their own:
but says God, as the heavens are higher then the earth, so are my thoughts
then your thoughts, and my ways then your ways; That is, as my thoughts have
a vastnes in them to all things beyond yours, so especially in this thing, the
performance of my promise for the pardon of sin. O how unlike is God to man
in this? God is not more unlike man in his absolute freedom from the least
inclination to commit any the least sin, then he is in the admirable freenes of
his inclination to pardon any even the greatest sin. Men are commonly not
only unmercifull to those who wrong them, but revengefull, and when once
offended are hardly drawn to a reconcilement, and seldom so fully reconciled,
but that somewhat of offense stays behind. But the thoughts of God are not
so. He is slow to wrath, and ready to forgive. He quickly pardons the offense,
and receives the offender into favor; no more retaining the memory of his
offense (as to his hurt) then if he had never offended. Thus the Lord would
assure sinners, that his thoughts in pardoning sin are not as theirs. And it
is but need he should do so; For when sinners begin to be awakened, they frame
such thoughts of God, as to pardon of sin, as they have in themselves: when
they look upon their sins as too bigg to be pardoned by man, they conclude
presently the Lord cannot or will not pardon them. And as many under
temptation, frame thoughts of God like their own about the pardon of sin; so
it is the constant course of wicked men (which is indeed the worst of their
sins) to frame thoughts of God like unto themselves, while they commit and
continue in sin. Man should not dare to Imagine any thing of God in reference
either to his justice or mercy, either about the punishing or pardoning of
sin, but what he has declared of himself, all that we Imagine beside that,
is the making of another God. There are many false gods made with men's hands,
but the hearts of men make many more. The heart of man makes thousands of false
or strange gods. Every undue, every wrong Imagination of God, is the forming up
of a strange, of a new god. When we ascribe to God such a kind of power, such
a kind of knowledge, such a kind of holiness, such a kind of justice, such a
kind of mercy, as is common to the creature, in all this we frame up a new
god to our selves. And thus those Gentiles of whom the Apostle speaks ( Romans
1.21. and 25.) Became vain in their Imaginations, and their foolish heart was
darkened; in what was their foolish heart darkened? in false notions of God;
therefore they are said ( ver. 29.) to change the glory of the Incorruptible
God into an Image made like to Corruptible man, and to birds, foure-footed
beasts, and creeping things. Now as there is the changing of the glory of the
Incorruptible God into the Image of a Corruptible man, that is, into the
External Image of a Corruptible man, (for some set up false gods in the
likeness of men;) So there is a Changing of the glory of the Incorruptible God,
into the Internal Image of a Corruptible man, that is, into such thoughts and
Conceptions as are ordinarily in men. Let such consider, that, if to make a
worship of our own for the true God, be indeed to set up a false god; (all
they worship false gods who set up a strange worship for the true God, now, I
say, if they who do but set up a new worship for the true God make a strange
God) what then do they who in their hearts set up a new God, that is, who
frame Conceptions of God which himself never gave ground for in his word? Such
was the Conceit which Eliphaz had of Job, when he presumes him saying, How does
God know? Can he judge through the dark cloud?

Secondly, From the particular misapprehension of God, imposed by Eliphaz upon
Job; And thou say, How does God know? etc. Observe.

Sinful men fancy to themselves that God either does not or cannot take
notice of them in their sinful ways. Thus they reason; Can he see through the
dark Cloud? and conclude, Thick Clouds are a Covering to him that he sees not,
and he walks in the Circuit of heaven? What Eliphaz lays to Jobes charge
falsely; is often charged by the Holy Ghost upon wicked men truly. ( Psalm.
10.11.) He has said in his heart God has forgotten, he hides his face, he
will never see it. Who this He is, whose heart speaks this language, appears
clearly in the former part of the Psalm, where he is more then once called
The wicked (ver. 2, 3.) and where more then one of his wickednesses are
described, ( ver. 7, 8, 9, 10.) His mouth is full of cursing and deceit, and
fraud, under his tongue is mischief and vanity, he sits in the lurking
places of the villages: in the secret places does he murder the innocent etc.
After all this, he says in his heart God has forgotten, that is, he has
forgotten the poor whom I have under my power, therefore I may safely oppress
them. He hides his face, he will never see it; that is, God will never take
any knowledge, either of my doings or of their sufferings. We have a sample of
the same impiety ( Psalm. 73.11.) And they say how does God know? and is there
knowledge in the most high? behold, these are the ungodly in the world, etc.
And again ( Psalm. 94.6 ver.) They slay the widow, and stranger, and murder
the fatherless (here are their works of darkness) yet they say, the Lord
shall not see, neither shall the God of Jacob regard. Not only did they
presume that the Lord did not see, but that he should not; The Lord shall not
see! As if they could stop or blind the eyes of God as easily as they had
blinded their own Consciences. Take one Instance further ( Ezekiel. 8.12.) Then
said he unto me Son of man, See thou what they do? have thou seen what
the Ancients of the house of Israel do in the dark, Every man in the
Chambers of his Imagery, for they say the Lord sees us not, he has forsaken
the Earth. Much like the language here, He walks in the Circuit of heaven;
he has other business to do then to mind us. As God is sometimes said to
forsake the Earth in wrath, to punish the sin of Man, so wicked men say he
always forsakes the Earth in neglect both of their sin and punishment. And as
Idolaters who have a mind to other gods, are willing to believe that God has
forsaken the earth, as to the protection of them; We (say they) are in danger,
God takes no care of us, therefore blame us not if we betake our selves to
other Gods for protection; If he had not forsaken us, we had not forsaken him:
So all sorts of resolved transgressors, who have a mind to any sinful way,
are willing to believe that God has forsaken the earth, as to any observation
of them. We may do what we list, for God does not mind or regard what we are
doing. If we thought he did indeed see us, we durst not thus sin against him.
But seeing he does not trouble himself with any care about us, why should we
trouble our selves with any fear about him? Now, this Presumption that God
does not see us in what we are doing, opens a door to the doing of all Evil.
Security from danger is the great encouragement unto sin. Though wicked men
would not be less sinful, yet they would not sin so much, or be so full of
sin, did they not vainly flatter themselves out of the sight of God. Every Man
would feign believe that God does not see him when he is doing that which he
would not have seen or be seen in doing it. And how do men please themselves
in this false hope that God does not see them, when they do that which is
displeasing unto God!

From the Intendment of Eliphaz to Convince Job, that the Clouds are no
Covering to God, and that the Circuit of heaven does not Confine him.

Observe; Thirdly, God is omniscient, he knows all things.

Thou say thus; How does God know? I tell thee God does know; And thou have
an argument upon thy back, if thou have none in thy heart to prove it, thy
sense or feeling may teach thee, if thy reason or understanding do not, and by
thy suffering thou may see that God sees what thou have been doing. This
great truth, That God is omniscient, or knows all, may easily be known, and
ought to be believed by all. When the Lord had made the world in six days (
Genesis 1.31.) He saw all that he had made; All was in view at once, he had a
Prospect of the whole Creation in his eye. And as all his own Creatures, so all
our Creatures are seen by God; he sees all that himself has made, and he
sees all that we have made, or are making day by day. ( Genesis 6.5.) God saw
that the wickedness of man was great in the earth, and that every thought of the
Imagination of the thoughts of his heart was only evil Continually, or every
day. The Lord saw, that is, the Lord knew fully (infinitely more fully then we
know those things which we see) every Imagination or figment of the thoughts
of man's heart. The figment of our thoughts, is what the mind fashioneth or
makes up within it self by thinking: corrupt nature keeps a constant mint of
evil imaginations in the head, as it has a sink of filthy affections in the
heart. The mind of man has a formative faculty in it. And the same word which
the Holy Ghost uses to signify the work of God in making man, ( Genesis 2.7.)
The Lord God formed man out of the dust of the earth, or dust out of the earth
(the same word, I say) is used in the Noune ( Genesis 6.5.) to signify, the
imagination of man, because that is always shaping moulding or forming one
sort of thoughts or other, and, naturally, none but ugly evil thoughts. These
are the creatures which man (as fallen) is the maker of; and he makes (as I
may say) infinite creatures, he is forming them continually in his imagination,
that is the shop wherein there is a daily Creation (such as it is) of monstrous
wickednesses, till God by his new Creation changes the frame and nature of it.
Now (I say) as God sees his own creatures; so he sees all our Creatures,
though we make them in the shop of our darkest imaginations. And much more
does he see all the Creatures which we make without, that is, all our bodily
and external actions. ( Jere. 17.10.) I the Lord search the heart, I try the
reins; if he search our hearts, then surely he searches all our ways, if he
sees our thinkings, then surely he sees our walkings. Deus scientiarum,
phurale, perfectam scientiam and rerum omnium cognosibilium cognitionem indicat.
Therefore it is said (1 Samuel 2.3.) The Lord is a God of knowledge; the Hebrew
is, The Lord is a God of knowledges; that is, all things fall under his
knowledge; he is perfect in all knowledges, there is nothing knowable, but the
Lord knows it; and by him actions are weighed: now the weighing of actions is
more then the seeing of actions; many see that which they cannot weigh. He
weighs actions, that is, he takes not only the action it self, but every
circumstance of it into Consideration; he takes his Balances, and tryes fully,
how much each ingredient weighs, and what it comes to. He weighs whole States,
Kingdoms, and Nations. So it was said to the Babylonian Monarch Belteshazzar
(Dan. 5.26.27.) Mean, God has numbered thy Kingdom, and finished it, Tekel,
Thou art weighed in the balances, and art found wanting. Thy councels, thy
policies, thy undertakings, the whole compass, all the contrivances of thy
Government are weighed and found too light. And as God weighs the actions of
Princes, so of private persons. ( Prove. 5.21.) The ways of a man (that is, of
every man, even of the meanest man) are before the Lord, and he pondereth all
his paths; he puts them into a Balance, and does not only see them, but
ponder or weigh them. David says of some wicked men that they weigh the
violence of their hands in the earth ( Psalm. 58.2.) though they do violence,
yet they do it not violently, but with a kind of skill and deliberation. They
do wrong and oppress with a show of Justice, whereof weights are the common
Emblem. Now as some men do evil, not hastily, rashly, or all at once, but
give it out by weight, and with a seeming gravity and zeal for justice. So the
Lord does never look over the ways of men rashly or hastily, but weighs them
out even to a grain, yea to the dust of the balance he pondereth all their
paths. That is, he knows them throughout. Therefore David (Psalm. 139.) having
spoken much to this point of the Exactnes of Gods knowledge, concludes at the
6th verse; Such knowledge is too wonderful for me, it is high I cannot
attain unto it. Some expound this Text, not of the knowledge of God concerning
us, but of our knowledge concerning God. Thy knowledge or the knowledge of thee
is too wonderful for me, I cannot attain unto it. Others thus; This thy
knowledge (namely that which he had before described) is more wonderful (or
more exact) then that I should be able to deceive it. We may impose upon and
deceive the most knowing man, but we cannot impose upon or deceive God. I
conceave our reading to be most suitable both to the Text and context. Such
knowledge, that is, Such knowledge as thou have of me, of the least and
greatest things, even of all things that I or any man does, is too wonderful
for me. For though we may know some actions of men, yet we cannot know them
all, and we can hardly weigh any of them to the utmost. And in this
acknowledgement we may take notice of the Psalmist modesty, who though he had
the immediate assistance of a Prophetical Spirit, yet confessed, that he was
not only not able to know God, but not to know himself, his thoughts, words,
and ways, as God knew them. Such knowledge of my self as thou O Lord have of
me, is too wonderful for me, I cannot attain unio it.

Some perhaps may querie upon this, if the Lord knows all the ways of men,
and pondereth all their actions, is not this a trouble to God? is not this a
disturbance of his peace, and a distraction to him?

I answer (as I said before) this is to frame a God like our selves, for to him
that is omniscient, it is all one to know all, and to know but one thing: it is
no more distraction, no more trouble to God to know all that we do speak, or
think, then to know any thing. If two or three speak to a man together, he is
not able to take in their sense, the variety of their discourse makes such a
hurry and trouble in his spirits, that he loses all that is spoken. But the
application of thousands or of Millions at the same time in speaking to the
ear of God, is no more trouble, then if but one did speak; an infinite ear
hears all, and an infinite eye sees all, without any the least distraction;
the infinite knowledge of God takes in all the actions of all men, as easily as
the single action of any one man.

Again, Others may say, Surely the Lord will not take such exact knowledge of
all the actions of men, especially of mean men, or surely not of the mean
actions of meanest men; possibly of some persons in great place, and of some
great things done by those persons he may take notice, but to stoop to small
things, if it be not a trouble, yet it cannot but be a dishonor to, and too
great a Condescension for the great God. The Heathens said their Jupiter had no
leisure to deal in small matters; Non vacat exiguis rebus etc.
And may not we Christians say, It is not honorable enough for our God, to have
to do with small matters.

I answer; This also is to frame a God like our selves; as it does not weary
God to behold, to try and ponder all the ways of all men (which was the fear
concerning Moses that he should be tired out with the various cases and
affairs of that great People; and was therefore advised by Jethro to make more
Judges, that so the weightier matters only might be brought before and Judged
by him) So it is no dishonor at all to God, no, it is his honor that he takes
cognizance of the smallest matters as well as of the greatest, of the lowest as
well as of the highest concernments of the children of men. ( Psalm. 113.5, 6.)
Who is like unto the Lord our God, who dwells on high? who humbles himself
to behold the things which are in Heaven, and in the Earth. Who is like to God
in this? this is the honor of the high God that he will humble himself to
behold the lowest things, the things which are in the Earth, as well as things
in Heaven, and the lesser, the least things in earth, as well as the greater or
the greatest. Though the Lord be high, yet he humbles himself unto the lowly
(Psalm. 138.6.) and as to lowly persons, so to the lowest things. Indeed the
Lord does humble himself to behold the things which are in Heaven, it is a
Condescension in him to take notice of any creature; yet he does not only
humble himself to behold things in Heaven, but things in the Earth, and in
this who is like unto the Lord our God? this is his glory, and for this he is
to be glorified, yea to be cried up with this admiring Elogium, Who is like
unto the Lord our God? None among the sons of men are like him in this, yea
there is no God like unto the Lord our God in this. We have cause to say
(considering our vileness) What is man that thou should take notice of him?
It Is too Great an honor for man, but it is no dishonor to God to take notice
of the meanest man. The greatness of God appears as in the making, so in the
governing and disposing of the smallest things. The power of God is seen in
making a fly or a worm, as well as in making an Elephant or the vast
Leviathan; So also is his wisdom and providence seen in the observing and
ordering of those businesses and motions of the creature, which compared to
others are but as a fly to an Elephant, or but as a worm to Leviathan. There
is nothing does more detract from the greatness of God, then the denial or
dis-beleefe of his cognizance of and care about little things. And as it shows
the exactest perfection of holiness attaynable by man in this life, when he
takes an account of and reproves himself for the least sins, whether they be
omissions of that good which he is commanded to do, or commissions of that
evil which he is forbidden to do. So it is an undeniable argument of the
exactly and absolutely perfect holiness, justice, goodness and faithfulness of
God, that he takes an account of, and will certainly reward or punish every
man for the least good or evil which he has done. This is the glory of him
who walks in the circuit of heaven, that he sees all to the center of the
earth. Eliphaz having thus detected and reproved (as he thought) those thoughts
and assertions of Job which detracted so much from God, as if he did not mark
the ways of men; proceeds to put the question to him, whether himself had
well marked the ways of wicked men.

JOB, CHAP. 22. Verse. 15, 16. Have thou marked the old way which wicked men
have trodden?

Which were cut down out of time, whose foundation was overflowne with a flood?


(...)
THe word translated to mark, notes a diligent observation; So it is used (
Chap. 10.14.) If I sin then thou markest me, (that is, thou take exact or
strict notice of me) and thou will not acquitt me from mine Iniquity. (Psalm.
37.37.) mark the perfect man, Observare dei actiones imprimis ipsius judicia,
magna pars scinentiae est.
and behold the upright, that is, take special knowledge of him, for the end
of that man is peace. (Psalm. 107.43.) who so is wise will observe, or mark,
these things, he shall understand the loving kindness of the Lord. So here,
Have thou marked? have thou with diligence and seriousnes of spirit observed,
the old way which wicked men have trodden. Senitam saeculorum vel seculi;
aeternam aut aeternitatis, nam ea omnia denotat vox (...) Rab: Kimchi.
The Hebrew is, The way of age, the way of ages, or as some read, the Eternal
way, the way of Eternity. David prays ( Psalm. 139.23, 24.) Lead me in the way
everlasting; that is, Lead me in the way of holiness and righteousness, which
leads to eternity. Which yet one of the Rabbis expounds, as a periphrasis of
death; for death is called, the way of all the earth (1 King. 2.2.) the way of
all flesh (Josh. 23.14.) As if David had said, Lord, if upon search thou
find that I walk in any way of wickedness, that is, of wilful sinning,
then destroy me, lead me to my grave, yea cast me with the wicked to hell, or
to everlasting condemnation. Master Broughton thus; Have thou marked the way of
the old world?

But what was this way of the old world, about which Eliphaz questions Job,
whether he had taken notice of it yea or no? The way of the old world may be
taken two ways.

First, For the way of their sins. Secondly, For the way of their punishment.
First, Have thou marked the old way of their sin? and the old way of their
sin may be Considered under a twofold notion.

First, As it was the way of their opinion. Secondly, as it was the way of
their practice: Some restrain it here to the way of their opinion, and
Interpret Eliphaz as chiefly intendding that; Have thou observed the old way;
that is, the old Erroneous opinions which were in the first ages of the world?
In those times there were not a few like thy self, who either flatly denied or
belyed the providence of God, who said (as thou do) How does God know?
Surely he has forsaken the earth, and intermeddles not with what is done here
below. Thus a learned Interpreter expounds the Text, Ad eos opini^ haec
referenda est, qui vixeru^t tempore diluvij censebantque ^ollendam
providentiam. Vatabl: Gigantes religionis contemptores Berosus.
with reference to their ungodly opinion; They (says he) who lived in the time
of the flood denied Providence; Have thou (O Job) marked their opinion and
Considered it? And that this wicked Error did prevail in those times, may be
Collected from what is reported by Berosus of the Giants (of whom we read in
the 6th of Genesis ver. 4th, There were Giants in the earth in those days)
Among other of their abominations, this (says he) was one, or this was a
Chief one, the root, or source of them all, they blasphemed God, and
contemned Religion, they thought there was no Supreme Power, none to whom man
was accountable for any of his actions. Have thou marked this old way of Error?

In pursuance of which Interpretation, Custodiendi verbum pro sequi exponitur.
Merc:
the words which we render, Have thou marked, may be Expounded thus; Have thou
taken up the old way? art thou a follower of that Sect, of that Tribe who have
gone in that wicked way? do thou also maintain their blasphemy, that God
takes no notice of man? This notion holds fair with what he had said before.

Secondly, As it may be referred to those abominable Atheistical opinions
which reigned in those times, so to the wicked Practices, to the old Customs
and sinful Courses which were followed in those times; for where a wicked
opinion is lodged in the heart, what kind of wickedness is there that they may
not break forth in the life? And so here the old way is the way of sin, the
corrupt Course and practices of that debauched generation, especially the way
of pride and ambition, which appeared much in the titles given them, Mighty
men, men of name, or as we render, Men of renown. They were men of honor and
name with men, but we read not of any honor they did to or received from God.
It is the highest disgrace, to be memorable for actings against grace, or for
ungracious actings.

Number observas perpetuum, ordinem, quem in puniendis talibus impijs te^uit deus,
post natos homines. Merc: Putat hunc esse perpetuum ordinem domini ut impios
hic puniat, sed fallitur. Merc:
Again, The old way may be taken for the way of punishment, or for that course
of divine Justice which was Executed upon wicked men in those elder times.
There is away of Judgment which God takes, as there is a way of Sin which
man takes. Sinful ways lead into troublesome ways, and end in death. Have thou
considered the way of justice which the Lord went in toward those old Sinners?
pouring out his wrath, and emptying the vialls of his Indignation upon them,
till he had consumed and swept them off as rubbish from the face of the earth.
Have thou marked the old way, which either the lusts of wicked men have led
them into, or which the justice of the Lord has brought them into. Have thou
observed the old way?

Which wicked men have trodden? The Hebrew is, Men of Iniquity; Which phrase
plainly imports, that he does not speak of the ordinary race, or rank of
sinners, but of the Extremest sinners, men so full of iniquity, that they
deserved this black Title, men of Iniquity. Antichrist is called not only a
man of sin, or the man of sin, but (which implies a sinner of a higher form,
then both the former) That man of sin (2 These. 2.3.) He being indeed not only
among the chiefest sinners, but the chief of sinners. The phrase in the Text
is a degree lower then that, yet it notes a very great degreee. And therefore
when the Prophet would assure the greatest sinners repenting and returning to
God, of the readiness of God to pardon, he expresses them in this style ( Isa.
55.7.) Let the wicked forsake his way, and the unrighteous man, or (as the
Original Text has it) the man of iniquity, his thoughts and etc. As a man of
Bloods notes a very bloody man, a man given up to that particular sin of
cruelty. So a man of iniquity, is one given up to sin in General. Have thou
marked the old way which wicked men, men of iniquity, have Trodden.

This word, trodden, referred both to a sinful and a suffering way, notes the
frequency of their going or being in those ways. And as it is referred to
their sinful way alone, it notes first their boldness in sinning; secondly,
their resolvednesse to sin: A trodden way, is such a way as a man has often
gone, and in which he is not afraid to go. Have thou marked the old way.

Hence note. First, The way of Sin and Error is an old way.

The Devil sinned from the beginning, and men have sinned from their
beginning, not only have there been sinnings, but great sinnings from the
beginning; the old way is the way of sin, though the oldest way be not. There
was holiness before there was sin, and truth before there was Error; So that
the way of sin is the old way, but not the oldest way. God, all whose ways
are holy, was from everlasting. The Angels who have been holy as long as they
have been, were from the beginning. And the first beginning of man in his
conversation, was, no doubt, like his constitution, holy. He quickly went out
of the way, but surely his first step was not out of the way, he went right
before he went wrong, and stood before he fell. Again, if you take the way for
the way of punishment.

Note.

That God in all ages has punished sinners in their sinful ways. God has
every where and every when left the tract and print of his anger and
displeasure upon sinners; though some particular sinners, have gone unpunished
in some age, yet there was never any age wherein sin was not punished in
some. The Lord gives a moral stopp to sin perpetually, that is, by his Laws
he declares against it, his word is express against all ungodlynes, both the
word of his Command, and the word of his threatening. Now as the Lord does
always put this moral stopp in the way of sin, so, he often puts a
Judiciary stopp, or a stop by way of Judgment. And as in the 3d of Genesis, he
set a flaming sword in the way of the tree of life, so he continually sets a
flaming word, that is, a threatening to keep the way of the tree of death, that
is, of sin. Thus he always meets sinful men in the way of their lusts (as
the Angel met Balaam when he went to curse the Israel of God) with a drawn
sword to stopp them in their way; the Lord has set many drawn swords in the
way of every sin; and he has left the prints of his wrath upon the backs of
many sinners, that we should take heed of sinning. The Lord has left many sad
examples upon record against sin, nor has he at any time favored it, or
done any thing which might indeed encourage sinners; for though sometimes
wicked men have prosper'd, yet, should we look into all times, we cannot
find that wicked men were ever blessed; Judgment has overtaken them sooner
or later. And if it has at any time come too late to overtake them in this
world, yet it will come soon enough to overtake theirs in this, or themselves
in the world which is to come. No man is blessed, at any time, who comes at
last to be miserable.

Thirdly, In that he says; Have thou marked the old way?

Note.

It is our duty to observe and mark, as the way of sinful men, so the way in
which God punishes their sin. All the ways of God are to be marked; as we
are to observe what the Lord speaks, so what he does; his works as well as his
word, are remarkable. Who so is wise (says the Psalmist, Psalm. 107.43.) and
will observe these things, even they shall understand the loving kindness of the
Lord. I may say also, that they shall understand the judgments of the Lord.
And again, the Prophet confirms it ( Hos. 14.9.) Who is wise and he shall
understand these things prudent and he shall know them; for the ways of the
Lord are right, and the Just shall walk in them, but the transgressors shall
fall therein. The wicked fall in the way of his commandments, and therefore
surely they shall fall in the way of his judgments. And as the Lord has given
us Examples of this, so he has given this as the use of those Examples that
we should mark and observe them. The Apostle (1 Cor. 10.) shows that all the
dealings of God with that his ancient People the Jews, are written and
recorded as our Examples ( ver. 5, 6, 7.) With many of them God was not well
pleased, but they were overthrown in the wilderness. Now these things were our
Examples, to the Intent that we should not lust after evil things as they
lusted, neither be Idolaters, as some of them were, nor fornicators, nor tempt
Christ, nor murmr, etc. He shuts up all with the same doctrine ( ver. 11.)
Now all these things happened unto them for Ensamples, and are written for our
admonition, upon whom the Ends of the Earth are come, therefore let him that
stands take heed least he fall. The Apostle Peter also (2 Pet. 2.) brings
in; first, the instance of the Angels that fell; secondly, of the old world;
thi^dly, of Sodom and Gomorrah, Whom God condemned with an overthrow, making
them an ensample unto those that after should live ungodly. The Scripture
speaks of two sorts of Ensamples. F^rst, for imitation; secondly, for caution;
The lapsed Angels, the old world, these Cities Sodom and Gomorrah, are all left
as Ensamples for caution, that all after ages marking the old way of their
sin and punishment, might fear to sin and suffer as they have done.

Fourthly, From the manner of this Expression (which wicked men have trodden)
taking the way conjunctively for the way both of sin and punishment, this
troddennes of it notes the frequent passage which many have made through it;
They have not gone it once only but often. Hence observe.

As wicked men offend often, so the Lord has punished often, as they have made
paths in sin, so God has made paths in Judgment. It is easy to follow
sinners (as it were) by the print and tract of those evils which have
overtaken them. But I pass it here, because Eliphaz proceeds more directly to
describe the punishment of wicked men in the next words.

Verse. 16. Which were cut down out of time, and whose foundation was
overflowne with a flood.
At this verse the Original has a very conspicuous note of distinction. The
Jews are very exact in observing the letters and the verses of every book in
the Bible, and between these two verses is the middle of the book: (...)
there being exactly the same number of verses behind as we have had before in
this whole book of Job (taking the 16th verse Inclusively) So that now we are
half the book over according to the number of verses. The whole containing
1070. The former part has had 535. and as many remain for the latter part.
This I touch only by the way.

Which were cut down. The words carry an alusion to the felling of trees; as
if he had said; (...) plerique reddunt succisi sunt; sed verbum hoc nunqua^
occurrit in ea significatione in sacris literis sed tantu^ apud doctores
Hebraeoru^ idque per meta -- thesin literarum a verbo (...) cum enim tantum
occurrat in libro Job, ibi vertitur rugare aut corrugare aut rugas contrahere.
These men were like great Oaks and tall Cedars, but the Lord cut them down.
The word is Conceived more properly signifying to wrinckle, or to make furrows
in the face; for this word is used but once more in all the Bible, and it is in
the 16th Chapter of this Book, ver. 8th, and there we translate, wrinckles;
Thou have filled me with wrinckles, which is a witness against me. So some
render it here; Who were wrinckled out of time. Now what are wrinckles? they
are the marks of old age, and they show that weakness is coming upon us, or
that we are in our declining Condition; so that it is a very Elegant
Expression to say, They were wrinckled out of time; that is, they were old
before they were old, before they were old according to the nature of man, they
were made old by the Judgments of God; They looked as if they were worn,
spent, and eaten out by time, whereas indeed they were spent, eaten, and worn
out with the wrath and indignation of God which fell upon them. Thus they were
wrinckled out of time, or before their time.

(...) sine tempore, vel non tempus, i. e. antequam explerent vitae annos,
secundam communem naturae legem.
They were cut down, and no time, as some render: But it may be said as
Solomon did ( Eccl. 3.1.) There is a time for every thing; how then could they
be cut down in no time? There may be a twofold interpretation given of this
Hebraisme.

First this, to show that they dyed a violent not a natural death, that either
God by his immediate Judgments did cut them off, or that he gave them up to
the Justice of man, who cut them off before their time. Man has a set time, an
ordinary time of dying (the days of man are threescore years and ten, this is
the ordinary time of dying) they that dye before, are in Scripture sense, Cut
down out of time, or not in time, that is, not in that time at which men
usually dye according to the course and custom of nature.

Secondly, when it is said, They were cut down without time, the meaning is,
they were cut down very suddenly, as if it were done without any time at all;
God was so far from lingering or taking up long time to destroy these men,
that he cut them down (as it were) without any time at all, (...) sine
tempore, verti potest, sine mora.
even in a moment, in an Instant, as speedily as a man can think it, far
more speedily then any man can do it. He did it without delay. As usually the
grace of God, so often the wrath of God makes no demurres.

Observe from the manner of Expression, Cut down.

That, God brings ruining Judgments on the stoutest of sinners.

He does not only pull off some of their fruit, and leaves, or lopp off their
branches, but he cuts them down, yea he stubs them up by the roots, till
there is nothing left, they are cut down root and branch. Thus the Lord
threatened the house of Jeroboam (1 King. 14.10.) Behold I will bring evil upon
the house of Jeroboam, and will cut off from Jeroboam, him that pisseth against
the wall (that is, every man of his house) and him that is shut up and left in
Israel (that is, him that is most esteemed, as things shut up are, and him that
is least esteemed, as things left abroad are; or those who are secured or have
secured themselves in strongest holds, as men shut up are, as well as those who
are left naked and exposed to the easiest dangers, as men left at large are)
and will take away the remnant of the house of Jeroboam (that is, all who have
escaped or survived the former troubles) as a man takes away dounge till it be
all gone; that is, till his house be utterly exterminated: for dounge being a
filthy and noisome thing, men never leave taking it away, from places where it
is an annoyance, till they have taken it all away. That which is offensive in
the whole nature of it, is offensive in the least degree of it.

Again, When it is said, He cuts them down without time, or before their
time, we may observe.

Wicked men are often ripe for Judgment, before they are ripe in years. It is
said in the 15th of Genesis, Cum potuissent diutive persistere. Tygur. Capti
sunt immaturi. Sep.
The Iniquity of the Amorites is not yet full, their sin is not come to a full
stature; for as there is a fullnes of stature in holiness unto which Saints at
last arrive in Christ, so there is a fullnes of stature in wickedness to which
the Lord suffers sinners to arrive; and as when Saints have attained their full
stature in holiness, they are received into glory; so when wicked men have
attained a full stature in wickedness, they are cut off and turned down to
destruction. Though the Lord suffer long, yet he will not always suffer. And
as some are but young men, yet old Saints, and have had much Experience of God,
and of the ways of grace, though but little of the world (that distinction
which the Apostle gives of Saints into little children, young men, and fathers
(1 John 2.13, 14.) is not to be understood in reference to natural years, but
to standing in grace, or to a growth and progress in holiness) so some wicked
men, are but of few years, or but young in reference to their natural age,
who yet are old in sin, aged in wickedness they are fathers in abomination,
while but children in time, and so are cut down before time: Wicked men are
never cut down till they are ripe in sin, but they are often cut down
before they are ripe in nature.

Thirdly, Which were cut down out of time; namely, in little time, or without
delay.

Hence Note; That, God can quickly make an End of wicked men.

He needs not take any long time to do it; he took but very little time to
make the world, it was made in six days, which in reference to the greatness
of the work is no time: when a great thing is done in a little time, we may
say it was done without any time at all. Now if the Lord could frame a world
without time, surely he can cut down the world, or the inhabitants of it in a
little time? Ruining work, is easier then building work. He that built (in
this sense) without time, can pull down without time; we need not trouble our
selves with such thoughts as these, when we see wicked men, Enemies of God and
his people in their height and strength, O what a length of time will it
require? O how many years must be spent in cutting down these strong Oaks,
those tall Cedars? the Lord can cut them down in a moment. Our late experinces
have showed us wicked men cut down without time; before they thought they
could be shaken, yea touched, they have be^n cut down; when they concluded they
could not be reached, they have been ruined. The Jesuits and other
Matchavillian politicians have a received Maxim of State among them; Take time
and you may do any thing. If you are disappointed in a project this year,
wait a few years longer (say they) and you shall either find or make a way
to accomplish it. But the Lord can do any thing he has a mind to at any
time, or without taking time. The Apostle prophesying of the Antichrist says
(2 These. 2.6, 7.) Now ye know what withholdeth, that he may he revealed in his
time; for the mystery of iniquity does already work, only he who now lets
will let, till he be taken out of the way. The power and splendor of the
Roman Empire stood in Antichrists way, and he could not cut it down without
time; He was hacking and hewing, heaving and thrusting many years, yea some
ages before he could remove that block out of his way, and so make way for his
own Greatness. The wisest of men must have time to bring about their ends.
Only God, the only wise God, can cut down and remove whatsoever stands in
his way (though it stand like a great mountain) without time or without taking
time, if once his time be come in which he would have it removed. The wicked of
those elder times were cut down suddenly, without time. Eliphaz confirms it
further in the next words.

Whose foundation was overflowne with a flood. In this latter clause Eliphaz
seems more clearly to hint at some particular wicked men, or to show who those
wicked men were that he Intends as the object of his observation, namely,
those, whose foundation was overflowne with a flood. It is usual in Scripture,
by some one word to alude to great actions and changes past. Take two or three
Instances for Illustration of this; ( Psalm. 55.15.) David Imprecates vengeance
upon his enemies in this Language; Let them go down quick into hell. Which
expression carries a plain allusion unto that dreadful judgment. ( Numb.
16.31, 32.) It came to pass as he (that is, Moses) had made an End of
speaking all these words, the ground clave asunder that was under them; and the
earth opened her mouth and swallowed them up and their houses, and all the men
which appertained unto Corah, and all their goods. They and all that
appertained to them went down alive into the pit, etc. This historical
Narration the Psalmist hints at in his imprecation, as is plain by that word
quick or alive; Let them go down quick (or alive) into hell; that is, let
such wrath seize upon them, as seized upon Corah, Dathan and Abiram, on whom
the earth closed and they perished from among the Congregation. Again, when
the Apostle makes promise to Saints in the behalf of Christ what assistance
they might expect from him in time of temptation, and what issue from it, he
thus assures them; The God of peace shall tread Satan under your feet shortly,
(Romans 16.20.) Which plainly bears upon that first grand Promise, that (Christ)
the seed of the Woman should break the Serpents head (Genesis 3.15.) for it is
by virtue of that act of Jesus Christ bruising the head of Satan, that Satan is
trodden under our feet. As Christ bruised him under his own feet, so he will
bruise, or tread him under out feet; the seed of the woman in person, as well
as in their representative, shall break the Serpents head. Lastly, those words
( Romans 9.16.) hold a clear correspondence with that Story ( Genesis 27.)
concerning Jacob and Esau, So then it is not of him that wills, nor of him
that runs, but of God that shows mercy. He had said before that God loved
Jacob and hated Esau; and concludes upon it, So then, it is not of him that
wills, etc. We may take notice in that famous piece of the divine History,
that much means was used that Jacob might obtain the Blessing; Rebecca her
heart was set upon it; she did what she could to procure the Blessing for her
younger Son, her will was wholly in it; and Jacob, he run for it too; for as
soon as Ever his mother had given him counsel, he ran presently to the flock
and brought in a Kid to make the savoury meat for Isaac; Now, the Apostle Paul
to advance the freenes of grace, does not only instance in those two persons,
but uses a phrase of speech which savours so much of that passage, that though
he had not named the men, yet every man who knew the Scriptures must needs
understand both of whom and of what he meant it; It is not of him that wills,
etc. that is, it was neither Rebeckaes will to have it so, nor Jacobs have
(which appeared in his running to the flock) to have it so, that gave him the
Blessing, but it was of God that showed mercy. And as it was then, so it is
now, though a man be as willing as Rebeckah, or though he make as much speed as
Jacob for his blessing, yet all comes freely by the grace of God. Thus the
frequent usage of Scripture shows us how much the Spirit of God delights to
lead our thoughts (by the light of some one word) a great way back into the
consideration of what has been done and written of old for our instruction.
The words of the text now under discussion, (Whose foundation was overflowne
with a flood) are surely an allusion to some particular persons or action in
the days of old, and they may be applied three ways.

First, To the drowning of the whole world in the time of Noah by a flood, when
the Lord opened the windows of heaven, and overwhelmed both man and beast in
those mighty waters; which universal judgment is (by way of eminence) called,
The Deluge, or, The Flood, unto this very day.

Secondly, They may have respect to the overthrow of Sodom and Gomorrah, which
Cities, though they were destroyed by fire, yet it was with a flood of fire.
The Text says expressly ( Genesis 19.24.) Then the Lord rayned upon Sodom and
upon Gemorrah brimstone and fire from the Lord out of heaven, and he overthrew
the Cities and all the plain, etc. They were overflowne with a flood of fire.

Thirdly, Hunc locum a v. 15. ad v 20. omnino respicere ad dimersionem
Pharaones and Egyptiorum non levibus suadeor conjecturis. Pined:
The allusion may be carried to the destruction of Pharaoh and the Egyptians in
the red Sea; They also were overflowne with a flood. The waters of the red Sea
which stood up as a wall for Israel to pass through, at the Command of God
returning upon the Egyptians, swallowed them up, them and their Chariots and
their horses. The enemy said (thus Moses describes that fatal overthrow ( Exodus
15.9, 10.) I will pursue, I will overtake, I will divide the spoil: my lust
shall be satisfied upon them, I will draw my sword, my hand shall destroy them.
Thus the enemy raged and foamed with revenge, like a tempestuous Sea, and had
opened all the sluices of his will to overflow them. And when the enemy had thus
breathed out his wrath in a four times repeated, I will; Then the Lord did
blow with his wind, the Sea covered them, They sanke as lead in the mighty
waters. So then the words may relate to any of those three signal Judgments,
to the drowning of the old world with a flood of water, to the destruction of
Sodom and Gomorrah with a flood of fire, or to the overthrow of Pharaoh and
his Egyptian host in the red Sea.

But more particularly, for the explication of these words; whose foundation
was overflowne with a flood.

Whose foundation. This word foundation taken in a proper sense, referres to a
material building. And the foundation of any building is the stability and
strength of it; by foundation, in a metaphorical sense, Ea omnia quae illis
velur fundamenti loco erant, in quibus spem and praesidium ponebant, etc. Merc:
we are to understand all those things by which the state of persons or things
is upheld; and here whatsoever wicked men support and bear up themselves by,
as a building is borne up by the foundation, is to be understood as their
foundation. So their power, their riches, their council, their wisdom, their
friends and confederates; whatsoever, I say, is the support of their worldly
State, that is their foundation. And thus it is here said, their foundation was
overflowne With a flood.

In two of the former Instances, to which the allusion was made, their
foundation was overflowne by a flood properly taken. If we take it more
generally for all wicked men, who at any time have been overthrown, we may
say, that they have all been overflowne by a flood metaphorically. For so

First, The displeasure of God, by what means or instrument soever put forth
is called a flood; whether is be by sword, or by famine, or by pestilence, it
is a flood. ( Esa. 8.7.) We read war Compared to a flood; Now therefore
behold the Lord brings up upon them the waters of the river, strong and many
(what were these waters?) Even the King of Assyria, and all his glory; the King
of Assyria with his Armies, in which he gloried, or which he counted his glory,
were the waters of the river, strong and many) and he shall come up over all
his channells, and go over all his hands (that is, the former Limits of his
Dominion) And he shall pass through Judah, he shall overflow and go over.
There The Sword is Compared to a flood, or to a mighty river, which bears
down all before it. The same Prophet speaks again in the same Language (
Esa. 59.19.) When the enemy shall come in like a flood, the Spirit of the Lord
shall lift up a Standard against him; as if it had been said, The enemy shall
come rushing in like a mighty torrent but the Spirit of God, like a more mighty
wind, shall blow and rush upon him, causing him to recoile and give back, or
(as our Margent has it) put him to flight. Again ( Ezekiel. 13.) The Prophet
foreshewes the approaching calamity upon those who had seduced the Jews into a
vain security; which is there called, the building of a wall with untempered
mortar. A wall he calls that prophecy, because it promised safety, and defense;
but he calls it also a wall built with untempered mortar, because that false
prophecy was a weak prophecy, and should shortly fall. The manner how, he
gives us in the notion of the Text ( verse. 13.) Wherefore thus says the Lord
God, I will even rent it with a stormy wind in my fury, and there shall be as
an overflowing shower in mine anger, etc. that is, wrath shall be upon it (the
Babylonian Army was the special judgment in which that wrath was expressed)
and that shall be as an overflowing shower. Great and continual showers will
try the strongest buildings, and quickly overthrow the weak. A wall of
untempered mortar is no match for a storm. As our Savior also assures us in
the close of his Sermon on the Mount, ( Matthew. 7.27.) where all those evils,
troubles, afflictions, sorrows, and persecutions, whether sent upon such as
are really godly, or only in name and outward profession, are called rain,
floods, winds. So says the Text, The rain descended, and the floods came, and
the winds blew and beat upon the house and it fell, and great was the fall of
it. While it stood, it stood to no purpose but for a show, but when it fell, it
fell to purpose, The fall thereof was great. Thus it is more then evident from
Scripture phrase, that raines and floods signify all sorts of afflicting
evils, and therefore we need not restrain the word flood in the Text to a
Deluge of Elementary water, or of water in a proper sense, but we may Enlarge
it to any kind of afflicting Evil or trouble whatsoever that falls upon man.
And the Scripture is (I conceave) so frequent in the use of this metaphor of a
flood, and of waters, where great calamities are set forth, for these two
reasons.

First, To note the swiftnes and suddennes of the judgments of God. Floods
come often very suddenly, and rise not only beyond expectation, but before
there is any the least expectation of them. Noah's flood was long foretold
before it came, but when the time came, wherein it should come, it came at
once. Though God give long warning of his judgments, yet most men are
surpriz^d with them, they come like a flood.

Secondly, To note the Irresistablenes of the Judgments of God; who or what
can stand before mighty waters? Great floods do not only wash and overflow
all, but ruin and overthrow all, there is no resisting. Such are the Judgments
of God, they are a flood both for their sudden rising and breaking in upon
sinners, and likewise for their Irresistible violence in breaking and ruining
them.

Further, It is not to be passed by, That Eliphaz does not only say, They were
overflowne, but, Their foundation was overflowne with a flood. He calls it the
overflowing of their foundation, to note, that they were totally or utterly
ruined and overthrown: for when the foundation is destroyed, all is destroyed;
destruction to the foundation is the worst of destructions. The cruel enemies
of the Jews cried, Raze it, raze it even to the foundation thereof (Ps.
137.7.) but to raze the foundation it self is more cruel then rasing to the
foundation. When the Lord threatened a full and final destruction of those
foolish Prophets who had seen vain visions for his people, he said ( Ezekiel.
13.14) I will break down the wall that ye have daubed with untempered mortar,
and bring it down to the ground, so that the foundation thereof shall be
discovered, etc. That is, I will destroy it as far as destruction it self
can go. There shall not only not a stone be left upon a stone of this building
above ground, but even the underground stones shall not be left. The very
foundation shall be opened and discovered. That which lies at the bottom, or
the bottom it self of those flattering prophecies, all the wiles and secret
way^ of them shall be revealed. David complains of those irreparable breaches
made upon the civil state in this style ( Psalm. 11.3.) If the foundations be
destroyed, what can the righteous do? The civil foundation of a Nation or
people, is their Laws, and Constitutions, the order and power that is among
them, that is the foundation of a People, and when once this foundation is
destroyed, what can the righteous do? what can the best, the wisest in the
world do in such a case? what can any man do, if there be not a foundation of
Government left among men? There is no help nor answer in such a case, but
that which follows in the 4th verse of the same Psalm; The Lord is in his
holy Temple, the Lords throane is in heaven, his eyes behold, his eyelids try
the children of men. As if he had said; in the midst of these confusions, when
as it is said ( Psalm. 82.5.) All the foundations of the earth are out of
course; yet God keeps his course still, he is where he was and as he was,
without variablenes or shadow of turning. We read in the vision of the four
Monarchies ( Dan. 2.34.) That The stone Cut out without hands smote the Image
upon his feet that were of Iron and Clay, and brake them to pieces: The stone
did not strike the Image upon the head, or upon the breast, the golden head,
the silver breast, etc. but upon the feet that were of Iron and Clay. Now the
feet are to a natural body, as the foundation is to an Artificial body; A
man's feet are the foundation of his body; if the feet be smitten and broken
to pieces, the body must needs fall. And therefore as soon as ever it was
said, That the Stone brake the feet to pieces, The ruin of the whole Image is
described in the immediately following words of the vision ( ver. 35.) Then was
the Iron, the Clay, the brass, the silver, and the gold broken to pieces
together, and became like the chafe of the Summer threshing floor, and the
wind carried them away, that no place was found for them. The breaking of the
feet, was the breaking up of the foundation, and so the breaking down of all.
Whose foundation was overflowne with a flood.

Hence note; First, Wicked men think themselves very sure, they have
foundations, they lay foundations.

The people of God are sometimes over-conceited about the strength and
stability of their worldly foundations. Holy David said, In his prosperity, I
shall never be moved, Lord by thy favor thou have made my mountain to stand
strong, (Psalm. 30.6, 7.) And if a godly man may, by the strength of temptation,
thus overreckon the strength of an Earthly state, what may they do whose
state, yea whose minds are altogether earthly? How often do they judge
themselves wise and politic enough to lay for themselves an everlasting
foundation in things which cannot last? and that they are so surely bottomed in
the favor of men, that they shall never be removed. Babylon thinks her self
settled at this day upon such everlasting mountains, upon such perpetual hills
of power and policy, that certainly her foundation shall never be overflowne.
Thus she spoke her heart out, while she said in her heart (Rev. 18.7.) I sit
a Queen, and am no widow, and shall see no sorrow. Babylon is bottomed and
foundation'd upon so many hills, that is, upon so many Interests and advantages
of strength, as render her (to her self) impregnable and unremoveable. And as
this vain confidence bears up the Spirit of that Man of sin, so of very many
sinful men, who presume they are upon a sure foundation, when indeed none but
the godly man's foundation is sure. ( Prove. 10.25.) As the whirlewinde passes,
so is the wicked no more, but the righteous is an everlasting foundation. The
wicked man supposes himself founded as on a Rock of ages an everlasting
strength, such as the righteous man has in God, or such as God is to a
righteous man. ( Esaias 26.3.) Yet as the whirlewinde be passes away but the
righteous is an everlasting foundation. We find not the Copulative word, is,
expressed in the Hebrew, there it is only, but the righteous an Everlasting
foundation; So that I should rather read it thus; But the righteous have an
everlasting foundation: wicked men seem to have, but the righteous man indeed
has an Everlasting foundation. There is no earthly foundation everlasting; For
all earthly things pass away, and are fo far from lasting for ever, that
they last but (as it were) for a little, for a moment. What then is this
everlasting foundation? It is a foundation laid in heavenly things; The
foundation which is laid in things above shall abide; The things which are not
seen, and they only, are eternal (2 Cor. 4.18.) but the strongest foundation
laid in things below, endures but for a season; The things which are seen, are
temporal, as the Apostle speaks in the same place. Such foundations are soon
overflowne with a flood. As will appear yet further in the next observation;
Which take thus; The flood and storm of Gods anger will overflow all the
foundations, the strongest foundations of wicked men.

Their riches, their power, their wisdom, their Councels, whatsoever they have
imagined, laid and made for a foundation to themselves, either of honor or
safety, shall be overflowne and swept quite away; yea all their refuges laid
together will prove but a refuge of lies, (Isa. 28.17.) Judgment also will I
(says the Lord) lay to the line, and righteousness to the plummet, and the
hayle shall sweep away the refuge of lies, and the waters shall overflow the
hiding place. That is, those places wherein they thought to hide and secure
themselves against the overflowing scourge. A wicked man is in greatest danger
when he thinks himself in greatest safety, and then most ready to fall when
he says in his own heart, or boasts it out to others, that he is upon a
sure foundation; For whatsoever opinion he has of it; yet the truth is, his
foundation is but sand; and (which makes his case more miserable) though he be
told so, and others have found it so, yet he will not believe it. While (as the
Prophet speaks, Isa. 44.20.) He feeds of ashes, a deceaved heart has turned
him aside, that be cannot deliver his soul, nor say is there not a lie, or (as
the former Scripture has it.) a refuge of lies in my right hand. Only the
righteous is, or has (as Solomon speaks) an everlasting foundation. A
righteous man has two foundations which shall never be shaken, much less
overthrown; who so are settled on those foundations may be as confident as
confidence it self.

The first of these two foundations is Gods Eternal Decree, his Decree of
Election, that is an unmovable foundation, and that is the foundation upon
which believers build their hopes. The Apostle (2 Timothy 2.19, 20.) is proving
that even in the house of God, that is, among the outward professors of the
name of God, there are of all sorts, vessels of gold and silver, vessels also
of wood and of Earth; Some to honor, and some to dishonor; and when he had
said of Himeneus and Philetus, that they had erred concerning the truth, saying
that the resurrection is past already, and so had overthrown the faith of
some, verse. 18. He presently adds, What though it be thus, what though some
men have fallen from their foundation, yet the foundation of God stands sure,
having this Seal, The Lord knows who are his, verse. 19. Where we have first
the foundation of God, namely, his decree of Election; Secondly, the Seal or
assurance of it, as to him, even his own certain knowledge of the Elect, The
Lord knows who are his. So that while hypocrites or mere verbal formal
professors back-slide and Apostatize from the faith, yet the Elect are safe and
stand fast in the purpose of God; and while many discover themselves to be
vessels of dishonor in the house of God, wood and Earth, of base and britle
materials; yet Saints, indeed, who are vessels of honor made of purest metal,
of Gold and Silver, these shall abide for ever. He that is once a vessel of
honor, shall always be so; For the foundation of God stands sure, having
this Seal, The Lord knows who are his.

Secondly, As there is this more hidden foundation, upon which Saints are sure,
and which no flood can overflow; so there is another sure foundation, and that
is Jesus Christ, upon which Saints are built, and therefore the holy Prophet
having discovered that refuge of lies which he threatens should be swept away
by the overflowing scourge, subjoynes by way of Opposition in the next verse (
Isa. 28.16.) Therefore thus says the Lord God, Behold, I lay in Sion for a
foundation a stone, a tried stone, a precious corner stone, a sure foundation,
and he that believes shall not make have. Whom the Prophet means by this sure
foundation, the Apostle tells us expressly and by name (1 Cor. 3.11.) Other
foundation can no man lay then that which is laid, which is Jesus Christ; and
they that are built on him the living Rock (as all Believers are) have eternal
life, and shall never perish. This Christ himself teaches us ( Matthew. 7.24,
25.) Whosoever bears these sayings of mine and does them, I will liken him
to a wise man that built his house upon a Rock. And what is the Rock that these
wife men build upon? This rock is Jesus Christ, he is the rock of Ages; He
fayles not, nor can they fall who are in him; as it follows; Then the rain
descended, the floods came, the winds blew and beat upon the house, and it fell
not, for it was founded on a rock. Saints are lively stones, and they coming
to Christ (by faith) who is a living stone, dissalowed indeed of men, but
chosen of God and precious, are built up a spiritual house (1 Pet. 2.4, 5.) If
this house should fall, Christ must fall too, for though Christ and this house
are distinguished, yet they are not divided; Christ and this house are one; So
then though the floods of angry men, and of enraged Devils beat upon it, yet
they shall return foaming out their own shame, and when they have done their
worst, they shall but wash this house, leaving it somewhat more clean, but no
whit unsettled. This is the glory and privilege of Believers, that while the
strongest foundations of the Earth are overflowne with a flood, They have a
twofold foundation, That of Election in the Love of God, and that of Redemption
in the blood of Christ, which cannot be overflowne by any the most violent and
impetuous flood.

So then, ungodly men are miserable, when they appear most happy, and at their
best estate are altogether vanity; for either their estate has no foundation,
or but such a foundation as cannot stand, and that is as bad or rather worse
then none at all; It is better to have no appearance of strength, then to have
nothing but an appearance of it.

Further, may we not from the opposite state of Godly men (at least intimated
in this, and touched before) conclude, that they are happy when they appear
most miserable? and that at their worst estate, they are altogether above
uncertainty? For as they have a foundation, so such a foundation as will stand
all storms and weathers; What can be added to their felicity, who are in an
estate so good (in the nature of it) that they need not desire a change, and so
sure (in the foundation of it) that they need not fear a change, much less an
overflowing flood?

Eliphaz proceeds to describe the particular wickedness of those men, or how
they did Express their wickedness; Whose foundation was thus overflowne; They
say unto God depart from us, etc.

JOB, CHAP. 22. Verse. 17, 18. Which said unto God, Depart from us, and what can
the Almighty do for them?

Yet he filled their houses with good things: but the counsel of the wicked is
far from me.


IN the former context Eliphaz had charged Job with impiety against God, and
called him to consider the dispensations of God in former times toward impious
men, here he shows us what their impiety was, It was impiety hightned into
blasphemy; The seven abominations which were in their hearts, brake out at
their lips, and were vomited out of their mouths in black choler, in choler as
black as hell.

Verse. 17. Which said unto God, depart from us, etc.
These words are filled with the very spirit of malice against God himself;
And we have the same breathed out in the same language in the former Chapter at
the 14th verse, there the reader may find them explicated, and I shall add
somewhat for a further explication here.

Which said to God, depart from us. To this hight of madness do some wicked men
arise, their spirits being big with sin, they bring forth or belch out this
monster of words; They say to God, depart from us. They (as it were) send God a
writ of Ejectment, they do not pray or entreat God to depart from them, but
with as much rudenes and incivillity as unholynes and prophanenes, Say unto
God, depart from us. It Is a word of command, from man, but such a one as
breaks all the commandments of God. Moses (Numb. 16.26.) beseeches the
people, saying, Depart I pray you from the tents of these wicked men, and touch
nothing of theirs; but here we have wicked men not praying God to depart, but
bidding him, they say depart from us. David speaks to the wicked ( Psalm.
119.115.) Depart from me ye evil doers, for I will keep the commandments of
my God; he bids them begone, He would not give them the least welcome or
entertainment. And so Jesus Christ is described speaking to the wicked in the
day of Judgment, ( Matthew. 7.23.) Depart from me, away, get you out of my
presence, I will not have to do with you, I will do nothing for you; Depart.
His is a word of command, indeed, which though they have no will to obey, yet
they shall obey it whether they will or no. Thus in the present text wicked men
presume to say to God himself, depart from us, etc.

Hence note.

First, That wicked or mere carnal men, have some appearances and impresses
of the presence of God upon their spirits. They could not say to God, depart
from us, had they not some impressions and notions of God, of the will and Law
of God, of the truth and power of God upon them. They who are alienated from
the life of God through the ignorance that is in them, do yet feel a presence
of God with them ( Act. 17.27) That they should seek the Lord, if happily they
might feel after him and find him, though he be not far from every one of
us. Take mankind in general, good and bad, believers and infidels, there is a
neerenesse of God unto them, unto them all: and that not only a neerenesse of
God in what the Apostle there speaks of, common preservation ( verse. 28.) In
him we live, and move, and have our being, or of natural communications, of
which the Apostle speaks there also, From him we receave life, and breath, and
all things (verse. 25.) But further God is with them, by a twofold light; first,
by a light of Direction; secondly, by a light of Conviction. All have a Light
of direction, 1. by the Law written in their hearts. The Apostle is express
for this ( Romans 2.14.) For when the Gentiles (he means it of Gentiles
unconverted) which have not the Law, do by nature the things contained in the
Law, these having not the Law (that is formally published and preached to them)
are a Law unto them selves: Which show the work of the Law written in their
hearts, their conscience also bearing witness, etc. And as all have a light of
direction from the Law written in their hearts, or in the book of Conscience;
so also 2. they have a light of direction from the Law of the creation, or from
that which is written of God in the Book of the creature. The same Apostle
makes this the ground of the righteousness of God in that dreadful Revelation
of his wrath against all ungodlynes and unrighteousnes of men (be they who they
will) who hold the truth in unrighteousnes, because that which may be known of
God is manifest in them (or to them) for God has showed it to them. But how or
where has God showed them this? The Apostle answers in the next verse ( Romans
1.20.) For the invisible things of him from the creation of the world are
clearly seen, being understood by the things that are made, even his eternal
power and Godhead, so that they are without excuse. So that, though all men
have not a light of direction from God so powerful as to change them and make
them holy, yet they have a light so clear and full as is enough to make them
guilty. And when they refuse to follow this light of direction in doing what is
right, then follows that other light of convictio^, their consciences
troubling them, or (as the Apostles phrase is, Romans 2.15.) their thoughts
accusing them, because they have done that which is not right. This presence of
God is common to all men, to the worst of men, and this is it which provokes
them to say to God, depart from us. And this is argument enough to stop the
mouth of the Atheist, who says in his heart, there is no God; when as yet he
cannot stop the mouth of his own conscience from saying there is a God, while
he says (and this he always says, either in plain terms, or in that which
is equivalent) to God depart from me. And from hence we may observe;

Secondly; That the presence, and manifestations of God to wicked men, are a
trouble to them.

None are troubled with the neerenes of God to them, but they who are far
from him: all natural men are far from God in state and in heart, and God is
near all natural men either in his word or in his works, either speaking his
mind to their ears, or sending it in to their consciences. This light of God
is not only not pleasing but vexing. They who love darkness cannot abide the
light of direction, much less the light of conviction; So that if ever God be
near in their mouth, near in their ear, or near in their conscience, yet as
the Prophet speaks ( Jer. 12.2.) He is far from their reins; that is,
though they speak, hear or think of God, yet they delight not in him, they
have no desirings, no breathings after him, yea the more he offers himself to
them, the more weary are they of him. What David spoke in a temptation, they
speak from their disposition ( Psalm. 73.3.) I remembered God and was troubled.
It troubles them when they are put in mind of God, it troubles them when God
comes into their mind. God is holy, and they are unholy, The holy God must
needs be a burden to an unholy heart. The Prophet puts the Question ( Amos
3.3.) Can two walk together except they be agreed? they cannot. That company
is always unpleasant to us, which is unsuitable to us; They who are not at
one, are best pleased when they are furthest asunder. The ways of God are
grievous to wicked men, much more is God himself; They say what a
wearisomnesse is it to serve the Lord, they say his yoke is heavy, and his
burden insupportable, the very outside of heavenly and spiritual work is
burdensome to them, how then can they maintain communion with God (in truth of
spirit) Who is a Spirit and will be worshipped in Spirit and in truth.

Thirdly, Note; Natural men are blind and foolish, they know not wherein their
own happiness does consist, they forsake and throw away the mercies offered
them, for lying vanities.

They who are not taught of God are full of mistaken and false principles,
among which, this is a principal one; They suppose they can do well enough
without God, whereas indeed there is nothing can do us good without him who is
the chief good. Now, that the natural man believes he can do well enough
without God, is plain from this abominable and hateful motion which such make
to God in the Text, Depart from us. No man would desire God to depart from him,
if this persuasion did abide upon his heart, That he could not subsist without
him; or that he depended upon God for his subsistence. Therefore this is their
opinion (though possibly they are as far from acknowledging it, as they are
from the true knowledge and love of God) That they can do well enough alone,
that they can stand upon their own bottom without God, yea that they are
selfe-sufficient, as God is; for whosoever does not see an emptiness and
insufficiency in himself, and so place his all in God, makes himself a God.
This is the way of wicked men, and this their way is their folly, (as the
Psalmist speaks, Psalm. 49.13.) Though their posterity approve their sayings.
Who but they? they can maintain their being, yea their well-being without God;
they can live, and live happily whether he will or no. Surely if they thought
they were beholding to him, either for being or well-being, either for life, or
a happy life, they had never been heard saying to God, depart from us. And if
this be a truth that they have said so, and say so still every day, we need
not stay to prove this a truth, that they show their blindness and foolishnes in
saying so. Is not he foolish who would have the Sun depart from him, which
enlightens him? or who would have the Shield depart from him, which protects
him? or who bids the fountain be gone which gives him drink; God is all this
to all men in some degree or other, and he promises himself such in the
highest and best degree to all such as walk uprightly, even to be their Sun,
their Shield, their fountain, their spring. Then, can folly it self utter
more foolishnes then this, To say to God, depart from us? Further, how foolish
are they to refuse that, as if it were a hurt to them, which Saints who have
the true wisdom, have prayed for, and still do pray for, as the greatest
blessing and privilege, The presence of God with them. How foolish are they
who ask and desire that as a blessing, which God the only wise God threatens
as the soarest curse. ( Jer. 6.8.) Be instructed O Jerusalem, lest my soul
depart from thee, lest I make thee a Land desolate, not inhabited: Utter
desolation is the consequent, yea the effect of the Lords departure from a
Land; and when he cease in regard of his favorable presence to inhabit a
Land, either none shall inhabit it, or none shall have a comfortable habitation
in it. The Lord threatens this departure as the last and soarest, or as the
sum of all his judgments, and wicked men desire this, as if to be without
God were the chief or sum of their enjoyments. See another instance of this
folly; among all the threatenings of God against sinful men, this is one of
the greatest, that he will take away his Gospel, and the light of his Word from
them, yet this a wicked man desires, let the Gospel go, let the light of the
word go; He wishes it gone, it is but a trouble to him, he is sick of it, it
is a death to him. The best of good things is refused, and the worst of evils
chosen by those that are evil. As their understanding is so blinded and
distempered, that they call evil good, and good evil, that they put darkness
for light, and light for darkness, that they put bitter for sweet, and sweet
for bitter (Isa. 5.20.) So their will and affections are so perverted, that
they choose and embrace darkness for light, evil for good, and that which is
most bitter, for that which is sweeter then the honey and the honey-combe.

Observe. Fourthly.

Wicked men are not only foolish, but wild and furious. See at what a rate
they speak, even as if they had God at their command, They say to God depart;
As if God could not be where he pleased, as if God were at their limiting, and
disposing. Here Is madness, like madness it self. As there is madness in the
heart of man in the enjoyment of the creature ( I said of laughter it is mad
(says Solomon) Some are so over-acted with joy, and laughter, in their
creature-enjoyments, that whereas laughter is the proper passion of a rational
creature, there is nothing more irrational then their laughter, It Is plain
downright madness, Now (I say) as some carnal men are mad in their manner of
enjoying the creature) so they are more mad, in refusing the enjoyments of God
the Creator. Who can tell how mad they are who desire God to depart from them?
They are mad to purpose who would put God from them, yet they more who think
they can.

Fifthly; Note.

That the godly and the wicked have quite contrary both desires and fears. What
are the desires and fears of a wicked man, he desires to have God depart, he
is afraid of the presence of God: what are the desires of a godly man, he
desires nothing more then the presence of God, he says as Moses (Exodus 33.15.)
If thy presence go not with me, carry me no further, I desire to be no where,
but where God manifests himself to be; let me see the day of my departure out
of the world, rather then the day of Gods departure from me in the world; Let
riches go, let liberty go, let friends and relations go, so God stay with
me. All company is solitarines to me, all fulness is emptiness to me, and
the most populous City worse then a desolate wilderness to me, where I find not
the presence of God with me. I fear nothing like this, The departure of God
from me. I read indeed ( Luke 5.8.) that Peter once said to Christ, Depart from
me, for I am a sinful man O Lord. But the reason was not because he was weary
of the presence of Christ, but because he thought himself altogether unworthy
of the presence of Christ. And therefore at another time when many of Christ's
Disciples went back and walked no more with him, and hereupon Christ said to
the twelve, Will ye also go away? Then Simon Peter answered him, Lord to whom
shall we go, thou have the words of Eternal Life (Joh. 6.68.) He who would
not go from Christ, could not indeed desire that Christ should go or depart
from him. They who have tasted how gracious the Lord is, can never totally
depart from God, nor can they at all bear it, that God should depart from
them. Thus the Church complains ( Jer. 14.9.) Why should thou be as a
stranger in the Land, and as a way fayring man that turns aside to tarry for
a night. Why should thou be as a man astonished, as a mighty man that cannot
save, yet thou O Lord, art in the midst of us, and we are called by thy name,
leave us not; Whatsoever thou do to us, do not leave us; let any evil
come, but do not thou go: let sword come, let famine come, let plague come,
but do not thou depart; leave us not. Thus the Saints cling about a departing
God, while wicked men are willing he should depart. And considering the opinion
which these wicked men had of God, it is no wonder though they press him to
depart; for what should God do with them, if he can do nothing for them, or
do them no good: Such was their apprehension of God, as appears in the next
clause.

And what can the Almighty do for them? They should rather have said; What
cannot the Almighty do for them? If the question be put, what the Allmighty
can do? The answer is at hand, he that is Allmighty, can do any thing; yet
these wretches say, What can the Allmighty do for them? Et quid operabitur
omnipotens eis. Heb.
Allmightinesse it self is questioned as weakness, and omnipotency as
impotency by unbeleevers.

From the general sense of this infidel question.

Observe.

First, That worldly wicked men have low, and slight thoughts of God. It is
said of a wicked man ( Psalm. 10.4.) God is not in all his thoughts; that is, he
is in none of his thoughts, or God is not at all in his thoughts. But is any
man so void of God, that God is not in all his Thoughts? can any man utterly
extinguish or blot the thoughts of God out of his heart? is not the notion of a
God, written with indelible characters upon the heart of man by nature? if not,
how is the Law written there by nature? I answer, wicked men have thoughts, and
cannot but have thoughts of God. But, first, They like not to retain God in
their thoughts, or (which is the same) in their knowledge (Romans 1.28.)
Secondly, The thoughts which they have of God, are unworthy of God; while they
think of God, they think below God, and so indeed their thoughts are not at
all the thoughts of God. While we think of God otherwise then he is, and has
revealed himself to be, we do not think of the God that made us, but we make
an Idol-God in our own thoughts. Now wicked men think either that God has no
strength, power, goodness and wisdom, or can do little with what he has;
What can the Allmighty do for them? They who are afar off from God by
unbelief, are not able to discern his power, his goodness, his wisdom, his
faithfulness, his Allsufficiency; They neither understand what God affirms
of himself, nor give credit to what he has promised unto us. We say of those
things, which appear more then they are, that they affect more afar off then
near at hand; but those things which are more then they appear, affect more
when they are nigh, then when they are afar off. God is infinitely more, then
he appears; And he being near to those who believe, affects them wonderfully.
But God is far from unbeleevers, and they are far off or in a state of
farthest distance from God, therefore they are not affected with him; But say,
who is God? what is Gods power? what is his allmightinesse? We have heard much
of him, but we see little in him. They look upon God, as if he were like the
Idols (described, Psalm. 115.4, 5, 6, 7.) Who have eyes, and see not, ears,
and bear not, hands and handle not etc. All the attributes of God, that he is
allmighty, unchangeable, etc. are but a sound of words or empty titles in their
ears. A believer can make a living out of any attribute of God; for when the
Scripture says he lives by faith, the meaning is, he lives upon the goodness,
mercy and power of God, revealed in the promise, and laid hold on by faith.
Thus the just live by faith upon God, but the wicked and unbeleevers cannot
live upon those terms; They see little or nothing in God to make a Living of,
and therefore they say; What can the Allmighty do for them?

Secondly, Note; That carnal men count the service of God unprofitable.

What can God do for them? if they serve him what profit is it? His is a lean
service, they shall but starve themselves by attending upon him, and undo
themselves by doing his work. Thus they said in the former Chapter, and so
they say again in this. The carnal man accounts nothing good but that which is
outwardly good: Who will show us any good? (Psalm. 4.6.) they know not that all
good comes through the hand of God, that it comes in at the door of the
promise; They can look no further then they see, and therefore becuse they see
no profit, they look for none; They do not see that God does any thing for
them, and therefore they conclude he cannot: What can the Allmighty do for
them?

Thirdly, Note; That, The spirits of worldly men, are merely mercenary.

If they do any thing for God, or at the command of God, they do it only upon
hopes of reward, they never obey commandments for the holiness that is in them,
but for the benefit that comes by them. What can the Allmighty do for them? As
when Judas betrayed Jesus Christ, he went out with a mercinary spirit to do
that wickedness; What will you give me, and I will betray him? So when a
carnal man serves Jesus Christ, he says, What will he give me? what can he do
for me? he cannot serve God for naught, that is, freely, as Satan charged Job
in the beginning of this book; Job serves thee, said Satan, because thou have
done so much for him, because thou have served his turn, and made a hedge
about him; this was Satan's slander upon that good man; but it is no s^under to
say so of carnal men, Do they serve God for naught? They do not, they cannot;
if they may gain by godliness, they will do somewhat, which shall have a
show of godliness; profit will make any thing pass with and pleasing to a
carnal mind, though in it self it be never so displeasing. Such is the
nobleness of the people of God, that though there be a reward in serving of
him, yet they are ready to serve him without reward, they can serve him upon a
bare command, abstract from promises and profits; They can obey God as a
creator, though he should not be a rewarder. Godliness is profitable for all
things, and has the promise both of this life, and of that which is to come,
yet a gracious heart loves Godliness more then profitablenes, and eyes the
work of God more then his reward.

Further for the opening of these words; Some read thus, What can the allmighty
do against them? The Hebrew particle stands indifferently to both, and may be
translated for, or against, in which sense we find it in the 35th of this
Book, Si peccaveris quid ei nocebis, proprie, quid ei facies.
ver. 6, 7. If thou sinnest what do thou against him? That is, what hurt do
thou to God? thy sin cannot reach, or wound him, what do thou against him?
Thus here; They say to the allmighty depart from us, and what can the allmighty
do against them? Surely the allmighty is not able to hurt us; from him we
expect no good, and from him we fear no evil. Were not these mighty men,
think you, who thought the Allmighty could not match them? These were mighty
men indeed, Giants sons of Anak no doubt they were, but Giants in wickedness.
And so this reading gives us a further character or discovery of a wicked man's
Spirit.

Hence Observe.

Some wicked men have this presumption, that let God do his worst, he cannot
hurt them. I find in Scripture a threefold false and presumptuous
apprehension, which evil men have of God while they are doing evil.

First, Some presume that God will protect them from evil while they do
evil. ( Mich. 3.11.) The beads thereof judge for reward, and the Priests
thereof teach for hire, and the Prophets thereof divine for money, yet will
they lean upon the Lord and say, Is not the Lord among us? none evil can come
upon us. These were such as made it their business to break the Law of God, yet
they thought God would not suffer any trouble to break in upon them.

Secondly, Others presume that, at least, God will not be so severe as to
inflict those evils which he has threatened. The old world was threatened with
a Deluge, but they could not believe God would make good his word, they even
mocked at the credulity and simplicity of Noah, to see him build that great Ship
or Arc upon the dry Land, as if he meant to sail his vessel without water. As
for them, they neither bel^^ved nor feared a flood. So they ( Isa. 5.19.) will
put the Lord to a trial, Let him hasten his work that we may see it; let us
see what he will do; as if they had said to the Prophet, you told us what he
would do, how severe he would be, what means all your talk, we would see
something done. What will the Allmighty do against us? Surely nothing; he is
not so strict as you make him. The Prophet describes the worst of men, the men
settled on their lees, speaking thus ( Zeph. 1.12.) They say in their heart, the
Lord will not do good, neither will he do evil; that is, he will neither
reward nor punish, he will neither help nor hurt. To say either of these is
alike dishonorable unto God; To say either much more both (though indeed to
say either is to say both) is to say, not only that God is neither to be loved
nor feared, but that he is not at all. It is the glory of God to do the one as
well as to do the other, and unless he could do both, he could do neither.
( Isa. 45.7.) I form the light, and create darkness, (the darkness of
trouble is of God as much as the light of comfort) I make peace and create
evil; the evil of punishment is as much the creature of God as peace is, and
God does as much appear a creator in the one as in the other; the doing of
this kind of evil does as much show the power, and providence of God, as the
doing of good; yet those in the Prophet said the Lord will do neither; He will
neither do good, neither will be do evil.

Thirdly, Those in the Text were raised to a higher pitch of presumption then
both the former; For they said, what can the Allmighty do against us? As if
they had said, Let him do his worst, we fear him not; To think that God
will shield us from the evil which others threaten, or that he will not bring
that evil upon us which himself has threatened, when we do evil, are very
high actings of presumption; But to think that God can do nothing against us,
to think that the Arm of God is shorter then that it can reach us, or weaker
then that it can overpower us; to think that we have out-growne divine
justice, and are too big or too strong to be dealt with by the Allmighty is
presumption to madness; woe to those sinners who secure themselves in the
goodness of God to them, more woe to those who secure themselves in Gods neglect
of them, but above all, woe is their portion who secure themselves as it were
in the weakness of God, even while in words they acknowledge his power; saying,
What can the Allmighty do against us?

Thirdly, Others read the words thus; They say to the allmighty depart from us,
and what has the allmighty done against them? That is, what hurt has God done
them? They are troubled at the presence of God; But what cause has God given
them to be troubled at his presence? And then we may connect these words with
the words of the 18th verse; What has God done against them? yea he filled
their houses with good things; that is all the damage he did them? This is a
fair sense, and consistent with the Original Text: leaving the reader to his
choice; I shall only give the observation which rises clearly from this.

God never gives wicked men any just cause to be weary of him. He never does
them any wrong, and he often gives them many a blessing; and have they any
reason to bid him depart? he is usually very patient toward them, and does
never bring any evil upon them till they have doubly deserved it; and have
they any reason to be displeased at that? yea whenever he punishes them in
this world, he punishes them then their sins deserve; indeed there is a
punishment behind adaequate and commensurate to their sin, but they shall
never be punished beyond what or more then their sin deserves. Seeing then
their punishment in the next life, though it will be great beyond imagining,
yet shall not be great beyond deserving; and all their punishments in this life
are less then the demerit of their sin) As was paenitentially confessed by
Ezra in the name of the Jews after they had been broken by the sword, and
brought into captivity for their sin, Chap. 9.13 Seeing (I say) it is but thus
with them when it is worst with them) What has the Allmighty done against them?
is not all their destruction (meritoriously) from themselves?

Again, How much soever God punishes them in this life, they have no reason
to complain, or say to God depart from us; for even those punishments are
messages from God to awaken them out of their sins, and so to prevent worser
punishments; therefore when God perceived that stubborn people going on in
their sins, tells them he will smite there no more, as implying that it was
his favor to smite them. ( Isa. 1.5.) Why should ye be smitten any more, ye
will revolt more and more. Surely then such have no reason to say to God,
depart from us, when he smites them, as if he did them ey there hurt or wrong,
seeing he smites them, that they might return unto him; Those judgments of God
are a mercy, which are sent to teach man his duty. Now if the judgments of God
have sometime mercy in them, and never have any injury in them, what hurt or
injury can there be to man in the service of God? Has the Allmighty done any
thing against them, whom he lovingly invites to the doing of his will? And yet
some complain of wrong when they are only called to do what is right, and
cry out as if God hurt them, when he does but govern them. The Lord calls his
murmuring people to account about this thing, ( Mich. 6.3.) O my people, what
have I done to thee (that is, what hurt, what wrong have I done unto thee) and
wherein have I wearied thee, testify against me; As if he had said? thou have
nothing to bring against me in evidence, unless it be my kindness, as it
follows ( ver. 4.) For I brought thee up out of the Lord of Egypt, and redeemed
thee our of the house of servants, and I sent before thee, Moses, Aaran, and
Miriam. O my people, remember etc. Consider all my dealings with thee, all the
deliverances I have wrought for thee, all the Statutes and Ordinances, all the
Laws and Commandments which I have given thee, and then let thy Conscience
speak; What have I done unto thee, which is an evil to thee? or wherein have
I wearied thee, in the things which I have required thee to do? I have done
many good works for thee, and I have commanded thee to do many works, such
works as are not only good in themselves, but good for them who do them; for
which of these is it that thou art weary of me? There is not that wicked man in
the world but God may say to him, what have I done to thee, or what have I
called thee to do, that thou should be weary of me? that thou should
desire me to depart from thee? Thus if we read the words in this latter sense;
What has the Allmighty done against them? They carry a reproof of their
ingr^titude against God, who had not hurt them, yea who had done them good. If
we read the words in the second sense; What can the Allmighty do against
them? They carry a high contempt and slight of his power, as if God could do
them no hurt. If we read the words in the first sense according to our
translation (which I rather pitch upon) they carry (upon contrary terms) a
like contempt of the power of God, as if he could do them no Good; What can
the Allmighty do for them?

Verse. 18. Yet be filled their houses with good things.
The Hebrew is, And be filled their houses with good things; we translate yet,
which better cleares the meaning and scope of the Text, according to our
reading of the former verse; They say to God, depart from us, and what can the
Allmighty do for them? yet he filled their houses with good things; As if he
had said, they thought God could do nothing for them, Horum quidem domos ipse
impleaver at bonis. Jun: q. d. Dei benificijs abusi sunt turpiter and tanquam
de spolijs dei ipsius triumphaverunt. Jun:
whereas indeed he did all for them: all the good they had, they had it from
God, He filled their houses; that is, he gave them abundance; he did not only
put some good things into their houses, but he filled their houses with good
things, they had a plentiful state, God gave them a rich portion in the good
things of this world; his corn, his wine, his oil, his flax, his gold, his
silver, were their portion. He filled them, and they rebelled against him; He
bestowed many benefits upon them, which they abused to serve their lusts, and
vainly triumphed in what he freely gave them, as if they had been spoils
forcibly taken from him.

Hence Observe; first, That God does them good that are evil.

Christ persuaded his hearers (and us in them) upon this account to love their
enemies, That they and we might be the children of our father which is in
heaven; For he makes his Sun to rise on the evil and on the Good, and
sends rain on the just, and on the unjust (Matthew. 5.45.) As God has some
peculiar people, so he has some peculiar blessings, and good things, which the
world in common shares not in; but he has a sort of blessings, and good
things, which are the common share of the world; rain and Sun, fat and sweet,
Gold and silver are such good things as their hearts and houses are often
filled with, whose hearts and house are empty of goodness. These good things God
gives them, who know no more why he gives them, then they did, why he did not
suddenly bring evil upon them, of whom the Apostle speaks ( Romans 2.4.)
Despisest thou the riches of his goodness, and forbearance, and
long-suffering, not knowing that the goodness of God leads thee to
repentance; when God does good to those that are evil, whether it be by
bestowing good upon them, or by withholding evil, He does it usually for one
of or both these reasons.

First, That they might repent, and live; know thou not what Message the
goodness of God brings? Speaks it not thus? Repent, repent; yea does not
divine goodness (taking thee by the hand) lead thee to repentance?

Secondly, The Lord does them good who continue in the evil of sin, that
they might be left inexcuseable when the evil of wrath and punishment falls
upon them; every mouth shall be stopped, and all the world of wicked ones
become guilty before God, when they remember that they sinned, and went on to
sin against the God that sed them, against the God that clothed them,
against the God that filled their houses with good things, and protected them
in the use and enjoyment of those good things, with which he had filled their
houses.

Secondly, In that he does not only give them good things, but filled their
houses with good.

Observe.

God gives great portions of good things to wicked men.

They have not only enough to live upon, but they have enough to live
comfortably upon, they have not only enough to live upon themselves, but they
have enough to lay up for their children after them; the Lord is not only good,
but he is liberal and bountiful (in its kind) to the worst of men: they
whose hearts are shut to him, his hand is open to them; he is enlarged toward
them who are straightened toward him; And this is added not only to render the
goodness of God more glorious, but the sin of man more sinful and odious in
our eyes.

Whence observe; Thirdly.

Sin has by so much the greater evil in it, by how much it is committed
against the greater goodness. It is a horrible wickedness to say to God, depart
from us, though he empty our houses of all good things, but it is much more
horrible wickedness, to say so when he fills our houses with good things.
What? When God has filled our houses, shall we kick him out of doors? This
was the sin of Jesurun, that when he waxed fat he kicked, as Moses says (
Deuteronomy. 32.15.) Thou art waxen fat, thou art grown thick, thou art covered with
fatnes; Then he forsook God which made him, and lightly esteemed the rock of
his Salvation. Their fin is great who lightly esteem God while he makes them
lean, but how sinful is their sin, who slight God that has made them fat. As
good things received bind us stronger unto duty, so good things abused, bind
us stronger under guilt.

Fourthly, As we connect these words with the latter branch of the former
verse; What can the allmighty do for them? yet he filled their houses with
good things. We may take this observation.

Though Carnal men receive many good things from God, yet then know him not as
the fountain of them. They who are evil cannot own God purely either in good
or evil. It is but seldom that they say, with that wicked King, This evil is
of the Lord (2 Kings 6.33.) And it is seldomer that they say, this good is of
the Lord They say, what good does God for us? eve^ whil he fills their houses
with good things. Indeed the best of Saints receive many good things from God
which they know not of; they receive many secret mercies, secret I mean not
only to others, but to themselves; and so they are not able to give God the
glory of them distinctly, because they have not a distinct knowledge of them.
But all the good things which the wicked have are to them of an unknown
original. Though they know what they have, yet they know not from whence or
from whom they have what they have; they know not who feeds them, who clothes
them, who provids for them: yea though they make many formal acknowledgements
of this, and will tell you of Gods goodness to them, yet really they know it
not, nor do they cordially acknowledge it. The Lord complains of his people
about this ( Isa. 1.3.) The Ox knows his owner, and the Ass his Masters
cribb, (he upbraids them not only as below other men, but a below the beasts,
as if the reasonlesse creatures had acted more rationally then they) but
Israel does not know, my people do not consider: What was it they did not
know, nor consider? they knew not nor considered what the Ox and the Ass knew
and consider^d; The Ox knows his owner, he knows that his Master seeds him,
as well as works him. Thus also the ass knows his Masters crib, as he knows
that his Master imployeth him, so he knows that his Master provideth for him.
The dull Ass takes notice of the cribb, and knows where and by whom he
receives Good; but ye my people know not me, ye do not consider him that
seeds you; For I have nourished and brought up children, and they have rebelled
against me, they never honored me as the fountain and founder of their
felicity. The Prophet Hosea reproves the same sottishnes and blindness in that
people ( Chap. 2.8, 9.) For she did not know that I gave her come, and wine,
and oil, and multiplied her silver and gold, which they prepared for Baal.
Therefore I will return and take away her come in the time thereof; As If the
Lord had said, I will make them know that I can take these things away, seeing
they would not know, or at least not acknowledge that I am he who gave them.
Carnal men attribute their good things, and the filling of their houses with
them to any thing rather then to God. They thank their friends or their good
fortune; they thank themselves, their policy, their industry, for what they
have. They ascend not up to God in thankfulness for what they have. They who
say, What can the Allmighty do for them? How should they acknowledge, that the
Allmighty has done any thing for them? The Prophet ( Hab: 1.16.) speaks of men
those portion was fatt, and their meat plenteous; but to whom did they refer
all this? whom did they acknowledge for their benefactor, or as the cause of
those great successes? The Prophet tells us, They sacrificed to their nets, and
burnt incense to their drags. The words carry an allusion to fishing, in which
work or art netts and drags are the instruments of the fisherman; so that to
sacrifice to the net or to the dragge, is to give the honor and thanks of all
our attainements to second causes, and creature helps, to our own wit, power,
and industry, etc. To these says the Prophet they sacrificed; That is, they
honored them in the place or stead of God; Sacrifice it proper and peculiar to
God, and therefore he that offers sacrifice to any thing, makes it his God, or
puts it in the place of God; They who thank themselves for the good they have,
are a God to themselves. And thus we find The Assyrian ascribing all to his
own power ( Isa. 10.14) By the strength of my hand I have done it, and by my
wisdom, for I am prudent, and I have removed the bounds of the people, and
have robbed their treasures, and I have put down the inhabitants like a
valiant man; he did not think that the Lord did it by his hand, but (says he)
by the strength of my hand I have done it: Dextera mihi deus. Virg: 1.10. Sanct:
my right hand, is my God, my wisdom is my God. These, these, have removed the
bounds of the people, and robbed their treasures. See how the Lord checks this
insolency ( v. 15.) Shall the axe boast it self against him that heweth
therewith, or shall the saw magnify it self against him that shakes it? Men
(I grant) are living instruments, yet they can do no more then instruments
without life (the axe and the saw) unless God act them, or act by them. An axe
or a saw can do as much without man, as man can do without God; yet vain
proud man is as full of boasting, as if he could do, or had done all alone.

Fifthly, Observe.

That the portion of wicked men lies all on this side heaven, and heavenly
things. God fills their houses with good things, but they are the good things
of this life; they have nothing that reaches to eternal life. They have
nothing that concerns pardon of sin, or grace, much less have they glory for
their portion. ( Acts 14.16, 17.) God did not leave himself without witness
(among the Heathen Nations) in that he did good, and gave rain from heaven,
and fruitful seasons, filling their hearts with food; and gladness; so much
they received from God, as filled them with food for their bodies, and made
their lives comfortable; but no more, that was all they had. As Abraham in the
parable tells the rich man in hell ( Luke 16.25.) Son remember that thou in thy
life time have had thy good things. And what were the good things which he
formerly had? We have an answer at the 19th verse, He was clothed in purple
and fine linen, and fared deliciously every day. As the Psalmist is express (
Psalm. 17.14.) that the men of this world have their portion in this life, so,
his purpose is to show, that they have their portion in the things of this
life; for he adds, Whose bellyes thou fillest with thy hid treasures, that is,
with those treasures of corn, wine, and oil, which are virtually hidden in
the earth, and brought forth by the earth; God fills the bellyes of the wicked,
but he fills the Spirits of the Godly; he fills the former with the hidden
treasures of the earth, he fills none but the latter with the hidden treasures
of heaven.

Lastly, Note.

That the gifts of God even in temporal things are free and undeserved. Not
only are spiritual gifts and graces, together with eternal life undeserved,
but even temporalls, and the things of this life. The Lord gives them unto his
enemies, to those that say to him, depart from us; and what do these deserve
at his hands, but stripes and death? He gave Christ to us while we were most
unworthy of him; when we were yet enemies Christ dyed for us; sinners do no
more deserve bread then they deserve Christ; we no more deserve the comforts
of this life then eternal life; The one is of free Grace to the Elect, and the
other is of bounty and goodness to the wicked. Quoniam moris erat in Egypto,
ut mensura ascendentis Ni^i fluminis ad templum Serapidis deferretur velat ad
incrementi aquarum and inundationis auctorem subverso ejus simulachro, ulna
ipsa id est, aquae mensura, ad aquarum dominum coepta est in Ecclesias deferri.
Cassiod lib. 2. ad Eusebius: Histor:
The old Egyptians (as some writers report them) were careful to confess the
undeservednesse of those outward favors, the plenty and abundance of corn and
cattle, with which Egypt was stored; in testification whereof they every year
brought into the Temple of their Idol Serapis a measure showing how high the
river Nilus rose and overflowed its banks (for Egypt being a flatt Country, is
watered by the overflowings of Nilus) and by the rising of those waters they
could (very probably) prognosticate the plenty or scarsity of the year
ensuing. And they therefore took an exact account how many cubits high the
river swelled, leaving it in the Temple of Serapis, thereby acknowledging (as
some conceive) that their Idol God was the bestower of all that plenty, or (as
Eliphaz here speaks) that he had filled their houses with Good things.

But the counsel of the wicked is far from me. We had these words before (
Chap 21.16.) Job made use of them there, and here Eliphaz, therefore I shall
add but little for explication in this place. In general know, they are a
proverbiall speech, Puto Vulgarem esse dicendi modum, quo homines aliquid
execrantur and a se arceri longissime Jubent. Qualiasunt, a page avertat. Deus.
Pined:
by which the abhorrence of our spirits concerning either things or persons is
set forth to the utmost; as when we say to any man, be gone, depart from me, or
as Christ to Satan, Get thee behind me, we show our vehement detestation of
his person. So when a man says, such or such a thing is far from me, his
meaning is he utterly detests it, or that the thing is the very abomination of
his soul. Therefore while Eliphaz says; The counsel of the wicked is far
from me, it is, as if he had said, I cannot endure to have any thing to do
either with the wicked, or with their counsel. O my soul come not thou into
their secret, unto their assembly O mine honor be not thou united (as dying
Jacob bespake his sons Simeon and Levi, Genesis 49.6.)

But what is the counsel of the wicked? their counsel may be taken; first,
for that dishonorable opinion which they held of God, that he could do nothing
either for them or against them. I (says Eliphaz) am of another mind, of
another faith and persuasion. Their Counsel is far from me who either deny
the providence of God, or think they can hide themselves from the eye of his
providence; I believe that his eye beholds all, and that his hand works
whatsoever pleases him.

Secondly, Others by Counsel understand the scope of wicked men; so Calvin
reads, the intent of the wicked is far from me; I have other purposes and
designs then they have; The ploughing of the wicked (says Solomon, Pro.
21.4.) is sin; that is, the stirring and plotting of his mind to get his
desires satisfied is sinful; I desire not (says Eliphaz) to put my hand to
their plough. The counsel of the wicked is far from me.

Thirdly, As the design and plot, so the course and way of the wicked is far
from me. The counsel of a man is put for the means by which he acts his
designs, as well as for the method in which he lays them. We shall not wrong
the drift of the Text in which soever of these three senses we understand this
protestation, The counsel of the wicked is far from me.

Again, There is a threefold difference about the reading and relation of
these words, which put together will give us yet a further light and
understanding about them.

Quae consilia illi ineunt long sunt a deo.
First, The Septuagint read thus; The counsel of the wicked is far from him;
and the antecedent, to him (according to their sense) is God himself. As if
Eliphaz had said, the counsels and resolutions which the wicked take up, God
cannot abide, they are far from him. His are holy, theirs are unholy counsels.

Secondly, Others apprehend, that Eliphaz spoke thus in the person of Job, and
only reassumed what he had said ( Chap 21.16.) O this is the man that said
even now the counsel of the wicked is far from me; Pray consider, This is
the man that professed he would not so much as come near a wicked man, he
would have nothing to do with their counsels, Quasi Job ore tenus non reipsa
impiorum consilium improbaret, q. d. Number poteris dicere, te non sentire eum
improbis, eum tu, ut ipsi providentiam dei tollas.
not be; He would be taken for a man of another spirit, of another frame then
they; but see what he is, see how he joins with them, how be walks in their
ways, how he follows their counsels; though be denies them with his lips, and
makes strange as if he knew them not, yet indeed he is of the same piece and
spirit with them: and while he says, the counsel of the wicked is far from
me (behold his hypocrisy) the counsel of the wicked lies in his bosom, and
is embraced by him.

Thirdly, Which is more plain and clear, we may expound these words not
only as spoken by Eliphaz, but as therein speaking of himself; The counsel
of the wicked is far from me; that is, I am a man of another strain, of
another grain then they, I am a man of another mould and make then they.
Therefore O Job, what you spoke before I speak again, and I speak it upon
better grounds, with a better heart then you; you spoke with your lips, Haec
sunt ipsius Eliphasi verba, quibus seipsum commendat; ut qui potiori jure quam
Job, and multo verius possit asserere se toto coelo ab impiorum sententia
dissidare. Jun: Pisc. Eliphaz vult ex uno cum Jobo principio ijsdemque
praemissis, contrariam elicere conclusionem. Bold.
or from the teeth outward, that the counsel of the wicked was far from you,
but I have proved that you approach too near them both in course and council.
I say, what you said, but I say it (which you did not) in sincerity, I
profess, and what I profess is true, that the counsel of the wicked is far
from me. The same truth may be professed by different persons, upon different
grounds and to different ends: the same premises do not always yield the same
conclusions in the minds of men's, though in themselves they do. Eliphaz
thought his counsel as far from Jobs, as Job had professed himself to be
from the council of the wicked. When Job said, The counsel of the wicked is
far from me; his purpose was to show that though he was afflicted like wicked
men, yea, that though he was afflicted while many wicked men were prospered,
that yet he was not at all spirited or principl'd like wicked men. And that
therefore his friends assertion must needs be false, who numbered him with the
wicked because he was afflicted. Eliphaz seems to retort this upon Job, and to
say, if this be so, as thou affirmest, surely then God has laid aside the care
of this world, and lets all things run at six and sevens; for surely if he
took notice of men, either what they were, or what they were doing, he would
never suffer the wicked to prosper, no nor to escape unpunished. And seeing thou
continuest so stiff in thy opinion, that thou do not suffer these grievous
calamities for thy sin, thou seem to me plainly to comply with their
blasphemy, who querie, how does God know? can be judge through the dark cloud?
This counsel of the wicked is far from me. And seeing as Job before, so
Eliphaz here ascribes counsel (which is the most deliberate act) to the wicked.
We may observe.

First, That wicked men sin advisedly, or that many of their sinful ways,
are studied ways. And as the more studied they are, the more sinful they are;
so they study most for those which are most sinful. They are not hurried into
sin by passions or thrust on upon sin merely by the violence of
temptation; they sit down and go to counsel how they may compass their
ungodly pu^poses. A godly man does not consent unto sin, much less does he
consult about it; The ev^ll which I do I allow not; I (faith the Apostle)
consent to the law of God that it is good (Romans 7.) A godly man sins daily, but
sin has not his consent, or allowance when he has done it, much less does he
consult or advise how to do it. Sin does not please him consequently, much
less does he project it antecedently. It Is the character of a wicked man, that
his sin is his counsel, and that his art is in it as much as his nature; The
counsel of the wicked is far from me.

Secondly, Eliphaz does not say how far the counsel of the wicked was from
him, but that it was far from him, and by far, he means furthest; as if he
had said, it is as far from me as far may be, I have no compliance with
their counsels.

Hence observe.

That the spirit and way of the godly, and the wicked are as different as their
end and conclusion shall be. They are at furthest distance; They are like two
parallel lines, which how far soever they run together, they never meet
together, nor touch in a point. The conclusion of a wicked man or his end is
far from that of the upright; the end of the one is light, the end of the
other is darkness; the one ends in sorrow, the other in joy, the end of the
one is peace, of the other trouble. And so the way of the one is sin, the way
of the other is holiness; the way of the one is oppession and covetousness, the
way of the other is justice and righteousness; the way of the one is faith,
the way of the other is unbelief. Now as darkness and light, joy and sorrow,
peace and trouble, can never comply or be united; so neither can sin and
holiness, oppression and justice, faith and unbelief. There Is no communion
between these contraries, between these ways and ends, counsel and
conclusions. And unless we keep far from the counsels of the wicked, we
cannot go far from their conclusion; nor can we avoid their end, but by
avoiding their way. The same way brings the same end, whether we respect good
or evil. And hence it is that the Spirit of God by Solomon gives such a
vehement admonition, to beware of the way of wicked men ( Pro. 4.14, 15.) Enter
not into the path of the wicked, and go not in the way of evil men; avoid it,
pass not by it, turn from it and pass away. As in the former context, he, as
a careful father, had pressed his Son to the closest pursuit of wisdoms
way, so here, he as earnestly presses him, to depart from the path of
wickedness; He would have his son not only not go into it, but not so much as
pass by it, that is, not go near it; as the next words intimate, turn from
it, as if he had said, keep at a distance, keep aloose off; do not stay so
long within sight of it as to look upon it, that is his last counsel, pass
away, not to return or come near it any more. And while we consider whither
that way leads, we shall easily grant that when all is said, little enough is
said to lead us away from it. Where the way is sin, the wages is death.
Therefore let him who desires to avoid the conclusion of the wicked, say, The
counsel of the wicked is far from me.

Job, CHAP. 22. Verse. 19, 20. The righteous see it, and are glad, and the
innocent laugh them to scorn.

Whereas our substance is not cut down, but the remnant of them the fire
consumes.


ELiphas still pursues the ruin, and extirpation of wicked men; he showed us
before the sinfullnes of their practices toward man, and the folly of their
opinion, in saying to God depart from us, who had never hurt them nor given
them any cause to be weary of his presence; unless this displeased them, that
he filled their houses with good things. And because they declared themselves
thus vain, therefore. Eliphaz rejected both them and their way; The counsel
of the wicked is far from me. Now, in this verse he acquaints us wi^h the
event or issue of their counsels, and how the righteous carry themselves, when
God calls the wicked to an account and reckons with them for their prophanenes
and irreligion.

Verse. 19. The righteous see it, and are glad.
Who the righteous man is, and what denominates a man righteous, has been
showed before. The righteous see it; what do they see? That which they believed
and looked for; the fall of wicked men. This act of seeing may be referred
either to the person seeing, or to the object seen: as it is referred to the
person of the righteous; so seeing notes both their privilege and their
pleasure. They are admitted to see this spectacle of divine Justice, and it is
their happiness to see it. This David intimates ( Psalm. 37.34.) Wait on the
Lord, and keep his way, and he shall exalt thee to inherit the Land, when the
wicked are cut off thou shall see it. The righteous shall be honored with this
fight, yea and pleased with it, the cutting off of wicked men by the hand of
God. The righteous man has a promise to see this (and promises are the
conveyances of mercies ( Psalm. 91.8.) A thousand shall fall at thy side, and
ten thousand at thy right hand, but it shall not come nigh thee, only with
thine eyes shall thou behold and see the reward of the wicked. Thou shall be a
spectator, not a partaker in that calamity. Wicked men sometimes glutt their
eyes with ^eholding the troubles of the Saints, and they account it a happy
day, when they can have such a sight. They sign that day with a white stone,
when the black stone of the most unjust and cruel condemnation proves the
present lot of the righteous. David discovered such a spirit in his enemies (
Psalm. 35.21.) They opened their mouth wide against me, and said, aha, aha, our
eyes have seen it. What had they seen? The former verse tells us; They speak
not peace, but they devise deceitful matters against them that are quiet in
the Land. When these devises took, and had success, then they were pleased,
then they had what they would, and saw what they desired. And thus the enemies
of the Church are described ( Mi^: 4.11.) Now also many Nations are gathered
against thee, and say, let her be defiled (there is a twofold defiling, a
defiling with sin, and a defiling with blood and misery, the latter is meant
by the Prophet, let her be defiled) and let our eyes look upon Sion. They
counted it a blessed sight to see Sion bleed; The wicked would have such sights
often, though usually their eyes fail with waiting, and their hope is as the
giving up of the Ghost; But righteous men shall see (the righteous God has
said it) vengeance powered upon the wicked.

Again we may expound this act of seeing with reference to the object seen;
and so it imports 2 things; first, the certainly of their fall: wicked men
shall undoubtedly be destroyed, and there shall be eyewitnesses, honest and
faithful witnesses, testifying their destruction; The righteous shall see it,
and report it to after generations.

Secondly, As seeing notes the certainty of their fall, or the evidence and
clearenesse of it, so the publiquenesse of it; That which is done to the eye,
is done openly. What the justice of God does against the wicked shall not be
done in a corner, but as upon the housetop. The reading of the Septuagint is
full to this sense; They shall be made public examples. (...). Denotat rem
omnibus conspicuam and in publicum exemplum propositam.
It is the care of just and wise Magistrates, not only to punish malefactors,
but to punish them openly, That so all may see and fear and do no more
presumptuously. There are three special reasons why offenses are punished; and
the Greeks express each punishment by such a word as carries a distinct
signification of those reasons. First, Some are punished, that themselves may
amend and better their manners; This they called (...). Secondly, Others are
punished, to repair the honor or maintain the dignity of those against whom
they have offended, lest if such should escape without condign punishment,
authority should be contemned, grow cheap, or be lightly valued; This they
called (...). A third sort were punished for example, 1 (...). 2 (...). 3 (...)
Acerbitas ulciscendi maleficij, been atque cante vivendi disciplina est.
Caecilius apud Gel. l. 2. c. 1.
that others might be deterred from doing the same things, lest they also
incur the same sufferings; This was called (...), As much as to say, the
holding of a man forth in his sufferings to the open view, that he may be seen
of all men, and that all may be warned to avoid his error. And thus the Lord
who is the righteous Judge of all the world punishes wicked men. The same word
is used by the Evangelist Matthew (Chap. 1.19.) Joseph being troubled that Mary
was with child (for he knew not the mystery of her over-shadowing by the Holy
Ghost) was minded to put her away secretly, and would not make her a public
example; He was unwilling to bring her to justice, or that others should see
either her (supposed) sin or punishment. But as God does work many glorious
salvations for his people, that the wicked may see it, and be ashamed; so he
brings many visible destructions upon the wicked, not only that the righteous
may see it and rejoice, or be glad (which act follows next to be opened) but
that the wicked may see it and tremble to do wickedly.

Hence observe.

First, That the Lord sets up wicked men many times as examples of his
wrathful justice. Not only do they feel wrath upon themselves, but others
see it; The Lord sometimes chastens his own people in the view of the world,
and sets them up as examples of his fatherly displeasure. Thus Nathan speaks
in the name of the Lord to David (2 Samuel 12.12.) Thou did it secretly, but I
will do this thing, (what thing? I will afflict and chasten thee for this
great offense) before all Israel, and before the S^nne; that is, in plain and
clear light; Though thou have done this evil in the darkness ot many close
contrivances, yet I will draw the curtain and make the poenall effects of thy
sin as conspicuous as the actings of thy sin have been close and covert.
Again ( Numb. 25.4.) when the people began to commit whoredom with the
daughters of Moab, and Israel had joyn^d himself unto Baal peor, so that the
Anger of the Lord was kindled against Israel; Then the Lord said to Moses, take
all the heads of the people, (that is, the capital offenders, or chief rulers,
who gave way, or at best gave no stop to such wickedness) and hang them up
before the Lord against the Sun, that the feirce anger of the Lord may be
turned away from Israel. To hang them up before the Sun, is a phrase of
speech importing the publicknes of their punishment (as it is said of the seven
Sons of Saul, that they were hanged on the hill before the Lord, 2 Samuel 21.9.)
for caution unto all; whatsoever is done in the fight of all, or so that all
may see, is said (in the Language of the Jews) to be done before the Sun. To
which sense also we may interpret that vision of the Prophet Zechariah (Chap.
5, 6. 9, 10, 11.) at the 6th verse we read of an Ephah, and this lift up (ver.
9th) between earth and heaven; the Ephah was a measure of dry things among the
Jews: and in that vision it signified that the sin and punishment of the
Jews were measured and proportioned; This Ephah being lifted up and carried, I
(says the Prophet) said whether do these bear the Ephah, (ver. 10.) And he
said unto me, to build it an house in the land of Shinar, and it shall be
established and set there upon her own base; The building it a house in the
land of Shinar (that is, in Babylon) signified the lastingnes or continuance of
their sin in the sad consequents of it, their punishment and banishment in
strange lands, not for the space of seventy years only, as by the
Babylonians, but (as some of the Learned expound the vision) for many seventyes
by the Romans: and as this Ephah had a house built for it, noting the
setlednes and dur^tion of the Judgment which should come upon them for their
sin; so also it was set upon its own base, to signify the notoriousnes or
conspicuousnes of the Judgment, it being as a house set upon pillars for all
to behold and take notice of: as we see fullfilled to this day, since the first
overthrow of their estate by Titus Vespatianus, and their final dispersion by
Aelius Adrianus. There are, I grant, other conceptions about that vision, but
as this suits well with the point in hand, so with the calamitous state of that
people to this day.

And thus the Lord threatened the King of Tyrus (Ezekiel. 28.17.) Whose heart was
lifted up because of his beauty, and who had corrupted his wisdom by reason of
his brightness. Now what will the Lord do? what course will he take with him?
The next words inform us; I will cast thee to the ground, and I will lay thee
before Kings, that they may behold thee; He does not say, I will cast thee into
the ground, but to the ground, and lay thee before Kings; that is, thou shall
he a spectacle for all the Kings of the Earth, that they may behold as what thy
pride and selfe-confidence have brought thee to, so what their own (if they
tread thy path) either will or justly may bring them unto. Thus also in the 7th
verse of Jude, Epistle, the Apostle says, that Sodom and Gomorrha, and the
Cities about them in like manner, giving themselves over to fornication, and
going after strange flesh, are set forth for an example, suffering the
vengeance of Eternal fire. The Judgments of God are not only punishments to
them who went before, but premonotions to them who come after.

The righteous see it, and are glad. Here is the effect which that sight
wrought upon the righteous; The eye affects the heart, and the heart is
affected sutably to the object, either with joy or with sorrow. The destruction
of men is a sorrowful object, and therefore we might rather expect that the
righteous beholding it should be affected with sorrow but the Text affirms a
direct contrary effect of this fight; The righteous see it, and are glad.

Hence observe.

The judgments of God upon the wicked are matter of joy to the righteous. It
is the duty of the Saints to mourn with them that mourn, and to rejoice with
them that rejoice (Romans 12.15*) But then we must understand these mourners and
rejoycers to be such as themselves are. Saints must mourn with mourning
Saints, and rejoice with rejoicing Saint. The godly are not bound either to joy
the joys, or sorrow the sorrows of the wicked. The judgments of God upon the
wicked have a twofold effect eminently noted in Scripture. First, they cause
fear; and secondly, they cause joy. When exemplary justice was to be done
(according to the law of Moses) upon presumptuous transgressors, it is said, (
Deuteronomy. 13.11.) All Israel shall hear, and fear, and shall do no more any such
wickedness. David (Psalm. 64.) having complained to God in prayer of the cruelty
of his enemies, and begged protection from their malicious practices, grows up
to much assurance, that down they must ( v. 7, 8.) But God shall shoot at them
with an arrow, suddenly shall they be wounded; and then ( ver. 9.) All men
shall fear, and shall declare the work of God, for they shall wisely consider
of his doings. Thus fear is the issue of divine judgment; And yet joy is the
issue of them at the 10th verse of the same Psalm; The righteous shall be glad
in the Lord, and trust in him, and all the upright in heart shall glory. Fear
is a common effect; All men shall fear; Gladness, faith and glorying, (which is
faith triumphant) are peculiar to the upright, when the arrow of God wounds the
wicked. We have this double effect again expressed upon the same occasion
(Psalm. 107.42.) He powers contempt upon Princes, and causes them to wander in
the wilderness where there is no way; but he sets the poor oh high; the
righteous shall it and rejoice. What shall they see? not only the Godly poor
set on high, but ungodly Princes filled with contempt, that is part of the
spectacle which the righteous shall behold and beholding rejoice; yet this is
not all, for it follows; And all iniquity shall stop her mouth; The abstract is
put for the concrete, iniquity for men of iniquity: And so the meaning is men
of iniquity, or wicked men shall stop their mouths; their mouths shall be stopped
With shame and fear, they shall have nothing to say when the Lord does this;
They shall not mutter a word against the works of God; but as Hannah speaks
in her Song (1 Samuel 2.9.) shall be silent in darkness. A like report rayseth the
hearts of the people of God into a holy merriment ( Psalm. 97.8.) Sion heard,
and was glad, the daughters of Judah rejoiced. What was the matter? what good
news came to Judah? what to Sion? the Text resolves us; Because of thy
judgments O Lord: The answer is not, because of thy mercies, or because of thy
goodness O Lord, but because of thy judgments, and those were dreadful ones (
ver. 3.) A fire goes before him and burns up his enemies round about.
Confounded be all they that serve graven Images, etc. ver. 7. Sion heard of it,
and was glad. Once more ( Psalm. 58.10.) The righteous shall rejoice when he
sees the vengeance, he shall wash his feet in the blood of the ungodly. Not
that the righteous delight in blood, or proudly insult over the worst of
enemies; The Psalmist does only in hyperbolical strains of Eloquence, borrowed
from the language of triumphant conquerers, express a complete and glorious
victory. The style is of the same signification with that ( Psalm. 68.23.) That
thy foot may be dipped in the blood of thine enemies, and the tongue of the
dogs in the same. When so much blood is shed that the foot may be dipped and
washed in it, that dogs may lap it up like water, this argues a great
destruction, and when the wicked are thus destroyed, the righteous shall
rejoice.

But here it may be queried, What matter of joy is this? why should the
righteous rejoice in the sorrows of the wicked? is it not alike sinful to be
troubled at the joys, and to rejoice at the troubles of our brethren? The
light of nature condemns rejoicing over those who are in misery; and we have an
express Scripture against it ( Pro. 24.17.) Rejoice not when thine enemy
falls, let not thy heart be glad when he stumbleth. And David puts it among
the sins of his enemies ( Psalm. 35.15.) In my adversity they rejoiced. And he
professed ( ver. 13.) that when they were sick his clothing was sack cloth,
and that he humbled his soul with fasting. David was so far from rejoicing
when his enemies were ruined, or dead, that he mourned when they were but
sick, and would not eat, when they could not. And as David's holy practice
denied it, so does Solomon's divine precept; Rejoice not when thine enemy
falls. How then shall we reconcile these Texts?

I answer, there may be a rejoicing at the afflictions and troubles of others,
which is not only unbecoming and unseemely for the righteous; but very
sinful. As

First, To rejoice, and be glad, merely because an enemy is fallen into
misery, is both unseemly and sinful. And so we are to understand Solomon's
Proverb; Rejoice not when thine enemy falls. Some understand this of falling
into sin. He makes himself a sinner indeed, who rejoices because another
has sinned. He that rejoices because another has sinned, rejoices (upon the
matter) because God is dishonored. Such joy is a kind of thanksgiving for
Satan's victory. But as to rejoice because another falls into sin, is the worst
fall into sin; so to rejoice merely because an enemy falls into misery, is
worse then our own falling into misery. He shows that he has not the heart
of a man in him, who is glad at the misery of any man, And he who rejoices
thus when his enemy falls, does himself fall much worse. The ruin and
downfall of an enemy (suppose him the vilest enemy) considered in it self, is
meat and drink to none but revengefull and envious spirits. David was much
troubled and charge it as an extreme piece of folly upon himself, Because
he was envious at the foolish when he saw the prosperity of the wicked (Psalm.
73.3.) Now it is an issue flowing from the same principle, purely to envy the
prosperity and purely to rejoice in the adversity of the wicked. Nero was
justly reckoned a monster among men, who could sing when himself had set Rome
a fire: And they have somewhat of a Neronian spirit in them, who can sing when
they see their enemies consuming in the fire. God delights not in the misery of
man (as it is misery upon man) nor do they, who are taught of God.

Secondly, As to rejoice or be glad at the destruction of enemies, merely
because they are destroyed; so to rejoice upon private ends or respects,
because they being taken out of the way and removed out of the world we hope to
have more scope and room in the world for our selves; or because we hope to
step into their places, to fit down in their seats, to possess our selves of
their lands and riches, to fill our selves with their spoils; upon this
account to rejoice when wicked men fall, when the Lord powers out contempt upon
Princes, (because (I say) we hope to be gainers by it) is altogether uncomely
for the righteous. Let the righteous take heed to themselves, that they be not
found thus rejoicing in the calamities of the wicked. They who do so are
either but pretenders to godliness, men who are only of the faction of the
righteous (for though they who are righteous indeed are far from a faction,
yes there are a sor^ of men, who profess righteousness as if it were nothing
but a faction, now (I say) they who thus rejoice are but either of the faction
of the righteous) while they are really of the number of the wicked, or if they
are really righteous who do so, (and I confess that a righteous man may do
so, David (which was acting the counter-part) envied their prosperity, and by
the same reason any godly man may be acted out in joy at their adversity, but
now (I say) if they who are really righteous do so) we must conclude them
under a sore temptation, and they will at last conclude of themselves as David
did in the counter-case, Psalm. 73.22.) so foolish have we been and ignorant,
even as a beast before thee.

You will say then, how may or do the righteous rejoice when the ungodly fall,
and not fall into sin themselves.

I answer, First, The righteous rejoice at the fall of the wicked, as blessing
God who has kept their feet from those ways in which the wicked have fallen;
As it is a great mercy to be kept out of those ill ways, to be kept from fiding
with those corrupt interests, in the pursuit of which we see many broken; so
it is a duty to rejoice that we have not walked in their way whose end we see to
be nothing else but destruction.

Secondly, The righteous have cause to rejoice and bless God when they see the
wicked fall, because themselves are saved, and keep their standing; because
themselves have escaped the danger, and the Lord has been a banner of
protection over them in the day when the wicked fell. Moses after the
destruction of Amaleck built an Altar, and called the name of it Jehova-Nissi
(Exodus 17.15.) that is to say, The Lord is my banner. And in like cases the joy
of the Saints is not properly in the destruction of the wicked, but in their
own deliverance, through the mighty power and good hand of God with them. It
is the presence of God with them, the appearance of God for them, which is the
gladness of their hearts.

Thirdly, The righteous then rejoice, because the Church and people of God are
in a fair way to peace; when the Lions are destroyed, the sheep are in
safety; when the Wolves and the Bears are cut off, the flock rests quietly; so
in this case when men of devouring cruel spirits, wicked and ungodly ones, are
removed, the flock of God, the sheep of his pasture feed quietly, none making
them afraid. The fall of the enemies of Sion, is the establishment of Sion; yea
in a great measure of mankind. As the Prophet most elegantly sets it forth (
Isa. 14.6, 7, 8.) He who smote the people in wrath with a continual stroke, he
that ruled the Nations in anger, is persecuted and none hinders; The whole
earth is at rest, and is quiet: they break forth into singing, yea the
firre-trees rejoice at thee, and the Cedars of Lebanon, saying, since thou art
laid down no feller is come up against us. How often have wicked men in power
felled not only the Firre-trees and Cedars of the world, but the goodly trees
of righteousness in the Lords plantations; have they not therefore reason to
sing when such fall, seeing the Fellers themselves are then felled and fallen.

Fourthly, Joy arises to the righteous, because God is honored in the fall of
wicked men; And that is their chiefest joy. That God is honored is more joy to
the righteous, then that themselves are saved, how much more then, then that
the wicked are destroyed. There is a threefold honor arising to God when the
wicked fall.

First, God is honored in his justice; such a day is the day of the
declaration of the righteous judgment of God; as the Apostle speaks of the
great day of Judgment ( Romans 2.5.) Thou after thy hardness and impenitent
heart, treasurest up to thy self wrath against the day of wrath, and
revelation of the righteous judgment of God. Some do even question the
justice of God when wicked men prosper, but he is vindicated in his justice
when wicked men fall; It cannot but please righteous men, to see the righteous
God exalted, or God exalted in his righteousness. They know and believe that
God is righteous, when the wicked prosper ( Jer. 12.1.) But when the wicked are
punished, they proclaim his righteousness, Then they sing the song of Moses the
servant of God, and the song of the Lamb, saying, Great and marvailous are thy
works Lord God Almighty, just and true are thy ways thou King of Saints. Who
shall not fear thee O Lord, and glorify thy Name, etc. for thy Judgments are
made manifest, (Rev. 15.3, 4.) The Lord is always alike Just, but it does not
always alike appear how just he it. And as, that God is just is the faith and
stay of the Saints, so the appearances of his justice are their joy and triumph.

Secondly, God is honored much in the attribute of his truth; in the truth of
his word, in the truth of his threatenings, when the wicked are punished. God
has spoken bloody words concerning wicked men; not only in reference to their
future estate in the next life, but to their present estate in this. Say to the
wicked it shall be ill with him, the reward of his hands shall be given him.
But what is this reward? There are two sorts of rewards; First, rewards of love
and favor according to the good which we have done; Secondly, rewards of wrath
and anger, poenal rewards, according to the evil which we have done. Now when
the Lord puts these poenal rewards into the hands of the wicked, or powers them
upon their heads, he is honored in his truth as well as his justice, for the
mouth of the Lord has spoken it. As the promises are yea and Amen (2 Cor.
1.20.) so also are the threatenings, unto the glory of God by us. But as when
David saw his life in danger every day, he began to question the truth of God,
in the promise, that he should live to reign and fit upon the throne of
Israel; for says he ( Psalm. 116.11. when things went thus with him) I said in
my have all men are liars, even Samuel among the rest, who assured me of the
Kingdom by express message from God, but surely he also is deceived, and has
fed me with vain hopes. Now as these words of David according to our
translation of them, and the truth of the thing in frequent experiences, show,
that Godly men are apt to question the truth of the promise, when themselves
are by seemingly contradicting providence much afflicted; so they are apt to
question the truth of the threatenings when they see outward providence
prospering the wicked; Therefore when the threatenings have their actual yea
and Amen, that is, when they are executed upon the ungodly, this also is to the
glory of God by us, that is, God is glorified by all his people, who hear of
it in the truth of what he has spoken. Again, as God is magnified in the
truth of his threatenings, when any particular wicked man is punished; so when
common calamities come upon the wicked, the truth of God or God in his truth is
magnified two ways. First, As such calamities are a fullfilling of many
Prophecies; secondly, As they are the answer or return of many prayers. The
vengeance which falls upon the Enemies of the Church of God is drawn out by
prayer, Luke 18.7, 8. And there is nothing wherein God is more honored, then
when prayer is answered; For as therein he fullfills our wants, so his own
word; Who has not said to the seed of Jacob, seek ye me in vain.

Thirdly, When the wicked fall the Lord is honored in the attribute of his
power; How great is his power, who pulls down great power? It argues the
Almightines of God, when he puts the mighty from their seats: when the Oaks
and the Cedars, when the high walls and mountains are shaken and removed by
his blows and batteries. When Pharaoh and his Egyptian host were drowned in
the red Sea; Then Moses magnified God in his power ( Exodus 15.2.) The Lord is
my strength and song (that is, I will sing of the strength of the Lord, not of
the strength of man) he is my God, and I will prepare him an habitation; my
fathers God and I will exalt him.

In these three attributes, Justice, truth, and power, God is honored, when
the wicked are destroyed, and therefore it cannot be uncomly for the Saints to
rejoice when they are destroyed. The Lord by his Prophet assures the Church his
Jacob that all the enemies thereof shall be scattered. ( Is. 41.15.) Behold, I
will make thee a new sharp threshing instrument, having teeth, thou shall
thresh the Nations and beat them small, and shall make the hills as chafe, etc.
The mountains and th^^^lls to be threshed, were the mighty ones of the earth,
setting themselves against the ways and designs of heaven. The Instrument or
flayle wherewith they were to be threshed was the worm Jacob (ver. 14.) God
did not so much make an Instrument for the worm Jacob, as he made the worm
Jacob his Instrument. Behold, I will make thee, (not for thee) a new threshing
Instrument; But when the worm has done this great work, when he has
threshed the mountains, and made the hills as chafe; What must he do then?
The 16th verse tells, Thou shall rejoice in the Lord, Gaudebunt de eorum
exitio, non vindictae cupiditate, sed zelo dei accensi qui hoc modo declarabit
sibi curae esse res humanas. Drus.
and shall glory in the holy One of Israel. Glorying is more then rejoicing:
Glorying is a kind of rapture or ecstasy of the soul. As there is an ecstasy
of Infatuation, so there is an ecstasy of Gracious admiration. Fools and
madmen are besides themselves for want of reason; the wisest and best of men,
are besides themselves through the abundance of the Grace of God in them, and
the abundance of the goodness of God toward them. When the goodness of God
acted mightily toward us, meets with the Grace of God acting mightily in us,
we are lifted up so far out of our selves, that we can see nothing in our
selves, and then in whom or in what can our rejoicing be, but in the Lord the
holy one of Israel.

This joy is not, First, the joy of the Epicure; A sensual joy, in wine and
belly-cheare, in eating the fat, and drinking the sweet, in carnal merriments
and music; nor is this, secondly, a cruel joy in the ruin and destruction of
men, which the Prophet rebukes ( Obad. v. 12.) Thou should not have rejoiced
over the children of Judah in the day of their destruction. Nor is this,
thirdly, a proud joy, or a joy of ostentation, when men spread their plumes,
and publish their own wisdom, greatness and power; nor is it, fourthly, a
covetous joy, such as theirs is who are glad because they have filled their
purses, enriched their familyes, and their hand has gotten much; Nor is it
lastly, a secure joy, because when evil men are cast down we hope to fit
warm and well, safe and quiet upon their ruins; But this joy consists; first,
in high thoughts and valuations of God; Whom have I in heaven but thee, etc. (
Psalm. 73.25.) Who is like unto thee O Lord among the Gods (Exodus 15.11.) It
consists, secondly, in a sweet rest or complacency in God. Return unto thy
rest O my soul; that is, tur^^ ^n to God, live nearer him says a Godly man
(to his soul) a such a case ( Psalm. 116.7.) This joy is the rest of the soul
in God; He who is rest to himself (as God is) may be so infinitely more to us.
Thus, The righteous see it, and are Glad.

And the innocent laugh them to scorn. This heightens the sense of the former
part of the verse, not only are the righteous glad when the wicked are
destroyed, but they laugh them to scorn. The righteous, in the former part of
the verse are the same with the innocent here; yet we may distinguish them. The
innocent are taken two ways in Scripture; first, the innocent are they who are
pure from sin; secondly, the innocent are they who are pure or free from
punishment.

or from trouble; freedom from sin, and freedom from trouble are so dependent
upon one another, that one word may well express both. Thus the word is used
(2 Samuel 14.9.) The woman of Tekoah said to the king; My Lord O king, the
iniquity be on me, Innocens in Scriptura sumitur, non solum active, pro eo, qui
nemini nocet, sed etiam passive, pro eo cu^ nemo nocet.
and my fathers house, and the king and his throne be guiltless or innocent,
that is, free from all evil and trouble; While she says, The iniquity be upon
me, her meaning is, let the punishment of the iniquity be upon me, let the
king, and his throne be guiltless; let no punishment of iniquity fall either
upon the king in person, or upon his government. In the same sense the word is
read ( Exodus 19.21.) If he (that has been smitten) rise again and walk
abroad upon a staff, then he that smote him shall be quitt; the Hebrew is,
then shall he be innocent, that is, free from punishment, he shall not have any
censure, or judgment for it. We have the like use of the word ( Numb. 5.19.)
in the case of the woman suspected by her husband for disloyalty in breaking
her marriage vow; she being for her purgation to drink the bitter water,
Innocens eris ab aquis istis amarissimis. Heb.
the Priest was to bespeake her in this manner; If no man has lien with thee,
and if thou have not gone aside to uncleanenes with another in stead of thy
husband, be thou free (or innocent) from this bitter water that causes the
curse, that is, let the water do thee no harm; as if he had said; thou shall
feel no evil of pain by it, if thou art not guilty of the evil of sin.
Thus some expound the word here. The innocent shall laugh them to scorn, that
is, they who are free from those troubles with which the wicked are over-taken
and undone, those particular righteous men who escape the storm untouched,
laugh the wicked to scorn. Many of the Hebrew writers fix upon a special
person; and by the Innocent, understand Noah, as if it were a report of what
was done upon the old world; Then the righteous, that is (as the Chaldee
Paraphrase explaines it) the sons of righteous Noah saw (the flood) and were
glad, Videbant filij Noe justi et laetabuntur, and Noe innocens subsa^nabit
ees. Targ:
and innocent Noah laughed the profane old world to scorn. When Noah, and his
sons were building the Arc, the old world in stead of believing and fearing
the report or prophecy of a deluge, laughed them to scorn, and in derision,
doubtless, ask't them what voyage they intended, and whether they meant to
sail their Ship over the dry Land; as for them they never dreamt of a Sea
hanging in the clouds, and ready to drop down upon their heads. Now as the
ungodly world derided Noah and his Sons for their credulity before the flood
came, so it is probable enough that when the flood came upon that world of the
ungodly, Noah and his Sons laughed at and derided their incredulity. They who
laugh at divine threatenings, deserve to be laughed at under divine sufferings.

Others apply this particularly to the Tragedy of Pharaoh and his Egyptians
overwhelmed and drowned in the red sea; of which it is said, ( Exodus 14.30,
31.) Thus the Lord saved Israel that day out of the hand of the Egyptians, and
Israel saw the Egyptians dead upon the shore, and Israel saw that Great work,
which the Lord did upon the Egyptians. The effect of this sight is two ways
described in that holy History; First, by the acting of fear and faith; And
the people feared the Lord, and believed the Lord and his servant Moses:
Secondly, by the acting of their joy in the Lord, and their holy insultation
over the drowned Egyptians ( Chap. 15. v. 1.) Then sang Moses and the children
of Israel this song unto the Lord, and spoke, saying; I will sing unto the
Lord, for he has triumphed gloriously, the horse and his rider has he thrown
into the Sea. Thus also that innocent people saw the ruin of their wicked
enemies, and laughed them to scorn.

Yet I conceive Eliphaz speaking here rather upon a generally experienced and
positive truth, then strictly and particularly aiming at those ancient
Examples. The innocent, that is, any innocent person, whether innocent in
reference to the doing of evil, or having escaped the sufferance of evil,
laugh them to scorn.

Before, he said, the righteous see it and are glad, now he says, the innocent
laugh them to scorn: it is one thing for a man to be glad in himself, and
another thing to laugh other men to scorn; for though to be innocent carries
in it somewhat less, or at the most but so much as to be righteous, yet to
laugh the unrighteous and wicked to scorn when they fall, carries in it much
more then to be glad when they fall. (...) denotat gestum qui fit ore, labijs,
and ficta balbutie, five quod balbutientes irrideri solea^t, sive quod
irrisores balbutiant, per contemptum et malignam imitationem.
And besides, the word in the Hebrew, signifies, the most scornful laughter,
such a laughter as is expressed, by a distortion of the mouth, and lips, or by
a kind of fained lisping with the tongue, and artificial faultring in speech;
For as they that lispe and faulter in speech are usually derided and laughed at,
so they that deride and laugh at others will purposely lispe, or faulter in
speech. Stammerers are contemptible, and many stammer at others in contempt;
This imitation of a defect in nature shows the excess of malice. Such is the
force of this expression, The innocent laugh them to scorn.

Here it may be questioned, how a good man, an innocent person, can do such a
thing; can he thus laugh the wicked to scorn? it is difficult enough to salve
it as consistent with Grace, for a righteous man to rejoice at the fall of the
wicked, but it is far more difficult to salve it, how a righteous man may
laugh them to scorn; scorning and deriding are the practices of lewd persons,
of sons of Beliall; such indeed are usually scorners and jeerers. The enemies
of Jesus Christ are so described ( Psalm. 22.7.) All they that see me (that is,
all the wicked that see me, for many Disciples saw Christ in his sufferings,
and did not only pity him, but honor and believe on him, but (says he) all
they (who are mine enemies) that see me) laugh me to scorn, they shoot out the
lip, and shake the head. And David tells us ( Psalm. 1.1.) that to fit in the
seat of the scornful, is the conclusion of those who have first walked in
the way of the ungodly, and secondly, stood in the way of sinners. The common
Latin translater renders that in the Psalm, not the seat of scorners, but
the seat of the pestilence. And indeed they have spiritual plague-spots upon
them, and the surest tokens of eternal death, who are given up to be scorners.
Therefore question it again, how are the Innocent scorners?

I answer, That as when humane affections, which are below the divine nature,
are attributed to God, (such are to repent, to be grieved at the wickedness, and
to laugh at the calamity of the wicked) we say these note only an effect upon
the creature, not a change of affection in God (for, in him there is no
variablenes nor shadow of change) so when those actions, Irrisio, and (...) and
similia quae affectum humanum significant, uti a deo long absunt, ita quae
mali moris sunt ab ecclesia. Coc: Vt haec de dee (...) i^a de sanctis (...)
sunt intell genda.
which are below or unsuteable to a renewed regenerate nature in man, are
attributed to the Saints (such as these, to wash their feet in the blood of
the ungodly, to laugh them to scorn in their saddest miseries) we must say,
that these note rather what the wicked deserve, then what the godly do. The
godly are no scorners, but there is that in wicked men which is worthy to be
laughed to scorn, or wicked men do that, for which they deserve to be laughed
at; whatsoever is evil in such like actions, is far from the heart and
spirit of the godly. And therefore as Scriptures of such a tenor are to be
interpreted and understood in such a manner as becomes and is consistent with
the holiness of God, so also (in their proportion) to the holiness of the Saints.
The laughter of the Saints in these dispensations is serious, and their
scorning, the acting of their graces, not of their corruptions. And thus it is
said of God himself ( Psalm. 2.4.) He that sits in heaven shall laugh, the
Lord shall have them in derision. And ( Prove. 1.26.) I will mock at your
calamity, and laugh when your fear comes: when your fear comes as
desolation, and your destruction comes as a whirlewind etc. that is, I will
carry my self so toward you, I will pity you (who have been scorners of my
word, and have set at naught my counsel) no more then men pity those, whom they
laugh to scorn; such is the laughter of the Saints at the calamity of the
wicked. And thus Eliah derided Baals Priests, while they wearied themselves in
their foolish superstition (1 Kings 18.27.) And it came to pass at noone that
Eliah mocked them, and said cry aloud, for he is a God, either he is talking,
etc. Thus Jerusalem is expressed ( Isa. 37.22.) when Senacherib sent up that
proud threatening message, the Lord sent a comfortable message to his people by
Isaiah the Prophet; Thus says the Lord God of Israel, whereas thou have prayed
to me against Senacherib the king of Assyria, this is the word which the Lord
has spoken concerning him; the virgin the daughter of Zion has despised thee,
and laughed thee to scorn, the daughter of Jerusalem has shaken her head at
thee. The daughter of Zion, and the daughter of Jerusalem are but one and the
same; she was called a virgin, not (as some have conceived) because she was
never taken or forced by any enemy; nor was she so called, because he had
preserved her self pure and chaste in the worship of the true God (For she had
her faylings and Idolatrous dalliances before that day) but she was so called
because of that special care which God had of her to protect and save her
against the insultations of the enemy then ready to assault her, even as a
virgin is protected from violence in her fathers house. And the Prophet to
assure them that it should be so, speaks of the ruin of Senacheribs Army, and
Jerusalems laughter, as accomplished and come to pass already; The virgin
daughter etc. has despised thee, and laughed thee to scorn, and shaken her
head at thee. What God says shall be done, is as good as done already. The
Assyrians were yet in their Jollity, laughing at Jerusalem, and promising
themselves the spoil of the people of God, yet (says the Lord) Jerusalem has
laughed thee to scorn; that is, assuredly she shall. And as the people of God
do sometimes formally and explicitly laugh at the downfall and whitherings of
the wicked, so they always virtually and secretly laugh them to scorn, even
when they stand and flourish in their greenenes and prosperity; For while the
Godly are not daunted with the power and splendor, while they are not
terrified with the threats and high looks of the wicked, but in the singlenes
and simplicity of their hearts, keep close to God, his ways and truths; even
this, though they use the duest respect to them in regard of their authority,
both in word and gesture, is a laughing them to scorn; For this is as a thorn
in the sides of evil men, and as a prick in their eyes, when they see they
will not stoop to their greatness in any sinful compliance with their
commands. This is a truth, but the former is the truth intended in this Text.

Hence note; That wicked men are not only miserable but ridiculous.

They are the laughter of the innocent, upon more accounts then one.

First, because they do such childish, and ridiculous things, such things as
can never reach the ends they desire and purpose: they are justly laughed at,
whose counsels and courses are unsuitable, much more, when contrary to their
designs.

Secondly, Wicked men become ridiculous, while the Lord frustrates their wisest
counsels, and blasts those hopes which were bottomed upon the most probable
principles and foundations, while he takes them in their own craft, and entraps
them in the snare which they laid for others.

Thirdly, While he overrules all that they plot or act to serve his own ends,
and fulfill his own holy counsels. Hence the enemies of God are said to pine
away; this shall be the plague wherewith the Lord will smite all the people,
that have fought against Jerusalem, their flesh shall consume away while they
stand upon their feet (he does not say, that they shall all be slain, but
their flesh shall consume away while they stand upon their feet) and their
eyes shall consume away in their holes, and their tongue shall consume away in
their mouth (Zech. 14.12.) which as some interpret of their bodily
languishment, that they shall live dying continually, or that their life shall
be a continual death, so all interpret the cause of this consumption to arise
from vexation of spirit, because they shall see themselves scorned and laughed
at, or that they are become ridiculous to all the world, but chiefly to
Jerusalem, the Church and people of God, whom they shall behold in good
condition, notwithstanding all the opposition which they have made against
them; which Eliphaz also clearly expresses in the next words.

Verse. 20. Whereas our substance is not cut down, but the remnant of them the
fire consumes.
There are diverse readings and renderings of this verse; first, some with an
affirmative interrogation; is not their substance cut down? that is, it is cut
down; And then this verse is a continuation of the former discourse concerning
the utter extirpation of the wicked; The righteous are glad, they laugh them to
scorn; is not their substance cut down? and does not the fire consume the
remnant of them? As if Eliphaz had said, Whatsoever they had of any substance
or moment is cut down, and if possibly there be any small inconsiderable
remainder of them, fire (that is, some devouring Judgment) will meet with it,
and make an utter end of it.

Innocens subsarnabit eos, quia non fuit succisa substantia nost^a etc. q. d.
ut qui se and res suas salvas, illos autem penitus igne illo divino videant
jure absumptos. Bez:
Secondly, Another understands this 20^h verse as a reason of the former; the
righteous are glad (when the wicked fall) the innocent shall laugh them to
scorn, because our substance was not cut down; as if he had said, our safety
will be matter as of praise to God, who has preserved us, so of holy scorn
and insultation over ungodly men, who longed to see our destruction, and said
in their hearts, that surely our day was not only coming, but hastening;
whereas indeed we see the day come upon them which burns as an oven, and
themselves as stubble. Wicked men are for the most part doubly disappointed;
first, by their own fall, when they looked to stand; secondly, by the standing
of the righteous when they look, yea, and long for their fall; This double
disappointment does at once double their sorrow, and the joy of the Innocent,
who laugh them to scorn, because their own substance is not cut down, but
the remnant of them the fire consumes.

Innocens subsannabiteos dicens, etsi non est succisa substantia nostra, tamen
excellentiam illorum consumpsit ignis. P^sc:
There is a third translation which makes these words the form in which the
innocent express their laughter at the wicked. When The innocent laugh them to
scorn, they will thus bespeake them; Whereas or Although our substance is not
cut down, yet the remnant of them, or the best, the excellency of them the
fire has consumed.

There is a fourth reading, which makes the second part of the Chapter begin
with this verse. For hitherto Eliphaz has been describing the sinfulness of
wicked men, and the wrath of God upon them for their wickedness. Cum nondum
abscinditur substantia nostra, and residuum illorum absumit ignis, assuesce
quaeso cum illo. Jun:
But here he is supposed entering upon a very serious exhortation to repentance,
after this manner, or to this effect; O Job, now while our substance is not
quite out down, and the fire consumes the residue or the remnant of the
wicked, acquaint thy self with God; or apply thy self to God, as if he should
say, before thou art clean cut down, before thou art utterly ruined as many
wicked men have been heretofore, and now are, humble thy self and seek to
God, that thy sin may be forgiven, and thy wound healed. Some parallel this in
sense with that of the Preacher, Eccle. 12.1. Remember now thy Creator in the
days of thy youth, while the evil days come not, nor the years draw nigh
wherein thou shall say, I have no pleasure in them. Thus Eliphaz is conceived
exhorting Job, While our substance is not cut down, while we are not totally
undone, Quum subsiste^tia nostra non sit excisa, reliquias autem istorum ignis
assumpserit. Tygur: Ita been ut nihil melius. Bold: (...), extant^a vel potius
(...) quo subsistimus duramus, vel subsistantia nostra i. e. vita qua
subsistimus, nam stare valet interdum superstitem esse. Drus:
while the fire of Gods wrath is consuming the remainder of wicked men, do
thou acquaint thy self with God, and repent. And though our translation makes
not this connection, yet it joins fully in the sense of the Original.

Whereas our substance is not cut down. So this verse is an elegant conclusion
of the whole matter hitherto insisted upon by Eliphaz; and he shuts it up in
two parts; first, showing the state of the innocent, who are brought in
speaking thus; Our substance is not cut down. strictly, That by which we stand
or subsist, our substance or subsistence; which some expound not by goods, but
by life; we may take it both ways, our life, and that by which our life is
maintained, or by which we and our families subsist, is not cut down.

There is yet a difficulty in regard of the grammatical sense of these words.
For Eliphaz having spoken before in the third person plural, The righteous are
glad, and the innocent laugh them to scorn, should (as it may be thought)
rather have continued his speech in the same form, and have said; Whereas
Their substance is not down, but he puts it in the first person plural,
Whereas our substance is not cut down etc.

We may answer two ways; First, that it is usual in Scripture to vary the
number, while the same person or persons is or are spoken of; take only one
Instance, Hos. 12.4. He (that is the Angel of the Covenant) found him in
Bethel, that is, Jacob. And there he spoke with us. It should according to
Grammar be read thus; And there he spoke with him. Having found Jacob in
Bethel, he spoke with him in Bethel. But we see both the person and number are
varied, the former words running in the third person singular (being meant
particularly of Jacob,) the latter in the first person plural, There he spoke
with us; The Spirit of God thereby signifying, that, what God spoke at that
time to Jacob personally, he spoke to all the spiritual seed of Jacob, whether
of the Circumcision or Uncircumcision, virtually; He so spoke to Jacob as that
the substance and effect of his speech reaches down to and has an influence
upon us, believers, who are his posterity according to the Spirit. Besides
this, other Scriptures hold out the like variation of the number, as in the
Text, which is the first answer.

Secondly, Eliphaz might purposely vary the number, that himself might put in
for a share, and be numbered among those, who had obtained that sparing mercy,
not to be cut down while others were consumed. And so this reason of the
change is purely spiritual, much like that last opened out of Hosea.

Whence note; That the righteous are often preserved in common calamities.

( Psalm. 20.8.) They are brought down, and are fallen, but we are risen and
stand upright, our substance is not cut down; God takes special care of his
own people; they are under a promise; there can be no greater safety, no
better security then to be under a promise; the promise is the best shelter in
a storm, and the best shield against the dart. The Apostle Peter gives us two
famous examples of this, (2 Pet. 2.5, 6.) God spared not the old world, but
saved Noah etc. bringing in the flood upon the world of the ungodly. And having
turned the Cities of Sodom and Gomorrha into ashes, condemned them with an
overthrow etc. and delivered just Lot etc. From both which examples he
concludes ( v. 9.) The Lord knows how to deliver the Godly out of
temptation, and to reserve the unjust unto the day of Judgment to be punished.
When judgment begins at the house of God, what shall the end of them be that
obey not the Gospel of God? as the same Apostle speaks (1 Pet. 4.17.) It is a
sure argument to the wicked that they shall be judged, when they see God
bringing judgments upon his own house and people; but the wicked are many
times judged while the house and people of God are preserved and untoucht; and
when both good and bad, both the innocent, and the wicked are wrapped up in the
same calamity, when they are (as it were) thrust together into the same
furnace, the Lord makes a difference, they are not cut down as the wicked are
cut down, nor consumed as they are consumed. When the righteous are cast into
the fire they are purged but not consumed, but (as it follows in the second
part of this conclusion, showing the state of the wicked) The remnant of them
the fire consumes.

Fire in this place is not taken strictly, as opposed to water; God indeed has
often made fire in kind his scourge. And the Apostle Jude says of Sodom,
That it suffered the vengeance of eternal fire. But all the judgments of God
are in Scripture compared to fire ( Mala. 4.1.) Behold the day comes that
shall burn like an Oven, and all the proud, yea all that do wickedly shall be
stubble, and the day that comes shall burn them up, says the Lord of hosts,
that it shall leave them neither fruit nor branch. There is a burning, and not
by fire; There is so great a judgment and terror in fire let loose and
breaking its bounds, that it may well signify all judgments, or any thing
that is terrible. ( Isa. 52.4.) As the fire devoureth the stubble, and the
flame consumes the chafe, so their root shall be rottenness, and their
blossom shall go up as dust. Thus here, the remnant of them the fire
consumes, that is, the wrath of God appearing in some visible judgment
consumes the remnant.

But what is this remnant which the fire consumes?

I answer. First, we may expound it of persons. The remnant of persons, all
that are left of their family, their children and posterity, their kindred and
relations are taken away and consumed from off the face of the earth.

Secondly, We may expound it of things, the remnant of goods, whatsoever
remains of their estate, the odd ends, the very gleanings and leavings of
their great riches and worldly substance, are all eaten up and brought to an
end, so that nothing of them or theirs remains.

Thirdly, The remnant of them may be the remembrance of them. A fire shall
consume their name and memorial, they shall never be thought of nor spoken of
any more with honor.

(...) significat illud quo quis alium excellit, ideo reliquiarum nomine
impiorum excellentem and supra cu^ctos mortales ingentem foelicitatem
intelligo. Pined.
Fourthly, The word remnant, as it signifies in the Original any thing which
remains, so especially that which remains in way of excellency, or
eminency; not (as we say) the fagge end of a thing, but even the uppermost and
best of it. So that (after this translation) the remnant of them, is the
excellency of them, that which they thought most durable, and honorable, that
which they looked upon as most substantial and intrinsecall to their greatness,
that very thing the fire shall consume. So the word is used ( Psalm. 17.14.)
Deliver my soul from men which are thy hand, O Lord, from men of the world
etc. whose belly thou fillest with thy hid treasures, they are full of
children, and leave the rest (or as we supply, the rest of their substance) to
their babes; the rest, that is, the best; their bellies are full of hid
treasures while they live, that is, they have and use abundance of the things
of this life themselves; and they leave the rest; he does not mean the scraps
or parings after they had filled their own bellies, but by the rest or the
remnant, (it is the word of the text) he means the choicest of what they had;
even that they leave to their babes or children, when themselves must be gone
and leave the world. Thus we may understand the word remnant in this place, not
for a poor pittance, but for the best, the choicest things, for the flower and
cream of all they had, even these things the fire shall consume, vengeance
shall pursue and follow, till all be turned into smoke and ashes.

I have in diverse other passages of this book met with Texts showing the utter
consumption of wicked men, therefore I shall not stay upon it here; only take
this brief note.

That the Lord has a different fire for the righteous and the wicked. He has
a fire for his own people, but it is a purging fire, a cleansing, a refining
fire. Like that ( Mal. 3.3.) He shall sit as a refiner and purifier of silver.
The Lord also has a fire for the wicked, but it is a consuming fire. He
kindles many fires upon them, and himself is a consuming fire to them. But it
may be said, that God is a consuming fire also to his own people; for the
Apostle speaking of himself and other believers, says ( Heb. 12.29.) Our God
is a consuming fire. I answer; First, It Is true, the God of Believers is a
consuming fire, but he is not a consuming fire to believers; even the hearts of
believers ought to be overawed with a holy fear of that in God, which they
shall never feel from God. Secondly, God is sometimes a consuming fire to
believers; but it is only to consume their corruptions, or their corruptible
comforts; He will never consume either their Graces or spiritual interests.
These he will not consume whatsoever he consumes. But the whole of a wicked man
is as combustible matter before him. There went up a smoke out of his
nostrills, fire out of mouth devoured (Psalm. 18.8.) That is, God powered out
wrath, which devoured them like a fire. Fire (I mean natural fire) is a great
devourer, it has a strong stomach, there is nothing but pure Gold too hard for
its digestion; but mystical fire, the fire of divine wrath is infinitely a
greater devourer. Wrath kindles ma^y devouring fires, but wrath it self is the
most devouring fire; who can stand before it? who can abide the heat and
flames of it? This is the Tophet prepared of old for the wicked; This fire is
able to consume branch and rush, the root and top of the wicked in one day,
and yet it will continue consuming them to eternity. The remnant of them the
fire consumes.

Eliphaz having thus far prosecuted a description both of the unrighteousnes
and of the ruin, both of the sin and punishment of wicked men, closely
insinuating that Job was the man concerned in all this large Discourse, he, in
the latter part of this Chapter, turns his speech into a serious Exhortation
to move Job to repent, and seek God, giving him many assurances and promises,
that (in case he did so) it should not be in vain,

JOB, CHAP. 22. Verse. 21, 22. etc. Acquaint now thy self with him, and be at
peace: thereby good shall come unto thee.

Receive, I pray thee, the Law from his mouth, and lay up his words in thine
heart.

If though return to the Almighty, thou shall be built up, thou shalt-put away
iniquity from thy Tabernacles etc.


ELiphaz having reproved Job for sin, and pressed him with the remembrance of the
Judgments of God against sinners: now turns his speech into a serious
Exhortation, mooving him to seek the favor of God, and humble himself,
Acquaint now thy self with him, and be at peace. From this course and method
in which Eliphaz deals with Job, take this note.

That in dealing with sinners we are not only to threaten, but to persuade
and propose the promises of peace to them. Daniel dealt so with Nebuchadnezzer,
yea though he had told him of a decree in heaven past against him ( Dan.
4.22.27.) yet he gives him faithful counsel, and exhorts him to break off
his sins by righteousness, and his iniquities by showing mercy to the poor,
if it might be a lengthning of his tranquillity, or (as we put in the Margin) a
healing of his error. Hopes of mercy prevail with many more then fear of
wrath, and they are sooner led then driven unto Christ. Thus Eliphaz; Acquaint
now thy self with him, and be at peace.

This 21 verse contains two general Propositions. First, a Proposition
concerning duty, in the former part of the verse; Acquaint now thy self etc.
Secondly, Concerning mercy in the latter, thereby good shall come unto thee.
This duty of acquainting himself with God, Promissionibus invitat amplissimis,
quae and in se verae sunt and cum lege consentiunt, non tamen perpetuae ut
Eliphaz pu^t. Merc.
and being at peace with him is explained in the 22 verse. Receive, I pray
thee, the Law from his mouth, and lay up his words in thine heart. That Is a
good Comment upon, Acquaint now thy self with him, and be at peace. The
Proposition of mercy, or the promises laid down in the close of that verse,
are drawn out in all the following part of this Chapter, in which Eliphaz by
most ample Proposalls of good things, does provoke Job to turn from those
sins of which he supposed him guilty, and to return to God.

Acquaint now thy self with him. The Original word which we render to
acquaint, has some variety of significations; As first to be familiar with
another. And so it is used by David (Psalm. 139.3.) to show the Intimacie which
God has with all our ways, works, and thoughts; O Lord (says David) thou
have searched me and known me, etc. thou art acquainted with all my ways;
As if he had said; Lord, thou know my ways infinitely more clearly and
distinctly, then any of my nearest acquaintance, who converse with me every
day. It is used 2dly to express the customary doing of a thing. ( Numb.
22.30.) Balaams Ass spoke thus by a miracle, Was I ever wont to do thus unto
thee? Has it been my custom, or have I familiarly served thee thus, said the
Ass, when he thrust Balaam against the wall.

Thirdly, To profit; (...) profuit, commodus, aptus fuit. Profice cum deo. Rab.
Mos.
one of the Rabbines translates the Text thus; Profit with God, as who should
say, thou have been an unprofitable servant to God all this while, be thou now
profitable unto him, serve him and his Providence, advance his name and glory;
or thus rather, Thou have but played the truant hitherto, be thou now a good
proficient in the school of Divine doctrine and discipline under the holy
precepts and various providence of God. We find it applied to that fence at
the second verse of this Chapter; Can a man be profitable unto God, as he that
is wise may be profitable to himself? Man cannot be profitable unto God, or
add any advantage to him by what he does, but man may be profitable unto
himself, or do himself good in doing the good will of God; yea God reckons
it and rewards man for it, as if he had been profitable to him, when he acts as
becomes a faithful servant to him. So some expound it here, be profitable unto
God, be a faithful and industrious servant unto him: having received his
talents, do not lay them up in a napkin, hide them not in the earth.

Thirdly, Master Broughton read's thus, Reconcile thee now unto him. That Is
Gospel language, like that of Paul (2 Cor. 5.20.) Now then we are Ambassadors
for Christ, as though God did beseech you by us, we pray you in Christ's stead,
be ye reconciled to God. So he conceives Eliphaz speaking here, I pray thee now
reconcile thy self unto God. Master Beza reaches that sense fully, Return
into his favor, Redi cum ipso in gratiam. Bez: Accommoda te illi. Tygur:
get into his heart again; God has as it were locked thee out of his heart,
and shut the door upon thee, now get in again; and the Tygurine reads very
aptly, Accommodate thy self to him, that is every way suite thy self go
(...), thou have heretofore been humorous, or have followed thine own spirit,
and have labored to please thy self, now Accomodate thy self to him, or
comply with him in every thing, be no more at thine own but at his dispose.
All these renderings comply well both with the words and the general scope of
Eliphaz in this part of his discourse. Our translation fully joins with the
first of them.

Assuesce cum eo. Pagn. Reg. Vatabl.
Acquaint now thy self with him. Get into a familiarity with God. The word
implies a likeness, or a suitablenes between two in their wills and affections,
in their ways and counsels; for from likeness in these familiarity or
acquaintance does arise. So that Eliphaz here speaks to Job as one that had
estranged himself and departed from God, as one who had broken off Communion
with God; and so he must needs have done, had he run such a course of wickedness
as Eliphaz charged him with, in the former part of this Chapter. Therefore upon
that supposition he gives Job wholesome advice, Acquaint not thy self with him.

Hence observe; First, That as man by nature is a stranger from God, so every
act of sin, especially great and continued actings of sin breed a further
estrangement from God.

We act the part of nature every time we sin, and that in a proportion brings
us back in some degree to what we were by nature, strangers unto God. A godly
man (who has had acquaintance with God) sinning puts back his acquaintance,
and a distance grows between God and him. Believers after great sins and
follyes committed, are not forward to come into the presence of God, they have
a kind of listlesnes to duty, a listlesnes to prayer, and to all acts of
communion with God. And God himself appears as if he did not much care for
them when they come, they have not those Communications from God which he
usually vouchsafes his, God does not give them the meeting as formerly; they
do not find the Lord presently, though they seek him earnestly. So that both
ways there is an Estrangement; sin separates between God and the soul, not
only judicially but naturally. If God should not depart from sinners, or
command them to depart from him, yet they would of themselves depart from him.
It is not possible for one, who willingly lives in sin, to live willingly in
the presence of God; For as to be cast out of the presence of God, is the
extremest punishment of wicked men, so also is their being in his presence.
The same thing is both their desire and their punishment. They are punished
with a departure from God, and they desire nothing more then to be out of his
presence.

Acquaint thy self now with God. Secondly, Whereas Eliphaz exhorting Job to
repentance, counsels him to acquiant himself with God.

Observe; That Repentance is the renewing of our Communion or acquaintance with
God.

As sin is a turning from God, so repentance is a returning to God; it is a
change first of our mind, and then of our way. Impaenitency brings the soul
into an acquaintance and unholy familiarity with Satan; Repentance brings back
the soul into its former acquaintance, and holy familiarity with God. As the
first conversion (which is from a state of sin) so the second and every renewed
conversion (which is from our falls into sin) renewes our converse with the
most high.

Thirdly, take this general observation; A godly man is (as we may say) one of
Gods Acquaintants or familiars.

God calls Abraham his friend; friendship cannot be without familiarity,
there must be acquaintance before there can be love, if therefore there be
friendship and love between God and man, there must be Acquaintance; we cannot
love either persons or things, while unknown.

But it may be said, how can we, who are at such a distance, Acquaint our
selves with God?

I answer, we (who of our selves are a (...) by the blood of Jesus Christ, and
being thus made nigh in our state, we draw nigh or acquaint our selves with
him by several Acts. As first, To think or meditate of God, is to acquaint
our selves with and draw nigh to God; meditation is an inward discourse and
converse with God, it is a Soliloquie between God and the soul; acquaintance
is got by Conference: when friends meet and confer, that does not only begin,
but confirm, strengthen, and highten their acquaintance. Saints have many
thoughts of God, and that is their acquaintance with God. How precious are thy
thoughts to me, O God! (says David, Psalm. 139.17.) how great is the sum of
them! when I awake I am still with thee. How was David still or ever with God?
He was so in his thoughts, and meditations, in the actings and goings forth of
his soul to him. Now he that is still or ever with a person, must needs be
acquainted with him, I am still with thee, always meditating upon thee. We
find him again in the same holy frame ( Psalm. 63.5, 6.) My soul shall be
satisfied as with marrow and fatnes, and my mouth shall praise thee with
joyful lips; while I remember thee upon my bed, and meditate on thee in the
night watches. As the Lord is ever thinking upon his people, they are written
upon his heart, and graven upon the palms of his hand, and when his outward
actings toward them are such, as may seem to intimate that his heart is
withrawne from all intimacy with them, yet even then he thinks most of them.
This he acknowledges concerning Ephraim (Jer. 31.20.) Since I spoke against
him I do earnestly remember him still. Since I spoke against him, that is,
since I spoke against him by words of rebuke and correction, since I spoke
against him by rods of chastisement and correction, (as Ephraim found and
confessed he had Thou did chastise me and I was chastised) since I spoke
thus against him, I do earnestly remember him still. I remember him, and I
remember him strongly, my heart is much upon him. And when the Lord says thus,
we are not to understand it, as a man will remember an Enemy, when he speaks
against him; he will remember him indeed, and that earnestly to plot mischief
against him, and to execute his revenge; but the meaning is, I remember him in
mercy, my affections go out to him, my bowels are moved toward him. Such is
the remembrance which God had of Ephraim, even when he was speaking against him
and smiting him. Now as the Lord does remember his people at all times, and
earnestly remember them at sometimes. So his people in their proportion do
earnestly remember the Lord, they mind him often, they would mind him
always, they like to retain God (which the natural man likes not, Romans
1.28.) in their knowledge, or to acknowledge God; They have not some flitting
transient thoughts and acknowledgements of God (as a carnal man may have) but
they fix and retain God in their thoughts and acknowledgements, they think of
God, what he is in his nature, they think what God is in all his perfections,
they meditate of all his glory, of his justice, of his mercy, of his
faithfulness, of his power, of his truth, of his unchangeablenes, of his
all sufficiency, they acquaint themselves with God in all these; for indeed we
are never acquainted with God, till we come to a distinct knowledge of him in
all these parts of his glory, which yet are all but one and the same glorious
God. To know only in general that there is a God, is not to acquaint our
selves with God; our acquaintance with him consists in a spiritual and
fiduciall knowledge of all his revealed perfections, so far as it is possible
or lawful for man to search and know. To be acquainted with any man, notes
more than a general knowledge of him, how much more to be acquainted with God.

Secondly, We acquaint our selves with God, not only when we study his
nature, or what he is, but when we study his works, or what he has done, God
is visible in his works. That his name is near, his wondrous works declare
(Psalm. 75.1.) We may acquaint our selves much with God in the works of
Creation, but more in the works of Providence, in those we may most legibly
read his name, that is, his greatness and power, as also his goodness and mercy.

Thirdly, We acquaint our selves with God in the study of his word; there he
has made a full discovery of himself and of his will; O how I love thy Law
(says David) my meditation is in it might and day. The word of God is the
demonstration of the holiness of God. There he has set forth himself, how
just, how pure, and how gracious he is. The word is a glass in which God is
seen, therefore acquaint thy self with the word of God, and thou shall be
acquainted with God; reading and hearing the word of God is our going to God
for Counsel, as we acquaint our selves with a man when we go to him, and
ask his advice and counsel in any matter, or consult his books; so every time
we either read or hear the word of God in faith, we are asking counsel of God,
and so acquainting our selves with him.

Fourthly, We, especially, acquaint our selves with God in prayer. That is
nothing else but the opening of our hearts to God, a declaring of our wants to
him, Prayer is the ascending, the lifting up of the soul to God, therefore in
prayer we acquaint our selves with God.

Fifthly, Our daily holy walking, is a daily acquainting our selves with God,
every step of a holy life is both toward and with God; the life of Enoch (who
was too holy for a life here on earth, and therefore he was translated that he
should not see death, his life I say) is described thus, Enoch walked with God
(Genesis 5.24.) God and Enoch were like two familiars or intimate friends walking
together; And because he took so much delight in Gods acquaintance, God took
him from all acquaintance with men; so says that text; Enoch walked with God,
and was not, for God took him. He was so taken with God, that God took him, or
as the Author to the Hebrews says, translated him (chapter 11.5.) He was before
translated from nature to Grace, and he proved so great a proficient in that
school, that he was translated from Grace to Glory (as it were per saltum,) by
a leap over the grave; for he saw not death; From which sad vision, but one
more (that I read of in all the Scripture, Elias by name) was excused before he
was admitted to the beatificall vision. Holy walking is the sum of all our
acquaintance with God; and our fullest acquaintance with God is but the issue
of our holy walkings.

To draw toward a close of this point; we may take notice, That there is a
twofold acquaintance with God; First, from necessity, when we come to him and
desire to have to do with him, pressed with our own wants, fears, or
afflictions; of this the Prophet speaks ( Isa. 26.16.) Lord in trouble have
they visited thee, they have poured out a prayer when thy chastening was upon
them. And of this the Psalmist speak ( Psalm. 78.34.) When he slew them they
sought him, and they returned and enquired early after God: nevertheless, they
did but flatter him with their mouth, etc. These make God their refuge not
their choice; They, I grant, who have made God their choice in good times, may
comfortably make him their refuge in evil times. But to neglect God while it
is well with (...), and only to run to him when it is ill with us, or to have
our evils and burdens removed, is to acquaint our selves with God, because we
cannot choose, or because we cannot be without him, not because we have chosen
him, or desire to be with him. As there is a patience, so there is an
acquaintance, perforce. Though God does not refuse acquaintance with many poor
souls, when their necessities drive them to him, yet it is best to acquaint
our selves with him for the love we bear to him, or the desire we have to
enjoy him, rather then (though we all have need of him, and are bound to come
to him because we have) for the need we have of him. And therefore, secondly,
there is an acquaintance with God from pure love. As when we come to a friend,
having nothing to do but to see him, and to renew or strengthen our
acquaintance with him. We do not come to load him with our cares, or advise
with him about our businesses, or desire a courtesy of him, but, merely and
purely to show our love to him. Thus to come to God when we are not pressed with
fears, nor pincht with wants, nor clouded with doubts, nor vexed with
troubles, is the most noble and ingenuous way of acquainting our selves with
him. When we (as it were) make a Journey to God, having nothing to do with
him, but to visit him and to desire further communion with him, nothing to do
with him but to behold his excellency and his glory, nothing to do with him,
but to tell him what our hearts are toward him, how we love him, how we depend
upon him, how we desire to please him, and to commit our ways to him, to
acquaint God with those things which only concern our holy walking with him,
this is to seek pure acquaintance with him. The Lord says of Abraham his
acquaintant or friend ( Genesis 18.17.) Shall I hide from Abraham the thing that I
am about to do? I should not deal with him as with my friend, if I did so. A
friend who is as our own soul ( Deuteronomy. 13.6.) should know all that is in our
souls. Now as God (whether we will or no) is acquainted with all that is in
our souls; So a soul acquainted with God, will let him know all; shall I hide
from God the thing that I am about to do? shall I not tell him how it is with
me? To acquaint our selves thus with God is a sweet and precious duty. Much
might be said about it; I shall only add these two things; First, That all
our acquaintance with God must be had through the mediator; There is no getting
near the Father but by the Son. Secondly, That the more we are acquainted with
God, the more we are transformed into his likeness. Some have altered the habit
of their bodies, yea, the dispositions of their minds by long acquaintance
with others; and have looked or appeared like them, by often looking upon or
being with them. When Moses had been forty days in the Mount talking with God,
his face shone, some rays of a divine glory darted out from him, so that Aaron
and the children of Israel were afraid to come nigh him (Exodus 34.30.) And thus
every one who gets up into the Mount by faith, and acquaints himself with God,
gets somewhat of God, which will draw a reverence upon him among men. As when
Christ shall appear hereafter to us in glory, we shall be like him (says the
Apostle John 1 Ep: 3.2.) for we shall see him as he is; so according to the
sight which we have of and our acquaintance with Christ in the ways of grace
here, will our likeness be unto him. The more we are with God, the more we have
of God. Acquaint now thy self with him, and be at peace.

There is a threefold Interpretation of this clause.

Inperativum p^o futuro passim in hac lingua. Merc: Quando Hebraei dicunt pax
tibi, significant id quod Graeci tribus verbis enunciant, (...) quorum primum
ad animum refertur, secundu^ ad corpus, tertium ad actiones externas. Drus.
First, it may be taken as an Effect of what was said before, Acquaint thy self
with God, and be at peace, that is, If thou acquaint thy self with God, thou
shall have peace. So in the Hebrew often the Imperative mood is put for the
future tense, as, Do this and live, (according to the tenure of the Covenant
of works) that is, Do this, and thou shall live, So acquaint thy self with
him, and be at peace, that is, thou shall have peace. Peace comprehends all
good; good of the mind, good of the body, good of the estate. When the
Hebrews say, Peace be unto you, they say as much in that one word as the
Greeks say in three; whereof the first respects the welfare of the mind; the
second, the welfare or health of the body; and the third the success of all
our affairs and undertakings. So that while Eliphaz says to Job according to
this reading, Thou shall be at peace, it is a promise of all manner of good
flowing in upon the renewing of his acquaintance with, and his returning to a
reverentiall converse with God. But becuse this promise follows in the next
words, thereby good shall come unto thee, therefore I understand this clause as
a duty, and not as a promise Acquaint now thy self with him, and be at peace.
To be at peace, is a distinct duty from that of acquainting our selves with
God, yet necessarily following upon it; The words may have these two things in
them.

First, Be at peace, rhat is, Sedatiore animo esto. Bez: Acquiesce in
castigationibus dei satis repugnasti; satis proterve reluctatus es, ergo
mitesce.
be quiet and content under the chastning hand of God, do not murmr, do not
repine. Thou have strugled enough already, now lay aside all impatiency and
passion, all discontents and animosities, as do not rage and rave, do not
distemper and discompose thy self as thou have done; There is a storm upon
thee, but be thou of a calm and quiet spirit, kiss the rod, be not angry with
it; we may express this frame by that which the Apostle Peter makes the
chief adorning, or ornament of a woman, that she be of a meek and a quiet
spirit, which with God is of great price; As meeknes is a Jewel of the
greatest price that women can wear; so it is a most rich and precious Jewel
for a man to wear; and as at all times, so then especially meeknes and
peaceablenes of spirit becomes man, when God seems to come in anger and to be
at war with him. Bildad said of Job (Chap. 18. v. 4.) He teareth himself in
his anger; As if he had said, the man's mad or distracted; now Eliphaz advises
him, Be at peace, be quiet; This is a good interpretation, and we may note
from it, That it is our Duty to sit down quiet and satisfied under the saddest
dispensations of God.

A submitting spirit under an afflicting hand, how comely is it! To be at peace
in our selves, when all is unquiet about us, how blessed a sight is it! there
are some who trouble themselves a great deal more than all the troubles that
are upon them can. Man is naturally a very unquiet creature, an angry piece of
flesh, when God is angry, he is apt to storm: till his heart is subdued to
God, he cannot bear the hand of God. Wicked men naturally (as the Prophet Esaias
found them, Chap. 51.20.) are like a wild Bull in a net^, full of the fury of
God; and not only so, but full of fury against God, throwing up the dust, and
moyling themselves when the nett of God has caught them, or when God has
caught them in his net. God catches his own people in his net many times as
well as the wicked. His own people are like a dove in a net, but the wicked
are like a wild Bull in a net. I grant, the Doves will flutter a while when the
net has caught them. Impatiency does often break out in the best of Saints:
it is a hard thing to keep the heart quiet within while our estate is unquiet
without, and to be at peace in our selves, when God seems to be at war with
us. It is hard for us to hold our peace, much more to be at peace in an
afflicted condition; yet this lesson, though very hard, Saints have learned.
David says ( Psalm. 39.9.) I was dumb, I opened not my mouth, because thou
did it. His was not a sullen silence, but a patient silence. He had not a
word to say against God, when God speak hard words against him, yea, when God
was at blows at sharpes with him. Paul also had learned in every estate to be
content ( Phil. 4.11.) how ever the world went with him, he was at peace.

Cum e^ pacem habe, in gratiam redi qui nunc alienatus es, and velut hostis.
Secondly, Be at peace, may refer unto God, and so it is but the heightening of
our acquaintance with him; for, first there must be an acquainting, and then a
making up of peace; when friends fall out, they must first speak with one
another, before the breach can be healed, if they do not treat, there can be
no reconciliation. After treating comes peace; As peace is the fruit of the
lips (Isa. 57.19.) when God treates with man by man, so when man treats with
man, and when man treats with God. Acquaint now thy self with him, call for a
treaty, and therein make thy peace, Be at peace with him, do not any longer
continue thy unholy war with God. Eliphaz supposing Job as a man setting
himself against God, had reason to bespeake him thus.

Hence note.

That till we do acquaint our selves with God, we can have no peace with
him. The wicked are like the troubled Sea, whose waves cast up mire and dirt;
there is no peace to the wicked, says my God ( Isa. 57.21.) why no peace to
the wicked? the wicked have no acquaintance with God, they are strangers, they
are afar off from God, and God beholds them afar off, therefore there is no
peace to them: if they have any peace, it is a false peace, a deceitful peace,
or it is but a short peace, which will quickly break out into a war again
when once Conscience is awakened, when that sleeping Lion is rouzed, what will
become of all their peace? they will then ^^^d, indeed, that their soul is
among Lions; and that they have been only secure, not safe, or that theirs
has been at best, a tr^^e only, not a peace; no peace till acquinted with
God, and no acquaintance with God can produce peace, but that which is by Jesus
Christ; He is the Peacemaker, who is also the Mediator; sinners cannot have
peace by any immediate acquain^^^^e with God, for he is a consuming fire, and
sinners standing alone are but as dry stubble before him. When we are made
nigh to or acquainted with God by the blood of Jesus Christ, then (and not till
then) are we at peace with him. Acquaint thy self with him, and be at peace:
no peace without acquaintance with God, no acquaintance with God but by Christ,
therefore no peace but by Christ.

Secondly, Observe; That God is ready to give peace to or to be at peace with
those that acquaint themselves with him.

Acquaint thy self with him, and be at peace; as if he should say, ^^ou shall
certainly be at peace with him, if thou do but acquaint thy self with him;
for the Lord will not always chide; his love is everlasting, but his anger
toward his c^^^^^es but for a moment; As the wisdom of God in man, so much
more the most wise God, is Gentle, and easy to be entreated. The Lord is found
of those who seek him not (Isa. 65.1.) Surely then he will be found of those
that seek him; he is not implacable, no nor inexorable. The Lord has declared
himself full of Compassion to returning sinners, so full of compassion that he
seeks the acquaintance of sinners, and beseeches them to be reconciled to him,
much more will he be acquainted with them who beseech him that they may be
reconciled to him. Fury is not in me (says the Lord, Isa. 27.4, 5.) who would
set the briars and thorns in battle against me? that is, who would be so
foolish as to encourage sinful men to be so foole-hardy as to stand out
against me, or contend with me, for alas, (as it follows in the text) I would
go through them, I would burn them together. There Is no dealing with me upon
those terms; but I will tell you upon what terms a (...) may deal with me;
Let him lay hold of my strength, that he ^^y make peace with me, and he shall
make peace with me, that is, he shall n^^ loose his labor, he shall find
peace, if he take hold of my str^^gth. One would think he should rather have
said, let him take hold of my mercy and goodness, but he says, Let him take
hold of my strength. To oppose the strength of God is most dangerous, but by
faith to take hold of it, that is both the duty and the privilege of an humbled
sinner. Proud sinners oppose the strength of God, humbled sinners take hold of
it, as their strength. As a man seeing another whom he has offended, but is
unable to resist, or make his party good with him, with much submission takes
hold of his arm or weapon, endeavoring by earnest suit to stay him from
smiting. And indeed to take hold of the strength of God, is to take hold on his
mercy; The strength of God to save sinners lies in his mercy, and that mercy is
in his Son, who is his strength to save sinners; if a sinner lay hold of this
strength, the mercy of God in his Son, that he may make-peace with God, if this
be his design he shall make peace, there shall not be a treaty with God in
Christ for peace in vain; if a sinner should take hold of the strength of his
own righteousness and performances, if he should take hold of the strength of
all the Angels in heaven, he could not make peace with God, nor would God agree
with him upon those terms. Such a soul must return (re infecta) without his
errand. God is ready to be at peace with (...), but we must have our peace in
his way, not in our own. Acquaint now thy self with him, and be at peace. And
this peace, whether in our selves or with God, is no light or unprofitable
thing, as Eliphaz to provoke Job to pursue and seek after it, tells him in the
last words of this verse.

Thereby good shall come unto thee. Thereby; whereby? or by what? what is it
that shall procure, or produce this good? The answer is at hand. Thy
acquaintance with God, thy being at peace will procure all good things for thee
Acquaint thy self with him, and be at peace: be at peace in thy own spirit, be
quiet; be at peace with God, be reconciled, every way good shall come unto
thee. Mr Broughton renders, Prosperity shall come unto thee, the sense is the
same. Others read, in stead of, good shall come unto thee, thy comings in shall
be good, thou shall have a good reven^^ ^ood income: Proventus tuus erit bonus.
Drus.
whereas before evil came upon thee, now thy co^^^gs in shall be good. This
also is of the same meaning with our translation. I shall not need to stay upon
the opening of the words, there is no difficulty in them.

From their dependence, in that he says, Acquaint thy self with him, and be
at peace, so shall good come unto thee, These words are brought in by way of
inference upon the former, whence

Observe.

That when we are estranged from God, good is estranged from us. God can stop
the Influences of all our mercies from us, he can lay an embargo upon all
Creatures from bringing any good to us, the there be store of treasure and rich
Commodity in the place, yet he can bar up all, that no good can come unto us;
yea, the Lord in such cases does often lay a stop upon the spirit of prayer in
his own people, and when the heart is stopped that we cannot pray, then usually
good is stopped and kept back from coming to us; Prayer is that which fetches in
mercy and good things through the love of God in Jesus Christ. Prayer may have
a twofold stop. First, prayer may have a stop in the heart; secondly, Prayer
which comes forth of the heart may have a stop in heaven, the Lord does even
shut out-prayer sometimes, and when prayer is shut out, no good can get out to
us. Prayer is sent upon a message to heaven, and if our messenger be shut out
of doors and not admitted in, what answer can we expect by his message. And
the Lord as he does stop such from the receiving of further good, so from the
receiving of good by what they have already. We may have that which in the
nature of it is good, and yet have no good by it; God can stop the creature in
our hands, that it shall not at all give us any Comfort, as well as he can stop
any creature-comfort from coming into our hands. Unless the Lord (in one
sense) stop the creature, it quickly leakes out all the Comfort which he has
put into it, and proves to us indeed, what sin has made it, a broken Cistern;
And unless the Lord open the creature, the creature cannot give forth that
good which it has; It will be to us as a Cisterne without a vent to pass out
the water for our use. There Is many a one who has enough in his hand (take it
in any kind) but he enjoyes nothing of it, because the Lord locks up the
conduit, or the cisterne, and then how much good soever there is in it, there is
none for him. It is all one to us, whether we have only a broken Cisterne for
our portion, or a Cisterne always locked up; for as the one lets all the water
run out, so the other holds all the water in; we are as far from good, if our
Cisterne hold all, as if it held nothing at all. It is then not only our duty
and our holiness to acquaint our selves and be at peace with God, but our
wisdom and our interest; For it is as he pleases, always, and usually as we
please him, that either we have any thing that is good coming to us, or that
any good comes to us by that which we have.

Secondly, Note (which is a Corallary from the former observation) That the
renewing of our Communion with God, and making peace with him, is followed with
all manner of mercies and good things.

So shall good come unto thee. There was never any man a looser by acquaintance
with God; Gods acquaintance is a gainful acquaintance; Our acquaintance with
God, should we consider it abstractly and separate from all benefit but his
very acquaintance, yet that is benefit enough; God is the chiefest Good, and
therefore when we enjoy him, we enjoy all Good. The enjoyment of God himself
is infinitely more then the enjoyment of all created good things that come from
God. Friends are sometimes in those heights of friendship and noblenes of
spirit one to another, that they count the enjoyment of one another to be more
then all the benefits they can heap upon or reap by one another; it is your
good Company, says such a friend, and your acquaintance that delights me more
then all the good you can bestow upon me. And is not God much more so to us?
Thus (I say) acquaintance with God alone is all good; but besides (as the point
leads us to consider) God gives out good things from himself, to all his holy
acquaintants, temporal or bodily, good comes to us by his acquaintance, and so
also (and that chiefly) does spiritual or soul good. Acquaint thy self with
God, and the dewes of grace, showers of the Spirit shall fall into thy bosom.
Acquaint thy self with God, and spiritual Comfort shall flow in unto thee,
spiritual strength shall flow in unto thee, thy soul shall be filled as with
marrow and fatnes. And as good shall come to thee in person, so to thine; to
thy family and posterity good shall come. And as God will cause good to come to
such, so to stay and abide with them. As good comes, so good continues
according to the command and commission which it has from God. Thus he
promised in the Prophet ( Isa. 48.18.) in case his people had harkned to his
commandments; Then had thy peace been as a River, and thy prosperity as the
waves of the Sea. Thy peace and prosperity had not been as a Land flood or
Brooks of water which fail in summer when we have most need of them, (all
worldly things are apt to do so) but they should have flowed perpetually as a
river does, which is fed by a constant Spring, or as the Sea does which is the
feeder of all Springs. A godly man gets not only a large portion of good
things, but a lasting portion, yea a portion of those good things which are
everlasting, by acquainting himself with God. And because by acquaintance with
God so much good comes to us, Therefore Eliphaz presses Job further to it in
the next verse.

Verse. 22. Receive, I pray thee, the Law from his mouth, and lay up his words
in thine heart.
Receive, that is, learn from his mouth; he that teaches gives, Dat Magister
quando docet, capit discipulus quando discit. Drus.
and he that learnes receives; and the Hebrew word which we render here to
Receive, signifies not ordinary receiving, but receiving with an earnest
desire; yea, it implies a kind of violence in desire, such as they have who
take spoils in war. They fly upon the spoil, (...) verbum hoc ad praedam
quae cum violentia tollitur referri potest.
and catch it with as much eargernes as they won it with courage. So Receive
the Law from his mouth. David says, I have rejoiced in thy word, more then
they that find great spoils, (Psalm. 119.162.) O how strongly did his heart
run out to the word? And there is an Elegancy also in it, that this word which
signifies to receive the Law, Ex hac radice dicitur doctrina. (...) quase
accepta vel accipienda, quia sc: lex debet accipi grato and lubenti animo.
does also signify the Law or doctrine to be received. ( Prove. 4.2.) I give
you good doctrine, forsake you not my Law. The word which is there used for
doctrine is the same that ^s here rendered to receive, the reason is, because
wholesome doctrine ^s worthy to be received, and ought to be received willingly,
cheerfully, and gladly, and therefore the Gospel which is the highest and most
precious doctrine is called an Acceptable doctrine; This is a faithful saying,
and worthy of all Acceptance (1 Timothy 1.11.) The Gospel is worthy not only of
Acceptance, or of great, but of all Acceptance, and that from all men, even
from the Greatest; And so also is the Law; for, as shall be opened further
afterward; the Law in this place comprehends the Gospel also. Receive the Law
at his mouth.

Further, The word which we express Receive, is rendered by some to buy; we may
connect both senses here, Receive the Law as a thing bought and carry it home
with thee. That of Solomon (Prove. 23.23.) suites it well; Buy the truth, and
sell it not; Truth is a Commodity the trade whereof goes but one way; all
Civil Trades and Merchandises are continued by buying and selling, but this
spiritual trade is continued by buying only, without selling; it will be our
profit to have this Commodity always upon our hands, or rather always in our
hands. Thus here; Receive the Law at a price, buy it, and keep it; not that
the Lord does expect any price from us, or that we can bring any thing to him
valuable for it. We buy it, when we take pains for it, when we do our
utmost endeavor to receive the truth, when we receive the truth, not only
as it is offered and brought home to us, but when we go out for it, and seek
after it in all the means which God has appointed as conveyances of it,
that is buying the Law of truth.

Receive the Law. Again, We may profitably consider a double derivation of
that word which we trenslate, (...) a radice (...) explorare aut circumquaque
lustrare, quia lex universa est diligenter observanda, ne q^is in uno offendat.
Law. Some say it is from a root that signifies to behold or Contemplate, to
Consider, to look about; and the Law is well expressed by a word of that
sense, because the whole Law is diligently to be observed and considered,
looked into, and meditated upon, we are always to behold it, and that in
every part. For the whole Law is copulative, and he that offends in one part
offends in all. David speaking of the righteous man, ( Psalm. 1.2.) says, he
meditates in the law of the Lord day and night. What Is meditation? but the
Inward view of a thing, or the beholding it with an Intellectual eye;
meditation is the continual turning of things over in the mind, to behold the
excellencies and perfections that are in them.

A radice (...) quod est p^uere irrigare; quare commune and fere idem est
nomen, pluviae Doctoris and legislatoris.
Secondly, Say others, it proceeds from another radical word, that signifies
to rain, and that not only some small drissling dewing rain, but full
showers, or as we say to power down; and in the Hebrew, the same word
signifies, to rain, and to teach, because teaching by the word is like
raining, or the sending down of rain. The Apostle ( Heb. 6.7.) alludes to
it. For the earth which drinks in the rain that comes often upon it, etc. by
the earth he means those who hear the word or doctrine, which comes down
upon them like rain to soften their hearts and make them fruitful. There are
two other Texts of Scripture very suitable to this Exposition ( Esaias 30.20.)
Though the Lord give you the bread of adversity, and the water of affliction,
yet shall not thy teachers be removed into Corners any more, but thine eye
shall see thy teachers. Thy teachers shall not be removed, so we render: but
strictly from the letter of the Hebrew we may read it thus; (...) elongabit
^^viam.
Though the Lord give thee the bread of adversity etc. yet shall not thy rain
be removed from thee. It may seem strange that they should have the bread of
adversity, and the water of Affliction, and yet have also rain, which
naturally causes the earth to bring forth bread, and fills the pooles with
water. But the Prophet who speaks of corporal bread and water in the
former part of the verse, speaks of spiritual rain in the latter, making
this so full a compensation to the people of God, for the want of other two,
that they should have no cause to complain of it. As if the Prophet had said,
Though you are cut short in outward things, yet you shall not be shortened in
spiritualls, the rain of holy doctrine shall not be removed from you, or as
we translate, thy teachers shall not be removed etc. Some amongst us would
have the teachers of holy doctrine removed, lest by feeding them the bread and
water of the Land should fail, as if the charge of public preaching the
riches of the Grace of Christ would be an undoing, or at least an impoverishing
of the Nation. Whereas (I touch it only by the way) the Prophet comforts the
people of God in the midst of all their wants and outward afflictions, that
they should not want the presence of their teachers, nor the showers of holy
instruction by them. Again ( Joel 2.23.) Be glad O Zion, and rejoice in the
Lord your God, for he has given you the former rain moderately, and he will
cause to come down the rain, the former rain and the latter rain in the
first month. That which we render, (The former rain moderately) others
translate, a Teacher of righteousness, Sancte colludit propheta nominibus
doctoris seu legislatoris and pluv^ae, seu imbris maturini and serotini.
or according to righteousness; so you may find in the Margin of your larger
Bibles. And that is the great mercy which Zion is to rejoice in; for can we
think that Zion, the children of Zion should be called so earnestly to rejoice
merely in natural rain, or the effects of it; because of the abundance of
Corn and Wine and Oil, which the earth well watered usually produces? This
is too poor a thing (considered alone) for Zion to rejoice in! Zion or the
people of God do and must confess themselves unvvorthy of the least outward
mercy, even of a shovver of rain, or of a sheafe of corn, and they ought to
praise God, and be very thankful for these; But these are not properly, the
matter of Zions gladness and rejoicing. In these the world rejoices, Who
will show us any good (Psalm. 4.7.) they are for Corn, and Wine, and Oil, but
Lord (says David) lift up the light of thy Countenance upon me; Thou have put
gladness in mine heart, more then in the time that their corn and their wine
increased; As if he had said; Worldly men rejoice in corn and wine; but I
rejoice more in the light of thy countenance. The light of the favor of God,
and the light of the knowledge of God, are the chief matters of a believers
joy. And this light of holy joy comes in usually with and by the rain of that
doctrine, which falls upon us from the mouth of God in the teachings of his
divine Law. Receive the Law from his mouth.

But you will say, What is this Law which comes down like rain from
heaven? and which we are to receive from the mouth of God.

I answer; The Law may be taken two vvayes.

First, Strictly for the ten Commandments, or the five Books of Moses, which
are called the Law.

Secondly, More largely, and so the whole word of God is the Law. Christ
himself calls the Book of Psalms the Law two or three times in the new
Testament ( Joh. 10.34.) Jesus answered them, is it not written in your Law, I
have said ye are Gods? where was that written? in the 82d Psalm. v. 6. And
so again ( Joh. 15.25.) But this comes to pass, that the word might be
fullfilled that is written in their Law, they hated me without a cause. What
Law does he mean? those words we find ( Psalm. 35.19.) Take one text
further (1 Cor. 14.21.) In the Law it is written, With men of other tongues,
and other lips, will I speak unto this People. Where is that written? ( Esaias
28.11.) So that the Law, in a large sense, is taken for the whole body of the
word of God, or for the general Revelation of the mystery of his will; in
which sense we may say the Gospel is the Law; And the Gospel is expressly
called the Law (or rule) of faith (Romans 3.27.) So that by Law here we may
understand whatsoever the Lord has given us, either as a rule of life, or as
a rule of faith. The Seaventy translate Eliphaz speaking in that latitude,
(...).
Receive whatsoever God delivers, declares, or puts forth. Receive, I pray
thee, the Law from his mouth.

From whose mouth? from the mouth of God; how can that be? Indeed Moses went
up into the Mount, and was with God forty days, and there received the Law
from his mouth; but could Job Receive the Law from his mouth as Moses did? I
answer; If God had called him to it, as he did Moses he might. But that is not
the purpose of Eliphaz. Neither are we (I conceive) to understand him of such
a Receiving from the mouth of God, as the old Prophets had who received the
mind of God by Immediate Inspiration, and dictates from God himself: for
though they were not called up solemnly into a Mount (as Moses) to receive the
Law, yet the Spirit was sent to make known the mind of God to them. And in
that sense the Prophet Jeremiah is said to warn King Zedekiah from the mouth
of the Lord (2 Chronicles. 36.12.) And he did that which was evil in the sight of
the Lord his God, and humbled not himself before Jeremiah the Prophet speaking
from the mouth of the Lord; that is, he received a word from God by an
Extraordinary Revelation to carry unto the King, who yet humbled not himself.
And so ( Esaias 30.2.) the Lord complains of his people that walked to go down
to Egypt to strengthen themselves with the strength of Pharaoh etc. and yet
had not asked at his mouth, that is, had not asked direction in the thing
according to the vvayes of Revelation then in use, by enquiring of the
Prophets, or of the high Priest; And the Lord tells the Prophet Jeremy (Chapter
15.19. Prophetae sunt quasi os dei quia per ipsos loquutus est.
) that he should be as his mouth if he would take forth the precious from the
vile, as if he had said, if thou art faithful in my work, I will reveal my
self to thee, and thou shall speak even as if I my self spoke, thou shall be
as my mouth. Now, I conceive, Eliphaz does not go thus high when he bids Job
Receive the Law from the mouth of God, as if he were to expect Immediate
direction and advice from him. For then, we may be said to receive a rule or a
law from the mouth of God, when we receive that which God has manifested at
any time as a rule and law for us with the rest of his people to walk by:
they who receive that law once delivered from the mouth of God, may be said to
receive the law from his mouth, though they are not the Immediate receivers of
it, yea, though it were published some thousands of years before they were
borne. Some from these words, collect that the books of Moses were written
before this time, and that Eliphaz did refer Job to those, bidding him
receive that law which the mouth of God had spoken to Moses, but, though
whether the law were then formally spoken or no is a dispute, yet it is
without all dispute, that the mouth of God had then given a law or rule of
life to his people: and so Eliphaz might safely and truly say, Receive, I pray
thee, the law from his mouth, there having been a Revelation of the mind of
God among the faithful in all ages and times. God never left his people to
their own will, nor them to be their own Guide and Counselor. For when the
Apostle says ( Romans 2.14.) that the Gentiles having not the law are a law unto
themselves; his meaning is not that they had no law but one of their own
devising. They indeed had not the law of God formally spoken to their ears,
and preserved in tables of stone, but they had the substance of the law of God
naturally written in their hearts. So then, there has always been a law
from his mouth formally in the Church, and naturally in the world. Therefore
says Eliphaz, Receive the law from his mouth, and when he says, Receive the
law from his mouth, it may have a double Opposition.

First, To the will and vvisdome of Job; As if Eliphaz had said, Thou have
been hitherto a law to thy self, that is, thou have followed thy own advice,
Ex ore ejus notanter dicit, i. e. non ex ore aut arbitrio tuo. Merc.
run on upon thy own head, now Receive the law from his mouth. Man, naturally
has high thoughts of himself, and would be a law to himself. Not as ( Romans
2.14. which place was touched before) The Gentiles not having a law, were a
law to themselves; that is, they had the law of God written in their hearts by
nature; but besides that, there is a law which man would be to himself
against that law of nature written in his heart, and against the light of
nature shining in his conscience, he would set up a law, even his own Lust, in
opposition to the law of God. Thus he would be a law to himself, and not
Receive a law from the mouth of God. Therefore says Eliphaz; Now, receive the
law from his mouth.

Secondly, (from his mouth) may be opposed to the mouths of others; as if he
should say, if thou will not trust us, nor take our word, then trust God, we
would not have thee depend upon us, nor upon any man living, not on the
Judgment or Authority of any Creature, but receive the law from his mouth;
there is a law and a truth come from God, let thy faith be guided, and thy life
ordered by that.

Hence Note.

It is our duty to receive the rule from God. The Lord has power to give us
the law, and we must receive the law from him. None have power to Impose a
law upon us but God himself, nor may we devise a law for our selves; God is
the only Master of the Conscience, he alone can say, Receive the law at my
mouth. If you ask, what is it to receive the law? I answer, it is more then
to give it the hearing. To receive, is, first, to believe the law; secondly,
to receive, is to honor and reverence the law; thirdly, to receive the law,
is to yield up our selves to the obedience of it, to be cast into the mould of
it, to subject our selves wholy to the mind of God in it; Then we receive
the law when we take the Impressions of it, and have as it were the Image
and stamp of it upon our spirits, and in our lives; fourthly, then we receive
it when as it follows in the Text, we lay up his word in our hearts; barely
to receive it is not enough, you must lay it up, treasure it up.

And lay up his word in thy heart. This is opposed,

First, To forgetfullnes of the word, Praecedentis partis ex positio and
amplificatio. Ita legem suscipe ut ponas proprie, disponas art cura
sollicitudine observandi.
Receive the law and let it not slip out of thy memory.

Secondly, It is opposed to negligence in the practice of the law; lay it up
that it may be forth coming to direct thee in every duty. In Conversion the
law is written in the heart; every godly man has a Copy of the law in his
heart; That Is the description of a godly man, ( Psalm. 37.31.) The law of God is
in his heart, none of his steps shall slide; which is not an universal
exclusion of all failing and slipping, as if every godly man were as much past
sinning, as he is past perishing: but when it is said, none of his steps, the
meaning is, few of his steps shall slide, or he shall never slide so in any of
his steps as not to recover his feet and get up again. He shall walk very
holily, so holily as if all his vvalkings were but one continued act of
holiness. But, to the text, None of his steps shall slide quite and for ever out
of the way, because the law of God is in his heart. What David speaks in that
prophetical Psalm of Christ ( Psalm. 40.8.) Thy law is within my heart, is
true in its degree of every Christian, all the laws of God are in his heart.
That Character is again given of them ( Psalm. 84.5.) In whose heart are thy
ways; there is a suiting of the mind of God and the heart of man together in
regeneration. But now the duty spoken of in the Text is another thing; for a
man that has the law written in his heart, may yet possibly forget to lay up
the word and law of God in his heart, he may (under temptation and the
pressures of corruption) be negligent in that; it is the work of a godly man,
who has the law of God in his heart already, continually to lay up the law in
his heart; and so we are to understand such Scriptures as these ( Pro. 7.3.)
Keep my Commandments and live, and my law as the apple of thine eye, bind
them on thy fingers, write them on the table of thine heart etc. The first
writing of the law in the heart is by the finger of the Spirit, by Gods own
finger. As it was God that first wrote the law in tables of stone with his
own finger, so it is he that writes the law in these fleshy Tables of the heart
by the finger of the Spirit: yet Solomon persuades his son to write the law
upon the Table of his heart: when grace is received, and the law once written
in our hearts, we do as it were put in several fresh Copies of the law, we
are continually writing divine notions and Instructions upon our hearts; this
renewed act is ascribed to us, because we through grace join in it. We have an
Expression of like import ( Pro. 4.21.) My Son attend to my words, incline
thine ear to my sayings; let them not depart from thine eyes, keep them in the
midst of thine heart. The heart is said to be the midst or Center of the body,
now, says he, keep the law in the very midst of thine heart, in the safest
place; as the heart is the safest place the middle of the body, so the middle
of the heart is the safest place of the heart. So we may understand that of
David, I have hid thy Commandments in my heart (Psalm. 119.11.) And ( Deuteronomy.
6.6.) These words which I command thee this day, shall be in thine heart; that
is, thou shall lay them up there. Of this laying up the law in the heart we
are to understand Eliphaz here; as if he had said; O Job, thou have often heard
of the law, but thou have been a forgetful hearer; now hear it, and hold it,
now (as the Apostle exhorts the Hebrews, Heb. 2.1.) give the more earnest heed
to the things, which thou have heard, or shall hereafter hear, lest at any
time thou should let them slip, or thou should run out (as we there put
in the margin) as a leaking vessel.

Further, This laying up the word in the heart, is opposd unto a bare barren
knowledge; it is not enough to have the word of God in our heads, that is, to
know it: it is not enough to have the word of God upon our tongues, that is, to
speak of it, but we must lay it up in the heart; For though the heart, in
Scripture, takes in the understanding, and the whole soul, yet chiefly it
respects the affections; lay up the word in thine heart, that is, let thy
affections be vvarm'd with it, while thy memory retains and keeps it, and
thy understanding is enlightened with a true notion of it.

Hence Observe.

First, The word of God is a precious thing.

We do not lay up trifles and trash, but precious things, and treasure; we
lay up our Plate and Jewels, our Gold and Silver; the word of God should be
more to us than thousands of gold and silver, it is the most precious Jewel,
it is treasure, and therefore it must be laid up.

Secondly, The heart is the Arc or Cabinet, in which the word must be laid up.
There was an Arc or Chest provided for the law ( Exodus 25.21.) and that Arc
was Christ, he was typified by it, and indeed the law would be too hot for our
hearts, too hot to lie there if it had not first layne in the heart of Christ;
we (since fallen) could never have been an Arc for it, if he had not been.
The tables of the law were laid in the Arc, and the Arc (in which the law
was put) had a mercy-seat which did cover it all over (The dimensions of the
Arc and of the mercy-seate were exactly the same, two cubits and a half in
length, and a cubit and a half in breadth, ( Exodus 25.10.17.) so that nothing
of the law could appear or rise up in Judgment against poor sinners. The
propitiatory or mercy-seate covered all. Now as Christ has been the Arc of
the law to protect and cover us from the condemning power of it; so the hearts
of believers must be the Arc of the law, where it must be laid up with a
readiness of mind to yield our selves up to the commanding power of it. David
prophesying of Christ says ( Psalm. 40.10.) I have not hid thy righteousness
within my heart, yet he had said before, I delight to do thy will, thy law is
within my heart. To clear which Scripture take notice that there is a twofold
hiding of the righteousness or word of God in the heart. First, so as to
obscure or conceal it from others, in that sense David says, I have not hid
thy righteousness in mine heart, I have declared thy faithfullnes and thy
salvation, and not concealed thy loving kindness and truth from the great
Congregation. And thus no man ought to lay up the truths, the law, the promises
of God in his heart to conceal and stifle them there. Secondly, There is a
hiding of the law in our hearts, first, that it may be safe, lest Satan or the
world should snatch it from us. Secondly, That we may further consider of it;
when a man has got an excellent truth, or Scripture, he should lay it up in
his heart to ponder and meditate more upon it, to draw out the sweetness, and to
experience the power of it. Thirdly, That we may have it ready at hand for our
use; and so the Scribe instructed for the kingdom of heaven is described by
bringing forth out of his treasury things both new and old. How sad is the
condition of many that have heard much, but laid up little or nothing at all of
all that word which they have heard. Some having laid it up in their note
books, are satisfied with that; it is good and useful to do so; but do not
let it lie there, get a Copy of it in your hearts; a few truths in your hearts
are better to you then many truths in your books; no man was ever saved by the
word in his book; unless that word were also written in his heart. God
commanded the Jews (Deuteronomy. 6.8, 9.) to write the law upon the post of their
houses, and on their gates, to bind them as a sign upon their hand, and as
frontlets between their eyes. They were commanded also to put fringes upon the
borders of their garments ( Numb. 15.38.) which our Savior calls Phylacteries
(Math. 23.5.) these were ribands of blue silk, or as some say, scroles of
parchment upon which the law being first wrought or written, and then bound
upon their garments, they were to look upon it, and remember all the
commandments of the Lord (Number. 15.39. Vanissimi profecto pharisaei illi, qui
cum ipsi non servarent in cord manda^a, at membranulas decalogi complicantes
and quasi corona^ capiri facientes. phylacterium eoc sua proprictate,
Custodit^rium est. Bold.
) Now, says Christ, they make broad their Phylacteries, and enlarge the
borders of their Garments; as much of the law as you will upon their Clothes,
but none of it in their hearts. Thus the proud Scribes and Pharisees went about
as it were Clothed with the word of God, but his word was far from their
hearts, nor did it appear in their lives; it is a mere vanity to have much of
the law in our books, while we neglect to keep it in our hearts, and act it
in our ways. The former is good, but it does no good without the latter. The
want of this, the laying up the word in the heart, causes the great want of
Saints in the things of God; and as many loose that Grace which they seemed to
have, so many are at a loss in the use of that Grace which they have, because
they have not laid up the word of God in their hearts so carefully as they
ought. We say proverbially, Sure bind and sure find; They who would surely
find the comfort of the word of God when they need it, had need to bind it
sure, when they receive it.

JOB, CHAP. 22. Verse. 23, 24.25. If thou return to the Almighty, thou shall be
built up, thou shall put away iniquity far from thy Tabernacles.

Then shall thou lay up gold as dust, and the gold of Ophir as the stones of
the brooks.

Yea, the Allmighty shall be thy defense, and thou shall have plenty of silver.


ELiphaz having invited Job (at the 21 verse) to renew his acquaintance with
God, and now again pressing him to return to God, he reckons up those
advantages which might move, and encourage him (...) it; he tells Job what will
follow his return to, and acquaintance with God, and these advantages are of
two sorts.

First, Temporal, and outward; secondly, spiritual, and inward; the temporal
good things which he assures him of in case he repent, and turn to God, are
set down first more generally in the 23 verse, Thou shall be built up;
secondly, They are set down particularly; first, He should then have riches,
gold and silver in the 24^h verse; secondly, protection, The Allmighty shall be
thy defense, (v. 25.) as he will fill thy house; so he will guard thy house and
keep all safe.

In the following parts of the Chapter, Eliphaz assures him of eight blessings
spiritual.

First, Joy in God, ver. 26th; Thou shall have thy delight in the Allmighty.

Secondly, Confidence, or holy boldness before God; Thou shall lift up thy
face unto God; thou shall not hide thy head, and run into ^orners, but lift up
thy face.

Thirdly, (which is an effect or part of the former) freedom in prayer; Thou
shall make thy prayer to him, (v. 27th)

Fourthly, He assures him of audience, or of an answer to his prayer in the
same verse; He shall hear thee, and thou shall pay thy vows; that is, thou in
thy prayer having made vows to God, God shall hear thy prayer, and so give
thee occasion to pay thy vows.

Fifthly, He promises him not only that his prayer shall be heard, but that
his very purposes and designs shall be fullfilled; Thou shall decree a thing,
and it shall be established to thee, v. 28. When thou resolvest upon such a
way, or course in thy affairs, thou shall have this privilege, thy decree
shall stand.

Sixthly, He promises him direction and counsel, what way he should take,
what course to run in the close of the same verse; And the light shall shine
upon thy ways; that is, thou shall see what to do, the Lord will give thee
counsel.

Seaventhly, He gives him hope of rising out of any trouble, or that when
others are overtaken with calamities, he should be preserved, at the 29th
verse; When men are cast down then thou shall say, there is a lifting up, for
God will save the humble person.

Eighthly, He promises, that he shall not only have blessings personal, and
family blessings, but he shall be a ^^blique blessing, ( v. 30.) He shall
deliver the Island of the innocent, and it is delivered by the pureness of thy
hand. Thus you have both the general scope of this latter part of the Chapter;
which is to stir up Job to return to God, and likewise the particular
blessings and mercies which are held forth as arguments moving him to return.

Verse. 23. If thou return unto the Allmighty.
To Return is used frequently in Scripture in a metaphorical sense, and
signifies as much as to repent; sin is a going away from God, great sinning is
a going far from God, a going, as it were, into a far Country, such sinners
would go out of Gods sight, and fall out of his memory. Eliphas had charged
Job deeply with such departures; and now he speaks to him of returning.

And here we may consider the condition or state of Job, and the season in
which Eliphaz presses him to this duty, he was in an afflicted condition, the
hand of God was upon him. Now Eliphaz advises him to return; Intimating at
least, that the present dispensation of God toward him, was a special
opportunity for the duty he moved him unto.

Hence Note.

When God afflicts us, when his hand is upon us, he speaks to us, repent, or
bespeaks our repentance. How often in Scripture does the Lord complain as if
he were wholy frustrated of his design, when either nations or persons being
smitten by his judgments did not return unto him, or repented not. ( Isa.
9.13.) They turn not to him that smites them; that is, they turn not to me
the Lord: I have smitten them, and I alone can heal them, yet they turn not
to me; as if the Lord had said, I therefore smote them that they might bethink
themselves of returning, but they turned not to me. As they turned not at my
word, or to me speaking, so they turned not at my sword, or to me smiting. I
see they are not only Sermon-proofe, my Prophets spoke to them in vain, but
they are judgement-proofe also, my hand is upon them in vain, they return
not. And as it was then, so at this day, for may we not observe, some
mouldering in their estates, crushed in their hopes, crossed in their children,
blotted and blasted in their credit, weak and sick in their bodies, even
tired and worn out under several afflictions, yet no thought of returning to
the Lord, or of making their way perfect before him. So that the Lord may say
to them, as he once did to his ancient people the Jews (Isa. 1.6.) Why should
ye be smitten any more, ye will revolt more and more. The returning of many is
like that which Solomon speaks of ( Pro. 26.11.) As a dog returns to his
vomit, so a fool returns to his folly; As Jesurun waxed fat, and kicked, so
some will be kicking while they wax lean.

Further, Eliphaz does not speak barely to Job of returning, but he directs
him to the object; If thou return To the Allmighty.

And that is expressed in some translations very emphatically, (...) revertere
usque ad dominum, videtur idem esse cum (...)
Return home to the Allmighty, return till thou come to or reachest God, be
thou sure to repent home; so the word is used ( Hos. 14.2. Joel 2.12. Amos 4.6.
return home to God, stay not short of him in your repentance, that is, repent
fully, seriously; And the intendment of Eliphaz in speaking thus, might be to
reprove Job for his former (by him supposed) hypocrisy: Si plane and serio,
toto cord, no^ ut ante hypocrita fuisti etc. Merc:
thou have returned before, but not to the Allmighty, surely thou did repent
only as an hypocrite in former times when thou made the greatest shows of
repentance. Therefore now repent as a sincere convert. Thy former repentunce
was to thee a fruitless repentance, and therefore doubtless but a fained and
false repentance. Thou could never after it recover out of thine afflicted,
thy ruinous condition, and therefore surely thou did never by it recover out
of thy sinful condition, or from thy sins. But now, I promise thee, if thou
return to the Allmighty, thou shall be built.

Hence note.

That, True repentance is a full, a home returning to God.

Much of the progress of a Christian is to go backward, backward (I mean)
from those sins and evils to which he has (by temptation) been carried forth;
nor (having sinned) can any man go forward till he return to God. We read in
Scripture, of God returning to us, as well as of our returning unto God; in
both there is repentance; when God returns to us, he repents of the evil of
punishment, that he has brought upon us; and when we return to God, we repent
of the evil of sin which we have committed against him: only be sure (as the
points directs) that ye return home to God. The Prophet found Isreal's
repentance defective in this ( Hos. 7.16.) They return (that is, they make a
show of repentance) but not to the most high. There is a repentance which
brings the soul never the nearer unto God. And that is a repentance (as we
speak) never the near, or to no purpose. Thus another Prophet taxes their
fasting ( Zech. 7.5.) When ye fasted and mourned in the fifth and seventh
month, even those seventy years, did ye at all fast unto me, even to me?
Observe how he doubles it upon that point, as if the whole emphasis of
repentance lay upon that point; To me, even to me. As David in confessing his
sin ( Psalm. 51.4.) Against thee, thee, thee only have I sinned etc. Many fast,
but not at all to God, they return, but not at all to God. They fast to
themselves, and return to themselves, that is, their own interest, not the
honor of God is the motive and end of their fasting and repenting. And hence
the Prophet is plain and downeright with Israel in this case ( Jer. 4.1.) If
thou will return, O Israel, says the Lord, return unto me; as if Israel had
used to return, but always short of God, or not to God, Israel made some stop
in the work of repentance before he came at God. Now then (says the Lord by
his Prophet) O Israel, if thou will return, return to me. If thou have any
further purpose to return, be persuaded to return to some purpose. Let not
thy repentance be any longer such as is to be repented of. All our returnings
are but wanderings, unless we return to God.

But when may we be said to return to God?

I answer; first, when we return out of a sense of sin against God, as well as
of smart upon our selves; for when we return only because of smart, we return
to our selves rather then to God; as when it is said in Hosea (Chap. 7.16.)
They returned, but not to the most high; we may see the reason of this charge
at the 14th verse; They have not cried unto me with their heart, when they
howled upon their beds: they assemble themselves for corn and for wine, and
they rebel against me. As if he had said, all their crying and howling, is not
because they have sinned against me, but because their sins have pincht them,
they do not mourn because of their wickedness, but because of their wants.
It Is famine that moves them, not my fear. They would feign be at their full
tables again, they are all for corn and wine, nothing for grace and
holiness. We may say of some persons repenting, as Job (Chap. 6.6.) of the
wild Ass braying, Does the wild Ass bray when he has grass, or loweth the
Ox over his fodder; he applied it to his own case, that he did not cry out
without cause, he was, nor complain when he felt no pain; but (I say) we may
apply it to some persons repenting. They would never bray if they had but
grass enough, nor low if they had foddar enough; that is, if they had but
outward comfort enough, corn and wine, health and strength enough, did they
but abound in these, you should never hear them complain nor shed a tear,
how much soever they abound in sin; All the world cannot satisfy the soul of
a godly man, till (after sinning) he be reconciled to God; His soul is hungry
and thirsty, notwithstanding all his corn and wine, till he be filled with the
favor of God. And, this is indeed to return to the Allmighty.

Secondly, Then also we return to the Almighty, when we turn specially from
and mourn for that sin whereby we have most provoked the Allmighty; when
that which has most offended God, is most offensive and burdensome unto us.
For though in repentance, every sin is to be repented of, yet some more; As
Samuel said to the house of Israel (1 Samuel 7.3.) if you do return to the Lord
with all your hearts, then put away the strange Gods and Astaroth. But why does
he exhort them to put away that strange God Astaroth, by name, more then any
other of their strange gods? I answer; it was because they had most provoked
the true God by worshipping that strange God, and therefore he counsels them as
ever they would approve themselves to have returned to God in their repentance,
to look to it, that they turned from that Idol. If every strange God must be
put away when we return to God, how can we return to God, if we put not away
our Astaroth. Thus the rule was given by the king of Niniveh, in proclaiming a
fast ( Jon. 3.8.) Let them turn every one from his evil way (that is, from
his beloved sin) and from the violence that is in their hands, that is, from
the sin of oppression, by which they got much into their hands. But why does he
instance in that sin? Surely because that was the common sin of that City,
they were an oppressing people, and loved the gain of oppression, or to get by
violence; They lived more by the blood of others, then by their own sweat,
more by the violence, then the labor of their hands, therefore they must
particularly repent of that sin. If the covetous man return to God, he must
turn from every sin, and from his covetousness. If the proud man return to
God, he must turn from every sin, and from his pride, this is the nature of
returning to the Allmighty, yet

Thirdly, Unless we do all this with the whole heart, we do not return to
the Allmighty (2 Chronicles. 6.38.) Jere. 3.10. Jere. 24.7. The wicked are serious
and cordial in sinning, they must be so in repenting. But some sinner possibly
may say, I have gone away too far to return; No, Jer. 3.1. Thou have played
the harlot with many lovers, yet return unto me, says the Lord. Another will
say, I have sliden back and relapsed, I have as it were, repented of my
repentance. The Prophet answers this doubt ( Jer. 3.12.) Return thou
backsliding Israel, says the Lord. And again ( v. 14.) Turn O backsliding
children, says the Lord, for I married unto you etc.

If thou return etc. Eliphaz having thus showed him that it is his duty to
return to the Allmighty, now proceeds to show that it will be his happiness,
and this he does by an enumeration of those manifold blessings which follow our
returning to him. Whereof the first is, Thou shall be built up.

Affliction and trouble, which are the fruit of sin, pull down, and lay us
wast, godly sorrow and repentance, which are our turning from sin, have a
promise of this good fruit, That we shall be built up again.

This building up, may be taken two ways; first, more generally for an
increase in all good things; secondly, more specially for an increase in
children. In the Hebrew the same word, (...) filius inde dictus, quod
aedifictum sit and structura parentium. Merc:
which signifies a son, signifies, to build, because children build up their
fathers house, or are their fathers building; in that sense the word is often
used, ( Genesis 16.2. Genesis 30.3. Ruth 4.11.) It is said ( Exodus 1.21.) that God
built the midwives houses; which some interpret, he gave them children, Prolem
dedit. Merc:
or made them more fruitful in childbearing. We read in the law how that man
was to be dealt with, who refused to take his brothers wife, according to the
commandment of God in those times, and the conclusion of all is ( Deuteronomy. 25.9.)
So it shall be done to the man that shall not build up his brothers house, that
is, who refuses to marry his brothers widow, and (through the blessing of
God) to have children by her, which would be as the building up of his house,
or the continuance of his name and family. Thus some understand the phrase
here; Thou shall be built up, that is, thou, who have lost all thy children;
Thou, whose house has been pulled down by the fall of a house ( Chapter 1.19.)
shall have more children, and so thy house built up again. But I rather take
the phrase here in that larger sense, and so to be built up, implies all kind
of prosperity in outward things. ( Mal. 3.15.) Now ye call the proud happy, yea
they that work wickedness are set up, we put in the Margin, are built up,
that is, they are very prosperous, they may have what they will in this world,
or (as we say) the world at will. And (note that by the way) it is the vvorst
character of an age, when they that work wickedness (which ruins the best
built State) are built up. The Lord makes a promise in the language of this
Metaphor to the Church, ( Jer. 31.4.) I will build thee, and thou shall be
built, O virgin of Israel; As if he had said plainly, I will bless thee, and
raise thee up out of the dust of thy present desolate condition, into a
glorious fabric of prosperity and honor; so it follows in the same text;
Thou shall again be adorned with thy tabrets, and go forth in the dances of
them that make merry. This sense of the word is clear in that opposition used
in the Psalm ( Psalm. 28.5.) Therefore says the Lord, I will destroy thee, and
not build thee up, that is, thou shall be destroyed for ever, I will never
repair any of thy ruins, thine shall be as Asaph speaks ( Psalm. 74.3.)
Perpetual desolations. So that, when Eliphaz promises Job, Thou shall be
built up; his meaning is, thy ruined state shall be repaired, and thou shall
have not only a beautiful, but a well foundation'd felicity.

Hence note; It is no vain nor unprofitable thing to repent and turn to the
Allmighty.

If we by repentance pull down the strong holds of sin, if we forsake and
lay wast our lusts, the Lord will build us up, he will build us up with all
manner of blessings; repentance is fruitful; There are many who profess they
repent, but they do not bring forth fruits meet for repentance; but as true
repentance is accompanied with our fruits of holiness and obedience toward God,
so with Gods fruits, the fruits of his love and mercy toward us. Ther^ is a
kind of repentance in hell, there is weeping, wailing, and gnashing of teeth,
but that is a fruitless repentance, as well as a faithless repentance; the
damned are under chains of everlasting darkness. Unsound repentance, or the
repentance of hypocrites in this life, is like the repentance of the damned in
the next life, but true repentance is fruitful. If we as the Baptist exhorted
the Jews (Math. 3.) Bring forth fruit meet for repentance, our repentance
will bring forth fruit meet for us; we shall have good things of all sorts, if
we sorrow (as the Apostle says the Corinthians did) after a godly sort; godly
sorrow is rewarded with joy; if we humble our selves, God will lift us up. The
sorrows of Gospel repentance, are like the sorrows of a woman in travail, who
(as Christ speaks Joh. 16.21.) straight way forgets her pain for joy that a
man is borne into the world. The pangs and throws of godly sorrow are therefore
said by the Apostle to cause repentance not to be repented of, because that
repentance brings forth joy to be rejoiced in, a masculine joy, joy that a
man-child of Grace to build up our spiritual house is brought into the world.
If thou return to the Allmighty, thou shall be build up. And Thou shall put
iniquity far from thy tabernacles.

The word imports, first, putting away with indignation; secondly, putting away
to the utmost distance; therefore we translate, put away far; it is but two
words in the Original; Thou shall put iniquity far etc. Iniquity may be
taken either for sin, or for the effects of sin, that is, punishment; if we
take it in the first sense for sin it self; and then, this latter clause must
be understood as a duty; If thou return to the Allmighty, thou shall be built
up, thou shall put away iniquity far from thee, that is, It is thy duty to
put away iniquity far from thee; as if Eliphaz here did set forth more fully
what repentance is; thou shall be built up if thou return to the Allmighty;
that is, if thou return so as to put thy iniquity far from thee; if we take
iniquity in the second sense, for the punishment of iniquity, then the words
are a promise, as if he had said, if thou return etc. then thou shall rid and
discharge thy self and thy house of all the troublesome effects of sin; Thou
shall put iniquity, or all the sad issues and consequents of iniquity, far
from thee, none of them shall touch thee to annoy thee.

Mr Broughton pitcheth upon the former sense in his translation; If thou cast
far off unrighteousness from thy tents. That gives a perfect sense to the
whole sentence, and from thence we may

Observe; That, in true repentance sin must be utterly cast off and put away.

We return not at all to the Allmighty, till we wholly turn from sin, nor
will the Allmighty build up our house, till we put iniquity quite out of our
house; till we turn it out of house and home; out of the house of our family,
out of the home of our hearts; nor is it enough to put sin away a little, or
a little way, but it must be put far away. There are several degrees of
putting away sin; first, There is a putting it away out of our practice, or
conversation, so that it has no visible being or abode in us or with us. This
is a putting of sin away, but this is not a putting of sin far away.
Secondly, There is a putting of it out of our affections, or out of our hearts;
not as if we could keep it (while we are in the body) from having a place or
dwelling there, but as keeping it from having a throane or reigning there. This
is to put sin very far away from us; it is no great thing to put sin out of
our hands, but it is hard to get it out of our hearts; hypocrites will
(possibly) lay down the practice of it, but still their spirits cleave to it,
they are not at all alienated from the love of it, but only restrained from
the acting of it; such are oftentimes kept from doing iniquity, but they do not
at all put away their iniquity, much less put it far away. As it is with a
natural man in reference to his doing of Good, so to his not doing of evil;
If good be at any time in his practice, yet it is far from his spirit, he
has no mind to it, he cannot say the law of God is in his heart, or that he
delights to do it; so if evil be at any time put out of his practice, yet it
is still in his spirit, his mind is toward it, he cannot say that his heart is
withdrawn from it, or that he hates it. No, but as the Prophet Ezekiel speaks
of the stubborn Jews (Ezekiel. 11.21.) Their heart walks after the heart of
their detestable things. As every Godly man is (in the maine) like David, A man
after Gods own heart, and walks after the heart of God; so every ungodly man
is a man after the heart of the devil, and every Idolater or worshipper of
false Gods (who is one of the worst of ungodly men) is after the heart of his
false gods, and he walks after the heart of his false Gods, which the Prophet
calls detestable things. Whatsoever is most after the heart or according to the
desires and commands of an Idol, that the Idolatrous heart walks after; that
is, he loves it, he delights in it, and thus does every natural man's heart
walk after the heart of his lust, though sometime his feet walk not after
it, or he may seem to lay it out of his hand. But he that turns indeed from
sin, deals with it, when he is repenting of it, as the Lord does when he is
pardoning it. How is that? The Lord in pardoning sin, puts it far from us (
Psalm. 103.12.) As far as the East is from the West, so far has he removed
our transgressions from us; That is, he has removed them from us to the utmost
imaginable distance; for such is that of the East from the West: they and we
shall no more meet together again, then the East and West shall or can meet
at all. And thus in repenting a godly man desires to put his sin as far from
him as the East is from the West, that he and they may never meet together in
the practice of them, as he is assured that God has so pardoned them that they
and he shall never meet together in the punishment of them.

Thou shall put away iniquity far from thy Tabernacles. Innuit ante hac ^ec
Jobum nec e us filios culpa vacasse, ideocum eversum and filios extinctos. Merc:
In which words he includes more then his own personal repentance; for by the
Tabernacles, we are to understand the whole family or household, the tabernacle
containing, is put for the persons contained; in this Eliphaz seems to strike
at Job for his former course, as if he said, Wickedness has lodged not only
in thy heart, but in thy house, in thy family, children and servants. And this
surely was it which provoked the Lord to crush thy family of children and their
servants with the fall of a house; now therefore I counsel thee to put away
iniquity from thy tabernacle, that is, from all that belong to thee, from all
that are under thy shadow, and are committed to thy trust and charge.

Hence observe; That they who repent truly should endeavor to purge sin not
only from themselves, but from all that belong to them.

They should cleanse not their persons only, but their families, they should
sweep their houses, as well as their hearts from sin. ( Genesis 35.2.) Then Jacob
said to his household, and to all that were with him, put away the strange Gods
(or, the estranging Gods (such are Idols, they are not only strange, because
new Gods, and strange, because it is a strange or wonderful thing that man
should be so besotted as to worship such things for Gods, but they are
estranging Gods) because they withdraw or steal away the heart from the true
God; therefore said Jacob put away the strange Gods) that are among you, and be
clean, and change your garments. This outward changing of their garments
signified the changing or cleansing of their souls. God principally looks at
that, and the outward ceremony has no acceptance at all without the inward
sincerity; In comparison of which, as the Lord said in Joel, Rent your hearts,
and not your garments, so he would say here, change your hearts, and not your
Garments. Now Jacob was very careful, that this blessed change of Garments,
betokening the change and cleansing both of heart and life, should be the
livery of all his family and household. Family sins bring family judgments
as well as personal: and they that have the charge of a family, have (in a
great degree) a charge of souls as well as of bodies; every Master of a family
has cure of souls; And he is to see so far as lies in him, that no sin
nor wickedness remain or be harbored in his family, that his children and
servants live not in ignorance, nor in any evil. In the 6th of Numbers, Moses
gives charge to the Congregation, That they should depart from the tents of
those wicked men, Corah, Dathan, and Abiram; it is dangerous to be near the
families of the wicked, but it is more dangerous to have wickedness remaining
in our family, in our servants, or in our children. And if Masters endeavor
not by all due means, to remove sin out of their family, that in a little time
may remove them out of their family, or (as we say) eat them out of house and
home. Thou shall put away iniquity far from thy Tabernacle. Thus much of this
part of the verse, in the first sense, as iniquity is taken for sin; yet,

Further, as the word iniquity is taken for punishment, thou shall put away
iniquity (or the effects of iniquity) far from thy Tabernacle; and then the
words are both a new promise and a further explication of what is meant by
being built up, which was the former promise; Thou shall be built up, and all
evil shall depart away from thy Tabernacle. Iniquity, which properly signifies
the evil of sin, is often put in Scripture, for the evils of trouble and
suffering; and as all acknowledge this to be a truth, so some judge it the
truth specially intended in this place. I shall therefore briefly, note from
it, That, when we truly return to God from sin, then suffering evils depart
from us and ours.

For though the Lord be pleased to dispense variously for trial of his people,
and often suffers the evil of affliction to hang about their Tabernacles, who
desire sincerely, and endeavor faithfully to put all iniquity far from their
Tabernacles, yet this is the promise of God, and this has been often
experienced by Godly men; That God has turned trouble out of their doors,
when they have humbly and zealously labored to turn sin out of their hearts.

Eliphaz having encouraged Job by this general promise, he draws it forth
into particulars. And that, first, in reference to outward things.

Verse. 24. Then, shall thou lay up gold as dust, and the gold of Ophir as the
stones of the brooks.
(...) munire. Aurum lectissimum quasi ab igne munitum, aut quod sit h^mini
munimentum.
Then, that is, when thou have acquainted thy self with God; then, when thou
have laid up his law in thy heart; then, when thou have returned to the
Almighty thy self, and put away iniquity far from thy Tabernacle; Then thou
shall lay up gold as dust, etc. The word which we render Gold, signifies to
fortify, or to defend, and it is translated a defense at the 25th verse
Solomon says ( Eccl. 7.12.) not only, That wisdom is a defense, but that
money is a defense, (that is, it procures defense) and Gold is the chief of
money. Though Gold be not a defense formally, yet virtually it is; Gold defends
it self against all the forces of fire, and it is a principal means of
defending us against the fire and fury of the Greatest dangers. Thou shall lay
up Gold as dust, etc. But Christ says ( Math. 6.19,) Lay not up treasures for
your selves on earth. And it was a rule given concerning the King of Israel in
the Leviticall Law, long before Israel had a King, ( Deuteronomy. 17.17.) He shall not
greatly multiply to himself silver and gold. How then, does Eliphaz say, that
he who repents, shall lay up gold as the dust? is that fit work for him? I
answer, the words are not to be understood as an exhortation to bend his
endeavors to the gathering of riches; but as a promise from God that he shall,
by a blessing from above, gather store of riches here below. Thou shall lay up
gold as the dust. By gold here, and silver in the next verse, we are to
understand all manner of riches; because gold and silver are the chief riches,
therefore all is contained under them. And when he says, Thou shall lay up
gold as the dust, the words receive variety of renderings; some thus, Thou
shall lay up gold above the dust; as if he should say; thou shall have more
gold than dust, which is a strain of rhetoric, expressing abundance; Others
read, Thou shall lay up gold upon the dust; As ( Psalm. 24.2.) He has founded
it upon the Seas; A third renders, Thou shall lay up gold by the dust; Like
that ( Psalm. 1.3.) A tree planted by the river side: A fourth thus, Et pone in
pulvere Aurum. Coc: Noli animum auro apponere, nimisque illud diligere, sed
nihili aestima, deijce in terram unde ortum est aestima ut terram and lapides
petrae. Scull. Pone ubi deus and Natura posuit. Coc.
by way of counsel; And lay gold in the dust. Which two latter readings, are
expounded as a direction given to Job, how he should lay up gold, he must not
lay up gold in his heart and spirit, but in the dust, or by the dust; As if he
had said; Put that purer dust, that better concocted, and refined dust, in the
common dust; put the dust to dust; put thy gold in its proper place, where God
and nature put it. It Is but dust, and so a fit companion for the dust; yea (say
some) it is as if Eliphaz had said; Do not so much as make room for it in thy
house, provide not chests for it, let it lie where it had its original; It
came from the dust, there leave it, return it back to its own Country, to
the place of its nativity. A Heathen has this notion concerning gold and
silver, etc. And he labors much to show that the site and position of these
things in nature, holds forth how we ought to receive and estimate them; Nulli
nos vitio natura conciliat, nihil quide^ quod avaritiam nostram irritaret
posuit in aperto: pedibus aurum and argentu^ sub jecit, calcandum ac premendum
dedit, and quicquid est propter quod calcamur and premimur. Sen: ep: 94.
Even nature (by which he means the ordinary course set in nature) draws us
off from coveting Gold and silver; there is nothing which may provoke or stir
up covetousness, which God has advanced or set up high in the order of
nature; Gold and silver are the chief objects of Covetousness, now both
these, as also whatsoever else man is pressed about, and as it were trodden
underfoote in the dirt for, by burdensome or covetous cares, God has thrust or
trodden under our feet; Gold does not fall out of the clouds of heaven, hut
lies under the clods of the earth; there God has put them to be trampled and
trodden under our feet, that we might scorn to have our affections trampled
upon and trodden underfoote by them, or such things as they. So then, All that
this interpretation or translation aims at in saying Gold must be put in the
dust, is only to show us, that our estimations should be taken off from it, or
that we should place it as low in our thoughts, as God has placed it in the
order of nature. And this is a spiritual sense, suiting that of our Savior;
Lay not up for your selves treasures on earth, make not great preparations to
keep your earthly treasures, especially let them not be kept in your heart, or
lie there where Christ only and the treasures of heaven ought to be laid up.
Put your gold in the dust, or let it be esteemed as dust, seeing at best it is
but well concocted dust. So Gold and silver are called Amos 2.7. That part after
the dust of the earth upon the head of the poor. So the Prophet describes
their extreme covetousnes, who will be rich, though it be by empoverishing
those who are poorest.

Yet I conceive in this place Eliphaz has another aim; And that where be
says; Thou shall lay up Gold as the dust, his meaning only is, thou shall lay
up plenty of Gold, or ^^ou shall gather much riches; for the dust of the earth
or sand of the Sea are used frequently to signify abundance, or the exceeding
numerousnesse of things, or persons; Who can count the dust of Jacob? and the
number of the fourth part of Israel (Numb. 23.10.) that is, they are as the
dust that cannot be counted, or numbered; that was the promise made to Abraham
(Genesis 13.16.) I will make thy seed as the dust of the earth. So here, Thou
shall lay up gold as the dust, that is, gold more then thou can tell, or cast
up; Thou shall have not only enough, but even more then enough. Job was very
rich before, now says Eliphaz, Thou shall have gold as the dust, thy riches
shall be increased, thou shall have a greater store and stock then ever. Thou
shall lay up gold as the dust. And as it follows The Gold of Ophir as the
stones of the brook.

It Is the same thing in another tenor of words; the Hebrew is, Thou shall lay
up Ophir as the stones of the brook. The word gold is not expressed in the
Original; yet it may well be understood; Ophir Nomen insula unde au^u^ primae
no^ae adferebatur; quod inde Ophir appellatum hoc est, ut quidam opinantur
Obrysum quasi Ophirisum. Drus.
Ophir is put for the Gold of Ophir, because Ophir was the place of Gold, yea
of the richest Gold (1 Kings 9.27, 28.) They came to Ophir and fet from thence
gold four hundred and twenty tallents, and brought it to king Solomon. Ophir
was a noted place in those times for gold, both in reference to the plenty and
purity of it. It Is a question much controverted, where Ophir is; some making it
to be an Island in Africa; others place it in India; since the discovery of
America or the West Indyes, many contend, that Ophir is now called Peru; and
they have (as they conceive) a probable ground for this opinion from that place
in the Holy Story (2 Chronicles. 3.6.) Where it is said, He (that is, Vid: Bold. in
hunc locum Jobi.
Solomon) garnished the house with precious stones for beauty, and the gold was
gold of Paruaim, which is near in sound to the name of that Gold-abounding
Country in America called Peru. I shall not undertake to decide this
Geographicall Controversy about Ophir; That which is agreed on all hands is
enough for my purpose, and the explication of this Text, that Ophir was a
Country famous in ancient times, both for the plenty and excellency of the Gold
found there and brought from thence. Therefore said Eliphaz, Thou shall lay up
Ophir, that is, the Gold of Ophir, pure and precious Gold.

As the stones of the brook. That is, thou shall have abundance of gold; to
lay up gold (...) the dust, and to lay it up as the stones of the brook, or as
the stones of the valley, are parallel expressions for plenty of Gold, suitable
to those hyperbole's (2 Chronicles. 1.15.) The king made silver and gold at
Jerusalem as plenteous as stones etc. And Chap. 9 of the same book ( v. 27.)
The king made silver in Jerusalem as stones, and Cedar trees made he as the
Siccamore trees that are in the low plain in abundance. Thus in the text Job
is promised to lay up the Gold of Ophir, as the stones of the brook.

The Vulgar translation reads differently; He shall giv^ Thee for earth a
Rock, Dabit pro terra silicem and pro silice torrentes aureos. Vulg.
and for a Rock streams of Gold; which is a proverbiall speech, implying a
change for the better; as if he said, thou before who had a sandy foundation,
shall now build upon a rock, as ( Math. 7.27.) And we find such language in
the Prophet ( Isa. 60.17.) where the Lord promises, for brass I will bring
gold, for Iron silver, for wood brass, etc. So here, For earth I will give
thee stone, and for stone Golden brooks, or brooks of Gold, that is, those
brooks where gold is, or, I will give thee much Gold out of those brooks.

Idque ponendo pro pulvere lectissimum aurum, and pro rupe Ophirin^m
stuviatile. Jun.
Junius seems to favor this translation most of all, rendering the whole verse
thus, connexing it with the former; Thou shall be built up etc. and that by
giving thee for dust the choicest gold, and for the rock the river gold of
Ophir. By all assuring Job of a happiness in his civil state in case he did
change or mend in his spiritual state. Then he who had so great a change in
his worldly estate for the worse, should have a greater change in his worldly
state for the better. The next verse is a continuation of the promise, much to
the same intent, and almost in the same words, and therefore I shall open that
also before I give any observations.

Verse. 25. Yea the Allmighty shall be thy defense, and thou shall have plenty
of silver.
There is some difference in the reading of this verse, for the word which we
translate defense, is the same which we translate gold in the former verse. And
hence some translate thus; thy gold shall be mighty; Making the word Shaddai
(which is one of the names of God, and usually rendered Almighty) to be as an
Epithet to the word Gold, Thy Gold shall be strong or mighty. And thus some
translations render the word Shaddai (Ezekiel. 1.24.) where the Prophet says, I
heard the noise of their wings like the noise of great waters, as the voice of
the Allmighty; so we render; but others thus; As a mighty voice; So in the
present text, whereas we say, The Almighty shall be thy defense, or according
to the strictnes of the word; The Almighty shall be thy Gold; others give it
thus; Thy Gold shall be mighty. And this answers the latter clause of the
verse, where we read; Thou shall have plenty of silver; yet put in the Margin,
Thou shall have silver of strength, or, strong silver. These readings have an
elegancy in them.

But I shall keep to our own, which is profitable to us and suitable to the
text; Yea the Almighty shall be thy defense; the particle (yea) shewth that
this is a h^gher step of mercy then the former; as if he had said, Thou shall
not only have gold which is a defense, but better then gold, even the Almighty
for thy defense, or, God who is better then Gold, will be thy defense, and the
defense of thy Gold. The Hebrew word is plural, Defenses, which intimates;
first, all sorts of defense; secondly, strong defense; The Almighty shall be
thy defenses; All manner of defense, and a strong defense unto thee.

Hence note; God himself is pleased to be the Lord protector of his people
(who repent and turn to him) both in their persons and estates.

There are many in the world who have gold, but there are few who have this
defense for it. The Prophet Haggai speaks of those who earned money, but put
it into a bag with holes; that is, they could not hold or keep what they had
gotten. It is the Lord that establishes the creature to us, and defends it for
us. The best things in the world take wings and are gone, unless the Lord stay
them with us; and unless the Lord defend and keep them for us, they will
soon be pulled out of our possession. Some men's estates wast away they know not
how, there is a hole in the bottom of the bag they thought not of. Others
have their estates violently taken away from them, because the Lord is not
their defense. The Lord is The protector of his people, the Lord is a Castle, a
strong Tower, all manner of fortifications about his people, to defend their
estates and persons, much more their souls. And Eliphaz seems to mind Job that
he once had, but now had lost this defense; God once made ahedg about him, or
rather was a hedge about him, but he opened a gap or withdrew, and then in came
the Sabeans and Caldeans and spoiled all. Now then (says he) return to the
Lord, and he will once again be thy defense. How safe are they that have God
for their defense, who live under the shadow, and covert of the Almighty! How
safe are they (I say) and all that they have.

The vulgar latin is so full of this sense, Eritque omnipotens contra honestes
tuos. Vulg.
that he leaves out the word defense, and o^l says; The Almighty shall be (or
shall stand up for thee) against thine enemies; and in this perfect outward
happiness consists. For to have much, and that secured, is all we can desire
for the things of this world. Many have gold, and riches store, but the thing
that troubles them is this, how to make all sure; Return to the Lord, and he
shall be thy defense; he shall be an assurance Office to thee, he shall protect
thee against all winds and weathers, against all enemies and pirates; The
Almighty shall be thy defense and the defense of thy gold.

Further, Because the word which we render defense, signifies gold also, as
was showed; therefore some keep to that reading, and thus translate this 25
verse, Eritque omnipotens lectissimum aurum tuum and argentu^ viresque tibi.
Jun.
And the Almighty shall be thy choice gold, and silver, and strength unto thee.
Which reading is likewise followed by Master Broughton; And the Almighty will
be thy plentiful gold and silver of strength to thee. This sense of the word
is comfortable indeed; for to have told Job only this; Thou shall lay up gold
as the dust, and gold of Ophir as the stones of the brook; this had been
though a great mercy, yet but a common mercy, such as the men of the world have
and enjoy. Many that know not God lay up gold as the dust, and they who serve
him not, have often store of silver. But when God himself says, I will be
your Gold and silver, This is not only the richest of temporal, but the
riches of all spiritual mercies. For when it is said, the Lord shall be thy
choice gold and silver of strength to thee, the meaning is, he will be better
to thee then the choicest Gold, and a greater strength then silver unto thee.
This is a rare and a distinguishing mercy. Wicked men may have gold from God,
but no wicked man has God for his gold.

Hence note; That God himself is the riches, and fullnes, the gold and silver
of his people.

The Lord is my portion, says my soul; whose soul said this? It was the
soul of a mourning Jeremie. And when said he this? even then, when their lands
and houses were possessed by the enemy, even then, when their Gold and silver
with all their goodly things were carried captive into Babylon; Then Jeremy
said, The Lord is my portion (Lam. 3.24.) the Gold and silver which I had in my
house are gone, but my Gold and silver in heaven is not gone into captivity, he
is my portion still and for ever. They who have God for their gold and silver,
are happier and richer then gold and silver can make them: What can be said
more to draw our hearts to God, then this promise, that God will not only give
us riches, but that himself will be our riches? What can be said more to take
a covetous man's heart off from the love of his gold then this? take thy heart
off from thy Gold, and God will be thy gold. And so what can be spoken more
prevailingly to the voluptuous man, who delights to swim in rivers of sensual
pleasures; O take off thy heart from these pleasures of sin, which are but for
a season, and God will be thy pleasure for evermore. What stronger argument to
take down the ambition of man, who hunts after high places and dignities in
the world? then to tell him, withdraw from this pursuit, and God will be thy
honor, and thy high place. We may say to the ambitious, to the covetous, to
the voluptuous, and in a word to all sorts of sinners, Ye shall find all that
your sins can offer you, and infinitely more in God; your honors, and
pleasures, your gold and silver, you shall have altogether in him. One of the
ancients speaks well and truly to the point; That man is too, Nimis est avarus
cui deus non sufficit. Bern. Deus meus and omnia.
too covetous whom God does not suffice, or, who is not satisfied with God. The
only true reason why any man is not satisfied with God is, because he knows
not God; He that can say knowingly, the Lord is my God, cannot but say, I am
satisfied. When God is ours, all is ours. And the poorest who are rich in
faith, have as great a share in this riches, as the richest. God is the poor
man's gold, they that have neither gold nor silver in their purse (as Peter said
to the impotent man) may have God in their hearts. The Almighty is their gold,
and silver too, as it follows in the text.

And thou shall have plenty of silver. (...) a radi^e (...) lassus fatigatus
fuit. A^gentum lassitudinum; quod prae copia lassos reddit homines numerando
illud vel cer^e appendendo. Nam olim appendebant argentum, unde pensionis
vocabulum in sermon latino. Drus.
Some render, Thou shall have silver of weariness; He means it not of silver,
as it wearies a man in the getting of it, but he means it of so great a
quantity or sum of silver, as shall weary a man to tell it, or trouble him to
weigh it. The manner of accounting silver was anciently by weight; hence what
is paid in money is called a pension. We translate fully to that sense, thou
shall have plenty of silver; for they that have so much as tires and wearies
them to tell or weigh it, have store enough. We put silver of strength in the
Margen. Silver is a strong metal, and it is strength, great strength to Man.
This rendering suites best with the beginning of the verse. The Almighty shall
be thy defense, and thou shall have silver of strengths, Nihil tam sanctum quod
violari, nihil tam munitum, quod non expugnari pecunia possit. C^c. (...)
or silver to strengthen thee. As for plenty, that was fully set forth in the
former verse, where he is promised Gold as the dust, and the gold of Ophir as
the stones of the Brook. Besides, the word is diverse times applied to express
strength by, but rarely if at all in Scripture to express plenty by, and here
our translaters render it so, not properly but tropically, as appears before;
for properly it expresses the greatest strength, as first, The strength of the
Unicorn (Number. 23.22.) God brought him out of Egypt, he has as it were the
strength of an Unicorn; Secondly, The strength of Mountains (Psalm. 95.4.)
therefore I conceive it is best rendered silver of strength; as gold is clothed
with a word which signifies defense, so silver is joined with a word that
signifies strength, because there is much strength and defense in both, money
being the sinews or strength of war; So that to say, Thou shall have silver
of strength, is as if he had said, thy silver shall be a strength, or a
blessing to thee; Some have silver and it is no strength to them; or he calls
it, silver of strength, because it should be confirmed, and established for his
use and in his possession. He should find, by experience, that there was tacke
in it, that it was solid silver, or silver that had strength in it. So then,
these are but several expressions of the same thing, all which gathered
together heighten up the promise of this outward mercy; he should have gold,
and God would be his defense, yea his gold, and he should have silver plenty,
enough of it to make a man weary to tell it, or he should have silver of
strength, his silver should be a strength to him, and all this is assured him
upon his repentance and return to the Almighty.

Hence note; First, That godliness is the best and nearest way, even to
worldly gain.

Godliness is gainful, though a godly man should die a beggar; but besides
there is worldly gain in it, these promises are not made in vain. Christ
speaks as much ( Math. 6.33.) Seek first the kingdom of God, and the
righteousness thereof, and all other things (even gold and silver) shall be
added to you. And the Apostle is full for it (1 Timothy 4.8.) Godliness is
profitable for all things, it is good to make men rich, it will bring in worldly
profits; Godliness has the promise of gold as well as of grace, of silver, as
well as of pardon and peace, do not think that godliness is barren of outward
blessings, or that we must needs loose all gain in this world, by getting that
which fits us for the Glory of the next world. Know, that as the Lord makes his
ways sweet to his people by inward communications of himself, revealing his
love and grace to them, yea in them, so he makes his ways sweet to his people
by giving them outward good things, blessing their basket and their store,
filling their hearts with food and gladness.

Secondly, Note; That, The godly man may lawfully possess earthly riches, gold
and silver.

It is no sin to be rich, but when riches are got by sin; Poor Lazarus lay in
the bosom of rich Abraham; As many poor men may be called the Devils poor,
so some that are rich may be called Gods rich men. Again, if Godliness have a
promise (as it has) of riches, then the godly may lawfully possess riches;
which also may be instruments in their hands of glorifying God, and doing good
among men. Nor can it be denied, that they know best how to use the things of
the world, and how to be the best Stewards of earthly treasures, who are
instructed for the kingdom of heaven, and are (as the Apostle Peter exhorts
Saints to be (1 Pet. 4.10.) Good Stewards of the manifold grace of God.

Thirdly, Note; That riches, gold and silver are at Gods dispose.

He bestows them where, and upon whom he pleases. This promise of plenty of
gold, upon repentance and returning to the Almighty, must needs proceed from
this supposition, that the Almighty has gold and silver in his power. The
world is the Lords, and the fullnes of it (Psalm. 50.12.) God is the best Indies
for gold. If any would trade for gold prosperously, let them trade heavenward;
for God is every where Lord of the soil, and he says of all the precious
mines hidden in the bowels of the earth, They are mine. See how the Lord speaks
as the great proprietour of all the gold, and silver, of all the good things of
this world; ( Hos. 2.8, 9.) She did not know that I gave her corn, and wine,
and oil, and multiplied her silver and gold, which they prepared for Baal,
therefore I will return, and take away my corn in the time thereof, and my
wine in the season thereof, and will recover my wool and my flax etc. All Is
mine. Thus the Lord voucheth himself the great owner of all these things, all
the gold and silver, all the wool and the flax, all the corn and wine are
his. When the people and Princes of Israel with David their king offered so
willingly and so liberally Gold and silver etc. for the building of the Temple.
David makes this confession for them all (1 Chro. 29.14.) All things come of
thee, and of thine own have we given thee. And may he not do what he will
with his own? Men think they may, surely God both may and will.

Fourthly, Observe; That, the plenty and stability of the creature, is from God
as well as the possession of it.

Eliphaz promises Job from the Lord gold as the dust, and as the stones of the
brook, with silver of strength, that we have it in such or such a proportion
is from the Lord, as much as that we have any thing at all; he can give much as
well as little, and that our proportion has a defense and strength in it is
from the Lord; therefore we should honor the Almighty for every portion and
proportion of worldly riches, and for the establishment of our portion
whatsoever it is. Silver and gold have no strength in them unless the Lord who
gives these give them strength, and bid them stay with us to do us good.
Lastly, Observe; We may lawfully possess abundance of outward things.

It Is sinful to make abundance our aim, or to contend for much in temporals;
to do so in and about spiritualls is our duty, and our contention for the
highest degree our commendation. We should design it, to lay up the Gold of
Grace, as the dust, and the silver of sanctification as the stones of the
brook; We should forget all that we have, that we might get what we have not.
Our desireings while pitched upon an eternal object cannot be immoderate, but
in temperals they quickly may: and therefore as to them, our moderation should
be known to all men. Yet if God give in abundance of temporals in the lawful
exercise of our callings, we may warra^tably enjoy it as a blessing from him.
The providence of God does often bound us to a little, and we ought to be
contented with the least portion of outward things, with bare food and raiment;
but the word of God does not bound us to a little, nor does it say it is
unlawful to have much. And as it is not unlawful to have much of the world,
so it is a great exercise and trial of our Graces to have much; As there are
some Graces of a Christian which come not to trial till we are in want, so
there are other Graces which come not to trial unless we have abundance.
Want tries our patience, and our dependence upon God for a supply of what we
have not; and abundance tries our temperance, our humility, our liberality,
yea and our dependence upon and faith in God, for the sanctifying, blessing,
and making of that comfortable to us which we have. When a rich man sees an
emptines in his abundance without the enjoyments of God in it, he exercises
as high a grace, and shows as heavenly a frame of mind, as that poor man
does who sees and enjoys a fullnes in God, in the midst of all his emptines.
And therefore Paul puts both these alike upon a divine teaching, ( Phil. 4.12.)
In all things I am instructed, both to be full and to be hungry, both to abound
and to suffer need. And had it been unlawful to enjoy plenty, Eliphaz had
never pressed Job to repentance by this motive, The Almighty shall be thy
defense, and thou shall have plenty of silver.

JOB. CHAP. 22. Verse. 26, 27. For then shall thou have thy delight in the
Almighty, and shall lift up thy face unto God.

Thou shall make thy prayer unto him, and ^e shall hear thee, and thou shall
pay thy Vows.


IT has been showed from the former context, how Eliphaz encouraged yea
provoked Job to repentance, and returning to God by the proposal of many
promises, by promises of outward, and temporal mercies, gold, silver, and
protection. He might have what he pleased of God for the comforts of this life,
if his life were once pleasing unto God. In this latter part of the Chapter he
rises higher and proposes spiritual promises; And he begins with the best of
spiritual promises, the free enjoyment of God himself.

Verse. 26. For then shall thou have thy delight in the Almighty, etc.
As if Eliphas had said; If thou do indeed repent and turn from sin, thy
conscience which now troubles, yea torments thee, shall have sweet peace in
God, and thou who now grovellest with thy eyes down to the ground, by reason
of thy pressing guilt, and misery, shall then with confidence lift up thy face
unto God in prayer, and thou shall find God so ready at hand with an answer,
that thou shall see cause chearefully to perform thy Vows, which thou made
to him in the day of trouble; That Is the general scope of this latter part of
the Chapter. I shall now proceed to explicate the particulars.

For then shall thou have thy delight in the Allmighty. The first word implies
a reason of what he had said before. Having spoken of temporal promises, he
confirms his interest in them by assuring him of spiritual; for then shall
thou have thy delight in the Almighty. As if he had said, God will not deny
thee outward comforts in the creature, seeing he intends to give thee the
highest comforts, even delight in himself. It Is an argument like that of the
Apostle ( Romans 8.32.) He that spared not his own Son but delivered him up
for us all, how shall he not with him freely give us all things? Thus Eliphaz
seems to argue, seeing God will give thee himself to rejoice in, or to
rejoice in himself, how can he deny thee gold and silver with those other
conveniences which concern this life? these being indeed as nothing in
comparison of himself.

Then shall thou delight, etc. Then, that is, when thou returnest to God, and
not till then, then thou may expect to receive much sweetness from him,
such sweetness as thy soul never tasted or experienced to this day.

Then shall thou have thy delight. The word signifies to delight, or take
contentment, (...) delectatus fuit co^pore vel animo. Sonai etiam aliqu^d
delicatum and ^o^^e.
whether it be outward contentment, or inward contentment, the delight of the
body, or the delight of the mind; And so an universal delight, thy whole
delight shall be in the Lord. Moses (Deuteronomy. 28.56.) describes those women by
this word, who were made up of delight; Thy tender and delicate woman, that is,
such as are so delicate that they are the delight of all who behold them, or
who are themselves altogether devoted to their delights, who (as the Apostle
Paul speaks of the wanton widow (1 Timothy 5.) live in pleasure; These are
threatened with such calamities as should render their very lives a pain to
them. The word is used again ( Isa. 58.13, 14.) where the Prophet speaks of
keeping the Sabbath; If thou turn away thy foot from the Sabbath from doing
thy pleasure on my holy day, and call the Sabbath a delight; what then? then
shall thou delight thy self in the Lord; thou shall have curious delight, all
manner of delight in the Lord, if thou call the Sabbath a delight, the holy of
the Lord, honorable, and shall honor him; if thou have a delight in duty,
thou shall have the delight of reward.

Thus Eliphaz, then shall thou have thy delight in the Almighty. And it is
considerable that he does not say, thou shall have thy delight in the
merciful, or gracious God, but in the Allmighty; in him thou shall have thy
delight, whose power is over all, and who is able to do whatsoever pleases
him. Even the power and allmightinesse of the Lord shall be as pleasant to thee
as his mercy and loving kindness.

Further, delight in the general nature of it, consists in these two things.

First, In the suitableness and convenience of the object, and the faculty,
whether sensitive or intellective.

Secondly, It consists in the reflection and application of the faculty upon
the object. So that to delight our selves in the Allmighty, has these two
things in it.

First, A suitableness in our souls to the Lord.

Secondly, The souls reflecting upon the Lord as good and gracious unto us.
This reflect act breeds and brings in delight, and works the heart to an
unspeakeable joy in God. By this last and highest act of faith, we take in the
sweetness of the Almighty, and delight our selves in him mightily. This faith
does not only suck the promises, wherein the love of God is evidenced to us,
but is it self an evidence of the love of God to us. We suck and are
satisfied with the breasts of consolation by believing ( Isa. 66.11.) that is,
we believing draw forth that sweetness of the promise which the word declares
to be the portion of Believers. Thus spiritual delight is made up; and
therefore Saints are said to rejoice in believing, with joy unspeakeable and
full of glory (1 Pet. 1.8.) that is, having as much and as clear a
manifestation, yea participation and taste of that Glory in believing, which is
prepared and reserved for them against the next life, as they are capable to
receive, and more then they are able to express, in this life. Then shall thou
delight thy self in the Allmighty, We may look upon the words first as a
command; and then observe, That, it is our duty to delight our selves in God.

Delight in God, is both a privilege and a duty, it is commanded in the Law,
and it is promised in the Gospel. God is pleased to give us many things in the
world, not only for necessity, but for delight, A heathen looking upon the
various provisions which the Great Creator has made not only for the
maintenance of man in his being, but for his comfortable and pleasurable being.
Some of which affect the senses, the eye, the ear, the taste etc. others are
sweetly contentfull to the understanding, with all the faculties of the soul,
He (I say) concludes this from it; Neque enim necessitatibus tantu^ nostris
provisum est, usque in delicijs am^mur. Sen l. 4. de Benif. c. 5.
The bountiful Creator has provided for more then our necessity, or he has
provided more then will barely serve our turn to live upon, we are loved even
up to our delights. Now I say, though the Lord has provided delights for us in
the creature, yet it is our duty, our greatest, our highest duty to delight
chiefly in the Lord, to delight in him first, and to delight in nothing but in
reference unto him; nothing should be pleasing to us, but as there is an
impresse or stamp of the love of God upon it, or as it tastes of his goodness.
And indeed what can delight us long but this thought? that God delights in
us, or that we are a delight to God; that God is Good, and that God is good to
us; having tasted his goodness, we should love and delight in him, above all our
delights. The Psalmist ( Psalm. 137.6.) preferred Jerusalem above his chiefest
joy; how much more should we prefer the God of Jerusalem above our chiefest
joy. God delights in man whom he has made, and who is his son by Grace, next
to Jesus Christ who is his son by nature, and Jesus Christ delights in man
whom he has redeemed, and should not man delight in his maker, in his father,
in his redeemer? We have a most divine description of the delight which the
Father takes in Christ his Son, and which Christ takes in his redeemed ones, (
Pro. 8.30, 31.) Then was I by him as one brought up with him, and I was daily
his delight (Christ was the delight of his father, and he delighted in his
father) rejoicing always before him; rejoicing in the habitable parts of his
earth, and my delight was with the sons of men. Jesus Christ himself takes up
many of his delights with the sons of men, whom he calls the habitable parts
of the earth, even those of the sons of men that are a habitation of God
through the Spirit. Hae sunt piorum delicia and suv^ssimae volupta^es, deo
placa^ to f^ui, cujus eliam deliciae sunt habitare intereos qui ipsum animo
reverentur and colunt.
Now (I say) as the delight of the Father is in the Son, and the delight of
the Son in the Father, and the delight both of Father and Son in the
Saints, in the habitable parts of the earth, or with the sons of men; so the
delight of the sons of men should be in the Father, and in the Son; there
should our delight be, there should we take our highest contentment.

Secondly, The words are rather to be taken for a promise; Then shall thou have
thy delight in the Lord; Then, that is, when thou turnest from sinful
delights, or delight in sin, I assure thee of spiritual delight.

Whence observe; That they who mourn for, and turn from sin, shall have
delights in the Lord.

When once sin is bitter to us, the Lord will be sweet to us; and until sin
be bitter to us, the Lord is not sweet to us; sin hinders our delightful
enjoyment of the creature, it puts gall and wormwood into our dish, and cup, it
is that which makes all relations grievous and burdensome to us; yet this is
but a small matter, that it hinders us from the contentment, and sweetnesses
which are to be had in the creature; sin takes us off from delighting in God.
That soul cannot delight in the Almighty, who loves and continues in the
love of sin. If such profess delight in God, it is but a false boast, and a
high presumption; it is impossible for such to delight in the Lord indeed. Job
(Chap. 27.10.) says of the hypocrite; Will he delight himself in the
Allmighty? will he always call upon God? He may pretend to a delight in the
Allmighty, he may have some flashes, some raptures, but his joys and delights
are not in the Allmighty, what joys soever he has they are in somewhat below
God; the hypocrite may delight himself in somewhat received from the Almighty,
in some present benefit, or future expectation that he has from the Almighty;
he cannot delight in the Allmighty himself, or in God as God.

As it is impossible in the nature of the thing, for a man to delight in sin,
and in God too; so God has said that he who has a delight in sin, shall not
find any delight in him. God has said, Delight thy self in me, and I will
give thee the desires of thy heart, (Psalm. 37.4.) But if any man will follow
the desires of his own heart, he shall not delight himself in God. Sin
separateth between God and us (Isa. 59.2.) that is, it separates between the
comforts and mercies which are in God, and us; sin does not, cannot separate us
from the power, or presence, from the eye, or justice of God, so sin does not
separate (for God is nigh to sinners both to see what they are doing, and to
punish them for what they ^^ve done sinfully) but sin separates from all those
delights that flow from God, from those joys which his people take in him; yea
sin breeds a strangeness between God and the soul, so that the soul that
loves sin, cannot have any holy familiarity or converse with God. The Lord
says to those who repent ( Isa. 1.18.) Come let us reason together, etc. As if
he had said, I am now ready to debate the matter with you that repent, and how
great soever your sins have been, they shall be blotted out. Whereas before
the Lord tells them that he was weary of them, and that they were a burden to
him in all their services; Now when we are a burden to God, God is never
pleasant to us; if the Lord say he is weary of us, we cannot say we delight our
selves in him. Our delight and pleasure in God is the fruit of his delight in
and wel-pleasednes with us.

Thirdly, Eliphaz proposes this delight in the Lord, as the most winning
promise.

Hence note; Delight in the Lord is the highest and choicest mercy.

There is nothing better, nothing sweeter then to delight in the Lord; delight
in the Lord has all true delights in it. David speaks this out fully in that
place lately quoted to another occasion ( Psalm. 37.4.) Delight thy self in the
Lord, and he shall give thee the desires of thy heart; that is, thou shall have
all thy desires fullfilled in this thing; delight in the Lord will be the
fullfilling of all thy desires; not only shall they who delight themselves in
the Lord; have all their desires filled up, but their very delight in the Lord
is the fullfilling of all their desires. What is the glory of heaven, but
delighting in the Lord? And he who delights in the Lord, feels not the want or
absence of any earthly Good. In thy presence is fulness of joy, and at thy
right hand are pleasures for evermore (Psalm. 16 11.) Heavenly glory is nothing
but delight in God, and all earthly good is nothing without delight in God. We
may affirm four things of this delight, in opposition to all worldly delights.

First, This is a real delight, worldly delights are but shaddows, or
pageant-like shows of delight. The joys of a hypocrite, are like his holiness,
mere appearances of joy; he has no real, no true joy, as he has no true, no
real holiness. That man does but feign a taste of joy, whosoever he is, that
does but feign the practice of holiness. Thus who wickedly hold out a holiness
which they feel not, shall talk of joys which they find not.

Secondly, Delight in the Lord is a strong delight, yea it is a strengthening
delight; That must needs be strong joy, which is strengthening joy; such is the
joy of the Lord, as Nehemiah told that people ( Neh: 8.10.) The joy of the
Lord, is the strength of the soul, the strength of the inward man, it makes us
mighty, it makes us giants to run our race, the race of holiness. The giant
rejoices to run his race, because he is strong, and knows he can do it. The
joy of the Lord is our strength, and is both an evidence tha^ we are strong,
and a means to make us so. Worldly delights are weak, and they weaken us,
Delight in the Lord is strong, and it strengthens.

Thirdly, It is a lasting delight; not like the crackling of thorns under a
pott, (to which Solomon elegantly compares the laughter of the fool, Eccl.
7.6.) that make a noise, and a blaze for a while, but are presently extinct.
Now Solomon's fool may be either, first, the profane man in the world, or,
secondly, the hypocrite in the Church; All the joys of this pair of fools,
the profane worldling, and the formal hypocrite are soon in and soon out,
like crackling thorns. But joy or delight in the Almighty is a lasting
delight, it is not for a fit, or a pang, but for continuance, yea it
continues in the midst of all worldly sorrows, for it overcomes and conquers
them. There is a laughter in which (says Solomon, Pro. 14.13.) the heart is
sorrowful, and there is a sor^ow in which the heart laughs; As sorrowful, yet
always rejoicing, says the Apostle (2 Cor. 6.10.) Spiritual joy, or joy in
the Lord is not extinguished, though surrounded with worldly sorrows; Many
waters cannot quench this vehement flame, this flame of God (as Solomon speaks
of love, Cant. 8.) neither can the floods drown it.

Fourthly, Delight in the Allmighty is a holy delight, a delight which makes us
more holy; the delights of the world are impure, and they defile us, we seldom
take in worldly pleasures, but they leave some spot and taint upon our spirits
or conversations; but the delights we have in the Lord are all pure, yea
purifying delights, they make the soul more clear, more holy, more heavenly,
they make us like unto the Almighty, in whom our delight is. For look what the
object is in which we delight, such is the spirit of him that takes that
delight; now the Lord in whom this delight is, being altogether holy, they that
take delight in him, must needs be made or kept holy by it. As delight in
worldly things makes the heart worldly, base and dreggish, so this refines and
purifies it. The more we drink of the rivers of this pleasure, the more sober
we are, to be an epicure (as it were) in these delights, is the highest
temperance. Our feeding cannot be too full, nor our drafts too large upon these
delights. Solomon (Eccle. 2.2.) who had run a course through all worldly
delights, and tried them to the utmost, said of laughter it is mad, and of
mirth what does it? there is a madness in the mirth of the world, what does
it? that is, what good does it to any man? many things it does, it makes men
vain, foolish, dissolute, dispirited for any goodness; but what good does it?
does it make any man better, more holy, more wise or fit for duty, no, it can
do none of these things. But delight in the Lord, is all this, and can do all
this, it is true, strong, strengthening, Quum unus quisq, licenter respicit id,
in quo delectatur, subd^t, ver^seq: Aq^in.
lasting, holy, a delight that makes us more holy. This is the portion of
Saints at all times, though paid them in more or specially at some times, and
that either, first, respecting the state and disposition of their own souls,
as in the rest, or secondly, the state of and promised dispensations of God to
the Church. ( Isa. 65.14.18. Isa. 66.11.) Then (also in a special manner)
shall thou have thy delight in the Lord. And because every man does freely or
willingly look to that in which he is delighted. Therefore Eliphaz adds, And
shall lift up thy face to God.

But some may say, is that such a great matter, is it any special favor to
lift up the face to God? seeing to do so is common to mankind. The Naturalist
says, O^ homini sublime dedit. Ovid.
That whereas other creatures look grovelling downward, God gave man an erect
countenance, and bid him look heavenwards. How then does Eliphaz promise, Thou
shall lift up thy face to God? We had the like expression ( Chapter 10.15.) If I be
righteous, yet I will not lift up my head. And ( Chapter 11.15.) Then shall thou
lift up thy face without spott. The lifting up of the head, and the lifting up
of the face are the same; implying confidence, or a wel-grounded boldness in him
that does so; For all these phrases of speech imply a lifting up of the mind
or Spirit to God. As David says ( Psalm. 25.1.) Unto thee O Lord do I lift up
my soul. Equiparantia sun^ caput vel oculos vel faciem vel animam ad deum
levare. Bold.
Eliphaz means not the lifting up of a heart-lesse face or head, such as the
hypocrite or formalist lifts up to God in worship, nor the lifting up of a
mere living head or face, such as all men lift up to God according to the
form or frame of their natural constitution, Fiduciam habebis recurrendi ad
deum. Aquin.
but the courage and confidence of the soul, and that a holy courage and
confidence, is here intended. And there are not many, who can thus lift up
their face to God, as is promised here to Job by way of privilege.

And shall lift up thy face to God. To lift up the face, is taken under a
twofold notion in Scripture, first, Faciei elevatio orantis habitus est. Pinec.
as a gesture or bodily position in prayer; He that prays does usually lift
up his face to God, and so to lift up the face to God, is to pray unto God. A
corporal posture being put often in Scripture to signify a spiritual duty.
Thus some understand it here; Thou shall lift up thy face to God, that is, thou
shall pray; secondly (which further complyes with the duty of prayer. To lift
up the face, Vultum attollit qui sibi been conscius est animoque fidenti. Drus.
(...). Sept.
notes (as was touched before) confidence of spirit, and boldness, courage,
and assurance toward him, before whom the face is lifted up, whether God or
man.

The Septuagint who rather paraphrase then translate this text, give this sense
fully; Thou shall be confident before the Lord (or thou shall act fiducially
and boldly before him) and behold heaven chearefully. This lifting up the face
is opposed to casting down the face, and that is a phrase used in Scripture to
signify shame and failing of spirit. When courage is down, the countenance is
down too; as we say, such a man has a down look, that is, there is an
appearance of guilt upon him. The face is cast down three ways; First, by
fear; secondly, by sorrow; thirdly, by shame. Ezra. 9.6. O my God I am ashamed
and blush, to lift up my face unto thee; for our iniquities are increased over
our heads. So ( Luke 18.13.) the Publican durst not lift up his eyes to heaven,
and possibly there was a complication of all these three causes why he durst
not, fear, sorrow, shame; he was so much terrified, so much grieved, so much
ashamed of himself, that he durst not lift up his eyes to heaven. It was the
speech of Abner to Asahel (2 Samuel 2.22.) Turn thee aside from following me,
why should I smite thee to the ground, how then should I hold up my face to
Joab thy brother; that is, if I slay thee I shall be afraid to look him in the
face, nor can I have any confidence of his favor; and it is well conceived,
that he spoke thus (for it is indeed a very unusual thing for the General of
an Army in the very heat of war to look after the favor of the General of
the opposite Army, but (I say) it is conceived he spoke thus) as being convinced
that he had undertaken a bad cause in upholding the house of Saul against
David, and therefore had misgivings that he might shortly fall into the hands
of Joab David's General, and was therefore unwilling to provoke him by killing
his brother. This made him say, How shall I hold up my face to thy brother
Joab? As if he had said, I shall obstruct the way of my own reconciliation to
thy brother, (in case The turn of things in this war cast me into his hands)
by killing thee. Again we may look back to Genesis 4.5. where it is reported of
Caine, That he was wrath, and his countenance fell; anger, and sorrow, and
shame, falling at once upon him (because the Lord had respect to Abel and his
offering, but had no respect to him or his) caused his countenance to fall;
which phrase stands in direct opposition to lifting up the face in all the
three occasions of it. For it implies first fear, which is opposed to
boldness; secondly, sorrow or anger, which are opposed to content and joy;
thirdly, shame which is opposed both to freedom of approach, and liberty of
speech. We have an expression which paralels much with this, in that Prophecy
of Christ ( Psalm. 110.7. Q^od legitur Exodus ^4.8. eg^essos filios Israel in
manu excels^, Chalda^^e dicitur, capite discooperto. i. e. palam, confidenter
sine metu.
) He shall drink of the brook in the way, therefore shall he lift up his
head, that is, he shall rise and appear like a mighty Conqueror with
boldness, honor, and triumph. So Christ himself prophesying of the troubles
which shall be in the latter days, comforts the surviving Saints in this
language; When these things begin to come to pass, then look up and lift up
your heads (that is, then take heart and boldness) for the day of your
redemption draws nigh, (Luke 21.28.) that is, the day is at hand wherein you
shall be freed from all fears and sorrows.

Hence observe; Holiness has boldness and freedom of spirit with God.

Then shall thou lift up thy face unto God. As soon as Adam sinned, he hid
himself from the presence of the Lord amongst the trees of the Garden, ( Genesis
3.8.) He ran into the thickets for shelter, he durst not appear or show his
face. But when once we are reconciled to God, and sin is taken off, when we
are freed from the bonds of guilt, then we have boldness, reconciliation is
accompanied with the spirit of adoption, whereby we cry abba father; we can
then speak to God as a child to his father; the child dares lift up his face
to his father, and speaks freely to him. Where the spirit of the Lord is,
there is liberty (faith the Apostle, 2 Cor. 3.17.) and that a threefold
liberty. First, a liberty from sin; secondly, a liberty unto righteousness, or
a freenes and readiness of spirit to do good; thirdly, where the spirit of the
Lord is, there is a liberty of speech or access, with boldness in all our
holy Addresses unto God. As the Apostle clearly shows at the 12^h verse of
the same Chapter. Seeing then that we have such hope, we use great plainness
(or boldness) of speech, as we put in the Margin of our Bibles to express
the significancy of the Greek word in the full compass of it. For as because
we have such hope we ought to use great plainness of speech toward men in
preaching and dispensing the Gospel to them, so great boldness toward God in
receiving the offers and promises of the Gospel, for our selves. Eliphaz having
thus showed what freedom Job, truly repenting, might have with God in prayer,
proceeds in the next verse to show what success with God, or what fruit he
should have in prayer.

Verse 27. Thou shall make thy prayer to him, and he shall hear thee, and thou
shall pay thy Vows.
In these words we have a further promise, leading to a further duty; as before
the duty of returning to the Almighty, had a promise annexed to it of lifting
up the face to God, or boldness in prayer. So now the promise of being heard
in prayer, is followed with a duty, The payment of vows.

Thou shall make thy prayer to him etc. (...) multiplicavit, proprie verba
fortia f^d^t in Oratione.
The word notes the pouring out of many prayers, or of a multitude of words in
prayer, yet not of bare w^rds, but of words clothed with power, strong prayers
as well as many prayers. For as the Gospel comes from God to us, not in word
only, but in power and in the holy Ghost, and in much assurance, (1 These.
1.5.) so prayer should go from us to God, not in word only, but in power, and
in the holy Ghost, etc. Thus, says Eliphaz, Thou shall make many, and mighty
prayers, strong prayers, prevailing, conquering prayers; so the word is used (
Genesis 25.21.) T^en Isack entreated the Lord for his wife because she was barren;
that is, he made many prayers to God, he made a business of praying that he
might have a son, though there was a sure promise made to Abraham that he
should have a son, and that in him, and from him should come the promised
seed; yet Isack was long without a son, and he leaves it not carelessly in the
decree of God, resolving Idly, God has said I shall have a son at least, if
not many sons, why should I trouble my self in the thing. No, Isack had not
so learned the mind of God, he was better skilled in Divinity then so, to
separate the means from the end, or to conclude that we need not pray for
that which God has purposed and promised. He I say, was better instructed then
so, and therefore though he (doubtless) did fully believe that God would
fulfill the promise made to Abraham in giving him a son, yet he entreated
the Lord for his wife because she was barren: and he entreated the Lord
earnestly, he made plenty, abundance of prayers; for it cannot be supposed but
that he had prayed for that mercy long before (for it was near twenty years
since his marriage to Rebeccah, as appears plainly by comparing the 20 verse
of that Chapter with the 26^h, the former telling us, that he was forty years
old when he married Rebeccah, and the latter that he was threescore when
Rebeccah bare Jacob and Esau. So that I say, we cannot suppose but so holy a
man as Isack had been suing out the good of the promise before) but when he
perceived it sticking so long in the birth, then his soul fell in travel about
it, then he was very fervent in prayer, and would give the Lord no rest; Then
he entreated the Lord etc. The same is said of Manoah (Judges 13.8.) Then
Manoah entreated the Lord, and said, oh my Lord, let the man of God which thou
did send come again unto us, and teach us what we should do unto the child
that shall be borne; he prayed then with much earnestnes, or made prayers for
direction in that thing. The word is often used to signify abundance, ( Isa.
35.2.) It shall blossom abundantly. (Jere. 33.6.) Behold, I will bring in
health, and cure, and I will cure them, and will reveal unto them the
abundance of peace, and truth. Not only shall they have peace, and truth, but
abundance of them. So here, thou shall not only pray, but a spirit of prayer
shall be powered out upon thee abundantly. Thou shall make thy prayer unto him.

Hence note;

First, Prayer is a duty.

We owe prayer to God as his creatures, or in regard of our natural dependence
upon him, much more as new creatures, or in regard of our spiritual dependence
upon him.

Secondly, Note; It is our duty not only to pray, but to pray much, or to pray
with much fervency.

The emphasis of the Original word here used, leads us to this as well as
many Scripture Authorities. Cold asking invites a denial, it is effectual or
working fervent prayer that prevails much, ( Jam. 5.16.)

Note, thirdly.

Prayer is due only to God. Prayer is a part of holy worship, and all such
worship is proper to God alone; Thou shall make thy prayer unto him. Saints and
Angels worship God with us; we must not worship either Saint or Angel with God,
no nor God by the help and mediation of Saints or Angels. We know no mediator
of intercession, but he who is the mediator of redemption, the Lord Jesur
Christ.

Fourthly, Taking in the consideration of the time, as before in the former
part; Then shall thou have thy delight in the Lord, then shall thou make thy
prayer to him.

Observe.

That, we are never in a fit frame for prayer, till we turn from every sin by
repentance. As the Lord will not hear us when we pray, if we regard iniquity
in our heart (Psalm. 68.18.) so neither are we in a fitnes to speak to God in
prayer, if we regard any iniquity in our hearts. Repenting and praying must be
of the same length; unless we repent continually, we cannot pray continually,
because we sin continually. The more holy we are, the more free we are to pray.
Sin clogs and checks the spirit in this great duty, cast off that weight, and
then, shall thou make thy prayer to him, And he shall hear thee.

To hear prayer, is more then to take notice of the matter or words spoken; to
hear prayer, is to grant what we pray for; as our hearing the word of God is
more then to take in the sound or sense of what is spoken; it is to submit to
and obey what is spoken; Now as we hear no more of the word of God, then we
believe and practice, so the Lord hears no more of what we pray (in a
Scripture sense) then what he grants. There are two expressions in Scripture
which note this.

First, To have regard to a person, or to a prayer (1 Kings 8.28, 29.) when
Solomon prayed at the dedication of the Temple, the Lords hearing of prayer,
which he then beggd, is thus described, Have thou respect unto the prayer of
thy servant, and to his supplication, etc. that thine eyes may be open toward
this house night and day. Respicere est audire.
So it is said of Abel (Genesis 4.4.) that the Lord had respect to his offering,
the Lord looked toward him, and accepted of him; to accept a prayer, is to
hear a prayer.

Secondly, The hearing of prayer is described by the presence of God with those
that pray. ( Isa. 58.9.) Then shall thou call, and the Lord shall answer, thou
shall cry, and he shall say, here I am. This is a wonderful condescension,
it is even as when a Master calling to his servant, he answers, here, Sir,
here I am; and that is as much as to say, I am ready to your command, I am
ready to do what you will have me, here I am; so says that promise in the
Prophet, Thou shall cry, and the Lord shall say, here I am, that is, Adesse est
a^dire.
I am ready to do what you ask, I am even ready (O unspeakeable Goodness) at
your command (as our translation of the 11^h verse of the 45th Chapter of
Isayah, speaks out in plain terms,) or I am willing to do what you will
have me to do. All which is in effect and vertually contained in the word of
the Text. He shall hear thee. This teaches us, First, That God is the hearer
of prayer.

It is the Lords title, O thou that hear prayer, unto thee shall all flesh
come (says David, Psalm. 65.2.) God is not only A hearer of prayer, but he is
The Hearer of prayer; to hear prayer is his peculiar prerogative and
privilege as well as his goodness and mercy; none in heaven or earth have a will
to hear prayer as God does, nor have any a power to do it. No creatures ear
is long enough to reach the complaints, nor his stock large enough to supply
the wants of all his fellow creatures. The crown of this honor fits none but
God himself. He shall hear thee.

Secondly, Note; It is a great mercy, a mercy comprehending all mercy, to be
heard in prayer.

He shall hear thee; Man cannot desire a richer favor then to be heard of
God. To have audience in the Court of Princes, and among the great men of the
earth is a great favor. What greater worldly privilege can a man have then
this, that he has the ear of those who are greatest in the world? When a man
says, I have the Princes ear, I can be heard when I speak, we think he has
spoken enough to make him a man. How great a mercy is it then to have the ear
of God? to have ready audience in the Court of heaven? that as soon as we
call, the Lord is ready to answer, here I am, what is the matter? what would you
have? it shall be done, your request is granted. And to show that to be heard
by God is the sum of all mercies, or all our mercies wrapped up in one, the
Scripture testifies that not to be heard of God is the sum of all judgments,
or all judgments wrapped up in one. When the Lord refuses to hear, or says he
will not hear those that pray, then wrath is coming upon them to the
uttermost. Thus the Lord threatened the Jews (Isa. 1.15.) When ye spread forth
your hands, I will hide my eyes from you, yea when ye make many prayers I will
not hear, your hands are full of blood; As it is an argument of the greatest
sinfullnesse of man against God not to pray; Power out thy fury upon the
Heathen that know thee not, and upon the families that call not on thy name,
(Jere. 10.25.) So it it an argument of the greatest wrath of God upon man not
to be heard in prayer. He that is not heard receives nothing, and he that is
heard receives all. And this is the Saints privilege by Jesus Christ, their
prayers are heard, they have welcome audience at the throane of Grace
continually. And hence by way of Corallary from the former observation, we
learn, that Holy prayers are fruitful and gainefull prayers.

God has not said to the seed of Jacob, seek ye me in vain; He that goes
forth and weepeth bearing precious fruit, (this precious fruit faith and
prayer, or the prayer of faith) shall doubtless (there is no hazard nor
peradventure in the case) come again rejoicing, bringing his sheaves with him.
His showry seed-time shall be blessed with a fruitful and plentiful harvest.
The wicked make many adventures, many voyages by prayer, such as it is,
heavenwards, yet come home without ladeing, without any freight at all. Their
prayers are all lost, and turn to no profit; and indeed theirs are not prayers
but words, or babbling rather. But holy prayer, the prayer of the holy is
prevailing; At quibus cum que tande^ modis peccator oret, verum etiam est
nunquam exaudiri peccatorem ex dignitate suae personae aut meriti sed ex dei
gratia and misericordia. Bold.
Those showers of prayers and tears which believers send up to heaven, are
like the rain (as the Prophet speaks, Isa. 55.10.) which comes down, and
the snow from heaven, and returns not thither, but waters the earth, and
makes it bring forth and bud, that it may give seed to the sower, and bread to
the eater. Even thus the word of prayer which goes out of the mouths, or
hearts rather of believers, returns not to them void, but prospers in the
thing whereto they send it. As appears yet more fully in the next words of
this verse spoken by Eliphaz; He shall hear thee; What then?

And thou shall pay thy Vows. That is, God will give thee the mercies which
thou did pray for, and thereby give thee occasion to pay the vows which thou
did make to him in case he performed thy desire in prayer. Eliphaz is not
exhorting Job (directly) to pay vows; but he is assuring him that his prayer
shall be heard, and so fully answered, that he shall see reason and have
abundant cause to pay them, and to pay them both fully and chearefully.

Thou shall pay thy Vows. The word signifies free votive promises made to God,
(...) significat votivas promissiones deo factas quae obligant, nec retractari
nec solvi propria authoritate possunt. Bold.
yet obligatory upon man; for howsoever as the word implies, there ought to be
the greatest freedom and voluntarines in making a vow, yet a vow being made,
there is an obligation, a bond or tie upon him that made it to perform or pay
it; He that voweth binds himself, but he cannot unbind or absolve himself
from his vow, nor can he retract or call in his lawful vow.

Eliphaz, I suppose, here mentions the payment of Vows, because the godly in
those times did often make Vows. When Jacob (Genesis 28.20.) fled from his
brother Esau, he in case of his safe return, vowed a vow, saying, If God will
be with me, and will keep me in this way that I go, and will give me bread to
eat and raiment to putt on, so that I come to my fathers house again in
peace, then shall the Lord be my God, (that is, I will own and honor him,
love and depend upon him more then ever) And this stone which I have set up
shall be Gods house, and of all that thou shall give me I shall surely give the
tenth to thee. Here Is the tenor and form of the most ancient and famous vow
that ever was made. Likewise Hauna (1 Samuel 1.11.) vowed a vow, and said, O Lord
of hoasts, if thou will indeed look on the affliction of thy handmaid, and
remember me, and not forget thy handmaid, but wilt give to thy handmaid a
man-child, then will I give him unto the Lord. We read often in the Psalms
of paying of Vows, Psalm. 66.13, 14. Psalm. 50.14. Psalm. 76.11. Psalm. 116.14.
And we have the command for it ( Eccl. 5.4.) Pay that which thou have Vowed.

Further, To explicate this Text, It may be inquired what a Vow is?

I answer, A Vow is a solemn, free, and voluntary promise made to God, of
things lawful, weighty, and possible, to further and help us to glorify God in
our obedience. In which description we have, first, the nature of a Vow, It is
a solemn promise, not a bare promise. Secondly, the object; It must be made to
God; Thirdly, the manner of it, It is a free and a voluntary promise; for
though a lawful vow lays a necessity upon us to keep it, when once we have
made it, yet there is not an antecedent necessity of compulsion upon us to make
it; so that, a vow ought to be a most free, and voluntary act. Fourthly, in
this description of a vow, we have the general matter of it. As first, it must
be of things lawful, we may not vow that which we may not do, either
expressly, as they did ( Act. 23.12, 13.) who vowed to kill Paul, or
implicitly, as Herod did who promised to give the daughter of Herodias
whatsoever she should ask, limiting her only as to the quantity of her
demand, she must not ask above half the kingdom, but leaving her without
limits as to the quality of her demand, whether good or evil, lawful or
unlawful made no matter. And thus many conceive Jephtah failed, implicitly
vowing to do that, which was unlawful for him to do, ( Judge. 11.30, 31.)
Secondly, a vow must be of things weighty and serious, we must not vow about
trifles. Thirdly, it must be of things possible, through grace, though we must
vow weighty things, yet we must not vow things impossible, either in their own
nature, or without extraordinary assistance and strength from God. Fifthly, we
have here the ends of a vow; first, to Glorify God; secondly, to oblidge us
more strictly to obedience.

Hence Note; First, It is lawful to make a Vow.

All the Scripture testimonies before alleged confirm that proposition.

Secondly, Vows lawfully made, ought to be kept. Thou shall pay thy vows,
has in it the nature both of a promise and of a command; Vows are bonds, we
must take heed of breaking them; if we break our vows, God will break our
peace. The word which we translate to pay a vow, signifies also to give peace
and quietness, implying that till the vow be paid we cannot have peace. A man
that is in bonds to men has no peace till he discharges or has prepared to
discharge his debt, and therefore an acquittance or a discharge for a debt, is
commonly called, A quietus est, implying that till a man has got a discharge,
he is not at quiet. We are at our liberty whether we will vow or no, but we are
not at our liberty whether we will pay our vows or no. And therefore Solomon
does not only exhort to the payment of vows, but to the speedy payment of
them ( Eccl. 5.4.) When thou vowest a vow unto God defer not to pay it, for
he has no pleasure in fools; That is, he is greatly displeased with fools;
he means it not of such as are called fools for the want of a natural
understanding, but for the want of a good conscience, and such are all they,
who flatter God with their hastines in making vows, and then mock him by their
slownes in or neglect of paying them. And therefore, take four Cautions about
Vows.

First, Be not frequent in making vows; vowing must not be like praying, an
every days work, we may not vow, as we must pray, always, and without ceasing.
Many have brought themselves into great snares by multiplying vows; and we
have need to be cautioned in this thing, because the nature of man is carried
much to it. The Heathens made many vows, especially when they were in any
distress, and so mere carnal men will do to this day, vow great things, what
they will be, and what they will do, if trouble be upon them. It is said that
those Heathen Mariners made vows when the storm was over and the danger past
( Jon. 1.16.) Many make vows in a storm whether at Sea or Land, which they
little mind when the storm is done. But those Heathens (which may be a rebuke
to some Christians) made vows of praise and thankfullnes when they had escaped
the storm. And this is a further proof of that naturalnes which is in man to
make vows. And the reason of it is, because this satisfies a natural man, and
fills him with confidence that he shall receive good from God, because he has
vowed duty to him. Man loves to be upon his own bottom, and thinks he shall
surely engage God to be merciful, while himself promises to be dutiful and
thankful. Now (I say) though there be still a lawfullnes of vows in these
Gospel times, yet take heed of making many vows, especially of conceiting to
oblidge God by any of them. As the former may prove a snare, and an
entanglement to us, so the latter is a dishonor to God, who never shows us
mercy more freely, then when we bind our selves most to duty.

Secondly, When ever you vow be sure you do it in the strength of Christ. None
discover more weakeness in keeping vows, then they who make vows in their
own strength, or not wholly in the strength of Christ. Some have vowed never to
commit such a sin more, and they never committed it so much as after they had
vowed. Some have thought to get cure and remedy against such a corruption or
lust by a vow, and yet that lust or corruption has prevailed more upon them
after their vow. The reason of all is, because they have either put their vow
in the room of Christ, as if that could help them alone, or else they have
made their vows alone without relyance upon the power of Christ. That rule of
the Apostle which obtaines in all cases of duty, does most in this; Whatsoever
ye do in word or deed, do all in the name of the Lord Jesus, giving thanks
to God and the Father by him (Col. 3.17.)

Thirdly, In things which are directly commanded or directly forbidden in the
Law of God, we are not to vow the doing, or not doing of the thing in it self,
but only a greater care and stricter watch over our selves, either for the
doing of the one, or not to do the other. As for example, we should not vow
absolutely, that we will not worship Idols, that we will not swear, that we
will keep the Saboath, that we will honor our parents, that we will do no
murder, for all these duties are expressly commanded by God, and are therefore
past being vowed by us. Only thus, we (observing the treachery of our own
hearts) may vow more care and diligence in and about all these things. And thus
we are to understand that of Jacob (Genesis 28.21.) vowing that the Lord should
be his God; as also that of David (Psalm. 119.106.) I have sworn and will
perform it, that I will keep thy righteous judgments. David kept them
before, but now he would be more strict then before in keeping them. So then,
when we vow things already commanded or forbidden, we must pitch and place our
vow not upon the matter of the commandment, but upon the manner and intensenes
of our spirits in keeping it.

Fourthly, Let not vows about indifferent things be perpetual. All vows
about things expressed in the Law of God must be perpetual, because the things
themselves are always a duty. For the affirmative precepts of the Law are at
all times binding, and the negative bind at all times. But as for things which
are not precisely under a Law; As for example, in the affirmative, to pray so
many times in a day, to read so many Chapters of the holy Scriptures in a day,
to hear so many Sermons in a week; and in the negative, not to drink any
wine or strong drink; not to wear silk or lace for or upon our Apparel, not
to take such or such a recreation in it self lawful. I say in these cases,
let not vows be perpetual but limited to a season, lest thereby we entangle
our own souls, and cast our selves into temptation, while (through a zeal
not according to knowledge) we use such means to avoid it. Make no vows to
bind your selves at all times in things which are not necessary at all times,
either to be done or not to be done.

From the whole verse, Observe; That, the answer of prayer received from the
Lord, does call us to pay and perform all the duties that we have promised or
vowed to the Lord in prayer.

Though we do not always make strict and formal vows when we pray, yet every
prayer has somewhat of a vow in it, so that having prayed at any time, we may
say, The vows of God are upon us; for when we pray we promise, and then
especially we do so, when we pray under any pressure of trouble, or when we
have any extraordinary request to make; then, I say, we engage our selves in a
more solemn manner to serve and walk with God. And so the return or answer
of such prayers ingageth us more strongly to duty. For wheresoever the Lord
sows, there he looks to reap, and where he has sowed much, he looks to
reap much; but then and there chiefly when we promise him fruits of duty for
our receipts of favor and mercy. Did we take notice of this, we should not be
found as we are so much in arreare to the Lord, either for our private or
public mercies? What promises have we made in the day of our distress? that
we would be holy, that we would strive against and mortify our sins, or the
deeds of the body through the Spirit and power of our Lord Jesus Christ. Now
let conscience speak; have we performed our promises? have we paid our vows?
we can hardly say that we have put up a prayer which has not had an answer by
blessings and successes; God has been to us a prayer-hearing God; have we been
to him a vow-paying people? Who amongst us is now more active for God? or more
careful to please him then before? Who amongst us is more watchful over his
heart, or more circumspect in his walkings then he was before? Who is more
careful over his family, that it may be holy? or more zealous for the
public, that it may be reformed, then he was before? What manner of men
should we be in all holy conversation and Godliness, did we but pay those vows
and make good those engagements which have gone out of our lips, and we have
laid upon our selves before the Lord, in the day of our trouble? how just, how
pure, how righteous a Nation should we be were we what we promised our utmost
endeavors to be? the Lord has done much for us; let us up and be doing for
him; let us make good what we have spoken to the Lord in vowing and promising,
seeing the Lord has performed what we have spoken to him in praying and calling
upon his name. God has answered us at the first call, yea sometimes before we
called; let us not put God to call a second and a third time, much less often
and often for the payment of our vows. For though the Lord in patience wait
many days for the payment of vows, yet according to righteousness we should
not let him wait one day for it. All these spiritual debt-bills are payable
at sight or upon demand; God shows us our own bills and bonds wherein we
stand engaged to his Majesty every day, and every day (by some or other of his
Atturneyes, that is, by some means or other) he makes his demand, therefore
pay to day, pay every day, for we can never come wholly out of these debts to
God, or say, we owe him nothing, how much soever, we have paid him. And know,
that if when God has heard us, we be sloathfull in paying our vows, either
God will hear us no more, or we shall hear of him (and that, as we say, with
both ears) till he make our ears tingle, and our hearts ache for not paying
them. Swift Judgments have often followed these slow payments. And though they
have not been swift in coming presently upon the neglect, yet when they have
come, they have come swiftly upon the neglecters. And as we may always say of
the evils and Judgments which come upon any of the people of God, as the
Prophet in a like case does to the people of Israel (Jer. 4.18.) Thy way and
thy doin^s have procured these things unto thee this is thy wickedness. So in
most cases when evils and judgments fall upon and afflict the people of God,
we may say, Your not doing what you have promised, has procured these things
unto you; This is your vow-breaking or your neglect of paying your vows. And
how just is it that their troubles should not only be renewed, but even
doubled and trebled, yea, seventimes more increased upon them, who slight and
throw off those very duties which they took upon them in the day of their
trouble, in expectation to have their troubles removed. Every man's mouth will
be stopped, when he suffers for not doing that good which the mouth of the Lord
has spoken, how much more will his mouth be stopped, and he have nothing to say
for himself, who suffers for not doing that good, or for not forbearing that
evil, which his own mouth has spoken, and solemnly charged upon himself as
a duty in the presence of the Lord. They will have least to say for themselves
who go against or come not up to what themselves have said. Then pay your
vows.

JOB, CHAP. 22. Verse. 28, 29, 30. Thou shall also decree a thing, and it shall
be established unto thee: and the light shall shine upon thy ways.

When men are cast down, then thou shall say, There is lifting up: and he
shall save the humble person.

He shall deliver the Island of the Innocent: and it is delivered by the
pureness of thine hands.


IT has appeared in opening the whole Context (of which this is a part) how
Eliphaz presses Job with promises, assuring him that not only good, but great
good should accrue to him by his returning to God, and acquainting himself
with the Allmighty. And in the foregoing verse That great benefit was showed,
The Lords hearing the prayer of such as do so; Thou shall make thy prayer to
him, and he shall hear thee, and thou shall pay thy vows: Here Eliphaz gives
in another excellent promise; Thou shall also etc. that is, moreover and beside
what I have said, I add this,

Verse. 28. Thou shall also decree a thing, and it shall be established unto
thee.
(...) scidit abscidit secuit divisit. Metaleptice secuit lites, definivit
decrevit. Importat hoc verbum decretum cum quadam separatione unius rei ab
alia. Bold.
Thou shall decree. The word here translated to decree, signifies properly to
divide, to cut asunder. So it is used (1 Kings 3.25.) when Solomon gave
sentence between the two women that were harlots concerning the living Child,
he says, Divide the Child; my decree is that the Child shall be divided. Now
hence by a Trope, the word signifies also to decree, to descide, or to
determine a matter, because in all decrees about or determinations of a
Controversy, there is (as it were) a Cutting off the buisines, a laying aside
of one thing, and a sticking to another. When the whole matter is debated and
weighed in Council, then the result and issue of all is drawn up and given
out in a decree. So that to decree is to divide, or separate one thing from
another, resolving upon that, which we conceive most just, and reasonable.

Thou shall decree a thing. The Hebrew is, Thou shall decree a word: Verbum pro
re frequenter per Metonymiam adjuncti.
it is usual in that language to put word for thing. And when he says, Thou
shall decree a thing, we are not to understand it at large, as if whatsoever
were decreed should be established, but the meaning is, thou shall decree that
which is right and good in it self, and good for thee. For the decree being
made by a godly man, we cannot suppose that he should decree any thing but
that which is just and good; and so the signification of the former word is
well applied to this, Thou shall decree, that is, thou having by deliberation
and serious discussion considered what is right, and having cut off all evil
from thy sentence, thou decreeing such a thing, it shall be established unto
thee.

There are yet two opinions concerning this decree, as it is an exposition of
the former promises, Thou shall be heard, and, Poterit esse pracedentis partis
expositio Decernes offerre vota et deus illa rata efficiet, vel rata semper
fundes verba. Pi^ed.
thou shall pay thy vows; that is, what thou suest for by prayer on earth,
shall be decreed for thee in heaven. That is, thy prayer shall certainly be
performed, thy prayers shall not be lost, no, They shall be as the Statutes and
decrees of heaven. It is said of Eliah (1 Kings 17.1.) what he decreed was
done? and what was his decree? his decree was his prayer; See how he speaks as
if he had the command of heaven and earth, as if he had carried the keys of
the Clouds at his girdle. As the Lord God of Israel lives, before whom I
stand, there shall not be dew nor rain these years, but according to my word.
But what was this word of Elijah? the Apostle James expounds that for us, he
tells us what this word was, when Eliah said, it shall be according to my
word (Jam. 5.17.) Elias was a man subject to the like passions as we are, and
he prayed earnestly that it might not rain; and it rained not on the earth for
the space of three years and six months: And he prayed again, and the heavens
gave rain, and the earth brought forth her frruit. The Apostle explaines, what
the word of Elijah was, even a Prayer-word, he prayed and sought the Lord in
that thing, and his prayer was as certainly performed to him, as if he had the
whole power of decreeing what he would have. Thus here, thou shall power out a
prayer, and thy prayer shall be as a decree established with God. So we read (
Genesis 32.24.) in the report of Jacobs wrestling with the Angel, that the word of
Jacob was as a decree, I will not let thee go, except thou bless me; I will
have a blessing; and it is said, as a Prince have thou power with God, and with
men, and have prevailed. Jacob had what he would in prayer, he decreed a thing,
and it was established to him. The prayers of Saints are decrees with God: and
it is but reason they should be so; because their prayers answer the decrees of
God, or they pray for that which God has decreed; and indeed there is no Saint
or Godly man would pray any other prayer, or ask any thing of God, but what
God has determined and decreed before to give: As a Godly man would do
nothing but what God has commanded, so he would ask nothing but what God has
decreed. This is a comfortable truth, yet I rather conceive the sense of this
place more general, and not tied up to that of prayer, and therefore

Secondly, Thou shall decree a thing; that is, thou shall take up a resolve, or
a purpose; thou in thy wisdom and prudence shall say in thy heart, I will do
such a thing, or I would bring such a thing to pass, Ordinabis per tuam
providentiam facturum aliquid, and quasi rem non futuram and incertam, sed
quasi divina jam voluntate constitutam illam habebis. Aquin.
and it shall come to pass or be established. For as many men met together in
Council, make Decrees; so any man in himself may make a decree; and we
always make decrees in our own minds before we join in any decree with
others; first, we speak in our minds, then we speak out our minds; Thou
shall decree a thing; that is, thou shall resolve to go such a way, or to do
such a thing, and it shall be done. Now, this Case of decreeing must be
understood with a Caution, suppose the thing it self be just and lawful (as
we touched before) yet a man must not make absolute decrees (that is the
privilege of God, he only can make peremptory decrees, who has all things in
his power) we must decree submissively to the will of God, and say, if the Lord
will, if the Lord please we will do such a thing. The Apostle ( James 4.12,
13, 14.) reproves those that would make peremptory decrees of what they would
do in reference to outward affairs: Go to now ye that say to day or to
morrow we will go into such a City, here is a decree, we will go to such a
place, or do such a thing, we will continue there a year, and buy and sell,
and get gain. It is lawful for men to take up a purpose to go to such a
place, and follow their trade to buy and sell, and get gain in an honest way,
but no man must be peremptory in this, because we know not what shall be on the
morrow; therefore, the Apostle directs; Ye ought to say, if the Lord will we
shall live, and do this or that. Such decrees must be made with the Lords good
leave, or with a reference to his pleasure who alone does whatsoever pleases
him. As the persons so the works of all men are in the hand of God ( Eccl.
9.1.) And there they are; first, as to the performance of them; secondly, as
the success of them. They take themselves for more then men, who decree the
doing of lawful things without the leave of God. We must not only see what we
do is according to the will of God, but we must have his goodwill for the
doing of it; that is, as we must have a Law from God for what we do, so leave
from God. Thus Paul teaches us to speak by his own example (1 Cor. 4.19.) I
will come unto you shortly if the Lord will. And again ( Chap. 16.7.) I must
tarry a while with you if the Lord permit. Once more ( Phil. 2.19.) I trust in
the Lord to send Timothy to you shortly. And even Heathens themselves by the
light of nature have acknowledged such a submission as due unto their superior
Power, their gods, Ethnicis illudi in ore frequens erat, si dij volunt.
therefore they used to express their resolutions thus; If the gods will; much
more must Christians speak thus in all they undertake to do, we will do it,
if God will.

Thou shall decree a thing
And it shall be established unto thee.
That is, thou shall have success in it, it shall be confirmed. (...) surget
tibi; surgere pro existere vel effectum dari.
The word in the Original signifies, to rise up, as also to stand. So some
render it here; Thou shall decree a thing, and it shall rise up to thee. When a
thing that we are determined upon, prospers and comes well on, we say it rises
up to us, whereas a business that fails, falls off from us, or goes
backward. But says Eliphaz to Job, The thing which thou decreest shall rise or
come up to thy mind, to thy desire, or as some read, It shall come to thee; we
say, Veniet tibi. Vulg.
it shall be established. So the word is used frequently in Scripture ( Esaias
40.8.) The word of the Lord shall stand. Now as the word of the Lord shall
stand, so shall the word of man while it is according to the word of God. So
the word is used in the Case of a virgins making a vow ( Numb. 30.4.) If the
father hear it and say nothing it shall stand, or be confirmed; otherwise if
he dislike, it is a void vow, a null vow. So that here, to rise up, or to be
established, notes only the effectivenes and success of those decrees which
this godly man should make, these shall be established unto him for his good,
he shall have the comfort and benefit of them, while he aims at the Glory of
God in them.

Hence note;

First, The success of our Counsels and Decrees is a great mercy.

Eliphaz brings it in by way of promise, Thou shall decree a thing, and it
shall be established unto thee. Success in any of our right actions is to be
acknowledged as a mercy; and therefore the Lord does so distinctly specify the
successlesnes of the Jews after their return from Babylon in their rural and
household businesses for neglecting to build his house ( Hag. 1.6.) to show that
he had a Controversy with them; Ye have sown much, and brought in little (no
success) ye eat, but have not enough, ye drink, but ye are not filled with
drink (that is, ye are not satisfied) ye cloth you, but there is no warmth
(which is the effect of clothing) and he that earneth wages, earneth wages to
put it into a bag with holes. Which is a proverbiall speech, implying that
nothing sticks, nothing stays by a man, no more then money does in a bag that
has holes in it, or water in a sieve, or in a leaking vessel. Successlesnes
attended them in all they did, and that was their affliction. So when our
Counsels prosper, when what we advise to be done thrives in the doing; when
the directing word of a man proves like the Creating word of God (Genesis first)
who did but say; Let there be light, and there was light, let there be a
firmament, and there was a firmament, etc. Thus when a man shall say, let such
a thing be done and it is done, when every thing comes forth at a word, like a
new Creation, how great both a mercy and honor is this? When he says, let
there be deliverance, and there is deliverance, let there be victory, and there
is victory, let there be peace, and there is peace; when in cases of greatest
difficulty and utter impossibility to flesh and blood, he speaks like
magnanimous Joshua (Josh. 10.13.) in a commanding language to the creature,
while with strongest confidence in and humblest dependence upon God. Sun
stand thou still upon Gibeah, and thou Moon in the valley of Ajalon, and the
Sun stood still, and the Moon stayed until the people had avenged themselves
upon their enemies. Who of the sons of men (who were not also the sons of God)
were ever crowned with such an honor?

Secondly, He does not say, he shall decree a thing and establish it, for man
may decree a thing, but man cannot establish it; the decree is from one, the
establishment is from another; and who is that other? Eliphaz does not express
who by name, but we may easily understand who it is, even God himself. For as
it is God alone who has given a being to all things, so he alone gives all
things their establishment, whether they be things wrought by him, or wrought
by us, God shall establish it, or it shall be established by the fiat, and
consent of God.

Hence observe; The success of our Counsels and decrees is from God.

There are many who take wise, yea honest Counsels, which yet are not
established, because the Lord is not pleased to establish them, and the Lord
does often overthrow evil and malicious Counsels. We read ( Esaias. 7.5, 6, 7.)
of Counsels and Decrees made; Syria, Ephraim, and the son of Remaliah, have
taken evil Council against thee, saying (they decree a thing, what was it)
let us go up against Judah to vex it (there was the decree) let us make a
breach therein for us, and set a king in the midst of it, even the Son of
Tabeal. Here was their decree; we will vex this people, we will set a king
among them, the Son of Tabeal. But what says the Lord to this? Thus says the
Lord God (7 ver.) it shall not stand, neither shall it come to pass. It is
this word in the Text, it shall not be established. You have made a decree, but
you have not my consent for the Establishment of it, and therefore it shall not
stand, it shall not come to pass. Take another Scripture ( Esaias 8.10.) The
Lord does as it were give them leave to make decrees: make as many decrees as
you will, and sit together in Council, lay your Counsels as deep as you can,
take Council together, and it shall come to naught (you may take Council, but
it is in my Power whether it shall succeed or no, and I have decreed concerning
your decree, that it shall come to naught) speak the word and it shall not
stand. The standing or not standing, the frustrating, or the fullfilling of our
Decrees and Counsels, it is from the Lord.

Thirdly, When he says, Thou shall decree a thing, and it sha^^ be established
unto thee. We may observe; The Counsels of the Godly are under a promise of
good success.

They have a kind of Assurance that what they say shall come to pass; though
they have not an absolute Assurance, yet they have much assurance, though we
cannot say in every particular Case, that their decree shall be Established to
them, yet their decrees in general are under a promise of Establishment.
Christ speaks concerning the Decrees of a Church-Assembly ( Math. 18.18.)
Verily I say unto you, whatsoever ye shall bind on earth, shall be bound in
heaven; and whatsoever ye shall loose on Earth shall be loosed in heaven; that
is, I will Establish your Decrees. If when you meet together in my name, you
decree concerning a person to bind sin upon him, he shall be bound, if to loose
or pronounce him pardoned, he shall be loosened, your decree on earth, shall be
a decree in heaven, I will bind what you bind, and loose what you loose. Now
in proportion, the Lord speaks the same concerning the decrees of any Godly
man; what he binds on earth, the Lord does bind in heaven, and what he loses
on earth, God loses in heaven; that is, there is an Establishment of his
decrees; and as the Church there has a promise that the Lord will join with
her in her decrees; so a Godly man has a promise here that the Lord will join
with him in his decrees. We have also an excellent confirmation of it, ( Esaias
44.25, 26.) The Lord is many ways described in Scripture, but here he is
described by disappointing and establishing the Counsels of men. He it is that
frustrateth the tokens of the liars, and makes diviners mad; that turns wise
men backward, and makes their knowledge foolishnes. Here is a description of
God in reference to the disappoyntments which he puts upon his enemies, in
frustrating their Counsels and decrees; they boast of these and these tokens
that assure them of good success, but the Lord frustrates their tokens. The
Diviners say, O the Stars promise good luck, and tell us we shall have good
fortune; thus diviners boast, but the Lord makes the diviners mad; how does he
make them mad? by making them see things fall out quite cross to what they have
foretold or prophesied. Again, he turns wise men backward; that is, he
turns the Counsels of wise men backward, when they have resolved such a
thing, the Lord sets it quite another way: this is the glory of God that he can
give check to the Counsels of the greatest Politicians, and deepest
Machiavells, he turns them backward. Thus the Lord is set forth overthrowing
the decrees of the wicked; but at the 26^h ver. He is set forth establishing
the decrees of the Godly. He it is that confirms the word of his servant, and
performs the Council of his Messengers; that says to Jerusalem, thou shall
be Inhabited, and to the Cities of Judah ye shall be built, etc God confirms
the word of his servant; which may be understood not only of the word of
Prophecy (though that be the scope of that place, as if it had been said, when
the Lord sends forth his Prophets and holy Diviners, it is not with them as
with false Prophets and heathenish Diviners, who making promises from the
Stars of heaven, not from the God of heaven, are frustrated and disappoynted;
it is not thus with the Lords holy Diviners, for he confirms the word of his
Servants. Now, I say, we may understand that Text not only of that word of
prophecy which the Lord puts into the mouths of his Servants by an immediate
inspiration) but also of that word of prophecy, or decree, which any one of his
faithful servants speaks or makes according to his already revealed will.
This word of his servants the Lord confirms also, and performs the Council
of his Messengers. And the reason is (as was touched before about prayer)
because there is a suitablenes between such words and decrees of his servants,
and his own Decrees; for the designs of his servants falling in with his own
designs, and so their decrees with his decrees, he in establishing their
decrees, does indeed but establish his own. For the servants of God desiering
that their decrees may be suitable to the written or revealed will of God, they
seldom miss of a suitablenes to the decrees of his hidden and secret will. So
that their decrees are (as it were) the Duplicate or Counterpane of the Decrees
of God; and therefore no wonder if they be under such a promise of success and
establishment. The Lord says concerning his own Decrees or thoughts; Surely
as I have thought, so shall it come to pass (Isa. 14.24.) (Now if we think
as God thinks, then what we think shall come to pass too) and as I have
purposed so shall it stand; If we purpose as God purposes, then our purposes
shall stand too. Again ( Esaias 46.10.) I am the Lord and there is none else, I
am God, and there is none like me^: declaring the End from the beginning, and
from ancient time the things that are not yet done, saying, my Council shall
stand, and I will do all my pleasure. If then the Counsels of Saints, be the
Counsels of God, he will do all their pleasure. That Is the sum of this
promise to Job; Thou shall decree a thing, and it shall be established unto
thee. Which appears further from the last Clause.

And the light shall shine upon thy ways. Eliphaz in this promise might
possibly have respect to Jobs former Complaint ( Chap. 19.8.) He has fenced
up my way that I cannot pass; and he has set darkness in my paths. As if
Eliphaz had here said, thou did Complain a while ago that God set darkness
in thy paths, do thou return unto the Lord, and the light shall shine upon
thy ways, or there shall be light in stead of darkness in thy paths. This
light may be taken three ways.

First, A light of direction, thou shall see what to do; So it answers the
former promise, Thou shall decree a thing, and it shall be established unto
thee. Thou shall not make blind decrees, or decrees in the dark, thou shall
not decree at a venture, or at random; the light shall shine upon thy ways;
thou shall have the light of the Word, and the light of the Spirit to direct
thee in making thy decrees, and for the ordering of thy whole conversation.

Secondly, Light shining upon his ways, is the prosperity of his ways; as if
he had said, success shall attend thy undertakings, the favor of God and his
blessing shall be upon what thou take in hand; as the Sun shining upon the
earth ripens the fruits thereof, so the light, heat, and influence of divine
favor shall ripen thy undertakings, and bring them to a desiered perfection.
Light, in Scripture, is often put for prosperity, as has been showed from
other passages of this book.

Thirdly, The light shall shine upon thy ways; that is, thou shall have
personal Comfort and Contentment in thy ways; that is a different blessing
from the former; it is possible for a man to be in a prosperous way, and yet
himself to take no Comfort nor Contentment in it. When these three lights
shine upon any man in his way, or upon the ways of any man, when the Lord
shows him what he should do, when he prospers and succeeds what he does, and
when he has comfort and joy in what he is doing or has don, then the blessing
is full. As the Lord meets him that rejoices in his way and works
righteousness, so the Lord does often meet those that work righteousness in
their way, causing them to rejoice; And then the light shines upon their way
indeed. This is a further adddition unto the promise of success before given.

From the first notion of light, first Observe; The righteous are under a
promise of direction and guidance by God, they shall see their way, and know
what to do, by a divine light.

The steps of a Good man are ordered by the Lord (Psalm. 37.23.) That is, the
Lord gives him light to see how to order his steps; He has not only an
outward natural light shining in the air, and an outward spiritual light
shining in the rule, but he has an inward spiritual light shining in his
heart, or that outward rule planted within, as it follows at the 31 verse of
the same Psalm; The law of his God is in his heart, and none of his steps
shall slide: The law in the heart is a rule within, which directs the good man
what to do, and gives him such good direction, that none of his steps shall
slide. He shall not walk like a man upon glass or ice, all whose steps are
slips, or in danger of sliding, but he shall walk like a man upon plain firm
ground, whose very steps are as sure as standings. As Saints who were darkness
are made light in the Lord, in reference to their state, so they have light
from the Lord, in reference to their walkings; and as they receive a light from
God whereby they know all things, that is, those great things which concern
Eternal life (1 John 2.20.) Ye have an Unction from the holy one, and ye know
all things. Now as they have a light promised them, that they may know all
things, that is, all necessary saving truths or doctrines of salvation for
attaining the next life, so a light is promised them whereby they may do all
things; that is, all their necessary works, businesses, and affairs, which
concern their duty in this life.

From the second notion of light, Observe; Righteous men, such as turn unto
the Lord, shall have a Blessing in their way, their way shall prosper.

As they shall have a light shining to show them their way, so to prosper them
in their way: God is a Sun, and he is a Shield, ( Psalm. 84.11.) And as he is
a Sun to give light, and a Shield to protect, so, no good thing will he
withold from them that walk uprightly; That is, he will not hinder or stopp
those good things from them which their souls desire, or move after, they
shall prosper in their way, yea, when it is said, He will not withhold, etc.
there is more intended then expressed, for the meaning is, he will plentifully
give forth or power out all good things to and upon them who walk uprightly.

From the third notion of light, learn; That the Lord gives Godly men Joy and
Comfort in their way.

Though their way be a way of much labor, yea and a way of much danger too,
though it prove a way full of sweat and trouble, yet the Lord will cause a
light to shine upon them, and refresh them in their way. To the righteous there
rises up light in darkness: The light of joy in the darkness of sorrow, the light
of comfort in the darkness of trouble; They who walk in the light of truth and
holiness, usually find the light of joy and comfort in their way, and are sure
to find it in their end. The ways of wisdom (says Solomon, Pro. 3.17.) are
ways of pleasantnes, and all her paths are peace; and if at any time her
ways and paths are not peace and pleasantnes (as to the outward man they
often are not) while we are traveling in them, yet they are always so in the
close of our travells. ( Psalm. 37.37.) Mark the perfect man, and behold the
upright, for the end of that man is peace. Yea when others find most trouble
in their way, then God is nearest to him for support, as it follows in the
next words.

Verse. 29. When men are cast down, then thou shall say there is a lifting up,
and he shall save the humble person.
In this and the following verse, Eliphaz gives a firm assurance to Job by way
of promise, that he should not only be delivered, but should have two further
privileges.

First, That himself should be exalted when others were cast down, or that he
should be saved in times of common calamity, ver. 29.

Secondly, That he should be a means of safety to others, and should prevail
with God for their deliverance: he shall deliver the Island of the Innocent,
etc. verse. 30. That Is the general scope of these two verses, according to our
translation; as will further appear in the explication of them.

Verse. 29. When men are cast down. (...) depressus prostratus.
When they are pressed, or oppressed with mountains of affliction and trouble. So
the word is used ( Esaias 2.17.) The loftines of man shall be bowed down; that
is, the lofty man shall be bowed down, as a man with a heavy burden upon his
back. We say, when men are cast down, the word, men, is not expressed in the
Hebrew text, it is there only, when cast down: and because that word is not
expressed, therefore some supply out of the former clause, Cum humiliatae fuer^nt
viae tuae dicas, elatio illis est, i. e. mox senties condition^m tua^ ex ima
factam optima^. Contextus mire concisus est, ideo va^ie intelligitur. Merc.
the word, way, The light shall shine upon thy way when it, that is, when thy
way is cast down; though thou be now in a low condition, and though thou
should hereafter be cast into a low condition again, yet thou shall say
there is a lifting up, or, thou shall be lifted (...) If at any time thy ways
be cast down in darkness, the light shall shine upon them, thou shall say in
faith, there is a lifting up. The Apostle speaks (in a language like this) of
himself and of his fellow-Apostles (2 Cor. 4.8.) We are troubled on every
side, yet not distressed; perplexed, but not in despair, persecuted, but not
forsaken, cast down, but not destroyed. Thus here, when there is a casting
down, or, when thy ways are cast down, yet thou shall say there is a lifting
up; Thou may be cast down, but not destroyed. Yet, I conceive, that
Suplement of the word men, which we put into the Text, is more suitable to the
scope of it, and then the sense is this, When men are cast down, that is, when
sinners or ungodly men are cast down, when God comes to ruin his enemies, and
make them desolate, then thou shall say there is a lifting up. A lifting up for
me and for such as I am.

Thou shall say. This saying may be taken two ways, and in both it is the voice
of faith.

First, Thou shall say in prayer, or thou shall pray, O Lord, Dices, sc: in
tuis ad deum precibus exaltatio sit, sc. illi depresso. i. e. exalta illum
Odeus. Pisca^.
let there be a lifting up. Thus it is expounded as a promise to Job, that when
others were cast down, he should help them up again by prayer, thou shall
say, There is a lifting up, or, O Lord, let there be a lifting up, namely, of
him who is cast down, lift him up O Lord. As prayer is in its own nature a
lifting up of the soul to God ( Psalm. 25.1.) so prayer in the effect of it
has a mighty power and prevalency with God for the lifting up both of our own
bodies and outward estates, as also the bodies and outward estates of others
out of the deepes of misery and trouble. Many a Godly man has lifted himself
and others out of the mire by prayer, while seeing a casting down, he has
said, There is a lifting up, or, O Lord, let there be a lifting up. This sense
carries a high privilege; but I rather conceive that intended in the next
verse. And therefore

Secondly, I shall take these words of Eliphaz as a promise, When men are cast
down, Pollicetur Jobo Eliphaz eximiam foelicitatem, i^pijs alijs atque etiam
h^stibus suis ad ext^e^u^ infelicitatis gradum praecip^tatis.
thou shall say, (or confidently affirm this thing) there is a lifting up:
that is, I promise or assure thee O Job, that when thou shall see the Lord
bringing vengeance upon the wicked, when thou see them fall on this side, and
on that, when nothing is visible but the ruin and destruction of men and
families, yea of Nations, that even then thou shall say^ there is a lifting up,
that is, thou shall have faith for thy self, that both thou and thine shall be
lifted up, or saved and delivered in a time when many wicked men or thine
enemies fall and perish, and shall never (as to any worldly enjoyment) rise any
more.

Hence observe; That a godly man may have much assurance when others are cast
down, that yet he and others shall be preserved and lifted up.

When men were cast down in Sodom, when Sodom was overthrown, Lot was
lifted up, and assured of his preservation. When all the men in the world were
overwhelmed and swept off the face of the earth with a Deluge, there was a
lifting up for Noah and his family, he and his were safely housed in the Arc
floating upon the waters. Thus the Lord has made provision for the
preservation of his people, when thousands have been undone, and cast down on
the right hand and on the left by common calamities; yea when they have been
cast down, his people have been not only preserved, but exalted and lifted
up. Thou shall say there is a lifting up, And he shall save the humble person.

That is, the Lord shall save him; the vulgar reads thus; He that is humble
shall be in glory. (...). Sept Interior animi fastus and tumor per oculos et
per omnes externos gestus se prodit.
The Seaventy thus; Because thou have humbled thy self thou shall be saved.

But I shall keep to our Reading; he shall save the humble person (or
according to the strictnes of the Hebrew) He shall save him that is low of
eyes, it is frequent in Scripture to express an humble person in this form; A
man that has low eyes; as high looks and lofty eyes, are every where in
Scripture the periphrasis of pride. David said ( Psalm. 101.5. Non enim is
supe^biae mos est, qui latere aut d^ssimulari possit. Pined.
) him that has an high look and a proud heart will I not suffer; for you may
see pride in the eye, pride sits upon the eye, therefore David puts a high
look and a proud heart both together there. And again ( Psalm. 131.1.) Lord
mine heart is not haughty, nor mine eyes lofty. So that I say an humble person,
and a person of low eyes, is the same, as a proud person, and a person of lofty
eyes is the same in Scripture sense, and both are very significant Expressions;
He shall save the humble person, this humble person, may be taken two ways,
either passively, or actively.

Passively, Non tam modestu^ qui sese submittit (ut v rtute^ significet)
intelligo, quam affictum etsi illad etiam sente^tiae non repugnat, imo utru^que
recte intellexeris? Merc.
so it is he that is cast down and laid low by affliction. Thus the humble
person is the same with the humbled person; affliction is an humiliation,
however the afflicted take it or carry it; and usually it makes men humble, at
least in appearance and lowly in their looks, whereas in prosperity men lift
up their eyes usually and look softily, as if they would reach heaven with
their heads, while their hearts are far from it. But affliction makes men
stoop. We may understand the Text of a person who is humble when humbled, who
stoopes down quietly to take up and bear his cross, and does not in stoutnes
slight it, or in wantonness play with it, but is serious under the rebukes of
God; He shall save the humble person.

Secondly, It may be taken actively, Dimissus oculis est, qui suo ju dicio and
existi matione sibi ipsi vilescit.
He shall save the humble person, that is, the person who is low in his own
eyes, while in the greatest worldly heights, the person that humbles himself,
and walks humbly with God and men when most exalted. Thus the Apostle James
exhorts the brother of high degree, or the rich brother to rejoice in that he
is made low (Jam. 1.10.) But if he be rich, how is he made low? he means it
not of a lownes in state, but of a lownes or rather lowlines of spirit. The
brother of high degree has no cause to rejoice in his highness, but when he is
low in his own eyes. Lownes of eyes is more then a virtue or common modesty,
it is a Grace; That Is in a spiritual sense, the most Grace-full look, which is
the most humble look. He shall save the humble person. But with what
salvation? I answer; Salvation is either temporal and bodyly or eternal,
usually called the salvation of the soul. We may expound this Text of both;
The Lord saves the humble person both body and soul both temporally and
eternally.

Where note; That the Lord takes special Care of humble ones.

The Lord seems to take so much care to save the humble, as if there were none
else that he took care to save, or regarded what became or them, whether saved
or no. And the Lord speaks of proud persons as if he contemned none but under
that name and notion. ( Jam. 4.6.) He resists the proud; he that is proud of
his person, or parts, or estate, or wit, or power, the Lord resists him. And
he speaks of the humble as if none were saved but under that name and notion,
He saves the humble person^, or as that Text in James has it, He gives grace
to the humble. What grace? There is a twofold grace; and both are given to the
humble; First, he gives them the grace of favor or good will, he is kind to
and respects the humble, or (as this text in Job has it) He saves the
humble person. Secondly, He gives much grace to the humble, as grace is taken
for that gracious work of the Spirit in us, forming up faith, love, etc. in
our souls. The Lord gives more of this grace also to the humble, that is, he
adds unto the graces which they have, and makes them more humble, more
gracious: a man cannot be (in that sense) an humble person without grace;
humility it self is a great grace, and the greater our humility is, the
greater accession we have of other graces. Thus, I say, we may understand the
text in James both ways; He gives grace to the humble, that is, he favors
and respects them, because they are gracious, and he adds to or increases
their graces. We have a promise very parallel to these of Eliphaz and James
(Psalm. 18.27.) Thou will save the afflicted people, but wilt bring down high
looks. The word which we translate afflicted, signifies also one humbled, and
humble, and so we might render the Psalm; Thou shall save the humbled or the
humble people; and that the humble are to be taken in to partake of the
privilege of that promise, is plain from the opposite Term in the latter
clause of the verse; High looks; that is, high lookers God will bring down,
but he will save the humble person. Men of low and mean estates are usually
wrapped up with great ones in the same judgment, as the Prophet speaks ( Esaias
5.15.) The mean man shall be brought down, and the mighty man shall be
humbled, the eyes of the lofty shall be humbled; there we have the mean man
and the mighty man under the same wrathful dispensations of God. The wicked
whether high or low, are far from salvation, but God knows how to make a
distinction between the humble and the proud, when his wrath makes the greatest
confusions in the world. Humility it is not only a sweet, but a safe grace,
yea a saving Grace; we never go under the Covert of God so much as when we
walk humbly with God; He will save the humble person.

Verse. 30. He shall deliver the Island of the Innocent, and it is delivered by
the pureness of thine hands.
The promise is continued to the man that returns to God, He shall deliver
the Island of the Innocent; or as some translate, the Innocent shall deliver
the Island. The sense is the same; He shall deliver the Island, that is, the
Inhabitants of the Island; All shall be safe, the Island and they that dwell in
it. There is another reading of the Text, which yet falls in fully and clearly
with this; whereas we read, He shall deliver the Island of the Innocent,
Liberabit noxium. Pisc.
it may be read, He shall deliver him that is not Innocent. Now because this
may seem a very wide difference in the translation, we are to Consider the
ground of it, how this can be made out, that the same text should be rendered,
the Innocent, and him that is not Innocent? The reason is because the word
which we translate, Island, is taken by many of the Hebrew Doctors, Vocula
(...) quae hic redditur insula, idem valet quod (...) non. Pisc. Ego cum
veteribus (...) pro negatione exponere^. Eritque facilis sensus, sc. deus
puritate manuum tuarum etiam nocente^, vel non innocentem liberabit: Merc.
as also by other translators, only for a negative particle, signifying not or
that which is not. So the word is rendered (1 Samuel 4.21.) when Phineas his wife
dying in travel gave the name to her Child, she said, He shall be called
Ichabod, There is no glory, or not glory. And again, ( Pro. 31.4.) the word is
used in the same sense; It is not for Kings O Lemuel, to drink wine; strong
drink is not for Princes. So here, Thou shall deliver the nocent, or the not
Innocent. And so the whole verse is thus translated; God, because of or for the
pureness of thy hands, will doliver the nocent, or those who are not innocent.
Whereas we say, Thou shall deliver the Island of the Innocent, or the Innocent
shall deliver the Island.

And it is delivered by the pureness of thine hands. Eliphaz spoke before in the
third person, here in the second; it is probable he did so purposely to make Job
understand that he meant him. It is delivered etc. That is, the Island is
delivered, according to our translation; how is it delivered? by the pureness of
thine hands. The word notes the most exact purity and cleannes, like that of
gold when it is refined in the fire, or of garments that are washed with Soape
or Nitre; Manus purae sunt opera inculpata and quae crimine vacant. Drus:
by this pureness it or the Island shall be delivered: and by the pureness of his
hands, he means the pureness of his actions or administrations. The hand is the
instrument of action, and pure or clean hands in Scripture are put for the
purity or cleannes of our actions or conversation. While our doings are holy,
our works righteous, just, and good, it may be said our hands are pure. And we
may refer this especially to prayer; Thou shall deliver the Island of the
Innocent, and it is delivered by the pureness of thine hands; That is, thou
praying in the purity of thy hands, or with pure hands, shall deliver the
Island of the innocent, or (according to that other reading) those that are not
innocent. And then, pureness of hands, or pure hands, are put as a sign for the
thing signified, the gesture, for that which is done in that gesture. The
lifting up of hands is a gesture in prayer, and the lifting up of pure hands,
notes the purity of prayer. (1 Timothy 2.8.) I will that men pray every where,
lifting up holy or pure hands. Now because it is usual in prayer to lift up the
hands; and in prayer no hands but morally pure or holy hands should be lifted
up (and so theirs are in Scripture sense whose lives are holy) therefore we
may well conceive, that when he says, it shall be delivered by the pureness of
thy hands, his meaning is this, it shall be delivered by holy prayer, or when
thou prayest holyly, it shall be delivered. Thus Eliphaz does not only promise
Job, that himself in person should be lifted up and saved when others are cast
down, but that he should be a means of saving and delivering others, and
those not some few or all his own family, but that the whole Nation or Island
in General should escape and fare the better for him. It shall be delivered by
the pureness of thy hands. Learn hence, this Great and famous Truth; That, a
Godly Person is a Common good.

He does good not only within his own walls, or to his own personal
relations, but he is a Common good, a public mercy, a general Blessing,
whether we Consider general Blessings either negatively, or affirmatively,
that is, either as delivering from evil, or as bringing in of good, every way
the Godly man is a general blessing, he shall deliver the Island of the
Innocent, yea those that are not Innocent; the Lord will accept his prayer, and
hear his request for the deliverance of a place, though there be many wicked
ones in it. Abraham (Genesis 18.32.) had that privilege granted him, that for his
sake and at his suite the Lord would have spared the wicked, the not Innocent,
those who were most abominably poluted: if there had been but ten righteous
persons there, Sodom had been saved from burning at the suit of Abraham. Much
more will the Lord spare the Island of the Innocent, that is, where there are a
great many Innocent ones, at the prayer and request of an Abraham, a man
Eminent in faith and holiness. How often did Moses turn away the wrath of God,
when it was breaking forth against the people of Israel (Psalm. 106.23.) He
said he would destroy them, (that is, the Lord said it) had not Moses his
chosen stood before him in the breach, to turn away his wrath lest he should
destroy them. The Lord had as it were made a decree that he would destroy that
people; but Moses comes and Interposeth for them, and the Lord spared them. We
read ( Exodus 32.9, 10.) that how the Lord said to Moses, I have seen this
people, and behold it is a stiff-necked people; Now therefore let me alone,
that my wrath may wax hot against them, and that I may consume them, and I
will make of thee a great people; But did Moses accept this offer of
advancement upon the ruins of that people? No, he deprecates his own honor,
as it follows ( ver. 11^h) And Moses besought the Lord his God, and said, Lord
why does thy wrath wax hot against this people etc? Then at the 14th ver. The
Lord repented of the evil which he thought to do unto his people. Thus Moses
by the pureness of his hands, holy prayer delivered a Nation that was not
innocent, from consumption in the flames of the Lords provoked Jelousie. Again
( Jere. 5.1.) the Prophet is Commanded to run to and fro through the streets
of Jerusalem, to see and know in the broad places thereof, if he could find a
man, if there were any that executed judgment, that sought the truth, and I
will pardon, says the Lord. One man should deliver the City that was not
Innocent by the pureness of his hands. We see the Lord puts the whole issue upon
this, if thou can find a man. But were there not multitudes and throngs of
men in Jerusalem? Why then was it proposed as a matter of difficulty to find a
man there? Doubtless Jerusalem was a populous City, and was filled with men;
but a man so qualified, a man of Justice, a man that sought the truth was
hardly to be found there, and therefore if thou can find (such) a man, I
will pardon it says the Lord. How pardon it? There is a twofold pardon: first,
a pardon of the guilt of sin; secondly, a pardon of the punishment of sin.
The Lord, upon the finding out of such a man, would not pardon the guilt of all
that were there, nor give them an everlasting pardon, but pardoned they should
be as to present punishment and ruin, they should be pardoned or saved from
destruction for that time, if such a godly man could be found among them. Godly
men save the wicked three ways.

First, They save them, when by their good Council and Instruction they turn
them from their sins, and bring them to repentance; this is a happy way of
saving them. And thus a godly man may save the wicked, every godly Minister of
the Gospel is said to save not himself only, but (in this sense) those that
hear him; because he offers and urges upon them the means of salvation. (1 Timothy 4.16.)

Secondly, As they may save them thus by being a means of their Conversion, so
they may save them by being a means of their Direction; One godly man may save
a whole Land by his directing Council, as well as he saves many by his
converting Counsel. Of this Solomon speaks clearly ( Eccle. 9.14, 15.) There
was a little City and few men in it, and there came a great King against it,
etc. Now there was found a poor wise man in it, and he by his wisdom
delivered the City. That is, He gave wise and wholesome Counsel, which being
followed, proved an effectual means for the deliverance of the City.

Thirdly, A godly man may be a public good to save and deliver others by his
Prayers and Intercession, by seeking the Lord that they may be delivered, Haud
tamen deus id semper facit, neque est ^uod quisquam in hac re certa^ ei legem
imponat, fallitur ergo Eliphaz si hoc perpetuum esse putavit. Merc:
as the latter branch was opened, he saves them by the pureness of his hands,
lifted up in prayer. Yet we must take this with a Caution; For we cannot
affirm it universally, that the righteous have always this privilege (in the
event) to deliver the Island or Nation wherein they are. But we may say, that
this is a privilege which Saints have often been honored with, and which none
but Saints have been honored with at any time to be the Saviors and
Deliverers of a people among whom they dwell; For we know the Lord himself
has given express Exceptions to this rule ( Jer. 15.1.) where he tells the
stubborn Jews by his Prophet; Though Moses and Samuel stood before me, yet
my mind could not be toward this people; Cast them out of my sight, and let
them go forth; and it shall come to pass if they say unto thee, whither shall
we go forth, thou shall tell them, thus says the Lord, such as are for
death, to death; and such as are for the sword, to the sword, and such as are
for famine, to famine. When he says, Though Moses and Samuel stood before we;
Some may ask, what to do? I answer, we are not to take it for a mute
standing before the Lord, but a standing before the Lord with earnest Prayers,
Intercessions, and Supplications, for the sparing of that people; Now says the
Lord, though Moses and Samuel (who in their generations were eminent godly men,
and eminent favorites of God) though these should stand before me, earnestly
praying for this people, yet my mind could not be toward them, that is, I
would not spare them, nor save them from death, sword, famine, or captivity, no
not at their entreaty. And we have a like Instance ( Ezekiel. 14.14.) Though
these three men, Noah, Daniel, and Job were in it (there were but two named in
Jeremy, but here three, though these three men, Noah, Daniel, and Job were in
it) they should but deliver their own souls by their righteousness says the
Lord God. They might have the privilege mentioned by Eliphaz in the former
verse, When men were cast down, they might say, there is a lifting up, or
there is preservation for us, God will take care of us: but God would not be
persuaded, no not by Noah, Daniel, and Job, to save the rest. So that there are
cases wherein the Lord will not hear the Intercessions of the best of men for
a sinful people. The Island of the wicked, or of the not Innocent shall not be
delivered, no, not by the pureness of their hands; yet it is an experienced
truth, that God has spared a people for the sake of some Godly found among
them; yea the reason why the Lord does not destroy the world which lies in
wickedness, is, much, in respect of them who walk in holiness. For were it not
(as Elisha told Jehoram to his face in reference to good king Jehosaphat, 2
Kings 3.14.) that God has regard to their presence in the world, God would not
so much as look toward the ungodly, nor see them for good. This honor have
all the Saints, and how great an honor is it to be a public good, to be a
Savior to an Island, to a Nation? Some indeed are of such narrow spirits, that
if they may save themselves, and keep their own stakes, they care not what
becomes of the public. But as it is a great honor to be active for the
saving and delivering of a Nation, so it is a greater honor to have the safety
and deliverance of a Nation attributed or given in to us by God himself
(though not at all by way of desert, yet) in a way of favor. Paul was at Sea
with no good company, yet when all looked to be swallowed up, An Angel of God
appeared to him, saying, Fear not Paul, Thou must be brought before Caesar,
and lo, God has given thee all them that sail with thee (Acts 27.23, 24.)
That is, for thy sake, or because they are now in thy company, they also shall
escape the rage of this tempest. They all owe their lives to thee henceforth as
well as to me, for to thee have I given them. The men of this world might
hence take notice of their own folly, who can hardly afford them a good word,
or room to live in the world, for whose sake it is that they live. How often
do they wish and seek their destruction, for whose sake it is, that
themselves are not destroyed? How often do they accuse the Godly, as the
troublers of a Nation, as the hinderers of public good: whereas they are
indeed a common good, The Chariots and horsemen, The Protection and Defense,
the Salvation and Deliverance of those States and Nations where they are. The
breaches which wicked men make by sinning, they make up by praying, to turn
away the Lords wrath, that they be not consumed. We read how the Lord
Complains, that there was none found to make up the hedge, to stand in the
gapp when he was coming to destroy them. ( Ezekiel. 22.30.) And it is said of
Moses (Psalm. 106.23.) that he stood before the Lord in the breach, that he
should not destroy the Israelites. Which phrase of standing in the breach
seems to bear an alusion to an Army besieging a City, who first plant their
Canon, and make a breach, and then come to the storm. Thus the Lord deals
many times with a people, he encampes against them, and batters them, he makes
some breach upon them by troubles and divisions, and then expects that some
should stand in the breach, and beseech him not to storm them with the whole
Army of his Judgments. And the Lord takes it well when any of the Valiant
Ones, when any of the Worthies of his Israel present themselves in the breach,
praying with utmost importunity, that the Lord would withdraw those evils
which threaten to come in at the breach like armed men and lay wast a Nation.

And forasmuch as men of pure hands, or Godly men have this privilege to be a
common Good, by being the deliverers of Nations from common evils and
calamities, I shall hint some few things from it more distinctly.

First, We see wherein (under God) the strength and safety of Kingdoms and
Commonwealths does consist. It is not, so much, in the wisdom of the
Counselor, or in the courage of the Soldier; It is not, so much, in Armies at
Land, or Navyes at Sea; It is not, so much, in walled Cities and fortified
Castles; It is not, so much, in union at home, or in leagues and confederacies
abroad, as it is in the purity of men's hands, or in the holiness of their lives.
Godliness is the Sampsons lock, wherein the strength of a Nation lies. A
Heathen could say, that A people were never safe by the standing of their
walls, while themselves were falling in their virtues. It is therefore (if
there were nothing better in it) good policy to encourage piety, and to
^ndeavour the increase of a Holy Seed in any Nation. For as the Prophet speaks
( Is. 6.13.) As a teile tree and as an oak whose substance is in them, when
they cast their leaves, so the holy seed shall be the substance thereof.

Secondly, In this we see the honor which God puts upon Godly men. What can be
greater then this, to be really (though perhaps far from being accounted so)
the Deliverers and Saviors of their Country? What an honor was it to Abraham
when God told a King, that he was beholding to Abraham for his life, or that
favor must be granted to him at the suite and as it were sent him by the hand
of Abraham (Genesis 20.7.) He shall pray for thee, and thou shall live. An honor
much like this God put upon Job also, at the latter end of this Book ( Chap.
42.8.) My servant Job shall pray for you, for him will I accept, lest I deal
with you after your folly. Such Honor (in some degree) have all the Saints.

Thirdly, Let men honor those whom God honors thus; and let the Princes and
Powers of the world be glad when they hear that they have many such in their
Dominions. When such are subject to them, as rule with God. It is said of
Zerxes (the Greatest Monarch in the world in his time) that when Themistocles
came over to him (who was a man eminent for wisdom and Eloquence) that, being
over-joyed at such a treasure, he cried out in his sleep; I have got
Themistocles the Athenian. Spiritual wisdom renders men a Greater treasure to
States, then moral wisdom can. Surely then they who are spiritually wise
deserve to be rejoiced in. I am sure it is not safe to let them be discouraged
by whom our safety is established, much less is it safe to let them fall, by
whom in their capacity kingdoms stand; least of all, is it safe to cast them
down, who (by the rule of divine politics) are State-upholders. Therefore let
me say this to all the powers of this world, do not destroy those who have the
privilege to be Saviors and deliverers. Yea, Take heed of deading and
straitning their spirits in prayer for you, above all, take heed of turning
their prayers against you. Do not provoke your own Horsemen to fight against
you, and your own Chariot-wheeles to run over you. As these are the best
friends to a Nation, so the worst enemies. Better have many outwardly opposing
you, then one (upon just ground) secretly praying, or but complaining to God
against you. They who have no power at all in their hands* no not so much as to
help or save themselves, may yet destroy many by the pureness of their hands,
that is, they holding up pure hands in prayer, may bring down destruction upon
many who are wicked, and the adversaries of Christ because their adversaries.
But that which they mostly do, and that which they worst of all desire to do
is, That Lands and Islands may be delivered by the pureness of their hands.

To shut up this point and Chapter, we see, that as the Saints are killed all
the day long, by the wicked world, for the Lords sake (Romans 8.36.) that is,
because they own the Lord and his ways: so the wicked of the world are spared
even all the day long, or as often as they are spared by the Lord, for the sake
of the Saints, that is, because the Lord ownes and approves them and their
ways, and does therefore give peace to the world, that so in their peace, they
also may have peace.

JOB, CHAP. 23. Verse. 1, 2. Then Job answered, and said,

Even to day is my complaint bitter, my stroke is heavier then my groaning.


IN the former Chapter we had the third and last charge of Eliphaz against Job,
in this and that which follows Job makes his reply, and defends himself
against what Eliphaz had objected and charged upon him. There are two opinions
concerning the tendency of this reply.

First, Some interpret it in favor of Job, as if he only summoned his friends
to the tribunal of God, being confident of a good issue there.

Secondly, Others enterpret it as a presumptuous suggestion against God
himself, and the strictness of his proceedings with him, which they endeavor
to prove upon (as they conceive) these four grounds of his complaint.

First, Because he complained that his afflictions were beyond all his
complaints; and that what he had said was but little to what he felt, or to the
greatness of his sorrow ( ver. 1, 2.) Eve^ ^o day is my complaint bitter, my
stroke is heavier then my groaning. These words are conceived, to carry in
them, at least, an intimation that Job thought himself too hardly dealt with,
or that there was no just cause why he should be prosecuted and proceeded
against with so much severity by the continued and renewed strokes of God upon
him. And indeed it cannot be denied, That he (whosoever he is) is justly judged
as over-bold with God, who judges any of the dealings of God with himself or
with any other man over-severe. But we shall find, that though Job complained
often that his sorrows (as to him) were exceeding great, yet he never
complained, that (as to God) they were unjust.

Secondly, (Say they) because he complained, that he could not get admittance
unto God, nor audience with him, which was a further aggravation of his sorrow.
This he prosecutes from the third verse to the end of the ninth. O that I knew
where I might find him, that I might come even to his seat, I would order my
cause before him, and fill my mouth with arguments, I would know the words
which he would answer me etc. As if (according to the scope of this exposition)
he had said, I have waited long under my pressures and burdens, with my
petition in my hand, yea I have tendered up my petition, but as yet I can get
no answer; Alas, I am greatly afflicted, yet, so far from being releeved,
That I cannot be heard, I would therefore get near God, to spread and order
my cause before him. To be heard and to be releeved, are often in Scripture
sense the same thing, and always not to be heard signifies as much as not to
be releeved. Till the Lord gives us his ear, he never gives us his hand,
therefore Job must needs think himself far from being helped while he
thought that he was not heard.

Thirdly, Because he complained that the Lord did thus afflict and try him,
when he already knew what he was, and what he would be after his trial by the
sorest afflictions; when he knew that he was innocent, and that he would
continue and hold out in his innocence to the end. That he would not be weary
of well-doing, though under the worst of sufferings. ( Ver. 10, 11, 12.) He
knows the way that I take, etc. As if he had said; The Lords needs not do
this to try me, for he knows well enough who I am, and the way that I go; he
knows both the frame of my heart and the course of my life; he knows how it
is with me now, and that I shall be found such (...) I have often professed my
self to be, when he has kept me to the utmost of his purpose in this fiery
furnace of affliction. When he has tried me I shall come forth as gold, that
is, when all is done, he knows that I shall hereafter approve my self upright
in heart, and that (through his grace, already bestowed upon me) I have
hitherto kept his way, and not declined nor gone back ftom the commandments of
his lips, yea that I have esteemed the words of his mouth more then my
necessary food. Thus Job is conceived complaining upon this account, that he
should be so extremely afflicted, though the Lord knew his way, and that he
was both a lover of his Word, and a keeper of his Commandments, and that he
would persevere with joy in keeping them to the end, though he should not see
the expected and desiered end of those sorrows.

Fourthly, Because he is conceived complaining that he found the Lord
altogether inexorable, so that no impression could be made upon him by any
thing he could say or do to take him off from his severity toward him. ( Ver.
13, 14.) He is of one mind, who can turn him (there is no dealing with God)
and what his soul desires, even that he does (let it fall where and on whom
it will, he will do it) for he performs the thing that is appointed for me.

From all which Job infers, that he had cause enough to complain, much more
that he did not complain without cause. ( Ver. 15, 16, 17.) Therefore am I
troubled at his presence when I consider, I am afraid of him, for God makes my
heart soft, and the Allmighty troubles me, because I was not cut off before
the darkness, neither has he covered the darkness from my face. Thus you
have the parts and scope of the whole Chapter, as it is supposed to be an
over-bold complaint in reference to the dealings of the Lord with him.

From all which it is concluded, Saepe antea statuerat Job, se amicorum
exacerbantibus sermonibus ^efessum, nolle amplius cum ijs disserere, sed potius
cum deo aequissimo judice; Nunc hoc suum propositu^ ad implere tentans ad deum
sermonem dirigit, vel ad seipsum, i. e. secum ipse ratiocinatur. Bold.
that though the Chapter begins with, Then Job answered, and said, yet, that
Job does not answer Eliphaz, nor apply himself to what he had said; but that
being wearied with his often repeating, and renewing the same arguments against
him, he does, upon the matter, leave him and his friends, and all discourse
with them; turning himself to God, and pouring his sorrows into his bosom; as
if the answer were directed to God, and not at all to Eliphaz.

But I rather apprehend (according to the former interpretation of this reply)
that Job does here plainly hold forth an answer to what Eliphaz had objected or
laid to his charge, and that being still so hotly opposed, he does first defend
his own integrity in this Chapter; and that, secondly, in the next he
overthrows the ground or foundation upon which his friends built their
general opposition: affirming, that there is neither any certain time nor way
in which the Lord does punish wicked men in this world, and that therefore no
argument can be framed, or judgment given of any man's condition by his present
state, or the external dispensations of God toward him. Taking this sense, we
may reduce the whole Chapter to these two parts.

First, A preface; secondly, the pleading it self.

The preface is laid down in the second verse; Even to day is my complaint
bitter, my stroke is heavier then my groaning; the pleading follows in the
subsequent parts of the Chapter; the sum of which may be collected into this
formal Argumentation.

Ye do falsely accuse him of wickedness, and hypocrisy, who is ready to
plead his cause, and does earnestly desire that he may do it before the
throane of God.

But I am ready and do earnestly desire to plead my cause before the throane
of God.

Therefore ye falsely accuse me of wickedness and hypocrisy.

The assumption only of this Syllogism is handled in this Chapter, from the
second verse to the end; in which it appears, that Job was ready not only to
dispute the point in controversy with his friends, but was most willing that
the Lord should have the hearing of it; for so he says, O that I knew where I
might find him, that I might come even to his seat, I would order my cause
before him, and fill my mouth with arguments. That is, I would produce such
arguments for my self, and against my opposers, as would render my cause just
and innocent before God, how guilty soever I am found and represented in the
opinion of men.

Thus far concerning the general state of this Chapter.

I shall next proceed to explicate the parts and particulars of it.

Verse. 1. Then Job answered, and said; These words have occurred often before,
I shall not stay upon them. But what said he? and how did he answer?

Verse. 2. Even to day is my complaint bitter, my stroke is heavier then my
groaning.
Thus Job begins, This is at once his prologue to what he had to say, and his
Apology for what he had (passionately) said already. Even to day, or even this
day. The word day is taken either more largely for the time near at hand, or
strictly, for the present time. ( Psalm. 95.8.) To day if ye will hear his
voice, harden not your hearts; That is, Hear his voice this instant day, and
harden not your hearts one day longer. Again ( Deuteronomy. 4.8.) What Nation is
there so great, that has statutes and judgments so righteous as all this law,
that I have set before you this day, or at this present time. Jacob says to
Esau (Genesis 25.31.) Sell me this day thy birthright; that is, let me have it
now, let us strike up the bargain this hour, or before we part. Thus here, To
day etc. As if Job had said, O friend Eliphaz, I perceive that after all those
days of disputation which have passed between us, this day is like to be spent
and run out in as harsh censures on your part, and in as bitter complaints on
my part as any of the former.

Even this day is my complaint bitter. The word rendered complaint, is
translated also sometimes prayer, and sometimes meditation. (Genesis 24.69.) Isack
went out into the field to meditate, we put in the Margin, to pray. Hannah
uses the same word (1 Samuel 1.16.) Account not thy handmaide for a daughter of
Beliall, for out of the abundance of my complaint (we put in the Margin,
Meditation) and grief, have I spoken hitherto. Many complain, who pray not,
some pray, who complain not, and others meditate, who do neither complain
nor pray, yet usually we meditate, that we may consider what to pray about, and
in prayer power out our complaints both about those sins and wants and mercies,
which have fallen under our meditation.

Even to day is my complaint bitter. The Original word has a twofold
derivation, Aliqui deducunt a (...) quod signifi at amaritudinem, alij a (...)
denotane rebellionem seu contumaciam.
most render it as we, bitter; Bitterness in Scripture is often used by a
metaphor, to denote any thing which is grievous, troublesome, afflictive, or
distasteful to us, because bitter things are so to the palate or taste of man.
Bitter things are troublesome to sense, and troubles are bitter to the Spirit.
Affliction is a bitter pill; thou writest bitter things against me, said Job to
God before ( Chap. 13.26.) so that when he says, my complaint is bitter, it
sounds thus much, my complaint is as great as great can be, and I have the
greatest reason to complain. For by complaint, we are to understand not only
the act of complaining, but the matter upon which he did complain, or the
cause of his complaint. As if he had said, My afflictions (about which I
complain) are exceeding bitter, no marvel then if my complaint be so too.

Secondly, The word comes from a root, signifying to rebel, to disobey, to be
exasperated, or (as some learned in the Hebrew give it) to vary or alter the
frame of a man's spirit, and the disposition of his mind; (...) exasperatio,
proprie variatio, altenitas, ut sic di^am; quod qui rebellet, variet and
infringat verbum and mandatum alterius, aut foedus cum eo initum.
because they who disobey and rebel, do certainly vary and change their minds
from what they engaged to be, or professed they were before; they turn aside
either from the lawful command given them, or from the promise and faith which
they had given. So the word is used (1 Kings 13.26.) Where the sacred History
tells us of a Prophet who was sent out upon a Message by the Lord unto
Jeroboam, and though he faithfully performed the Message, yet hearkening to the
counsel of another Prophet, he was slain by a Lion; Thus says the Lord, for
as much as thou have disobeyed (or rebelled against) the mouth of the Lord,
(that is, the words that proceeded out of the mouth of the Lord,) and have not
kept the commandment which the Lord thy God commanded thee, etc. Thy carcass
shall not come into the sepulcher of thy fathers. Thus the word is translated
by some in this Text, of Jobs disobedience or rebellion; And they render the
whole sentence with an interrogation.

Etiam hoc die, contumacia, (habetur) querimonia mea? Contuman est questus
meus, perstat. q. d. non paret non cedet solatijs vestris. Rab. Sol:
What, is my complaint this day accounted rebellion? as if I did contumaciously
set my self against God, while I am pouring out my sorrows before him; whereas
indeed, my complaint is rather rebellious or stout against your consolations,
it yields not to them, nor is at all abated by them. The way or course which
you take to comfort me, is too weak to graple with, much more is it too weak
to conquer and subdue my sorrows.

Yet further, This sense and translation of the word, may be applied to that
speech of Eliphaz in the former Chapter ( ver. 21.) exhorting Job to acquaint
himself with God, and to be at peace. As if he had said, Leave off thy
distances, lay down the weapons of that most unholy war which thou have
taken up against God. To which close rebuke Job answers here, what? Is my
complaint to God looked upon by you as a combat with God? or do ye think that
while I beg pity and favor of God, I have bid him defiance, or declared my
self his enemy? What else can be the meaning of it, that you exhort me so
seriously to reconcile my self to God? He that is called to make peace with
another, is supposed to be at war with him, or at least to bear him ill
will. So then, according to this rendering, and interpretation of the Text, the
drift of his speech is to show how little ground there was, yea how unjust it
was, that he should be accused of rebellion and contumacy against God, while he
was only bemoaning his own sad condition, and putting up his complaint to
God. We may form up his sense into this argumentation.

He cannot be justly accused of rebellion against God, who complains much, or
greatly, when his grief is more or greater.

But my grief is more and greater then my complaint.

Therefore I cannot be justly accused of rebellion against God, because I
complain.

Again, The text is thus rendered; Etiam hodie est (vel suo loco manet)
exasperatio querelae meae. Merc. Quasi ex noxio medicamine vulnus crevit. Etiam
post tot and tanta verba vestra, quibus sperabam fore ut me sola remini augetur
mea querela quia nihil est in vestris verbis consolationis. Merc.
Even to day the sharpnes or bitterness of my complaint remains, or my
sorrow is as it was. I am no way eased but rather more afflicted by what you
have said for the easing of my affliction. An improper plaster does but
inflame, not at all heal, the wound. So that, as according to the former
interpretation, he took off their charge of impatience, contumacy, and
rebellion against God, according to the mind of this he shows the weakness
and insufficiency of what they had spoken, as to the allay of his sorrow, and
the curing or satisfying of his distemperd spirit. So that here he seems to
renew and confirm that opinion which he had given of his friends in their
procedure with him ( Chap. 13.4.) Ye are forgers of lies, ye are all Physicians
of no value: O that ye would altogether hold your peace, and it should be your
wisdom. And again ( Chapter 16.2.) Miserable Comforters are ye all; Shall vain
words have an end? or what emboldeneth thee that thou answerest. So here, ye
have done nothing yet effectually to remove my complaint: I am like a poor
patient, who having been long under the Physicians hand, and suffered many
painful applications, is yet as far from a cure as the first hour of his
undertaking. Even to day the bitterness the sharpenes of my diseased mind
remains. I have been in pain (as the Church speaks, Isa. 26.18.) I have as
it were brought forth wind. Ye have not wrought any deliverance, neither has
this inhabitant (my sorrow) fallen by your hand.

Lastly, Some refer these words to the promise made by Eliphaz (Chap. 22.21.)
exhorting Job to acquaint himself with God etc. and so good should come to
him. But says Job here, Though I am clear from what you accuse me; and also
have communion with God in ways of holiness; yet I experience no such good as
you promise, I am not brought into ways of comfort, but rather my sorrows
increase, and my complaint is as bitter this day, as ever it was.

And (as it follows in the Text) My stroke is heavier then my groaning.

Non satis pro gravitate plagae conquerar; Superat ploga querimoniam. Merc: Sic
se excusat ab impatientia and contumacia objecta. q d. Injustissimum est me a
v^bis accusari quia querar de meis malis cum multo grav^or sit plaga.
This he adds as a further explication, or as a proof of the former part of
the verse; as if he had said, If ye inquire why my complaint is so bitter, it
is because my stroke is so heavy, even heavier then my groaning; And why
should ye call my complaint rebellion, seeing I do not complain more, no nor
so much as I have cause. My stroke is heavier then my groaning. Thus he is
still laboring to acquit himself of that so often repeated accusation,
impatience under the hand of God, and rebellion against him.

My stroke. The Hebrew is, my hand, the hand is taken for that which was done
by the hand; The instrument for the effect; my hand, that is, the stroke of
the hand that is upon me; whose hand was that? the hand of God he means. As if
it had been said more expressly, The stroke of the hand of God upon me is
heavier then my groaning. In the former part of the verse, Manus pro plaga a
manu dei inflicta. Metonymico^s.
he spoke of the bitterness of his complaint, here of the heavines of his
stroke, or that the stroke given him was exceeding heavy. As bitter things
are grievous to the palate, so heavy things are burdensome to the whole body;
We are soon weary of that which is very heavy. And therefore ( Mat. 11.30.)
when Christ would convince us that we have no reason to be weary of that
burden, which he lays upon us, (his holy counsels and commandments) he
says, My yoke is easy, and my burden light: My burdens are not like those
which the Pharisees bind upon you, heavy and grievous to be borne (Math. 23.4.)
So here, when Job says, My stroke is heavy, he would have his friends know
that his were (in themselves) no light afflictions (though there is a sense in
which all the afflictions of the Saints are light, 2 Cor. 4.17.) but grievous
to be borne.

Secondly, Some read the words thus, My stroke is heavier upon my groanings,
or when I groan; As if he had said, the more I groan and sigh, the more I am
wounded, I get nothing by my groanings but fresh smitings and additional
sorrows.

Thirdly, Others translate the Hebrew word properly, not stroke (by a
Metonymie of the effect) but hand. My hand is heavy upon (or because of) my
groaning; that is, my hand is weak because of my groaning; a weak hand, is a
heavy hand; Manus mea aggravata super genitum meum, i. e. propter genitus et
planctus quos dolores extorquent, etiam v^^es meae deficiunt, manusque lessae
and remissae vix prae imbecallitate attolli possunt. Scult.
that is heavy, which is not lifted up without difficulty. Now when the hand is
weak we can hardly lift it to our head (as we say). The weak hand is a heavy
hand, not because of the weight of it, but because of the weakness of it, or
want of strength to weild any thing with it, or to hold it up. In this sense we
are to understand Job crying out, My hand is heavy because of my groaning; As
if he had said; My strength fails me, my hands hang down, and through
weakness I am not able to lift them up. In the fourth Chapter, Eliphaz told
Job, that he by his good counsel had formerly strengthened the weak, or the
loosned hands. Which form of speaking answers that of the Apostle ( Heb.
12.12.) Lift up the hands that hang down. Weakness is as a weight fastened to
the hand, and holding it down. The hand is never so much fastened, as when it
is (in this sense) made lax or loosened The Original word here used intimates,
that much sorrow and trouble weigh down the hand; My hand is heavy because of
my groaning, or (as we read) My stroke is heavier then my groaning.

Thus we have Job still complaining and groaning; whence was all this? even
from the sense of his sore afflictions.

Which may teach us;

First, That affliction does usually vent it self in complaints and groans.

While we are in the flesh, we are subject to affliction; and all affliction is
grievous to the flesh, not only to flesh as it notes the corruption of the
soul, but to flesh as taken for the constitution of the body. Affliction will
be felt; It makes the flesh smart; and when the flesh smarts, it may make him
complain and groan who is spiritual; yea, complaints and groans give some
ease to our afflictions. As the pain of affliction causes groaning and
complaining, so groaning and complaining are some relief in our pains: and
hence it has been reported as one of the highest pieces of cruelty not to
allow those who have been under exquisite pains to complain and groan; for
though groaning does not at all abate the pain, yet it does somewhat divert
our thoughts from it; and while we communicate it to others in complaints, we
are somewhat the less sencible of it our selves.

Secondly, Whereas Job checks his friends (according to the second exposition
of the words) for calling or accounting his complaint rebellion.

Observe; That we are apt to misunderstand and wrongfully interpret the
complaints of others.

Many are ready to mis-interpret that which we speak deliberately, much more
what we speak passionately and complainingly; Job spoke sorrowfully, and he
was presently judged to speak rebelliously: he was but humbling and bemoaning
himself before God, yet he was esteemed as a man rising up against and warring
with God. While Hanna was making a prayerfull complaint to God, Eli a good man
thought she was overgon with wine (1 Samuel 1.14.) How long will thou be drunk,
put away thy wine from thee. When the Apostles were uttering the great things
of God, as some were amazed, so others mocked, saying, These men are full of
new wine (Acts 2.13.) There are two sorts of words and actions most liable to
mis-interpretation.

First, When we act or speak highly in holiness; for then the world looks
upon those of soundest minds as mad, or vain, as distracted or drunken, these
men (says the world) are full of new wine; whereas indeed (as Peter makes
answer in the Acts) they are not drunken, as is supposed, but filled with the
Spirit. Festus told Paul, that he was beside himself, that much learning had
made him mad, when he heard the discourse of his wonderful conversion to
Christ, and holy conversation in Christ ( Acts 26.24.) And it seems that some
among the Corinthians had no better nor other opinion of him, else he would not
have made such an Apology for himself and fellow servants in Gospel-worke (2
Cor. 5.13.) Whether we be besides our selves it is to God etc. that is a sober
madness indeed which is to God. But thus still we see they who act or speak
highest in grace, are censured as acting and speaking below nature. And as
these whose graces are ^oving aloft, are often suspected of madness,

So, secondly, they who lie below complaining under the pressures of nature by
affliction, are as often suspected of and charged with impatience. A troubled
spirit can hardly judge aright of it self, and is seldom rightly judged by
others. I will end this point with two Cautions. The first to all, concerning
those that are afflicted; The second to all that are afflicted.

To the former I say, judge charitably of those who complain bitterly; for as
a man in a low condition knows not what himself would either be or do, were
he advanced to the heights of honor and power; so he that is at ease, and well,
knows not what himself would either be or do, were he in pain or
overwhelmed with sorrows. Extremes in any ^^ate are rarely borne with a well or
duly tempered moderation.

Secondly, To the latter I say, let them expect to hear themselves hardly
censured, and learn to bear it: let not such think strange of their
sufferings, either under the hand of God, or by the tongues of men. Great
sufferers speak often unbecommingly, and are as often so spoken of.

Thirdly, Forasmuch as the matter of this suggestion against Job, tumultuous
and rebellious speeches, at least speeches savouring strongly of rebellion are
incident to any Godly man in Jobs condition. Observe.

There may be rebellion against God in a good man's complainings under the
afflicting hand of God. An unquiet spirit is not only a great burden to man,
but a dishonor to God. Our dissatisfaction with the dealings of God, carries
in it (at least an implicit) accusation of him, or that God has not done well
because it is ill (to sense) with us. There is a rebellion against the rod as
well as against the word of God. For as our struggling and striving with the word
of God and the unquietness of our hearts under any truth when it takes hold of
us is rebellion against God, so to strive, and struggle, with the rod of God,
or with the cross that he lays upon us is rebellion against him also. God
speaks to us by his rod as well as by his word; and we spurn at God in
wrangling with his rod, as well as in wrangling with his word. Yea to have hard
thoughts of God, as that he is severe, and rigourous, that he has put off his
bowels of compassion toward us, and forgotten to be gracious; such thoughts,
as these, of God under affliction, are rebellious thoughts. And as there is a
rebellion in the thoughts against God in case of affliction, so also in the
Tongue. Thus, to murmur is to rebel. I do not say that all complaining is
rebelling, but all murmuring is; we may complain and tell the Lord how sad it
is with us, how much our souls, our bodies, our estates, our relations bleed
and smart. We may complain, and make great complaints without sin, but the
least murmuring is sinful, yea in the very nature of it, so full of sin, that
it usually and deservedly passes under the name of Rebellion. The children of
Israel were as often charged with rebellion as with murmuring; And therefore
when they murmured for want of Water, Moses said unto them, Hear now ye
rebels, must we fetch you water out of this Rock? (Numb. 20.10.) And again,
Moses charge this upon them with his last breath (as it were) Deuteronomy. 31.27. I
know thy rebellion and thy stiff neck, behold while I am yet alive with you
this day, ye have been rebellious against the Lord, and how much more after my
death: yea the Lord himself charge rebellion upon that unparalleld pair of
Brethren, Moses and Aaron themselves, because they had not so fully as they
ought at all times and in all things submitted unto his divine dispensations
among that people, ( Numb. 24.) The Lord spoke to Moses, saying, Aaron shall be
gathered unto his people, for he shall not enter into the Land which I have
given unto the children of Israel, because ye (the Lord puts them both
together in the sin) rebelled against my word at the waters of Meribah.

Fourthly, whereas Job says; Even to day my complaint is bitter. Observe.

The Afflictions and sorrows of some eminently Godly, stick by them, or
continue long upon them. It is with afflictions as with diseases, there are
some acute diseases, sharp and feirce for a while, but they last not, they are
over in a few days; for either the disease departs from the man, or the man
departs out of the world by the feircenes of his disease. There are also
Chronicall diseases, lasting, lingering diseases, that hang about a man many
days, yea months and years, and will not be gone while he lives, but lie
down in the grave with him. Such a difference we find among thos^ other
afflictions and troubles which are not seated (as diseases) in the body, but
reach the whole estate of man. Some are acute and sharp, like the fierce fitts
of a feavor, but they last not; or like Summers sudden storms, which are soon
followed with a succession of fair weather. But there are also chronicall
afflictions, tuffe and unmovable troubles, which abide by us, which dwell with
us day after day, year after year, and never leave us while we live, or till
we leave the world. Many a good man has carried his affliction with him to the
grave. If any shall object; how then is that of David true, ( Psalm. 30.5.)
Weeping may endure for a night, ^^t joy comes in the morning. I answer;
First, That Scripture speaks of that which is often experienced, but not
always: secondly, It is most true also that all our weeping is but for a
night, yea but for a Moment (as the Apostle speaks, 2 Cor. 4.17.) compared
with that morning of joy when the day of our blessed eternity shall begin.
Thirdly, the Psalm has this scope cheifely, to show, that the troubles of the
Saints are not everlasting, not that they are never lasting; or to show that
the night of weeping shall at last conclude in a morning of joy to the Godly,
not that their night of weeping shall presently conclude. For as some have
only a Summers night, or a short night of sorrow, so others have a winters
night, or a long night of sorrow. And this night of sorrow, may be as long not
only as many natural days, or as somes years, but as long as all the
natural days and years of this present life. The morning of joy is not to be
understood of the next morrow after the sorrow began, for how long soever our
weeping continues, it is night with us, and whenever joy comes (though at
midnight) it is morning with us. For sure enough as those sons of pleasure are
described ( Isa. 56.12.) promising themselves the continuance of their joys; (
To morrow shall be as this day, and much more abundant, therefore come fetch
wine and let us drink to day, there will be wine enough for to morrow too,
thus they promised themselves that their pleasures should continue in a
succession of many morrows, now as these sons of pleasure promised themselves
the continuance of their delight) so many of the sons and daughters of sorrow
have found and still find a continuance of their troubles, and have cause to
say, this day is even as bad as yesterday was; yea our bitter cup, our wine of
astonishment is much more abundant, our sorrow is greater this day then it was
yesterday, that was a black sad gloomy day, and this is a day more black,
sad, and gloomy then that was.

Fifthly, From these words; My stroke is heavier then my groaning. Observe.

That the afflictions of some of the precious servants of God, exceed, and
surpass all their complaints and groans. The groans of some are heavier then
their stroke, and the strokes of not a few are heavier then their groans.
Some show more sorrow then they have, and others have more sorrows then they
can show. I, says Job, cannot tell you no not so much as by the language of my
groaning, how heavy my stroke is. As there is a peace of God, a peace which he
gives to many of his people in this life which passes all understanding
(Phil. 4.6.) they have a sense of such peace sometimes upon their spirits as
their understandings know not what to make of it, they are so far from being
able to tell you what it is, that they are not able to conceive what it is, but
must confess that their peace is greater and larger then their understanding,
now (I say) as the peace which God gives his passes their understandings) so
the troubles and sorrows of many who are dear to God, exceed, or surpass all
their expressions, they cannot declare, nor can any for them, how it is with
them. Again, as there is in this life a joy in beleiving, which is
unspeakeable (1 Pet. 1.8.) so there is a sorrow in suffering which is
unspeakeable. And (which is very wonderful) these two meet sometimes in the
same person, who at the very instant while his sorrow is so great that he is
not able to express it, has also sweet and ravishing joys beyond
expression. Yet, I conceive (as to Jobs case) his spirit was dark, and his
mind troubled, as well as his body was pained, and his outward estate torn
and ruined.

Sixthly, From these words; My stroke is heavier then my groaning. Observe;
That, it is sinful to groan and complain beyond the stroke that is upon us,
or to complain more then we have cause.

Job seems here to yield it, and confess, that if his stroke had not been so
heavy, his groans had not been innocent; and if it be sinful to groan, and
complain more, or beyond our strokes, how sinful is it to complain without
any stroke at all? Some complain without cause, and groan before they are
smitten, yea, some are ready to complain when they are encompassed about with
many mercies, and are not satisfied when they are filled; they complain,
because they have not what they would, or because others have more then they,
though themselves have enough, if they knew what is enough. The Ox and the
Ass are a rebuke to such; For as Job speaks ( Chap. 6th) Will the Ass bray
when he has grass, or loweth the Ox over his fodder? Irrational creatures
will not complain when they have the conveniences of nature. Surely then those
men act much below grace, who complain when they have food convenient, and
health convenient, yea all things convenient (possibly abundant) for the
support of nature; who complain when they have not so much as an akeing joint
about them, or the scratch of a pin, no nor the want of a pin, nor of a
shoe-lachet. Some complain when they have meat enough, because they have not
sauce, yea some complain when they have both meat and sauce enough, the
affluence of all things, not only for necessity but for delight. What shall we
say of them who are never well neither full nor fasting; who are so far from
having learned the Apostles lesson to be content in all estates, that are
content in none. The people of Israel murmured not only when they wanted
bread, but when they had it; when they had Mannah they murmured for Quails,
and at last they murmured at their very Mannah, their souls loathed that light
bread: Consider how ^^at their sin is, who complain upon such terms as
these, who complain before they are hurt, yea who complain when they have no
cause but to be very thankful. We live in complaining times, many cry out of
pressures and burdens, nothing pleases many among us, because every thing is
not as they please. Take heed your groanings be not heavier then your stroke,
especially take heed ye be not found groaning without a stroke, and
complaining over your blessings; the Lord has healed our strokes in a great
degree, but our complainings are not healed; If we be found complaining when we
have no cause, or when we should be giving thanks, we may quickly provoke God
to give us cause enough of complaining. God ha^h heavier strokes for them,
whose groaning is heavier then their stroke, and he has heaviest strokes for
them, who groan when they are not stricken. When children cry for nothing, they
are usually made to feel something which will make them cry to purpose. This
humor is childish enough in children, it is worse in men, but it is worst of
all in Christians, who are also the children of God. There are two things which
God will not bear in his; First, when they grow wanton with a mercy; secondly,
when they complain without a cross. To complain under a cross, is to act
below grace; To complain of a cross, is to act against grace. To complain
beyond a cross, is a defect of grace, but to complain without a cross, is a
defect in nature.

The Apostles rule is (1 These. 5.18.) in every thing give thanks, and he gives
his reason for it in the words which follow, for this is the will of God in
Christ Jesus concerning you. Now, if it be the will of God that we should give
thanks in every thing, then it must be against his will that we should
complain in any thing. Complaining is contrary to thankesgiving. A godly man
may see two things in the heaviest strokes of his affliction, which may
provoke him to thanksgiving, at least, which may stop him from all immoderate
complaining; First, That God has a respect to his good in his heaviest
afflictions, and that the issue shall certainly be good to him. Secondly, that
how heavy so ever his stroke is, his sin has deserved a heavier, and that God
could have made it heavier, even his little finger heavier upon him, then his
loins have been. That our stroke might have been heavier may stop our
complaining, but our hea^^st stroke shall turn to our benefit, should stir
us up to thanksgiving: In heaven there will not be the least shadow of a cause
to complain; Thanksgiving will be all our work, and the work of all in
heaven; And by how much we are the more in thanksgiving and the less in
complaining on earth (unless it be of and against our selves for sin) the
more heavenly we are. When we are stricken we should complain as little as we
can, and we should always be able to say (as Job here) That our complaint is
not greater then our stroke.

JOB, CHAP. 23. Verse. 3, 4, 5. Oh that I knew where I might find him, that I
might come even to his seat:

I would order my cause before him, and fill my mouth with arguments.

I would know the words which he would answer me, and understand what he would
say unto me.


JOb having showed in the former verse, how bitter and how sad his Condition
was, even far beyond his own Complaint, and that his stroke was heavier
then his groaning; he now turns himself from earth to heaven, from the
creature to the Creator, from man to God. Job had been among his friends a
great while, they had debated the matter long, but all in vain, and without
fruit to his soul; he had yet received no Comfort: What will he do next? see
here his address to God.

Verse. 3. O that I knew where I might find him! that I might come even to his
seat,

O that I knew!


The Hebrew is, who will give me to know etc. The words are a form of wishing,
ordinary among the Jews; Who will give, or who will grant me this or that, O
that I knew etc. And it Intimates or Implies two things.

First, A vehement and strong desire after somewhat much desierable; who will
give me this? or where shall I have it?

Secondly, It Implies selfe-Inability, or selfe-Insufficiency to attain and
reach the thing desiered. As if Job had said; I am not able of my self to
find him, O that I knew where I might find him! O that I either had the light
of this knowledge in my self, or that some body would inform and teach me! O
that I had a friend to Chalk me out the way, to lead me by the hand, and
bring me near to God.

Quis mihi tribuat ut cognos came and inveni am illum. Vulg.
The vulgar latin Reading fixes both those acts upon God as the Object; O that
some one or other would give me to know and find him! As if his wish and
longing desire were first to know God, secondly, to find him; or in finding to
know him. Our translation determines this knowing in Job, and finding upon God.
O That I knew where I might find him! Who it is that Job would find is not
expressed in the text by name, nor is there any Anticedent in the verse before,
with which we can Connect this relative him. Yet it is beyond question or
dispute that he means God, O that I might find him! that is, God. But why did
he not say, O that I knew where to find God, but, O that I knew where to find
him? I answer, He does it because his heart being full of God, he supposed that
those to whom he spoke had their hearts full of him too, and so would easily
understand whom he meant, or that he could mean none but God.

We find such kind of abrupt speeches (as I may call them) in other Texts of
Scripture, still arising from fullnes and strength of affection in the speaker.
See how Solomon begins his Love-song, his Song of Songs. The Song of Songs
which is Solomon's, that is the title of it; How does it begin? Let him kiss me
etc. Here is a strange Exordium to a Song, none having been spoken of before,
Let him kiss me with the kisses of his mouth! by whom the Church would be
kissed she expresses not, but her heart was so full of Christ, so full of
love to Christ her Bridegroom, her husband, that she thinks it needless to
mention him by name, when she speaks of him whose kisses she desiered. Her
love had passed through the whole Creation, through men and Angels, through all
things here below, and fixed it self only upon Christ her Lord and Love.
Therefore she never stood speaking personally of him, but only relatively,
and leaves all to understand whom she intended. Thus says Job, O that I knew
where I might find him! when as he had not spoken of any distinct person
before, in this Chapter. And we have a like passage flowing from a like
abundant love to Christ, in the 20^h of John ver. 15. where Mary comes to the
Sepulcher (Christ being risen) and the Angel seeing her weep asked her the
reason of it; To whom she replied, Because they have taken away my Lord, and I
know not where they have laid him; having thus said, she turned her self
back, and saw Jesus standing, and knew not that it was Jesus: he says unto
her, Woman, why weepest thou? whom seek thou? She supposing him to be the
Gardener said, Sir, if thou have borne him hence, tell me where thou have laid
him: She never names Christ, but only says, If thou have borne him hence
etc. because her heart was full of Christ, she thought his heart was full of
him too, and that he understood her well enough whom she meant, though she
said not whom she meant. Thus in the present text, Job was to God at that
time, as Mary to Christ, at a loss for him, not knowing where to find him,
God was as it were removed from him, as Christ was risen from the Sepulcher;
Therefore he complainingly and affectionately enquires; O that I knew where I
might find him! My soul is a thirst for God, my heart pants after him, O that
I knew where I might find him!

The Hebrew word signifies to find, Verbum (...) significat saepius obviam
habere quemquam vel al^cui obvium fieri.
by going out to meet a man, or (as we say) to light upon him. As Ahab said to
Elijah (1 King. 21.20.) Have thou found (or met) me O mine enemy? and he
answered, I have found (or met) thee. So the word is used (2 King. 10.13.) Jehu
met with the Brethren of Ahaziah King of Judah; In the Margin we say, Jehu
found the Brethren of Ahaziah, that is, he met them upon the way, for he went
out to meet them. Read also (1 Samuel 10.3.) As if the sense were thus given; O
that I knew where I might find him! that is, whither I might go to meet him,
though I should not find him by accident, or (as we say) stumble upon him; I
would go out, I would travel, and take pains upon hopes to meet him.

Secondly, That word signifies so to find as to take hold and apprehend, to
take fast hold of a thing; and then, O that I might find him; is, O that I
might lay hold on him; if I knew where I might have him, I would lay fast hold
on him, and cleave close to him. So the word is used ( Esaias 10.10.) As my hand
has found the kingdoms of the Idols, and whose graven Images did excel them
of Jerusalem and Samaria. Thus spoke the proud Assyrian, my hand has found
them; Why, the Kingdoms of the Heathen were not in a Corner, that he had need
to search after them, he did not make a new discovery of those kingdoms, They
were not, terra Incognita, an unknown or a new found land; that is not the
meaning; but when he says, my hand has found them, the sense is, I have laid
hold on them, and ceized them to my own use, I have added them to my own
dominion, and brought them under my subjection. So in the 14 verse of that
Chapter; My hand has found as a Nest the riches of the people, that is, I have
laid hold on their riches, and said all is mine; I have taken the whole nest
with all the eggs, all their goods and treasures, into my custody and
possession. Thus Job would find God that he might lay hold on him for his own
or own him as his. Thus also the word is used ( Psalm. 21.8.) Thine hand shall
find out all thine Enemies, thy right hand shall find out those that hate
thee. It is not meant only of a discovery of a person (though it be a truth,
that the Lord will discover all that are his Enemies) but thine hand shall
find them out, is, it shall take hold of them, graspe them, and arrest them.
Thy hand shall find out all thine Enemies, though close, though Covert
Enemies, not only thy above-ground Enemies, but thy underground Enemies, as
well those that undermine thee, as those that assault thee. Once more, in the
116th Psalm. ver. 3. we have an Illustration of this sense; The sorrows of
death Compassed me, and the pains of hell gate hold upon me. The Hebrew text
is, the pains of hell found me: the pain^s of hell, that is, the greatest,
the extremest pains, gat hold upon me; they found me, that is, they ceized
upon me, and held me fast: a word of the same root is used in both parts of
that text, that which we translate to get hold, is the same with that, I found
trouble and sorrow, they found me and I found them; thus says Job, O that I
knew where I might find him, that I might take hold of him; why how does the
hand of a Saint find God? how does he take hold of and apprehend God? how does
he as it were, arrest him, and keep him close? I answer, By faith, and
reliance upon him; O that I knew where to find him; that the Lord might not be
at such a distance from me, as he has been, but that I finding him might fix
my soul upon him. That Is a good sense.

Yet I conceive in this place, we may rather expound Job speaking of God after
the manner of Magistrates among men, who appoint certain places where to sit
in Judgment, where to hear Causes, whither all that are wronged and oppressed
resort for relief and right. (1 Samuel 7.17.) Samuel was the Chief Magistrate,
The Judge in Israel: Now the text says at the 16th verse, that he went from
year to year in Circuit (as we have the Judges of the Circuit) to Bethel,
and Gilgal, and Mizpeh, and Judged Israel in all those places, and returned to
Ramah, for there was his house, and there he Judged Israel; As if he had said,
his standing house was at Ramoth and thither all causes were brought and all
persons grieved resorted for Justice in their several cases. He rid Circuit
every year, that all the people might the more easily find him; yet he had a
fixed seat. In alusion to this practice Job appealing from his friends to God
says, O that I knew where I might find him, and go to him for Judgment; O
that I might have Audience before him in this great buisines.

But it may be said, Did not Job know where to find God? or was Job out of the
presence of God?

I answer, the Lord carried himself to Job at that time as a stranger, and
though he were with him (as he always is with all his) yet he did not find
him; The Lord is with many of his people when they are not with him, that is,
when they do not find him, or are not sencible of his presence. God is with
his people, even when they walk through the valley of the shadow of death, yet
they are not always with God: yea God does not always manifest himself to
them while they walk in the most delicious and lightsome paradises of this
life. God sometimes hides himself, so that they cannot make it out that God is
present with them. God is never seen in regard of the invisibility of his
nature, and he is often unseene in regard of the obscurity of his
dispensations: as Job shows further at the 8th verse, Behold I go forward but
he is not there, and backward but I cannot perceive him. I go forward and
backward, that is, I go every way, I take all courses to find him, but I
cannot perceive God, for he hides and covers himself with clouds, that our
prayers cannot come at him; as the Church complains ( Lament. 3.44.) though
we are always present to God, yet God is not always present to us, that is,
to our apprehension; as God is not at all present to our sense, so he is not
always present to our faith; that is the meaning of Job, when he says, I go
forward but he is not there, etc. God is every where; whither can I go from
his presence (says David, Psalm. 139.) If I go up into heaven he is there etc.
yet says Job, if I go forward he is not there, that is, I have no Enjoyments
of God there; and upon this ground he says in the present text, O that I knew
where I might find him! Job was well acquainted with the doctrine of Gods
Omnipresence, he was far from thinking that there was any certain place
where God was fixed, and whether he must repair as to the Kings and Princes of
this world for help. Job knew better Divinity then this, he was acquainted
with the nature and divine perfections of God, but he speaks as to his present
want, O that I knew where I might find him!

Hence observe first, A godly man has earnest and longing desires after God.

Whatsoever, or whomsoever he finds, he thinks he has found nothing, or no
body till he finds God; O that I might find him! How does David (Psalm. 42.1,
2.) show his unsatisfiednes till he found God. As the heart pants after the
water Brooks, so pants my soul after thee, O God, my soul thirsts for
God, for the living God, when shall I come and appear before God? nothing but
God was in his mouth, nothing in his desire; David had a kingdom, David had a
Throne, David had honor and riches as much as he could desire, why would not
these satisfy his thirst? Could not he sit down in these Enjoyments? no!
David was hungry and thirsty, and pineing, and empty, and starveing, and dying,
till he had God, till he had this special Enjoyment of God; for so we are to
Expound that text, as this. A wicked man can take up on this side God, Cares
not to find him, nay, is afraid to be found of him; he then says (according
to the text touched before) as Ahab to Elijah, Have thou found me O mine
Enemy? He would be glad if God would never find him, nor he find God. ( Ps.
10.4.) The wicked through the pride of his Countenance will not seek after
God. The seat of pride is in the heart, but the prospect of pride is in the
face; through the pride of his Countenance, that is, by reason of that pride
which does discover it self in his Countenance, which breaks out there, he
will not seek after God, his pride will not let him seek after God. He that
is proud, sees not his need of God, and he that sees not his need of God will
never seek after him. Such a one is so far from longing after God, or
saying, O that I might know where I might find him, that he will not so much
as look after him, when he is told where he may be found. And not only so,
but, God is not in all his thoughts; or as some render it, all his thoughts
are, there is no God; yea not only are all his thoughts, but all his hopes
are, that there is no God; if he can but strengthen himself in the unbeleef
of a God, then he is well; all the thoughts and hopes that please and delight
him are that there is no God, so far is he from being solicitous to know God.
It Is a condition equally sad either when all a man's thoughts are, that there is
no God, or when God is not in all his thoughts. A wicked man may talk of God
sometimes, but God never comes near his heart, as the Prophet speaks ( Jer.
12.2.) Thou art near in their mouth, but far from their reins; that is,
from their desires and delights. It Is what our reins say, not what our mouths
say, that God respects. A Godly man's chief care is to be accepted with God,
his thoughts are for God, and of God; and were it not for this thought, that
God is, or that there is a God, and he a holy God, a just God, a gracious God,
he would not think himself (as we say) worth the ground he goes upon. And
as all his thoughts are that there is a God, so all his hope and faith is in
him, and his desires are after him; O that I might find him, enjoy him, graspe
him, take hold on him, who is The All of my desires and hopes and thoughts.

Secondly, Observe; That a Godly man is sometimes at a loss for God, and cannot
tell where to find him.

He has no sensibly-spirituall Enjoyment of him; The children of light often
walk in darkness; They who fear the Lord much, may be without the feelings of
his love, and they who obey his holy commandments without the comfort of his
precious promises. Even Christ himself was at such a loss for God, when he
cried out, My God, my God, why have thou forsaken me (Psalm. 22.1.) Christ being
to suffer for sinners, tasted of all those sorts of sufferings which are due to
sin; He endured not only the punishment of sense in the pains of his body,
but the punishment of loss in the hidings of his fathers comfortable presence
from his soul. If this were done to the Green tree, much more to the dry, and
if our head found an interruption of the presence of God, much more may we, who
are his members.

Thirdly, Observe; That while Saints are at a loss for God, their desires are
often quicker and more stirring after God.

It is a sad thing not to find God, but it is far sadder to have no desires
after him: Unbeleevers are always at a loss for God, they live without God in
the world, such a life is a very death, but this is more deadly that they have
no desires after God, that they make no enquiry, no search after him. Though
Job were at a loss for God, yet his heart was full of desires to find him; and
God (I may say) is most desirable to Saints while they are at a loss for him.
Thus the Spouse speaks ( Cant. 3.1.) By night on my bed I sought him whom my
soul loves, I sought him but I found him not. But because she found him not,
when she sought him, did she give over seeking him? No, her desires of
seeking and finding him were enflamed by her not finding him when she sought
him; as it follows in the second verse; I will rise now and go about the City
in the streets and in the broad ways, I will seek him whom my soul loves,
I sought him but I found him not. Thus her second labor in seeking of him was
lost also. But does not this quite discourage her, and kill her desires after
him? will she not now give over seeking him? No not yet ( ver. 3.) The
watchmen that go about the City found me, to whom I said, saw ye him whom my
soul loves? She is still enquiring and seeking, and at last she found (
ver. 4.) It was but a little that I passed from them but I found him, whom my
soul loves: I held him and would not let him go, etc. Many who enjoy Christ
have not such strong desires after him as they who enjoy him not; as it is with
other mercies, so with this, which is the highest and chiefest, the sum of
all mercies, the Enjoyment of God, our desires to him grow quicker upon his
absence, and we seldom prize his presence as we ought, till he is departed or
withdrawn from us.

Again, we may consider Job here in a very afflicted Condition, what does he
do now? O that I knew where I might find him!

Note, Fourthly; God is most sweet to an afflicted soul.

The presence of God is sweet, precious, and delicious to Saints at all times,
but then sweetest when they find most bitterness in the world. How pleasant is
the love of God when we are sencible of man's hatred? Some good men have so much
sweetness and love in the world, that they cannot so well relish or taste the
sweetness of the love of God; though indeed nothing argues the Excellency of the
spirit of a Saint, then this, Extrema calami^as and aba lienatio amicorum
justum hominem ad deum confugere compellebat. Pined.
that the sense of the love of God to him, takes off the relish of all
creature-love, in the midst of his highest Enjoyments of it. That soul is
purely spiritual, which having abundance of worldly enjoyments, riches,
friends, relations, all that he can desire, yet in the affluence and highest
floate of all these can say, that the sweetness which he tastes in God
drownes the relish of all these, and makes them as tastlesse as the white of an
Egg in comparison of that sweetness which he has tasted in the goodness of
God; this is spiritualness in the very height of it; but usually God is then
sweetest to us when the world is bitterest to us. Afflicted souls make most
have after God; and it is well to do so; it is a very sad sign, the worst
Symptom that can appear upon the souls of any, when afflictions draw them
off from God, or when they grow cold in their affections toward God, while the
love of the world grows cold toward them. The Prophet ( Amos 6.7.)
foresheweth a very great calamity that should fall upon the people of God; Thou
shall go Captive with the first that go Captive, etc. And in the 8 verse; The
Lord God has sworn by himself says the Lord the God of hosts, I abhor the
Excellency of Jacob, and hate his Palaces (As if he had said, though I have
invested him with excellent privileges, and though he make a great profession
of my name, yet because of his provocations and unworthy walkings) I will
deliver up the City and all that is therein, there is Captivity; then comes
Pestilence in the 9^h verse; And it shall come to pass, if ten men remain in
one house that they shall dye; and they shall not bury them after the ordinary
way, but burn them, and the nearest relations shall do it. ( Ver. 10^h.) And
a man's Uncle shall take him up, and he that burns him, to bring the bones out
of the house, and shall say unto him that is by the sides of the house, is
there yet any with thee? and he shall say, no, then shall he say hold thy
tongue, for we may not make mention of the Name of the Lrrd. As if when all
these evils and plagues were come upon them, they had been stopped or restrained
from prayer, and totally withdrawn from God, by some prohibition from men, who
were so far from calling the people to solicit God by prayer to take off his
hand, Diligentius d^^ irati coluntur. Sen. l. 1. Declam: 1.
that they forbid them so much as make mention of his name; As if they were
either afraid or abhorred to mention the name of God, because he had been so
terrible among them in his Judgments. And whereas we translate, We may not
make mention of the names of the Lord. Ne ill^ ^ inter pelles neque illu^ tuis
precibus solicites, illius ve nomen aut memoriam usurpes qui tibi haec mala
fecit mandavit voluit. Pined.
Our late Annotators take notice of two other readings. We have not, or, we
will not make mention of the name of the Lord; Implying that the stop lay only
in their own spirits, they being either so generally wicked, that they had no
mind to call upon God, or so unbeleeving that they thought their case
desperate, and had no hope of help if they should. A Heathen has said, That
their gods were most worshipped when most displeased; but we have some
Christians in name who will not worship God at all when they are under the
tokens of his displeasure. Thoughts of God are never more pleasing to a
gracious heart, nor more troublesome to a wicked, then when they are in trouble.

Fifthly, (which will further clear what was last observed)

Observe; That, The unkindnesse and trouble which a godly man finds among his
friends or others in the world, drives him nearer to God.

Job besides the hardship he found from strangers, had been hardly used by his
friends. The use which he made of all this, was to make more use of or to get
near unto God. O that I knew where I might find him. This was David's wisdom
also ( Psalm. 142.4, 5.) I looked on my right hand, and beheld, but there was no
man would know me, refuge failed me, no man cared for my soul. When all
slighted him, when none took care of him; what does he in this case? The next
words tell us what; I cried unto thee, O Lord, I said thou art my refuge, and
my portion in the land of the living. As if he had said, Upon these
unkindnesses, disrespects and slightings which I found in the world, I took
occasion, yea I was stirred in my spirit to cry unto thee, O Lord, and to say,
thou art my refuge, that is, then I made thee my refuge more then ever. Having
made thee my choice in my best times, when men honored and embraced me, I am
much encouraged in these evil times when men regard me not, and the more
because they regard me not to make thee my refuge, to shelter my
weather-beaten self in thy name and power. As the natural spirits in the
body, when the air is very sharp, cold, and unkind to the outward parts,
retire inwards, resort to the heart, keep close to the heart; whereas in warmer
weather the spirits are drawn forth, and therefore we are more subject to
faintings and swoonings in hot weather then in cold; so when it is cold weather
in the world, when it is as it were frost and snow, storm and tempest, then
our spiritual spirits resort and come in to God, and keep close to him. When
we have most friends in the world, or when the world is most friendly unto us,
then God is our best friend; his favor is the most beneficial and desirable
favor, when we have as much as we can desire of favor among men. But when the
world hates us and frowns upon us, especially when (as the Prophet speaks of
some, Isa. 66.5.) Our Brethren hate us, and cast us out for the name sake of
God himself, saying, Let the Lord be glorified. When it is thus with us (I say)
our souls are even forced into the presence of God, to renew our interests in
his love, and to assure our souls that we are accepted with him. If under such
measure from men, we find not help in God, we must remain for ever
miserable. God alone is enough, All without God is nothing to a Godly man. The
fullnes of the creature without God cannot satisfy him, and the utmost want of
the creature cannot discontent him while he enjoys God; the more he wants in
the creature, the more he seeks his content in God, and when he finds
nothing below, he cries out with greatest earnestnes, O that I knew where I
might find him, whose throane is above, and who is the only happiness of man
while he is below.

Sixthly, We see how Inquisitive Job was after God, as he had a desire and a
mind to find God, so he lays about him for information where and how to
find him.

Hence observe; They who truly desire to find God, are diligent in searching
after him.

O that I knew (says Job) where I might find him! This was not an Idle wish;
many are much in the Optative mood, full of wishings and wouldings; but their
wishes are altogether wishes, and their desires nothing but desires; and such
desires are killing desires; as Solomon has taught us; The desire of the
sloathfull kills him (Prove. 21.25.) an Idle desire is a death to the desirer;
A godly man's desires are active desires, they put him upon enquiry, lead him to
the means of enjoying the good des^ered. And though God be unexpectedly found
of some that seek him not, yet no man can expect to find God, but he that
seeks him. And indeed what should the Creature do, but be upon an enquiry
after God? there is a Naturality in it, he being the supreme being, that we
who have our being from him should seek after him. And the Apostle tells us (
Act. 17.26, 27.) that this is the design of God in making of one blood all
Nations of men, for to dwell on the face of the earth, and in determining the
times before appointed, and the bounds of their habitation (namely) That they
should seek the Lord, if happily they might feel after him and find him, though
he be not far from every one of us, for in him we live, etc. The Lord is near
all, he has a presence in all places, with all persons; but the Lord would
have all seek, feel, grope after him, even such as have but a dim light of
him, as those have that do not seek so much with their eyes as with their
hands, they only feel after the things which they would have. There is a
light in the spirits of all men, that happily they may feel after God, and find
him; They who have not Scripture light, Gospel light, the highest light, yet
have some kind or degree of light; they have some glimmerings though no clear
discernings; And that should put them on to seek God; much more should they
seek after him, who have clearest light. And where there is any heat of
affection to God, a little light will serve them to seek after him; they that
are true desierers will be diligent seekers. And they, who seeking God, have
found him, will seek him yet again, yea they will seek him more and more, as
long as there is any thing more of God to be found; And there will always be
more of God to be found; for here we know God but in part, and therefore have
found him but in part: and hence it is that all the Saints in this life, or on
this side Glory, even they of the highest form and greatest proficiency in
grace and knowledge, are called Seekers (this is the generation of them that
seek him (Psalm. 24.6.) not such seekers (as we find too many in these days)
who, as if all were upon uncertainties in religion, say; they have as yet found
nothing; for as there is something wherein the most knowing and strongest
Christians may be to seek, so there are many things, yea all things necessary
to salvation, or without which we cannot be saved, which the weakest may find
and know sufficiently, though not sully. And as they who desire to find these
things, will be diligent in seeking them, so they may know in themselves, or be
fully assured that they have found them; and so even while they still continue
to be seekers, know that they are already Finders.

Lastly, Observe; God is every where, yet especially some where to be found.

As there is a finding time, so there is a finding place, and finding means;
There is a finding time, says holy David (Psalm. 32.6.) For this shall every
one that is godly pray to thee, in a time when thou may be found. The Hebrew
is, in a finding time; though I would not give any one a stop from seeking God
at any time, yet I must say there is a special finding time. And this the
Apostle calls the Accepted time (2 Cor. 6.2.) that is, the time which we ought
to lay hold upon, or accept, as also, the time, wherein we shall be acceptable
or find acceptance. There is also a finding place, there is a where as well
as a when God specially is to be found, I mean it not of a mere locality, as
if God were now to be found more in one place then in another; for Paul says,
(1 Timothy 6.8.) I will that men every where lift up pure hands without wrath and
doubting. And Christ told the woman ( Joh. 4.21.) The hour comes when ye
shall neither in this Mountain, nor yet at Jerusalem worship the father; not
as if Christ had forbid the worship of the father in those places for the time
coming; but he enlarges public worship to all places, or abrogates all
differences of place under the Gospel as to the worship of the Father. Yet if
any man shall enquire, where may I find God, or say as Job here; O that I knew
where I might find him! I would answer; First, Seek him in his promises,
search the Scriptures, there you will find God. Secondly, Look for him in his
Ordinaces, of prayer and preaching etc. for there he has promised to be
present; Where two or three are met together in my name, there am I in the
midst of them (Math. 18.20.) When the Church or Spouse in the Canticles (Chap.
1.7, 8.) Asks the Question; Tell me (O thou whom my soul loves) where thou
feedest? where thou make thy flocks to rest at Noone? Christ her Beloved,
answers, If thou know not (O thou fairest among Women) go thy way forth by the
footesteps of the flock, and feed thy kids besides the Sheepherds tents; That
is, follow the holy practices and examples of the Saints in all former ages,
which the Apostle calls walking in the steps of the faith of Abraham (Romans
4.12.) And again, hearken to the voice of faithful Teachers, who as Shepherds
feed the flock of God with knowledge and understanding. Wait at these
Shepherds tents (says Christ) and there thou shall find a presence of God
with thee, and his blessing upon thee.

Thirdly, And above all, Seek God in Christ; The father is only to be found
in the Son; Look to Jesus Christ, and in him you cannot but behold God; for
he is the brightness of his glory, and the express image of his person (Heb.
1.3.) and therefore as he that has the Son has the Father also, so he that
(by an eye of faith, and in the light of the Word and Spirit) Beholds the Son
beholds the Father also. For the light of the knowledge of the glory of God
is given us in the face of Jesus Christ (2 Cor. 4.6.) The light of the
knowledge of the goodness of God, of his mercy, Justice, holiness (which are
his glory) shines forth from Jesus Christ; that is, in and by Christ it
appears gloriously, that God is exceeding good, merciful, just, and holy.
Therefore to every wearied soul complaining of the loss of God, and crying
out, O that I knew where I might find him! The sum of all the Counsel that
I can give, or indeed that can be given is this; Seek God in Christ, and he
will be found. O that I knew where I might find him, That I might come even to
his seat.

Some conceive these words as the issue of a distemperd spirit: others tax Job
with too much boldness, that he being but dust and ashes should thus press upon
God, and that he was afterward reproved for it in the 38th Chapter of this
Book, verse the first and second; Then the Lord answered Job out of the
whirlewinde and said (there he found him) who is this that darkeneth Council
by words without knowledge, gird up now thy loins like a man, for I will
demand of thee, and answer thou me. And again, in the 40th Chap. ver. 2d, 3d,
4th, 5th, Shall he that Contendeth with the Almighty instruct him, he that
reproves God let him answer it. Then Job answered the Lord and said; Behold I
am vile, I will lay my hand upon my mouth. Once have I spoken, but I will not
answer, yea twice, but I will proceed no further, As if he had acknowledged his
error and overboldnes in pressing upon God; as in other places, so also in
this; O that I might come even to his seat.

Yet I conceive that Job in this passage, does but put forth the nobler and
higher actings of his faith, and that he speaks this, not as forgetting the
distance of dust and ashes, from the glory of God, or from the glorious God,
but as remembering the promise, and as insisting upon his privilege as a
believer who is invited to come, and to come with boldness to the throane of
Grace. For though that promise was not given out as to the formality of it in
those times, yet the virtue of it was, though in a lower degree then now. To
come with boldness to the throne of grace, (...) denetat lo^um praeparatum a
^adice (...) In voce (...) pu^o esse metotonymiam, q d. vsque ad locu^ in quo
ipse pro^ptus paratusque est ad audiendum ubi sui cop^am facit. Coc.
Representat deum tanquam supremum Judicem in solio excelso sedente^. jusque
suum unicuique reddentem. Bold.
sounds much like this, to come even to his seat, and this Job did not only
as emboldened by the clearnes of his conscience toward men, but as by the
freenes of the Grace of God in Christ toward him. In pursuance whereof it is
well conceived by a learned enterpreter, that there is a metonymie, in the word
which signifies a prepared seat, that is, such a seat as whereon God presents
himself to poor sinners, prepared and ready to give them both admittance to
himself and a gracious audience of their requests and suites. The word which
we translate seat, signifies a prepared place, a place fitted, implying
somewhat special and peculiar unto God. Heaven is called the habitation of his
holiness and of his glory (Esaias 63.15.) yet wheresoever the Lord is, he makes
it a heaven. Thus also he can make any place where he is a hell. The wicked
shall be punished with everlasting fire from the presence of the Lord, (2 These.
1.9.) that is, the very presence of the Lord shall be a hell and torment to
them. The Lord can be both terrible and gracious in his presence any where; yet
he is somewhere more graciously, some where more terribly present. Some cannot
bear those expressions, The Throne of God, the seat of God, heaven, and hell.
As if these were but the Imaginations, fancies and fictions of man's brain. But
the Lord has his seats and dwelling places, whence and where he declares
himself, both in mercy and in judgment, both in his holiness and in his glory.
( Isa. 6.1.) I saw also the Lord sitting upon his Throne, high and lifted up.
Thus the Lord manifested himself in vision to the Prophet; and David
confesses, Thy Throne O God is for ever and ever (Psalm 45.6.) that is, thy
Power and Soveraigntie. David speaks not of a material Throne such as Kings
have; the Power and Sovereignty of God are his throne wheresoever he is, and is
pleased to declare himself in his sovereignty and power. So that when Job
says, O that I might come even to his seat or throane, the meaning is, O that
I might come as near him as possibly I may, I would not stand at a distance, or
keep aloof off, as a guilty malefactor, but draw near to him in a holy and
well-grounded confidence. Thus Job speaks in answer to that Charge of Eliphaz
in the former Chapter, Is not thy wickedness great, and thine iniquities
infinite? Now (says Job) you shall see what my sins are, and what my guilt,
seeing I dare venture even to the very throne of God, where no hypocrite dares
appear. While Job professes, That if God after the manner of men should sit
in open Judgment (there will be such a Judgment at the last day) he would
come near to him, and not be afraid, he seems fully assured of his own
integrity, or of the goodness of his cause, as also that God would be good unto
him.

Hence observe; That true holiness and uprightnes has abundance of Confidence
before God.

Adam having sinned, and the guilt of his sin being upon him, durst not come to
the Seat, to the Throne of God: God came to him in the cool of the day to
examine and question him about his sin, but he hid himself among the trees of
the garden, he withdrew, not daring to abide him: and that is the state of all
sinners, who have the guilt of sin upon them, they hide, they run from God,
when once their Consciences are awakened. As sin in the act of it is a turning
or departure from the holiness of God, so sin acted or sin in the guilt of it
causes not only a departure but a running and a hiding from the justice of
God. Guilty sinners are so far from coming up to his Seat, that they cannot
endure to come in his sight; a malefactor has little mind to come before the
Judge, or to the Bench where the Judge sits. Solomon says ( Prove. 20.8.) A
king that sits in the Throne of Judgment, scatters away all evil with
his eyes. We may understand it thus, he scatters evil actions, and evil
persons, evil works and evil workers with his eyes; there is not an evil man
willing to appear, or that dares to appear before him. They who are
selfe-condemned, must needs be afraid that others will condemn them also.
Magistrates sitting in Judgment are terrible to guilty malefactors. Or thus,
He scatters the evil with his eyes; that is, he makes evil men reveal and
scatter their most secret evils, by his prying into them, and industrious
Examination of them; that evil or wicked practice which they had bound up in
their hearts, and said, none shall know it, he scatters and discovers. Solomon's
proverb carries an experienced truth in it both ways. And we may argue from
it, That if an earthly King or Magistrate, sitting on the Throne, scatters
all evil with his eyes, how much more does God? neither any evil matter, nor
any evil man can stand before him. And seeing the Lord discovers all the evil
that is in the hearts and ways of men, what can give perfect boldness in
coming to the Throne of God, but only an Interest in Jesus Christ, in whom
the throane of God is become a Throane of grace to sinners? Were it only a
Throne of Judgment and Justice, no flesh could stand before it, but being a
Throne of grace, the worst of sinners, who wait for grace, may come near, and
the nearer they come the welcomer they are. A godly man is never better then
when he is near God, and then thinks himself best when he is nearest unto God;
all his happiness in this life and his glory in that which is to come, does
consist in his nearenes unto God.

Secondly, Whereas Job says; O that I might come even to his Seat. Observe.

A Godly man is willing that God should Judge both his Person and his Cause.
That Is the design of Job, he had appealed from the Judgment of his friends,
and begd the Judgment of God; He was resolute in it, to stand or fall
according to his sentence. But why was Job so desirerous of the Judgment of
God? why would he go to his Throne, and appeal to him? When men make appeals
from one Throne to another, they have their reasons for it; When Paul said, I
appeal to Caesar (Act. 25.11.) doubtless he was fully persuaded that he should
find better terms with Caesar then among the Jews; So when Job says, I
appeal to God (which is the highest appeal, and beyond which there lies no
appeal) doubtless Job was fully persuaded that he should find better terms
at Gods tribunal, then he had found among his friends. And Job might have many
grounds of better terms from God. For

First, God is wise, even a God of Judgment, who would not receive Judgment
from a wise and understanding Judge, especially from him who is wisdom and
understanding.

Secondly, God is Omniscient; there are many wise Judges, but no Omniscient
Judges in the world. Princes are said to have long hands, and very clear eyes,
they can reach far, and see far, but they cannot see all; but God is able
to Judge the secrets of all hearts, for he sees all secrets, and knows what
man cannot. For that reason a godly man loves the Judgment of God, because he
knows his heart; And for the same reason wicked men, hypocrites especially,
are afraid of the Judgment of God: they know if their outward actons should
come to be scanned, much more if their hearts should be turned outward, it must
needs go ill with them. Most hypocrites carry it fair only for a while
before the world, they at last discover themselves, the disease breaks out at
their fingers ends, or at their tongues end; Their words or works discover the
rottennes of their hearts, and the formality of their profession. But some
hypocrites carry it fair to the world all their days, and fear not the
Judgment of men, yet even then a thought of the Judgment of God is dreadful
to them, whereas the Saints, even all who are sincere, desire God to Judge
them; for indeed their hearts are better then their ways, and their affections
then their actions, and they know that God discernes with what heart and spirit
every thing is done, as well as what is done. He does not Judge by appearances
(as we ought not, Joh. 7.24.) and therefore his is a righteous Judgment. God
does not judge things as they appear, but as they are, unless they are as
they appear, and whatsoever their appearance is, he can judge them as they
are. He can judge by discerning what is in the deep, and follow a matter to
the very spring of it; therefore I Will go to God (says the upright heart) my
desire is that he should Judge my cause.

Thirdly, The Lord is a gracious and a merciful Judge; he is as full of pity
as he is of wisdom, and as ready to relieve as he is quick-sighted to discern.

Fourthly, The Lord is very patient; First, patient to hear; and secondly,
patient to bear. Patience to hear is a great encouragement; many Judges are
weary of the work, they will not hear a poor man out, but God will; and God
is patient also to bear with and pass by the faylings of his people, whose
uprightnes he knows.

Lastly, A Godly man knows that God his Judge has received an atonement, that
he is made for him, and upon grounds of Justice and righteousness is become
his friend. Some who have bad Causes, yet come up to the Throne of man boldly,
because they know the Judge is made for them by a bride, and so will give
sentence on their side, be it right or wrong. Saints know that the Judge is
made for them, but made in a holy manner, not with base bribery to blind his
eyes to pervert justice, but he has received an atonement, he is appeased and
satisfied by a Mediator at his own appointment. If God should search the best
of Saints narrowly, they must needs fall in judgment, yet they know they shall
stand in judgment, because the Judge is reconciled to them by Christ; yea
Christ who made the Atonement, and is the reconciler, is the Judge, this
encourages Saints to come to God; For if when we were enemies we were
reconciled to God by the death of his Son, much more being reconciled we shall
be saved by his life (Romans 5.10.) The case standing thus with believers, who
sees not ground for their appeal from the judgment, either of open enemies,
or (as Job did) mistaken Friends; O that I might come even to his Seat.

In the two next verses, Job tells us what he would do if his appeal were
granted and himself admitted to the seat of God.

Verse. 4. I would order my Cause before him, and fill my mouth with arguments.

Verse. 5. I would know the words which he would answer me, and understand what
he would say unto me.


Thus he describes his intended behavior before his Judge, in allusion to
legal proceedings, where the Plaintiff brings in his bill, and the Defendant
his answer.

I would order my Cause before him. The Hebrew word which we translate to
order, (...) est militare verbum atque dicitur de aciebus quae certa ratione ac
ordine disponuntur.
is a military term, properly used for the ordering of an Army, or the putting
of them into a Posture for a battle, we call it Marshalling an Army. And hence
it is applied to the ordering of any other thing ( Psalm. 23.5.) Thou will
prepare a Table for me in the midst of mine enemies, to order a Table is to
set dish by dish, there is a kind of method in setting dishes at great feasts;
Thou will prepare a Table for me. Again ( Ps. 50.21.) God speaks to the
hypocrite about his sinful doings; I will set them in order before thee; that
is, those sins, and confused practices of which thou have said in thy heart, I
shall never hear more of them, shall be brought forth and set like a terrible
Army in rank and file before thee. Job speaks to this sense, I would order my
cause before him, or, to his face, as the Hebrew Text has it, that is, in his
presence.

And fill my mouth with Arguments. Pleno ore fidenter, constanter pro me dicam.
Bold.
I would have arguments enough or good store to prove that your proceeding has
been unequal toward me; And when he says; I would fill my mouth with
arguments, it shows that his heart was full of arguments Christ teaches us to
argue so ( Luke 6.45.) Out of the abundance of the heart the mouth speaks;
Jobs heart was full, therefore he would fill his mouth. David prays ( Psalm.
71.8.) Let my mouth be filled with thy praise. And the Church speaks of her
joy when God had turned their captivity, ( Psalm. 126.2.) Then was our mouth
filled with laughter. In this language God bespeaks his people ( Psalm. 81.10.)
Open thy mouth wide, and I will fill it. Open it by faith, and I will fill it,
with what? fill it with mercy, and with blessings. So here; I would fill my
mouth with arguments; that is, I would not want matter to speak for my self,
Os meum replebo increpationibus. Vulg.
or in my own cause. The vulgar reads it, I will fill my mouth with Chidings,
or, with reproofs. The word properly signifies, Conviction; and then we are to
understand it in reference to his friends; I would abound with convincing,
reproving, or chiding arguments against you, (...) non redargutiones
intelligit, quibus deum injustitiae accusaret sed rations quibus se tueretur.
Sic (...) and (...) Graecie sumitur. Merc.
who, have thus long reproached me; I would bring such arguments as should not
only be a proof of mine own integrity, but a reproof of my friends severity.
Some arguments have only a proof in them; others have a reproof too. Job would
fill his mouth with arguments, which should be both proofs for himself, and
reproofs to his opposers. Job had not a word to say against God, but he had
much to say against his friends. I would fill my mouth with Arguments.

Note from it.

Troubled spirits have many things to say, and usually abound much in their
own sense. Furor arma ministrat.
As the passion of anger will administer weapons to a man though he be no great
fighter, so those passions of grief and sorrow will administer arguments to
him though he be no great disputer. A troubled soul will hardly be put to a
stand or nonplus. They who suffer much will always have somewhat to say; If
nature deny (said one of old) yet Indignation will make a man a Poet; And if
nature deny, yet sorrow will make a man a Logician; and trouble will make a man
an Advocate in his own cause. The tongues of many are tipped with Oratory, they
have excellent words and strong reasons too from the pressures that are upon
their spirits: trouble of spirit fills the mouth with Arguments two ways.

First, Against themselves, how strongly will some in that case dispute against
their own peace? what arguments will they bring against any comfort that is
offered them? and how nimbly will they reply to any one that goes about to
answer them? how will they find out new mediums, when those are foiled by
which they have formerly nourished their unbeleefe, and discouraged themselves
from taking hold on mercy. It Is wonderful to hear the pleadings of a troubled
spirit; and it is one of the hardest taskes in the world to answer the doubts
which such a man will make against himself.

Secondly, The troubles of many fills their mouths with arguments for
themselves; that is the meaning of Job here in this place; I would fill my mouth
with arguments to maintain my Cause; I should not want either matter or words,
to plead this busienes, were I before the Throne of God, and yet I would not be
so free and forward to speak, as to neglect or slight what is spoken to me, as
it follows.

Verse. 5. I would know the words that he would answer me, and understand what
he would say unto me. Some are so hasty to speak, that they will not hear,
they are so forward to plead their own Cause, that they will not receive the
opinion of another. Job discovers an equal spirit to both; As I would order my
Cause, and fill my mouth with arguments, so I would know the words that he
would answer me too, I would have the good manners, or the grace rather, to
heed and understand what God would say to me.

Cogn^scam sanationes quas loquetur mihi. Sep. Quam mihi laboranti curatione^
adhibiturus esset intellige^em. Chrysostom.
The Septuagint render it thus; I would know the healings which he would speak
to me; or as another, What medicine or way of cure he would praescribe and
administer to me; and this might respect either the quieting of his Spirit, or
the repayring of his credit and good name, which had been sorely and deeply
wounded by his friends, not only suspecting but charging him as an hypocrite
or wicked man. This is a fair sense, only it straitens the Text; For we may
suppose Job in this address and application to God ready to hear whatsoever
God should say unto him, whether his were words of approbation or reproof,
whether for him or against him. Though Job had (doubtless) a strong
confidence, that God would approve of him and give sentence on his side, yet
considering his own weaknesses and distempers of mind, he might well conceive
that some things had fallen from him or been done by him which might deserve
and call for chidings and rebukes, as the issue indeed was. And therefore it
was most congruous that he should present himself before the Lord in a frame
of heart to receive reprehensions as well as consolations. I would know the
words that he would answer me and understand etc.

Knowing, and understanding, may be taken here two ways; First, for
Considering and weighing what God would say, or what Award he would make; In
which he seems closely to check his friends, who thought him so dull and
incapable, that surely he did not apprehend nor understand their answers. Well
(says Job) whatsoever you think of my dulnes to understand your answers, or
what you have said, yet I doubt not but I shall understand the answers of God,
or what he shall say unto me.

Secondly, They note a reverence and respect to the word of God; I would know
the words that he would answer; that is, submit to them, I would not oppose the
Judgment or Opinion of God concerning me. Though Job did not sit down or
acquiesse in the judgment of his friends, yet he would reverence and sit down
quietly in the judgment of God, and in the answer which he should please to
give. In either of these interpretations, the sense is good. I would know; that
is, I would study to find out the mind of God, and understand what he says
to me, and then reverently submit thereunto.

Further, This form of speaking, I would know the words, and I would
understand etc. seems to imply a vehement desire in Job to know the mind of
God concerning him. As a man that is accused longs to hear the mind of the
Judge, as for others it is not much to him what they say for him or against him.
As Paul spoke in a like case (1 Cor. 4.3.) With me it is a very small thing to
be judged of you, or of man's judgment etc. he that judges me is the Lord;
that is, to his judgment I must stand; He is above all.

Hence note.

First, That a godly man is careful to understand the answer and
determinations of God concerning him. I would know the words that he would
answer me, and this not only (according to the supposition which Job makes
here) if God should speak to him personally, or mouth to mouth; but in what
way soever God should speak to him. It is the great care of a Godly man to
know the word of God written and delivered over to us, as the rule of our life
and faith; for indeed therein we have our judgment, and our answer: as Christ
says, the words that I speak, they shall judge you at the last day; that is,
by the word you shall be judged. Likewise it is the care of a Godly man to
understand what God speaks to him by his works and providence, by his rods
and chastnings. In these the Lord speaks to us and gives us answers. They who
are wise, will study to know and understand them. We may conceive that Job had
respect to two things especially, about which he desiered that he might
understand the answer, and words of God to him.

First, That God would show him the true Cause of his affliction; for he did
not take that to be the Cause which his friends had so often suggested, and so
disputed upon that Fallacy all along, which Logicians call, The putting of that
for a Cause which is not the Cause. Therefore Job hoped to know of God what he
would say, as to the reason why he did Contend with him.

Secondly, What God would say to him by way of Direction and Council, by way
of remedy and redress, he was sollicitous to understand the mind of God, and
what God expected from him under this dispensation. So that Jobs scope was not
at all (as Eliphaz suspected) to plead his own righteousness and holy
walkings before God, as if God had been beholding to him for them, and so must
needs grant him (as having deserved it) whatsoever he should ask. But that he
might be acquainted with the holy will and purpose of God concerning himself,
and to be instructed by him about the grounds and ends of his long and sharp
affliction, that so he might bear it more chearefully, and more fruitfully. As
also (and that principally) that he might hear from his Majesty which was the
great point in controversy between him and his friends) whether he did correct
and chasten him as a son, or punish and take vengeance on him, as on a rebel;
and so set him among the examples of caution for sinners in time to come.

Secondly, Note.

A Godly man rests in the Judgment of God. Si me nisontem pronunciaret, cum
gaudio, si sontem cum patientia s^sciperem sententiam ejus. Scult.
Job would not rest in his friends judgment, but in Gods judgment he would
rest, and enquire no further; I (says he) freely yield up my self to that; if
the Lord should pronounce me Innocent, I would rest in his sentence, and be
thankful; if the Lord should pronounce me faulty, yet I would rest in his
sentence, and be patient; yea then I would ask mercy and beg his grace for
the pardon of my faylings. God is an Infallible Judge, and therefore no man
ought to question his determinations; Indeed, Every mouth shall be stopped, and
all the world become guilty before God (Romans 3.19.) that is, acknowledge
themselves guilty before him when he judges. And as there is no avoiding the
judgment of God, so a godly man desires to rejoice in it. Good is the word of
the Lord, said Hezekiah (2 King. 20 19.) When a very sore sentence was past
against him, and he said, is it not Good? if peace and truth be in my days? By
good in the former part of the verse, he means just and equal; as if he had
said, though this word be full of gall and wormwood, yet it is no other then I
and my people have deserved and drawn upon our selves: By good in the latter
part of the verse, he means Gracious and merciful; as if he had said, God in
this sentence has mixed the good of justice and equity, with the good of
graciousnes and mercy, or in the midst of Judgment he has remembered mercy.
Thus also when God gave sentence by fire against the two sons of Aaron; Moses
said to Aaron; This is that the Lord spoke, saying, I will be sanctified in
them that come nigh me, and before all the people I will be glorified (Lev.
10.3.) Now, when Aaron heard this, the text says; And Aaron held his peace. He
murmured not, he contradicted not, but rested patiently in the judgment of
God. And thus Job was resolved to give himself up to the judgment of God
whatsoever it should be. And we shall find him (in the next words) hoping
strongly to find God very sweet and gracious to him, could he but obtain a
hearing at his Judgment seat.

JOB, CHAP. 23. Verse. 6, and 7. Will he plead against me with his great power?
No, but he would put strength in me.

There the righteous might dispute with him: so should I be delivered for ever
from my Judge.


JOb still prosecutes the proof of his integrity from his willingness to
appear before God, and plead his case at his throne; and as in the two former
verses he told us what he would do upon supposition that he could find God,
and have access unto him, even that he would state his case, and then fill his
mouth with arguments; he would also seriously attend and strive to understand
the answer which God should give him. So in these two verses, he holds out what
entertainment he assured himself of, in this his address to God, as also what
confidence he had of a fair hearing and of a good issue; As if he had said, O
Eliphaz, you have often deterred and overawed me with the Majesty of God, as
if he would certainly crush such a worm as I am, and that I could not at at
all stand or abide a trial before him in Judgment (Eliphaz has spoken to
that sense at the 4th verse of the former Chapter) Will he reprove thee for
fear of thee? will he enter with thee into judgment? do thou think that
God will condescend so far, as to treat with thee) but know, O Eliphaz, that
I am not afraid of the presence of God; for, though I confess, if God should
put forth his power, I were not able to hold up my head before him, and that he
could easily overthrow me with a breath, yet I am persuaded he will take a more
favorable course, and deal with me in mercy, not with rigor or severity.

Verse. 6. Will he plead against me with his great power?
I know he is clothed with Majesty, and that the greatness of power is his; but
will he plead against me with it? The Hebrew text is, will he plead with me; to
plead with and to plead against are the same. (...) conten^et quasi de jure suo
ut illud exigat.
To plead is a Law term; He that pleads against another, discovers either
the faultines of his person when accused, or the weakness of his Title when
controverted. This word is used by the Prophet ( Isa. 57.16.) I will not
contend (or plead) for ever, I will not argue my own prerogative, nor will I
argue thy sinfullnesse always, or without end; why not? if I should, the
spirit would fail before me, and the souls which I have made; where, though
spirit and soul are put synechdochically for the whole man, that is, for flesh
and spirit, for soul and body together, yet the Lord mentions only spirit and
soul, because of their strength to bear divine contendings beyond the body or
the flesh. As if he had said, even that which is strongest in man would fail,
if God should always contend.

(...) Number copia sui roboris etc.
Will he plead against me with his great power? or strictly to the Letter, with
the multitude of his power, with the forces of his power. The power of God is
great, yea the power of God is greatest, all his power is allmighty power, yet
God does not always put forth the greatness of his power; He is a most free
agent, and so can restrain and hold in his own power, when he pleases, and
not use it to the terror of a poor creature, or plead against him with it.

Again, The power of God may be taken two ways; First, for his strength, or
his power of doing and executing; secondly, for his prerogative authority, or
his power of commanding and ruling; we may interpret it here of the latter;
will God deal with me by his prerogative power, think you? will he oppress
me with his mere authority? Per multa^ dei fortitudine^ potentiam ejus
absolutam (summum jus dici solet) intelligu^t multi. Bold.
I have another opinion of God; surely he will not do so; For he is good and
gracious, and he will attemper his prerogative with pity, and his great power
with much mercy. Will he plead against me with this great power? Jobs question
is a confident negation (such negative interrogations are frequent in
Scripture) will he? is, he will not plead against me with his great power; but
Job is not satisfied that his speech carries a negation in it, and therefore
lest any should not fully enough understand him so, he expresses his negative;
will he plead with me with his great power; no, His power is not, nor ever will
it be against me. He will take some other course with me, he will deal with me
upon the account of goodness and mercy, not upon the account of power; He will
not break me a bruised reed, nor quench me who am but smoking flax, he will
rather bind me up and cherish the least spark which he perceives alive in me.
Will he plead against me with his great power?

Hence observe; First, God has great power, much power, All power is his.

The power of men and Angels is his; What power soever, whether for kind or
degree, is in the hand of any creature, that power belongs to God. Thus David,
a man of Great power states it, God has spoken once, twice have I heard this,
That power belongs unto God. The power that is scattered and divided all the
world over is centred and united in him. God has a greatness of power, in
commanding and disposing what and how things shall be done, he also has a
greatness of power in doing and executing what he has commanded. The commands
of men are often unperformed, either because they to whom their commands are
sent have no power to perform them, or because they want power to back their
own commands. We may consider the Greatness of the power of God several ways.

First, As he can do all things, and is omnipotent, there is nothing too hard
for him, his hand is not shortened in reference to the longest or the greatest
works, and difficulties. And as he can do whatsoever he has a will to do,
so he will do whatsoever he pleases to have done, whatsoever he purposes to
do, whatsoever is upon his heart to do: none of his counsels ever failed,
nor have any of the thoughts of his heart been frustrated. Men often purpose to
do, but they seldom have power to do what they have purposed; they are big
with the conceptions of many great matters, but when the children come to the
birth, they have no strength to bring forth. God never fails in his power to
do whatsoever he has a purpose or a mind to do, God has power enough to
back his commands, and he can supply power to those whom he calls to execute
them.

Secondly, The greatness of Gods power is seen in this; that He has a right
to do all that he does. As he has a fulness of strength, so a fullness of
Authority; he does not usurp or entrench upon any other power in what he does,
nor upon any man's property in what he has; it is his due to do what he does,
and to have what he has. God is supreme, giving the Law to all, receiving the
Law from none; his is not a tyrannical, but a just and a righteous power; his
is not a might without right, but a might with right. What the Prophet speaks
of the Chaldeans (Hab. 1.7.) is true of God in every sense, in the strictest
sense; His judgment and his dignity proceeds of himself; he is a law unto
himself, his rule is internal, and his power intrinsecall. All derive power
from him, therefore his power is altogether underived. Power underived must
needs be great power, yea the Greatness of power.

Thirdly, The greatness of his power appears further in this, that no man
may presume to question him for what he does. He has great power in what he
does, whom none may so much as ask what do thou? Nebucadnezzar (a heathen
in highest earthly power) confesses as much of the power of God, as soon as
he regained the reason of a man ( Dan. 4.34, 35.) At the end of the days (that
is, after the term of seven years was accomplished, when for the heart of a
beast a man's heart was restored to him) I Nebuchadnezzar lift up mine eyes to
heaven, and mine understanding returned unto me, and I blessed the most high,
and I praised and honored him that lives for ever, whose dominion is an
everlasting dominion, and his kingdom is from generation to generation; and
all the inhabitants of the earth are reputed as nothing, and he does according
to his will in the army of heaven, and among the inhabitants of the earth, and
none can stay his hand, or say unto him, what do thou? that is, none may so
much as question, much less reprove him for any thing that he does. Though
there are many who in the pride of their hearts, and through the forgetfullnes
of their duty, will presume to question God about what he has done, and even
control his doings; yet of right or according to rule, none can. Hence the
Apostle having asserted the sovereignty of God, he has mercy on whom he will
have mercy, and whom he will he hardens, brings in some questioning his
proceedings; but he checks them soundly for their boldness in questioning, and
instructs them by many upbrayding questions, that they ought not to put that or
any such question. Thou will say then (ver. 18, 19, 20.) why does he yet find
fault, for who has resisted his will? nay but who art thou o man, that
reply against God, shall the thing formed say to him that formed it, why
have thou made me thus? has not the potter power over the clay, of the same
lump to make one vessel of honor, and another of dishonor? what if God were
willing to show his wrath in some, as well as his grace and mercy in others,
what have you or I to do with it? who gave you or I leave to examine God upon
intergatoryes about it? Thus he pleads the power or prerogative of God, this
must silence all our queries, and satisfy all our doubts; none may ask him a
reason of what he does; the reason is in himself. The will of God is his
reason; and there is all the reason in the world it should; for his is not
only a sovereign will, but a just and a holy will. Solomon says ( Eccl. 8.4.
Where the word of a king is, there is power, and who may say unto him, what
do thou? In all lawful administrations, it is true of kings and supreme
earthly powers, in what form soever, none may say unto them what do ye?
their word must stand: much more is this true of him who is King of Kings, and
Lord of Lords, who is the supreme power of heaven and earth; all whose ways
are equal, and his dispensations righteous, though we see not the equity and
righteousness of them. That, is not only great, but the greatest power, which
none may question.

Fourthly, This also demonstrates the greatness of Gods power, that none can
stop or hinder him in what it has a mind to do: what he appoints he
executes, and none can stop it, or as ( Nebuchadnezzar speaks in the place
before mentioned, Dan. 4.35.) stay his hand. The hand of the strongest power
upon the earth may be, and has been staid; kings have had a check, their hands
have been stayed, but none can stay the hand of God; I will work (says he) and
none shall let it (Isa. 43.17.) God should do but little work in the world,
if men could let it. Wicked men would let or hinder God in all his works, and
the godly (through their mistakes) would hinder him in some of his works; but
none can; He speaks to the Sun and it shines not, yea he speaks to the
Sun and it moves not. This is the greatness and the muchnes of the power of
God.

But, says Job, Will he plead against me with this great power? All this power
God has (and this power he can put forth) but he will not put it forth against
me (says Job 1.) And what was Job that he should be thus confident, and rise
up to such a strong assurance that God would not use his strength against him?
Job was a godly man, a man fearing God, a man perfect and upright, a man full
of faith, even full of faith (though he lived in dark times, and under dark
dispensations, yet, I say, he was a man full of faith) in the Redeemer. Now it
is no wonder if a man of this character, a man thus qualified and privileged
had this confidence, and was much assured that he should prosper and speed in
it, That God would not plead against him with his great power.

Hence Observe; A godly man may be confident that God will deal gently and
graciously with him. or,

That God will deal with him according to the greatness of his mercy, not
according to the greatness of his power; The greatness of the power of God is an
exceeding great comfort to the sincere, because they know it is acted toward
them in the greatness of his mercy. It is comfortable to hear that the Lord,
who (as the Prophet describes him, Nah: 1.3.) is great in power, is also slow
to anger (the greatness of man's power does usually quicken not clogg his
passions) but it is more comfortable to know, that God who is great in power,
is quick and speedy to show mercy. And hence it is that a true believer
rejoices in the power o^ God as well as in his mercy, because he knows that
God has declared himself powerful for him, as well as merciful. He knows
God will not put forth power alone, or nothing but power toward him. God does
exercise all his refreshing attributes, and divine perfections, in dealing with
Saints Whereas upon the wicked he exercises his power chiefly, though not
only. What if God to make his power known endured with much long-suffering
the vessels of wrath fitted for destruction, says the Apostle ( Romans 9.22.)
God pleads with the wicked according to the tenor of the Covenant of works,
but with Believers according to the Covenant of grace, in which he does as it
were uncloath himself of his power, and cloth himself with love, mercy,
goodness, and tenderness to his people. The Lord (as the Psalmist speaks,
Psalm. 93.1.) is clothed with strength, wherewith he has girded himself, he
is clothed also with mercy, and with that he has girded himself; he pleads
with his people (I grant) in righteousness, as well as in mercy (as the
Apostle speaks ( Romans 3.25, 26.) God has set forth Jesus Christ, to be a
propitiation through faith in his blood, to declare his rightenesse, for the
remission (or passing over) of sins that are past through the forbearance of
God, to declare I say at this time his righteousness; and the justifyer of him
that believes in Jesus. The justice or righteousness of God was never so
fully declared as in Christ; for God did not spare him at all, but he having
taken our debt upon him, discharged it to the utmost farthing. God pleaded
against Christ with his great power, and with his perfect righteousness; To
which plea Christ made answer with as Great a power (his being the power of
God) and with as perfect a righteousness, his being also the righteousness of
God. And hence it is, that when God comes to plead with Believers, he pleads
not against them with his power and righteousness, seeing Christ with both
pleads for them; He pleads for them not only as he is Jesus Christ the
righteous, but as he is the mighty, the All-powerfull God. This is the chiefest
ground of a believers confidence, that God (as Job here says) will not plead
against him with his great power. What then did Job believe would God do with
him? the next words inform us what his faith was in that particular.

But he would put strength in me. (So we render) the Hebrew is only thus; He
will put in me; Veruntatem ille pones in me. Heb.
what he would put is not expressed in the Original; which has caused some
variety of opinion what it should be that the Lord would put into him; and I
find a threefold conjecture in the point.

First, The supplement is made thus; He would produce arguments or reasons
against me; and this is conceived most suitable to the context, and scope of
the place, as also to the action of pleading before spoken of; Poneret and
afferret in me suas rations. Merc. Ipse poneret co^tentione^ in me, id est non
robore mecum ageret sed verborum contentione. Ch
would he plead with or against me with his great power, no, but he would show
me the reason of his dealings with me; he would not proceed against me in a
martial but in a legal way, not in a prerogative but in a discoursive
argumentative way: he would show me the cause why he thus contendeth with me,
and has so sorely afflicted me. God would condescend so far to my weakness as
to give me an account, though I dare not presume to call him to an account; and
though he has both power and right to deal with me as he pleases, yet I am
much assured that he would be pleased to tell me why he deals thus with me.
This interpretation is clear to the general scope of the context, and argues
nothing unbecoming that holy confidence which the Grace of the Gospel,
allows, a believer in, yea encourages him unto, when in any distress he
approaches unto God for the relief and comfort of his troubled Spirit.

Secondly, Another thus; Will he plead against me with his great power, Fonet
in me, sc. cor suum, i e. comple^eretur me favor. Pisc:
no, but he would put his heart upon me; that is, he would embrace me with his
favor and lay me in his bosom. Though his hand has been exceeding heavy upon
me, yet I believe his heart is toward me; though he has smitten me with the
wound of an enemy, yet he will receive me as a friend; and give me signal
testimonies of his love. I should not feel the weight of his hand, but see the
tenderness of his bowels and his heart moving toward me. This also is an
interpretation full of truth, and as full of comfort to a wearied soul.

Thirdly, The supplement made in our translation reaches both the former, and
suites also to the former branch of the Text, with much elegancy; Alij sub
audiu^t and repetu^t (...) in me robur poneret ad consistendum coram s^, ^e
infi^mum fulciens and roborans. Merc.
Would he plead against me with his great power, no, but he would put power, or
strength into me, he will be so far from putting out his strength against me,
that he will put his strength into me, he knows my weakness, how unable I am
to contend with or bear up against his power, and therefore he would put power
into me. Mr Broughton renders clearly to this sense, Would he by his great
power plead against me, no, but he would help me; help is power, and he that
helps another, administers power to him; he either puts new strength into
him, or joins his strength with him. So then, Job was assured that God would
put strength into him, or be his strength to help and carry him through all
the difficulties that lay before him.

Hence Observe.

First, A beleiver has no opinion of his own strength, or that he can do any
thing in his own strength. He trusts no more to his own strength or power,
then to his own righteousness or worthiness. As our Justification before God
is purely founded in the righteousness of Christ, so all the actings of our
sanctification are maintained by the strength of Christ. Holy Job spoke nothing
of his own strength, yea he spoke as having no strength of his own. A Godly
man knows his own strength is but weakness, and that when he prevails with
God it is with a power which he has from God. Paul uses a form of speech
which we may call a divine riddle (2 Cor. 12.10.) When I am weak then I am
strong, he predicates or affirms one contrary of another, weakness is
contrary to strength, how a weak man should be strong, and then especially
strong when he is weak, is hard to conceive by those who are spiritual, and
is unconceivable by those who are carnal. This assertion is enough to pose and
puzle nature; He that is weak is strong, or the readiest way to get strength
is to be weak. The truth and the Apostle Paul's meaning is plainly this; When I
am weak in my own sense and opinion, when I am convinced that I have no power
of my own, then I feel power coming in, then Christ strengthens me, and I am
strong, then I experience that word, My grace is sufficient for thee. When I
find the waters of my own cisterne low and failing, then I have a supply from
the Spirit. So the Apostle spoke, ( Phil. 1.19.) I know that this also shall
turn to my salvation through your prayers, and the supply of the Spirit of
Jesus Christ. The first Adam received all his strength at once, we now receive
our strength by daily fresh supplies from the second Adam. The word there used
by the Apostle, which we render supply, signifies an under-supply, implying
thus much, that as the natural body and each particular member of it, is
supplied with sense and motion, together with a suitable strength and ability
from the head, so believers who are altogether the mystical body of Christ,
and each of them members in particular, are supplied from Christ their head by
the Spirit, with spiritual life, motion, and strength of Grace for every duty
to which they are called, or which is required of them. And because as this is
so in its self, so believers are instructed in it; therefore they disclaim and
go out of their own strength, that the power of Christ may rest upon them.
Christ fills none but the hungry, nor does he strengthen any but the weak.
They who think they have any thing of their own, shall receive nothing from
him; unless Christ be all in all to us, he will not be any thing at all to us.

Secondly, Observe; God himself puts strength into humbled sinners, that they
may stand before him. As he knows what strength such need, so he gives them the
streng^h they need; He will put strength in me, maybe the confidence of any
soul in Jobs case. We are not able to stand before God under the burden of our
corruptions, nor yet are we able to walk before him under the burden of our
duties, unless himself be pleased to administer strength to us. And surely if
we have cause even to glory in our infirmities, that the power of Christ may
rest upon us (2 Cor. 12.9.) then much more have we cause to glory in the power
of Christ, when we find so many infirmities resting in us. The Prophet saw
this fully while he said ( Isa. 45.24.) Surely shall one say in the Lord have I
righteousness and strength, even to him shall men come, in the Lord shall all
the seed of Israel be justified and shall glory. That we have strength in and
from the Lord, is to us a ground of holy Glorying as well as that we have
righteousness in him. For though to be justified be a higher favor then to be
strengthened, yet unless we were strengthened, as we could not take in the
comfort of our Justification freely, so neither could we give God the glory of
it so fully as we ought. And as it is the joy of believers that God will put
strength into them when they are humbled under the greatest weaknesses, so that
their strength is still in him. For God does not so put it into us, as to put
that strength out of himself. The strength which God puts into us is a
strength still residing in himself. The strength which we have received, as
well as that which we have not yet received, is still in the hand of God. And
from his hand we shall receive renewalls of strength for all our needs and
purposes. Take five instances in special.

First, A Believer shall receive strength to do, or an acting power from
Christ; Though Christ has done all for us, yet we have much to do for Christ,
and (such is the mystery of Godliness) that the same Christ who has done all
for us, will also do all in us. Christ lays a yoke upon the necks of his
people, and a burden upon their shoulders, but he puts power and strength into
their shoulders to carry his yoke and bear his burden; and that is the reason
why he calls his yoke easy, and his burden light, it is not so considered in
it self, as if we could make light work of the work of Christ; but his
burden is light, because he has promised to give his at least a sufficient
strength to bear it. A heavy burden is not grievous to equal strength, and it
is light to a superior or greater strength. As all our sins (the least whereof
is a burden too heavy for us to bear) are light to us through the
righteousness of Christ, so all the commandments of God (the least of which
is too hard for us alone) are light to us through the strength of Christ. This
was the Apostle Paul's profession, I can do all things through Christ that
strengthens me, (Phil. 4.13.) A little is too much for us, all is but little
for Christ; as we have the anointing of the Spirit, whereby we know all things,
(1 John 2.20.) so we have the strengthening of the Spirit, whereby we do all
things It is a high privilege, that Saints who receive their work from
heaven, receive their strength from heaven too. And that as God puts his
commands upon them, so he puts this power into them. The Lord is so far from
requiring work of us, without giving us wages for what we have done, that he
does not require work of us without giving us strength to do it. When we
look upon our reward it might seem that we have done all our selves, but when
we look upon his assistance, it is as evident that we have done nothing of our
selves. The Lord is not like those Egyptian taskmasters who called for brick,
but would not give straw; no, the Lord who calls for brick, does not only give
us straw, but strength, even hands, and hearts to do our work. Gospel Grace
or new-Covenant-grace promises us strength to do what we are commanded to do.

Secondly, The Lord gives us, as strength to do, so to suffer, strength to
bear his cross as well as his yoke: so the Apostle comforts the Corinthians
(1 Ep: 10.13.) No temptation (that is, no affliction, for as every temptation
has trouble in it, and is therefore justly called an affliction, so every
affliction has a trial in it, and is therefore justly called a temptation, in
which sense the Apostle there says, no temptation) has taken hold of you, but
that which is common to man, but God is faithful that will not suffer you to
be tempted above what ye are able, but with the temptation will make a way of
escape, that ye may be able to bear it. As if he had said; be not afraid that
you shall be oppressed with the burden of any affliction or temptation which ye
endure in my cause or for my name sake; for ye shall receive an ability
commensarable to your affliction, whatsoever it is; you shall be supported in
those afflictions which are immediately from the hand of God, much more in
those which are from the hand of man, even in the extremest and hottest
persecutions. Paul had experience of this (2 Timothy 4.17.) There he tells a sad
story of the fearefullnesse if not of the unfaithfullnes of men, even of good
men to him in an evil day, and he tells as comfortable a story of the presence
and faithfulness of God to him in an evil day, even in the worst and
blackest day that this world could lowre upon him in. At my first answer, no
man stood with me (that is, no man appeared to strengthen, to comfort me) all
men forsook me, I pray God it be not laid to their charge, (What then? was he
left of all, because left of all men, no such matter, All men left him, but God
who is but one One-most God, and who alone is more then all men abode by him,
as it follows in the Text) notwithstanding the Lord stood with me and
strengthened me, that by me the preaching might be fully known, and that all
the Gentiles might hear: and I was delivered out of the mouth of the Lion;
that is, out of the danger of my deadly persecuters, even out of the danger of
Nero himself, by whose power so many had been destroyed. The Lord always
stands by his in time of affliction and trial, either to strengthen them in
it, or to strengthen them out of it, that is, to escape it; either to deliver
them from the danger of it, or to encourage them in the dangers of it.

Thirdly, The Lord puts strength into his people to mortify corruption, he
gives us not only power against, but power over our lusts. Fleshly lusts and
corruptions are strong, and if we have not strength from Christ to subdue and
conquer them, they will be too hard for us, and foil us. We are easily and
presently foiled, by pride, by covetousness, by wrath, by envy, all these
passions and lusts will trample us under their feet in the dirt of all
sinfullnesse and pollution both of flesh and spirit, unless we receive power
from on high to subdue and mortify them. ( Romans 8.13.) If ye through the
Spirit mortify the deeds of the body, ye shall live; that is, ye shall live
comfortably, holyly, and eternally. The deeds of the body, that is, sinful
deeds, and the root of them sinful lusts, count all weapons (as Leviathan
does spears and swords) but straw and stubble, rather to be laughed at then
feared, except only the weapons or power of the Spirit. And when once we take
our lusts to task with the weapons of the Spirit, they presently fall and dye
before us. The Spirit is the strength of God in us for the mortification of
Corruption.

Fourthly, We are strengthened, or God puts strength into us for the resisting
and conquering of the temptations of Satan; we meet with many assaults from the
devil, and from the world, who are confederate with our lusts. These we must
resist steadfast in the faith; and that not only in the faith as the faith
imports soundnes of doctrine or divine truth, but as The faith imports
dependence upon Christ for strength and assistance. Peter, being a chief, a
grandee in the train of Christ, or among the Disciples of Christ, was Satan's
eyesore, and the fayrer mark for his fiery darts; Satan's fingers itcht to be
doing with him, he (says our Savior) desired to have him that he might sift
him as wheat (Luke 22.31.) that is, to sift him thoroughly, not to fetch out his
chafe from him, but indeed to make him chafe. How was Peter upheld? I have
prayed for thee (says Christ) that thy faith fail not; that is, I have prayed
that God would put strength into thee, that thy faith fail not; if once faith
fail we are overcome. But is faith our strength? No; but faith goes to and
takes hold of him who is our strength, or who puts strength into us that we
fall not in temptation. But you will say, Peter fell, and he fell grievously,
his fall was great; he denied his Master. It Is true, Peter fell, but he did not
fall away, his faith did not fail, that is, it was not totally lost, and
therefore when Christ looked upon him, and by that look renewed his strength,
he gat up again: even when he denied Christ there was a seed of faith
remaining in him, though like a tree in the winter, his fruit was gone, yea and
his leaves too, and he looked dead and withered, yet there was sap in the
root; his faith failed not; whence was this? he had an invisible supply of
strength from God; I have prayed (says Christ) that thy faith fail not. The
prayer of Christ failed not, and therefore his faith did not; Christ prayed
that he might have strength by believing, and though he had not so much faith
as to preserve him standing, yet he had so much faith as to raise him from his
fall. And what Christ prayed for Peter, he prayed for all that should believe
on his name, that in all their resistings of, and contendings with temptation,
their faith also may not fail. As faith is one principal piece of our
spiritual armor whereby we overcome temptation, so it fetches in that which
is the whole of the whole Armor of God, even the strength of God. When the
Apostle exhorts Saints ( Ephesians. 6.11.) To put on the whole armor of God; He
premises another most needful exhortation, or exhorts them first ( v. 10.) to
be strong in the Lord, and in the power of his might; implying, that it is not
any one piece, no nor the whole armor of God abstractly or precisely taken,
which is our strength, but that the God of this Armor is our strength in the
spiritual combat. Though our loins were girt about with truth, and we have
on the breast plate of righteousness, though our feet were shod with the
preparation of the Gospel of peace, and we have the shield of faith in our
hand; though we should take the helmet of salvation, and the sword of the
Spirit which is the word of God, yet, if thus arrayed, it were possible for us
to neglect or forget the God of the Word, it were not possible for us to
conquer, the footmen, lesser, much less the horsemen, Greater, least of all,
The Charets of iron, the greatest temptations of the Prince of darkness. As no
carnal weapon has any thing at all to do, so no spiritual weapon can do any
thing at all in this war without the strength of God; or rather (to conclude
this point) all these spiritual weapons and Armor are nothing else but the
strength of God, or the various puttings forth of the strength of God in weak
man.

Fifthly and lastly, God gives us strength to pray to and plead our cause
before him; he will not dazzle us with his glory, nor confound us with his
Majesty when we come to plead with him, but he will put strength into us. In
prayer we prevail with God, but the strength whereby we prevail with God,
comes from God; yea he does not only give us strength in prayer to act by, but
he acts that strength in prayer. ( Romans 8.26.) Likewise the Spirit helps our
infirmities: for we know not what we should pray for as we ought, but the
Spirit it self makes intercession for us with groanings which cannot be
uttered. Prayer is strong work, it calls forth the whole strength of the soul,
nor does the soul in any thing show its strength more then in prayer; praying
is wrestling, and how can we wrestle without strength? Even the king of Ninevy
gave this direction at his fast ( Jon. 3.8.) Let them cry mightily. And our
Lord Jesus Christ in the days of his flesh offered up prayers and
supplications with strong crying and tears (Heb. 5.7.) Now, the Spirit is the
strength of God in us, for prayer: he helps our infirmities, and we are only
a bundle of infirmities without his help. There is a threefold strength
needful in prayer, and God by the Spir^t puts these three strengths into us.

First, The Spirit helps us with strength of argument to plead with God.

Secondly, The Spirit helps us with strength of faith in taking hold upon God.

Thirdly, The Spirit helps us with strength of patience in waiting upon God
till we receive what we have prayed for. Jacob by this threefold strength had
power with God in prayer (Hos. 12.3.) and it was the power or Spirit of God by
which he had this threefold strength to prevail with God. Thus we are
strengthened with might by the Spirit in the inner man (Ephesians. 3.16.) We are
strong to do, and strong to suffer, we are strong to mortify corruptions, and
strong to conquer temptations, we are strong to pray and strong to plead our
cause at the throane of Grace, when God puts strength into us. Job who had
received great strength from God in all the former cases, was assured that he
should receive strength also in the last, were he admitted to the seat of God.
Would he (there) plead against me with his great power? No, but he would put
strength in me, to plead with him. And as he was thus assured that God would
put strength into him to plead his cause, so also liberty and freedom to do
it; as appears more fully in the next verse.

Verse 7th. There the righteous might dispute with him; so should I be
delivered for ever from my Judge.
There; where? he means at the seat of God, as if he had said; Could I but
once come to the throne or seat of God, I should have free leave and liberty
enough to open and argue, to state and debate my case, my long controverted and
yet unresolved case with him. He would not plead against me with his great
power of Authority, but he would give me the power of liberty to dispute, and
reason out that matter with him. Several passages in the former part of this
Book, clearly hold out this sense. ( Chap. 9.34, 35.) Let him take his rod
away from me, and let not his fear terrify me; then would I speak and not
fear him, but it is not so with me; as yet God pleads against me with his
great power. Again, ( Chap. 13.21, 22.) Withdraw thy hand far from me, and
let not thy dread make me afraid (as if he had said, Plead not against me with
thy great power) then call thou and I will answer, or let me speak, and answer
thou me. Those Texts already opened are of the fame general scope and tendency
with this underhand; There (that is, All things being put into such a posture)
the righteous might dispute with him.

Some read the text in the first person; There, I, being righteous might
dispute with him. Others, thus; I should be found righteous if I did dispute
with him; As if he had said; I make no doubt of proving my self righteous or
innocent in this controversy with my friends; There I should not be found a
false-hearted hypocrite, God who knows both my thoughts and my ways, would
judge otherwise of me, then men have done.

We read the text indefinitely, not restraining it to his person, but as
taking in any that are righteous; The righteous, that is, any righteous man
might dispute with him there; his Court, his tribunal is free, and open for all
that are upright or righteous. In what sense the word righteous is used in this
Book has been opened more then once. In a word, the righteous man is not he
that is legally righteous, but righteous in a redeemer, or righteous as opposed
to an hypocrite. In both these senses, we may take the word here; The righteous
may dispute with him.

(...) est apud alium ita argumentari ut petas responsio nem qua vicissim si
quid erraveris redarguaris. Merc.
The word is properly applied to scholasticke exercises; where questions being
put, arguments are brought by the opponent, which the respondent takes away,
and the Moderator states between them both. This is the nature and manner of a
strict dispute. But in a large or vulgar sense, every discoursing and reasoning
about a doubtful point is called disputing. There the righteous may dispute
with him.

Hence note.

God is free, and ready to hear, the pleadings, and reasonings of those who
are upright and righteous. As the prayer of the upright is the delight of God,
so their modest and humble disputings are not displeasing to him. A righteous
man may plead with God freely, but he must not plead with God proudly, either
crying up and boasting in his own righteousness, or laying the least
imputation of unrighteousness upon the ways of God in dealing with him. The
righteous dispute with God, yet they know and keep their distance, and while
they do so, God is willing they should, and welcomes them when they do draw
nigh to him, disputing as well as praying. In opposition to which it is said (
Psalm. 5.5.) The foolish shall not stand in thy sight, thou hate all workers
of iniquity. The foolish, that is, the wicked man, the hypocrite with his
false-hearted and flattering tongue, are an abomination to God. The foolish man
that the Psalmist means, is not the man low in parts, but unsound in spirit.
This foolish man shall not stand in the sight of God, nor will God hear him
either disputing or praying, but reject him with his disputes and prayers. Thou
hate all the workers of iniquity, and to the wicked God says, what have thou
to do to declare my statutes, or that thou should take my Covenant in thy
mouth (Psalm. 50.16.) God will not endure it, that wicked men should speak of
him, much less will he endure, that a wicked man should dispute with him. God
will have nothing to do in way of arguing, and reasoning, either with a person
or with a people, while he or they continue in their sins. ( Isa. 1.15, 16.)
When ye spread forth your hands, I will hide my eyes from you; yea when ye make
many prayers, I will not hear; your hands are full of blood; that is, either
of bloody sins in special, as murder and oppression, or of sins in
general; for every sin is blood and bloody, every sin may be called blood: and
while the hands are full of blood in either sense, God will not hear, that is,
he will not graciously hear or accept so much as one of many prayers. But are
the wicked and their prayers and their disputings excluded for ever? while they
continue such, or to do such things they are; and therefore in the next words,
the Lord by his Prophet gives them this counsel; Wash ye, make ye clean, put
away the evil of your doings from before my eyes, cease to do evil, learn
to do well, seek judgment, relieve the oppressed, judge the fatherless,
plead for the widow; here is a description of a righteous person, righteous in
his way, upright with God and men; and with such God will speak, such may
dispute with him, as it follows ( v. 18.) Come now, and let us reason together.
We know (says the blind man after he was healed) ( Joh. 9.31.) that God
hears not sinners (that is, such as plead for or please themselves in any
sin) but if any man be a worshipper of God, and does his will, him he hears;
him he hears praying, and him he hears disputing. Whereas of the prayings
of the wicked he says, they are but mere bablings, and of their disputings,
they are but vain fanglings. If (says David, Ps. 66. 18.) I regard iniquity
in my heart, God will not hear me; God will not regard his prayers, therefore
not his disputes, who regards iniquity; but to the righteous and to such as
repent of and turn from their unrighteousness, the Lord says, Come let us
reason together, let us dispute the point; Though your sins be as scarlet,
they shall be as white as snow, though they be red like crimson, they shall be
as wool. Where take notice, by the way, that while God says, your sins which
were as skarlet shall be as white as snow, we are not to think that sin shall
ever change color, or be other then it is in the eyes of God: so that your sin
shall be as snow, is you sinners shall be so. It is a very hard thing, and next
to an impossibility to change the nature of a sinner, yea or the custom of a
sinner ( Jer. 13.23.) but it is altogether impossible to change the nature and
constitution, yea or the complexion and color of a sin, that looks ever red,
but the reddest sinner may turn white as snow. And when once the sinner is
turned white, God is ready to hear both his prayers, and disputes. God loves
to hear such penitents confessing their sin, unburdening their conscience,
pleading the promise. And he loves to hear the righteous holding out and
maintaining the righteousness of their ways (against all the clamours and
calumnies of men) before him. There the righteous may dispute with him.

Secondly, Note; The righteous are willing and have privilege to dispute or
argue their cause with God.

The righteous have access to God, and boldness with him in the blood of
Christ; So that they dare not only, first, tell him of their own wants, or
secondly, of their wrongs from others, or third-of their integrity, and the
uprightness of their hearts with him, and that he knows it is so, but fourthly
(which argues the greatest hight of holy boldness) they dare tell him of all the
sins which they have committed against him, and dispute with him for mercy as
their right upon the account of his own promise and covenant made with Christ
in their behalf, while respecting and reflecting upon themselves they can
justify God in condemning them for ever under wrath. Here is the right
Gospel-Logicke; These are the holy subtleties which the Spirit teaches; These
are none of the disputers of this world, whose wisdom (as the Apostle says, 1
Cor. 1.20.) God has made foolish and will destroy; but these are Divine
Disputants indeed, or disputers for another world, whose wisdom is of God, and
who are wise unto salvation. These righteous ones may dispute with him.

So should I be for ever delivered from my Judge. Job proceeds from the thesis
to the hypothesis, from the third person to the first; The righteous man pleads
with him, but he does not say, so should the righteous be delivered for ever
from his judge; but so shall I be delivered for ever from my judge; thus he
puts himself expressly into the number of the righteous or upright, and his
argument stands thus;

He that is righteous, or upright, may dispute and be acquitted or delivered
when he disputes with his Judge.

But I am righteous, or upright.

Therefore I shall be delivered from my judge when I dispute with him.

The Major proposition is laid down in the former part of this verse; The
Assumption in v. 11th, 12th. The conclusion appears in the latter part of this
7th verse, and in the 10th.

So should I be delivered for ever from my Judge; That is, L^berarer evaderem
semper a judice meo, i. e. absolverer, vitarem ejus con^emnationem. Merc:
Probata causa impetrarem ab eo liberationem. Jun.
I should escape the severity of his sentence. The Judge has him that comes
before him in hold, he has him in his hand or power when his case is pleading,
but when a man is acquitted, then he is delivered from his Judge, that is, from
the condemning sentence of his Judge, then he is pronounced free, or (as we
say) acquitted by Proclamation; no man may then meddle with him, or charge his
crime upon him. Job was assured that he should come off well at his trial, and
that there could be no bringing of the matter about again. I should be
delivered for ever; that is, I should never be questioned more, I should see an
end, or final dermination of my cause. Vindicabor ad victoriam vel eternitatem
utrum enim (...) significat. Hoc supremo judicem decidentes, a vobis iniquis
judicibus vestrisque suspicionibus quovis alio Aristarcho liberabor victor
totaliter. Scult.


The word which we translate for ever, signifies both victory, and eternity; I
should be delivered victoriously and eternally, or unto victory or eternity
from my Judge. The same word signifies victory and eternity in the Original,
because eternity gets the victory over all. Time is a great Conqueror, that
eats out all things here below, whose pedigree is from below; but eternity will
eat it out, and conquer time it self; eternity is the greatest Conqueror. For
ever is the saddest and sweetest word (upon different accounts) in the whole
Bible; to be condemned had not so much sadness in it, were it not for ever, and
to be justified, had not so much sweetness in it, were it not for ever. This
word for ever weighs most both in refence to mercy and to judgment. Job said
the utmost to his own comfort, when he said, I shall be delivered, or (as M.
Broughton translates) be quit for ever by my Judge.

There is yet a question concerning the Judge, or who the Judge is from whom he
should be delivered. Our reading seems to intend it of God himself. Others by
the Judge understand his friends or others who charged him so hardly. There is
yet a third opinion which supposes the Judge to be some third person, Judicem
intelligit apud quem ipse suam causam ageret adversus deum; facit enim deum
velut litigatorem; quasi coram tertio quodam judice causa disceptetur. Merc.
who should umpire the busienes between God and him. I rather conceive that by
his Judge he means God himself, to whose righteous and merciful tribunal he
appealed from the hard sentence and judgment of his friends. And who having
once declared his judgment, not only the censures but even the suspicions of
all men, whether friends or enemies, would be silenced for ever. And so lastly,
we may take the word Judge, which is here indefinitely proposed, universally.
As if he had said; when once God has had the hearing of my cause I shall not
need to fear any, what they can say, or do against me, in the capacity of a
Judge. So should I be delivered for ever from my Judge.

Hence observe; God will for ever acquit the righteous, nor shall any have
power to condemn those whom he has once acquitted.

There is no condemnation to them that are in Christ (Romans 8.1.) as much as to
say, such shall be for ever delivered from their judge. Who shall lay any thing
to the charge of Gods Elect? It is God who Justifies (Romans 8.33.) Though some
will presume to lay many and grievous things to the charge of Gods Elect, yet
God having Justified them, Hac ratione liber evaderem ab iniquis vitae meae
Judicibus and calumniatoribus, ut ultra mihi disceptatione and contentione opus
non erit.
all their charges shall be reprobated and rejected. God who has once
Justified a person, will never lay any thing to his charge, and what charge
soever others bring against him, Gods justification will take it off. The
Apostles challenge is universal, Who shall lay any thing etc? It is universal
two ways. First, in regard of persons accusing, he excepts none in earth,
heaven, or hell. Secondly, in regard of crimes, he excepts no sort of sin,
let them seek and find what they can, be they sins against God or man, be
they sins of omission or commission, be they sins never so much aggravated, or
sadly circumstantiated, though against both light and love, yet they will not
do against a person Elect and Justified. Who shall lay any thing to the charge
of Gods Elect? wipes away all charges. Accused they may be, though justified,
but condemned they cannot be, because justified. The best of Saints on earth
have much in them, and much is done by them, which might be matter of charge
against them (for he that says he has no sin in him, has indeed no truth in
him, 1 John 1.8.) but Justifying Grace is their full discharge.

Again, As the word Judge, is expounded universally, for all those that did or
might accuse Job.

Observe; The best and most righteous on earth, meet with many harsh accusers
and hard Judges.

David had those who laid to his charge things that he knew not ( Psalm. 35.11.)
The Jews returned from Babylon to build their City and Temple, were charged
with sedition; Jeremie was charged with treason; Paul was called, a pestilent
fellow; and the primitive Christians were generally loaded with slanders by
the Heathen. Misreport and reproach are the portion of Saints from the world.
And how sadly Job was charged all along by his friends, and how severely
censured, has appeared every where in this Book, especially in the former
Chapter ( ver. 5, 6, 7.) Is not thy wickedness great, and thine iniquities
infinite? for thou have taken a pledge from thy brother for naught, and
stripped the naked of their clothing etc. Had not Job reason to look upon it
as a great mercy to be delivered from such a Judge. And has not every Godly
man reason to make David's choice (2 Samuel 24.14.) Let me fall into the hand of
the Lord (for his mercies are great) and let me not fall into the hand of men.
Now as men are for the most part over-severe executioners of Gods sentence, so
they are usually over-severe Judges in giving their own whether sense or
sentence concerning others. And therefore Jobs faith did prophecy this good to
himself, That God having heard him, and judged him, he should be delivered for
ever from (man) his Judge. And let this be the comfort of the righteous who are
oppressed with the hard opinions of men, That, God will at last deliver them
for ever from every rigorous and unrighteous Judge. In that Great day (as the
Apostle Jude calls it) the cause of every righteous man shall be disputed
before God, and then they shall be delivered for ever from their Judge. And
this did exceedingly bear up the spirit of the Apostle Paul in the midst of
the various censures and judgments of men concerning him; he knew their
judgment should be taken off at last, (1 Cor. 4.3, 4.) With me it is a very
small thing that I should be judged of you, or of man's judgment, yea I judge
not my own self; But he that judges me is the Lord, therefore judge nothing
before the time till the Lord come, who both will bring to light the hidden
things of darkness, and make manifest the counsels of the hearts, and then
shall every man have praise of God; That is, every righteous man, though
dispraised, and despised, though judged and condemned by men, though blackt
over with false reports and reproaches, yet then every righteous man shall have
praise from the most righteous God. He will then do all his people right who
have been wronged, and pass a just sentence upon those who have suffered much
and long under unjust censures. And so shall they be for ever delivered from
their Judge.

JOB, CHAP. 23. Verse. 8, 9, 10. Behold I go forward but he is not there, and
backward but I cannot perceive him.

On the left hand where he does work, but I cannot behold him, he hides
himself on the right hand that I cannot see him.

But he knows the way that I take, when he has tried me, I shall come forth
as gold.


IN the two former verses, Job expressed much Confidence of a good issue in his
Cause, could he but find God and come to trial. And he renews this again
at the 10th verse, Expressing the same Confidence; When he has tried me I
shall come forth as gold. But though he was thus Confident of a fair coming
off in Case he could find God, yet he seems in these words to cast off all
Confidence of finding him; forasmuch as yet he could not, or had not.
Expressing himself here as a man that had traveled into all parts and
quarters of the world, East, West, North, and South, to find a friend, yet
could not meet with him. Behold I go forward but he is not there, and backward
but I cannot perceive him. On the left hand where he does work, but I cannot
behold him, he hides himself on the right hand that I cannot see him.

There is a threefold scope held forth about these words.

First, As if Job did here deplore his fruitles pains, in wishing for his
appearing before God, and in appealing to his Tribunal; for as yet he saw
himself unanswered and frustrated in his expectation; God did not appear to
him in his troubles, nor declare his purpose toward him. Declarat Job se non
posse ratione humana, per res naturales (quas per quatuor mundi plagas
significat) cognoscere certo and clare rations divinorum judiciorum. Pined.


Secondly, His scope may be to assert the hiddennes of the ways of God, or
that the ways of God are not to be found out, nor understood by all the pains
and industry, by all the endeavors and disquisitions of man; let him turn
himself which way he will, East or West, North or South, yet he must say, I
cannot behold him.

Thirdly, Some conceive that Jobs intent is to declare his own understanding
or meaning in that earnest wish which he lately made, Haec subjungit ad
declarandu^ dei immensita tem, ne quis putaret eum ex istimasse, deum corporeum
esse aut corporali loco circumscribi cum de illius tribunali loquutus est. Id:
about his admittance to the Throne of God; O that I knew where I might find
him, that I might come even to his seat (v. 3d) He was not so gross as to
think that God was Confined to any place, or that he had a Seat on which he
sat, as the Princes of the Earth have; and therefore he affirms, that God is
every where, and no where; that he is every where indeed, though he could not
find him appearing to him any where; as if he had said, I do not circumscribe
God in my apprehensions to this or that place; I enquire after him East, West,
North, and South, that is, all the world over, yet I miss of him and have not
attained my purpose to this hour; for he has not yet manifested himself unto
me. This seems to be the general scope of these three verses, which have two
things especially Considerable in them.

First, Jobs solicitous Complaint of the Lords hideing himself from him after
all his searchings.

Secondly, The Comfort which Job took in the Integrity of his own heart, and
in the clearnes of his Conscience, that if once he came to trial, all would be
well with him.

The 8th and 9th verses are all of one Importance, which I shall briefly open,
and then give some notes from them.

Verse. 8. Behold!
He speaks here as of some strange thing, that God who is every where, should
be no where found by him; I go forward, and backward, to the right hand, to
the left, and find him not.

Behold, I go forward. (...) aliquando temporis aliquando vero loci principium
and prioritatem significat.
The word is applied in Scripture to signify both a priority in time, and a
priority in place. Some Interpret it here of time, I look to the times which
were before, and now are past. In which sense the word is used (2 King. 19.25.)
Have thou not heard long ago? That is, have thou not heard of the times which
are forward, or which have been before. So ( Prove. 8.23.) Wisdom thus speaks,
I was set up from everlasting, from the beginning, ere ever the earth was. So
we translate it; the Hebrew is, I was set up from everlasting, from the head
of time, before the earth was. Christ was before the head of time, or the
beginning of time; we translate it here as referring to a place; Behold, I go
forward, that is, as some render, I go Eastward, or toward the East. The world
Considered in it self has neither forward nor backward, but man being
considered as setting himself to the Sunrising (for that is the natural
posture of man) then forward is Eastward, the Sun rises in the East. And then
backward is Westward. The left hand is the North, and the right hand is the
South; Such is the position of every man standing with his face to the East.
Thus here, Behold, I go forward, that is, to the East, or I go Eastward; for
a man may go forward, in a large sense, though he go to the North, or to the
South, toward East or West, which way soever he goes, he goes forward. But to
go forward, In Scriptura pars antica, Orientalis, postica occidentalis,
Australis dextra: Aquilonaris sinistra.
according to this strict notion is to go Eastward, not only because the
Jews and Arabians were wont to worship toward the East, but especially because
man does naturally turn himself toward the East, or the Sunrising. So the
word is used ( Genesis 2.8.) The Lord planted a garden Eastward in Eden, or
forward in Eden. Behold I go forward, but he is not there.

And not he, says the Original, that is, he is not to be found, Ante ibo,
and non ipse. Heb.
or he is not to be had; not that Job did think the Eastern part of the world
empty of God, for he was acquainted with the doctrine of Gods Omnipresence, he
knew that God is every where; but his meaning is only this, he does not
manifest himself to me, nor appear according to my appeal to him, that I
might argue my case, and reason my matters with him. I obtain no discovery of
God, but continue still in darkness and dissatisfaction; Behold I go forward,
but he is not there, And backward, but I cannot perceive him.

The same word in Scripture (as was noted of the word Forward) signifies that
which is behind both in time, and in place. (...) nunc ad tempus nunc ad locum
respectum habet.
It is applied to that which is behind in time ( Esa. 41.23.) where the Lord
Challenges the Idols to give a proof of their Deity, or that they were gods;
Show the things that are to come hereafter, or the things that are backward,
and behind in time, things that are to be done or to come to pass hereafter,
and we shall have some testimony of your Godhead, or that ye are Gods. And as
it signifies that which is behind in time, so that which is behind in place.
Thus we render it, I go backward, and then (according to the former notion,
forward being Eastward) backward is Westward. The Western parts of the world
are called the back parts of the world; not as some (grossly enough) give the
reason, because the west parts of the world are the worst parts of the world,
or were fit only to be cast behind the back and be forgotten, as a more
ignoble part of the world; but because according to the position of a man
looking toward the Sunrising which is Eastward, the West is backward, or upon
his back.

And backward, but I cannot perceive, or (as the Original word strictly bears)
understand him; That is, I cannot find any mark or print of Gods special
presence with me there. God is as much hidden or secrets himself from me as
much in the West, as in the East, both here and there my pursuits after him are
fruitless. I go backward, but I cannot perceive him, nor do I yet give over
my enquiry; For as it follows;

Verse. 9. I go on the left hand where he does work, but I cannot behold him.
These words are a description of the Northern part of the world, for that is
on the left hand, (as was said) according to the most natural position of man's
body. And he adds, where he does work; which addition gives a peculiar
character or description of the place, and is variously translated.

Quando operatur. Pagn. In faciendo ipsum. Pagn. Dum operatur. Vatabl. Vbi
facit opus suum. Isidor:
First, On the left hand when he does work. Secondly, On the left hand, in his
work, or working; thirdly, On the left hand while he works; we render, On
the left hand where he does work, or where he does his work. Here a question
is raised, why is this description given of the left hand, or of the Northern
part of the world? does not God work on the right hand, or in the South as
well as on the left hand, or in the North.

I answer; Though God works all the world over, yet God works in some parts
of the world in a more eminent manner. God works so in some places, as if he
did work no where else: All places are the work of God by Creation, and God
works in all places by his providence. The works of creation would run to
ruin, if God did not sustain, and as it were keep them in reparation by the
works of providence, yet as God works in some men, and by some men, more
then in, nnd by others, some persons are to him as his right hand, he calls
them forth to be greatly isntrumental to him. So he works in some places,
and nations, and by some places and nations more then he does in or by others.
God is a free Agent, he works where he will, and he pitcheth upon some
special places, and persons, (according to the pleasure of his own will) to
work in, and by, more then many others. And seeing according to this
Interpretation, The left hand where he is said to work so eminently, is the
North.

We may observe; First, That God works more in the Northern parts of the
world then he does in the South.

And the reason of this may be, because the Northern parts of the world are
more inhabited and peopled then the Southern are. And which may be a second
reason of it, The Inhabitants of the Northern parts of the world are more
civillized and better instructed then the Southern: Now the providence of God
are most remarkable where there are most people, and they best taught and
instructed, where the natural faculties of man are most raised and sublimated
by art and regular education, there or by them God does his greatest works;
those places are (as it were) the stages whereon he acts and brings to issue
the secret purposes and counsels of his heart, both in ways of judgment and
in ways of mercy.

Besides, we find that the Northern Nations have in all ages been the most
active and warlike.

The Fourth Monarchy, That of the Romans whose seat was more Northerly then
any of the former three, was the most active and warlike of the Four, and
extended its Dominion by extreme and unwearyed industry further then any had
done before. And those irruptions of enemies and Armies which gave the greatest
check to the Roman Greatness, and often plumed or pulled off the Feathers of
that mighty Eagle, were still made by those people who lived and were bred up
in climates more cold and Northerly then they; as all Historyes do with one
consent make good. Insomuch that it grew into a Famous Proverb; Omne malum ab
aquilone.
All evil comes from the North, that is, all troubles, invasions, and
devastations are brought upon the Nations by some hardy people or other coming
out of the North. And the holy Scriptures of the Prophets are full of this
observation ( Jer. 1.14, 15.) Then the Lord said unto me, out of the North an
evil shall break forth upon all the Inhabitants of the land. For lo I will
call all the familyes of the kingdom of the North, says the Lord, and they
shall come, and they shall set every one his throane at the entrance of the
gates of Jerusalem, etc. By The North in this prophecy, he means Chaldea and
Babylon, which are situate North from Jerusalem. And by all the familyes of
the kingdoms of the North, he means all the Northern parts under the
obedience of the King of Babylon, who should readily follow and serve him in
his wars against Judea. Again in the same Prophet ( Ch 4.6.) I will bring
evil out of the North (Chapter 6.1.) Evil appears out of the North (ver. 22) A
people comes forth from the North (Chap. 10.22.) Behold a great commotion out
of the North. And when the Lord promised to remove far away from his people the
Northern Army, (Joel 2.20.) he therein promised them the removal of all
Armies and troubles, because the North had most of all, if not alone troubled
and harrazed them with Armies. Again, In the North, the Gospel (which is the
highest teaching and instruction) has been more generally and more clearly
published then in the Southern parts of the world; so that in allusion to that
of the Prophet ( Isa. 30.26.) we may say, That the light of our Northern Moon
has been as the light of the Southern Sun, and that the light of our Sun has
been sevenfold to theirs, even as the light of seven days. And according to
the greatness of Gospel light, the dispensations, and changes, which we have
been under, have been very great; we especially in this Northern Nation, with
those adjoining to us and united with us under one Government, have had full
Experience of, and may therefore (giving glory to God) seal to the truth of
Jobs position; That God works on the left hand, or in the North. Have not we
found God working in the North? What changes, what variety of action have our
Northern parts both seen and felt? What wonders of mercy and salvation? what
terrible things in righteousness has God wrought of late among us? The heavens
and the earth, States of all sorts, The heavenly and the earthly, and of all
degrees, the higher and the lower have been terribly shaken in these Nations.
Providence has wrought to amazement in our days; The Nations round about have
heard the report of it, and wondered. Many have and will have cause to say of
us, what has God wrought! on the left hand, in our North, God has been at
work indeed!

Moreover, we find that Mount Sion (which was not only an eminent part of the
literal Jerusalem, but a figure also of the mystical Jerusalem, or whole
Church of God under the Gospel ( Heb. 12.22.) This Mount Sion (I say) is
Geographically described in our Northerly situation ( Psalm. 48.2, 3.
Beautiful for situation, the joy of the whole earth is Mount Sion; on the
sides of the North, the City of the Great King. God is known in her palaces
for a refuge. As if he had said, in Sion, on the sides of the North God works
wonderfully, as it follows expressly ( v. 4, 5.) for lo the kings were
assembled, they passed by together, they saw it and so they marveiled, they
were troubled and hasted away: that is, Kings conspiring against the Church
were so terrified with the evidences of Gods power working mightily there, that
they fled away, or as another Scripture phraseth it, They came one way and
returned seven. And in this form of speech is both the then Jerusalem, and the
Church ever since expressed, in that boast which the king of Babylon (who was a
type of all the enemies of the Church clothed with mighty power and
sovereignty) makes against her, ( Isa. 14.13.) I will sit also (that is, erect
my throane) upon the Mount of the Congregation on the sides of the North. Mount
Sion was called the Mount of the Congregation, because there the people of God
the Jews were famously known to congregate often together, and this (says
that proud boaster) on the sides of the North. And to complete this notion of
the workings of God in and from the North, Christ himself is said to be raised
out of the North; For so some expound that Scripture ( Isa. 41.25.) I have
raised up one out of the North, and he shall come, from the rising of the Sun
shall ^e call upon my name, etc. This prophecy (I say) some expound of Christ,
who shall gather his dispersed and despised ones from all quarters of the
world. The greatest works of God that ever were done, Christ did them; and
therefore the North, may justly be called the place where he works, seeing he
raised Christ from thence.

Secondly, As the words are read thus; On the left hand while he works; as
if Job had said, I look after God on the left hand, or in the North, even in
the time while he is working, or doing great things, and yet I cannot behold
him.

Observe; That God may be, and often is, working great things, and we not able
to apprehend or behold him at his work.

The invisible thengs of God, even his eternal power and Godhead are seen in
the things that are made, and that not only in the things that he made while
he created the world, but also in the things which he makes while he governes
the world, and yet himself is not seen in making them; and that not only
because he is invisible in his nature, but because (which is the point in hand)
the manner of his working is invisible. In some things God works so evidently,
that the natural man cannot but say, The finger of God is here. But in other
things he works so secretly, that the spiritual man is not able to see where
the finger of God is, unless upon that general acknowledgement that the finger
of God is every where. Solomon (Prove. 30.18.) says, There be three things
which are too wonderful for me; yea, four which I know not; the way of an
Eagle in the air, the way of a Serpent upon a rock, and the way of a Ship in
the midst of the Sea; even such are the motions of God, the ways and workings
of God among the sons of men; A ship in the Sea leaves no track, no path, you
cannot see where the Ship has sailed; The ship plowes the Ocean, but the
furrows are unseene as soon as made. A Serpent upon a rock, makes no dint,
leaves no footsteps behind him; the flying Eagle parts the air, but there is
no discerning where she has past.

And thus Job seems to speak here; Though I goo to the North while God
works, yet I can see no more of him, then of the way of an Eagle in the air,
or of a Serpent upon a rock, or of a Ship in the Sea, I cannot behold him while
he works, nor the way of his working. And further, He hides himself on the
right hand that I cannot see him.

(...) cooperire, involvere seu occultare significat. Quasi deus meridionali
part velut operimento sese circumtegat. (...) est mare at (...) dextra unde
etiam meridies dicitur (...) Theman Nomini Ja^in pra^^sitio Thau. Exo. 26.18.
unde Theman si appellative sumatur dextrum Australe sive meridionale significat
si autem proprie est no^men regionis Australis. Hieron.
The word which we render hides, signifies, to wrap up with a covering,
implying that God does cover himself from the eye of man, in or with the right
hand part of the world. Some render it thus; He hides his right hand, or his
working hand, that I cannot see him. We render it well, he hides himself on
the right hand that I cannot see him. The right hand, is put in opposition to
the left, mentioned in the former part of the verse. There, in the South, God
does (as it were) purposely and artificially hide, and cast a veil over
himself (says Job) lest I should see him there, he keeps himself yet more
out of my view and reach then elsewhere. The word which we translate, the right
hand, signifies the Southern parts of the world (Cant. 4.16.) Awake O
Northwinde, and come thou South, blow upon my Garden. (Exodus 26.18.) On the
South (or right) side Southward. The word is also rendered, the right side, (2 Samuel 24.5.) On the right side of the City. Further the word signifies, as the
right hand, so also strength, because the right hand is strongest in most men
and readyest for use. And so he hides himself on the right hand may import (as
was touched before) that God hides himself even there, where he puts forth his
strength and power.

From all these expositions laid together, in that Job here says, he went
forward and backward, or East and West, on the right hand, and on the left, or
North and South (from all I say) it appears that Job was a great traveller,
that he traveled all the world over; yet where was Job when he spoke all this?
Was he not upon his bed? was he not Gods Prisoner, shut up in his Chamber, when
he said, I go forward and backward, Northward and Southward, and yet I find
him not, perceive him not, see him not.

Hence learn.

First, That God is every where.

Job knew there was a presence of God forward and backward, Northward and
Southward, He knew that God fills heaven and earth with his presence. There is
a presence of God from which the worst of men cannot go, and there is a
presence of God into which, many times, the best of men cannot get; there was a
presence of God out of which Job could not get, while (according to his
desires) he could not get into the presence of God.

Secondly, From those various negatives here used, I cannot perceive him, I
cannot behold him, I cannot see him.

Observe; God is a spirit, not visible at all in himself, and he only
appears, as and to whom himself pleases to appear to and among men.

The appearances of God are not natural but voluntary, when his will is to be
seen he gives man the privilege to see him. It is altogether impossible to
see him with a bodily eye, (1 Timothy 6.16.) God only has Immortality, dwelling
in the light that no man can approach unto, whom no man has seen, nor can see,
that is, with bodily eyes, and as it is impossible to see him at any time with
an eye of sense, so he will not always be seen by the eye of our
understanding, no nor always by the eye of faith. Faith shall hereafter be
perfected in the vision of God, but here faith is sometime quite deprived of
the vision of God, He hides himself from the house of Jacob. Faith is opposed
to all bodily sight (2 Cor. 5.7.) We walk by faith not by sight; and faith
has not always a spiritual sight. It is said ( Heb. 11.27.) that Moses saw
him that is Invisible, he saw him with a spiritual eye, the eye of faith; we
have reason to believe, that Job at that time, saw God with an eye of faith,
but he saw him not with an eye of understanding, to discern the way of his
working with him. They who are most spiritual and of the largest understanding
in spiritualls, can no more comprehend God then a cockle-shel can contain the
Ocean; and many who are spiritual, are so dark in their understandings, or
God is so dark to their understandings, that they cannot so much as apprehend
or discern him, see or perceive him.

Thirdly, When Job says, God hides himself on the right hand, or in the
South, so that I cannot see him.

This teaches us; That God does sometimes purposely withdraw and reserve
himself from his most precious servants.

The Propher has a strange description of God ( Isa. 45.15.) Verily thou art a
God that hidest thy self (as if he had said) it is thy use and custom to do
so) O God of Israel the Savior; he was the God and Savior of Israel, yet
Israel could not see him, for he hid himself; When God will conceal himself,
his Israel cannot see him. And hence we find in Scripture so many earnest
Deprecations, that God would not hide himself, and so many vehement
Expostulations when he did. Wherefore hidest thou thy face (says the Church,
Psalm. 44.24.) and forgettest our affliction and oppression? God hides himself
five ways, or in five things from his people.

First, He hides his favor and the light of his Countenance from his people.
And (when this is hid God is hid) he will not let them see the love which he
has in his heart toward them, yea (possibly) he lets them see anger, wrath,
displeasure; he puts on the habit of an enemy, and deals with them as with
enemies. Job complains more then once that God hid his favor from him, and
showed him nothing but his dread and terror.

Secondly, God hides his works from his people, he will not let them be seen,
nor be seen in them; O how unsearchable are thy Judgments, and thy ways past
finding out! God has ways and Judgments which man cannot reach unto. Some of
his works are acted (as we say) above board, they are done in a clear light,
he that runs may see and read them, and God in them; he that runs may read
love written upon some of them in letters of Gold, or with beams of light. And
he that runs may read wrath written upon others of them in letters of blood, or
with streams of darkness, and the very shadows of death; but some works of
God are so curtaynd about and veiled, so hidden and obscured, that we cannot
perceive them. Though all the works of God are works of light, yet many of them
are in the dark to man; While judgment and righteousness are the habitation
of Gods Throne, clouds and darkness are round about him, (Psalm. 97.2.)

Thirdly, God hides the reason of his working. His works are often hid, but
the reason of his working is oftener hid. Jeremy complains, Why does the way
of the wicked prosper? He would know a reason of it; he saw that God let the
wicked prosper, but the reason he saw not.

Fourthly, The design, or end of the work of God is a hidden thing; as God
does not let men see the reason why he does this or that, so not his aim, and
end, what he would have, or what he drives at in doing it. When God afflicts a
Godly man, whether it be for the trial of his graces, or to chasten him for his
failings, or for the purging out of his corruptions, is often his doubt: and as
it is thus in personal workings, so also in public workings; Whether God has
to do with a Nation, or with a man only, he has his secrets.

Fifthly, As God hides what himself does, so he hides from us what he would
have us do, he hides his own will from us in some things; we have indeed his
Letters Patents, his proclaimed laws before us in all things needful to
salvation; but there are some things which concern particular actings in our
lives, wherein a godly man may be very ignorant of the will of God, and much
puzzled in his Spirit what to do, whether this or that be the course which God
would have him take. God hides himself from us in the hidings of his will from
us. For as when the Apostle says ( Ephesians. 4.20.) Ye have not so learned
Christ, we are not to understand Christ personally, but Christ according to
the Revelation of himself in the Gospel, Christ there is the will or mind of
Christ; so when God hides himself from or does not discover himself to us,
the meaning may be this; he does not discover his mind and will to us, what
he would have us do, as to our particular case and condition. God keeps some
long in suspense, long in the dark about this point; so that they often cry
out with that good King in his dangerous strait, We know not what to do, but
our eyes are toward thee. (2 Chronicles. 20.12.) Many a man is in as great a strait
what to do in regard of the darkness of his condition, as Jehosaphat was, in
regard of the dangerousnesse of it.

Fourthly, Note; That, a Gracious soul uses all means to attain what he
desires, especially to find out the mind and will of God in his workings.

What else is the meaning of all this? why else went Job forward and backward?
why went he on the right hand, and on the left? why did he thus traverse his
ground, and represent himself in these busy enquiries after God, traveling
in the multitude of his thoughts upon his bed from sea to sea, and from the
river to the ends of the earth, leaving no stone unturned (as we say) nor path
untrodden, that he might get his cause determined, and his heart settled.
Obadiah tells Eliah after he had met him (see how industrious the malice of
Ahab, against that holy man, made him to to find him out whom his soul hated,
1 King. 18.10.) As the Lord thy God lives, there is no nation or kingdom
whether my Lord has not sent to seek thee etc. Not that Ahab had sent
Messengers into every quarter of the world, but the meaning is, that he had
been very diligent and industrious to find out Elijah. And so says Job, there
is not any Corner under heaven, where I have not been seeking to find him whom
my soul loves and longs for. Thereby importing his exceeding diligence to
find God. They who have a desire after God indeed, will take pains for him,
they will seek him, East, West, North, and South, and never complain of the
length of their journey. They will not stay till God comes home to their doors,
but out they will go to seek him. For though it be a truth that no man can seek
or look after God, till God has first looked after and found him, yet they
whom God has once found, have such an impression left upon their hearts, that
when God seems to leave them, and to be as lost to them, they will more then
seem to look after and seek him while he is absent from them; that is, while
he hides himself from them. Surely God has never touched the hearts of those
lazy professors that would feign be saved, but will go neither forward nor
backward, neither North nor South after Jesus Christ; whereas if their desires
were true and genuine, they would use all means, go all due ways, leave
nothing unassayed that might probably bring them to the knowledge and enjoyment
of him; O how busy was Job's spirit to find out God? And so busy should our
spirits be to find him out, both for comfort and for counsel in all the
turnings of our lives.

Lastly, Observe; That after the use of much means to find God, yet possibly
God may not be found by us as to our apprehension.

Job spared no pains to find out God, and yet he could not speed at that
time, after all his search he found him not, he perceived him not, he did not
behold him; you may pray, and seek, and advise, and wait, follow this means
and that means to find out God, or to recover the sense of his gracious
presence with your souls, and yet (for a long time) miss of him. This is one
of the exercises which God is pleased to put his people to, he therefore hides
that we may seek him; he does not hide himself because he will not be found,
but he hides himself because he will be sought; and yet when he is sought, and
sought in a right way too, he will not presently be found. For though none that
seek him in sincerity, but shall find him at last ( He has not said to the
seed of Jacob, seek ye my face in vain; that is, seek me and never find
me, the Scripture speaks no such thing) nor did Job always seek and not
find; yet, as he in his time, so we in ours may seek him long and not find
him, and yet still we must continue seeking, because God hides himself that we
may seek him more, not that he would have us give over seeking. And therefore
in times of desertion, in hideing, and withdrawing times, do not give over
seeking; for the reason why God does withdraw, is, that we may seek him more,
and follow harder after him; that we may seek him (as Job did) East, West,
North, and South; that is, in all means, duties, ordinances, he will not
always hide himself; that is the sum and scope of the 8th and 9th verses.

Verse. 10. But he knows the way that I take, when he has tried me I shall
come forth as gold.
Connecto hunc versum cum 70. obtinerem a judice nam is novit. Est igitur
aetiologia spei; caetera autem quasi per parenthesin interseruntur illo loco.
Coc:
Job could not find the ways of God, well (says he) though I cannot find
out Gods ways, yet God has found out my ways; though he is pleased to veil
his own ways, yet mine are open, He hides himself from me, but I am not hid
from him. He knows the way that I take.

Further, In this verse Job seems to give a reason of his hope to speed well
at the seat or throane of God whether he had appealed ( v. 3.7.) As if he had
said, Seeing my heart tells me, my way is good, and my Judge knows it to be so,
how can it be but that my judgment from him should be Good? He knows the way
that I take.

Quamvis illum non possit homo perspicere, a^ ille perspectas habet omnium
mortalium actiones.
To know, may be taken here two ways; first, as an act of the Understanding
only, he knows, that is, he fully perceives and apprehends what my way
is.

Secondly, As it takes in an act of the affection too, He knows, that is, he
approves the way that I take; my way is pleasing to him. When God is said to
know the way of the righteous (Ps. 1.6.) the meaning of it is, he is
wel-pleased with their way, and will prosper them in it, they shall have good
success in what they go about.

Again, whereas we translate, He knows the way that I take, that is, my
course of life, or conversation among men. The Hebrew is, He knows the way
that is in me, he does not only know my outward way, or the way that is
without me, but he knows my inward way, the way that is within me. We have
a way within us, and that is the way of our thoughts, and we have a way without
us, and that is the way of our works. He (says Job) knows the way that is
in me, therefore much more the way without me, he knows me through and
through; As if he had said, what though I cannot find him, yet I will leave my
cause with him; for he needs no information of mine, to lead him into the
understanding of it; He himself knows all things by himself; He knows the
way that I take, or that is in me.

There are three things which Job might aim at in this sentence.

First, an account why he was sure of a right judgment from God, because he
was not only a Judge, but an eyewitness of all the ways that he had ever
gone.

Secondly, A confutation of his friends opinion of him, as if he were a man
that did not fear God; whereas he did acknowledge that both himself and all
his ways were visible and manifest unto God.

Thirdly, A strong assertion of his own innocence, seeing he could speak thus
rejoycingly, that God knew all his ways.

Hence observe; First, The way of man, even his most secret way, or the way
within him, is known to God.

God wraps up himself often in the darkness of secrecy as to man, but man is
never in that darkness as to God; the very children of darkness, and the ways of
darkness are in the light to him. And as the ways of evil men, and the evil
of their ways, so the ways of good men, and the goodness of their ways, are
known to God. We need not fear that the good we do or have done (though no
eye of man see it) shall be lost in the dark. We scarce know our own ways,
and we cannot know our own hearts, but God does. ( Jerem. 17.9.) The heart of
man is deceitful above all things, and desperately wicked, who can know it? No
man can know all the ways of his heart; he cannot come to the bottom of his
own heart, though he may know the bent of it; but (says God) I search the
heart; much of our heart is a secret to our selves, but to God nothing of it
is; he knows our inside fully. As he knows our actions, so the grounds upon
which we act, and the ends for which we act, and the heart with which we act;
thus God knows the way that every man takes. And thus none but God can know
the ways of man. We can trade no farther then upon the borders of men's ways,
their outward acts, as for the spirit and principle of them, whence they flow,
as for the aims and ends of them, whether they are flowing, with these God
alone is intimate. And with these God is more intimate then man can be with
that which is wholly outward.

And seeing God knows all the ways which man takes; let no man go about to
hide his ways from God; It Is vain to hide any thing from him, who sees all
that is hidden. He that comes before a Judge that knows what he has done, and
is able to prove it, why should he deny it? The heart of a natural man is not
more busied about any thing then in making veiles for his sin; the first thing
that man did after he had sinned was, to make such a veil. As all men have
sinned after the similitude of Adams transgression, so they cover their
transgressions according to the similitude of his covering. The Holy Ghost (
Psalm. 32.1.) calls them blessed whose sins are covered, but it is with a
covering of Gods provideing, not of their own; woe to those whose sins are
hid by a covering of their own provideing; God has given us his Son our Lord
Jesus Christ in his righteousness, for our covering; while our sins are so
covered blessed are we, but if we cover them with a covering of our own, God
will lay them open for ever to our shame. Woe to the rebellious children, says
the Lord, (Isa. 30.1.) that take counsel but not of me, and that cover with a
covering, but not of my Spirit, that they may add sin unto sin; if we cover
our sins with any thing but the righteousness of Christ, we cover them with a
sin, not only because all our righteousness (which is the best thing of our
own that we have to cover them with) is sinful, but because the very act of
covering them so is a sin; and therefore in so doing, what do we but add sin
unto sin? And if to cover our sins with our own righteousness be a sin, how
do we heap sin upon sin while we cover it (as many endeavor to do) with our
denyalls, dissemblings and excuses?

Secondly, Consider with what Confidence Job speaks; he had discoursed of his
fruitles labor and travel in the use of all means to find God; well (says
he) yet it is a Comfort that God knows my ways, though I cannot find out his.

Hence Note.

It is the Joy of the upright, that God knows them and their ways, yea the
ways that are in them. Thus Jeremy (Chap. 12.3.) having complained of the
prosperity of evil men before the Lord, concludes, But thou O Lord know
me, thou have seen me and tried my heart toward thee; this was the Prophets
joy, and so it was the Apostles, when he said; But we are made manifest unto
God (2 Cor. 5.11.) That Is the thing that pleases us. David (1 Chronicles. 29.17.)
speaks in the same frame of spiritual contentment; I know also o my God that
thou tryest my heart, and have pleasure in uprightnes; This was a pleasure to
David, this was his Joy and crown of Rejoicing, that God knew him; and a godly
man has much Cause of rejoicing in this, that God knows him perfectly,
considering how much he is mistaken and misunderstood by men. When our ways
are mistaken by men, it is great content to remember, that God knows the way
that we take without the least mistake. For this assures a godly man of three
things.

First, That God will reckon his ways such as they are, and him such a one as
he is. He is much assured that God will never put a false gloss, or an unjust
construction (which men are apt to do) upon the text of his life.

Secondly, This assures him that his works of righteousness shall not want a
reward; for God is not unrighteous to forget our work and labor of love (Heb.
6.10.) that is, he will not let us go without a reward for such works; for as
then we are said not to forget the word of God, when we obey it; so God is said
not to forget our works when he does reward them.

Thirdly, This assures him that God will give testimony to his integrity, and
bear his witness (when most seasonable) to his righteous works. Though men
will not give him Testimony, yet God who knows his ways will; God will not
do less for a good man then a good Conscience will; For as an evil
Conscience will accuse, so a good Conscience will excuse. ( Romans 2.15.) Their
Consciences in the mean time accusing or excusing one another. Conscience
knows our ways, and therefore Conscience gives Testimony against them that
do evil, and Conscience will give Testimony with those that do well: let all
the world clamor against them, Conscience will not, because Conscience knows
the way that a man takes. Much more then will God Testify for that man whose
way is good; and how sweet is this! It Is sweet and satisfying to a gracious
soul to do good, but when God himself shall testify for a gracious soul,
that he has done good, this is much more sweet and satisfying. (1 John 3.20,
21.) If our heart (or Conscience) condemn us, he is greater then our heart (or
Conscience) and knows all things. Beloved, if our heart condemn us not, then
have we confidence toward God: even this confidence, that God will not only
not condemn us, but acquit us, yea and testify for us; And as it is worse to
be condemned by God then by Conscience, so it is better and sweete^ to be
acquitted by God then by our own Conscience, when once our Consciences are
acquainted with his acquittall of us and testimony for us. Yea, there is this
further Comfort in it, that for as much as our ways are known to God, he will
give testimony of them to others, as well as to our own Consciences. The world
shall know what our ways are one time or other, as well as God knows them
now: they who are most prejudiced against them, and draw the blackest lines
over them, shall one day be made to know, that they did not know the beauty of
them. And this God will do; either

First, In this world by some extraordinary providence; as David speaks (
Psalm. 37.6.) He shall bring forth thy righteousness as the light, and thy
judgment as the noon day. A man's righteousness may lie in obscurity, or in
the dark, no man knowing it, and most men judging him unrighteous, and wicked,
but Providence some time or other will bring forth this man's righteousness as
the light, and his just dealing as the noon day.

Or, Secondly, If a good man's ways lie hid from the world all the days of his
life in this world, yet the Apostle assures him, that in the great day God will
proclaim them in the ears of all the world. (1 Cor. 4.5.) Judge nothing
before the time, till the Lord come, who will both bring to light the hidden
things of darkness, and will make manifest the Councels of the heart. So then a
day is coming which will make thorough lights in the world, and bring to light
the most hidden things of the darkest darkness. And by these hidden things of
darkness, and Counsels of the heart, we are to understand not only evil
things, and wicked counsels (sure enough God will bring them to light) but even
those righteous things, and good Councels of the heart, which have layne in the
dark, or unrevealed: God will bring to light all the hidden things of darkness,
the good as well as the bad, and then shall every man, that is, every good man,
every godly man, have praise of God. The praise of man is very pleasing unto
man, but O how unspeakeably pleasing is the praise of God! And this opens a
vast difference, between the hypocrite and the sincere; Can a hypocrite rejoice
in secret, saying thus; God knows the way that I take? He cannot say thus;
and I may say three things of the hypocrite in opposition to this.

First, The hypocrite endeavors to hide and put his ways out of the sight of
God, as much as he can; As he has not the light of Gods countenance, or of his
favor shining upon him, so he desires not to have the light of his knowledge
shining into him. ( Isa. 29.15.) the Prophet describes some seeking deep to
hide their Councels from the Lord, and their works are in the dark (both in
natural and moral darkness) and they say, who sees us, and who knows us? The
endeavor of the hypocrite is that he may be hid. And

Secondly, He cries alls hid; as it is his endeavor, that God should not, so
it is his hope that God does not know his ways, much less his heart; He is
often sure that men do neither see nor know, and he always presumes that God
does not; and therefore as one out of doubt he puts his doubts, who sees? and
who knows? Though flashes of fear come in upon him, sometimes, yet he
flatters himself with presumptious hopes and false persuasions, that God
knows him not, sees him not, and that his dark way shall never be discovered;
and as in that place of the Prophet, they speak indefinitely, thereby
inferring that God does not see them; so we have them in the Psalm speaking
directly that God shall not. ( Psalm. 94.5, 6, 7.) They break in pieces thy
people O Lord, and slay the widow and stranger, and murder the fatherles; yet
they say, the Lord shall not see, neither shall the God of Jacob regard it; As
if they had said, though God should set himself to search us out, and would
never so feign see what we are doing, yet he shall not. We will carry it so
closely and cunningly, that the eye of God shall not reach us. Their works
were so foul and bloody, that the Sun might be ashamed to look upon them,
and they were so close that they believed God could not look upon them, or
bring them to shame for them.

Thirdly, It Is a terror to an hypocrite to remember, that God knows his
ways. That which Job says of the wicked in general, is most proper to
hypocrites ( Chap. 24.17.) The morning is to them even as the shadow of death;
if one know them, they are in the terrors of the shadow of death. The Hebrew
is very concise, if know; we make up the sense thus, if one know them, that is,
if God or man know them and their ways, if they be apprehended and discovered,
any way, in their abominable ways, they are in the terrors of the shadow of
death; that is, they are ready to dye with the fright and terror of it.
Hypocrites are so far from rejoicing in this, that God knows the way which
they take, that to be known either of God or man is their torment.

Thirdly, Consider why does Job appeal to God in this Cause depending between
him and his friends? The reason was, because he knew his friends mis-judged him
through their ignorance; Therefore he desiered to be heard by a Judge, that
perfectly knew his ways, and so was able to make a righteous judgment of him.

Hence Observe; God is every way fitted to be a righteous Judge.

There are two things especially that fit a man, to be a Judge.

First, That he has a principle of righteousness in him, that he be not biased
and turned aside from doing right indifferently without respect of persons.

Secondly, That he has a principle of light in him, that he be (as Jethro
advises Moses) a man of knowledge. Both these meet perfectly in God; He is
just and righteous in all his ways, and he knows all our ways. Some Earthly
Judges err for want of a Principle of righteousness; and so in things which
they plainly know and see as clear as the light, are ready to be drawn and
wrought off by respects and interests. Again, there are other Earthly Judges,
who are right and honest enough in their Principles, nothing can take them off,
or mislead them to the right hand or to the left, but they want knowledge and
understanding to discern between good and evil, right and wrong, they cannot
see into the merit of the Cause, or the integrity of the person before them,
and thereupon stumble in Judgment. Indeed the best of Earthly Judges cannot
always (when they have done their best) find out who has the good Cause, and
who has the bad; and many times they that plead blind them with their
Rhetoric, setting a fair gloss upon a foul Cause, or making a fair Cause
look foul, and so the Judge is deluded; seeing he judges of things as
witnessed and represented, as alleged and legally proved, and so it may fall
out that while he judges righteously, his judgment may not be right. But we
(as Job here) have cause to rejoice that we have to do with a Judge, who as he
is both righteous and knowing, so he knows all things and persons in
themselves, and not from others. He needs not that any should testify of man,
for he knows what is in man (Joh. 2.25.) He knows the way that is in me, or
the way that I take: and as it follows; When he has tried me I shall come
forth as gold.

Mr. Broughton reads thus; Tried he me I should come forth Gold; that is, if
God (as I desire) would vouchsafe to try me, I should appear what I am indeed,
not what I now appear.

When he has tried me. There are diverse ways of trial, three especially;
God tryes, first, by prosperity, that is a trial; a full estate discovers a
man, as well as a low and empty estate does. To know how to abound is as high a
point of grace as how to want ( Phil. 4.12.) to have power in our hands,
discovers us as well as to be oppressed by power. Magistracy shows the man, and
it shows many to be but men. Magistratus indicat virum.
Great power over men is a great temptation to man, and so likewise is the
praise of men. (2 Cor. 6.4.) But in all things approving our selves as the
Ministers of God in much patience, in afflictions, in necessities, in
distresses, etc. and by what else? by the Armor of righteousness on the right
hand, and on the left, by honor and dishonor, by evil report and good
report. We approve our selves, and trial is taken of us as well by things on
the right hand, as by those upon the left, as well by honor, as by dishonor.
The good report or praise which a man meets with in the world is as great a
trial as the ill report or dispraise which he meets with in the world; it is a
great trial to be dispraised, to have dirt thrown in our faces, and it is a
great trial to be praised, to be commended, and applauded, to be lifted up in
the thoughts and upon the tongues of men. Solomon has an excellent passage (
Prove. 27.21.) As the fineing pot for silver, and the furnace for gold, so is a
man to his praise; that is, a man is tried by his praise, as the silver is
tried in the fineing pot, and as the gold is tried in the furnace. Whenever you
are praised, you are tried; Then your humility and selfe-denyall are tried;
Then you are tried whether when you are praised by men, you can give the whole
glory to God. Herod's praise was the fineing pot, and the furnace wherein he was
tried, it made him appear to be but dross indeed. His hearers Cried the voice
of God and not of man; When you cry up such a Preacher, such a Magistrate, such
a Soldier, such an Orator, you put him into the fineing pot, and he that is
but dross consumes. The worms eat up Herod, because he gave not Glory to God
(Act. 12.23.) As it was a most dreadful, so it was a most righteous judgment,
that he should be eaten up of worms, who forgot that he was one, and forgot it
so far that he was pleased with their applauses, who cried him up for a God.
Worldly prosperity, power and praise are the right hand, way, by which God
tries the sons of men.

Secondly, God does usually try by affliction, and that is the left hand way.
(James 1 12.) Blessed is the man that endures temptation (meaning affliction)
for when he is tried he shall receive the crown of life, etc. That is, when
those temptations and afflictions have tried him, and he has approved himself
in the trial; then, he shall receive the crown of life, etc. (1 Pet. 1.6.)
Though now for a season (if need be) ye are in heavines through manifold
temptations, that the trial of your faith being much more precious then of gold
that perishes, Cos aurum probat rectam tentamina mentem. Natura vexata p^edit
seipsam.
though it be tried with fire, might be found to praise, etc. Affliction is the
trial of our faith in God, and of our patience under the hand of God. When
nature is vexed it shows it self, and so does grace. Affliction discovers
both what our virtues and what our corruptions are.

Thirdly, God tries man by a kind of examination; David speaks of that (
Psalm. 17.3.) Thou have proved mine heart, thou have visited me in the night,
thou have tried me and shall find nothing. In the night the soul is free
from business with the world, and therefore freest for business with God, and
then did God prove and visit David, that is, examine and sift him, by calling
to his mind all his ways and works in former passages; And the issue of this
trial was, he found nothing, not that his soul was empty of good things, or
that there was nothing evil in him, but God upon examination found nothing of
that evil in him, which some men suspected him of, Namely, either any ill will
or evil design against Saul, in reference to whom he called his cause a
righteous cause, or the right (ver. 1.) Hear the right, O Lord, etc. Thus God
tried David; And thus earthly Judges try men; They examine them, and their
case, that is called a trial; in this third sense we are chiefly to understand
the meaning of Job in this place. Job had long before undergone a trial by
prosperity and praise, Job was at that time under trial by affliction, he had
past the former and was under the latter, yea, he was deep in it, Intelligitur
de stricto dei examine in suo judicio ad quod Job provocaverat. Merc:
but as yet he had not come to this trial of Examination, or to a judiciary
trial, which he earnestly beggd of God. All men shall come to such a trial
in the Great day. We must all appear before the Judgment seat of Christ,
that every one may receive the thingt done in his body, accordeng to that he
has done, whether it be good or bad (2 Cor. 5.10.) Some expound Job appealing
here to that Judgment. But I conceive that the whole tendency of his discourse
aims at an earlyer Judgment or day of trial then that. And though (possibly)
his expectation was not great, if any at all, that God would grant him a
private Session (as we may call it) for his personal trial, yet (to show that
he had not the least suspicion of being acquitted in that day whenever it
should be, he importunately professes he could wish it might be the next day,
and that he would refuse no pains nor travel, for the procuring of such a
day, were it to be obtained; being fully satisfied from the light and dictates
of his own Conscience, that when the Lord had so tried him, he (as David spoke
in the place lately opened) should find nothing, no such fault or guilt as was
charged upon him. Christ writing to the Angel of the Church of Ephesus, gives
him this among other commendations, ( Rev. 2.2.) Thou have tried them which say
they are Apostles and are not, and have found them liars. Many appear fair in
holiness, and boast highly of their privileges, (even as high as an infallible
Spirit and immediate mission) who yet being tried and thoroughly examined by the
Church, or by those who are spiritual, and have senses exercised to discern
both good and evil, will be found liars, counterfeit stuff, and lighter then
vanity. But Job was persuaded that though God should try him, not only should
nothing be found against him, nor he found a liar, but that much would be found
for him, and himself be found in the truth, as he plainly expresses in the
close of the verse; when he has tried me, whut then?

I shall come forth as gold. Egrediar ex hoc igne probationis meae
expurgatissimus Coruscabi^^ innocentia mea. Pined.
Here Is the issue of the trial. There are seven words used in the Original for
gold; That in the text notes the color or yellownes of it, (...) generale
vocabulum est a color sulvo seu flavo, and transfertur ad aliarum rerum
munditiem significandum, sic ab aura and aurora aurum derivat Isidor: Plenus
vino aureo, i. e. splendido velut aurum.
and is applied to signify any thing that is bright, or shineing, pure and
splendid, as Gold is. ( Zach. 4.12.) we read of golden pipes which did empty
the golden oil (or, according to the letter of the Hebrew, the Gold) out of
themselves. That spiritual oil was called golden or gold, because, like gold,
shineing, pure and precious. The gifts and graces of the Spirit are golden oil
indeed. So ( Jer. 51.7.) Babylon has been a golden Cup in the hand of the
Lord; Which some expound tropically; taking the Continent for the thing
contained; The cup for the wine, Called golden wine, because of the splendidnes
and beauty of it (as Solomon speaks, Pro. 23.31.) When it gives his color in
the cup. Or Babylon is called a Golden cup; first, because of the great glory,
wealth, and illustrious pomp of that Empire, described in Daniel (Chap.
2.32.38.) by a head of Gold, and marked out in Isaiah, by the name of the
Golden City (Isa. 14.4) and secondly, because God had caused other Nations to
drink deep of his wrath by the power of the Babylonian Empire. Upon which
account Mystical Babylon is said to have a Golden cup in her hand ( Rev.
17.4.) Gold, is the King, the chief of metals; gold is among metals as the
Sun is among the Stars and Planets of Heaven, the glory and Prince of them
all. So that when Job says, I shall come forth as gold, his meaning is, I
shall come forth pure and in much perfection. Gold is first the most precious
metal; secondly, the most honorable metal; thirdly, the most weighty metal;
fourthly, the most durable metal; fifthly, the most desirerable metal: Every
one is for gold; Aurum per ignem probatum symbolum est j^storum nam ill^ minime
laedit examen ^gnis, per ista igitur verba vir sanctus candorem suae
innocentiae and conscientiae puritatem maximam cir^umloquitur. Bold.
So that when Job says, I shall come forth gold, his meaning is, as if he had
said, my trial will not diminish, but rather add unto me; I shall be
precious, honorable, weighty, durable, desirable after I have been in the
furnace or fineing pot of my sorest and severest Trials. And he speaks thus
in opposition to his friends, who had an opinion of him as if he were but
dross or the off-scoureing of all things (as the Apostles were reckoned in
their time) I shall come forth not dross and trash, but gold, as if he had
said, Were I once tried, I should be for ever quit of those Charges brought in
against me, and of those scandals cast upon me, I should shine in reputation
and honor like pure gold coming out of the fire. I should recover my good
name, and be found a man loyal to God and righteous toward men.

Hence note.

Grace renders man excellent and precious. Every godly man is gold, yea he is
more precious then fine gold; The finest gold is but dross to Grace; the
wicked of the world are reprobate silver, or refuse silver (Jer. 6.30.) the
Saints are finer then Gold refined in the fire, for they are precious, they are
honorable, they are useful, they are dureable and lasting, they shall endure
everlastingly, they are weighty in their worth, and their portion is an
eternal weight of glory.

Secondly, Whereas Job says, when I am tried I shall come forth as gold.

Observe.

A godly man is no looser by being tried, yea he gains by it. He who before
was reputed but as dross, and had much dross in him, comes out of the trial
as gold, and loses nothing of his weight, worth, or beauty by being tried, he
only loses (a good loss) his dross and the rubbish of his corruptions.
Grace is not only grace still, but more gracious even glorious after trial.
Some speak of grace as if it were but dross, consumeable in the fire; as if
every temptation and trial endangered it to an utter consumption, or as if,
like lead, it would quite evaporate, and spend to nothing in the fire. They
stick not to affirm, that a true believer may lose all his graces, and how
much soever enricht before by the Spirit, yet prove a bankrupt in spiritualls.
Job was Confide^t that his gold would hold the trial, both of the hottest
afflictions, and of the strictest examinations. He had been tried long in the
furnace of affliction heated seven times more then ordinary, and yet held his
integrity, and though he should come to trial at the Judgement-seate of God,
which is more then seventy-times seven times stricter then the Judgement-seate
of man (according to truth) can be, yet he nothing doubted, that nothing (as to
the general bent of his heart and frame of life) should be found or appear but
integrity still. That is but drossie grace, natural grace, if not hypocritical
grace, or a counterfeit only of grace, which a^ides not in the day of trial.
They who loose the grace which they have showed, had only a show of grace.
Hypocrites shall ^o^e all at their trial, their paint, their varnish will not
endure the fire, either of a lasting affliction, or of that last examination;
when once a hypocrite is tried, then he is shamed. He may go current for pure
gold a great while, but at last he appears but as a gilded sepulcher or dross
of gold. ( Psalm 119.119.) Thou put away all the wicked of the earth like
dross. And the Lord speaking of the degenerate house of Israel (Ezekiel. 22.18.)
says, The house of Israel is to me become dross, all they are brass, and
tin, and iron, and lead, in the midst of the furnace, they are even the dross
(or drosses) of silver; That is, though they are a professing people, and hold
out my name, yet I having tried and examined them thoroughly, find them to have
nothing but a name of profession; They being tried are come forth like dross.
The Apostle (1 Cor. 3.13,) Allegorically shadowing out all sorts of
superstructive doctrine, by Gold, silver, precious stones, wood, hay, stubble,
says, If any man build upon this foundation (that is, Christ) Gold, silver,
precious stones, wood, hay, stubble, every man's work shall be made manifest,
for the day shall declare it, because it shall be revealed by fire, Dum
p^obantur toti in fumum abeunt.
and the fire shall try every man's work of what sort it is. If any man's work
abide which he has built thereupon, he shall receive a reward; if any man's
work shall be burnt, he shall suffer loss, etc. The wood, hay, stubble, shall
be burnt, but the gold, silver, precious stones, will abide the trial of fire.
Whether it be the fire of persecution, tribulation, and temptation (nothing but
holy truth can abide these fires) or the fire of the holy Spirit (who in
Scripture is often compared to fire, and) who together with the light of the
Word reveals the soundnes or falsenes of all doctrines delivered by men, and
like fire consumes what is false, but gives a further brightness and luster to
the truth. Even truth untryed may be counted dross, but being tried it comes
forth like gold. Now, as the truth of doctrines, so the truth of persons, in
their works and graces will abide when they come to the Test or trial; God
who puts away all the wicked of the earth as dross, will gather up all the
godly of the earth as Gold, when he has tried them, and try them he will. We
read ( Dan. 7.9, 10.) how dreadfully God comes to Judgment; I beheld till the
thrones were cast down, and the ancient of days did sit; his Throne was like
the fiery flame, and his wheels as burning fire; a fiery stream issued and
came forth from before him, the judgment was set, and the books were opened.
Which whether it be meant of the last Judgment, or of some special Judgment
upon a particular state or oppressing power, comes all to one as to the point
in hand; while it shows that God in the trial of men will examine their
persons, and their actions, as by fire. Of every such trial it may be said (as
Mala. 3.2, 3.) Who may abide the day of his coming? and who shall stand when he
appears? (The Prophet speaks of the coming of Christ in the flesh, at which
time he was also mighty in Spirit) for he is like a refiners fire, and like
fullers soape, and he shall sit as a refiner and purifier of silver. When
Christ came in the flesh to redeem us, he came with fire also to purge and
sanctify us, and he comes with fire whenever he comes in the Spirit to
comfort and enlighten us, and at last when he comes in glory, he will come with
fire to try, examine, and judge us. When he comes to try us thus, All the
faithful shall come forth as Gold, but the wicked and their works will burn
and be consumed. When Saints come to trial at last they will stand, and when
they are tried here, they will mend; first, their Corruptions will be the more
outed, and, secondly, their graces will be the more acted. We may read this
issue of their trial ( Zech. 13.9.) And it shall come to pass that in all the
Land, says the Lord, two parts therein shall be cut off and dye, but the third
shall be left therein. Whether we take the Land in particular for Israel and
the people of the Jews, or typically, for all professors thorowout the world,
two parts shall be cut off and dye, but the third shall be left therein. And
what will God do with them? or how will he deal with them? We may see what at
the 9th verse. And I will bring the third part through the fire (of affliction
and examination) and I will refine them as silver is refined, and try them as
gold is tried (and what will be the issue of this?) And they shall call on my
name, and I will hear them. Here faith and prayer (in which all graces are
exercised) are put for all graces. When they are in this fire they shall call
on my name, In igne deum amanter invocant and candido and germano sunt erga
illum studio. Theod.
and I will hear them, and I will say (when they are in the fire) it is my
people, and they shall say, the Lord is my God. They who pray in the fire of
trial, or in the fiery trial, declare evidently, that they are Gold in the
fire; but they to whom God says in the fire of their trials, ye are my
people, and they who (being still in the same fire) can say, the Lord is our
God, are declared both by God and themselves eminently, that they are gold in
the fire. They are as the choycest gold, as the Gold of Ophir, of whom the Lord
says, (by an act of distinguishing love) ye are my people, and who can say to
God (by an act of appropriating faith) the Lord is our God. Surely then Saints
lose nothing in the fire (but what is not worth the holding) while God finds
and owns them, and they find and own God in the fire.

Further, Some read this latter part of the verse as an offer; Let him try me,
Probat me.
and I shall come forth as gold; as if Job had said, I do not refuse, but
desire a trial; God knows my way, the way that is in me, let him come and try
me, yea I am ready to come to him for my trial.

Hence note.

A sincere heart is willing to be tried. It Is a great part of the work of a
godly man to try himself and his works, and it is one of his greatest wishes,
that God would try him, and his works. They who are sincere are much in trying
themselves; Let us search and try our ways (say they) and turn again unto
the Lord. And they who are much in self trial and Examination, are willing to
be tried and examined both by God and man; sure enough, They that try
themselves much, are not afraid of the trial of man, no nor of the trial of
God. If we compare the first verse of the 139th Psalm with the 23^, we shall
see what an answer there is in them as to this point. At the first verse David
says, O Lord, thou have searched me and known me: at the 23 verse he
prays; Search me O God, and know my heart; why did David pray thus to God;
Search me and know my heart? having said before, Thou have searched me and
known me. Seeing David knew that God had searched him, what needed he to pray
that God would search him? why did he beg God to do that which he had done
already? The answer is at hand. David was a diligent selfe-searcher, and
therefore he was so willing to be searched, yea he delighted to be searched, by
God; and that not (as was said) because himself had done it already, but also
because he knew God could do it better. He knew by his own search, that he
did not live in any way of wickedness against his knowledge, and yet he knew
there might be some way of wickedness in him that he knew not of. And therefore
he does not only say, Search me, O God, and know my heart: try me, and know my
thoughts; but he adds ( ver. 24.) see if there be any wicked way (or any way of
pain and grief) in me. (The same word signifies both, because wicked ways
lead in the end to pain and grief) and lead me in the way everlasting. As if
he had said; Lord, I have searched my self, and can see no wicked way in me,
but Lord thy sight is infinitely clearer then mine, and if thou will but search
me, thou may see some wicked way in me which I could not see, and I would
feign see and know the worst of my self, that I might amend it and grow
better, therefore Lord, if there be any such way in me, cause me to know it
also; O take that way out of me, and take me out of that way, lead me in the
way everlasting. David had tried himself, and he would again be tried by God,
that he being better tried, might become yet better. He found himself Gold
upon his own trial, and yet he feared there might be some dross in him that
he had not found, And now he would be re-tryed that he might come forth purest
gold. Pure gold fears neither the furnace nor the fire, neither the Test nor
the Touchstone, nor is weighty gold afraid of the Balance; He that is weight
will be weight, how often soever he is weighed: he that is gold will be gold,
how often soever he is tried, and the oftener he is tried the purer Gold he
will be; what he is he will be, and he would be better then he is. Every man of
Jobs metal says or may say, Let him try me, and I shall come forth as gold.

JOB, CHAP. 23. Verse. 11, 12. My foot has held his steps, his way have I kept,
and not declined.

Neither have I gone back from the commandment of his lips, I have esteemed
the words of his mouth more then my necessary food.


AT the 21th and 22th verses of the former Chapter, Eliphaz having sharply
rebuked Job, gave him very wholesome and holy counsel. Acquaint thy self now
with him, and be at peace, receive the law from his mouth, and lay up his words
in thy heart. In these two verses Job professes that he had done so; that he
had kept close to God, followed him step by step, that he had not declined, or
turned back, and that he had done all this out of pure love to the word. So
that each member of this context seems to carry a direct answer to every member
of that counsel which Eliphaz had there given him; As first, to that of
Eliphaz, Acquaint thy self with God, (he says) I have held his steps. That
man takes and holds near acquaintance with another, of whom it may be
affirmed, that he treads in or holds his very steps. Again, Eliphaz advised
Job thus; Receive the Law at his mouth; Job answers, I have not gone back from
the commandment of his lips, etc.

Or thus;

First, He that takes hold of the steps of God, acquaints himself with God.

Secondly, He that keeps the way of God and declines not from it, is at peace
with God.

Thirdly, He that goes not back from the commandment of his lips, receives
the Law at his mouth.

Fourthly, He that esteems the word of God more then his necessary food, has
surely laid up the word of God in his heart.

Job professes in these two verses that he had done all this, and therefore he
had already done what Eliphaz presses him to do. His whole conversation had
exactly hitt the counsel given him.

Verse. 11. My foot has held his steps.
My foote] We are not to take the word foot, strictly, Cum dicit, pes meus,
pro eo habendum ac si dixisset, ego apprehendi gressum ejus. Drus: Verbum
significat aliquid violenter detinere, ne labatur, aut fugiat, aut fluat. Bold.
(...)
for that special member of the body so called; but by the foot we are to
understand the whole man; my foot, that is, I my self have held his steps, I
have held them; And he means such a holding as has a kind of honest
pertinaciousnesse in it, or a resolvednesse not to let go what is held, a
resolute holding, a cleaveing fast to, a holding with a kind of violence, such
as Jacob expressed to the Angel ( Genesis 32.26.) I will not let thee go except
thou bless me.

My foot has held. To lay hold is the proper action of the hand, not of the
foot; and it is used here only as it signifies the keeping of a thing close
and fast any way, so as not to part with it; or as it imports, a constant
walking with God.

My foot has held his steps, or upon his steps. The word which signifies to
go, signifies also to be happy or blessed, and the reason is, because our way
or motion shows what our end and rest shall be; our happiness in the end
lies virtually in our way.

But what were those steps that his foot took hold of? Steps in the Text may
be taken two ways.

First, For those steps which God has appointed man to take, Vestigia dei idem
significare, poterunt quod via dei, sc. illius precepta and legem, quam nobis
tenendam commonstrat. Pined. Gressum ejus accipe passive id est ab eo definitum
and monstratum. Jun. Vestigia dei sunt divinae actiones quibus ille preit; vel
sunt ejus effectus ad extra, sc. Charitatis, clementiae, justitiae veritatis.
Pined.
walking as and where God would have him; so these steps are the same with the
law or way of God: not actively for the steps which God takes, but passively
for the steps which he directs and appoints us to take.

Secondly, We may expound these steps for Gods own steps, not for the steps
which he shows us in his word that we should take, but for the steps which he
shows in his practice, or in his example that himself has taken. My foot
has held his steps; so to follow the steps of another is to imitate him, and
to follow the steps of God is to imitate him; the steps of God are those holy
actings wherein he goes before us, and sets us an example. Some of the works
of God are a rule, his actions are directions to us. Then Jobs meaning is, I
have imitated God, and followed his example in all things that are imitable by
man, I have so much acquainted my self with God, and have been so familiar
with him that I have as it were coppied out his way in my life and
conversation. Thus he speaks of God as leading the way, and going before us;
and (says he) I have not satisfied my self to follow him at large, or in the
same common path, but I have set my feet in his very steps, or I have followed
him step by step.

Hence note.

That a godly man does example himself by God. He follows the way of God in
his works, as well as in his word, or he obeys God doing as well as
commanding. Many of the works of God are infinitely beyond our imitation, yet
he works so in other things that he has descended to our imitation. And
though we cannot follow God in any thing as to an equality, yet we may follow
him in many things as to the similitude of his workings; we may go the same
way that he goes, and take the same steps that he has taken, though we cannot
take them in that perfection, nor go with such exactnes as he has gone before
us. A child may write the same letters, the same words and lines, which the
most acurate penman or artist in writing has prescribed him for a copy, and
so the child may be said to hold the steps of his Master, letter for letter,
word for word, line for line, though there be a wide difference discernable
between their writings. To follow God is our duty, Godliness is Godlikenesse,
or, an imitation of God, And practical Christianity is nothing else but our
imitation of Christ, and that not only in doing but in suffering (1 Pet.
2.21.) For even hereunto are we called; because Christ also suffered for us,
leaving us an example that we should follow his steps. ^equere deum. Epict.
Christ is not only a principle of holiness in us, or our spiritual life,
but he is also a pattern of holiness according to which we ought to live. And
the same Apostle represents the holiness of God, both as a rule, and as a
motive of that holiness which should be acted by us (1 Ep: 1.15, 16.) As he
that has called you is holy, so be ye holy in all manner of conversation,
because it is written ( Lev: 11.14.) Be ye holy for I am holy. To be holy as
God is in all manner of conversation, is steadfastly to hold the steps of God.
And when (as Christ exhorts Math. 5.55.) We are merciful as our father which
is in heaven is merciful. When as the Apostle exhorts ( Ephesians. 4.32.) We
forgive as God for Christ's sake has forgiven us; when we are patient and
long-suffering one toward another, as God is toward us all, then we take hold
of his steps; this should be our business every day, to follow God in his
word, and in his works, to follow him fully. It is said of Caleb (Number. 14.24.)
My servant Caleb has another spirit, he has followed me fully. Here some may
object, to follow the counsel of God fully, is the duty of all, but to follow
the example of God is surely beyond the attainment of any. This seems to be a
hight of holiness too high for man; For if Solomon said ( Eccl: 2.12.) What
can the man do that comes after the King? even that which has been already
done, or (more close to the Original) in those things which have been already
done. How much more may we say, What can the man do that comes after God the
King of Kings? can he do that which has been done already? I answer, no man
can parallel the works of God, but all men are called to imitate him in his
works; though we cannot follow him with equal steps, yet we may follow the
equity and holiness of his steps. This Job did and we (through grace) may do.
My foot has held his steps, His way have I kept, and not declined.

The way of God is his Law, in that he will have us to walk, and that is
called his way, because he has prescribed it, and is the author of it; as that
is man's way wherein he walks, so that is Gods way wherein he will have man to
walk; Blessed is the undefiled in the way (Psalm. 119.1.) What the way is, he
tells us in the next words, Blessed are they that keep his testimonies, and who
walk in the Law of the Lord. His law and testimonies are his way: now says
Job, As I have held his steps, or followed his example, so I have kept his way,
that is, I have done that which he has commanded. The way of God is put
sometimes in Scripture for that which himself has done ( Ezekiel. 18.25. Via del
and hominis sumitur; 1 Pro itinere and gressibus. 2 P^o ipsa via strata.
) Hear O house of Israel, is not my way equal, that is, the way wherein I my
self have gone, the way of my dispensations to you, both in rewarding and
punishing. And as the works of providence, so the work of Creation is called
the way of God ( Pro. 8.22.) The Lord possessed me in the beginning of his way,
(that is, before he came forth in the work of Creation) before his works of
old; his way and his works are the same, or his works are his way. But in
this Text (as I touched before) we may rather take way for that which God would
have us do, or for the way in which we ought to walk. And so we have the
compleatnes of Jobs obedience, he imitated the example and he obeyed the
command of God.

His way have I kept. Yet further, There is a twofold keeping of the way of God;

First, by practice and obedience, thus we keep the way of God by submitting
to it.

Secondly, There is a keeping the way of God by protection and defense; Thus we
keep the way of God, when we stand up to maintain it. We may take it here in
both senses; and in both, doubtless, Jobs Spirit was led out to keep the way
of God.

Hence note.

A godly man keeps close to the word of God. He keeps close to it by obeying
it, and he keeps it close by defending it; and this he does as Job did it
universally (for so this indefinite proposition, His way have I kept, is to be
understood) it was not this or that way, but any or every way of God which he
kept. And thus a godly man keeps the way of God, though it be a difficult and
(to the flesh) an uneasy way, though it be (among men) a reproachful, and
ignominious way, though it be (as to his outward concernements) a
disadvantageous and dangerous way, yet he keeps it: he that is through with
God, does not only keep those ways which suit with his own pleasure and
credit, with the safety of his own interests and accommodations in the world,
but if the way of God lie through difficulties, through dangers and disgraces,
he will yet keep it. And if we thus keep the way of God, we may be sure, that
the way of God, or rather the God of this way will keep us, and keep us in
perfect peace, in spiritual freedom, safety, and honor, though we have
trouble in and from the world. His way have I kept, and which does heighten his
obedience, care, and zeal in keeping it.

He adds, And not declined.

(...)
The word signifies, to be unsteady, or to move every way; As if he had said, I
have kept his ways steadfastly and unmoveably. Job speaks both in the
affirmative, I have kept, and in the negative, I have not declined. Some keep
the ways of God a while, but they keep not on, much less do they keep up
in keeping them. There is a twofold declining. First, a declining from the way
of God to evil and sinful ways; and these are of two sorts, first, erroneous
opinions; secondly, wicked practices; secondly, there is a declining in the way
of God, when though we keep the good way, yet we are not so good in the way as
we were, but slack our pace and cool in our zeal to the good ways of God.
We may expound Jobs negative in reference to both these; as if he had said, I
have neither gone out of the way of God, nor have I been sloathfull in it. It Is
the highest commendation of man, thus to keep the way of God, and not decline.

Hence note.

A godly man is, or ought to be, and it is his honor to be steady in a good
way. Perfeverance is our Crown. The Apostle (1 Cor. 15.58.) Exhorts to be
steady and unmovable, always abounding in the work of the Lord. We should be
always moving in the work of the Lord, but never moving out of the work of
the Lord: we should be as a rock in regard of stedfastnes, and as fire in
regard of activenes. The Author to the Hebrews (Chap. 10.23.) gives this
admonition to beleivers, Let us hold fast the profession of our faith, without
wavering, or without declining. There are some of whom we may say, they hold
nothing, they hold no profession, they dare not make a profession lest they
should be bound to stand to it, or they stand not to that which they have made;
and as they hold no profession, so they hold no position, but as to the
doctrine of faith are mere scepticks, they are always querying, but never
concluding. The Apostle speaks of some (2 Timothy 3.7.) who are ever learning,
but never able to come to the knowledge of the truth; and there are others ever
learning, but never willing to declare their knowledge of the truth; and they
who hold nothing in doctrine, will not hold long in practice. Therefore says
the Apostle; Let us hold fast our profession, let us be steady in it, and that
without wavering. And this is the great argument which the Apostle carries
through that whole Epistle, to establish the Saints, that so they might hold
fast, without wavering, and declining in the profession of the faith. Let us
take heed of either of those waverings and declineings, before explained.
First, Let us not decline in the way, but keep up in the same degree of
holiness and love to Christ. The Church of Ephesus is charged with this sort of
declineing; and therefore after Christ had given that Church a great and a
deserved commendation ( Rev. 2.2.) I know thy works, and thy labor, and thy
patience, and how thou can not bear them which are evil, and have tried
them that say they are Apostles, and are not, and have found them liars; yet
Christ comes with a rebuking, nevertheless (at the 4th verse) I have somewhat
against thee, because thou have left thy first love; that is, thou have
declined from, or abated in thy first heat of love. Ephesus did not totally
forsake, nor cast off Christ out of her love; Ephesus did not choose other
lovers, nor say, she would have no more to do with Christ: The chief object
of her love was the same, but her actings were not the same. The streams of
her affection did not run into another channel, but they were fallen and ebbed
in their former channel. It Is sad, when Saints decline thus; we should keep up
to the same height, to the same heat, to the same degree of love without
declineing, we should not only run at first setting out, but continue running,
or as the Apostle speaks ( Heb. 12.1.) Run with patience, that is, run
constantly, or with perseverance, the race that is set before us. They that run
in a worldly race, the nearer they come to the Goal, the faster they run, and
the more they strive; so should we in our holy race; we should still be growing
and increasing with the increase of God. A Saint should be thankful for the
least degree, but he should not sit down in the greatest degree he has
already attained unto. And though some who have grace do not actually reach
after more, yet they who say they have enough, or need no more, give too clear
an evidence against themselves, that they have none at all. As the higher
degrees of grace (under a temptation or desertion) may be unthriving and
unstriving after perfection, so the lowest degree of saving grace is (in its
own nature) thriving and striving after more perfection. He that believes,
truly, would believe more, and he that loves truly, would love more and more,
till his love become a vehement flame, so vehement a flame that many waters
shall not be able to quench it, nor the floods (of trouble and persecution from
the world) drown it.

Secondly, as we should thus take heed of declining in the way of grace, so we
should much more take heed, that we decline not from the way of grace, or as
the Apostle Peter expresses it (2 Ep: 2.31.) that we turn not from the holy
commandment delivered unto us. This declining or turning from the
commandments, is twofold; first, to the right hand; secondly, and to the left.
The Scripture gives warning against both ( Josh. 1.7.) Be thou strong and very
corragious, that thou might observe, and do according to all the Law which
Moses commanded, turn not from it to the right hand, or to the left. Again (
Pro. 4.25, 26, 27.) Let thine eye look right on, and let thine eyelids look
straight before thee; ponder the path of thy feet, and let all thy ways be
established, turn not to the right hand, nor to the left, remove thy foot
from evil; As if he had said, there is evil both on the right hand, and on
the left, therefore turn neither to the one, nor to the other, that thou
may remove thy foot from evil. But some may say, What is here meant by the
right hand, and what by the left? and what are these declineings, or turnings?
I answer; To turn to the right hand, notes excess, when we will take upon us
to do more then God has commanded, when we will needs over-doe, this is to
decline to the right hand; for though, when man has done his utmost through
grace in this life (considering his in dwelling corruption) he always falls
short of that exactnes which the Law requires, and so cannot possibly exceed
the Law in holiness; yet all they may be said to act beyond the command, or to
out-act the Law of God, as to the matter of their obedience, who do that which
God never commanded, nor ever came into his heart (as the Prophet speaks, Jer.
7.31.) to command them. They who thus do what God requires not, and as if God
had been too scant in his rules, will needs give a new rule either to
themselves or others, and as if God had not given them laws enough, will (in
this sense) be a law to themselves or others, either in matters of practice or
worship (And so indeed make void the Law of God by their tradition) these
exceeders are the men who turn to the right hand, though indeed (except they
repent this rashness) themselves are likely to be set upon the left hand. Men
never act more left-handedly then when they thus turn to the right hand, nor
do they ever wrong God more, then when they do that which is right in their
own eyes: men never show themselves so foolish, as when they will be wiser
then God.

Again, Declining or turning to the left hand, implies a sin in defect,
when we do less then God commands, when we shorten, and streighten the will
of God in our obedience to it. Every natural man thinks a little much, yea he
thinks much to do a little; and may therefore be said to turn to the left
hand, because that is the unworking hand, or the hand which does the least
work. A natural man either makes the Law of God void by doing that which is
against it, or he lets it lie void by not doing it, and would be glad that this
talent committed to him might for ever be wrapped up in a napkin, or be buried in
the earth. Both these turnings, whether to the right hand, or to the left, are
evil. The way of holiness, the good way lies straight forward, right on; It
has no turning either to the right hand, nor to the left. All the ways of
sin are called crooked ways, and they are our own ways. ( Psalm. 125.5.) As
for such as turn aside to their crooked ways, the Lord shall lead them forth
with the workers of iniquity. The Psalmist calls them, Their crooked ways;
that is, ways of their own devising; whereas the way of holiness is the Lords
way. To exceed or to do more, to be deficient or to do less then God
requires, both these are crooked ways; the way of the Lord lies straight
forward, right before us. ( Pro. 28.18.) Who so walks uprightly shall be
saved, but he that is perverse (or crooked) in his ways shall fall at once.
The motion of a godly man is like that of the kine that carried the Arc (1 Samuel 6.12.) Who took the straight way to the way of Bethshemesh, and went
along the high way, lowing as they went, and they turned not aside to the right
hand, or to the left.

But you will say, Do not good men, even the best of good men, decline
sometimes, and go aside? or does it argue every man to be wicked who declines
at any time? I answer; Job speaks of what he had not done, not of what it was
impossible for him to do; he had not declined, yet he might have declined. We
find many declinings among the godly; how many are there that decline in
degrees, who are godly in the maine; They love still, but they have not the
same warmth of love, the same heat of affection; They obey still, but they
have not the same strength of obedience. There may be a declineing also not
only in the way, but from the way, to the right hand sometimes, and sometimes
to the left; there may be an exceeding, and there may be a coming short in
those, as to actions, who, as to their state, are come home to God; these
things are possible, yea common, but we speak of what many godly men do, and
what should be the aim, and design of every godly man, that is, to keep the
way of God, and not to decline, to keep himself up in spiritual strength,
and to keep himself onne in a spiritual course; yea every godly man may, and
can say as David did ( Psalm. 18.21,) I have kept the ways of the Lord, and
have not wickedly departed from my God. Though every godly man cannot say as
godly Job did, I have kept his way, and not declined, yet every godly man may
say as David, I have kept his ways, and have not wickedly departed from my
God; we should be afraid of declineing and decaying, we should strive to be
always advancing and increasing. And as Saints are under a command to be such,
so they are under a promise to be such, ( Psalm. 92.12, 13, 14.) The righteous
shall flourish like a Palm tree: he shall grow like a Cedar in Libanon. Those
that be planted in the house of the Lord, shall flourish in the Courts of our
God, they shall still bring forth fruit in old age: they shall be fat and
flourishing. Here is not only a mention of growing, but of flourishing, and
here is flourishing three times mentioned, and it is growing and flourishing not
only like a tree, but like a Palm Tree, (which flourishes under opression)
and like a Cedar (not growing in ordinary places, but) in Lebanon, where were
the goodliest Cedars. Nor does the Spirit promise here a flourishing in boughs
ane leaves only (as some trees do, and do no more) but in fruit; And this
not only fruit for once in a year, or one year, but they still bring forth
fruit, and that not only in the years of their youth, or beginnings in grace,
but in old age, and that not only in the entrance of that state which is called
old age, threescore years, but that which the Scripture calls the perfection
of old age, threescore years and ten, as the learned Hebrews observe upon the
word used in the Psalm. What a divine climax does the Spirit of God make in
this Scripture, to show that the godly man, as to his state, is so far from
declining, that he is still climbing higher and higher? And if any shall ask
how comes it to pass then, that some godly men are observed not only by
themselves, but by others, to decline often in and sometimes from the ways of
God?

I answer, these declinings may be assigned to several Causes.

First, To the power of some Corruption remaining much unmortified in them; as
in a garden when the weeds grow high, the good herbs decline; And as in a
field, when the weeds are strong, the corn is weak; so it is here; the
prevailing or growing of Corruption, is the declining of Grace in degree, and
by reason of it, some (for a time) decline from the way.

Secondly, Declinings are from the prevalency of temptation; while Satan plieth
some with temptation, he turns them out of the way, or causes them to walk
but slowly in it. As temptation is a trial of, so a hindrance unto grace, yea
though corruption be kept much down, yet some through a violent gust of
temptation have been over-borne.

Thirdly, Declinings are caused in the good by the example of those that are
evil, therefore the Apostle gives that Caution ( Romans 12.2.) Not to be
conformable to the world. A godly man is apt enough to write by a false copy,
and to do as he sees the world does. What was all their way, or their only
way before conversion, they after conversion (through neglect of their watch)
may be found stepping into, or taking a step or two in. Before conversion our
whole course, says the Apostle ( Ephe. 2.2.) is according to the course of
this world; And the examples of the world have drawn many aside, after they
have come out from the world. The fashions and vanities of the world, in pride
and pleasure, are very drawing. All examples, especially evil examples (like
the Loadstone) have an attractive virtue in them; and many of the godly have
been drawn aside thus, and have declined, with much scandal, fot a while from
the way of God.

Fourthly, Declinings are sometimes from afflictions; and those we may consider
of two sorts, personal, or public: both or either of these have caused many
to decline. The cold frost of affliction has nipped the graces of some, and
made them to turn aside from the way of God. Therefore the Church (having
reported her great troubles) speaks it as an argument of much sincerity
toward God, and strength of Grace received from him. ( Psalm 44.17, 18.) All
this is come upon us (that is, all these common calamities and afflictions) yet
have we not forgotten thee, nor dealt falsely in thy Covenant; our hearts are
not turned back, neither are our steps declined from thy way; As if she had
said, These afflictions have been strong temptations upon us to cause us to
decline from thy ways, but through grace we have kept our ground, and remained
constant in thy Covenant, yea though thou have sore broken us in the place of
dragons, and covered us with the shadow of death. As, many, yea most of the
Saints have improved under the cross, so there have been some who either
through their present unbeleefe, or forgetfulness of the exhortation which (as
the Apostle says, Heb. 12.5.) speaks unto them as unto children, have had
their faintings and declinings under it.

Fifthly, Others decline through prosperity, and worldly enjoyments; when they
grow rich in temporalls, they grow poorer in spiritualls. As their outward man
increases, so their inner man decays; and as they flourish in the flesh, so
hey wither in spirit. Hence holy Agur prayed ( Pro. 30.8, 9.) Give me not
poverty, least I be poor and steal, and take the name of God in vain, (that
would be a sad declining) give me not riches, lest I be full and deny thee, and
say who is the Lord? That Is a sadder declining then the former. Poverty
endangers grace much, but riches more. To be rich or great in the world, is a
great temptation; Food convenient is the most sweet and most untemptationlesse
condition. As hypocrites fall quite off from God, when they come onne much in
the world; so the sincere may be much hindered in their way. And as many godly
men have declined through their own prosperity, so some have declined, or at
least have been in great danger of declining by the prosperity of others.
David was ready to decline from God, when he saw the prosperity of ungodly
men. ( Psalm. 73.2.) As for me my feet were almost gone, my steps had well nigh
slip't, when I saw the prosperity of the wicked. David was almost down, when
he saw the wicked up Their standing had almost given him a fall; My steps
(says h^^ had well nigh slipped; now if it put David, a man eminent in
godliness, so hard to it to keep his standing (all the grace in his heart,
and assistance from God could scarce hold him up) how much more may they who
come far short of David, decline by seeing the prosperity of wicked men? are
not they ready to conclude, surely we shall thrive, and do well enough,
though we do as others do, who do not trouble themselves in a strictnes
about matters of religion as we have done, Verily (as it follows at the 13th
verse) we have cleansed our heart in vain, and washed our hands in innocence.
If we had spared our pains of labor, we could not have endured more pain of
trouble; for all the day long have we been plagued, and chastned every morning.
Such arguings as these show great declinings. Yet they who are sincere will
soon recover themselves again, and say as David after he had reviewed this
Temptation ( ver. 15.) If we say we will speak thus, we should offend against
the Generation of the righteous.

Now seeing the Godly are so many ways endangered to declining, let us be
warned of it, and beware of it. These are declining times, many professors have
shamed themselves, and the profession of the Gospel. He is a Christian indeed
that can say in truth as Job did, I have kept his words and not declined; they
that knew me many years ago may find me in as good, yea in a better plight
then I was then. Hypocrites and true believers may look and act very like one
another, but as the nature of their estates have always a vast difference to
the understanding, so the event gives a vast difference between them to the
eye. Hypocrites keep the word of God a while, but they ever decline in the end
finally from it, and sometims throw it off in the way totally. When they are in
the way they grow weary of it, and a small matter working either upon their
hopes or fears, will put them quite out of it. Every difficulty, every danger
is to them a Lion in the way, causing them to decline from it; whereas to those
that are sincere, difficulties are not stops, but incitements and spurs, they
do but provoke their zeal, they cannot quench it. And hence the holy Apostle
sends a challenge ( Romans 8.35.) to all the troubles, afflictions, and evils in
the world: he bids them do their worst, and when they have done it, they shall
not be able to separate him from the love of God, neither from the love
wherewith Go^ ^oved him, or from that love wherewith he loved God.

I have kept his ways and not declined. Secondly, Observe.

That sin is a declining from the way of God. That Is the Apostles definition
(1 John 3.4.) Sin is the transgression of the Law; And transgression is a going
aside, or a going over the line by which God has chaulked us out our way. God
has not left us at our liberty, though he has left us (as the Apostle James
calls it, Chap. 1.25.) a perfect law of liberty. He has not left us to travel
over hedge and ditch, but has showed us our way, a high way and a way (as the
Prophet speaks, Isa. 35.8.) And it shall be called the way of holiness, the
wayfaring men, though fools, shall not err therein. Yet fools are always
erring from it, all their walkings are wanderings, and their goings are goings
astray who walk and go on in a sinful way. The word which signifies sin in
the Hebrew, imports most properly the missing of a mark; because sinning is a
missing of the mark, and a declining from the way; I have kept his way, and not
declined.

Verse. 12. Neither have I gone back from the commandment of his lips, etc.
Job proceeds with his negative profession, having said before, I have not
declined, he says the same thing again in other words; I have not gone back
from the commandment of his lips. See, how often he repeats, and inculcates
this point, both that he might be believed, and that he might show how
confident he was in the uprightnes of his own heart; I have not declined,
neither have I gone back. By these various expressions, and often repetitions,
Job sets forth in general the exactnes of his care in keeping close to God;
neither have I gone back. The word signifies both to depart, and to touch; and
some put both significations together here, (...) recessit, decessit, palparit,
tetegit; Ita recedere a re aliqua, ut tangi aut contrectari nequeat.
implying such a departure from a thing or person, as not at all to touch or
come near it again; which is a total apostasy, or desertion from it; As if
Job had said, I have not apostatised from the ways of God. But this seems
less then what he spoke before; for having said, I did not decline, what need
he say, I did not apostatize, for he that does not so much as decline, is far
from apostatising. I answer, that in this negative there is that ordinary
figure extenuation, speaking less then is intended, or intending more then is
expressed, and so, not to go back from, is to go forward in, or to proceed
on in the commandments of God; and so the sense rises higher; I have kept his
way, and have not declined, Non recedere a mandatis est illa opere complere
tenere, non dimittere de manu aut action. Pined.
neither have I gone back from his commandment; I have kept close to it
without the least willing declension. I have not laid the commandment out of
my hand, much less have I put it out of my heart. And then we are to interpret
this negative, I have not gone back, by this affirmative, I have stood to thy
commandments constantly and resolvedly. The Scripture is full of such
negatives. Thus when the Lord makes that promise ( Joel 2.26.) My people shall
never be ashamed; It seems to be but a small matter, that the people of God
shall not be ashamed, but the meaning is, they shall be highly honored, they
shall have a name and reputation in the world, they shall make their boast in
and of me their God all the day long. So when the Apostle gives that negative
counsel; (1 These. 5.18.) Despise not prophecy, his purpose is to exhort the
Thessalonians, and us in them to the readiest embraces and highest estimations
of it. Not to despise, is to honor prophecy, that is, the preaching of the
word in a due exposition and application of it to exhortation, and edification
and comfort. So then, there is much more in these words, I have not gone back
from the commandment; then thus, I have not turned, or apostatized from the
commandment, I have not thrown up, nor abjured my profession; Jobs meaning
is, I have kept strictly and firmly to it, I have asserted it, and affirmed
it, and will maintain it to the end: as I have hitherto lived, so I am
purposed to dye in the obedience of it. I have not gone back from the
commandment of his lips. We find the word used in such a signification (
Prove. 17.13.) Who so rewards evil for good, evil shall not depart from his
house, Semper familiariter in illius domo versabitur.
or, evil shall not go back from his house. As evil shall come, so evil
shall not go back, he shall not be able to dismiss it when it comes; evil
shall keep close to his house, dwell and abide in his house, or hang upon him
like an unwelcome guest, he shall not get it out for ever. Again, ( Isa.
54.10.) The mountains shall depart, and the hills shall be removed, but my
kindness shall not depart from thee, neither shall the Covenant of my peace be
removed, says the Lord that has mercy on thee. Thus the Lord assures his
people of the grace and good of the new Covenant; The mountains shall depart,
that is, though the mountains depart, or let them depart, and the hills
remove, yet my kindness shall not depart, or, it shall not go back from you;
that is, my kindness shall embrace you, stick close to you, and abide with
you for ever; so here, I have not gone back, that is, I have embraced, and
stuck to the commandment of his lips. We also find such a sense of the word,
( Mich. 2.3.) Therefore thus says the Lord, Behold, against this family do I
devise an evil, from which you shall not remove (or withdraw) your necks;
that is, the evil which I devise against you shall remain upon you, and stick
by you, ye shall not get this yoke off your necks, nor your necks out of
this collar; it shall be an abiding evil, which will not go back; as ye have
not gone back from the evil of sin, so ye shall not go back from the evil
of punishment, it will not remove from you, nor shall ye remove from it. So
here, I have not gone back, or removed my neck from the commandment of God,
I have not stirred a foot from it.

Yet further, that which before, he called the way of God, here he calls the
commandment of his lips; lips are the instruments of speech. God is a spirit,
and has no corporeal parts: the Scripture speaks thus of God after the
manner of men; because men speak with their lips (their lips being a
principal instrument of speech) therefore the commandment which God has made
known, and spoken (in a way peculiar to himself) is called the commandment
of his lips. Praeceptum labiorum, i. e. praeceptum labijs ejus pronounciatum.
Genitivus adju^cti vel efficientis. Pisc.
Mr Broughton translates strictly to the letter; His lips laws I cast not off.
And when Job calls the commandments of God, the commandments of his lips,
it has a great force in it, to oblige man to reverence, and obey them. They
are not commandments which he has published by others only, he has also
published them himself. They are the commandments of his lips, that is, those
commandments which as he made and others speak in his name, so he has spoken
them too. Emphaticus est iste Hebraismus ad majore^ praeceptoru^ dei
commendatione^ reverentiam and observantiam, sc. quod ab ipso dei ore prolata.
Bold.
He is both the Author and the publisher of them. ( Exodus 20.1.) And God spoke
all these words and said. David (Psalm. 66.13, 14.) puts that imphatically upon
his holy vows, to show how he was engaged to perform them; I will go into
thy house with burnt offerings, and I will pay thee my vows that my lips have
uttered, and my mouth has spoken when I was in trouble: As if he had said, my
vows are not only such as I have conceaved in my heart, and resolved in my
own thoughts, but I have spoken them out and declared them openly, therefore
it lies upon me not only in conscience, but in honor to pay and perform
them. If we must do what our lips have uttered, much more wust we do what God
has uttered with his lips. Lip-labor will not answer those commandments
which are the labor of Gods lips. Therefore says Job, I have not turned back
from the commandment of his lips.

Hence Observe; First, A godly man's way is forward, he does not turn back.

He does not decline, either to the right hand or to the left, much less does
he go back; he does not only stay where he was, but he is better then he
was, his course is onward and forward. ( Job 17.9.) The righteous shall hold on
his way. It is bad enough not to go forward, but to go backward is far
worse. If any draw back (says God, Heb. 10.38.) my soul shall have no
pleasure in them. And what pleasure can their souls take, in whom the soul of
God takes no pleasure? To draw back is perdition: as they who draw back are
the most forward to destroy others ( Hos. 5.2.) The revoulters are profound to
make slaughter) so they shall be sure to be destroyed themselves. The people of
Israel in their travels through the wilderness to Canaan, did often discover
this spirit of Apostasy ( Psalm. 78.41.) They turned back and tempted God; We
find them at a consultation about it ( Numb. 14.4.) They said one to another,
let us make us a Captain, and let us return into Egypt. Our Lord Jesus had
such a sort of men, who followed him in person ( Joh. 6.66.) From that time
many of his Disciples went back from him, and walked no more with him. They
were Disciples who went back, and there were many of them, so many that Christ
(in the next verse) said to the twelve, Will ye also go away? Then Peter
answered, Lord, whether shall we go? thou have the words of eternal life: As
if he had said, we cannot mend our selves whether soever we go; why then
should we go from thee? As a Godly man goes on, so he sees reason why he
should. It Is as irrational as sinful, to go back from him who has the
words of eternal life, or from the commandment of his lips, who has given
the promise of life. The Apostle Paul had a reaching spirit, and he was always
reaching forward ( Phil. 3.12, 13.) Not as though I had already attained, or
were already perfect, but I follow after, if that I may apprehend that, for
which also I am apprehended of Christ Jesus; As if he had said, I would to the
utmost answer the design which Christ had upon me, when he first took hold of
me effectually by his grace. Paul was so far from going back, that he forgot
what was backward. Some remember what is past, or what they have done so much,
that they forget what is to be done But (says Paul) this one thing I do,
forgetting those things which are behind, and reaching forth unto those things
which are before, I press toward the mark; for the price of the high calling
of God in Christ Jesus. The mark and the price are always before us, there is
no coming at the mark, nor winning of the price by turning back. ( Prove.
4.18.) The path of the just is like the shining (or morning) light, which
shines more and more unto the perfect day. The path of the unjust (if it have
any light in it) is but like the evening light, which shines less and less,
which declines and goes downward, till the perfect night, and till himself be
wrapped up in everlasting darkness. The Sun in the firmament went back by
miracle for a sign to Hezekiah that he should recover the health of his body.
But if we see any go back who have heretofore shined like the Sun in a
Gospel pofession, we have just cause to look upon it as a sad symtome, that
their souls are in a dangerous, if not in an irrecoverable condition. I have
not gone back (says Job) from the commandment of his lips.

Again, from all these expressions, in that Job speaking of the same thing,
calls it, the way of God, the commandment of his lips, and (in the latter part
of this verse) the word of his mouth, to which he had cleaved and wholly devoted
himself for the guiding of his whole man in the duty which he owed and had
been careful to pay both to God and man.

Observe.

The word of God is the only rule of life. And in this point the word or
commandment of God is to be taken in a double opposition; first, to our own
devises and rules; secondly, to the devises and rules of other men; man must
not prescribe to himself, nor may we receive the prescriptions of men, to
order our practice by. God is the only Lawgiver, and we must receive the Law
from his mouth. He that will please God, must shutt all his own imaginations
out of doors, and have nothing to do with them; It Is not what man has a
mind to do, but what the mind of God is he should do, that pleases him, or
is either a worship or a service acceptable to him. We never dishonor God more
then when we take upon us to serve him our own way, and leaving his rule make
a rule for our selves. Such a serving of God is rebellion against him; as was
told Saul by the Prophet (1 Samuel 15.22.) Has the Lord as great delight in
burnt offerings, and sacrifices, as in obeying the voice of the Lord. Saul
thought he had done very well when he saved the sheep and oxen for sacrifice;
But he was told, that to obey is better then sacrifice, and to hearken then the
fat of Rams. God had commanded burnt offerings, and sacrifice, but he had no
delight in them when his own voice was not obeyed, or when they were offered,
either beside or against his command. ( Luke 16.15.) That which is highly
esteemed among men, is an abomination to the Lord: His thoughts are not our
thoughts, either in the doing of what is good, or in the pardoning of what is
sinful. As man is apt to think, that God will not pardon what he has done
sinfully, so that he will accept of what he thinks he has done holyly, though
he has no rule for the doing of it, but what himself has devised. We always
fail in our measure, while we measure God by our selves. And it is as
dangerous to take the rule of our actions from men, as not to take the rule of
God. In this sense we must call no man Master, nor may we be the servants of
the wisest men. And as we must not be the servants of men, because (which is
the Apostles reason, 1 Cor. 7.23.) We are bought with a price; that is, dearly
redeemed by Christ; so neither may we be the servants of men, in following
their dictates, because we have received a word from God, whom alone we ought
to follow, and none else, but in subordination to or compliance with his word
and the commandment of his lips, or as it follows in the conclusion of this
verse, the words of his mouth.

I have esteemed the words of his mouth more then my necessary food. Job having
given us two negatives, I have not declined, I have not turned back, as
proofs of his integrity and holiness, now gives us an affirmative to make up
the fullnes of his proof. Not to do evil is commendable, but to do good is
a higher commendation. I have esteemed the words of his mouth. (...)
The Hebrew word signifies two things; first, to hide or conceal; secondly, to
prise, value, or esteem. Some render this Text by the former, not as we, I
have esteemed the words of his mouth, In sinu meo abscondi verba oris ejus.
Vul^. Graecos secetus (...) legit non (...) at ventit ac si scriptum esset,
(...) in sinu meo abscondi. Merc.
but I have hid or laid up the words of his mouth, that is a good reading, and
so M^ Broughton translates; More then my daily bread have I laid up the words
of his mouth. The Vulgar gives another reading, In my bosom have I hid the
words of his mouth: in this, following the Septuagint, who by the change of a
letter in the Original, translate the word which we render, More then my
necessary or statute food in my bosom; But I pass that as a mistake of the
text in that word, yet in the former part it consents with Mr Broughton; I have
hid, or laid up the words of his mouth more then my daily bread. And as this
translation holds out a truth in it self, so the sense meets with ours; for as
the Original word does as properly signify to hide, or lay up, as to esteem,
so those things are laid up or hidden by us, which are of most esteem. And
this action of hiding or laying up the word, is often spoken of in Scripture,
both as the practice, and as the duty of the Saints. ( Psalm. 119.11.) I have
hid thy commandments in my heart. And the rule is given by wisdom ( Prove.
2.1.) My son, if thou will receive my words, and hide my commandments with
thee. Wisdom counsels us not only to receive, but to hide the
commandments. And ( Pro. 4.20, 21.) Wisdom goes yet further; My son,
attend to my words, incline thine ear to my sayings, let them not depart from
thine eyes, keep them in the midst of thy heart. The heart (as Naturalists
say) is in the midst or center of the body. Holy truths must be kept in the
midst of the heart, in the midst of the middle, that is, in the safest place,
in that most retired chamber, the midst of the heart. But why should these
words be hidden in the heart, which are and ought to be proclaimed in the ear
and upon the housetop? I answer; we hide things, first, that we may know
where to have them; what is thrown at our heels, we know not where to have.
Secondly, We hide things for safety, or from danger as well as to have them
ready at hand for use. There are enemies who watch their opportunity to steal
the word away from us, and therefore, it is our wisdom as well as our duty to
hide it or lay it up safe. So that in both notio^s we ought to hide the word of
God; first, that we may have it at hand for use: as it is said of the Good
house-holder in the Gospel, that he lays up, and has in his treasure, things
both new and old. Secondly, that it may be kept out of the hand of the theife,
who would rob us of that precious treasure. Satan and the world, are
Word-stealers, and they steal away the Word, not because they desire to make
any use of it, but lest we should; therefore as Gideon (Judge. 6.11.) threshed
wheat by the wine press to hide it from the Midianites, so, seeing there are
mystical Midianites, who daily steal away the Word (that most necessary and
precious wheat) from thousands who have heard and received it, we should (in a
holy jelousie and suspicion of them) hide it out of their reach. In conversion
God puts the Law in our mind, and writes it in our heart; And through that
grace received and daily renewed, we also are enabled to lay it up there.
Pectus meum feci Bibliothe came dei. Hieron: de Nepotiano.
A Good man (as one of the ancients speaks) makes his heart Gods library,
there he lays up whole volumes of holy precepts, and of precious promises.
And look what precepts or promises he finds in the Bible, or written book of
the Word of God, the same he finds transcribed into his own heart, and so into
his life. But I will not insist upon that reading, I have laid up the words of
his mouth, more then my necessary food.

We render, I have esteemed the words of his mouth, etc. These two rendrings of
the word give light to each other. That which we esteem we hide, and the more
we esteem a thing, the more carefully we hide it. No man will lay up that
which is worth nothing; what we hide is of value, at least we judge it to be
so. Childrens pockets are often full of Bables, but to them they are no Bables;
they esteem them as men do gold and silver, else they would not take them up,
much less lay them up.

I have esteemed the words of his mouth. Before it was the commandment of his
lips; some make a distinction between these, expounding the commandment of his
lips, for the preceptive part of the word, and the word of his mouth, for the
promissive part of the word, or for the promises, which are gracious
declarations and manifestations of the love and good will of God to sinful
man. Dicta oris distinguo a praeceptis. dictum oris est verbum gratiosae
nunciationis et promissionis, q. d. gratiam annunciatam libente^ accepi animi
fide. Coc:
As if Job in the former words had a respect chiefly to the Law, or rule of
doing, and in this latter to the Gospel or ground of believing. But though I
see not well how these seems can bear that distinction, yet the matter does,
yea and seems to require it; for though a godly man esteems the precepts of
God as well as the promises, and the commandments are the words of Gods mouth
as well as the promises, yet the promises are the most feeding, fatning, and
refreshing part of the word, and if so, surely they were not left out, yea
possibly were principally intended by Job in this place, that he might show how
his Spirit was carried out to the full latitude and compass of the mind of
God, both in the Law and in the Gospel. And because the promises have so much
soule-food in them, he does therefore elegantly prefer them before his
necessary food.

I have esteemed the word of his mouth. But how much, or at what rate did he
esteem them? it follows in the next words.

More then my necessary food. There is yet some variety observable in the
reading of these latter words. Some give it thus; A statuto meo abscondi
eloquia oris ejus. Mont: Ex statuto meo vel more meo, ut ab ^nevute aetate
assuevi praetermittere, quae deus odio habet. i. e. plena electione and
deliberatione fixa apud se, non externe tantum et leviter divinam legem
custodire apud se decreverit. Cajet: Aliqui ad actiones hominis consuetas quas
de more facit referunt; ut antiquius habuerit legem domini animo recondere and
ei operam dare quam solita and constitua sibi ac usitata facere. Merc: (...)
proprie statutum et decretum sonat, and hinc certam and decretam cibi rationem.
Quicquid advictum and vitam fovendam ac tuendam est necessarium (...)
appellatur. Merc:
I have esteemed or hid the word of his mouth, according to my former manner,
or as I was wont to do: As if he had said; what I now profess is no new thing
with me, I have not taken up this estimation of the word now on the sudden,
upon my sickbed, I have done so long before now, and so I do still. As it was
said of Timothy, that from a child he had learned the Scripture.

Again, Taking the same reading, the sense may be given thus; Upon election
and deliberation, I esteem the word of his mouth; As if he had said, I do not
esteem the word of God for nothing, or as not having considered it, and judged
of the excellency of it, but upon long debate, consultation, and trial, I have
pitched my election upon it.

Further, Some in these words conceave Job alluding to those things which men
do out of long custom, or according to their ancient course of life. As if he
had said; There is nothing more fixed and settled, either in my heart, or in my
practice, then the Law of God; Obedience to it is now become to me as another
nature. I slight in comparison of that, all humane Laws and Constitutions; as
also all my own most practiced forms and customs.

We render, I have esteemed the words of his mouth more then my necessary food.
The Original word signifies a statute, or a law, and so any thing which is
established or appointed for our use, as a law, or statute is. And because our
food, our necessary food, is that which is cut out or appointed to us, either
by God or man, therefore this word is applied to signify daily bread, or
necessary food. Banquets, and great feasts, are without all measure, and
bounds, they know no law, but are usually full of excess, both as to what is
prepared, and to what is consumed, it is seldom that either providers or eaters
keep the rule in feasting. But a due necessary food, which is for the
maintaining of our lives, and the renewing of our strength, to go on in our
callings, this food has a bound, and we eat (as it were) by measure, or by
statute; therefore we translate necessary food, others appointed food, or a
portion. So the word is used ( Genesis 47.22.) Only the Land of the Priests
bought he not, for the Priests had a portion assigned them of Pharaoh, and they
eat the portion which he gave them; their assigned portion is expressed by
this word; a portion it was to live upon; such as Scholars have in Colleges,
and Almes-men in Hospitalls by the Statute of their Founders. And in the book
of the Proverbs, we have it twice used in such a sense ( Pro. 30.8.) Remove
from me vanity, and lies, give me neither poverty nor riches, feed me with food
convenient for me, or with my statute bread; that is, give me so much only as
the law of nature, or the law of my necessity and convenience calls for, to fit
me for duty; with this statute bread let me be fed, let others have their full
tables, this shall serve my turn. Again ( Pro. 31.15.) She arises also
while it is yet night (speaking of the good house-wife) and she gives meat to
her household, and a portion to her maidens; she does not throw the house out
at windows, or make havoc of all, as not caring which end went forward. And as
she is no prodigal waster, so she is neither niggardly nor scraping, neither
pineing nor pinching, but gives a meet portion to her maidens. So here, I
have esteemed the word of thy mouth more then my necessary food. This small
proportion of food greatens the sense of the Text, and heightens Jobs holiness
and piety very much; for when we come to full tables, where there is excess,
our stomachs loath the meat, and the more meat there is, the less some are
able to eat, because the stomach is overcharged with the sight of it.
Appetie may be dulled with abundance; but when we find only a convenient,
necessary statute portion, as it were, so much as is needful to satisfy
hunger, and give some moderate delight, this pleases most, and is more
esteemed by temperate persons then the greatest feast in the world. A man does
not nautiate his necessary food, or loath what hunger craves; a crust of bread,
and that which is course is pleasant then; necessary food is the sweetest food,
and we are best satisfied with that which breeds no satiety. We live most
comfortably with that food, without which we cannot live at all comfortably. So
then, when Job says here, I esteemed the word of his mouth more then my
necessary food, it is as if he had plainly said, I took more care for, and
had a higher esteem of the food of my soul, then for that food of my body,
which necessity forces every man to esteem.

Hence note.

First, That, a godly man has a high estimation of the word of God.

First, He does not only esteem it, but he esteems it as food.

Secondly, He esteems it as necessary food.

Thirdly, He esteems it more then necessary food.

Here are three steps, by which his estimation of the word of God is to be
taken. David says of a godly man ( Psalm. 1.2.) His delight is in the law of
the Lord. The word there used signifies both will, and delight. Some render it
(voluntas) will, and others (voluptas) delight. We may take in both, his will,
and his delight is in the law of the Lord, or he delightfully wills it. Would
you know where the delight and joy of a Godly man is; it is in the law of the
Lord, there it is fixed, and no where else comparatively, but in the Lord of the
Law. These two are inseparable, he that delights in the Law has first
delighted in the Lord, and he that delights in the Lord, cannot but delight in
the Law. There are two metaphors used in Scriptute, which show the estimation
and delight which Saints have in the law of God, or in the word of his mouth.

First, As the word is compared to food; secondly, as the word is compared to
treasure: the word is often compared to food, and the most delicious food (
Psalm. 119.103.) How sweet are thy words unto my taste, yea sweeter then honey
to my mouth. And ( Psalm. 19.10.) They are sweeter then the honey and the
honey-combe: He does not mean the honey-combe barely, as the vessel wherein
the honey is kept, but by the honey-combe he means the honey that flows or
drops immediately and (as I may say) naturally without any art, or pressing out
of the comb, which is esteemed the purest honey; such is the law of God to the
spiritual palate of a Godly man. That feast ( Math. 22.2. Luke 14.16.) to
which sinners are invited, is only the declaration of the word, and mind of
God in the Gospel. The word of Grace is the greatest feast which God makes his
people. Again, the word is as often compared to treasure: what the esteem,
and desire of man is to treasure, I need not stay to tell you. The Judgments
of God (says David, Psalm. 19.10.) are more to be desired then Gold, yea then
much fine gold. And again ( Psalm. 119.72.127.) The law of thy mouth is better
to me then thousands of Gold and silver. And ( ver. 127.) when he saw how some
made void the Law of God, he says, Therefore I love thy commandments above
Gold, yea above fine Gold. As if he had said, because I see some men esteem
and reckon thy law as if it were dross, and throw it up as void and
antiquated, or taking the boldness, as it were, to repeal and make it void,
that they may set up their own lusts and vain imaginations, because I see both
profane and superstitious men, thus out of love with thy Law, therefore my
love is more enflamed to it, I love it above gold, which leads the most of men
away captives in the love of it; and I esteem it more then that which is most
esteemed by men, and gains men most esteem in this world, Fine Gold; yea as
he said ( Psalm. 19.) more then much fine Gold.

Secondly, Observe.

A high and reverentiall esteem of the word of God, works the heart and
keeps it close to the obedience of the word. Job having said before, I have
kept the commandments of his mouth, I have kept his ways, and not declined, I
have not gone back, now comes to the spring of all this constancy in obedience,
I have esteemed the words of his mouth, etc. Love is the spring of action, and
esteem is the top of love; we love nothing which we do not esteem, and what
we love much we think we can never esteem enough; And what we thus love and
esteem, we strive to keep close unto. They that receive the truth, and do
not receive the love of it, quickly turn from it to believe a lie, yea God
therefore sends them strong delusion to believe a lie, because they received
not the love of the truth. As not to love, the truth is a sin, so it is
punished with another sin, the love of error. Though we have taken much truth
into our understandings, yet unless we take it into our affections also, we
cannot hold it long. It Is love which holds the heart and the word together. No
man willingly obeyes that Law which he does not love. Before David could say,
The Law is my meditation all the day, he says, O how I love thy law (Ps.
119.97.) The hypocrite, who hates instruction, and casts the word of God
behind his back; that is, slights and vilifies it to the utmost (for so much
to cast behind the back imports, the hypocrite, I say, who thus casts the
word of God behind his back) will be talking of the word, and have it much in
his mouth, yea he will mouth it so, or be so talkative about it, that God
reproves or checks him for it ( Psalm. 50.16.) Unto the wicked says God, What
have thou to do to declare my statutes, or that thou should take my
Covenant in thy mouth. So then, the hypocrite was very busy with his tongue,
and he could speak much of that which he loved never a whit. But was the
hypocrite a man of his hands also? was he busy in obeying the word which he
had cast behind his back? The next words of the Psalm ( ver. 18, 19, 20, 21.)
tell us what he was busy about, even this, he was breaking the Law as fast as
he could; When thou saw a theife, then thou consentest with him, and have
been partaker with Adulterers, etc. The indictment is large, and upon many
heads, yet all true, and is therefore closed with, These things have thou done
(ver. 21.) I the Lord am witness, and so is thy own Conscience. That Scripture
is a clear glass, wherein we may see how all they will use the Law of God,
who do not highly esteem the words of his mouth. We may read Jobs text
backward for their character; Their feet have not held his steps, his way have
they not kept, but declined, they have gone back from the commandment of his
lips. And why so? for they have esteemed the words of his mouth no more then
their un-necessary food, no more then the scraps that fall from their Table, no
more then (as the Proverb says) their old shoes. I have esteemed the word of
his mouth more then my necessary food.

When Job says, I have esteemed the word of his mouth, etc. It is, as if he
had said, this is enough for me that God has said it, to make me esteem it.

Hence observe.

Thirdly, Whatsoever God says, is to be esteemed for his own sake, or because
he has said it. As God needs not borrow light from any what to speak, so he
needs not borrow testimony or Authority from any to ratify what he has
spoken. He is to be believed for himself. His words need no sanction, but
(ipse dixit) I the Lord have said it, or thus says the Lord; that is enough to
silence all queryes and disputes both about the truth of what is delivered, and
the necessity of our obedience to it. As the word of Gods mouth is to be
obeyed, so it is therefore to be obeyed, because it is the word of his mouth.
That he has said it must command our faith; As he is the true God, so he is
the God of truth. Every word of his mouth is precious. As what God has spoken
must be the rule of our faith, so that he has spoken it must be the reason of
our faith. I have esteemed the words of his mouth, etc.

Lastly, From both these verses, we may take notice of the several steps, by
which Jobs piety did arise to so eminent a hight.

First, He strongly took hold of the steps of God.

Secondly, He diligently kept his way.

Thirdly, He declined not, either to the right hand, or to the left.

Fourthly, He went not back from the Holy commandment, both which negatives
may be resolved into this affirmative, He walked very closely and exactly with
God, in utmost perseverance.

Fifthly, He took a delightful care about all those things, which the word of
God called him unto, even beyond all the care which he took for those things
which are most conducible to and necessary for the comforts of his body or
natural life.

JOB, CHAP. 23. Verse. 13. But he is in one mind, and who can turn hinc? and
what his soul desires, even that he does.


IN this verse, Job is conceived by some, at once making discovery of his own
infirmity, and of the sovereignty of God; But though all agree that they carry
a full discovery of the sovereignty of God, yet many are so far from judging
them a discovery of Jobs infirmity, that they rather discover the strength and
hight of his Grace and holiness. To clear the whole matter, we may take notice,
That there are three apprehensions about the scope and sense of these words.

First, As if in them Job renderd a reason of what he spoke in the verse
immediately foregoing, here giving an account, why he had kept so close to God,
and to his ways; My foot has held his steps, his way have I kept, and not
declined, neither have I gone back from the commandments of his lips, etc.
And why all this? for he is of one mind. That is, God will have his way,
there is no resisting, his commandments must be observed; that which he once
made a law, and rule for me to walk by, continues so still: He is of one
mind. Therefore I must keep close to his mind. It were a vain thing, for me
to turn any other way, when God holds the same way. It were folly for me to
change my practice, when I find no change at all in his precepts; they being
still one and the same in themselves, and having the same obligation upon me.

Secondly, These words may give an account, or a reason of his afflictions; As
if he had thus expressed himself; Though my conscience bears me witness,
that I have not gone onne in any such sinful way, as ye tax me with, nor
defiled my self with such gross iniquities, as usually draw down the visible
Judgments of God upon men; Yet I find God going on still to afflict me, he
keeps his rod upon my back, and his burden upon my shoulders, his terrors
still incamp about me, and his arrows drink up my spirit. Nor will he be
moved by any entreaty of mine to withdraw his hand from me; What ever pleases
him, he will do, how unpleasant soever it is to me. And what is the reason of
all this? He is in one mind: God is unalterable: therefore do not think,
that because he continues these afflictions and burdens upon me, that
therefore all must be resolved into my sin. No, we may resolve all this into
the soveraigntie, and unchangeablenes of God, he is in one mind, and he will
do what his mind is, and none shall turn him.

Egregie tuetur divinam providentiam nam cum amici illa tantum ratione pro
divina providentia pugnent, quod scelera puniat, at Job illam agnoscit cum
aerumnas ille immittit propter praeclaros fines nobis occultos soli deo notos.
Pined: Juri and libertati dei assignat afflictiones, quas amici peccatis. Coc:
Thirdly, (which suits the former) That Job here shows his friends, the true
way of reconciling his own innocence, with the sharp afflictions and troubles
which were upon him, Job felt and saw (and others either did or might) that he
was sorely afflicted, And Job knew (though others did not) that he was
innocent, as to the charge brought against him. Then how shall he reconcile the
justice of divine providence, with his own innocence? His friends knew not how
to reconcile, the innocence of an afflicted man, and the Justice of an
afflicting God. This was a riddle which they could not unfold. And therefore
when they saw God thus afflicting him, they concluded as strongly as if they
had seen it, that Job had greatly offended God. But Job knew how to unlocke
this secret, and expound this riddle; He knew how to maintain and assert his
own integrity while he suffered, and yet acquit the Justice of God in laying
those sufferings upon him. He could say, God is supreme; He is in one mind;
And what he does, he may do because he has a mind to do it. He has deep
purposes and designs, which I am not able to reach or fathom: Therefore
though I complain, I do not complain as if God had done me wrong, but
because I smart, because I feel such pains, and so heavy a pressure upon me.
I am far from saying that he has injured me, though he has thus afflicted me;
nor can any thing which he has done or shall further do, be an injury to me,
for I confess that he has a right to do whatsoever he pleases to do. Thus
we have an excellent defense made by Job in these words, to vindicate the Lords
sharp dealings with him from the least suspicion of injustice, and to accord
the assertion of his own afflicted innocence, with a believing reverence of
the righteousness of God; and so these words of his are the breathings of a
very gracious spirit: teaching us far better then his friends had done, how to
answer for God in his saddest dispensations toward man. They knew no other way
to do it, but by rendering Job a notorious hypocrite, an heinous offender, and
these his sufferings to be the punishments of his hypocrisy and offenses. But
Job resolves all into the unchangeablenes of Gods will, and the sovereignty of
his power. Thus much for the general scope of these words.

Verse. 13. But he is of one mind. (...)

These words undergo variety of readings, I will name four.

First, Some translate thus; For he is alone. That is, Ipse enim solus est.
Vulg.
he is the only Judge, there is none above him, to whom I might appeal from
him, nor has he any equal to balance him. There Is none to be found upon the
earth, no nor in heaven, that can alter and control his decrees, or supercede
and check any of his proceedings; He is alone. Ipse unus est. Pagn: Aliqui
(...) redundare putant. Merc: Cum nemo absolute sit nisi deus and nemo sit
absolute bonus nisi deus; ita nemo unus est nisi deus. Deus est unissimus. Sed
si ipse contra unum agit, quis revocet eum. Jun: Et ipse in uno. Mont: In uno,
supple, fixus, ipse perpetuo sui similis est. i. e. non mutatur ut homo. (...)
Et quis averiet eum. Mont: Et quis redire faciet eum retrorsum. Pagn. i. e: ab
instituto vel a semel statuta sententia.


Secondly, Others conceave there is a redundancy in the affix (beth,) in. And
so in stead of He is in one, the words are thus given, He is one; As if Jobs
meaning were this, There is none One but He, or none One as He. As Christ
says, There is none good but God, or there is but one good, that is,
absolutely good; so there is none one but God, that is, absolutely One, God is
suherlatively one, the one-most-one.

Thirdly, Thus; But if he act against one, who can turn him? And so M.
Broughton; Yet when he is against me, who can stay him? This has a clear
truth in it, and fully hits the scope of the place.

But I conceive a fourth reading, (which leads to ours) to be yet more clear,
and that is, He is in one, and who can turn him? In one; what one? we answer,
in one mind; noting the stabilitie of the thoughts, and purposes of God, his
mind is one, his purpose is one, his decree is one, he is always like
himself in all these. He does not change his mind, as man does; He is
constant and fixed to his own purposes, to the dictates of his own will and
wisdom; He is one And who can turn him?

Or, Who can turn him away? Or, as another renders, Who can make him return
backwards? that is, who can make him go back from what he has determined and
once resolved upon. True repentance or conversion is the change of the mind in
man. Every man that is converted from his sinful state and course by the power
of God, becomes another man (as to his morals and spiritualls) then he was
before, but man cannot turn God, and make him any other then he is. God can
cause man to change his mind; but man cannot make God change his mind, nor
turn him backward. The Prophet says of God ( Isa. 44.25.) That he turns wise
men backward, and makes their knowledge foolish. The turning of the wise
backward, is the altering of their counsels. When they will not alter them,
God can. He says, Their counsels shall not stand, nor shall they reach the
end to which they were appointed. And it is so. Sed quid ego? similis cum sit
sibi semper and idem. Quis rationem ab eo facti dictive reposcat.
But can the wisest of men, or all wise men plotting and laying their heads
together, turn the most wise God backward? They cannot. So that these words
hold forth the efficacy, and stabilitie of the purposes, counsels, and
decrees of God. Who can turn him?

And what his soul desires, even that he does. God is not like man,
consisting of a soul and body; Man is the result of soul and body united
together. A soul is not a man, nor is a body a man; man is a third thing
rising out of both; But God is a spirit. Animam alicujus sumi pro eo cujus est
anima res est nota, quare anima dei, deus est. Sanct:
And when Job says, What his soul desires; The meaning is, what himself
desires. The soul of a man, is indeed the man, because the choycest part of
man; though man has another part, namely, a body, yet the soul is he. The
soul of man, being his best part, is often put for the whole man. But the
soul of God is not put here for God, because it is the best part of Him; His
soul is himself.

Further, This phrase or manner of speaking, what his soul desires, notes
only the intensnes and strength of his desires, or what he desiereth strongly.
The Lord sometimes makes offers to do that which is not in his heart or desire
to do: But what ever his soul goes out upon indeed, or would have done, that
shall be done. Thus the word is used frequently, to set forth the full purpose
of God to do a thing ( Levit. 26.30.) And I will destroy your high places, and
cut down your images, and cast your carkases upon the carkases of your idols,
and my soul shall abhor you. That is, extremely abhor you, I will abhor
you with the utmost abhorrence. And again ( Isai. 1.14.) Your new moons, and
your appointed feasts, my soul hates. That is, I hate them with a perfect
hatred, to show how deep his hatred was of those things (as done by them) he
says, my soul hates them; As if he had said, I hate your formality in my
worship, from the bottom of my heart. We have the same sense ( Jer. 6.8.) Be
thou instructed O Jerusalem, lest my soul depart from thee. That is, lest I
totally depart. I will depart not only by withdrawing some of your outward
comforts, but even those which are the more intimate and immediate discoveries
of my love, my soul shall depart from thee, or, be loosed and dis-joynted from
thee (as we put in the Mergin) that is, I will be of no more use to thee, or a
help to thee, then a member of the body is to the body, when it is dislocated
or removed from its proper joint. Once more ( Jer. 32.41.) I will rejoice over
them to do them good, and will plant them in this land assuredly, with my
whole heart, and with my whole soul; That is, I will do it for them entirely
and affectionatly, or with entirest affection.

What his soul desires. That is, What he desires, or whatsoever pleases
him; Velle est hoc loco aliquid peculiarius expetere, concupiscere, solet ad
rem quam piam delectabilem referri.
We desire only those things which are very pleasing, And those things which
are most pleasing to us, are, to us, very desirable. The desire of man is love
in motion, as his joy is love at rest. But in God desire and joy are not
distinguishable, in him there is no motion, all is rest. What his soul
desires, Even that he does.

The Hebrew is very concise, His soul desires, and does. That is, he no
sooner desires a thing, but he does it, Optat tantam and protinus fectum est.
Merc:
or when he desires, it is done. The will of God is execution; though he
wills many things, which (as to man) are not presently, no nor till a long
time after executed, yet as to himself whatsoever God wills is executed, and
whenever he pleases, his will is actually executed among men. He desires,
and it is done.

From the words thus opened, we may observe according to the first reading of
the former part of the verse. That God is one.

There is one God, and but one. Thus the Lord speaks of himself by the Prophet
( Isa. 44.8.) Is there a God besides me? Yea there is no God. I know not any.
(Isai. 45.5.) I am the Lord, and there is none else, there is no God besides
me. He is one himself, and he has not a second. The Heathens having many
gods, when they were oppressed by any one god, Saepe premente deo dat deus
alter opem.
they sought relief from another. As Sorcerers and Witches go to a stronger
spirit, for help against what a weaker spirit has done. Heathen gods were
devill-gods, and they are many. The Jews degenerating into Idolatry,
multiplied their Gods according to the number of their Cities ( Jer. 2.28.) But
Jehovah, The living God, The Lord, is one God. We affirm from Scripture that
there are three He Is or subsistences in the Godhead (commonly called persons)
Father, Son, and Spirit; but these three are one, not only by consent, but
by nature and essence. Hear O Israel (said Moses, Deuteronomy. 6.4.) The Lord our God
is one Lord.

Secondly, From our reading; He is in one, or (as we supply) He is In one
mind. Observe that great truth.

God is unchangable. I the Lord change not (Mal. 3.6.) The unchangeablenes of
God may be considered in diverse things.

First, In his essence or nature; God knows no decay. He is a spirit, an
eternal spirit; He has nothing mingled or mixed in him which should work or
tend to alteration. God is simple, He is most simple, even simplicity it self.
There is no composition in him, no diversity of qualities in him. Man changes
in his natural constitution, because compounded and made up of different
elements, qualities, and humors, which contending and fighting one with
another, necessitate his change. Every day brings some, though insensible,
changes upon us; And in a few years our changes are very visible, and
sensible. The Psalmist speaking of the heavens, which of all visible creatures
are in nature most unchangeable, yet calls them changeable in comparison of God
( Psalm. 102.26.) The heavens are the work of thy hands; They shall perish, but
thou shall endure; yea all of them shall wax old like a garment; as a vesture
shall thou change them, and they shall be changed. The heavens are the purest
part of the creation, and freest from elementary mixtures, yet they shall wax
old, they shall be changed. In opposition to which the Psalmist adds ( ver.
27.) But thou art the same, and thy years shall have no end. Nor are the
years of God only without end, but himself is without change. Indeed there
is no change of time to God; past, present, and to come, are all the same to
him, and he is the same in all; Thou art the same, or more emphatically
according to the strictnes of the Hebrew phrase, Thou art thy self, always
thy self. As thou art thou wast, and as thou art and wast thou will be for
ever. When Moses desiered to know the name of God, ( Exodus 3.13.) we find it
at the 14th verse; and God said unto Moses, I am That I am; And he said, thus
shall thou say to the children of Israel, I AM has sent me unto you.

Secondly, As God is unchangeable in his essence, so in all his divine
perfections and attributes; all which are essential unto him. God is as
powerful and strong as ever he was ( Isa. 26.4. Isa. 59.1. As high and
sovereign as ever he was, Psalm. 92.8. as wise and omniscient as ever he was, 1 Timothy 1.17.) As gracious and merciful as ever he was, his mercy endures for
ever. (Psalm. 100.5.) As faithful and true as ever he was ( Romans 3.3, 4.) And
as just and righteous as ever he was, he does and will reward every man
according to his works.

Thirdly, God is unchangeable in his purposes, decrees, and counsels. The
Medes and Persians boasted of their decrees, that they alterd not ( Dan. 6.18.)
But the very unalterablenes of humane Decrees is alteration it self compared
with the unalterablenes of divine decrees. We have the Lord thus speaking in
the Prophet ( Isai. 46.16.) I am God, and there is none like me, declaring the
end from the beginning, and from ancient times, the things that are not yet
done, saying my counsel shall stand, and I will do all my pleasure. And as
the Lord establishes his own counsel, so he can unsetle the best laid
counsels of the sons of men ( Psalm. 33.10, 11.) The Lord brings the counsel
of the Heathen to naught: he makes the devices of the people of none effect:
The counsel of the Lord stands for ever, the thoughts of his heart to all
generations. And hence the Lord, by his Prophet, challenges the deepest
politicians, the Oracles for counsel, the Achitophels of this world (...)
strain their wits to the utmost, for securing of their own counsels from
disappoyntment ( Isai. 8.10.) Gird your selves, and ye shall be broken in
pieces, take counsel together, and it shall come to naught; speak the word,
and it shall not stand; for God is with us; he is with us as to protect us
against your open opposition, so to blast your most secret consultations
against us. And as the Lords counsels are immutable in themselves, so he has
condescended to assure us of their immutabilitie ( Heb. 6.17, 18.) Wherein God
willing more abundantly to show unto the heirs of promise the immutability of
his counsel, confirmed it by an oath, that by two immutable things, in which it
was impossible for God to lie, we might have strong consolation etc. Oaths are
sacred and the strongest confirmations between man and man, and therefore
though the counsel of God be immutable without an oath, yet that we might have
the greatest assurance that it is so, God has confirmed it by an oath. That so
the heirs of salvation having two immutable things to rest their souls and
build their faith upon, might not only have consolation, strong consolation;
such consolation as might master and overcome all the fear and unbelief of
their own hearts, and the gainesayings of Satan.

Fourthly, God is also unchangeable in his promises; what ever he has said he
will do for his people, (He is in one mind) it shall be done. A promise from
God is the best security; half a promise, an it may be (as he speaks to the
meek of the earth (Zeph. 2.3.) Seek righteousness, seek meeknes, it may be ye
shall be hid in the day of the Lords anger; this half promise (I say) is
better security then the hand or seal, yea then the oath of the faithfullest
man on earth. (2 Cor. 1.20.) All the promises of God in him (that is, in
Christ) are yea and in him amen; That is, they shall certainly be performed and
accomplished. God does not give promises (as many men do) to raise and then
disappoynt and abuse our Hopes; He does not make promises rather for snares to
catch others, then for bonds to tie himself, as some men do, (which is not
only a great unworthines, and disingenuitie in them, but a great iniquity and
sin) the Lords promises are our richest inheritances; and that not only
because he has promised greater and better things then are in the compass of
any man's power to make good, or in the compass of any man's understanding to
make, but because h^ will certainly be as good to us in performance as he has
been in promise. For He is in one mind concerning all that he has promised.
He will be merciful as he has promised, and pardon sin as he has promised,
He will deliver us from trouble as he has promised, and sanctify all our
troubles to us, as he has promised. He will give us his Spirit, as he has
promised, and save us eternally, as he has promised.

Fifthly, He is also in one mind, concerning his threatenings. He will be as
good as his word in the evil which he has spoken against sinners, as well as
in the good which he has spoken concerning his servants ( Zech. 1.5.) Your
fathers where are they? and the Prophets do they live for ever? But my words
and my statutes, which I commanded my servants the Prophets, did they not take
hold of your fathers? And they returned and said, like as the Lord of hoasts
thought to do unto us, according to our ways, and according to our doings, so
has he dealt with us. That is, his threatenings have arrested us as Sergeants
do a malefactor, or a debtor, and carried us away their prisoners. As if the
Lord had said, Your fathers are dead, and my Prophets are dead also, but the
words which my Prophets spoke to your fathers concerning the sword, famine, and
captivity which should shortly come upon them, these dreadful prophesies dyed
not, yea these are not yet dead but alive and in force against you. If we do
not take hold of the preceptive part of the Law by obedience, the poenal part
of the Law will take hold of us for our disobedience. Thus the Lord professes
( Mal. 3.5.) And I will come near to you to Judgment, and I will be a swift
witness against the sorcerers, and against the adulterers, and against false
swearers, and against those that oppress the hireling in his wages, the widow,
and the fatherless, and that turn aside the stranger from his right, and
fear not me says the Lord of hosts, for I am the Lord, I change not. I will
certainly be not only a Judge but a witness, and that a swift one, against
such wicked ones. There is no evading my Judgment, seeing I am both witness and
Judge; as a witness I know all that ye have done, and as a Judge I have power
not only to condemn you, but also to give you up into the hand of the
executioner; for I am the Lord of hosts; I have all the Armies of heaven and
earth at my command and bidding. Thus I will do, and be ye assured of it, that
I will do so; for I am the Lord, I change not.

Sixthly, God is unchangeable, or of one mind in his gifts. ( Romans 11.29.) The
gifts, and calling of God are without repentance; That is, The gifts of his
effectual calling shall never be repented of; As they who receive them, will
have no cause to repent (yea they will have cause to rejoice in them for ever)
so God who gives them will not repent. He is in one mind, he will not alter
his gifts. As Pilate when he was moved to alter his writing upon the Cross of
Christ, answered, What I have written I have written; that is, what I have
written shall stand; so what motion soever should be made to God to recall the
gifts of effectual calling, he would surely answer, What I have given I have
given, my gift shall stand. There are gifts of a mere outward calling, which
God takes away again. His gifts do not stand with such, because they stand
still with his gifts. That was the doom of the idle servant who had one talent
given him; Take the talent from him, and give it to him that has ten Talents
(Math. 25.15.28.) But the gifts of effectual calling shall not be taken away.
( Jam. 1.17.) Every good gift, and every perfect gift (such is the gift of
effectual calling) is from above, and comes down from the father of lights,
with whom is no variablenes, nor shadow of turning. And as there is no
variablenes in God, as to the matter or general nature of the gifts which he
bestows (they are all good and perfect gifts in their kind, though they are
not all in the same degree of goodness and perfection; God does not give his
people, sometimes bread, and sometime a stone, now an egg and anon a scorpon,
now, I say, as there is no variablenes in God, as to the nature of the gifts
which he bestows) so there is no variablenes in him as to the act of giving
or bestowing. As the Lord gives liberally, and upbraydeth not (Jam. 1.5.) so
he gives liberally and repents not. Thus we see he is not only one, but in
one mind; He is unchangeable; And that not only in his essence and glorious
attributes or perfections, but in his counsels, and decrees, in his promises,
and threatenings, in his gifts and bounties to all his people; He gives and
repents not.

Before I pass from this point, it will be needful to answer some Objections
which are raised against it from those Scriptures, which seem to say, that God
is not of one mind, or that his mind does alter and change.

First, That report which Moses makes of God, seems to say so, ( Genesis 6.6.)
And it repented the Lord, that he had made man on the earth, and it grieved him
at his heart: What is repentance, but the change of the mind? therefore he that
repents is not in one mind. Seeing then God repents, how is he unchangeably in
one mind? A like appearance of contradiction, we find (1 Samuel 15.) not only
with this text in Job, but between the 11th verse compared with the 29th of the
same Chapter. The 11^h verse speaks thus; Then came the word of the Lord unto
Samuel, saying, it repents me that I have set up Saul to be King etc. ( ver.
29.) And also the strength of Israel will not lie, nor repent; for he is not a
man that he should repent. The strength or victory of Israel, is God, for it
was by his strength that Israel had all his victories; and of him Samuel says,
He will not repent, when as himself had said a little before, It repents me
etc. To these Scriptures we may add 2 Kings 20th, which in words holds out a
great change in the mind of God concerning Hezekiah, if we compare the first
and the fifth verses of that Chapter together ( ver. 1.) In those days Hezekiah
was sick unto death, and the Prophet Isaiah, the son of Amos, came to him and
said unto him, thus says the Lord, set thine house in order, for thou shall
dye and not live. Here is a strong affirmation that Hezekiah should dye; And to
the affirmative the negative is also added; Thou shall dye, and not live. It Is
the strongest manner of asserting any thing, when the contrary is denied. As it
is said of John the Baptist ( John 1.20.) And he confessed, and denied not; but
confessed, I am not the Christ etc. So here, Thou shall die, and not live. Yet
we read ( verse. 5.) And it came to pass before Isaiah was gone out of the
middle Court, that the word of the Lord came to him, saying, Turn again, and
tell Hezekiah the Captain of my people, thus says the Lord, the God of David
thy father, I have heard thy prayers, I have seen thy tears: behold I will
heal thee; on the third day thou shall go up unto the house of the Lord, and
I will add unto thy days fifeene years. Does not this import an evident
change in the mind of God? Having dispatched the Prophet to tell Hezekiah, that
he shall die, and not live, He presently after, even before he was got out of
the Court, sends the same Prophet back to tell him that he shall live and not
die. We have the same difficulty in that known place in the Prophecy of Jonah
(Chap. 3.4.) Jonah is sent to Nineveh with a direct message; Yet forty days
and Nineveh shall be overthrown. Notwithstanding as soon as the fast was
proclaimed and kept, and the Ninevites had repented and turned from their evil
ways, The Lord also repented of the evil denounced against them; (ver. 10.)
And God saw their works, that they turned from their evil way, and God
repented of the evil that he had said, that he would do unto them, and he did
it not. Here God repented of his threatening. He had said Nineveh should be
over-throwne, yet when they turned from what they had done, God turned from
what he said he would do. And did he not change his mind, in reference to his
promise to Zion, as there in reference to his threatening against Nineveh? The
promise to Zion runs in this tenor; This is my rest for ever; here will I
dwell, for I have desired it (Psalm. 132 14.) Yet the Lord removed out of Zion,
he departed from Jerusalem, and gave it into the enemies hands. How many
miseries, and captivities did that people undergo, long ago? and how are they
scattered from Jerusalem into all Lands unto this very day? How then shall we
reconcile the Text, and point in hand, with these quoted Scriptures, and many
others of a like interpretation?

How is God unchangable, or, in one mind, when we read of his repenting what
he had done, of his saying what he would do, and yet not doing what he had
said, both in his promises and in his threatenings? How can these changes and
the Lords unchangeablenes stand together? or how is he but in one mind, the
tenor of whose doings does so often vary, both from what he has formerly
done, and from what he has professed he would do. In a word, How is the Lord
constant to what he says he will do, when either he does it not, or does the
quite contrary to it? He that repents is not in one mind, seeing repentance
is a change of the mind.

First, I answer; Repentance properly taken notes a change of the mind; But in
an improper or allusive sense, there may be repentance without any the least
change of the mind. When God is said to repent (as in those texts alleged) we
are to understand it improperly, or only in allusion unto man. The Scripture
in many other things speaks of God, either as condescending to man's
understanding, or as alluding to the common actions of man. God does not act as
man does, yet by such expressions as hold out, what and how man acts, we may
come the more easily to understand what God does. As in the present instance,
when man repents, he does these two things.

First, He cease to do, what he began to do, he breaks the thread of his
former motions.

Secondly, When man repents that he has done, or made such a thing, he is
ready to deface and destroy that which he has made or done: When man repents
that he has set up such or such a thing, he removes and takes it down. Thus
God is said to repent, not because his mind is changed, but because (as a man
that repents) he cease to do what he did, or he destroys that which he
had made. Thus the Lord is said to repent his making of Saul king, because he
meant to remove him from being king; And to repent that he had made the world,
because his purpose was, for the sin of man to deface and destroy the present
beauty and excellency of the world which he had made. God often puts forth the
effects of repentance toward man, but the repentance of a man never put forth
any effect upon God.

Secondly, We may answer thus; God often minds a change: Aliud est mutare
voluntatem, aliud velle mutationem. Aquin: par: 1. q. 19. art. 7.
But he never changes his mind. And so all those Scriptures before mentioned,
note only that God did mind a change, or make a change: But not that he did
change his mind. There is a vast difference between these two, to mind or
determine a change, and to change the mind or determination. As for instance,
a man that is resolved to wear garments suitable to the season of the year,
and temperature of the weather; in the heat of summer it is his mind to wear
light and thin garments that he may be cool, and in the cold of winter, his
mind is to wear heavier and thicker garments that he may be warm. Now if
this man when winter comes leaves off his light thin garments, and puts on
those that are heavier and thicker, he cannot be said to change his mind, for
his mind was always to wear change of garments according to the season of
the year, and temper of the weather. And thus the Lord according to the
changes which he finds among men for the better or for the worse, does both
mind and make eminent changes among them, as to his providentiall
administrations, whether in ways of Judgment or of mercy, but in these he
never changes his own mind, forasmuch as his mind was everlastingly fixed, in
case of such emergencies, to make those changes in his administrations and
dealings with the sons of men.

Thirdly, For further answer, We are to distinguish between the outward
sentence, and declaration of God, and his secret purpose or decree. God does
often change his sentence, or the declaration: But he never changes his
purpose, decree, or counfell.

Quaest: But is not that external declaration, the mind of God also?

Answ: I answer; These denounced sentences or declarations are the mind of
God, yet they are not the same with the counsels and purposes of God, but serve
for the fullfilling and bringing of them about; for by the change which the
sentence revealed works in man, the counsel of God not revealed is effected.
The frustrating of the one, fulfills the other; And the Lords design in such
declarations of his mind, is to bring about or accomplish his purposes and
counsels. God did purposely declare or pronounce a sentence of death against
Hezekiah by the Prophet Isaiah, to the intent that his counsel concerning the
continuance of Hezekiahs life might be fulfilled. And he sent the Prophet Jonah
to publish a sentence of utter destruction against Nineveh, purposely that his
counsel concerning the preservation of Nineveh might be accomplished. The Lords
counsel and purpose was that Hezekiah should live, and recover out of that
disease. But how did he fulfill this? even by sending him a message of death,
which caused him to weep sore, and pray and cry earnestly to the Lord for
life. Thus says the Lord, set thine house in order, for thou shall die and not
live. Then he turned his face to the wall, and prayed unto the Lord, saying,
etc. But then it may be questioned, was that word of the Lord true which he
sent to Hezekiah by the Prophet, saying, thou shall dye. The sentence published
was true, and would certainly have come to pass according to the order and
working of second causes, for looking to them, Hezekiah must die, his sickness
was unto death; In those days was Hezekiah sick unto death. Doubtless his
Physicians and all that were about him gave him over for a dead man. Only God
could restore him, and the way wherein he would restore him was by prayer. So
for Nineveh, if we consider the desert of their sin, the sentence was true,
Nineveh shall be destroyed. But the Lord sent his Prophet to tell them of their
approaching destruction, that they might fast and turn from their evil ways,
and so his purpose for their preservation might be accomplished. Thus the
outward sentence is changed, but the mind of God is not changed. And these
changeable sentences were decreed by God, to bring about his unchangeable
decree.

Fourthly, I answer; When God is said to repent, the change is not in God, but
in us, God is always the same, but we are not. God is so much the same, that
he never alters, and man is so little the same, that he is always altering;
and, when he has done evil, it is good for him that he is so. God did not
change, but Noneveh changed by turning from sin, and Hezekiah changed by
improving more in prayer, and therefore he dyed not at that time, nor were they
then destroyed. The change is in the creature, not in God, when that is changed
which God speaks concerning the creature. He is still unmovable in the same
mind; all the motion is in the mind of man. It is in this case as with a ship
putting out to Sea. When a ship sets out from the harbor, and sails by the
shore, the unexperienced passenger thinks the shore moves from the ship,
whereas indeed the ship only moves from or by the shore. So when we think God
changes, or is moved, the change or motion is only in our selves In one
dispensation we take notice of the love of God, and in another of his wrath, in
a third of his justice, and in a fourth of his mercy. These are changes upon
us, but not in God. And these show that God changes his course toward us, but
they are no proofs of a change in God. For the love of God, and the wrath of
God, the justice of God, and the mercy of God are still the same, but we
changing are cast sometime under the effects of his love, and sometimes of his
wrath, we are sometimes under the saddest droppings of his justice, and
sometimes under the sweetest influences of his mercy. As when a man changes
his aspect, and turns about his body to another point, That part of the heaven
which was before at his right hand, is now at his left; yet the heavens are as
they were, they do not change either their position, or their motion, but the
man has changed his. Thus the wrath, and love, the Justice, and the mercy of
God stand always at the same point; but man turns sometimes Justice-ward,
and sometimes mercy-ward; now he faces the wrath, and anon the love of God. And
doing so, he meets with many changes in the dispensations of God toward him,
but there is no change in the mind of God toward him.

And seeing God is unchangeable, or, in one mind, take this by way of deduction
from it.

It Is the duty of man to submit himself unto and acquiesce in the mind of
God. Seeing the mind of God rests, we ought to rest in the mind of God; that is,
we ought to resign up our selves, and to resolve our minds into the mind, and
our wills into the will of God. What ever pleases God, should please us. He is
in one mind, and that one mind of his has nothing in it but justice, and
righteousness toward all, nothing but goodness, and mercy, nothing but loving
kindness, and faithfulness toward his peculiar people. As the mind of God
revealed in his word, should be the rule of our actions, so the mind of God
revealed by his works, should be the rest or ease of all our passions. The
mind of God is that by which we are to guide our selves in all we do, and to
that we must yield in all we suffer. While we see some sorely discomposed in
their spirits, yea vexed beyond all reason at the dispensations of God, have we
not reason to believe, that they have never heard, or at least not well learnt
and digested this great truth, That God is in one mind. When the mind of God
is done, himself is pleased, and should not whatsoever pleases God, please us
also, yea though it be in it self, bitter and unpleasant to us? A gracious
heart tastes sweetness in Gall and Wormwood, considered under this notion, as
it is the will and mind of God he should drink it, or feed upon it. It was a
strange power that David had over the people of Israel, or it shows that they
had a very strong opinion of his justice and integrity, when it is said (2 Samuel
3.36.) Whatsoever the King did, pleased all the people. What was said of him,
we should say in the highest sense of God, whatsoever he does should be
pleasing to all his people. It was once the saying of a Court-flatterer; That
which pleases the King, Placet mihi quod regi placet; dixit Harpalus, Apud
Herod: lib. 1.
pleases me. We cannot flatter God in saying so. It is but our duty to say
so; we sin if we say not, and say not with our hearts, Whatsoever pleases God,
pleases us. He acts below both the duty and privilege of a man, who resolves
himself into the will of any man, how high soever, or though he be King-High,
and he acts above both the state and proportion of a man (though much below the
duty of a Christian) who does not resolve himself into the will of the most
high God, who is higher then the highest of the Kings of the earth. He vainly
supposes himself God-High, who submits not to the will of the most High God.
Whatsoever God does or will have done, man should say, Even so be it, as God
will have it.

But some may say, if it be so, then it seems we may not endeavor to
extricate our selves from, or to get a removal of any of those evils,
troubles, or afflictions, which at any time press and greive us.

For answer to this scruple, I say.

First, It is our duty in every trouble that God lays upon us, to seek unto
God, and to use all good means for the taking of it off from us. But

Secondly, We must not seek unto God for the removing of any evil from us, as
being displeased with his laying it upon us: we must be quiet under our
troubles, and yet we may both desire and endeavor to be quit of them. Though
God be in one mind, yet that does not necessitate man to one condition, nor
hinder him from seeking a better then that wherein he is.

I have insisted the longer upon this point, because Job gives it as a general
answer to all his friends queryes about him, and as the best expedient for
reconciling the difference between them and him. He is in one mind, And who
can turn him?

Hence learn.

That as God is unchangeable in himself, so none can alter or change him. Some
men are of a very steady spirit, they are not in and out, as we say, forward
and backward: let them alone, and they are true to their own principles, and
they will be true to others according to their promises. Yet, possibly, these
men may be turned aside, and led out of the way, by the persuasion of others. A
subtle head and a smooth oily tongue, may work them off from their own
resolutions. It has been a question disputed among moral Philosophers, Whether
a wise man may be an uncertain or a various man; And they resolve it
Negatively; Wisdom is as balast, which keeps the mind from floating. And it
has been said of a wise man among the Heathen, that the Sun might as soon be
thrust out of his line, as he from the line of Justice; yet let no man glory in
man, no not in wise men. The wisest, and most constant among men may do
unwisely and prove unconstant. The most resolved among the children of men, may
be wrought upon, and brought over to what they purposed not. But this is the
glory of God, that as he is in one mind, so none can turn him, or make him in
two. None can turn him out of the way, either of his intended Judgments, or
promised mercies; what he has a mind to do, he will not be put by the doing
it.

We may affirm three things concerning the works of God, or concerning God in
his workings.

First, The works of God are so full of mystery, that none can fully
comprehend them; there is much in his ordinary works beyond man, and his
extraordinary works are all beyond man. We (by reason of our indiligence) see
but little of any of his works, and some of his works are such, as we can see
but a little way into them with all our diligence.

Secondly, The works of God are so full of righteousness, that no man can
justly reprove, or find fault with them. They who come with the most curious
and critical eyes to examine the works of God, shall not find any flaw or
defect in them. There have been many, who (through their presumptuous folly)
have found fault with the works of God, but there was never any (who with his
most refined wit) could find a fault in them. The Jews of old complained of,
and quarreled at the ways of God as unequal ( Ezekiel. 18.25.) but when it came
to trial, they could prove nothing but the inequality of their own.

Thirdly, The works of God are so full of power, that none can put a stop to,
or hinder the accomplishment of them. These are three excellent perfections of
the works of God; And the last is that which is here under hand. Hezekiah,
though a great King, was not able to bring a work about which he had a mind
to, The rescue of Jerusalem out of the hand of the Assyrians, and therefore he
sends this pitiful cry to the Prophet Isaiah (2 King. 19.3.) The children are
come to the birth (that is, the business is ripe for execution) and there is no
strength to bring forth. The works of the strongest men may stick in the
birth for want of strength to bring them forth. But the works of God never
stick in the birth upon that or any other account. He is in one mind, and who
can turn him? There are four ways by which men are usually turned off from
or stopped in their works, but by none of them will God be turned, when he
has a mind to work.

First, Men are often stopped by outward power; they do not either that good or
that evil which they would, because they cannot, and their cannot, possibly,
does not lie in this, that they have not a power in themselves proportionable
to the work, or because they have meddled with a matter too great for them, and
for which they are no match; but they therefore only cannot do what they
would, because they are hindered from doing it. A man may have ability to
master the work he is about to do, yet not to master the impediments that
stand in the way of it. But all the power of the creature cannot hinder God; If
he will work, none can let him (Isa. 43.13.) The power of men is weakness
unto God. And that which looks like weakness in God, is stronger then the
united strength of all men (1 Cor. 1.25.) The foolishnes of God, is wiser then
men; and the weakness of God is stronger then men.

Secondly, Men are, or may be turned by counsel or advice: and some who could
not be stopped by power, have yet been stopped by persuasion. An eloquent tongue
has prevailed, where a violent hand could not. We read how Abigail prevailed
upon David, a mighty warrier, and mightily resolved to destroy Nabal, and all
his house (1 Samuel 25.22.) So and more also do God unto the enemies of David,
if I leave of all that pertain to him by the morning light, any that pisseth
against the wall. David spoke not only peremptorily, but with a kind of
adjuration; And he was upon his march with four hundred armed men at his
heels to put his purpose into Execution: Yet a discreet woman goes out to meet
and turn him from his course, and turn him she did; she did it effectually.
But what could Abigail a woman do, to prevail with David and his Soldiers?
What she did, she did by persuasion, she laid arguments before him, and
managed them with so much pathetical rhetoric, and clearnes, that he could
not withstand her ( ver. 32.33.) And David said unto Abigail, Blessed be the
Lord God of Israel, which sent thee this day to meet me; and blessed be thy
advice, and blessed be thou which have kept me this day from coming to shed
blood, and to avenge my self with mine own hand. Thus men may be turned from
what they have resolved, especially when they do not well deliberate before
they resolve. But God cannot be turned by any counsel or advice, seeing
whatsoever he purposes to do, he does it upon the unerring advice and counsel
of his own will. Those passions of anger and jealousy, in which (as he is set
forth to us in Scripture) God is said to act, are yet the issues of infinite
deliberation. He that does all things by the best counsel, can never be turned
by any.

Thirdly, Men are often turned by petition, when they will not by argument, and
you may entreat them to desist from what they were about to do, though you
cannot advise them out of it. And we know that of all things prayer is the most
prevailing with God. Nothing has ever turned God so much as prayer has; and
yet prayer it self (in the sense here intended) cannot turn God. We must not
think that we change God by our prayers, though when we pray, God often makes
a gracious change for us. Whatsoever his mind is to do, he does it, yea
though prayer stand in his way. We may say that the greatest providentiall
changes that were ever made in the world, God has made them upon the prayers
of his people; yet he never changed his own mind in the least at the prayer
of his people. The Lord calls his people earnestly to call upon him so, and
meeting him by prayer to stop him when he is preparing to do some great thing
against them, or to bring some great evil upon them. ( Amos 4.12.) Therefore
thus will I do unto thee O Israel, and because I will do this unto thee,
prepare to meet thy God O Israel. We may take those words prepare to meet thy
God O Israel, not so much for a challenge as for a direction. But how shall
Israel prepare to meet God? Not with weapons of war, not with sword, and
spear, these will make no defense against God. No: but with tears and
prayers, these are the arms and ammunition of a Saint, there is no contending
with God, but only by humbling our selves before him.

But you say, prayer cannot turn God.

I answer; prayer has caused and may cause God to turn from his outward
actings and dispensations, only, it cannot turn God from any of his counsels
or resolutions. And because prayer has so great a power upon God, to turn him
from his outward dispensations, therefore he sometimes has forbidden prayer,
when he was resolved not to turn from such threatened dispensations ( Jer.
14.11.) Then said the Lord unto me, pray not for this people for their good. As
if the Lord had said; if any thing could prevail with me, thy prayer would;
But because I am fully purposed to visit their iniquities, therefore I will not
have thy prayers run waste. As for them let them pray as long as they will, as
their prayers come, only from their necessities, not from their hearts, so
they shall not come near mine; nor do I care how long their prayers (which
are but pudle water) run waste; let them pray and spare not; but let them be
sure of this, that though they pray I will not spare; so it follows ( ver. 12.)
When they fast I will not hear their cry, and when they offer burnt offering,
and an oblation, I will not accept them: but I will consume them, by the sword,
and by the famine, and by the pestilence. Their own prayers had no power in
them to turn God; and he who had a power to stop God by prayer, is himself
stopped from prayer, as in the place last quoted, so once before ( Jer. 7.16)
Therefore pray not for this people, neither lift up cry nor prayer for them,
neither make intercession to me, for I will not hear thee. And as the Lord
stopped Jeremie from prayer for them, so he professes that if they who in former
ages had been most prevailing with him, should now again manage their suite
before him, yet he would not be moved by it. ( Jer. 15.1.) Then said the Lord
unto me, though Moses and Samuel stood before me, yet my mind could not be
toward this people. As if the Lord had said; Though they should get my chief
favorites, to solicit their cause, and plead on their behalf, yet they should
find me in one mind, and that even they could not turn me. Jesus Christ
never solicited any cause but he sped in it, but the best of men may be earnest
soliciters and not speed. For though good men will not solicit a bad cause
before God, or pray against his revealed will, yet they do not always hit his
secret will. And God who says to his people generally ( Ps. 50.15.) Call upon
me in the day of trouble, I will deliver thee: yet in some particular cases he
will not deliver them, though they call upon him. Prayer is not only an
allowed, but a commanded means, and so the most probable means to obtain
deliverance, yet that cannot always obtain or fetch it. Yea God who often
brings his people into trouble, on purpose to provoke them to seek his help,
yet, sometimes, will not help them though they seek him. And the reason is,
because he is in one mind, and will not be turned from his purposes, no not by
prayer. If once the Lord be resolved to destroy, prayer cannot save; Though
Moses and Samuel stood before me, yet (says the Lord) my mind could not be
toward this people, cast them out of my sight, and let them go forth, such as
are for the sword to the sword, etc.

But if prayer cannot turn God, then you lay a temptation before us to turn
away from prayer.

I answer; first, as was showed before; prayer may turn God in reference to
his outward dispensations, though it cannot turn him from any of his counsels
and resolutions.

But then it may be enquired; how shall I do to direct my prayer? For I know
not what the purpose or resolution of God is, I only see what his
dispensations are. And if so, I may pray against the mind or purpose of God; I
may ask for the removing or taking away of that, which he is purposed shall
continue; and I may ask the gift of that, which he is resolved not to bestow.

To this I answer; First, That though the mind of God to give us such a mercy,
or to withdraw such an affliction, be a secret to us; yet this is revealed,
that it is our duty to pray about these things. What God will give or do for
us when we pray is a secret; but this is revealed, that in all things we ought
to pray. That Is the Apostles rule ( Phil. 4.6.) Be careful in nothing, but in
every thing by prayer and supplication with thanksgiving make your requests
known unto God.

Secondly, Suppose the things we pray about, whether for the having, or
removing of them, be such as it is not the mind of God either to give or to
remove. Yet we may please God, in praying for the attainement of those things,
which it is not his pleasure to give, and in praying for the taking away o^
those things, which it is not his pleasure to remove. We do not offend God, by
asking that which he will not give, if the thing be such, as is in the general
nature of it according to his will. The Lord takes it well at our hands that we
pray, and is well pleased to hear us pray, when he is not pleased to hear,
(that is, to grant) our prayers.

Thirdly, Be not turned from prayer, because prayer cannot turn God, for it is
a great argument that the mind or purpose of God and his decree is to give
such a mercy, or to remove such an evil, if we have an heart to pray much for
or about it. For God who has said, I will be sought unto, that I may do it
for them (Ezekiel. 36.) has not said unto the seed of Jacob, seek ye me in vain
(Isa. 45.19.) And when God stirs up his people to pray, it is an argument he
is ready to hear. Thou will prepare their heart, thou will cause thine ear to
hear. (Psalm. 10.17.) So that as God takes it well at our hands that we pray
for many things which he has no purpose to give us; so it is a good ground of
faith that he has a purpose to do such or such things for us, when he puts it
into our hearts to pray for them.

Lastly, Let not any stumble at the duty of prayer, because of Gods
unchangeablenes; for we pray, not to change the mind of God, but to fulfill
it; we pray for the fullfilling of his decrees, not for the altering of them,
for the fullfilling of his counsels, not the voyding of them. And because God
is in one mind, and none can turn him, we have the more encouragement to
pray. For all the good things that are in the mind, counsel, and purpose of
God to do for us, and bestow upon us, are borne, and brought into the world
usually by the hand of prayer: Prayer is (as it were) the midwife, to bring our
blessings to the birth. Therefore though prayer cannot turn God, yet we have
no reason to turn from prayer.

There is yet a fourth thing which may stop men, but cannot stop God; And that
is nearnes of relation. Men are often turned out of the way when a near
relation stands in their way. They purposed to do this or that, but that such
a friend, or such a kinsman has turned them from their purpose. It Is rare to
find such a spirit as the Lord by Moses observed and highly commended in the
Tribe of Levi (Deuteronomy. 33.9.) Who said unto his father, and to his mother, I have
not seen him, neither did he acknowledge his Brethren, nor knew his own
children. That is, he was not turned by the nearest relations from executing
that terrible sentence of the Lord upon the children of Israel his Brethren
after they had made the Golden Calfe, of which you may read at large ( Exodus
32.26, 27, 28, 29.) It is truly said, That relations have little entity in
them, but they have the greatest efficacy in them: And their efficacy has
never appeared more in any thing then in this, The turning of man from his
purpose or his duty. But relations have no efficacy in them to stop or turn
the Lord from his purposes. ( Isa. 27.11.) It is a people that have no
understanding, therefore he that made them, will not have mercy on them, and he
that formed them will show them no favor. As if the Prophet had said; When the
Lord threatens to bring evil upon you, possibly ye will say, we are the work
of thy hands, he has made us, surely then he will not destroy us. We find
that argument pleaded ( Isa. 64.8.) But now O Lord, thou art our father, we are
the clay, and thou our potter, and we all are the work of thy hand: Be not
wroth very sore O Lord, etc. To plead our relation to God by Christ is the
strongest plea in prayer, and to plead any relation to God, has a great
strength in it. Yet while some urge these, they signify nothing, and have no
force at all. They who are like that people in the Prophet, a people of no
understanding, spiritual idiots, such as have no knowledge to do good, or no
practical understanding in the things of God; such, I say, may urge their
relation, and get nothing by it; He that made them, will not have mercy on
them, and he that formed them, will show them no favor. The Lord professes
strongly against any power which a relation shall have upon him to turn him,
or take off the process of his Judgment under high provocations from the
highest of men. ( Jer. 22.24.) As I live, says the Lord, though Coniah the son
of Jehoiakim King of Judah were the signet upon my right hand, yet would I
pluck thee thence, and give thee into the hand of them that seek thy life,
etc. To be as the signet upon the right hand, notes the most intimate neerenes
of relation, yet the Lord breaks thorough this, and will not be turned away by
it, from the severest actings of his own purposes. Thus it has appeared that
as the Lord is unchangeable in himself, so nothing can change him. He is in
one mind, who can turn him?

And what his soul desires, e^^^ that he does. Hence observe.

That God does whatsoever he will, or whatsoever he desires to do. There is no
bound to the power of God, but his own will. When the Heathen asked in scorn,
Where is your God? The Psalmist tells them plainly both where he was, and what
he had been doing, ( Psalm. 115.3.) But our God is in the heavens, he has done
whatsoever he pleased. The doings of God know no bounds, but his own pleasure;
He has done whatsoever he pleased. He will not endure to have any articles put
upon him, nor any circles or limit-lines drawn about him. The power of God is
regulated and determined by nothing but his will. A great Prince once said,
That he had indeed a circle about his head (meaning his Crown) but he would
not bear it to have a circle about his feet; he must go which way himself
pleased, and do whatsoever his soul desired. Yet there are circles drawn
about all the powers of the world, only God has none. His government is purely
arbitrary. Nor is it fit that the government of any but his should be so; It Is
neither fit nor safe that any should govern arbitrarily or purely at will, but
he whose will is altogether pure, but he whose will is so far from needing a
rule, that it is one, yea the only unerring One. (Ezekiel. 24.14.) I the Lord
have spoken it, it shall come to pass, and I will do it, I will not go
back, neither will I spare, neither will I repent; according to thy ways, and
according to thy doings, shall they judge thee, says the Lord God. As if the
Lord had said, It is my will to have it thus, and therefore it shall be thus.
That which is most sinful in man, is most holy in God, to act according to his
own will. Man's will is to crooked a rule, for others to guide their actions
by, or for himself to guide his actions by. He that says, I will do this or
that, because I will, does nothing as he ought. There should be much
willingness, but none of our own will in what we do. But as Gods will should
be both the rule and reason of our actings, so it always is of his own. There
is (as I may say) an holy wilfulnes in God, He will have what he will, and he
will do what he will. God will not do many things which he can, but he can
do whatsoever he will, and whatsoever he will do, he is just and righteous in
doing it. And this is the glory of God, to have such a power, and such a will.
And there being such a power in God, with such a will, we need not fear his
power. We leave men to their will as little as we can, whom we trust with much
power. When men in power, have nothing but their will to guide them, we
presently fear oppression and tyranny, and that we shall be far from leading
peaceable and quiet lives under them in all godliness and honesty, which is the
most desirable and blessed fruit of Magistracy. Nor is this a pannicke or
groundless fear, seeing the will of man is corrupt and sinful, selfeish and
revengefull. And who can but fear to be under that power which has no limits
but a corrupt will? But who would fear to be under the power of God, acted by
his will, seeing he wills nothing but what is righteous, just, and good. What
can we expect but right from him, who is righteousness? what but good from him
(in a good cause) who is goodness it self, how great or how unlimited soever
his power is? If some men might do what they would, what evil would they not
do? There Is nothing stands between some men, and the wronging of all men they
have to do with, but the want either of power or of opportunity to do it. The
Lord can do what he will, but he will do nothing but what is good. He is able
to ruin all men, but he will wrong no man, no not the worst of men. What his
soul desires, even that he does; but it is impossible his soul should desire
to any thing but what is right.

Lastly, When it is said, Whatsoever his soul desires, even that he does, or
more close to the Original, He desires, He does. We learn, That, It is as
easy with God to do a thing, as to desire to have it done.

All men would do what their souls desire, but most men desire that which
they cannot do; yea though men have a desire to do a thing, and a power to
do it also, yet it is not so soon done as desired; there must be a
preparation and the use of means before man can do what he has a power to
do; so that though a man has power proportionable to his desire, yet he is
not presently a partaker of his desire. But God can make his power as speedy as
his desire. He can make the declaration of his will, and the execution of it
contiguous. For though many things lie long in the will of God before they are
done, and what he willed from eternity is don in time, and the time of doing it
be yet a great way off, yet he can do any thing as soon as will it, and
whatsoever he wills or desires, is, to him, as done already. ( Psalm.
104.30.) Thou sendest forth thy Spirit, they are created. The creation there
spoken of is providence, for that is a continued creation. The first creation
was the production of all things out of nothing to that being which they had,
but there is another work of creation which is the continuing or renewing of
things in their being, and of this he says; Thou sendest forth thy Spirit,
that is, thy power, they are created, And thou renewest the face of the earth.
Thou make a new world; And thus God makes a new world every year, sending
forth his Spirit, or quickening power in the rain, and Sun to renew the face of
the earth. And as the Lord sends forth his power in providenciall mercies, so
in providenciall Judgments. He looks on the earth, and it trembles; He
touches the hills, and they smoke (ver. 32.) A man can soon give a cast with
his eye, so soon can God shake the earth, that is, either the whole mass of
the earth, or the inferior sort of men on the earth. When he looks, or casts
an angry eye upon the earth it trembles. He touches the hills (that is, the
powers and principalities of the world) and they smoke; If he do but touch
them they smoke, that is, the dreadful effects of the power and Jugement of
God are visible upon them. As soon as the Lord calls, all creatures readily
tender their service. ( Psalm. 105.31. and 34.) He spoke, and there came diverse
sorts of flies, and lice in all their coasts. (ver. 34.) He spoke, and the
Locusts came; and caterpillars, and that without number. If the Lord speak the
word, it is done. God spoke the world into this beauty, he did but say, Let
there be light, and there was light. And he can speak the world into trouble
and confusion; He does but say, Let there be darkness, and there is darkness. It
was an high speech of Caesar, who meeting with some opposition from that young
noble Roman Metellus, said, Let me alone, lest I destroy thee. And presently
added; It is easier for me to do this, then to speak it. Such was his power,
that he could easier take away a man's life, then give sentence of death against
him. This is most true concerning the great God of heaven and earth, there is
no more difficulty in his doing of a thing, then in his desiring and willing
it to be done.

The general truth of this verse carries in it a twofold inference.

First, Of terror to the wicked, God is in one mind, the same opinion which
he had of their ways, and persons heretofore, the same he has still. The same
curses and Judgments which he has denounced against them formerly, are in
force still. Is it not a terrible thing to incorrigible wicked men, to remember
that what the soul of God desires, he does, when his soul desires nothing
but vengeance and wrath for them. Therefore tremble before the Lord ye wicked,
and be ye sore afraid at the remembrance of his unchangeablenes.

Secondly, Of abundant comfort to the faithful and righteous. The mind of God
is mercy to them, and he is in this one mind toward them, none can turn him.
His soul desires to do them good; And whatsoever his soul desires that he
does. What can Saints desire more, then that God should do all that for them
which he desires? and all that he will assuredly do. Therefore rejoice in the
Lord ye righteous, and give thanks at the remembrance of his unchangeablenes.

JOB, CHAP. 23. Verse. 14, 15, 16, 17. For he performs the thing that is
appointed for me: and many such things are with him.

Therefore I am troubled at his presence: when I consider, I am afraid of him.

For God makes my heart soft, and the Almighty troubles me:

Because I was not cut off before the darkness, neither has he covered the
darkness from my face.


IN the former verse Job exalts God, first, in his unchangeablenes, He is in
one mind, who can turn him? Secondly, in his Almightines, What his soul
desires, even that he does. In the 14th ver. he speaks of God in reference to
his personal experience, and brings down the general proposition to his own
particular case. As if he had said; I indeed have found, that what his soul
desires, even that he does, mine own sad experience proves and bears witness
to this truth, my present state makes the Comment of this text; for he
performs the thing that is appointed for me.

Verse. 14. He performs.
(...) in primaria significatione, denotat, implere, finire, deinde in pace
esse; etiam solvere, compensare. Pined.
The word has various translations, but all are well summed up in this, He
performs.

First, It signifies to pay; payment is performance, therefore the same word is
used both for performing and paying.

Secondly, The word signifies, to be at peace; and this agrees well with the
former, because he that performs and pays according to his word, has
peace, both in himself and with other men. An honest play master sits down in
peace, and prevents his own trouble. But to the matter; He (that is, God)
performs The thing that is appointed for me.

(...) quia reddet statutum meum. Mont.
It Is the same word which we had at the 12th verse of this Chapter, I have
esteemed the words of his mouth more rhen my necessary, or my appointed food.
Here we render it, the thing that is appointed for me. The word is often used
in the 119 Psalm, and signifies any Ordinance, Law, Statute, or Decree,
whether divine or humane, for all these are the appoyntments, either of God or
man, about things to be done, or forborne. And as God makes appoyntments of
things which he would have us do, so of such things as himself will do to,
or concerning us.

Master Broughton translates it here, as we do at the 12th verse, implying
necessary food, or the provisions of this life. Because he furnished me with
my daily bread. That which we render, the thing that is appointed for me, he
renders, my daily bread.

Another, learned in that language, Perfecit necessaria mea. Vatab: i. e.
perfecit quicquid mihi erat opus, ipse corporis mei artifex and omnium quae in
me sunt.
agrees in the same sense and varyes very little in words; He has performed,
or accomplished those things which were necessary for me, or all those things
which I stand in need of. He who set up this frame of my body, and has given
me this life, has administered all things needful for the upholding of this
body, and for the maintaining of this life. And so, the words carry Jobs sense
or acknowledgement of the fatherly care and kindness of God toward him. What
his soul desires, even that he does, for he furnishes me with daily bread,
and he performs what is necessary for me, or supplyeth all my wants.
According to which sense Mr Broughton renders the second part of the verse
also; And many such graces are with him. Thus Job spoke at the 10th Chapter,
ver. 8.12. Thy hands have made me and fashioned me together round about. Thou
have granted me life and favor, and thy visitation has preserved my spirit.
So that the mind of these translaters seems to be this, That Job would set
forth the unchangeablenes of Gods decree in giving him his appointed comforts,
as well as sorrows.

Yet rather by this appointment (or the thing which God had appointed him) we
are to understand (as I conceive) his afflictions only and his sorrow; As if
he had said; Quicquid deem decrevit absolvet, sive in bonum sive in malum.
Merc: Non me missum faciet, donea impleverit, quae in statuit. Merc:
I find that God will do what he has a mind to do, how grievous soever it
be either to the mind or flesh of man: for he performs the thing that he
has appointed for me; he has appointed me to sorrow, and I have had sorrow
and trouble store; And he will not dismiss me or let me go out of his hand,
till he has performed every title of what he has appointed for my portion of
sorrow and suffering in this world. And to show how much he was assured of
this, He speaks in the present tense; Not he will perform, but he performs,
etc. As if he had said; He will as surely do it, as if he were now a doing it.

Hence observe.

First, That God will certainly perform all his appoyntments concerning man;
He is able to do it, and he will do it. This point was largely insisted upon
from those words of the former verse; He is in mind, who can turn him? God
does what he has a mind to do, therefore I shall not here stay to show the
certainty of Gods performing what he has appointed, but to show the
appointment of all things which he performs. Take the observation thus formed.

Whatsoever God performs, or does to any man, was before appointed, or
decreed for, or concerning him. All the works of God in time, were his decrees
before time, he performs the thing that is appointed, and appointed by
himself, and his appoyntments are as himself is from everlasting. Whatsoever
God does, we find it under an appointment.

First, and especially, as to (the buisines in hand) the afflictions and
suffering of his servants; All their sufferings are under an appointment. (
Micah 6.9) The Lords voice cries unto the City, and the man of wisdom shall
see thy name, hear ye the rod, and who has appointed it. As if he had said;
your selves by your sins are the procurers of it; we the Prophets are only the
reporters and publishers of it; But God himself is the appoynter of it. As
public and national rods, so private or personal rods are appointed; And as
often as we feel their smart, we should consider their appointment. The
Apostle (1 These. 3.3.) moves the Saints to a steadines of spirit under
affliction upon this ground, that no man should be moved by these afflictions
(he does not mean that we should be without sense of our afflictions,
strokes, and sufferings, but his meaning is, that we should neither be moved
by impatience under them, to murmr at them, nor be moved by undue fears to
faint in them, why?) for your selves know that we are appointed thereunto. The
afflictions are appointed to us, and we are appointed to them, and your selves
know it. This doctrine has been published to you, that afflictions are under a
divine appointment, that there is a decree of God about them. And that, First,
as to the matter, of what sort the affliction shall be; secondly, as to the
measure or degree; how great the affliction shall be. Thirdly, the appointment
reaches the season, and that twofold. First, when the affliction shall begin,
and secondly, how long it shall continue; every thing, in affliction, is under
an appointment.

Secondly, As our afflictions, so also our comforts are under an appointment.
As the Lord has appointed the Gall, so the honey of our cup, as the cold and
winter, so the warm and summer seasons of our lives. ( Isa. 61.2, 3.) The
Spirit of the Lord God is upon me, because the Lord has anointed me to preach
good tidings to the meek etc. To proclaim the acceptable year of the Lord,
and the day of vengeance of our God, to comfort all that mourn; to appoint
unto them that mourn in Sion (and this appointment, in execution, is (...)
fullfilling of the first appointment by decree, to appoint unto them t^^ mourn
in Sion) to give unto them beauty for ashes, the oil of Joy for mourning, the
garment of praise for the spirit of heavines. And as our spiritual comforts,
so our temporal, our outward salvations and protections are under an
appointment. ( Isa. 26.1.) Salvation shall God appoint for walls and bulwarks.

Thirdly, As the wall of protection is set up, so the sword and all other
instruments of destruction are sent out by appointment. ( Jer. 15.3.) I will
appoint over them four kinds, says the Lord, the sword to slay, and the
dogs to tear, and the fowls of heaven, and the Beasts of the Earth to
devour and destroy. And as the destroying sword, so the place whether the
sword shall go to destroy is under an appointment. When the question is put (
Jer. 47.6.) O thou sword of the Lord, how long will it be ere thou be quiet?
put up thy self into thy scabbard, rest and be still; The answer is made (
ver. 7.) How can it be quiet, seeing the Lord has given it a Charge against
Askelon, and against the Seashore, there he has appointed it. He has
appointed this place, this ground, this Country, this City, this shore for
the sword; and the sword being under an appointment, must do as it is
appointed. If we look all the Scripture over, we shall find all things under
an appointment; As first our children are appointed; when Adam had another Son,
his wife Eve said ( Genesis 4.25.) God has appointed me another seed in stead of
Abel, whom Cain slew. Secondly, our wives are appointed. When Abraham's servant
was sent by him to Mesopotamia for a wife for Isaac, he says, If the woman
come whom thou have appointed to be wife to my Master Son, etc. That this woman
rather then any other should be his Masters sons wife, was (he knew) by the
appointment of God ( Genesis 24.14.44.) Thirdly, All our Times are appointed by
God. ( Exodus 9.5.) My times are in thy hand (says David, Psalm. 31.15.)
Fourthly, not only things that are or exist, but things that as yet are not,
come under an appointment. What shall be is as certain to God, as what already
is. ( Isa. 44.7.) And who as I, shall call, and shall declare it, and set it in
order for me, since I appointed the ancient people? And the things that are
coming, and shall come? The ancient who have been long and still are, were
appointed by me, and the things which are not but shall be in a continued
succession, like Linkes of a Chain holding one in another, are appointed by
me. The things that are coming (or that are near the birth) and shall come
(things afar off) all that is to be done, as well as all that has been done,
is under an appointment. Fifthly, as all the passages of our lives, so death it
self is under an appointment ( Heb. 13.27.) It is appointed for all men once
to dye. And as death is appointed, so the season or the when of it is
appointed. ( Job 7.1.) Is there not an appointed time to man? Again ( Job
14.5.) Thou have appointed his bounds that he cannot pass. Sixthly, as the
days of man, so The day of the Lord, the day of Judgment, is under an
appointment. ( Act. 17.31.). Because he has appointed a day wherein he will
Judge the world in righteousness by that man whom he has ordained; the time
is fixed, he has appointed a day, a day of Judgment. When the appointed day
shall be is a secret, but, that he has appointed a day is revealed, and that
he has appointed all the motions and changes that are coming upon the world,
till that day come. So then

First, We are not governed by blind fortune. Nor

Secondly, By a Stoicall Fate.

Thirdly, But by a divine appointment.

Further, The appointment of God determines, first, the end; secondly, the
means leading to and promoting the attainement of the end. Lastly, as God
appoynteth Great things, so the least, A sparrow falls not to the ground
without him, that is, without his appointment, or without an order from heaven,
yea the hairs of our head are all numbered (Math. 10.29, 30.)

This truth well digested is enough not only to supercede and stop all the
undue fears, but to establish the comforts of all the people of God. What can
be better for us, then that all things are in so good a hand, that they are
appointed and measured out by God, that he cuts out our condition for us, that
he forms and frames our state for us. It has been said, Every man is the
fashioner of his own Condition, there is some truth in that, men's conditions
are much according to their actings; but God is the supreme fashioner and
orderer of every man's state and portion. The portion of the wicked is set out
by God ( Job 20.29.) This is the heritage of the wicked, and the portion
appointed to him of God. Theirs is indeed a sad portion, but it is a just and a
deserved one. He also fashions and cuts out a portion for his own people; And
though theirs is often for the present a bitter one, and so deserved by them,
yet he always makes it a good one to them, and has prepared a better for
them, which they have not at all deserved. He performs the thing that is
appointed for me: And many such things are with him.

Some expound this of the parallel dealings of God with other persons; He
performs the thing that is appointed for me, Haec multitudo refertur ad
similia exempla hominum quos deus similiter exercet sive exe^cere possit si
velit. Non unicum (inquit) ego sum exemplum hujus liberae dei potesta^is.
and many such things are with him; That is, I am not the only Instance, or
example of this; God does the like also to others, my case is not singular, I
am not alone in the thing, God has not appointed a portion for me only, and
performed it accordingly to me; no, he does many such like things; yea
whatsoever he does with, or concerning any else, it is by appointment and
according to the determinate purpose of his own will: Many such things are
with him.

But, secondly, I conceive that we may rather expound these words (many such
things) of such things as Job had already suffered; As if he had said, The Lord
bath performed the thing that he has appointed for me; hitherto (I have had
my portion of trouble and sorrow unto this day) and I am like to have more; Cum
jam me quibus voluerit tormentis affligerit, and alia ad huc quanta voluerit
mihi infligere poterit. Hieron:
I do not yet perceive that God has done with me; for as our comforts, and
the provisions of this, so our afflictions and the sorrows of this life, are,
or may be renewed or returned upon us every day. Our bread is called (in that
prayer which Christ taught his Disciples) daily bread, that is, the bread that
is brought out to us every day; And when we have received our bread for one
day, we may say, Mulia jam passuis sum, ta^en si aliud voluerit anima ejus
fiet. Phil: Videtur se patientissime compara^e ad nova flagella.
many such things are with him, that is, he has bread enough for us for to
morrow, and for next day, for this year and for the next, for all the days
and years of our lives, many such things are with him; So, when we have
suffered and been troubled this day, we may say, he has other sufferings and
troubles for us against next day, when these are gone and blown over; this I
suppose is the thing that Job aims at; so that he seems to prepare himself
for new rods, and to say, in the sweetest and humblest composure of a meek and
quiet spirit, It is the Lord, let him do with me, what seems good in his
own eyes. All that God has performed to me-wards he has appointed for me,
yet I am not of opinion that God has spent all his appoyntments upon me;
surely he has not drawn his quiver dry, he has yet more arrows to shoot
at my poor already wounded and bleeding breast. My heart misgives or rather
gives me, that he has not yet showed me all the troubles which he has
appointed for the trial of my graces, for the exercise of my patience, and for
the purging out of my corruptions. For many such things are with him. And this
we may take two ways.

First, In reference to the power of God; he can do many such things as
these, he can do what he has done, his arm is not shortened.

Secondly, In reference to his own deservings; many sins are with me; and
therefore I have reason enough to suspect, that many more sorrows are
appointed for me. I may need more humbling and refining, and therefore it is
like I shall have it, and that another furnace is heating for me. In how holy a
frame was the spirit of this good man! He justifies God in all that he had
done, and he was ready to submit (though it made his flesh fear and tremble at
the thought of it, as he confesses it did in the next verse; yet I say, he was
ready to submit) to whatsoever God would yet do, knowing that he could, and
being much persuaded that he would do much and many things more then he had
done yet. For (says he) Many such things are with him.

Hence note.

First, God has variety of ways to exercise and chasten his in.

As he has more then one Blessing, so he has more then one Chastening; as he
has many Comforts, so he has many sorrows ready at his hand; as he is the
God of all Consolation, so he is the God also of all tribulation; and as he
can make all Consolation to abound, so he can make all tribulation to abound;
many such things are with him. When you have suffered one affliction, do not
think that you have suffered all, there may be a second at hand. They are
usually twin-borne, and sometimes we may say (as Leah in another case, Genesis
30.11.) A troop comes. Troubles come by Troops. We read the Lord threatening
his ancient people the Jews after great sufferings, and Judgments had been
upon them, with a succession of new Judgments. The whole twenty eight Chapter
of Deuteronomie is but a continued description of that variety both of
blessings and curses which God has at hand stored up in his Treasures. Read
how various his Judgments are (1 Kings 8.37. 2 Chronicles. 6.28.) I will punish you
yet seven times more for your sins (Lev: 26.18.24.) And that seven times more
may be understood; First, in reference to the variety of their punishments, you
shall have seven kinds of punishments more then you had; secondly, in
reference to the degrees of their punishment; I will make them seven times
greater then they were. As Nebuchadnezar commanded the fiery furnace to be
heated seven times hotter; so the Lord can command the furnace to be heated
seven times hotter: And as the Lord can chasten and afflict his people seven
times more both in kind and degree, so they may need seven sorts of
afflictions more, and a furnace heated seven times more then formerly, either
for the purging out of their sins, or for the exercise and proof of their
Graces. For though the Lord has a great variety of afflictions at his command,
yet he never lays any one of them upon us, but when there is need. The
Apostle Peter gives us assurance of this from God (1 Ep: 1.6.) For having said,
that Saints are kept by the power of God through faith unto salvation, wherein
they greatly rejoice, he presently adds, though now for a season (if need be)
ye are in heaviness through manifold temptations. We see the temptations
wherewith the Lord exercises the heirs of heaven here on earth, are many, yet
they never feel these but when need is; And many have as much need of the rod
for their spiritual estate, as they have of bread for their natural. Many
such things are with him.

Secondly, Note.

We deserve more and sorer afflictions then God has yet laid upon any of us.
They who sin least suffer less then their sin, how much soever they suffer
here. ( Psalm. 103.10.) He has not dealt with us after our sins, nor rewarded
us according to our iniquities, so great is his mercy to them that fear him.
The Text is to be understood of them that fear God: He has not dealt with us
after our sins, that is, in proportion to our sins, nor rewarded us according
to our iniquities, that is, we have not had that measure of trouble which
answers the measure of our iniquities. Ezra made humble confession of this in
the name of the Jewish Church ( Ezra. 9.13.) And after all that is come upon
us, (much is come upon us) for our evil deeds, Non sunt condignae passiones
hujus vitae 1 ad praeteritam culpam quae remitti^ur. 2 ad praesentem
consolationis gratiam quae immittitur. 3 ad futuram gloriam quae promittitur.
Punit deus intra condignum, and retribuit bona ultra condignum.
and for our great trespass, seeing that thou our God have punished us less
then our sins deserve, etc. Their punishment was great, yet less then their
iniquities. As all the afflictions and miseries of this life are less then the
glory that is promised ( Romans 8.18.) I count that the sufferings of this
present life are not worthy to be compared to the glory that shall be revealed;
So all the sufferings of this life are not to be compared with the deserts of
the least sin committed by us, nor with the least comfort of the Spirit which
is given to us. As the good things which God bestows upon us are above and
beyond any worthiness of ours, so the evils with which he chastneth his
children, yea or punishes the worst of wicked men in this life, are below and
on this side what they are worthy to receave.

Verse. 15. Therefore am I troubled at his presence, when I consider him I am
afraid of him, etc.
This and the next verse express the state of Jobs spirit upon the former
discovery, or how he was affected with this thing, that many such things were
with God. I have often met with other passages in this book which have a
neernes of signification with these words, and therefore I shall with the more
speed pass through them, and part with them.

Therefore am I troubled at his presence. The words (probably) are an answer to
an objection; for his friends had charged him with fear and trouble of spirit
at the presence of God upon another account, even because of the guiltines of
his conscience, or because of his great wickedness. So ( Chap. 22. v. 10.)
Eliphaz having showed him his sin, thou have sent the widow empty away, the
arms of the fatherles have been broken, presently adds the sad effects which
were upon him; therefore sudden fear troubles thee, and snares are round
about thee; As if he had said, thou have been very wicked in thy actions, and
therefore thou art so unquiet in thy spirit; Thou have been uncharitable and
injurious to men; therefore thou art troubled at the presence of God. No, says
Job, my trouble of spirit does not arise from my guilt (though I have sin and
iniquity enough about me, to deserve greater Chastenings then these which are
upon me) but the cause of my trouble arises from the knowledge and
apprehensions which I have of God, who is in one mind, Quia ita potens est, ut
absolute quicquid libet faciet, and hac potestate nunc in me utitur. Merc:
(...) turbare accelerare.
and who can turn him? he performs the thing that is appointed for me; and
many such things are with him. This is the spring and ground of my trouble: I
am troubled both with the feeling of my present calamities, and with the fear
of greater.

The word signifies both to make haste, and to trouble, the reason is, because,
as some say, trouble makes have, ill news comes apace; or, secondly, because
we are very hasty to get out of trouble; and usually overhasty; he that is in
trouble would feign be out of it; no man loves to stick in such a condition:
therefore the same word in the Hebrew elegantly signifies both to make have,
and to trouble. And hence one of the Ancients translates, Therefore have I
hastened to his presence. Expounding it thus; Propterea ad eum festinavi. quod
ipse exponit. Quia me tribulavit ideo relictis temporalibus ad eum festinavi.
August.
Because he has thus afflicted me, therefore leaving all the world, I make
have to him, I throw my self upon him, and leave my cause to him; that is a
good sense, and very spiritual; For the Saints being afflicted, make have to
God, because he is their father, and because he alone is able to be their
deliverer; who would not make have to God upon such an interest? A wicked man
turns from God by sinning against him, and he runs away from God afflicting
him. He that delights in sin, cannot delight in God, who is the avenger of sin.
But afflictions draw Saints nearer to God, therefore have I hastened (says
that translation) into his presence. But we have rendered it (as I conceave)
better to the Intendment of this place.

Therefore am I troubled at his presence. The letter is, at his face, or
because of him; that is, for fear of him.

Therefore am I troubled. Job was troubled upon a twofold account.

Sensu flagellorum praesentium, mutu furorum. Jun.
First, With the pain and smart of his then present sufferings.

Secondly, With fear of further or future sufferings. I am troubled at his
presence.

The presence of God is most desirable; what is it that Saints wish and
rejoice in comparatively to the presence of God? My soul thirsts for God;
when shall I come and appear before God? says David, (Psalm. 42.2.) How greedy
was he of the presence of God? how did he (as it were) tell the clocks, and
count every hour a day, every day a year, till he was restored to it. And in
another place, how earnestly does he deprecate his banishment from the face of
God, as the sorest punishment, ( Psalm. 51.11.) Cast me not away from thy
presence. Yet here Job confesses, I am troubled at his presence.

Hence note.

God can easily vary the appearances of himself to us. He can discover
himself so to us, as that his presence shall be better to us then life, better
to us then ten thousand of these lower worlds, or as the heaven of this lower
world, yea as the only felicity of that heaven which is above. What is heaven,
but this presence of God. Thou will show me the path of life; In thy presence
is fullnes of Joy (Psalm. 16.11.) Thus God can make himself known with a
delightful presence, yet he can make himself known, and often does, even to
his own, with a dreadful and an amazing presence. God in whom there is no
variablenes, nor shadow of turning, can vary the demonstrations of himself to
us, as much as light varieth from darkness, or life from the shadow of death.
God has a light side, and a dark side as to manifestation, though in himself
he is light, and in him there is no darkness at all. Sometimes his presence is
sweetness and joy, even joy unspeakeable and glorious; at other times, his
presence is bitterness and sorrow, even sorrow unspeakeably grievous. There is
nothing so dreadful to wicked men at any time as the presence of God. As it
has been their wretched care to hide their sins from God as much as they
could, so they would count it their happiness to have their persons hid for ever
from the presence of God. That which is both the sin and trouble of the wicked
at all times, is the trouble, if not the sin of some godly men at sometimes,
namely, the presence of God, not in it self, but with respect to the manner of
his manifesting himself to them, and dealing with them. As will appear
further in the next clause of this verse. I am troubled at his presence, When I
consider I am afraid.

As if he had said, Cum diligentius considero ejus tantam potentiam, cujus nunc
in me specimen vides, noe possum quin expavescam, non quid in me, sit
iniquitas, sed ne deinceps pergat sua potentia me affligere. Merc:
When I seriously weigh and have deep thoughts in my mind, when I set my
understanding thoroughly on work to consider the severity of Gods proceedings
with me, and when I remember the wormwood and the gall, those bitter tastes and
sad experiences which I have had already of his dreadful power, then I am
afraid. And this fear arises not from the guilt or accusations of my own
conscience, but lest the Lord should again act and put forth that his terrible
power upon me.

But what fear is here meant? or how was Job afraid upon the taking up of this
consideration? I answer,

There is first, a pure filial or son-like fear, when we are afraid to sin
against and displease our father. This fear is a special grace promised in
the new Covenant, and the beginning of wisdom.

Secondly, There is a pure slavish fear, when we dread God as a Judge, and
revenger. This fear is the issue of the Covenant of works, and the beginning
of sorrow.

Thirdly, There is a mixed fear, not a pure filial, nor a pure slavish fear,
but with a mixture or ingrediency of both. Such I conceive the fear of Job
was; his was a mixed fear; it had some tang of slavery in it, and it had some
touch of Sonship in it; there was much of the spirit of Bondage in it; and
something of the Spirit of Adoption in it. With the former fear many good men
have been much exercised in all ages, especially before Christ came in the
flesh, and the clearer breaking and beaming out of Gospel light, ( Romans 8.15.)
Ye have not received the spirit of bondage to fear again. And ( Job. 14.27.)
Let not your hearts be troubled, nor be ye afraid; that is, be not burdened
and oppressed with that servile and slavish fear which you are subject to Christ
spoke it to his own Disciples, for even at that time deep impressions of that
fear were upon them, doubting much what would become of them, when he should
(of which he had told them) leave the world, and be gone from them. And besides
that special reason which the Disciples then had to fear at that time. This
fear usually arises from two reasons, in others, at all times.

First, From the Consideration of their own weakness and faylings.

Secondly, From the Consideration of the Majesty and greatness of God; when they
Consider these things they are afraid. And though Believers are freed from the
praedominancy of slavish fear, and are endued with infusions of true filial
fear, yet they are often taken with this mixed fear, as in reference to their
own weakness, so respecting the Majesty of God, with whom they have to do.
When I Consider I am afraid of him.

Observe.

That the Majesty and power of God duly Considered, are terrible even to his
own people. Many men have slight thoughts of the great God, they tremble not,
they fear not; what is the reason? they Consider not; they are careless, and
therefore they are fearelesse, they are ignorant, and therefore they are
confident. There are none so bold as they who are thus blind. Who is the Lord
(said Hard-hearted Pharaoh) that I should obey his voice, to let Israel go? I
know not the Lord, neither will I let Israel go. That Is a sad Confidence that
proceeds from ignorance, and a sad fearelesnes that has no ground but
carelessness. I remember what the answer was of a very Godly man upon his
deathbed; who having much trembling upon his spirit at the apprehension of the
greatness, Majesty, and glory of God, it was said to him by a Godly friend that
came to visit him; Sir, you have known God, and been long acquainted with him,
why are you thus full of fear and trembling? O, says he, if I knew God more,
I should tremble more. If we were but more acquainted with, and did more
Consider of the Infinite greatness of God, and of our own distance from him as
creatures, much more as sinners, how should we be swallowed up with divine
amazements; so that we must charge it upon the want of Consideration, that so
many have such undue and unbecoming thoughts of God, as also that their
thoughts fall so much below both their duty, and their sins: if we did but
Consider how sinful we are, and how holy God is, we should always serve him
with fear, and rejoice with trembling; When I consider I am afraid of him. Job
was afraid of him when he considered him; and so was Asaph (Psalm. 77.3.) In the
day of my trouble I sought the Lord, my sore ran in the night and ceased not,
my soul refused to be comforted. I remembered God and was troubled, I
complained and my spirit was overwhelmed. Such a remembering of God is not a
bare act of the mind, in opposition to forgetfulness, as if Asaph had said, I
remembered God, that is, I did not forget him, but I remembered God, that is, I
fixed my heart upon him, I minded him fully, or set him fully before my mind:
though the rememberance of God is the spring of Comfort to us, and that many
ways, yet an Asaph, a holy man, The holiest among many men, may be troubled
when he remembers God, when he Considers his glory, greatness, power, and
Majesty, and himself a poor worm. When the holy Prophet Isaiah saw the Lord
(in vision) sitting upon a throne high and lifted up, and saw the Seraphims
covering their faces and their feet, and heard them crying one unto another,
and saying, Holy, holy, holy, is the Lord of hosts, the whole earth is full of
his glory. Then he said; Woe is me for I am undone, because I am a man of
unclean lips, etc. What a concussion was there upon his spirit upon the
meeting of these two visions; first, that of the holiness of God; secondly, that
of his own uncleanenes, ( Isa. 6.1, 2, 3, 4, 5.) Moses who had such intimacy
with and access unto God, is yet described trembling at his giving the Law (
Heb. 12.21.) And so terrible was the sight, that Moses said, I am exceedingly
afraid and tremble: Moses knew that God was his friend, a God in Covenant with
him, yet Moses said, I exceedingly fear and quake; the sight and voice o^ God
is our Blessedness, yet there may be a troublesome and a terrible both sight and
voice of God, even Moses was afraid: and so was Habakkuk (Chap. 3.16.) When I
heard (that is, thy speech, v. 2.) my belly trembled, my lips quivered at the
voice, rottennes entered into my bones, and I trembled in my self, etc. And at
last wicked men (though now so unconsidering who God is) shall have such
Considerations of him as shall for ever drown and swallow them up in a deluge
of fear: the thoughts of the presence of God will be Eternal terror to them,
who now are unmoved with the thoughts of his presence, or who have not God in
all their thoughts. There is a presence of God which shall be death to them,
who have not lived in a due and awful consideration of his presence. Thus the
Apostle describes the punishment of wicked men (2 These. 1.9.) They shall be
punished with everlasting destruction from the presence of the Lord. We may
understand it two ways.

First, They shall be punished by being put from the presence of the Lord;
That Is the punishment of loss, they shall be for ever excluded and banished
from his presence. That which was their desire here, shall be their misery
hereafter. They who care not for the presence of God in this world, shall be
everlastingly cursed with the want of it, in the world which is to come.

Secondly, I rather conceive the meaning of that Text to be this, there shall
be a manifestation of the wrathful presence of God to them, and that shall be
their punishment; the presence of the Lord is everlasting life, and light, and
joy to his own people; but the presence of the Lord shall be terrible and
dreadful, even everlasting destruction to wicked men; they shall at last
Consider it so much, that they shall fear to purpose. God will power out such
a presence upon them as they shall be equally unable to hide themselves from or
stand before, but must lie down and sink under it into the bottomless gulf
of despair for evermore. If the Godly are sometimes afraid, where shall the
wicked appear, when God appears. When I consider (with Job) I am afraid of
him.

Verse. 16. For God makes my heart soft, and the Almighty troubles me.
Nihil opinor addit novi, sed tantum versiculum praecedentem exponit. Sanct:
This verse is near in sense with the former. Job herein further showing both a
reason why he was afraid of God, as also the effect which Gods dealing with him
had upon his own heart, or how he was affected with it. For God makes my
heart soft.

The word rendered, to make soft, signifies the abateing of the strength of the
heart.

But it may be enquired, what was this soft heart which God made him?

I answer; First, Negatively, by a soft heart here we are not to understand a
penitent heart, or a heart broken with Godly sorrow at the sight, either of sin
acted or wrath threatened. (2 Kings 22.19.) The Lord says by the Prophet to
Josiah, Because thy heart was tender (soft or melted) and thou have humbled thy
self before the Lord, when thou heardest what I spoke against this place,
therefore etc. The heart of flesh promised and given in the new Covenant, is a
relenting and repenting heart ( Ezekiel. 36.26.) I will take away the heart of
stone, and give you an heart of flesh; that is, I will make your heart soft,
which before was hard. Job had such a heart, a soft heart in this notion, when
he spoke thus, but that is not the heart here meant; God had given him that
softnes of heart before; for he is described ( Chap. 1.1.) A man that feared
God; and a man that fears God, is a man of a soft heart. ( Prove. 28.14.)
Blessed is the man that fears always, but he that hardneth his heart shall
fall into mischief. Where the hard heart and the fear of God are opposed; For
wheresoever the true fear of God is in the heart, that is a soft heart.

Secondly, By a soft heart, is not here meant the patient heart; that is a soft
heart in Scripture, a heart which is willing to submit to and bear the burden
that God lays upon it: in this sense God makes the heart soft, when, as he
accustomes his to sufferings, so he fits them to suffer. Man naturally is (like
Ephraim, Jer. 31.18.) As a Bullock unaccustomed to the yoke, both of active
and passive obedience. Only God makes man submit his stiff neck and hard heart
to a suffering condition, and to answer the call of his sufferings. Pharaoh is
said to have a hard heart, because he did not yield to what God called him to
by Judgments, he had not a patient but an unquiet spirit under the plagues
sent upon him, nor did he obey what he was summoned to by the Lords voice in
those terrible plagues. Now, though I grant that an heart made soft in patience
is an excellent frame of heart, yet we cannot understand it so here; for Job
had a patient heart, yea he had abundance of patience before, as he fully
discovered at the very beginning and breaking out of his troubles; he did not
flinch at the Cross, but did embrace it. The Apostle exhorts all Christians to
Remember the patience of Job. And we must apply that Scripture to Job before
he came to this point. Therefore the softnes of heart intended in this text is
somewhat besides this.

Thirdly, Much less are we to understand by a soft heart, a fearful or a
Cowardly heart; that is a soft heart indeed, but in a bad sense. We have it so
expressed ( Deuteronomy. 20.3.) Hear o Israel, you approach this day unto Battle
against your Enemies, let not your hearts be faint, etc. The Hebrew is, let not
your hearts be soft or tender: a soft heart is not for a sword, nor for a
battle. How shall they stand in dangers, who are fallen below them? A penitent
heart, and a patient heart are proper in dangerous undertakings, but a cowardly
heart is the greatest disadvantage in the world; therefore the Lord commanded
this to be proclaimed to his people, Let not your hearts be tender when ye go
forth against your Enemies, or as it is expressed afterward; Fear not, neither
tremble, neither be ye terrified because of them. Job had not such a soft
heart, he was no coward when he complained before, that the terrors of the
Almighty did encamp against him as a dreadful Army, nor while he said here,
God has made my heart soft.

Fourthly, A soft heart, is an effeminate, delicate, wanton heart. There are
too many who have such soft hearts. Men that are fit for nothing but what is
worse then nothing, to wallow in the sinful delicacies and delights of this
present world. The Apostle uses a word (1 Cor. 6.9.) which expresses this
fully. We render it effaeminate, (...). Molles.
but both the Greek and the Latin is soft; that is, persons wantonly and
vainly given. And Moses applies the very word of Jobs text to this kind of
softnes ( Deuteronomy. 28.56.) The tender (or soft) and delicate woman, that would not
adventure to set the sole of her foot upon the ground for delicatenes and
tenderness, (or softnes) her eye shall be evil toward etc. This is not only a
sinful softnes of heart, Liquefecit afflictionibus and consumpsit. Merc: Haec
mollitudo pertinet ad timorem vehemente^ quo quis cord and mente cedit divinae
majestati and potestati, cum quis facile recipit cogitationem et metum supernae
magnitudinis.
but the worst of sinful softnesses. Jobs heart was far from this softnes.
As he was at that time a man of sorrows, so he had not been at any time a man
of pleasure. But if Jobs soft heart were none of these, what was it then?

I conceive the soft heart proper to this place is, a heart weakened and laid
low through the burden of affliction. A heart so worn out and spent that it
can hardly bear any more. God had softened and even consumed his heart with
sorrow and affliction. As he abhorred a hardness of heart to resist the hand of
God, so now he feared that his heart was not hard enough to bear it with that
chearefulnes and constancy of courage which he desiered. Hard things are firm,
compact, and knitt together; those that are soft, are weak and unable to bear
any weight. So that Jobs softnes of heart was his weakness to bear; Teneritatem
and imbecillitatem affert animo meo attendenti ad omnipotentiam ejus. Jun:
And he gives this as an account why he was afraid of the power of God in any
new sufferings. O (says he) God has made my heart soft; that is, I begin to
faint, I find my self drooping, I have not that strength of spirit (and
though I am not a coward, yet) I have not that courage, that hardness, or
hardines of spirit which I have had heretofore. He queried indeed ( Chapter 6.12.)
Is my strength the strength of stones, or is my flesh brass? He had much
strength, but not the strength of stones, nor was he hard as brass. Now he
says plainly, my heart is made soft, it melts like wax at the fire; I am so
little like brass or stones in strength or hardness, that I am altogether like
wax or water. I am so far from having a mind to strive with, or rise up
against God, that I know not how to stand before him, if he (which he seems to
intend) should still go on to afflict me. I am grown weak and unable to
bear, yet my burden remains, and will probably be made yet more heavy. This
interpretation carries a distinct sense in it, and that which is most genuine
to the scope of the place. Mr Broughtons translation of the latter clause of
the verse, suites this exposition of the former with much clearenes; For the
Omnipotent has softened my heart, and the Almighty has made me shrink.
Whereas we say the Almighty troubles me, he says, The Almighty has made me
shrink: For so a man commonly does who either fears or feels that which he
is not well able to bear.

Hence Note.

The heart of a Godly man, even of the most Godly, may be so weakened under
long continued sufferings, that he may find himself utterly unable to bear
them any longer. Wicked men labor to strengthen and harden themselves all they
can, to bear, in opposition to God, and Saints would strengthen and harden
themselves all they can to bear in submission to God. Pharaoh hardened his
heart to oppose God striking him; he had stroke after stroke, and Judgment
after Judgment, yet he would not yield; but at last God made his heart soft in
one sense, though he hardened it in another. God appeared at last too hard for
Pharaoh, he could hold out no longer. And we find the Lord speaking thus by
Ezekiel to his people, who (it seems by the language which God uses
concerning them) had, as it were, set themselves with unholy resolutions to
stand or rather stout it out with God, and bear the worst that he could do
unto them; But (says the Lord, Ezekiel. 22.14.) can thine heart endure? or can
thine hands be strong in the day that I shall deal with thee? When I deal
with thee in ways of Judgment, when I take thee in hand to punish and repay
thee according to thy works, can thine heart endure? no! it cannot endure, it
shall not be able to endure. The Lord does not mean it of an endureing with
submission and patience; So it is the honor of Saints to endure what ever God
lays upon them, but to endure with stoutnes and resistance; art thou able to
stand it out, or can thine hand be strong? no, thy heart and hand will be soft
and weak, thou will not be able to bear it when I come to deal with thee. It
is said of Christ by David his type ( Psalm. 22.13.) when he was under those
terrible sufferings for our sins, that his heart was made soft (and if it were
so with the green tree, what must it be with the dry?) I am powered out like
water, and all my bones are out of joint: my heart is like wax, it is melted in
the midst of my bowels. Thus the sufferings of Christ our head (who was also
the Captain of our salvation, and the mighty God) made his heart soft and
melted him. His heart was not melted with sorrow for his own sin, (for he was
without sin) but the sorrow that was upon him for our sins melted his heart.
Whose heart will not melt and grow soft, (that is, unable to bear it) when God
lays his hand heavy and long upon him? Therefore we r^ad in the Prophet, how
the Lord takes notice of this, and condescends to the weakness of man ( Isa.
57.16.) I will not contend for ever, neither will I be always wroth. I will
not go onne to do, as I have done. Why? What Is the reason of it? not but that
God is able to continue his Contending, and to carry on his war, whether with
persons or with Nations for ever; but he has respect to the poor Creature;
for (says he) I will not do it, lest the spirit should fail before me, and
the souls which I have made. How can souls fail? the soul is an immortal
substance, and shall not fail for ever. The souls of the damned shall be
under everlasting Contendings, and never fail, they shall bear wrath for ever
and not fail, yea their bodies shall not fail, but through the power of God
(sustaining them under his Justice) shall endure everlasting torments. The
meaning of that expression in the Prophet, is the same with this in the Text,
Their heart will be made soft; as yet they have strength, faith, and courage to
bear these afflictions, but if I continue them longer, their spirit and
strength, their faith and patience will fail, and be so worn out that they
will not be able to abide it. God would not Contend for ever, lest (as Job here
complains) he should make their hearts soft.

And the Almighty troubles me. That is, his presence, or his dispensations
trouble me, Deus, in cujus potentia sufficientiaque divitiarum, solatium meum
esse debebat, is me privavit omni solatio, and animam meam plane dejecit,
deserit me, terret me. Sanct:
we see how much the spirit of Job was carried out in the thing; And he uses
a word here that signifies the power of God to comfort and refresh, or God in
his allsufficiency to comfort, yet (says he) this Almighty troubles me; that
is, the thoughts or remembrance of him troubles me. He has cast down and
grieved my soul already, and I am much troubled with fearful apprehensions
of like severities from him again. These words, the reader will easily
perceive to be of the same mind and meaning with the 15th verse of this
Chapter, lately opened, and therefore I shall not stay upon them, but proceed
to the last verse.

Verse. 17. Because I was not cut off before the darkness, neither has he
Covered the darkness from my face.
Here Job gives another reason of his being thus troubled at the presence of
the Almighty. It is (says he) because I was not cut off before the darkness;
or, because I dyed not by thick darkness (so Mr Broughton) we say, because I was
not cut off, he, because I dyed not; both meet in the same meaning. For death
is a cutting off, and death will cut off or mow down the strong, yea the
strongest, as the since does either corn or grass. Thus spoke Hezekiah in his
sickness ( Isa. 38.10.) I said in the cutting off of my days, that is, when I
thought I lay a dying. Job was troubled because he was not cut off.

Before the darkness, or, from the face of darkness. Death it self is darkness,
Quod me non interemerit, auferens a conspectu non tantam hanc caliginem and tot
mala. Merc:
and yet Job would feign have dyed before the darkness. There is a darkness of
affliction and trouble spoken of often in this book and elsewhere, which is
more bitter to man then death it self. Some had rather be taken out of the
world, then endure the troubles of it. This is the first part of the reason, I
am troubled, why? because I was not cut off before the darkness, or before this
trouble came; As if he had said, I should have been glad, or it had been good
for me, if death had prevented these troubles; this troubles me that I dyed
not, that I went not to the grave before these troubles came upon me. Thus Job
gives way again to his passion; he broke out much in this strain or language
at the third Chapter, where at large he opens his wish for death, either that
he had dyed before, or presently after he was borne into this world, that he
might have been at rest, and so out of the reach of those evils and calamities
that did encamp against or beset him round about. The reader may consult what
has been done upon that Chapter, of which this verse is an Epitome, and there
find the nature of this wish for death explained, as also what lively desires
Job had of death, or as this text speaks, that, he had been cut off before the
darkness. I shall here only take notice; That to some, the sorrows of this
life are much more bitter then death it self; yea that God himself has
sometimes in a way of mercy and favor called some out of the world before he
would let great troubles in. There was a promise made to Josiah King of Judah,
that, God being resolved to bring trouble upon that people, yet he should be
cut off before the darkness. (2 Kings 22.20.) Because thy heart was tender, etc.
Behold therefore I will gather thee unto thy fathers, and thou shall be
gathered to thy grave in peace, and thine eyes shall not see all the evil,
which I will bring upon this place. And when Ahab had humbled himself before
the Lord, even he went not without a reward for it, and his reward was this (1
Kings 21.29.) I will not bring the evil in his days. He shall be cut off
before the darkness. Jerome speaking of the troubles that came upon the Church,
Foelix Nepotianus qui haec non vidit. Hier:
does as it were applaud the death of Nepotian upon that Consideration, Happy
he that dyed before these troubles lived. It has somewhat of mercy in it, to
go out of the world before extraordinary affliction comes in; yet in these
things we must take heed of being our own Carvers; it is one thing to have a
promise from God, that the Cloud shall not break in our time; and another
thing for us to wish and desire to be out of the world before the Cloud
breaks: The former argues the tenderness and care of God toward us, but the
latter must needs argue either our unwillingnes to suffer either from or for
God; Or our distrust of his assistance and presence with us to support us in
our sufferings. If God will not cut us off by death before the darkness, we
should be willing to live in the darkest darkness of outward calamity that ever
fell upon this world. Job adds a second reason of his troubled spirit in the
last words of this verse and Chapter.

Neither has he Covered the darkness from my face. I am troubled because I have
lived in troublesome days, but though I have, yet God could have hidden me
from those troubles, or those troubles from me; but as he has let me live in
the darkness of trouble, so he has not at all covered the darkness of ttouble
from me. I do not only live in troubles, but I am always looking troubles in
the face. Mr Broughton renders thus, Nor he yet hides gloomines from my face;
which he also paraphraseth in these words; Because I find neither death nor
ease of sickness, that I should not feel these afflictions. So that as he
complains because he dyed not before the darkness came; so because God did not
hide the darkness from him when it came, but let him have such sad visions of
it. This still imports that Job had not that fullnes of submission to the
dispensations of God, as duty called him to; and for this Elihu reproves him;
yea God himself chid and rebuked him, because he took upon him so often to
give the rule, and did not sit down more quietly under his appointment and
portion for him. Though Jobs patience was great, yet he had not all patience,
or all of patience. And though, I doubt not, but his patience had a perfect
work, yet he did not attain to the perfection of patience. This (according to
our translation) is the sense and sum of these words, concerning which many
things have been spoken in the former part of the Book, whether I refer the
reader: yet before I pass them quite out of my hands, I shall gather up some
other Renderings of this verse, and leave them to the readers Judgment and
consideration.

First, Thus; when I was only not Cut off by darkness, Nam ubi tantum non
excisus sum propter tenebras a facie mea se operit caligine. Coc:
he has hid himself in darkness from my face. This translation the Original
may bear with some little supplement, which is usual in like Cases, when
there is no strain upon the general scope of the place, and the meaning is
clearly this, Whereas I am only not cut off by darkness, that is, whereas my
troubles are such as have only not extinguished my life, when I am in this
pitiful miserable plight, He (that is, God) has hid himself from me in
darkness. So that here he speaks of a twofold darkness or evil that was upon
him: first, affliction upon his body; secondly, desertion upon his spirit; and
so the negative particle not, is rendered by some only not, it is only not
death with me, (...) non, (...). Tantum non, q. d. hoc effecit in me absconsio
ejus ut non quidam exscinderer, sed excisiom proximus essem. Coc:
yet the Lord is pleased to hide his face from me; whereas we say, He has
not Covered the darkness from my face; this translation says, He has Covered
his own face with darkness, or, Covered himself with darkness from my face.
First, thereby intimating that God does often join spiritual troubles with
corporal, the hidings of his face with the troubles of our flesh. Secondly,
that outward troubles are then most grievous to us, when God hides or
withdrawes his presence from us.

Quod non fuerim excisus a praesentibus tenebris, and quod a facie mea
averterit caliginem. Bez:
Another reading gives it as an admiration; I am exceedingly troubled because I
was not cut off by the present darkness, and that he has turned away darkness
from my face: As if Job had stood wondering that his life was thus prolonged;
that his sickness and sorrows had not made an end of him; that ever he should
continue so long in such a storm as he had done, and who or what power it was
that in those his great pressures, both of mind and body, did hinder or stay
him from being covered with the shadows and darkness of death.

A third renders; Because he has not cut me off through darkness, Calvin.
but hid darkness from my face; and he gives the meaning of it thus; the reason
why I am so much troubled and afflicted, is because God has not cut me off
through darkness; that is, because I have not had some secret or private
affliction, but all the world has taken notice of what has been done to me.
God has not chastned me in the dark; these things have not been done to me
in a corner. Job might speak as the Apostle, I am made a spectacle to the
world, to Angels and men, all beholding me in this pitiful condition. And
this occasions me much trouble of mind, because as I see plainly, that the
hand of God is gone out against me, so all others see it too, and they make
several Interpretations of it. Had I been lost in the dark I should have
borne it better, now I am made the common talk of the world, and how to answer
their descants upon my condition, is more then a little trouble to me. This
translation has a fair sense as to the general truth; but the textuall
Construction (as they who are skilsull in the Grammar of the Hebrew know) will
not bear it. And therefore I shall stay in our own translation, which is
fair and clear as to the scope of the Chapter, showing this good man's
passion, breaking forth into some kind of quarrel with the dispensations of
God, because he was not carried out of the world before these troubles came
in, or if he must needs stay, and be contemporary with them, because he found
no cover, no shelter from either the beholding or feeling of them.

Thus I have done with the first part of Jobs Answer to the third and last
assault which Eliphaz made upon his Innocence; But as Eliphaz spoke much
against him, so he could not be satisfied to speak but a little for himself;
He had more to say, both for his own vindication, and the refutation of his
opponent. What he said, the twenty-fourth Chapter will tell us, which comes
next in order to be opened.

JOB, CHAP. 24. Verse. 1. Why seeing times are not hidden from the Almighty, do
they that know him, not see his days?


Ad propositam questionem recte pargit Jobus, rursum affirmans, deum eum in
assertundis probis, tum in puniendis sceleratis, non palam semper, sed
pleru^que acculta quadam ratione, notis ipsi vni temproibus agere. Bez.
THis Chapter contains the second part of Jobs answer, to Eliphaz: the
general scope whereof, is to pull up the foundation of his friends suspicion
of him, and dispute against him, showing that many men do much evil in this
life, who suffer none, and that many who are innocent, suffer much evil, and
are not releived: from both he concludes, that the suffering of evil can be
no concludeing argument that any man is so; for then it must be so with all
men, which most men's experience contradicts.

So that here Job falls downright upon the point in debate, affirming what he
had often affirmed before, that God both in asserting the innocence of the
righteous, and in punishing the sins of the wicked, uses much variety; and
that his proceedings with the sons of men, are so far from being always
open, and plain, that usually they are very secret, concealed, and so much in
the dark, that there is no print of his steps to be found. This seems to be
the design and tendency of the whole Chapter; and the argument of it may be
formed thus;

Ye, my friends have said, that God punishes all evil doers in this life;
seeing then he knows the length and continuance of their days in this world,
why does he yet suffer them to slip out of this world unpunished. And if they
are so frequently punished in this world (as ye affirm) why do not they who
know God see it, and take notice of it?

But so it is, that many wicked men slip out of the world unpunished, and the
godly who know him do not see judgment executed, therefore surely it is not
the way of God presently in this life to punish every offendour; nor can ye
conclude that they who are afflicted are wicked, seeing many of his people are
not only afflicted by himself, but lie under the rod of the wicked a long
time unrevenged and undelivered.

In the whole Chapter we may observe these three parts.

First, A questioning proposition in the first verse, Why seeing times are not
hidden from the Allmighty, do they that know him, not see his days?

Secondly, We have the confirmation of this proposition, and that in two
branches; First, of innocent persons not releived; secondly, of wicked persons
not punished; Thirdly, he concludes his whole discourse in the last verse of
the Chapter by a stronger affirmation of what he had said before; And if it be
not so now, who will make me a liar, and make my speech nothing worth?

Again, More distinctly in this Chapter, we have the proposition in the first
verse; secondly, the confirmation of it, made by an enumeration, of many gross
sins, which wicked men commit, and feel no smart, but pass unpunisht; and
those sins are either, first, against man, or secondly, against God.

Against man, first, by removing of the Land-markes in the second verse;
secondly, violently taking away of cattle, in the third verse. Thirdly,
turning the poor out of house and home, in the fourth verse; fourthly, lying
in wait and watching their opportunities to rob and get their prey like wild
beasts, at the fifth verse; fifthly, reaping and carrying away other men's corn
out of the fields by violence, at the sixth verse; sixthly, using all manner of
oppression upon the poor, 7, 8.9, 10, 11, 12 verses.

Secondly, Job discovers their rebellion against God, and their ignorance of
his ways: for though both these be included in the former acts (whosoever sins
against man, sins against God too) yet there are sins that are more peculiar
and immediate against God. And of these he speaks at the 13th verse, They
rebel against the light; against the light of the knowledge of God shining
with much evidence and clearenes, both in his word and in his works; And then
takes occasion more perticularly to describe, first, the murderer, and his
dark ways, ver. 14. Secondly, the adulterer and his dark ways, ( ver. 15,
16, 17.)

Thirdly, Job shows, that though the wicked do all this, and are not
presently punished, yet that they are under a secret curse, which shall surely
overtake them ( ver. 18, 19, 20.)

Fourthly, Upon this, he again revives the mention of their sin; first,
against the poor, ver. 21. Secondly, against the rich, ver. 22. Together with
their punishment, though late, yet at last, ver. 23, 24.

Fifthly, He re-asserts all that he had said, by challenging all men to
disprove him (if they could) in what he had said, ver. 25. So much of the state
and general scope of the whole Chapter.

Verse. 1. Why seeing times are not hidden from the Almighty, do they that know
him, not see his days?
Locus subdifficilis and salebrosus. Merc:
This (as a learned interpreter gives his opinion of it) is a hard Text, and
there are various renderings of it. I shall touch upon them, and then draw out
that which may be suitable for observation.

First, The whole verse may (as some conceave) be rather read thus; Why are not
times hidden from the Almighty, seeing they that know him do not see his days?
The meaning of which translation is this; it might make a man that is not well
instructed in the ways and providence of God, to think that God takes no
notice of the times that pass, nor of the things done here below, seeing the
best of his servants could never yet make it out, that he punishes ungodly men
according to their deeds in this world. Surely then we may say, That times are
hidden from God, for were it not so, godly men could not but see his days, his
judgement-dayes upon the wicked, and things would not be in such confusion, and
disorder as they are. So that Job either shows what men do ordinarily
conclude from Gods indulgence and patience toward the wicked, and his seeming
slacknes and slownes in avenging the wrongs of his own people, even that as
God is in heaven, so thick clouds are a covering to him there, and that he
sees not what is acted on the earth. As if either the Lords eye did not reach
this inferior world, or that he would not trouble himself about it. Surely
times are hidden from the Almighty, or

Secondly, that Job speaks his own passions, and temptations about this
point; As if he had said, I am tempted to think that times are hidden from the
Almighty, because he does not send present releife to his people, nor present
wrath upon his enemies. Such temptations are discovered in other Scriptures, (
Psalm. 73.2.) My feet (says David) had almost slipped when I saw the prosperity
of the wicked, when the wicked and unholy were not punished presently according
to Justice, he was urged and tempted to think that God did not regard justice,
nor declare himself in his holiness as he ought. And though the Prophet
Jeremiah durst not question the righteousness of God, yet he knew not (in this
case) how to give an account of it, as has been noted heretofore from his
questionings ( Jer. 12.1, 2.) Why does the way of the wicked prosper? etc. And
with this the following parts of the Chapter seem to carry a fair
correspondence, wherein he enumerates many gross practices and impieties of
wicked men, notwithstanding which they pass out of this world in worldly peace.

Thirdly, One of the ancient Rabbis reads the words as a wish, Quare non sunt
abscondita, q. d. aequio^i animo ferrem si essent abscondita. Aben-Ezr:
or a desire, Why are not times hidden from the Almighty? As if he had said, I
could wish they were hidden from the Almighty, and I could bear it better if
God did take no notice of times, then that taking notice of them, he should not
set them in order, and redress what is amiss; but I pass that.

Fourthly, The Latin translation is positive, and direct; Ab omni potente non
sunt abscondita tempora. Vulg: Latini videntes interrogationem blasphemam
opinionem cont^nere; quasi aut abscondita esse dicat aut optet, i. e. dominum
tempora and quae hic fiunt non curare aut non videre, sine interrogatione
verterunt. Merc:
Times are not hidden from the Almighty, yet they that know him are ignorant of
his days; and the reason why they leave out the interrogation is given thus;
because they thought there was a kind of impiety, yea blasphemy in it to say
or querie, Why are not times hidden from the Almighty? As if Job must in saying
so either affirm that times were indeed hidden from the Almighty, or that he
wished they were. Therefore to avoid that inconveniency they turn it into a
direct negative proposition; Times are not hidden from the Almighty. And many
of the Jewish Writers stumbling at the same stone, have judged Job as denying
the providence of God, or his care of times, and seasons here below; but (upon
diverse occasions) Job has been vindicated concerning this point, therefore I
shall not stay upon it.

A fifth translation gives it thus; If times are not hid, by the Almighty, how
comes it to pass that they that know him do not see his days? as if he had
said, were it not for this, or were it not thus, that God does hide times, or
that times are hidden by God, that is, that Gods providence are carried in
secret, and run a great while (as some rivers do) as it were underground, it
could not be, but that they that know him, that is, wise and holy men (as we
shall see afterward) should see the effects, and issues of those judgments.
The judgments of God (says Job) are delayed in their execution or executed in
so secret a way, that they are mostly and to the most of men undiscerned.
Wherein he fully opposes what Eliphaz said ( Chap. 20.16.) They are cut down
out of time; that is, they are presently cut down, no, says Job, God hides
their times, that is, he puts stops and delays upon the times of his revenge;
or as he speaks ( Chap. 21.19.) He lays up wrath for his children, but
themselves are not presently cut down.

(...) cur quare. Cur a Saddai nan occultara sunt tempora.
Sixthly, Thus; Why are not, or why should not times be hidden by the Almighty?
so Mr Broughton. As if he had said, What reason can be given of this, why times
are not hidden by the Almighty? or why should it not be thought right, and
just, that times should be hidden by the Almighty? who can question God if he
will hide times and judgments, or who shall say, it is unequal? The Hebrew
particle (Min) signifies as well by as from, we say, why seeing times are not
hidden from the Almighty; they say, why should not times be hidden by the
Almighty? This rendering bears a clear and a profitable sense, and therefore
I shall give this observation from it.

God does hide times from men. The providence of God and their seasons are not
carried plain to every man's eye; and why should not times be thus hidden by
the Almighty? God does not hide that time from us wherein we ought to do our
work (he shows us plainly not only what we ought to do, but when we ought
to do it, to every work there is an appointed time, and the present time, is
our time for most works, yea for all those works which have a proper tendency
to eternity) but though God does not hide the times from us wherein we should
do our work, yet he does often hide the time from us wherein he will do his
own work, and why should he not? he hides the time wherein he will punish the
wicked, and break the power of his enemies, and he hides the time wherein he
will revive his own people, and deliver the afflicted. There are sometimes
which God keeps, Insita est mortalibus incredibilis quaedam ea quae futura
sunt praenoscendi cupiditas.
and will keep in his own power; as Christ told the Disciples ( Act. 1.6, 7.)
when they asked him, Lord, will thou at this time restore again the kingdom
unto Israel? It is not for you to know the times or the seasons which God has
put in his own power. That is, which he has not put forth or discovered to
the sons of men. All times are in Gods power, but those which he reserves
from men, and keeps under lock and key, these he has more especially put in
his power. God will not let those times appear to men, wherein himself is
purposed to appear. The time of those works of God are wrapped up in greatest
darkness when they shall be done, which being done shine forth with greatest
light and; God will have it so.

First, To reprove and stop the curiosity of man; There is nothing more
natural to man then a desire to know both what shall be hereafter, and when
that hereafter shall be: we are very negligent, and careless in seeking out
the season of that which we our selves should do, Homo est animal curiosum.
but over-carefull and curious in seeking out the season of what God will do.
Man is given to vain curiosity, and he is in nothing more vainly curious,
then in an itch to know the times which God has hidden from him. Most men are
great questionists, and their questions mostly are about times, and seasons,
when shall this, and that be? The Disciples of Christ discovered this spirit
more then once; When Christ had told his Disciples that of those Goodly
buildings to which they admiringly poynted him, There should not be one stone
left upon another, that should not be cast down (Math: 24.2.) They a while
after came unto him privately, saying, tell us, when shall these things be, and
shall be the sign of thy coming, and of the end of the world? It did not
satisfy them that Christ had told them such should be, unless he also tell
them the time and season when they should be. The Apostle found this humor
stirring much in the Church of the Thessalonians, for having spoken of the
resurrection of the body, and that then the Lord himself shall descend from
heaven with a shout, with the voice of the Archangel, and with the trump of
God (1 Those. 4.15, 16.) He, to prevent their inquisitivenes about the time when
this should be, begins the fifth Chapter thus; But of the times and seasons
brethren* ye have no need that I write unto you. Which implies, that either
they had intimated such a querie to him, desiring to be acquainted with the
time and season of those things, or that he foresaw they would be enquiring and
making it their next question, when shall these things be? when shall the
deceased Saints be raised, and the living caught up, when shall Christ descend
from heaven with a shout, etc? Some have made it their study to unvaile the
times which God has hid, and to uncover his secrets. And it is no part either
of the honor or ornament of these times, Mathematicorum and gene^hliacorum
vesana temeritas.
that Astrologers and Mathematicians have been so bold in these studyes. As if
the stars of heaven were either betrusted with the secrets of the God of
heaven, or being so would be unfaithful Secretaryes, bewraying his secrets,
and putting those times and seasons into the power of man which God has put
into his own power. Ancient historyes tell us that the Princes of the world
have been very greedy after this forbidden, or at least unrevealed knowledge.
Being more desierous to know what should come to pass in after times, then
diligent in the duties of the present time; Whereas indeed, which is

A second reason why it is so, God therefore hides the issues and events of
future times, that we might be kept to present duties, to the work and
business of the day. He conceales from man the precise day of his death, that
he might every day be preparing to dye. If men had all times in their hands,
they would quickly lay the greatest and best part of their work out of their
hands.

Thirdly, God hides times to try the faith of his own people, whether they can
depend upon him in the dark; whether when they know not when the time shall
be, or what a day may bring forth, they can yet freely trust him for all their
days. He that lives by faith at all times, troubles not himself about what
shall be next in time, nor what the next times may be.

Fourthly, God hides times, that we may be guided by rules, not by events;
That we may steer our course through this world according to his divine
appoyntments, not according to humane successes. Upon all these and many more
accounts, why should not times be hidden by the Almighty?

But I shall proceed with our reading, to open that, and give some notes from
it.

Why seeing times, etc. As if Job had said, seeing the Lord knows all times,
seeing times are not hidden from him, what is the reason why those who know him,
and are nearest to him, do not know times also? or thus; God knows times,
they are not hidden from him, why do not they know times that know him?

We are not to take time here nakedly or naturally as it notes days, months,
and years, measured out by the motion of the Sun, Moon, and Stars; but
time is to be considered providentially as clothed with all the varieties of
action and event, which are imaginable, as incident to the affairs of mankind
in this life.

Why seeing times are not hidden from the Almighty, etc. When Job says, Seeing
times are not hidden from the Almighty, his meaning is, that Times are clearly
and fully known to the Almighty.

The whole verse taken together seems to be a denial of what is in it self
very probable; for seeing God knows times, Potest esse negata connexio causae
probabilis cum effecto. Coc:
it is most probable that they who know him should know times too: for to whom
should God communicate his secrets, but to those who are near to him, to those
that are his: As if he had said; Give me a reason, if you can, why God, to whom
all things and times are known from eternity, should not make known these
times to those that know him? And so the argument may be formed in this manner.

Such as know God, should know his days, if any know them.

But they that know God, do not know his days; therefore God keeps his days
close to himself; so that whereas Eliphaz supposed Job as doubting the
providence of God ( Chap. 22. ver. 12, 13, 14.) and asks the question, ver.
15th, Have thou marked the old way, which wicked men have trodden. Job answers
here, I deny not the providence of God, but I deny that all the ways of Gods
dealing with wicked men, are obvious to the eye of Godly men, and show me
reason, if you can, seeing God knows all times, why the way of his judgments
are so little visible to them which know him.

But who are they that are described by this circumlocution, They (or the men)
that know God? We may take them in a twofold notion.

First, More Generally for all godly men, for all who are truly such know God.

Secondly, More specially for those Godly men who know God more then others;
there are some who have a peculiar knowledge of him, and daily intimacy with
him, who live as it were in his bosom, and see what is in his breasts,
comparatively to others.

And further (because words of knowledge comprehend the affections in
Scripture) by those that know him much, we are to understand those that love
him much, that delight in him much, that fear him much, and obey him much. Now
though we may expound this text of truly Godly men at large, yet the latter
sort are chiefly meant: why seeing times are not hidden from the almighty, do
not they that know him, godly men, yea his favorites, who know most of his
mind, who as they are after his heart, so in his heart eminently, why do not
they who know him thus, See his days?

Diem domini appellamus cum judicium suum exercit in impios.
Whose days, and what days does Job here intend? The former part of the verse
answers the first question, They are the days of God. And to the second
question I answer; The days of God are those days wherein he works, or
brings forth some great work, whether it be a work of Judgment, or a work
of mercy. For as Times in the former part of the verse, so days here include
the things done in those days, and hence Mr Broughton renders, ways not
days. None (says he) that know him see his ways. Whenever God does
somewhat among men, which declares him in an eminent manner to be God, that in
Scripture is called the Day of God. Thus the Prophet speaks ( Isa. 2.12.) The
day of the Lord of hosts shall be upon every one that is proud and lofty, and
upon every one that is lifted up, and he shall be brought low. And upon all the
Cedars of Lebanon that are high and lifted up, etc. Thus the day of the Lord is
the day of his judgment among men. I pass not for man's day, or for the
judgment of man, says Paul (1 Cor. 4.3. And when he says, 1 Cor. 3.13.) The
day shall discover it, He means a day of trial will discover every man's
work, whether it be silver, gold, hay, wood, or stubble. The day of discovery,
will be a Glorious day of God. The Civilians have an expression which reaches
this notion of a day; They say of a man that has had judgment in the highest
Court, from whence there is no appeal; Summum obijsse diem dicunt
Jurisconsulti. vid: Bold:
He has passed his last day; that is, his highest and greatest trial, because
then there is no more meddling with him, or bringing the suite about again.
Such are the days of God, of which Job here speaks.

Why seeing times are not hidden from the Almighty, do they that know him not
see his days?

From the former part of the verse, Note.

First, That times are known, perfectly known to God.

Yea not only are times perfectly known to God, but firmly fixed and most
wisely disposed of by him; men may know that which they have no power to
dispose of; but the knowledge of God and his power run parallel through all times
and things. So that as when the text says, Times are not hidden from the
Almighty, it notes that they are fully known to him, so also that they are
uncontrouleably disposed, and ordered by him. And as times are known to God,
so he makes them known when and to whom he pleases. When Joseph had revealed
to Pharaoh both the matter and the time concerned in his dreams, then (says
Moses, Genesis 41.45.) Pharaoh called Joseph's name Zaphnath paaneah, which say
some signifies in the Egyptian language, The Savior of the world: Which name,
say they, Pharaoh might give him, because by his advice in laying up stores of
corn in the years of plenty, such a world of men, or so great a part of the
world, was saved from perishing by famine in the years of scarcity. But, say
others, deriving the word from an Hebrew root, it signifies a revealer of
secrets. Which title of honor Joseph well deserved, and was most proper to
him, seeing he had revealed that Great secret unto Pharaoh, both that there
should be a famine, as also the time and season of it. But where had Joseph
this secret? was it from any astrologicall skill of his own? He tells us
plainly whence it was at the 15th and 16th verses of the same Chapter; for
when Pharaoh had said to Joseph; I have heard say of thee that thou can
understand a dream to interpret it; He presently answers, first, Negatively,
It is not in me; and then affirmatively, God shall give Pharaoh an answer of
peace. See the like in that most remarkable passage ( Den. 2.17, 18, 19, 20,
21.) From all which we learn that God knows times and changes times, that
is, makes great changes in times according to the counsel of his own will.

First, If we take time, for the succession of days, weeks, months, years,
and ages, thus the Lord knows times. The number of the days of man, the
precise number of the years and ages wherein any worldly state or power shall
continue, are not hidden from him.

Secondly, Times are not hidden from God, as times are taken for the seasons
and opportunities of action. The Lord knows what time will be as a wheel or
as a socket fitted for the carrying on or establishing of every work. We are
often troubled at this, and miss our season, but God knows every season, he
knows the times, and therefore can time every work exactly. And the Hebrew
word here used, (...) denotat congruum tempus.
properly signifies a fit or a convenient time, implying that time, in that
notion, is not hidden from God. ( Isa. 50.4.) God has given me the tongue of
the learned, that I might speak a word in season to him that is weary. Which
some translate thus, That I might know the appointed time to the afflicted. An
afflicted soul must be watched, and a season taken, these times are not hidden
from the Almighty, he knows the opportunity, and therefore can direct him
that speaks to a wearyed soul, as to speak proper and taking matter, so to
speak it in a proper and taking time, when it shall be as welcome to the soul
as rain to the dry and thirsty ground. David says to the Lord ( Psalm.
119.23.) It is time Lord for thee to work, for they have made void thy Law;
that is, now is the season, and opportunity for thee to work, if ever thou will
show thy self do it now. And when David confessed ( Psalm. 31.15.) My times
are in thy hand. He means that the seasons of his comforts, Per tempora
intelligit rerum vicissitudines, divitias et pauperiem pacem and bellum etc.
Theodoret:
and of his sorrows, all the turnings and changes of his life from one
condition to another, were cast and ordered by the power and wisdom of God.
Why seeing times are not hidden from the Almighty, Do they that know him, not
see his days.

Thus Job describes the persons that see not the days of God; they are such as
know him. Which character, as was showed before, belongs to every Godly man,
though it be more peculiar to some.

Hence note.

First, Every Godly man knows God.

And none but the Godly know him indeed; many ungodly men profess they know
God, and they may know him notionally, but no ungodly man knows him truly,
experimentally, or practically. Many ungodly men have a form of knowledge, and
of the truth in the Law (as the Apostle speaks of the Jews. Romans 2.20.) but
no ungodly man feels the power of knowledge, and of the truth in the Law.
Pietas est cognitio scientiaque dei. Trismeg.
And therefore the wicked are spoken of in Scripture, as not knowing God (
Jere. 10.25.) Power out thy fury upon the heathen that know thee not. And when
the Prophet describes the wickedness of the Jewish State, he says ( Hos.
4.1.) There is no knowledge of God in the Land. Which the Chalde Paraphrast
renders thus; Neither are there any who walk in the fear of God in the land;
where there is no knowledge of God, there is no fear of God. We neither love
nor fear him of whom we have no knowledge; nor can we believe in or trust him,
whom we know not. ( Psalm. 9.10.) They that know thy name, will put their trust
in thee; That is, the truly godly will trust in thee, for they know thy name,
but they that know thee not, how can they trust upon thee? and therefore the
Prophet calls us to boast in, the knowledge of God. ( Jere. 9.23.) Thus says
the Lord, let not the wise man glory in his wisdom, neither let the mighty man
glory in his might, let not the rich man glory in his riches, but let him that
glories, glory in this, that he understands, and knows me, that I am the
Lord whech exercise loving kindness, judgment, and righteousness in the
earth, for in these things I delight says the Lord. There is nothing in this
world worth the boasting in, but the holy knowledge of a holy God, or such a
knowledge of God, the fruit whereof is a godly life here, and the end whereof
is an eternal life hereafter. Joh. 17.3. This is eternal life, that they may
know thee the only true God, and Jesus Christ whom thou have sent. This
knowledge of God does not floate in the brain, but sinkes into the heart, and
is rooted in the affections. Thus the Apostle John argues (1 Epist. Chap. 2. v.
3, 4, 5, 6.) Hereby we know that we know him, if we keep his Commandments, he
that says he knows him, and keeps not his commandment is a liar, and the
truth is not in him; As if he had said, The true knowledge of God is an
obedientiall knowledge, so that if any man says he knows God, while his life
is not suitable to what he knows, this man's profession is vain, and himself
is a liar; Whosoever keeps his word, in him verily is the love of God
perfected, that is, he loves God with a perfect or sincere love, and the love
of God is perfected toward him. The scope of his whole discourse there is to
show that the true knowledge of God is the keeping of the word of God. Many are
so ignorant of God, that they know not the word which they should keep, and
all they who knowing the word keep it not, will at last be numbered among the
ignorant, or among those that know not God: But their condition will be worse,
and their punishment greater then theirs who never knew God according to the
teachings of his word. Their estate will be bad enough, who perish for want of
the knowledge of God, then, what will their end be, who perish in the neglect
or abuse of plentiful knowledge!

From the second notion of the words, they that know him, as they intimate a
sort of Godly men, who have nearer acquaintance with, and freer access to God
then others.

Observe.

That as all godly men know God, which the wicked do not, so some godly men
have such a knowledge of God as many who are godly have not. Though the
knowledge of all godly men be of the same nature and kind, yet not of the same
degree and height. We read of some who in old time were called Seers (1 Samuel
9.9.) as if they only had been endued with sight, and all others were blind
in the things of God. They were the only seers, yea they were foreseers,
because God did often reveal himself, and declare to them what he was about
to do in dreams and visions. Now as in those times there were some men called
seers, so in these times some may be called knowers, as if none knew any thing
of God comparatively to them, or as if other godly men were ignorant and
understood nothing of him. When God (1 Samuel 3.) appeared to Samuel in a vision,
and revealed the doom of Elies house to him; the Text says, at the 7th verse,
Now Samuel did not yet know the Lord; surely Samuel did know the Lord as other
godly did in those times, though he were but young; yea it is said, The child
Samuel ministered before the Lord; and did not he know the Lord? no doubt he
did. The meaning therefore is, Samuel did not yet know the Lord by any special
intimacy with him, or particular revelation from him, as afterward he did; he
became a knower of God at last, though then he did not know God, in this
peculiar sense. But God having revealed to him the secret what he would do to
Elies house, then he knew God, he knew him as a favorite, that is trusted with
secrets. So David speaks ( Psalm. 25.14.) The secret of the Lord is with them
that fear him. There is a secret in the plainest truths and doctrines of
Godliness, both in Law and Gospel; and many know the doctrine, who know not the
secret; any common professor may know the doctrine, but the sincere only know
the secret, that is, the power and efficacy, the sweetness of comfort of the
doctrine. There is also a secret of God with his in blessing and prospering
them in the world; of which Job speaks ( Chap. 29.4.) as there is also a
secret and imperceptible curse, which the Prophet calls the Lords blowing upon
what men have in their possession, or for their use ( Hag. 1.9.) But besides
these there is a secret of favor, which is the sealing of the Spirit, the gift
of the hidden Manna, and of the white stone, with a new name in it, which no
man knows saving he that receives it ( Rev. 2.17) This secret of the Lord is
with them that fear him; and there is yet another secret of his with them,
even the secret of his purpose and intendment concerning his own providentiall
workings. Which while many or all see, yet they know not the meaning of them, I
mean it not only of the wicked and carnal, but even of many who are holy and
spiritual in the maine. The secrets of providence are known only to some
choice ones, to some of an excellent Spirit and high attainements, to some
Abraham's, etc. intimate friends, who are to God as his own soul. There is a
secret of the Lord, which is with all them that fear him, yet some of his
secrets are not with many of them who fear him. What Job spoke in the 12th
Chapter of this Book, ver. 2. reproving the pride of his friends; Ye are the
men, and wisdom shall dye with you; you (I trow) have engrossed all wisdom,
and others must borrow of you; The same we may speak soberly and approvingly
of some humble Godly men, they have the knowledge of God, and it is but little
that others have, though they have a saving knowledge. Some conceive the
Prophet upbraiding the Jews ( Isa. 58.2.) As if they affected to be looked
upon, not only as such as know God, but as such as know him intimately, and
were his bosom friends. They seek me daily, and delight to know my ways, as
a nation that did righteousness, and forsook not the ordinance of their God,
they ask of me the Ordinances of Justice, they take delight in approaching
unto God. They who do indeed, as these Jews seemed to do, may be numbered
among those of the highest form that know God. Why do they that know him, not
see his days.

Here Job has found out somewhat knowable, which they who know God, do not
always know; and that is, as has been showed, the season of his judgments.

Hence Note.

First, The judgments of God are often either deferred, carried so closely,
and secretly, that the wisest and holiest men cannot always discern or see
them. The judgments of God are often deferred in this life, and they are very
often concealed, though presently executed. That is not always true which
Eliphaz asserted ( Chap. 22.19.) The righteous see it and are glad, the
innocent laugh them to scorn. The righteous sometimes see the judgments of
God upon wicked men, and his care watching over themselves, but they do not
always see either; for as a wicked man may do evil a hundred times, that is,
very often, and go unpunished, as is intimated ( Eccl. 8.12.) So a wicked man
may be punished a hundred times, and yet not one of his punishments seen. Some
judgments of God are great and sore, which yet fall not under the observation
of the best, of the wisest, of the holiest in the world; They that know him,
do not see his days; God (for terror and warning to others) does judgment
upon some openly ( Deuteronomy. 7.9, 10.) Know therefore the Lord thy God, he is God,
the faithful God, who keeps covenant and mercy with them that love him, and
keep his commandments to a thousand generations, and repayeth them that hate
him, to their face to destroy them; He will not be slack to him that hates
him, he will repay him to his face. Here are two things in this Text concerning
the judgments of God; That they shall come, first, suddenly; secondly, openly;
they shall come suddenly, God will not be slack, they shall come openly, God
will repay them to their face; as they sinned openly, so they shall be punished
openly. Thus God repayd the Sodomites, he paid them to their face; so he repayd
Pharaoh, and so the rebelling Jews; and he was not slack, (for as the Psalmist
says) while the meat was in their mouth, the wrath of God fell upon them.
Thus it is sometimes: yet judgments are often deferred, and hidden. What the
Apostle speaks ( Romans 9.22.) is applicable here; God willing to show his
wrath, and make his power known, endured with much long suffering the vessels
of wrath fitted for destruction; there are vessels of wrath fitted for
destruction, thrown to hell, not only to a temporal, but to an eternal
destruction; yet God did endure them with much long suffering; that is, he did
not presently power out wrath upon them, he was so far from casting them
presently to hell, that he did not afflict them with any trouble in this life,
but endured them with much long suffering, and patience. David was much
astonished with this consideration ( Psalm. 36.6.) Thy righteousness is like
the great mountains, thy judgments are a great deep. Take both together; Thy
righteousness is like the great mountains, the mountains of God, that is,
thy righteousness indures, and remains inviolable. But though it be so, yet
the execution and actings of thy righteousness are not always decerneable,
for thy judgments are a great deep; that is, when God does execute, and put
forth his righteousness, few see it, his judgments are a great deep, many
deepes, who can go to the depth of them? how unsearchable are thy judgments?
says the Apostle, Romans 11.33.) they are such and so deep that none can reach
the bottom of them; and therefore no wonder if they are sometimes hidden from
those that know God.

Secondly, Whereas Job says, Why seeing times are not hidden from the Almighty,
do they that know him, not see his days?

We may Note.

That, if any thing which God does in this world be seen by any, Godly men are
in the Greatest likelihood to see it. And that upon a twofold ground; first,
because they have the best eyes, and senses most exercised to discern what God
is doing. And as this is, because they have the best internal light, and purest
principles to make this discovery with; So in the second ^lace, because they
stand fairest in the eye of God, to have his providence manifested and
expounded to them. For as God by the Spirit expounds his word, so his works to
his choycest servants. Shall I hide from Abraham (said God, Genesis 18.17.) that
thing which I do. And so the Lord says to the spiritual children of Abraham
unto this day, Shall I hide from them either what I am about to do, or the
meaning and scope of what I have done? If any in the world see the days of
God, Saints shall. So that we may conclude, if they see them not, that either
they are not yet come, or that God purposely concealed their coming. Both or
either of which may be the mind of Job in this place.

Lastly, Consider the text as a question, Why, seeing times are not hidden from
the Almighty, do they that know him not, see his days? What is the reason of
this? Job here answers Eliphaz, who thought that the judgments of God were
ever open, and obvious to all beholders; but as it is not so, so what is the
reason of this? why is it not so? I have heretofore given an account of these
whyes and wherefores, of these questions about the dispensations of God. Yet
here I answer further, God is pleased to cover or defer his Judgment days.
First, because it is his pleasure to do so, that is answer enough for man, it
is his pleasure. Times are not hidden from God, but must he needs make us
acquainted with all times, or show us the way of his judgments presently; no,
it is his pleasure to do otherwise, and it is his privilege to dispose of
times, seasons, actions, and judgments as he pleases; who may say to him,
what do thou? or why do thou so? he is supreme, and sovereign, if he
will have it so, why should any one oppose it, or rise up against it?

Secondly, If it be demanded, Why are not the wicked presently punished, seeing
God knows times, and seasons, and how all things pass among the sons of men?
I answer, God will leave wicked men more inexcusable, the more patience is
exercised toward them, the more long suffering God is to them, the more
evident will the justice of God be in their sufferings, and they will have the
less, or rather nothing at all to plead for themselves. The least sin
committed by man, may stop his mouth, how much soever he is punished by God;
how much more may their mouths be stopped, who continued to sin greatly, while
God continued to spare them long in their sin?

Thirdly, The day of the wicked man's suffering comes no^ suddenly, that the
patience of the Saints may be tried, and exercised. There are three things
which chiefly exercise the patience of the Saints. First, the Greatness of
their own troubles; Secondly, the slownes of their deliverance out of trouble:
Thirdly, the long prosperity of wicked men, or the long deferring of their
punishment. These delays and stops in the vindicative administrations of God
toward evil men, give the graces of his servants present work, and God often
forbeares purposely to put forth his power, that Saints may put forth their
patience, or that it may be said of them as in the book of the Revelations,
Here is the patience of the Saints, in this the patience of the Saints is
visible. Faith and patience can never have so fit an opportunity to be seen,
as when the Justice of God in avenging them, and in punishing the wicked is
least seen. Yea therefore it is that they do not see those his days with an
eye of sense, that they might see them with an eye of faith. While the Prophet
says ( Hab: 2.4.) The just shall live by his faith; He speaks in reference to
the deferring and delaying of judgments upon the enemies of the Church; as
appears fully in the first Chapter ( ver. 12, 13.) O Lord, thou have ordained
them (namely, the Chaldean Empire) for Judgment, (that is, to punish and
afflict thy Church, the Jewish Nation) and O mighty God, thou have established
them for correction; As if he had said, Thou O Lord, did not intend the ruin
and destruction of thy people, by arming and sending this bitter and hasty
Nation against them, but only their amendment and repentance; yea thou have no
pleasure at all in these Chaldeans, by whom thou have powered out thy
displeasure upon thine own people. For, as it follows; Thou art of purer eyes
then to behold evil, and can not look on iniquity, to approve of it, or to
be pleased with it, and seeing thou can not; wherefore look thou upon them
that deal treacherously, and hold thy tongue when the wicked devoureth the
man, that is more righteous then he? That is, why do not thou O Lord, take
vengeance speedily upon these evil and treacherous ones? The Prophet having
proposed and urged this question to the Lord, What does he next? you may see
that at the first verse of the second Chapter; I will stand upon the watch and
set me upon the tower, dnd I will watch to see what he will say unto me, and
what I shall answer when I am reproved, or (as the Hebrew has it) argued with,
by carnal men, or the turbulent passions of my own spirit? The Lord gives him
his answer at large ( ver. 2, 3.) which is summed up ( v. 4.) in this brief
direction or assertion, But the Just shall live by his faith. As if he had
said, proud men will be querying, yea quarrelling, when they see my providence
cross my promises, or my works carrying a present face of unsutablenes to my
word. When things go thus, they are presently offended and nonplus'd, they
know not what to make of it, unless it be to make me a liar, as speaking, what
I meant not to do, or impotent, as speaking more then I had ability to do;
But, my people know how to satisfy these doubts with a saving to my honor;
The Just shall live by his faith. And they who live by faith will not have
uncomely thoughts of me, whatsoever it is that appears to their sight: or
though that which they hoped would appear be still kept out of their sight.
Though, they that know him, see not his days, with an eye of sense, yet they
see them by an eye of faith, and by that faith they live.

So then the reason why they who know God, or the Godly, see not his days, is
not because God is not able to bring a day of vengeance upon wicked men, it is
not because he bears any good will to them, but to exercise the faith and
patience of his people. That Is the scope of this first verse, which lays
down the proposition by way of question, times are not unknown to God, yet
they that know him do not see his days, his judgment days, as Eliphaz had
before asserted. In the next part of the Chapter, Job goes on to prove by an
enumeration of particulars, that many sorts of wicked men go on in all sorts
of sin, who yet feel not the day of God upon them.

JOB, CHAP. 24. Verse. 2, 3, 4. Some remove the Land-markes, they violently take
away flocks, and feed thereof.

They drive away the Ass of the fatherless, they take the widows Ox for a
pledge.

They turn the needy out of the way, the poor of the earth hide themselves
together.


IN the first verse of this Chapter, it was showed that they who know God, that
is godly men do not in this world see his days, that is, the days of his
judgment, and vengeance upon the wicked. In the following part of this
Chapter, Job proceeds to describe wicked men, in several acts of wickedness,
and how they carry it on, and have many fair days in the world, while they
are doing foul, and filthy work. They do as much mischief as they can, and
they enjoy as much outward prosperity, as they can desire to have, or tell what
to do with it, when they have it: so that they seem equally to abound in the
practice of evil, and in the possession of Good. See what havocke they make,
in the words of this context.

Verse. 2. Some remove the Landmarks, they violently take away flocks, and feed
thereof.
Some remove] Of whom Job spoke in particular, or of what particular time he
spoke is uncertain. Some refer it to the days before the Flood, for that
was a time wherein the world was filled with violence; and that was the
special sin of that age, set forth ( Genesis 6.11.) The earth also was corrupt
before God; That is, men dwelling upon the earth, were corrupt, morally
corrupt, corrupt in their manners. Thus, the earth was corrupt before God, and,
he shows wherein that corruption did consist, and the earth was filled with
violence. But as the character which Job gives of these men, may well suite
those times: so what times have not produced such a sort of men? And though
some times have been more tainted with, and notorious for those sins then
others, yet all times have been tainted with them, and therefore we may take
the words generally as applicable to any age of the world.

Some remove the Land-markes. That is, those marks which are set up for the
distinction, or division of Lands, that every man may know his own, and not
entrench upon his neighbors inheritance. These landmarks, or bounds they
remove. (...) retigit apprehendit vis verbi ea est ut ita res attingatur quo^
apprehendatur, pe^tinet ad vim potentioris manu^ inijcientis.
The Hebrew is, they touch, so it is translated, some touch the landmarks;
landmarks were sacred things; they ought not to be touched, nor meddled with.
The Lord speaks of his holy people ( Psalm. 105.15.) Touch not mine anointed,
and do my Prophets no harm. Another word is used in the Psalm, but we may
give the same emphasis here, some touch the landmarks, as if it were a fault
so much as to handdle, or meddle with them: yet the word here used signifies
both to touch, and to take, and so to take, as violently to carry away. ( Zech.
1.6.) Did not my word take hold of your fathers; that is, did it not apprehend,
and seize upon them, yea remove them out of the land of the living. Where the
word of God touches, it takes away, either to destruction or salvation. And
that word in the Prophet has a double allusion, either to the hunting of
beasts, or to fighting, and contending with men; the word followed your
fathers, it overtooke them, it took them, it laid hold on them, as the hunter
lays hold upon his prey, or as an enemy follows, and over-takes a fleeing
enemy, did not my word take hold of your fathers? yes, it did, and that to
purpose. The word is used ( Psalm. 40.12.) Mine iniquities (says David) take
hold of me, so that I am not able to look up; they have dealt with me, as with
a fugitive, that runs away; They have taken hold of me, and they hold me
fast, my sin has apprehended me. So that, though this original word
signifies to touch, yet it is so to touch as to offer violence, to take away,
to remove, as is expressed in those instances (1 Samuel 30.8.) David inquired of
the Lord, saying, shall I pursue after this troop, shall I over-take them; so
(2 Samuel 15.14.) David said to all his servants that were with him at Jerusalem,
arise let us flee, for we shall not escape from Absalom, make speed to depart,
least he overtake us suddenly. In which places as this word is used, so the use
of it is about violent and forcible actings, so that this touching is taking or
removing; they remove or pull up the landmarks, to set them in some other
place for their own advantage. This was their first sin, the removing of
landmarks; which was upon the matter to take away propriety, and to put all
men out of possession. There can be no possession without distinction; Mira
fuit in antiquis tum in constituendis tum in servandis limitibus fides atque
religio.
natural riches consist in lands and cattle, and both bear their owners mark.
The care and industry of the ancients was exceeding great and accurate about
their landmarks, both in setting them up, and in observing them, that every
man might have his own; wherefore to remove the landmarks, was indeed to take
away the land.

Hence note.

That, God has given unto man a proper, special, and personal right in his
lands, and goods. If it were not so, then, first, it were no sin to remove
landmarks, or a vain thing to set them up; if there be no distinction of
inheritances by propriety, what needs there be any distinction, by marks, or
limits, to show, this is such a man's land, and that another. No man may set a
special mark, where he has not a special right. Secondly, if there were no
propriety, there could not be such a sin as stealing, and theeving: that
which is every man's, any man may take, and be blameless. Thirdly, if there
were not propriety, there would be but little industry; If men's lands and goods
were not their own, who would be found to take care of them, or pains about
them. Fourthly, to make all things common, were to run all into confusion.
There is nothing more unequal then this kind of equality. If all had a like
right in the things of the world, all would think to have a like power in the
government of the world. Propriety and Magistracy must stand and fall together.

But some may object that practice of the primitive Church ( Acts 2.44.) who
had all things common. And if all things with them were in a community, where
was propriety?

I answer, First, This practice of theirs was purely voluntary, not at all
imposed; as appears plainly from the words of Peter to Ananias (Acts 5.4.)
While it remained, was it not thine own; or more close to the Greek, Remaining
did it not remain to thee; that is, it was properly thine before thou soldest
it, and thou might have kept thy interest in it. No man compelled thee to
sell or give, and if thou had not sold it, thou might still have held
communion with the Church for all that; But this is thy sin, to pretend the
gift of all to God, and perform but in part.

I answer, secondly, That community did not extend to the whole estate of all
believers, but to what they did consecrate to relieve the public necessity;
For if they had put themselves quite out of all propriety by one gift, they
could not have exercised their charity any more. Whereas the Apostle directs
them to a constant use of their charity in making collections for the poor (1
Cor. 16.1, 2.) And surely Paul had made a vain profession when he said; I have
coveted no man's silver, or Gold, or apparel, (Act. 20.33.) if no man had any
peculiar propriety in gold, silver, or apparel.

Thirdly, It appears from the 44th verse, that even they who sold their goods
retained some kind of right in them; for all did not come to the common bank,
and take what they pleased; but they who sold their possessions parted the
price to all men, allotting to every one a proportion as he had need. It was
not share and share like, every man was not his own carver out of the public
stock, but distribution was made, as necessity required. God does to this day
keep the eighth commandment in full force and strength, as a Fence or hedge
about the worldly estates of men, and he that goes about to break this Hedge,
a Serpent shall bite him, as Solomon speaks ( Eccl. 10.8.) Hedges are
Land-markes; And both are, not only arguments, but securers of propriety.

Again, Seeing land-markes were set up to distinguish men's estates.

We learn.

That we should use all due means to prevent contentions about worldly
possessions. As every man has a title and a right to his own, so every man
should have a rule whereby to know his own; peace is a sacred and precious
thing (even peace about civil things) and therefore whatsoever makes for peace
should be accounted sacred and precious. Blessed are the peacemakers, but more
blessed are the peace-preservers. It is good to heal breaches among Brethren,
but it is better when there are none. Preventing physic is more desierable
then restoring.

Thirdly, Note.

To remove land-makes, which are the means of preserving the possessions of
men distinct, and so of preserving their right and peace, is very sinful. This
is a sin condemned by the light of nature, as well as by the light of
Scripture; Numa pompilius statuit ut liceret eum tanquam sacrilegu^ occidere
qui violare, jus termini ausus esset. Etiam qui terminum exarasset, ipsum and
bovem sacros esse. i. e. Ferro devotos. Festus. Numa lapides sacravit Jovi
Terminali.
Histories report how strict the ancient Romans were against such offenders; as
they were accurate in setting up bounds, so they were severe to punish those,
who removed, and disturbed the bounds; it was lawful by their law to take away
the life of him who took away his neighbors landmark. And if any man in
tilling the ground, plowed up the land-marke, himself and his ox were both
sacred, that is, both were to be slain or devoted to death; yea the Romans
were so intent, and devout about this thing, that they had a special God of
the bounds or limits stones. And as the old heathens, judging by the rule of
common reason, and light of nature, did abhor this practice, so the holy
Scripture in the Law of Moses provides directly and by name against it. ( Deuteronomy.
19.14.) Thou shall not remove thy neighbors land-marke which they of old times
set, in thine inheritance, which thou shall inherit, in the land that the Lord
thy God gives thee to possess it. And again ( Deuteronomy. 27.17.) Cursed be he
that removes his neighbors land-marke, and all the people shall say Amen. A
curse contains all penalties, and Amen seals them all upon the person of the
offender. Solomon renewed these laws ( Prove. 22.28.) Romove not thy neighbors
land-marke, which thy fathers have set. And again ( Prove. 23.10.) Remove not
the old landmarks, and enter not into the field of the fatherless. Thus
Solomon cautioned those times against this sin. And the Prophet ( Hosea 5.10.)
makes this sin as the Standard of all other sins, or as that by which we
are to take the greatness and weight of any sin; if a sin comes near to
this, or be like this, it is a great sin. The Princes of Judah were like them
that remove the bound, therefore I will power out my wrath upon them like
water; As if he had said, the Princes of Judah are extremely wicked: how
wicked? even as wicked as they which remove the bound. Now if high-growne
wickedness be but such a thing as removing the bound, how high is their
wickedness grown, who remove the bound? But it may be demanded what bound does
the Prophet mean? I answer, it may be understood of all sorts of bounds, of
the bounds of laws, of the bounds of liberty, of the bounds of religion, as
also of the bounds of lands. It is wickedness to meddle with or remove any of
these bounds, though to remove some of them be a greater wickedness. To remove
the bounds of the laws, and the liberties of a Nation, especially to remove
the bounds of religion, are heinous abominations and though; to remove the
bound of lands, be not so bad as these, yet that also may be numbered among the
abominations which both God and man hate; and therefore when the Prophet would
in one word speak all the abominable practices of the Princes of Judah, he
chose to say, they are like those who remove the bound; implying that nothing
could be said of them worse then that. The same Prophet uses an expression
somewhat parallel to that ( Hosea 4.4.) where describing the wickedness of
those times, he tells them, that the Lord had a controversy with the land,
because there was no truth, no mercy, no knowledge of God in the land, by
swearing, and lying, and killing, and stealing, etc. then at the 4th verse, he
concludes, Let no man strive, and reprove another. ('It Is the soarest judgment
of God upon a people or a person to let them alone and be quiet in their sin,
to say, Let no man strive, and reprove another) but why did God give up that
people to such a judgment? The greatness of their sin was the cause of it; And
what was that; the next words show us; For thy people are as they that strive
with the Priest. It was so great a wickedness to contend or strive with the
Priest, that the vilest of wickednesses was but an exemplification of it. God
forbids that they should be reproved or striven with for good, who were once
grown so evil as to strive with the Priest; and the greatest reproof that
can possibly be gives any man, is to say, let no man reprove him. Thus we see
that to strive with the Priest, and to remove the bound, are sins of the first
magnitude, the one in Spiritualls, the other in Civills.

Fourthly, In as much as the word here used signifies not only quite to
remove, but to touch or meddle with the landmarks.

Observe.

That we ought to avoid all those acts, that are leading to sin, as well as
the sin it self. It was not absolutely a sin, or a sin in it self, to
touch or come near the land-markes, but because this had an appearance of
evil in it, and because while men handled the bounds, either it might come
into their minds to remove them, or they might possibly remove them a little
against their minds, therefore even that act is forbidden, as having in it a
tendency to that sin. It is good for us to keep at the furthest distance we
can from that which is evil. The Apostles rule is, Abstain from all
appearance of evil, (1 These. 5.22.) unless all the appearances of all the
approaches unto evil be abstained from, we shall hardly abstain from the
evil it self. Solomon gives a like caution ( Pro. 23.31.) Look not upon the
Wine when it is red, when it gives his color in the cup, when it moves it
self aright. It is not a sin to look upon the wine, yet Solomon says,
look not upon it; why? because that act may occasion another; while you look
upon the wine, you may be taken with the beauty and color of it, and so drink
intemperately; for he adds, it will bite like a Serpent; which implies that
looking may ensnare a man, and cause him to drink more then he ought, and then
the wine will bite indeed; wine will go down without chewing, but he that
lets too much go down shall find it biting. And it is more dangerous and
venomous to be wine-bitten, then to be serpent-bitten; therefore look not upon
the wine. So here, touch not the landmarks, be not busy about them, stand off
from them, lest you be enticed to remove or take them away; They that will
always do the utmost of what is lawful, may soon be overcome to do that
which is unlawful. It is our wisdom as well as our duty, not to touch that,
which to take away will be our sin.

Lastly, When Job says, Some remove the landmarks; That is not the only
thing intended, though it be only here expressed; for this removing had a
further purpose: as touching comes to removing, so removing the landmarks
goes further, even to the taking away of the land. And they therefore took
away the landmarks, that they might take away the land also; they took away
that which distinguished their lands from other men's lands, that so other men's
lands might be accounted theirs, and that they might enter upon the possession
of them as their own. Thus, to color and cover their covetousnes and
oppression in invading other men's lands, they removed the marks whereby they
held and claimed their lands. It were not worth the while to remove
land-markes, unless it were for the lands sake. The value of a stone, or of a
piece of timber, or of a Turfe of earth (any of which may be made a land-marke)
is not considerable, but the land marked by it, is. The heart of man is cunning
and full of contrivance to compass sinful ends by such ways, as may keep
the sin (as much as may be) unseene. Forceably to take away lands were gross,
but first to take away landmarks, and so to rayfe a question, or make it a
controversy to whom the land belongs, this is a piece of oppession spunne with
a finer thread. This is robbing without seeming to do wrong. Some remove the
land-markes, They violently take away flocks, and feed thereof.

(...) rapuit, vehemens est o iginali illud diripiendi verbu^, denotans
violenter capere et vi extorquere.
These wnrds contain the second act of their wickedness. Before we had land
stolen, now cattle, they violently take away. The word notes a feirce violence.
As it is said of one of David's Worthies (2 Samuel 23.21.) He slew an Egyptian, a
goodly man, and the Egyptian had a spear in his hand, but he went down to him
with a staff, and plucked the spear out of the Egyptians hand. He plucked it
from him by strength of hand, or by fine force. Thus here, They take or pluck
away flocks. There are two ways of taking away what belongs to another. First,
secretly, or by fraud; secondly, openly, or by violence. Both are forbidden (
Lev. 19.13) Thou shall not defraud thy neighbor, (that is, thou shall not take
away his goods secretly by deceit and cunning) neither shall thou rob him; he
that cozens or deceives another, robs him; but in that law of Moses, by robing
is meant violent taking away. There are some private thieves, so are all they
who defraud their brethren; others are bold and open thieves, these properly
are robbers. Might overcomes right. Of such Job speaks here.

They violently take away flocks. A flock is a collection of cattle, less, or
great, sheep, or oxen, they make prey of all, (...) est collectio animalium,
tum minorum, ut evium, caprarum, tum majorum ut boum vaccarum.
they take away flocks. See the greedynes of these robbers. Any one flock
contains many cattle, these took away many flocks, or many a flock; and that
violently; they had no law for it, and they asked no leave for it.

Hence note.

Where the rule of what is done is the will of the doer, any thing is done
which he has a power to do, whether right or wrong, makes no matter. I will
have it, says he; and if he be strong enough have it he will. The Prophet Amos
gives such a character of the Princes of those times ( Chap. 3.10.) They know
not to do right, says the Lord, who store up violence and robbery in their
palaces. It Is sad for a people when Princes or they who dwell in palaces,
know not to do right, especally when their know not, is not, an Ignorance of
the Law, but a wilful perversion of the Law; when their know not to do
right, is they have no mind nor will to do right; when Princes are wise
(enough, too wise) to do evil, but to do good they have no knowledge; such
were they of whom the Prophet complained in that place, they know not to do
right. And what are such like to do then? The Prophet tells us what; They
store up violence and robbery in their palaces; that is, all the furniture and
riches of their palaces, are but robbery, and violence, or such things as they
have taken away by violence, and robbery. The Lord therefore threatens such,
that they shall be scourged with violence, ( Ezekiel. 7.11.) Violence is risen up
into a rod of wickedness, none of them shall remain, nor of their multitude,
nor any of theirs, neither shall there be wayling for them. Violence rises up
to a rod of wickedness two ways. First, as violence shootes or puts forth from
wickedness, as a branch or rod shootes forth from the stock of a tree; all the
violence and oppression that ever was committed in the world, is both branch
and fruit growing or rising up from a wicked heart. Secondly, Violence rises
up into a rod of wickedness, when violence punisherh wickedness; they who have
afflicted others by violence, often find violence turned into a rod to afflict
themselves. And we may give that sense of Solomon's Proverbs, ( Pro. 13.2.) The
soul of the transgressour shall eat violence. The words are a threat. As
wicked men eat violence, that is, what they have gotten by violence; so they
shall have violence to eat, that is, they shall be violently dealt with;
either violence shall compel them to do their duty, or violence shall punish
them for not doing it, or, as they lived by violence, so they shall die by
violence. The souls of transgressors shall eat violence, as a punishment,
because (as it follows in the next clause) they eat violence as their
portion. They violently take away flocks, And feed thereof.

The Original words are rendered two ways. First, as we, They feed thereof;
that is, they feed themselves with the flocks which they have taken away;
Secondly, They fed them; that is, they feed the flocks which they have
violently taken away. According to our translation the sense is this, when they
have taken away flocks violently, they sit down quietly and feed themselves
with these flocks, they and their families are maintained by the spoil. And I
conceave Job adds this, not only to show another or a second act of their sin,
but to show the resolvednes and setlednes of these men in the ways of sin.

Hence note.

Then a wicked man is hardened in sin, when he feeds, and fills himself
with what he has sinfully gotten. They not only act evil, but delight in
evil, who take away any thing by violence, and feed thereon. Solomon speaks
of some ( Pro. 4.17.) Who eat the bread of wickedness (that is, bread (by which
is meant all the necessaryes of this life) gotten by wickedness) and they drink
the wine of violence; that is, the wine which they have gained by violence, or
suppose what they have violently gained be not wine, in specie, or that liquor
which we call wine, yet they drink it as wine, like sweet and pleasant wine.
This is a sign of a heart settled in sin, when the sinner eats his sin as
bread, and drinks it as wine. What stomachs have they who can digest such
hard-meates; and though now they seem to make a good digestion of it, yet
unless they vomit up such morsels and draughts by true repentance, they will
lie heavy upon their stomachs, and make them heart-sick to Eternity. The
Prophet threatens ( Isa. 3.14.) That the Lord will enter into judgment with
the ancients of his people, and the Princes thereof, for (says he) ye have
eaten up the vineyard, the spoil of the poor is in your houses; that is, ye
maintain your houses by that which is not yours, even by the spoils and
vineyards of the poor. When Jezabel had got Naboth slain, she presently said
to Ahab, Arise, take possession of the vineyard of Naboth, and Ahab did so (1
Kings 21.15, 16.) But the Lord sent Eliah to him with this Message ( ver. 19.)
Have thou killed and also taken possession? As if he had said, Art thou indeed
so hardened in sin, that thou can go down and please thy self in the use
and possession of what thou have gotten sinfully? how wicked art thou, who art
so far from having thy heart to smite thee with sorrow, for smiting a
faithful subject of thine to death by thy Authority, that now thou can
delight thy self in eating up the vineyard of the dead man. Sometimes a godly
man sins by inordinate desires after the creature, but it is very rare, that his
stomach does not turn before he comes to eat his sin. David (2 Samuel
23.16.) had a longing desire to the waters of Bethlem, and upon the making
known of his desire, three mighty men broke through the host of the
Philistims, and fetched him the water; but ( ver. 16.) when the water was
brought him his stomach turned, he would not drink because it was gotten by
the hazard of three men's lives. For though David did not speak those words; O
that one would give me drink of the water of the well of Bethlem; with an
intent to put any of his Soldiers upon that dangerous enterprise in fetching
it for him; yet that he might declare how far he was from indulging himself
in such inordinate desires, to engage any man's life for the pleasing of his
appetite, or satisfying of his present (though probably a very urgent) thirst,
therefore he would not drink it, but powered it out unto the Lord; saying,
Far be it from me O Lord, that I should do this, is not this the blood of
the men that went in jeopardy of their lives? Thus it is with tender
consciences, who though they sometimes speak and do rashly and sinfully, yet
before they come to eat their sin, that is, what they have sinfully desiered
or attained, they repent and cannot make either meat or drink of it. Ungodly
men can drink blood, not only that which (as in David's case) others have
gotten for them with the danger of their lives, but even that which themselves
have gotten with the unjust spoil, (sometimes) of other men's lives, but often
of their livelyhoods. They violently take away flocks, and feed thereof.

Again, I shall touch a little upon the second reading; They violently take
away flocks, and feed them; that is, they do not only drive other men's flocks
away, but keep them openly in their pastures, and feed them; so Mr Broughton,
Vix vel Hebraeum (...) vel latinum pascere pro comedere usu pan^ur sed saepe
pro, pastoris instar, pascere. Pined^.
They rob away herds, and feed them. The Original word in the Hebrew, as also
the Latin is seldom used to signify man's feeding upon dead flesh, but often
to signify man's feeding of living flesh or cattle. A Shepherd is said to feed
his flock. Thus first they play the thieves, violently taking away their
neighbors flocks; next they turn Shepherds and Grasiers and feed them openly.

This implies three things concerning these oppressors, of whom Job speaks.

First, That they were great men, not petty robbers, who when they have got
cattle away, hide them, or sell them off as soon as they can, they dare not
put them in their own pastures, and usually they have none to put them in. But
these Nimrods, these mighty Hunters take them violently, and then own it
broadly; they care not who sees what they have done. Thus the Prophet Isaiah
reproves the Princes of Israel (Chap. 1.23.) Thy Princes are rebellious, and
companions of thieves; that is, they do like thieves, they oppress, and vex,
and violently take away. They are so far (which is the duty of Princes) from
repressing thieves, that they encourage and countenance them, and not only so,
but are actually Thieves themselves. Thieves in Authority and power are the
vilest thieves; who shall deliver from oppression, when Princes turn
oppressors, and Great ones thieves?

Secondly, When it is said, that they take away flocks, and fed them, it
shows, that these robbers persisted in their sin, and were not ashamed of it.
They could spoil their neighbors and never blush. They declared their sin as
Sodom, they hid it not.

Thirdly, This imports that they had quiet possession of their ill gotten
goods; What they got unjustly, they held securely and unmolested. Their stolen
goods were neither recovered by law, nor forceably retaken from them; they fed
them, and kept them as their own; wickedness prospered in their hand; no man
saw the day of Gods reckoning with them. This their impunity, Job specially
aimed at, when he said; They violently take away flocks, and feed them, or feed
upon them.

Hence note.

That God leaves some wicked men in a long, and quiet possession, of what they
have unjustly gotten. To hold by injustice and oppression is the worst and most
slippery title and tenure in the world; yet as unjust gain makes some rich, as
they improve and thrive, as they trade in, and increase by ways of
unrighteousnes, so they live prosperously, and hold strongly what they have
unrighteously gained. They both feed upon and feed the flocks which they have
taken away by violence. Though some oppressors are so suddenly attached by
pursuing vengeance, that they can neither feed nor feed upon their stolen
flocks, but even before the meat is in their mouths the wrath of God and
justice of man falls upon them and will not suffer them to roast what they have
got in this kind of cruel hunting, yet others roast and eat to the full,
though indeed, they do but fat themselves against a day of slaughter, which
though it come slowly will surely come. Job still proceeds in describing their
other acts of violence.

Verse. 3. They drive away the Ass of the fatherless, they take the widows Ox
for a pledge.
There is somewhat considerable in these words, though they are but a continued
description of the same thing under variety of instances.

They drive away the Ass of the fatherless. Here is more violence still. Some
conceave the singular is here put for the plural; The Ass for the Asses of
the fatherless; Abigeus is proprie dicitur qui pecora ex pascuis vel ex
armen^is subtrahit, and abigendi studium quasi artem exercet. Ulpian: Insigne
est apud Jurisconsultos Abigeatus crimen.
that is, all the Asses that he had, they left not one, but swept all away. But
if we take the word strictly for one single Ass, then it aggravates the sin,
They drive away the Ass of the fatherless: Though he has but one, they drive
that away; this hightens the oppression, as (2 Samuel 12.3.) in the parable which
Nathan put to David to convince him of his sin; He tells him of a rich man
that had exceeding many flocks and herds, but the poor man had nothing save
one little Ewe-lambe, which he had bought, and nourished up, and it grew up
together with him, and with his children, it did eat of his own meat, and
drank of his own cup, and lay in his bosom, and was unto him as a daughter:
Now, when the traveller came to the rich man, he spared to take of his own
flock, and of his own herd to dress for the waifareing man, but took the
poor man's lamb, etc. So here, they drive away the Ass of the fatherless;
though he has but one, they drive that away.

Further, when he says, They drive away the Ass, there are two things
considerable in it. First, the Ass is a useful and serviceable beast for the
bearing of burdens. Secondly, the Ass is a mean creature, a beast of no
great value, though of some use. They drive away the very Ass, and that the
Ass of the Fatherless.

In the former verse, where it is said, They violently take away flocks, and
feed thereof, there is no mention at all made, whose the flocks were, or from
whom they took them. But here Job seems to lay the emphasis of their sin,
not so much upon what they drove away, as upon the person whose it was, which
they drove away; They drive away not the great or the rich man ass, but the
ass of the Fatherless. The word fatherless may be taken two ways, either
strictly, for a child that is left without a father to take care of him, and
provide for him: or secondly, we may expound the word fatherless more largely
for any that are poor, and in distress; as was showed ( Chap. 22.9.) How
cruel are they, and how covetous are they, who will not spare the poor, no not
poor Orphans! To take from the fatherless in either sense, aggravates the
sin. Which aggravation of their sin is further prosecuted in the next
instance of their oppression.

They take away the widows Ox for a pledge. What a pledge is has been opened
at the 22d Chap. ver. 6. It is not sinful to take a pledge; but there is a
twofold sin employed in this place, while they are charged with taking the
widows ox for a pledge. First, in reference to the person of whom the pledge
was taken, the widow; Secondly, in reference to the thing which was taken for
a pledge; it was the widows ox. For the ox being used for labor in tilling
the ground (a most necessary use) should not be taken or at lest not detained
as a pledge; Viduae and pupillae asinum and bovem certa vitae instrumenta
averiunt. Nicet: Ipsarum viduarum facultates per vim eripiu^t quasi jure quodam
instar creditorum pignorarentur. Bez: Quasi sub quodam color justitiae viduam
gravantes. Aquin:
therefore we find that those things which were for necessary use and
livelihood, were forbidden to be taken for pledge Exodus 22.26, 27.) or if they
were taken they were presently to be restored before the Sun went down. But
these cruel men took the widows ox for a pledge, and restored him not. We may
also understand it (as some) that they took the ox as if it were a pledge,
doing it as of right, or under pretense and color of Justice (as being her
creditors) for a debt. And so the whole proceeding is expounded either of
tyrants, that lay heavy taxes upon the poor people, and if they are not able
to pay presently take all away by distreine: or of common extortioners, who
lend money, or let leases, and upon every default of payment take the
forfeiture, and carry all away as due to themselves.

Further, we may observe in Scripture, that as we have these two usually put
together, the fatherless, and the widow, so we have these two usually joined
together, the ass, and the ox. Thus they are joined twice in the ten
Commandments, in the fourth and tenth, and often elsewhere. But some may
question, Has the poor widow an ox? The ox seems rather to belong to rich
men, then to the poor widow. To which we may answer, (...) pro bove foemina
sumitur. Bold:
that the Hebrew word which we translate ox, signifies as well the female, as
the male, and so it is rendered by some here, They take away the cow of the
widow. The poor widow lives upon the milk of her cow. Take that from her,
and you take away all her living. But whether we understand it of the one or of
the other, the difference is not material as to the scope and purpose of Job,
who puts the widows ox or the widows cow, either for the whole or chiefest
part of her substance. They take the widows ox for a pledge.

Hence note.

Some care not from whom or what they take, so they may have it. They will take
from the fatherles, they will take from the widow. The Prophet Amos (Chap.
2.7.) speaking of such oppressors, says, They pant after the dust of the earth
on the head of the poor, and turn aside the way of the needy. The former part
of those words, has variety of readings and expositions, I will not stay upon
them: but only touch that which is most suitable to the point in hand, They
pant after the dust of the earth; that is, they exceedingly desire, and long
for it. As David describes his holy desires ( Psalm. 42.1.) As the heart pants
after the water brooks, so pants my soul after thee, O God; that is, I
extremely desire thy presence and communion with thee, even as the heart being
hunted and heated desires the waters. Thus they panted after the dust of the
earth; That is, after those things which are but as the dust of the earth, or
whose original and matter is but the dust of the earth, gold and silver. These
are but the refined dust of the earth; but whose dust did they pant after? It
was the dust on the head of the poor; if they did but see a poor man to have
gotten a little about him, though only enough to keep life and soul
together, to preserve himself and his family from starving or begging, they
presently panted after it; They were passionately desierous of it, they cast
about how to get it. They who are enflamed with covetousnes are busy to find
out, and having found out, are greedy to pursue all advantages and occasions to
enrich themselves, though it be with the ruin of the poor. They are glad to
get something even from them who (according to common speech) have nothing;
they scrape from them, who have but scraps to live upon. Such was the grace of
our Lord Jesus Christ, that (as the Apostle speaks, 2 Cor. 8.9.) though he was
rich, yet for our sakes he became poor, that we through his poverty might be
rich. And such is the covetousnes of some men, that though they are rich
enough, yet they care not to make many, who are poor enough already, poorer,
that they by making them poorer, might make themselves richer.

Secondly, Consider the matter, they drive away the ass of the fatherless,
and take the widows ox (or cow) for a pledge.

Hence note.

Some will sin for a small matter, they will do much evil, though they get
but little worldly good by it, only a silly ass, or a laboring ox from the
fatherless or the widow. Who as they never have many of these, commonly, but
one of each (for both words are of the singular number) so those that they have
are usually none of the best, fattest, strongest, greatest, and so highest
prized ones: As the fatherless, and the widow, are poor, so their ox and
ass are but poor ones too; yet some will unjustly drive and take these poor
things away; They will play at small game (as we say) rather then sit out; And
act basely to get but an ass. The Prophet Amos (Chap. 2.6.) represents the
Lord protesting against such, thus; For three transgressions of Israel, and for
four, I will not turn away the punishment thereof, because they sold the
righteous for silver, and the poor for a pair of shoes; that is, they sold
the right of the poor, when they could get but a very small advantage by it,
the worth of a pair of shoes. Some in sinning are like Eagles, they will not
stoop at flies, if they break the rules of righteousness and faithfulness, it
shall be for a Crown or a Kingdom. They who sin for the greatest profit,
make a loosing Bargain of it: What then do they who will sin for the lowest
profit?

Thirdly, They drive away the ass from the fatherless, and take the ox of
the widow; From the consideration of the persons wronged. Note.

It is sinful to wrong any, but much more to wrong the poor; Sordido lucro
asservientes, ne calceos quidem pauperum lucrifacere recusant, qui extremum
hominibus usum prebent. Theodoret:
having met with this point from other passages in this book, I only name it,
and add, that there are two things which show the sinfullnesse of taking from
the poor. First, because they are weak and unable either to resist injuries,
or to right themselves; They cannot help themselves, nor can they easily
procure help from others. The poor and him that has no help, are put
together ( Psalm. 72.12.) and usually they are the same. I returned (says
Solomon, Eccl. 4.1.) and considered all the oppressions that are done under the
Sun, and behold the tears of such as were oppressed, and they had no
comforter: and on the side of their oppressors there was power, but they had no
comforter. And they who have no comforter, surely have no helper. Now it is
most sinful to hurt them who are least able to help themselves, or find help
from others. And who so helpless, as the fatherless and the widow? Secondly,
it is therefore extremely sinful to wrong the poor, and especially these
poor, because God has commended them to the care, and tuition of the rich;
they are his charge, God has taken them into his protection, and has trusted
them over to men of power, that they should look to them. Magistrates should
be as a wall of defense, to the fatherless, and widow, they should provide
for them, and nourish them. Therefore to spoil, and rob them of all, how great
a wickedness is this? this is (as much as in them is) to make God a liar, and
unfaithful to his word and promise. As then it should be a great encouragement
to help the Godly poor, because in so doing we are a means to fulfill the
promise of God to them. So we should therefore be afraid to wrong them, because
in so doing we do what we can to make the promise of God to them void. No
marveile then, if the Apostle James places all religion, as to practice, in
the visitation of the widow, and the fatherless in their affliction; and if,
in that sense, all religion be placed in it, what shall we judge of their
religion, who afflict the widow, and the fatherless? And if to visit them in
trouble, be an act not only of charity to them, but of honor and religion
toward God, because God (who provides for all) has taken upon him to provide
for the fatherless, and the widow, by name (So that we discharge Gods debt of
promise to the fatherless, and widow, when we do them good. If, I say, it be
thus) then how gross an act is it both of uncharitablenes to them, and
irreligion toward God, to visit with trouble, to afflict and vex the
fatherless and the widow.

Fourthly, From the matter about which they sinned; The ass of the
fatherless, and the ox, or cow of the widow.

Observe.

That the less any thing is for or about which we sin, the greater is that
sin. It shows that we value God little, and that we set light by his
commands, that we regard neither his favor nor his anger, when we can do
evil upon such poor accounts. That, by which many excuse their sin,
increases it. They will say, 'twas a small matter, a little thing they stole,
or took away; but to sin in a small matter may be found a great sin. What?
will you break through the holy commands of God, and venture his displeasure
for a trifle? though no man should encourage himself to sin, because he
sins for a matter of importance, yet there is not only more folly, but more
sinfullnesse in sinning for a little. Woe to those who sin for the greatest
advantages, but more woe to those who value their souls, and the laws of God
so little, as to disobey the one, and endanger the other, when scarce any thing
which the world calls advantage is to be had. It has been said of old; If
faith or an oath be to be broken, let it be broken for a kingdom; yet he will
be found no gainer, who breaks his oath to get all the kingdoms of the world;
what shall we say then of those poor low spirited persons, who sin (as we
say) for six pence, and break the laws of God, for so poor a profit, as will
hardly give them a breake-fast. The sin of these oppressors is not yet full,
see more and greater abominations then these.

Verse. 4. They turn the needy out of the way, the poor of the earth hide
themselves together.
The word which we translate needy, signifies to desire; they who have many
wants have many desires, and the sense of our wants, is the spring of our
desires; And though many who have no want in outward things are full of
desires, yet the needy are properly the desirers; and whosoever desires much,
either has many wants, or is not satisfied with his fullnes.

They turn the needy out of the way. The Prophet ( Amos, Chap. 2.7.) reproving
the Princes of Israel, says, They turn aside the way of the meek, or (as
others render) of the poor and afflicted. That speech of the Prophet seems to
be of near alliance if not altogether the same in sense with this of Job, They
turn the needy out of the way.

What way this should be is expounded four or five ways.

First, Some take it metaphorically, for a moral way. Divertere fecerunt
impotentes a via justa. Sept:
And that, first, the way of righteousness and equity. And the wicked turn the
needy out of that way, either, first, by their evil examples, or secondly, by
their threatenings and persecutions. The sinful practices of men in power,
lead the needy, or the inferior sort into the practice of the same sins. And
the oppressions of the mighty do even compel the needy to turn aside from the
right way of getting their livings, Quasi cogerentur de via recta pietatis
divertere ad furta and perjuria, and quaerimonias de divina providentia.
to stealing and living by spoil and rapine, as they themselves do. When rich
men oppress the poor, they turn the poor either to begging, or theeving.
When men are vexed and molested in honest ways, they lie under a great
temptation to turn and betake themselves to those ways which are dishonest.
Paul says of himself being a persecuter, that he compelled the professors of
the Gospel to blaspheme, (Act. 26.11.) and this he effected in one or both the
ways above specified, either first, by his example, he being a blasphemer (as
he confessed, 1 Timothy 1.13.) they imitated him in blaspheaming or speaking evil
of the ways of God, and of his people: or, secondly, he did it by his cruelty,
vexing them so in the profession of Christ, that some who were unsettled fell
away, and blasphemed the name of Christ, whom they had professed. But though
this be a truth, yet I shall not give it as the intent of this place. Therefore

Secondly, They turn the needy out of the way; that is, Dejecerunt impotentes
de via justa. Ambr: Via pro jure and justitia.
out of the way of that justice or right which is due to them. And so it suites
well with what he said before; they drive away the ass of the fatherless,
etc. and they turn the needy out of the way; that is, from what is his right,
or from all means of recovering his right.

Thirdly, They turn the needy out of the way; that is, out of the way of their
livelihood; we commonly enquire, how does such a man live? and it is answered,
he lives in a very good way, he has such a way of living, such a trade,
calling, or profession; that is his way. Via pauperum est facultus, sibi
necessaria parundi. Aquin: Viam pauperum subvertit tyrannus, cum illa detrahit
sine quibus ars cui vacatur pauper, exerceri non potest.
Thus, to turn the needy out of the way, is to put them besides the way of
getting their bread, and maintaining their familyes with necessaryes for this
life. In a figurative sense, every man's profession and calling is his way, and
he that molests him in it, turns him out of his way. As suppose a man live in
the Country, where he keeps a farm, if his cattle be taken away, he is turned
out of his way, he can live no longer in that way. He that takes away what is
isntrumental to a man in his calling, puts him out of his way; And he that
disturbes a man in the work of his calling, turns him out of his way. Our
ordinary work is our way, ( Psalm. 1.1.) Blessed is the man that has not stood
in the way of sinners, that is, who has not taken the course which (as such)
sinners take. Now as a Godly man turns out of, or will not stand in the way of
sinners; so oppressing sinners turn many that are needy and Godly out of the
way of their lawful callings, and will not suffer them to stand or abide in
them.

Secondly, We may understand this way properly for the way or road wherein men
walk or travail upon their occasions, and then these words; They turn the
needy out of the way, may be expounded, as an argument of the extreme pride of
these Nimrods, or sons of violence. They caused the needy to turn aside out
of the way to give them place, or they made the poor to keep out of their
sight for fear of them, lest as they had already spoiled them of their
estates, so they should also abuse their persons, Illis grassantibus, nullis ne
tenuis quidem sortis, viatoribus tuta est via; adeo ut deflectere a via publica
et latebras quaerere passim cogantur. Bez:
and make them slaves. Thus they turned the poor out of the way; that is, they
durst not come in sight for fear; this suites well with the last clause of the
verse.

The poor of the earth hide themselves together. The word needy, in the former
part of the verse (as was touched before) signifies one full of desires; here
the word which we render poor, notes one that is humble, meek, lowly, not
only one low in estate, but lowly in mind, not only him that is poor in
purse, but poor in spirit; so it is translated, ( Zeph. 2.3.) Seek ye the
Lord, ye meek of the earth, even these poor of the earth hide themselves
together; Invisibiles fecerunt. Author Cat:
wicked proud men make the poor seek corners; the poor have often had
experience of their cruelty, and rough dealing, and therefore run together into
holes and corners to hide themselves, as desireing rather the society of wild
beasts, then of such beastly men. Further, the word which we render together,
may be translated, alike; They hide themselves alike; that is, one poor godly
man as well as another, they all fare alike, they deal no better with one then
with another, none have hope to escape the hands of these unmercifull tyrants.
Thus it was in the time of that great oppression which the Israelites were
under by the Philistims; The Israelites hid themselves; When Jonathan and his
Armor-bearer got up, and discovered themselves to the Garrison of the
Philistims, the Philistims said, Behold the Hebrews come forth out of the
holes where they had hid themselves, (1 Samuel 14.11.) The Author to the Hebrews
gives us a description of the poor Saints thus hiding themselves together, (
Heb. 11.37.) They wandered about in sheepe-skins, and goate-skins, being
destitute, afflicted, and tormented, they wandered in deserts, and mountains, in
dens, and caves of the earth. The poor and meek of the earth hid themselves
together.

Thus we have had a large enumeration of those violences which Job had observed
among men, and men prospering in them. First, violence upon lands; secondly,
upon cattle; thirdly, upon persons, the needy, and the poor are forced to run
together into corners; While The sin of some increases, the affliction of
others must needs increase.

Hence note.

Sinners know no bounds. They who at first wrong men in their lands, will not
stick to wrong them in their cattle, and within a while, they make no bones to
fall upon their persons.

Secondly, Note.

Those evils which are done to men immediately in their persons, are more
sinful then those that are done to them in their goods, cattle, and estate.
Job shows the worst of their doings last. It Is bad enough to touch the goods of
a poor man, but to trouble his person, or causelessely to make him hide his
head, is far worse.

Thirdly, Note.

That the promotion, and exaltation of wicked men, is the oppression, and
vexation of poor men, especially of all of poor godly men. It is a sad time
with poor men, most of all with poor godly men, when the wicked are exalted.
Solomon gives us this note in express terms ( Prove. 28.28.) When the wicked
rise (that is, when they rise in power and authority) men hide themselves, that
is, good men hide themselves: poor men hide themselves when the wicked rise,
but most of all such poor men as are godly. The reign of wicked men is the
ruin of the godly. Which is more plain by the opposition made in the last
clause of the verse; When the wicked rise, men hide themselves, but when they
perish the righteous increase. In which Proverb, rising is opposed to
perishing, but men and righteous are the same. When the wicked perish, those
righteous men, who before hid themselves, appear, and show themselves again.
Some poor men are turbulent, proud, untractable, seditious, men of unquiet
spirits, if such be dealt with by justice, and made to hide themselves, they
have their desert. But the poor who are also humble, meek, and of a quiet
spirit, (as the word here imports) are the aim of the wicked. Such David found
in his low estate, and against them he prayed ( Psalm. 35.19, 20.) Let not them
that are mine enemies wrongfully rejoice over me: neither let them wink with
the eye (that is, let them not have occasion to contemn and despise me, of
which, winking with the eye was a token) that hate me without a cause. For they
speak not peace, but they devise deceitful matters against them that are
quiet in the land.

Lastly Note.

The poor go by the worst, and the weakest to the wall, the needy are turned
out of the way, and the poor hide themselves. And therefore says God ( Psalm.
12.5.) For the oppression of the poor, and for the sighing of the needy, now
will I arise and set him in safety from him that puffs at him. Oppression may
quickly empoverish the rich, but usually the poor fall under oppression; they
that are full sigh when they are made needy and empty, when all is taken from
them, but usually the needy and empty are made to sigh; for the oppression of
the poor, will I arise says the Lord. Rich and great men can defend
themselves from oppression, but the poor have no shelter; rich men will
purchase their right, but the poor who has nothing to give, seldom finds a
friend to deliver him, and get him his right. The storm falls upon the poor,
and most upon Gods poor, they are most subject, or lie most open to the evils
of this world, of whom this present evil world is not worthy, and for whom the
good of the next world is prepared. And therefore they should fly to shelter,
while they are here, get under covert, run into the name of God for safety and
protection; they who are most subject to oppression, need most protection. Some
are so poor that they have nothing to loose, and so needy, that they need not
fear oppression. They have neither bread to eat, nor clothes to put onne,
These are no bait for covetousnes; But, they also are to be reckoned among the
poor, who have no more then will save them from poverty; and they are among
the needy, who have only so much as serves to supply their own needs. These
poor and needy ones are game for the oppressors, these the Wolves and Lions of
the earth make their prey. The oppression and wickedness of these has ascended
three steps, in the context now opened, They are first Land-invaders; secondly,
Cattel-takers; thirdly, men-troublers. Job carries on the description of their
wickedness yet further, in the following parts of this Chapter.

JOB, CHAP. 24. Verse. 5, 6, 7, 8. Behold as wild asses in the desert, go they
forth to their work, rising betimes for a prey: the wilderness yields food
for them and for their Children.

They reap every one his Corn in the field: and they gather the vintage of the
wicked.

They cause the naked to lodge without Clothing: that they have no Covering in
the Cold.

They are wet with the showers of the mountains, and embrace the rock for want
of a shelter.


JOb proceeds to enumerate the wickednesses of those men whom yet God spared,
and bare with; he had set down many of their sinful ways before; they
removed the landmarks, they violently took away flocks, they spared not the
ass of the fatherles, nor the widows ox; They turned the needy out of the
way, so that the poor of the earth were forced to hide themselves together.
See now the further progress of their wickedness, even to admiration, for so
much the word, Behold, with which Job leads on his discovery of their vexatious
practices, does import.

Verse. 5. Behold as wild asses in the desert, they go forth to their work.
There is a difference in opinion among Interpreters about the subject of this
verse, whom we are to understand under this description, As wild asses in the
desert, going forth to their work. Some of Note conceave that the poor are
the subject of these words, Exegesis praeordentis dicti, de intoleranda
inproborum, sev^tia in pauperes, quorum opera contra legem abutuntur. Jun:
or the persons here intended. And then they hold forth the hardship and misery
to which they were reduced by those merciless tyrants; Behold as wild asses
in the desert, they go forth to their work. Oppressors did so vex them and
strip them out of all, that they who heretofore had enough to live upon, were
constrained to go forth to day-labour and work for their living, at the
command, or under the cruel bondage of those inhumane Taske-Masters.

Yet I conceive that we may more clearly expound these words as carrying a
continued series of the practices of wicked men, who are here compared to wild
asses; and there is a word in the 5th verse which gives a special reason why
this should not be understood of the poor or oppressed, but of the oppressor,
where it is said, they rise betimes for a prey; now that word which we render a
prey, comes from a root which signifies to tear, (...) carpsit discarpsit,
dilaceravit dentibus, pr^prium ferarum est.
to rend, to pull assunder after the manner of wild beasts; and is of the same
sound as well as signification with our English word, tear, therefore it
should rather be understood of oppressors, then of the oppressed; for a man
that goes forth to labor, and work for his living, cannot properly be said to
rise betimes for a prey, for he goes forth to get his bread honestly; now a
prey is that which is got by violence; and the word is never applied to men,
but in allusion to ravenous and devouring beasts. Jacob comparing his son Judah
to a Lions whelpe ( Genesis 49.9.) says, From the prey, my Son, thou art gone
up. So Moses (Deuteronomy. 33.20.) And of Gad he said, Blessed be he that enlarges
Gad; he dwells as a Lion and teareth the Arm with the Crown of the head.
And David praying to be delivered out of the hand of his enemy, gives this
reason ( Psalm. 7.2.) Lest he tear my soul like a Lion, while there is none to
deliver. So that the word noting properly the act of a ravenous beast who lives
upon spoil and prey; It is very improper to apply it to the work of a
laboring man, who lives and earnes his bread with the sweat of his brows. Yet
I find that word signifying food in general ( Mal: 3.10.) Bring ye all the
tithes into the storehouse, that there may be meat in mine house. Which the
interlineral renders, that there may be a prey in mine house; Vt sit praeda in
domo mea. Mont: Vt sit quod rapitis etc. P^gna.
and another thus, that there may be that, which ye snatch, in mine house
Surely the Lord strikes at some misdemeanour while he expresses the food of
the Priests and Levites, by a word signifying that which is torn away by
violence. And (I conceave) it may either reflect upon the people who parted so
hardly with the tithes which did belong to the Temple at that time, that they
were rather torn or pulled from them by a kind of violence, then freely paid
or brought in according to the Law of God: or it might reflect upon the extreme
greedines of the Priests that did administer in the Temple, as if they did look
upon the tyths, and their portion in them, with as earnest desire as wild
beasts hang over and wait for a prey. So that where this word is used to
signify food, there is somewhat in the circumstance of the Text, which leaves
a touch of rapine and violence upon it. And therefore it is not applicable to
the earnings of honest laborers, but to the cruel gettings of thieves and
oppressors. The mountains of prey, spoken of ( Psalm. 76.4.) were either those
places where conquering Armies divided the spoil after a victory obtained; or
where robbers preyed upon passengers. And therefore I shall take the subject of
this verse to be the oppressors of the poor, not the poor oppressed.

Behold, as wild asses in the desert they go forth. (...)
The particle of likeness as, is not in the Hebrew, nor yet the word Asses,
expressly. And therefore Mr Broughton reads strictly to the Original, Behold
the wild in the wilderness go forth to their work. The word signifies wild
at large; but because wild asses are extremely wild, therefore the word is
specially applied to them. (...) Ferus homo.
Thus the Angel said of Ishmael (Genesis 16.12.) And he will be a wild man.

Behold as wild asses in the desert. The desert is the dwelling place of wild
asses: Tame asses or asses brought to hand, are about the house, or in the
enclosed pastures, but wild asses inhabit the desert. The word that we render
desert, comes from a root that signifies to speak; and the desert is so
called by the figure of Contrary speaking, (...) a (...) Locutus est per
antiphrasin quasi locus a sermon remotus.
because there is little or no speaking in deserts; many words are heard only
in Cities or places where many people frequent. It signifies also to lay wast,
because deserts are wast and barren places, in comparison of dressed and Enclosed
grounds; such is the place whether these spoylers go forth as wild asses To
their work.

But wild asses work not, only tame asses are laboring asses; So that the
similitude runs not upon that point; yet we may say, wild asses have a work,
and it is much like that which wicked men do in the dererts; (...) in. i. e.
opere vel artificium suum vel artem vnde victu^ quaerunt. Merc:
they work there, but it is wild work, such as wild asses are busyed about,
the getting of prey. They go forth to their work; and that word signifies not
only a work, but an art, or a Craft. These spoylers were their
Crafts-Masters, and could do mischief cunningly, as having been brought up as
apprentices to it, or studied it like Scholars, they had well learned and were
verst in their work, and what their work was we may learn in the next words.

Rising betimes for a prey. Like workmen, like work. To take a purse, or
spoil passengers, that is their work; And they get up and are out betimes
about this work; For a prey, they rise betimes. The Hebrew is, (...) a (...)
Mane, studiose quaerunt vel summo studio. Drus:
They morning it; that is, they rise early in the morning; to do a thing in
the morning, is in Scripture language, to do a thing diligently and with
greatest Intention of spirit, because diligent active men are up early; so that
to rise in the morning is not only an Expression of the time of their rising,
but of their spirit and diligence at their work when they were risen,
whenever they rose. The whorish woman says to the young man, ( Pro. 7.15.)
Therefore came I forth to meet thee diligently, to seek thy face. Verbum
hebraicum delarat diluculare, vnde significat praecipuo studio vel cura aliquid
agere.
The Hebrew is, To seek thee in the morning, or, to morning thee, and yet it
was in the twilight in the evening, when she came out to meet him, as is
expressed at the 9th verse of the same Chapter. Here indeed in the text, To
morning it, notes that they took the first of the morning for their work;
rising betimes for a prey. And that not without success, as the last clause of
the verse shows.

The wilderness yields food for them and for their Children. Where have they
their prey? The text answers, they have it in the wilderness. In the former part
of the verse he spoke of the desert, and in this latter of the wilderness, in
both he means the same place, both import barrennes, wildnes and wastnes;
(...) solitudo idem quod (...) desertum hinc Arabia deserta.
Mr Broughton translates; The vast-Ground gives him bread for his young. We
say, the wilderness yields food for them, etc. It may seem strange that a
wild wilderness, a wilderness untilled, unplanted, uninhabited, should yield them
food.

I answer; First, The Scripture speaks of many wildeernesses that were planted
and inhabited. John the Baptist preached in the wilderness of Judea (Math. 3.1.)
And the wilderness had many houses if not towns in it, such wildernesses yield
food in plenty. Secondly, the wilderness may be said to yield them food, not
because they did live upon that which grew in the wilderness, or in these wast
places, but because in the wilderness they took occasion to spoil and robb
those that thorough it travailed to other places. Many get their livings there,
where none live, and where nothing is to be had of the growth of the place to
live upon. Outrages and robberyes are usually committed in such places. And
therefore in the Prophecy of that great Peace which Christ should give to his
Church ( Psalm. 72.3.) It is said, The mountains shall bring peace to the
people, and the little hills by righteousness; He names the mountains and the
hills above other places, because in or upon them violence is often exercised;
and to say, the mountains shall bring peace, is much more then to say the
valleys and the Cities shall bring peace: when there is peace and safety upon
hills and mountains, we may presume that there is peace every where. Therefore
as when God promises ( Isa. 60.17.) that in the latter days he will make the
officers among his people peace, and their exactors righteousness, he means
that he will make all sorts of men peaceful and righteous, because he will
make them such who are usually most troublesome and unrighteous officers and
exactors: so when he says the mountains shall bring peace, the meaning is,
every place shall, or that the peace shall be universal in all places, because
mountains and wildernesses are the places where robbers and spoylers take
their prey, and get their subsistence. And hence it may well be answered, why
Job says, that the wilderness yielded them food, even because that place was
fittest for them so rob and spoil in, who made the spoil of others their
daily food. Thus the wilderness yields food for them And for their Children.

The word signifies any that are young, and is taken as well for servants as
for Children (1 Samuel 21.5.) The vessels of the young men are holy, said David
to the Priest concerning his followers. So (1 Samuel 25.9.) Thus here it
comprehends all that are about them, even all their family and retinue. They
and all theirs, all that belong to them have their food in the wilderness, that
is, there they take opportunity by violence and oppression to maintain
themselves and theirs.

Here we may consider, first, that Job calls these spoylers wild asses, nor
does the Scripture speak this in vain.

Hence note.

Wicked men are like Beasts or beastiall in their dispositions and actions.
David compares the best of that sort, men in honor, to beasts ( Psalm. 49.20.)
Man (says he) that is in honor and understands not, is like the beasts that
perish. David's man that understands not, is not a man without natural, but a
man without true spiritual capacity and understanding; A man who fears not
God, (for to fear God that is wisdom) and who departs not from evil, for to
depart from evil that is understanding (Job 28.28.) Now how great and large an
understanding so ever any great and honorable man has, yet if he has not an
understanding in these things, he is like the beasts that perish. It is not
said he is like this or that beast, but he is like the beasts that perish. Take
any beast, or all beasts, the worst of beasts, he is the picture of them all,
and he daily exemplyfyes the vilest of their qualityes in his own. The Prophet
Michah (Chap. 3.1, 2, 3.) says that of them, which speaks them rather beasts
indeed then like beasts, Hear I pray you, O heads of Jacob, and ye Princes of
the house of Israel, is it not for you to know Judgment? (as if he had said,
who should if not you) who hate the good, and love the evil, who pluck off
their skin from off them, and their flesh from off their bones, who also eat
the flesh of my people, and flay off their skin, and break their bones, etc.
How could the beast be more lively acted then by these men? Paul fought with
beasts at Ephesus (1 Cor. 15.32.) which, I grant, may be expounded properly,
and possibly best so, It being usual in those times of persecution under
Heathenish power; to cast the Christians to the wild beasts, and for the common
sort to cry out, Away with the Christians to the Lions; yet it is as true that
Paul did fight or contend with beasts in the shape of men. And he speaks
particularly concerning bloody Nero, A man in the highest honor of that age.
(2 Timothy 4.17.) I was delivered out of the mouth of the Lion. The Baptist called
the Pharisees a generation of vipers, (Math. 3.7.) And Herod is called by
Christ, that Fox, (Luke 13.32.) And it is said of all ungodly men at once ( Rev.
22.15.) Without are Dogs. Wolves, Lions, Foxes, Vipers, Serpents; Dogs, the
worst of Creatures for rapine and spoil, do but express the inhumanity and
cruelty of wicked men. And because they are compared to wild Asses in the text,
I will give you some paralels between them and the wild Ass.

First, In their lawlesnes and unsubjection to command: carnal men are lawles.
Libertatis symbolum est Onager.
The Apostle calls them so (1 Timothy 1.9.) Knowing this that the law is not made
for a righteous man, but for the lawles and disobedient; not that they have no
law, but they live as if they had none, they who love to disobey the law are
lawles, and embrace libertinisme in stead of liberty. Thus the wicked man is as
the wild ass, for his licentiousnes and lawlesnes; for so the wild ass is
described in the 39th Chapter of this book, verse the 5th; Who has sent out
the wild ass free? or loosed the bands of the wild ass? what is the freedom
of the wild ass? not like that of men who have the privilege of freedom in
an order, but to be free without order. The wicked would be where they will,
and do what they list, this is the freedom of the wild ass. Now as God
himself there puts the Question, Who has sent out the wild ass free? who
has manu-mitted him? Surely no man has done it, but God has planted it in
the nature of the wild ass to be free, and to live without bands or bounds.
And if we should ask the Question, Who has sent out wicked men free? and who
has loosed the bands of the wicked? The answer must be, Satan has done it,
and their own evil hearts have done it: they have broke the bands, and cast
away all coards from them, they have set themselves free, in such a freedom as
it is, which is indeed perfect thraldom to their own lusts, and the laws of
the Prince of darkness; they are not free by being deliverd from the bondage and
condemnation of the law, but by casting off all obedience and submission to it.

Secondly, Wild asses are extremely violent and Impetuous in their desires or
lusts. Jeremy expostulating with the Jews about their revolting from, and
rebellion against God, compares them ( Chap. 2.24.) to A wild ass used to the
wilderness, that snuffeth up the wind at her pleasure, in her occasion who can
turn her away? all they that seek her, will not weary themselves, in her
month they shall find her; there is no meddling, no dealing with the wild ass
while lust is upon her, she will have the desire of her heart if she can. Thus
wicked men are given up to and transported with their pleasures and inordinate
affections, in their occasion, that is, when the heat of their intemperate
desires or lusts, of any kind, are upon them, there is no turning of them;
only, in their month, when sorrows and pains are upon them, they may be
spoken with. We may also read both this sin and the reproof of that people in
a like allusion ( Hos. 8.9.)

Thirdly, The wild ass is an Emblem of the wicked man, especially as he is an
oppressor or tyrant in his unsociablenes; for as the ass refuses society, so
these are unfit for society, and are indeed enemies of mankind; They are unfit
not only for spiritual, but also for Political, or Civil Society. God
speaking of the wild Ass (in the 39th Chapter of this book, v. 6, 7.) says,
Whose house I have made the wilderness, and the barren land his dwellings. He
scorneth the multitude of the City, neither regards he the crying of the
driver; the range of the mountains is his pasture, and he searches after
every green thing. Though the oppressor live in the City, yet he is like the
wild ass in this, he cares not to maintain society as he ought; he cares
for the society of others only for himself, he scorneth the multitude of the
City, he is for the range of the mountains, where he may take all he can get,
he searches after every green thing, whatsoever has pleasure or profit in
it, he pursues it for himself.

This parallel might be drawn out further; wild asses (as Naturalists have
observed) are fearful. Belocitas timiditalis subsidium.
Those Creatures that are most swift, are naturally most fearful; and their
swiftnes is a relief to their fearfullnes. Thus, wicked men are fearful. They
only have true Courage who fear God, and where the fear of God is not,
Timida est omnis Nequitia.
every other fear is, or every other thing is feared. They who find not a
friend in their own consciences, are ready to suspect every one for an enemy.
So that though every wicked man would have all that he can get to himself
alone, yet he dares not be alone in getting it. And upon those terms only he
is willing that others should join with him in the profit, because he would
have them join with him in the sin. ( Pro. 1.11.14.) Come with us, let us lay
wait for blood, etc. Cast in thy lot with us, we will all have one purse.
Wicked men are not for society, unless it be in wickedness, and yet theirs is
not so much a society as a conspiracy. A wicked man, let his sin be what it
will, is glad when he has partners in doing it, or that others do the same
with him, not only because he has a suscipicion of the lawfullnes of what he
does, but also because he suspects some sudden danger in doing it. And hence
some have noted that the woman, who committed the first sin, did not like to
be alone in it, and therefore having eaten her self she gave the fruit of the
tree to her husband to eat also; she desiered an associate both to
countenance her in the act, and to help bear her out in the consequents of
it. And when they had both sinned, they showed themselves like wild Asses
indeed, running into the thickets at the approach of God, there to hide
themselves both for shame and fear. Behold as wild asses They go forth to
their work.

Hence note.

To wrong men, to sin against God, is the work of wicked men. That Is their
busienes. Therefore in Scripture they are often called workers of Iniquity;
Implying that to do iniquity is their trade of life, or that which they live
by and daily set themselves about. The work of God is none of their work, nor
do they count it so, being (as the Apostle speaks, Tit. 1.16.) abominable,
disobedient, and unto every good work reprobate. Good work is put into the
hand of man by the hand of God, but they have their work from another hand,
the lusts of your father ye will do (says Christ to the Pharisees, Joh.
8.44,) that is, ye will do the devils work; That Is their work, and they go
forth to it as the honest laboring man goes forth unto his work and to his
labor until the Evening, (Psalm. 104.23.) so the wicked man goes forth to sin
as to his work; And that he does so is evident upon a fourfold account.

First, Because he does not stumble upon it, but intends it; a godly man falls
into sin, but to sin is not his intendment, a godly man may sin when he goes
forth, but he does not go forth to sin, he does not make it his buisines. That
is properly a man's work, which he proposes to himself to do, and purposes
to do.

Secondly, He goes forth to it as to his work, for he delights in it; he is
pleased with it. It is his meat and drink, yea his mirth and music to do
evil. That is properly a man's work, which though it be painful to him to
do it, yet he is pleased in doing it.

Thirdly, He goes forth to it as to his work, for he spends his spirits, his
strength and time in it; we do many things which are not our work, they are
but by-works, or beside our work, we bestow little of our time and strength
in such things: that which a man bestows his time and strength upon, that
whereat he labors to sweat and wearines of body, that is his work; now the
time of wicked men runs out, and their strength is consumed in sinning, and
though they are not weary of committing iniquity, yet they weary themselves (as
the Prophet speaks, Jer. 9.5.) to commit iniquity, therefore that is their
work.

Fourthly, Wicked men are skillfull to sin, they sin with a kind of art,
therefore that is their work; that which is a man's proper work, he has
knowledge about it, and is dextrous at; He does not bungle, but makes clean
work (as we say) of that which is his work. A Minister should preach the
Gospel like a workman that needs not be ashamed (as the Apostle speaks.) The
wicked sin like workmen, though the more they do so, the more cause they have
to be ashamed. The Prophet ( Jer. 9.5.) bewayling the extreme sinfullnes of
those times, says, They have taught their tongues to speak lies. As if they
had studied the art and language of lying: while they told or made gross lies,
they would not make them grossly, but with a kind of finenes and neatenes As
though what a Godly man does according to the mind of God, he does by grace,
yet he uses a kind of artificialnes in doing it; and is therefore exhorted to
walk circumspectly or accurately; that is, to act all his duties with
exactnes; so, though what an ungodly man does against the mind of God, he does
it by nature, or very naturally, yet he uses a kind of artificiallnes in doing
it, and therefore he is said ( Psalm. 50.19, 20.) To give his mouth to evil,
and to frame deceit with his tonuge, to sit (as an artist at his work) and
speak against his brother, and slander his own mothers son. Thus, they go
forth to their work, Rising betimes for a prey.

Whence observe.

A wicked man is very industrious and diligent in doing his work. To rise
betimes, and to do a thing diligently, are the same in Scripture; to rise
betimes is to rise somewhat before the ordinary time of rising; Now, when a man
breaks his sleep to go about his work, this shows that he is industrious at
it. As some wicked men quickly throw off their sleep, that they may do
mischief: So (which argues the same principle and spirit) Others sleep not
unless they have done mischief, and their sleep is taken away, unless they
cause some to fall. (Prove. 4.16.) Their own sleep is taken away, unless they
take away somewhat which is not their own. They will defraud themselves of
rest, rather then not defraud others of their right. They go not more
unwillingly to prison after they have done evil, then they go to bed before
they have done it. O how are they set upon mischief, whose sleep departs from
them unless they do it, and who cannot rest unless they trouble others. The
servants of God, when they are up in zeal cannot sleep unless they do good;
as David speaks ( Psalm. 132.4, 5, 6.) Surely I will not come into the
Tabernacle of my house, nor clime up to my bed; I will give no sleep to mine
eyes, nor slumber to mine eyelids, till I have found a place for God, etc. he
was so zealous for God that if he could he would not sleep, he would forbid
his own rest, though he had never so much mind to it, till he had finished
that work for God. So says the wicked man, I will give mine eyes no sleep
nor slumber to mine eyelids till I have done this or that mischeife, and
brought my device to pass. When the wicked lie wakeing on their beds, what are
they about then? their wakeing thoughts in the night are to do mischief in
the morning. ( Michah 2.1, 2.) Woe to them that devise Iniquity, and work
evil upon their beds. How do they work it upon their beds? they work it in
their thoughts, in their inward shop, there they fashion it, and when the
morning is light they practice it, because it is in the power of their hand;
they hinder themselves from sleep, that they may forward themselves in sin;
The night is spent in Imagineing, and plotting, and the day in accomplishing
what they have imagined and plotted. Their morning light is spent in the works
of darkness, and the text says, They practice it, because it is in the power
of their hand. They never consider what is Just for them to do, but what they
have power to do, if they have ability they want no will for the vilest
practices.

Again, as they cannot sleep sometimes for devising evil, so when they have
slept, their first waking thoughts are about evil; and this also is a further
proof of their extreme industriousnes in doing evil. For as it is with a
zealous Godly man, his first wakeing thoughts are with God, and Christ, or
about his own soul, how God may be honored, and how his soul may be saved.
( Psalm. 139.18.) O how precious are thy thoughts (that is, thoughts of thee) to
me O God, how great is the sum of them! when I awake I am still with thee:
that is, my thoughts and meditations are with thee as soon as ever I awake;
here is the diligence of the soul after God: so the wicked man when he awakes
he is still with sin; And if he cannot awake naturally soon enough to sin,
he will force himself to awake: And so he may be said to awake to sin, before
he is awake; for as some nurse up and feed their sleep when they are a little
awakened, like the sluggard, yet a little slumber, yet a little sleep; so
others offers violence to, or break their sleep, that is, as the text says,
they rise betimes, even before the usual time of rising, that they may get a
prey. It is no wonder, if they who stick not at breaking the laws of God,
break also the laws of their own rest.

Diligence is good about that which is good; it is good to be zealously
affected always in a good matter, but zeal and diligence misplaced, how evil
are they! it is better to creep in a good way, then to run in a wrong way; Even
idleness is better then such diligence; yet they who misplace their zeal and
diligence, are commonly more in both then they who place them right; and they
who are in a false way, make more have then they who are in a true. The
Scripture notes the extreme Intensenes of the builders of Babel upon their
work. And that is the strain of most men in such work as theirs was, the
building of a Babel, or in doing that, which will be but a monument of their
own pride and folly, or of their rebellion against and contempt of God. ( Genesis
11.6.) This they begin to do, and now nothing will be restrained from them
which they have Imagined to do; if they have but a mind to it they will do
it, let it cost what it will, neither difficulty nor danger shall restrain
them. See also how Industrious the ten Tribes were in their Idolatrous worship
which Jeroboam had set up, (1 Kings 12.30.) And this thing became a sin; for
the people went to worship before the one even unto Dan; that is, they went a
great way to worship; for howsoever Jeroboam pretended the ease and
accommodation of the people in setting up those Calves ( ver. 28.) It is too
much for you to go up to Jerusalem; Behold thy Gods O Israel, which brought
thee up out of the land of Egypt (as if he had said, thy Gods are at hand, or
in thine eye, thou need not toil thy self in going so far to serve them)
yet Jerusalem was nearer unto most of the Israelites, then either Dan or Bethel
were. For Bethel one of those places of worship was in the utmost bounds of the
South ( Josh. 18.22.) and Dan the other place of worship was in the utmost
bounds of the North, ( Josh. 19.47) so that they were willing to take more
pains to follow the Idolatrous inventions of man, then to keep to the
Institutions of God. Jerusalem was nearer to most of the ten Tribes then either
Dan or Bethel; and yet thither they would go. All the way to sin, whether in
ordinary practice or worship is downe-hill to Nature, we have both the wind
and tide of the world with us, will we set our faces helward; and to be sure,
Satan will never check their diligence who are doing his work, nor take them
off from their pace, who are going or Galloping his way. We have a clear
evidence of this in the case of the worshippers of those two Calves in Dan and
Bethel; and, it is further observed by some, that the Israelites grew so
zealous in a short time in that abomination, that they who dwelt near Bethel
did even disdain to worship at Bethel, they disdained to serve their God at
their own doors, and therefore they that dwelt at or near Bethel would go to
Dan and worship; and they that dwelt at or near Dan would go to Bethel to
worship. The heart of man is so mad upon Idolatry, that he is willing to be at
any cost or pains for it; He scorns to serve a false God at an easy rate,
nor is he pleased (which is the only thing which pleases some who pretend to
the true religion) with a cheap religion. You may lay what tax you will upon
him, either of pains or purse, and he is willing, yea even ambitious to pay or
perform it. Thus the blind votaryes among the Papists at this day will needs
go a Pilgrimage to remotest places, they will travayle to Jerusalem, and visit
the Sepulcher, etc. these long Journeyes they glory in, it is but a step to
them; hard penances, not only fastings but whippings they glory in. The nature
of man will carry him two miles at his own bidding, rather then one at Gods.
How may it shame Godly men for their sloth in doing the will of God, when they
hear how industrious evil men are in doing their own? how may it shame them,
that they should take less pains to keep a righteous law, then many do to
satisfy a filthy lust? Who like wild Asses go forth to their work, rising
betimes for a prey. And whereas it follows.

The wilderness yields food for them and for their Children. Note.

Wicked men will have it, if it be to be had above ground. They that live by
rapine, will live any where; every man's estate is theirs, if they can but get
it. They find a harvest in the wilderness, and riches in the desert.

Again, Note.

Wicked men lay up for theirs, as well as for themselves by the spoil of
others. The light of nature teaches parents to lay up for their children, and
they who get an estate by wronging others, yet think they are bound to provide
for more then themselves ( Nahum 11.12.) Where is the dwelling of the Lions,
and the feeding place of the young Lions? where the Lion even the old Lion
walked, and the Lions whelpe, and none made him afraid. The Lion did tear in
pieces enough for his whelps, and strugled for his Lyonesses. What did the
Lion? the Lion did tear in pieces! and how much did he tear in pieces? not
only enough to fill his own belly, but to feed his whelps, and his Lyonesses;
He filled his holes with prey, and his dens with ravine. Thus the Prophet
describes wicked men, providing not only for themselves, but for theirs,
their young Lions and Lyonesses; The wilderness yields food for them and for
their Children.

Further, Some note the Consent of the whole family in wickedness, from these
words; The wilderness yields food for them and for their Children; that is,
they all agree together, Master and Servants and Children, all agree together
to do mischeife, to spoil and oppress all they can. Where Parents and
Masters are evil, Children and servants are seldom good. It is rare to see
hearts united about that which is good, but they are often and easily united in
that which is evil. Thus the Lord speaks to Jeremie (Chap. 7.18.) See thou
not what they do in the Cities of Judah, and in the streets of Jerusalem; The
Children gather wood, and the fathers kindle the fire, and the women knead
their dough to make Cakes to the Queen of heaven, etc. All were at work,
busy, very busy they were about an Idolatrous service, the Children, the
fathers, and the women act their several parts. So here, either they robbed
for their children, or their children were robbers as well as themselves. The
wilderness yields food for them and their Children. Job proceeds in his
narrative of their sin.

Verse. 6. They reap every one his Corn in the field, and they gather the
vintage of the wicked.
In the former verse Job spoke of the oppression of persons, in this, he
speaks of the spoiling of lands and fields; They, that is, the wicked, reap,
every one his Corn, that is, by their servants whom they set aworke (They reap
every one his Corn) in the field.

But you will say, what hurt is there in that?

The meaning is, they reap the Corn which does not belong to them. Agrum non
suum ante tempus demessiverunt. Sept: Agrum non suum demetunt.
The Septuagint give that sense of the text expressly: They mow, or reap the
ground or field which is not theirs. And so Mr Broughton, They reap the field
that is not their own; Or if we keep to our reading, They reap every one his
Corn in the field; the sense is, wheresoever they find a field of Corn for
their purpose, they pretend some title or other to it, they must have it as if
it were their own. This is their sin, and the affliction of those who are
their neighbors.

Note from it.

That it is a great sin to reap the Corn which we have not sown, and a great
affliction when the Corn which we have sown is reapt by others. Job
imprecates this punishment upon himself, in case he had done, or were guilty,
as his friends had charged him, then let me sow, and let another eat, (Chap.
31.8.) And this is threatened ( Isa. 1.7.) Your land strangers devour in your
presence; that is, they devour the fruits of it, the Corn which ye have
sowed, and and the Cattle which ye have bred. ( Micha 6.15.) Thou shall sow,
but not reap; thou shall tread the Olives, but not anoint thy self with the
oil, and sweet wine, but shall not drink wine: others shall come and take it
from thee. That Idle servant charged his Master ( Math. 25.24.) Thou reapest
where thou have not sown. It is the misery of some, that what they have sown
is reapt by others, and it is a wickedness to reap where we have not sown.

And they gather the vintage of the wicked. That is, the grapes that grow in
their vineyards. Mr Broughton renders, The wicked snap off the vineyard grapes;
they were in the Corne-fields before, now they are got into the vineyards.

But how is it said, They gather the vintage of the wicked? it seems strange
that they being wicked should gather the vintage of the wicked? Some take it
plainly thus; they oppress those that are as bad as themselves. And so we may
take this note from it.

One wicked man will oppress another. Wicked men spare neither good nor bad,
Lupus lupum non edit.
neither friend nor foe; They spoil those that are as bad as themselves; we
say a Wolf does not prey upon a Wolf, nor a Lion upon a Lion, but it is
otherwise with brutish men, they prey upon and devour one another.

Secondly, They gather the vintage of the wicked; that is, of those whom they
Count to be wicked, and so fit to have their goods taken from them; they accuse
them of wickedness, and put their names in their black book, as if they were
dishonest; that is a truth also.

Wicked men often oppress the Innocent under a pretense that they are wicked.
We have a great Instance of this about the taking of a vineyard (1 Kings
21.13.15.) Naboth was Innocent and honest; Inter omnia simillimum videtur;
vinea^ impij, ejus scilicet quem illi habent pro impio, and ideo opprimendum
sibi Ju^icant. Merc: V^neam ejus quem oppresserunt. Vulg:
but Jezabel hired two men, to make Oath that he had blasphemed God and the
King, and he was presently cast out and stoned: his was the vineyard of the
wicked, because the wicked had a mind to it. Thus, under a pretense of some
evil done, they really do evil: And having brought a false accusation against
a man, they proceed to condemn his person and confiscate his estate, as if all
were true.

There is yet another reading, (which we put in the margin of our Bibles) so
plain in the letter, that it needs none of these Interpretations to make it
out; The wicked gather the vintage; As they took away the Corn, so the wine
also. We need not wonder, that they were so injuriously buisie to take that
which was not their own, for they were wicked, and they that are so, make no
bones of doing wickedly; a wicked man is ready for any sin, the vile person
will speak villainy, and act villanously too.

Verse. 7. They Cause the naked to lodge without Clothing, that they have no
Covering in the Cold.
Their progress in wickedness is further described by their incompassionatenes
and Cruelty; when we see any naked we should Cloth them; but they caused the
naked to lodge without Clothing. And they might be said to do this two ways.
First, by not giving them Clothing; secondly, by taking away their Clothing;
for by naked, we may understand not only those that are quite naked, but (as
was showed, Chap. 22.6.) those also that have but little Clothing; they took
away even that little from them, and so Caused the naked to lodge without
Clothing. We see by what steps of wickedness they proceeded, they not only
spoiled them of their Corn and Wine, but pulled their very Clothes from off
their backs; it is bad enough not to cloth the naked, but to take away their
clothing, and make them naked, that is worse. And (which they also did) to let
them lodge without clothing is worst of all. To lodge without clothing, notes
their continuance in that distressed state. The Prophet rebuking the Jews for
their vain thoughts, puts them this question; How long shall vain thoughts
lodge within thee? Why do ye (as it were) make ready a room, and a bed for
them? So while the naked lodge without clothing, they continue in nakedness. It
is a great injury to take away a man's day-cloaths from his back, but to take
away his night-cloaths from his bed, is yet more afflictive and injuririous. If
a man have not clothing for his body by day, yet if he have clothing for his
bed he may help himself, but to cause the naked to lodge without clothing,
what Cruelty is this? And therefore the Law of God provided against it ( Deuteronomy.
24.12, 13.) Thou shall not sleep with his pledge: In any Case thou shall
deliver him the pledge again, when the Sun goes down, that he may sleep
in his own raiment (that is, in his night-cloaths, or bed-cloaths) and bless
thee, and it shall be righteousness to thee before the Lord thy God; That is,
God will look upon this as a righteous act. The Lord was very tender in this
point, he would not have the poor lodge without clothing; but some wicked men
care not what the poor suffer, they neither regard whether they have any
lodging, nor whether they have any clothes to lodge in. They cause the naked to
lodge without Clothing; so That (as it follows in the text) They have no
Covering in the Cold.

The word signifies to Cover as with a veil or with a garment. It is applied
to the pardon of our sins, ( Psalm. 32.1.) Blessed is the man whose sin is
Covered. Their condition is most sad, who have no covering for their souls,
yet theirs also is very sad who have no covering for their bodies in the Cold.
To have no covering in the Cold winter nights, is not only uncomfortable, but
dangerous. Death is a great cold, and it endangers life to have no covering in
the cold, or in the frost, which is the extremity of cold. The word is used to
signify frost, ( Genesis 31.40. (...) Gelu.
) Jacob tells Laban; Thus I was, in the day the drought consumed me, and the
frost by night.

The Septuagint translate thus; (...). Sept:
They take away the Covering of their soul; what is that, you will say? in a
spiritual sense, Christ is the only covering of the soul, But no tyrant can
take away this. Therefore by the covering of the soul here, we are to
understand that which is to a man as his life, take away that and you take away
his life. The soul is often put for the body, and then the Covering here meant
is the Covering of the body, or that covering that is nearest the soul, or
nearest life, so that, there is a great elegancy and emphasis in it to say,
They take away the Covering of their very soul; That is, they endanger their
lives by it. Some translate to that sense, They take away the covering which is
next their very skin, they would not leave them so much as a shirt, that is the
Covering (in this sense) of the soul. And when we speak of the utmost rigor
and cruelty of man toward man, we say (proverbially) He has not left him so
much as a shirt to his back. Yet the Prophet expresses the rigorous cruelty
of man to man, by taking away that which may much more be called the covering
of their soul ( Mich: 3.3.) They eat the flesh of my people, and flay their
skin from off them. Skin and flesh are indeed the Covering of the soul. To
strip the poor to their skin, is to take away the Covering of their soul; How
much more to strip off the skin from their flesh, and the flesh from off their
bones. But, to the words of the text; They have no Covering in the cold.

This has in it a double Inhumanity; First, to expose them to extreme pain,
and then to extreme shame. Not to have a covering is to be exposed to shame,
not to have a covering in the cold is to be exposed to pain. But what becomes
of the poor when they are naked, and have no covering in the cold, The next
verse informs us about that.

Verse. 8. They are wet with the showers of the mountains, and embrace the rock
for want of a shelter.
Here Is the shift these poor hearts are put to, they are wet with the showers
of the mountains; that word which we render wet, is only found in this place
in the old Testament; it notes not only to be dashed with rain, but to be
soakt thorough with it. We use to say of those who are very wet, that they are
wet to the skin, but these being naked had nothing to wet but their skin, and
their skin was (if it might be) soaked through with the wet, or they were
thorough-wet with the showers of the mountains, that is, with those showers
which they meet with upon the mountains; showers gather about high mountains,
there the Clouds engender rain, and there the showers are bred. Travelers
observe by the eye, how Clouds gather about the tops of mountains, Est autem
qualecunque nuditatis remedium si ille qui vestimentorum operimentum non habet,
saltem operimento demus non careci. Aquin:
and that the rain broods there. This is a further addition to the Cruelty of
oppressors, and the misery of the oppressed; they took away their Clothes, and
turned them out of their houses naked into the open air, and left them to
contend with cold and hunger, with all varieties of weather and danger among
the mountains. It is some help to a man, if he have no Clothes to cover him,
yet to have a house to cover him; but to have neither body-cloaths, nor
bed-cloaths, nor house, nor harbor, how sad is this! And being thus helpless,
the next words show us what a poor shift they made.

They embrace the rock for want of a shelter. When he says, They embrace the
rock, his meaning is, they make much of it, they are glad of it, for so we are
of those things which we embrace; in stead of soft warm beds, they were glad
of cold hard stones to secure and shelter them from the rain. Again, They
embrace the rock; that is, they go into the holes and clefts of the rock, they
had houses (possibly) Palaces before, but now they are forced to dwell in the
holes of the rock.

In as much as Job says, they did not only go to the rock for shelter, and
make a shift with it, but embrace and hugg it, as being joyful they had it.

Note.

Great afflictions make small comforts very welcome to us. He that is turned
out naked and has no Clothes to Cover him, would be glad to have a thatcht
house, or the meanest Cottage to hide himself in; he that has no house is
glad if he can have but the hole of a rock. ( Lam. 4.5.) They who were brought
up in scarlet embrace dunghills; he does not say, they are thrown upon
dunghills, but they embrace them, they that were bred up in scarlet, are now
glad of a dunghill to escape in, there to find a moldy crust to eat, there to
pick up an old dirty ragge to cover their nakedness with, or old shoes to put
upon their feet. So it was in the great famine and desolation of Jerusalem.
And so it was during the late wars in Germany, and the later, in Ireland.
Some have fought and contended for a piece of Carrion, for a piece of a dead
Horse, nay for a piece of a dead man; that which stunck above ground, they
contended for, and having won it, they embraced it and made dainty of it, as
of the most pleasant meat. We that are in our fullnes, and plenty, we that
have abundance, slight and make light of many good things; but we may soon be
so straightened and put to it, that we would be glad to embrace a rock, or a
dunghill, that we would be glad of the crumbs that fall from our tables, and of
the worst scraps we leave upon our trenchers. Thus the old Saints are described
( Heb. 11.36.) glad they were of Caves and Dens, they wandered in deserts, and
in mountains, and in dens, and Caves of the earth, being destitute, afflicted,
and tormented; they were glad to live among the wild beasts, when they could
not live quietly among men. When the wind and the Sun beat upon the head of
Jonah, the text says, Jonah was glad of his gourd, a thing of little value,
very mean, and fadeing in it self; yet when the Sun shined hot, and the
wind beat strongly upon him, then he was glad of a gourd. In times of plenty
and peace, wre are scarce thankful for goodly houses, for full tables, and
rich Clothes; But a little and that course food will cause the hungry to be
thankful. The naked will catch at old rags, and they who have no house will
embrace a rock. There is a rock, a mystical rock, whom the Saints embrace
for a shelter, and rejoice in above all the goodly houses in the world, yea
above this whole world. Christ is a rock to be embraced in our best days as
our best shelter, and in our bad days he is our only shelter. And while we
are constrained by outward wants to embrace natural rocks for the shelter of
our bodies, let us remember, how our inward and spiritual wants, do always
constrain us to embrace that mystical rock, for the shelter of our souls.

Lastly, Observe.

The Cruelty of man to man knows no bounds. We have seen in this context
several steps of cruelty, men ravening for their prey like wild beasts, men
invading the harvest and the vintage of their neighbors, men robbing both the
fatherles and the widow, men pulling clothes from the backs of the poor, and
exposing them naked to the cold, and to the rain, to the mercy of rocks and
mountains. Thus, man who should be a God to man, kind, merciful, charitable,
bountiful, courteous, proves himself a Devil to man, churlish, cruel,
merciles, yea such that even his tender mercies are cruel. How cruel are their
cruelties, whose mercies, whose tender mercies are cruel!

JOB, CHAP. 24. Verse. 9, 10, 11, 12. They pluck the fatherles from the breast,
and take a pledge of the poor.

They cause him to go naked without Clothing, and they take away the sheafe
from the hungry.

Which make oil within their walls, and tread their wine-presses, and suffer
thirst.

Which groan from out of the City, and the soul of the wounded cries out;
yet God lays not folly to them.


JOb still draws out the line of the oppressors wickedness, or discovers the
several ways of his oppression; We have seen much of his bloody work
before, here we have more, even highest oppression, oppression devoyd not only
of all justice, but of all humanity; such is that which is next instanced in.

Verse. 9. They pluck the fatherles from the breast.
They, that is, the oppressors before spoken of, do it, either with their own
hands, or it is done at their command by their ministers and instruments.

They pluck the fatherless. The word notes an act of violence, they lay
violent hands upon the fatherless. Who are meant by the fatherless, has been
opened more then once already. Here the fatherless are taken, not largely for
any that are destitute of help and means, as the word is often used in
Scripture, but strictly, for children whose fathers are lately dead, and they
yet in their minority, yea in their infancy, and in the first of their infancy,
sucking children, children hanging upon their mothers breasts; which
exceedingly hightens the cruelty of these oppressors. To use any violence to
the fatherless, though grown up, is (as has been showed) a great
wickedness, to use violence toward fatherless infants is much more wicked,
but to pull fatherless infants from their mothers or nurses breast (which is
all the livelihood a child has) this is utmost wickedness. And this is not
only an affliction to the children, but to the mother, a disconsolate widow,
who having lost her husband, is now bereaved of her child also. Thus they add
affliction to the afflicted, and sorrow to the sorrowful.

It Is here enquired, what should move them to pluck the fatherless from the
breasts, or what their intent might be in this barbarous action?

Some answer, That it was their covetousness which moved them to be cruel;
They pulled the children from their mothers breasts, that so their mothers
might be the fitter to do them service; they would needs weane the children
before they were fit, that the mother might be the more fit to labor, and
toil for them; or they plucked the fatherless from the breast, to sell them and
to make money of them; when they had murdered the father, and taken all from
the widow, they made their markets of their children. So we may interpret that
of the Prophet ( Isa. 10.2.) Woe to them that decree unrighteous decrees, and
that write grievousnesse, which they have prescribed, to turn aside the needy
from judgment, and to take away the right from the poor of my people, that
widows may be their prey, and that they may rob the fatherless. So we read,
implying that they took away the estate of the fatherless, and so robbed
them. Others give this sense of th^se words, that they took away the persons
of the fatherless, or more plainly, thus, That they stole away fatherless
children, and sold them into slavery. There is a generation among us, called
spirits, who pull children from the breast, or enveigle away such as know not
their right hand from the left, to make merchandise of them. The smell of gain
is sweet to some from any thing, even from the sale of poor fatherless
children.

(...) mamma, etiam vastitas a (...) vastavit. Rapiunt pupillo quod post
vastationem relictum est. Tygur:
Secondly, Others read the text thus; They pluck from the fatherless that
which was left after the prey or destruction; for the word which we translate
breast, is derived from a root which signifies to destroy or lay wast; so the
sense is given thus; They take away from the fatherless, even that poor
pittance which was left after they had made havocke of all that was their
fathers.

And take a pledge of the poor. What a pledge is has been opened ( Chap.
22.6.) The words may also bear this translation, They take that which is upon
the poor for a pledge, namely, their raiment, not only the clothes which they
have by them to spare, (a poor man may have a little change) but the clothes
which they actually wear. How contrary this practice was to the Law, has been
showed before, which forbad to take a pledge of such things, as without which
the poor cannot conveniently subsist.

There is a third reading, which says not as we, they take a pledge of the
poor, but, they take the poor for a pledge. Of which cruelty we read (2 Kings
4.1.) where the poor widow complained to the Prophet, that her husband being
dead, the creditors were come, and had taken her two sons to be bond men.
Thus here when they had gotten their cattle (as was showed before) and their
clothes from their backs, then they must have their bodies too, to be slaves
and drudges. Here first, I might note, That the sin of oppression is
aggravated in reference to the persons upon whom it is exercised. But because
it has been observed from other passages both of this and former Chapters, how
sinful it is to oppress those, whom we are bound to relieve, and to vex
those, whom we ought to comfort; I shall not insist upon it in this place. But

Observe, Secondly.

That covetousness knows no bounds. As it has been said of envy, so we may
say of covetousness, Covetousness, whether will thou? whether will thou lead,
or rather hurry and force worldly men? covetousness carries those who are
under the power of it no man knows whether: who can tell where he shall stopp
or stay when he is once under the power of the spirit of covetousness? such
will not spare either the fatherless, or the widow, not the clothes upon
their backs, no nor their backs nor bodies. If a covetous eye can but
discern any advantage to be made, it will have body and all. There is no sin
so heinous, none so base, and sordid, but covetousness may be both the mother,
and nurse of it. A covetous man will not forbear either for the cruelty of the
sin, or for the sordidnesse of it; Covetousness is a sordid lust;
Covetousness is earthy, and mudds our spirits in earthly things. When the
spirit of a man is once embased by covetousnes, he is ready to do any base
thing. There is nothing here below, lower then that Spirit. And hence the
Apostle concludes (1 Timothy 6.10.) That the love of money (which is
covetousness) is the root of all evil, that is, any evil of sin may grow
up from that root; and therefore the Apostle adds in the same place, That,
while some have coveted it, they have erred from the faith. Covetousness is
the root of heresy, which we may think far removed from it. But (says he)
such have erred from the faith; which may be understood of erring from the
faith, both in regard of practice, and of doctrine; They have both acted and
believed against the rule of faith for filthy lucre; and so have peirced
themselves through with many sorrows. Covetousness runs us into all evil,
and provokes many to do such things as pierce themselves through with many
sorrows as well as others. Covetousness peirceth the poor and needy, the
widow and the fatherless with many sorrows, nor does it spare its own
Master, or slave rather, but peirceth him likewise through with many more and
much worse sorrows.

Verse 10. They cause him to go naked without clothing.
The 7th verse spoke the sense of this; They cause the naked to lodge without
clothing, and they have no covering in the cold. Job touches upon their
cruelty again and again. They cause him to go naked withoat clothing. They
will not allow him so much as those things which are for necessity. The word
him, is not expressly in the Hebrew, which runs only thus; They cause to go
naked without clothing; as implying, that they were ready to exercise this
inhumanity upon any one that came next to hand, or stood in their way. Our
Translation seems to refer it to those poor taken for a pledge, and so the
difference between this 10th and the 7th verse is this; in the 7th verse he
spoke generally of the poor, whom they made to go naked; here at the 10th
verse he speaks of those whom they had taken to be their slaves, and servants;
they take the poor for a pledge, and cause him to go naked without clothing;
they take his work, but they give him no clothing, they command his labor,
but deny him releife. Which sense is carried further, both in the next verse,
and in the next clause of this verse.

And take away the sheafe from the hungry. Some render, they take away the
ears of corn, that is, (...) non solum manipulum integrum sed pauculas spicas
quae messoris manum effugere solent significat.
the gleaneings which the poor have picked up and gathered together; They take
away the very gleaning from them, and that two ways, either, First, they will
not suffer the poor to gleane after their reapers; This is to take away the
ears of corn from the hungry; such is the cruelty of some, that they will not
suffer the poor to gleane in their fields; or, secondly, when the hungry have
gleaned a few ears of corn, they take all away from them. Against which
cruelty to the poor the Law of Moses provided, Deuteronomy. 24.19, 20, 21. When thou
cuttest down thine harvest in thy field, and have forgot a sheafe in the
field, thou shall not go again to fetch it, it shall be for the stranger, for
thr fatherless, and the widow, that the Lord thy God may bless thee in all
the work of thine hands. Now, if the forgotten sheafe must be left for the
poor, surely the scattered ears must not be raked up from them. We have an
eminent instance of the liberty of gleaning in the second Chapter of Ruth.

Again, By the sheafe which is taken away, we may understand that little corn
which the poor man has of his own growing in his own field. And Job speaks
in the singular number, the sheafe, implying that the poor man has not many
sheaves, his corn makes but a sheafe as it were; as the poor man in the
parable (2 Samuel 11.11.) had but one lamb, he had not a flock, so the poor man
has but a sheafe, he has not many sheaves, and shocks of corn, he has not
barnes full, as the rich man is described* Luke 12. he has but a sheafe, yet
they take that away.

Thirdly, The word which we translate, sheafe, Est autem Gomer mensurae genus
quod quotidianu^ dimensum and diurnu^ victum hominis cape^e potest, ergo
necessarium victum abstulerunt famelicis quem forte and spicis minutatim
collectis sibi sumo labor collegerunt. Pined:
signifies a measure which did contain a convenient quantity for a days
provifion; This measure the Jews call An Omer ( Exodus 16.16.) This is the
thing which the Lord has commanded, gather of it every man to his eating an
Omer for every man according to the number of your persons, take ye every man
for them which are in his tents, ye shall have an Omer for every man; So that
an Omer conteines a convenient quantity for one man's provision for a day, and
then the sense arises thus, they take away the Omer from the hungry; that is,
they take away mere necessary food or daily bread from the hungry. The poor
man has but an Omer, just enough for a day, as our Savior teaches us to
pray, Give us this day our daily bread, or the bread of our necessity, so much
bread as will suffice us for a day, our Omer; how much soever we have we are to
ask no more, and usually poor men have no more. The rich have food aforehand,
or food for many days or years, as he said to his soul (Luke 12.19.) soul
thou have goods laid up for many years, he was beforehand with the world; but
the poor man has only enough for a day, if he has that, and that these
oppressors took away; They take away the sheafe, or the Omer from the hungry.

The hungry is put for the poor; and to aggravate the sin, it is said, they
take away the sheafe from the hungry; That is, before the poor man has eaten
his belly full, yea before he has broken his fast, they find the poor man
hungry, and so they leave him; for they leave him nothing to appease his hunger
with; They take away the sheafe (the Omer) from the hungry.

There is yet a fourth reading, and those that carry their sheaves they make to
go away a hungry. The meaning is, Their laborers in harvest, or their
harvest-men have no provision made for them, they work all day, and are sent
home hungry at night. Which sin is more expressly noted in the next verse,
where Job taxes the wickedness of those Masters who are forward enough to
employ poor laborers, but are backward to give them a reward, or rather keep
back their reward, altogether.

Verse. 11. Which make Oil within their walls, and tread their wine-presses,
and suffer thirst.
The last reading of the 10th verse joins fitly with this verse; Those that
carry their sheaves they make to go away hungry, and those that make oil
within their walls, and tread their wine-presses suffer thirst, they are both
hungry, and thirsty, who do their work.

Which make oil within their walls. The word which we translate, to make oil,
signifies light or noone day in the nowne, Meridiati sunt inter acervos. Vulg:
and in the verb to be abroad in the light or Sun about noonday. And hence
the words are thus translated by the vulgar latin; They noone it among the
heaps, or they are abroad among the heaps at noone. And there is a double
exposition given of the words in this translation; first, they are expounded of
the wicked themselves who oppress the poor; as if he had said, They come
forth to please themselves, and take the air, or to Sun themselves among the
heaps of those things which they have taken from others by oppression. But I
conceave this very unsuitable to that which is joined with it in this verse.
Their treading of their wine-presses and suffering thirst. And therefore I lay
it by.

Secondly, The words in this translation are expounded of the poor, They abide
till noone day, or till the heat of the day among the heaps; that is, among
the sheaves, or among the oile-fats, or among the wine-presses; poor men
labor there unto the very heat of the day, and then are turned home hungry
and thirsty, without meat or drink or any thing to procure either.

We translate, which make oil, and the same word signifies, (...) merediati
sunt, vel oleum fecerunt tam meridies quam oleum a splendore and puritate
dicitur Hebraice. Est enim (...) splendere. Vel quia oleum accensum lucem facit
ut meridies. Aben-Ezra.
noonday, light, and oil, because of the light, and splendidnesse of oil.
The eye enformes us, that oil is a clear body which has much light, and
purity in it; and therefore the word is applicable unto either, which make oil
Within their walls.

There is a twofold exposition of these words, within their walls, that is, say
some, within their own walls; the poor make oil within their walls, and
tread their own wine-presses, yet they suffer thirst; that is, the poor are
so oppressed by the rich, that all the wine, and oil they can make for
themselves, will not satisfy their ordinary thirst or necessity, or when the
poor have made wine and oil within their own walls they suffer thirst, that
is, the rich come, and take all from them. Thus we may enterpret it of the
poor making wine, and oil for themselves; For in those Countries where Vines
and Olive Trees abound, the poor have their quantity, and portion of wine and
oil, as here they have of corn or any other commodity, which is of the growth
of this Country.

But I rather expound the whole verse of the poor making oil for, and
treading the wine-presses of the rich. The poor labor for the rich, making
oil within their walls, or within their ranks, that is, among their Olive
trees they grow in ranks, and tread their wine-presses, yet they suffer
thirst; that is, though they labor hard for them, yet they have nothing for
their labor, they make oil but they have no oil to anoint themselves, they
make wine, but they have no wine to quench their thirst; those cruel men
neither gave them wine nor oil (in specie, or) in kind; but used them as
Poets feine of Tantalus, who was set in a river of water up to his chin, but
could not reach it, so the rich Tantaliz'd the poor, calling them to work all
day in their oil fatts, and wine presses, and yet sent them home hungry and
thirsty; or they sent them home without that which is virtually or amounts to
wine and oil, that is, their wages, or reward; they gave them not that which
their service deserved. This is that special oppression, which, I conceive,
Job intended in this place, both to discover and reprove, the unconsiderablenes
and cruelty of the rich toward the poor laboring man.

Hence observe.

That to deteine the wages of the laboring man is a provoking oppression. When
men carry sheaves, and yet are hungry, when they make oil, and tread the
wine press, and yet suffer thirst, this is a crying sin. The Lord forbad
this expressly ( Deuteronomy. 24.14, 15.) Thou shall not oppress an hired servant,
that is poor, and needy, whether he be of thy brethren, or of the strangers
which are in thy land, within thy gates, at his day, thou shall give him his
hire, neither shall the Sun go down upon it, for he is poor, and sets
his heart upon it, lest he cry against thee to the Lord, and it be sin unto
thee. The Law also says ( Deuteronomy. 25.4.) Thou shall not muzle the mouth of the
ox that treads out the corn. Which though the Apostle applies in two places
(1 Cor. 9.9. 1 Timothy 5.18.) to show the equity of it, that they who labor in
the word and doctrine, or preach the Gospel (which is spiritual food, the food
of souls) should be comfortably supplied with temporal food, the food of
their bodies (though, I say) the Apostle does peculiarly apply it to this sort
of laborers, yet it is extendible to all honest laborers in what kind or way
soever; For if the mouth of the laboring ox should not be muzled, then much
more the mouth of a laboring man should not be muzled, that reaps the corn,
and treads the wine press, that is, such should not be sent away hungry and
thirsty. The Prophet ( Jer. 22.13.) thunders out a threatening against those who
deal thus with the labourer; Woe to him that builds his house by
unrighteousness, and his chambers by wrong, that uses his neighbors service
without wages, and gives him not for his work. As some unrighteous men build
chambers and houses with the gold and silver which they have wrongfully gotten
from the rich, so some build their houses by getting the labor and pains of
the poor wrongfully from them, that is, by denying them the wages which is due
for their work; Woe to such says the Lord. And again ( James 5.4.) the
Apostle charge this upon the rich, Behold (says he) the hire of the
laborers, that have reaped down your fields, which is of you kept back by
fraud, cries and the cries of them which have reaped are entered into the ears
of the Lord of Sabbath, or of the Lord of hosts; As if he had said, the Lord
who has all the Armies of heaven and earth in his power, even he has taken
notice how ye wrong the labourer, and he will put forth his power to avenge
their quarrel; The Lord of hosts is the poor laborers friend, and he will be
his Avenger. It is a sin crying for vengeance, that when a poor man has sweat
out his strength to do service to the rich, he should not have his wages given
him to renew his strength, and revive his spirits for further labor. The
Apostle (2 These. 3.) gives a charge that they that will not labor should not
eat; we hear (says he) that there are some who walk among you disorderly,
working not at all, now then, they that are such we command and exhort by our
Lord Jesus Christ, that with quietness they work and eat their own bread;
and ( ver. 10.) If any will not work, neither should he eat. But as they that
will not work have no right to eat; what they eat, they steal: so they who
work should eat, else they are deprived of their right. Woe be to those who
eat, and work not in some kind or other, and woe be to those who do not
give them to eat who work; who compel or but call the poor to tread their
wine-presses, and then let them suffer hunger and thirst.

This sin is committed not only by the total denying of reward, and wages;
that is the grossest way of it; But,

First, This sin is committed, when the poor man receives not a reward
proportionable to his labor, when he has not what answers his work, but his
wages is so scanty, and short, that he is not able to make a living of it for
the comfortable (according to his degree) maintaining of his charge: many are
apt in this case to oppress the labourer while they pay him. They will give
him somewhat, but it shall be so short, and poor, that he is not able to
subsist upon it. Hence that common speech among us, that there is nothing
cheap but poor men's labor; men care not so their work be done, though the
workman be undone. They care not though the sweat of his brows will scarce (as
it is usually phras'd) find him water to wash his hands.

Secondly, This sin is committed when the labourer is defrauded of that which
has been agreed for, when cavills are raised and so the hire detained. This
the Apostle James reproves, ( Chap. 5.4.) speaking of the laborers hire, which
(says he) is of you kept back by fraud; they did not tell them plainly they
should have no wages, but they quarrelled with them about their work; ye have
not done your work well, or not so soon as ye should, and therefore they will
not pay them, or they pay them to halves. Thus some by fraud and cavills
detain the laborers hire, as others do it by open violence, or flat denial.

Thirdly, This sin is committed by delaying to pay the labourer. We find in
Moses Law (the equity whereof remains to this day) that not only the denying,
or defrauding of the labourer concerning his hire, is charged as sinful, but
the very delaying of it. Suppose you pay all, at last, yet if you cause the
poor to wait long for what is their due, this will be reckoned an oppression:
therefore says the Law ( Deuteronomy. 24.14, 15.) Thou shall not oppress an hired
servant that is poor, Minus solvit, qui minus tempore solvit.
and needy, at his day thou shall give him his hire, (Thou shall not oppress
him so much as by deferring it for a day) neither shall the Sun go down
upon it. Consider how strict the righteous Lord, and our great Master is in
this point, That Masters should deal well with their servants, and
day-labourers, The Sun must not go down upon it, Why, for he is poor, and
sets his heart upon it. Which is not to be understood like that ( Psalm. 62.10.)
If riches increase, set not thy heart upon them, that is, do not fix your
affections upon your riches, think not your selves happy because ye are rich:
but when Moses says, the poor labourer sets his heart upon it, the meaning is
this, the poor labourer having wrought hard all day, thinks of his wife, and
family, for whom he is to provide, and then remembers that at the evening he
shall have his wages. I (says he) shall have somewhat at night, though I work
hard all day; therefore says the Lord, give it him at his day, let not the
Sun go down upon it; he reckons to have it when he goes home, therefore
disappoint him not. It may be a dangerous thing to be a laborers purse-bearer
for a night, if he desire to have his hire, and you able to pay it; to deteine
his wages upon those terms is sinful, for he has set his heart upon it, and
fully expects it; therefore disappoynt him not, do not make him ashamed of his
hopes. This is the sin which Job describes here, the wicked take, yea exact
work of the poor, and then take or deteine their wages also. They must make
oil for them, and tread their wine-presses, and suffer thirst. This sin
cries, and this oppression makes the poor groan, as it follows in the next
verse.

Verse. 12. Men groan out of the City, and the soul of the wounded cries
out, yet God lays not folly to them.
This verse shows two things; first, the sad effects of oppression, it makes
men groan and cry; secondly, the frequent and long impunity of oppressors; yet
God lays not folly to them.

Men groan out of the City. They vex not only the Country, but the City too;
for as before he described Country-oppressors, so now City-oppressors;
oppression is a sin that fills both City and Country; Est velut epiphonema
ad superiora. Merc: (...) clamare non quoquo modo significat sed cum singultu
ut solent moribundi. Merc:
and here we have, as it were, the conclusion, or a kind of acclamation upon
the whole matter. Would you know what work these men make; they are so high in
their cruelty, that men groan under it. The word which we translate to groan,
does not signify any kind of groan (for some cry before they are hurt) but
that which is caused by the greatest hurt, and comes from the very bottom of
the heart, even such a groan as they give forth who are about to dye. Men
groan from Out of the City.

This shows the impudence of those men in sin as well as their impunity. We
might reasonably suppose, they would not dare to do thus in the open City,
though they had done it in a corner of the Country, where there were but few to
take notice of them. To do thus in the City, in the eyes of all men, is an
argument that they had lost their modesty, as well as their honesty, and were
resolved not only to do evil, but to stand to it, or make it good.

And the soul of the wounded cries out. That is, the wounded cry out; the
soul is put for the person, or the man; or the soul of the wounded is said to
cry out, to show the greatness and dolefullnesse of the cry. As when Mary
said; My soul does magnify the Lord, it argues that she magnified the Lord
with strong affections, as if she had been all soul. Such also is the force
of that passage in Deborahs Song ( Judge. 5.21.) O my soul, thou have trodden
down strength; she trod down the strength of the enemy with all her
strength. And her soul (which was her strength in God) was in it more then her
body. So here, the soul of the wounded cries out, that is, the wounded cry
out most lamentably, they power out their own souls, while others were
pouring out their blood. But what are these wounded? or how were they wounded?
We may take it either of an outward or inward wounding. There is a wounded
spirit as well as a wounded body, many are wounded whose flesh is whole, who
have not so much as a scarre made in their skin; yet here the wounded were such
whose flesh or outward state was wounded first, and then their hearts or
spirits were wounded, because of that, with grief and sorrow.

The soul of the wounded. The word which we translate wounded, signifies two
things. First, that which is profane and polluted, and in the verb to pollute
and profane a thing. Idol-worshippers are so called, because they are polluted
as wounded men with blood. And hence also it is used as a word of abomination,
The Lord forbid, said David, (1 Samuel 24.6.) And again (2 Samuel 20.20.) Far be
it from me, far be it from me, said Joab; in both which places, the actions
abominated, (...) polluti prophani (...) absit, vox prohibitionis and
abominationis res prophana s t mihi.
had the defilement or pollution of blood in them. And the Jews speaking this
word, usually rent their garments, showing the abhorrence and indignation of
their minds at blasphemy, or such like abominations. Now because wounded men
are defiled in their blood, therefore this word signifies the wounded. The
soul of the wounded cries out, not only cries, but cries out; Which
implies the greatness of their wound, and the extreme painefullnes of it.

Hence Note.

Oppression is a crying sin, and makes the oppressed cry. The blood of Abel,
who was the first man that ever was outwardly wounded, cried when he was dead;
how much more do they cry whose blood is pouring out, and themselves under
present fear of death. The souls under the Altar cried how long Lord, how
long, (Rev. 6.9.) Those souls had suffered, and were past suffering, yet they
cried out for vengeance upon their adversaryes, how much more will their souls
cry who are under sufferings? The wounds of the wounded are as so many wide
mouths crying out to God, though their own souls should be silent and say
nothing. I have upon other passages in this book met with the sin of
oppression, and the cry of the poor upon it, therefore I shall not further
stay here, but a while insist upon the last clause of this context, which holds
out the chief and most considerable matter of it. The oppressor does all
these wickednesses, but what does God? Surely we might expect to hear of God
in the next words, healing and helping the wounded who make this cry, and
wounding the hairy scalpe of those who made them cry; had not God a fit
occasion put in his hand to show himself? first, for the releife of the
oppressed; and, secondly, for the punishment of the oppressor. He that beholds
such actings as these, the fatherles plucked from the breasts, the poor made
slaves, the labourer denied his wages, the wounded crying, groaning, (he I say,
that beholds all this) might say in his heart, surely now God will presently
appear, and indeed God has often appeared, when the wicked have been in the
heat of such actings, and the poor in the heat of such sufferings. ( Psalm.
12.5.) For the oppression of the poor, for the sighing of the needy, now I
will arise says the Lord, I will set him in safety from him that puffs at
him. Yet here we find no such thing, nothing like the Lords arising for the
saving of the poor from oppression, or for the breaking of oppressors. Job saw
or had seen the poor oppressed, and the needy sighing, but did not see God
coming either with deliverance or revenge? for he adds, though all this be
done, Yet God lays not folly to them.

Master Broughton reads; And the puissant marketh not the unsavory dealing. His
meaning is not that God did not know that their dealings were unsavory, or that
he did not observe and take notice of their dealings, but he did not observe
them, so as to appear presently against them. God lays not, or God puts
not, the meaning is, God imputes not, or God charge not folly, or (strictly
to the letter of the Hebrew) that which is unsavory to them or upon them. That
word which signifies a thing unsavory or without salt, in a natural and proper
sense, may elegantly be rendered folly in a moral or metaphorical sense; for
foolishnes or folly is that, which has no salt of reason, righteousness,
(...) quod fit praeter omnem rationem and aequitatem. Bez:
justice, or equity in it. Hence the word is often used to signify that which
is done besides, without, or against all these. So it is said ( Chap. 1.22.) In
all this Job sinned not, neither did he charge God foolishly, or, neither did
he charge folly upon God; it is this word. Job did not think that God dealt
unjustly or unreasonably with him, though he had taken all worldly comforts
from him, and heaped all those afflictions upon him. And here Job says, God
lays not folly to wicked men, notwithstanding all the unjust and unreasonable
things which they have done, in heaping troubles causelessely upon the poor.
Though abundance of folly and madness was committed and acted by them, with a
high and heavy hand, yet God did not lay folly to them.

Some read the text thus; Notwithstanding all this, God does nothing that is
unsavory; Non ponit infulsum. q. d. nihil sine maxima sapientia agit, vel
permisit faciendum deas.
we supply those words, to them; the Hebrew text is only this, God puts not
folly, so the last mentioned translation may well stand; for when Job had
reported all those things, it might well be questioned, how is it that God
permits, and suffers such wickedness in the world? O, says Job, God puts no
folly, or he does nothing which is unjust, or unreasonable in all these things;
as if he had said, how unreasonable and unrighteous soever men are in these
actings, yet God is not unrighteous, God does nothing unbecoming himself,
nothing unseemely or unsavory in it self; Several of the Jewish Doctors fall
in with this translation; Deus non facit hoc gratis and frustra. i. e. non
temere and absque ratione. Rab: Abr: Deus non ponet imminutionem. i. e. rem
deficientem aliqua vel justitiae vel aequitatis circumstantia. Rab: Kimhi: Deus
nihil absurdum aut reprehensione dignum agit, dum haec omnia permittit. Pisc:
God does not this (gratis or) without cause (says one) He has abundant
reason to let that be done, which men do without either rule or reason. A
second renders thus; God does not that which is defective or wanting in any
circumstance of Justice and equity. The sense of both which rendrings or
paraphrases of the text, are given in fully in the Annotations of a modern
writer upon it. God (says he) does nothing uncomely or blameworthy, while he
suffers all these things to be done, which are not only uncomely and worthy of
blame, but abominable, and worthy of the severest punishment.

Hence observe.

Whatsoever God does, he does it wisely and justly. God who is wisdom and
justice it self, and is to himself and all others, the rule of wisdom and
justice, can no more do any thing unwisely, or unjustly, then he can cease to
be wise or just; and he can no more cease to be wise or just, then cease to be,
for his wisdom is himself, and his Justice is himself. There needs no more
to be said, to acquit any action of weakness or unrighteousnes, then to say, God
has done it. For (as the Apostle speaks, 1 Cor. 1.25.) The foolishness of
God is wiser then men, and the weakness of God stronger then men; We may say
also (and in saying so, we say no more then the Apostle said before) that, The
injustice of God, is juster then men, that is, those things which God seems to
do unjustly and unrighteously: As when he suffers wicked men to devour the
man that is more righteous then they, this seems to be an act of
unrighteousness, yet this is juster and more righteous, then the justice and
righteousness of men. And if the very unrighteousness of God (that is, what
appears to man as unrighteousness) be righteous; Then how righteous is the
righteousness of God? That I mean which appears righteousness in the eyes
of all men. This reading and sense of the words, is safe, and holds out an
excellent point of truth.

That God does nothing which is unsavory or unjust. Yet our translation is both
profitable and clearly suitable to the context, and therefore I shall a little
insist upon that.

Yet God lays not folly to them. As if he had said, These men do most
unsavory and foolish things, yet God does not charge folly upon them. The sense
of this translation rises by four steps.

First, God does not presently call evil men to an account, or charge their
sin upon them.

Secondly, God does not presently punish evil men for their sin. To lay folly
to a man is not only to call him to answer for what he has done, but to
punish him as having done foolishly. He looks for a sentence next who has
already received his charge, and is not able to acquit himself, and wipe it
off.

Non posuit deus prohibitionem Vatabl: in Hebraeo est ins^lju^ i. e nihil
adversi and in grati illis accidere patitur. Vatabl: Quasi in sulsum significet
mala naturae palato male gratas tribulationes quas deus impiorum conatibus
opponere possit. Bold:
Thirdly, God does not presently stop evil men in their work, or make their
work like the work of a fool, which seldom prospers, or proves
successful. The Prophet Jeremie complained of this to God ( Chap. 12.1.) Why
does the way of the wicked prosper? Wherefore are all they happy, that deal
very treacherously? As if he had said, Lord, why do thou not send out a
prohibition from thy Court above, and stop the proceedings of wicked and
treacherous men? they go on smoothly, they meet no rubs in their way, but
carry all before them, they meet with nothing that does disgust or distaste
them. A stop in our way is to our spirits like hard and unsavory meat to our
stomachs, that which we cannot digest. Thus (says Job) God does not lay folly
to them, he does not make them like foolish builders that begin but are not
able to carry on their work. God laid folly (in this sense) to the builders of
Babel, he checked and confounded them in their work, so that they left off to
build the City ( Genesis 11.7, 8.) But many begin a Babel, a work of confusion to
others, but are not confounded themselves, they not only begin to build, but
finish; They set up the topstone of their work, while many cry, woe, woe to
it, and yet God does not lay folly to them.

Fourthly, We may resolve this Negative, God lays not folly to them, into an
Affirmative, God lets them go on as if they had done wisely, discreetly,
justly. And whereas it is said to Christ in that prophecy ( Psalm. 45.4.) Ride
prosperously, because of truth, and meeknes, and righteousness. God seems to
say to them, ride prosperously, even in deceit, and wrath, and
unrighteousness; They hate righteousness, and love wickedness, yet God seems to
anoint them with the oil of Gladness and success above their fellows. God
lays not folly to them.

Hence note.

First, The ways of unrighteousness are foolish, and unsavory ways.
Whatsoever has sin in it, wants salt in it; Christ says to his Disciples
( Mark. 9.50.) Have salt in your selves, and have peace one with another; that
is, let there be a savor of Christ, a savor of grace, and holiness, and
equity in your own spirits, and be ye sweetly, mildly, amiably, brotherly
disposed one to another. They have no salt of wisdom in themselves, whose
conversation is unsavory and troublesome unto others. Sin and folly are more
then like one another, for they are the same. They have no seasoning in them,
who have no Goodness in them. Righteousness is the wisest and the most savory
thing in the world, in the account both of God and good men. The wisdom which
is from above, (says the Apostle James, Chap. 3.17.) is first pure, then
peaceable, gentle, and easy to be entreated, full of mercy, and good fruits,
without partiality (toward men) without hypocrisy (toward God) But the
wisdom that is troublesome and vexatious, rough and harsh to others, is
earthly, sensual, devilish indeed, downright madness, absurdnes, folly.
Solomon says, Oppression makes a wise man mad; but it will appear at last,
that the wisest oppressors have been mad, foolish, saltlesse, and brainlesse
men. Such use to flatter themselves, and are often much flattered by others in
their projects, and policies, for the only wise men in the world, but in the
end they dye like fools.

Observe, Secondly.

God suffers oppressors to go on long before he punishes them, and he
suffers the oppressed to cry long before he releives them. God is often pleased
to wink, while the wicked sin, and he as often seems to be asleep while the
righteous suffer. Hence that sad complaint of the Church ( Psalm. 44.23, 24.)
Awake, why sleep thou, O Lord, arise, cast us not off for ever; wherefore
hidest thou thy face, and forgettest our affliction and our oppression. This
also caused David to cry out ( Psalm. 13.1.) How long will thou forget me O
Lord, for ever? how long will thou hide thy face from me? how long shall mine
enemies be exalted over me? What, under the oppression of an enemy for ever!
while God assures his people (in that parable of the importunate widow, and
the unjust Judge, Luke 18.) that he will deliver them, yet he more then
intimates that it may be very long before he does it, ver. 6, 7.) And the Lord
said, hear what the unjust Judge says; and shall not God avenge his own
elect who cry to him night and day, though he bear long with them; that is,
though he exercise much patience toward those tyrants who oppress his elect,
yea and much patience also toward his elect, in regard of their doubts and
despondencies of their fear and unbeleefe about his coming to avenge and
help them against those Tyrants.

Further, Folly imports not only sin, but the greatness of sin, so that when it
is said, God lays not folly to them, the sense (according to this notion of
the word folly) is, that, though they sin greatly, yet God makes no great
matter of it, or he does not charge their sin upon them, nor punish them for
their sin answerably or in proportion to the greatness of it, Non ponit
stultitiam. i. e non imputat hoc iis tanquam graude peccatum, hoc enim
stultitia vocatur.
but passes it by, as if it were only some infirmity or small offense; he
does not lay folly to them, nor does he let them feel what egregious fools
they have been. The word folly is used often in Scripture in this sense, to
note a notorious sin ( Genesis 34.7.) when the sons of Jacob came out of the
field and heard how their sister had been dealt with, they were exceedingly
grieved, and they were very wrath, because he had wrought folly in Israel in
lying with Jacobs daughter; that is, because he had committed a great wickedness
in Israel. We have the same sin so expressed again by folly (2 Samuel 13.12.) And
she answered him, nay my brother, do not force me, for no such thing ought to
be done in Israel, do not thou this folly; As if she had said; This is a
grievous sin, therefore do it not. And when the Lord would show Jobs three
friends, the Greatness of their error and mistake in their dispute with Job, he
calls it folly (Job 42.9.) My servant Job shall pray for you, for him will I
accept; lest I deal with you according to your folly, in that ye have not
spoken of me the thing that is right like my servant Job. Thus we see that
great sins whether in practice or opinion come under this censure in Scripture;
only we may note that the three texts mentioned express folly in another
original word then the present text does. There is folly enough, great folly
in every the least sin, but Great sins deserve more to bear the name of
folly in their foreheads.

Taking folly under this peculiar consideration;

We may observe.

That, as The Lord in this life does not punish any, no not the worst of
sinners, according to the just demerit and dimension of their sins, so he
punishes some, whose sins are very great, but very little. Though he lays
their sin to them, yet he does not lay it to them in the folly of it, or as
it is their folly. He does only touch them with his little finger, while it
might be thought he would break them with his iron rod. He does but chastise
them with whips, while their sin calls for scorpions. The Time will come, when
God will lay folly to every wicked man, and make their sin appear, in the
punishment of it, what now it is in the nature of it, out of measure sinful.
Every impenitent sinner shall then find that his sin is folly, that is, that
his sin is very great.

Yet a late learned Expositer upon this Book, conceaves, thar the sense is
abated and diminished in the word folly, as if it were, Non ponit stultitam. i.
e. non dico scelera, sed ne (...) quidem aut faecta illepida and insulsa iliis
impatat. Coc:
a term of extenuation; God does not lay folly, that is, the least sin to
them; he does not so much as charge them to have done irrationally, vainly,
childishly, or unhandsomely; he does not only not deal with them as if they
had sinned haynously, but he does not deal with them as if they had done
foolishly. But whether we take the word Folly, as implying the Greatness or the
littlenes of their sin; whether we expound it as a term of diminution, or of
aggravation, the sense of the text is not altered: in which Job intends only
to show that though men have done very wickedly, yet God does not presently
render to them according to what they have done. This is true in the first
sense of the word, if God do not lay folly to them, as it signifies a great
sin, and this is much more true, if God do not lay folly to them in the second
sense, as it signifies a little sin. And this sense of this latter clause of
the verse corresponds fully, with the general scope of the Chapter, and of the
whole Book. For Job argues with his friends thus; Ye charge me with folly and
wickedness, because I suffer, yet God suffers the wicked and does not charge
them with folly.

Lastly, Et tamen insulsitatem non designat deus Jun: i. e. pergere and
confirmari non sinit tam prava^ administrationem; quae ideo insuls^^acis nomine
perstringitur, quia nec deo nec hominibus bonis humanum al^quid sapienabus
probatur. id:
I shall only represent another translation of these words, which keeps
strictly to the Hebrew; in which those words, To them (as we render it) are not
found, but supplied. And then the text runs only thus; And yet God does not
lay folly; that is, such things as are uncomely, vain, and foolish: As if Job
had said; Though I have made report to you of all these oppressive-wayes of
wicked men, yet I assure you, God will not suffer these evil administrations
to continue and be established; but will at last bear his witness against them,
and eminently show his utter dislike of them, as of that which is most foolish
and unsavory, not only to himself, but to all men, who have any taste or sense
of that which becomes man. Let men do as foolishly and unrighteously as they
will, the purpose of God is to rule the world in righteousness, and in
wisdom. The Kings strength (as the Psalmist speaks ( Psalm. 99.4.) that is,
the strength of Christ (who is called The King of Kings, (Rev. 19.16.) both
because he excels all other Kings, and rules all other Kings, he I say)
loves judgment (or righteous dealings with all his strength) and (as it
follows in the same verse) he establishes equity; he establishes the rule
by which others may do equity, and he establishes the acts of equity which
others do; For seeing Christ loves judgment, and also (as we have it in the
close of the same verse) executes judgment and righteousness in Jacob. He
cannot but establish acts of equity, which are nothing else but the execution
of judgment and righteousness. And therefore though he bear with unjust and
unrighteous men a while in their vain projectings and vainer actings, yet he
will not establish them in it. He will not lay folly, he will not lay it as a
foundation for them to build and proceed upon. Weak and small things have
often been established by God, but he will not long establish wicked and
sinful things.

JOB, CHAP. 24. Verse. 13, 14. They are of those that rebel against the light,
they know not the ways th^reof, nor abide in the paths thereof.

The murderer rising with the light kills the poor and needy, and in the
night is as a Thief.


JOb having given many particular Instances of the wicked practices of evil
men, seems in this 13th verse to give us a general Character of them; They
are of those that rebel against the light; As if he had said, Would you know
what these men are who commit such horrid wickednesses, who oppress the poor,
the fatherles, the widow; who detain the hire of the labourer, and send them
away hungry and thirsty when they have done their work? would you know what
sort or kind of men these are? I will tell you, They are of those that rebel
against the light; that is their genius, or their strain. This general sense
of the words does very well agree with, and carry on the discourse which Job
was upon.

Yet others conceive, that in this 13th verse, and so forward, Job is
describing another sort of wicked persons then those formerly mentioned. As if
he had said, I have before spoken of those open sinners and sons of violence,
such as sinned and cared not who saw them, impudent sinners; but now I will
speak of a sort of close sinners, or sons of deceit, who do their work no
whit more honestly, yet more modestly then the former; They are of those who
rebel against the light, they know not the ways thereof, nor abide in the
paths thereof; The murderer rising with the light kills the poor and
needy, etc. In which sense soever we take the context, the difference is not
much, though I rather adhere unto the former.

They are of those that rebel against the light. He does not say, they are of
those who have not the light, or they are of those to whom the light has not
shined, he says not they are of those who sit in darkness, and in the valley of
the shadow of death, but they are of those that rebel against the light, as
implying the presence of the light with them, and their contempt of it.

They rebel. (...) rebellavit defecit.
This word is often used in Scripture for rebellion against any lawful
authority or power set over others to rule and govern them, and that is the
Importance of it here, they rebel: and from this word Nimrod had his name, who
was the first noted rebel that ever was in the world; Nimrod was a great
Prince among men, but he became so by rebellion against God. Here Job discovers
Nimrods or rebels against the light. But what was the light, against which
they rebelled?

Light may be considered two ways; Either properly, or figuratively; we may
understand the text of light in a proper sense, and some insist chiefly upon
that. They rebel against the light; that is, against the very light of he
Sun, or the ordinary daylight; as if he had said, If it were in the power of
these men they would even pull the Sun out of the firmament of heaven, that
they might sin unseen. I will not, as some Interpreters do, fix the Exposition
here, though I grant, this sense may be taken in, wicked men love natural
darkness, and hate even natural light, the light of the Sun, because it
seldom serves but often hinders their occasions.

Secondly, Take light figuratively for the light of knowledge, so it is more
true, that wicked men rebel against it: and that light in this notion should
be here meant, the words plainly imply; For though some wicked men would be
willing to be shut of the day light, yet it is hard to say they rebel against
it: and those other passages, not to know the ways of it, and not to abide in
the paths of it, are not so proper and significant to set forth their desire
and endeavor of avoiding natural light. So that the light rebelled against is
rather an Internal light, that light which shines into the soul, then that
which shines to the eye; and There is a twofold internal light, against which
wicked men may be said to rebel.

First, The light of nature, or natural internal light; There is a light of
nature, or as some call it, a light of the natural conscience, which every man
carries about him, concerning good and evil, or what is to be done, and what
is to be left undone. The Apostle is direct for this ( Romans 2.14.) The Gentiles
having not the Law, do by nature the things contained in the Law, these having
not the Law (that is, the law of God formally published to and pressed upon
them) are a law unto themselves (that is, they have the law of nature in common
principles and notions of righteousness in themselves) and (therefore) show
the work of the law written in their hearts. Against this internal light the
wicked rebel.

Secondly, There is a light of divine Revelation, which shines into the soul
from the Scriptures, or written word of God. The word of God is so often called
light in Scripture, that I need not give particular Instances. Divine truths
inspired and directed by the Spirit of God are there written as with the beams
of the Sun. Yet the wicked man rebels, as against the light of nature, so
against the light of Scripture, against the clearest and fullest discoveryes of
the mind of God.

Further; Some by the light against which they rebelled, understand God
himself, who is light (as the Apostle John calls him, (1 Ep: 1.5.) and in him
is no darkness at all. All that rebel against God, must needs rebel against
light, seeing God is light. And the very reason why the light of nature, and the
light of Scripture are rebelled against, is, because the former has somewhat
of God in it, and the latter much of God in it; For as God is light, so all
light is of God. And that light which is of God must needs be rebelled against
by wicked men, seeing they most of all rebel against God, who is light and the
fountain of it; for as the Apostle John argues about love, 1 Ep: 5.1.) Every
one (says he) that loves him that begat, loves him also that is begotten of
him. So we may argue about hatred and the effect of it, rebellion; He that
hates and rebelleth against him that begets light (so God does, whence also
he is called the Father of lights, (Jam: 1.17.) he, I say, that rebelleth
against him that begets light) hates and rebelleth against that light,
which is begotten of him. They are of those that rebel against the light.

Hence observe.

First, Divine truth is as light. As the Sun gives light to the eye, or
outward man, so the Spirit of truth gives light by the word to the inner man.
When God sends his word to a people, he sends light to a people: Christ is
light, and the word is light; Christ in person, is the light of the world; the
word in doctrine, is the light of the world: The truth of Divine Revelation is
many ways answerable to the light.

First, Light is pure, and beautiful, and the light is so pure, that you
cannot impure, or defile it; so is truth: Though many have attempted to corrupt
the truth and word of God, and shall at last be dealt with and judged, as they
who have corrupted it; yet the truth remains incorruptible, and ever shall.
The beauty of it fades not, nor is the purity of it stained, by all the filth
of false doctrine which has been cast into the face of it, from the beginning
of the world unto this day.

Secondly, Light is pleasant and delightful; Light is sweet (says Solomon,
Eccl. 11.7.) and a pleasant thing it is for the eyes to behold the Sun: So
truth is sweet, and it is a pleasant thing to behold and receave the Sun-light
of Divine Revelations, where truth is taken in, it does even ravish the soul
and fill it with unspeakeable delights. Truth is as suitable and pleasant to the
understanding, as good is or can be to the will and affections. David found not
only delight, this or that single delight, but all sorts and degrees of
delight in the Law of God; And therefore he speaks plurally ( Psalm. 119.92.)
Unless my delights had been in thy law, I had perished in my trouble. And
again ( ver. 143.) Trouble and anguish have taken hold of me; yet thy
commandments are my delights. All his troubles were over-ballanced and
conquered by his delights in the law, and all his delights and contentments
were Centered in the Law. That light was so much his delight, that it overcame
all worldly darkness, and did even extinguish all his worldly lights.

Thirdly, Light has heat in it, and light is accompanied with influences, or
conveighes them with it. All living creatures here below are cherished and
refreshed, yea and things without life, as Gemms and mineralls are concocted
and refined with the warmth and virtue of it. And so has truth; The light of
the word carries heat and Influences with it, to warm the heart and comfort
it, to concoct the grossenes of man's mind and sublimate it into an heavenly
purity. Did not our heart burn within us while he talked with us by the way?
and while he opened to us the Scriptures, said the Disciples of Christ's
discourse with them, Luke 24.31.

Fourthly, Light discovers and makes manifest; so does truth, ( Joh 3.20, 21.)
Every one that does evil hates the light, neither comes to the light, lest
his deeds should be reproved, or (as we put in the Margin) discovered. Light
makes manifest; the word of God (as the Apostle speaks, Heb. 4.12.) is a
discerner of the thoughts and intents of the heart, it discovers that to us,
not only in others but in our selves, which we saw not before; we are much,
if not altogether, unknown to our selves, till we see our selves in the Glass
of the Word.

Hence observe.

Secondly, The light of truth is Clothed with Authority, the truths of God have
a Soveraignety over man. We cannot be said to rebel against any thing but
that which has power and authority over us; a man may oppose and contend with
his equal, but he cannot be said to rebel against his equal; we rebel
only against those that are above us. If a child opposes his father, it is
rebellion; if a servant opposes his Master, it is rebellion, because fathers
and masters have authority over their children and servants. All rebellion is
the breaking of the bands of subjection. And all the bands of subjection are
broken when the light is rebelled against, because the light of heavenly truth,
is invested with all power and authority over us; it has a power to lift up
and a power to humble or cast down; It has a power to convince, and a power
to comfort; It has a power to kill, and it has a power to make alive; all
these powers the light of the word has. But it has two powers more especially
and eminently.

First, It has the power of a rule, or power to rule and govern both the
hearts and lives of men; the light of the word does not only offer advice, and
give Council, but it gives out a Command, what the word speaks we are not
upon point of Indifferencies whether we Will receive it or no, but upon point
of duty. Therefore not to receive it, especially to resist it is rebellion; the
light of the word is as a King, and where the light of that word comes, there
is power, and no man may say, What does it?

Secondly, It has the power of a Judge; It gives both Law and Judgment. He
that rejects me (says Christ, Joh, 12.48.) and receaveth not my words (The
not receiving of the word of Christ, is the rejecting of Christ himself, and
he that rejects Christ) has one that Judges him, the word that I have
spoken, the same shall Judge him in the last day. The word is now the rule of
living, and it shall be hereafter the rule of Judging; Now it is the rule by
which we must live to Christ, and then it shall be the rule by which Christ
will Judge us.

Thirdly, Where it is said, They are of those who rebel against the light;
Observe.

Wicked men cannot abide to be seen in what they do, nor do they love to see
what they do. They would neither see their wicked practices, nor be seen in
them. They are darkness, and they walk in darkness. As they walk in the darkness
of sin, so they would walk in the darkness of secrecy, that others should not
see what evil they do, and in the darkness of ignorance, that they might not
see that what they do is evil. They are like those uncouth Creatures, Batts,
and Owls, that come abroad only in the night, knowing that if they do but
stir out in the day, all the birds in the air will gather about them, and
hoote at them, because of their strangenes and deformity. And doubtless if
wicked men did but see the misshapen and ugly visage of their own ways in the
light of the word, they would abhor and run from themselves as the most
abhorred monsters in the world, and so would all men (who see the uglynes of
sin in the glass of the word) abhor them and point at them as monsters, did
they but see them in their sinful works. And hence the Apostle (hinting the
general disposition of sinners) says (1 These. 5.7.) They that are drunken are
drunken in the night. And again ( Ephesians. 5.12.) For it is a shame even to
speak of those things which are done of them in secret, that is, when they are
out of the sight of men, and, possibly, had it not been that they were out of
sight, or in secret, themselves would not have done those things for shame; For
though some wicked men, as they have cast off their honesty, so their modesty
too, and act not only wickedly, but impudently, the show of their faces
testifying against them, they declaring their sin as Sodom; yet as the most of
sinners presume God does not see them when they do evil, so they are
unwilling that men should; for though their Conscience puts no bar to their
sinning openly, yet their credit does. So that as every wicked man would be
glad he did not know that what he does is evil, and does what he can to hinder
or extinguish the light of that knowledge in him, so most wicked men would be
glad that no man knew of the evil which they do, and they do what they can
to hinder others from knowing it; as hypocrites love to be seen in all the good
they do, and would do no good, were it not (as Christ assures us, Math. 6.5.)
to be seen of men; They fast, and pray, and give Alms, and all to be seen of
men, that is, that men may applaud them, and point at them with a Behold (of
admiration) There go the men, The charitable men, The humble men, The devout
men; and if men see them not, or applaud them not, they are as in the shadow of
death, they are dead-hearted to every good word and work. Now (I say) as all
gross hypocrites love the light, or to be seen while they are doing good, so
the most profane and wicked usually avoid the light, and love not to be seen
when they are doing evil. For though they are not troubled at the dishonor
they do to God by sinning, yet to be dishonored among men is a trouble to
them. They can easily venture their souls as to the life to come, but they are
afraid to do wickedly in the sight of men, lest they endanger their ease and
safety in this present life. That God sees them not is their hope, that men
may not see them is their care, and that they may not see themselves is their
desire. They are unwilling to know their duty, lest their consciences should
check them for not doing, or for doing that which is not their duty. Thus in
every sense, They are of those who rebel against the light.

Fourthly, As rebelling against the light, is an argument (as has been showed)
that wicked men desire not to know what they ought to do, so it teaches us
Further, That wicked men will do against that which they know.

Men will have fellowship with the works of darkness, while their eyes are
dazzled with light, if their hearts have not been changed by it. They would be
glad if they might never be troubled with the light, but suppose the light do
come (as many times it does come whether they will or no) suppose the light
darted upon them so clearly and convincingly, that they cannot but see and
know what they ought, and what they ought not to do, yet they rebel against
it; either they will not do what they know, or they will do contrary to their
knowledge. When some of the Pharisees were offended at those words ( Joh.
9.39.) For Judgment am I come into this world, that they which see not might
see, and that they which see might be made blind: What, say they, are we also
blind? Jesus said unto them, if ye were blind ye should have no sin, but now ye
say we see, therefore your sin remains; that is, it remains in the guilt
and aggravations of it. For as they eonfessed that they saw, so Christ would
convince them that they acted against what they saw, or that though they had
the light, and so knew their duty, yet they had done contrary to duty. Man
breaks through all the light that stands in his way, he breaks through the
light both of nature and Conscience, both of the Spirit and Scripture, till
himself be made light. The Apostle demonstrates the former in the example of
the old Gentiles, who though they were under a conviction of the power and
presence of God by the works of Creation, and so were said to know God, yet
they did not like to retain God in their knowledge, nor did they glorify him
as God, (ver. 21.28.) but rebelled against that light which shone into their
understandings from the creature. And in the second Chapter of the same Epistle
to the Romans the Apostle demonstrates the latter in the example of the old
Jews, who though they were under a conviction not only of the power and and
presence of God, but of the mind and will of God also, by a divine Revelation,
or by the light of the word, yet they rebelled against that word which they
boasted of; and while they judged themselves only in the light, and all the
rest of the world in darkness, they walked in darkness. Behold (says he, v. 17,
18.) thou art called a Jew, and restest in the law, and make thy boast of
God, and know his will, etc. But how did the Jew answer this knowledge and
this boast, read that ( v. 21, 22, 23, 24.) Thou therefore which teach
another, teach thou not thy self? Thou that preachest a man should not
steal, do thou steal: Thou who make thy boast of the law through
breaking the law dishonourest thou God? for the name of God is blasphemed among
the Gentiles through you. So that wicked men do not only rebel against the
light to hinder the coming of it, or to keep it off as long as they can, that
so they may not know what to do, but they rebel against it when it is come,
and will do against what they know.

Fifthly, When it is said, They rebel against the light.

Observe.

Wicked men are not only no friends but professed resolved enemies of the
light, they hate and oppose holy truths, or the discoveries of the mind and
will of Christ. They are in open actual hostility, they take up arms and
maintain a war against it; not that all wicked men do expressly send forth
their defiance against God and his word, but all wicked men carry this defiance
in their hearts, and it is to God as an openly professed defiance, though it be
not so to man; God hears the language of their hearts, and he knows that the
wisdom (or best) of the flesh is Enmity against himself, that it is not
subject to the law of God, neither indeed can be (Romans 8.7.) That is, while a
man continues (as to his spiritual state) under the power and teachings of the
wisdom of the flesh, and is unregenerate, as he is not so it is impossible he
should (continuing in that state) be subject to the law of God. The law of God
will ever continue as holy as it is, and if the heart of man continue as unholy
as it is, how shall they agree? A wicked man stands not upon terms of
neutrality with the law and light of God, but he is a direct opposite or enemy,
he rebels against the light.

Sixthly, Seeing Job when he had described all those wickednesses which he saw
done, adds this description of the wicked who did them, they are of those that
rebel against the light. This may be Considered two ways (as I intimated
before) first, as the discovery of a new and a greater sin then any of those
particular sins already instanced in; or as a reason why they did break out
into those enormous sins; the former consideration yields this Note.

To resist or rebel against the light of truth the word of God, is wickedness
in perfection, or wickedness wrought and boyld up to the very height. As God
sometimes brings Judgments upon men in perfection, so men sin against God
sometimes in perfection. And if any do so, surely they do so, who rebel
against the light: That special sin against the Holy Ghost, of which Christ
says, It shall never be forgiven; what is it? but rebellion against the light,
the highest and clearest light? and the more clear and high the light is, the
more danger there is of falling into that sin. And hence some conceive that
before Christ came in the flesh, though there were very high and presumptuous
sins committed, that yet none of them did amount to that which the Gospel
calls, The sin against the Holy Ghost. There was Gospel Light in those times,
but it was under types and shadows, there was not that clear light, that
clearest light which was shed abroad at the coming of Christ, and therefore
there was not light enough to sin against, for the production of that sin
against the holy Ghost, which is not only the greatest rebellion against
light, but is also a rebellion against the greatest light. And here consider by
what degrees, sinning against light rises unto its full height of rebellion.

First, It is very sinful and extremely dangerous, not to love the light. See
how Christ thunders against such as do not ( Joh. 3.19.) This is the
condemnation that light is come into the world, and men loved darkness rather
then light: He does not say, men rebelled against the light, he only charges
them with this crime, that they did not love it, but loved darkness rather.
This, says he, is the Condemnation; that is, this will certainly be matter of
condemnation against sinners, that when light came to them, their hearts did
not close with it, and embrace it. Now if it be so sinful not to love the
light, what is it to rebel against it? It is very possible for a man not to
love that thing or person against which yet he does not rebel.

Secondly, Not to obey, not to submit to the light, is exceedding sinful.
Jesus Christ shall at last be revealed from heaven (personally) in flaming fire
to take vengeance on them, that obey him not as revealed (doctrinally) that is,
who obey not the Gospel (2 These. 1.7, 8.) yet it is possible not to obey the
Gospel, that is, to forbear an active obedience to that which is Commanded in
it, and not to rebel against it actively, these are distinct in themselves,
though seldom, if at all, distinct in those that do them. Now then if there
be abundance of wickedness in not obeying the light, in not doing every thing
that the light directs us to; then it must needs be a more abounding wickedness,
when the heart rises up and rebels against it. For though (as was even now
intimated) we can hardly divide these in their existences, yet we may
distinguish them in their natures, or at least in their degrees; for barely not
to obey the light in doing the will of God, is a sin of a lower stature, then a
professed rebelling against it; though in every not doing according to light,
there is somewhat of rebelling, yet in that which is properly rebelling, there
is more then not doing.

Thirdly, It is a great sin not to set a great price upon the light, or not to
value it according to its worth; that is, not to value it highly, not to have a
high esteem of it, not to have a higher esteem of it then of all the Enjoyments
and Comforts of this world, is a high provocation. What is it then to rebel
against it? it is sinful not to let all go, not to suffer the loss of all for
the light, not to suffer even the loss of life it self for the light, this is
extremely sinful. Therefore says Christ ( Luke 14.26.) He that will be my
Disciple must forsake father and mother, etc. yea and his life too; that is,
he must be ready to let all these go if called to it, rather then let go the
light or truth of the Gospel. Now if it be so great a sin not to be willing to
suffer any loss, or to endure any torment in standing up for the light; what
is it for any soul to rise up against the light, or knowingly to withstand it?

Fourthly, The Apostle says, that our neglect of the light of the Gospel
subjects us to outer darkness ( Heb. 2.3.) How shall we Escape if we neglect so
great salvation, which at the first began to be spoken by the Lord, etc. As if
he had said, the wisest man in the whole world, cannot tell how a man should
escape eternal darkness or damnation (there is no possible way, no door of hope
to escape by) if he neglect that great salvation. But what is neglect? it is a
light passing by of a thing, when offered; non-acceptance, is a neglect.
Suppose you do no more, when light is offered to you, but only pass it by,
because you have no mind to it, you are not taken with the beauty and worth of
it; If you do nothing against it, only you do not embrace it, you cannot
escape. And when the Apostle says, you cannot escape, without saying from
what; you may say the worst you can or can imagine, and that is it which he
means you cannot escape, even the wrath of God and death eternal. Now if but
to neglect salvation or the light, which is indeed, only not to elect it, or
not to make it our choice, be so damnable a sin, what is it to rebel against
the light? to do which is the worst that we can do, even the perfection of
wickedness. Surely they who thus rebel against the light, shall (as the Psalmist
speaks, Psalm. 49.19.) Go to the generation of their fathers, where they shall
never see light. They who rebel against the light of knowledge, shall not enjoy
the light of comfort. As they have desiered the absence of the former light, so
they shall be punished with the absence of the latter.

Lastly, As in these words Job shows who they were that acted those gross
wickednesses, even they who rebelled against the light; We may observe.

They who rebel against the light, will close with, and embrace any sin
whatsoever; or, They who are all for darkness, are for any wickedness. They who
rebel against this beautiful thing light, are forward to embrace the foulest
monster; Those things which it is a shame to speak of, or so much as to name,
these rebels against light are ready to do. The Psalmist moves God in prayer
to look to his Covenant by this argument ( Psalm. 74.20.) For the dark places
of the earth are full of the habitations of cruelty; that is, of cruel men, or
of men so full of cruelty, that they deserve rather to be called cruelty, then
cruel, this sort of men inhabit and fill up all those places where the light of
holy truth does not shine. Now if they who want the light, or have no true
knowledge of God among them, are hereby (as it were) prepared for and put onne
to the acting of all manner of wickedness, how much more are they prepared for
the acting of any wickedness who have thrust the light from them, and are in
dark places of their own making. The Prophet Hosea shows ( Chap. 4.1.) that
where there is no knowledge of God in a land (for want of means) there is no
truth nor mercy, (that is, there is none exercised) in that land, but
oppression, deceit, and falsehood, bear down all; how much more must it be so
where there is no knowledge of God in a land, because of the contempt of
means, and rebellion against the light. What wickedness will not they do in
the dark, who put out the Candle that they may not see what they do? These
are they who rebel against the light, and as it follows, They know not the
way thereof, nor abide in the paths thereof.

These latter words are an illustration of the former.

They know not the ways thereof. This not knowing may be taken either for a
simple ignorance, when we know not, either because we have not an ability to
know, or because we have wanted all opportunities and helps to get knowledge;
or, secondly, not knowing may be expounded of a wilful affected ignorance;
they know not, that is, they desire not to know: and so I conceive the meaning
of they know not, is not that they were simply ignorant, or invincibly
ignorant, as they are who sit in a land of darkness, and in the valley of the
shadow of death, but that these rejected the land of light, and so were under
an affected ignorance; They knew not the truth, because they would not.

Again, We may be said not to know that, Non nosse vias lucis est non agere ea
quae in luce agi solent. Illud nescire dicimur quod non probamus.
which we do not delight in, approve and practice. We know no more to purpose,
then we presently do, or have a purpose to do when the season or opportunity
calls us to it. How much light soever a wicked man has, yet he knows not the
ways of light, because he does not rejoice or delight in the ways of light,
as also because he does not so much as approve the ways of light; and if he
neither delight in nor approve of those ways, no mervaile if he walk not in
those ways, nor (as it is in the last clause of the verse) abide in the paths
thereof.

As if he had said; Suppose they come sometimes into the ways of light and
truth, suppose they sometimes do that which the light directs them to, yet
they abide not in it. This is a further Character of the disposition and temper
of wicked men, who though possibly for a fit, or for a turn or two they walk
in the ways of light, yet they abide not in the paths thereof. And this
latter piece of their sinfullnes arises from the former; why do they not
abide in the paths of light? even because they know not the ways thereof;
that is, because they do not approve or delight in the ways thereof. Whence
note.

We cannot be constant in that which we do not affect. If a man does not
know, that is, love and affect the ways of light, he will never abide in the
paths of light; what we love, with that we close, what we affect, in that we
stick. The reason why the wicked abide in the paths of sin, is because they
love and delight in them. All the paths of wickedness, are paths of
pleasantness to the wicked, and therefore they abide in them. No man would be
at all, much less would he be long in a way that he does not like. And that is
the reason why wicked men if ever they do this or that particular act of
righteousness and holiness, yet they cannot persevere in such actings. A
wicked man does Good as a godly man does evil, upon a temptation, not upon
approbation; some carnal aim or interest of profit or credit tempts him to do
good, but he does not approve the good which he does. And hence it is that as a
good man abides not in the paths of darkness, so a wicked man abides not in the
paths of light. True holiness does not begin at action, but at affection. They
begin at the wrong end with Religion, who begin with doing rather then with
liking. Many do this, and they do that, whereas they should strive to
approve, and pray for a love to the truths and ways of God which they
practice; for want of this they often apostati^e and fall back, even from the
practice of them. No bonds can hold us always to the duties of obedience, but
those of love to God, and to the things wherein duty calls us to obey. And as
want of this love is the reason why man is so apt to backslide, and is (so far
as a Negative may be) the very seed and principle of backsliding, so it is the
reason why God gives such up to the power and spirit of backsliding. (2 These.
2.10, 11.) Because they received not the love of the truth, that they might be
saved, for this cause God shall send them strong delusion, that they should
believe a lie. What is not begun in our affections, will not abide long in our
actions.

Secondly, Observe.

Not to abide in the paths of truth and holiness, is the mark of an ungodly
man. They who are not what they appear in goodness, will not always so much
as appear good. They that are (as Jacob spoke of his eldest Son Reuben (Genesis
49.4.) unstable as water, shall not excel, nor are they to be numbered among
the excellent ones. The Apostle exhorts Saints (1 Cor. 15.58.) To be steadfast
and unmovable, always abounding in the work of the Lord. Saints move in the
work of the Lord, but they must not move out of the work of the Lord, Be ye
steadfast and unmovable; but in what? in the work of the Lord; That is the
sphere in which Saints move, the sphere of their activity and use; and out of
that they dare not move. The Sun in the firmament is moving continually, but it
is in his proper line, called by Astronomers, The Eclipticke line; So a godly
man is always moveing in the way of godliness, that is his proper line, and he
never moves out of it wholly; He may have (through the power of corruption and
temptation) his wanderings and goings astray, but then he has his repentings
and returnings into the way again; he cannot abide long much less always in
the paths of darkness; He comes to himself with the prodigal, and then he
comes to his father, he bethinkes himself where he is, and comes backs into
the path where he ought to be; if at any time he walk in the counsel of the
ungodly (the gradation is made in the first Psalm) which thing he ought not to
do, yet surely he will not (as it follows) stand in the way of sinners, or if
he stand a while in that way, yet, he will not sit down in the seat of the
scornful; he will not rest nor stay there. Now as it is an argument and a
mark of Godliness, when a man finds, that though he has many faylings and
wanderings, yet he abides not in the paths of darkness; so it is an argument of
the noughtines of a man's heart and state, when though he now and then hits upon
the doing of a good thing, yet he abides not in the paths of light. Vain
thoughts (as the Prophet Reproves the Jews) lodge in the wicked so long, that
the Lord complains, How long shall vain thoughts lodge in you? But as good
thoughts seldom come to an ungodly man, so they lodge not at all with him;
they are great strangers to him, and he uses them as the worst of strangers,
yea as enemies, he quickly turns them off, yea he thrusts them away from him,
he abides not in the paths of light.

Job having thus set forth the Spirit of a wicked man, by his rebellion against
the light, by his unaffectednes with and unstayednes in the ways and paths of
it, proceeds to give us a further account of his wicked courses and works of
darkness.

Verse. 14. The murderer rising with the light kills the poor and needy, and
in the night is as a Theife.
The murderer is he that kills a man without warrant and authority; every
slaying of a man is not murder, but to slay a man, or to take away the life of
a man without warrant, that is murder: And that is the gross sin forbidden in
the sixth Commandment, Thou shall not kill, or thou shall do no murder. And
this is usually committed either in malice to the person, or in Covetousness
after the spoil. Some take away the life of a man in malice to his person,
they hate him deliberately, as Cain did Abel, and therefore they kill him.
Others have no quarrel to the man, possibly they never saw him before, but they
covet his goods, and that they may rob him of his goods, they rob him of his
life. They are such as live upon the spoil, and they will spoil, though they
cause the innocent to dye for it, and themselves too in the end. In either of
these ways, we may understand the murderer here. The former, because it is
said in the next words, He slayes the poor and needy, and there is little
gain in their blood when they go down into the pit. The latter, because it is
said in the latter part of the verse, That in the night he is as a theife. But
Job first shows us that this murderer is a diligent man.

Rising with the light. That is, rising as early, or as soon as the light
rises. The murderer is no sluggard, the light does not find him in bed; he
takes the prime of the morning, he will loose no time. Men who love hunting
rise early; So do these hunters of men. When the morning is light they
practice it, says the Prophet ( Mich. 2.1.) Honest men rise early to go about
the works of their Calling, and wicked men rise early to fulfill the lusts of
their hearts. David says, ( Psalm. 101.7.) I will early destroy all the wicked
of the Earth; As if David had said, I will rise with the light to destroy the
wicked; and here you see how the wicked are described riseing Early to destroy
the righteous, to murder the Innocent. So the next words express the design
of his early rising; He rises with the light; what to do? no good I warrant
you, it is

To kill the poor and needy. That Is his busienes; He begins his mornings work
with a work of cruelty; you hear of killing presently. The murderers heart
is full of blood, and it will not be long ere his hand be full too, for their
feet are swift to shed blood (Romans 3.15.) and they are skillful to destroy.
But it may seem that they are not very wise for themselves, though they are
very bloody against others; For Job does not say, they slay the fat and full
ones, but The poor and needy.

There are some who distinguish between these two, and tell us that in these
two words, two yea all sorts of poor are Included.

The first word, they say, intends those poor who heretofore were rich, but
now impoverished or fallen into poverty; and that by the second word are meant
those who have been born and always bred up in a low condition; But we need
not stand upon such nicities in distinguishing between the poor and needy. But
it may be enquired, why does the murderer kill the poor? what does he get by
that? where are the spoils which he brings home? There Is nothing to be had
from them who have nothing, The poor and needy. And it has been anciently
said, The empty traveller will sing before the Theife; why then should the
Theife or the murderer meddle with, especially why should he kill the poor
and needy? What have they? or what have they done?

Two things may be said in answer to these queries; first, it is thus expressed
to show the extreme wickedness of the murderer, who does not care so much for
booty as for blood. It Is for that he thirsts, his delight is in cruelty,
therefore he kills the very poor and needy, the next man he meets with, let
him be what he will. It Is the sin it self, or to do wickedly, which some men
delight in, they care not whether any advantage or profit come in by it; when
they have their will, when they have don what they would, that is reward enough
for them.

Hence Note.

Some will do wickedly, though they get nothing by it. All the true servants
of God love the work which he sets them, better then the reward which he gives
them, and so do some servants of the Devil. Even the Devil has servants who
scorn to be mercinary. The act of sin is sweeter to them then any profit that
sin can bring in; They are exact and perfect sinners, who sin out of love to
the very act of sinning: As the highest acting in holiness is to be pleased with
pure acts of holiness; To do them though we should get nothing by doing them,
though we make no earnings, though we see no present fruit in doing them. Thus
(I say) to go onne in ways of holiness when the ways of holiness appear
barren and unprofitable to us, yea when they are unsafe and dangerous to us,
here is the perfection of holiness. So the perfection of wickedness is to be
wicked when nothing is got by it; it shows a sincere love to sin (as I may
say) to love sin for sins sake; as it shows a sincere love to Grace and
goodness, to love them for their own or Gods sake. Hypocrites love the ways of
God for the spoil which they find there, for the carnal advantages which they
meet with there; were those ways poor and needy, lean and empty, they
should not at all be filled with their company. The profane will rise up in
Judgment against these professors, for they kill the poor and needy; They do
evil, where they cannot have any hopes of receaving good by it.

Secondly, For answer; By The poor and needy, we may here understand the
Innocent and honest, not as if all who are poor and needy, were also Innocent
(for there are many wicked poor) nor as if all who are innocent, were also
poor and needy (for there are many godly rich) but because usually they are
so: men that are rich and great may be Innocent and holy, but these are rare
conjunctions; usually the Innocent are poor and needy. Again, we are not to
take the poor and needy for them who (as we say) have not a penny to buy them
bread, but by the poor we understand those of the middle or rather Inferior
rank, such poor and needy they kill.

But what is their quarrel at them?

First, Because such poor honest men stand in the light of wicked men, that is
the wicked cannot be so wicked as they would, because some good men are near
them, and therefore they must be removed out of the world, that they may be out
of their way. Or, secondly, because such poor honest men either have given, or
are ready to give evidence, or be witnesses against them before the Magistrate:
now, either to prevent or revenge this, they rise with the light and kill the
poor and needy.

Hence Observe.

That a wicked man will do his utmost to remove those who stand in his way, or
oppose him in his wickedness. He will kill some that he may vex others; that is
his aim here, the poor and needy are not his utmost aim; but the poor and
needy stand in his way, they hinder him in his other projects. And whatsoever
interposeth between him and the enjoyment of his lust, he will remove it if he
can. And as he will kill some that he may vex others, so he will much rather
kill those who vex him. Holy David being left under the power of a strong
Temptation, slew Vriah an innocent man, only because he could not persuade him
to do that which might have bin some covering of his sin from the eyes of men.
How much more will the profane do so, when honest men do either professedly
oppose them in their sinful works, or discover the sinfullnes of them.

Further, In that Job upon the fresh account which he gives of the wickednesses
of men, brings in the murderer in the first place, riseing with the light and
killing the poor and needy. We may here take notice, a little, of the
greatness of this sin of murder, and demonstrate how great a sinner the
murderer is. The murderer is a sinner of the highest form, and there are two
Scripture Considerations in general, upon which we may make this out.

First, How sinful is it for a man to murder a man, when as the Scripture
tells us that if a beast kill a man he must suffer for it: ( Exodus 21.28.) If an
ox gore a man or a woman that they dye, the ox shall be surely stoned, and
his flesh shall not be Eaten. A beast is not capable of subjection to a moral
rule or law, as not being capable of reason, yet a beast who is not properly
under any Law must dye for transgressing this Law, Thou shall not kill; And
this surely, First, to convince man of the greatness of this sin; secondly, to
admonish him lest he commit this sin; thirdly, to assure him, that if he do he
must dye; For if a beast must dye for killing a man, then much more must man,
seeing that Law, against the killing of a man, was given to men, not to beasts.

Secondly, The Lord gave a rule to the Jews, what to do for the removing of
the guilt of blood, in case a man were found slain and no man could tell who
was the Author of that murder, read this at large ( Deuteronomy. 21.) from the
beginning of the Chapter to the end of the 9th verse; If one be found slain in
the Land which the Lord thy God gives thee, and it be not known (after
diligent enquiry, or hue and cry) who has slain him; Then the Elders of thy
Judges shall come forth, and they shall measure (in case there be a doubt which
City was nearest to the place where the slain was found) unto the Cities which
are round about him that is slain. And it shall come to pass, that the City
which is next unto the slain man (for from thence it was most probable that
the murderer came, or that thither he was fled to hide and conceal himself,
therefore) even the Elders of that City shall take an heifer which has not
been wrought with, and which has not drawn in the yoke (therein fitly
shadowing the murderer, in whose stead the heifer was to be slain; for such
are sons of Belial, men who will not bear the yoke of obedience) And the
Elders of the City shall bring down the heifer into a rough valley (the very
place was to carry a resemblance of a murtherous spirit, and of the act of
murder, both being rough and uncouth) and shall strike off the heifers neck
there in the valley (implying that if they could have got the murderer into
their hands, he must have dyed under their hand.) Then the Priest must come to
decide the controversy ( ver. 5.) and (at the 6th verse) The Elders of the
City that are next unto the slain man, shall wash their hands over the heifer
that is beheaded in the valley (washing of the hands, was, first, an argument
that blood defiles; secondly, it was a ceremony which employed innocence and
clearenes from blood, as appears by a like action of Pilate (Math. 27.24.) But
these Elders must not only use this speaking ceremony, to show their
innocence, but they must explicitly profess it ( ver. 7.) And they shall
answer and say, our hands have not shed this blood, neither have our eyes seen
it. And then the Priest must pray ( ver. 8, 9.) Be merciful O Lord, unto thy
people Israel, whom thou have redeemed, and lay not innocent blood unto thy
people of Isreal's charge, and the blood shall be forgiven, so shall thou put
away the guilt of innocent blood from among you, when thou shall do that which
is right in the sight of the Lord. This solemn Law and the manner of
proceeding upon it, shows three things, as to the point in hand. First, that
the Lord is very tender of shedding man's blood; secondly, that the shedding of
man's blood in any murtherous way is extremely displeasing to him. Thirdly,
That God will certainly bring vengeance one time or other first or last, upon
the murderer, seeing a whole City should be charged, in some degree, with the
blood of a man slain near them, if they did not publicly and solemnly
declare and testify their clearenes from it.

But besides these two general Considerations taken from Scripture, and now
instanced in; There are many other grounded both upon Scripture Authority, and
common reason, which set forth the vileness of this sin of murder.

First, Murder offers violence to nature in common, there being but one
common nature in all men. And hence

Secondly, He that murders another offers violence to himself; for though
there be a special sin of selfe-murther, yet the murder of another is
selfe-murther too, and that not only as it is an offering of violence to
common nature, but also as it lays the murderers own person open and
obnoxious unto violence, and that, both to the violence of a private revenge,
and to the violence of public Justice.

Thirdly, Murder destroys society, men will never live together where they
find themselves continually in danger of their lives: Man is a sociable
creature by nature, how sinful then is murder, which breaks the very first
fundamental laws of Nature?

Fourthly, Murder does not only defile the person that commits it, but the
land also in which it is committed. ( Numb. 35.31.33.) Ye shall take no
satisfaction for the life of a murderer, which is guilty of death, and he
shall surely be put to death; so ye shall not pollute the land wherein ye are;
for blood it defiles the land: and the land cannot be cleansed of the blood
that is shed therein, but by the blood of him that shed it. Murder as acted
defiles the person only that acts it, but murder (when known) defiles a
whole land, if it go unpunished. In which case there may be defilement upon a
land by many other sins, but this is especially expressed of murder, as if
that among and above all sins were the land-defiling sin.

Fifthly, Murder is not only an injury to man, but an impiety against God;
and that is the reason given in the first Law which God made against it, ( Genesis
9.6.) Who so sheddeth man's blood, by man shall his blood be shed, for in the
Image of God made he man. For though the body of a man slain be not in the
Image of God, yet the person slain is, even the person of a wicked man has
somewhat of the Image of God remaining in him. And therefore that law is to be
expounded universally; whosoever the man is, whether good or bad, righteous or
wicked, whose blood is unrighteously shed; by man (that is, by man who has a
call to it as being a Magistrate) shall his blood be shed, that is, he by his
authority shall (upon proof) condemn him to dye, and shall give him up to
execution. A contempt of the Image of God in man, is a contempt of God. And he
takes it as a high affront to his Majesty, that any should presume to deface or
spoil his Image, And this does more aggravate their sin, who oppose, vex, and
destroy godly men, because they oppose that more excellent Image of God, the
new Creature, or the Image of God renewed in righteousness and true holiness.
As there is an image or likeness of God in every man, so much more in a godly
man, for Godlynes is true God-likenes. Therefore to shed the blood of a Godly
man is a higher affront to the Majesty of God. As the new wine is in the
cluster, and one says destroy it not for a blessing is in it (Isa. 65.8.) So
we may say, destroy not a Godly man, for a blessing is in him, (first, from
God, and, secondly, for men) but we may say much more, Destroy him not for the
Image of God is in him.

Sixthly, Murder deprives us of that which is most precious in the whole
compass of nature; And according to the value of that wherein the damage is
received, is the greatness of the sin committed. Satan represented life better
then all other things ( Job 2.4.) Skin for skin and all that a man has will he
give for his life; Gold and silver, houses and lands are but toys and trifles
to life. There is nothing of man except his soul (which cannot dye) better
then his life. And this the murderer takes away. A murderer is the greatest
theife, and the vainest one, he steals away that from another which is to him
of highest value, yet that which himself cannot carry away, nor make any use
of.

Seventhly, The sinfullnes of murder appears in this; That it is not only a
wrong to that particular person who is murdered, but a wrong to all that have
dependence upon him. The life of one man may have an Influence upon many; wife
and children, the whole family, and kindred, all relations, and employments,
whether more private, or public, are wronged and suffer in his death. Though
that which cuts off a man's life, cannot cut off his own hope (if he have a
wel-grounded one) for things to come, yet it cuts off the hopes of all others
depending upon him (as an instrument in the hand of God) for good things
present.

Eighthly, The murderer takes away that from a man which no man can restore to
him, or repair him in; he takes away that which is Impossible for him to give
again. He that took away a man's goods was bound by the law of God to restore
it fourefold, or fivefold, or sevenfold, (according to the case) and possibly
he might restore it an hundredfold, but he that takes away a man's life, has
taken that which (though he would) he cannot restore so much as single. The law
of nature will not suffer the murderer to restore life, for it is like water
which being spilt cannot (by any humane power) be gathered up again; and the
law of God says concerning the sin of murder, that no satisfaction shall be
taken for it, and indeed none can. For though some would commute and have (by
the sinful indulgence and cruel pity of unjust Magistrates) commuted for it,
yet none could ever satisfy for it. And when Magistrates either through foul
corruption, or foolish compassion, have not taken vengeance upon the murderer
in kind, but have suffered him to commute, or compound for that sin, either by
paying a pecuniary penalty, or by undergoing some punishment less then death,
God has taken vengeance upon them for it, and has said to them in his
providence as he said to Ahab by his Prophet for the sparing of Benhadad (1
Kings 20.42.) Because ye have let go out of your hand a man whom I had
appointed to utter destruction, therefore your life shall go for his life, and
your people shall be cut off by the sword, because your sword did not cut off
the murderer. Si magistratus cessent ab officio deus ipse injustas caedes fame
peste and bellis externis aut intestinis ulciscitur. Merl.
Whole nations have been filled with blood by this kind of keeping back the
hand from blood.

Lastly, The murderer hurts others, but he chiefly hurts himself. Some
expound Lamech confessing this with sorrow ( Genesis 4.23.) while he said unto his
wives, Hearken unto my speech, for I have slain a man to my wounding, and a
young man to my hurt. There are diverse other Interpretations and readings of
those words, and we put in the Margin, I would slay a man in my wound, and a
young man in my hurt, As if he had boasted of his strength to his wives, that
though he were weak with wounds and hurts, yet he would venture to fight with
any man, and doubted not to get victory over him and kill him: and so the words
carry a sense like that speech of the Prophet ( Jer. 37.10.) telling the Jews
that theirs were vain confidences while they hoped to be delivered from the
Caldeans who besieged them; for, says he, Though there remained but wounded
men among them, yet they should rise up every man in his tent, and burn this
City with fire. But as to our reading, I have slain a man to my wounding. Some
expound it only of a bodily wounding, I have got a wound my self, or I have
hurt my self while I slew a man; much more is this true of a spiritual
wounding, and hurt to the soul and Conscience; for though a murderer slay a
man, and come off with a whole skin, yet he slays a man to his wounding, and
kills him to his hurt. The Rabbis have a tradition upon that place; that
Lamech having been a great hunter in his younger days being then grown old
was led forth by his young man to take his pleasure in hunting, and shooting at
Dear, and that while he was in this disport or exercise in the field, Cain
passed by, and the young man poynted him to Cain, Lamech (being dim-sighted)
shot at Cain and killed him in stead of a wild beast; but soon after
discovering that he had killed Cain, turned to the young man his guide in a
passionate anger and killed him also. This relation they give as the reason why
Lamech said, I have slain a man to my wounding, and a young man to my hurt:
but I shall not stay upon that tradition of the Jews; and shall only make so
much use of Lamechs confession, as at least to illustrate, if not to prove, the
point in hand, that he who slays a man does it to his own hurt and wounding,
often to the wounding of his body, estate, and honor, always to the wounding
of his own soul and conscience. Every sin in some degree or other wounds the
soul; But the wounding of others to death is the chief sin (of all sins
against the body and outward concernments of man) which wounds a man's soul.
The murderer at one blow strikes through the body of his neighbor and his
own soul.

Further, we might observe from those words in the text, riseing with the
light: That murderers, and indeed any sort of wicked doers, are diligent and
laborious to do the commands of their vilest lusts.

But I noted this at the 5th verse upon those words, Rising betimes for a prey,
I shall not stay upon it here. I only add this; Let not us be sloathfull in
doing good, seeing the murderer is so diligent and early up for the doing of
mischief.

And in the night is as a Thief. These words may be taken two ways; For

First, The Particle, as, is by some conceived not to be a note of similitude,
but to carry on a direct predication, He is as a thief, that is, Particula
quasi non dicit similitudinem sed proprietatem.
He is a very thief. We find elsewhere in Scripture, that a particle of
likeness does not only note the likeness of one thing to another, but the
samenes of one thing with another. Taking it thus here; The meaning of the
words is as if Job had said, He rises betimes in the morning to play the
murderer, and in the night he playe's the thief. I have noted the same sense
of the particle heretofore, first, from those words of the Evangelist
concerning Christ ( Joh. 1.14.) We saw his glory as the glory of the only
begotten Son of God; for Christ was not only like the only begotten Son of
God, but he was really so: as also from that of the Prophet ( Hosea 5.10.) The
Princes of Judah were as or like them that remove the bound, that is, they did
remove the bound.

Secondly, Others keep to the similitude, and say the meaning of Job is not,
that the murderer does turn theife, or that he proceeds from killing in the
day to stealing in the night; Facere aliquid tanquam fur est proverbialis
locutio, quae importat secretam diligentemque abscensionem.
But say they, this verse is quite through a description of the murderer, as
the next is of the Adulterer. So that to say, In the night he is as a Thief,
imports only this; That in the night he does carry himself very closely, and
very secretly, or that as a theife in the night is close and sudden in
stealing, so is he the murderer in killing. We have this similitude often used
(1 Thessalonians. 5.2.) The Coming of Christ shall be as a Theife in the night. Read
also (2 Pet. 3.10. Revel. 16.15.) in which the same similitude of a Theife in
the night is applied to Christ's coming, not as if we could hence conclude, that
Christ will come in the night time, but that, whenever he comes it shall be
as in the night, that is, suddenly, and (as to any antecedent appearances)
secretly upon the world, it shall be unexpected to them, they shall not know
the time of it, nor shall they be aware of it, though, when he is once come,
his coming shall be accompanied with so much light and luster, with so much
splendor and power, as shall not only awaken, but astonish all the world.
Thus it may be said of the murderer, In the night he is as a Theife. And

Hence, it may be noted.

First, That wicked men give themse^ves wholly to watch opportunities of doing
mischief.

The murderer rises early in the morning, and in the night is as a Theife:
he takes his advantages in the day, and he will not forbear them in the
night. As it shows the great assiduity of Saints in prayer when it is said,
They cry to God day and night (Luke 18.7.) day and night reach the whole
compass of time. So while Job tells us that the wicked are doing mischief
betimes in the morning, and that they are at it again in the night, if not all
the night, What can be said more for their watchfullnes and assiduity in doing
mischief? The Apostle ( Ephesians. 5.16.) exhorts Saints to redeem the time
because the days are evil; but we see in the present example, alleged by
Job, that wicked men will redeem the time, that they may do evil. We cannot
possibly redeem the time, by recalling or bringing back the time which is
past, but we may redeem the time by our more diligent actings in the time
present; Now, who can act more diligently in improving the time present, then
they who are at work both day and night, which two distinctions of time
include and carry all time. Let not the Godly be found Idling away the day,
while the wicked are found laboring (at their work, such as it is) in the
very night.

Again, We may note.

That the murderer does his bloody buisines not only diligently, but closely.
He does it as a theife in the night. The murderer, who is at all times feirce
and cruel, will sometimes be subtle and cunning; and this is the guise of other
sinners too, especially of the Adulterer, whose secret conveyances and close
contrivances for the attaining of his filthy delights, are elegantly described
in the words which follow.

JOB, CHAP. 24. Verse. 15, 16, 17. The eye also of the adulterer waits for the
twilight, saying, no eye shall see me: and disguiseth his face.

In the dark they dig through houses which they have marked for themselves in
the day time: they know not the light.

For the morning is to them even as the shadow of death; if one know them,
they are in the terrors of the shadow of death.


WE have heard many wickednesses described in the former part of this Chapter,
and in the foregoing verse, The murderer rising with the light kills the
poor and needy, and in the night is as a Theife. Job proceeds to discover the
practices of two other sorts of gross sinners, the Adulterer and the Theife.

Verse. 15. The eye of the adulterer waits for the twilight.
Before I come to open the particular terms of this clause, or to raise any
observations from it, I shall give in somewhat about Adultery in general,
which is the special subject of the whole verse. Adultery is the breach of the
7th Commandment. And in that Commandment a twofold Adultery is forbidden.
First, Mental, or the adultery of the mind; secondly, Corporal, or the
adultery of the body. It was the former which Christ intended, when he
corrected the false gloss or exposition of the Pharisees about the 7th
Commandment, ( Math. 5.27, 28.) Ye have heard that it was said by them of old
time, Thou shall not commit adultery; but I say unto you, whosoever looks on
a woman to lust after her, has committed adultery with her already in his
heart. By which it appears, that the Pharisees, who were the chief
interpreters of the Law in those times, limited the commandment against
Adultery to the outward act; but Christ the Lawgiver who best knew the mind of
the Law, enlarged it to the prohibition of the internal act, and told them that
there is a heart-adultery, an adultery in thought, occasioned by a vain or
wanton glance and cast of the eye, as well as there is an Adultery of the body,
or in the outward act.

The text in hand speaks only of corporal Adultery, though the other be not
excluded as being the root of it. Latinae voces adulteri and adulterae hanc
vim habent ut adulter ad alteram, adultera ad A^terum se conferat. Fest:
And This corporal adultery is taken in Scripture sometimes strictly, when
either man or woman to satisfy their lust with others break their conjugal
Bond; and is either that act of uncleanenesse which is committed by persons who
are both engaged by marriage-covenant to mutual faithfulness, or when at least
one of them is under that engagement. This latter is properly called single
adultery; the former is double Adultery, or corporal Adultery in the highest
and strictest sense of it. Secondly, Corporal Adultery is taken more largely,
or in a lower sense for fornication or bodyly uncleanenesse of any kind
between man and woman. And so it is intended in the Commandment given against
it; Thou shall not commit Adultery.

The foulenes and greatness of this sin of adultery (take it in either sense)
appears many ways. The Apostle puts it in the front of the works of the
flesh ( Gal. 5.19.) Now the works of the flesh are manifest, which are these,
Adultery, fornication, uncleanness, lasciviousness, there is adultery with
all its retinue; and ( Col. 3.5.) it is set as the first of our earthly
members, which are to be mortified; mortify therefore your members which are
upon earth, fornication, uncleanenesse, inordinate affection. Whereas in other
Scriptures fornication is included under adultery, in this adultery is included
under fornication.

Adultery strictly taken, has a special sinfullnesse in it. First, as it is
the breach of a Covenant; every sin has in it a breach of Covenant in
general, but there is a superadded breach of a special Covenant in this sin.
Hence Solomon says of the Adulteress ( Pro. 2.17.) that she forsakes the
guide of her youth. One of the Rabbines expounds this woman mystically for the
sensitive appetite, and that she is said to forsake the guide of her youth,
because in youth appetite commonly forsakes reason, which is appointed to be
the guide of it. But we may expound this guide either for her father, who had
the government of her in her younger years, or else for her husband whom she
married in her youth, and whom by marriage she received as the guide of her
youth, under God, who is indeed the guide both of our youth and old age: and
what guide soever the wife forsakes, she cheifely forsakes God who is her
chief guide, and forgets the covenant of her God, that is, the covenant
which God gave her in reference to that particular estate of marriage. Every
believer is in covenant with God, in reference to his spiritual estate, but a
married person has a covenant with God in reference to that civil state; And
Adultery is the breach of this covenant.

Secondly, This shows the sinfullnesse of Adultery, that it is a sin which
cannot be committed alone, there is always a double sin, in this sin of
adultery, two are defiled with it at once. In which sense it is worse then
murder, and theft; For these may be committed, and but one defiled with the
sinfullnes of them. He that robs is guilty of stealing, not he that is robbed;
He that murders is guilty of blood, not he that is murdered; But in Adultery,
the Agent and patient are both alike guilty of uncleanenes; The defilement
reaches both.

Thirdly, The evil of this sin appears, by the many and manifold evils which
it brings with it. Solomon has set them forth very particularly and fully (
Pro. 6.26, 27, 28, 29, 30.) Lust not after her (that is, after the strange
woman) in thine heart, neither let her take thee with her eyelids, (why not?
First, thou may be undone in thy outward estate) by means of a whorish
woman a man is brought to a piece of bread, (that is, he is ruined in all he
has by it, and brought to so low an ebb of poverty, that he has scarce the
worth of a piece of bread left) And (which is both a second and a worse evil)
the adulteress will hunt for the precious life, which may either be understood
of the natural life, (sometimes the adulterer is murtherd by the adulteress)
or of that which is a more precious life then the natural, even the life of the
soul, or the eternal good and happiness of the soul, she cares not to
destroy body, and soul for ever (so her lust may be satisfied) that is the
gain which the adulteress pursues; she hunts for the precious life, the life
of the soul. Thirdly, Solomon describes the evil of this sin in the 27 and 28
verses, by the guilt which it inevitably brings with it; Can a man take fire in
his bosom, and his clothes not be burnt? can a man go upon hot coals, and
his feet not be burnt? So he that goes into his neighbors wife, whosoever
touches her shall not be innocent, that is, he shall surely be very guilty. As
if he had said, You can no more retain your innocence, while you commit this
folly, then you can avoid being burnt when you carry fire in your bosom, or
tread upon burning coals. Fourthly, the sinfullnes of this sin appears, by
the comparison which the Scripture makes between it and theft, ( Pro. 6.30,
31.) Men do not despise a theife, Ferenda est magis omnis necessitas quam
perpetranda aliqua iniquitas.
if he steal to satisfy his soul when he is hungry; it is a sin to steal,
though it be to satisfy hunger; no necessity can excuse iniquity; and we
should rather choose to starve then steal, if at least that may be called
stealing, which is done merely to avoid starving; Therefore (says Solomon) if
he be found, he shall restore seavenfold, he shall give all the substance of
his house; yet this sin of stealing which is to satisfy hunger is but a small
sin compared with Adultery, which is only to satisfy a man's lust and
beastiall sensualnes. This Solomon affirms to us in the next words; But who so
commits adultery with a woman lacks understanding, he that does it
destroys his own soul. He that steals, upon those terms does it for
want, but he that commits adultery upon any terms, does it for wantonness. He
that steals does it for lack of bread, but he that commits adultery does it
for lack of understanding. He that steals when he is hungry does it to
satisfy his soul, but he that commits Adultery, (though he does it not
with an intent to destroy his soul, yet in the issue he) destroys his own
soul. But is not stealing a soule-destroying sin too? I answer, it is; and so
is every sin in its own nature, but there are some sins (and among these
Adultery is a chief one) which in the event prove usually more destructive to
the soul, and have oftener destroyed it. And as this sin does very often
destroy the soul as to its happiness hereafter; so it destroys it as to its
abiding here. Thus the soul may be said to be destroyed when the life is
destroyed; and this destruction of the soul, Solomon seems directly to aim
at, as the next words lead us to Judge ( ver. 33.) A wound and dishonor shall
he get, and his reproach shall not be wiped away, for jealousy is the rage of
a man, therefore he will not spare in the day of vengeance.

Another Scripture to be much minded in this point is that of St Paul (1 Cor.
6.13, 14.) where writing to the Church of Corinth, (among which people that sin
was very common before they were called to the knowledge of Christ by the
preaching of the Gospel) he urges many arguments upon their consciences, to
prevent their relapse into it. And we may discover six arguments which the
Apostle uses in that place; I shall only touch them, and so return to the
text in hand. The first appears at the close of the 13th verse, Now the body
is not for fornication but for the Lord, and the Lord for the body; As if he
had said, you put the body to a use for which it was never intended, the body
is not for fornication, but, for the Lord, that is, for the Lords use and
service; and the Lord is for the body, that is, for the good and salvation of
the body. Such is the wonderful goodness of God, that look in whatsoever we
are for him, he is for us; As our bodies are for the Lords service as well as
our souls, so the Lord is for the good of our bodies, as well as for the good
of our souls. And therefore our bodies ought to be employed for his Glory in
every thing. The second argument is taken from the resurrection; God has both
raised up the Lord, and will also raise up us by his own power, (ver. 14.) As
if he had said, your bodies shall be raised again; if they were to be lost in
the dust, then it were no great matter how you did defile, and abuse them, but
as God has raised up the Lord, so he will raise you up. Seeing then God has
promised, and you are such as profess faith in that promise, that your bodies
shall be raised up out of the dust, to put on glory as a Garment in the last
day, therefote in the mean time (while your bodies are in your keeping) do ye
keep your bodies pure. Thirdly, He argues thus with the believing Corinthians,
(v. 15th) Know ye not that your bodyos are the members of Christ; not only is
the soul of a believer a member of Christ, but his body too, yet it is not
properly either the body or the soul that is a member of Christ, but the
person; for the union is made between Christ and the person of a believer,
consisting of soul and body. But thus the Apostle argues, Know ye not that
your bodies are the members of Christ, shall I then take the members of Christ,
and make them members of an harlot, God forbid. What! will ye dispose the
members of Christ to so base a use? will ye who prefesse, your selves joined to
Christ, condescend to such a base conjunction? And hence he expostulates at the
16th and 17th verses, What? know ye not that he which is joined to an harlot is
one body for two, says he, shall be one flesh, (They who abuse marriage, are
as the married, The Adulterer and the harlot are one flesh as well as the
husband and the wife) but he that is joined to the Lord (by faith and love) is
one spirit; He has a nearer and a more noble union then that of flesh, and
therefore he ought to maintame the hight of honor and purity, both in mind
and body; and as he is one Spirit with the Lord, so to make it good that he is
guided and governed by one Spirit, and that The holy One. We have a fourth
argument at the 18^h verse, Flee fornication, why so? The reason is added,
every sin that a man does is without the body, but he that commits
fornication, sins against his own body. But are all other sins without the
body? I answer; first, other sins have the body as an instrument for the
committing of them; if a man steal, the body is an instrument, if a man commit
murder, the body is an instrument, but in this sin the body is more
isntrumental then in other sins, the body is cheifely isntrumental, in this
sin; so that comparatively to this, every sin that a man does is without the
body. And therefore this sin is more against the body then other sins are.
Again secondly, when the Apostle says, every sin is without the body, he is
to be understood of those sins which are external, otherwise every sin that
a man commits is not without the body, there are a thousand acts of sin that
are done within the body, or in the soul, envy, wrath, malice, are sins
within the body, being bred and acted in the Spirit. But we may say of every
sin which is external, (about which the discourse there is) that comparatively
to this sin of adultery and fornication, it is without the body. I answer,
thirdly, The body is not only the instrument of this sin, but the object of it
also; for the unclean person does not only sin with his body, but he sins
against his body; Adultery leaves that blot and brand of ignominy and baseness
upon the body, which no other sin does, making it the member of a harlot, as
was touched before, and degrading it from that excellent honor whereunto God
advanced it, even in a Natural consideration, much more degrading it from that
honor, whereuntor God has advanced it in a spiritual consideration. And as
that was the Apostles third Argument, so, upon another relation of the bodies
of believers, he makes his 5th argument, which is laid down at the 19th verse;
What? know you not that your body is the Temple of the Holy Ghost, which is in
you, which ye have of God, and ye are not your own; As if he had said, A
Temple is a holy and sacred thing, and will ye defile the Temple of the
Holy Ghost? The Jews, how angry were they? what an uproar did they make, when
they thought Paul had brought Greeks into the Temple, who by the law were
looked upon as profane persons, and so not to be admitted to come there; they
cry out, This is the man that has polluted this holy place (Acts 21.28.) Much
more may it be urged upon Gospel-professors, what! commit such a sin as this?
what! pollute the Temple of God? Know ye not (which every believer is bound to
know) that your body is the Temple of the Holy Ghost as well as the soul. The
last argument concludes the 19th verse, and is prosecuted in the 20 h; Ye are
not your own, for ye are bought with a price, therefore glorify God in your
body, and in your spirit which are Gods. Redemption is a strong engagement, ye
are bought, and dearly paid for, ye are bought with a price, ye are not your
own. Some (who take liberty in this sin) would excuse themselves by the
contrary argument. Our bodies (say they) are our own, and we may do what we
will with our own. No, says the Apostle, ye are bought with a price, ye are
not your own; ye have your bodies of God, in their natural constitution, It is
he who has made us (in that capacity) and not we our selves (Psalm. 100.3.) and
ye are not your own; for ye are redeemed or bought with a price, both body and
soul. Ye are bought out of your own hands, as well as out of the hand of
divine justice and displeasure. The Apostle speaks especially to believers; For
though it be a truth concerning all, whether believers, or unbeleevers, that
they are not their own, none of the sons of men are their own, God has a
right to them by creation, as also by his continual providence, provision, and
preservation, yet believers or the redeemed in a special manner, are not their
own, and therefore they ought above others to glorify God in their body and
in their spirit which are Gods. Having thus opened several Scripture grounds
and arguments to demonstrate the soulenes and filthiness of this sin of
Adultery, which is the general subject of this verse; I shall now proceed in
the exposition of particulars in it.

The eye also of the adulterer waits etc. The word, also, referres to the
murderer spoken of in the former verse; implying, that the Adulterer and he,
though their sins are very different, yet agree much in taking their
opportunities of sinning. How contrary soever sinners are in their particular
practice, yet they have all one common principle and Spirit. The Murderer and
the Adulterer are alike desierous of privacy. They both love darkness rather
then light, or that which is neither, Twilight. Jeb seems to speak of a man,
that is no novice, but of one long verst and practiced in this way of
wickedness. Oculus Adulteri, i. e. ipse Adulter.
The eye also of the adulterer waits, that is, the adulterer himself
waits. Job does not say, the Adulterer waits, but the eye of the Adulterer
waits, because the eye is much in adultery; The eye has so great a share in
that sin, In re amatoria oculi sunt lenones, prima amoris via. Lucian: Amoris
principium. Plato. Amoris seeds. Philostr: Nihil in oculis est quod non sit
lascivum and petulans, nihil in oculorum pupilla in esse dicas, quam amicam,
cum potiri non possunt, saltem conspectu se sanunt.
that the whole sin is here charged upon the eye. The Apostle Peter (2 Pet.
2.14.) speaks of a generation of evil men, having their eyes full of
adultery, or (as the Greek Original has it with much Emphasis) full of an
Adultenesse. As if he had said; they are persons so given up to uncleanenes,
that they have no desire to see any body with their eyes but an Adulteress,
nor is any thing else to be seen in their eyes but Adultery. They are as
impudent as they are unclean, letting out the Adultery which is in their
hearts at their eyes, not caring who sees it. Adultery is seated in the heart,
there is the fountain of it ( Math. 15.19.) Out of the heart proceed evil
thoughts, murders, adulteries, fornications, thefts, false witness,
blasphemy; Adultery comes out of the heart, but it is first seen in the eye,
yea the eye often gives the first occasion of it to the heart. ( Math. 5.28.)
Whosoever looks upon a woman to lust after her, has committed adultery with
her already in his heart. Wanton love usually ascends by these five steps:
First, the eye sees; secondly, the heart desires; thirdly, the thoughts are
plotting and contriving how to attain what is desiered; fourthly, there is
hope to attain what is plotted, and, fifthly, there is joy and delight in the
attainement of what was hoped. Thus usually the eye gives the occasion and
leads the dance in all the meetings of vanity. The Ancient Moralist (in his
book of the long-comming revenges of God) makes report that one Apollidorus
being in a dream saw his own skin pulled off by a barbarous Scythian,
Plutarchus de sera numinis vindicta.
who then presently threw him into a chaldron of boileing water, where being
tormented his heart whispered to him, I am the cause of all this. The heart is
the cause of punishment and misery, remotely, because nextly it is the cause of
sin, especially of this sin of Adultery, yet as the heart does sometimes set
the eye a work to find out objects, so the eye meeting with objects sets the
heart aworke, yea it sets the heart a fire, or all in a flame with vain
desires and adulterous lustings. The eyes of some look out continually for the
fuel of those secret fires, and the eyes of others meet with it unlooked for.
A good man's eye may meet with a vain object, but his eye does not go out to
seek or wait for it. Against such active wickedness Job professed while he
said ( Chap. 31.1.) I have made a covenant with mine eyes, etc. A godly man's
eye has somewhat else to wait upon, then such ensnaring objects. And the
Psalmist tells us upon what the Godly man's eye waits ( Psalm. 123.2.) Behold as
the eyes of servants look unto the hand of their Masters, etc. so our eyes
wait upon the Lord our God until he have mercy upon us. The eye of a Godly
man waits to receive Good, and the eye of a wicked man waits to do evil.
The Adulterer has a waiteing eye, and this waiteing notes three things.

First, That the Adulterer is very diligent, and intentive to attain his
purpose; he that waits is more then awake; He is not only awake but
watchful; both these are put together ( Pro. 8.34.) where the diligence of the
Saints is spoken of in their waiteing upon Christ in his appointments; Blessed
is the man that hears me, watching daily at my gates, waiteing at the posts
of my doors; they who wait at the posts of wisdom, that is, of Christ, watch
also at his gates; they watch there, and they wait there. It is possible for a
man to watch, as watching is only opposed to sleeping, and yet not to wait,
that is, not to be diligent or attentive upon any busienes, but he that
watches, as watching is opposed to Idling, he is always waiting as long as
watching, and he cannot but be watching, who is indeed waiting. Thus the
Adulterer takes much pains to obtain his forbidden pleasures, his eye waits
and watches, he is a diligent servant or slave rather to his lust; every man
that commits sin, is a servant to sin, and every servant must wait; it is the
duty of a servant to wait for his Lord, the adulterer waits upon his lust as
upon his Lord, every lust would be waited upon as a Lord. Saints watch at
wisdoms gates, and wait like servants at her posts to know her pleasure.
Adulterers watch at whoredoms gates, and at her posts they wait for sinful
pleasures.

Secondly, To wait, implies the exercise of much patience; he that waits,
expects long, he must expect and stay till the opportunity comes, Even the
wicked have patience, upon hopes of enjoyment; And shall not the Godly? It may
shame the Godly out of their impatience and loathnes to wait for an answer of
prayer from God, when they hear that The husbandman waits for the precious
fruit of the earth, and has long patience for it, until he receave the early
and the latter rain (Jam: 5.7.) But it may shame them much more out of all
their impatience in waiting for good things from God, when they hear that the
Adulterer waits for the whorish woman, and has long patience, till he
receave his longing.

Thirdly, Waiteing implies the Adulterers fixednesse in and resolvednesse to
sin, his eye waits; he does not sin by a sudden glance of his eye, or upon
a vehement gust of temptation, or upon an unthought of hurry of wanton
passions, but he sins deliberately, and (as it were) in cool blood. He waits
for and watches his season, he is serious and studious about his wickedness.

Hence note.

A wicked man sins with resolution. He that waits to do any thing, has a
resolution to do it. A Godly man sins, but he does not wait to sin; or if at
any time he do so, he at that time acts the wicked man's part in the godly man's
state, and so upon a strong temptation Godly men have done. But usually he is a
wicked man (as to his state) that waits for a temptation. Afflictions wait
every where for a godly man (as Paul spoke of himself, Acts 20.23.) and so
also do Temptations. But the ungodly are every where waiteing for temptations.
They are not surprised, or taken unawares, by a sin, but they are resolved to
take their first opportunity of sinning. What a godly man says (when he is in
a right frame) in reference to the ways of holiness ( Psalm. 108.1.) O God my
heart is prepared or fixed; A godly man does not good upon a sudden, or by
chance (as we say) but he sets himself to it, his heart is fixed or prepared,
and his face is set heavenward, or for heavenly duties. So Daniel spoke of
himself ( Dan. 9.3.) I set my face unto the Lord God to seek by prayer and
supplications, and as a godly man is in the ways of God, so the ways of God
are in him. Thus David describes him ( Psalm. 84.5.) Blessed is the man whose
strength is in thee, in whose heart are the ways of them, that is, the ways
which Godly men walk in, and they are the ways of God. Now as this is the
true state of godliness when the heart is in it and prepared for it, so the
true state of wickedness is, when a man's heart is in it and prepared for it.
This is the proper character of a wicked man. The eye of the Adulterer waits
for the twilight.

Every word has weight in it, the twilight is the Adulterers season; It is not
said, he waits for the night, or for the day, but he waits for the twilight,
which is neither day nor night, but between both. We have such a description of
time in reference to the mixed and uncertain state of things ( Zach. 14.6, 7.)
And it shall come to pass in that day, that the light shall not be clear nor
dark; But it shall be one day which shall be known to the Lord, not day nor
night. Such a thing is Twilight, it is neither clear nor dark, neither day
nor night, but between both. There is a twofold twilight; first, the morning
twilight; and, secondly, Diluculum. Crepusculu^.
the evening twilight; the morning twilight begins when the night ends, the
evening twilight begins when the day ends. The Latins have two distinct words
to express these distinct twilights by, but our language is not so well
stored, and therefore we must distinguish them by the matter spoken of, or the
scope of the speaker. Thus here, when it is said in the text, he waits for the
twilight, we are to understand it of the evening twilight, not for the morning
twilight, and the reason is, because the morning twilight is not for the
adulterers turn or purpose, for then the light prevails upon the darkness,
but it is the evening twilight, for then darkness prevails upon the light. And
that this is the Adulterers twilight is clear ( Prove. 7. v. 6, 7, 8, 9. Nox et
tenebrae administrae sunt impijs suarum libidinum. Ipsa nox alioquin caeca
infandarum tamen libidinu^ oculatus testis est.
) At the window of my house (says Solomon) I looked through the casement, and
behold among the simple ones, I discerned among the youths, a man void of
understanding, passing by the way to her house, and he went near her corner,
in the twilight in the evening (or) in the evening of the day, in the black
and dark night. And behold there met him a woman with the attire of a harlot,
etc. His eye waited for the twilight, and in the twilight he was taken.

Hence note.

The doing of evil has its proper seasons, as well as the doing of good.
Though sin be never in season, yet it has some times which are more seasonable
for it; to sin is never in season, as to the lawfullnesse of committing it, but
sin has its seasons as to the convenience of committing it. The Adulterer
takes his season, he waits for the twilight. Whence note secondly.

Evil men are very careful to hit their seasons for the doing of evil. It
were desirable that the godly were as careful to hit their seasons, and take
their times, as the ungodly are. To every thing (says the Preacher, Eccl:
3.1.) there is a season and a time for every purpose under the Sun. And
because it is so (says the same Preacher, Eccl: 8.6.) The misery of man is
great upon him. But why does this make the misery of man great upon him? I
answer, The reason of this misery upon man, is not because there is a season,
but because either of his ignorance or negligence to find it. There are a
thousand ways to miss a season, and but one to hit it; And were there as many
ways to hit as to miss, it were a thousand to one but man would miss rather
then hit; and therefore the misery of man is great upon him, Because if once he
miss his season, it cannot be recovered, and then he must needs be miserable.
Good men are miserable (as to some cases) because they are often so careless
to hit their season of doing good, and do so often miss it, notwithstanding
all their care. Wicked men are for ever miserable, because they are so careful
not to miss their season of doing evil, and do so often hit it. The eye of
the Adulterer waits for the twilight, and he seldom (as to his own end)
waits in vain. But why is he so greedy for the twilight? The next words say
why, where he brought in Saying, no eye shall see me.

Where says he this? he says it in his heart, this is his discourse in his
own breast; and to whom says he this? he says it to himself, there is a
dialogue between the Adulterer and his own heart, and thus he concludes, I
will wait for the twilight, and then no eye shall see me. And when he says,
no eye shall see me, his meaning is, There is not any eye that shall see me.
Thus he plays the fool at All Is hid.

Yet further, this no eye may have a threefold reference.

First, No eye of common men shall see me, I will do this in secret, I will
have such a cover of darkness over me, that my neighbors and friends shall
not be able to take any notice of me.

Secondly, No eye, may refer to men in chief, that is, Verba quae sequuntur
exigunt ut ista de Magistratus justitiaeque ministris intelligantur. Bold:
Quisquis aut officio aut quovis alio modo super alios inspicit, actusque eorum
observat vocatur oculus.
no eye of the Magistrate, nor of any Minister of Justice shall see me.
Magistrates are the eyes of a Nation, they should overlooke all places, either
by themselves or their Officers, to observe what is done. As the adulterers eye
watches, so there should be an eye of Justice watching to catch Adulterers.
Some interpret this Text, especially of the adulterers hope, or
selfe-perswasion that he shall escape the eye or knowledge of the Magistrate,
who is appointed to oversee the manners of that people over whom he is placed,
and to be a terror, yea a Minister of vengeance to them that do evil; for he
bears not the sword in vain (Romans 13.3, 4.) Magistrates should so much mark
and eye the state of a people, that they are called eyes in Scripture ( Isa.
29.10.) For the Lord has powered out upon you the spirit of deep sleep, and
has closed your eyes (what or who are those eyes? the next words inform us)
the Prophets and Rulers, the seers has he covered. The Hebrew word which we
render rulers is heads; Rulers are the heads of a people, and what is a head
without eyes, or having its eyes covered. God did not cover the eyes which were
in the peoples personal heads, but he covered the eyes which were in their
public heads. He has closed your eyes, that is, those that should be as
heads and eyes to you, your Prophets and your rulers. Thus also say some,
Government is expressed by an eye ( Deuteronomy. 33.28.) Israel then shall dwell in
safety alone, Fons vel oculus Jacob suum imperium habebit in terra Canaan.
Bold: Apud persarum reges. quidam fuerunt qui dicebantur oculi and aures.
Zenoph.
the fountain of Jacob shall be upon a land of corn and wine, also his heaven
shall drop dew. That which we translate the fountain of Jacob, others render
as well, and as truly from the Original, the eye of Jacob, that is, (say they)
the Magistracy, the ruling power, as if he had said, as the people of Israel in
general shall dwell in safety, so their eye, their government or their
Governors in special shall be blessed with plenty, they shall be upon a land
of corn and wine. It has been observed also in antiquity, that great Princes
had certain men in office whom they called their eyes. Princes have their eyes
and ears in every place, that is, their Officers. Thus we may expound this
Text, the Adulterer says, No eye shall see me. The ruling or Magistraticall
eye shall not see me and if what I do be not seen by that eye (let others see
what they will, and say what they please) I shall not suffer at all for what I
do; and then all is well, that is as much as I care for. And here we may note,
That, As some Adulterers have their eyes abroad, that is, agents to espy out
Beauties for them. So most of them (if not all) are afraid of the eyes of
others.

Thirdly, No eye shall see me, that is, not the eye of God; God himself shall
not see me. Thus the adulterer hopes to hide his sin from his eye who is indeed
all eye, Homines latere cupiens Dei oculum non timeus.
and whose eye is over all. Thus the adulterer supposes himself under such a
vayl of darkness, that he is free not only from the eye of men on earth, and
from the eye of those who are gods upon earth, but even from the eye of the God
of heaven.

Hence observe.

First, A sinner is full of vain presumption. He presumes that the sin which
he commits against the light of his own conscience, shall never come to light;
he presumes that the sin which he commits in his own eye, shall not come to
the eye of others. I have elsewhere noted this ignorant confidence of carnal
men, and only name it here.

Secondly, Note.

It is not the act of sin, but the discovery of it which a wicked man fears.
He cares not what wickedness he does, so he may go unseene; a godly man is
afraid of doing evil, though he could do it with greatest secrecy, or under
the darkest cover: he is afraid to do evil, because of the evil and
unrighteousness of it, because of the pollution, and unanswerablenesse of it,
both to his own duty, and the goodness of God to him; but it is the discovery
not the iniquity of his work, which the hypocrite fears.

Thirdly, As the eye is taken for the eye of the Magistrate.

Observe.

That it is the punishment of sin at which a wicked man is troubled, he is not
troubled at the sin it self. It Is the consequence of sin, not the nature of
it, the smart of sin, and not the filth of it, which the wicked would avoid.

Lastly, As no eye is exclusive also to the eye of God.

Note.

Wicked men presume that their sins are secret even to God himself. They
think, sure, God can see no further, nor no better then man; And so they have
hopes to hide themselves, not only from the eyes of men, but from the eyes of
God, as we may see plainly ( Jere. 23.23.) Can any hide himself in secret
places, that I shall not see him, says the Lord; This question, can any? shows
that some had flattered themselves into such a conclusion, that they could so
hide themselves in secret places, that God could not see them. The holy
Psalmist said ( Psalm. 139.12.) The darkness hides not from thee, but the
night shines as the day, the darkness and the light to thee are both alike.
But a wicked man says, the darkness hides from thee, the night is night to
thee. O what beggarly apprehensions have men of God! As if he whose eyes are
ten thousand times brighter then the Sun, could not see without Sunlight, or
as if he could not see but in the light, who made the light. Vanus est qui
purat se in tenebris esse tutum, cum lucem vitare non possit, quae lucet in
tenebris and tenebrae eam non comprehenderunt. Ambros:
Naturalists say of those living creatures which have fiery eyes, that they can
see as well in the dark as in the light, the reason is, because they see not
by taking in the species of the object into the eye, but by sending out a light
from their own eye upon the object. God has fiery eyes indeed; he needs no
outward light to see by who is nothing else but light. Vain sinner, what can
be darkness to him, who is light, and in whom there is no darkness at all? There
is nothing does more argue the blindness of a sinner, then this simple saying of
his, No eye sees me, unless it be that simple practice of his which he uses
to the same purpose, and which is discovered (as his last shift) in the last
words of this verse.

And he disguiseth his face. The Hebrew is, He sets his face into a secret;
he muffles himself, he changes his habit, he puts on a visard; harlots were
wont to disguise themselves ( Genesis 39.14.) when Tamar took upon her the habit
of an harlot, the Text says, She put on a disguise; so here the Adulterer puts
on a disguise, he puts a cozzening face upon his face, and then thinks, that
though he be seen, yet he cannot be discerned, and that, though some may see
where he is, yet none shall see who he is, He disguiseth his face. One would
have thought that being in the twilight, and the darkness of the night ready to
compass him about, that no eye could see him, he should not need to have put
on a visard or a muffler, yet he does so, he puts a disguise upon his face.

Which may teach us* That when a man does ill, he never thinks he is safe, or
secret enough.

When a man's conscience tells him he sins, he would not have any other tell him
so too. The Adulterer fears twilight is too light for him, and therefore while
the natural darkness is so imperfect, he puts his face into perfect
artificial darkness. Job yet proceeds to show this cowardly temper of sinners
in their fear to be seen, either by a further discovery of the same sort of
sinners, or of another sort, in the same frame.

Verse. 16. In the dark they dig through houses which they have marked for
themselves in the day time, they know not the light.
We have all along the words, and the works of darkness; In the dark, they
dig through houses; The question is, who are here meant by these diggers; some
understand the verse of the adulterer; And whereas he speaks here in the
plural number, and before in the singular; it is frequent in Scripture (say
they) to vary the number while the same subject is continued. And that while he
says, They, the meaning is One and All of them are bent and apt enough to do
thus. But is digging through houses the work of an Adulterer? In answer to
this, it has been storyed and remembered, that Adulterers have used such
boisterous practices to come at their unlawful pleasures; Haec domorum
perfossia, non ad latrocinia nocturna, sed ad turpes arts penetrandi in
alienas domos manifest pertinet. Pined:
they have dug through houses to make private passages that they might not
be discovered when they came to, or when they departed from their lovers. It
has been commonly said that hunger will break through stone walls, and it is a
truth that wantonness will do so too. Some have been so mad upon their lusts,
that if they could not find a way, they would make one to meet with their
paramours. Upon this consideration we may fayrely enterpret this verse (as the
former) concerning the Adulterer.

But I rather conceive that this 16th verse contains a description of another
sort of sinners, Thieves or Robbers. Because, Ego libentius haec de latronibus
quam de Adulteris caperem; Quia hoc latrones saepe faciunt, Adulte^i non nisi
per quam raro. Sanct:
though it be true, that Adulterers do sometimes dig through houses, yet
this is both more frequently and more properly the busienes of Thieves. Another
reason to persuade this understanding of the present Text may be, because so we
have a fuller and more particular enumeration of several sorts of sin and
sinners.

In the dark they dig through houses. To dig through houses, is the work of a
theife. And thus Christ speaks of the theife ( Luke 12.39.) And this know that
if the good man of the house had known what hour the theife would have come,
he would have watched, and not have suffered his house to have been broken
through. Jacob says of Simeon and Levi (Genesis 49.6.) In their anger they dug
through a wall. Some break through walls for want, or in covetousness to rob
and steal, others for anger and in wrath to kill and destroy. They dig through
houses, Which they had marked for themselves in the day time.

See the method and cunning of these robbers; here are three points of their
sinful skill. First; they mark houses; the word signifies, to mark with a
seal; as if they did put their seal upon other men's houses for their own
use. Thieves go abroad in the day time to espy where they may commit a robbery
with best advantage, and they set their mark upon such houses as they resolve
to rob; or, which I rather take to be the meaning, they diligently observe the
strength of the house, the ways to the house, what company is in the house,
where they may with most ease and advantage break into the house. All this
they do in the day by way of preparation, and in the dark they put their
purposes into execution; In the dark they dig through houses which they had
marked in the day.

Hence note.

Sinners would make sure work, they would not miss. And therefore they either
set their mark upon a house, or exactly mark it. O how witty, and how cunning
men are to do mischief!

Secondly, Whereas they went from Town to Town, and any house they saw and
liked, they marked it for themselves.

Learn.

An unjust person makes every thing his own, if he can come by it, if he can
but get it. He says of another man's house, this is mine, I will fill my own
house with the spoil and plunder of this.

Thirdly, The theife marked houses In the day time.

He dug through them in the night, but he made use of the day; he would not
break open a house in the day, but had somewhat to do toward the breaking
open of a house in the day, he marked it in the day.

Hence note.

That time which suites not one wicked purpose, may suite another. The theife
makes use of all times, he makes use of the day to mark houses, and of the
night to dig them through. He is careful to take his time; to do the work
of the day upon the day, and the work of the night, in the night.

They know not the light. But why does Job add this? said he not before, that
they marked houses for themselves in the day? How then does he say, They know
not the light.

Knowing is not meant of a bare act of knowledge, as if they knew not when it
was light, and when it was dark, or as if they knew not the nature of light,
what kind of creature it is. But, not to know, is not to affect; They know not
the light, that is, they care not, they love not the light. In which sense
words of knowledge are often used in Scripture. ( Nah. 1.7.) The Lord knows
the soul that trusts in him. The Lord knows those that do not trust in him,
he knows those that are unbeleiveing as well as those that believe in a way of
discerning who they are; but he knows the soul that trusts in him, in a way
of loving and approveing him; Non nosse lucem est non ama^e.
so here, They know not the light, that is, they have no love to the light, no
delight in the light, they care not for the light. But it may be objected; It
should seem these men cared for the light, and liked it well, for they made
much use of it; In the day they marked houses. I answer, When Job says, They
know not the light, we may restrain it to one part of their busienes, and that
the maine, Their digging through houses; for this purpose (which was their
principal purpose) they knew not the light, that is, they neither loved nor
liked the light, darkness was more welcome to them. I shall not give any notes
from these words here, having before (especially at the 12th verse, where it is
said, They are such as rebel against the light, they know not the ways of it,
etc.) been somewhat large upon the same subject; As also because the next verse
is but a further illustration and enforcement of these words.

Verse. 17. For the morning is to them even as the shadow of death, if one know
them they are in the terrors of the shadow of death.
This verse gives a reason, why these theives took the night for their work;
or it is an exposition of what was last said, They know not the light.

The text may be read thus out of the Original, Vmbra mortis i. e. tam
terribilis ut aliquem enecare potest. Genitivus effecti. Pisc: Cum venit mane
venit umbra, dictum acute propter speciem contradictionis.
As soon as it is morning the shadow of death comes upon them. This Hebraisme
the shadow of death, has been opened at the 5th verse of the third Chapter,
whether I refer the reader. In this place, it only imports thus much in
General, That these wicked men did equally fear the morning as death it self;
they were surprised with fear, as soon as surprised with light. What is the
reason of it, why does the adulterer fear the morning, and why does the theife
fear the morning? they do so upon these three considerations.

First, Lest they should be hindered in their wicked works; secondly, lest
their wicked works should be discerned; thirdly, lest their wicked works
should be punished, for these reasons they hate the light, and the morning is
to them as the shadow of death.

Hence observe.

That good things even the best things are a trouble to wicked men. Sin makes
good things evil to us, and pleasant things troublesome to us. What a pleasant
thing is the light? How beautiful are the eyelids of the morning? yet light is
a trouble, and the morning a burden to wicked men. And if natural light be a
trouble to them, much more is moral and spiritual light. How do they hate the
morning of truth, the dawnings of divine knowledge? These lights to life, these
enlivening lights are to them as the shadow of death. In how deplorable a
condition are they to whom Good becomes evil, and that which good men rejoice
in, is to them an occasion of sorrow. The whole course of nature is out of
frame to us, till we are set into a right frame by grace. We put light for
darkness and darkness for light, till we our selves are brought out of darkness
into light. Nothing is good to us till we are made good, nor does any thing
please us, except sin or that which we use sinfully, till we please God. The
very morning (which gives a new life to all) is to some as the shadow of death.

If one know them, they are in the terrors of the shadow of death. These
words are but a further explication of the same thing, if one, that is, if any
one, man, woman, or child, as we say, know them, that is, take notice of them,
in their wickedness, or take notice of their wickedness, they are (as we say)
dead in the nest.

Cum agnoscit alius alium. Pisc:
Others render the words thus, if they know one another, that is, if only so
much of the light of the morning breaks forth, as serves them to see one
another faces, they are afraid. So this phrase is used ( Ruth 3.14.) And she
lay at his feet until the morning, and she rose up before one could know
another, that is, before there was light enough to discern each other. So
these two readings, if one know them, or if they know one another, meet in the
same General sense, their unwillingnes to be discovered at their work; if once
there be light enough for these evill-workers to see themselves by, they then
know they may also be seen by others; And if one (any one) know them: They are
in the terrors of the shadow of death.

That is, they are troubled like them, who being ready to dye, are yet
unwilling to dye; when death stands at a man's bedside, when death stands at
his back ready to attach and apprehend him, ready to carry him away, while yet
he is altogether unwilling and unready to dye, O in what a terror is he? Just
thus it is (says Job) with those wicked men, they are not only afraid to dye,
but the terrors of the shadow of death are upon them, their terror is such as
men have when death over-shaddows them; That Is the meaning of, They are in the
terrors of the shadow of death.

A shadow in Scripture is taken two ways. First, properly, for that darkness
which is caused by the interposition of a thick body, between us and the
Sun. Secondly, improperly or metaphorically, and so that is a shadow which
keeps off the heat of the Sun, or the violence of the rain and wind; and
so by a trope any thing of defense is called a shadow. ( Judge. 9.9.15.) Come
trust under my shadow (said the bramble) that is, put your selves under my
protection. And again ( Isa. 30.2, 3.) Therefore shall the strength of Pharaoh
be your shame, and the trust in the shadow (or protection) of Egypt your
confusion. So ( Isa. 49.2.) In the shadow of his hand has he hid me. And (
Isa. 51.16.) I have covered thee in the shadow of my hand, as birds cover or
shelter their young ones with their wings and feathers. Thus the Scripture
speaks of a shadow. But what is the shadow of death? It is first, the
appearance of death; secondly, the power of death. So the the meaning is (as
was touched before) they are as much terrified, as if death appeared to them,
as if the image of death passed before them in vision, or as if the power of it
had taken hold of them to bring them prisoners to the grave.

If one know them, they are in the terror of the shadow of death. I have from
the former words of this context, as also at the 12th verse taken occasion to
observe, how troublesome both the light of the Sun and the light of the mind
are to evil men, and therefore I shall not stay upon any Instructions of that
kind here.

Yet forasmuch as not only the Murderer and Adulterer, spoken of before, but
the Theife spoken of here, are all for darkness and concealment.

Observe.

First, That sinners have a secret conviction upon themselves, that what they
do is not good. They draw up their own enditement, and condemn themselves
before God does. They would rock conscience asleep, but they cannot, they
would blind it, but they cannot. This their delight in darkness, both outward
and inward, is a plain demonstration that they know their deeds are evil.
Christ says as much ( Joh. 3.20, 21.) Every one that does evil hates the
light, neither comes to the light, lest his deeds should be reproved. No man
fears his deeds will be reproved, but he that suspects at least, that his
deeds are his faults, and his actings his transgressings; for as it follows,
He that does truth (that is, who acts according to the truth) comes to the
light. He that does good, or truth indeed, yea he who is but persuaded that he
does so, cares not who sees him; some are ambitious to be seen while they do
so, and though any should be so modest that they do not desire to be seen
while they do so, yet no man that does so is affrayd to be seen; and usually
such come to the light, to the light of other men's knowledge, and they would
come further into the light of their own knowledge; such are free to come to
light of all sorts, that their deeds may be made manifest, that they are
wrought in God; when a man comes to the light, he gives a fair evidence that
his works are wrought in God, how ever it argues both that he desires they
should be such as are wrought in God, as also that he is willing they should
come to the trial, whether they are wrought in God or no, that is, whether
they be so wrought, as if God did work in him, or whether there be any
appearance in them that he has wrought them in the light and love, in the
strength and help of God. Now as when a man comes willingly to the light, it
shows that he has an honest persuasion in his breast, that his works are
good. So when we see any seeking corners and shunning the light by which others
may see them, or that light by which they may see themselves, this shows that
they have a troublesome conviction upon their consciences, that their works
are so far from being wrought in God, that they are wrought against God, that
is, against his mind and will. This, the Apostle teaches in the example of the
old Gentiles ( Romans 2.15.) They show the work of the Law written in their
hearts, their conscience bearing them witness, and their thoughts in the mean
while accusing or excusing one another. Were there not an unextinguishable
light in nature, by which even a natural man may have some glimmerings of and
discernings between good and evil, he would no more avoid the sight of others
when he does evil, then when he does good. And seeing he thus naturally
avoydes the view and sight of all men when he does evil; This does more then
intimate that there is a Judge above nature, who, without respect of persons,
will reward every man according to his works. Conscience is Gods Deputy in
man, and what that (being rightly informed) does in man, God will do too. We
are so assured by the Apostle John (1 John 3.21.) If our heart condemn us, God
is greater then our heart, and knows all things; As if he had said, this is
an argument that there is a God to condemn, because the heart condemns; For
God is greater then the heart. God is the supreme Judge, the infallible Judge,
the heart is but an under-officer unto him. Why should the heart of a man smite
him? why should he be troubled when he has done evil? why should he be so
troubled to be seen in doing evil? were it not that there is a God, who
judges both the hearts and ways of men; While the fool says in his heart
there is no God, (Psalm. 14.1.) the heart of a fool says there is a God: while
he says in his heart there is no God to see my sin, his heart says to him,
cover thy sin, that it may not be seen; and what English can we make of this
saying of his heart, but this, There is a God. For though Job spoke here of
such gross sinners as have reason enough to hide themselves and their doings
from the eyes of men, lest they should bring them both to shame and punishment,
yet even those sinners are fearful to have their sins discovered, who need
not fear any punishment but from the hand of God.

Secondly, Observe.

Sin befools the sinner, or sinners are very foolish. They are glad if they can
escape the eye of man, when as their sins are always under the eye of God.
What is the eye from which darkness can hide us, to that eye which sees
through darkness? If one see them (says the text) they are in the terrors of
the shadow of death, and yet they are not terrifyed that One sees them. That
One sees them always who is more then all men, and yet they are satisfied if
they are not seen of men. That which they would not do if a little child did
see them, they dare do though the Great God of heaven and earth see them. What
the Prophet speaks of fear in reference to suffering, we may say much more
of fear in reference to sinning, ( Isa. 51.12, 13.) Who art thou, that thou
should be afraid of a man that shall dye, and forgettest the Lord thy
Creator? Who art thou? surely thou art so far from being a Godly man, that thou
art less then a man, in this thing, even a fool, and a beast. What? do
thou fear to sin in the presence of a man, or when a man, who shall dye sees
thee, and forgettest that the Lord thy maker sees thee? that he sees thee who
has stretched forth the heavens, and laid the foundations of the earth. Well
might the Apostle (2 These. 3.2.) join these two together, unreasonable and
wicked men, and give the reason of both in the words which follow, for all men
have not faith. Where there is no faith, there is much wickedness, and he who
is much in wickedness, is nothing in reason. Faith is above reason, but not
against it; wickedness is not only below reason, but quite against it. They
who act against that rule which is given by God to man, act also against that
reason which is given by God to man. No man acts so much against faith, as he
who does not believe that God sees him in all his actings, nor does any man
act more against reason, then he who believes that God sees him, and yet is
more afraid to be seen of men, then he is to be seen of God.

JOB, CHAP. 24. Verse. 18. He is swift as the waters, his portion is Cursed in
the earth: he beholds not the way of the Vineyards.


THere are four Apprehensions concerning the general scope of these words.

First, Job is conceived here describing a fourth sort of wicked men, or the
same men acting a fourth sort of wickedness; for having (as has been showed
from the former words) first drawn out the doings of the murderer, and
secondly, of the Adulterer, and thirdly, of the theife at land digging through
houses, he in the fourth place (as some Interpret the text) proceeds to
discover the Pyrate, who is a theife upon the water, a Sea-theife; He is swift
as the waters, or, he is swift upon the waters: The letter of the Hebrew, is,
He is swift upon the faces of the waters, he moves in, and upon all waters. It
is usual in Scripture to call the outward part of any thing, the face of it,
as the face of the heavens, is that part of the heavens which does outwardly
appear to us, or is next to our eye. O ye hypocrites (says Christ, Math.
16.3.) ye can discern the face of the sky. So the face of the earth is the
superficies, or upper part of the earth, and the face of the waters, is the
upper part of the waters. The word in the text is plural, faces, he is swift
upon the faces of the water; that is, when he has murtherd, committed
Adultery, and robbed at land, when the Earth is weary of him, then he betakes
himself to the Sea, and turns Pyrate. There is a truth in this, Velociter
man^ se ad mare recipient. Vatab: Levis est ad n^tandum sive remigandu^ super
faciens aquae. Targ:
some men make such a progress in wickedness; they try all trades of sin upon
the earth, and then trade sinfully upon the water, defileing both earth and
water, both sea and shore, polluting all the Elements with their abominations.
And in pursuance of this exposition the two other Clauses of the verse are thus
expounded, Their portion is Cursed in the earth, that is, they who live at land
Curse them when they are gone to Sea, fearing lest they should take their
ships, and spoil them of their goods by pyracy. And then, he beholds not the
way of the vineyards, that is, he will come no more on shore, he will not live
at land: vineyards by a synecdoche of the part for the whole being put for any
kind of home or land possession, of which vineyards (in many places) are the
chief; he who lived by dressing and planting the earth, now takes another
course of life, he beholds not the way of the vineyards; he will labor no
more in a Country life, he will not get his liveing by the sweat of his face,
but by the face of the waters. What cares he to get wine by dressing of
vineyards, when he can get whole Shiploads of wine upon the waters. And having
got a smatch of the sweetness of robbing at Sea, he will work no more aland. We
have too much experience of it, that when a man has once given himself up to
stealing, he cannot abide laboring. He is better pleased with an easy life
that is sinful, then with an honest life that is painful; and because ease
pleases him more then honesty, therefore he will not behold the way of the
vineyards, nor the way of the Corn feilds, nor of the pasture grounds, Ad
piratas refer divinare est ex proprio cerebro, cum hic tantum de
infes^^toribus ag^orum mentio fiat, non navium aut maris. Pined:
for all these are ways of labor. But I shall not Insist upon this
Interpretation, it may suffice only to name it. And though, as to the thing it
self, as also to the practice of many, this be a truth, yet it is scarsely
probable, that Job had that practice in his eye.

Secondly, We may here conceave, that Job is describing the miserable and
unsettled Condition of the murderer, of the Adulterer, and of the Theife; he
is swift upon the waters, or, swift as the waters (say we) Mr Broughton
renders, He is lighter then the face of the waters. The Hebrew particle serves
either reading, as, or upon; He is swift, or light upon the face of the waters,
that is, he is as a light thing that swimmeth upon the face of the waters;
light things swim there, things which are of no worth, of no price, as strawes,
or chips, or feathers, or the foame (which is light and hoven) swim upon the
face of the water. Mr Broughton translates thus; He is lighter then the face of
the waters. The sense is the same, for as those things which swim upon the face
of the waters are light, so also is the face of the waters. Every blast or
puff of wind moves and tosseth up the face of the waters.

Levitas pro velocitate sumitur, leve enim facile movetur and quod facile
movetur velox est.
He is swift, or, light upon the face of the waters. The Hebrew word which we
render, swift, in our translation signifies also light; because those things
that are swift in motion, are light; we say of one that is slow paced, he is
heavy heel'd, and that he is a heavy man or that a heavy beast which is slow
of foot; all swift things are light. The meaning of this Interpretation is,
that a wicked man is a Contemptible Creature; what is he when he has done all
those mischiefs before specifyed and walked to wearynes in all those sinful
ways? Proverbialis loquutio ad exprimendum aliquid quod flocci penditur and
fere nihil est. Bold. Leves erunt ut res quae super aquas natant, fluctuabunt
abibant, diffluent.
The best account which we can give of him is this; He is light, or as a light
thing, upon the face of the water; which is a Proverbiall speech to Express
that which is nothing worth. Thus the destruction of the King of Samaria is
expressed ( Hos: 10.7.) As for Samaria, her King is cut off as the foame upon
the water, or (as the Margin has it) upon the face of the water, that is,
though he be a great King, yet he shall perish as a very light, and
contemptible thing, even as a little foame and froth, or as a buble upon the
water.

Hence observe.

Wickedness makes men Contemptible and vile, they are but as light things upon
the water. In the 21th of this book ( v. 18.) the wicked are said to be as
stubble before the fire, and as Chaff before the whirle-winde. So ( David,
Psalm. 1.4.) speaking of the wicked in general, says, They are like the chafe
which the wind drives away. Stubble and chafe are light things, and they are
also worthles things; what is the stubble worth, or what the chafe? What is the
chafe to the wheat? such are wicked men in comparison of the Godly. The
Scripture does even strive for Expressions (as I may say) to set forth the
lightness, the vanity, Indeed, the nullity, the nonentity, the nothingnes of
men given up to their lusts. David (Psalm. 62.9.) speaking of them who trust in
oppression, and become vain in robbery, says, they are vanity and a lie, and
that to be laid in the balance, they are altogether lighter then vanity. And
Solomon putting the tongue of a Godly man, and the heart of a wicked man
together into the balance, gives this determination between them ( Pro.
10.20.) The tongue of the just is as choice silver, but the heart of the wicked
is little worth. The heart is there taken in the highest sense, for the best
thing that the wicked man has; for though where the heart is naught, it is the
worst thing that a man has, yet the sense of the proverb is to show that the
best thing that a wicked man has is of little worth, and therefore the
instance is made in that which he accounts his chiefest treasure, his heart;
for by the heart, all that man has within him, all the powers and faculties of
the soul, with their best and richest furniture are understood; all these
says Solomon in a wicked man are little worth; so that take him at his best,
and in his best, he is but trash, or as a trifle. Sin is a reproach both to
persons and nations, as honor is a man's weight in the esteem of others, so
reproach abates his weight, and makes him light upon the balance. Since thou
wast precious in mine eyes, thou wast honorable, says God ( Isa. 43.4.)
holiness adds honor and weight to our persons; sin makes us light, and then we
are lightest, when we make light of sin; sin is a weight that presses us
down, yet they who sin most, weigh least in the esteem of God and of all good
men. Sin will quickly sink the soul like lead under water, even to the
bottom of the water, yet the sinner is as a light thing that swims upon the
top or face of the water. This is a profitable sense of the words.

Thirdly, Others expound these words, as a description of the wicked man's
shifting and running from place to place for fear of pursuers; or that being
conscious to himself; or selfe-condemned in his own conscience, he is as the
Lord threatened Cain (Genesis 4.14.) a fugitive and a vagabond upon the earth:
swift as the waters of a stream, which glide along and never stay in one
place; or he is upon the earth as a light thing upon the waters, continually
moved and tossed up and down. But I pass from this. And conclude

Fourthly, That we may rather understand these words as a description of the
spirit and temper of a wicked man in reference to his sinful actings, or the
fulfilling of his lusts; He is swift or light as the water, or, as the light
things upon the water, that is, he is a man very unsettled, he is hurryed to
and fro, there is no stability either in his ways, or in his spirit; He abides
not in one place, nor does he abide in one mind. He is full of Inconstancy, he
is constant in nothing but in his unconstancy: and it must needs be so if we
Consider,

First, his lusts within. How can he but be swift as the water, who has such
winds blowing and striving in him. A carnal man is hurryed with storms and
tempests rising in his own mind: as the wind tosseth and rolleth the waters
of the Sea or light things upon the water, so the lusts of evil men toss and
tumble them up and down. Pride tosseth some, and Covetousness tosseth others,
luxury and wantonness toss thousands into a thousand vanities, and sinful
ways, as the winds toss the waves of the Sea; Lusts are strong and
boisterous, lusts are many and numerous, he that serves any one of them is a
slave to them all, and must go upon their errand whethersoever they will send
or rather hurry him.

Secondly, Carnal men must needs be swift as the water, or light upon the
water, very unconstant and unsettled if we Consider the temptations that blow
upon them from without. For though our own lusts are temptations, and every
man (as the Apostle James says, Chapter 1.14.) is tempted when he is drawn
away of his own lust, and enticed, yet our lusts also are tempted, or our
lusts are drawn away and enticed by temptation. Man is apt enough to sin of
himself alone, if once God leave him, but he is seldom left to himself alone
to sin by the Devil; and most usually he is tempted with a kind of violence
unto sin; his lusts (which are a fire) are blown and kindled by Satan's
breath, and he is driven to do evil by vehement blasts of temptation.
Temptations blow upon Saints, they blow strongly upon them; Satan breathes out
a mighty wind to make them swift as the water unto sin; but they have received
a power to resist and stand fast. They are founded upon the rock Jesus Christ;
Though the wind moves the water, yet it cannot move the rock: they that are
founded upon Christ, are (in their proporion) firm as Christ himself is
firm. It Is true, Saints are many times grievously shaken with temptations; but
the wicked are tossed and overwhelmed by them. They are swift as the water, or
as the lightest thing upon the face of the waters, when strongly moved by
temptation. Dying Jacob called Reuben, his firstborn, unstable as water (Genesis
49.4.) though we will not number him among the wicked, yet he did a very
wicked act, and in reference to that, though he was a great man, and a
Patriarch, the head of the Tribe, yet (in reference to that act) he received
this Character, unstable as water. And if he was so unstable when hurryed by
passion and temptation, how much more are mere wicked men so, when they meet
with such temptations. For as they are not fixed in any thing that is good, as
was touched at the 13^h verse, They know not the ways of light, nor do they
abide in the paths of it (if at any time they stumble upon the doing of that
which is right, yet they abide not in the doing of it; they are light as the
water, unstable and unsettled in all good ways) So though they are fixed (as to
the subject) in doing that which is evil, yet they are extremely tossed and
swiftly moved, both to and in and after the doing of it.

Again, As this similitude implies The easines of evil men to be moved by
temptation unto sin, even as easily as water, or the lightest things upon the
face of the water are moved by the wind. So it implies also their speedyness
and activity in sinning. The water moves swiftly, sinners are like swift ships
upon the water, they make speed to do evil, or to trade upon any forbidden
coast, but they are very sluggs to any thing that is good, or to trade upon any
coast where they are bidden. A learned Interpreter insists much upon the
emphasis of this Expression, to show not only the swiftnes, but the feircenes
of a wicked man's spirit in sinning, he is swift upon the face of those waters,
and is carried on with full sails in sinning; he runs so swiftly and treads
so lightly, that he might run even upon the surface of the water and not sink.
Those creatures which are very swift, leave little Impression behind them;
they that go slowly, tread heavy, and unless they be upon firm land, fall
in. It is said in the 8th of Daniel (v. 5th) Concerning the hee-goate (who
represented Alexander the Great) That he touched not the ground. Alexander was
extreme swift in his Conquests, he Conquered the world in as little time as
another could have traveld over it. His motto was, Without delay; or, I do all
by making no delay; He was swift upon the face of the earth. De facilitate
peccandi atque velocitate ad castandu^, quamcu^que sceleris occasionem
intelligi posse videtur. Tam leviter in terra figunt pedem, ut etiam super
aquas incedere pass videantur. Sanct:
Thus wicked men are light upon the face of the water, that is, they are swift
and fierce for the attayning of their sinful ends, they run as nimbly at it,
as if they could run upon the top of a corn field, and never press a straw,
or as if they could run upon the water, and never wet their feet. By which
hyperbolies the ancient Poets used to express the greatest celerity of motion.
We have a proverbiall saying among us, which reaches this swiftnes of a
wicked man in sin; He (say we) must needs run whom the Devil drives. There is
no doubt but evil men are Divel-driven, yea Divel-ridden, he rides them with
whip and spur to the doing of his black work, and therefore no wonder, if
they are so swift and make such have about it. That they make have to do it is
too visible, and that they make more have then good speed is as visible. For
while they make have to sin, they make have also to the curse. As it follows in
the next words.

Their portion is cursed in the earth. Job spoke in the singular number before,
but here in the plural, He is swift etc. Their portion etc. His meaning (I
conceave) may be this; That, look how many soever they be of them that are
thus swift to sin, there is not one of them shall be able to outrun the curse.
They are swift as the water to do evil, but the curse will be as swift as the
wind to make them miserable.

Their portion is cursed. The word signifies any thing which falls to a man of
right, (...) pars porti^, possessio.
or is bestowed upon him for his lot or share.

First, that part or portion, which comes by way of Inheritance, is so
expressed ( Genesis 31.14. Deuteronomy. 12.12.) The Inheritance that a father gives his
son is his portion.

Secondly, It signifies that part, share, or lot of food, which is given out to
any man for his daily provision. ( Deuteronomy. 18.8.)

Thirdly, It notes that which is given to the poor by way of alms ( Eccl:
11.2.) Give a portion to seven, and also to eight; (that is, give to many) for
thou know not what evil shall be upon the earth. It is used also for a
share, or distribution of the spoil to each Soldier after a victory ( Genesis
14.24.) Aner, Eshcol, and Mamre, let them take their portion, said Abram to the
King of Sodom, after he had rescued his Brother Lot and the captivated Kings.
In this place the word is taken in the largest sense, as comprehending
whatsoever they could call theirs, or was any way belonging to them; So that
when Job says, their portion is Cursed, his meaning is, all that they have is
cursed. As they have sinned in all they did, so they are cursed in all they
have. The Grace of God in the Gospel is compared to leven ( Math. 13.33.) which
a woman took and hid in three pecks of meal, till the whole was levened. As
the Grace of God both in regenerating and comforting runs through the whole
man, Pulchra est in Hebraeo paranomasia vocu^ conjugatorum nam levis and
maledictus ab eadem radice (...) oriuntur. Levificatio est maledictio. Pineds:
so the curse of God like leven sowres the whole lump of man, it runs through
all that a man is or has.

Their portion is cursed. There is an Elegant paranomasia in the Hebrew between
these two words in the text, swift or light, and Cursed; They being both
represented by one radical word, and the reason of it is, because those things
that are light, or contemptible, are Cursed, or in a Cursed Condition. They
that honor me (says the Lord, 1 Samuel 2.30.) I will honor, but they that
despise me shall be lightly esteemed, or, they shall be cursed. There the same
word is used in the Original, which in the present text, we translate cursed.
To curse a man is to slight him to the utmost, and we never esteem so lightly
or basely of any thing or person, as when we curse either the one or the other.

Their portion is Cursed in the earth. Maledicere est leviter de aliquo sentire
levibus acerbisque scommatibus aliquum proscindere.
But by whom are they cursed? or who curses them? I may answer, They are cursed
both by God and man. As if Job had said, their doeings have been such upon the
earth, that, first, all men curse them, and secondly, God curses them. Some
are cursed by men, and yet God blesses them, others are blessed or highly
esteemed by men, yet God curses them. But these men are such who as they
please not God, so they are contrary to all men (as the Apostle spoke of some,
1 These. 2.15.) and therefore God and man join in their curse. Their portion is
cursed In the earth.

That is, in all their earthly concernments, or they are cursed even here while
they are upon the earth, where they think themselves, and where, possibly,
some others think them also, most blessed. For though they have gotten much in
the earth, or of earthly things, yet all they have gotten is cursed, and
therefore all that they have is cursed, for they have got nothing beyond the
earth.

Again, These words may be read by way of Imprecation (we read them by way of
assertion) let their portion be cursed in the earth; Like that ( Psalm. 109.8,
9, 10, 11.) Let his days be few, and let another take his office, let his
children be fatherless, etc. Appareant plantae eorum super terra^ aridae. i.
e. cum conseverint agros suos non gerimnet terra.
Some of the Ancients make the Paraphrase thus; Let the roots of what they sow
or plant appear bare in the earth; when the root of a tree, or the roots of
corn appear above ground, both tree and corn must needs wither, for want of
moisture. For as the earth feeds the root, so the root feeds the stock, and
the stock the branches. That is a cursed tree which bears no fruit according
to its kind, and that tree whose root is not suckled by the earth can bear
no fruit. Every wicked man is either cursed in not bringing forth fruit, or
else the fruit which he brings forth is cursed. And therefore Their portion is
(every way) cursed in the earth.

There is yet another Interpretation of these words, which I shall but briefly
touch and pass on. Their portion is Cursed in the Earth, that is, the Region,
or place where they dwell is Cursed; They dwell in desolate places, or they
skulke up and down in deserts and wildernesses, having done so much mischief
among men that they dare not show their faces where they are known. Now,
deserts and desolate places may justly be called Cursed places, because of
their barrennes, for barrennes is the Curse which God laid upon the earth for
the sin of man ( Genesis 4.17.) As a fruitful Land may be called a blessed Land,
because the blessing of God makes a Land fruitful ( Isaac said to his Son
Jacob (Genesis 27.27.) The smell of my Son is as the smell of a field which the
Lord has blessed; that is, as the smell of a fruitful field) So it may be said
that the earth or land where a man lives, Describit quomodo sese gereresoleant:
ut suae maleficia co^modius tegant eligunt sibi sed^s in vastis locis; unde
dicit, nec se convertit ad vias vinearum quia vineae in locis cultis sitae sunt
non procul ab urbibus. Merc:
and his portion in it is cursed while he lives in a barren desolate land,
which looks as if it were under the perpetual curse of God. And according to
this interpretation, the later part of the verse (and he beholds not the way
of the vineyards) may be thus understood; He comes not into any fruitful
fields; Vineyards are planted in a fruitful soil, and fruitful vines are
full of the blessing of God. Thus as the portion of the wicked in the earth is
always cursed, by a decree from God, so it may be said that their portion is
sometimes cursed by their own Election, because for the better secreting and
hiding of themselves from the eye of Justice, they spend their days in such
places as by reason of their wastnes, and barrennes seem to confess
themselves under a curse. Their portion is cursed in the earth.

Hence note.

First, Sin brings a Curse with it.

When J^b had described the wickedness of these men, their murders, their
adulteries, and their thefts, he concludes, Their portion is Cursed. Sin
calls for a Curse from men, and it calls for a Curse from God. Solomon
says ( Pro. 12.26.) He that withholdeth Corn (that is, who hoards it up and
will not sell it at a reasonable rate, resolving to make a dearth when God has
made none, he who thus withholdeth Corn) the people will curse him. Now if the
people curse him that will not let them have corn for money, then much more
him that steals or takes away their corn without money. He that destroys
other men's goods, gets a Curse in stead of good. Eliphaz says ( Chap. 5.3.) I
have seen the foolish taking root, but suddenly I Cursed his habitation, that
is, I saw his habitation was Cursed, or under a curse, I knew what would become
of him shortly. In some Cases it may be lawful for man to wish a Curse upon
man, and the Curse of man may be the Curse of God too; and usually it is so,
when any man is generally cursed by men. Vox populi vox dei.
The voice of the people is the voice of God. When a man is followed with a
Curse from the most of men good and bad, it is an argument that there is a
Curse gone out from God against him; and that his portion is Cursed in the
earth. Sin is the deserving or procuring Cause, and the wrath of God is the
inflicting or productive Cause of the Curse. Balaak hired Balaam to Curse the
people of God, but the Curse could not take, the train was laid, but he could
not make the powder take fire, the Curse came not, why? the reason is given,
yea Balaam himself gives it ( Numb. 23.21.) He (that is, God) has not beheld
Iniquity in Jacob, neither has he seen perverseness in Israel. If there had
been iniquity, that is, any national iniquity or public iniquity, persisted
in and not repented of among them, that had brought the Curse inevitably; but
though Balaam labored to Curse them, though he went from hill to hill, and
tried all means to get an opportunity to Curse them, yet he could not, for
(says he) God has blessed them, and I cannot reverse it. There is no Iniquity
in Jacob, nor perverseness in Israel, therefore their portion was blessed in the
Earth. Sin in whomsoever it is has a Curse in the belly or bowels of it. Even
Christ himself taking our sin upon him, was necessitated to take the Curse
upon him which was due to our sin; Christ taking our sin upon him, was (as the
Apostle says, 2 Cor. 5.21.) made sin for us, that is, an offering or a
sacrifice for our sin, yea as the same Apostle says ( Gal. 3.13.) He was
therefore made a Curse for us. And if Christ who (having no sin in him) did
only take our sin upon him, could not avoid the curse, how shall they avoid
it, who (having no part in Christ) have all manner of sin in them?

But it may be objected, All men sin, and yet many have no appearance of a
Curse upon them, nor is their portion Cursed in the earth?

I answer, First, This assertion is to be limited to unbeleevers or ungodly
men. Secondly, unbeleevers and ungodly men are under a Curse, though the Curse
do not break out and appear visibly upon them. As the portion of a godly man
may be blessed, though there be no appearance of the blessing; when nothing
appears upon him but affliction and the Cross, yet the Godly man is blessed.
The Cross of a Godly man is like the prosperity of a wicked man. The former
has an outward Cross, but a Blessing at the bottom; the latter has outward
prosperity, but a curse at the bottom, and bitterness in the end. Again, the
peace of the profane, is like the grace of hypocrites, only a show;
hypocrites have a show of grace, an appearance of holiness, yet they are but
painted Sepulchers, full of rottennes within; So the wicked have a show of
peace and prosperity, of benefits and blessings, but a curse is within them,
and a curse hangs over them, ready every moment to drop down upon their heads.
For

Secondly, His portion is cursed, that is, it is under a curse, though the curse
be not actually inflicted. As the mercies of God are sure to his people, yet
many times very slow, they come not presently, but they will come. So also the
wrath and curse of God will surely come upon the wicked, though, as to outward
effects and impressions, they are slow and long in coming. Actings of mercy
are for an appointed time; Every vision is for an appointed time (as the Lord
told his Prophet, Hab. 2.3.) The vision of Judgment and wrath is for an
appointed time, as well as the vision of love and mercy; That is, all the love,
and all the wrath, the blessing, and the curse, which are revealed, (in any way
of vision, are for an appointed time) but at the end the vision will speak and
not lie; if it tarry, wait for it, for it will surely come, and not tarry. As
it is (I say) in the visions of mercy and blessing, so in those of wrath, and
of the curse; They are for an appointed time, in the end they will speak.
Sometimes the Curse is quick, it apprehends the sinner in the very act, it
takes him in the manner, as Phineas did Zimri and Cozbi. And as ( Psalm. 78.30.)
While their meat was yet in their mouths, the wrath of God came upon them.
The sound of the Curse is sometimes at the heels of sin, at other times the
sound of the Curse is a great way behind the sin, no sight nor sound of the
curse for a long time. As, light is sown for the righteous (Psalm. 97.11.) that
is, They shall have a crop of good things, though it lie, as seed does, a great
while under the clods, and as dead in the furrows; So darkness is sown for
the wicked, they perceive it not yet, but they shall be wrapped up in it for
ever; yea while they perceive it not, they are in it, and they are by so much
the more in it, by how much the less they perceive it. For, this is ever true;
The portion of the wicked is Cursed in the Earth, though they seem compassed
about with blessings. I will Curse your blessings, says the Lord, ( Mala.
2.2.) yea I have cursed them already. The wicked may be rich, and yet cursed,
honorable, and yet cursed, successful in busienes, and yet cursed, blessed,
and yet cursed, God does curse their blessings. That which is a blessing in the
kind and matter of it, is to some a curse in the use and issue of it. So then,
as, godlynes is profitable for all things, and has the promise of this life as
well as of that which is to come (1 Timothy 4.8.) Godlynes is compassed about and
clothed with promises of all sorts and seasons. So ungodlynes is unprofitable
for all things, and makes him that is so, miserable in all things. For it has
the curse of this life, and of that which is to come; if the promise do not
meet a godly man in this life, or in the things of this life, yet it will in
the life to come, and in the things of the life to come, yea in all things so
far as concerns the life to come, the blessing always meets him. And if
the curse do not meet a wicked man in this life, yet it will in the life to
come, and in the things of the life to come, yea in all things so far as
concerns the life to come, The curse always meets him.

Then see the folly of those, who fear the Curse, and are not afraid of sin;
as if a man should fear drowning, and yet cast himself into the water, or
fear burning, and yet throw himself into the fire; thus do they who love
sin, and fear the curse. If the beauty of holiness does not take upon the
heart, yet the curse that attends sin may deter from meddling with it. And did
men know the terror of the Lord, (as the Apostle speaks, 2 Cor. 5.11.) they
would easily be persuaded to take heed of sin, even of every sin, for though
usually great sins bring the curse, yet the least sins may. They who know what
the curse of the Lord is, cannot but know what the terror of the Lord is, that
is, that the Lord is (to sinners) very terrible. For the curse of the Lord
abiding upon a sinner, makes him every way and always miserable. There needs
no more to be said to prove a man miserable then this, that his portion is
cursed, or that he is under the curse. For as the blessing of God makes us
happy with any portion, that is enough, the blessing being it self the best and
most abundant portion (Every good thing is vertually in the blessing) so the
Curse is vertually every evil thing; therefore that must needs make a man
miserable. When the Lord blesses, it is not an empty word, but a power goes
with it to make a man blessed; And when the Lord curses, it is not an empty
word, but a power goes with it, to make a man's portion cursed in the earth. Job
having laid down this position, gives a proof of it in the last words of the
verse.

He beholds not the way of the vineyards. Some read these (as the former)
words, Cohaerebit cum superioribus si haec sit quasi praecedentis expositio
imprecationis. Nullam habeat impius partem in agris locisque frugiferis, ex
quibus ullum fructum percipere possit. Pined:
by way of imprecation; Let his portion be cursed in the earth, and let him not
behold the way of the vineyards. We translate assertively, He beholds not,
etc.

But what is meant here by not beholding? is it only this, he comes not
within the view or sight of them? I conceave there is more in it then so, and
that when Job says, he beholds not, his meaning is, he enjoys vineyards no
more, or he dwells no more in a fruitful and pleasant land, such as that
land is which abounds in vineyards, and so consequently with wine, but he
shall live miserably in a barren soil. So that we may now interrogate wicked
men, whether murderers, Adulterers, or thieves (as Paul does every sinner,
Romans 6.21.) What fruit have ye of those things, whereof ye are (or ought to be)
ashamed? have ye any fruit of the vine? surely no, For such behold not the way
of the vineyards. To behold is to enjoy the pleasantnes, to taste the sweetness
of the fruit of the vineyards. Wine which is the fruit of the vineyard is
pleasant and delightful, it makes glad the heart of man ( Psalm. 104.15.) And
vineyards are here named to signify all sorts of outward good things, they
being the Chief of outward good things: For as sometimes bread signifies all
outward good things, because that strengthens man's heart; so Wine, because that
cheareth and comfort the heart of man. So that when Job says, He shall not
behold the way of the vineyards; It is as if he had said, He shall not taste of
or enjoy any good thing. For

Again, Those words, he heholdeth not etc. are not to be understood as if he
did voluntarily refuse to behold, or cared not to behold the way of the
vineyards, but as implying a force or constraint upon him, by which he was kept
or hindered from looking that way.

Whence take this brief note.

The loss of good is a great misery as well as the enduring of evil. It has
been questioned which is greater, the punishment of loss, or the punishment of
pain; but without all question, loss is a very great punishment; not to
behold the way of the vineyards, not to return to house and land, to wife and
children, is a sore affliction. What will it then be never to behold the face
of God, but to be under a sentence of eternal banishment from his presence. His
portion is cursed in the earth, here in this world, who beholds not the way
of the vineyards, how then is his portion cursed in the next world, who shall
never behold the path or way of life?

There are yet several other readings and expositions of these words.

Abstinebit a via regia et freque^tia hominum ne cognoscatur. Vatabl: ita
festinat fugere, ut ne proprias quidem vineas olim tam gratas aspiciat. Isidor:
First, As if the meaning were to show the wicked man's fear of being seen,
because of his guilt, and that therefore he would not behold or come near the
way of the vineyards, that is, those places which many people have occasion to
frequent.

Secondly, As if Job would here show what have men make to escape who are under
guilt; As if he had said, The wicked man will be so set upon the run, That he
will not stay so much as to view or behold his own vineyards, formerly so
delightful and pleasant to him.

Thirdly, It is conceaved to be a proverbiall speech, according to which it was
ironically said of Malefactors who were led forth to suffer death, They Behold
not the way of the vineyards; No they behold only the way to the Gibbet or
place of execution.

Fourthly, Others divide the word Cheramim, which we translate, Non refluet,
secundum consuetudinem Aliqrum, ru^t.
vineyards into two; that is, into Chi, a particle of similitude or likeness,
and Ramim which signifyes, either pers^ns, or things that are high. Hence
Junius translates, He shall not return or flow back again, he shall fall
after the manner of things that are high. And he expounds the sense of his own
translation; He shall not return to his former state, as waters do which ebb
and flow; but as waters which fall from a high place cannot go back, so shall
he remain cast down for ever. Water being a heavy body must have a descent,
it cannot ascend naturally, therefore the water that falls from a high place is
gone, and comes not again. The wicked man perishes, as waters that flow
from a high place and return no more.

Another following that division of the word, renders the clause, Non prospicit
incessum sicut excelsorum, i. e. non curabit incedere eo modo, quo solent in
cedere illi qui dignitate vel potentia alijs praesunt. Bold:
thus; He does not look to (or provide for) his way or his going, as of the
High ones; that is, he shall never go in that pomp or equipage, in which they
go who are above others in power and dignity. As if he had said, he shall
ever live in a low, mean, and miserable condition; He shall no more behold
the way of the high while he lives; nor (which the same Author cleaves to as
the most genuine interpretation) shall he take care or provide to be buried
according to the way, custom, or manner of the high ones when he dies.

But, I shall not insist upon either of these rendrings, though they all fall
into one common channel with the former, which is to set forth that the wicked
man is under a curse, or that his portion is cursed in the earth, yea, that a
curse is his portion. Nor shall I (having often observed from other texts of
this book the woeful end of wicked men, for this reason, I say, I shall not)
stay to give any further observations from this clause, according to any of the
rendrings of it: of all which I most embrace that of our own translaters, He
shall not behold the way of the vineyards, not only because most of the
learned Hebricians render it so, but first, because it makes no division of,
nor puts any strain at all upon any of the Original words in the text; And
secondly, because it carries (to my thoughts) so fair a correspondence with
the words which follow in the two next verses.

JOB, CHAP. 24, Verse. 19, 20. Drought and heat, consume the snow waters, so
does the grave these which have sinned.

The womb shall forget him, and the worm shall feed sweetly on him; he shall
be no more remembered, and wickedness shall be broken as a tree.


THere are two different translations of the 19th verse; I shall propose them,
and then explicate our own.

First, thus; In the drought and heat they rob, and in the snow water, they
sin to the grave.

Secondly, (to the same sense by way of similitude) like as the dry earth and
heat drink up the snow water, so they sin even to the grave.

Both these rendrings carry in them two things generally remarkable.

First, The obstinacy, and perseverance of wicked men in sin while they live.

Secondly, Their impunity in sin until death.

In the drought and heat they rob, and in the snow water. That is, they rob
and spoil at all times, or in all the seasons of the year, in hard times, in
the hardest times, in the extremity of drought, and in the extremity of cold,
They never give over, they sin to the grave. This reading is much insisted upon
by some, and as the sense is useful, (...) rapuit vi and aperte res aut
personas.
so the text may bear it. For the verb signifies to snatch a thing openly, and
forceably, as well as to consume secretly, and so may be rendered by robbing, as
well as by consuming.

In drought and heat they rob, and in the snow waters. First, We may consider
this drought and heat with the snow water as expressing those seasons which
are very troublesome to the wicked man, to do his work in, to rob, and
spoil: extreme heat, and extreme cold, are great impediments to action, yet
in heat and snow they rob.

Whence observe.

A wicked man will break through all difficulties, to find a way to his
beloved sin. Though he be in danger of melting with heat, or of freezing with
cold, yet he will rob, or do any other mischief that his heart is set upon:
neither heat, nor cold, neither wett, or dry, shall keep him in, yea though
an Angel with a drawn sword in his hand stand in his way (as in the way of
Balaam) yet, when he has a mind, he will go on. We may say of every bold and
presumptuous sinner, that he sins in heat, and cold, he sins in the sight of
wrath and death. The threatenings (which are the portion of such) have the
extremity of heat and cold in them; The threatenings have sword and fire in
them, wrath and death in them, yet the wicked sin in the face of them, and
(upon the m^^ter) dare them to do their worst. A godly man, whose heart is
bent and set heavenward, will walk on his way, though he must pass through
heat, and cold, though he meet with dangers, and difficulties, though he
meet many Lions in his way, yet he will not turn out of his way. Paul says
of himself and his fellow laborers (2 Cor. 6.4.) In all things approving our
selves as the Ministers of God, in much patience, in afflictions, in
necessities, in distresses, in stripes, in imprisonments, etc. And a little
after ( v. 8.) By honor, and dishonor, by evil report, and good report, etc.
Here was working in heat and cold, in fire and frost, in all sorts of
providence from God, in all sorts of aspects from men. Paul and his
colleagues, never minded what men did to them, but what the mind of God was
they should do. And thus every godly man works, or does the work of God. For
though every Godly man attaines not to such a degree of zeal and holy courage
as Paul had; yet he has a truth of zeal and holy courage which will
(according to his measure) carry him through a world of evils and
encumbrances, to the doing of that good, which duty and conscience, or the
conscience of his duty calls him to. Now as Godly men labor to approve
themselves the Ministers or servants of God, so ungodly men will approve
themselves the servants of sin in much patience, in afflictions, in
necessities, and in distresses; they will run all hazzards, and venture through
all extreamities, rather then leave the law of a lust unfulfilled. The Lord put
the Jews to much suffering for their sins, yet sin they would; Why should ye
be stricken any more, (says he, Isa. 1.5.) Ye will revolt more and more; while
I have been striking, ye have been revolting. The same pertinacy is complained
of ( Isa. 57.17.) I smote him, and was wrath, yet he went on frowardly in the
way of his heart; that is, in a sinful way. The heart of man knows no other
way, till himself is formed after the heart of God, and in that sinful way he
will go, though God make his heart ache as he goes, I smote him, and was wroth,
yet he went on, etc.

In drought and heat they rob, and in the snow water. Again, we may take
drought, heat, and snow water, not only as importing their sufferings while
they were doing in such times, but also as importing the several seasons of
time, as if he had said, they will sin both winter and summer, that is,
continually: we say of some, they are never well neither full nor fasting: As
full and fasting imply all the conditions of man, so hot and cold, summer and
winter, imply all divisions of time.

Hence note.

Evil men will do evil always. Sinning time is never out with them, they
do not sin by fits or starts, in an ill mood only, or through a stresse of
temptation, but they sin from a principle within, they have a spring of
wickedness within, and that will ever be sending and flowing out. A good man may
be overtaken with sin at any time, but he does not sin at all times, in winter,
and summer, in heat, and cold. Corruption will be working where Grace is, but
where Grace is not, nothing works but corruption. If wicked men be not doing
evil in every moment of time, it is not because they at any time would not do
evil, but because at all times they cannot; And therefore the translation now
underhand speaks of their whole life as one continued act of sin.

They sin to the grave. That is, till they dye, and so are carried out to the
grave. So that this manner of speaking, They sin to the Grave, signifyes the
utmost perseverance of wicked men in sinning; as if it had not been enough to
say, they sin in heat, and cold, winter, and summer, but they sin out the last
inch of time, even till they come to the graves mouth.

Whence Note.

Wicked men will not cease to sin while they continue to live. The Apostle
Peter (2 Pet. 2.14.) says of that generation, who have eyes full of adultery,
and that cannot cease from sin, sin is their nature, it is not what they have
acquired, but what is implanted in them, and borne with them. And because sin
is natural to them, therefore they cannot get it off until their nature is
changed. And hence it is that conversion or regeneration is the change of our
nature as well as of our actions. A man unregenerate sins as naturally as he
lives: he sins as naturally as he sees or hears, or exercises any of those
natural faculties, so naturally does he sin, and therefore he sins to the
grave. And this is a rational demonstration of the Justice of God in awarding
eternal punishment for sin committed in time, or in a short time, (the whole
time of a man's life, in which sin is committed, is but a short time, a nothing
to eternity) wherein sin shall be punished. This, I say, is a demonstration of
the Justice of God in punishing wicked men) because if they could have lived to
eternity, they would have done evil to eternity, they do evil as they can,
and as long as they can. Seeing then, there is a principle in man to sin
eternally, it is but just with God if he punish sinners eternally: did not the
grave stop him, his heart would never stop him from sin. In heat and cold they
rob, they sin to the grave.

Further as these words are put into a similitude, they intimate the easiness,
and naturallnesse of their sinning, as well as the continuance of it; Like as
the hot earth drinks up the snow water, so wicked men sin to the grave: they
sin to death, and they sin with as much ease and naturalnes as the earth, when
dry and thirsty, drinks up the snow water. Sinners are said to drink iniquity
as water, (Job 15.16.) They are said to draw iniquity with cords of vanity, and
sin as it were with cart ropes, (Isa. 5.18.) The last of these comparisons
notes their strength and grossness in sinning; The second notes their wit and
cunning in sinning; The third (which suites with the present text) notes their
readynes and easynes to sin; They can do it as easyly as drink, as easyly
as the hot earth drinks up the snow water.

So much of that translation; I come now to consider our own.

Drought and heat consume the snow waters. (...) siccitas. proprie ariditatem
terrae significat, unde pro terra arida and inculta sumitur.
Drought or dryness; The word notes the dryness of the earth, and is often
put for dry earth, as also for earth undrest, or for a desert place, because in
such places the earth is usually parcht with heat and over-dry. And hence the
word (Tsijm) in the plural number signifyes a people that dwell in a
wilderness, or in a desert. So the people of Israel were called while they
marched slowly throught it to Canaan (Psalm. 74.14.) Thou brakest the head of
the Leviathan, (...) populo so^itud^nicolis, aut de serta incolenti.
and gave him to be meat for the people, who dwelt in the wilderness. And
as men, so those wild beasts that dwelt in deserts, or solitary places are
called Tsijm; (Isa. 34.14.) The wild beasts of the desert shall also meet
with the wild beasts of the land, and the Satyr shall cry to his fellow, the
Shrich-Owle also shall rest there, and find for her self a place of rest.
Tsijm are such uncouth creatures as inhabit Tsijah, dry and desert places.
Drought And heat.

(...) caluit Heb^aeis Cham calidum, et chum nigrum sonat, hinc chami nomen a
calore vel nigredine.

Jupiter Hammon.


Cham the original word signifyes both to be hot, and to be black; The second
son of Noah, (who mocked his father) was named Cham, and it is supposed that
the posterity of Cham inhabited Africa, which is also called Ammonia, being a
hot Country, and the people of it black. And from this Hebrew word (it is
conceaved) the Heathens also called the Sun Jupiter Hammon; and they had
Sun-Images called Chammamin (Levit. 26.30.) which they worshipped.

Drought and heat consume the snow water. The word (as many other in the
Hebrew) has a neernesse of sound as well as in sense with our English word
gussell, and we say of Great drinkers, They are Guzzlers. The dry earth and
heat gussell or drink in the snow water, as the intemperate person gussels
and drinks down his liquor. Thus, drought and heat consume the snow water,
that is, the snow when melted into water.

So does the grave those that have sinned. There is a wonderful concisenes in
the Hebrew, (...) intra brevi^as quae obscuritatem parit, non dubium est
similitudinem esse. Merc:
we find there no particle of likeness, nor is there any expression of those
that, as appears by the different letter in our translation; yet there is no
doubt but the words carry in them the force of a similitude, therefore we may
safely supply them, according to our reading; So does the grave those that have
sinned.

The same word is used indifferently in the Original both for the grave and
hell; both significations are made use of by Interpreters in this place. First,
the grave or death; secondly, Hell, which is the second death, and everlasting
death consumes those that have sinned.

But why does he say, the grave consumes those that have sinned? Can he mean
any special sort of men by this, forasmuch as all men have sinned and sin
daily?

I answer, It is a truth, the grave consumes, and death reigns over all, for
that all have sinned; Wheresoever sin has to do, death has to do, the
terretories of death are as large as the terretories of sin; And had it not
been for sin, death had never had any dominion in the world, nor can the grave
consume any but those who have sinned. The Body of man had never come into the
graves mouth, and it had been too hard a morsel for the stomach of the grave
to digest, had it not been for sin; For though the body of man in its
materials and constitution was mortal, that is, was under a possibility of
dying before he sinned, yet if sin had not brought him under the threat of
death, God had never subjected him under that decree of dying, in pursuance of
both which the grave now consumes (all) those that have sinned. The grave
consumes Godly men because they have sinned, and the grave consumes wicked men
because they have sinned; yet there is a great difference among these sinners
who dye, and a greater difference among these sinners when they are dead.

And therefore Job speaks here destinctively; for though it be a truth that
all whether Godly or wicked have sinned, and that the grave consumes all, who
have sinned; yet Job does not here intend all men by Those who have sinned. For
by them Job means gross presumptuous and impoenitent sinners; he means it
not of those who sin according to common fraylety, but of those who sin with a
high hand obstinately. Such he means, even oppressors, adulterers,
murderers, of whom he spoke by name before; these and such as these are the
sinners whom he intends, while he says, so does the grave those that have
sinned.

And it be said, so does the grave those that (in this sense) have not sinned.

I answer, The Grave is said in a special manner to consume those who have
thus sinned.

First, Because such sinners do more subject and lay themselves open to death,
by their wicked courses and intemperate living. Such sinners spoil their
bodies, and corrupt their blood, they fill themselves with diseases, which
bring them early to the Grave.

Secondly, Because God does often cut the thread of such men's lives when they
are strong and healthy, and tumbles them into the graves mouth to be consumed,
before they have lived out half their days.

The words being thus opened, fall under a twofold interpretation.

First, As implying the felicity (such as it is) of wicked men in dying, or the
easiness of their death; as they live in pleasure, so they dye without pain.
That Is a point insisted upon at the 13th verse of the 21th Chapter, They spend
their days in wealth, and in a moment (or with ease) they go down to the
grave. Moriuntur facillime and suavissime, ita ut nihil doloris aut cruciatus
senti ant, non lenta morte contabescunt ut magna ex part probi. Merc: Ex
Hebraeis aliqui putant indicari lenissimam mortem in piorum, qua lenitur et
insensibilt^e^ liqu fiant, etc. Pined:
And again ( ver. 32, 33.) He shall be brought to the grave, the clods of the
valley shall be sweet unto him. Where Job shows that wicked men have as much
ease in death as others, and many times a great deal more. They dye in a
moment, not tired out with the torture of chronical diseases, but having a
quick and speedy passage out of the world, are dissolved even as the snow is
by the heat and warmth of the Sun. This sense some of note insist chiefly
upon, as most suiteable to Jobs scope in describing the corporal, and
temporal felicity of wicked men, even in death, which carries the greatest
appearance of terror and trouble in it.

But I rather take these words as a description of the miserable end and sad
conclusion of a wicked man. For the word which we render, to consume, signifies
a forceable swallowing down, a kind of devouring, which does not consist with
that other explication.

Drought and heat consume the snow-waters, so does the grave those that have
sinned. Hence observe.

First, Some sin so as if they were the only sinners, or as if they only had
sinned. All men sin, but some go away with the name, as if they only were
worthy to be called sinners. In which sense the Evangelist says ( Luke 7.37.)
And behold a woman in the City which was a sinner, when she knew that Jesus sat
in the Pharisees house brought an albaster box of ointment, etc. But were not
all the women in the City sinners? They were so, but this woman had a common
fame for a sinner, that is, for an unclean, wanton woman; she was a sinner of
sinners, the chief of sinners in that City. So ( Luke 19.7.) when Christ went
to the house of Zacheus, the Pharisees were vexed, and murmured, saying, that
he was gone to be guest with a man which was a sinner; As if they had said, he
is gone to the house of a notorious sinner, a man so sinful, and guilty, that
all men seem innocent and sinlesse in comparison of him. So they accounted
That Zacheus the Publican; and doubtless he was as noted a man for sin before
his conversion, as he was for grace after it. As they who are borne of God do
not commit sin, yea, cannot sin because they are borne of God (1 John 3.9.)
that is, their sinning is no sinning in Gods account, and comparatively to the
sinning of others. So they who are borne of the Devil (as Christ says those
contradicting Jews were, Joh. 8.44.) do nothing but commit sin, and sin so as
if they (and their like) alone did sin. For as no godly man sins as a wicked
man does, so some wicked men sin at such a rate, that it may be said they only
sin, eve^ in respect of the generality of wicked men. Thus also some Godly men
do so far exceed and outstrip other Godly men in holiness and the acting of
their Graces, as if they only were Godly, as if they only had the acting of
those graces. Abraham believed as if he only had been a believer; and Job was
patient, as if none had patience but he; David was a man so upright, as if
only he had been upright, or a man after Gods own heart. There are Saints
like Abraham and David, none like them, and there are sinners, like Jeroboam
and Ahab, none like them.

So does the grave those that have sinned. Observe.

They who are extremely sinful, make themselves sevenfold more subject to
death then other men. They who sin as if none did sin but they, are so subject
to death, as if none were subject to death but they. For if every sin, the
least sin does put us into the hand or under the power of death, then great
sins multiplied and continued in, put us into the hand and under the power of
death much more. The Psalmist says of wicked worldly men ( Psalm. 49.14.) Like
sheep they are laid in the grave, death shall feed on them, and their beauty
shall consume in the grave, from their dwelling; or (as we put in the Margin)
the grave being an habitation to every one of them shall consume their beauty.

But some may object, Is not this true of Godly men too, are not they thus
handled by death, and the grave? does not death feed on them? and does not the
grave consume their beauty?

I answer, though it does, yet it does not so feed upon, nor consume them, as
it feeds upon and consumes wicked men. For the Psalmist speaks here of death
as it were triumphing over the wicked, whereas the Godly triumph over death.
For, first he says, The wicked are laid in the grave like sheep; They lived
like Wolves or Lions, but they are laid in the grave like sheep. If it be
asked, why like sheep? I answer, not for the innocence of their lives, but for
their impotency in death; as if it had been said, when once death took them in
hand to lay them in the grave, they could make no more resistance then a sheep
can against a Lion or a Wolf; And when death has thus laid them in the grave,
then secondly (says the Psalmist) death shall feed on them, as a Lion does
upon a sheep, or any wild beast upon his prey, which is a further degree of
deaths triumph over the wicked; And thirdly, their beauty shall consume in the
grave, that is, all their bodily and natural beauty (and that is all the beauty
which they have) shall consume in the Grave, whereas the Godly, have a beauty
(and they count it their only beauty) which the grave cannot consume, and that
is the beauty of their graces, the beauty of holiness, the spiritual beauty of
the inner man, yea and the spiritual beauty of their outward holy actings
shall not consume in the Grave; For blessed are the dead that dye in the Lord,
for from henceforth, says the Spirit, they rest from their labors, and their
works follow them (Rev. 14.13.) that is, their good works follow them (not to
death but into life) and will be both beauty and blessedness to them from the
Lord for ever. Whereas cursed are the dead that dye in their sins, for from
henceforth, they shall be denied rest for ever, and none of their works,
wherein they took pleasure in this world, shall follow them into the next to
give them any pleasure. All their beauty and outward blessedness ends in the
grave. If in this life only we have hope in Christ, says the Apostle of
believers (1 Cor. 15.19.) we are of all men most miserable; then how miserable
are they, who have no hope beyond this life, or if they have, both that, and
their present beauty consume together in the grave. Thus it is plain, that
though godly men dye, yet death has not such a hand over them, as over the
wicked. And as wicked men are more under the hand of death then the Godly when
they dye, so they are continually more liable unto death. Sin, which unfits men
to dye comfortably, fits them (as it were) to dye naturally: The more sinful
any man is, the sooner may death surprise him. Holiness has not only a promise
of eternal life hereafter, but of a long life here ( Psalm. 34.12, 13.) And sin
is not only under a threat of eternal death hereafter, but of a speedy death
here. ( Psalm. 55.23.) But thou O Lord shall bring them (that is, wicked men)
down into the pit of destruction, (But when? it may be long first, the next
words make answer) Bloody and deceitful men shall not live out half their
days; That is, not half the days which as others do so they naturally might
live; either the Justice of God or of man shall cut such men off in the midst
of their days. The grave gapes for those who have thus sinned. So then, though
there are many spiritual reasons referring to eternal life, which may move the
sons of men to take heed of sin, Pro, sepalchru^ est cur malim infernus aut
inferi, Nam sepulch^um rapit etiam bonos i^feri solos eos rapiunt qui
peccaverunt i e. improbos Drus:
yet there is a strong motive from the concernments of this present temporal
life, and that not only as to the comforts of it, but also as to the very
continuance of it. They hasten themselves to the grave who make have to sin,
and so at once endanger the hopes of the next life, and the enjoyment of this.

Lastly, Some, because the Grave (in a general sense) consumes the Godly as well
as the sinner (in the sense last expressed) do therefore restrain the word
Sheol in this place to hell, as it signifyes the place or state of the damned,
which is proper only to those who have sinned, and dye in their sins. So the
whole verse is thus rendered. Vt terra torri da and calor absumunt aquas
invales, ita infernus eos qui peccaverunt. Tygur:
As dry earth and heat consume the snow waters, so hell consumes those that
have sinned. All that sin and turn not, shall be turned to hell; But shall
hell consume them? they shall ever be consuming, but never consumed. Hell shall
consume them as to a comfortable being, but it shall not consume them as to a
being; they shall be always dying, but never dead. Hell is the portion and
all the portion of all wicked men hereafter, what ever portion of worldly
profit or pleasure they have had here: hell shall consume them, and they shall
be consuming for ever.

The 20th verse may carry the sense of this interpretation, but it complyeth
more clearly with the former, describing the calamitous condition of a wicked
man at his departure out of this world.

Verse. 20. The womb shall forget him, the worm shall feed sweetly on him, he
shall be no more remembered, and wickedness shall be broken as a tree.
The number varyes here again, Job spoke in the plural number immediately
before, yet here keeping to the same subject, he speaks in the singular.

The womb shall forget him. (...) a verbo quod intensissi^re and tenerrime
amare signisicat.
That is, They who loved him most tenderly and dearly shall forget him. The
word which we render the womb, is of a verb which signifyes to love, with
greatest intensenesse and tenderness: it is applied to the love of man to God, (
Psalm. 18.1.) I love the Lord, I love the Lord dearly with bowels of
affection; and it is often applied to the love of God unto man. Some translate
it here by the Abstract; Vim majorem haber per abstractum. Obliviscetur ejus
miseratio, sive amor sive dilectio, i. e. illi qui eum suaviter amabunt. Bold:
Love, mercy, or pity shall forget him. Which may be taken two ways; First,
that those friends who before were pitiful to him, should forget him; his
lovers, and acquaintance, who were dear to him even as his bowels, they shall
forget him; or secondly, mercy shall forget him, that is, the mercy of God, or
the God of mercy shall forget him, God who is altogether mercy shall forget
him; hell shall consume him, and mercy, or the merciful God shall forget him
for ever. The vulgar reads it by way of imprecation, let mercy forget him;
others as a direct denunciation, mercy shall forget him; But I rather apprehend
that this phrase, or manner of speaking, The womb shall forget him, does only
import thus much; That when the wicked man dies, he shall be as much forgotten
among men, as if such a man had never come out of his mothers womb, nor been
born into the world. But are not wicked men remembered to have been in the world
when once they go out of the world? usually they do such things in the world
as cannot easily be forgotten; And are not many wicked men, who dyed some
thousands of years ago, remembered unto this day, as if they had dyed but
yesterday? I answer, As to forget, always implies former knowledge, and
acquaintance, so sometimes it implies only present neglect. When we pass by,
or slight a man, then we are said to forget him, though we not only remember
who he is, but see him before our eyes. Much more then may we be said to forget
those men being dead, whom we slighted while they lived, and never speak of
but with contempt and abhorrence both of their persons and actions since they
dyed. The womb shall forget him.

Yet as the former verse is expounded by some, (as was there touched) to show
how quiet and easy a passage wicked men usually have out of this world by
death, so this clause also of the verse in hand, yea the whole verse is
expounded to the same sense; I will only hint it, and pass onne.

The womb shall forget him. That is, his mother shall not be troubled or
grieved at his death, because he dyed without grief or trouble.

The worms shall feed sweetly on him. That is, The grave shall be no seveerer
to him then to others. Ita suaviter obdormit, ut in sepulchro ei vermis
duscescere videatur. Drus:
There the worms feed upon all men, and they shall feed sweetly on him; or it
shall be a kind of sweetness and pleasure to him, to have the worms feeding on
him; which is no more then what Job said upon the same argument ( Chap. 21.33.)
The clods of the valley shall be sweet to him.

He shall be no more remembered. That is, there shall no hard fate or evil
accident befall him when he dies to administer matter of discourse concerning
him: for when a man is cut off by some remarkable stroke of Judgment either
from the hand of God or man, his death becomes the discourse and Table-talke of
all sorts of men, for that generation at least, if not for many more. What has
caused Korah, Dathan, and Abiram, to be remembered to this day, was it not the
strangenes of their death? ( Numb. 14.29, 30.) And Moses said, If these men dye
the common death of all men, or if they be visited after the visitation of all
men, then the Lord has not sent me; but if the Lord make a new thing, and the
earth open her mouth, and swallow them up, etc. This dreadful hand of God upon
them in swallowing them up alive, has made them to be remembered more then many
thousands of honest and good men in Israel, who dyed in their beds. Upon this
account Ananias and Saphira are remembered, and so is That Herod (Act. 12.23.)
Who was eaten of worms and gave up the Ghost, because he gave not glory unto
God. But says Job (according to this exposition) the wicked man's death is
commonly so fair, and so much after the common death of all men, that no man
reremembers him any more.

And wickedness shall be broken as a tree. That is, the wicked man shall dye
like an old rotten tree, he shall moulder away and decay by peice-meale, or
gradually, as a tree does which is never hewn down, but is suffered to wast
and dye alone. Thus the interpretation is carried through the whole verse, as a
proof, that bad men may (in this kind) have a good death.

But though this be a truth, and suites well with Jobs scope in some passages
of this Chapter, as also in other passages of this book, that wicked men dye
as to outward appearance as fairly, and sweetly, as the godly, so that as no
man knows love, or hatred by all that is before him, but all things (in this
life) come alike to all; There is one event to the righteous and to the wicked
(Eccl: 9.1, 2.) So all things come alike to all in death, so far as it
merely concerns the separation of soul and body; yet I rather conceive that
this verse declares wrath and judgment to wicked men dying, or their misery
and wretchedness in death. And therefore first, the womb, that is, his nearest
relations, and friends, even his mother, and wife, shall forget him. They
expected no good from him while he lived, and so it was little sorrow to them
when he dyed. Some men live till their friends are weary of them, Matter quia a
vivo nihil expectabat solain, neq pro mortuo amplius angitur.
and every one thinks the world is well rid of them when they dye. Secondly,
The worm shall feed sweetly on him, that is, as he fed sweetly upon sin
before, so now the worm shall have a sweet morsel of him; Which some
interpret also as a circumlocution of an ignominious or at least a vulgar
buryall; as if he had said, he shall not have the buryall of the noble and
honorable, who usually are secured from worms by spices and imbalmings (spice
and perfume fence the dead body against the worm) But though he lived
honorably, death shall overtake him, and he shall be buried ignominiously, or
he shall be buried among common men, he shall not have that privilege which
appertains to his state, preservation from the worms. And (which is a greater
misery then both the former) Thirdly, He shall be no more remembered, that is,
he shall be no more spoken of with honor, but his name shall rot, as a man
that is not worth the remembering. His name shall not be registerd with honor,
nor kept upon the file, with men of credit and renown. So that as the first
part of the verse shows how his nearest relations and lovers shall forget him,
so this latter part shows that he shall be remembered no more of any others.

The Original word which we translate to remember, Meshciim secretarij
zichronoth, memoriae historiae, monumenta, zacha^, Masculus.
taken in other forms, signifyes a history, or a monument of record, as also a
recorder or register, who writes and sets down things for memory. And hence
also a man-child in the Hebrew is called Zachar, because the family is
reckoned by the males, they only being named in genallogyes, and registered in
the monuments of antiquity: so that these words, He shall be no more remembered,
sound thus much, he shall be a man whose name is quite blotted or rased out of
all memorialls. And This curse of being no more remembered, may be taken as was
intimated before, either first absolutely, he shall not be thought of, named,
or remembered at all, or secondly, relatively, he shall no more be remembered
with honor, his name will smell worse then his rotten carcass when he is
dead, and whenever he is mentioned, it will be like rakeing in a dunghill
which raises up a filthy stench and vapor. Possibly while he lived he was
spoken of with honor, he had many flatterers, who crept to him, bowed to him,
adored him, and called him a gracious Lord, but when he dies his reputation
dies too, he shall be no more remembered with honor; when any man cease to
be remembered as he once was, he may be said not to be remembered at all. The
worst and wickedest men that ever were in the world may be still remembered, but
when they are remembered it is with some mark of infamy, or with a black
brand upon their name.

Hence note.

Not to be remembered at all when we are dead, or to be remembered with
dishonor, is the portion of the wicked. Many precious Saints have both lived
in obscurity and being dead it is scarce remembered that they ever lived, but
none of the known Saints did ever live in disgrace (unless in their opinion
who had no grace) and being dead they are remembered by all (who have grace)
with honor. But They who have been most famous for wickedness while they
lived in this world, the most famous oppressors, adulterers, and robbers, have
dyed undesiered, and their name^ has rotted being dead ( Prove. 10.7.) David
(Psalm. 69.28.) powers out this curse upon his enemies, Let them be blotted out
of the book of the living, and not remembered among the righteous. The Jews
were wont to number their familyes, and to take their names; so they did when
they came out of Egypt. In which sense the book of numbers may be called, The
book of the living; and we may take the book of the living in a double
notion, either first for the book of those who lived naturally, or secondly,
of those who lived spiritually, and so were such as should live eternally (
Phil. 4.3. Rev. 3.5.) David seems to intend this book of the living, because
he adds, let them not be remembered among the righteous. As if he had said,
These men made an outward profession and seemed once to be in the list and
catalogue of the righteous, they had once an esteem and a name among the
people of God (as all hypocrites have till they are unmasked) but they have
discovered themselves to be of another alliance, therefore let them be no more
named nor remembered as having any relation to that society. Thus we may
interpret that imprecation of Moses (Exodus 32.32.) when the Lords wrath waxed
hott against the people of Israel, and would have destroyed them, Moses prayed,
Yet now if thou will forgive their sin, and if not, blot me I pray thee out of
the book which thou have written, that is, out of the book which thou have
commanded to be written as a record of the people of Israel; As if he had said,
Voluit Moses de libro legis deleri nomen suum ne unqua^ ulla in ea plus mentio
fieret, nec legislator haberetur vel dux populi. Rab: Sol: Ex pungi se voluit
ex catalogo quasi scriptorum patrum, i. e. principum virorum populi Hebraei,
sc: patriarcharum, etc. qui vocabatur liber Justorum. Bold: Ab ipso populi dei
catalogo radi poscebat, ut nulla deinceps inter fidelium nominis sui me^tio
fieret, quamvis fidissimus dei servus esse perseveret. Haec deletio nominis a
libro viventium populi dei opprobriosa nimis erat and infamis sceleratorum
poena. Id:
let me be reckoned no more for an Israelite, especially let me not have a
glorious, honorable name in Israel (such a one Moses had being the leader of
that people) Blot me out of the book which thou have written, let not my name
stand upon that record. The Lord had said ( ver. 20.) Let me alone that my
wrath may wax hot against them, that I may consume them: and I will make of
thee a great nation. And Moses besought the Lord, etc. As if he had said, I
stand not upon my own name, I am so far from being ambitiously desirous to be
the head of a greater nation then these, that rather then thy name should
suffer, I care not to be taken notice of as the head of this nation, no nor as
the meanest member of them, no nor to be accounted so much as a common
Israelite. Blot me out of the book which thou have written. This also is a
fair interpretation of Paul's meaning ( Romans 9.3.) when he wished himself
accursed from Christ for his brethren, his kinsmen according to the flesh. We
may suppose that Moses and Paul were moved with the same Spirit of zeal for
the Glory of God in both their wishes; And that when Moses wished (upon that
account) to be blotted out of the Book which God had written, he wished the
same thing which Paul did, when he wished to be accursed or an anathema from
Christ; That is, to be as a person separated or excommunicated from the society
or communion of the faithful, and so no more to be remembered among the Saints,
or to have his name blotted out of the Church-records, though he had been so
great a planter and propagater of the Churches. There are two Scriptures that
speak of such writings or holy records ( Isa. 4.3.) It shall then come to
pass, that he that is left in Sion, and he that remains in Jerusalem shall be
called holy, even every one that is written among the living (or to life) in
Jerusalem. Many might live in Jerusalem, who were not written among the living,
or to life in Jerusalem. Thus to be written to life, or among the living, is to
be written in the Catalogue of those who are reckoned to have a life of Grace,
holiness, and sanctification here, as also to be heirs and expectants of a life
of Glory hereafter. Again we have a like evidence of this ( Ezekiel. 13.9.) My
hand shall be upon the Prophets that see vanity, and that divine lies, they
shall not be in the assembly of my people, neither shall they be written in the
writing of the house of Israel. As when the Lord brought the people of Israel
out of Egypt, he commanded them to be mustered or numbered ( Number. 1.2, 3.) Thus
also when they returned from the Babylonian Captivity, they were numbered again
( Ezr: Chap. 2. Neh. Chap. 7.) Now those records in which their names were
written, are conceaved to be the writings of the house of Israel, mentioned in
this 13th of Ezekiel, as also, the Book of the living or to life, in the
fourth of Isaiah, at least that both these Scriptures allude to those records.
And it was the custom of the Jews, that when any of them acted wickedly, his
name was rased out of those records as unworthy to be remembered among the
people of God, and was looked upon as a dead man, yea as a damned man, who has
no name in the book of life so often mentioned in Scripture, or whose name
might be said to be blotted out of it.

From all which it appears how great a curse it is to be no more remembered,
with respect and honor, which Job affirms shall be the condition of wicked
men. Which he further confirms in the last clause of the verse.

And wickedness shall be broken as a tree. Here the abstract (as elsewhere
frequently in Scripture) is put for the concrete, That man who obstinately
perseveres in sin, is not only wicked, but wickedness it self. ( Psalm.
107.42.) All iniquity shall stop her mouth, that is, such men as are full of
iniquity, shall have nothing to say or object against the righteous dealings of
God, but shall be silent in darkness. So ( Job 35.13.) men extremely vain are
called vanity, and we usually call crafty men craft, covetous men
covetousness, and proud men are called pride; So a man much given to peace, is
in Scripture Language called peace, ( Psalm. 120.7.) I am peace, or I peace, but
they make themselves ready for war. They who are much carried to or in any
thing, are sometimes called by the name of that thing, or they take the name of
it upon themselves. Thus David spoke ( Ps. 109.4.) For my love they are my
adversaries, but I give my self to prayer; The Hebrew is, I prayer. David was
so much set upon prayer, that he was prayer it self; and a wicked man is so
set upon wickedness, that he is wickedness it self.

Wickedness shall be broken as a tree. What tree? The text determines not, but
speaks indefinitely, as a tree. We may understand it first of a barren tree;
barren trees are broken, and cut down. The word broken, imports violence, and
so a violent breaking; wicked men shall be broken violently. Christ says of
the Barren tree ( Luke 13.8.) Cut it down, why cumbereth it the ground.
Fruitful trees adorn and beautify the ground, but barren trees do only
burden and cumber it. As good not to be as to be good for nothing. The wicked
shall be cut down and broken as a barren tree; secondly (which provokes more
to breaking) they shall be broken as a tree that brings forth distasteful,
bitter, poisonous fruit; It is not good to let a tree live, which brings forth
evil and deadly fruit. If they deserve to be broken who bring forth no fruit,
then much more they who bring forth none but noughty fruit. Now as the wicked
are always barren of good fruit, so they are always bearing evil fruit, nor
can they bear any other, Do men gather grapes of thorns? Thirdly, they shall
be broken as a tree that is rent and shivered both body and boughs with a
tempest, or storm of thunder and lightening; Thus many tall and goodly trees
are broken, and thus the wicked shall be broken, a storm, a tempest from
heaven shall break them. The downfall and destruction of wicked men has been
insisted upon from other passages of this book, and therefore I forbear to
add any thing further here.

JOB, CHAP. 24. Verse. 21, 22, 23. He evil entreats the barren that bears
not, and does not good to the widow.

He draws also the mighty with his power, he rises up and no man is sure
of his life.

Though it be given him to be in safety, whereon he rests, yet his eyes are
upon their ways.


JOb having showed the miserable conclusion of wicked men, begins afresh to
describe their further progress in wickedness in the 21th and 22th verses.

Verse. 21. He evil entreats the barren.
Here Is another part of his wickedness, having robbed and murdered the
innocent, having committed adultery, where he could have opportunity and
admittance, Nos putamus explicari non quid improbus faciat, sed quibus
supplicijs deus ipsorum posteros, etsi ad tempus stare videantur deijciat.
Merl: Consociat ( sc: deus) ei sterile non parituram, and viduam non afficit
bono. Jun: Neque vivo ei neque mortuo uxor^ benedicit. Jun: Tollit (deus sc:) e
medio liberos ejus, vel opibus potestate and honor florentissimos. Jun:
he proceeds, to afflict the barren, and vex the widow. The word which we
render to evil entreat, has several significations, and I find
Interpreters accordingly varying about the sense of the whole verse.

First, The word signifies to associate, or join together. Thus Mr Broughton
(to whom others join) renders it, he adjoyneth the barren which has not borne
child: whereas our translation holds out the further actings of wicked men in
sin, this shows the further progress of God in punishing them for sin; For the
relative he, in the text, is not referred to the wicked man, but to God
himself, he, that is, God joyneth the barren that has not borne child (or
that shall not bear) and he does no good to his widow; that is, God sends
him a barren wife, and when he dies his widow shall live in misery. This gloss
Master Broughton gives upon his own translation; God sends after him a barren
wife, that he should have no help by Children, and shows no pity to his
widow. The next verse is also translated in this sense; He draws the mighty
after him, that is, God draws his Children though they are mighty into ^he
same Condition with him, and if any of them hold out a while, yet they shall be
sure to fall at last. The Original may bear this sense, and the Context or
Antecedents suite well with it; but yet I shall rather keep to our own
translation then fall into this channel of interpretation, which changes both
the person and the state of the text: we rendering it of the actings of the
wicked man in reference unto others, and these rendering it as the actings of
God in reference to the wicked. The reason of this difference is, as the
gramarians speak, because the nomnative Case is not here set down (and
according to the Concisenes of the Hebrew tongue it is usual to leave it out)
the verb only being expressed, whence some refer it to man, others to God.

Secondly, As the word signifies to associate, (...) pavit tam se quam alios;
etiam depastus fuit perdidit destruxit.
or join together; So, to feed, nourish, and take care of, as a shepherd
feeds his flock, or a father his Children and household: this suites well with
the former signification, because they that are joined together and associated,
do usually feed together. ( Prove. 28.7.) Whosoever keeps the Law is a wise
Son, but he that is a Companion of riotous men (we put in the margin, he that
feeds gluttons) shameth his father. According to this sense of the word the
Interpretation is given thus; he feeds the barren that bears not, Pavit
sterilem quae non parit. Vulg: Alit sterilia scorta, non prolis sed obscaenae
voluptatis gratia.
and does not good to the widow; That is, he runs after harlots, and feeds
them; such lewd women are expressed by the barren, because such seldom bring
forth Children, nor do they desire it, being so intent upon the fullfilling of
their wanton or covetous lusts, that they quite forget the ends of marriage.
Thus the prodigal son lived after he was gone from his Father, as his Elder
brother gave the character of his sinful course of life, which his father
(upon his return and humiliation) had covered and forgiven ( Luke 15.30.) As
soon as this thy son was come, which had devoured thy living with harlots,
etc. They who feed and keep such barren ones, shall be kept bare and feed
barely enough themselves, if they be not quite devoured.

Thirdly, The word signifies as the care of the shepherd in feeding his flock,
or the care of a father in feeding his household, so it signifies to feed upon,
to eat up and devour: and then the sense is; he eats up, or he devoureth
the barren; which rendering falls in with ours, he evil entreats the barren;
he that devoures and eats them up, evil entreates them. To which sense also
the word is translated to break or to spoil, (Jer. 11.16. Psalm. 2.9.) He
shall break them with a rod of Iron. Thus he eats up or he evil
entreats, that is, he vexes, or oppresses The barren that bears not.

The barren, in strictnes of signification, are they that have not received the
blessing of fruitfullnes in Childbearing; and this phrase, the barren that
bears not, implies a woman that never bare children. Such a one was Hannah in
a proper sense (1 Samuel 1.5, 6.) and in a spiritual or mystical sense, such
were the Gentiles for a long time, whom the Prophet thus encourages ( Isa.
54.1.) Sing O Barren, thou that did not bear; that is, Rejoice O ye
Gentiles, who as yet have brought forth no fruit to God. The Church of the
Jews was fruitful, she brought forth, but the Gentiles were barren; yet at
last the Gentiles were brought forth into a Church, and then they brought forth
abundantly, both in reference to holy actions, and holy persons; for as the
Apostle applies that Prophecy ( Gal. 4.27.) The desolate has many more
children then she that has a husband. Barrennes is an affliction, yea it was
a reproach; and therefore that good woman Hannah when God heard her prayer and
gave her a child, said, God has taken away my reproach.

Afflixit sterilem ne pareret. Bez. Confregit uxo rem sterilem ne pareret.
Pagn: Hic est improb^s ille, qui uxorem propriam quia sterilis est malis
afficit. Merl:
Some render the text as if it were the design of the wicked man to afflict the
barren, though his own wife, lest she should bear him children; others as if
this were his wickedness, he afflicted and vexed his wife because she was
barren, whereas such women ought rather to be comforted by their husbands. As
good Elkanah did his wife Hannah when grieved because of her own barrennes (1 Samuel 1.8.) Why weepest thou? and why eatest thou not? and why is thy heart
grieved? am not I better to thee then ten sons? It is inhumanity in any,
especially in a husband to afflict the barren, much more to afflict them
because barren.

Hence note.

To upbrayd any with their afflictions, especially with their natural
infirmities, such as barrennes or any bodyly defect, is very sinful. God
gives liberally and upbraydeth not (Jam: 1.5.) and shall we upbrayd any
because God denies them his gifts? This was Peninahs sin in the present case (1 Samuel 1.6.) and it will be a sin to any to do so in any other case.

Again, I Conceive we may take the word barren here, not only strictly for
one that bears not, but largely for any one that is in a sad or afflicted
Condition, as the words widow and fatherles are often used in Scripture, not
only for such as have no father, or have lost their husband, but for any that
are in a troubled or low estate. So because barrennes was then a state of
affliction and of reproach, therefore by the barren any in affliction may be
meant; And so Evilly to Entreat the barren, is to vex or oppress any that are
afflicted.

Hence note.

To afflict the afflicted, is the work of the wicked. Not to support the
afflicted is sinful, Sterilis per se satis afflicta est ergo dum conterit eam,
afflictae afflictionem addit. Drus:
how sinful then is it to add to their affliction, and increase their burden?
I only mention this, having discovered this strain of wickedness heretofore,
and what this former part of the verse says affirmatively, is said negatively
in the latter.

And he does not good to the widow. Eliphaz (Chap. 22.9.) charged Job with
this wickedness that he had sent widows away empty, that is, that he had not
done good to the widow; and Job at the third verse of this Chapter numbers it
among the evil deeds of the wicked man, that he had taken the widows Ox
for a pledge. In this verse he again reckons up the same piece of the wicked
man's uncharitablenes, He does not good to the widow; That is, he administers no
help to the widow in her wants, no counsel to her in her straites, nor any
Comfort to her in her sorrows. And this Negative, he does not good to the
widow, has an Affirmative in it, he does her wrong, he grieveth and vexes
the widow. For as Negative Commandments always contain the Affirmative
(while we are forbidden to do any evil, we are enjoined to do the contrary
good) so negative practices usually imply the affirmative, and while we neglect
to do good, we are active in doing evil. Or as the Negative threatenings of
God contain affirmatives ( Exodus 20.7.) Thou shall not take the name of the
Lord thy God in vain; for the Lord will not hold him guiltles that takes his
name in vain; that is, he will hold him very guilty, or look upon him as very
sinful, and punish him accordingly that takes his name in vain; and as
Negative promises contain affirmative promises ( Psalm. 51.17.) The sacrifices
of God are a broken spirit, a broken and a contrite heart O God thou will not
despise; that is, thou O God wilt highly esteem, accept of, and delight in a
broken heart; and as negative conclusions imply the affirmative ( Prove. 17.21.)
The father of a fool has no Joy; that is, he has much sorrow and grief (
Prove. 28.21.) To accept persons in Judgment is not good; that is, to accept
persons in Judgment is very bad; so negative practices of sin contain the
affirmative, as elsewhere so here in the Text, he does not good to the widow,
that is, he wrongeth and troubles the widow, the widow who is helples, is
hurt by him.

(...) ab (...) quod significat c^ll^gare and obmutescere.
The word which we render widow, signifies in the verb both to bind, and to be
silent: Both which significations are complicated in the widows Condition. For
first the widow is bound, though she be loose from her husband: she is bound,
and that two ways; first, with troubles, that is her affliction; secondly, she
is bound to be or stay much at home, that is her duty; secondly, as the widow is
home-bound, so she is tongue-bound too; the widows eloquence is silence, she
speaks most to her own commendation when she speaks little. The Apostle Paul
reproves widows about two things, which discover two faylings in them, opposite
to both these latter bindings (1 Timothy 5.13. And withal they learn to be idle,
wandering from house to house; As if he had said, it is not comely for the
widow to wander abroad, she should stay at home; the widow should be a fixed
star, not a planet. Not that the widow is to be a prisoner in her house, but
she should be so much there, that she may deserve the name of a Housekeeper,
not of a wanderer from house to house. The Apostle proceeds in his charge
against the faulty widow, And not only Idle, but (which is the second vice)
Tattlers also and busy bodies, speaking things which they ought not; Tattlers
are such as use their tongues overmuch, and usually much more then their hands;
whereas the widow should be much in busienes, little in discourse, always
doing, seldom speaking. We see the wisdom of God in teaching proper duties
in common names; in which thing the Hebrew language is most exact and
fruitful. But I shall return from this digression (if it may be so called)
about the word, when I have only added, that the sense given from this
Etymology of the word, does not only show the widow much of her duty, but
aggravates the sin of the wicked man in the neglect or omission of his duty
unto her, He does not good to the widow, no not to the widow, who is bound
down with many sorrows; he speaks not a good word for the widow, who is as
David speaks in another case ( Psalm. 39.2.) even dumb with silence. I have
already both in this Chapter as also in the 22d showed how sinful it is either
to neglect or afflict widows, yea that to neglect them is to afflict them;
therefore I shall not prosecute those points here. Only from the form of
speaking.

Note.

Not to do good is sinful as well as to do evil, yea as sinful as to do
evil. Not to do what we are enjoined, is as bad as to do what we are
forbidden. We are not only forbidden to wrong the widow ( Jer. 22.3.) but we
are often enjoined to relieve and help her, to visit her and do her good;
therefore the widow has wrong done to her, when good is not done to her.

The spirit of wickedness is not yet drawn to the full length, see the wicked
man still at work in the next verse.

Verse. 22. He draws also the mighty by his power, he rises up and no man
is sure of his life.
In the former verse the wicked man had to do with the weak, with the barren,
with the widow, but now he grapples with the strong and mighty; He draws
also the mighty. (...) traxit per traxit, occulto impetu aliquem impellere quo
velis, verbis atque rationibus aliquem trahere. Drus:
The word may denote a twofold drawing. First, drawing by a secret hidden and
imperceptible power, a moral power, the power of persuasion working upon the
heart and influencing the affections. There is an internal atractive virtue,
which draws the mind as the loadstone does iron, when nothing is seen, nor
so much as a word heard. The word is used in that sense ( Judge 4.6, 7.) where
(the people of Israel being sore oppressed by Jabins Army under the conduct of
Sisera) Deborah the Prophetess, who at that time Judged Israel, sent and
called Baruch and said unto him, Has not the Lord God of Israel Commanded,
saying, go and draw toward mount Tabor, and take with thee ten thousand men of
the Children of Napthali, and of the Children of Zebulun. Thus God bid them
draw to that place. But what had God promised? Deborah tells him what in the
next verse; And I will draw unto thee to the river Kishon, Sisera the Captain
of Jabins Army with his Chariots and his multitude, and will deliver him into
thine hand. But it may be questioned how God would draw Sisera with his Army
thither? It was not by any outward force, only God put a purpose into his
heart to draw up his Army to that place, that so he might fall into the snare;
Sisera had a secret motion or impulse upon his spirit, which he could not
withstand, though he fell by obeying it. Thus also God draws souls to
himself, by the invisible power of his Spirit, in their effectual vocation
and Conversion. ( Joh. 6.44.) No man can come to me except the father which
sent me draw him: how does God draw? he draws by persuasion, not by
compulsion; his persuasion carries a mighty commanding power with it: This
drawing is not a bare moral persuasion, by the proposal of an object before
them, and so leaving the sinner purely to his own election, but it is a
persuasion which has an over-comming power going along with it; God does not
draw us against our wills to Christ, but he draws the will to Christ, or
makes us willing to come to Christ. And the Lord draws believers thus also
after conversion to nearer converse with Christ. The Church begged the putting
forth of this powerful drawing ( Cant. 1.3.) Draw me and I will run after
thee. As the soul must have a drawing before we can come to Christ at all, so
after we are come to Christ, we need drawing still, that we may follow hard
after him. This sense of the word may have place in the present text. Wicked
men have a power of drawing others after them, though they do not act any
outward power. He draws the mighty by his power; That is, he allureth them
to his side, or to a compliance with him; And he does this sometimes as without
any formal threatenings to exercise his power against them, so without any
formal promises of using his power for them; As they usually draw the mighty by
the power of persuasion, so their power and example draw much without
persuasion.

Secondly, There is a drawing by an outward violence, or a drawing by force.
And this I take to be most proper here; He causes the mighty to come in and
stoop to his power, though they have no mind at all to it.

He draws the mighty. That is, first, those that are mighty in courage;
secondly, (...) est ingens 1 numero, 2 motu, 3 potentia.
those that are mighty in strength, whether of body or estate ( Psalm. 76.5.)
The stout-hearted or mighty are spoiled, they have slept their sleep; he
draws the mighty, the stout-hearted by his power.

There is a twofold power; first, of natural strength or activity; secondly,
there is a power of civil strength or authority ( Romans 13.1.) The powers that
be, are ordained of God; That is, the Authoritative or Magistraticall powers
are ordained of God. We may suppose the wicked man here spoken of clothed
with both these sorts of power; and so as he tramples upon the poor, the
widow, the barren, and the weak, so he keeps down the mighty, the rich, the
Great, and in conclusion he so tyrannizeth and domineereth over all, that all
are overawed, to connive at him, and stand as Neuters, if not to join with
him, and be of his party. He draws the mighty by his power.

Hence observe.

Oppressors and Tyrants will reach men of all degrees and qualities. When
wicked men have undone the poor, they will engage the mighty; when they have
done with the barren, and with ^he widow, they will have to do with the most
numerous and potent familyes. Their oppression of the poor does not satisfy,
but whet their appetites, it does not Extinguish but only Increase their
desires of attempting greater persons and things. As godly men proceed from
lesser acts of holiness to greater, from lower acts of faith to higher, They go
from faith to faith, and from strength to strength, their path is like the
morning light shining more and more unto the perfect day; so the wicked go on
from lesser acts of wickedness to greater, from lust to lust, from sin to sin,
their path is like the evening darkness, which darkneth more and more unto the
perfect night. As God adds eniquity to their iniquity (Psalm. 69.27.) by way
of punishment, so they add iniquity to their own iniquity in a way of
pleasure, and care not to come into his righteousness.

Secondly, Observe.

The rule by which wicked men act is their power. They act according to their
strength, rather then according to righteousness or reason, they will do what
they can, not what they ought; might serves their turn in stead of right, and
they think any thing is done well enough, which they have power enough to do.
Thus the Prophet Michah describes the oppressors of that age, ( Chap. 2.1.)
They work evil (in their thoughts) upon their beds, when the morning is
light, they practice it, because it is in the power of their hand. So says the
present text, They draw the mighty by their power.

Fourthly, See here the powerful man working upon the mighty man (He draws
the mighty by his power.)

Hence note Mighty men may not only meet with their matches, but be
overmatched.

Mighty men think themselves safe, or out of danger, and while the poor are
under oppression (possibly) they smile at their own indemnity, and applaud
their own happiness; yet it may soon come to the turn of the mighty to be
overturned by might, their power may quickly be overpowred; as the might of God
does always overmatch the might of man ( Luke 1.56.) He has put down the
mighty from their seat; so he often arms men, sometimes the worst of men, to
pull down the mighty from their seats. The power of God is above all power,
he is higher then the highest. And some men get so high, that they are higher
then all others who (besides themselves) are highest among the children of men.
The mighty may meet with their match, and be overmatched He draws the mighty
by his power, He rises up, and no man is sure of his life.

(...) a radice (...) surrexit ^d standum.
These words are a clear description of the oppressor, He rises up; the word
signifies, first, only to stand, or so to rise as to stand, which is common
to all men in nature. Secondly, To rise up, is to get higher, to advance a man's
self to further degrees of honor and power; thirdly, it signifyes to rise in
a hostile manner, to rise as an Enemy against another. ( Psalm. 18.39.) Thou
have girded me with strength unto the battle; thou have subdued under me those
that rise up against me. And again ( Psalm. 44.5.) Through thee will we push
down our enemies, through thy name will we tread them under that rise up
against us. The wicked oppressor, in the text, rises up in all these senses:
He rises up to stand, or to settle and establish himself, to take good
footing, and lay a good foundation for the perpetuating of his greatness;
secondly, he rises up to higher honor; thirdly, having thus settled and
advanced himself, he rises up as an enemy to vex all those who oppose him or
stand in his way; fourthly, some give another sense of this action; He rises
up or stands.

What to do? even to make fair promises, and to enter engagements what good
he will do, and how good he will be, when as he intends all these things to be
but snares to catch others, not at all to be as bonds to ty himself, which
suites and falls in fully with the last words of the verse; and no man is sure
of his life.

The Hebrew is plural, No man is sure of his lives. Non fidere vitae est
ambigere de vita, spe abjecta, omnibus circu^stantijs mortem denunciantibus.
As if he had said, if a man had an hundred lives he could be sure of none of
them, or he could not be sure of one of them, when this man rises up. The
form of speaking here used, No man is sure of his life, or, strictly to the
letter of the Hebrew, No man can trust or believe for his life, imports a man
brought into such a dangerous and uncertain condition, that he has no hold
(as it were) of his own life, nor does he see any reason to believe, that he
can hold it long, every thing about him carrying the face, and denouncing
threats of death. So that it may be said of a man in that estate, as Paul said
of himself (2 Cor. 1.9.) I received the sentence of death in my self; he
that is not sure of his life, has upon the matter a sentence of death in him.
Moses describes such a state, ( Deuteronomy. 28.66.) Thy life shall hang in doubt
before thee, and thou shall fear day and night, and thou shall have no
assurance of thy life: As if he had said, thou shall not be able to call thy
life thine own, nor to say in whose keeping it will be an hour hence; It shall
hang before thee as a thing which two are contending and striving for, and no
man can determine who is like to be master of it. The life of man does or ought
always to hang in doubt before him, and he can have no assurance of it,
whether we respect the common fraylety of nature, which concerns every man, or
the special purpose or appointment of God which concerns him. But there are
some men whose lives hang in doubt before them, and they have no assurance of
their lives, because of outward real dangers, or at least because of their
jealousy and suspicion of those dangers which they fancy to themselves. He
rises up, and no man is sure of his life. These two parts of the verse being
thus laid together, The whole may be expounded

First, Of another man rising up, and the wicked man fearing his life, if any
man rises up, he is not sure of his life; that is, if a man oppose and set
himself against this tyrannous oppressor, Tam timidus et vecors est tyrannus
quam saevus and crudelis; si enim quispiam audeat resistere, statim de vita sua
and incolumitate desperate. Simplicissimus est sensus ut utraque pars de impio
dicatur, et de illius commotione animi and metu quem mala conscientia efficit.
Cum steterit non credit vitae suae. Merc:
he (namely, the tyrant, or the oppressor) will not be in any surety of his
life. For, As tyrants are very Cruel, so they are very fearful, and when
they see themselves opposed, their fears are increased. They fear all men, of
whom all men are afraid.

Secondly, Others expound it as an expression of the wicked man's secret fear,
even when no man opposes or pursues him. And thus he is afraid in the
strength of his state, or when it is best with him. When he rises up in
greatest power and glory, he is not sure of his life; that is, he is afraid
of his life; his evil Conscience troubles him, and darts in continual fears
upon his soul: He fears falling as soon as risen up, and death when he is
(as to humane provision and appearance) safest and furthest from danger. The
marginal reading of our English Bibles gives this sense of the text; He
trusts not his own life; that is, He does not trust that his own life is
safe; He doubts his nearest friends will be his enemies, and that they who are
of his blood seek his blood, and are ready to ruin him; he has evil
thoughts of others, and he thinks the thoughts of all others are evil
concerning him. It can never be well with him whose conscience is evil; How
troublesome is that man's life to him, who either is always in danger, or
suspects always that he is? How unsure is that man's life to him, when he sees
himself ready to fall, who rises or stands up, and yet is not sure of his
life?

Qui restitit tyranno statim de vita sua actum putet.
Thirdly, These words are expounded to set forth the danger of that particular
man, or of those men, how many soever they are, who oppose the wicked
oppressor. He that rises up is not sure of his life; As if he had said, if any
man rise up to stop this tyrant in the ways of his oppression, he shall but
ruin and undo himself by it. Many an honest just man has sacrificed his
life to the wrath of powerful oppressors, only by speaking a word against
them, how much more by acting against them, and some have not thought their
lives dear, that they might do it.

Fourthly, Etsi porrigant manus et foedera percutiant, tamen quarunt occasiones
nocendi. Stare accipit pro percutere foedus stando. Isid:
(Which was touched before) as this posture of rising up, implies
Covenant-making, The sense is this; Though the oppressor give you assurance by
the strongest Covenants, yet no man is sure of his life; that is, there is no
trusting to him, though you have his word, though you have his Oath, yet you
have not him; though he give you all the Engagements under heaven, yet he
gives you no security; for he is unfaithful, unsteady, a Covenant-breaker; He
that makes a covenant or takes an oath merely for his own advantage, will
quickly break both oaths and covenants for his own advantage, and if no
occasion be offered for the making of a breach, he will make one, or at least
pretend one.

Fifthly, According to our translation, Si insurrexerit in aliquem and
adoriatur, is quem adortus fuerit, non sperabit se ultra victurum. Vatabl:
the sense may be given two ways; First, he rises up, that is, he grows
very powerful, and then no man is sure of his life, that is, no good man is
sure of his life. For he is a terror not only to evil doers (as all
Magistrates ought to be, Romans 13.3.) but he is a terror to those that do well;
secondly, He rises up, that is, he grows angry and enraged, his choler
boyles in him, and then no man (of them especially against whom he is enraged)
is sure of his life. And when he says (in reference to any of these cases) no
man is sure of his life, the meaning is, every man has great reason to fear,
if not utterly to despair of his life; no man is absolutely sure of his life
at any time; for (as the Apostle James says, Chap. 4.14.) What is our life? it
is even a vapor that appears a little time, and then vanishes away; and how
short the time of its appearance will be no man knows, therefore (I say) no
man can at any time be absolutely sure of his life, no not for the least moment
of time, but at sometimes our lives are less sure to us then at others, yea at
sometimes we have no assurance at all of our lives, and we never have less
hope to live, or less hold of life, then when The wicked man rises up.

Hence observe.

The power of a wicked man is the danger of all; good men yea all men are in
danger when the wicked man is in power. He rises up, and no man is sure of
his life; when the ungodly are in the hight of prosperity, no man is in safety.
( Pro. 11.10, 11.) When it goes well with the righteous the City rejoices,
and when the wicked perish there is safety: by the blessing of the upright the
City is exalted, but it is overthrown by the mouth of the wicked, that is, by
the mouth of those wicked men who are in power; their rising is the fall of the
righteous, and with their fall, the righteous rise. When the wicked perish
there is safety. And again, ( Pro. 28.12.) When righteous men do rejoice,
there is great glory. That is, when righteous men prosper (the effect is put
for the cause, or the consequent for the antecedent, joy follows prosperity,
when (I say) it is thus with righteous men) there is great glory, that is, men
appear in their best both by words and actions. The joy of the righteous is
not alone, many others rejoice with bim, yea, are made joyful by him. So that
when the righteous rise up in honor and authority, all men set themselves out
to the utmost, and do as it were cloth the dignity of righteous men with
glory. Then they are willing to show what they have, because they know, they
shall keep what they have safely. And the freenes of their glorying when the
righteous rejoice, shows the freedom which they enjoy under the power of the
righteous. But (says Solomon in the same place) when the wicked rise (which is
the word of the text) a man is hidden. Which may be expounded first thus. The
wicked when they rise do scarce show themselves to be men, they are so
inhumane and cruel, which suites well with the 15th verse of the same Chapter,
As a roaring Lion and a ranging Bear, so is a wicked ruler over the poor
people. So that nothing of a man appears in them when they are in power.
Secondly, we may take the meaning (more nere the present point) thus; When the
wicked rise, that is, to greatness and authority, A man is hidden, that is, men
keep as close and private as they can, as if they were affrayd to be seen,
and doubted they should be ruined by their rising. When the wicked appear
most, the godly run into holes; for they instead of being a shield of
protection and defense to the Godly, are a snare, a sword, and vexation to all
that are about them; they use their power for destruction, and not for
Edification. The Apostle (2 Cor. 13.7.) speaking of the power given him by
Christ in the Gospel, says, It is for Edification, not for destruction; the
design of that power is to build up, and not to throw down; So the great
design of all power in the hand of the Magistrate as well as of the Ministry
is for Edification, not for destruction; destruction is that which comes but by
accident, by reason of the sin and wickedness that men do; the great business of
the Magistrate is to save, to build up, and to defend; yet such is the
wickedness of man's heart, that many times when he has power in his hand, no man
is sure of his life. He is so far from giving assurance, protection, and
defense to all by his power, that his power is every man's danger. And hence
Solomon concludes ( Prove. 29.2.) When the righteous are in authority the people
rejoice, but when the wicked bears rule the people mourn. It cannot but be
sad with them who have nothing sure to them; they must needs mourn who have
neither estate, nor liberty, nor life sure to them; they must needs mourn who
see nothing so sure to them as sorrow. As to have our spiritual calling and
eternal election made sure to us, is the top of all joy to us in this world; So
to have nothing in this world sure to us, no not so much as our life (in the
sense explained) sure to us, is the bottom and lowest of all that sorrow which
concerns this present world. And this sorrow the wicked man's exaltation brings
upon all men; He rises up and no man is sure of his life.

But as it felloweth,

Verse. 23. Though it be given him to be in safety, wherein he trusts, yet
his Eyes are upon their ways.
In this 23d verse, Si quis ei donet ut tutus agere possit ac nitatur illi,
oculi ejus speculantur vias ad nocendum. Tygur: Solent boni dare impijs munera
ut confidenter h^b^tent inter illos: at poslea infidiantur illis a qu^bus
munera acceperun^. Vatabl:
Job further describes the state of wicked men in their prosperity: we may
read the text thus; If any one gives to be in safety, etc. and so the sense of
this verse falls in with the Interpretation of the words last opened; If any
one gives to be in safety, that is, this man is so wicked, that though any
poor man, or any who are in fear of him would bestow large gifts upon him to
bribe him for his favor, or stay his hand from oppression, that they might
live quietly by him, and so should trust upon him, that having received their
money, surely he would let them alone, and they should be quiet, yet his eyes
are upon their ways; that is, he is looking about him, to pick holes in their
Coat, and find some advantage against them to bring them into trouble. For as
his own Covenants cannot hold him, so neither can their courtesies, but his eyes
are (severely and critically) upon their ways, to discover some fault, if any
be, or if none be, yet to suggest somewhat as matter of accusation, and so of
proceeding against them. This is a truth, though a man buy his peace at a very
dear rate of wicked men, yet there is no assurance to be had: bribeing and
submission, and flattery will not hold long; many examples have proved that
these things have not secured good men from the oppression of tyrants; but they
have quickly found out a way to ruin them that have been most liberal in
rewards to gain their favor, and purchase their own peace. If any one give
to be in safety, and trusts he shall be safe, his trust will fail him; The
more we trust God the safer we are, but there is no safety to be had by
trusting ungodly men. This is a good sense, yet, rather according to our
translation, the words show the Condition of the wicked man himself in his
prosperity.

Though it be given him to be in safety, wherein he rests, yet his eyes are
upon their ways. That is, though it be given him of God, or though God give
him this privilege to be in safety, (...) ad fiduciam, nomen Batach insigne^
importat fiduciam and confidentiam sine ullo pavore. Dat ei securitatem; i e.
dat ei quod ipsum reddere potest securum.
that is, though he rise up, and put down all that oppose him; though God give
him this safety, yet etc. The word which we translate, to be in safety,
signifies the most secure safety, or safety accompanied with the highest
Confidence, that is, when there is not so much as the least mixture of any
fear, not so much as the least Jealousy or suspicion of a change. Babylon is
described presuming upon such a safety ( Esaias 47.8.) I sit a Queen and am no
widow, and shall see no sorrow; and the wicked are spoken of as possessing and
enjoying such a safety ( Job 21.9.) Their houses are free from fear, neitheir
is the rod of God upon them; they are free not only from the rod of God, but
from the fear of the rod; though the wicked man live thus Confidently, and all
things are with him according to his wish; though God seems to crown him with
loving kindness and tender mercies, which are the proper portion of the Saints (
Psalm. 103.4.) Though he give him his hearts desire (which is a promise
peculiar to the godly man ( Psalm. 37.4.) though it be given him to be thus in
safety, wherein, or whereon he rests, that is, though as he sees no
danger, so he suspecteth none, but rests in his state, and says, all is sure,
all is well; though the Condition of a wicked man be thus safe and prosperous;
and all this by the gift of God, yet etc.

Before I explicate Jobs exception upon this great gift, Take two or three
notes from the consideration of the Author and nature of this gift, as also
from his rest upon it.

First, To be in safety is a great outward mercy. We find it promised among
many other special mercyes to the Church in her best estate ( Ezekiel. 34.27.)
The tree of the field shall yield her fruit, and the earth shall yield her
increase, and they shall be safe in their land. And such was their old promise
( Lev: 26.5.) Ye shall eat your bread to the full, and dwell in your land
safely. (Deuteronomy. 33.28.) Israel shall dwell in safety alone. Though Israel be
alone he shall dwell in safety, or Israel alone shall dwell in safety. He shall
have safety when others are in danger. Thou (says David, Psalm. 4.8.) make me
dwell in safety; and says the Lord concerning the poor man ( Psalm. 12.5.) I
will set him in safety from him that puffs at him. (Pro. 21.3^.) Safety is of
the Lord. Yea Secondly, The safety even of a wicked man is of the Lord.

It is given to him (by way of common providence) to be in safety; as God takes
care of his own servants in mercy, so (...) takes care of a wicked man in
wisdom; he is the preserver both of man and beast; he is the preserver not
only of good men, but of evil men, who are as beasts. How bad soever any man
is, his good, whatsoever he has, is from the Lord. They may have safety, who
shall never have salvation. And they who are near to eternal damnation, may be
far from danger.

Thirdly, Whereas it is said, Though he be in safety, wherein he rests.

Note.

Outward prosperity is the foundation of a wicked man's peace. God gives him
safety, and he makes his safety his God. He rests in the safety which God
gives him, not in God who gives him safety. Carnal men loose God in the
creature; and whereas they should trust in God, because he sends them good
things, they trust upon the good things which God sends. In whatsoever
(besides God) we place our trust, that we put in the place of God. David was
much overshot in this point ( Psalm. 30.6.) In my prosperity I said I shall
never be moved; God made David prosper, and David rested in his prosperity.
When David was right, he said in his adversity (and every godly man may say in
his deepest adversity) I shall never be moved. God is as strong to us in our
greatest weakness as when he makes our mountain strongest; and they who think
themselves more immovable when their mountain is strong, then when it is
weak, rest in their mountain not in God. Now if David (a man after Gods own
heart) set or rested his heart so much upon his mountain (that is, his worldly
prosperity) because it was strong, how much more may carnal men grow into an
admiration of their earthly mountains, and rest under their shadow and
shelter, as if they could never be moved? Worldly men do this so much that
this is made the description of worldly men ( Psalm. 49.6.) They that trust in
their wealth, and boast themselves in the multitude of their riches. Who these
are is not expressed, as if every one must needs know what sort of men they are
who trust in their wealth; that is who see all well with them, and who say all
shall be well with them, because of the multitude of their riches. For that is
properly to trust in riches, when a man says to himself (as the rich (...)
said, Luke 12.19.) Soul, take thine ease; thou have much goods laid up for
many years, Eat and drink, and be merry. Job had another spirit in the midst
of his prosperity ( Chap. 3.26.) I was not in safety, neither had I rest, etc.
he spoke there of his Condition before he was in trouble, when he had some
thousands of sheep, some hundreds of oxen, with a multitude of Camells and
Asses, when he had many sons and daughters, with servants in great number;
When it was thus with him, when no Cloud had in the least darkened his day, nor
so much as a grain of gall or wormwood embittered his cup; when he was thus
safe, yet he said I was not in safety. When the Devil said he was so safe
that he could not touch him; Thou have made a hedge about him, yet he said, I
was not in safety, neither had I rest; that is, he looked upon his hedge as
upon that which might quickly be broken through, and upon his mountain, as
that which might not only be quickly moved, but quite removed, he saw all he
had shakeing and tottering, and so could not have any rest in any thing which
he had: he had rest in opposition to murmuring and discontent about the things
of this world, but he was restless in opposition to confiding in and
satisfaction with the things of this world. In this respect his very safety was
unsafe, and his rest, restless to him. Only the carnal man, when God gives
him to be in safety, rests in it; he sits down and concludes that he has
enough at present, and that his Enough will last for Ever; He rests in his
safety, not only as being out of danger, but above it. Job having thus set
forth the outward state of the wicked man, he is in safety, as also the state
of his inward man, He rests in it; shows us in the last place and close of
the verse, what God is doing toward him, while he is doing thus, or
notwithstanding he does thus, Yet his eyes are upon their ways.

Some read, though his eyes are upon their ways, and give the sense thus,
though God sees all their wickedness, yet he lets them proceed and prosper;
That Is a truth; God does not let wicked men prosper, because he does not know
how wicked they are, or what wickedness they do; he knows well enough, how
ill they are, and what evil they do, his eyes are upon their ways, while
they abuse his mercyes, and (in stead of resting in him who gives them safety)
rest in the safety which he has given them.

Secondly, Others read thus, and his eyes are upon their ways; as if the words
were a further description of the wicked man's outward prosperity, and a
description of it to such a height, Quasi intentis in ipsos dei ipsius oculis
ut eis omnia ex ipsoru^ animi sententia succederent. Bez: Plus est quod
probatur aspectu quam quod sermon laudatur. Ambros:
as if the eyes of God were fixed or fastened upon his ways, to take care of
him, and to cause him to prosper in them; as if the eyes of God did drop
blessings upon him, and guide him every day successefully in all his
undertakings. The eye of God upon a place or person implies (in Scripture
language) his presence with them for good. ( Deuteronomy. 11.12.) The land whither
thou go in to possess it, is not like Egypt, etc. but it is a land which
the Lord thy God cares for, the eyes of the Lord thy God are always upon it,
from the beginning of the year even unto the end of the year; as if he had
said, The Lord is uneessantly watchful over it, both to prevent evil, and to
bestow good upon it. Read the same sense of the phrase ( Ezra 5.5. Psalm. 33.18.
Psalm. 34.15.) And usually in Scripture when the eye of God is said to be upon
any, it is not taken in an evil sense unless so expressed: as ( Amos 9.4.) Mine
eyes shall be upon them for evil and not for good. So that, while Job says,
And his eyes are upon their ways, The words, according to this reading,
continue, if not highten the former sense, showing further the outward
prosperity of evil men by the seeming favor of God to them.

But I rather close with our reading, yet his Eyes are upon their ways; as if
he had said; Do not think that God takes no notice of their sinful Courses,
because he gives them to be in safety, and in such safety, that they rest and
trust upon it, for I tell you the eyes of God are upon their ways.

Hence observe.

God always sees the ways of wicked men, or he sees wicked men in all
their ways. It is no argument that God neglects the government of the world,
because wicked men are in safety; He fully considers their ways, who either
through ignorance are wandering from, or, through wilfullnes, turning out of his
ways.

And the eye of God is upon the ways of such men, not only to see which way,
Hic opponitur conniventiae and dissimulationi. Coc:
or whither they are going ( Job 34.21.) but to punish them for their going
wrong. God will not connive at, nor dissemble what he sees when he sees what
is unfit. ( Hab. 3.6.) He stood and measured the earth, he beheld and drove
asunder the nations, that is, he divided and brake those nations in whom he
beheld iniquity. ( Zach. 9.8.) And no oppressor shall pass through them any
more, for now I have seen with mine eyes, that is, I have exactly seen, I
have taken perfect notice of them and their oppressors, and I will in justice
so oppress their unjust oppressors, that they shall be rid of them for ever,
No oppressor shall pass through them any more. We may make a threefold
difference about the Eye of God upon the persons or ways of men.

First, The Eye of God is upon the ways of men, to observe what they do, his
eye distinguishes between good and evil, and discerns, as much as beholds
what is done; His seeing the ways of men is a clear understanding of them.

Secondly, The Eye of God is upon the ways of men to prosper and bless them
in what they do well. The eye of God upon the righteous implies, yea and
conveigheth mercy to the righteous.

Thirdly, The Eye of God is upon the ways of men, to punish and chasten them
for what they do amiss. God has a vindictive, or a revengeing eye, as well
as an intuitive or a beholding eye. This eye of God is upon all the ways of
wicked men, though for a time he gives them to be in safety, wherein they
rest. And because God sees the ways both of the righteous and the wicked,
therefore God commands us to say to the righteous it shall be well with them,
for they shall eat the fruit of their doings. Woe to the wicked, it shall be
ill with him, for the reward of his hands shall be given him. Every man shall
receave from the hand of God, according to what God has seen with his eye.

Lastly, We may take these words as an admiring Conclusion, like that ( ver.
12.) Yet God lays not folly to them. They do foolishly, yet God does not
deal with them according to their folly; so here they do wickedly, yet his
eyes are upon their ways. As if he had said, it is a wonderful thing, even
matter of astonishment, that God who so exactly sees and knows the ways of
wicked men, should suffer them to be an hour in safety. Is it not a wonder
that God should suffer them to live long and safely, sinning, who deserve to
dye for every sin? As all wicked men who dye impoenitently dye in their sins,
so God suffers many wicked men to sin till they dye; he sees their ways and
will not stop them, till they have run their full course. Here is the patience
and long suffering of God. Men sin to a wonder, when they go onne in sin
after many smitings; as the Lord complains by his Prophet ( Amo: 4.) I smote
them with the pestilence, and with the sword, etc. yet have they not returned
unto me says the Lord. Now as it aggravates man's sin, to sin under wrath and
smitings, so it hightens the goodness and patience of God to admiration, that
he does not smite men in their sin, seeing he beholds them in their sin. His
Eyes are upon their ways to behold every sin, and every sin is not only
displeasing but burdensome and grievous to him. What a miracle of patience does
this discover in God? The Prophet Habackuk moves the Lord to revenge, and
wonders how he could hold his hand from punishing, while his eye beheld that
done which was so displeasing. ( Hab. 1.12, 13.) Art not thou from everlasting
O Lord my God, mine holy one? we shall not dye, thou have ordained them for
Judgment, and O God thou have stablished them for Correction. Thou art of
purer Eyes then to behold evil, and can not look on iniquity. Wherefore
look thou on them that deal treacherously, and hold thy tongue, when the
wicked devoureth the man that is more righteous then he? As if he had said,
Lord, I know thou beholdest all the Evil in the world, and art of purer eyes
then to behold it with any delight or approbation. Now seeing it is so, why
then do thou look on them that deal treacherously? In the former part of
the verse he said, Thou can not look on iniquity, and in the latter he
says, why do thou look on them that deal treacherously? There is a
twofold look of God; First, (as was touched before) a look of approbation;
secondly, a look of patience. And so the meaning of the Prophet is, seeing, O
Lord, thou can not look upon sin approvingly, why do thou look upon it
patiently? And hold thy tongue when the wicked devour the righteous. As if
he had said, How is it (Lord) that thou do not break forth into the
severest rebukes against them? How is it that they have not so much (to
appearance) as a frown or an ill word from thee, who have deserved blows and
utter breakings? Indeed if God had but the patience of all Creatures, had he
but the patience of men and Angels, the sin of man would spend it out in one
day: God could not hold his tongue nor his hand an hour, Considering, that he
clearly discerns all the wickedness that is in the ways of men, and that
every the least unevennes as well as wickedness is extremely displeasing to him,
were not his Infinite patience; God could not hold but destroy all the wicked
of the world, or all that world which lies in wickedness, were it not that he
is resolved to magnify his patience. And though for reasons known to
himself, he bears with those that are burdensome to him very long, not only
many days but years, yet the time is at hand when he will bring them to
Judgment, and Judge them according to those ways upon which his eyes have
been. Then the wicked shall find that as the eyes of God have been upon all
their ways, so that he has not at all, or not in the least been pleased with
any of them.

JOB, CHAP. 24. Verse. 24, 25. They are exalted for a little while, but are
gone, and brought low, they are taken out of the way as all other, and cut off
as the tops of the ears of Corn.

And if it be not so now, who will make me a liar, and make my speech nothing
worth.


JOb still proceeds to describe, and here concludes his description, of the
state of wicked men, he has (as has been showed in the exposition of the
former part of the Chapter) drawn the blackest character of their wickedness,
as also given the fairest prospect of their outward happiness; They sin and
prosper, they sin and are safe, they have much good while they do much evil.

This text speaks again of their prosperity, yet with a diminution, they are
exalted (but it is only) for a little while, for they are gone and brought
low, they are taken out of the way as all others, and cut off as the tops of
the ears of Corn.

There are two opinions concerning the general scope of these words.

First, Some conceive that Jobs aim is to show, that both in life, and death,
wicked men fare like other men; They are exalted for a little while, as all
others are, they are gone, brought low, and taken out of the way as all others
are.

Yet, secondly, I rather incline that he here intends to set forth the
miserable conclusion of wicked men, not only as they are cut off from worldly
enjoyments, as all men sooner or latter are, but as they are cut off from
worldly enjoyments in a way which is not common to other men, or which is not
the common way of man. And the reason why I rather incline to this as Jobs
scope, is, because these various expressions of the same thing, they are gone,
they are brought low, they are taken out of the way, they are cut off (these
various expressions, I say) seem to carry somewhat more then the remove of men
out of the world, by the ordinary way of dying, or then by a natural death.

Verse. 24. They are exalted for a little while, but are gone.
They, that is, the wicked, the adulterer, the theife, the oppressor (such he
had before described) are exalted; they grow great, and spread far, they grow
high, or are advanced to high places. The original word which we render, to be
exalted, signifies to be lifted up, (...) levavit exaltavit, exaltatus fuit;
latini Roman hac originatione decorare gestiunt ab magnitudinem.
or any thing that is lifted up in height, or greatness, and hereupon some
Critricks tell us that the Great City Rome had her name from this Hebrew root;
Rome as all (who know any thing of antiquity) know, is a City which has been
exalted over the nations, a City great in strength, and mighty in power; Rome
is as much as, height, or exaltation; As Abraham is a high father, an exalted
father.

They are exalted. The word may be applied to a twofold exaltation; first, an
inward exaltation by pride; some rise within, faster then they rise without,
yea there are some that rise very high within, when they are cast very low
without; they exalt and lift up themselves in pride of spirit, though they are
cast down in state. The word is often applied to note pride or haughtiness. (
Micah 2.3.) Thus says the Lord, behold against this family do I devise an
evil, from which ye shall not remove your necks, neither shall ye go
haughtily. The word is, ye shall not go in your height, in your altitudes, as
ye have done, the case shall be altered with you, and the Tables turned; for
this is an evil time, that is, an evil time to you, a time of calling you to
an account about, and of punishing you for all your wickedness, and especially
for your pride. As ye have made it an evil time by your sin, so ye shall find
it to be an evil time to and by your smart And this hight of spirit often
breaks forth, and is signified in height of action, or in haughty postures,
The lifting up of the head, the stretching out of the neck, Thus (Isa. 2.11.)
The lofty looks of man shall be humbled. The heart looks out at the eye, the
lofty heart makes a lofty look; according to the frame of the heart, is the
cast of the eye; the eye is not proud, but as it is instructed, and tutoured by
the heart, so it acts proudly, and looks haughtily. And thus they always act,
who though they are not exalted, yet have a mind to exalt themselves, who when
others cast no honor upon them, yet they will take it, and reach after it.
Thus the word is applicable to internal selfe-exaltation, as well as to
external exaltation, or exaltation by others. For as many are outwardly
humbled, who are not at all humble: and as some are inwardly humbled, who are
not at all outwardly humbled, (they have an humble lowly frame of heart, and
are active in humbling of themselves) so many are inwardly exalted, who never
had nor deserved, in the least, any outward exaltation. They are active to
exalt themselves, whom no man besides themselves, thinks worthy to be exalted.
The men of whom Job speaks were doubtless forward enough to exalt themselves,
yet

I understand him rather speaking of their outward exaltation. For Job is here
describing the prosperity of wicked men, not their pride. Though, we know,
prosperity is the occasion of pride, and men usually grow high-minded, when
they grow high in the world. As by pride comes contention, so by exaltation
comes pride.

They are exalted. That is, they are great, and rich, they are promoted to
honor, and set uppermost among men.

For a little while. The Original in strictnes is only thus; (...).
They are exalted a little. But the word is taken two ways in Scripture.

First, For little in degree, or for a little deal (as we say) that is, for a
thing that is little ( Psalm. 37.16.) A little that a righteous man has, is
better then the riches of many wicked; His morsel is better then the others
feast; his penny is better then the wicked man's pound. Thus Jonathan spoke (1 Samuel 14.29.) when Saul had given that severe charge that no man should eat
till the Sun went down; My father has troubled the land, see I pray you how
my eyes are enlightened, because I tasted a little of this honey; As if he had
said, I did not eat much, not so much as to delight my self, much less so
much as to glut my self, I did eat but a drop or two, and mine eyes are
wonderfully enlightened, that is, my spirits are much refreshed and cheared, for
naturally, when a man is faint, his eyesight fayles.

Secondly, For a little in time, or for a short space of time ( Psalm. 37.10.)
For yet a little while and the wicked shall not be, yea, thou shall diligently
consider his place, and he shall not be, that is, he shall not be in power, he
shall not flourish in worldly pomp many days. The birth of his prosperity
shall not be far in time from the death of it, nor the grave of all his glory
from the cradle of it. So ( Psalm. 8.5.) Thou have made him a little lower then
the Angels; which prophecy of Christ is cited ( Heb 2.7.) Now Christ was not
made a little lower then the Angels in degree; For he was the Lord of the
Angels, and when God brought him his first begotten into the world, he said,
And let all the Angels of God worship him. But Christ was made lower then the
Angels for a little time; And so we put in the margin, Thou made him a little
while inferior to the Angels. Namely, for the while or time when he was abased
by death and lay in the grave; yet we may say also that Christ was made a
little lower then the Angels in his taking upon him our nature; The Angelical
nature being higher then the humane, as considered in it self. We may expound
the word here in either sense, they are exalted a little, that is, first, they
have a little exaltation; secondly, how great soever we may conceave their
exaltation to be, yet they are exalted but for a little while or time. We
restrain the word to this last sense, as referring to the space of time,
wherein the wicked are aloft; They are exalted for a little while.

Hence observe.

The exaltation of wicked men shall not continue. They may be high built, but
they have not a sure foundation, they may floate aloft, but they have no
consistance below, they are as vapors rising from the earth, or as meteors
hanging in the air, both which are lifted up only for a little while, and are
gone. Athanasius said concerning the wrathful reign of Julian the Apostate,
Let us be quiet, it is a little cloud which will soon pass away. The wicked
man's civil honor is but a vapor (as the Apostle James speaks of the natural
life of every man) that appears for a little time, and then vanishes away.
The exaltation of wicked men, is but for a little while; For, first, their
exaltation is usually but for a part of their lives, and that the lesser part;
and that cannot (upon any reckoning) be more then a little while. Secondly,
their longest and utmost exaltation can be but for their lives, and the whole
life of man is but a little while. David taking the exactest measure of his
life, says, Behold, thou have made my days as an hand breadth, and mine age
is nothing before thee (Psalm. 39.5.) The whole life of man is very short, and
the preferment, or exaltation of wicked men is either much shorter then their
lives, or their lives are much shortened by their exaltation. They act their
power beyond the bounds of Justice, and so forfeit their lives, before they
come near the bounds of nature. Now if life last but a little, and they are
exalted but a little while of their lives, or if their lives be cut off within
a while after they are exalted, then they have but little exaltation. Many
spend a great part of their life before they arrive at exaltation, or
preferment in this world, and there are many who outlive their own
exaltation, and there are not a few, who loose their lives by the abuse of
their exaltation. The worldly enjoyments of all men are short, and evil men's
enjoyments are shortest. Saints shall have enjoyments hereafter commensurate
with eternity, but the best of Saints here, have neither any lease of their
lives, nor of their enjoyments. And if it be so with the best of men, then much
more with the worst of men, who as they are wrapped up in the common condition of
humane fraylety, with all other men, so they lie under some peculiar curses or
threatenings which other men do not. And how soon may a curse cast those down
who are most highly exalted, and blast or wither all their beauty and bravery,
whose branches are greenest, and whose faces shine brightest with earthly
splendor.

Secondly, Forasmuch as the word signifies a little thing, as well as a little
time, a little deal, as well as a little while, a thing which in regard of the
smalnes of it, is inconsiderable as well as that which in regard of the
weakness of it, is not durable.

Observe.

The greatest exaltation that any man can have in the things of this world is
but a little exaltation. That man is but little exalted, how much soever he is
exalted, who is only exalted in the things of this world; That which is but
little in it self, cannot make us very great, though we should have it all as
ours, or in our possession. How little a thing is all this world, and how
little a part has any one of this little? The whole world is but little, what
then is a little part of it? which yet is all that falls to the share of the
greatest men in this world. Philosophers say that the whole body of the earth
and Sea together, is but as a point or prick with a pen compared to the
heavens; and yet there are very few of the great men of the earth, who possess
so much as a mathematical point or prick with a pen in the body of the earth.
We may say, that the day of the greatest man in the world, is but a day of
small things. The Prophet to encourage the mean beginnings of Sions
deliverance ( Zech. 4.10.) said, Who has despised the day of small things? As
if he had said, I know many do it, some hoping and others fearing that these
small beginnings will have smaller endings, or end in nothing, but in the joy
of the enemies, and in the sorrow and disappoyntment of the friends of Sion;
But I say unto you, take heed of despising the day of small things, that is,
the least appearances of deliverance and salvation to Sion. Now as we are not
to despise the works of God, because they are small, so we have no reason to
be proud of, but even to despise the things of the world, for they are small.
Men have great thoughts and make much ado about small things, when they have
to do with the greatest things on this side heaven. The greatest things that
continue only for a little while, are but tittle worth, then how little worth
are those things, which besides that they continue but a little while, are
themselves but little? Though wicked men are exalted, yet no man has cause to
be troubled at it, or envy them; They are not blessed because exalted, for they
are exalted but a little, and that only for a little while. It should not be
much to us what any man is as to worldly enjoyments, no nor what we our selves
are as those enjoyments, seeing whatsoever others are, or whatsoever we are in
that capacity, is but for a little while. The Apostle says (2 Cor. 4.18.) We
look not at the things which are seen, but at the things which are not seen;
that is, we make not the things of the world our scope, but the things which
lie beyond this world, which are seen by faith only; And the reason why he
looked not at these things which are seen, was because the things that are
seen are temporal; those things which are seen, will not be long seen, they
are but for a while, and therefore not to be much looked after. The Things
which are not seen shall be seen for ever, they are eternal, and therefore
most worthy to be looked after. The world has beauty and glory in it, but this
stains the beauty of all earthly glory, that it may be so quickly stained. The
evils and troubles of this world, should not much trouble us, nor the
afflictions of this world present much afflict us, because they are but for a
while; suppose a godly man be cast down, and laid low in reference to the
world, he is laid low but for a while, therefore no great matter to him, he
has no great reason to be troubled at it; as the Apostle argues in the same
Chapter ( ver. 16.) For this cause we faint not, for our light afflictions
which are but for a moment, etc. therefore he calls them light, how great and
how heavy soever in their own nature, though they were as heavy as a
mountain, he calls them light, because as to their duration they were but for
a moment. We say, A light thing carried a great way or a great while becomes
heavy: He that puts only a pound-stone in his pocket, will be very sencible of
and much burdened with the weight of it, before he comes to the end of a long
journey; whereas a great weight is not much burdensome, if it be not much
borne. Now as worldly evils and troubles are light, because but short, so are
worldly comforts and honors, especially the worldly comforts and honors of
wicked men; of whom it is expressly said, not only by way of assertion (in
which sense it may be said of all men) but also by way of commination, They are
exalted for a little while. Again, as the profession of hypocrites, has a
kind of appearing goodlinesse and beauty, but it is little worth, or it is of
no worth, because they endure but for a little while, they are but Temporyes,
as the word is in the parable of the Sower. Or as the Lord complains by his
Prophet ( Hos: 6.4.) O Ephraim, what shall I do unto thee, O Judah, what shall
I do unto thee, for your goodness is as a morning cloud, and as the early
dew, it goes away; goodness it self is scarce good, goodness is little
worth, if it be but as a morning cloud, if it be but as the dew that goes away
when the heat of the Sun comes. The worth and glory of true grace stands
in this, that it stands and endures for ever; let the world turn which way it
will, true grace stands its ground and turns not away. Now if all the
goodness and pretended holiness of hypocrites and formalists be nothing worth,
because it is (like a cloud, or a dew) only for a little while; how little
worth is the exaltation of wicked men, which goes away, and is as quickly
gone, as a cloud is scattered and blown away by the wind, or a dew exhaled by
the rising Sun. We may say of all the glory of the wicked, as the same
Prophet Hosea says of Ephraim (Chap. 9.11.) As for Ephraim, their glory shall
flee away like a bird from the birth, and from the womb, and from the
conception; that is, it shall quickly depart; by their glory, some understand
their children; As if he had said, Their children shall flee from the birth;
that is, if borne alive they shall dye as soon as borne; Their children shall
flee from the womb; that is, they shall not be borne alive, they shall be
abortives; Their children shall flee from the conception; that is, they shall
not be so much as conceived. We may read the Prophet backward, and beginning
with the last first, say; Their glory, that is, their children, or whatsoever
else they glory in and make their glory, shall flee from conception; that is,
it shall not be conceaved, or have any being at all, and if conceived and so
have a being, yet it shall flee from the womb, that is, it shall never come to
a complete being, but shall be marred in the making; or if it be borne and so
have a perfect being, yet it shall flee from the birth, that is, it shall dye
as soon as borne, and come to its grave in stead of or as soon as to a cradle.
Thus he describes the evil that shall come upon all their glory, it shall
suddenly fly away, and this spoils the beauty of all that earthly glory, with
which the wicked shine; They are exalted for a little while. This sudden
vanishing of the wicked man's glory is further described in four expressions;
first, they are gone; secondly, brought low; thirdly, they are taken out of the
way; fourthly, they are cut off as the top of the ears of Corn.

Et non ipse. Heb. i. e. non ullus ipsotu^. hac dicendi formula solent Heb^aei
significare, quod omnino deletuut perit. Pined: Mutat pluralem in singularem ut
significet quemlibet eorum interire. D^us: Pronomen singular cum verbo plurali
notat distributionem in singula, vel collectionem singulorum. Pisc:
First, They are gone; the Hebrew is, they are not; this kind of speaking is
used to signify a total or utter perishing. They are so gone, as if they had
lost not only their existence but their essence. The original text is
singular; They are exalted, and he is not, or, he not; he does not say, they
not, but he not; Job changes the number from They to He, to signify that
every one of them is not, or that, not any one of them is. God will deal thus
with every single man of them, he is not; we say, They are gone; they that go
out of one condition into another, are not as they were, and as to their former
state, they are not at all. They who go from place to place, from state to
state, though from a state of life to a state of death, have a being, and
therefore we translate well, not to be, by, to be gone. Some read the words
thus; They are exalted, and within a little while they are not; we say, they
are exalted a little while, and are gone, or are not. The meaning of hoth
readings is the same. To say, they are exalted for a little while and are gone,
is as much as, and no more then to say, they are exalted, and within a little
while are gone. Thus David spoke from his own experience, concerning the
prosperity of wicked men ( Psalm. 37.35.) I have seen the wicked in great
power, and spreading himself like a green bay tree, yet he passed away; and
lo he was not: yea I sought him, but he could not be found. David's experience
falls in fully with Jobs assertion; They are exalted for a little while, and
are gone, or are not.

Hence note.

The worldly felicity or exaltation of a wicked man, or a wicked man in his
worldly felicity and exaltation, shall be as if he had never been. Worldly men
and worldly things are scarce any thing while they are seen, and therefore
when once they disappeare and are not seen at all, it may well be said, They
are not at all. God who is altogether invisible, is an eternal being, from
everlasting to everlasting he is God (Psalm. 90.2.) But all those things which
are altogether visible, are altogether vanishing; They are going from us, while
they are with us; and when they are gone, they are as if they had never been
with us. And as it is with worldly things; so with worldly persons, when they
are gone, they are not, as to any enjoyment, though they shall ever be as to
punishment. They are exalted for a little while, but are gone.

And brought low. That is the second step; Some might say, possibly they are
gone to a better estate, then before; they were high before, now higher; some
remove from greatness, to greatness, from dignity, to dignity, therefore Job
explaineth his meaning, They are gone And brought low.

Or degraded from their high places, They are brought low by disgrace, or into
disgrace, They are brought low by poverty, or into the lowest depth of poverty.
In whatsoever they were exalted, they are now made low. Some expound it of
death; They are brought low, that is, down to the grave, and that is low
indeed. The grave is called the lower part of the earth; And yet the wicked
shall be brought lower then the grave, even as low as hell, or as the lowest
hell, as Moses speaks ( Deuteronomy. 32.22.) The Apostle James says ( Chap. 1.9, 10.)
Let the Brother of low degree rejoice, in that he is exalted; But the rich, in
that he is made low; A poor brother, or a brother of low degree seems to be
far from exaltation; yet he has cause to rejoice in that he is exalted; and
he is doubly exalted; first, as he is a brother to the Saints, and a member of
Christ; secondly, as he is a sufferer, or afflicted for Christ. Every godly man
of the lowest degree is exalted in one of these ways, and many of them in
both; and any man has cause to rejoice in these spiritual honors and
exaltations, how low soever he is in temporals. But how is the rich, or the
brother of high degree made low? and why should he rejoice in that he is made
low? for though there are readings of the text by a supply of other words, yet
I judge that to be the best; But why should he rejoice in that he is made low?
As the poor man's exaltation before spoken of, is spiritual, so also is the
rich man's humiliation. The rich man has great cause to rejoice when he is
spiritually humbled, and made low in his own eyes, when he is highest in the
eye of the world. To be made low in our own eyes, or in the sense of our own
sinfullnes while we are rich and outwardly exalted, is a great work of Grace;
But to be brought low by the hand of God, while we are high and exalted in the
eyes of men, and in our own eyes, is the punishment of sin. Godly Great men
are made low in their own thoughts by grace. Wicked men though never so great,
shall be brought low in the sight of others for their sin. They are exalted for
a little while, but are gone, and brought low.

Hence note.

First; As the worldly estates of all men, so most of all the estates of
worldly men are subject to changes. Now they are exalted and lifted up, within
a while they are depressed and cast down. The providence of God ring the
changes of men's estates all the world over. As the estates and conditions of
several men differ at the same time; some men are honorable, others are base,
some men are rich, others are poor, some are exalted, others are cast down.
So the estates and conditions of the same men differ as much at several times;
They who were honorable are abased, the rich become poor, and the men of
exaltation are brought low. Thus the hills are turned into valleys, and the
highest mountains, that is, men as high and strong as mountains (as we read
in the Prophecy of Zechary (Chap. 4.7.) become plains. Our spiritual estate
is like mount Sion, which shall never be removed, it is founded upon a rock
that can never be shaken; But Temporal things are like a wheel which moves
continually, and that spoke which is now aloft (as that Captive King said to
his Conqueror) is quickly turned to the ground, and brought low. The Apostle
gives an excellent caution in reference to our spiritual estate (1 Cor.
10.12.) Let him that thinks he stands take heed lest he fall. And I may say
in reference to any man's temporal estate, He that is surest of his standing,
may fall not-withstanding all his heed. And if any one (as the Prophet once
questioned, by whom shall Jacob arise for he is small?) should question by whom
shall wicked men be brought low, seeing they are so highly exalted? It must be
answered, that as Jacob rises when he is fallen, so the wicked fall when they
are risen, by the hand or power of God. He brings them low by his
appointment, and he brings them low by his power. ( Psalm. 75.7.) God is the
Judge, he puts down one and sets up another. And he it is that sets
up and puts down the ^^me man. They are gone, and brought low.

They are taken out of the way as all others. The original word signifies to
narrow, contract, or shut up; (...) contraxit cont nuit, o^hu^avit* in piet,
festinavit ire and e contrario extendere se, transilire.
as also to hasten, extend, and shoot forth; and the reason is, because by
contracting, or drawing any thing back, we shoot it forward with more force
and speed. We see how snakes and other creeping things contract, and g^ther
themselves up, and then cast themselves forward with much advantage. Both
significations of the word are made use of in this place by Interpreters. Some
rendering, They shall be shut up, they are brought low, Claudentur sicut omnes.
Pagn: Reg:
and sh^t up, they (like prisoners) are under restraint, or they are restrained
in prison. They are apt to abuse their liberty and their power, to the wrong of
others, and therefore they are cut short and kept in; not only are their
horns broken, their claws cut, and their nails pared, but themselves are
shut up like beasts, which hurt him that is next whosoever it is. It is reason
they should be in safe custody, who being at liberty no man is in safety.

Saltabunt e loco suo Rab. Moy:
Mr Broughton gives a sense of the word, which imports not their restraint, but
their flight, Every one are made to skip away; They shall skip or leap out of
their places, as if they were forced or frighted, as one of the Rabbis
translates it. The meaning of both rendrings meets in the same thing; for
whether a man be shut up in prison, or forced to run and hide himself to avoid
restraint and imprisonment, his condition is much alike. By the former he is a
prisoner, and by the latter he has lost his liberty. The difference is not
great, whether a man be where he would not, or dares not be were he would. They
are shut up, or, they are made to run away. Both which readings comply fayrely
enough with ours, They are taken out of the way. For whether a man be carried
away by force, or flies for fear, He is taken out of the way.

Hence note.

God does remove, and take wicked men out of their place when they are in their
highest exaltation. High estates have no security in them, yea they are less
secure, then the lowest estate; and that not only because they are more
subject to the envy of men, but because they who are in high places make
themselves more liable to the wrath of God. They use their power to the casting
down and taking away of the innocent, and therefore God is engaged to take
them away. For, as God often takes his own people out of harms way, so he
takes the wicked quite away that they may do no more harm. The righteous
perish (that is, dye, says the Prophet) and no man lays it to heart, and
merciful men are taken away, they are taken away upon that account which few
consider, even from the evil to come, (Isa. 57.1, 2.) God takes away the
righteous, lest they should suffer evil, and he takes away the wicked, lest
they should continue to do more evil. The wicked would know no bounds if left
to themselves, and let alone; Therefore God bounds them and says (as the
Apostle prophesied of such evil doers, 2 Timothy 3.9.) They shall proceed no
further, for their folly shall be made manifest to all men; they shall be taken
out of the way. God will give them a stop; it is a form of speech like that
which the Apostle uses (2 These. 2.7.) The mystery of iniquity does already
work, only he who now lets, will let, till he be taken out of the way;
there was a rub, a remora in the way of the man of sin, that he could not do
what he would: The power of the Roman Empire stood in his way, and till that
was taken out of the way, he could do no great feats, he could not appear in
his colors. Now as God took away the power of the Roman Empire, as to that
hight wherein it had formerly been exercised, That the man of sin, might have a
liberty to do evil and fill up the measure of his iniquity; so God takes away
many wicked men, lest they should do more evil, and even exceed the measure
of their iniquity. They are taken out of the way as all others.

This may be expounded; first, of persons; secondly, of things; Transferuntur
ut caeteri, nec pejus illis accidit quam cae^eris. Etsi ad tempus evecti tandem
amplius non extant: tamen non aliter quam alij. Bez:
They shall be taken away, and be sent out of the world as the meanest persons,
or according to the common lot of all men. This is understood two ways; first,
to show that in death all men fare alike; so that we cannot distinguish a good
man from a wicked man by the manner of his death; secondly, to show that they
who are highest in the world, are as soon overthrown by death as the lowest.

Hence Note.

God can as easily remove mountains as mole-hils, and as quickly triumph in
his anger over the Greatest, as over the least. They who are highest in this
world, are no more in his hand, who is higher then the highest, then the lowest
of this world are. No creature strength can stand against God. When we see
enemies high, we are ready to say, who shall pull them down, but God can pull
them down, as all others, the high Cedars, the strong Oaks shall be like the
poorest shrub. By whom shall Jacob arise, for he is small? (says the Prophet
Amos 7.2.) O how shall the weakness of Jacob be strenthened, and the lowness
of Jacob be exalted? by whom shall Jacob arise, for he is small? as we are apt
to question the rising of the people of God, because they are small, so the fall
of the enemies of God and of his people, because they are strong and great. By
whom shall the bloody enemies be brought down, for they are high? by whom
shall our oppressors be destroyed, for they are strong? Such are the
reasonings and questionings of our fear and unbelief. The text and point make
answer; They shall be taken away as all others, even as the weakest and the
meanest in the world; it puts God to no more trouble, to pull the strongest
Princes out of their Palaces, Forts, or Castles, when they stand in his way,
and hinder his designs, then to turn a beggar out of his cottage, or house of
Hurdles. Such a scorn is put upon the King of Babylon (Isa. 14.10.) All they
shall speak, and say unto thee, Art thou also become weak as we? art thou
become like unto us? Thou thoughtest thy self impregnable in power, and thou
did look upon us as contemptible weaklings, but now thou art become weak as
we. While God himself speaks great things of Magistrates, and lifts them up
as it were beyond the state of man, he yet with the same breath, makes them in
one thing but parallel with all other men; ye rule or have power over others
like God, but in your selves ye are as weak and mortal as any other sort of
men ( Ps. 82.6.) I have said ye are Gods, and all of you are children of the
most high, but ye shall dye like men, like the common sort of men, and ye shall
fall like one of the Princes. Or rather, by much, as some render the Hebrew,
and the Princes shall dye as one, or, as any one; that is, as any ordinary man;
For indeed there appears no argument in the words reaching the scope of the
place, according to our translation, to say, That Magistrates shall fall like
one of the Princes, is no abatement to them, but to say, Princes shall fall
like any one, is a great abatement and fall to them, and fully reaches the
sense of the present observation.

Secondly, These words, as all others, are expounded of other things, that is,
as all worldly things.

Hence Note.

Man in his greatest enjoyments is in as perishing a condition as any thing he
injoyeth. Worldly men are as vain and transitory, as worldly things are, They
are as soon gone as their riches, or their honors, or whatsoever they most
desired or trusted to here below. That which they have is perishing, and so are
they too. Christ calls all the things of the world, meat that perishes,
(Joh. 6 27.) The wicked man shall perish and be taken away, as all perishing
things are, upon which he sets his heart, Accepimus peritura perituri.
or which he has in his hand. We are always dying, and so is all that we
have; ours are dying comforts, dying riches, dying honors, ours is dying
strength, dying beauty. ( Isa. 40.6.) All flesh is grass, and the goodlynes
thereof is as the flower of the field; If all things we have be but a flower,
and we our selves but grass, then, we are taken away as all other things; for
flowers and grass are alike easily taken away.

And are cut off as the tops of the ears of Corn. The original word is often
used to express that act which was the sign of the Covenant between God and
his people from the time of Abraham until Christ, namely, (...) circumcidit
secuit, praecidit, de praeputio carnis vel cordis dicitur.
Circumcision or the cutting off of the foreskin of the flesh, and it is
applied not only to the corpall but spiritual Circumcision, to the
Circumcision of the heart in the Spirit. Here it is applied either to the
common way of cutting off by death, or to a cutting off by Judgment, both
which may be comprehended under the following similitude; They are cut off As
the tops of the ears of Corn.

The Hebrew is, as the heads of the ears of Corn, that is, Summitas vel caput
spicarum pro ipsis spicis natis in summitate and capite calami.
as the ears of corn which grow upon the top of the straw. Where (by the way)
the reader may take notice, that the word which we render, Ears of Corn, is
that hard word which cost the lives of so many Ephraimites (Judge. 12.6.) Every
man that escaped was bid say Shibboleth, and he said Sibboleth, for he could
not frame to pronounce it right; Then they took him and slew him. The
Gileadites cut off all those Ephraimites who could not rightly pronounce this
word, that signifies ears of Corn; And here Job says that all wicked men are
cut off as the tops of the ears of Corn.

The similitude (as some expound it) sets forth nothing else but the fayrnesse
and easines of the death of wicked men, as has been showed before; They are
cut off as the tops of the ears of corn, that is, they dye as corn when it
is fully ripe, at a full age. Thus Eliphaz spoke to Job by way of promise in
case of his return to God ( Chap. 5.26.) Thou shall come to thy grave in a
full age, like as a shoke of corn comes in his season. But to be cut off
like the tops of the ears of corn, seems rather to imply a violent death,
and sounds much more like a Threatening then a promise: Therefore

First, To be cut off like the tops of the ears of corn, shows how easily
wicked men may be cut off by death or Judgment, rather then the easines of
their death, when they are cut off. How quickly may an ear of corn be cut
off? wicked men who seem as strong as oaks, shall be cut off like strawes.

Secondly, It shows that wicked men are usually cut off by a violent death,
ears of corn are cut off by the reapers sickle, they do not fall off alone:
and though a wicked man dye a natural death, yet there is a violence in it; he
is cut off when he dies in his bed as well as when he dies upon the block; a
natural death, is a kind of violent death to every man who is unwilling to
dye. Such a man does not resign up his soul into the hand of God, but his
soul is rent and ravished from him. Christ says of the rich man, though dying
in his bed (for so the parable is to be understood, Luke 12.20.) Thou fool,
this night thy soul shall be required of thee, or this night do they require
thy soul from thee. It may be questioned, who shall require it? he does not
mean, that murderers should kill him, but that when he dyed his soul should
rather be taken by force, then quietly surrendered.

Thirdly, He shall be cut off as the heads or tops of the ears of corn, may
note his destruction when fullest and highest. For as the ears of corn are
better then the straw (what is the straw to the ear?) so there be some ears
of corn that be head or chief ears; so that to say wicked men shall be cut
off as the head of the ears of corn, is to say they shall be cut off in their
fulness, in their hight and glory. When the wicked are not only ears, but
heads of the ears of corn, when they are at the highest, they shall dye; and
this resemblance holds not only because some ears are head-eares, fuller and
higher then others, but because all corn is cut, when once it comes to a head,
that is, to a perfect fullnes.

Fourthly, To be cut off as the tops of the ears of corn, may also signify
that there is a special time or season, when wicked men are to be cut off; For
as corn is not always ripe for the sickle, so wicked men (though they always
deserve, yet) are not always ripe for Judgment; Corn is not cut down when
green, or when grown high, but when it is ripe and fit for the flaile, it is
cut in its season; wicked men shall be cut off in their season. And as there is
a general season for the harvest of the whole world, so for every man in
particular. ( Rev: 14.15.) Thrust in thy sickle and reap, for the time is come
for thee to reap, for the harvest of the earth is ripe, God will not command
the Angel to put in his sickle till the world be ripe for Judgment, as he
spoke also by the Prophet Joel (Chapter 3.13, 14.) Put in thy sickle for the
harvest is ripe, come get you down for the press is full, the fats overflow,
for their wickedness is great, multitudes, multitudes in the valley of decision,
for the day of the Lord is near, in the valley of decision; that is, in the
valley of cutting down, or of cutting off; or as we put in the Margin, in the
valley of concision or threshing; When the wicked shall be cut off as the tops
of the ears of corn, by the sickle of divine wrath, and be under dreadful
breakings and threshings for evermore.

Lastly, This cutting off as the tops of the ears of corn, shows that God
does not cut off wicked men when he has them at an advantage, when they are
weak, when they are low, but when they are as the tops of the ears of corn,
when they are at their best, then he does it; the chief of the people are
called the heads of the people, (Numb. 25.4.) hang up the heads of the people
before me, says God, by Moses, he cut them off who were as the heads of the
ears of corn. As some Tyrants for fear, So God in Justice cuts off the heads
of the people, the chief of Familyes, Princes, and great men. This was
Elegantly, though cruelly, Summa papaverum capita decussit, ut significaret
principes civitatis paulatim esse ^ollendos. Flor: de Gest: Rom: cap. 7.
expressed by Tarquin the proud, the last King of the Romans, who when a City
was taken, or surrendered, and application was made to him how he would have the
Citizens dealt with, he answered, only by a sign, calling the Messengers into
a garden, and having a stick in his hand, he struck off the heads of the
poppyes, intimating to them, that now the Citizens were in their power, they
should cut off all the chief and leading men among them: Thus the Lord cuts
off the heads of the ears of corn, the chief of men, or men of greatest
power, in the greatness of their power, he cuts them off in love to justice
and righteousness, as tyrants do in fear and jealousy of their power and
greatness. They are cut off as the tops of the ears of corn.

Job having at large described the state of wicked men, and exemplified many of
their wickednesses, concludes by way of challenge.

Verse. 25. And if it be not so, who will make me a liar, and make my speech
nothing worth.
In this verse we have Job triumphing, and yet not so much Job triumphing, as
truth triumphing; for how much soever we speak for and defend the truth, Non
timet veritas falsitatis insidias sed vel pressa tandem triumphat. August: Ser:
de Sanct:
it is not comely that our selves should triumph, but the truth only. Job
indeed shows his confidence in the equity of his cause, which he affirms so
just and so fully proved to be the mind of God, that he dares venture upon the
Judgment of any man alive.

If it be not so now, who will make me a liar. Brevissime in Hebraeo, Etsi non.
Some make other men liars, by teaching them or encouraging them to tell lies,
others make men liars by proving that they have taught or told lies; This is
Jobs meaning when he says, Who will make me a liar? We may suppose Job at the
close of his speech rising up and looking about him, while he spoke thus, who
will make me a liar? Let me see the man stand forth that has any thing to
object against what I have said. The words are elegant in the Original, and if
not, that is, if it be not so as I have asserted concerning the dealeings of
God with wicked men, that they many times flourish and continue flourishing a
long time, if it be not so, let any man disprove me, and make me a liar, if he
can; let him convince me that I am in an error if he can. As if he had said, I
do not impose my opinion upon you, but submit it to the consideration and
discussion of all men.

Hence note.

First, We should freely offer our opinions and assertions to the trial.

It Is too much for a man to look that what he has said should be consented
unto and believed, because he has said it. Only God himself is worthy and
may demand, to be thus believed by man. That God says this or that is enough
to persuade, yea to require our faith in it, and obedience to it. When God
speaks, he that has ears to hear, let him hear (Math. 13.9.) that is, let
him believe and obey, at his peril be it. He that is truth cannot but speak
truth, and therefore is to be believed in whatsoever he speaks. Man ought not
to say any thing as questioning the verity of what God has said. But we ought
to consider what men say, and not to believe beyond what we have tried. And as
no man ought to believe before he has tried, so every man ought to present
what he has said to the trial. Man has no dominion over the faith of
another; Paul professed he had not (2 Cor. 1. 24.) and if Paul had not who
has? dares any man pretend to a higher privilege then Paul himself did? We
may not bind up the consciences of men to our dictates any further then what we
say is grounded upon and answerable to the sayings of God. To the Law and to
the Testimony, if we speak not according to this word, ye have leave or may
take leave to say (as to that saying) there is no light in us ( Is: 8.20.) We
must not teach magisterially, but ministerially, we must not affect to be
called Masters, for one is our Master even Christ (Mat. 23.10.) The Beraeans
received the word with all readiness of mind, yet they did not swallow down all
whole that was said to them, but searched the Scriptures daily whether those
things ware so (Act. 17.11.) The Apostles rule is suitable to their practice (1
These. 5.21.) Prove all things, hold fast that which is good. Now as it is the
duty of hearers and learners to hold nothing till they have proved it, so it is
the duty of Teachers to offer every doctrine to the balance or trial which
they desire others should hold.

Secondly, While Job does thus confidently offer his assertion to trial; We
learn, That Truth is not affrayd to be tried.

Truth often lies in a corner, but truth does not seek corners, truth never
hides her head, as ashamed to be seen or discussed by men. Truth (as some have
said) lies in a deep pit, it is hard to find it out, it lies out of sight,
yet truth does not hide it self, but dares stand forth in the face of all the
world; truth no more fears the trial, then pure gold fears the touchstone,
or then a scholar who has made good progress in his learning, fears to be
examined; He that has truth with him needs not care who appears against him.

Thirdly, In that he says, if it be not so now, who will make me a liar?

Note.

False doctrine is a lie. (Isa. 9.15.) The ancient, and the honorable he is
the head, the Prophet that teaches lies, that is, (the Prophet that teaches
false doctrine) he is the tail. (Jer. 9.3.) They bend their tongues like their
bows for lies, but they are not valiant for the truth on the earth. The
Prophet (as I conceave) intends not so much falsehood in discourse, which we
call telling a lie, as falsehood of doctrine, which we call teaching of lies.
They bend their tongues (as bows) for lies, that is, they set themselves to the
maintaining of false doctrine to the utmost stretch of their wit and words.
Again, says the Lord ( Jer. 14.14.) The Prophets that prophecy lies in my
name, I sent them not, neither have I commanded them, neither spoke unto them,
they prophecy unto you a false divination, and a thing of naught, and the
deceit of their heart. The whole doctrine of the man of sin is called a lie.
Because they received not the love of the truth, that they might be saved,
therefore God gave them up to strong delusion that they should believe a lie (2
These. 2.11.) All the faith-devouring and conscience-wasting errors that ever
the man of sin vented to the world, are wrapped up in this one syllable, or word,
a lie. He that receaveth a lie that is told, wrongeth others by it, but he that
received a lie that is taught wrongeth himself most by it. To tell a lie is
very sinful, but to teach a lie, is much more sinful. The evil of that sin
is greatest which spreads furthest, and continues longest. A lie that is
told and received sticks not long in the memory, but passes away for the
most part like a tale that is told, and it is enough to many a man that tells
a lie, if he be believed but a little while; But a lie that is taught and
received sticks long in the understanding, and abides there like a nail
fastened by the Masters of the assemblyes, and it is not enough to him that
teaches a lie, unless it be believed for ever.

Thirdly, When Job says, Who will make me a liar?

Note.

The worst thing that can be proved against any man, is, that he is a liar. To
be a liar is to be as bad as may be; For it is to be as bad as the Devil; He
deceaved the woman both by telling and teaching a lie ( Genesis 3.) He abode not
in the truth, because there is no truth in him, when he speaks a lie he
speaks of his own, for he is a liar and the father of it (Joh. 6.44.) Every
sin is of the Devil, both by temptation and approbation, but only some sins
are of the Devil by way of practice, and the sin which is chiefly of him by
practice is lying. Now, every sin the more congeniall it is to the Devil, the
more sinful and abominable it is. And therefore among those who shall be
without, lye-makers are chief ( Rev. 22.15.) Without are dogs, and sorcerers,
and whoremongers, and murderers, and Idolaters, and whosoever loves and makes
a lie. The universality of this exclusion is only expressed upon liars, as if
he had said, to be sure all liars shall be without. He that makes a lie has
nothing worse to make; and he that makes (that is, proves) a man to be a
liar, has nothing worse to make of him.

And make my speech nothing worth. The Hebrew is, And bring my speech to
nothing; (...) ide^ quod (...) Graeci b^ne interpretantur (...), verbum e
verbo, in non.
as if he had said, I challenge all men to disprove my reasons, or to prove
that my reasons are not a proof of that for which I brought them. In brief,
let any man refute or confute what I have said, if he can, and then let all
that I have said go for nothing, or be counted nothing worth.

Hence note.

Unsound doctrine is worthless doctrine. The speech of a liar is nothing
worth, sound doctrine is of great value, it is worth thousands. David preferred
the word of God before thousands of Gold, and silver; every holy truth is the
word of God either formally or vertually, either in terms or by consequence.
The Apostle compares sound doctrine to things of greatest worth, even to Gold,
silver, and precious stones, and in the same place (1 Cor. 3.12.) he compares
unsound doctrine or doctrine unsuitable to the foundation (which is Jesus Christ
alone) to wood, hay, stubble, which as they are things in their own nature
unconsiderable and worthless in comparison of Gold, silver, and precious
stones, so, as to the busienes upon which he there treates (a suitable building
upon Christ) they are altogether worthless. And if those doctrines, which
(because of some error in them) are unsuitable to the foundation, are to be
accounted but wood, hay, and stubble, how worthless are those doctrines, which
(being altogether erroneous) are inconsistent with and quite overthrow the
foundation. Such doctrines are worthy of nothing but a dunghill, being
themselves nothing but dross and dung. What is that worth to us, which is
useless to us? How worthless then is that which is destructive to us? Every
error is a Babble, a thing of no use, some errors are as poison, deadly in their
use. The Apostle Peter does not spare to say as much of them (2 Epist. 2.1, 2.)
while he calls them damnable heresies, which bring swift destruction upon the
bringers of them in, or the broachers of them abroad; And if they bring
destruction upon those who bring them, they that receave them cannot be safe.

To conclude this point and Chapter, if erroneous doctrine be nothing worth,
what are those Books worth, which are full of erroneous doctrines? To print
such Books is but wast of pains and paper, and when such Books are printed
the best improvement that can be made of them, is to make them wast paper. To
buy them is wast of money, and to read them, is (to most) but wast of time.
That speech is not worth the hearing, nor is that book worth the reading,
which (as all erroneous books and speeches are) is nothing worth. Job granted,
that if any could make him a liar, they, with the same pains, must needs make
his speech nothing worth. Upon this issue he shuts up his discourse in answer
to Eliphaz, nor durst Eliphaz undertake him any more upon that issue, and
therefore lays down the Bucklers and quits the field; yet Bildad takes them
up and makes a short skirmish with Job; but upon another point, as will appear
in the following Chapter.

JOB, CHAP. 25. Verse. 1, 2, 3. Then answered Bildad the Shuhite, and said,

Dominion and fear are with him, he makes peace in his high places.

Is there any number of his Armies? and upon whom does not his light arise?


THis short Chapter contains Bildads third contest with Job, in which quite
waving the point in Question concerning the present troubles of the righteous
and the felicity of the wicked, he falls, first, into a description of the
glory, power, and majesty of God; secondly, by way of opposition and comparison
he sets forth the misery and impurity of man. For whereas in the 23d Chapter,
verse the 3d, Job appealed unto heaven, wishing that he might have Admittance
to God himself, and plead his cause in his presence; O that I knew where I
might find him! that I might come even to his seat! I would order my cause
before him, and fill my mouth with arguments; Bildad perceiving him thus
confient, labors to take him off by setting before him the greatness, Bildad
iteri^m dei potentiam and altitudinem expendit ut Jobum co^primat, ne divina^
Majestatem appellet, suamque coram judice tanto innocentiam jactet.
and dreadfullnesse of the Lord. He takes up the same argument upon which he
had formerly insisted; wonderfully exalting the Majesty of God, and debasing
man in the sight of his own fraylety. This is the sum and scope of the whole
Chapter.

Verse. 1, 2. Then Bildad the Shuhite, answered and said, Dominion and fear are
with him.
With whom is not expressed, though it be the beginning of a speech. God is often
spoken of in Scripture without naming. The glorious things which are attributed
unto him will fit and suit none but himself. Barely to say some things are
done, is as much as to say, they are done by God, because none but God can do
such things. And as such things may be named as can be done only by God, so
such things may be named as can belong to none, but God. As here dominion and
fear are with him; that is, with God. For these can belong to none but God.
And because these are proper and peculiar unto God, therefore Bildad seems to
say thus to Job; Surely thou have not yet considered (as thou ought) the
sovereign authority and power of God, which must needs strike thee with an
awful reverence of him, and cause thee to know thy own distance better.
Surely thou do not mind, that, Dominion and fear are with God, and that
thou thy self art but dust and ashes, yea impure and polluted dust and ashes.

Vnum hoc agit ut demonst et Jobi desiderium conveniendi deum esse temerarium.
Coc:
Thus Bildad seems to chide and rebuke the forwardness of Job in appealing and
putting his cause to God; as if he had been over-bold with God, while he
desired right of him against the unrighteous accusations of men. Or as if he
had forgotten the sovereignty of God, while he was earnestly begging that he
would do him Justice.

Dominion and fear are with him. (...) Notat efficax exercitium potestatis.
Dominion, is that supreme power that God exercises over all things, and
persons. The Hebrew is strictly rendered thus; To rule is his; we say, Dominion
is with him. There are three things which we may comprehend under the dominion
of God.

First, His strength and mighty power, whereby he is able to subdue all things
unto himself, as the Apostle speaks ( Phil. 1.21.)

Secondly, His authority, whereby he has a right to do whatsoever he does. (
Dan. 4.35.)

Thirdly, His Efficiency, or the efficacy of his power, whereby he is able to
carry every thing through to the desired issue ( Is: 43.13.) Many have great
power, and great authority, who yet want this efficacy and efficiency, they may
undertake much, but they cannot carry it through; whereas in God there is a
concurrence of these three, strength, authority, and efficacy, to bring to
pass what ever himself intends, or is pleased to do. The Dominion which
Bildad here ascribes unto God, is a dominion clothed with these three
excellencies. From the scope of Bildad, representing God in his dominion and
greatness.

Observe.

The best way to humble man is to set the power and sovereignty of God, as also
his holiness and infinite purity before him. Any of the perfections of God
taken in by faith and well meditated upon, may lay the heart of man low. How
does all our bravery and the high conceits which we have of our selves vanish
like smoke and become a mere nothing at the appearances of God? Though (as the
Apostle speaks, 2 Cor. 10.12.) we measuring our selves by our selves, and
comparing our selves amongst our selves are not wise; Yet while we only do so
we seem very wise; But when once we compare our selves with God, O what idiots
and poor simple things are we. What is our power when once we contemplate the
power of God? What is the dominion which any Prince of the earth has when once
he considers the dominion and sovereignty of God? What is the wisdom of man,
what the holiness of man, to the wisdom and holiness of God?

Dominion and fear are with him. More particularly, in that Dominion is here
appropriated to God.

Observe.

Supreme power is proper unto God. There is a dominion put into the hands of
men: many have dominion and power, but originally all Dominion is Gods. In him
is the seat and root of power. David says ( Psalm. 62.11.) God has spoken
once, twice have I heard it, that power belongs unto God. As my ear has
heard so my heart has heard and consented to this truth. And this power or
dominion of God may be considered four ways.

First, In the universality of it, (1 Chronicles. 29.12.) where David makes this
confession; Both riches and honor come of thee, and thou reighnest over all,
and in thine hand is power and might, and in thine hand is to make great and to
give strength unto all. He that gives strength unto all, has strength over
all, and his dominion is over all nations and persons, not limited to this or
that particular nation or person: yea he has dominion not only over all here
below; but in heaven above; as Bildad speaks a little after; He makes peace
in his high places. Christ is Prince of the Kings of the earth (Rev: 1.5.) He
is Lord of Lords and King of Kings (Rev. 19.16.) that is, not only a King or a
Lord, excelling all other Kings and Lords, but also ruling them, or reighning
over them: Kings are his Subjects.

Secondly, His is an absolute dominion, that is, he governes by no law, but by
his own will: this kind of dominion is proper unto God alone. He does and he
only may govern by his own will. He does in heaven and earth what ever
pleases him. This was spoken of ( Job 23.13.) He is in one mind, and who can
turn him? and what his soul desires that he does. He does not go out of
himself for his rule, his own desire is his rule, all the desires of God are
holy, just, and righteous, and therefore his desire and will may well be his
rule. It is good that he should have an absolute dominion, and rule according
to his own will, who cannot will any thing, but what is good. And it is but
just that he should rule as he pleases, who cannot be pleased with any thing
but what is just.

Thirdly, His is an everlasting dominion ( Psalm. 145.13. Psalm. 66.7.) As men
are mortal, so are States, Kingdoms, and Empires. The strongest and greatest
of them have had their fates and funerals. We see what changes there have been
of dominion and power out of one hand into another; but the dominion of God is
subject to no change, nor knows it any fate. The Babylonian, the Persian, the
Grecian, and the Roman Monarchies have seen their day; but the dominion of
Jesus Christ is an everlasting dominion ( Dan. 4.34.) it is so acknowledged even
by Nebuchadnezzar. And at the end of the days I Nebuchad-nezzar lift up mine
eyes unto heaven, and mine understanding returned unto me, and I blessed the
most high, and I praised and honored him that lives for ever, whose dominion
is an everlasting dominion, and his Kingdom is from generation to generation.

Fourthly, His is an Effectual Dominion. As he has a right to do what he
will, so he has strength to effect what he wills. Such is the dominion of
God, and because it is such, even an uni^^rian, absolute, everlasting and
effectual Dominion. Therefore, let man remember his duty.

Dominion calls for subjection. That Is the Apostles rule ( Romans 13.1.) Let
every soul be subject unto the higher powers: and if every soul ought to be
subject unto the higher powers among men: then every soul ought to be subject,
much more to the power of God, for his is the highest power. And thus we ought
to submit.

First, Unto his laws; Legislative power is his, what God says must be our
rule. We may not dispute, much less quarrel at any of his commands, but obey
them: naturally the heart of man rebels against the law of God ( Romans 8.7.)
The carnal mind is enmity against God: for it is not subject to the law of
God, neither indeed can be; that is, it cannot be subject, while it remains
carnal; only a renewed or a spiritual mind submits to a spiritual law.

Secondly, Submit to his works, to what he does, as well as to what he says;
and that, first, in the provision and allowances that he makes for you, that is
a part of Gods dominion to cut out a portion for every man. Therefore in every
estate be content; secondly, submit to the works of God in his afflictions, and
chastisements (1 Pe. 5.6.) Humble your selves under the mighty hand of God,
that he may exalt you in due time. When old Eli heard that terrible message
concerning the destruction of his whole family (for Samuel told him every whit,
and hid nothing from him) he said it is the Lord: let him do what seems him
good (1 Samuel 3.18.) Thus the Church sat down in silence not speaking a word
because it was the act of God ( Lam. 3.28.) Thirdly, submit to God in the whole
compass of his government, in ordering the affairs of the whole world, when
he breaks, and when he builds, when he sets up, and when he pulls down, when
he makes peace, and when he makes war, in all these acts of dominion submit
to God. When the Prophet calls us to behold what desolations the Lord makes in
the earth, he adds this word as from the Lord, Be still and know that I am God
(Psalm. 46.10.) As if the Lord had said, Let none question me for what I have
done, I am God, and if ye know, indeed, that I am, ye will not have a word to
say against what I do. So ( Zech: 2.13.) Be silent, O all flesh, before the
Lord: for he is raised up out of his holy habitation: He is risen to make great
changes, therefore be silent, submit, let there be no murmuring at, no
contending with his providence; for dominion and fear are with him.

Some render this word fear, as an adjunct or Epithete of the former;
Dominatus and quidem formidabilis est penes illum. Jun:
Dominion and that a terrible fearful or formidable dominion is with him, but
rather distinctly as we, Dominion and fear are with him. God has no fear in
him, nor upon him, for he is as infinitely above all fear, as he is above
hope. But fear is with him, or, fear is his, because he is so much to be
feared. Fear is with God upon this threefold account.

First, Because many at present do fear the Lord: every Godly man is a man
fearing God.

Secondly, Because every man ought to fear, dread, and stand in awe of God,
even the Princes and powers and dominions of the earth, ought to fear the
Lord. ( Psalm. 2.11.) Be wise now therefore O ye Kings; be instructed, O ye
Judges of the earth, serve the Lord with fear, and rejoice with trembling.
Kings and Judges must serve and fear the Lord, or serve the Lord with fear.
Who then must not?

Thirdly, Fear is with him; because all shall fear and dread him at last,
whether they will or no, they whose proud hearts stout it against God, they
that go on impudently in sin, fearelesse of the Majesty and wrath of God,
yet a time will come when their stomachs shall be taken down; a time will come
when all the world shall tremble before the Lord. As now, many do it, and as
all ought to do it, so all shall do it. ( Isa. 2.19.) They shall go into the
holes of the rocks, and into the tops of the ragged rocks, for fear of the
Lord, and for the glory of his Majesty; when he arises to shake terribly the
earth. Such a day is coming upon the lofty ones, upon the Cedars and upon the
Oaks, upon the fearelesse, and they shall fear; and (which is the greatest
argument of fear) run into a hole for fear. It is prophesied ( Revel. 6.15.)
That, the Kings of the earth, and the great men, and the rich men, and the
chief Captains, and the mighty men, and every bondsman, and every free man
shall hide themselves in the dens and in the rocks of the mountains, and say
to the rocks and to the mountains fall on us and hide us from the face of him
that sits on the Throne, and from the wrath of the Lamb. They who having
been threatened with the wrath of God, were no more afraid then the rocks,
shall, for fear, woo the rocks to hide them from the wrath of God. Though
Adam had not the fear of God to keep him from sin, yet the fear of God
fell upon him as soon as he had sinned. ( Genesis 3.10.) I heard thy voice in the
garden and I was afraid; because I was naked and I hid my self.

Hence Observe.

First, God is in himself very dreadful, he is to be feared.

God is so much to be feared, that not only fear is with him, but he is
fear. As because God is so full of love, therefore the Scripture predicates
love directly of God, God is love (1 John 4.8.) so because God is greatly to be
feared, therefore he is called fear (Genesis 31.42.53.) Except the God of my
father, the God of Abraham, and the fear of Isaac (that is, the God whom my
father Isaac feared) had been with me, surely thou had sent me away empty,
said Jacob in his contest with Laban. And at the 53d verse of the same Chapter
he says again to Laban; the God of Abraham, and the G^d of Nahor, the God of
their father, judge betwixt us: and Jacob ^ware by the fear of his father
Isaac; that is, he swear by God; for by him only can we swear in a holy
manner, An oath being a part or an act of divine worship. The dominion and
fear of God are put together ( Mal. 1.14. I am a great King (there is
dominion) and my name is dreadful among the Heathen. (there is fear.) Even
Heathens who know God only by the lig^t of Nature, (which is so imperfect a
way of knowing God, that the Heathen are said not to know him, Jer. 10.25. yet
I say, the Heathen who know God only thus) do fear him, they fear him in
proportion to or according to the way of their knowledge of him. How much more
then is the Lord to be feared, and how dreadful is be to and among his ow^e
people, who know him savingly, who know him by Gospel light. God is greatly to
be feared in the assembly of the Saints: and to be had in reverence of all them
that are about him (Psalm. 89.7.) He is terribly dreadful amongst the Heathen,
he is awfully or reverentially dreadful among the Saints. Fear is with him.

First, In reference to the greatness of his power; consider what God can do,
and that renders him dreadful. We fear those that can do great things,
those especially that can do great things against us. For this reason Christ
exhorts his Disciples to fear God, when he saw them in danger of a surprisal
by the fear of what men could do against them ( Luke 12.4, 5.) I say unto you
my friends be not afraid of them that kill the body, and after that have no
more that they can do. But I will forewarne you whom ye shall fear: fear
him which after he has killed, has power to cast into hell; yea, I say unto
you, fear him. How is he to be feared, who at one stroke can pierce body and
soul quite through, and throw both into hell? The Lord is to be feared upon
the consideration of the ordinary providentiall puttings forth of his power,
how much more when he puts forth his power extraordinarily and Judicially? (
Jer: 5.22.) Fear ye not me, says the Lord? will ye not tremble at my
presence, which have placed the sand for the bound of the Sea, by a perpetual
decree, that it cannot pass it, and though the waves thereof toss themselves,
yet can they not prevail, though they roar, yet can they not pass over it? I
have done this thing, put a stop to the Sea, I have put a bridle into the mouth
of the Sea, I can check the waves when they roar and toss, and will ye not
fear me?

Secondly, God is to be feared for his goodness, as we read at the 24th verse
of the same Chapter, where the Lord upbraides their want of fear, while they
remembered his most ordinary good providence at land; Neither say they in their
heart, let us now fear the Lord our God, that gives rain, both the former
and the latter in his season: he reserveth unto us the appointed weeks of the
harvest. If God be to be feared for that witness of his goodness which is held
out by rain and fruitful seasons, or by filling the hearts of men in common
with food and gladness, then how much more is God to be feared for the
distinguishing acts of his goodness and mercy, the pardon of sin, and the giving
out of his Spirit. There is forgivenes with thee, that thou may be feared,
said the Psalmist (130.4.) and ( Hos: 3.5.) They shall fear the Lord and his
goodness in the latter days; that is, they shall fear the Lord because of
his goodness, his special goodness to his Church and people, in advancing them
to all their spiritual liberties and privileges in the latter days. And thus
the Lord is said to be not only glorious in holiness, but fearful in
praises; because we should fear him when we are praising him, both because
he has wrought so much goodness and mercy for those who are unworthy, as also
lest while we receave so much from the hand of his goodness and mercy, we should
walk unworthyly.

Secondly, When the text says, Fear is with him, we learn, That God can
strike man with fear when he pleases.

Power is with him, and he can put forth his power: if God send out his power,
it goes and prevails. So fear is with him, and he can send out his fear
to strike whom he will with fear, when and as often as he will. The Scriprure
shows the Lord sending forth his fear at pleasure, and attaching the
strongest and hardyest of the children of men. It is said ( Genesis 35.5.) And
they journeyed (that is, Jacob and his small company) and the terror of God
was upon the Cities that were round about them, and they did not pursue after
the sons of Jacob. The terror of God was sent out to keep them in, so that
none of them stirred. Else no doubt but all the Cities would have pursued them
because of that high provocation which the sons of Jacob had given them by the
late slaughter of the Sichemites. When God promised to send Hornets before the
people of Israel to drive out the uncircumcised Nations, this fear was the
Hornet ( Exodus 23.28.) God stung their hearts with fear, or (as it were by
Hornets) buzzed a fear into their ears; as he did into the ears of the
Syrians, who encamped before Samaria (2 Kings 7.6, 7.) The Lord made the host
of the Syrians to hear a noise of Charets, and a noise of Horses, even the
noise of a great host: and they said one to another, lo the King of Israel
has hired against us the Kings of the Hittites, and the Kings of the
Egyptians, to come upon us. Wherefore they arose, and fled in the twilight, and
left their tents, and their horses, and their asses, even the camp as it was,
and fled for their life. As a word from God makes the heart confident and bold
in the greatest danger, so a word from God makes the heart fearful and
cowardly, where there is no danger at all. This is the glory of God, that he
can command our passions. That by a word he can make them fear, who do not at
all fear his word.

Many men have fear belonging to them, yet they cannot send out their fear,
they are in great place, and so both dominion over men, and fear are with them
(for unto whomsoever dominion belongs, fear does belong ( Romans 13.7.) Render
to every man his due, tribute to whom tribute is due, custom to whom custom,
fear to whom fear, honor to whom honor Yet (I say) many have dominion and
fear belonging unto them, who cannot send out their fear. Their power is
despised, and none regards them; they command, and are not obeyed, they promise
and are not believed, they threaten, and are not feared. Only God can send out
his fear, and make every man fall and tremble before him When many armed men
came to take Christ, Christ sent out a fear upon them, so that they went
backward and fell to the ground (Joh. 18.6.) Christ gave them never an angry
word, he only confessed himself to be the man they sought for, I am he; and
they were as men astonished with fear; Christ in speaking those words did
only let out a little ray or beam of his Deity, and this struck them down. O
what fear will Christ send out when he comes to judge the world, who could
send forth such a fear, while he yielded himself up to be judged and
condemned by the world. Dominion and fear are with him. He can make all
afraid, and yet, as it follows; He makes peace in his high places.

This latter part of the verse, is a continued description of the irresistible
power of God (as all agree) in making peace, yet there is some difference what
should be meant by the high places, where God makes peace; He makes peace in
his high places.

First, Many understand these high places, to be the Heavens, or (as the
Scripture speaks) the Host of Heaven, Sun, Moon, and Stars; There or
among them peace is made through the power of God, keeping them in or to order,
that is, in their duest motions. The heavenly bodies are in continual strong
motion, and they are kept in their motion by the power of God. The Sun,
Moon, and Stars, are mighty bodies, and they are in a perpetual career, yet
they justle not one against another, nor do they fall foul upon one another.
In this sense it may be said, that God makes peace among them; They all
according to his appointment keep their places, and stir not out of their
own spheres No man could ever keep his Watch or Clock in such order as God
keeps the Sun.

Secondly, By these high places, others understand that which is somewhat
lower; not Sun, Moon, and Stars, but the several regions of the air; God
makes peace in those high places, where storms and tempests and all manner of
fiery impressions are bred and wrought. Naturalists say, that the second region
of the air is both the shop where those dreadful instruments of war,
Thunder, lightning, hayle, snow, are formed, as also the storehouse where they
are laid up; yet even in those high places, God makes peace. If he speak to
the thunder, Deus vel solo nutu tranquillat elementorum dissidia tempestatesque
serenat.
it does not stir, and to the lightning, it does not go forth, if he speak
to the wind it blows not, and to the storm it is hushed and quiet. Fire and
hayle snow and vapor stormy wind and tempest, fulfill his word (Psalm.
148.8.) And they fulfill it whether in going or in staying. Thus God makes
peace in the high places of the air, and upon the high waves of the Sea.
Christ did but rebuke the Sea, and say to it (when it was in its feircest rage)
peace, be still, and there was a great calm (Mark. 4.39.) The air is under
the Empire of God as much as Sea or Land; And he makes peace in those high
places.

Thirdly, The words are expounded of those high places which are the more
proper seat of Angels. And so God may be said to make peace in his places,
because he makes peace among the Angels, that is, he keeps the Angels in
peace; The Angels do not contend one with another, and none of them dares
contend with God. Some urge this exposition as most pertinent to Bildads
purpose for the conviction of Job; As if he had said, His verbis vellicatur Job
quasi insolens sediti^sus and querulus homo. Pined:
The Angels dare not contend with God, And do thou (O Job) contend with God?
The Angels utter not a word against God, and dare thou undertake to plead
with him, and engage him in a controversy?

A fourth sort, by Gods making peace in his high places, understand only thus
much, That all is quiet in heaven, or that God has a most peaceable and quiet
fruition, and enjoyment of himself; He has had it from eternity, and will
have it unto eternity, this is the blessedness of God, he is above all
trouble and disturbment. And thus also Bildad seems to reprove Job; Will thou
begin a contest with God, will thou trouble God himself, who makes peace in
his high places, who lives in everlasting rest and quiet. God does not use to
be sued and pleaded with as thou seem over-boldly to desire.

Lastly, These high places are expounded for the high places of the earth; As
if he had said, God makes peace amongst the States, Princes, and powers of the
world, who are in high places, and in Gods high places. For every throne is
Gods, and thrones are high places. As the heavens are high places in comparison
of the whole earth, so some places of the earth (in a civil capacity as well as
in a natural) are higher then the rest. Now among those that are in his high
places of power and authority, the Lord makes peace, and this is a very
glorious work of God. Thus we see there are many high places, and they are
all the high places of God; yet I conceave that Bilded cheifely if not only
aims at Heaven, which is more peculiarly the high place of God; as being that
to which (though many lay claim to the high places of the earth) none besides
God ever did make claim or lay title.

Further, Besides these different apprehensions about the high places, there is
a difference in the reading of the words together; some thus; He works in
peace in his high places; That is, what troubles soever are here on earth,
there is peace and quietness in heaven, or there God works in peace and
quietness. Others, thus; The Dominion and fear which are with him make peace
in his high places; As if the dominion and power of God were that to which
peacemaking is ascribed as an effect. Or as if he had said, God has authority
enough to compose all differences, yea he so orders things in heaven that there
arises no difference in those high places, his dominion and fear keep all in
peace. There are no murmurings nor discontents, much less any rebellions or
open wars in heaven.

M. Broughton reports the Chaldee translation in a phrase very uncouth in our
language; Sultanship and fear be with him: (some Eastern Princes are called
Sultans) He makes peace in his high heavens. To which he adds the exposition
or gloss of the Chaldee Paraphrase; Michael is on his right hand; and he is
of fire; Gabriel is on his left hand; and he is of water; and the heavenly
creatures be part of fire and part of water. But Mr Broughton gives a good
corrective, such Fables St Paul forbids. To conclude, though it be difficult
which of the high places before-named are here meant, yet it is a truth that
all high places are his high places, and that in what high place soever peace
is made, God makes it. He makes peace in his high places.

Hence observe.

Peacemaking is the work of God. And as God makes peace every where, so he
makes every kind of peace. We find peace spoken of in Scripture in a
five-fold opposition; and God the maker of that five-fold peace.

First, He makes peace in the high places of the world, as peace is opposed
to any kind of trouble, or affliction. Peace is usually accompanied with
prosperity, and peace signifies any kind of prosperity. Peace in this extent
is assumed by God himself as his proper work ( Isa. 45.7.) I form the light,
and create darkness, I make peace and create evil, I the Lord do all these
things; that is, I do them and none can do them without me, or but by me.

Secondly, God makes peace as peace is (more strictly) taken in opposition to
war and tumults; He causes war to cease in all the world, (Psalm. 46.9.)
He makes war to cease unto the end of the earth; He breaks the bow, and
cutteth the spear in sunder, he burns the Chariots in the fire. He that
destroys all the Instruments of war, does surely make peace; and he that
makes war to cease, does certainly make peace begin. Peace is made two
ways; first, by taking up the differences and reconciling the Spirits of men;
secondly, by breaking the power and taking away all provisions of war from
men. The Lord makes peace by both these ways, or by either of them.

Thirdly, God makes peace as peace is opposed to persecution; There may be no
war in a Nation, and yet no peace to the people of God, by reason of sore and
fiery persecution; yea a general peace is the very opportunity which
persecuters look for, to break the peace of particular men. The most bloody
times that the Church ever had, have been the most peaceable times of Nations.
And when nations are most troubled, then Churches usually get their libertyes,
and are most quiet. Such a peace as this the Churches had, though I cannot say
they had it upon this occasion. ( Acts 9.31.) Then had the Churches rest (or
peace, that is, they were quiet from their cruel persecutours) throughout all
Judea, and Galile, and Samaria, and were edified, and walking in the fear of
the Lord, and in the comfort of the holy Ghost, were multiplied. This peace
does God make for his Saints, his little flock, that they may sometimes lie
down in Green pastures, and beside the still waters, without fear of the
Wolves and Lions, who would always tear and worry them. Thus the Lord
promises ( Isa. 60.17, 18.). I will make thy officers peace, and thine
exactours righteousness, violence shall no more be heard in thy land, wasting
nor destruction within thy borders.

Fourthly, God makes peace, as peace is opposed to dissension among brethren.
It is possible there may be no war in a place, yea no persecution, none to
vex the people of God, and yet they may have great dissentions, vexations, and
divisions among themselves. This peace the Church of Corinth wanted, when none
from without troubled the Church. Hence that rebuke which the Apostle gives
them (1 Cor. 3.3.) Whereas there is among you envying and strife and divisions,
are ye not carnal and walk as men? Thus Saints and Churches war one with and
trouble another, when the world gives them no trouble at all. To the keeping of
this peace Christ admonishes his Disciples ( Mark. 9.50.) Have salt in your
selves, and have peace one with another. But why did Christ speak thus to his
own Disciples; have peace one with another? Were they ready to make war one
with another? had they any Armies to engage and lead out into the field against
one another? surely none. Therefore when Christ says, have peace one with
another, his meaning was only this, wrangle not with one another, fall not out
one with one another. The Disciples were not like to run into any other war
but that of dissension amongst themselves. And this war may be in those
Churches that live in the most peaceable condition. And it is God only who
makes peace as in his high places both of heaven and earth, so in his holy
places.

Fifthly, and lastly, God makes peace as peace is opposed to disorder, for
there may be consent amongst men, and yet much disorder among men, yea they may
(possibly) agree, consent and center together in that which is most disorderly.
Of this peace the Apostle speaks (1 Cor. 14.33.) God is not the author of
confusion but of peace, as in all Churches of the Saints, that is, God would
have every one keep his order and his place; He would not have the Prophets
speak all together in the Church, for that is disorderly; nor would he have
women speak at all in the Church, for that also is disorderly. That which
breaks order breaks peace, for there can be no true peace without order, and
God is not the Author of disorder or confusion in Churches but of peace.

Thus peacemaking is the work of God in this five-fold oppotion, as peace is
opposed to trouble, as peace is opposed to war, as peace is opposed to
persecution, as peace is opposed to dissension, and lastly, as peace is opposed
to disorder. To make peace in all these kinds, is as much the honor as it is
only in the power of God. He makes peace in his high places.

Secondly, Observe.

Where God is most eminently, there is most peace. He makes peace on the
earth, but in his high places where his most glorious appearance is, there is
nothing but peace. And as There is nothing but peace in heaven, where God
declares himself most clearly, so they to whom God declares himself most
clearly on earth are most for peace: the nearer and the liker we are unto
God, the nearer we are unto peace, and the more we like it. All true peace
flows out from God, and the more of a healing and peacemaking spirit
appears in any man, the more of God appears in him.

Lastly, By way of inference; Take this, First,

Seeing God makes peace in his high places, or in heaven above, how easily can
he (when our breaches are widest) make peace in these low places of the earth.
And because, as it is his property, so his promise to do it, we should wait
upon him for and urge him with the fullfilling of this promise, that he who
makes peace always in the high places of heaven, would make that five-fold
peace in the low places of the earth.

Secondly, Seeing God is able to make peace in all places, he can also make
war in all places. The same power does both, and Bildad shows the
preparations of God for war as well as his sanctions of peace. For he has
innumerable Armies under his command, as it follows in the next verse.

Verse. 3. Is there any number of his Armies? and upon whom does not his light
arise?
There seems to be somewhat a strange conjunction between these two verses,
he makes peace, and, Is there any number of his Armies? One would think we
should hear of nothing but war, when we hear of such numberless armies.
God has innumerable invincible armies, always ready for war, yet he is
most ready to make peace; yea he who is The Lord of Hosts, is also styled, The
Lord of peace (2 These. 3.16.) This likewise speaks the dominion, power, and
Majesty of God in that he makes peace, and can make war. His armies are at
hand, and those no contemptible ones. As if Bildad had thus bespoken Job; It is
in vain for thee who art a weak man, to think of contending with God, who
has numberless armies to take his part against all opposers.

The word which we translate Armies, properly signifies Troops. Is there any
number of his troops? And this is given in name to one of the Patriarchs (
Genesis 30.11.) And Leah said, a Troop comes; And she called his name Gad. A
troop is a little Army; and a great Army consists of many troops. We say, Is
there any number of his Armies?

When the Scripture says, that God has armies, it is not to be understood as
if God needed them, either to protect himself, or to suppress his enemies;
The Lord of hosts himself is infinitely stronger then all the Armies and hosts
of which he is Lord. Earthly Princes have their Armies, and guards, to protect
their persons and dominions from danger and invasion. They want armies to help
their friends abroad, and to defend their Subjects at home. Woldly Princes
borrow power from others to protect themselves, while they undertake to protect
others. But God is the guard of his guards, and the strength of his own
armies. Princes are saved by their Armies, but God is the safety of his armies.
The Gods of the earth are afraid of what man may do unto them, but the God of
heaven is not only above those fears, but also above all want of man's doing
any thing for him. So that, as God is not worshipped with man's hands (as the
Apostle tells The Athenians, Act. 17.25.) as though he needed any thing, so
neither is he assisted by men's hands or by any hand, as if he needed any thing,
seeing he gives to all life and breath and all things.

And therefore when the Lord is said to have Armies, it is either to signify,
first, that he has all things at his command, and is full of power, or
secondly, that although he can do all things by himself, yet he will use the
agency of the creature to effect his purposes.

This question, Is there any number of his armies? resolves it self into this
negative, There is no number of his armies, or there is no numbering of them.
But what are these armies of God?

First, The Angels are his armies: we read of one Angel that destroyed a
whole army, (2 Kings 19.35.) And it came to pass that night, that the Angel of
the Lord went out, and smote in the camp of the Assyrians, an hundred
fourscore and five thousand; and when they arose early in the morning, behold,
they were all dead corpses. If one Angel destroyed an army, what cannot an army
of Angels do? The Angels of God are armies without number. We read them
expressed by such great numbers, as render their numbers inexpressible. So in
Daniels vision of the Glory of God ( Chap. 7.10.) A fiery stream issued, and
came forth from before him: thousand thousands ministered unto him, and ten
thousand times ten thousand stood before him; that is, an innumerable company
stood before him. Christ said to Peter when he drew his sword and sought to
rescue him from the Officers of the High Priest that came to arrest and bring
him to Judgment, Put up thy sword again into his place, for all they that
take the sword shall perish with the sword. Think thou that I cannot now
pray to my father, and he shall presently give me more then twelve legions of
Angels (Math. 26.53.) Here is an army of Angels. Christ speaks in the Roman
phrase, who reckoned their armies by legions, as we do by regiments, Six
thousand six hundred sixty six was the number of a legion as some affirm, and
if so, Then twelve legions make Seventy nine thousand nine hundred ninety two;
a great Army; but (says Christ) my father can send more then twelve legions.
But how many more, no man can say. Christ pitcheth upon a great certain
number, to show that he might have what number he would, if he did but call
for them.

Secondly, The Sun, Moon, and Stars, are the Armies of God. ( Judges
5.20.) They fought from heaven, That is, the heavenly or aeriall meteors, wind,
thunder, hayle, did as it were join their confederate forces for the
destruction of Isreal's enemies (as they had done before, Josh. 10.11. and as
they did afterward, 1 Samuel 7.10.) yea as it follows in the same place, the
Stars in their courses fought against Sisera. The Stars charged like an
Army in battle array, raising storms and dreadful tempests by their
influences, and so might be said to fight against and ruin the whole army of
Sicera. By all which Rhetorical expressions the Spirit would lead us to
understand, that the Lord himself by invisible powers did fight against
Sisera, while Israel fought him with a visible power. Surely if the Stars be
the Lords armies, we may well say, is there any number of his armies? When the
Lord would show Abraham that his seed should be an innumerable army, he
brought him forth and said, look now toward heaven, and tell the Stars, if
thou be able to number them. And he said unto him, so shall thy seed be (Genesis
15.5.) that is, thy seed shall be numberless, as the Stars are numberless.

Thirdly, By these Armies we may understand, not only the Angels, and the
Sun, Moon, and Stars, that heavenly host, but any creature, yea all the
creatures, from the Elephant even to the worm that creeps upon the ground,
or to the fly that buzzeth in the air, or to the lice that breed out of
corruption. All these are the Armies of God; and by these he can do his work
as well as by the Angels in heaven. What were the armies of God, with which he
made war upon Pharaoh? were they not flies and lice and such like
contemptible creatures, mustred together at his command? therefore the Text may
well say, Is there any number of his armies? God can leavy an army upon the
earth, not only of men, but of beasts, and not only of Lions and Elephants,
the stoutest and greatest beasts, but of the weakest and meanest, and not only
of the weakest and meanest among living creatures, but of the very Inanimate
creatures, the stones in the feilds, the winds in the air, the waters of the
Sea, yea the sand of the Sea, and the very dust of the earth are the armies of
God, if he give them commission and send them forth. God and the weakest
creature are an overmatch for the strongest creatures; It Is no matter how mean
the means is, or how inconsiderable the instrument, so it be in the hand of
God, so it be of Gods providing, and go forth at his bidding. God can leavy an
army where he will, and out of what he will, and it shall do the deed. Now if
all things or any thing may be his army, no marvayle if it be said, Is there
any number of his Armies?

Hence observe.

All creatures are the host the Armies of God. They may be called his Armies in
a threefold consideration.

First, Because of their multitude, a few cannot make an army. There are many
creatures of every kind, how many then are all of every kind put together?

Secondly, They are his Armies, because of their order; The greatest many out
of order do not make an Army, but a throng or heap. Armies are martiall'd and
disciplined, trained and taught. An Army is an ordered company; all the
creatures are in order by nature, and when God calls they are in order as it
were by Art.

Thirdly, They are his Armies, because as God has a power to command them, so
they are ready to obey him; They (as the Centurion in the Gospel said of his
Soldiers) go when God says go, they come, when he says come, and if he bid
them do this or that they do it. Soldiers must neither refuse nor dispute
the commands of their General. The most violent and boisterous creatures, are
obedient to the call of God; stormy winds and tempests fulfill his word (Psalm.
148.8.) He speaks to the lightnings; and they say, here are we (Job 38.35.)
The very thunder which seems to be all voice, is all ear at the voice of God.
The Angels are so ready to go, that they are said to fly, and their readiness
to do the will of God in heaven, is made the pattern of our doing it here on
earth. The Scripture speaks often of them as of an army employed in wars,
either to destroy the wicked, or to be a guard to the people of God. We have an
illustrious example of the latter in Jacobs case ( Genesis 32.2.) And when Jacob
saw them, he said, this is Gods host: and he called the name of that place
Mahanaim, that is, two hosts or companies. And it might be so called, because
Jacobs company or little host, and that company of Angels who were Gods host
sent out to convoy him in safety, did both encampe upon the same ground; or
rather because the Angels divided themselves into two companyes, The one
encamping and marching before him as his Vantguard, the other behind him or in
his Reere; That so he might see himself every way protected, and might be
filled with a full assurance of safety. That God has such numerous Armies
always at hand and under command, is

First, A very comfortable hearing to all that love and fear God. The Apostle
says ( Romans 8.31.) If God be for us, who can be against us? that is, none can.
Though many be against us opposingly yet none can be against us prevaylingly.
We may say also if the Lord be for us, who will not be for us? If God be our
helper, we cannot want helpers, not only because the help of God is enough
without any more, but because, if he be our helper we shall have many more.
When we see our selves utterly destitute of all helps and helpers, yet God
has an army of helpers, he has auxiliary forces ready for us. ( Psalm. 34.7.)
The Angel of the Lord encampeth round about them that fear him, and delivers
them. David speaks as if one single Angel were a whole Army; The Angel of the
Lord (says he) encampeth, he does not say the Angels of the Lord encampe about
them that fear him; and indeed every Angel of the Lord is more in power, then
a whole Army of men; yet here, possibly, is meant that Angel who is the Lord,
The Angel of the Covenant, who as Captain General with his Army of created
Angels encampeth about them that fear God. And if so, then they need not be
afraid. (2 Kings 6.16, 17.) When the servant of Elisha cried out for fear,
Elisha answered, fear not: they that be with us are more then they that be
with them. And Elisha prayed, And said, Lord, I pray thee open his eyes that
he may see, and the Lord opened the eyes of the young man, and he saw: and
behold, the mountain was full of horses; and Charrets of fire round about
Elisha. And thus it is often with us though we discern it not. We have many
invisible succors, in our visible dangers. And as, that the Angels are our
helpers in eminent and extraordinary dangers is very comfortable, so also, that
they are so against ordinary, common or every-day-dangers. ( Psalm. 91.11, 12.)
He shall give his Angels charge over thee; to keep thee in all thy ways.
They shall bear thee up in their hands; lest thou dash thy foot against a
stone, that is, lest thou take hurt in thy daily works and travels.

Secondly, These Armies are a terror to all those who rebel and rise up
against God, or are enemies to his people. He that resists God has as many
enemies as there are Angels in heaven, or stars in the firmament, or stones
in the earth, or beasts in the field; so many enemies has he, and if God
appear as Captain general, none shall be able to stand before his armies,
though he levy them of Grasse-hoppers, or flies, or worms, or lice. How should
the greatest fear to provoke God, who can make them fall by that which is
least? For as David acknowledged ( Psalm. 33.16, 17.) There is no King saved by
the multitude of an host: a mighty man is not delivered by much strength: a
horse is a vain thing for safety: neither shall he deliver any by his great
strength. So we must acknowledge, That if God will, any King may be destroyed
by the smallest host, that a mighty man may be overcome by that which has no
strength, that a fly is a sufficient thing for ruin, and that, if God say the
word, even that shall not only trouble but subdue any man with its little or
no strength.

Secondly, Note.

The power which God can draw forth is a limitlesse power. His Armies are
without number. When Princes have greatest Armies they may number them, and
tell you how many hundreds and how many thousands and how many hundred
thousands they have. We have read of many very numerous Armies, but we never
yet read of an innumerable army, only Gods army is without number, and
therefore only his knows no bounds. Is there any number of his Armies?

And upon whom does not his light arise? Here Bildad sets forth the glory of
the goodness, De homine proprie dicit (...) superquem; etsi omnia similiter
lumen and virtutem ab eo accipiunt. Merc:
omniscience and omnipresence of God, by his sending forth his beams of light,
as he in the former part of the verse sets forth the glory of the greatness
and power of God by his sending forth the Armies of his strength.

Upon whom does not his light arise? The text may be read thus; Upon whom does
not his light stand? or, upon whom shall not his light stand? We say, upon
whom does not his light arise? Both translations are good. But what is this
light of God?

First, We may understand it of that common light, the light of the Sun, for
that is Gods light, and the universal arising of it upon the world is a
wonderful work of God. For as God made the light, and gathered it into that
great vessel the Sun, so he carries it about the world every day. The light
of the Sun is the messenger of Gods care and love to man every morning. (
Math. 5.45.) He makes his Sun to rise on the Evil and on the Good; that
is, upon all, Good and Evil, divide the whole world between them: and while
the text in Matthew says, that God makes his Sun to rise, etc. it intimates
that the Sun rises daily by special direction from God; The Sun is his,
and the light is his; There is no creature that enjoyes the light of the Sun,
but is beholding to God for it. He that made the Sun, makes the Sun to
rise; as if the Sun like a weary or tired traveller were unwilling to rise in
a morning and renew his Journey, or long stage about the world, till called up
by God, and commanded out for the service of mankind; of Sun-light we may say,
Upon whom does not his light arise?

Secondly, This light may be taken more strictly for the light of divine
goodness. All the good, the peace, the comfort, which we enjoy in the world,
is comprehended under the name of light. When the Psalmist says, Light is
sown for the righteous, his meaning is, good or comfort is sown for the
righteous, (Psalm. 97.11.) and, Upon whom does not this light arise? The
goodness of God extends it self over all. God does good to all, though he
does more good for some; for as God would have us to do good to all, but
specially to the household of faith, so does he. He sends forth so much light
of goodness as will make all men eternally inexcusable who abuse it, but he
sends forth so much light of his goodness to some as will make them eternally
happy. The light of his gooddesse rises upon good men to cause them to rejoice
and live comfortably; And unless some light of his goodness did arise upon
evil men, even upon the worst of men, they could not subsist, nor live at all.
His light is the life of man, and upon whom does not this light of divine
goodness arise?

Thirdly, We may expound this light of the light of divine wisdom, which
disposes and orders all things; And does not this light arise upon the whole
creation? does not this light shine upon every creature? does not this light
direct the ways of man on earth? yea does not this light arise upon the Angels
in heaven, to direct them in all their ways?

Fourthly, We may understand this light of the light of that knowledge by
which God himself knows all things. As God is light essentially, or as all
that he is, is light, so we may say more especially of his knowledge, it is
light. Knowledge is the light of man, and therefore we say of an ignorant or
unknowing man that he is in darkness; and thus also knowledge is the light of
God; and when the Apostle John says (1 Epist: 1.) That in him is no darkness
at all, his meaning is in him is no ignorance at all. God sends forth this
light of his knowledge all the world over, he takes notice of all; As nothing
is hid (in a common sense) from the heat or light of the Sun in its walk
about the world, so nothing is hid in, any, the strictest sense from the
knowledge of God. Upon whom does not this light arise? we are always in the
presence of God, his eye is upon us and sees us, he sees where we are, and
what we do; and as this light of his shines upon all things, so it will, at
last, bring all things to light.

Now, among these four interpretations given, I conceive that the word light
is to be taken here in the second sense, upon whom does not his light arise?
That is, the light of the goodness of God: V detur potius lacis, nomen ad v^in
quam omnibus insundit pertinere, per eam sunt omnia id quod sunt. Merc:
which goodness is the infinite freenes and readiness of his nature to do
good. And this light of his goodness arising upon the creature is five-fold.

First, There is an upholding or preserving Goodness, by which all things are
maintained in their state and being.

Secondly, There is a quickening and refreshing goodness, whereby all things
(men, and among them godly men especially) are renewed and revived in their
wel-being.

Thirdly, There is a protecting goodness of God, whereby his are kept while they
are in dangers.

Fourthly, There is a delivering goodness, whereby his are brought out of and
set free from danger.

Fifthly, There is a strengthening and supporting goodness, whereby his are
enabled to bear all the evils with which they are exercised in this world.
And upon whom (yea upon what) does not the light of the goodness of God arise
every day in some one or more of these particulars?

Hence Observe.

All the light of man or the light of all men is from God. If any light arise
upon man it is of God, and upon what man soever light arises it is of God. As
the light of the air is his, so also is the light of our hearts. The light of
life is his, and so is all that light of comfort which shines upon us while we
live. God is the father of lights, from whom every good gift and every perfect
gift comes (Jam: 1.17.)

Secondly, Observe.

God is very communicative of his goodness; upon whom does not his light
arise? God does not keep his light to himself; he is good, and does good; he
has good, and does good, he distributes it; God would not have us, much less
does he himself put his candle or light under a bushel, but he sets it upon
a candlestick, and it gives light to all the world, it refreshes and warmeth
all the world. As the light of the special goodness of God in Christ arises
upon all sorts and conditions of men in the world, so there is a light of his
common providentiall goodness which arises upon each man of every sort and
condition in the world.

(...) super quem n^n stabit lumen ejus ut non solum exorientem and su^gentem
luce^; sed etiam con sistentem calore* lumine et agendifacultate prae potentem
and rebus omnibus humanis immine^tem intelligamus. Bold:
Another reading says, Upon whom does not his light abide? The light of God is
not only an arising or springing light, but a continuing and an abiding light;
It does not only break out upon us, but dwell with us. The natural Sun
arises every day upon us, but it does not dwell with us, but is going from us
as soon as it appears unto us; and therefore it was miraculous when the Sun
stood still, or hasted not to go down about a whole day ( Josh. 10.13.) But
the mystical light of the goodness of God is a light that dwells always over
our heads, and hastes not to go down. And indeed if God should withdraw this
light, or let it go down, if he should stop the influences of his kindness
from us, and cease to do us good, we were ruined and undone; for in him all
things subsist, and are upheld by the word of his power; if his light did not
arise upon the creature, the creature would sink into darkness. Nor could we
abide what we are, if this light did not abide upon us. And as this is true in
reference to our natural subsistence, so much more in reference to our
spiritual. This light arising and abiding upon the Saints, maintains and
upholds them, both in their graces and in their comforts.

Bildad having thus set forth the power and greatness of God in his dominion,
and fear in his hosts and armies, as also his kindness and beneficence in his
light arising and abiding upon man, proceeds in the latter part of the Chapter
to show the sinfullnes and unworthynes, the impurity and impotency of man
compared with God.

JOB, CHAP. 25. Verse. 4, 5, 6. How then can man be Justified with God? or how
can man be clean that is borne of a woman?

Behold, even to the Moon and it shines not, yea the Stars are not pure in his
sight.

How much less man that is a worm, and the son of man which is a worm.


IN this context Bildad gives further check to Jobs presumption (as he
conceived) in appealing to heaven, and in begging audience of God himself,
which he did (as has been showed) with earnestnes at the 23d Chapter.

Verse. 4. How then can man be Justified with God?
The words are an Inference from what he had insisted upon and discoursed
before concerning the dominion and fear of God, concerning the number of his
Armies, and the shinings of his light every where: from all which he
concludes, How then can man be Justified with God? As if he had said, Seeing
God is so dreadful, seeing he is an all-powerfull, an all-seeing, and an
all-upholding God, how dare thou or any man living, plead with him? or how is
it possible for any man living to stand out with God and live?

How then can man be justified with God? This question, carries a strong
denial, To say, How then can man be Justified with God? is more then barely to
say, Man cannot be Justified with God, How can it be? is not only thus much,
It cannot easily be, it cannot probably be, but it cannot possibly be, or it is
Impossible to be; Such questions, how a thing may be? are usually an answer
that they cannot be at all. Questions are sometimes put for Information or with
desire to be directed, or to have the mystery opened how such things may be.
The holy virgin put such a question ( Luke 1.34. when the Angel had told her
she should have a son) Then said Mary unto the Angel, how shall this be,
seeing I know not a man? her question did not Import her denial of the thing,
but her wonder at it, nor did it imply her unbeleefe, as if she thought it
Impossible to be, but her desire to be Informed in the way and manner how it
should be, and to that sense she is answered, The holy Ghost shall come upon
thee, and the power of the most high shall over-shadow thee.

But here (I say) the question, ( how can man be Justified with God? is
reducible to this plain negative proposition; Man cannot be Justified with
God: (...) cal^^rilosus aegrotabilis, morbis mortique obno^^lus; sic latini
mortalem pro homine dicunt.
How can man? that is (as the word signifies) miserable man, sickly man, weak
Impotent man? and it may note not only the Impotency of his body, but of his
spirit. Man is of a weak body at best, and of a more weak and sickly spirit.
Master Broughtons translation reaches both; And why should sorrowful man
plead Justice with the Omnipotent? Man is compassed about with sorrows, and
every man is in himself, what Christ was more eminently for us all, a man of
sorrows, and acquainted with grief (Isa. 53.3.) We take the word in its
general signification.

How then can man be Justified? Bildad seems (as some expound him) by this
question, to suspect that Job had asserted a selfe-Justification, and it must
be confessed that what he spoke at the 23d Chapter, ver. 10, 11, 12. might give
him some color for that suspicion; He knows the way that I take, when he
has tried me I shall come forth as gold. My foot has followed his steps, his
way have I kept and have not declined, neither have I gone back from the
Commandments of his lips: I have esteemed the words of his mouth more then my
necessary food. While Job thus asserted his own Innocence and Integrity,
Bildad might possibly suppose that he was asserting his own righteousness;
and therefore not without some indignation he expostulates the matter with
him, How can man be Justified? that is, pronounced clean and quit at the
Throne of God. Justification (Considered in the Gospel notion) is that gracious
sentence of God, wherein with respect to Christ apprehended by faith, he
absolveth the believer from sin and death, and does repute him just and
righteous unto eternal life. Of this the Apostle treates at large in the 3d 4^^
and 5th Chapters of the Epistle to the Romans, and in that to the Galatians.
This doctrine of free justification is the foundation and corner stone of all
our comfort. For whereas there is a double change in the state of a sinner;
first, a relative change; secondly, an absolute and real change. The one is
made in sanctification, the other in Justification; Sanctification is a real
change, subduing corruption, destroying the power of sin in us; but
Justification is not a Physical or real change in the person, it does not make
him that is unrighteous righteous in himself, nor is man at all Justified (in
this sense) by any selfe-righteousnes, but it is only a relative change as to
his state. To Justify is a Law-terme, signifying, the pronouncing or declaring
of a man righteous: So that Justification is an act of God upon us, or toward
us: Sanctification is an act of God in us. This blessed Grace of Sanctification
always follows the grace of Justification, as an effect or fruit of it; and
though it may easily be distinguished from it, yet it can no more be separated
or divided from it, then heat from fire, or motion from life.

Yet I concave, that Bildad in this place does not speak of Justification in
that strict Gospel sense, as it imports the pronouncing of a man righteous, for
the sake of Christ, or as if he supposed Job looked to be pronounced righteous
for his own sake. But Bildad speaks of Justification here, as to some
particular act; As for instance, If any man will contend with God (and that
Bildad charge Job with) as if God had done him some wrong, or had afflicted
him more then was need, is he able to make this plea good, and give proof of
before the Throne of God; How can man be Justified with God?

There is a fourefold understanding of that phrase, with God.

First, Thus; If any man shall presume to refer himself to the Judgment of
God, shall he be justified? (all at last must appear before the Judgment of
God, whether they will refer themselves to him or no; but) suppose a man
refer himself to God (as Job had done by appealing to him) can he be
Justified? Will God upon the trial and examination of his cause give Judgment
or sentence for him? But in this sense it is possible for a man to be justified
with God; and thus Job was justified by God at last against the opinion and
censures of his three friends.

Secondly, To be Justified with God, is as much as this, If man come near to,
or set himself in the presence of God, shall he be justified? Man usually
looks upon himself at a distance from God, he looks upon himself in his own
light, and so thinks himself righteous; but when he looks upon himself in
the light of God, and as one that is near God; will not all his spots and
blemishes then appear, or rather will not he himself appear all spot and
blemish? When he is once with God, will he be any thing with himself, but an
impure and wretched creature? In this sense Bildad might check Jobs boldness in
desiering to come so near God, even to his seat, which would but have made
him more vile in his own eyes, and discovered to him his own impurities, as
it did to the Prophet Isayah (Chap. 6.5.) and as it did also to Job himself,
when he attained his wish, and got so near to God, that he called it a seeing
him with his eye (Chap: 42.5.) Then we have not a word more of pleading his
cause before God; His mouth was stopped, and he abhorred himself, repenting in
dust and ashes.

Thirdly, Can man be justified with God? that is, if man compare himself with
God, an he be justified? one man may compare himself with another and be
justified. And thus, the f^ithfull people of God are called righteous and just
in Scripture, comparatively, to wicked and unrighteous men. But how can any man
be just or righteous compared with God, in comparison of whom all our
righteousness is unrighteous, and our very cleanenes filthy?

Fourthly, To be justified with God, is, against God; that is, if man strive or
contend with God, in any thing, as if God were too hard and severe toward him,
either by withholding good from him, or bringing evil upon him; can man be
justified in this contention, or will God be found to have done him any wrong?
without all question he will not.

From the words taken in a general sense observe.

Man has nothing of his own to Justify him before God. There are two things
considerable in man; first, his sin; secondly, his righteousness; his worst
and his best; all grant man cannot be justified by or for his sins, nor can he
at all be justified in or for his own righteousness. And that upon a twofold
ground.

First, Because the best of his righteousness is Imperfect; and no Imperfect
thing can be a ground of Justification and acceptance with God. For though God
does justify those who are imperfect, yet he never justified any man upon the
account of that which is Imperfect. God never took cockle-shels for payment,
he must have pure gold, and he sees well enough what poor stuff, what base
coin the best of our righteousness is, and therefore cannot admit any of it
in justification. For the purpose of God is to exalt himself in Justice as well
as in mercy by the justification of sinners. And therefore the Apostle says (
Romans 3.25, 26.) That God has set forth Christ to be a propitiation, through
faith in his blood, to declare his righteousness (and he is not content to say
it once, but says it again) To declare, I say, his righteousness, that he
might be just, and the justifier of him that believes in Jesus.

Secondly, All the righteousness wrought by man is a due debt; how can we
acquit our selves from the evil we have done by any good which we do, seeing
all the good we do, we ought to have done, though we had never done any evil?
When we have done our best we may be ashamed of our doings, we do so poorly.
But suppose we had done richly and bravely; suppose our works (which indeed
are full of dross) were pure gold and silver, were precious stones and Jewels,
yet they are already due to God. We owe all and all manner of obedience as we
are creatures; And we can never justify our selves from our transgressions,
by satisfying (could we reach them) our obligations. There is enough in Christ
to justify us, but there is nothing in our selves; All that Christ did was
perfect, and Christ was under no obligation to do any thing, but what he
willingly submitted to do for us. This book of Job bears as great a
testimony to this truth as any; How often does Job disclaim all
selfe-Justification (Chap. 9.20, 21.) If I justify my self, mine own mouth
shall condemn me: if I say I am perfect, it shall also prove me perverse.
Though I were perfect, yet would not I know my own soul, I would despise my
life. What can be said more fully (to the tenor of the Gospel) for the
abasement of self, and the advancement of free grace in justification. He said
indeed ( Chap. 13.18.) Behold now I have ordered my cause. I know that I shall
be justified. But he never said that he should be justified for the cause sake
which he had ordered. There is a twofold justification.

First, The justification of a man in reference unto some particular act, or in
his cause.

Secondly, The justification of a man in his person. When Job said, I know that
I shall be justified, his meaning was, I shall be justified, in this case, in
this buisines, I shall not be cast as an hypocrite (for he always stood upon
and stiffely maintained his integrity) or I know I shall be justified in this
opinion which I constantly maintain; That a righteous man may be greatly
afflicted by God, while in the mean time he spares the unrighteous and the
sinner. A man may have much to justify himself by before God, as to a
controversy between him and man; but he has nothing at all to justify
himself by as to his state toward God.

Again, As these words are referred to Jobs complaint of the severity of Gods
dealings with him.

Observe.

Whosoever complains of the dispensations of God toward him, cannot be
justified in it. Thus the Jews of old complained ( Ezekiel. 18.25.) Ye say the
way of the Lord is not equal. But were they justified in this complaint, with
God? How does the Lord expostulate with them, in the next words. Hear O house
of Israel, is not my way equal? is not your way unequal. As if he had said;
All the inequality is on your part, there is none on mine. The ways of God,
how hard and grievous soever they may be (as they were toward Job) yet
unequal or unrighteous they can never be. The usual dealings of God with us
are full of mercy, and his severest dealings with us have no want of Justice.
How then can man be Justified with God?

Or how then can he be clean that is borne of a woman? Here Is another question
of the same tenor, and in the 15th Chap: ver: 14th, Eliphaz spoke almost in
the same terms, What is man that he should be clean? and he that is borne of
a woman that he should be righteous? Jobs friends beat often upon this point,
vehemently suspecting that he did over-weene his own condition, and thought
too highly of himself. Whereas Job did not only freely and ingeniously, but
with a great deal of holy rhetorique and elegancy confess against himself
again and again, that he neither was nor could be clean before God; Only
he would not admit their plea against him, that he suffered for his
uncleanenes, or that he was unclean because he suffered.

Master Broughton translates thus; Or, The borne of woman lock to be cleared.
We say; How can he be clean that is borne of a woman? that is, how can he
have a nature at all clean, or be altogether clean in his life, who comes
into the world through a world of uncleanenes? Can the stream be clean, when
the fountain is unclean? or the product be better then that which is
produced? Man borne of a woman by natural generation (so Bildad is to be
understood) comes from an unclean fountain, from an impure Original, and
therefore, how can he be pure or clean? What the particular Emphasis and
importance of this phrase (To be borne of a woman) is, has been opened already
( Chap: 14.1. Chap: 15.14.) and therefore I refer the reader to those texts
for a further Exposition. And shall here only give out this Observation.

All men borne of a woman by natural generation are impure and unclean. There
was never but one man, the Lord Jesus Christ, borne of a woman who was not
unclean, and he was borne of a woman, not in an ordinary, but miraculous way;
The holy Ghost shall come upon thee, and the power of the most high shall
overshadow thee (Luke 1.35.) All else borne of a woman have been and are
unclean. It is said ( Genesis 5.3.) Adam lived an hundred and thirty years, and
begat a Son in his own likeness, after his Image, and called his name Seth.
Adam begat a son in his own likeness; what likeness? it is not meant of his
outward likeness, of the figure or feature of his body, that was the least part
of the likeness there intended, in which his son was borne; every father begets
a son in a humane shape; and we say the child is like his father, not only as
having the same specifical nature, but as having the personal figure and
proportions of his father. But when it is said, Adam begat a son in his own
likeness, in his Image, the meaning is, he begat a son that was a sinner as
himself was, and corrupt as himself was, even Seth, who was given in the
place of Abel. God in the creation made man in his image after his likeness; Man
by procreation begets a son, not in Gods image, but in his own; And that not
only like him in constitution as a man, but in corruption as a sinner. David
confesses of himself ( Psalm. 51.5.) Behold I was shapen in Iniquity, and in
sin did my mother conceive me. Some to avoid the strength and dint of that
text, as to the proof of the corruption of nature by propagation, put a most
corrupt and base gloss upon it; As if David had therein only confessed his
parents sinfullnes or inordinate affections in begetting and conceaving him;
not his own natural sinfulnes as begotten and conceaved. I know no better
argument of the corruption of nature, then such corrupt interpretations of
Scripture; For doubtless as Bildad here in the Text, so David was acquainted
not only with the doctrine of original sin, and the corruption of nature, but
had found and felt the sad effects of it in himself, And from that experience
could say, I was shapen in iniquity, etc. as also consent to what Bildad says
in this place, What is man that is borne of a woman that he should be clean?
do but acknowledge that any one is borne ordinarily of a woman, and we may
conclude him to be sinful and unclean. That I may make this a little clearer,
I shall touch at three things, which are distinctly considerable in the sin of
Adam.

First, That particular act, or fact against the Law, which he committed in
eating the forbidden fruit.

Secondly, The legal guilt that flowed from that act, both upon his person and
upon his posterity.

Thirdly, The natural Corruption which as a consequent of the former stained
all mankind. Or there was first the transgression of the Commandment, which
was his eating the forbidden fruit; Secondly, there was the punishment of that
transgression, which was death inflicted for eating; thirdly, the depravation
of the whole mass of man's nature, by which, as Bildad speaks, Every man borne
of a woman is unclean. And these three fell upon the whole posterity of Adam,
or upon all that are borne of a woman in a threefold way.

First, The very act of Adams sin becomes ours, for we did participate with
him, and had, as it were, a hand in it, because we all were seminally in him;
so that when he sinned, we all sinned being in his loins long before we were
borne, as Levi paid tithes in Abraham before he was borne ( Heb. 7.9.10.) Thus
we all sinned in his sinning, and had a share in that act of his, because he
stood as the root of mankind, and as having entered a covenant with God in
that capacity. For he sinned, not only as a single person, but as he was the
representative of all mankind, and therefore what he did we are reckoned as
doing the same with him.

Secondly, The guilt of that sin is ours by particular Imputation, as the fact
is ours by common participation; for as if Adam had stood in a state of
Innocence, that had redounded to us for good, so his fall or sin redoundeth to
us for evil.

Thirdly, There is the pravity or corruption of nature, issuing from that first
sin, and that is chiefly aimed at in the present text. And this is derived to
us by propagation. The defilement of nature descends and passes from
generation to generation: therefore, how can he that is borne of a woman be
clean? and that defilement has two things in it.

First, The loss of original purity, or the defaceing and blotting out of the
image of God in which man was created.

Secondly, A succession of horrible deformity and disorder, which consists,
first, in a pronenes to all evil; secondly, in an impotency and weakness, yea
in an aversenes from and enmity against all that is good. So then, we have to
do with the very act of Adams sin by participation, with the guilt of it by
imputation, and with the filth and deformity of it by propagation: From all
which it may well be questioned, How can he be clean that is borne of a woman,
and concluded, Every man borne of a woman is unclean.

Verse. 5. Behold, even to the Moon and it shines not, and the Stars are not
pure in his sight.
In this verse Bildad proceeds to argue down the presumption (as he
conceived) of Job, by calling him to consider those things which are far
below God, and yet were far above him; as if he had said; Will thou contend
with God, when thou can not contend with the Moon and Stars? they have a
brightness beyond any thing of thine, why then do thou insist so stiffely
upon the shinings of thy conversation toward men, and the brightness of thine
integrity toward God?

Behold, even to the Moon and it shines not. There is a twofold understanding
of these words; first, some expound them by descending; as if Bildad had spoken
thus; Behold O Job, and be both ashamed of and astonished at thy own folly, in
venturing upon a trial before God, who is of such infinite purity, that while
he looks upon all these heavenly lights that are above the Moon, even to or
as low as the Moon, which (as Astronomers teach) is the lowest of all the
planets, it shines not, there is no brightness, no beauty in any of them; They
are all in comparison of God but clouds and darkness, but clods of earth and
dirt. And if they shine not in the eye of God, surely much less do thou,
who art a worm, and but a clod of moving or breathing earth?

Secondly, Others expound it by ascending. As if Bildad had spoken thus;
Behold, O Job, and tremble at thy presumption in desiring that God should take
so exact a scrutiny of thee and of thy cause; for look upon all the parts of
the inferior visible world, look upon all their glories and excellencies, and
look not only upon those things that are creeping here upon the Earth, but lift
up thine eyes as high as the Moon it self, Behold even to the Moon (which
is, as it were the boundary between the upper and the lower world; The Moon
being the lowest of the upper world, and the highest of the lower world, now
says Bildad, surveigh the world up to the Moon) and it shines not.

But does not the Moon shine? yes! the Moon shines, the Moon is that lesser
light which was made to rule the night (Genesis 1.16.) Why then does he say it
shines not? the meaning is only this, that Moone-light, and Sun-light, that
all creature-light is no light, nor their shining to be called shining, when we
speak of the light and shinings of God himself. The Moon shines for the use
and to the eye of man, but the Moon shines not for any use to or in the eye
of God. As because he is light, he needs no light, so because there was no
light till he created it, the light of the creature is nothing unto him.

The Moon and Stars shine, but when the Sun is up they shine not, that is,
not to our view; the Stars shine as much in the day as in the night, though
we cannot see them being over-powred by that greater light, the light of the
Sun; So when the glory of the Lord appears, both Sun and Moon
disappeare, and are no moore seen. Ne luna quidem lucida est collata eum deo.
Vatabl.
The light of the world is no light where God is named; do but speak of God,
and all the beauty and brightness of the creature fades and is extinct. The
Moon is a very beautiful creature considered by it self, as Job speaks to
show how far he was from idolizing it, notwithstanding all that beauty
wherein it appeared to him ( Chap. 31.26.) If I beheld the Sun when it
shined, or the Moon walking in brightness? that is, if I beheld either Sun
or Moon so as to adore and worship them; if I reckoned any thing of Moon and
Sun, in comparison of God, if I did not judge the light of both as darkness
and obscurity in reference to him, if I did not behold them so as if I did not
behold them, not being taken up or dazzl'd at all with their shining brightness,
scarce at all seeing, not at all admiring any brightness, but the brightness of
God, if it were not thus with me, if I stood not at this distance, and upon
these terms with the best of the creatures, then, etc. It argues that there is
much natural beauty in the Moon, when as Job to show his spiritual chastity
says that the beauty of it, did not at all withdraw or steal away his heart
from God. Indeed such is the beauty of the Moon that it is used to shadow out
the Church in her spiritual beauty ( Cant. 6.10.) Who is she that looks
forth as the morning, fair as the Moon; The Moon is fair, yet she has her
spots; But God is fair without any spot, and therefore the fayrenes of the
Moon is no fayrenes at all to his.

There is another reading of the words ( Behold even to the Moon, and it does
not extend its tents, (...) Et non expandit lumen suum in modum Ten^o^^ Complut:
or does not extend its light like a tent; for when the light is spread first
out, it is like the spreading of a tent upon the mountains. To which the
Prophet Joel seems to allude ( Chap. 2.2.) in that phrase; As the morning
spread upon the mountains. Behold to the Moon, and it does not spread out its
light, nor extend its tents; Our translation reaches the sense fully; It
shines not; Yea the Stars are not pure in his sight.

The Stars are supposed higher and greater then the Moon; The Stars are
pure and splendid bodies, as has been showed from other places of this book.
So that, when Bildad says, The Stars are not pure, it is not an absolute
denial of their purity, but as himself expounds it, they are not pure in the
sight of God. The Stars have neither those spots, nor those changes which the
Moon has, they are a more clear and a more certain light, yet Even the
Stars are not pure in his sight, and we may reckon the Sun among the
Stars too, though sometimes they are spoken of distinctly, Sun, Moon, and
Stars. Thus Bildad pleads the excellency of God above the most excellent
creatures, how much more above man, who is now cast much behind many of the
creatures, through the corruption of his nature, and is not disparaged by being
compared to the meanest of them. Behold, even to the Moon and it shines not,
and the Stars are not pure in his sight.

Hence Observe.

The glory or beauty of the most glorious and beautiful Creatures is no glory,
no beauty compared with the glory and beauty of God. Bildad instancing in the
most beautiful Creatures, takes in the beauty of all the creatures; all which
is but a ray, a beam of his infinite light, but a drop of his infinite Ocean;
their glory is but an effect of his, and though the meanest of them are perfect
in their state, yet the best of them are not perfect in degree. It was said
anciently; Look upon the heavens they are beautiful, look upon the earth
that also is beautiful, but he that made heaven and earth is infinitely more
beautiful then either of them both, or then both of them.

When God had finished the work of Creation, it is said ( Genesis 1.31.) And God
saw all that he had made, and behold it was very good. How then is it said
here, that the Moon shines not, and that the Stars are not pure in his sigh?

I answer, First as before, all things which God made were good as creatures,
but nothing was as good as the Creator.

Secondly, I answer, the creature is not now so good as it was when first
created, the sin of man did not only pollute and stain the glory of man, but
of the whole creation; and therefore the Apostle says ( Romans 8.20, 21, 22.)
That the creature was made subject to vanity, not willingly but by reason of
him who has subjected the same in hope, because the creature it self also
shall be delivered from the bondage of corruption, into the glorious liberty of
the children of God, for we know that the whole creation groaneth and
travelleth in pain together until now. From this illustrious context it
appears that God for man's sin has put the whole creation to disgrace and
suffering, and that all creatures are fallen from their first perfection by the
fall of the first man; The very lights of heaven are made dark, and the
Stars impure, by man's impurity. Now if by the sin of man, those creatures who
in themselves are sinlesse, even the Moon and Stars, have contracted
defilement, and are not without blemish in the sight of God; then how much
less is man (by whom they have taken this infection) free from blemish or
infection himself, as Bildad inferres in the next words and close of the
Chapter.

Verse. 6. How much less man that is a worm, and the son of man which is a
worm.
As if he had said, If the Sun Moon and Stars are not pure in his sight,
how much less is man pure? Nor is Bildad content to say how much less is man?
but he gives a very debasing comparison of man.

How much less is man that is a worm, Cum precedit sententia negativa
particulae. illae. (...) commode redduntur quanto minus. Pisc:
and the son of man which is a worm. How much lesse] We may say also, how much
more is man impure in his sight; So, the original words are often rendered; as
the reader may see in those places ( Prove. 11.31. Prove. 15.11.)

Bildad lays man as low as he can, showing that he is so far below the
Stars that he is as low as a worm; and if the Stars be impure in the
sight of God, how much more is man a worm? What Is a worm? what a dark, dull
thing is a worm to a Star? yet that is not so dull a thing to a Star, as a
Star is to God, therefore if the Stars be not pure in his sight, how much
less man that is a worm?

A worm is one of the meanest Creatures, and the word that is here used
signifies the meanest of worms; (...) vermis parvus in carne aut caseo
nascens.
properly and strictly those little worms which breed in flesh, or Cheese, or
in any other kind of food when it is corrupted. The word is used ( Exodus
16.24.) where it is said of the Manna that was reserved contrary to the command
of God, That it bred worms; such a worm is man; and Bildad is not content to
say this once, but he says it again.

And the son of man which is a worm. Here is the same thing doubled; And it is
doubled by Bildad to assure us of the truth and certainty of of it; as if he
had said, I am not afraid to averr what I have spoken, I have said it, and I
say it again, how much less man, who is a worm, and the son of man which is
a worm.

The son of man; that is, any man, high or low, rich or poor, learned or
unlearned, they who are at greatest distance in themselves meet all in this,
They are worms. To be called the son of man, imports the meanenes of man, and
minds man of his weakness and frailty. Ezekiel the Prophet is often spoken to by
the Lord in this style, Son of man; the reason given by some is this, because
he was a man often rapt up in the visions of God, or had the visions of God
sent down to him, he was a man that lived so much in heaven, that he might
even forget that he was of the earth, therefore the Lord minds him often of
his Original, by calling him, Son of man, Son of man; so here, Bildad minds
man of the meanenes of his birth, he is but the son of man. Some proud men have
drawn their pedigree from the Gods, or from the Stars. Alexander the Great
would be called the son of Jupiter, which was to say the son of the Sun, he
did not like to be called the son of man, though as he was so, so he was soon
after convinced and confessed that he was so.

And the son of man which is a worm. (...) vermis magnus and parvus. qui ab
omnibus teritur and contunditur.
We express this latter branch by the same word worm in our English, but the
Hebrew speaks it in a different word; and Master Broughtn renders it
differently in the English, and the son of man a vermin. The word signifies
both small and great worms, all sorts of worms or vermin; here is the state
of man; and how can he who is such a worm stand before God, in his purity,
when the Sun Moon and Stars are impure before him?

Again, we may take notice that Bildad does not say, man is like a worm, but
is a worm. It Is not spoken by way of similitude, but of assertion.

Hence observe.

Man is a very poor thing. So poor a thing that he is twice in this Text
called a worm; the lowest things serve for a Comparison and bear the likeness
of the highest and greatest men in the world; man is but a worm, and the son
of man, is no better, a worm or vermin. As it shows the excellency of God,
that nothing is so good, so great, so perfect, that is worthy to be compared
with him ( Isa. 40.18.) To whom will ye liken God? or what likeness will ye
compare unto him? Look over all the Excellencyes that are in the Creature, is
there any thing that looks like God? that has any excellency or beauty
comparatively to him? And again ( Isa. 46.5.) To whom will ye liken me, and
make me equal, and compare me, that we may be like? that is, there is
nothing that you can compare or make me like unto, I am above all comparison
-- Now (I say) as it shows the excellency of God, that there is nothing worthy
to be compared to him, so it shows the meanenes of man, that there is nothing
so unworthy but that he may be compared to it, and that without wrong or
disparagement. The Scripture does as it were strive for Comparisons, to set
forth the weakness, the poorenes, the worthlesnes of man; he is compared to,
yea called dust ( Genesis 3.19.) Dust thou art, and to dust thou shall return.
He is compared to the grass of the field that grows to day, but withers
or is cut down to morrow ( Isa. 40.6) He is compared unto a shadow that has
nothing of Entity or substance, and therefore continues not but vanishes away
( Job 14.2.) He is compared to that which is less then a shadow, even to that
which is, as I may say, the nothingnes of all things, vanity; and thus he is
called when at his best or in his best estate ( Psalm. 39.5.) Further, man is
not only nothing and less then nothing, but that which is worse then nothing
a ly, he is naturally under such disgrace, that he is the very word of
disgrace, a ly. Surely (says David, Psalm. 62.9.) men of low degree are vanity,
and men of high degree are a ly. Nor does the Lord speak thus of single
persons only, but of Nations, and not only of this or that Nation, but of all
Nations; take mankind in a cluster, or as bundled up together; not only is
this or that man, this or that Nation, but all men and all Nations before him
are as nothing, and are counted to him less then nothing and vanity (Isa.
40.17.) They are not only dust, but (which is the lightest and most
inconsiderable dust) the dust of the balance, and that the smallest dust of
the balance ( Isa. 40.15.) they are not only a drop, but the drop of a
bucket, which is but the drop of a drop. The similitude in the Text lays man
low enough, He is a worm. When the Lord would speak of his people at the
lowest rate in reference to the opinion which they had of themselves, or which
others had of them, he calls them a worm, (Isa. 41.14.) Fear not thou worm
Jacob, and ye men of Israel: God does not speak this to the disparagement, or
to the discouragement of Jacob, but to the comfort of Jacob; As if he had said,
though thou art a worm, though thou art thus low, thus mean, humbly in thy own
thoughts, contemptuously in the thoughts of others, yet fear not, yea all
shall have cause to be afraid of thee, for though thou art a worm, yet thou
shall thresh the nations and beat them small etc. As National Jacob then, so
personal Jacob, or Jacob in person before was but a worm in his own eyes. (
Genesis 32.10.) I am not worthy of the least of all the mercies (or I am less
then all the mercies) and of all the truth which thou have showed unto thy
servant, for with my staff I passed over this Jordan; that is, I came over in
a very poor manner, all my state was but a staff. Here Jacob in person spoke
of himself as a worm; and when we speak thus like worms, we speak most
like Saints. Our Lord Jesus Christ spoke thus of himself, as for our sakes he
became poor and emptyed himself, as for our sakes he took upon him the form
of a servant, and was made in the likeness of man. (Psalm. 22.6.) I am a worm
and no man, a reproach of men, and despised of the people. O how low did Christ
esteem and set himself, as, and while he stood in the place of sinners? He
not only confessed that he was a worm, because a man, but that he was a worm
and no man. How then ought every sinful man to abase himself and say, I am a
worm and no man. Man is a worm in a five-fold respect.

First, Look upon his original and constitution, he is from the earth as the
worm is.

Secondly, Look upon him in his natural state and condition, he lives upon
the earth and earthly things, as worms do.

Thirdly, He is a worm, because continually subject to danger, every foot may
crush him.

Fourthly, As the worm is very subject to danger, so likewise unable to
resist, or make defense; the worm is a naked creature, and wears no arms,
neither offensive nor defensive. Such a one is man, a worm, unable to defend
himself, unless the Lord be his shield and a defense to him round about.

Fifthly, Man is a worm, for he must shortly return into the Earth where the
worms are housed; he is going to worms, as a worm, and when he comes to the
grave it will be worm to worm. As the Lord said, Dust thou art and to dust
thou shall return; so we may say, a worm thou art, and to worms thou shall
return. Thus we see man is a poor thing, a very poor thing, and hence I
shall make four or five brief inferences.

First, Let no man be proud, or have high thoughts of himself; the son of man
is but a worm; O why does man swel above the clouds, or proudly make his nest
among the Stars, when as he must shortly fall among the clods, and as he is a
worm, so be eaten up of worms.

Secondly, Let men take heed of adorning one another with great words and
flattering titles, let us take heed of having the persons of men in admiration;
it is as vain a thing, for any man to give great flattering titles to others,
as it is to have high thoughts of himself. The titles which the Spirit of God
gives to man, are humbling titles, a flower, a shadow, etc. any thing which may
keep down his spirit and abate selfe-valuations; we should learn as to think
of our selves, so to speak of other men as the Holy Ghost speaks. As he does
not paint man out with praises, nor speak of him as Courtiers (whose hearts
are the shops of complements, and their tongues the venters of them) do of
Princes. So neither should we: There are two extremes which we should labor
exceedingly to avoid in our references to men; and yet most men walk in one of
these extremes toward men. First, we should take heed or reproaching,
vilifying, and despising others; for though it be a duty for every man to
think meanly of himself, and to say of himself, I am a worm; and though
we may lawfully think and say so of all men, as to the general truth of the
proposition, yet it is so far from being a duty, that it is not at all
lawful to call any man worm, with reproach and contempt of the meanenes of
his person. Secondly, we should take heed of flattering and daubing others, as
those Tyrians did Herod, crying out it is the voice of God and not of man (Acts
12.22.) whereas God to show their mistake, and that he was indeed but a worm,
smote him, and he was eaten up of worms. Elihu concludes and resolves
excellently to this point ( Job 32.21, 22.) Let me not, I pray you, accept any
man's person, neither let me give flattering titles unto man, for I know not to
give flattering titles, in so doing my maker would soon take me away. As God
took away Herod for receaving flattering titles, so they who give them are in
danger to be taken away by God.

Thirdly, Be not Envious at others; what if another have a little more glory,
riches, beauty, strength, power, then thou have, what though he have a little
more knowledge, and be a little higher in gifts then others, yet he is but a
worm still; what is man but a worm, and what is the son of man, (the best of
men) but a worm? why should a worm Envy a worm, what though some men are
silk worms, a little better furnished and richer then others in mind and
body, yet they are but worms in silk, and many who appear so, are but
Glow-wormes, which shine a little but have no consistence.

Fourthly, Let the sons of men take heed of vexing one another; why should
worms rise up against worms, why should worms destroy worms cruelly,
bloodily? We are all weak as worms, let us therefore engage that little
strength we have, for the supporting, not for the ruining of one another. We
usually have so much tenderness toward worms in kind, that when we see them
crawling upon the ground, we avoid treading upon them; yet how do men
purposely tread upon worms in likeness. All men are worms in likeness, we
should not willingly tread upon or hurt any man. But poor men, and men of low
degree, are more worms then rich men, and men in high places are, therefore
take heed of oppressing the poor, for that is indeed, a treading upon worms.
And though while you tread upon worms the weak and needy, they cannot (as
Christ speaks of swine, Math. 7.6.) turn again and rent you, yet if you do
so, God, the strong God will turn upon you and tear you while there is none
to deliver.

Lastly, Take this inference from it.

Man by sin is much degraded and fallen below himself. Man by sin is become
inferior to the meanest creatures, who was once above all visible creatures:
man in the state of Creation was the chief piece of the visible world, he was
next to the Angels, who are of the Invisible world, but now man is fallen very
low, he is levelled with the lowest of the Creatures, a worm; not only do
the heavenly bodies exceed him in beauty, but even the earthly bodies, the
beasts of the field, and the worm that crawles upon the earth, and lives in
the bowels of it, is good enough to make comparison with him. See what man has
lost by sin! see how he is degraded and fallen from his state and statelynes!
yea I may say that man by sin is not only fallen from that state and
statelynes wherein he was created, but he is fallen below the state of the
lowest creature. Man (by sin) is not only a worm but worse then a worm; A
worm is not capable of moral polution; a toad has natural poison, but man
has moral poison in him, which is worse then natural poison; and which makes
the condition of man yet more vile, his moral poison (sin I mean) is to him
natural. It is his misery and his dishonor that he has it, and it is his
greater misery and dishonor, that he loves it, and that it is not so much his
disease as his desire: and as the first sin, the sin of nature has debased all
mankind at once; so every man that goes on in and multiplyeth (with desire)
the acts of sin, debaseth himself yet more, and makes himself not only
lower then the worm, which is the lowest of living things, but even lower then
the lowest things that have no life. Senseless livelesse creatures are better
then sinful men, such I mean as live in sin, and better it had been for any
never to have had a being, or not to have lived at all, then to dye in sin.

Seeing then sin has degraded us, and placed us among and below the worms,
who were once next to Angels, how are we engaged to Jesus Christ, who by
becoming a worm for us, has raised us to be heirs of blessedness with the
holy Angels for ever, and has lifted us up to that hight of honor, that even
the holy Angels minister to us as long as we are here. And how should we strive
to raise our selves up higher and higher in the Improvement of all that grace
which is freely offered to us in Christ, even to our daily conversation in
heaven, and our sitting together in heavenly places in Christ Jesus, as the
Apostle speaks ( Ephesians. 2.16.) It is sad for any man who is but a worm, to be
lifted up in himself, but it is the duty of every man to strive that he may be
lifted up, not only above the worms, but above the heavens. We may quickly
sin in seeking our own exaltation in a worldly, But the more we seek our
exaltation in a heavenly state, the more holy, yea the more humble we are. We
never act as those who know they are but worms here on earth, till we have an
ambition to be like the Angels who are in heaven.

Thus I have opened and done with this third, and that a very short discourse
of Bildad in this Chapter, wherein he has spoken Excellently as to the
general truth, in exalting God and humbling man, yet he is upon the old
mistake, Concluding Job a selfe-Justifier, yea a contender with God; Whereas
indeed his thoughts were as low as his state or person, in reference to any
conceit of righteousness in himself, or of any boldness in charging God with
the least unrighteousness (though there was much severity) in his dealings
with him.

JOB, CHAP. 26. Verse. 1, 2, 3, 4. But Job answered, and said,

How have thou helped him that is without power? how savest thou the arm that
has no strength?

How have thou counseled him that has no wisdom? and how have thou
plentifully declared the thing as it is?

To whom have thou uttered words? and whose spirit came from thee?


THis Chapter contains Jobs answer to the third and last dispute or
opposition of his second friend Bildad; Non respondit ad Bildadi dicta, sed eum
ridet quasi ea attulerit quae parum ad rem faciant, imo ab instituto aliena.
Merc:
wherein he does two things.

First, He complains of and in a manner derideth Bildads dealing with him, as
if what he had urged were not only little to the purpose, but very wide from
it. This he does in the four first verses of the Chapter.

Secondly, Job gives out a large narrative of the power, perfections, and
excellencies of God, of his wonderful works, and providence, which Bildad had
but lightly touched; this he does in the remaining part of the Chapter.

Verse. 1, 2. But Job answered, and said, How have thou helped him that is
without power?
There is a question among Interpreters, who is here meant, (...) admirantis
est, and haec dicit, (...) sive (...). Drus:
by him, that is without power; and who by the arm that has no strength; who
by him that has no wisdom. There are three opinions about the resolving of
this question.

First, Some expound it not of a person, but of a thing, for the original
leaves it in such words as may be determined upon either, In qua re adjuvisti
sententiam tuam de providentia dei particulari, in qua nullae sunt viris. Quare
ex Hebraeo legit, non cujus sed quid adjuvisti. Vatabl:
and may as well be rendered, that, which has no power, as, him that has no
power. And the thing without power, which this interpretation aims at, is the
opinion or tenet which Bildad, and his friends had held forth in their
discourse: which Job is conceived to look upon, as weak, and without power,
as having neither strength nor wisdom in it. And because Bildad made the last
reply, Job (according to this exposition) bespeaks him thus; Thine own former
arguments, as also those of thy friends, had no power, no strength of reason,
nor true wisdom in them, and have thou mended the matter now, have thou by
what thou spakest last put any strength into what has been weakly and feebly
argued already? As for my self I am neither better informed nor comforted,
then I was, and therefore have reason to conclude, that there is no more
strength nor power in what is now said, then in what was said before. It is
usual to apply strength to a speech, we say such a man made a strong speech,
as for such a one, his speech had no strength no sinews in it. And that speech
which has no strength in it, can never administer strength to those to whom it
is spoken; so that to say, how have thou helped him that has no power; is to
say, the speech by which thou have attempted or endeavored to help him that
has no power. Yet I conceave that Job does here intend a person, whom his
friends supposed without power, strength, or wisdom, Hoc de deo accipio O quam
egreg^e eum adjuvisti qui imbecillis erat, and invalido es patrocinatus. Quasi
tua defensione deus indigerit. Merc: Cujus adju^or es number in becillis and
sustentas brachium ejus qui non est fortis. Vulg: Cui Auxiliatus es, cui non
potentia? Mont:
rather then his friends speech, which himself judged and (as his own
releife) found to be so.

Secondly, By him that has no power, and the arm that has no strength; some
understand God himself; who is indeed all power, all arm, who is altogether
strong and only wise. As if Job had said, O Bildad, thou have stood up in the
defense of God, as if he had not been able to defend himself, thou have been
an Advocate for him, who has no need thou should. Has not he power? has
his arm no strength in it? or is he destitute of counsel? surely God has no
need of thy patronage, or assistance? Therefore consider whose helper have thou
been? what? the helper of him that is weak, and have thou sustained the arms
of him that has no strength? surely no, God has strength enough to defend his
own cause, and wisdom enough to maintain his own acts against me and all men
else. Thou ought indeed to have helped him that has no power, but thou have
only given help to him that has all power. Thus some carry on the whole
context under that frame and form of this exposition, as if Job did but rebuke
Bildad for undertaking the matter on Gods part, whereas he should have used his
utmost endeavors for the support and comfort of him a poor weak creature,
laboring under heavy burdens of most sad afflictions, and wanting counsel, how
to bear and improve them as laid upon him by the hand of God. For this Job
had no power and might expect help from his friend; but he bestowed all his
help in vindicating the honor of God against Job, not in helping or advising
Job how to bear up under the hand of God, and therefore he thus interrogates
him, How have thou helped him that has no power? But

Thirdly, I rather expound the words of Job himself, as being now burdened and
distressed with great affliction, and under sore temptations, and therefore
fitly represented in these words, a man without power, an arm without
strength, and him that had no wisdom; at least that he was such in the opinion
and judgment of his friends. As if he had said, O Bildad, Thou look upon me
as a man without power, strength, or wisdom; very well, be it so as indeed
(though not in thy sense) it is so, what have thou done? how have thou helped
him that is without power? how savest thou the arm that has no strength? how
have thou performed the part of a friend, either in comforting me, or in
counselling me? so the words are a close Ironicall rebuke of what Bildad said
in the former Chapter. Thou came to strengthen and help me, consider how
well thou have made good thy own intendment; how have thou helped him that is
without power? thou have spoken words fitter to weaken, then to strengthen, to
cast down then to raise up; and so have quite mistaken the matter. Thou
should not have amplyfyed the power and majesty of God before a man in my
condition, Thou should rather have opened the doctrine of free grace, and of
the fatherly affection of God to his poor servants and children, while they
are under his sharpest corrections: Thy words should have been like oil, like
milk and honey, but thou have spoken very hard words if not gall and wormwood
to my wearied soul. Though what thou have spoken be in it self true, yet it
is to me improper and unsuitable, out of time and unseasonable, and therefore
weigh with thy self; How have thou helped him that is without power? We may
parallel this context with that of the Apostle, (1 Cor. 4.8.10.) where with much
holy derision he rebukes the overweening and high opinion which the
Corinthians had of their present attainements, and perfections in spiritualls;
Now ye are full, now ye are rich, ye have reigned like Kings without us, and I
would to God that ye did reign, that we might reign with you; As if he had
said, I could wish with all my heart, it were as well with you as you think it
is, that we also might have a part with you in those gloryes of the Gospel; But
I fear ye are only puffed up with notions, and that your portion is but small in
true solid spiritual knowledge. I fear ye have little except in conceit, and
there ye have a great deal too much; and upon the same account he puts it upon
them again at the 10th verse; We are fools for Christ's sake, but ye are wise
in Christ; we are weak, but ye are strong, ye are honorable, but we are
despised. Thus Job here, ye look upon me, as a weak man, as a man of no
power, but you are wise, and learned; see how you have played your part and
discharged your duty* you think you have a wonderful faculty in helping the
weak, in saving those who are ready to perish, in teaching the unlearned, in
counselling the unwise; whereas I am neither so weak, nor ignorant, nor
destitute of counsel as you think I am; and if I were, your oration is wide of
the mark or reaches not my case, and therefore can do me no good. How have
thou helped him that has no power? And which is the same in other words; How
savest thou the arm that has no strength?

The arm is an eminent member of the body, and in Scripture it often signifies
strength, because the arm holds out and acts the strength of the whole
body; How have thou saved the arm that has no strength? that is, the man that
has no strength. There is a threefold strength; first, natural, which is
twofold; first, of the mind or inward parts; secondly, of the body or outward
parts: secondly, there is a civil strength, which is the command or Authority
which a man has over others; thirdly, there is a spiritual strength, which is
the command which a man has over himself, both in doing good and in avoiding
evil, or both for the due enjoyment of good and enduring of evil. When, Job
says, How savest thou the arm that has no strength? we may expound it both
of the first and third sort of strength. For Job had indeed lost the strength
of his body, and his friends thought he had lost the strength both of his parts
and graces. Which is more clear in the next interrogation.

Verse. 3. How have th^s counseled him that has no wisdom?
To give counsel is the work of the wise, and they who are unwise have most
need of counsel, though they seldom think so. And it may be a very disputable
question, who is the wiser man, he that gives good counsel, or he that readily
receives it and makes good use of it. Good counsel directs how to judge of
things, how to speak, and how to act. In the multitude of Counselers there is
safety (says Solomon) and they must needs be unsafe, who either have none to
give them counsel, or refuse wholesome counsel when it is given. Counsel is to
a man without wisdom as bread is to a man that is hungry, or as clothes to a
man that is naked. Master Broughton translates; What do thou counsel without
wisdom? Right counsel is the very spirits of wisdom; but thy counsel is flat
and has no spirits in it. Thus his translation referrs the want of wisdom to
the counsel which Bildad gave Job; but ours refers it to Job to whom Bildad
undertook to give counsel. How have thou counseled him that has no wisdom? As
if he had said; Thou O Bildad look upon me, as a man without wisdom; If I
am so, I do not perceive that thy counsel is like to make me much wiser. Thy
counsel will even leave me where it found me, and it is well if it do not put me
backward. What strange kind of counsel is thine! How have thou counseled him
that has no wisdom? From all these cutting questions put together,

Observe.

First, They who are weak, and without wisdom, should be helped, and tenderly
dealt with, by grave and gracious counsel. The words of the wise conveigh
strength to the weak, comfort to the sorrowful, and counsel to those who know
not what to do. See the tenderness of Christ to the weak ( Math: 12.18, 19.)
Behold my servant whom I have chosen, and my beloved in whom my soul is well
pleased, I will put my spirit upon him, and he shall show judgment unto the
Gentiles. He means not judgment, as judgment is opposed to mercy; Jesus
Christ did not come in that sense to show judgment to the Gentiles, he did not
come to bring wrath upon them, but he came to show mercy to the Gentiles, to
those who were sinners of the Gentiles, who sat in darkness, and in the
shadow of death, he showed merciful judgment, he showed them the knowledge
of God, he reformed and purged them from their sins and sinful Idolatryes, he
brought them into a holy state and order under Gospel Government, this is the
judgment which Christ brought to the Gentiles, and this judgment is a mercy;
he shall bring Judgment to the Gentiles; How shall he do it? he shall not
strive nor cry, neither shall any man hear his voice in the streets; that is,
he shall not deal boysterously, and contentiously, he shall not be vexatious,
and rigorous, he shall not act as a man chafed and enraged, as a man full of
wrath and fury, but as a man most tenderly affected and full of pity, for a
bruised read shall he not break, and smoking flax shall he not quench; a
bruised read, and smoking flax, are emblems of the weak, of the arm without
strength, of those who are without wisdom; Christ will not deal roughly with
those, he will not break the bruised read, nor quench the smoking flax, that
is, such as are broken with the sense of sin, such as are weak in faith, such
as are so much over-powred by corruption, that they do rather smoke, and make
an ill-sented smother, then burn or shine in a gracious profession, such as
are thus low and mean in spiritualls, Christ will not break with his power,
nor quench with his rebukes, till he send forth judgment to victory, that is,
till he has perfected their conversion, and hightned their graces to the full,
and caused the better part in them to prevail over the worse (as the house of
David did over the house of Saul) till it arive at a blessed victory. And
again ( Isa. 61.2.) The spirit of the Lord God is upon me, (for wh^t) because
the Lord has anointed me to preach good tidings to the meek, he has sent me
to bind up the brokenhearted, to proclaim liberty to the captives, and the
opening of the prison to them that are bound. Here is helping those that have
no power, and saving the arm that has no strength. Thus Christ handles those
who through temptation, affliction, or any trouble are brought low. For the
neglect of this duty, the Lord reproves the Shepherds ( Ezekiel. 34.2, 3, 4.) Son
of man prophecy against the Shepherds of Israel, prophecy and say unto them,
thus says the Lord God unto the Shepherds; Woe be to the Shepherds of
Israel, that do feed themselves, should not the Shepherds feed the flocks?
That is, should they not be more intent upon the feeding of their flock with
spiritualls, then upon the feeding of themselves with temporalls? should they
not labor more to feed the peoples souls then their own bellyes? surely they
ought. But what did the Shepherds of Israel? The next words show us both what
they did, and what they did not; Ye eat the fat, and ye cloth you with the
wool, ye kill them that are fed. These things they were forward enough to do;
But see what they did not; ye feed not the flock, That Is a general neglect of
duty; then follows their neglect of particular duties; The diseased have ye
not strengthened, neither have ye healed that which is sick, neither have ye
bound up that which was broken, neither have ye brought again that which was
driven away (by force of Satan's temptation) neither have ye sought that which
was lost (through selfe-folly and corruption) Here is a large enditement
against the Shepherds; All which may be summed up in Jobs language to Bildad;
They did not help those who had no power, they did not save the arm without
strength, nor counsel those, who had no wisdom. See again how the Prophet
describes the compassionatenesse of God to his people in an afflicted condition
( Isa. 27.8.) In measure (that is, moderately) when it shoots forth thou will
debate with it, he stays his rough wind, in the day of the East wind; that
is, when affliction, like an East wind blows feircely upon his from the
world, then he stays his rough wind, he will not bring his rough wind out
of his treasures to join with the East-winde. God will deal gently with his
when they are hardly dealt with by men. And thus it is our duty when it is a
day of the East wind, a day of trouble, and temptation upon any soul, to stay
the rough wind, to breath gently, to give refreshment and ease to the weary
soul; How have thou helped him that has no power? how savest thou the arm
that has no strength?

Secondly, Observe.

The manner how we perform any duty is to be attended as well as the matter.
Bildads business was to comfort the sorrowful, to strengthen the infirm; how
did he perform this? his strengthening was a weakening, his helping was a
grieving of Job already weak and grieved; and the reason was, because he
failed in the manner, or mannaging of this work; we must be careful as to do
good for the matter, so to do it effectually, which cannot be unless it be
done rightly. Some go with an honest purpose to help, who yet administer no
help at all, to every such helper it may be said with rebuke, How have thou
helped him that is without power? how unhandsomely have thou done it? what
work have thou made of it? Thou have but entangled the poor soul worse then
before. This runs through all duties. We may say to some, How have you prayed,
and called upon God? They only speak a few words, present a few petitions,
but without a heart, without faith, without a sense of the presence of God, or
of their own wants; how have such prayed? call ye this prayer? we may say to
others, how have you heard the word of God? is this to hear? what to re^eive
the sound or the sense of the word, and never to mind it more, never to digest
nor turn what is heard into practice; is this hearing? We may say to others,
how have you f^sted, and humbled your souls before God? Is this a fast that
God has chosen, a day for a man to hang down his head like a bullrush; Is
this fasting to God, even to God? No; This is but a mock-fast, a No-fast; God
hates such formality, in praying, hearing, fasting, with a perfect hatred. A
body exercised and a soul sitting still, is not worship. God is a spirit, and
will be worshipped in spirit and in truth; In the truth or according to the
rule of his own word, as also in the truth or according to the sincerity of
our own hearts: unless we worship God in this twofold truth, we worship him
not at all, as he will be worshipped, how much soever we seem to have a will
to worship him. As Job here puts a question mixed with admiration and
indignation to his helper; How have thou helped him that has no power? How
ilfavordly how bunglingly have thou done it? So the Lord will put such a
question to many of his worshippers; How have ye worshipped him that has all
power? how slightly, how formally, how hypocritically have ye done it?
Therefore in all duties, look to the manner, as well as to the matter, and
labor to do them well, as well as to do them. To neglect the doing of a
duty, or the doing of it negligently, are alike offensive unto God; and he will
say to the latter with as much displeasure, How have thou done what I
commanded? as he will to the latter, Why have thou not done what I commanded?
yea

Thirdly, Observe.

That which is not done as it ought, is to be judged, as if not done. That
which we strive not to do in a right manner, we (upon the matter) do not at
all. We may resolve these interrogations of the Text into negations, How have
thou helped him that is without power? is as much as this, thou have not helped
him: how savest thou the arm that has no strength? is indeed, Thou have not
saved him: how have thou counseled him that has no wisdom? caryeth this
meaning, thou have given him no counsel; we use to say, as good never a whit,
as never the better, and how good soever any thing is that we do, if we do it
amiss, it will be reckoned by God (what reckoning soever men make of it) as if
we had done no such thing. Moses said to the Lord under a temptation, when he
was troubled at the complaint of the people, because the deliverance promised
did not come on, and they were not freed as was expected; Lord, wherefore have
thou so evil entreated this people? why is it that thou have sent me? for
since I came to Pharaoh to speak in thy name, he has done evil to this
people, neither have thou delivered thy people at all, (Exodus 5.23.) Is this a
deliverance? this is no deliverance; we are apt to think the mercyes of God no
mercyes, unless he give us full and perfect mercyes, unless we presently
receave all that we look for, we look upon it as if we had received nothing
at all. But how truly may the Lord say to the children of men, when they
perform duties slightly, and negligently, ye have not done them at all, ye
have neither prayed, nor heard, nor fasted at all, because ye have been
negligent in, and unprofitable under them. The works and duties of the best
are not every way full, but the works and duties of some are altogether
empty; and they do nothing in all they do.

Fourthly, In these several interrogations, are here held forth the several
effects of holy advice given according to the word, and mind of God; how have
thou helped him that is without power? saved the arm that has no strength?
counseled him that has no wisdom? As if he had said, thou indeed have
offered me counsel from God; if thou had managed it right, this would have
been the fruit of it; I who have no power should have been helped, and I who am
as an arm without strength should have been saved

Hence observe.

That the word of God or divine truths are mighty in operation, when duly
administered. The word of truth conveigheth strength to the weak, wisdom to
the simple, comfort to the sorrowful, light to those who are in darkness, and
life unto the dead. The word lifts up the hands which hang down, and the
feeble knees. The law of the Lord (that is, every holy truth, says David,
Psalm. 19.7, 8.) is perfect (and what can it do? the next words tell us)
converting or restoring the soul. The testimony of the Lord is sure (and what
can that do? the next words tell us) making wise the simple. The statutes of
the Lord are right (and what can they do? even that which is most sweet where
it is done) rejoicing the heart: The commandment of the Lord is pure (in it
self, and it works gloriously in us) enlightening the eyes. I may say also,
The word of the Lord is mighty, and it gives strength to those who have no
might. As it is mighty for the pulling down of strong holds, casting down
imaginations, and every thing that exalts it self against the knowledge of
God, and bringing into captivity every thought to the obedience of Christ (2
Cor: 10.4, 5.) So it is as mighty for the raising up of the weak, for the
lifting up of those who are cast down and fallen below the knowledge of God
through unbelief; and for the bringing of poor souls out of captivity into
that blessed liberty of faith in Christ. What Great things the word rightly
applied, and divine truths brought home with Authority, have done and still can
do was showed at the 4^h Chapter of that book, verse 3d and 4th. As also at
the 25^h verse of the sixth Chapter, upon those words, How forcible are right
words? Though we ought to help those who have no power by more then words, yet
words have helped many who had no power; as Job does more then intimate while
he reproves Bildad for his unskillfull wording it with him. How have thou
helped etc.

And how have thou plentifully declared the thing as it is? (...) unde Graecum
(...). Appellatio a (...) quod esse significat, sapientia enim rerum omnium
existentium prima and praecipua est. Drus:
That which we render, The thing as it is, is but one word in the Original, and
it has a threefold signification.

First, It is put for the essence, substance, or being of a thing; The Greek
word for substance, is very near this in sound, and may possibly be a
derivative from it.

Secondly, It signifies that working or operation which flows from being;
Things first are, and then they act, and they are to little or no purpose
unless they act.

Thirdly, It signifies counsel, advice, wisdom, or sound wisdom ( Prove.
3.21.) so Mr Broughton translates, And make advice known abundantly. Others
taking up the same notion render, How have thou declared wisdom abundantly. As
if he had said, Thou think thou have opened a treasure and declared store of
wisdom and knovledge in this discourse, or that thou have made a very wise and
learned discourse, whereas indeed it will be found lean and short in it self,
as also impertinent to the point in hand. (...) ad multitudinem vel
multipliciter.
Our translation takes it in the first sense, How have thou plentifully
declared the thing as it is, that is, how have thou declared the substance of
the thing, or the solid truth in plenty, or as the Hebrew phrase imports, in
great number and with much variety.

Hence note.

First, Every thing ought to be declared as it is, that is, the naked truth
ought to be declared. It is our duty to speak of things as they are, not to
put colors upon them, and so make them appear what they are not, or otherwise
then they are; truth is plain, and truth should be told plainly. The naked
truth, or, the thing as it is, is most beautiful to the eye of the
understanding. And though Bildad did misreport what he spoke of God, yet he did
not make a full report. How have thou plentifully declared the thing as it is?

Secondly, Hence note.

As we ought to speak the truth, so to speak the truth out, or all the truth.
Paul tells the Church of E^hesus (Acts 20.20.) That he had kept nothing back
that was profitable for them; and (says he, ver. 27.) I have not shunned to
declare unto you all the counsel of God. Paul plentifully declared the thing as
it was. Bildad spoke truth, but not all the truth, as to Jobs case. He spoke
great things of the power and holiness of God, but Jobs case called him to
speak as much if not more and rather of the goodness and kindness of God. He
spoke enough to humble and cast Job down, at the sight of his natural
uncleanenes, but he should have spoken more to raise him up and comfort him by
showing him that fountain which is opened to wash in for sin and for
uncleanenes. We may quickly entangle a soul by speaking truth, unless we
show him all that ruth which belongs to his condition. The Scriptures have
plenty of truth in them, and are therefore able to make as wise unto salvation;
They are profitable for doctrine, for reproof, for correction, for instruction
in righteousness. The Scripture is like that River spoken of ( Genesis 2.10.) which
went out of Eden to water the Garden, and from thence it was parted and became
into four heads: Paul in that place now mentioned (2 Timothy 3.16.) shows us the
Scripture parting it self into four heads; first, of Doctrine, for
establishing the truth; secondly, of reproof, for removing of error; thirdly,
of correction, for the beating down of ill manners; fourthly, of instruction,
for building up in a holy conversation; That so (as it there follows) the man
of God may be perfect, thoroughly furnished unto all good works; that is, in
Jobs language, that he may be able plentifully to declare (the solid truth) the
thing as it is, and as knowingly to declare General truths, so to apply them
discerningly to the state of every person; A failing wherein Job is supposed to
charge Bildad with in the next verse.

Verse. 4. To whom have thou uttered words?
Here Job taxes Bildad with inconsiderateness, in reference to the person to
whom he spoke; To whom have thou uttered words? have thou considered to whom
thou spakest? Quem docere voluisti, nonne eum qui fecit spiramentum. Vulg:
The vulgar translation referrs it to God, whom would thou teach? would not
thou teach him who made the breath? surely thou take upon thee to teach him,
who is the teacher of us all. Thus many carry on the sense of this fourth verse
according to the second interpretation of the second and third verses. With
which presumption Job taxed his friends once before, and that in express
terms ( Chap. 21, 22.) Shall any teach God knowledge? seeing he judges those
that are high.

But I conceive Jobs meaning is only to show Bildad that he had not well
advised about his case and condition before he spoke; for Bildad might say, is
this a question to be asked, to whom have I uttered words? have not I been
speaking to thee all this while? art not thou the man for whose sake we are
here met, and about whom we have had all this dispute? Why then do thou
ask, to whom have thou uttered words? Job doubted not who it was to whom he
spoke; but Job questions him as fearing he was not well acquainted with, or had
not enough laid to heart the state of the man to whom he spoke, do thou know
what my condition is, and have thou suited, and cut out thy discourse to my
condition? to whom have thou uttered words?

Hence note.

We should well consider the state of every person to whom we speak, and apply
our speech or doctrine accordingly. Bildad in the former Chapter had been
setting forth the power, majesty, and dread of God, as also his infinite purity
before whom the Angels are not-cleane; now says Job, to whom have thou uttered
these words? should I be thus dealt with, thus handled, who am a man cast down
already and under the terrors of God? Is this discourse (though an undoubted
truth) suitable to my condition? Thou should rather have represented God to my
faith in his goodness, and mercy, in his long suffering, and patience, in his
tenderness and gentleness toward sinners, thou should have proclaimed that
name of God to me which is his Glory ( Exodus 34.6.) The Lord, The Lord
gracious, and merciful, long suffering, and abundant in goodness and truth;
this had been a description of God, a proclamation of God fit for a man in my
case. Whereas thou have only told me of his mighty power and dominion, of his
Hosts and Armies; do thou know to whom thou have uttered these words? Jesus
Christ, when here on earth, considered to whom he was uttering words, and
therefore tells his Disciples ( Joh. 16.12.) I have many things to say unto
you, but ye cannot bear them now. Christ would not put new wine into old
botles, but attemper'd his speech to the strength and capacity of his hearers.
Some must hear that which they cannot bear (when that springs from their
passion and impatience, especially when from their love to and resolvednesse to
go onne in sin; Amos must not forbear to speak, though Amaziah cry out,
The Land is not able to bear all his words) But we must take heed of forcing
words upon any which they cannot bear, or are not fit to hear, either by
reason of their afflictions and temptations, or by reason of their present
infirmities and incapacities. The Apostle (2 Timothy 2.15.) bids Timothy study to
show thy self approved unto God, (he does not mean it in his private course
of life and daily converse, which is the duty of every believer) but in his
public course of life, or converse as a Minister of the Gospel, in that,
says he, study to show thy self approved (unto God) a workman that needs
not to be ashamed, (what kind of workman was Timothy, his work lay in the
Word, show thy self a workman, and a Master in thy work) rightly dividing
the word of truth; how is the word to be divided? he does not mean of a
gramaticall, nor of a logical division (though there may be a use of these
divisions of the Word) but the dividing of the word intended by Paul, is the
dividing of it spiritually to the several states, and conditions of men,
giving to such, a word of instruction, to others a word of reproof, to a third
sort words of comfort: This is dividing the word aright; And in doing this,
Paul would have Timothy declare himfelfe a workman that he needed not be
ashamed. He would have him know to whom he uttered words: to know when he spoke
to sinners, and when to Saints, when he spoke to the afflicted, and when to
them that were in a comfortable estate; He would have him know when he spoke to
those who were hardened in their sin, and when to those whose hearts were broken
under the weight and sense of sin. And thus as every man who utters words, so
Ministers of the Gospel especially should be well advised to whom they utter
them. For as the same garment will not serve every body to wear, nor the same
bed to lie upon, so the same word will not serve every soul. We must not do
as the tyrant, who made one bed serve all his guests, and they that were too
long for it were cut shorter, and they who were too short were stretched
longer. Yet thus do they who have but one word for all comers, or for all
they come to. We would judge him a very unskilful Physician, who, let the
disease be what it will, should prescribe one and the same medicine, or apply
the same salve (though a very sovereign one) to every soar. As we say, That
which is one man's meat is another man's poison, so we may also say, That which
is one man's medicine may be another man's poison; That which cures one disease
may increase another. Therefore the Physician must consider to whom he gives
the potion, as well as what he gives, and the Surgeon must not only know
what his salve is, but to whom he applies it, so in this case, To whom have
thou uttered words? weigh it well, whether they be babes or strong men in
Christ, whether they be under peaceable or troublesome dispensations, whether
obstinate, or tenderhearted; For these must be differently dealt with, as
their states do differ. We may else do more hurt then good. We may quickly
(as the Prophet speaks, Ezekiel. 13.19.) Slay the souls that should not dye
(that is, grieve and trouble the godly) and save the souls alive which should
not live, that is, harden and fatten the wicked in their sins. The Apostle
has left us an excellent rule by his own practice (1 Cor. 9.19.) Though I be
free from all men, yet have I made my self servant to all that I might gain
the more, and unto the Jews I became as a Jew, that I might gain the Jews,
to them that are under the Law, as under the Law, that I might gain them that
are under the Law, to them that are without the Law, as without Law, being not
without law to God, but under the law to Christ, that I might gain them that
are without Law; to the weak became I as weak, that I might gain the weak I am
made all things to all men, that I might by all means save some, and this I do
for the Gospel sake that I might be partaker thereof with you. In this context
we see what was chiefly in the Apostles eye, (even that which is the highest
and fairest mark in the world) the saving of souls. And that he might attain
this end, he critically observed the temper and state of his hearers, striving
to frame and suit himself, and his speech accordingly; He was not the same to
all, but he would be as they were to whom he spoke, or with whom he did
converse; yet Paul did not symbolize with, nor connive at any in their sins, he
did not take upon him all colors, he was not a man for all men, or a man for
all hours, and humors. The holy Apostle did not turn, as flatterers do,
with the times, nor fashion himself to the several garbes of men in a sinful
way; Paul was so far from any such base complyances, that he having put the
question, do I yet please men? answers and concludes in the next words ( Gal.
1.10.) If I yet pleased men, I should not be the servant of Christ. But
weighing the state of all men, he formed his words, and did accommodate his
Ministry for their gain, or rather for the gaining of them. Some are all
things to all men, that they may gain by all, that they may advantage
themselves by all (which is a spirit not only unworthy of a Minister, but of a
man) but Paul complied with all, that he might gain them, or bring them in the
greatest gain. Or he complied with all men, that Christ might gain, and faith
in him be propagated, this I do for the Gospel sake. I do not this for my
own sake, I do not put my self into all forms toward men for my own
preferment in the world, but that Christ may be preferred in the hearts and
acceptations of all men with whom I have to do, before the world. And that
this was his purpose, we have his sense fully from his own pen (1 Cor. 10.32,
33.) Give none offense, neither to the Jews, nor to the Gentiles, nor to the
Church of God, even as I please all men in all things, not seeking mine own
profit, but the profit of many that they may be saved.

There are five things to be taken notice of, that we may utter words to profit.

First, The matter or what we speak. Those words which have no worth in
themselves can never profit others. While the Prophet ( Hos. 14.2.) exhorts
the people to repentance, He says, Take with you words, that is, choice words,
select words, consider what words you take with you, when you turn to the
Lord, and plead with him for mercy, saying, take away all iniquity, and receave
us graciously. And as we are to take words with us, choice words to express
choice matter in when we speak to the Lord, so also in proportion when we
speak to Men, as from the Lord.

Secondly, We must consider to whom we are to utter words, we must not shoot at
random, or without a mark; Some doctrines are general, but there ought to be
a special application of General doctrines. Other Doctrines are peculiar to
some. We must not cast pearls before swine, nor give childrens bread to dogs.
And we must be as careful, that we speak not to children, that is, to the
truly Godly, as we should do to dogs and swine (for so the Scripture calls
them) profane and ungodly men.

Thirdly, We must consider the season or time when we speak. Those words will
take at one time, which will not at another. There is as much care to be had,
and as much skill seen in a due timeing of our words, as of our actions.

Fourthly, We must consider the quantum, or the measure of words uttered, we
may over-lay and over-charge those to whom we speak; Every one cannot bear a
strong shower of speech, or words powered out like a flood upon such. Our
doctrine (as Moses said his did, Deuteronomy. 32.2.) must drop as the rain, our
speech must distill as the dew, as the small rain upon the tender herb, and
as the showers upon the grass.

Fifthly, We must consider the manner in which we utter words: whether to
speak as a Barnabas, or as a Boanarges, whether as a son of thunder, of wrath
and judgment, or as a son of peace, of joy and consolation. Of some have
compassion (that is, deal tenderly with them, Jude v. 22.) making a
difference, and others save with fear, pulling them out of the fire. We do
but cast words into the air, unless we thus make a difference in the manner
of speech, as they differ to whom we speak. When we have duly weighed, the
matter which, the persons to whom, the season when, the measure how much, and
the manner in which we ought to speak, then we are like to speak to purpose,
and shall be above this reproof which Job here gives Bildad; To whom have thou
uttered words?

And whose spirit came from thee? The word which we translate spirit, signifyes
also the breath; whose spirit or whose breath came from thee? The sense is the
same.

And.

First, Some interpret Job thus; Whose spirit, or whose breath came from thee?
That is, Consider O Bildad, whose spirit moved thee, or who breathed these
things into thee? whose breath or whose spirit came from thee when thou did
utter these words? so it is a rebuke of Bildads presumption, as if he had
conceaved himself wrought or acted by some extraordinary spirit, while he was
speaking, or that the things which he uttered had been dropped into him by an
immediate Revelation from heaven; whose spirit came from thee? what breath,
what gale has filled thy sails? thou have high conceits of thy self, as if
God had spoken to thee by his Spirit, or as if thou had spoken these things
to me from his mouth. But is it not rather thy own spirit, thy own heart
which has dictated these words unto thee? Some think the same spirit comes
from them when they speak, which came from the holy Prophets and Apostles, who
yet are deceaved. The Disciples of Christ thought the same spirit came from
them, which came from Eliah when they said ( Luke 9.54.) Lord, will thou that
we command fi^e to come down from heaven, and consume them as Elias did: But
he turned and rebuked them, and said, ye know not what manner of spirit ye are
of: As if he had said in the language of Job, ye know not whose spirit comes
from you; ye would speak the words of Elias, but ye have not the spirit of
Elias; you have a zeal but not according to knowledge; yours is but a humane
affection, not a divine inspiration, as Elias his was, his was a pure spirit of
zeal, but yours is a rash spirit of revenge. And therefore your motion suites
not with your calling; for as I am come, so I send you, to save not to destroy.
We may speak the same words, and do the same things which others have done
and spoken, and yet not with the same but with quite another spirit. Therefore
examine, whose spirit comes from you? This is a good and profitable sense. Yet,

Cujus anima prodijt ex te; i. e. quem consolatus es tam efficaciter sermon
tuo, ut anima ejus ex maerore quasi in corpore sepulta jacebat rursum e
latebris prodierit seseq, per corpus exserue rit Pisc: Cujus animam verbis tuis
vivificasti? Hebraei, Apud Merc:
Secondly, Rather thus; Whose spirit came from thee? that is, whose soul, or
whose mind has been recovered out of trouble and fear, out of sadness and
sorrow by the words which thou have spoken. Thus the spirit is taken for his to
whom he spoke, not for his spirit who spoke, or not for the spirit with which
he spoke. This is a Great truth, gracious and right words, rightly applied, do
as it were relieve the spirit, and bring back the fainting, yea dead soul,
from the grave of grief and sorrow, wherein it lay as buried. Now says Job,
whose spirit came from thee? Have thou recovered or raised any languishing
soul by what thou have said? who has felt life and power coming from thee? I
am sure I have not, though I have heard thee out, and heard thee attentively.
What the Moralist said of Idleness, the same may we say of sorrow or heavynes,
It is the burial of a man while he lives. And therefore he that has
comforted a man and recovered him out of his sorrows, may be said to give him a
new life, and that the spirit of such a man is come forth from him: yea, he
that instructs the ignorant, and brings them to the saving knowledge of
God, may be said, to breath or put a soul into them. In which sense some of
the Jewish writers expound that place, ( Genesis 12.5.) where it is said, That
Abraham took Sarah his wife, and Lot his Brothers son, and all their substance
that they had gathered, and the souls that they had gotten in Charan, etc.
that is, all those whom by good instruction and example they had gained to God,
or (as the Apostle speaks, 1 These. 1.9.) had by their means turned to God
from Idols to serve the living and true God. These souls they got in Charan;
though Abraham and Sarah were barren of natural issue, yet they had much
spiritual issue, many souls or the souls of many came from them. And
therefore when Job would put a disparagement upon what Bildad had spoken, he
puts him this Question, Whose spirit or whose soul came forth from thee? or
whom have thou resouled, as the Greek word which the Apostle uses for
refreshing, (...).
does elegantly signify ( Acts 3.19.) Repent ye therefore and be converted,
that your sins may be blotted out, when the time of refreshing (or resouling)
shall come from the presence of the Lord. When a man faints, or is very weary,
we say he has lost his spirits, and he is even as a man without a soul. But
when in the use of any means he is refreshed, then we say, his spirit or soul
is come to him again. The spirit of man comes only from God in its natural
constitution, he is the father of Spirits (Eccl: 12.7. Heb. 12.9.) But the
spirit of man may come from man in its refreshings and consolations. And
therefore says Job to Bildad, Whose spirit came from thee? or whom have thou
comforted? Thou have undertaken to comfort me; but I am not comforted.

Hence note.

Holy truths or words rightly applied, have a releiving yea a reviving power in
them. Such words give a man his soul again, when he has lost it, and when he
is (as it were) gone from himself, he is brought back to himself again. For
as it is said of the repenting Prodigal, he came to himself, he was gone, he
was lost from himself, his soul was departed from him, his understanding was
none of his, he was no more Master of any spiritually rational faculty, then a
dead man is of any mere rational faculty; and so his father reported him
whilst in that condition, this our son was dead but is alive, he was lost,
but he is found (Luke 15.32.) Now (I say) as it is in extreme sinnings, so in
extreme sorrowings and dejections of spirit, a man is lost from himself, he
is as a dead man; and so when comfort comes in again, life may be said to come
in again; he who before was lost is found, and he who was dead revives. The
word revives from a twofold death; It revives a natural man from the death of
sin, and it revives a Godly man from a death in sorrow. How many spirits have
come forth at the voice of the Word, out of the grave of sin. Christ foretold
this resurrection of the soul by the preaching and publication of the Gospel (
Joh. 5.25.) The hour is coming, and now is, when the dead shall hear the
voice of the son of God (in the ministry of the word) and they shall live. And
lest any should think that this is meant of the resurrection of the body,
Christ speaks of that distinctly ( ver. 28.) Marvel not at this, for the hour
is coming (he does not say as before, and now is) in the which all that are in
the Graves (dead bodies) shall hear his voice, and come forth, they that have
done good, unto the resurrection of life, and they that have done evil unto
the resurrection of damnation. As if Christ had said, That powerful voice (and
a voice less powerful then that will not do it) which is able to raise dead
bodies, bodies mouldered into dust, from the earth, and cause them to live
again, (that voice I say) is able to raise a dead soul from a state of sin to
newnes of life. The Apostle says as much, while he calls the preaching of
the Word a savor of life unto life in them that are saved (2 Cor: 2.16.) They
smell and taste life, even eternal life at the receaving of the Word. And as it
is the means of conveighing life to those who are dead in sin, so of
recovering and renewing life to those who are dead in sorrow. Worldly sorrow or
the sorrow of the world works death (2 Cor. 7.10.) and extreme spiritual
sorrow, or the extreme sorrow of the soul about spiritualls, puts us into a
kind of death. Thus Heman spoke of himself in that case ( Ps. 88.4, 5.) I am
counted with them that go down into the pit; I am as a man that has no
strength, free among the dead, like the slain that lie in the grave, whom thou
remembrest no more; and they are cut off from thy hand. As Heman was counted
among the dead by others, so he was like a dead man in his own account too, as
he speaks at the 15th verse; I am afflicted and ready to dye, from my youth
up, while I suffer thy terrors I am distracted. He was not ready to dye of
bodyly diseases, but of soul terrors, nor could any thing revive him, or
fetch him back from that death, but the favor of God shining to him in the
word of promise; how glorious is the word by the workings of the Spirit, which
causes the spirit to come forth, and makes them who were free among the dead,
become free among the living. This effect and fruit of the word Job expected
from his friends before, and now from Bildad, but all in vain; As their, so
his discourse with Job was fruitless and ineffectuall. Much has been spoken,
but I have got nothing; I have got no spirit, no refreshing, my heart is no
whit cheared, nor my soul comforted, both you and the rest of your brethren,
have proved miserable comforters to me. To whom have thou uttered words? I am
no better, then if you had said nothing. And whose spirit came from thee, not
mine, for as yet, (notwithstanding all your reasonings) my spirit is not
returned to me; I am as deep in sorrow as ever I was.

There is yet another reading of this last clause of the verse given by Mr
Broughton, And whose soul admired thee. The same word may signify to admire,
and to come forth; because the soul or spirit of a man comes forth (as it
were) to gaze upon those things and persons which he admireth. As if Job had
said; Possibly O Bildad, thou presumest that thou have spoken like an Oracle of
Wisdom, even much beyond the rate and proportion of ordinary men, or of what
is common to man, and therefore do expect to be applauded, yea to be
admired. But whose soul is come forth by reason of thee? who has admired
thee? not I, nor do I know, that any man has reason so to do, unless it be,
because thou have so much mistaken my meaning and intention in what I said, and
have said things so improper to my condition. Some have the persons of men in
admiration, because of advantage (Jude v. 16.) and others desire no other
advantage, but to be cried up and had in admiration. I dare not say, that
Bildad was a man of such a spirit, though this translation (whose soul admired
thee?) seems to charge him with such a folly.

JOB, CHAP. 26. Verse. 5, 6, 7. Dead things are formed from under the waters,
and the inhabitants thereof.

Hell is naked before him, and destruction has no covering.

He stretches out the North over the empty place, and hangs the earth upon
nothing.


IN the former part of this Chapter, Job reproved the last discourse of Bildad
as unprofitable, not that it was so in it self (for that was true and a great
truth which he spoke of the greatness of God) but the method which he used,
and the application of it to his case made it so. How have thou helped him that
is without power? etc.

In this Context, and the subsequent part of the Chapter, Job enters upon or
reassumes the same argument or subject which Bildad had handled before; The
power, soveraigntie, and dreadfullnes of God in his works, both of Creation
and providence all the world over. Job would let Bildad understand, that he was
not unacquainted with the doctrine that he had pressed upon him in the former
Chapter. As if he had said, Do thou think that I know not these things,
surely I can tell thee as much, yea more of the power of God then thou have
spoken, and thereby thou shall see that I am not to learn, nor to seek in
this matter; yea I will point and paint out the power of God not only in the
visible heavens, but in those things which lie unseene, I will go down to the
deepes, to the bottom of the mighty waters, I can tell thee that he is not
only admirable above but beneath, in so much as nothing is bred or brought
forth whether animate or inanimate in the vast Ocean, but it is by his power
and at his disposing. Yea I will go as low as hell and search the power of God
there; I will also ascend up to heaven, and speak of the great things that God
does in the air, and in the clouds, and among the stars, whereby you may see
that I am no stranger to such divine Philosophy, and therefore this was not the
point you should have insisted upon, or that I needed to be informed in. That Is
the general scope and aim of Job in these words, I shall now touch upon the
particulars.

Dead things are formed from under the waters.
Jobs first instance concerning the power of God, is about things under the
waters; Dead, livelesse, inanimate things are formed there; Properly that only
is a dead thing which has sometime lived, we cannot say a stone is a dead
thing, because it never had any life, neither can we say that water or earth
are dead things, for they never had any life; but those things that have had
life, whether vegetative, or sensitive, or rational, as man, or beasts, or
plants, when once that life is withdrawn from any of them, that is properly
called a dead thing. Yet in a general vulgar and improper sense, even those
things that never had life may be called dead. Mr Broughton renders strictly,
not dead things, but things without life are formed under the waters.

The Hebrew word may come from a twofold root, and so has a twofold
signification. First, to heal and cure; (...) dolorem mitigavit, sanavit,
transferturper Metaphora^ a corpore ad animam ut sig: remittere peccata.
and in Scripture it is transferred from the healing of the body to the healing
of the soul in the remission of sins; because as the wound of the body is
healed by the salve, so is the souls wound, namely sin, healed by remission
or forgiveness. The word is used in this sense ( Isa. 6.10.) Make the heart of
this people fat, and make their ears heavy, and shut their eyes; least they
see with their eyes, and hear with their ears, and understand with their
heart, and convert, and be healed, that is, pardoned. Secondly, (...) debitis
dissolutus laxus languidus.
it signifies to be dissolved or loosened, to be weak and languishing; we
translate it dead, because things that are dead are weakened and dissolved, and
therefore death is called a dissolution; As Paul said ( Phil. 1.23.) I desire
to depart or to be dissolved, that is, to dye; and the same phrase is used for
death (2 Cor: 5.1.) We know that when the earthly house of this Tabernacle
shall be dissolved etc. Again, by the figure Antiphrasis (frequent in
Scripture) this word as it signifies dead and weak things, so also strong and
lively things, yea those that are strongest or most lively, and therefore
Giants who are the strongest of men, are expressed by this word ( Deuteronomy. 2.11.)
The Enims dwelt therein in times past, Ecce Gigantes gemunt sub aquis. Vulg:
a people great and many and tall, as the Anakims, which also were accounted
Giants etc. And the vulgar translates so here; Behold, The Giants groan under
the waters. Giants are called Rephaim in the Hebrew, which word in the root
signifies to weaken, not from their nature, but from their effects, not because
they are weak, but because they weaken others. Giants are so strong that the
very sight of them makes others weak and faint, or pulls down men of strength
and might. It is said that Saul and the whole Army of Israel were dismayed when
they saw Goliath, and greatly afraid; they were weak before the Giant. There is
much laboring to make out this sense of the word here; some understand it of
the Giants before the flood; Behold, the Giants groan from under the flood.
Those Giants were indeed overthrown by the waters; and so they conceave that
Job alluded unto them, but I shall not stay upon that interpretation.

Others expound the text of those Giants whose proper element is water, the
mighty fishes of the Sea, the Whale, the Leviathan spoken of in this book of
Job; Leviathan is a Sea Monster, a Sea-gyant of huge dimensions. Natural
Historians and travelers describe the vastnes of the Whale or Leviathan, to
wonder and amazement. And it is granted, that in these Gods power is much seen;
But I shall lay by this exposition also, because (I conceive) fishes are spoken
of in the next words, where they are called the inhabitants thereof, that is,
of the Sea or waters.

Again, this word Rephaim is often put for the dead, or those that are
departed this life. ( Psalm. 88.10.) Will thou show wonders to the dead? shall
the dead arise and praise thee? There are two words used for the dead in that
verse, one is the ordinary word, the other is that of the Text. Solomon (Pro.
2.18.) showing how dangerous it is to have to do with the adulteress, says,
Her house inclines unto death, and her paths unto the (Rephaim or the) dead.
The house of Adultery and uncleanenes is the Gatehouse to death; it is not a
house raised up, but bowed down, her house enclineth unto death, and she who
is the governesse, of rather the miss-governeness of the house, will by her ill
life bring thee among the dead, even among those who are twice dead, corporally
dead at present, and spiritually dead for ever.

But that which I shall rather pitch upon according to our translation, (...).
is that by these dead things are meant such things as never had any life. Mr
Broughton expounds his translation, Things without life, of those precious
things that are formed under the waters, Amber and pearl and goodly stones;
These dead things are found under the waters, and there they are formed; Gods
providence reaches to the furthest places, even to the bottom of the Sea and
lowest earth, which seem to be as cast off; So he glosseth, and so do other
Interpreters, Incipit dei providentiam and po^entiam describere a rebus
subterraneis initio sump^o. Merc:
concluding that Job is here setting forth the power of God in forming minerals
and precious stones under the waters or in the deepes, and so rises in his
discourse by degrees to higher things. As if he had said, O Bildad, what do
thou showing me the power and providence of God in the high places, where he
makes peace; I can tell thee that the same power and providence of God are
extended to those things which are wrought in the bowels of the earth, and at
the bottom of the Sea, and so are furthest removed from our sight.

And whereas we say, Dead things are formed there; that word properly signifies
to bring forth children, or any living creature ( Job 39.1, 2.) Know thou
the time when the wild Goats of the rock bring forth, or can thou mark
when the Hindes do calve? Can thou number the months that they fulfill, or
know thou the time when they bring forth? yea The Eternal Word and Wisdom
of God speaks of himself in the language of this Word ( Pro. 8.25.) Before
the mountains were settled, before the hills was I brought forth. It signifies
also to be in pain, and groan for pain, because childbearing causes much
pain and groaning. So the word is used in a metaphorical sense ( Deuteronomy: 2.25.)
This day will I begin (says the Lord) to put the dread of thee, and the fear
of thee upon the Nations, that are under the whole heaven, who shall hear
report of thee, and shall tremble and be in anguish because of thee; they shall
be in anguish as a woman traveling with child and pained to bring forth.
Whence that translation takes its ground, The Giants groan under the waters.
And as it signifies to form and fashion the child or any living thing in the
womb, and then to bring forth, so it is applied to the forming of things that
have no life ( Ps. 90.^2.) Before the mountains were brought forth, or ever
thou had formed the earth and the world: even from everlasting to everlasting
thou art God.

Dead things are formed. But by whom? here is no power expressed; Job says
only, they are formed, he leaves that to be understood; And what or whom can
we understand but God, or the power of God, by whom or whereby dead things are
formed as well as living things; for all things, whether animate or inanimate,
receave their being and form from him; Dead things are formed from under the
waters.

Hence note.

That all things are produced in their beings by the power of God. Dead things
as well as living things, gold and silver, minerals and gemms are formed by God
as well as men or beasts. And as they were of God in Creation at the beginning,
so there is a continual putting forth of the power of God in the continuing or
renewing of them; God is daily forming rich and rare things in the secret
Cabinets of the earth, and from under the waters.

And the inhabitants thereof. That is, as dead things are formed under the
waters, so are the inhabitants thereof, or those living things that dwell in
the water; we put in the Margin, with the inhabitants: who are they? The
inhabitants of the water are the fishes, they are bred and abide in the water.
As if he had said, Those precious stones and minerals, called dead things, are
formed from under or in the waters as well as the fishes, who are the proper
inhabitants of the water. Mr Broughton reads thus; Dead things are formed
under the waters and places near them, that is, in the mountains and hills,
in the clifts and rocks are these precious things formed. But I rather take our
reading, and so the Text gives a further illustration of the power of God; who
as he forms dead things under the waters, so living things, or the
inhabitants of the water.

Hence note.

The power of God is great in forming the fishes of the Sea. And the greatness
of it will appear if we consider three things about them.

First, Their number, as to us, the fish of the Sea are infinite in number,
there is no sort of creatures that multiply so fast as fishes do, therefore
when God created the inhabitants of the water, we read ( Genesis 1.21.) how
emphatically their increase is expressed; And God created great Whales, and every
living creature that moves, which the waters brought forth abundantly after
their kind. The waters did not bring them forth by any power of their own,
but they were brought forth in the waters by that power which God had planted
in the waters for that purpose. Now it is not only said that the waters
brought them forth, but the waters brought them forth abundantly, implying
that fish do multiply and bring forth more then other creatures; and therefore
when the Spirit of God would show a great increase of men, it is said, They
shall increase like fish (Genesis 48.16.) Jacob blessing the children of Joseph,
prayed thus; Inter omnes bestias nihil est foecundius piscibus igitur
tra^ffertur ad multiplicationem immensum.
The Angel which redeemed me from all evil, bless the ladds and let my name
be named on them, and the name of my fathers, Abraham, and Isaac, and let them
grow into a multitude in the midst of the earth. The Original is, Let them
grow or multiply like fishes into a multitude in the midst of the earth; or let
them be as numerous upon the land as fishes are in the Sea. And we find in the
sacred History how the blessing and providence of God made good this history.
For of the sons of Joseph, Manasseh and Ephraim were numbered eighty five
thousand and two hundred men meet for war ( Numb: 26.34.37.) which exceeded
the increase of any one Tribe beside. How wonderfully does the Lords power
appear, not only in those infinite sholes of lesser fishes, but in the
greater also? Who is able to report the number of these Sea-inhabitants, or of
the fishes who people the Sea?

Secondly, If we consider their various kinds, that also shows forth the
great power of God. Naturalists observe that there is no creature upon the
earth, but has (as I may say) its representative in the Sea, besides those
that have nothing like them on the earth; so various are their kinds.

Thirdly, Many of these inhabitants of the waters are wonderful for the
vastness and greatness of their bodies; the greatest of all living creatures
are in the Sea ( Psalm. 104.25.) So is this great and wide Sea, wherein are
things creeping innumerable: both small and great beasts. The Psalmist calls
the fishes beasts, and there are small beasts in the Sea and great beasts even
of a stupendous greatness. The greatest beasts of the earth are as nothing
compared to them; The Elephant is little to the Leviathan. Naturalists have
written much of this subject, the numerousnes, variousnes, and vastnes of these
water-Inhabitants. So that we may see much of the Majesty and power of God, as
in these things that are formed under the waters, so in those that are formed
in the waters. Job descends lower yet in the next words.

Verse. 6. Hell is naked before him, and destruction has no covering.
It Is questioned what is here meant by hell.

Some expound hell of the lowest parts of the earth, so Master Broughton; The
lowest earth is naked before him, and the lost (that is, that which seems to
be lost and condemned, as himself Glosseth it) has no covering.

Secondly, Hell is often put for the grave ( Psalm. 16.10.) Thou will not leave
my soul (that is, me) in hell (that is, in the grave) nor will thou suffer thy
holy one to see corruption.

Thirdly, It is most usually taken for that prison or place of torment, where
the Lord detaynes all those, in hold, that have rebelled against him, and dyed
impaenitently in that rebellion. In this third sense we may interpret it here
(as I conceive) most suitably to the scope and purpose of Job in this place.

Hell is naked before him. That is, it is fully discovered to him, he sees who
are there, and what is done there, he observes all passages there, even in that
bottomless pit of hell, as well as in heaven or upon the earth. As if Job had
said to Bildad; You told me that God makes peace in his high places, I tell
you God has to do in hell, or in the lowest places. The lowest hell is naked
before him. The Apostle speaks in this phrase ( Heb: 4.13.) Neither is there
any creature that is not manifest in his sight: but all things are naked, and
opened unto the eyes of him with whom we have to do. The words are an allusion
unto bodies, which being stripped, and uncloathed, all see what they are; there
may be many deformities, blemishes, and scarrs, yea ulcers upon the body
undiscerned while it is clothed or covered, but when naked nothing is hid. All
things are naked before God, that is, he as plainly discernes what they are, as
we discern what a body is, that stands naked before us. Hell is called
darkness, and utter darkness, yet it is light to God.

And destruction has no covering. Here the same thing is again repeated, and
it is usual in Scripture to speak that in negative words, which was before
spoken in affirmative. As to be naked, and to have no covering, are the same;
so hell and destruction are the same; and these two are often put together (
Pro. 15.11.) Hell and destruction are before the Lord: how much more the hearts
of the children of men? Though we know not where hell is, nor what is done
there, though we know not what is become of those that are destroyed, nor what
they suffer, yet God does; and if the secrets of hell and devils are known to
him, then much more the secrets of the hearts of the children of men. And as
that proverb teaches us that nothing is hid from God, because hell and
destruction are not, so another proverb delivered in the same form, teaches
us, that nothing in the creature can satisfy the desires and lustings of man,
even as hell and destruction can never be satisfied ( Prove. 27.20.) Hell and
destruction are never full: so the eyes of men are never satisfied. The Devil
who is the great executioner of the wrath of God, is expressed by this word; as
hell is called destruction in the abstract, so the Devil is called a destroyer
in the concrete ( Revel. 9.11.) And they had a King over them which is the
Angel of the bottomless pit (or hell) whose name in the Hebrew tongue is
Abaddon, but in the Greek tongue has his name Apollyon; both the one and the
other, the Hebrew and the Greek signify the same thing a destroyer; The
Devil, who is the Jaylour of hell, is called a destroyer, as hell it self is
called destruction from the Co-incidency of these two terms. Note.

Hell is destruction. They that are once there, are lost and lost for ever. The
reason why hell is called destruction, is because they that are cast to hell
are undone to eternity. We read of a City ( Isa. 19.18.) which was called the
City of destruction, because it was to be utterly destroyed; Hell may be called
a City of destruction, not because it shall ever be destroyed, but because it
shall ever be full of destruction, and nothing but destruction shall be there.
There is no estate on earth so miserable, but a man may be delivered out of it,
but out of hell there is no deliverance. Heman says ( Psalm. 88.11.) Shall thy
loving kindness be declared in the grave? or thy faithfulness in
destruction? There grave and destruction are put together, much more may hell
and destruction be put together, or for each other. What ever comes into the
grave is destroyed, it rots and perishes, much more does hell destroy all that
comes thither. And, look as the grave is to the body now, a destroyer
consuming, so hell is to the soul now, and will be to soul and body after the
resurrection, a destroyer tormenting. The loving kindness of God shall not be
declared in Hell, nor any faithfulness of his in destruction, unless it be
his faithfulness (according to what is threatened in the Word to destroy. The
Apostle Peter says, (1 Ep: 3.19, 20.) that Christ by the Spirit, went and
preached to the Spirits in prison, which sometime were disobedient, when once
the long-suffering of God waited in the days of Noah, etc. It is true, that
Christ by the Spirit in the ministry of Noah, did preach to those Spirits who
were disobedient in the time when Noah preached, and were in prison (or in hell)
in the time when Peter wrote; But Christ did not preach by his Spirit in the
ministry of Noah, or any other way to Spirits who were in prison (or in hell)
while he preached to them. There are no Sermons in hell, nor any salvation
there. The loving kindness of God is abundantly declared on earth, but it
shall not be declared in hell; As there is nothing felt in hell but destruction,
so there is no salvation offered to those who are in hell. There Is tears enough
and mourning enough in hell, but there is not the least Godly sorrow in hell,
which only works repentance to salvation, August: lib. 21. de Civ: dei, cap:
17.
not to be repented of (2 Cor. 7.10.) One of the ancients has reported the
opinion of some in his time, who thought, that, though there be destruction in
hell, yet not eternal destruction, but that sinners should be punished, some a
less, others a longer time, and that at last all shall be freed; and yet
(says he) Origin was more merciful in this point then these men; for he held
that the Devil himself should be saved at last. Of this opinion I shall say
no more in this place, then this one thing which he there said; These men will
be found to err by so much the more foulely and against the right words of God
so much the more perversely, by how much they seem to themselves to judge more
mercifully. for indeed the justice of God in punishing sinners is as much above
the scale of man's thoughts, as his mercyes in pardoning them are; let not
sinners flatter themselves in a hope of salvation when they are in hell, who
have neglected salvation while they were on the earth. For as the Apostle says
( Heb. 2.3.) How shall we escape (that is, how shall we escape falling into
hell) if we neglect so great salvation; so I may say, how shall any escape by
getting out of hell, who neglect so great salvation. Hell is destruction, and as
because heaven is a place of happiness and salvation, therefore, heaven and
happiness, heaven and salvation mutually or reciprocally signify one another;
to obtain heaven is to obtain salvation; to obtain heaven is to obtain
happiness: So because hell is a place of misery and destruction, therefore hell
and misery, hell and destruction signify the same thing, nor can they be
separated.

Again, when he says, Hell is naked before him, and destruction has no
covering, we learn.

There is nothing hid from the eye or knowledge of God. Philosophy and reason
teach us, that the virtue and force of the heavenly bodies, the Sun, Moon,
and Stars, do not only act upon those parts of the earth which are
uppermost, but send their influences and powers to the lowest parts or bowels
of the earth, for (as was said before) according to the ordinance of God, dead
things are formed there. Now (I say) as the power of the heavenly bodies
reaches down into the earth, much more does the power and light of God reach
into hell it self. I will not stay upon any curious enquiries where this hell
is; wheresoever it is, God sees it. Hell is naked before him, therefore says
David (Psalm. 139.8.) If I ascend up into heaven, thou art there: if I make my
bed in hell: behold thou art there (that is, there thou art by thy power and
inspection, thou see what is in hell (and if so, how much more does God
behold what is done here upon the earth; if hell be naked before him, then the
earth is naked before him; if destruction have no covering, then our actions
here have no covering: Hypocrites put many coverings upon their actions, they
have many policies to veil and screene them from the eye of man; but the
actions of men have no covering before God, yea the hearts of men have no
covering before God; As Solomon in the Proverbs (which place was lately touched
upon) argues from this reason, because hell and destruction are before him
(Prove. 15.11.) Hell and destruction are before the Lord: how much more then;
the hearts of the children of men. As if he had said, God who looks into hell
(which is not only darkness, but outer darkness, that is, darkness without any
thing that has the least ray or similitude of light in it, God (I say) who
looks into this hell) can look into the hearts of men much more. There are
some men (I grant) whose hearts are a very hell, a very deep, and they hope to
hide themselves in the depth of their own hearts from the sight of God, as the
Prophet tells us ( Isai. 29.15.) Woe unto them that seek deep to hide their
council from the Lord; and their works are in the dark, and they say, who
sees us? and who knows us? And what does he mean by the deeps which they
seek? do they seek caves and dens of the earth to take counsel or consult
together in? no, they may be in the open air and yet seek deep to hide their
counsels from God, so that the meaning is, they seek to keep their counsels
close locked up in their hearts; but woe unto them that dig thus deep to hide
their counsels from God, for they cannot be hid, for even hell is before him,
and destruction has no covering, how then shall these destroyers cover
themselves or any of their counsels from him? As the reason of all things is
naked and manifest before God, so are the motions and actions of all persons.

Thirdly, When it is said, Hell and destruction are before him: that word
before, does not only imply that God has a view or sight of what is in hell,
but also that he has power in and over hell, and can do what he will there;
hell is naked before him, that is, he has hell at his dispose.

Hence note.

The power and providence of God reaches to those things that are most remote.
He orders all things in hell as well as upon the earth; his power rules there
where there seems to be least order, yea where there is no order at all; They
who are cast into hell kept no order while they were upon the earth, nor are
they in any willing order there; when we see confusions in the world we say,
what a hell is there, or we say, Hell is broken loose; hell is a place of
confusion, yet hell is before God, he keeps hell in order; And when by reason
of troubles and confusion among men, we are ready to say, there is a hell in
the world, yet this hell is naked before God, he disposes and orders those
places, persons, and things, which are most confused; hell and destruction are
before him.

Before I pass from these words, I shall only take notice, that there are
many words in Scripture by which hell is expressed. The Rabbis number seven or
eight, here are two.

First, Sheol or the grave, because we lie as it were buried there in a second
death.

Secondly, Abaddon or destruction, because all are there in a perishing state,
or as given up into the hand of destruction.

Thirdly, Hell is called Tsalmaveth or the shadow of death; and by the shadow of
death, is not meant a small appearance of death: as the word shadow is used (
Jam: 1.17.) where the Apostle exalts the glory of the Lord in his
unchangeablenes, that he is the Father of lights, from whom every good gift,
and every perfect gift comes down, with whom is no variableness, neither
shadow of turning; that is, he is not subject to any turning at all; but hell is
called the shadow of death, as shadow is put for strength and power, and so to
be under the shadow of God or man, is to be under their protection. Thus hell
is the shadow of death, that is, the strength and power of it; Death never
triumphs so much in its strength, as it does in hell.

Fourthly, Hell is called Erets tachith, which signifyes, first, the earth
under, or the lowest and most inferior earth, whence in Scripture hell is
called the bottomless pit, and the way to it is described by descending and
going down: as heaven is described by ascending and hight; heaven is high, and
the highest ascending is our ascending to heaven: so hell is low, and the
lowest descending is descending into hell. Secondly, it imports, fear,
vexation, and trembling; hell is a land of trembling, it is a land of fear; it
is said of Caine that when he went out of the presence of God, after he had
murdered his brother he went into the land of Nod, that is, into a land of
trembling, which some expound not of any special place that he went to, but
that every place where he went was to him a land of trembling, he having much
fear and dread upon his conscience after he had embrewed his hands in his
brothers blood. Hell is indeed the land of Nod, a Trembling land; They who have
not rejoiced with trembling in this world, shall sorrow with trembling for ever
in the world to come.

Fifthly, Hell is called Bershiachathith, that is, the pi^^^ corruption, not
that the bodies of the damned shall corrupt in hell (as they do in the grave,
for though we cannot say that the bodies of the wicked shall be raised
incorruptible, as the bodies of the Saints shall, yet they shall be raised
immortal, and in that sense incorruptible, that is, they shall never dye) but
they shall be corruptible, that is, filthiness and corruption shall be upon
them: The bodies of Saints only shall be raised so incorruptible, that nothing
of corruption shall be seen upon them, or felt by them, but the bodies of the
wicked shall ever feel corruption, and bear the marks of it, without total
corrupting, or perishing, as corrupting and perishing are taken for not-being.
The wicked would be glad that they might perish so, but they shall not, hell
will be a pit of corruption to them, for whatsoever is painful and grievous
to the flesh, shall dwell in their bodies, and therefore it is called the pit
of corruption; and it may also be called a pit of corruption in a moral sense;
because all their sins and lusts shall remain upon them for ever; hel-fire
cannot purge the soul from sin, nor free any man from the power of that old
man, who (as the Apostle speaks, Ephesians: 4.22.) Is corrupt according to the
deceitful lusts. Nothing but the blood of Christ can purge the soul from
corruption; Hell is for the punishment of corruption, but not at all for the
purging of it, and therefore it is well called, the pit of corruption.

Sixthly, It is called Erets Nesciah, that is, the land of forgetfulness; as
the grave, so hell is called the land of forgetfulness, where the wicked shall
be remembered no more; God will remember them no more, to do them any good, and
they are forgotten how much soever they are remembered, who are not remembered
for good. And as God will not remember those in hell for good, so they shall
forget all the good they have had upon the earth; or the remembrance which they
have of it, shall only be to increase their sorrow under present evils.
Abraham in the Parable ( Luke 16.25.) said to the rich man in hell, Son remember
that thou in thy life time receivedst thy good things; and that remembrance of
the good things which he once enjoyed was but an addition to all the evils and
miseries which he then endured. It is better never to have had any good thing,
then only to remember that we have had it. How miserable is their condition
who shall neither be ^^membred for good, nor remember any good, but to make
them more miserable!

Seventhly, Hell is called Erets choscec, that is, a land of darkness, a region
of darkness; there is nothing but darkness in hell: The wicked go to the
generation of their fathers, where they shall never see light (Psalm. 49.19.)
They loved darkness here rather then light, and they shall be punished with
darkness hereafter, which has no light. Darkness was their choice in this life,
and it shall be their curse in the next.

Eighthly, Hell is called Gehinon (whence the Greek Gehenna) from the valley of
Hinnon; in which the Idolatrous Israelites (imitating the abomination of the
Heathens) were wont to sacrifice their children with horrible cruelty. And
hence the Scripture often makes use of that word to signify the place of
torment, or the torments of that place, where the damned must abide separate
for ever from the favorable presence, and subjected under the wrath of God.
This Hell is naked before God, and this destruction has no covering.

Verse. 7. He stretches out the North over the empty place, and hangs the
earth upon nothing.
In this verse Job exalts God in his Almighty power, upholding the mighty
fabric of heaven and earth. His discourse mounts up from the earth, from the
waters, and from hell, as high as heaven it self; and he speaks of heaven and
of the earth in their conjunction together.

He stretches out the North over the empty place. Bildad had spoken of the
power of God in the heavens, Dominion and fear are with him, he makes peace
in his high places, is there any number of his armies? and upon whom does not
his light arise? Job also speaks of the power of God in the creation and
disposition of these things; He stretches out the North over the empty place.
The word is so rendered to signify a gracious act of God to regardlesse men. (
Prove. 1.24.) I have stretched out my hand, and no man regarded. God stretches
out his hand to smite, and he stretches it out to save, but man lays it not
to heart. It is used also to signify that powerful act of God, in preparing
the heavens for himself ( Ps. 104.2.) Who coverest thy self with light, as
with a garment: who stretchest out the heavens like a curtain. As we draw or
stretch out a curtain, so God stretches out the heavens.

But why does Job say, He stretches out the North?

I answer, by the North he means that part of heaven that is Northward, or
the northern heavens. Again, the North may be taken for the whole heavens by
a Synechdoche: and Job might speak of the North because the North Pole was
nearest the climate where he dwelt. He stretches out the North, or the
northern heavens, that is, the whole heavens, both the North and South, East
and West.

He stretches out the North over the empty place. What is this empty place?

First, By the empty place, some understand the most remote and uninhabited
places of the earth: He over-spreads them with heavens, and disposes things
there as well as here; he spreads the heavens over those parts where there is
no man, and so may be called, Empty places, because un-inhabited, or not filled
with men. God causes it to rain on the earth, where no man is, on the
Wilderness, where there is no man (as he speaks of himself to Job in the 38^h
Chapter of this book, ver. 26th.) Now as God raineth upon those (in this
sense) empty places, so he stretches out the heavens over these empty places,
that is, he takes care of them as well as of those that are peopled or
inhabited.

Secondly, Rather, by the empty place, we are to understand the air, for in
the natural disposition or systeame of the world, the earth is lowest, the
water next, the air is the third, and the fire fourth, over which God
stretches out the heavens; And because nothing is visible to us upwards on
this side heaven but the air, therefore it may well be said, that he stretches
out the heavens immediately over the air, or the empty place.

Super inane; quod juxta communem opinione^ intelligi decet. Vulgo enim totum
spatium a terra usque ad coelum vacuum putatur, quum plenum aere sit.
But is the air or that place which we call the air empty? no, the air is not
empty, there is no vacuity, no empty place in nature; and nature will put it
self into strange courses to avoid a vacuity; water will ascend to avoid
vacuity, and it will not descend, to avoid vacuity; but though the air be not
empty or void, taking emptines strictly and philosophically (for every place
has its filling) yet as emptines is taken largely and vulgarly, so the air
may be called an empty place; when we come into a room where there is no
artificial furniture, we say it is an empty room: so the space between us
and the heavens in a vulgar sense is an empty place. The Scripture speaks
often of things according to the vulgar acceptance and understanding. Mr
Broughton translates thus; He stretches out the North upon the empty. And we
may conceave Job using this form of speech, the more to magnify and show
forth the great power of God; As if he had said, The heavens have nothing to
bear them up but an empty place, what can the air bear? the air will bear
nothing; yet the Lord uses no support for the whole heavens but this empty
place.

Thirdly, I conceave that this phrase may be expounded barely of the Creation;
For Moses says ( Genesis 1.1, 2.) In the beginning God created the heavens and
the earth, and the earth was without form and void or empty. It is the word
Tohu used here in Job; over this Tohu or empty place did God at the first
stretch the heavens. And as this was the work of God at first in Creation, so
it is his work still in providence; and therefore the Lord speaks of it, as
of a continued work ( Isa. 44.24.) Thus says the Lord thy redeemer etc. that
stretches forth the heavens alone, and spreads abroad the earth by my self.

Hence note.

As the heavens in creation, so the heavens in their daily motion are stretched
out and ordered by God. (Isaiah 40.22.) It is he that sits upon the circle
of the earth, and the inhabitants thereof are as grass-hoppers, that stretches
out the heavens as a curtain, and spreads them out as a tent to dwell in.
The Prophet entitles God to this with a special emphasis; It is He that does
it; as if he had said, God does it, and none but he, and in this he eminently
declares that He is God. Who ever stretched out such a curtain or canopy as
the heavens? who ever pitched such a tent to dwell in? This is a tent or a
Tabernacle, which though it shall be changed, yet (as the Prophet speaks of
Sion in her beauty and glory, Is. 33.20.) Shall not be taken down, not one of
the stakes thereof shall ever be removed, neither shall any of the cords
thereof be broken.

Again, Consider, the heavens have no outward support; They are stretched out
over the empty place; Which demonstration of the power of God will be more
cleared and hightned in the next words.

And he hangs the earth upon nothing. If any say heaven is a thin body, there
needs no great matter to keep that up. What will they say to the earth, which
is a gross and heavy body, a body of an unconceivable weight; who can count or
cast up the weight of the earth, or how much the earth weighs? God not only
stretches out the thin heavens over the empty place, but he hangs the
earth (that mighty mass of the earth) upon nothing, he has not so much as a
pegge in the wall (so the word signifies) to hang it upon. (...) appendit
suspendit.


He hangs the earth. (...) est nomen compositum ex (...) non and (...) quid
quasi dicas nihil quicquam. Drus: Philosophi rationem reddunt, quod illa sit in
suo centro; in quo res naturaliter, quiescunt, ideoque terra ponderibus librata
suis quiescat.
When he says, the earth, we are to understand both earth and water, the whole
terrestiall globe, This he hangs upon nothing. The Original word is a
compound, which in its parts may be rendered, not any thing at all, that is,
nothing. But how can any thing be hung upon that which is nothing? if it hang,
it must be upon somewhat. Philosophers tell us that the earth hangs upon its
Center, and so is poysed by its own weight, and cannot moove, which Center or
imaginary point is nothing.

But the Scripture says the earth has a foundation; And David (Psalm. 24.2.)
tells us expressly what that foundation is; The earth is the Lords, and the
fulness thereof; the world, and they that dwell therein; for he has founded
it upon the seas, and established it upon the floods. According to this
Scripture the Sea is the foundation of the earth, and the floods are the basis
of it. How then does Job affirm, that He hangs the earth upon nothing? That
indeed which David affirms, may seem very strange, that the earth should be
founded upon the sea, and established upon the floods, is the sea a fit
foundation for the earth? and can that which is stable and unmovable, be
established upon that which is the Emblem of instability, floods and waters?
Jacob says of Reub^n (Genesis 49.4.) unstable as water; and can floods or waters
be the whole earths establishment? the earth is rather the foundation of the
water: and many Philosophers tell us that the sea is higher then the earth, and
therein is the power of God seen that he holds in the sea as with bars, or
as with a bridle, lest it overwhelme the earth; how is it then said, the earth
is founded upon the sea? I answer, the word that we translate upon,
signifies, by, near, together, with, so, he has founded it upon the sea, is,
by the sea, Super flumina est juxta vel secus flumina quis enim terram
initifluminibus dixerit. Drus:
or near the sea, that is, the sea and the land are next neighbors, they dwell
so near each other, that the one seems to dwell upon, or be the foundation of
the other. There are waters within the earth; whence it is said, that at the
time of the Flood ( Genesis 7.11.) as the windows of heaven were opened, so the
fountains of the great deep were broken up: and we read of the waters as
placed under the earth (Exodus: 20.4.) yet if we say the earth is upon the
waters, sense contradicts it, and if we consider the whole globe together, we
cannot say which is uppermost, for in a sphere or round figure, there is
neither uppermost nor lowermost, but all the parts are equal and alike, being
placed one by another, not one upon another. So that the text, in the Psalm,
which says the earth is founded upon the seas, does not at all dash against
nor contradict this of Job which says, He hangs the earth upon nothing.

Again, There is another Scripture that seems to oppose this, and from which
we may infer, that surely the earth has somewhat to sustain it ( Psalm.
104.5.) Who laid the foundations of the earth, that it should not be removed
for ever. We put in the margin, He founded the earth upon her basis, if the
earth be founded upon a basis or pillar, then it does not hang upon nothing. I
answer, the foundation or basis, in the Psalm, does not oppose the earths
hanging upon nothing; for the foundation or basis which upholdeth the earth, is
not any created power without, or extrinsicall to the earth; God did not build
the earth as we do houses, first laying the foundation and then seting up the
walls and roof, there is no such thing imaginable in the work of God. But the
foundation or basis of the earth, is the infinite and invisible power of God
who made the earth. The will and word of the Builder is the pillar which
sustaineth this building. The thin air is all the appearing foundation of the
earth. For as the heavens hang over the air, so the earth hangs in the midst
of the air. What then is the basis and foundation of the earth? I answer;
which may be the point of observation from these words.

The earth is upheld by the infinite and allmighty power of God. The earth has
no pillar, but hangs like a ball in the air; we should look upon it as a
miracle did we see a little ball but of an ounce weight hanging in the air
without support; Non fundam^ntis suis n^xa subsistit terra, nec sulchris
s^isstabilis perseverat, sed dominus statuit terram and fundamento voluntatis
suae continet. Amb: Hexam: 6.
the air will scarce bear a feather, throw a feather up into the air and it
will descend, unless kept up by a breath of wind, and yet this huge vast
globe of earth and water, hangs as a ball in the air, and we scarce wonder at
it. The Poets fained an Atlas to bear up the heavens with his shoulders; God
is the Atlas that bears up the heavens and the earth too, the upper globe, and
the under globe too; he made all things by himself out of nothing, and he
supports them by himself upon nothing. We have an excellent expression of the
power of God in this thing ( Isa. 40.12.) Who has measured the waters in the
hollow of his hand? and meted out heaven with the span, and comprehended the
dust of the earth in a measure; and weighed the mountains in scales, and the
hills in a balance. God made all things in weight and measure; and he keeps
the weight and measure of all things. As the earth was not till his word and
will gave it a being, so his word and will alone is all-sufficient to uphold it
in that being. God has not hanged the earth upon any thing but himself, who
is indeed infinitely more then all things. Take two or three deductions from
this Grand Conclusion.

First, The same power which made the world supports and maintains it. Thus
the Author to the Hebrews sets forth the dignity of Christ the Son of God (
Chap: 1.2, 3.) Whom he has appointed heir of all things, by whom also he made
the worlds (both the natural, civil, and spiritual worlds, with all the
changes and successions which have been in them) who is also the brightness of
the glory of God, and the express image of his person, upholding all things,
(the natural frame of the world as well as the civil and spiritual frame of
it) by the word of his power, or by his powerful word, which as it once
commanded all things into a being, so now it commands all things into that
continuance of their being in which they are. Which power the Apostle
attributes again to Christ ( Col. 1.17.) He is before all things, and by him
all things consist. Sin made the world shake; And had it not been for a second
creation, the first creation had been ruined and lost. The earth and all our
concernements who live upon the face of the earth, hang upon nothing but the
will of God. If he let us go we fall, though all the powers on earth would
underprop and uphold us; and if he hold us up we stand fast though we have no
more of any earthly power to prop us up with, then the earth has, which is
propt up with and hangs upon nothing.

Secondly.

God can do the greatest things without any visible means. This work of God
in hanging the earth as it does, is to be numbered among the greatest works
that ever he did; and thus it hangs without any the least appearing means to
hold it up. There are three arguments given in Scripture of the mighty power of
God.

First, That he works by small, even the smallest, means, we have reason to
wonder when effects exceed all visible causes: as it shows the great power of
God when he stops great means from doing any thing; when he causes men to
labor in the very fire, that is, to toil and sweat themselves to the utmost
for very vanity, that is, without any hoped for issue or advantage. Some labor
in the fire for very vanity, because all they get by their labors is worth
nothing; but others may be said to labor in the fire for very vanity, because
with all their labors they can get nothing. And this is of the Lord, this is
an effect of the Lords power to make the power of man, in the use and
improvement of the best and choycest means, ineffectual. So on the other side
it is a great magnifying of the power of God, when by a little power put forth
by the hand of a weak instrument, he produces great effects. The Apostle
James brings it in with a behold ( Chap. 3.5.) Behold, how great a matter a
little fire kindles! When great matters are done by small means, we have
reason to extol and cry up the power of God.

Secondly, It argues the great power of God when he does great things by means
that are improbable, or that seem no way suitable to such an end; as Christ
cured blindness with clay and spittle, which means had no sutablenesse to
such an end, the curing of blindness; The means used to cure Naaman had no
sutablenesse for such a cure; and Naaman was so sencible of it, that he was
very angry with the Prophet about it, as if his leprosy could be cured by so
slight a thing as that was; he thought he would have done it with some
ceremony, or in an extraordinary way; yet this showed that the cure was wrought
by a divine power, because it was wrought by so improbable an application* As
the power of God appears in doing great things by small means, so by doing
great things by unlikely means.

Thirdly, It shows the power of God much more to do great things without the
use of any means at all. Such actings are creatings, as the Apostle speaks of
the Creation ( Heb: 11.3.) Through faith we understand that the worlds were
framed by the word of God; so that things that are seen, were not made of
things that do appear. Nothing appeared out of which this world was created.
There was no pre-excistent matter, out of which the world was made; The world
was made out of nothing; That Goodly fabric of heaven and earth which is now
seen, was made of that which was never seen; no man can tell what were the
materials of which God made the world. Now as God showed his infinite power at
first in making all things of that which did not appear, so the great power of
God does appear now in doing great things without the appearance or external
concurrence of any thing. The Lord turns whole Nations sometimes by nothing;
things are done and no man can tell how they were done, or by what. We love to
have a fair Appearance of means, when we attempt great matters; But God loves
to act when and where nothing appears. We honor God most, when we are
sencible that the greatest means is nothing without him; and that, he himself
is enough when no means at all appears to sense. It is Gods usual way to do
things in a way which is not used; and either to use no help or that which
signifies nothing. Thus the Apostle describes the dealing of God in bringing
souls to himself by a holy calling, and in removing whatsoever stands in
the way of that call (1 Cor: 1.26.) For ye see your calling, brethren, how
that not many wise men after the flesh, not many mighty, not many noble are
called, etc. (some wise and mighty men are called, lest any thing in man should
seem too hard for the Grace of God; and not many wise and mighty men are
called, lest any thing in man should seem to contribute to or help out the
call of God) but God has chosen foolish things to confound the wise: and God
has chosen the weak things of the world to confound the things which are
mighty, and base things of the world, and things which are despised, has God
chosen, yea, and things which are not, to bring to naught things that are; that
is, those things which are so foolish and weak and base and despised, they
seem to have no being, or are accounted as nothing, even these non-entityes,
these poor tools does God choose and take up to do great things by, and to
nullify or bring those things to naught, which are all in all among or in the
estimations of men. Therefore, so God own the work, the matter is not much (I
speak not in regard of lawfullnes but likelynes, I say the matter is not much)
what the means is; God can overwit wise men by fools, he can overpower
mighty men by those who are weak. Thus God trivmphs over humane
improbabilityes, yea impossibilityes, and would have no flesh either despair
because of the smalnes of means, or glory in his sight, because of the
greatness of it. How glorious was Abraham's faith in the former Chapter, who, was
so far from despayring that he, was strong in faith, giving glory to God,
though he saw nothing but death upon all the means which tended to attain the
blessing promised ( Romans 4.17, 18, 19.) As it is written, I have made thee a
father of many Nations before him whom he believed, even God (who was it that
Abraham believed? it was God. And under what notion did his faith eye God? even
as he) who quickens the dead: when God is closed with under this notion, as
quickening the dead, what can be too hard for faith? but there is more in it,
Abraham's faith eyed God not only as quickening the dead, but as he that calls
those things which be not as though they were: that is, as he who makes
something of nothing; when once Abraham had these apprehensions of God, then
nothing stuck with him, his faith could digest iron, and therefore (as it
follows) he against hope, believed in hope, etc. and being not weak in
faith, he considered not his own body being now dead (as to the procreation of
children) when he was about an hundred years old, neither yet the deadness
(as to conception) of Sarahs womb. He staggered not at the promise of God
through unbelief (that is, he never made any scruples or queries how the
promise should be accomplished) but was strong in faith, giving glory to God,
that is, gloryfying God by believing that he was able to make good the promise,
or that it was as easy for God to create a performance, as to make the promise.

Thirdly, Then fear not when God is a working, but he will carry on his work;
deficiencyes in the creature, are no stop to his actings: his immediate or sole
power is enough who hangs the earth upno nothing. Where are the pillars that
sustain this mighty mass? It hangs fast by no fastening, but the order of
God; And his order is strong enough to hang the greatest busienes that ever was
in the world upon. The Jews have a saying, in reverence of the written word of
God; That upon or at every Iota or the least title of the Law, there hangs a
mountain of sense: and it is as true in reference to his doings as his sayings:
God can hang mountains upon mole-hils, and turn mountains into mole-hils for
his peoples sake and safety. It is rare that we are put to the actings of faith
at so high a rate (There is usually somewhat in sight to encourage the actings
of our faith and dependence upon God, they that are in the lowest condition,
have somewhat to look to) but if there be nothing to be seen, then do but
remember, that God hangs the earth upon nothing, and faith will say, I have
all. Although the meal in the Barrel, and the oil in the Cruse should fail;
Although the fig tree shall not blossom, neither shall there be fruit in the
Vines; Although the labor of the Olive shall fail, and the fields shall yield
no meat etc. yet the Lord fails not, either in his power for us, or
compassions toward us, and therefore the believer can even then rejoice in the
Lord, and joy in the God of his salvation. For while there is nothing in
appearance, there is not only some thing, but all things are, that are for our
good, in the promise. Faith may make all sorts of comfortable Conclusions to
and for it self (and not build Castles in the air) from this one Assertion,
That, The earth hangs in the air, or to give it in the words of the text,
That God hangs the earth upon nothing. The Constitution or syntaxe of Nature
well considered, is no small advantage to our hightning and strengthening in
grace.

JOB, CHAP. 26. Verse. 8, 9, 10. He binds up the waters in his thick clouds,
and the cloud is not broken under him.

He holds back the face of his throane, and spreads his cloud upon it.

He has compassed the waters with bounds, until the day and night come to an
end.


JOB having showed how wonderfully God upholdeth the earth which is under us,
goes on to show no less a wonder, in his binding up those waters in clouds
which are above us. Whatsoever God has done or does in heaven above or upon
the earth beneath, either as to creation and the first constitution of t^ings,
or as to providence, and the continual motion of things, is wonderful and
glorious.

Verse. 8. He binds up the waters in his thick clouds.
As our English word, Bind, (...) Colligavit vinxit compressit.
so the Original implies a force upon the waters to keep them within the
cloud; Water would not stay there but that it must whether it will or no; It
would rush down presently and disorderly to the ruin of all below, but God
binds it to its good behavior. As the mouth of a sack is tied or bound
about, that the corn put into it fall not out; Or (which allusion comes
nearest the text) as barrels are bound with hoopes, lest the liquor put into
them should leake out; thus

God binds up the waters. What waters? There are two sorts of waters; first,
upper waters, or waters in the air; of which the Psalmist speaks when he
says, ( Psalm. 104.3.) He lays the beams of his chambers in the waters;
that is, in those upper waters, which are nearest the heaven, called in
Scripture, The habitation of his holiness and of his glory. Earthly Architects
must have strong walls to lay the beams of their chambers upon, but the Lord
who made heaven and earth, can make fluid waters bear up the beams of his
chambers for ever. Secondly, the^e are lower waters, or waters on the earth;
Which distinction Moses gave long before Aristotle (Genesis 1.7.) And God made the
firmament and it divided the waters which were under the firmament, from the
waters which were above the firmament. Where by the firmament we are to
understand that vast space which is extended or stretched out from the earth up
to the clouds, commonly called, The air, and by the waters above the
firmament, those rainewaters bound up in the clouds. These upper waters are the
waters of which our divine Philosopher here says, that God binds them up,

In his thick clouds. Though clouds are much thinner then the water which they
hold, (...) a (...) densitas.
as Naturalists teach us, yet they are thicker then the common air, or they
may be called thickened air, and therefore the Hebrew word for a cloud is
derived from a root that signifies Thicknes. And though we have a distinction
of clouds into thick and thin comparing one with another, yet all clouds
compared to the air are thick, and compared to the waters all are thin;
Besides the Hebrew word signifyes clouds indifferently as well thin as thick,
or rather clouds Generally without any determination or restriction either to
thick or thin. And therefore the text is best translated without an Epithete,
In his clouds, or if any Epithete were given, It would advance Jobs scope and
purpose most to translate it, In his thin clouds; for, the thinner the cloud
is, the greater is the power of God, and the wonder the more wonderful in
making them the Continent of such mighty waters. But, we translate well, He
binds up the waters in his thick clouds.

It may here be enquired, why the clouds are appropriated unto God in such a
special manner, by calling them, His clouds.

I answer, the clouds are His, not only

First, In that common sense (in which all things in the world are his) because
he makes and disposes of them for that use, to hold the waters which the
heat of the Sun exhaleth or draws up in vapors from the earth; But they are
called his clouds

Secondly, Because God is said to use them as Princes do Horses of State or
Charets of triumph to ride upon ( Isa. 19.1.) Behold the Lord rides upon a
swift cloud, as also because, the Lord, to show the unsearchablenes and
incomprehensiblenes of his ways and counsels in governing this world, and in
ordering the affairs of his chosen people, is often expressed in Scripture as
dwelling in a cloud, or covering himself with clouds ( Psalm. 18.11.) He made
darkness his secret place: his pavilion round about him, were dark waters, and
thick clouds of the skies. And again, it is no sooner said ( Psalm. 97.1.) The
Lord reigns, but in the very next verse it is said, Clouds and darkness are
round about him: righteousness and Judgment are the habitation of his throane;
that is, his administrations are always full of righteousness, though seldom
full of clearenes, they are always clothed with equity, though usually
clothed with obscurity. His way and his dwelling is in the clouds; and
therefore also the clouds are his. He binds up the waters in his thick
clouds. Some Philosophers hold that the cloud does not so much hold the water,
as is water, and that the cloud is dissolved into water when it raineth: others
that the clouds hold water like a sponge, which being pressed, yields it out
again. But Jobs Philosophy lifts up the glory of God most, which makes the
cloud as a vessel or garment, in which the waters are bound, and yet, see the
wonder.

The cloud is not rent under them. The waters being of a mighty bulk and
weight, (...) discidit rupit, secuit in duas parts, usurpatur de quavis
viole^ta ruptione aut segregatione rerum ante hac cohaerentium.
might easily break their way through the clouds, did not God both bind and
balance them (as Elihu speaks, Chap. 37.16.) Do thou know the ballancing
of the clouds; To his ballancing to his binding we must ascribe the not renting
of the cloud. As binding in the former clause, noted an act of power and force
in God; so this word renting, notes a power and force in the water. It is said
( Ps. 78.13.) God rent or divided the Sea, that his people might pass through;
And this word is used (1 Chronicles: 11.18.) concerning those mighty men who fetched
David water from the well of Bethlem; And the three brake through the host of
the Philistines. And thus would the waters naturally break through the clouds,
but they are forbidden; The cloud is not rent under all that weight, for God
holds it together, and makes it as firm as brass.

Hence observe.

It is an eminent a wonderful act of divine power by which the waters are
contained and stayed within the clouds. The mighty power of God is seen in
keeping the waters of the Sea in compass by the sands and shoares; but it is a
greater act of power to keep the waters of the air in compass by the clouds.
There are three things very wonderful, or there are three wonders in this
detention of the waters.

First, That the waters which are a fluid body, and love to be continually
flowing and diffusing themselves, should yet be stopped and stayed together by a
cloud, which is a thinner and so a more fluid body then the water. It is no
great matter to see water kept in conduits of stone, or in vessels of wood and
brass, because these are firm and solid bodies, such as the water cannot
penetrate, nor force it self through; but in the Judgment of nature, how
improbable is it that a thin cloud should bear such a weight and power of
waters, and yet not rent nor break under them. When Peter had enclosed a
multitude of Great fishes in his net, even an hundred fifty and three ( Joh.
21.11.) we find this added, as a wonder, And for all there were so many, yet
was not the net broken. How much more may this be added as a wonder, that such
a multitude of waters should be held in a cloud, and yet the cloud not broken,
Hac sane est ex illis naturae mirabil^bus, quae assiduitate vituerunt.
yea though the cloud be tossed and driven with feirce and raging winds. This
is one of those wonders in nature, which is therefore only not wondered at
because it is so common; and, which because it is continually done, few enquire
into or admire the power by which it is done.

Secondly, As it is a wonder that the cloud is not rent with the weight of the
water, so that the cloud is rent at the special order and command of God. At
his word it is that the clouds are locked up, and by his word they are opened As
in spiritualls, so also in naturalls, Nulla gutta descendit ex illis donec
veniat verbum ejus and mittat illas per plateas. Moses Gerund:
He opens and no man shuts, he shuts and no man opens. It is not in
the power of all the world to rent or open a cloud (though the earth be parcht
and all things that live languish) till God unlocke it.

Thirdly, This also is wonderful, that when at the word of God the cloud
rents, yet the waters do not gush out like a violent flood all at once, which
would quickly drown the earth, as it did ( Gen: 7.11.) When the windows of
heaven were opened; but the water descends in sweet moderate showers (as water
through a Cullender, drop by drop and stream by stream) for the moystning and
refreshing of the earth; And God caryeth the clouds up and down the world (as
the keeper of a Garden does his watering pot) and bids them distill upon this
or that place, as himself directs. The clouds are compared to bottles in the
38th Chapter of this book ( v. 37th) these God stops or unstops usually as our
need requires, and sometime as our sin deserves. ( Amos 4.7.) I have
withholden the rain from you, and he can withhold it, till the heavens over us
shall be as brass, and the earth under us as iron. I (says the Lord of his
vineyard, Isa. 5.6.) will also command the clouds that they rain no rain upon
it. The Reader may find further discoveryes about this point at the 5^h
Chapter, v. 10th. Only here I shall add.

First, That we depend upon God not only for grace, and pardon of sin, but
for rain and fruitful seasons.

Secondly, When we have rain, let us acknowledge that God has rent the cloud
and given it us; that he has loosed the Garment wherein he had bound the
waters (Pro. 30.4.) that they may issue down upon us.

Thirdly, When the cloud rents not, let us go to God to do it. Are there any
among the vanities of the Heathen that can cause rain? Surely there are none (
Jer: 14.22.) And therefore the Prophet ( Zech: 10.1.) sends the people of God
to him for it, Ask ye of the Lord rain in the time of the latter rain, so
the Lord shall make bright clouds, and give them showers of rain, to every one
grass in the field. Only he who binds up the waters in his clouds, can
unbinde the clouds and cause them to send out their waters. Job having thus
showed the power of God among the clouds and upper waters, rises yet higher in
his discourse, and from these waters wherein (as was touched before) God lays
the beams of his chambers, he ascends to the chambers themselves, even to
the throane of God there.

Verse. 9. He holds back the face of his Throane, and spreads his cloud
upon it.
There are three things to be enquired into, for the explication of the former
part of this verse.

First, What is here meant by the Throane of God.

Secondly, What, by the face of his Throane.

Thirdly, What, by holding it back.

To the first Querie, I answer. That according to Scripture, Heaven or that
place above, in opposition to the earth, or this sublunary world, is called the
throne of God; and that not the inferior heaven, or air, (which in Scripture
is more then once called heaven) but the supreme or highest heavens. Thus the
Lord speaks by the Prophet ( Isa: 66.1.) The heaven is my throne, and the
earth is my footestrole, where is the house that ye build unto me, etc. Thus
also our Savior in his admonition against swearing ( Math: 5.34.) says,
Swear not at all, (that is rashly) neither by heaven, for it is Gods throne,
nor by the earth, for it is his footestoole. Again ( Mat: 23.22.) He that
swears by heaven, swears by the throne of God. The reason why heaven is
called the throne of God, is, because there he manifests himself, as Princes
do upon their thrones in greatest glory and majesty: as also because there he
is more fully enjoyed by glorified Saints and Angels. God fills heaven and
earth with his presence, yet he declares his presence more in heaven then here
upon the earth. Heaven is the throne of God, but

Quidam faciem esse hominis putant os tantum and oculos et genas quod Graeci
prosopon dicunt, quando facies sit forma omnis et modus et factura quaedam
totius corporis a faciendo dicta; sic mentis and coeli and Maris facies probe
dicitur. Gel: lib^ 13. c. 28.
Secondly, What is the face of his Throne?

I answer; The face of a thing is taken for the whole outward appearance, or
for the appearing state of it. As the face of a man's body is not only that
forepart of the head, which we strictly call so, but the form and structure
of the whole body is the face of it. And in that sense the word is applied both
to those great natural bodies, the Heaven and the earth, as also to a civil
body, or to the Body-politicke of a City and Commonwealth. Thus whereas we
render ( Isa. 24.1.) Behold, the Lord makes the earth empty, and makes it
wast, and turns it upside down, etc. The Hebrew is (and so our translaters
put it in the margin) he perverteth the face thereof; that is, he changes the
state and outward form of things, and puts them into a new mould or model,
respecting order and Government. And so we commonly speak after great public
changes, The very face of things is altered, or things have a new face. And
thus the Psalmist expresses the gracious and favorable changes which God
makes in the things of this world ( Psalm. 104.30.) Thou sendest forth thy
Spirit, they are created, Coeli vultus est coeli superficies concavastellata,
quae nos resp^cit. Albert:
and thou renewest the face of the earth; that is, all things appear in
another hiew and fashion then before. So then, the Face of the Throane of God,
is that part of heaven (say some) which looks toward us, or which we look
upon; All that Greatness and beauty of heaven which our eye reaches unto, and
which appears to us as a vast Canopy set with spangles or studs of Gold, such
are the Stars to our sight. But I rather conceave. The face of the throne of
God to be, the visible and full demonstration of that infinite light and glory
wherein God dwells, and which appears or is given forth to the blessed
Saints and Angels, who are said to be about his throne according to their
measure and capability of receaving it. The face of his throne, taken thus, he
holds back from us always in this life, and as the face of his throne is
taken in the other sense, he often holds it back from us. About which it
remains to be enquired

Thirdly, What is meant by holding back the face of his throne.

To hold back, seems to be the same, as to hide, cover, Est tollere
apparentiam coeli. Cajet.
or conceal the face of his throne; for when any thing is held back, it is
concealed and hidden out of sight. Thus God does often hold back or cover the
face of his throne (as the face of it notes the Appearances of heaven toward
us) with clouds; as it is said in the report made of that terrible storm
wherein Paul had almost suffered shipwreck ( Acts 27.20. Tenere faciem throni,
est coelum occultare et obducere nubibus.
) That neither Sun nor Stars in many days appeared; here was a holding back
or covering of the face of the throne of God. And thus our experiences have
often found it held back; the face of heaven, being masked or vayled over with
natural clouds and vapors. Again, if we take the face of the throne of God,
for that eminent manifestation of himself, as in heaven. Thus also God holds
back the face of his throne, by covering it with a Metaphorical cloud; as it
is expressed ( Psalm. 97.1, 2.) The Lord reigns etc. clouds and darkness are
round about him; that is, we can see no more of his glory in reigning, then we
can see of a Kings throne which is covered with a Canopy, and compassed about
with curtains. Job gives this plainly for the interpretation of this former
part of the verse, in the latter part of it.

And spreads his cloud upon it. That is, upon the face of his throne. We may
take this cloud, first properly, thus God covers the heavens from the sight of
our eyes. Secondly, improperly, as clouds note only secrecy and privacy; Thus
God spreads a cloud upon his throne, to hide it from the eye of our
understanding; so that, we can no more comprehend the glory of God in himself,
or in his ways and workings toward man, then we can see the Sun, Moon, and
Stars, when muffled and wrapped up in thick clouds. Thus David speaks of the
Lord ( Psalm. 18.11.) He made darkness his secret place: his pavilion round
about him, were dark waters and thick clouds of the skies. But the Apostle
says (1 Timothy 6.16.) That God dwells in light, How then does the Psalmist say
there and elsewhere that he made clouds and darkness his secret place and his
pavilion? I answer; As the Lord is light and has no darkness at all in him
(Joh: 1.5.) so, as to himself, he ever dwells in light, and has no clouds
nor darkness at all about him. And therefore when it is said, that he spreads
a cloud upon his throne, and makes darkness his secret place, or his secret
place dark, we are to understand it in reference to our selves; for whenever
God hides himself, or the reason of his dealings and dispensations from us,
Then the cloud is spread upon his Throne. When God is said to spread a cloud
over us, or any thing we have, it notes his care over us, and his protection
of us ( Isa. 4.5.) And the Lord will create upon every dwelling place of mount
Zion, and upon her assemblyes a cloud and smoke by day, and the shining of a
flaming fire by night (what is meant both by this cloud and flaming fire is
clearly expounded in the last words of the verse) for upon all the glory shall
be a defense (or a covering.) Thus, I say, a cloud spread by God upon us,
implies that we are under his covert and defense. But when God spreads a
cloud upon or covers himself with a cloud, this implies (all the Scripture
over) the hiding and concealing of himself and his works from us. And in this
sense Job says; He holds back the face of his throne, and spreads a cloud
upon it.

Hence note.

First, God has a throne. Kings have thrones, much more has God who is the
King of kings. King Solomon made himself a great throne of Ivory, and overlayd
it with the best Gold (1 Kings 10.18.) Kings have formal Thrones, God has a
real one. He has all power in his hand, and this he administreth according to
the pleasure of his own will both in heaven and earth.

Note.

Secondly, God manifests himself in heaven, as Princes upon their thrones;
so heaven is the throne of God. And where God acts most, our affections should
be most, and our conversation most. Where the Throne is, thither the great
resort is, many flock to the Court. As it will be our glory hereafter to be in
heaven, or about the throne of God for ever in person, so it is our grace to be
daily there in Spirit while we are here. The earth is Gods footestoole, yet
many make that their throne; Heaven is Gods throne, and many make that their
footestoole; They tread and trample upon the things of heaven, while they set
their hearts upon the things of the earth. It Is a sad mistake, when men set
their feet where they should set their hearts, and profane the throne of God,
not only by levelling it with, but by laying it lower then the ground.

Observe.

Thirdly; God hides his own glory from the sight of man. He holds back the
face of his throne, he will not suffer the luster of it to appear, but
spreads a cloud upon it. Indeed we are not able to bear the clear
discoveryes of divine Glory (1 Timothy 6.16.) God dwells in light which no man
can approach unto, though he were permitted and offered the privilege to
approach unto it. God dwells in and is possessed of that infinite perfection
of light that no creature is capable of. When Moses made that petition to God (
Exodus: 33.18.) I beseech thee show me thy glory. The Lord answered ( v. 20.)
Thou can not see my face, for no man shall see me and live. It seems that
while God spoke with Moses his glory was overshadowed, or that God (to use Jobs
language in the text) held back the face of his throne, and spread a cloud
upon it; and therefore Moses begged the removal of it, or that his glory might
break through it, and shine unto him; Well, says God, thou can not see my
face; as if he had said, If I should grant thee that request, thou art not able
to enjoy it, or make use of it; for as my nature is altogether invisible, so
thou can not bear the super-excelling brightness, which the clear
manifestations of my immediate presence would dart forth upon thee; for that
Glory of my presence is too great a weight for humane fraylety to stand under;
it would astonish rather then comfort thee, and in stead of refreshing confound
and make thee as a dead man. No man shall see my face and live. Man must dye
before he can (in that sense) see the face of God, and then he shall (as the
Apostle speaks, 1 Cor: 13.12.) see face to face, and know as he is known. So
that though we are much short of the happiness of the next life, while we see as
through a glass darkely, and God holds back the face of his throne, yet it
is a mercy to us while we are in this life that he does so; because we are not
able to abide the sight of him face to face, or to behold the face of his
throne. As Christ had many things to say to his Desciples, which they were not
able then to bear; so Christ has purchased such mercyes and privileges for
his people, as they are not able to bear while they are on this side the
grave. Every state has enjoyments suitable and proper to it. Further as God
hides his glory from man, because he is not able to bear it all; so he hides
much of that from him which he is able to bear, both to make him hunger and
thirst the more after it, and to draw him into the greater reverence and
estimation of it. We usually esteem that more which is veyled and under a
cloud, then that which is very clear and openly revealed; and, according to
our present state and frame, that is most reverenced by us, which is most
concealed from us. When a cloud has dwelt a while upon the Sun we desire the
more to see the face of it, and are the more affected with the sight of it. God
will not hold back the face of his throne from us in glory, nor will he ever
spread a cloud upon it, and yet we shall have fresh desires after it, and high
valuations of it everlastingly; But while we dwell in this corrupt and
corruptible flesh, we are apt to neglect that which is always with us,
especially if it be always alike with us. And therefore as the wise and
gracious God, will not let us see his throne here at all in the full glory of
it, because we cannot bear it, so he will not let us see that glory of it
continually, which we are able to bear, lest we should grow either careless
of it, or unthankful for it. It is even best for us, that we have but a dark
and imperfect sight of God in this world, both in reference to what he is, and
to what he does: or first, in reference to himself in his nature and
Excellencyes. Secondly, in reference to his ways or works in their special
reasons and ends. As our darkness cannot at all comprehend the light of God, so
God is pleased to cover much of his own light with darkness that we should not
comprehend it. How many glorious truths are there, the face of which he holds
back from many of his precious servants? how often does he spread a cloud as
upon the truths which he sends in his Word, so upon the graces which he has
wrought in us by his Spirit? so that the soul is not only hindered from
beholding what is without, but what is within, and is so far from beholding
the glorious perfection of God and his works abroad, that it cannot so much as
discern any of the gracious works of God at home. He spreads his cloud upon
it.

Verse. 10. He compasses the waters with bounds, until the day and night come
to an end.
Job having described marvaylous acts of divine power in the heavens, descends
again to show his marvayles in or about the Seas and mighty waters.

He compasses the waters with bounds. The word which we render to compass,
Proprietas pecaliaris verbi (...) est lineam vel circulum describere quasi
circino. Forte etiam in dicatur eodem circumdandi verbo. unum effici globu^ ex
terra et aqua atque unum and idem utriusque elementi esse centrum. Pined:
signifies properly to draw a line, or make a circle, as Mathematicians do
with a pair of Compasses, so that it notes the shutting up or circumscribing
any thing to a certain place or measure, beyond which it cannot move. And thus
God compasses the waters. At the 8th verse Job showed how God compasses the
upper waters, the waters in the air, He binds up the waters in his thick
clouds. Here he shows, how God by the same almighty power compasses about
the lower waters, the waters of the Sea. The Hebrew is, The face of the waters,
as in the former verse, The face of his throne. The face of the earth is the
upper part of the earth ( Genesis 1.29.) I have given you every herb bearing (or
seeding) seed, which is upon the face of all the earth. And so the face of the
waters, is the upper part of the waters, because the upper part of the water,
as also of the earth lies open to the eye as the face of a man does. And it
may therefore be said that he compasses the face of the waters, because
(though the whole body and bulk of the waters swel and rage, yet) the face or
upper part of the waters is that which at any times breaks over and
overfloweth; And therefore the face of the waters, only, as to us, is
compassed about with bounds.

The word notes, a legal bound, a statute or decree, and is frequently used in
Scripture, especially in the 119th Psalm, (...) stanuum constitutie, dec
c^etum; sign ficat praecepti constantiam and durationem nam (...) est
insculpere seu incidere lapidi ligno vel Metallo. (...). Septu:
for the Law or rule which God has given man both for his worship and
continual course of life. And hence the Prophet Jeremiah speaking to the Jews
about this thing, uses another word to signify the Bound of the Sea, and the
word which here we render Bound, is there rendered Decree (Jer: 5.22.) Fear ye
not me says the Lord, will ye not tremble at my presence, which have placed
the sand for the bound of the Sea, by a perpetual decree that it cannot pass
it. And there is so much of a Law, or of an appointment in it, that the word is
applicable to any thing which is put under a certain law or appointment. So it
is put for an appointed time in the 14th Chapter of this book ( v. 13th) and
for appointed food in the 23d Chapter of this book ( v. 12th) as here for an
appointed space, or circle, within which as within a wall, or with gates and
bars the waters of the Sea are kept. He compasses the waters with bounds.

Hence Note.

First, The Sea is bounded by the power of God. As God has given man
understanding to provide a bit and a bridle for the mouth of the horse and
mule, which have no understanding, lest they come near unto him (Psalm. 32.9.)
that is, nearer to him then they should, or near to him, not to serve him, or
be used by him, but to kick him or tread upon him; Thus God himself who is
infinite in understanding, has put a bit or bridle into the mouth of the Sea,
which is further from understanding then either Horse or mule, lest it come
near to drown and overwhelme us. Neither shoares nor sands, neither cliffs
nor rocks are the bound and bridle of the Sea, but the Decree and command of
God.

Observe.

Secondly, It is an unanswerable argument of the glorious power and
soveraignetie of God, that he is able to compass the waters with bounds. Who
shut up the Sea with doors? (was Gods humbling Question to Job in the 38th
Chapter of this book, v. 8.10, 11.) and said, hitherto shall thou come and no
further, and here shall thy proud waves be stayed. The Psalmist ( Ps. 104.)
having showed how at first ( Genesis 1 1.) the whole earth was covered with the
deep as with a garment, and that the waters stood above the mountains, and
were in the progress of the work of creation sent down by the valleys into
the place which God had appointed for them, (having I say, made this excellent
description of the waters in creation, he concludes with the point of
providence now in hand ( v. 9.) Thou have set a bound, that they may not pass
over: that they turn not again to cover the earth. In which words the
Psalmist gives us three things clearly concerning the waters, First, that once
(he means it not of the deluge, but of the chaos) the waters did cover the
whole earth, till God by a word of command sent them into their proper
channels, that the dry Land might appear; secondly, that the waters have a
natural propension to return back and cover the earth again. Thirdly, that
the only reason why they do not return back and cover the whole earth, is,
because God has set a bound, that they cannot pass. They would be boundless
and know no limits, did not God bound and limit them. Wisdom gives us the
like Elogium of the power of God in this ( Pro: 8.29.) He gave to the Sea his
decree, that the waters should not pass his commandment. What cannot he
command, who sends his commandment to the Sea and is obeyed? Some great
Princes heated with rage and drunken with pride, have cast shackles into the
Sea as threatening it with imprisonment and bondage if it would not be quiet,
but the Sea would not be bound by them; They have also awarded so many strokes
to be given the Sea as a punishment of its contumacy and rebellion against
either their commands or their designs. How ridiculously ambitious have they
been, who would needs pretend to such a Dominion? Many Princes have had great
power at and upon the Sea, but there was never any Prince had any power over
the Sea; That Is a flower belonging to no Crown, but the Crown of heaven.
There are two things which are more peculiarly under the command of God, first,
the waves of the Sea, secondly, the heart of man. And because God is able to
rule the waves of the Sea, take two or three inferences from it; Thus,

First, That he is able to rule and command the heart of man; Solomon makes the
parallel in this ( Pro. 21.1.) The kings heart is in the hand of the Lord, as
the rivers of waters: he turns it whether soever he will: And as he turns
both whether soever he will, so he stays both wheresoever he will. Most men
at some times, some (wicked) men at all times are like the raging Sea when it
cannot rest, whose waters cast up mire and dirt (Isa: 57.20.) who could live by
these raging Seas, these raging waves of the Sea at once foaming out their own
shame, and threatening to swallow up others in destruction, did not God compass
them about with bounds? did not he say, here shall your proud waves be stayed;
If God did not bound the sea of some men's Spirits, they would not know much
less keep any bounds; they would neither know nor keep, not only the bounds
of religion and piety, but not the bounds of reason and civility.

Secondly, God is able to rule and put a bound to the rage of the multitude,
who in Scripture are compared to Waters ( Rev: 17.15.) The waters which thou
saw, where the Whore sits, are peoples, and multitudes, and Nations, and
tongues. And these are as apt to swel and be enraged with vain passions and
discontents, as the sea is by winds and storms ( Psalm. 2.1.) Why do the
heathen rage? rage as the sea; and thus they will rage sometimes though they
know neither why nor wherefore. (So again Psalm. 93.3, 4.) The flooods have
lifted up O Lord, the floods have lifted up their voice: the floods lift up
their waves; which as it is true literally and properly, so it is as true (and
so I conceave there intended) figuratively and improperly or mystically and
spiritually, that is, peoples and nations like floods lift up their voice, they
lift up their waves as if they would overwhelme all; But what follows ( v.
4.) The Lord on high is mightier then the noise of many waters, yea then the
mighty waves of the Sea; that is, the Lord can quickly check and stop the rage
of a people, when, or though they swel like a furious boisterous Sea. And we
find David putting both these together by way of Exposition ( Psalm. 65.) where
exalting the power of God as he is the confidence of all the ends of the earth,
and of them that are afar off upon the Sea (v. 5.) He adds ( v. 6, 7.)
Which by his strength sets fast the mountains; being girded with power.
Which stilleth the noise of the Seas; the noise of their waves, and the tumult
of the people. David joins the noise and waves of the Seas, and the tumult of
the people together; either implying, that he meant the tumult of the people,
by the noise of the Sea; or that it is an act of the same power, to still the
tumult of the people, and the noise of the Sea.

Thirdly, God is able to stop those seas of error, and give a bound to those
floods of false doctrine, which are ready to overflow the face of the world.
The Sea or Flood of the Arrian heresy (which denied the Deity of Christ, or
made him barely a Man by nature, only clothed with wonderful powers and
privileges, this heresy, I say, like a sea or flood) had almost overwhelmed
the whole world; yet God compassed those Black waters with bounds, and gave
them a commandment which they could not pass: and though in this Age they
seem to return, and strive to overflow the earth again, yet both the waters
of that heresy and of all other damnable heresies (as the Apostle Peter calls
them 2 Ep: 2.1.) which abound in these days, and threaten us with a fearful
inundation, are compassed with bounds which they shall not exceed. The Apostle
speaks of some in his time, (2 Timothy 3.8, 9.) Who as Jannes and Jambres
withstood Moses, so did they also resist the truth; men of corrupt minds,
reprobate (or as we put in the Margin, of no Judgment) concerning the truth.
But they shall proceed no further; So the Apostle prophesied of them; as if he
had said; They have a mind to proceed further, their will is to oppose truth
and propagate error (in infinitum) without end; But they have now gone to the
utmost of their line, they are come to their border, to their bound; they shall
proceed no further, for their folly shall be made manifest unto all men, as
theirs also was; that is, it shall appear to all men that the doctrine which
they stood up for, was nothing else but a bundle of folly, and that the
doctrine which they withstood was the truth and wisdom of God.

Fourthly, Then, the Lord is able to stop and bound the floods, the seas of
affliction, trouble, and persecution, which are ready to swallow up his Church
and people. The Church blesses God for her deliverance from troubles, under
this Allegory of Waters ( Psalm. 124.2, 3, 4, 5.) If it had not been the Lord,
who was on our side, when men rose up against us, they had swallowed us up
quick, when their wrath was kindled against us, then the waters had
overwhelmed us, the stream had gone over our soul, then the proud waters had
gone over our soul: Waters, streams, proud waters are nothing else but the
persecuting spirit and proceedings of ungodly enemies. And why did not these
lay all wast? God would not suffer them. When the Serpent (Rev: 12.15, 16.)
cast out of his mouth waters as a flood after the woman (that is, stirred up
many troubles) that he might cause her to be carried away (that is, utterly
ruined) of the flood. The earth helped the woman (says the text) that is (as
is conceaved) God made earthly men, by the use of earthly means, and for the
attaining of earthly ends, as a bound to stop those waters, or as a gulf to
swallow up those waters which should have swallowed up the Church. All these
things does he, and we may be fully assured he can do all these things, and
many more, who has compassed the waters with bounds, yea we may be assured
that he will continue to them, because as he has, so he will compass the
waters with bounds, Until the day and night come to an end; or as our Marginal
reading has it, until the end of light with darkness.

This last clause of the verse is a proverbiall speech, signifying perpetuity;
or that such a thing either shall not be at all, or shall be as long as the
world lasts.

But shall day and night, light and darkness end when the world or this frame
or constitution of things ends? Will there not be day and light, or an
eternal day of light in the heavenly Glory? is not that called, An inheritance
among the Saints in light? Col. 1.12.) And will there not be night and
darkness, or an eternal night of darkness in hellish misery? is not that called
outer darkness? How then is it said here that day and night shall come to an
end?

I answer. Though after the end of this world there shall be both day and
night, light and darkness; yet there shall be no vicissitude of day and night,
as there is in this present world, and as it is promised there shall be to the
end of this world ( Gen 8.22.) While the earth remains, seed-time and harvest
and cold and heat and summer and winter and day and night shall not cease.
These are called the Ordinances of the day and of the night, and the stability
of them is made the shadow of that stability of God to his gracious promise,
that the seed of Israel should not cease from being a nation before him for
ever (Jer. 31.35, 36.) In this world, light and darkness day and night are
coming and going, departing and returning continually; And in this sense day
and night shall come to an end, at the worlds end. Job speaks of day and night
in course and succession, not of day and night in being or constitution, when
he says, he has compassed the waters with bounds, until the day and night
come to an end. The Hebrew strictly translated makes this resolution of the
doubt more clear and doubtless; for that does not say absolutely that day and
night (light or darkness) shall come to an end; but that there shall be an end
of light with darkness; that is, of the intercourse or change between day and
night, between light and darkness; Ad consummatione^ lucis cum tenebris. Jun:
or until the consummation of light with darkness, that is, until light and
darkness have consummated or fulfilled their course one with another.

Hence observe.

First, Beyond this world there are no changes of times or seasons.

In the world to come all is day and light to the Godly, to those who dye in
the Lord; and all is night and darkness to the wicked, to those who dye out of
the Lord. Heaven and hell, a state of eternal Blessedness or wretchedness, have
no changes in them, nor any thing that is Heterogeneall, or of another kind.
Heaven which has light and joy in it, has no darkness, no sorrow at all in
it; Hell which has darkness and sorrow in it, has no light nor joy at all in
it; The mixtures and changes of light and darkness, of joy and sorrow, of pain
and pleasure, are made here on earth. The wine of the wrath of God, and the
wine of the love and consolations of God shall be powered out without any the
least contrary tincture or mixture in the life which is to come. Light with
darkness shall no more be heard of; They who go into light shall never see
darkness, and they who go into darkness shall never see light. We are now (as
Job speaks in the 14th Chapter of this Book, v. 14.) Waiting all the days of
our appointed time until our change come, and when that change is once fully
come, we shall go beyond all changes; Day with night will then be at an end.

Secondly, Observe.

What God does he can always do. As he has hitherto compassed the waters
with bounds, so he can compass them with bounds until the day and night come
to an end. Men can do that to day, which they are so far from being able to
do until the end of days, that, possibly they cannot do it the next day.
The hand of man is continually shortning in regard of natural strength or
activity, and it seldom keeps long at the same length in regard of civil
strength or Authority. As there are many things which man cannot nor ever could
do, so there are many things, which once a man could do, but now he cannot.
He is changed or the times are changed, either he has not the same power in
himself, or the same powers are not continued unto him. That man may be found
shaking and trembling, who a while before (as it is said of the Assyrian, Isa:
14.16.) made the earth to tremble, and did shake kingdoms, insomuch that all
(as it is at the 10^h verse of the same Chapter) shall speak and say unto him,
Art thou also become weak as we, art thou become like unto us? Thus we see the
mightiest men cannot do what they have done; they who have compassed the rage
and fury of men with bounds, can bound them no more, bat they break in upon
them like a wide breaking in of the Sea, and bear down all before them. But
the power of God knows no abatings, nor his hand any shortnings, as he has
bounded both the natural and mystical waters, so he can and will bound them
and none shall hinder, until the day and night come to an end. The Lord (says
David, Psalm. 29.10.) sits upon the flood, yea the Lord sits king for
ever. As if he had said, The Lord does not only sit upon (that is, rule and
govern) the floods for a while, but he rules and governs them always, he
sits upon them king for ever; even until day and night come to an end.

Thirdly; note.

The waters shall never totally overflow the earth; As God has given them a
bound, so such a bound as shall keep them in compass for ever; And as we have
an assurance in the power of God, that he can keep or compass the waters with
bounds to the end of the world; so also we have his promise and his
faithfullnes engaged that he will maintain those banks and bounds, and keep
them in such repair that the waters shall never prevail over them ( Genesis 9.8,
9, 10, 11.) And God spoke unto Noah and to his sons with him, saying, and I,
behold, I establish my Covenant with you, and with your seed after you, etc.
neither shall all flesh be cut off any more by the waters of a flood, neither
shall there be any more a flood to destroy the earth. And as mankind is under
this promise of freedom from an universal deluge, so every godly man may rise
up to this assurance, that no waters of any sort can wet so much as the sole of
his foot, or the hemme of his garment, but as they have leave and commission
from him, who has compassed the waters with bonnds, until the day and night
come to an end.

JOB, CHAP. 26. Verse. 11, 12. The pillars of heaven tremble, and are astonished
at his reproof.

He divides the Sea by his power, and by his understanding he smites through
the proud.


JOB still proceeds in the enumeration and illustration of the mighty works
of God; what he does in the clouds, and what in the heavens, was showed from
the former context; Here Job tells us what the Lord does with the heavens; He
who made the heavens and stretched out the North over the empty place, can make
these heavens totter in their place and tremble, when he pleases.

The pillars of heaven tremble, and are astonished at his reproof.
There are three things to be enquired into for the opening of this verse.

First, What is meant by the pillars of heaven.

Secondly, How the pillars of heaven may be said to tremble, and be astonished.

Thirdly, What we are to understand by the reproof of God, Columnae coeli, i.
e. Angeli contremiscunt. Aquin: Angelos vocat columnas coeli, quia s^ilicet
eorum officio adm^nistratur motus coelorum. Aquin:
when he says, they are astonished at his reproof.

The pillars of heaven tremble. There are various opinions about these pillars;
first, many of the Latins hold, that these pillars of heaven are the Angels,
by whose assistance (say some Philosophers) the motions of the heavenly bodies
with their orbs or spheres are guided and maintained. And doubtless as the
Angels have great employments upon and about the earth, so also in and about
the heavens, and therefore may (not improperly) be called the pillars of
heaven; in which sense also the Angels are called the powers of heaven, as some
interpret ( Math: 24.29.) where Christ prophesies, that immediately after the
tribulation of those days, the Sun shall be darkened, and the Moon shall
not give her light, the stars shall fall from heaven, and the powers of heaven
shall be shaken: Many of the ancients interpret those powers of heaven by the
Angels; as if the Lord would do such things in that great day, as should
trouble and astonish not only men on earth, but the Angels in heaven, who may
be called the pillars of heaven, as some eminent men for parts and power are
called the pillars of the earth; And we may suppose them pillars of heaven,
not for the strength and sustainement of heaven, Stabilita^e^ permanente^ in
natura angelorum intelligamus nemine Columnarum. Philip:
but for the beauty and ornament of it. As we see many pillars in stately
Palaces, which are not placed there to bear up the weight of those buildings,
but only to adorn and beautify them. Or Angels may be called the pillars of
heaven, because of the firmenes and stability of their own nature, not as if
they were any firmenes or establishment unto heaven.

Secondly, By these pillars of heaven are conceaved to be meant the high
mountains of the earth, which seem to touch the heavens, according to sense,
and so to sustain and bear them up, as pillars; but this opinion not being
grounded upon any truth in nature, but only upon a popular error, (though it
be a truth that even these supposed pillars of heaven tremble at the reproves
of God) I shall not insist at all upon this interpretalion.

Thirdly, These pillars of heaven say others are the air; for as the lowest
parts of the earth are called the foundations of the earth, because the
foundation of a building is laid lowest, so the lower parts of heaven, the air
(which is sometimes called heaven, yea the firmament of heaven, Genesis 1.20.) may
be called the pillar of heaven. It Is true also that the Lord makes dreadful
combustions by storms and tempests in the air, insomuch that those pillars of
heaven tremble, and are astonished at his reproof. But I shall not give this
neither as Jobs meaning here.

Terra tota velut orbis totius fundamentum ac firmanentum. Merc:
Fourthly, By the pillars of heaven, others understand (not the air or the
mountains) but the whole body on globe of the earth. Thus David speaks (2 Samuel
22.8.) Then the earth shook, and trembled, the foundations of heaven moved and
shook, because he was wroth; where the foundations of heaven in the latter
part of the verse, may be expounded by the earth in the former part of the
verse. For if we consider the whole fabric of the world together, then the
earth seems to be the foundation or pillar of heaven. And frequent experiences
in all ages, especially in some parts of the world, have felt and reported the
trembling of the earth. We commonly call it an Earthquake; and Philosophers
teach us that the reason of it in nature is the strength of vapors included in
and striving to make their way out of the bowels of the earth. And as this
trembling of the earth has a reason in nature, so it is often caused by
special command from God, as a reproof of the sinfullnes of man, or to awaken
him from his sin; yet,

Fifthly, I rather conceive, that this phrase, The pillars of heaven, is used
only in a general sense and not particularly intended either of Angels or
mountains, of the air, or of the earth; but that the pillars of heaven, are
the strength of heaven: the strength of a building consists in the pillars that
bear it up, take away the pillars, and it falls down, as Sampson said to the
lad that held him by the hand, suffer me that I may feel the pillars whereupon
the house stands, and when he had once moved them, the house fell ( Judge.
16.26.30.) so that when Job says, the pillars of heaven tremble, the meaning
is, the greatest strength of or whatsoever is strongest in heaven, the heavens
themselves with all their strength, Metaphorice haec dicuntur, non quod coelum
columnas habeat quibus nitatur, sed quod in vehementiori orbis concussione
videatur nobis perinde ac sinutent ejus columnae. Merc: (...) contritus
concussus fuit. (...) stupe^t denotat moram anamiin rei singularis
consideratione ad eam cognoscendam and ae^imandam. Coc:
tremble at the reproves of God. So that this is only a figurative and
Rhetorical expression, not that the heaven has any material pillars by which
it is supported, but because in those mighty concussions which God causes in
the world, it is as if the pillars or powers of heaven it self were shaken and
did Trembles and were astonished at the reproof of God.

But how may these pillars (whatsoever they are) be said to tremble and be
astonished? I answer, it is thus expressed in allusion to men who being severely
reproved, menaced, and threatened, tremble, and are astonished. Here are two
terms used; first, they tremble, which word signifies (as it were) the
pounding and shattering of the heavens to pieces, or as if they were even
ground to powder, or crumbled to dust. Secondly, They are astonished; The
original word imports not a light, sudden, transient astonishment, but an
astonishment that stays, abides, and takes up the mind, or which draws
the mind to a deep consideration of the matter presented, and thereupon to
wonder and admiration. ( Isa: 29.9.) Stay your selves and wonder, that is, sit
down and consider this thing and wonder; barely to wonder is not enough, you
must sit down, stay, and rest your selves to wonder, you must take your fill
of wonder at this thing. But how can the heavens be astonished, which are not
only without understanding but without life? I grant, that to be astonished is
proper only to rational creatures, yet it is attributed to beasts
metaphorically, yea and to things inanimate or without life and sense, as here,
and Jer. 2.12. to the heavens; for as rejoicing is attributed to the heavens,
and to the earth, to the mountains, and to the valleys, all these are said to
rejoice, to sing; so also astonishment, fear and trembling are attributed to
heaven and earth. And as livelesse creatures are said to rejoice, sing, and
praise God when men do it, so likewise they are said to tremble, when men
tremble; when God does such things as affect men with astonishment, then also
heaven and earth are spoken of as affected with astonishment.

(...) increpavit, objurgavit, reprehendit du^i^er and cum potestate.
Thirdly, What is meant by the reproof of God, which causes the pillars of
heaven to shake and be astonished. The word signifies, a sore chiding, the
severest reprehension, and that not a bare reproof, but a reproof with
authority, and command, as a father or master reproves his son or servant.
Thus, when Joseph told his dream, That the Sun, Moon, and eleven Stars
made obeisance to him, Jacob his father rebuked him, and said unto him, What is
this dream that thou have dreamed? shall I and thy mother and thy brethren
indeed come to bow down our selves to thee to the earth? And when Joshuah the
high Priest stood before the Angel of the Lord and Satan at his right hand to
resist him (Zeph. 3.2.) The Lord said to Satan, the Lord rebuke thee o Satan,
even the Lord that has chosen Jerusalem, rebuke thee. This rebuke had a
threatening in it, and was spoken as with an angry countenance, in which there
might be read displeasure, and indignation. The vulgar translates, not rebuke,
but nod; The pillars of heaven tremble at thy nod; There is a reproof in a
nod, Pavent ad nutum ejus. Vulg: Sic illud poetae natu treme-facit Olympum.
as it was said anciently, He made Olympus tremble with a nod of his head. A
nod of the head may signify a reproof as well as a word of the mouth. There
is a twofold reproof; first, verbal or by words; secondly, real or by action
and gesture. A verbal reproof may be real, but every real reproof is not
verbal. Both God and man can act reproves as well as speak them. And the
word here used is applied in Scripture not only to verbal, and voice
reproves, but to reproves given by gestures and by actions; for as the holy
lives of Godly men who walk exactly are a reproof to the world though they
speak not a word of reproof, so the actings of God are reproofs, though he
does not speak. Thus David says, ( Psalm. 9.5.) Thou have rebuked the heathen,
thou have destroyed the wicked; How did God rebuke the heathen? even by
destroying the wicked; that act of thine has been a reproof to the heathen,
and showed them their folly. In the same sense it is said again ( Psalm. 68.30.)
Rebuke the company of spear men, the multitude of bulls with the calves of the
people, till every one submit himself with pieces of silver. The rebuke there
prayed for upon that boisterous and bloody generation, was not a word but a
work of rebuke, that God would do somewhat that might be a rebuke upon them,
and a stop to them; as if he had said, Seeing this company of spear men, and
multitude of the bulls will not hear any of thy words, seeing they are not
capable either of reproof, or counsel, therefore rebuke them by some
extraordinary hand, and visible tokens of thy displeasure (as it follows)
scatter the people that delight in war. Thus some understand it here that God
gives a reproof to the heavens, not by a word spoken, but by his
providentiall actings and wonderful workings in the world.

Further, this reproof is expounded by that which is indeed the voice of God
(and so called in the 29th Psalm) the Thunder; which though it has a natural
cause (for which reason Atheists laugh at the simplicity of those who are led
up to the thoughts of God, and to a reverentiall aw of his power at the hearing
of it) yet that does not at all hinder but that God does in a special manner
dispose of it (as he does of all other natural things) when he pleases to
serve his providence in the demonstrations of his wrath among the children of
men. To which end we may say that God does often send forth his voice from the
clouds, and chides from heaven in thunder. The voice (this reprooving voice) of
the Lord is upon the waters (that is, upon the waters which are above the
firmament) the God of glory thundereth, the Lord is upon many waters, the voice
of the Lord is powerful, the voice of the Lord is full of majesty, the voice
of the Lord breaks the Cedars, he breaks the Cedars of Lebanon, the voice
of the Lord divides the flames of fire, the voice of the Lord shakes the
Wilderness, the Lord shakes the Wilderness of Kades, etc. Thus the pillars of
heaven, proper, and the pillars of heaven, in a figure, tremble at or are
astonished at these loud reproves.

Hence observe.

The greatest strength of the creature trembles at the angry dispensations and
appearances of God. As the lifting up of the light of Gods countenance, puts
joy into the heart more then corn and wine, the best things of this world, so
the darkness of Gods countenance puts more trouble and sorrow into our hearts,
then gall and wormwood, the worst of the world can do. David describes at
large in what a kind of hudle and hurry the world was in such a day ( Psalm.
18.13, 14, 15.) Then the earth shook and trembled, the foundations also of the
hills moved and were shaken because he was wroth. The Lord also thundered in the
heavens, and the highest gave his voice, hailestones and coals of fire, he
sent out his arrows and scattered them, and he shot out lightnings, and
discomfited them, then the channels of waters were seen, and the foundations
of the world were discovered at thy rebuke O Lord, at the blast of the breath
of thy nostrills. What David there spoke of thunder, and lightning, and
hayle-stones, has been visibly effected for the destruction of the enemies of
the people of God, and for the deliverance of his children. The history of
Joshuah gives us a famous instance at the 10th Chapter; and though it be not
recorded that David obtained victoryes by such immediate helps from heaven,
yet it is not improbable (considering the tenor of this Psalm) that he did.
And we have a notable instance of a victory obtained by Thunder and lightning
in the History of the Church, whence that Christian Legion of Soldiers who had
earnestly prayed that God would appear for their help, was called The
Thundering Legion. But whether we expound this context in the Psalm literally
and strictly, as expressing what God did for David in this kind; Or
figuratively, as expressing only thus much, that God did wonderful things, in
one kind or other, in helping David against his enemies, or whether we
understand it mystically, of what God does to and for the souls and spiritual
estates of men, yet it holds forth in all the utter inability of man to bear
up when the Lord shows himself in any terrible demonstrations of his
presence. Again ( Psalm. 104.32.) He looks on the earth, and it trembles, he
touches the hills, and they smoke. There is a twofold look of God; First,
there is the look of Gods favor, and thus Saints often pray that God will
look down from heaven upon them; this look is the releiving, yea the
reviving of the soul; secondly, there is a look of displeasure, an angry, a
frowning look, when clouds and storms are seen in the brow: Thus in the
Psalm God is said to look on the earth frowningly, childingly, and then it
trembled, he touches the hills, and they smoke, that is, they are as all
on-fire; The natural hills smoke at Gods touch, and so do the metaphorical
hills; when God touches the great men of the earth they smoke, presently they
fret and fume, till they break out into a flame of rage, heating and vexing
both themselves and all that are near them. ( Isa: 50.2.) Behold, at my rebuke
I dry up (or I can dry up) the Sea, I am as able to do it now with a word of
my mouth, as I once did it for the deliverance of your forefathers, ( Exo:
14.21.29.) I make (or I can make when I will with my rebuke) the rivers a
wilderness (that is, as dry as a desert or wilderness uses to be) their fish
stinketh, because there is no water, and dies for thirst. What strange work
does the rebuke of God make? By that he dries the sea, by that he makes the
river a wilderness: and as he does this by the power of his reproves upon the
sea and rivers natural, so upon the sea and rivers mystical. He can dry up
those worldly helps which seem as inexhaustible as the sea, and as lasting
and constant to us as a river which is fed with a continual spring. And when
any power rises up against us as deep and dangerous as the sea, as well
supplied and seconded as a river, yet we need not fear for God can presently
dry it up, and make us a passage over it, or through it. Yea they who are as
well bottomed and foundation'd as the earth, shall quickly feel the effects of
his power ( Psalm: 114.7.) Tremble thou earth at the presence of the Lord: at
the presence of the God of Jacob. But some may say, if the earth trembles at
the presence of God, then the earth must always tremble, for God is always
present; or what is the presence of God there spoken of? I answer, as there is
a presence of God, that makes all those that enjoy it to sing for joy; In thy
presence is fulness of joy, and at thy right hand are pleasures for evermore
(Psalm. 16.11.) so there is a presence of God that is very terrible to the
creature; yea that presence of God which is comfortable to his people is
terrible to his enemies; for when the Psalmist had said ( ver. 2.) Judah was
his Sanctuary, and Israel his dominion; that is, a people sanctified to him,
and governed and protected by him; presently it follows; The sea saw it and
fled, Jordan was driven back; The mountains skipped like rams, and the little
hills like lambs. The Psalmist perceaving all things in such a trembling fit and
confusion, seems to wonder what the matter was, and therefore puts the
question, What ayled thee, O thou sea, that thou fleddest, yea mountains that
ye skipped, etc? And presently makes answer, Tremble thou earth at the
presence of the Lord; As if he had said, the cause of all this terror and
trouble among the creatures, was nothing else but the presence of God. And if
the very sence-lesse creatures were sencible of his wrathful presence, how
much more must man both be sencible of it, and stoop unto it. This the Lord
insinuates by a cutting question ( Ezekiel. 22.14.) Can thy heart endure, or can
thy hands be strong in the day that I shall deal with thee, I the Lord have
spoken it, and will do it. The Lord by his Prophet speaks there to a people
that had a double strength; they were strong hearted, and they were strong
handed, they had much force or outward power, and they had much courage or
inward power; but neither hand-strength, nor heart-strength, neither force nor
courage shall avayle you in that day (says the Lord) that I shall deal with
you after the dealings of an enemy in wrath and Judgment. God strengthens the
hands of his servants and encourages their hearts to endure his severest
dealings with them. But when he comes to deal severely with those who are
rebellious and wicked, their hearts who are stoutest among them shall not be
able to endure, nor can they strengthen their hands. They who have strengthened
their hearts and hands most to commit sin, shall be least able to strengthen
them for the bearing of the punishment of sin.

And hence by way of Coralary or inference consider.

First, If the pillars of heaven tremble before God, if pillars (whose nature
is to stand still) move at the presence of God, what shall become of weak man,
of man who is a worm? if the pillars of heaven tremble at the reproof of God,
then certainly the pillars of the earth cannot stand fast at his reproof. The
pillars of heaven are the stro^gest pillars. When Jehu sent Letters to Samaria
unto the rulers of Jezreel, advising them to set up one of the Sons of Ahab
King and fight for him, the text says (2 King. 10.4.) they were exceedingly
affrayd, and said, Behold two Kings stood not before him, how then can we
stand? And thus may the strongest pillars on earth cry out with fear at the
displeasure and reproves of God, Behold the pillars of heaven tremble and are
astonished at his reproves, how then can we be established? Some men are or
are esteemed to be like James, Cephas, and John, pillars in the Church ( Gal.
2.9.) and others are pillars in States and Commonwealths; So we may expound
that of Hannah in her song (1 Samuel 2.8.) The pillars of the earth (that is,
earthly powers or Magistrates) are the Lords, and he has set the world upon
them, for, indeed, the world would soon fall into confusion, and shatter to
pieces (as to its civil capacity) if the Lord had hot founded it upon pillars
of Government and Magistracy, or set up Magistrates and Governors as the
pillars of it. And yet how often have these pillars of the earth trembled? how
many of them have fallen and been broken at the rebukes of God? There is a sort
of pillars that shall never be moved; How great an honor is it to be made such
a pillar, and Christ has taught us who shall be made such a one ( Rev: 3.12.)
Him that overcomes will I make a pillar in the Temple of my God; Such pillars
shall not tremble, they shall not be astonished, when all the pillars of the
world are cast down with trembling and astonishment. David has a strange
expression ( Psalm. 75.3.) The earth and all the inhabitants of it are
dissolved, (if so, whence was it that they were not utterly ruined and
destroyed; He answers) I bear up the pillars of it. But how could David bear
up the pillars of the earth, when all was dissolved? he means it not of a
natural but civil dissolution; things were out of order, the bands and
ligaments of government were sorely broken, men were divided into parties and
factions. Thus the earth, and inhabitants thereof were dissolved, which is the
saddest condition a people can be in; when it was thus, when there was such a
rupture among the people, Then David the chief Governor (under God) labored
to heal the breaches, and to be a pillar to those shaking pillars; He by his
great wisdom, Justice, moderation, and faithfulness, bore up the bearers of
the people, and supported their supporters, whether persons or things; As if he
had said, though there be much confusion in the earth, yet the Lord enables me
to keep things together, so that they fall not to the ground, and are not
utterly ruined. It is a Great honor to be a pillar bearing up the building,
but it is a greater honor to be a pillar bearing up the pillars; All good
Magistrates have the former honor, and all supreme Magistrates, if good, have
the latter; yet both these honors do originally and primarily belong unto
God; who as he makes the pillars of heaven tremble, so he can firmly setle
(and will while they willingly serve his ends and interests) the pillars of the
Earth, though but earthly pillars.

Secondly, Take this also by way of Corrolary from the text; If the pillars of
heaven tremble, and are astonished at the reproof of God; what shall we say of
those men, or of the hardness of their hearts?

First, Who, hear the reproves of God daily, yet tremble not. What? do the
pillars of heaven tremble at the reproof of God, and shall not men! yet, thus
more then brutish are many men; They hear reproves, severe reproves against
sin, yet they tremble no more then the stones they stand upon, nor are moved
any more then the seats they sit upon; let God thunder, and lighten, and
chide, and threaten, they are not stirred with it; The pillars of heaven shall
rise up in judgment against this dedolent and obdurate generation. The Prophet
( Jere: 36.24.) reports a sad story of this; a threatening roll was sent to
Jehoiakim king of Judah, written from the mouth of Jeremiah by Barucke; the
King caused it to be read as he sat at the fire, and then (whereas it might
have been expected that he should be cut at the heart with Godly sorrow and
contrition for his sin) he cut it with the Penknife and cast it into the fire
that was on the hearth until all the roll was consumed in the fire that was on
the hearth; yet they were not afraid nor rent their garments, neither the king,
or any of his servants that heard all these words; as if it had bin said, what
a wonderful hardness was there upon the hearts of these men, that they could
hear such words read, words so full of terror, words clothed with such
reproves, words which spoke nothing but death, wrath, destruction, ruin, and
desolation, yet notwithstanding all this they were not afraid, neither the King
nor any of his servants regarded it. The heart of man is more hard then
hardness it self, till God soften it, or breaks it; man moves not, he
relents not, let God reprove, and thunder, let God do what he will and say
what he will, let God make (as it were) a hell upon the earth, and, in the
greatest earnest, cast abroad his firebrands, arrows, and death, in the
dreadfullest representations of wrath and judgment, yet man trembles not, nor
is he any more astonished then if all this were spoken in jest.

Secondly, What shall we say of those who as they tremble not when they hear
the reproves of God, so they tremble not when they see his reproves. When God
makes his reproves visible, and writes them in blood; when he brings forth his
reproves in woeful effects (For as all our mercyes and comforts are nothing
else but the promises made visible; so all the judgments which God brings upon
the world, are nothing but his reproves and threatenings made visible, when (I
say) he brings forth his reproves in woeful effects) how desperately and
indeed (though it may seem a contradiction) how presumptuously are they
hardened in sin, whose ey never affects their heart, who can see such reproofs
of God yet never tremble. It is said in the Law of Moses that punishment should
be openly executed upon the presumptuous sinner, ( Deuteronomy. 17.13.) that all the
people should hear and fear, and do no more presumptuously; if all upon the
hearing, should fear, and fear so as to do so no more, how much more should
all that see fear, and do so no more?

Thirdly, What shall we say of those who not only hear and see the reproves
of God, but feel them also, and yet tremble not: when the rod is upon their
backs, a sword in their bowels, judgments round about them, and death climbing
up at their windows, yet they are not astonished; they are not only word
proof, but judgment proof: they are not sencible of what they feel, they
are smiteen, yet not sick, sorrow and grief of heart touches them not,
though they are smitten for their sins, and peirced with many sorrows. They are
so far from being troubled at the remembrance of former sins while they smart
under present afflictions, that with wicked King Ahaz they sin yet more against
God in the time of their affliction. They are so far from turning as wisdom
counsels us ( Pro: 1.23.) at the verbal reproves of God, or at the
reproves of his mouth, that they will not return while he reproves them with
his hand. Surely, at last the trembling pillars of heaven shall reprove them,
who tremble not, nor are astonished at the reproves of God.

Verse. 12. He divides the sea by his power, and by his understanding he
smites through the proud.
The general scope and sense of this verse, is an illustration of the power
and wisdom of God by a twofold effect; first, by dividing and vexing the
mighty waters of the sea with boystrous winds and storms; secondly, by
stopping and appeasing them when they are in their highest rage and proudest
fury, as if they were smitten to death.

First, He divides the sea by his power. (...) movit commovit volvit, per
Antiphrasin quievit.
The word which we render to divide, has a twofold signification, in a
contrariety, as is frequent in the Hebrew; First, to move and roll, to stir
up, and trouble, as the waters and waves of the Sea are by the winds; which do
so move and stir them as that they seem to divide and cut them asunder, and
cause them to dash one against another, and so it is applicable to the Sea in a
storm; secondly, Virtute sedavit mare. Sept: Virtute ejus quiescit mare.
Vatabl:
it signifyes to quiet and appease, and so it is applicable to the Sea in a
calm. The seventy render it, so here, He has appeased the Sea by his power:
and a learned Hebrician gives the same sense, By his power the Sea is quiet.
And it is indeed an act of the same power to quiet the Sea, to hush the winds,
and command a calm, as to raise storms upon the sea, or to put the sea into a
storm; but I shall not prosecute that sense in this first part of the verse,
because the latter part of it speaks rather of that point, as will appear in
the opening of it; And so the whole verse gives us a complete description of
the mighty power of God upon the mighty waters; first, in causing their rage
and fury; secondly, in causing them to be still, and quiet. The exercise of
which two powers carry a complete Empire and Dominion over the Seas.

He divides the sea. There is a general interpretation of the verse which I
shall touch before I pitch upon that which I conceave most proper. This
division of the Sea, and smiting through the proud, is supposed to be a
description of Gods dealing with Pharaoh and his Egyptians, when he brought
the people of Israel out of Egypt, at which time (the History tells us that)
he divided the sea by his power, and by his understanding he smote through the
proud, or through Rahab. The division of the Sea is unquestionable ( Exodus
14.21.) And Moses stretched out his hand over the Sea, and the Lord caused the
Sea to go back by a strong East-winde all that night, and made the Sea dry
land, and the waters were divided. The latter part of the verse is as clear in
the plain signification of it, to the same work of providence, for then, By
his understanding did God smite through the proud. And the word Rahab, which we
translate proud, is often used in Scripture to signify Egypt. Thus ( Psalm.
87.4.) I will make mention of Rahab and Babylon to them that know me, that is,
of Egypt and Babylon; as if he had said, those places which have been the
greatest enemies to the people of God, shall desire to join with the people of
God, Sion shall have converts from Egypt and Babylon. And the reason why
Egypt is expressed in Scripture under this word, arises from both
significations of it; first, strength, for Egypt was a very strong Nation, and
therefore the Israelites were reproved for going to them for help, and relying
upon their strength, which though great in it self, yet should be to them but
a broken reed; secondly, as it signifies pride, or the proud; men are usually
proud of strength, and Egypt being a strong Nation, was also a very proud
Nation; yet this Egypt, this Rahab, strong and proud, shall fall down and
humble her self before the Lord. And though now Egyptians be strangers from
the Commonwealth of Israel, yet of them it shall be said that they were borne
(by a second or new spiritual birth) in Sion. We have the like sense of the
word, and almost the same phrase of speech with this in Job (Ps. 89.9, 10.)
Thou rulest the raging of the sea, when the waves thereof arise thou stillest
them; then follows in the next words, Thou have broken Rahab as one that is
slain (that is, Egypt) thou have scattered thine enemies with thy strong
arm. And again ( Isa: 51.9.) Awake, awake o arm of the Lord, put on
strength; The Psalmist says, Thou have scattered thine enemies with thy strong
arm; the Prophet prays, Awake, awake o arm of the Lord, As in the ancient
days, in the generations of old, art thou not it, that has cut Rahab, and
wounded the Dragon, art not thou it which has dried the Sea? etc. Which
plainly hints the destruction of Pharaoh and his host in the red Sea. Job also
seems to aim at that noble, and notable act of divine power, and
understanding: And the words of the text (as all must grant) without any
strain or trouble are applicable to it; The only difficulty lies in this,
because it is not agreed upon by any Chronologers, who have searched strictly,
and critically into those times, that Job lived after the departure of the
people of Israel out of Egypt; Haec accipere de december plagis Egypti vix
permittit aetas Jobi, quem mo^tuum put^n^ eo anno quum I^aelitae eg^essi sunt
ex Egypto. Drus: Non plaet haec refer ad divisionem maris rubri in Egypto
Is^aelita ingratia quia ante illud e^pus, credimus fuisse J b and generaliter
potius loquitur de dei operibus. Merc:
yea some affirm, that Job dyed that very year when the Israelites departed
out of Egypt, and if so, then he could not make instance so many years before
he dyed (unless prophetically) concerning that miraculous division of the red
Sea, and the destruction of the Egyptians. Besides this, another argument is
alleged to invalidate this interpretation; because all along Job instanceth in
the general works of God, what he does in the heavens, in the earth, in the
air, and here in the Sea, so that it does not seem probable that Job should
descend to the mention of that particular providence of God to the Israelites;
though that may serve for a glorious proof and illustration of the point upon
which Job has so long insisted. The works of God in ordering the works of
nature, bear the resemblance of his works among the children of men; His
repressing the raging of the Sea, looks like his repressing the rage of the
wicked who are like the troubled Sea.

He divides the Sea by his power. We may take that act two ways, either,
first, as dividing is used in an ordinary sense, to cut out and part one thing
or one piece of a thing from another. It is a great and powerful work of God,
to divide the Sea, or the whole bulk of waters to several parts of the world,
and for the accommodation of several Countries. At first the waters covered
the whole earth, all was a great deep, and the Spirit of God moved upon the
face of the waters, (Genesis 1.2.) Nothing was to be seen, or there was no face
of any thing but water. And therefore as it is said ( Genesis 1.7.) that the Lord
separated or divided the waters which were under the firmament from the waters
which were above the firmament. So ( Genesis 1.9.) God said let the waters under
the heavens be gathered together into one place, and let the dry land appear,
and it was so, and God called the dry land earth, and the gathering together of
waters he called Sea. And as that Scripture in Genesis shows that the Sea is
the Gathering together of waters; so other Scriptures show that the waters of
the Sea are divided or run out in several Divisions. The 104th Psalm is a
continued meditation of the mighty power of God put forth both in creation and
providence; where the Psalmist having said of God ( v. 5.) Who laid the
foundations of the earth that it should not be removed for ever; he adds ( v.
6, 7, 8.) Thou coverest it (that is, the whole earth) with the deep as with a
garment; the waters stood above the mountains, (that is, the waters were
higher then the highest mountains.) But what did God then? at thy rebuke they
fled, at the voice of thy thunder they hasted away (that is, when thou did
speak powerfully and strongly to them, as with the voice of thunder) they go
up by the mountains, they go down by the valleys, unto the place which thou
have founded for them; thou have set them bounds that they may not pass over,
that they return not again to cover the earth. As the waters are now put into
one great vessel, so they are carried out in several great channels all the
world over for the convenience of traffic, and for the more easy intercourse
of nation with nation. Mr Broughton expounds his translation fully to this
purpose; Of a General water, he made many; and he translates the latter part
of the verse fully to that sense; And by his wisdom he parted the maine
water, or pride, that is, the proud Sea; that threatens to drown the land. So
that though the Sea be but one body of waters, yet it is divided into many
members, and receaves different names, according to the differing names,
whether of Islands or Continents, whose shoares it washes.

Secondly, Others expound this division of the Sea, of the violent motion of
the Sea. So, He divides the Sea, is, he makes the Sea rage, and waters rise
up against waters, as persons or nations do when they are divided among
themselves. Sometimes the Sea is (as if it were) all of one piece, in union,
and concord, all is calm and quiet; by and by, the Lord divides the Sea, sets
wave against wave, flood against flood, water against water, as if the Sea were
broken into a thousand factions. It is said in that mystical Scripture ( Dan:
7.2.) That the Prophet saw in his vision by night, and Behold the four winds
of heaven strove upon the great Sea; That is, there were great troubles and
commotions raised in all parts of the world, which vexed, divided, and
turmoyled the nations, even as the Sea is when boisterous winds, especially
when all the winds are let out of prison to strive and contend with one
another. Men make many fights at Sea, and God many times makes the Seas fight.
Which fightings and dividings of the Sea, are a clear emblem of all the
divisions and fights, which arise among men, and are acted either at Land or
Sea.

Hence note.

The divisions, storms, and ragings of the Sea are by the power of God. The
Psalmist is much upon this, ( Psalm. 107.23, 24, 25.) They that go down to the
Sea in ships, that do busienes in great waters, these see the works of the
Lord in the deep, for he commands and rayseth up the stormy wind, which
lifted up the waves thereof, (where note, they are lifted up by Gods command)
they mount up to the heaven, they go down again to the depths, their soul
is melted because of trouble. (Jon: 1.4.) The Lord sent out a great wind into
the Sea, and there was a mighty tempest in the Sea. (Jere: 10.13.) God is said
to bring the wind out of his treasure (and Prove: 30.4.) To gather the wind in
his fist. The wind is sent out, and the wind is gathered in, it is treasured
up, and it is disbursed out by his own appointment to serve his providence and
designs toward men, both in mercy and in Judgment.

We may hence infer, that As the Lord divides the Sea, so the Earth.

When men are all of a mind, all as one man, he can sever and divide their
spirits, and then cause them to dash against one another like the waves of a
tempestuous Sea. The old world was of one mind, but the Lord came down, and
divided them, when he saw them united in that work ( Genesis 11.6.) The people
are one, and they have all one language, and this they begin to do, and now
nothing will be restrained from them which they have imagined to do, so the
Lord confounded their language, and scattered them abroad; They were building a
Babel to secure themselves against a second deluge, and to get them a name lest
they should be scattered abroad upon the face of the whole earth. Therefore God
brought their fears upon them, and scattered them. We lay our selves most open
to that judgment, which we labor most to prevent in a sinful way. As there
are divisions among men which are their sin, so God sends divisions among men
which are their punishment. And as God sends divisions among men for the
punishment of some, so for the probation or trial of others. Christ says (
Math: 10.35. I am come to set a man at variance against his father, and the
daughter with her mother, and the daughter in law against her mother in law;
and a man's enemies shall be they of his own house. Such divisions the Lord
makes on the earth, that it may appear how strongly and immoveably his
faithful ones are united unto him. As we are to ascribe our union, so our
divisions to God; it is he that orders all these things, though they flow
from the corruption, pride, and selfeishnesse of men. When there are divisions
and emulations among us, we show our selves (as the Apostle speaks, 1 Cor:
3.3.) and walk as men; But God shows himself righteous, and acts as God;
He divides the Sea by his power, And by his understanding he smites through
the proud.

The dividing of the Sea was ascribed to the power of God in the former part of
the verse, (...) est ictu deprimere, ut quum paxillus ictu corpori solido
imprimitur.
and here his smiting through the proud is ascribed to his understanding. The
word signifies to strike so, as to destroy, or kill, to strike dead. ( Isa:
30.26. Numb: 24.8.) God strikes home when he strikes the proud.

But who or what are the proud ones, whom God smites through? The word is
Rahab, (as was touched before in the general interpretation of the verse)
signifies two things; first, strength, so some render it here; By his
understanding he smites through strength; that is, those things which are
strongest. The very weakness of God is stronger then man, and therefore there
is nothing so strong, but God can quickly smite it through or destroy it.
Secondly, it signifies pride, because men usually are proud of their strength;
whence that caution ( Jer. 9.23.) Let not the mighty man glory in his might.
Any kind of strength is apt to make man proud; the strength of his estate, and
purse, is a great temptation to pride; strength of body, strength of parts,
strength of wit and understanding (which is the highest, and noblest natural
strength) puts on to pride, yea (so strange are the ways and methods of
temptation) the very strength of grace or spiritual strength has blown up
some with pride; For though humility flow properly from the strength of grace,
and the more grace the more humility, yet upon a presumption of the greatness
and strength of their graces, some have been proud and high-minded, that is,
they have not lived in such dependence upon Christ as they ought. Our strength
lies much in the sense of our weakness, because, then we go out of our selves
to Christ for strength, that is the meaning of the Apostles confession, When I
am weak, then am I strong (2 Cor. 12.10.) And they who are strong in
themselves, must needs be weak, because the strength of God goes out against
them. And therefore it will not be unprofitable for us, before I come to the
special explication of the proud here intended, to meditate upon and make use
of this Scripture in the full latitude and compass of the word. For whosoever
he is that is proud, whether he be proud of his natural or civil or
supernatural strength, let him look to himself, God understands him, and
by his understanding he will smite through the proud. The proud man is always
in danger of falling, though (because of his pride) he least of all men, either
fears or suspecteth a fall. How can they be safe against whom God has
declared himself an enemy. There Is no armor of proof against the strokes of
God, if God smite as an enemy, he smites through, and so he always smites
the proud. Saul attempted more then once to smite David to the wall with his
Javelin; yet David avoided his blow and got out of his furious presence; But
when God casts his Javelin at the proud, they shall not escape a smiting
through and nayling to the wall. By his understanding he smites through the
proud.

But more distinctly, who is the proud in the text whom God smites through?

First, Some say the Devil; He indeed is the proud one, his pride was his fall
from God, and God has smitten him through for his pride.

Secondly, Others understand by the proud, the whale in the Sea; Et scientia
stratus est cetus. 70 i. e suo imperio subegit.
thus the seventy translate, and by his knowledge he has destroyed the Whale
or Leviathan, of whom the Lord says (in the 41th Chapter of this book, v.
34.) He is a king over all the children of pride.

Intelligentia sia percussit Gigantus. Targ:
Thirdly, The Chaldee paraphrase says, He has smitten through the Giants.
Which whether it be meant of the Whales who are Giants among the fishes of the
Sea; or of Giants who are like Whales at land, bigger and more formidable then
the rest of men, the sense is the same; both agreeing in this, that God can
quickly destroy and subdue those who are greatest, strongest, and so proudest
in this world. But leaving all these suppositions, I shall conclude,

Fourthly, That by the proud, we are rather to understand the strong and mighty
waves and waters of the Sea in their greatest hight and pride. This holds
fairest correspondence with the former part of the verse, He divides the sea
by his power, that is, Percutit, i. e. domat and compescit superbiam maris.
Drus: Sua potentia sc^n^it mara, and intelligentia sua compescit ejus ferociam.
Tygur: Cum deus tranquillat mare, percutere et ^onculcare videtur superbum
Pined:
He rayseth storms, and so divides the waters, and when the Sea is in its
greatest rage, then by his understanding he smites through the proud, the
proud waves, aad so makes a calm; The sea in it self, especially in its
swellings and stormings is a proud creature; and that title or epethite of
pride is often given to it: we read ( Psalm: 124.5.) of proud waters, and ( Job
38.11.) of the proud waves, at the 13th verse of the Epistle of Jude, we read,
of raging waves of the sea, and ( Luke 21.25.) of roaring waves of the sea. The
Prophet ( Jer: 12.5.) speaks of the swelling of Jordan; so that when Job
says, by his understanding he smites through the proud; we may clearly
interpret him of the sea-waves, then which nothing in appearance is more proud
and swelling; and therefore when God allayeth and guides the high-growne waves
of the Sea, he may well be said, to smite through the proud.

Hence note.

God knows how to bring down the Sea in its greatest rage and pride. God
does it by his understanding, as well as by his power; As God has power enough
to divide the Sea, and make it stormy, so he has understanding enough to calm
and quiet it. We read ( Math: 8.23, 24, 25, 26, 27.) That Christ being entered
into a ship with his Disciples, a great tempest arose, insomuch that the ship
was covered with the waves, but he was asleep. And his Disciples came to him
and awoke him, saying, Lord save us we perish. And he says unto them, why are
ye fearful, O ye of little faith? then he arose and rebuked the winds and the
Sea, and there was a great calm. This is a plain exemplification and
exposition of Jobs assertion, by his understanding he smites through the
proud; When the Sea was as furious as a mad man, who has lost his reason, and
will hear none, yet then Christ by his divine power and wisdom made it as
obedient as they who have and act most reason are, when they hear the most
rational and pressing persuasions, or (we may say) that he hushed the Sea as a
mother does her crying child, and rock't it into a sleep; yea he does not
only calm the Sea, but kill it, or strike it dead (as the word of the text
imports.) There is a particular sea which is called The Dead Sea, But God can
make all the seas Dead Seas, and then he delights most to do it, when they
threaten to swallow up all living.

This may be a great support to us among the storms which we meet with here
at land. When men and nations are divided and raging against one another, God
can quiet them; It is an easy matter to make divisions among men, but it calls
for much holy skill and wisdom, even the wisdom of God, to heal and soder
them. And when the spirits of men are proudest and lifted up like the high
waves of the sea, then usually it is Gods time to appear and strike them through
At his word (as the Prophet speaks, Isa: 11.13.) The envy of Ephraim shall
depart, and the adversaries of Judah shall be cut off, Ephraim shall not envy
Judah, and Judah shall not vex Ephraim. Whence is it that Ephraim envyeth
Judah? whence is it that Judah vexes Ephraim? is it not from their pride?
says not Solomon (Pro: 13.10.) By pride comes contention. How then shall the
contention between Ephraim and Judah cease, but by striking through their
pride? When there is less pride among men, there will be more peace, and God
will smite the proudest rather then his people shall not have peace. As the
Jews were divided among themselves, so likewise were the Jews and Gentiles,
Till Christ reconciling both to God in one body by the Cross, did slay enmity
thereby (Ephesians: 2.16.) And how did he slay their their enmity, even by smiting
through their pride, and humbling their spirits under his own cross or
sufferings, by which, and the throane of Grace, they were at once reconciled to
God, and one to another.

Secondly, That God who can appease the rage of the proud seas, can also
appease or destroy the rage of the proudest men who oppose his people. So some
understand that, ( Zech: 10.11.) where we have a prophecy of bringing the
children of Israel out of Egypt and Assyria into their own land; And he shall
pass through the sea with affliction, and he shall smite through the waves in
the sea, and all the deeps of the river shall dry up; that is, Christ the
deliverer of his people, shall pass through the nations who are like the red
Sea, standing in the way of his peoples return, and he will afflict them, or
bring much affliction upon them, and he will smite those who like proud waves
shall threaten to swallow them up; so that the deepes of the river, even those
hindrances, which it was thought could never be removed, shall dry up at his
command or rebuke, and the pride of Assyria shall be brought down, and the
scepter of Egypt shall depart away, that is, they who shall then be to the
people of God, as Egypt and Assyria were of old, hard Taske-masters and leaders
of them into Captivity, shall be subdued and removed, when they are proudest
and in their greatest power. It Is matter of strong consolation to all the
faithful, that they serve a God who is able to reconcile the divided spirits
of his own people one to another, and cause all their envy to depart from them;
who is able also to reconcile their greatest adversaryes to them, and either to
stay their enmity, or to slay them as enemies.

Thirdly, It Is matter of comfort to the people of God. For he who can appease
the rage of the Sea, can also appease the rage of Satan, and smite through the
proud waves of his Temptations. Satan goes about continually to raise storms,
and vex poor souls; O the rage of temptation that many poor souls are
under, how do the billows of it rise like a violent sea, wave after wave,
gust after gust. As God himself rayseth storms of temptation against a poor
soul (thus David spoke in his own case, Psalm. 42.7. Deep calls unto deep
at the noise of thy water-spouts: all thy waves and thy billows are gone over
me) which yet in due time he will appease; so when Satan by his leave or
command, direction or permission rayseth storms of temptation, which he has
no mind to allay but rather to increase and double daily more and more, yet O
wearyed and weather-beaten soul, be of good cheer, the Lord can smite through
the proud enemy Satan, with all his floods, and waves of temptation, and make a
calm.

Lastly, Let them also remember this and be comforted who find proud waves,
proud lusts, and corruptions, stirring and raging like a Sea within them. For
that which is said by the Prophet of the wicked, is true in part of the
righteous, and sometimes it is in a very great measure fullfilled in them ( The
wicked are like the troubled Sea when it cannot rest, (Isa: 57.20.) that is,
they are like the Sea in a storm which is so, not only because of the
unquietness of their spirits about the providence and dealings of God with
them, but because their violent lusts hurry them this way and that way as the
sea is toyled and tossed by the winds, this (I say) is true also in part of
Saints) some more, some less are like a troubled Sea, yea they have a Sea of
sinful lusts within them, which the Lord is pleased sometimes to divide and
stir up; their corruptions storm and bluster, and Satan labors to make them
bluster more and more. We daily hear the complaints and cries of souls, thus
tossed, coming to Christ, as his Disciples once did, and crying to him, Master
save us we perish; we fear we shall be overwhelmed and drowned in this Black
Sea of our corruptions. To such Christ says, O ye of little faith, wherefore
do ye thus fear, cannot I smite through the proud, the proud waves of your
hearts. Is unbelief the proud wave, that ye fear will swallow you up? Christ
can give you such an increase of faith as shall swallow up your unbelief; is
pride it self the proud wave that is like to overwhelme you? Christ who
smites through the proud in Judgment, will also smite through thy pride in
mercy. It is a great act of Grace in man to desire God to strike through his
pride, and it is a great act of mercy to man when God does so. The more God
smites our sins, the more he declares his love to and his care of our souls.
The remainders of pride in the Saints shall be smitten through; but sinners who
remain in their pride shall be smitten through themselves. God whose power and
understanding are made known by smiting through the proud waves of the Sea,
will at last make his Justice and his holiness known by smiting through the
proud hearts of men, or rather men of proud hearts. Proud men strike at God,
yea kick against him, no wonder then if he strike and kick them. All the
sufferings of Christ are wrapped up under that one word, His humiliation,
implying that as he was smitten for all our sins, so most of all for our pride.
That man whose pride is not smitten to death or mortifyed by the death of
Christ, shall surely be smitten to death, even to eternal death for his pride.
As God understands thoroughly who are proud, so by his understanding he will
smite through the proud.

JOB, CHAP. 26. Verse. 13, 14. By his Spirit he has garnished the heavens: his
hand has formed the crooked Serpent.

Lo, these are parts of his ways, but how little a portion is heard of him?
but the thunder of his power who can understand?


JOB has given us a particular of many illustrious works of God, what he does
in the depths below, Et ut in opere ipsius pulcherrimo desinam hic ille est,
qui coelos illa enarrabili pulchritudine exornavit, and spherae illae suis
giris undique coelos serpe^tium instar percurre^tes sunt opus manibus ipsius
tornatum. Bez:
and what in the hights above; in this verse he gives another instance, and
that a very choice one, upon the same subject. As if he had said; After all
this large discourse which I have made of the works of God, I will conclude
with that which is the most remarkable piece of them all. This is he who has
adorned the heavens with that unutterable beauty wherewith they shine, and the
spheres which wind and turn round about the heavens like Serpents, are
smoothed and polished by his hand.

Verse. 13. By his Spirit he has garnished the heavens.
The Spirit of God is taken two ways in Scripture. First, q. d. visua and
voluntate, ut nomen spiritus saepius in scriptura usurpatur; sed malo ipsum dei
spiritum almum accipere, quo omnia deus fecit. Merc:
for the power of God. Secondly, and so here for God, the power as distinct
from the Father and the Son; By whom God wrought all things in the creation of
the world ( Gen: 1.2.) The Earth was without form and void, and darkness was
upon the face of the deep, and the Spirit of God moved upon the face of the
waters. It is a rule in Divinity, That the external works of the Trinity are
undevided; and so the Three Persons concurred in the making of the world. God
the Father created, and is called Father in Scripture, not only in relation to
the Eternal ineffable Generation of God the Son, but also in reference to the
production of the creature. God the Son, or the Eternal Word created, ( Joh.
1.1, 2, 3.) In the beginning was the word, and the word was with God, and the
word was God; All things were made by him, and without him was nothing made
that was made. God the Spirit or Holy Ghost, he likewise created, and He only
is mentioned by Moses distinctly, or by name, as the Agent in the original
constitution of all things. (...) non simplicem motionem denotat sed qualem
columba perficit cum evis ad excludendum pullos incubat. Rab: Selom: Verbum
^ranslatum ab avibus pullitiei suae incubantibus. Jun.
And the Hebrew word (rendered in our translation moved, the Spirit of God moved
upon the face of the waters) by which the Agency of the Spirit in that Great
work is expressed, caryeth in it a very accurate significancy of that
formative virtue or power which the Spirit put forth about it. For it is a
metaphor taken from birds who sit upon their eggs to hatch and bring forth
their young ones; and so imports the effectual working of the Spirit, whereby
that confused mass or heap was drawn out and formed up into those several
creatures specifyed by Moses in the History of the Creation; Among which we
find the Garnishing of the heavens, spoken of here by Job, is reported by Moses
for the work of the fourth day. Further, we may consider the heavens; first,
in their matter and being; secondly, in their beauty and ornaments; Job speaks
of the latter.

By his Spirit he has garnished the heavens. (...) adornavit, decoravit,
pulchre fecit.
God has not only created, but pollished, and (as it were) painted or
embroydered the heavens. The original word implies the making of them
beautiful, contentfull, and pleasant unto the eye; this is the Lords work.
And therefore as the whole world because of the excellent order and beauty of
it is expressed in the Greek by a word that signifies beautiful, (...).
so some parts of the world have a special beauty and luster put upon them
beyond the rest. The heavens are not like a plain garment (as we say) without
welt or guard; but they are laced and trimmed, they are enameled and spangled,
they glister and sparkle in our eyes with rays and beams of light. By his
Spirit he has garnished the heavens.

If it be asked, what is this garnishing of the heavens? I answer, the setting
or placing in of those excellent lights, Sun, Moon and Stars in the
heavens, are the garnishing of them. Light is beautiful, and the more light
any thing has, the more beauty it has. Precious stones have much light in
them; those lights the Stars are as so many stones of beauty and glory set or
moving in the heavens. Light as diffused and shed abroad in the air is
exceeding delightful and beautiful, but light as it is contracted and drawn
together into the Sun, Moon, and Stars, is far more beautiful; light in
the air pleases the eye, but light in the Sun conquers and dazzel's the eye
by the excessive beauty and brightness of it. In the first day of the Creation
God said; Let there be light, and there was light; but in the fourth day he
said, let there be lights, that is, let there be several vessels, to receave,
hold, and contain light, and then to issue it out among the inhabitants of the
earth ( Genesis 1.14.) And God said, let there be lights in the firmament of the
heaven, to divide the day from the night: and let them be for signs, and for
seasons, and for days, and for years, and let them be for lights in the
firmament of the heaven, to give light upon the earth; and it was so. And God
made two great lights, the greater light to rule the day, and the lesser light
to rule the night; he made the stars also; and God set them in the firmament
of the heaven, to give light upon the earth. God in Creation did with the
light, as he did with the waters, which being made were divided, the waters
above the firmament were divided from the waters under the firmament, and the
waters under the heaven he gathered together into one place (Genesis 1.9.) God
prepared a certain great vessel into which the waters were called and
gathered that they should not spread over the earth, as they did at first,
which gathering together of the waters God called Seas (Genesis 1.10.) Thus the
light which was spread and scattered through the air over all the earth, God
gathered into several vessels, Pulchritudo es ornamenta coeloru^ stellae
sunt; sicut terrae animantia et plantae. Sanct:
and the gathering together of light he called Sun, Moon, and Stars, which
are (as Job here calls them) the garnishing of the heavens.

Moses epitomiseth or briefly sums up his larger narrative of the Creation in
these words ( Gen: 2.1.) Thus the heavens and the earth were finished and all
the host of them, that is, they were finished not only as to their essentials,
but ornamentalls; not only was the foundation laid, the walls and pillars, the
beams and rafters of that goodly structure set up and perfected, but all the
furniture of it was brought in, and the beautyes of it completed. Now, as
gemms, minerals, plants, trees, and all living creatures are the Garnishing of
the Earth and the host of God there, so the Sun, Moon, and Stars, are the
garnishing of heaven, and the host of God there. David speaks of these
distinctly ( Psalm. 33.6.) By the word of the Lord were the heavens made: and
all the host of them, by the breath of his mouth. All creatures whether placed
in heaven or earth, are for their number, their strength, their order, their
readynes at a call or command, the host of God. Earthly Princes show their
power in their hosts and armies; of what power God is both his acts and his
hosts abundantly declare. And as these creatures are the armies or host of God
in heaven and earth, so they are the Adornings and Garnishings of heaven and
earth. Job in this place speaks only of the former, By his Spirit he has
Garnished the Heavens.

Only here take notice, that some expound the word Spirit, for the wind which
blows in the air, and so render the text thus; By his wind he garnisheth
the heavens; As if this were Jobs meaning, that God sending forth the winds
dispelleth and scatters those clouds, foggs, and mists, which often cover the
face of the heavens, and hinder our beholding their glory and garnishings.
According to this interpretation the garnishing of the heavens is nothing else
but the removing of that which obscureth the Garnishing of them. And it is
true, that when the heavens are maskt over with clouds and darkness, God by
the winds clears the air, and so renews the face of those heavenly bodies.
But I pass by this, and shall only insist upon the former exposition of these
words, as being more suitable with Jobs scope, and more expressive of the power
and Glory of God, in the great things which he has wrought for us.

By his Spirit he garnisheth the heavens. Hence learn.

First, We ought jointly to acknowledge and give glory to the Father, Son, and
Spirit, in the work of Creation. Solomon in his advice to the young man says
( Eccl: 12.1.) Remember thy creators in the days of thy youth; (...) creatorum
tuorum Myster^um Sanctae Trinitatis. Pisc:
We translate in the singular number, creator, but the Hebrew is plural,
Creators; intimating the mystery of the Holy Trinity; as Moses also is
conceaved to do in that plural expression ( Gen: 1.26.) And God said, let us
make man in our image after our likeness. And though this be added in a way of
Eminency, when the particular creation of man is set down, yet we are to
understand it so generally of the whole work of Creation; and as of the work
of Creation, so of all other divine works toward the creature. Redemption is
the work of the Father and of the Spirit as well as of the Son; and
sanctification is the work of the Father and of the Son as well as of the
Spirit. The three persons work together, only they have a distinct manner of
working, according to which each work is chiefly attributed to that person:
and so creation is specially appropriated to the Father, Redemption to the Son,
and Sanctification to the Holy Ghost. Seeing then all Three work together in
all things toward us, All three ought to be equally and eternally honored,
worshipped, loved and obeyed by us. By his Spirit he has garnished the Heavens.

Secondly, Observe.

The heavens are full of beauty, God has not only made them, but adorned
them. What a rich and Royal Canopy has God hung over the heads of poor
worms, dust and ashes. God did not think it enough to give us a house,
unless he gave us also a pleasant house, he was not satisfied in setting up a
large fabric for us, unless he also furnished and garnished it for us. God
has made the world not only useful but contentfull to us, he has fitted it
not only for our necessity but delight. The earth is beautiful, but the
heavens exceed in beauty. The heavens are the Ceiling of our house, and the
Stars are like Golden studs and sparkling Diamonds in that Ceiling. We may
infer three things from the Garnishing of these heavens.

First, If the heavens which we see are so glorious, what are the heavens which
no eye has seen. If God has thus discernably adorned the first and second
heavens; how unconceaveable are the ornaments of the third heavens? If nature
has so much beauty in it, how be^utifull a thing is Glory? If God has
prepared such heavens, as our eyes see, for those who hate him, then surely eye
has not seen, ear has not heard, nor has it entered into the heart of man
to understand what those heavens are which God has prepared for them and for
them alone, who love him. The light of these visible heavens is but darkness to
that inheritance of the Saints in light. The Moone-light (if I may so speak)
of that state, shall be better and more illustrious, then the Sun-light of
this, and the light of the Sun shall be sevenfold, as the light of seven
days, in that Great day when the Lord shall perfectly bind up All the breaches
of his people, and heal the stroke of their wound. God, who by his Spirit
has garnished these heavens, will be himself, with his Son and Spirit, the
eternal Garnishing of those heavens.

Secondly, Seeing God has been so bountiful and munificent, as to Garnish the
heavens for us, even for us, by his Spirit; seeing he has provided such a house
for the comfort of our lives here, who never deserved the meanest cottage; how
should we pray that he would Garnish our souls by the Spirit, as a heaven for
himself to dwell in: or as the Apostle speaks ( Ephesians. 2.22.) That we may be
builded for an habitation of God through the Spirit. God has two houses, an
upper house, and a lower house; The heaven of heavens is his upper house, and
the heaven of an holy and humble heart is his lower. God is every where, but he
dwells no where but in a heaven; He dwells not in the heart of any man,
till that be made a heaven, and that a heaven Garnished by the Spirit. As the
Sun Moon and Stars are the garnishing of the natural heaven, so holy
knowledge and the graces, faith, hope and love, are the Garnishing of those
spiritual heavens, the hearts of the sons of men. And until their hearts be
thus garnished, they are not an heaven for God, but a hell or habitation for
the devil; and he puts furniture and garnishings into them suitable to
himself, and fitting his own entertainment. We read in the Gospel ( Math:
12.43, 44.) That, when the unclean Spirit is gone out of a man, he walks
through dry places, seeking rest and finds none; Then he says, I will
return into my house from whence I came out; and when he is come, he finds
it empty swept and garnished. Lusts and corruptions, unbelief, pride; wrath,
envy, these are the Garnishings of Satan's house. And as he delights most to
dwell there where he finds most of these Garnishings; so God delights most
to dwell in that soul which is most Garnished with grace. Then pray, and pray
earnestly, that God who has garnished the heavens by his Spirit for our use,
would also garnish our hearts by his Spirit, for his own use.

Thirdly, As this should provoke us to pray that our hearts may be garnished as
a house of delight, that God may dwell in us; So it should provoke us to garnish
our lives, that God may be honored by us. And as God has not only made a
good world for us, as to the matter, but made it pleasant, and adorned it for
us: so we should strive not only to do that which is good for the matter, but
to put ornaments upon it, and make it pleasant to our utmost in the eyes of
God. We should garnish our works as God has garnished his; God has (as it
were) polisht and engraven his works for us by exquisite art and skill, so
that the workmanship is better then the matter; and shall we satisfy our
selves, if we do that which is good for the matter, though we bestow no cost,
no holy skill and workmanship upon it? shall we serve God only with plain
work, when we see how curious and elaborate his works are? I grant, plain
work is best, and most pleasing to God, as plainenes is opposed to hypocrisy;
but plain work is not best as plainenes is opposed to exactnes. God loves to
see some lace and trimming (in sincerity) upon what we do; that is, it
pleases him, when he sees that we do our best, and that we not only do
good, but garnish (to his praise) the good we do; he would have us not only
walk in the truth, but honor the truth by our walkings; He would have us not
only obey the doctrine, but (as the Apostle speaks, Tit: 2.10.) Adorn the
doctrine of God our Savior in all things, or (to use Jobs language) Garnish
it, as he by his Spirit has garnished the heavens.

And his hand has formed the crooked Serpent. His hand, that is, his power;
hands are ascribed to God in a figure, or in allusion to men, who do all their
external works by their hands. The hand is a noble and most serviceable Organ
or Instrument, and therefore the Great things which God has done, especially
the heavens, are called the work of his hands, and his handy-worke (Psalm.
19.1.) yea the heavens are called the work of his fingers (Psalm. 8.3.) Which
notes (I conceave) the exactnes and curiosity of the work, for such are those
things which are wrought by the fingers. God being a Spirit invisible and
incorporal, has no formal hands, but he has a vertuall hand. That Executive
power by which he performs and brings about his will in every thing is his
hand. This hand Has formed the crooked Serpent.

There are several opinions about this crooked Serpent, (...) Serpentem
vectem. Pagn: Serpentem fugacem. Mont: Serpentem oblongum. Jun:
who or what it should be that Job here means. The Hebrew is, The Sepent the
bar, That is, The serpent which is like a bar or bolt of iron. Some render
the flying or running serpent, because as the bolt or bar of a door runs
from side to side, so that from place to place, Mr Broughton translates, the
long serpent. But what is this serpent? Diverse interpretens connect the sense
of these words with the former part of the verse, and so place this crooked
serpent in the heavens, as belonging to the Garnishing of them, or as if Job
were giving a particular instance of what God has done toward the garnishing
of the heavens; His hand has formed the crooked serpent. By which they
understand the celestial circles or spheres which are wrapped and involved one
within another, as a serpent wrappeth or twineth himself in several rounds.

Another following the same sense expounds it of that which Astronomers call
the milkey way, which is a beauty in heaven; It being (as it were) the
coalition of a number of little stars, Vatablus viam lacteam intelligit.
which because they look white and milkish, are therefore called the milkey
way; Which also has somewhat of the form of a serpent, as is evident to the
eye of any diligent observer.

A third, keeping still to that sense, expounds it yet more particularly of
that special constellation in the heavens known among Astronomers by the name
of the dragon or serpent; Which is supposed to be spoken of here by Job
synecdochically, putting a part for the whole, or one for all the other
Constellations with which the heavens are garnished; As if it had been said,
His hand has formed the crooked serpent, that is, all the Stars in their
several shapes and configurations, among which one represents the form of a
Lion, another of a Bear, another of a Ram, and among many others one appears
in the form of a Dragon or Crooked Serpent, shooting himself forth or forward
like the bolt of a door.

I find a fourth sort, who though they keep the crooked serpent of the Text
still in the heavens, yet they bring it down to a lower heaven, that is, from
the starry heaven, or from that heaven which is the Subject of the Stars to
the ayery heaven, which is the subject or shop in which the meteors, of all
sorts, are bred and formed, and among them there is a meteor called by
Naturalists, the flying serpent. As if the meaning of these words, His hand
has formed the crooked serpent, Draco volans.
were this; God has wrought and formed by his power and wisdom all those
fiery meteors that are often seen as it were flying and shooting in the air,
to the wonder of many, and the astonishment of not a few. There are the
treasures of the snow and of the hayle, there God prepares a way for the
lightning of the thunder ( Job. 38.22.25.) Some learned interpreters insist
much upon this Exposition, placing the crooked serpent in the heavens, either
the upper or lower, as has been showed under four distinct titles: nor can it
be denied, but that the hand of God has wrought all these things, much less
can it be denied that the working of these things is a great argument and
demonstration of the power and wisdom of God, which is the purpose of Job in
this place; therefore I shall not totally lay it aside. Neither yet will I
leave it with the reader as the special meaning of this place, for this
reason, because I much doubt, whether those poetical phancyes in giving such
fictitious names to the Stars of heaven, as, The Lion, the Bear, the Bull,
the Dragon, the Serpent, etc. of which Philosophers and Astronomers have made
use, were at all borne, or ever so much as heard of in those elder times in
which and before which Job lived. For though both in the 9th Chapter of this
book ( v. 9.) as also in the 38th Chapter ( v. 21, 22.) many Names are given
to the Stars, which both the Greek and Latin translaters, and we following
them in the English, render by those poetical names, yet The Original Hebrew
words bear no allusion at all to those phancyes. As for instance, The Hebrew
word which we render Arcturus (Chap: 9.9.) has nothing at all in it
signifying, The Tail of a Bear. But here in this text, the word properly
signifies a crooked serpent; and therefore to place it in the heavens as a
Star, when as in the times when this was written, there is so little, if any
probability at all, that any such apprehensions were taken up by any, or any
such allusive names given to the Stars, seems to me somewhat improper.

There is another vein of interpretation carrying the sense of these words,
His hand has formed the crooked serpent, to quite another point; for it is
conceaved by the Authors of this opinion, that as Job gave instance before in
the works of God above, his highest works in nature, the garnishing of the
heavens; so he now gives instance in his works below, or in his lowest
works. This general interpretation is delivered two ways distinctly.

First, That as God has garnished the heavens, so he has made and now
governs hell too, His hand has formed the crocked serpent, that is, the
Devil: That which favors this opinion, and has possibly cast the thoughts
of many upon it, is, that in Scripture the devil is often called a serpent, yea
a crooked serpent, and that he acted a serpent as his instrument in the first
temptation ( Genesis 3.1.) Now the serpent was more subtle then any of the beasts
of the field, which the Lord God had made, and he said unto the woman, that is,
The Devil in or by the Serpent said unto her, etc. He has well deserved to be
called a Serpent who acted his first malice against mankind by the help of a
Serpent; And for his thus early making use of a Serpent, he is called not only
a serpent, but, that old Serpent, (Rev. 12.9.) The great Dragon was cast out,
that old Serpent, called the Devil, and Satan, which deceives the whole
world: he was cast out into the earth, and his Angels were cast out with him.
The hand of God has formed this crooked serpent. To clear which some
interpret the former part of the verse in, compliance with this sense, for the
good Angels, thus; By his Spirit he has Garnished the heavens; Spiritus ejus
ornavit coelos Vulg:

i. e. coelestes spiritus orname^tis, scilicet spiritualium denorum. Aquin: Et
obstetricante manu ejus eductus est coleber tortuosus. Vulg:


that is, he has bestowed excellent gifts upon the Angels, who are the great
ornament of heaven, and may tropically be called heaven, as men are called
earth. And as holy, wise, just, and faithful men, are the ornaments, and
garnishings of the earth, so the holy Angels are the garnishings of heaven,
they having such mighty power and excellent gifts. Now (says this
interpretation) as God garnished the heavens with good Angels, so he brought
forth the crooked serpent the Devil, by his working power. Not as if they, who
stand up for this exposition, did affirm that God did make the Devil by his
immediate hand, as he did the good Angels and the rest of the Creatures; for
when God saw every thing that he had made, behold it was very good, and
therefore the crooked-serpent as taken under this Notion for the Devil (who is
the Evil one) could not be of his making. Therefore though the Devil
according to his original or general nature, as an Angel was formed of God; yet
the crookednes of his nature as well as of his ways, which properly and
formally denominate him a Devil was of himself, he having turned away from
God, and defiled that state, by the freedom of his own will, in which he was
created pure, and had society with his fellow-Angels, Eduxit deus diabolum e
medio Angelorum. Aquin:
till God for his sin did (as it were) pull him and his Adhaerents from the
midst of them; and as the Apostle Jude says ( v. 6.) Has reserved them
(together) in chains of darkness unto the judgment of the great day. But I
conceave that Job is not here speaking of an Allegorical or Metaphorical
serpent, such a one as the Devil is, but of a real and proper one; And
therefore I lay by this exposition as unsuitable to the text in hand.

And conclude, that Job having in the former part of the verse set forth the
power and wisdom of God in garnishing the heavens, his meditation descends
in this latter part of it, though not so low as hell, yet as low as the waters,
especially the waters of the Sea, and there shows us the hand of God at work
both in making and destroying, in forming and wounding the crooked serpent. For
the Hebrew word which we render, has formed, signifyes also to wound, and so
we translate it ( Isa: 51.9.) Awake, awake, O arm of the Lord, etc. art not
thou it which has cut Rahab, and wounded the Dragon? yea it is so translated
by some in this text of Job, His hand has wounded the crooked serpent. Which
comes near that of the Prophet according to the bare literal reading ( Isa:
27.1.) In that day the Lord with his sore and great and strong sword shall
punish Leviathan; the peircing (or as we put in the Margin, the crossing like a
bar) serpent, even Leviathan that crooked serpent, and he shall slay the Dragon
that is in the Sea. Where we may note by the way that our translaters render
those very original words a peircing serpent in this text of Isayah, which they
render a crooked serpent in Job; and, I conceave, it is better translated,
peircing (for so bolts or bars are rather) then crooked, another word being
also used in Isayah, which we translate crooked. For serpents are both strait
and long like a Bar, Malo hic coetu^ intelligi and balaenam. Merc: A coeli
ornatu ad maris ornatu^ tanquam ad aliud extremu^ descendit. Pined:

Intelligo Balaenam insigne inimis opus divinae potentiae efficacitatem
voluntatis atque arbatrij ejus singulariter comprobant. Coc:


they are also crooked and can wind themselves into a circle when they please,
or see it for their advantage. Now the long Bar-like (or as we say crooked)
serpent, which Job here says the hand of God has formed, is according to this
interpretation, the Whale-fish or Leviathan, which is the greatest not only of
all the fishes in the Sea, but of all living creatures; and therefore may well
be brought here by Job as an instance to demonstrate the mighty power of God,
whether in forming or wounding of him; especially considering that God himself
when he would humble and abase Job in the sight of his own meanenes, as he had
led him to the meditation of many of his great works in nature, throughout the
38th 39th and 40^h Chapters of this, he bestows the whole 41^^ Chapter in a
large particular and Rhetorical description of the Leviathan; and though he
had said of the Behemoth or Elephant (Chap. 40.19.) He is the chief of the
ways of God: yet he says more of the Leviathan or Whale ( Chap. 41.33, 34.)
Upon earth there is none like him, who is made without fear, he beholds all
high things, he is a king over all the children of pride. As if he had said,
The Elephant is the chief of all sensitive living creatures upon the earth,
but the Whale is greater then the Elephant, therefore he exceeds all creatures
moving upon the earth. The Whale is so vast and turbulent a living creature,
that he is joined with the Sea which is the vastest and most turbulent creature
without life. Thus Job speaks ( Chap. 7.12.) Am I a Sea or a Whale that thou
set a watch over me? implying that the Whale is among sensitive creatures
as the Sea is among insensitive the greatest and most unruly of them, and
therefore has as much need to be watched by a divine providence as the Sea it
self has. Thus the Psalmist describing the great works of God, puts the
Leviathan or Whale among the chiefest of them ( Psalm. 104.24, 25, 26.) O Lord,
how manifold are thy works! in wisdom have thou made them all: the earth is
full of thy riches; so is the great and wide Sea, wherein are things creeping
innumerable, both small and great beasts. There go the Ships, there is That
Leviathan whom thou have made to play therein. Thus we see how the Scripture
consents in exalting the power and wisdom of God in this part of his work
the forming of this long and mighty, or (as we translate the Substantive
Epithete) crooked serpent. And therefore Job might well claspe these two
together (while he was studying to exemplify in particulars the greatness of
the works of God) his garnishing or peopling the heavens with such infinite
variety of Stars, especially with the Sun, and his forming of and so
storing the Sea with such infinite variety of fishes, especially with the
Leviathan. For as the Sun is a Prince among the lights of heaven, so Leviathan
is a Prince a King among the fishes of the Sea. His hand has formed the
Crooked (or rather the long) Serpent. And if any should object against this
interpretation, that it seems unsuitable to call the Whale or Leviathan a
Serpent. I answer, that the text in Isayah (Chap: 27.1.) before alleged may
well bear us out in it; which (though it be to be understood of the Devil or
of his instruments the enemies of the Churches peace and safety, yet) calls
Leviathan, the peircing (which word in the Original, as I hinted before is here
in Job rendered crooked) Serpent; and in the immediately following words, That
crooked Serpent, and the Dragon that is in the Sea.

Wherefore restg (chiefly if not only) in this interpretation, that Job
having gone up in his discourse to the heavens, and the garnishing of them,
came down to the Sea, and to the furnishing thereof, and instances in that
creature which is chief in the Sea, The Leviathan, thereby to exalt and lift
up the glory of God in his works of creation and providence,

Observe.

The Sea, as well as the heavens, and all the inhabitants thereof, declare the
mighty works and workmanship of God. As the heavens declare the glory of God,
and the firmament shows his handy-worke (Psalm. 19.1.) So the earth declares
the glory of God, and the Sea shows his handy-worke. The least creatures
preach the power of God, how much more the greatest; All believers are taught
of God, and every thing we see teaches us somewhat of God, and this they teach
us especially that God is the former of them all. The Hand of God has formed
the Eagle, and a less powerful hand then Gods could not form a fly. The hand
of God has formed the Elephant, and a less powerful hand then his could not
form a mouse. The hand of God has formed Leviathan, and a hand less
powerful then his could not form a shrimpe. As Jesus Christ was declared many
ways to be the Son of God, but (as the Apostle says, Romans 1.4.) He was
declared to be the Son of God with power (or powerfully declared to be the Son
of God) by the resurrection from the dead. So all things that are created
declare that their Creator is God; But he is declared with power or powerfully
declared to be God by many of the creatures. Who can make any thing to live,
but the living God? Who can make Great things, but the Great God? His hand has
formed the crooked serpent.

And seeing the Lord has formed the crooked serpent, even those creatures that
are most dreadful and dangerous to man; then the most dreadful and dangerous
creatures are under the power of God, he formed them, and therefore he can
restrain and curb them. As it is said of Behemoth (Job 40.19.) He that made
him can make his sword approach unto him, that is, though he be too strong for
man, yet God who gave him that strength, has infinitely more, and can easily
Master him, yea and give a weak man skill and power to do it: so though it be
said ( Job 41.26.) of Leviathan that the sword of him that lays at him cannot
hold, the spear, the dart, nor the habergeon, yet God, who made him, can make
his sword approach to him, or as some render the words under hand, His hand
has and can wound Leviathan the crooked Serpent; He can put a hook in his
nose, and bore his jaw through with a thorn. And thus God can do also with
those, who are Leviathans, and crooked Serpents in a figure, The Devil, and
all cruel-minded men who do his work, and carry on his design against the
people of God, as is expressed in that lately alleged Scripture ( Isa. 27.1.)
In that day the Lord with his sore and great and strong sword shall punish
Leviathan, the peircing Serpent, that is, those enemies and persecuters of his
people, who seem to be as strong and invincible as Leviathan, and as subtle
and dangerous as the most peircing stinging Serpent. Thus the Lord assured his
faithful ones ( Isa: 54.16, 17.) That no weapon formed against them should
prosper; for (says he) I have created the Smith that blows the coals in the
fire, and that brings forth an Instrument for his work, and I have created
the waster to destroy. Therefore I can hinder the waster from destroying, and
make all his weapons edgelesse, poyntlesse, no more able to wound, then a straw
or a rush. How soon can God blunt and abate the keenest spirits of men, and
weaken their strongest arms, when he sees they will but do mischief with
them? He that causes motion can stop it; and he that gives power can call it
in, or break it where it is. While God is on our side who made all, we need
not fear who are made against us; Though they have teeth like Lions, and
stings like Serpents we are safe; The hand of God can kill and wound, for, His
Hand has formed the crooked Serpent.

Verse. 14. Lo, these are parts of his ways, but how little a portion is heard
of him? but the thunder of his power who can understand?
Thus Job concludes; after he had given an enumeration or Induction of many
particulars, he does as it were hold them forth in his hand to the view of all
men; Behold, or, lo these are parts of his ways.

(...) finem extremitatem denotat.
The word which we render parts, signifies the end or extremity of a thing.
There is a twofold extremity; first, that which is utmost or furthest from us;
secondly, that which is hithermost or nearest to us. The word takes in both, Ne
me putetis omnia enarrasse, vix enim extremam partem attigi. Coc:
and is used for both in one text ( Psalm. 19.6.) His going forth (that is, the
going forth of the Sun) is from the end of the heaven, and his circuit unto
the ends of it: As if he had said, the Sun compasses the heaven round, and
visits both the hithermost and uttermost (as to us) extremityes of it. In the
present text of Job we are to understand it of the hithermost extremity, or of
that which is next us, implying that there are many and much more glorious
things to be spoken of God, if we were able to comprehend them, and reach the
uttermost end or extremity of them. And that it is so to be understood here, is
plain from the next words, But how little a portion is heard of him? Ecce hae
sunt orae viarum ejus. Coc: Licet quae dixi siensibus nostris, et judicio
maxima esse videantur et vere sint stupenda respectu tamen divinae potentiae
non sunt nisi, minutiae, peripsemata minimaque particulae eorum quae fecit ac
facere potest. Bold: Extrema viae erunt opera minora and nostri captus. Coc:
In compliance with which sense some render the text thus; These are the edges
or borders of his ways; as if Job had said, I have showed you only the
borders, I have not led you into the heart of the Country, or into the midst of
the works and ways of God, much less to the furthest extremity or outside of
them. I have indeed spoken of very great and wonderful things, yet all that I
have said is but little to what might be said, or at least to what really is. I
have given you but as it were the parings and chipings of Gods works, I have
not gone to the bottom, nor reached the depth of them. So that Job seems to
distinguish these effects and works of God, about which he had discoursed,
from some greater works, which he was not able to attain unto, nor make any
discovery of; There are not only Celestial, but super-celestiall works of
God; we cannot well apprehend, much less comprehend what he has wrought
under the heavens, which are only the outside of his works, much less those
which are above the heavens: For as none of the works of God appear to us, or
have been found out by us in their fullness and utmost extent, so God has done
some great works which do not at all appear to us; And those things which
appear are but small parts or parcels in comparison of those which as yet do
not appear to us. Lo, these are parts of his ways. The ways of God are
spoken of in Scripture under a twofold notion.

First, As the ways in which God would have us walk; so the commandments and
statutes of God, are called the ways of God ( Psalm. 119.33.) Teach me, O Lord,
the way of thy statutes, and I shall keep it unto the end.

Secondly, The ways of God are those wherein he comes and reveals himself to
us. Via dei illius opera sunt and agendi rations quibus ad nos ille venire,
dicitur quia in his prodit ad nos et progrediendo se magis magisque nostris
sensibus accommodat. Coc:
As that is a man's way wherein or whereby he is known, so in whatsoever God
manifests or makes himself known to us, that is the way of God ( Isa:
55.8.) My thoughts are not your thoughts; neither are your ways my ways;
says the Lord. That is, my ways of mercy are as far above your ways of
mercy, as your duties are below my ways of holiness; yea what are your ways of
sinfulnes in doing evil, to my ways of graciousnes in pardoning the evils
which ye have done? Man has a vast and a large heart in sinning, but the
vastnes and largenes of man's heart in sinning, is but scantnes and narrownes to
the largenes and vastnes of Gods heart in pardoning. We may understand the Lord
speaking in either of or in both these senses; My ways are not as your ways.
And in general, the way of God is that wherein he acts or reveals himself
toward us, whether it be in mercy or in Judgment, in love or terror. God
has some ways which we may call foul and troublesome ways; such are his
ways of judgment: he has other ways, which we may call fair and
delightsome ways, such are all his ways of mercy. And as God comes to us
continually in one or other of these ways of providence, so he came forth of
old in the way of creation ( Prove: 8.22.) The Lord possessed me in the
beginning of his way, before his works of old. When God first came forth, and
appeared in making the world, he possessed me (says Wisdom) that is, from
everlasting. A way is, that wherein we go out, and show our selves openly or
abroad. And hence it is elegantly said, that Creation was the beginning of Gods
way, for then God did as it were go out from himself into his works, and in
his works he showed himself openly, who was before hidden in himself from
Eternity. God had infinite immanent or internal acts in himself before, or
rather God was one infinite eternal immanent Act before. But the first external
transient act of God, or the first expression of himself (who can never be
expressed, to the life, as he is) was by the work of creation; and therefore
that was the beginning of his way. And of this way, the way of creation, as
also of those of providence Job speaks when he says, lo, these are parts of
his ways.

Accommodate ad subjectam materiam viae dei dici possunt te^pestates, na ^que
in hujusmodi mirabilibut aeris mutationibus ille vanire ad nos dicitur.
And hence the Scripture calls storms and tempests, thunder, and lightning,
in which God appears so terrible, the ways of God ( Nah: 1.3.) The Lord is
slow to anger, and great in power, and will not at all acquit the wicked: The
Lord has his way in the whirlewind, and in the storm, and the clouds are the
dust of his feet; that is, God declares himself to be God by his judgments
and angry dispensations, which, like boisterous winds and storms, which, like
clouds and darkness afflict the children of men; lo these are parts of his
ways.

Hence note.

First, All that we know of the works of God is but a part. As it is said of
Solomon (1 Kings 4.33.) that he spoke of trees, from the Cedar tree, that is in
Lebanon, even unto the hyssope that springs out of the wall: He spoke also of
beasts, and of fowl, and of creeping things, and of fishes; so Job had been
discoursing from the heights of heaven to the bottom of the Sea, yea to the
bottom of hell; and yet he comes off, and says, lo these are parts of his
ways. He that speaks and knows many things, yea he that speaks all that
he knows, has yet spoken only a part of that which is knowable. The Apostle
says (1 Cor: 13.9, 10.) We know in part, and we prophecy in part; Many know
more then they utter or prophecy, but no man can utter or prophecy more then he
knows; We know but a part of what is to be known; and we know what we know
but in part, and therefore when we have spoken our all, we have spoken but a
part. Though every Godly man knows all things needful for him to do and
believe, yet the holiest man on earth does not know all that God has done. God
has some reserved and secret ways into which he does not lead his people. As
the best of Saints see but the Back-parts of God in this life, so they see but
a part of the ways of God in this life, lo, These are parts of his ways.

Again, Taking the original word as it signifies not only a part but the
outside or extreme of any thing,

Note.

That which we know of the works of God, is not only no more then a part of
his works, but it is indeed only the outside of his works. It Is but as the
hemme to a garment, or the borders to a Continent. When we have traveled as
far as we can, and as we think into the very heart of the works of God, yet
we have gone no further then the borders of them; And it is, as if a man
coming to discover this Island, should only walk upon the shore where he
dis-embarkt, and there viewing the cliffes and rocks, the sands and nearest
Marshes, should take upon him to report the state of the whole Island: what
has this man seen? nothing but the extremity, the border of the Land, and can
he make a complete discovery of the whole? he has not seen the pleasant
hills and vales, the towns, and Cities, the forts and Castles, the trade and
riches, the customs and manners of the people; no man can know the chief
things of a Nation or Country that stands only upon the shore. All that we
know of the works of God, is only the shore, and outside of them; we cannot
reach the heart, nor fathom the bottom of them. The works of the Lord are
great, ( Psalm. 111.2.) Sought out of all them that have pleasure therein; that
is, they who take pleasure in them do their utmost, to find out the utmost of
them; A godly man is as industrious to understand the ways and works of God
as he is to understand his word, yet he cannot reach either fully; And
therefore that Psalm has an excellent conclusion, to satisfy us in our
exclusion (as yet) from the perfect knowledge of these things. The fear of the
Lord is the beginning of wisdom, a good understanding have all they that do
his commandments; As if the Lord had said, though while ye labor to seek out
my works, yet, ye cannot find them out to perfection, be not discouraged, as
if ye were shortened in wisdom, and knowledge; for the fear of my name is
wisdom enough for you, and obedience to my commandments is the best
understanding; let this satisfy you while ye know but a part of my ways. And
if we know but a part, and that the outside of the ways and works of God,
then surely we cannot know all of God himself: as it follows in the next
words, And how little a portion is heard of him?

(...) pars pa^ticula murmur tenuis susurrus. Susurrum verborum ejus. Symmach^
ut deinceps cum ingenti toni^ru comparet. vix parvam stillam sermonis ejus
audierimus. Vulg: Sept: In Hebraeo tantum est pa^lulu^, pauxillumve sine ulla
guttae, sive stillae mentione (...) quanta exiguitas.
The Original notes any thing which is little, or a little portion of any thing.
Hence some render it a drop, which is a little or the least portion of water.
So the vulgar and the Seventy, We have hardly heard a little drop of his
speech. Others render it a whisper, which is but a little portion of a voice.
How little a whisper have we heard of him? The works of God are as it were a
whisper concerning him, all that we see, or can say, makes but a kind of
silent report of God, in comparison to what he is, or to what might be said of
him. And so the word whisper, is opposed to thunder in the close of the verse,
But the thunder of his power, who can understand? As if Job had said, All that
I have spoken of God is but a whisper, there is a Thunder of his power, which I
am neither able to utter, nor to understand. All creatures speak a God, yea
they speak much of God, as the Apostle affirms for the conviction of the
Gentiles in their Idolatrous departures from him ( Rom: 1.20.) For the
invisible things of him from the creation of the world are clearly seen,
being understood by the things that are made, even his eternal power and
Godhead, so that they are without excuse: The creatures speak loud enough to
stop man's mouth and leave him without all excuse, Opera haec nominat susurrum
sermonis ab usu et fine. Sunt enim opera dei significativa, indicant gloriam
authoris: sed non sunt clarus sermo verum submissior susurrus sc: indices
leviores et benigniores, and quasi puerorum magistri non docentes omnia sed
accommodata captui. Coc: Quam pauca sunt quae scimus respectu little quae
nescimus.
yet comparatively they do but whisper, there is a thunder of God infinitely
louder then their voice. So that Job calls those works of God wherein he had
instanced a whisper or still voice, because though they signify to us and
declare the Glory of their Author, yet they are not a full declaration of it,
but only such a one as is accommodated to our childish capacity. All that they
speak or can speak of God, yea all that can be spoken of God by the wisest of
men, is only as a whisper to thunder, or as a drop to the Ocean; But I shall
not say more of the elegancy of this word here, it having been already opened (
Chap: 4.12.) where Eliphaz thus bespeaks Job; Now a thing was secretly (or as
we put in the Margin, by stealth) brought to me, and mine ear received a
little (a whisper, a drop) thereof, in thoughts from visions of the night, etc.
All that we know now, of God and his ways is but little to what we know not,
and but little to what we shall know hereafter; every day we hear great
things reported and preached of God both to our eyes and ears, and though we
should have sermon upon sermon, line upon line all the days of our lives, yet
at the last day of our lives we must say, How little a portion have we heard
of him? The thunder of his power, the lowdest and clearest speakings of it, are
reserved to that state when our ears shall be bored and our hearts
proportionably enlarged to receave it.

Further, Job had been long speaking of the works and ways of God, yet
concludes, how little a portion is heard of him? why does he not rather say;
how little a portion is heard of them? the reason is because what ever is said
of the ways, and works of God, is to discover God, rather then to discover
them. To speak of the earth and seas, of the air and fire, of thunder and
lightning, of the heavens and stars, is not an extolling of the works of
God, but an extolling of God in and for his works.

Hence note.

The works of God should lead us to God himself. Our study of the creature
should be to gain a clearer light and knowledge of the creator. There are many
expressions, and impressions of God upon the things which he has made, and we
never see them as we ought, till in them we see their maker. A critical eye
looks upon a picture, not so much to see the colors or the paint, as to
discern the skill and workmanship of the Painter or Limner, yea some (as the
Apostle speaks in reference to spiritualls) have senses so exercised about
these artificialls, that they will read the Artists name in the form and
exquisitenes of his art; An Apelles or a Michael Angelo needs not put his name
to his work, his work proclaims his name to those who are judicious
beholders of such kind of works: How much more (as the Psalmist speaks) that
the name of God is near, do his wondrous works (both of creation and
providence) declare to all discreet beholders? that which the eye and heart of
every godly man is cheifely upon, is to find out and behold The name, that is,
the wisdom, power and goodness of God in all his works, both of creation and
providence; It were better for us never to enjoy the creature, then not to
enjoy God in it; and it were better for us not to see the creature, then not to
have a sight of God in it; And yet when we have seen the most of God which the
creature can show us, we have reason to say, how little a portion is seen of
him? and when we have heard the most of God that can be reported to us from the
creation, we have reason to say, as Job here does, how little a portion is
heard of him? and to conclude as he does this verse and Chapter.

But the thunder of his power who can understand? This thunder of his power,
may be taken,

First, Strictly, and in the letter for natural thunder; for, even that is
numbered in Scripture among the wonderful and most dreadful works of God. The
Scripture calls it also the voice of God ( Psalm. 29.3.) The voice of the Lord
is upon the waters, the God of Glory thundereth. Non, aliter de tonitruo
loquuntur sacrae scripturae quam de dei voce, magnifica atque terrib^li,
plenaque minarum.
Thus a learned paraphrast connects these words with the former; As if Job had
said; Now that I have said, all that I can, how little a thing is it in
comparison of him and his greatness; as may appear by one instance more, the
power and majesty which he utters in his thunder, which who can sufficiently
admire? and therefore none can fully understand.

Secondly, The Thunder of his power, is any extraordinary work of God,
especially his dreadful and terrible works of Judgment: For by them he
speaks out his infinite power and majesty in the ears of men as it were by
thunder. Of such a voice we read ( Psalm. 68.32, 33.) Sing unto God ye kingdoms
of the earth, O sing praises unto the Lord, Selah. Who this Lord is, and how he
manifests himself is set forth in the next words, Insignibus vero illius
gestis quibus non tam splendet quam cum tonitru coruscat animo percipie^dis
quie tandem per fuerit. Bez:
to him that rides upon the heavens of heavens, which were of old, lo he does
send out his voice, and that a mighty voice. Thus also the Prophet Isayah
(Chap: 30.30.) describes the Lord coming forth for the rescue of his people,
and the utter ruin of the Assyrian Army. And the Lord shall cause his glorious
voice to be heard, and shall show the lightning down of his arm, with the
indignation of his anger, and with the flame of a deveuring fire, with
scattering, and tempest, and hailestones. For though that destruction of the
Assyrians was effected by the ministry of an Angel ( Isa: 37.36.) yet,
doubtless it was not done in silence, but either with an amazing tempest, mixed
with thunder and lightning, or with such confusion and terror as appeared like
one. In the Book of the Revelation (which has as one of the Ancients
speaks, as many mysteryes as words) the dreadful judgments prophesied to
come upon the world in the several Ages of it, are expressed by Thunder (
Revel. 10.4.) And when the seven thunders had uttered their voices, I was about
to write: and I heard a voice from heaven, saying unto me, seal up those
things which the seven thunders uttered, and write them not. And as elsewhere,
so especially in this book of Job, we find, those things which carry the
greatest strength and terror in them, expressed by thunder ( Job 39.19.) Have
thou given the horse strength? have thou clothed his neck with thunder; that
is, have thou made the horse who is so strong and terrible? And at the 25th
verse (treating still of the horse) he says among the trumpets, Haec nos
cogitata et leviter co^memorata obstupefaciu^t quid si majora quae illius
potestate continentur etc. Pined. Quis comprehendere potest ingentes domini
virtutes, quae velut vocem tonitrui more attollant prae magnitudine et
multitudine. Merc: Quis satis consideret. Pisc: Tonitru fortitudinu^ vocat
sermonem clarum, fortiter prolatum, quod sit velut tonitru maximum. Coc:
Tonitru potentiae. i. e. Ipsum intonantem and loquentem coram. Argumentum est
per comparationem majoris. Jun: Tonare eos dicimus qui orarationis et
eloquentiae vi maxim pollent. Novar:
ha, ha; and he smells the battle afar of, the thunder of the Captains,
and the shouting; that is, the horse is pleased to hear the Great Commanders
speak with a loud voice, either directing, threatening, or encouraging their
Soldiers. Thus, the Thunder of Gods power, is some wonderful act of his
power, which lifts up its voice (as it were) like Thunder. This who can
understand? none can. The word signifyes also to weigh and consider; so some
render it here, Who can sufficiently consider the Thunder of his power? who can
consider it as he ought; either, first, according to the depth and
mysteriousnesse of it, or, secondly, according to the dignity and worthiness of
it.

Thirdly, These words, who can understand the thunder of his power? may be
expounded of the highest and clearest publication of his power; The thundering
of it out. As if Job had said, I have whispered a little to you, but if God
should thunder out himself, or if his works were spoken out (as they deserve)
in thunder, the minds of men would be amazed, and their understandings
confounded; The thunder of his power who can understand? It Is usual among the
learned to express high eloquence, and strong confidence of speech, by
thundering. It was said of Alcibiades, that he thundered Greece; He was a man
so mighty in Elocution, that he made his hearers tremble. And hence Christ
himself surnamed two of his own Disciples (James the son of Zebedee, and John
the Brother of James) Boanerges, which is, The Sons of Thunder. They did not
speak (as we say) like a mouse in a cheese, but with a great voice, and with a
greater spirit; they spoke the messages of heaven as if it thundered from
heaven. There may be a great force in a low voice, while what is spoken comes
with much clearenes of reason, and strength of Authority, or (as the Apostle
gives it) in the evidence and demonstration of the Spirit; but when all these
are convayed by a mighty voice, a voice like thunder, how forceable are they?
Basil was said to Thunder in his doctrine, and lighten in his life. Such (to
the hight) was that voice of words (in Mount Horeb at the giving of the Law)
Which voice they that heard, entreated that the Word should not be spoken to
them any more (Heb: 12.19.) that is, that it should not be spoken to them any
more in that manner, or by an immediate voice from God, as appears ( Exodus: 20.
v: 18, 19.) And all the people saw the Thunderings and the lightnings, and the
noise of the Trumpet, etc. And they said unto Moses, speak thou with us and we
will hear; but let not God speak with us, lest we dye. We cannot understand
the Thunder of his power.

Hence note.

Man is not able to receave and bear those highest discoveryes of God. God can
speak in such a light as will blind the eyes of man, and in such a language as
will rather astonish then instruct him. As among believers, they who are carnal
and babes in Christ, are not able to eat strong meat, they must be fed with
milk (as the Apostles speaks, 1 Cor. 3.2.) So we may say of all Believers,
even of those that are strongest, God does only whisper and speak gently to
them, the thunder of his power they cannot understand. For as there is a peace
of God which passes all understanding (Phil. 4.7.) they that have it not,
understand nothing of it, and they that have it, understand but little of it;
it passes all understanding, not a natural understanding only, but also a
spiritual. And as there is a love of Christ passing knowledge (Ephesians. 3.19.)
which yet we should labor to know; a love which has an incomprehensible
height, and length, and breadth, and depth in it, which yet all the Saints are
laboring to comprehend, so there is a manifestation of the will and works of
God, a Thunder of his power, which were it made and spoken out to us, our
understanding could not graspe nor comprehend, how much soever we should desire
and labor to comprehend it. And therefore God is pleased to put the treasure
of his mind and messages in earthen vessels; not only as the Apostle gives
the reason (2 Cor: 4.7.) That the excellency of the power may be of God and not
of us; but he does it also condiscending to our weakness, lest if he should
give out this treasure immediately from himself, or should put it into some
heavenly vessel, we should not be able to bear the excellency, or (as Job here
speaks) The Thunder of his power.

Thus after a very long ventilation of the Question between Job and his
friends, we are arrived at the Conclusion of their dispute. Job has answered
two of his friends thrice, the third ( Zophar I mean) only twice. He it
seems, gave out and sat down, whether satisfied or wearyed, whether having
no more to say, or being unwilling to say any more, or thinking that enough had
been said already, I determine not. But though Jobs friends have done arguing
against him, yet he has not done arguing for himself; Which he does in five
entire Chapters, twice called the continuation of his Parable. In what sense he
calls his ensuing speech a parable, together with the subject matter of it,
may through the Gracious presence, and supply of the Spirit of Jesus Christ,
who has helped hitherto, and has not suffered that little oil in the Cruse
to fail, shine forth with a clearer light.

A TABLE Directing to some special Points noted in the precedent EXPOSITIONS.
A
Abundance, a great trial of Grace as well as want. 151 Abundance of worldly
things not to be desired, yet may lawfully be enjoyed. 250 Accusation, to
accuse merely upon suspicion very uncharitable. 83, 84 Acquainting our selves
with God, what it is, and the several steps by which Saints arise to it. 207,
208, 209. A twofold acquaintance with God. 210. The more we are acquainted with
God, the more like we are to him. 211. No acquaintance with God but by a
Mediator. 211. We can have no true peace till we acquaint our selves with God.
214. While we are unacquainted or estranged from God, we are estranged from
Good. 216. Acquaintance with God brings in all Good. 218 Adams sin in eating
the forbidden fruit, how aggravated in one particular. 57 Three things in Adams
sin. 706. Sin of Adam fallen upon his whole posterity three ways. 706
Adultery, the kinds of it. 575. The extreme wickedness of it, set forth many
ways. 576, 577 Adulterer has a waiting eye, which implies three things. 583
Affliction has much instruction in it. 15. God has abundance of affliction in
his hand. 97. Difference between the afflictions of a Godly and a wicked man.
99. Affliction does usually vent it self by complaints and groans. 305.
Afflictions abide long upon some who are eminently godly. 308 The afflictions
of some exceed all their complaints. 309. There are two things which a godly
man may see in his greatest afflictions, which are matter of thanksgiving. 312.
God sweetest to the soul in affliction. 320. Affliction drives the godly
nearer to God. 322. Affliction a trial. 380. Afflictions fore-appoynted by
God. 444. God has variety of afflictions in his hand to exexercise his
children with. 448. We deserve more and sorer afflictions then God lays upon
us. 450. A godly man may be unable to bear afflictions any longer. 459 Angels,
how in a place. 109. Angels Gods Armies or host. 690. Angels how they may be
called the pillars of heaven. 781 Angry dispensations of God make all tremble.
786 Appointment, how all things are under a divine appointment, showed by
several instances. 445, 446. Arc in which the Law was put, typed Christ. 227
Arm, in Scripture notes power. 71 Armies of God, what they are. 690. All
creatures the Armies of God up on a threefold consideration. 692 Asses, or wild
asses, the resemblance between them and the wicked, showed in several things.
514 Assemblyes of the Saints to worship, are the dwelling place of God. 199
Air, how it may be called an empty place. 754
B
Barren land, a cursed land. 607 Beasts, evil men are like beasts, or
beastiall in their dispositions and actions. 513 Believer, he has no opinion
of his own strength. 344 Boanerges, why two of the Disciples called so. 824
Body, in what sense every sin that a man does, except adultery, is without the
body. 580 Bodies of the wicked shall be raised immortal, though not
incorruptible. 751 Book of the living, what meant by it; as also what by the
Book which God has written. 628, 629 Brethren of two sorts. 53. To do wrong
to, or not to relieve a brother, hightens the sin. 53 Building, and to be built
up, what it signifyes in Scripture. 134, 135
C
Carnal men, their spirits are merely mercenary. 164. They are full of
unconstancy. 602 Censure; The best of men may fall under the hashest Censures.
357 Change twofold made in a sinner by grace. 701 Changes of time or season,
none beyond this world. 779 Charity must and will make ventures. 45. Charity is
accepted, and uncharitableness condemned in the smallest matters. 63. Churlish
persons stick at small charities as well as great. 64 How charity believes all
things. 84. Children why compared to a building. 235 Christ an everlasting
foundation. 154 Christ, how he comes as a theife. 573 Cisterns, what kind of
cisterne the creature is. 217 Clothing put for all good things of this life.
59 Clouds and darkness, how God is said to dwell in them. 125. Clouds, what they
are. 764. Why appropriated unto God. 764. That waters are contained in the
Clouds, a great wonder in three things. 766. Three inferences from it. 767
Comforts, small comforts are welcome to us in times of great affliction. 527
Complaining; to complain more then we have cause is very sinful. 310
Condemnation, God will for ever acquit the righteous from it. 356 Confidence of
many proceeds only from ignorance. 454 Conscience, Gods Deputy in man. 597
Consideration, the want of it causes us to be so little affected with great
things. 115, 116 Contentation, it is our duty to sit down quiet and content
under the saddest dispensations of God. 213 Contention about worldly things to
be carefully avoided. 488 Continuance, things which continue but a little while
are but of little worth, 658, 659 Conviction, most sinners have a secret
conviction upon them, that what they do is not good. 595 Covetousnes knows
no bounds. 531 Counsel of the wicked, what. 175. The excellency of good
counsel. 723. Good and gracious counsel should be given the weak. 723
Creatures, we ought to consider the several excellencyes of them. 116. The
creature leads us to God. 118. Creature, can neither hold nor give out the good
it has, but by a word from God. 217. The goodness and glory of the creature is
nothing compared with God. 710 Creation, we ought jointly to acknowledge the
Father, Son, and Spirit, in the work of creation. 806 Cruelty of man to man
boundless. 528 Curiosity, very natural to man to be enquiring into times. 471
Curse, sin brings a curse with it. 607 They who are generally under the curse
of men, are often under the curse of God too. 608. Why sin does not always
bring a curse. 609. How the wicked are always cursed, even in their greatest
prosperity. 609, 610
D
Damned under endless sufferings, one reason of it. 43 Darkness, twofold,
external, internal, this internal darkness twofold. 93, 94 Day and night in
what sense they end after the end of this present world. 778 Day, or to day,
taken two ways in Scripture. 300 Days of God or day of God, what in
Scripture. 474 Death, when and to whom sudden. 9^. The death of a wicked man is
violent to him, though he dye in his bed. 668 Death, the territory of it as
large as that of sin. 619: death has more power over great sinners, showed two
ways. 620. 622. Some remembered after death chiefly for the strangenes of
their death. 625, 626 Declining in reference to the ways of God twofold. 393,
394. Some decline in them, others decline from them. 395. Declining from the
ways of God twofold; first, to the right hand; secondly, to the left. 395,
396. Whether a godly man may decline or no. 396. Declinings in grace, several
causes of it. 398, 399 All sin is a declining from the ways of God. 400
Decree, by man what; how he may be said to decree a thing, and have it
established. 275. The success of our decrees or counsels is a great mercy.
278. The success of our decrees is from God. 279. The decrees of Godly men are
under a promise of success. 279. Decree and appointment of God, whatsoever God
does was before appointed and decreed. 444 Degrees of excellency and dignity in
the creatures, God has not levelled them. 117 Delight consists in two
things. 254 Delight in God is our duty as well as our reward and comfort. 254.
They who mourn for sin, shall find delight in God. 256. Delight in the Lord is
the choycest mercy. 257. Delight in the Lord exceeds all worldly delights in
four things. 257, 258 Deliberate sinning the way of the wicked. 584 Desertion,
God is every where present, yet often not present to the apprehension of his
people. 317. 319. Desires of Saints often quickest after God in a time of
desertion. 319 Desire, they who truly desire to find God, are diligent in
searching after him. 323. Where God is cheifely to be found. 325, 326. Desire
is diligent in enquiryes. 370 Devil, in what consideration made by God. 812
Difficultyes, an evil heart will break through all difficultyes to find a way
to his sin. 615 Diligence, good in a good way. 519 Dishonor fallen upon man by
sin. 716 Disputers apt to make false inferences from the tenets of their
opposers. 122 Dividing the word of God aright, what. 732 Divisions among men
sent as a punishment from God. 796 Doctrine and divine teachings, why compared
to and expressed by rain and raining. 220 False doctrine is worthless. 673
Dominion of God what, Three things it it. 676. Dominion of God considered four
ways. 677. The Dominion of God calls us to a twofold subjection 679 Drawing,
twofold. 637
E
Earth; men of the earth, why the wicked are so called. 73. In what sense the
earth is founded upon the Sea. 756. What the foundation of the earth is. 757.
The earth is upheld by the infinite power of God. 757, 758. Inferences from it.
758, 759 How the earth may be called the pillar of heaven. 782 Earthquake,
whence it is. 733 Eastward, why it if called forward. 360, 361 Egypt, why
called Rahab. 793 Election, the decree of Election is an unmovable foundation.
153 Empty, a person may be sent away empty in a threefold sense. 80. How a
place may be said to be empty. 754 Enemies, in what sense we may not or may
rejoice in their fall 187, 188 Error, very binding upon t^^ conscience as well
us truth. 101. Hard to judge which is worse, unsetlednes in truth, or
tenaciousnes in error. 102. The way of error old. 139 Ever, The saddest or
sweetest word in the whole Bible. 356 Exaltation of wicked men shall not
continue. 656 Ecstasy twofold. 191 Examples very drawing. 398 Examples of
punishment upon sinners ought to be marked. 140. Examples of two sorts. 141.
God makes wicked men example^. 182. A Godly man does example himself by God.
390 Eye of God upon a place or person notes his care of them. 649 Eyes, high or
low, note pride or humility. 286. Eye much in adultery. 582 Ez^kiel, why so
often called and spoken to by God, under this name, Son of man. 712
F
Face, lifting up the face, what it imports in Scripture. 259. Face cost down
three ways. 260. Face of a thing what it notes in Scripture. 768 Faith, the
reflect act of it most sweet. 254. How faith is our strength to resist
temptation. 349 Fatherless and widow, who in Scripture. 81. How sinful to
wrong them. 85, 86 Fear taken two ways. 27. Fear makes men cruel, and do
unjust things as well as hope. 30, 31. Fear may be a just ground of doing
Justice. 31, 32. Fear of two sorts. 90. Sudden fear surprizeth secure
sinners. 91. Fear threefold. 453. Fear arises two ways. 454. God would be
more feared, if he were more known. 454 Fear is with God upon a threefold
consideration. 680. God can strike man with fear when he pleases. 682 Feared,
God is much to be feared. 681. God is to he feared as great and as good. 681,
682 Fire put to signify any Judgment. 201. There is a different fire for the
righteous and the wicked. 202. How God is a consuming fire in reference to the
Godly. 202 Fishes of the Sea, three things most considerable about them. 744
Flattering and reproaching one another, are two extremes to be carefully
avoided. 715 Flood, the Judgments of God compared to it, and why. 148, 149
Folly; the ways of sin and unrighteousness are full of folly. 544. Folly put
in Scripture to note some notorious sin. 546. Folly of sinners. 597
Forgetfullnes what employed by it. 625 Foundation, figuratively taken, what.
148. 150. Everlasting foundation, what. 152. The strongest foundations which
the wicked lay, are quickly overthrown by God. 152. A righteous man has two
foundations which shall never fail. 153
G
Giants terrible, why called Rephaim. 741 Gifts of God which he repents of,
what they are. 424 Glory of God such as man cannot bear or behold it. 771
Glorify, in what sense man may be said to glorify God. 9 God, absolutely
independent and perfect in himself. 7. To think of God on high, the best way
to quiet our souls in any trouble here below. 104 How God is every where. 110.
Carnal men frame co^ceptions of God like themselves. 127. A wrong notion of the
true God is the setting up of a false God. 128. The presence of God slighted by
carnal men, the only Joy of Saints. 159, 160, 161. God has not given the
worst of men any cause to be weary of him. 167. G^d does good to them that are
evilly, two reasons of it. 170 God is to be acknowledged as the fountain of
all good to us. 171, 172. God ready to be at peace with sinners. 215. God
infinitely better to the soul then all other things. 218. God is the defense
of his people. 245. God is the riches, the gold and silver of his people. 246.
God has put it into the nature of all men to seek after him. 324. God is
often doing great things when we see him not. 366. God appears only to such
as himself pleases. 367. God is one. 419. God does whatsoever he will. 438
Godly and the wicked have quite contrary both desires and fears. 161. 178. A
Godly man is one of Gods acquaintants. 207. He shall be guided the right way,
and blessed in his way. 283. He shall have comfort in his way. 284. A godly man
is a common good. 290. Godly save others three ways. 292 Godly men most likely
to be acquainted with what God is doing in the world, for two reasons. 481
Godliness is truly profitable. 17. Godliness the nearest way to worldly gain.
248. Godliness is Godlikenes or an imitation of God. 390 Goodness of God. Sin
has by so much the greater evil in it as it is committed against the greater
goodness. 171 goodness of God fivefold. 693. God gives out goodness freely. 697
Good things many of them a trouble to evil men. 593 Gold and silver how a
defense, and why put for all riches. 241. How Gold is to be laid up in the
dust. 241. The natural place of Gold should abate our desires after it. 242.
Gold the most excellent metal in five respects. 382 Grace renders a man
precious. 383. The glory of grace is, that it continues. 659 Greatest and
strongest as easily cast down by God as the least or weakest. 665 Growth of
Grace. 397
H
Hands, pureness of hands, what. 290 Hardness of heart in sin, when the sinner
can feed upon it. 494. Hard heart trembles not at the reproves of God. 790
Heart lift up to heaven, the work of Grace. 106. Laying up the word in the
heart, has a twofold opposition. 225. The heart of man is the Arc where the
word of God must be laid up. 227. Truth in the heart better to us then truth in
the book. 228. Heart of man makes more false Gods then his hand ever made.
128. The word to be hid in the heart. 407. Soft heart, what, several sorts of
it. 457 Heathens confined their Gods to certain places. 114 Heaven is the place
of Gods special residence. 105. 111. Two inferences given from it. 106. Heaven
and hell know no changes. 779 Heavens, what the garnishing of them is. 804.
Visible heavens are full of Beauty. 807. Several inferences from it. 807, 808
Hell, in what sense it consumes those who are cast into it. 624. What meant by
hell in Scripture. 746. Hell is destruction. 747. Hell expressed by eight words in
Scripture. 751 Heresy like a flood, yet bounded by God. 777 Hiding the word of
two sorts. 227. Three ends of hiding the word in the heart. 228 Hidings of God
from his people. 367, 368. God hides himself five ways. 368. God will be as
hid to his people sometimes, after the use of much means to find him. 371
High places of God, what they are. 684 Holiness, the Lord takes pleasure in it,
three reasons why. 22, 23. Why we should be every where holy. 113. Holiness has
boldness with God. 261 328. Holiness gives us weight and honor. 602 Holy Ghost,
sin against the Holy Ghost what it it in general. 557 Honor, a threefold
honor arising to God by the fall of the wicked. 189 Houses, God has two
special houses. 808 Humble persons of two sorts. 287. Humble persons under the
special care of God. 288 Hypocrites, some not discovered in this world. 330.
Hypocrites fear the judgment of God, or to be tried by God. 330. An hypocrite
cannot rejoice that God knows him, showed in three things. 377. Hypocrites
cannot hold out when they come to the trial. 384
I
Jelousie, guilt makes men full of it. 642 Ignorance, wicked men love it. 554.
A twofold ignorance. 560, 561 Imitation of God our duty. 390 Impenitency under
sin committed, worse then the sin committed. 44 Imprisonment, when a cruelty.
54 Inconstancy of a carnal man showed two ways. 602 Industriousnesse of the
wicked in sinning. 517, 518 Infinite, what. Nothing strictly infinite but God.
40 Innocent often charged with foulest crimes. 83. Innocent taken two ways in
Scripture. 192 Joy at the troubles which befall wicked men, how lawful. 186,
187. What kind of joy that is not, and what it is. 192 Judge. God the most
desirable Judge to the godly and sincere, five grounds of it. 429, 430. A
Godly man rests in the Judgment of God. 336. God is every way fitted to be a
righteous Judge. 378. In a Judge two things specially needful. 378 Judging,
man apt to judge favorably of himself, hardly of others. 48. We must take
heed of Judging upon suspicion. 48. What Judging of others forbidden. 49
Judgment, wicked ripe for judgment sometimes before ripe in years. 143.
Judgments of God have somewhat of mercy in them. 168. Judgments of God upon
the wicked, how matter of Joy to the righteous. 184. Why the Judgments of God
upon the wicked are not visible. 482 Jupiter Hammon, why so called. 618
Justice, how blind, and how seeing. 124 Justice must be done for the example of
others. 182, 183 Justice of God honored by the fall of evil men. 189
Justification, self- justification extremely displeasing unto God. 24. God
has no respect to our righteousness in the busienes of Justification. 29.
Justification what it is. 700. Man has nothing of his own to justify him
before God, two grounds of it. 702. A twofold Justification. 703
K
Keeping the way of God twofold. 392 Knowers of God, or they who know God, who
they are. 473. Every Godly man is a knower of God. 476. Some godly men know God
much more then others who are godly too. 478 Knowing and understanding taken
two ways. 334. 372 Knowledge; evil men will act against their own knowledge.
555. Knowledge of God, how and what God knows. 121. The most secret ways of
man, even the way within him is known to God. 373. A general inference from
this knowledge of God. 374. It is the Joy of the upright that God knows their
most secret ways. 374. That God knows the ways of a godly man, assures him
of three things. 375. Nothing is hid from the eye or knowledge of God. 749. All
our knowledge of the ways and works of God is but in part. 819
L
Labourer, not to be wronged. 536. Nothing cheap but poor men's labors, why
said so. 538. It may be a dangerous thing to be the laborers purse-bearer but
for a night. 539 Land-markes, the removing of them very sinful. 489 Law of
God, the Elegancy of the Hebrew word, whereby it is expressed, opened. 220. Law
taken two ways. 222. To receive the Law, what it is. 225. God only can give a
Law to the conscience. 224. Law how written in our hearts by God, and how by
our selves. 226 Left Hand declining, what it imports. 396 Levelling
principles confuted by the natural state of the creature. 117 Leviathan or
Whale, the mighty power of God in forming the Leviathan. 814. An inference from
it. 815 Liberty threefold where the Spirit is 262. Life of man, in what sense
it should always hang in doubt to him. 641. How no man is sure of his life.
643 Light of God fourefold. 695 Light; God is with all men by a twofold light.
157. Light threefold shining upon the ways of a Godly man. 282. Light twofold.
550. Wicked love not the light, neither to see what good they should do, nor
to be seen in the evil they do. 554. Light internal, against which the
wicked rebel, twofold. 550. Holy truth is light. 551. How divine truth is like
light, showed in several resemblances. 552. Sinning against light exceeding
sinful. 557. Four degrees of sinning against light. 558 They who sin against
light are ready for every sin. 560 Look of God twofold. 652 Love, true love to
man will not easily conceave or nourish suspicion. 102 Love, we cannot be
constant in that which we do not love or affect, 561 Lusts and corruptions
like a stormy Sea within us. 801, 802 Liars, men are made liars, two ways.
670. The worst that can be said of a man is, that he is a liar. 672 Lie, false
doctrine is a lie. 671
M
Magistrates, that are bad most ready to favor such as are so. 73. Why evil
Magistrates are compared to Oaks. 74. Evil Magistrates favor the great. 75.
They should take special care of the widow and the fatherles. 86. They are
the eyes of the people. 587. They are the pillars of the earth. 789 Majesty of
God, dreadful to his own people. 454 Man can no way be profitable unto God.
Objections answered. 7, 8. Man is a very poor thing. 712. Man compared to the
meanest things. 713. To a worm. 714 Manner how duty is to be performed, as
considerable as the duty it self. 725 That which is not done in a right
manner, is not done at all. 726 Maschil, the title of several Psalms, what it
imports. 15 Means, God can do the greatest things without any visible
means. 759 Meditation, what it is. 220 Mercy of God, in what sense sin may be
said to overcome it. 44 Merit; The best of men cannot oblidge God or merit any
thing at his hand. 4 Mind of man has a formative faculty in it. 131
Mis-interpretation; Two sorts of words and actions most liable to
misinterpretation. 306 Moon, in what sense it shines not. 708, 710 Mouth of
God, how we may be said to receave the Law from it. 222, 223 To receave the Law
from the mouth of God, stands in a double opposition. 224 Murder committed upon
two grounds. 563. The greatness of the sin of murder showed two ways by
Scripture. 567. Nine other considerations showing the greatness of the sin of
murder. 568, 569 Murmuring against the rod or severest dealings of God is
rebellion. 207. Mutability of man in bis natural and civil strength. 779, 780
N
Naked, who in a Scripture sense. 58 Nature, uncleanenes of nature runs through
all men. 705. Sinfullnes of nature consists cheifely in two things. 707
Necessary food, what. 409, 410 Necessity cannot excuse sinful actions. 57 Need
makes a little mercy seem great. 65 Negative commandments and threatenings of
God always imply the affirmative, and so usually do the Negative practices of
men. 635 Nimrod, whence so called. 550 Northern part of the world, why called
the place where God works. 362. God works more in the Northern parts of the
world, then in the Southern. 363. The Gospel has been more clearly taugbt in
the Northern then in the Southern parts of the world. 364
O
Occasions, or acts leading to sin are to be avoided as well as the sin it
self. 4^0 Omnipotency of God; It is as easy with him to do a thing as to
desire to do it. 400 Omnipresence of God. 108. Two deductions from the
omnipresence of God. 113. God is every where, yet some where especially to be
found 325 Omniscience of God, to deny that is to deny his being. 120. Sinners
fancy to themselves that God sees them not in all their ways. 129. That God
is omniscient, cleared. 131. Queries about it answered. 133 Onenes of God both
in his nature and mind. 419 Ophir the place of Gold; queried where it is. 243
Opportunity, a wicked man watches it to do evil. 573 Oppression of the
poor, the most sinful act of oppression. 60. 501. The promotion of the
wicked, proves the oppression of the righteous. 506. Poor most subject to
oppression. 506. Oppression falls often upon the innocent under pretense of
some wickedness. 523. Oppression is a crying sin, and makes the oppressed cry.
541
P
Pardon of sin, the infinite freenes of God in it, and the unlikenes of his
thoughts to man's about it. 127, 128. Pardon twofold. 292 Peace, G^d ready to be
at peace with us, when we apply to him. 215. Peac^making is the work of God.
686 Peace stands in a fivefold opposition. 687. Where God is most eminently,
there is most peace. 689 Perfection of our ways, what. 20 Person; The state of
every person to be considered to whom we speak. 731 Persecution and persecuters
bounded by God. 777 Perseverance, the duty and honor of a godly man. 393. Not
to persevere in a good way, the mark of evil men. 562. Persuasion, more then a
moral persuasion in conversion of a sinner to God. 638. The power of
persuasion. 433 Phylacteries among the Jews, what they were, and their use.
228 Pillars of heaven, what. 781 Plato, one of his chief lessons to his
Scholars. 118 Pleasing of men; how we may, how we must not please men. 733
Pleasure, all the pleasure which God takes is in himself, or in the
fullfilling of his own good pleasure in Christ. 26 Pledge, taking a pledge
when sinful, showed in two things. 50. 498 Poor, a poor man oppressed or
oppressing, how grievous. 60. Want of compassion to the poor, the mark of a
wicked man. 66. The poor have a right in what rich men have. 68. Not to do
good to the poor is sinful, as well as to them injury. 70. Honest poor less
regarded by wicked men, then their beasts. 74. Poor most oppressed. 84. Some
will oppress the poor to enrich themselves. 499 The sinfullnes of taking from
the poor, showed in two things. 501 Power, when evil men are in power, all
good men are in danger. 643. Power supreme proper to God. 677. Three arguments
of the power of God. 759. Power; The more power we have to prevent evil, the
greater is our sin if we do not. 77. Power of God twofold. 338. The greatness
of the power of God shewin four things. 339, 340. The power of God is no way
terrible to a godly man. 342. Power twofold. 639. The rule by which wicked men
act is their power. 640 Prayer may have a twofold stop. 217. We must pray much
for that whereof we have a sure promise that God will do it. 263. Prayer due
to God only. 264. We are never in a fit frame to pray, till we turn from sin.
264. To hear prayer, what. 265. God is the hearer of prayer. 265. It is a
mercy including all mercy to be heard in prayer. 266. Prayer profitable. 266.
Prayer is a lifting up both in the act and effect. 285. Prayer of the righteous
shall not prevail in some cases. 293. Prayer is strong work; a threefold
strength needful in prayer. 350. God most willing to hear the prayers and
pleadings of the righteous. 352. God is not changed by our prayers. 433. God
will not sometimes be at all entreated by prayer. 434, 435. Case answered how
we can pray in faith, seeing God is not altered, from any thing he intended, by
prayer. 346 Presence of God most desired by the godly. 318. God can quickly
make his presence terrible and grievous to us. 452 Presumption, a threfold
presumption of wicked men. 165, 166. Other presumptions of evil men. 588, 589
Pride seen in the eye. 654. Pride causes contention. 800. Profit; man cannot
profit God. 10. Eight Conclusions made from that principle, that man cannot
profit God. 11, 12, 13 In what sense a man may live and act to bis own profit.
16 Propriety in lands and goods given by God. 487. Objections against it
answered. 487, 488 Prosperity and honor a great trial or temptation. 379.
Many have declined in goodness by outward prosperity. 399 Proud men always in
danger of falling 798. Proud men shall be smitten. 802 Punishment of offenders,
three special reasons of it. 181, 182. Some whose sins are very great, are
punished very little in this life. 546. Punishment of loss a great misery as
well as that of sense. 612. Eternal punishment why just for sin committed in
time. 617
Q
Questions how put in Scripture. 699
R
Racha, what it means to call one so. 79 Rebellion, what it is, or what they
do who rebel. 301, 302. How there may be rebellion against God in complaining
under affliction. 307. Rebellion against light, the highest wickedness. 557
Redemption of sinners by Christ is Gods pleasure. 26 Relations cannot change
God. 437 Remembered, some are only upon the account of judgments upon them.
626 Not to be remembered, as it is a curse, taken two ways. 627. Not to be
remembered, in what sense, it is the portion of the wicked. 628 Repentance
renews our communion with God. 207. Affliction bespeaks our repentance. 230.
True repentance is a home-returning to God. 232 Repentance followed with a
blessing and a building of us up. 236. In true repentance sin is utterly cast
off. 237 They who repent truly endeavor to put away sin, not only from
themselves, but from all that belong to them. 239. Repentance properly taken,
what it is; how repentance may be said to have been in God. 426 Rephaim what it
signifyes. 741, 742 Reproof, how dangerous to sin against reproof. 38.
Reproof twofold. 784 Restraint of others from sin two ways. 76, 77 Return to
God, when we may be said to do so. 233 Reward, the difference between a godly
man and a carnal man, in looking to his reward. 16. Reward twofold. 190 Riches,
how we may lay up a good foundation for our selves by them. 18. Riches may
lawfully be possessed, they are at Gods dispose. 249 Rich covetous men, in what
sense, they would be alone in the earth. 75, 76 Right Hand turning out of the
ways of God as dangerous as left hand turning. 395 Righteous; how the Lord
has and has not pleasure in us as righteous, showed in six propositions. 21,
22. Righteous men often preserved in common calamityes. 200 Righteousness
twofold. 19 Romans, their severity against those who removed Land-markes. 489
Rome whence so called. 654
S
Safety is a great outward mercy. 647 Even the safety of a wicked man is of the
Lord. 647. Outward safety is the foundation of a wicked man's peace. 647, 648
Scornings, how the godly may be said to scorn the wicked in their troubles.
194, 195. Scorning very sinful. 195 Scripture parting it self into four
heads. 730 Sea, the mighty power of God in bounding it. 774. Inferences from
it. 775 Sea, called proud. God can calm the Sea in its greatest rage and
pride. 799. This a comfort in our storms at land. 800. Two other inferences of
comfort from it. 801 Seasons, how doing of evil has its season as well as
doing of good. 585. wicked men very careful to hit those seasons. 586 Secrets,
several secrets of the Lord with them that fear him. 479 Serapis, the honor
which the Egyptians did to that Idol. 175 Serpent, crooked Serpent who or what.
809, 810 Service of God counted an unprofitable thing by carnal men. 164
Shadow, what properly it is, and what it signifies in Scripture. 595 Silence
twofold. 214. Silence comely in women, especially in widows. 636 Sin, no
disadvantage to God. 13. We should not think any sin little. 36 In what sense
no sin is little. 36. It is our duty to take notice of the greatness of our sin.
37. How we may take the measure of sin. 37, 38. Seven aggravations of sin. 38,
39. In what sense sin may be said to be infinite. 40, 41. How our sins may be
said to be innumerable. 42. The less we are provoked to sin, the greater is
our sin if we fall into it. 56. 89. Sin punished in all ages. 139. Sin breeds
an estrangement from God. 206. Two degrees of putting away sin. 238 A sin is
the greater by how much the matter about which it is committed is the less.
502. Some will sin, though they get nothing by it. 565. A wicked man sins
with resolution. 584. Sin befooles the sinner. 597. Speedynes of wicked men to
sin. 604. Evil men would sin always. 616, 617. Sin has degraded man. 716
Sins of omission more frequent and numerous then sins of commssion. 36 Sinners,
some sin so fast and much as if they only were sinners. 621 Sinning advisedly,
the property of the wicked. 177. Some will sin for the meanest advantage. 500.
Sinning is the work of wicked men. 516 Smallest matters fall under the
knowledge and care of God. 134, 135 Soft heart, of five sorts. 457 Sorrow for
sin may be excessive. 96. There is an unavoydable sequel between sin and
sorrow. 99. Sorrows of life may be more bitter then death. 462 Soul, the
souls desireing or hating, what it signifyes in Scripture. 418. Soul how and
why it should be garnished. 808 Speaking; that we may speak to profit, five
things must be considered. 734 Stars to be considered, especially in four
things. 116, 117. The consideration of the Stars should make us humble and
thankful. 119 Steps taken two ways in Scripture. 389 Strength of God, in
what. 215, 216. God puts strength into an humble soul; especially for five
things. 345, 346 Spirit; many speak the words of the Prophets, who speak not
in their Spirit. 735 Spirit of God, taken two ways in Scripture. 803
Stedfastnes in good the honor of the godly. 393 Strength; men usually proud of
any kind of strength. 797. Our strength lies much in the sense of our weakness.
798 Sufferers, great sufferers usually thought to be great sinners. 46
Suffering, few hit upon any other cause of suffering but sin. 41. Other causes
of suffering noted. 47. In suffering it is good to suspect our sins, and search
after them. 48 Superstition, the forwardnes of man's nature to such worship. 520
T
Temptation prevayleth easily over carnal men. 603. Comfort in temptation,
what. 801 Thoughts, evil thoughts of God the Character of a wicked man. 123.
Thoughts of God, how we acquaint our selves with God by them. 208 Throane of
God, what. 327. 767. In what sense God spreads a cloud upon his throane. 770.
God manifests himself in heaven as Princes manifest themselves upon their
Throanes. 771 Thunder, a reproof from God. 785. Thunder of Gods power, what.
822, 823 Time, God can pull down the stoutest sinners in a little time, even
without time. 144. God needs not take time to do what he has a mind to. 145
Times, God hides times from men as he pleases. 470. Why God hides times or
keeps them in his power. 471. Times are perfectly known to God. 475
Treasure, in what sense the Lords people are his treasure. 8 Troubled minds
have much to say. 332 Truth, God honored in his truth by the fall of the
wicked. 189. Truth must be bought but not sold. 219. Truths of Scripture like
light, showed in several things. 552. Truth is full of Authority and power.
553. Evil men utter enemies to the discoveryes of holy truth. 557. Truth is
not afraid to be tried. 671. Truth ought to be spoken out, or all the truth
must be spoken. 729. Truth has a reviving power in it. 737 Trial taken of man
three ways. 379. A godly man is no looser by coming to his trial. 383. The
sincere are willing to be tried. 386 Twilight twofold. 585 Tyrant, who or what
he is. 50
V
Unchangeablenes of God set out in six particulars. 420, 421. Objections
against the unchangeablenes of God answered. 424. As God is unchangeable in
himself, so nothing can change him. 431 Unkindnes from men occasions the godly
to have more intimacy with God. 322 Vow, what it is. 267, 268. Vows lawfully
made ought to be kept. 269. Four cautions about Vows. 269, 270. When God
answers prayer, we must be careful to pay our Vows. 271
W
Wages, to detain the laborers wages very sinful. 536. Wages of the labourer
detained three days. 537 Walking of God and of Satan, how to be understood.
126. Our holy walking notes our acquaintance with God. 210 Wall, A false
prophecy why called a wall built with untempered mortar. 149 Wanton love or
wantonness ascends by five steps. 582 Water, fire and water put for all manner
of afflictions. 95. Grounds of the Allusion why water signifies affliction.
95, 96. Waters twofold. 763 Way of God, how taken in Scripture. 391. Way of a
Godly man right forward. 403 Way of God, what in Scripture. 817 Weighing of
actions and persons, God does it most exactly. 132 Wicked have impresses of the
presence of God upon their Spirits. 157. Presence of God grievous to the
wicked. 158 Wicked men think they can do well enough without God, their great
folly showed in it. 159, 160. Wicked have slight thoughts of God. 163. The
wicked do even dare God to do his worst. 165. God gives wicked men no cause
to be weary of him, showed diverse ways. 167, 168. They do not acknowledge God
the fountain of all the good they receive. 171. Portion of the wicked lies on
this side heaven. 174. A threefold honor arising to God by the fall of the
wicked. 189. Wicked men how made ridiculous. 197. Wicked men doubly
disappoynted. 198. Wicked men make sin their work or their busienes, showed
four ways. 516, 517, 518. Wicked men are not presently stopped in their evil
ways. 544, 545 Wickedness and iniquity, how distinguished. 36 Widow, what the
Hebrew word for a widow imports concerning her. 78 Two cautions to the
widow and the fatherless. 87, 88. Widow why expressed in the Hebrew by a
word that signifies both to bind and to be silent. 636 Will of man by nature
goes out without end to sin. 43 Will or mind of God to be submitted to, and
should please us in all things. 429 Will of God the only bound of all his
actions. 438. How unsafe it is that it should be so with men, though good men.
439. Dangerous to have man's will the rule of what he does. 492 Wisdom and
happiness go together. 15 What that wisdom is which does not profit man, and
what that is which does. 15, 16 Works of God, three things affirmed of them.
431. Nothing can stop the works of God, four things instanced in that cannot.
432, 433. Works of God cannot be fully known. 819, 820. The works of God
should lead us to God himself. 822 Worm, man is so in five respects. 714.
Four inferences from it. 715 Worldly things, the best and greatest of them are
but little, and for a little time. 657. Worldly state of worldly men most
subject to changes. 662 Word of God, in that God discovers himself to us. 209.
A Godly man keeps close to it. 392. The word of God is the only rule of
life. 405. Word of God taken in a double opposition. 405. A godly man highly
esteems the word. 411. Reverence to the word keeps the heart up in obedience
to the word. 412. The word of God is to be esteemed for his own sake. 413.
Word of God rightly applied is mighty. 727. It revives the soul, or gives a
new soul. 736
Y
Yoke of Christ why called easy. 346
Z
Zeal, superstitious zeal and laboriousnes of the Israelites in worshipping
the Calves in Dan and Bethel. 519, 520
A TABLE OF Those Scriptures which are occasionally cleared, and briefly
illustrated in the foregoing EXPOSITIONS. The First Number directs to the
Chapter, the Second to the Verse, the Third to the Page of the BOOK.
Chap. Verse. Page. Genesis. 1. 2. 803. 1. 14. 805. 1. 21. 744. 1. 26. 806. 2.
1. 805. 3. 23, 24. 78. 4. 5. 261. 4. 23. 571. 5. 3. 705. 5. 22, 24. 210, 113 6.
3. 92. 6. 5. 131. 6. 6. 424. 9. 6. 569. 11. 5. 112. 11. 6. 519. 12. 5. 736. 15.
16. 143. 18. 20, 21. 112. 19. 21. 74. 20. 7. 295. 25. 21. 262. 28. 21. 271. 31.
42.53. 681. 32 24. 275. 32. 2. 693. 32. 10. 714. 35. 2 239. 35 5. 683. 41. 45.
475. 47. 22. 410. 48. 16. 745. 49. 4. 603. Exodus. 1. 10. 31. 1. 21. 235. 15.
9, 10. 147. 18. 21. 20. 19. 5. 8. 19. 21. 193. 20. 7. 635. 32. 31. 37. 32. 32.
628. 33. 15. 161. 111. Leviticus. 10. 3. 336. 26. 18.24. 449. Numbers. 5. 19.
193 14. 42. 111. 20. 17, 18, 19. 66 23. 10. 242. 23. 21. 608. 25. 4. 183.
Deuteronomy. 2. 25. 743. 7. 9, 10. 480. 7. 21. 111. 20. 3. 458. 21. 1, 2, 3, 4,
5. etc. 568. 24. 6. 59 24. 10. 51. 24. 14, 15. 538. 28. 48. 58. 28. 56. 253.
28. 66. 641. 32. 9. 8 32. 41. 91. 33. 9. 437. 33. 18. 587. Judges. 4. 6, 7.
637. 5. 20. 691. 5. 21. 540. 5. 23. 7. 9. 9.15. 595. 11. 3. 79. I Samuel. 2. 3.
132. 2. 8. 789. 3. 13. 76. 7. 3. 233. 9. 9. 478. 15. 22. 23. 15. 11.29. 424. II
Samuel. 2. 22. 260. 12. 12. 182. 14. 9. 193. 22. 8. 782 23. 16. 495. I Kings.
8. 11. 124. 12. 28.30. 519. 14. 10. 143. 17. 1. 275. 18. 10. 370. 20. 23, 24,
25, 28. 114. 20. 1.5. 425. 21. 19. 494. II Kings. 19. 3. 432. 20. 19. 336. II
Chronicles. 3. 6. 243. 36. 12. 223. Nehemiah. 5. 13. 79. 8. 10. 258. Job. 1. 7.
126. 27. 10. 256. 31. 26. 709. 118. 35. 6, 7. 13. 39. 15. 514. Psalms. 1. 1.
195. 1. 2. 19. 411. 4. 3. 9. 5. 5. 353. 8. 3. 116. 119. 8. 5. 656. 9. 5. 785.
10. 4. 163. 318. 10. 11. 129 10. 18. 73. 11. 3. 150. 16. 2. 7 16. 8. 113 17. 3.
380. 17. 14 174 202. 18. 13, 14, 14. 786 18. 27. 288 19. 6. 817. 19. 10. 411.
21. 8. 316. 22. 7. 195. 22. 13. 460. 24. 6. 324. 714. 25. 11. 37 25. 14. 478.
29. 10. 780. 30. 5. 309. 30. 6. 648. 32. 1. 374. 32. 6. 99. 325. 33. 17. 4. 34*
7. 694 36. 6. 481. 37. 4. 256, 257. 37. 6. 376. 37. 23. 283. 37. 31. 225. 283.
39. 9. 214. 40. 10. 227. 40. 12. 42. 486. 42. 1, 2. 318. 42. 7. 98. 44. 12. 12.
44. 17* 18. 398. 45. 6. 327. 46. 9. 687. 48. 2, 3, 4. 365. 49. 14. 622. 49. 20.
513. 50. 8. 28. 50. 12. 7. 51. 5. 705. 55. 15. 145. 55. 23. 623. 56. 8. 42. 58.
2. 132. 58. 10. 186. 65. 5, 6, 7. 776. 68. 23. 186. 68. 30. 785. 69. 4. 56. 69.
28. 628. 72. 3. 512. 73. 2. 399. 73. 3. 159. 74. 20. 560. 75. 3. 789. 77. 3.
455. 82. 6. 666. 84. 5. 584. 87. 4. 793. 88. 11. 747, 748. 88. 15. 738. 89. 9,
10. 793. 90. 2. 10. 91. 8. 180. 92. 12, 13, 14. 397. 93. 3, 4. 776. 94. 5, 6,
7. 129. 377. 97. 8. 185. 97. 11. 610. 99. 4. 584. 102. 26. 420. 103. 10. 450.
103. 12. 238. 104. 3. 763. 104. 5, 6, 7, 8. 795. 104. 9. 775. 104. 25. 745.
104. 30, 32. 440. 104. 32. 787. 106. 23. 294. 107. 42. 630. 185. 108. 1. 584.
109. 4. 630. 110. 7. 261. 111. 2. 820. 111. 10. 16. 113. 5, 6. 134. 114. 7.
787, 788. 115. 2, 3. 111. 116. 3. 316. 116. 11. 190. 119. 1. 20. 119. 106. 271.
119. 127. 412. 124. 2, 3, 4, 5. 777. 125. 5. 396. 136. 13. 67. 139. 1.24. 386.
139. 6. 182. 139. 7, 8. 108. 139. 23, 24. 136. 142. 4, 5. 322. 144. 11. 123.
147. 10, 11. 22. Proverbes. 1. 24. 753. 1. 26. 196. 2. 17. 576 2. 18. 742. 3.
27. 68. 4. 17. 494. 4. 20, 21. 407. 4. 21. 226. 4. 25, 26, 27. 395. 6. 30. 57.
6. 26, 27. etc. 577. 7. 3. 226. 7. 15. 511. 7. 18, 19, 20. 126. 8. 22. 818. 8.
30, 31. 255. 8. 34. 583 9. 12. 16. 10. 20. 601. 10. 25. 152. 11. 26. 607. 13.
2. 493. 15. 11. 749. 747. 20. 8. 328. 22 2. 68 23. 23. 219. 23. 31. 491. 24. 7.
186 27. 20 747 27. 21. 379 28. 3. 60. 28. 12. 644. 28. 28. 506 29 1. 38 30. 8,
9. 410. 399 30. 18. 366. 31. 15. 410 Ecclesiastes. 2. 2. 259. 5. 2. 107. 5. 4.
269. 7. 6. 258. 7. 12. 241. 8. 4. 341. 8. 6. 586. 9. 1. 277. 11. 1. 55. 12. 1.
806. 12. 5. 107. Canticles. 1. 1. 314 1. 3. 638. 1. 7, 8. 325. 3. 1, 2, 3. 320.
Isayah. 1. 3. 172. 1. 10. 85 1. 15, 16, 18. 353. 2. 11. 654 3. 6 59 3. 11. 190
3. 14. 494. 4. 3. 629 5. 8. 75. 6 5. 106 6. 9. 94 6. 10. 741. 8. 7. 148. 8 10.
279. 10. 10. 315. 10. 14, 15. 173. 11. 13. 800. 14. 10. 666. 14. 13. 365. 21.
14. 66. 24. 1. 768. 27. 1. 816. 27. 4, 5. 215. 27. 8. 725. 27. 11. 437. 28. 15.
91. 28. 16. 154. 28. 17. 153. 29. 9. 784. 29. 10. 587. 29. 15. 750. 30. 1. 374.
30. 2. 223. 30. 20. 220. 30. 30. 72. 31. 15. 476. 32. 6, 7. 65. 37. 22. 196.
41. 14. 714. 41. 14, 15, 16 191. 41. 23. 361. 43. 13 341. 44. 25, 26. 418. 280.
45. 24 346. 48 18. 218. 50. 2. 787. 50. 4. 476. 51. 12, 13 597. 51. 16 595. 51.
20 213. 51. 9. 793. 53. 10. 26. 54. 1. 634. 54. 10. 402. 54. 16, 17. 816 55. 1.
12. 55. 8. 8. 8. 127. 57. 1, 2. 664. 57. 16. 460 338. 57. 20. 801. 58. 6. 55.
58. 9. 265. 58. 13. 253. 19. 59. 2. 256. 59. 19. 148. 60. 6. 95. 60. 17. 51^
62. 4. 21. 63. 15. 105. 65. 5. 25 66. 1. 108 ^05 66. 11. 254 Jeremiah. 2. 12.
784 2. 24. 514 3. 5. 72 4. 1. 232 4. 14. 43. 5. 1. 291. 5. 22, 23. 44 5. 28. 86
6. 8. 419. 60. 8. 5. 43 9. 3. 67 9. 5 5 7. 12. 2. 159. 13. 27. 43. 14. 9 162.
14. 11. 434. 15. 10.8 293. 15. 19. 223. 17. 9. 373. 22. 28. 19. 23. 23, 24.
109. 31. 18. 457. 31. 20. 208. 31. 35, 36. 778. 36. 24. 790. 49. 11. 88. 51. 7.
382* Lamentations. 3. 24. 246. Ezekiel. 1. 24. 244. 7. 11. 493. 8. 12. 129,
130. ^^. 21. 238. 13. 9. 629. 13. 10.13 149 13. 14. 150 18. 25. 704. 22. 6 71
22. 14 788 460 22. 18 384 28 17. 184 34. 2, 3, 4. 724. Danie 2. 21. 6 2. 34.
151. 4. 34, 35. 340. 7. 2 795. 7. 9.10.1 384. 8. ^. 604. Hosea. 2. 8, 9
249.172. 4. 1. 560. 477. 4. 4 490. 5. 1^. 489. 7. 14.16. 233. 232. 9. ^1. 660.
10. 7. 601. 12. 4. 199. 14. 3. 81. Joel. 2. 23. 221. 2. 26. 402. Amos. 2. 6.
500. 2. 7. 499. 2. 8. 59. 3 10. 493. 4. 12. 434. 6 7.10. 321. 7. 2. 665. Jonah.
1. 3. 11^. 3. 4.10. 425. 3 8 234. Michah. 2. 1, 2. 518. 2. 3. 654. 402. 3. 3.
61. 4. 11. 181. 6. 2. 26. 6. 3, 4. 168. 6. 9. 444. Nahum. 1. 3. 818. 342. 1. 7.
592. Habakkuk. 1. 7. 340. 1. 12, 13. 651. 1. 16. 173. 2. 3, 4. 483. Zephaniah.
1. 12. 166. 2. 3. 422. 2. 11. 7. Haggai. 1. 6. 278. Zechariah. 1. 5. 423. 1. 6.
486. 3. 12. 784. 4. 7. 382 4. 10. 658. 5. 1. 91 5. 6.8.10, 11. 183. 7. 5. 232
9. 8. 650. 10. 11. 800. 11. 2. 73. 13. 9. 385. 14. 12. 197. Malachi. 2. 2. 610.
3. 2, 3. 385. 3. 5. 423. 235. 3. 10. 509. Matthew. 1. 19. 18^. 5. 22. 79. 5. 45.
695. 7. 1. 49. 7. 23. 157. 7. 24, 25. 154. 7. 27. 149. 8. 23, 24. 799. 10. 30.
42. 10. 42. 62 11. 30. 346. 12. 18, 19. 723. 12. 43, 44. 808. 18. 18. 280. 23.
5. 228. 23. 14. 80. 24. 2. 47. 24. 29. 782. 24. 37.50. 92. 25. 1.28. 424. 26.
53. 691. Mark. 2. 27. 13. 9. 50. 688. Luke. 1. 34. 699. 5. 8. 162. 7. 37. 621.
9. 54. 735. 12. 20. 668. 12. 36, 37. 5. 14. 26. 559. 15. 32. 737. 16. 15. 406.
17. 7. 5, 6. 19. 7. 621. 21. 28. 261. 22. 32. 349. John. 3. 19. 558. 3. 20, 21.
596. 4. 21. 325. 5. 25. 737. 6. 44.^ 638. 6. 66. 404. 8. 44. 672. 9. 2, 3. 47.
9. 39. 555. 14. 27. 453 17. 1. 106. 18. 6. 684. 20. 15. 314. Acts. 1. 6, 7.
470. 2. 44. 487. 3. 19. 737. 5. 4. 487. 12. 23. 380. 17. 25.27, 28. 157. 17.
26. 324. 26. 11. 503. 27. 23, 24. 294. Romans. 1. 20. 158. 118. 1. 21.29. 128.
2. 14. 550. 2. 15. 375. 158. 3. 25, 26. 343. 4. 17, 18, 19. 761. 6. 21. 17. 8.
7. 557. 8. 13. 348. 8. 33. 356. 9. 3. 629. 9. 16. 146. 9. 18. 341. 9. 22. 480.
11. 29. 423. 12. 15. 184. 14. 7. 16. 16. 20. 146. I Corinthians. 1. 26. 760. 3.
13. 384. 4. 5, 6. 376. 4. 11. 58. 4. 8.10. 721. 6. 13, 14, and. 578. 6. 20. 6.
9. 19, 20, 21, 22. 733. 10. 13. 347. 13. 3, 4. 84. 13. 9, 10. 819. 14. 33. 688.
15. 32. 513. 15. 58. 562. 393. II Corinthians. 1. 20. 422. 2. 7. 96. 2. 16.
738. 3. 17. 262. 4. 6. 326. 4. 18. 658. 5. 15. 16. 6. 2. 325. 6. 16, 17. 109.
6. 4.8. 615. 12. 10. 798.345. Galatians. 4. 27. 634. Ephesians. 2. 10. 22. 2.
16. 800. 4. 20. 370. 5. 12. 554. 6. 10, 11. 349. Philippians. 1. 9. 102. 1. 19.
345. 2. 7. 79. 3. 12, 13. 404. 4. 13. 347. I Thessalonians. 3. 3. 444. 4. 15,
16. 471. 5. 2. 573. 5. 18. 312. II Thessalonians. 1. 9. 456. 327. 2. 3. 138. 2.
6, 7. 145. 3. 2. 598. I Timothy. 1. 9. 514. 2. 8. 290. 5. 13. 636. 6. 11. 532.
6. 16. 771. 6. 19. 18. II Timothy. 2. 15. 731. 2. 19, 20. 153. 3. 8, 9. 777. 4.
17. 348. Hebrews. 2. 3. 559 2. 7. 656. 4. 13. 746. 10. 23. 393. 11. 3. 760.
11. 7. 92. 12. 1. 394. 12. 19. 824. 12. 29. 202. James. 1. 10. 287. 1. 9, 10.
662. 1. 27. 87. 1. 14. 603. 2. 15. 58. 2. 16. 70. 4. 6. 288. 4. 12, 13, 14.
276. I Peter. 1. 8. 254. 1. 15. 390. 2. 21. 390. 3. 19, 20. 748. II Peter. 2.
14. 582. I John. 1. 5. 696. 2. 3, 4, 5, 6. 477. 3. 17. 66. 53. 3. 20, 21. 375.
Revelation. 2. 2. 394.381. 2. 20. 77. 3. 12. 789. 7. 9. 42. 12. 15, 1^. 777.
18. 7. 152. 81.

FINIS.

