DAVID'S PRAYER FOR SOLOMON, CONTAINING The proper Endowments and duty Royal of
a King, with the consequent Blessings upon a Kingdom.

Delivered in a SERMON at Christ-Church London, Before the Right Honorable the
Lord Major, the Right Worshipful the Aldermen his Brethren, Together with the
Worshipful Companies of the said City, Upon the 27th. of March, 1643. Being
the Commemoration of his Majesty's Inauguration.

BY JOSEPH CARYL, Preacher to the Honorable Society of Lincolnes Inn.

IT is this Present Eight day of APRIL, Anno Domini, 1643. Ordered by the
Committee of the House of Commons in Parliament concerning Printing, That this
Sermon Entitled (D^^ids Prayer for Solomon, Containing, The proper Endowments
and Duty Royal^ of a King, etc) be Printed and published. JOHN WHITE.

LONDON, Printed by G. M. for Giles Calvert, and are to be sold by Christopher
Meredith at the Crane in Paul's Churchyard, 1643.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE ISAAC PENNINGTON, Lord Major of the Famous City of
LONDON, Together with the Right Worshipful the Aldermen his Brethren.
Right Honorable and Right Worshipful,
THis Sermon being preached by your joynt-motion (and Printed by more then a
single one) has emboldened me to make this joint Dedication. These words were
not spoken in a corner, neither being spoken do they seek corners, unless it
be the corners of men's hearts, any other (Verits non quaerit) Truth seeks not.
While I put this, but into your hands, to other is the lodging I desire for it.
In these Endowments of a King, see what your selves (in your sphere) aught to
have: In the Duty of a King here presented, read what your selves (in your
sphere) aught to do. Every Magistrate is a King in a small Letter. You Act
(on the Stage of this Ancient City) the part of a Great King; Therefore you
need the Parts of a King. And though now (while you act for King and
Parliament) a Cloud of misconstruction dwells upon some of your Loyallties: yet
trust God ( God who gathers the wind in his fists, and sends it out when he
pleases) trust him for the scattering of that Cloud; and the causing of your
Innocence to break forth as the light, and your just dealing as the Noonday.
Sow to your selves, Govern others in righteousness: And fear not, but your
City shall bring forth Peace to the people, Good Will to your selves, or (which
is far better, then both, though alone) Glory to God on High. To the care of
this High God I commit this City, your Persons, and your Employments, and am

SIRS Your Honors and Worships To serve you in the Gospel of Christ JOSEPH
CARYL

DAVID'S PRAYER FOR SOLOMON, CONTAINING The proper Endowments and duty Royal of
a King, with the consequent Blessings upon a Kingdom.
PSALM. 72. VERSE. 1, 2, 3. Give the King thy judgments O God, and thy
righteousness unto the Kings Son.

He shall judge thy people with righteousness, and thy poor with judgment.

The Mountains shall bring peace to the people, and the little hills by
righteousness.


THIS Psalm was penned by a King, it is dedicated to a King, and it is chiefly
intended concerning him who is King of Kings; A Psalm for Solomon, that is the
Title: A Psalm containing the last breathings of David Heavenward, that is the
conclusion, so the Psalm ends, The prayers of David the Son of Jesse are
ended; David being about to commend his soul to God, first commends his Son
to God, and having himself like a careful Father, tutour'd, and instructed
him, while he lived, he now commits him to the tuturage and instruction of a
Father who could not dye. A Sonn^ is put into safe hands indeed, when God
himself is entreated to be the Guardian.

This whole Psalm spends it self in prayer and in prophecy; here is a prayer
for King Solomon, and a prophecy both of Solomon's Kingdom and of Christ's;
Prophecy fills up the body of the Psalm; it begins with prayer in
petitioning, and it concludes with prayer in thankesgiving; Verse 18. Blessed
be the Lord God, the God of Israel, who only does wondrous things, and blessed
be his glorious Name for ever, and let the whole earth be filled with his
praise, Amen, Amen.

The words which I have read, hold forth unto us 4 Points, most observeable. We
have first, The Endowments or gifts of a King; Secondly, We have here, the
duty of a King; And thirdly, We have the Blessings which from the discharge of
that duty, by those endowments, flow out to and upon a whole Kin^dom; Fourthly,
We have the means, by which those Endowments may be obtained for Kings,
through which, they discharging their duties, make both themselves and their
people blessed.

The Endowments or gifts are perfect and divine, contained in V. 1. Thy
judgments and thy righteousness; The duty, is purely Regal, contained in V.
2. He shall judge thy people with righteousness, and thy poor with judgment;
The blessing is a blessing eminently desirable, even the blessing of peace,
contained in the third Verse, The Mountains shall bring peace to the people,
and the little Hills by righteousness; The means by which those Endowments are
obtained for Kings, is heavenly and spiritual, set down in the beginning of
the first Verse, Prayer to the God of Heaven, Give the King thy judgments O
God; This is first in the order of the words, and ought to be first in the
order of all our actions, but I shall handle it last in the order of the
Sermon; beginning with the Endowments of a King, contained in the first Verse,
The judgments of God and the righteousness of God; Give the King thy
judgments O God, and thy righteousness unto the Kings Son;

Judgment and righteousness, are often in Scripture put as Synonomaes,
signifying the same thing, yet here we may distinguish them; Judgment as it
respects the business of a King, (for it has many other references) is taken
either for an ability to govern, or for the rule of Government. So Samuel, in
his first Book, 10. Chap. 25. Verse, did speak and write ( Mishp^at) the
judgment, or the manner of the Kingdom, we have the same word here, only in
this Text it is plural, Judgments; and because the word is here in the
plural, give the King thy judgments; we may take Judgments for all the
Statutes, and Laws, and Ordinances which were made by God, as the bottom and
foundation upon which government was then established.

If it be said, that these were given long before: Moses Ob.
delivered the Judicial Law from the mouth of God to the people, and therefore
David needed not to pray in this reference, give the King thy Judgments.

Laws may be said, to be given, not only when in An.
the letter or body of them they are at first published unto all, but also when
they are in a special manner revealed unto any one in the Spirit or native
interpretation of the^; For as the word of God in general, though it were
penned for and given to the Church many ages ago, yet may be truly said to be
given to every soul, in the day of their conversion, because the true
understanding of it so far as is absoutely necessary, is then given to every
soul; We have a famous instance in Paul, Romans 7. 9. Who though as a Pharisee
he was a great student in the Law, and exactly versed in it, yet when he was
converted, then the Commandment came to him, namely in the spiritual meaning
of it: and (says he) I was without the Law till that time: though he had the
body and the letter of the Law, yet he had not the spirit, and the mind of the
Law till then; so take that special part of the word which concerns
government, and is properly called Judgments or Statutes, these may be said
to be given to Solomon, when God gave him a clear light to understand his will
and intent in them. So then, it is as if David had prayed, that God would make
the comment upon his own Laws, that his Son might never wrest them by his
own glosses or expositions. Give thy judgments, that is, ability, strength
and clearenesse of understanding to apprehend what thy mind is in thy
judgments, how to discern between good and evil, how to distinguish
between right and wrong, true and falfe; This is to give judgments; Solomon's
prayer for himself (which is as it were the counterpane of this) does thus
expound David's prayer for Solomon, 1 King. 3. When God in Gibeon sends Solomon
a blanke from Heaven and bids him ask what be would, verse. 5. he says verse.
9. Give thy servant an understanding heart to judge thy people, that I may
discern between good and bad.

The other Endowment, is righteousness, which as distinct from the former, is
an evennesse and uprightness of conscience in passing every thing according
unto received light; The defect of some Princes is in their head-peece,
judgments are not given to them, but the defect of many is in their
heart-peece, righteousness, or rectitude of spirit is not given them;
Judgment is an ability to know what we ought to do, and righteousness is a
willingness to do what we know; So the Imperial Lawgiver defines justice,
or righteousness, Iustitia est constans and perpetua voluntas suum cuique
tribuendi; It is a constant and a perpetual bent of the will to give every one
his right, that is righteousness; and we may define judgment thus, Iudicium
est clara and perfecta scientia quid cuique sit tribuendum. Judgment is a
clear and a right knowledge what ought to be given or done unto every man; Put
both together, and the Prayer may be thus rendered, Give O Lord unto Solomon,
who is appointed King, and is also the Son of a King, or give unto Solomon
the present King, and unto his Sons, those that shall succeed him in the
Throne, pure light of understanding to enterpret thy Laws, that is judgment,
and integrity of conscience to act and resolve according to that light, there
is righteousness. These are the endowments, this the portion which I beg for
the King my Son, or for the King and his Son, and this is a Kingly portion
indeed.

It is here further to be noted, that the Endowments of a King, are not called
barely, judgments, and righteousness, but the stamp of God is set upon them,
Thy judgments and thy righteousness (says David:) Kings have judgments of
their own, and a righteousness too of their own, which are not the
Judgments nor the righteousness of God.

And as it is in the great point of Justification, there is a righteousness of
God, which some neglecting, take in and trust to a righteousness of their
own: The Apostle shows us such, Romans 10. 3. Who go about to establish their
own righteousness, not knowing, or being ignorant of the righteousness of
God; So likewise it is in point of government, there are some that have a
righteousness, but it is a righteousness of their own, and a judgment, but
it is their own judgment, not Gods; and then what the Apostle does infer,
respecting that great point, is appliable to this, in the place before cited.
They being ignorant of Gods righteousness, and going about to establish their
own righteousness, have not submitted themselves unto (nor ruled their people
by) the righteousness of God; yea, which is far worse, as much as in their
power is, they have overthrown the judgments and evacuated the righteousness
of God, they have (as it were) repealed Gods judgments, and enacted their
own; Now then as there is no righteousness that is fit to justify the person
of a man, but the righteousness of God; so there is no righteousness fit to
judge the person or cause of any man by, but that which is the righteousness
of God; Man's judgment, and man's righteousness not subordinate to and
regulated by the judgment and righteousness of God, is nothing else but
unrighteousness and injustice.

These are the special Endowments of a King; As reason distinguishes a man
from a beast, so judgment and righteousness distinguish a King, or Magistrate
from other men; not but that other men have there, but a King must; a
Magistrate without judgment and righteousness is like a man without reason,
^e is not able to do any thing in that capacity without these; as a man can
do nothing in the capacity of a man without reason; he may do acts, which are
acts of a man, but he cannot do a humane act, no act is strictly so but an act
of reason; so a King may do acts without judgment and righteousness, but
Kingly acts he cannot do without them.

As God has made distinct callings, so he has given distinct abilities. There
are particular gifts proper to the managing of every calling, as in the first
of Cor. 12. 8. To one is given the word of knowledge, to another is given the
word of wisdom; here are distinct gifts, or distinct qualifications; and in
Romans 12. 6. Having gifts differing according to the grace that is given us,
that is, (as some interpret, and I think rightly) having gifts according to
the offices and employments, wherein we are set (for these are graces, these
are favors, unto which God does call any person; And so the Apostle calls his
office grace, Grace and Apostleship, Romans 1. 5. That is, the Grace of
Apostle-ship. And Ephesians. 3. 8. Unto me who am less then the least of all
Saints is this Grace given, that I should preach among the Gentiles the
unsearcheable riches of Christ.) therefore (says he) having gifts according
to those graces, or offices, or employments, let us act in every one of them
according to the proportion of faith.

This will be yet clearer, if we descend to the second Point; and therein
consider the duty and employment, the work and business of Kings, the Text
says, Their duty is to judge; To judge is the trade of Kings; and therefore
when the first King was cried for by the people, in 1 Samuel 8. 5. they presently
speak of this work, make us a King to judge us, that is the business that we
have to do for Kings; make us a King to judge us, that is his Art; as he said
concerning the Romans, let others paint, let others ^arve, tu regere Imperio
populos Roman memento, hae tibi sint arts. Do thou govern people and
Nations, this is thy Art, this is thy craft; So the people of Israel said, at
the first cry for a King, let us have a King to judge us. Before they had a
King they had Judges, and now they would have a King, it is but to judge them.
Here was a new Title, but the work was still the same. Only before, God was
their King and man judged them: Now man was both their King and their Judge.

In that one word ( Judge) by a Synecdoche, all the duty and business of a
King is comprehended; As the general duty of a Man respecting the Law, is
fulfilled in this one word, Thou shall love thy Neighbor, as thy self; So the
general duty of a Prince, is fulfilled in this one word, Thou shall judge the
people of God with judgment and with righteousness. Barely to love is not the
fulfilling of the Law: But you must look to the object, thy Neighbor, and to
the measure, thy self. So barely to judge is not the whole duty of a King; The
object, Thy people, thy poor, And the measure, with judgment and with
righteousness are to be taken in.

If it be so, how is it possible they should ever drive that Royal trade,
without judgment and righteousness* The commodity in which Kings deal, and
which they put off to their people, is judgment and righteousness; Then they
must have judgment and righteousness in stock, how else shall they dispense
them unto others. Can any one judge, that has not judgment? or do right,
that has not righteousness? Judgment and righteousness, are (as it were)
the right hand of a Magistrate; yea, they are both his hands; he can do
nothing at all, ( quatenus talis) as a Magistrate without these; and therefore
when God himself is spoken of, under the notion of a King, presently it is
added, Judgment and righteousness are the habitation of his Throne; Psalm. 97.
2. His Throne inhabits or dwells in these; God must work in the sphere of
judgment and righteousness, or else He can do nothing as a King; And when
the Kingdom of Christ is spoken of in the glory of it, you shall see that
Christ does all his work by these; Isa. 9. Of the increase of his government
and peace there shall be no end, upon the Throne of David, and upon his
Kingdom to order it, and to establish it with judgment and with
righteousness, from henceforth even for ever. Christ orders and disposes
every thing in his Kingdom, by judgment, and by righteousness.

The reign of David is thus described, 2 Samuel 8. 15. And David executed
judgment and justjce to all his people. That which the fire is to the
Chemists, the same is righteousness and judgment unto Princes; the Chemists
can do nothing without fire, if they have not fire, all their work must stand
still; So unless Princes have righteousness and judgment, they cannot work;
the whole frame of true government, and all the wheels of a right
Commonwealth stand still, till judgment and righteousness give them motion.

And forasmuch as to judge and to judge with righteousness is the duty of
Kings. It is necessary to set down more distinctly what it is to judge with
righteousness: Neither is it improper for this authority to hear such
lessons. Though I speak not this day before the Person of a King, yet I speak
before many who are representative Kings. Every subordinate Magistrate has in
his compass the work of a King put into his hand, yea subordinate Magistrates
are the Kings Hands, and Tongue, and eyes, by which he sees, and speaks, and
executes. In such a correct sense as this, I may say of the Senate of London,
as he of the Senate of Rome, It is an assembly of Kings. Seeing you are trusted
with the Kings work, which is, To judge the people. Hear what it is to do it
by the Kings Rule, with judgment and with righteousness, with the judgment
and righteousness of God, for so it becomes Kings. I shall give 4 Rules to
clear it.

First, To judge with the righteousness of GOD, is to judge by a Law; Such is
the judgment of God. Though he be absolute in himself, and may make his will
his Law, and no man must question it, yet he judges by a Law. That of the
Apostle seems to cross this in some cases, Romans 2. 12. As many as have sinned
without Law shall also perish without Law.

I answer, you must understand that only in regard of the formale, the
formality of a Law, not in regard of the materiale or matter of it; for there
is no sinning without the matter of a Law. So the Apostle concludes, Romans 4.
15. Where there is no Law, there is no sin; there may be a sinning without the
formality of a Law, and so the Text carries it; they that sin without the
Law, that is, not having the Law formally published to their ear^s, or written
to their eyes (as we know many had not) they shall perish by the sentence of
the Law, as written in their hearts, and spoken to their consciences.

The foundation of every judgment is in the Law. And so strict is the Alliance
of these two, Law and Justice, that among the Latins, the word Justice derives
it is pedigree from the word, Law. Iustitia nomen habet a jure and jus a
jubendo, say the Critics. Hence the learned, both Divines and Statesmen, make
a threefold resemblance of the Law. First (say they) it is like a Glass to
discover. Secondly, like a Bridle to restrain. Thirdly, like a Sword to punish
offenses. These are the weapons of a Magistrate. As the Imperial Lawgiver
admonishes in the first proemiall sentence to his Institutions, Imperatoriam
Majestatem, non solum armis decoratam, sed etiam legibus oportet esse armatam.
A King must be adorned with arms, and armed with Laws. A King armed with
righteous Laws is, That Higher Power spoken of, Roman. 13. 1. To which every
soul must be subject, which they that resist shall receive to themselves
Damnation. Where that word of a King is, there is Power, and such a power, as
who may say unto him, what do thou? Eccles. 8. 4. This is the higher power
indeed; whereas a Magistrate and his will, especially a Magistrate and his
lust, is not properly the higher Power, but the higher weakness; the strength,
as well as the rule of Princes lies in the law; That Is the lock of these
Sampsons; and as Laws are the Kings strength, so the peoples security. That
people is most happy, whose Prince is a breathing Law. They cannot but be
unhappy whose Law is nothing else, but the breath of a Prince.

This is the first part of Gods righteousness, to judge by Law; and to make
this rule fuller it is to judge by a Law known, by a known rule, therefore
God did publish his Law to the ear of his own people, and he published it to
the hearts of all the people in the world; There is an Edition of the law in
the heart of every man, and God will judge none, but by a law at least thus
known. The Gentiles showed the works of the Law written in their hearts,
Their consciences also bearing witness, Roman. 2. 15. For to make Laws and
then to conceal them, is rather to set traps and snares to catch men, then to
give rules to direct them. Hence the ancient Greeks used to engrave their
Laws upon pillars of brass (to which usage it is well conceived the Apostle
does allude, when he calls the Church the pillar of Truth, a pillar for
Declaration. Hence also the Romans fixed Tables of their Laws in the most
frequented places of the City. God took such a care to have his Law known
unto the Jews, that he commands them to write it on the Posts of their
houses, and on their Gates, to lace their Garments with schedules of it, (such
were Phylacteries) they went about clothed with the Law, Deuteronomy. 6. 8, 9.

One step further to judge with the righteousness of God, is to judge by a Law
in it is proper native sense, and genuine interpretation, not by a purchased or
a forced one; for sometimes a Law, and a known Law may be urged, and yet as
the Apostle Peter speaks of Heretics, who urge Scripture, that they do wrest
the Scriptures; so there is a wresting of Laws. The Law that is set for the
guiding or punishing of others may be punished it self, as the Apostle notes
in that word, (...), they set Scripture upon the rack, to make it confess a
sense God never gave it; so Laws may be set upon the rack too, and made to
confess a sense the Lawmakers never gave them. Such bring not their judgments
to the Law, but the Law unto their judgments, dealing with it, as the Tyrant
dealt with his guests, if they were too long for his bed, he cut them shorter,
and if they were too short, he stretched them longer; This is not the
righteousness of God; the righteousness of God is to judge by a Law, a Law
known, a Law fairly, and naturally interpreted.

If any shall object, True, Kings are bound to rule by the Law of God: by the
letter of the moral Law, and by the equity of the judicial Law. But are they
obliged by humane Laws, or by the judgments of men?

I answer, Though no Nation under Heaven have judgments and Laws as the Jews
had immediately from God: yet all the wise and just Laws of every Nation, may
still be called the judgments of God. Both because God is specially called
upon to assist and direct in the making of them. He stands in the Congregation
of Law-making gods; as also because all righteous Laws are but extracts and
streams issuing from that ^ountaine of righteousness the law of God. And
indeed that Law which is purely humane, cannot be fit to govern any man by,
much less to be obligatory upon Kings.

The second rule is this, to judge by the righteousness of God, is a judgment
upon evidence; as there must be an evidence of the Law, so there must be an
evidence of the fact, or else it is not the righteousness of God; the Lord
never proceeds in judgment, till he have the fact clear, as well as the Law
clear; though he had a cry come up to him concerning the blood of Abell, and
the wickedness of Sodom, yet he comes down to examine the matter, and he
will enquire whether it be according to the report.

And thus he directs in the 13. of Deutronomie 12. If thou shall hear say in
one of thy Cities, which the Lord thy God has given thee to dwell there,
Certain men the children of Beliall are gone out from among you, etc. then
thou shall search and enquire, and ask diligently, and behold if it be a truth
and the thing certain, that such abomination is wrought among you, then thou
shall smite the Inhabitants of the City etc. Reports and probabilities will
not bear up a righteous Judgment, there must be proof, and proof from men
approved; for Iezabel got witnesses.

The third Rule, Judgment which is by the Righteousness of God, does always
stand between these two extremes, Rigor and Remissness. The Moralists
emblem this Rule by the place of that sign in the Zodiac, which they call
the Virgin, standing (according to the Doctrine of the Astronomers) between
the L^on and the Balance; the Lion bids the Virgin Justice be stout and
feareles, the Balance minds her to weigh all with moderation, and be cautious.
Judgment is remiss when it spares, where it ought to punish; such sparing is
cruel. Judgment is rigorous, when it punishes where it ought to spare, such
punishing is blood: Judgment is rigorous if at any time it be more then the
Law requires, and if at all times it be so much. Extreme right often proves
extreme wrong; And he who always does as much as the Law allows, shall often
do more then the Law requires. For what is odious in making promises, is
commendable in making penalties; namely to express more then we intend shall
be ever strictly executed. The enraged Jews whipped Paul thrice unjustly, but
they never whipped him to the height of Justice, they bared one stroke, he had
40. stripes save one, whereas the Law admitted forty, Deuteronomy. 25. 3.

The righteousness of God calls not for an Arithmeticall proportion; at all
times, and on all occasions, to give the same award upon the same Law: but
leaves to a Geometrical proportion, that the consideration of circumstances
may either increase or allay the censure; God is not extreme to mark what is
done amiss, if he were who could abide it. In this the gods on earth must
imitate the God of Heaven.

Lastly, To judge with the righteousness of God, is to judge impartially; the
Text directs, He shall judge thy people and thy poor; When judgment runs an
even course unto all, As it is noted of David, He did justice to all his
people, 1 Samuel 13. 15. when neither, 1. Fear of greatness, Nor 2. Hope of
gain, Nor 3. Neerenesse of affection, does interrupt or clogge the passage of
justice, that is to judge by the righteousness of God.

For first, The day of God is against the Oaks of Basan, and the Cedars of
Lebanon, upon the high Mountains, and the high Towers, Isa. 2. 13, 14.

But what? does God threaten Trees, and Hills, and Towers, things insensible
either of his anger or of his favor; does he like that Persian Zerxes, menace
Mountains, cast shackles on the Waves, or whip the Ocean? Or (as the Prophet
Habbacuk questions, ^c. 3. v. 8. Was the Lord displeased against the Rivers?
was thine anger against the Rivers? was thy wrath against the Sea? So here, was
the Lord angry with Trees, or wrath with Towers? The 12. verse. resolves this.
For the day of the Lord shall be upon every one that is proud and lofty, and
upon every one that is lifted up. So Iunius glosseth, his justice shall reach
them, quamvis valentissimos, quamvis munitissimos. His Artillery will bat-ter
down men as strong as Mountains, his Axe will hew down men as tall as Cedars.

Some men there have always bin, so fortified with greatness, and as it were
so entrenched about with Titles and privileges, that the judgment of man
dares scarcely touch them; to meddle with such, it is as it were to play with
the paw of the Lion, or to sport upon the hole of the Cockatrice; but justice
when it is according to the righteousness of God, will venture upon the high
ones, upon the Cedars and the Oaks, as well as upon the lowest shrubs, and
weakest bushes.

Secondly, The righteousness of God is never bias'd or stayed by hope of
gain; Their silver and their gold shall not deliver them in the day of Gods
wrath, Ezekiel. 7. 19. And when offenders cannot soar beyond the reach of man's
justice, (though they have got wings like that Dove, in Psalm. 68. whose wings
were covered with silver, and her feathers with gold;) Then justice works on
earth as it does in Heaven. It is well when justice is blind, but it is as ill
as can be, when justice is blinded: when a gift has put out her eyes. The
hopes of some are stronger then their fears, and though they cannot be
terrified from doing justice, yet they may be persuaded. By what language
think you! One wittily calls it dialectum doricam, the dorick dialect, or the
language of gifts. Hosea observed and reprooved such in the Commonwealth of
Israel; Her Rulers, (or as the Original has it, her Shields; noting, that
Rulers should be Shields to protect the innocent) with shame Love, give ye.
Chap. 4. 18. This love corrupts man from the righteousness of God.

Lastly, neerenesse whether in regard of alliance or of acquaintance, hinders
not the course of judgment, when it is ordered by the righteousness of God;
Though Coniah were the signet upon my right hand (says God) yet I would pluck
him thence, Ier. 22. 24. The justice of God knows no relations: He that made
them will not have mercy on them, and he that formed them will show them no
favor, Isa. 27. 11.

This was the honor of the Tribe of Levi, of whom it is said, Deuteronomy. 33. 9.
(when they had received warrant from Moses, Exodus 32. 27. Put every man his
Sword by his side, and slay every man his brother, and every man his companion,
and every man his Neighbor:) Who said unto his Father, and to his Mother, I
have not known him, neither did he acknowledge his own brethren, nor knew
his own children. It was a noble resolution, if it had been upon a right
ground, when Saul, in 1 Samuel 14. thus protests, Though the fault be found in
Jonat^an my Son, he shall surely dye: And that was a more noble execution
(for it was well grounded) of Asa who remooved his own Mother from being
Queen, because she made an Idol in a Grove, 2 Chro. 15. 16.

Affection is usually a strong impediment in the way of justice. It is no easy
thing to see a fault, It is very hard to censure it in those we love. Which
gave the occasion of that speech, Exuit personam judicis, quisquis amici
induit; When there is either a natural or civil tie upon a Magistrate, he is
quickly overcome, to take every probability for a proof, every presumption for
a demonstration, both of the innocence of his friends person, and of the equity
of his cause.

But that which the faith of God does to relations when they would hinder from
Christ, Luke 14. 26. The same does the righteousness of God to relations when
they would hinder from judgment. It makes us (as Christ there warnes) hate
Father, and Mother, and Wife, and Children, and Brethren, and Sisters: That is,
it breaks all ties, whether natural or civil, when they stand in the way,
and would stop it from running impartially unto all.

So says the Text, He shall judge thy people with righteousness, the
indefinite is universal, all thy people.

But if justice incline to any side with favor, it is toward the poor, that
sort of men are named in the Text, He shall defend thy poor. The poor are
instanced in special, for 3. Reasons. First, because the poor are usually
most oppressed. And Secondly, most flighted. And Thirdly, the poor are least
able to help themselves: therefore they are commended by name to the care of
Magistrates; God cares most for his poor, and men ought.

There is one thing very emphaticall in the Text, which may be as a Nail to
fasten home, the thought of judgment by the righteousness of God, upon all
that are in the place of God; it is said, they are Gods people, and Gods poor;
Thy people, and thy poor; Gods people and Gods poor must be judged with Gods
Judgment, and with Gods righteousness; God is their portion for ever, and his
righteousness ought to be their portion here. God will be very angry if they
have it not; If Magistrates had a people of their own, they might judge them
with their own righteousness. What Christ speaks in the Gospel, holds in
this case, May not I do what I please with my own; Indeed Princes might do
what they would with people, if they were their own: but this particle Thy,
shows that God is estated in them, they are his people, and the lot of his
inheritance. This made Solomon pray so hard for wisdom to govern, because he
knew they were not his own whom he governed: Give thy servant an understanding
heart to judge Thy people, for who is able to judge this Thy so great a people,
1 King. 3. 9.

It is a truth indeed, that the people of Israel were Gods people, in a more
peculiar manner, then any whole Nation upon the earth is at this time; there is
no whole Nation has such a privilege, and are the people of God in so strict
a sense, as they were; for they were all as a Church, and Christ had as many
subjects among the Jews, as the King had; because they were all at once taken
into covenant with God; It is not so in any Nation now upon the earth. But yet
God has his special Covenant people, his peculiar ones in every Nation, who
are the special charge of Princes; and though all others are Gods people, as
men, and the Princes charge too, yet for the sake of these chiefly, Governors
are set up, and Princes sit upon the Throne; If Christ had done his work
concerning these, he would quickly put down all rule, and all authority, and
all power; yea then Christ would lay down his government also, then shall the
Son also himself be subject unto him that put all things under him, that God
may be all in all: So the Apostle, 1 Cor. 15. 24, 29.

Wherefore, what the Holy Ghost speaks in reference unto every particular man's
government of himself: that no man ought to abuse himself, or make his body
an instrument in sin; Why not? You have your bodies from God, says he, and
you are not your own; Ye are bought with a price, you are not your own,
therefore glorify God in your body, and in your spirit which are Gods, 1 Cor.
6. 19, 20. This I say is true concerning all Princes and Magistrates who
govern others, they have their people given them by God, and they are not
their own, and therefore they ought to glorify God by their people, and in
their people, for they are Gods. Kings are trusted by God with the keeping of
his people, who are his inheritance and his jewels. Their charge and duty in
this is as great as their privilege. Hence the account which the Holy Ghost
gives concerning the reign of David, is, That after he by the will of God had
served his generation, he fell on sleep; Acts 13. 36. David a King, a glorious
King, and he that made this prayer in the Text, has the whole Story of his
reign summed up thus; After he had served his generation by the will of God,
he fell asleep; His honor was to serve his generation: And as if he never
waked an hour for himself, as soon as that work was done which the will of
God set him, he fell a sleep. Be ye thus wise (like David) O ye Kings, be
instructed ye Judges of the earth, Ps. 2. 10.

Now as the consideration whose they are whom Kings and Magistrates judge,
should move them to serve Christ in it with fear: So the consideration of that
excellent fruit which springs from it should move them to serve Christ with joy.

This leads me to the third Point; Namely, the Blessing which from the
discharge of that duty by those Endowments flows out upon a whole Kingdom.

This third Doctrine will be as a motive to the former, it may provoke them
with a holy ambition to be exceeding active and abundant in the work of the
Lord, forasmuch as their labor is not, cannot be in vain in the Lord. Look
upon the fruit, is it not pleasant to the eye? is it not a fruit to be desired
to make a Prince and a people happy? So the Mountains shall bring forth peace,
and the little hills by righteousness; do you think nothing shall be got by
it? there is no way for a King, for a people to thrive, like, yea there is none
but the way of righteousness; and therefore as soon as the work is set
down, the reward follows, as soon as the business is put upon their
shoulders, the blessing is put into their hands; If you will thus judge, the
Mountains and the hills shall bring forth peace by righteousness.

Judgment administered by Righteousness brings forth an universal blessing
upon a Nation. I say an universal blessing. For as Righteousness comprehends
in it all the virtues of a King (the Philosopher tells us, it is not (...)
Arist. quim ^ Eth. c. 1.
(...), A part of virtue, but it is all of virtue) So Peace includes all the
blessings of a people, or the confluence of all good things. And Hills and
Mountains reach all places, every corner of the Kingdom; there is a great
Emphasis in it, when he says, The Hills and the Mountains shall bring forth
Peace: Some refer it unto the nature of the Country of Judea, which was a
mountainous Country, and therefore when he says, The hills and the mountains
should bring forth peace, he means the whole Country should be peaceable. Or
he speaks it, because Hills and Mountains are usually barren places, if then
they bring forth blessings all places must needs abound with them. Or lastly,
The Holy Ghost speaks thus, because Hills and Mountains are commonly the
places of Robbers, and the retreat of spoylers. Hence in the Psalm they are
called the Mountains of prey. Therefore, as when God promises by the Prophet
Isaiah (Chap. 60. 17.) in the latter days to make the officers among his
people peace, and their Exactors righteousness; he means, that he will so
reform all degrees of men, that all shall be peaceful and righteous; because
officers, especially exactors are furthest from both; therefore when they mend,
all will. So when he promises that the Mountains shall bring forth peace, he
means every place shall.

You may be sure to have peace, when your mountains shall bring forth peace;
when those mountains which heretofore were mountains of prey, and hills of the
Robbers shall be a quiet habitation; when peace shall not be walled up in
Cities, or fenced in by Bulwarks, but the open Fiel^s and highways, the
mountains and the hills shall yield it abundantly, under every hedge and under
every green Tree, there shall you find it: When the Cottagers and the
Mountaneers shall have their fill of it, when they shall eat and be satisfied,
lie down and none shall make them afraid, then the blessing is universal: And
this is the work of righteousness.

As our spiritual peace was purchased and established by Righteousness, so is
likewise civil peace, and all civil blessings; there was nothing in the world
but trouble and vexation, tribulation and anguish upon every soul, until
Righteousness came into the world; but when righteousness came, then came
peace, spiritual peace: so the Prophet Isaiah 32. 17. The work of
Righteousness shall be peace; and the effect of Righteousness, quietness and
assurance for ever. Hence Christ, Hebr. 7. 2. is called a Prince of
Righteousness, Melchisedech, he is the true Melchisedech, and then he is also
King of Salem, which is by interpretation, King of Peace. The very same method
which was used for the obtaining and settling of spiritual peace, for the
reconciling of God unto man, the very same method (I say) must be used for the
settling of civil peace, and for the reconciling of man to man; manure and till
the Land with righteousness, and it will bring forth peace all over.

If it be so then, we see here first, why it was, or what was the reason,
that the Mountains and the Hills brought forth war, and trouble; If the
Mountains bring forth peace by righteousness, then they bring forth war by
unrighteousnes, that is a clear Inference.

While we had, and still have amongst us some who are enemies to all
Righteousness, as the Apostle characters Elimas the Sorcerer, Act. 13. 10. And
while there are so many, who are enemies to all righteous persons (for these
are ashamed to profess themselves enemies to Righteous^esse, but they are not
ashamed to be enemies to those who are righteous, they pretend love to the
notion of Righteousness, but they cannot abide the profession of
Righteousness. They like holiness, as it is bound up and clasped in the
Book, but practiced and acted in the life, especially if acted to the life
they cannot endure it) While I say there are so many enemies to all righteous
persons, can we be to seek why the Mountains brought forth war? while there
are some filled with all unrighteousness, as the Gentiles are described in
Roman. 1. 29. and while there are so many friends to all unrighteousness, can
we be ignorant why the Mountains brought forth war? While error was
maintained, which is unrighteousness in opinion; while Idolatry was winked at,
and superstition contended for, which are unrighteousness in worship; while
profaneness was encouraged, which is unrighteousness in practice; while
oppression was countenanced, which is unrighteousness in Government; can any
one be to learn, why the Mountains and the Hills brought forth War? While
Judgment was turned into Gall, and the fruit of Righteousness into Hemlocke
are ye not taught, why the Mountains brought forth war? While many (as this
Text calls them) of Gods people and of Gods poor, who are (in another Text,
Isa. 61.) called Trees of Righteousness, were stubbed up and rooted out of
most places in the Kingdom, not only from great Towns and Cities, but from
the very Mountains and H^lls; so that they could not live quietly any where;
are we not taught why the Mountains and the Hills brought forth war? Those
Trees of Righteousness are styled in the same place, The plantation of the
Lord; while men were busy to root up the plantation of the Lord; Is it any
wonder if the Lord by the Iron-hand of the Sword rooted up their Plantations?
who sees not clearly in the Glass of this Truth, why and by what our
Mountains and our Hills have brought forth war? it has been by
unrighteousness.

Now at this day there is a great cry for that, which is the promise of the
Text; There is a great cry for Peace, desire is upon the wing to over-take and
recall our departing if not departed peace. And it is our duty to cry after it.
Follow peace (is the command of God, Hebr. 12. 14.) The word signifies not only
to prosecute, but to persecute, Follow peace with as much love to embrace it,
as a persecutour follows an innocent person, with hatred to destroy him.
Follow Peace, though like a hunted beast it flies from you (so much the
Metaphor will bear) Follow this noble game (though it be upon a very cold
sent) with heat of spirit. Only let the point in hand direct us in this
purs^it. For what though all the people of the Nation cry for Peace, and what
though the King and Parliament at this day treat for Peace? yet all this cannot
obtain peace, unless there be a cry after, a Treaty about, yea an entreating
for Righteousness; See not my face (says Ios^ph) unless your younger Brother
come with you: So (says Peace) see not my face, unless my Elder Sister, or
rather my Mother Righteousness come along with you; if we should travel for
Peace without this, we shall but wander in a Maze, and more entangle our selves
in trouble. It is only the golden thread of righteousness that can lead us
through through the Laborinth of our present distractions unto rest; Who weeps
not to see the wounds of this Nation, weeping blood every day? and yet if we
should skin over those wounds, before righteousness has searched them to the
bottom; I tremble to think how quickly they will fester, and either striking
inward kill the heart, or breaking outward fill the whole body with a sore. Who
mournes not over our breaches, and yet if we shall go about to daube them up
with untempered mortar, and such is all that (though it have never so many
sublimated Ingredients of humane wisdom and State-policies) all that I say is
untempered mortar, which is not mixed and made up with righteousness. If we dawbe
with that, I tremble to think how quickly our wall will fall, and who can
imagine how great the fall thereof will be?

That which those Enemies spoke scoffingly, and spoke falsely concerning the
wall which Nehemiah had built, and the people of God, who helped with him,
Nehem. 4. 3. If a Fox go up, he shall even break down their stone wall; The
same we may speak truly and in good earnest concerning any wall of Peace, that
should be built, and not by righteousness, if but a Fox go up upon it, down it
will fall again.

For this is a certain Conclusion, That whatsoever the Fox alone, I mean
subtilty and humane policy builds, that the Fox subtlety and humane policy is
able to pull down again; the Foxes could not pull down, no nor the Ram
batter down the wall that Nehemiah had built, and why? Because men ( though as
wise as Serpents yet) as innocent as Doves built it; What the wisdom of
Innocence does, all the power of policy cannot undo.

You see then what course must be taken, what must he done, that the Mountains
and hills, that your Towns and Cities may bring forth peace; set righteousness
a work, or work by righteousness, and then your peace is wrought; The
pleasant Olive branches of peace grow and flourish, out of the acts and
administrations of justice; once part with the justice of a Nation, and you
part with the peace of a Nation; when the Sword of justice glisters, the Sword
of war shall rust; draw out the Sword of righteousness, and God will sheath
his Sword of wrath. The Psalmist assures us this in Psalm. 106. 3. Blessed are
they that keep judgment, and he that does righteousness at all times; (at
all times:) Every thing (says the Kingpreacher) is beautiful in its season;
Then righteousness is ever beautiful, for this Scripture warrants it in
season always. There are some now who greatly desire this blessing of peace,
but they are greatly afraid, this is not a time to be exact in righteousness,
or to stand strictly upon judgment; These would be wiser then God: would they
not? he says, blessed are they that keep judgment and do righteousness at
all times.

Ob. But affirmitive commands do not bind ( ad semper) at all times to the
doing of them.

An. 1. It ought to be our earnest desire and utmost endeavor to do them at
all times.

An. 2. It is best if we can do them at all times.

An. 3. The times are very rare wherein they cannot be done. God very seldom
casts his people into such streights as loosen the knot of his commands.

An. 4. Be sure those times and those streights be of Gods making, not of ours.
If either our own groundless fear, or heedlesse folly casts us into them,
this Maxim is no defense.

Ob. But David himself forbore to do righteousness at some time. Blood was
treacherously shed almost in his own presence, and yet he spares the murderer,
2 Samuel 3. 27, 28.

An. 1. All the policies of holy David were not holy. The infirmities of good
men must not be our rules. It is not safe for us on earth to go by the falls
of such as are now in Heaven.

An. 2. If the fear of David had not bin too hard (at that boute) for his
faith, he had never said, v. 29. I am weak, and these Sons of Zerviah are too
hard for me. Too hard for thee David? so was Goliath. Goliath was a more unequal
match for David, then Ioab was; And yet he says not, This mighty Giant is too
hard for me. When says is strong, every thing is weak to us: for then we work
in the Power of God. Had David believed as much, he might have received as much
assistance in his judgment upon Ioab, as in his combat with Goliath.

I believe David by such an Act of Justice, could not have provoked a greater
party against him, then Hezekiah in all probability might have done, by
breaking in pieces the Brazen Serpent, once Gods own institution, and then the
peoples Idol, 2 King. 18. 4. But the Text answers enough for him, if he had
done a more daring piece of Justice then this. v. 5. He trusted in the Lord God
of Israel; so that after him was none like him among all the Kings of Judah,
nor any that were before him. Unparale'ld Faith will bring forth unparal^l'd
Justice. He did not stand questioning, Sirs, do ye think This will take with
the people? This I know is right, but will the Kingdom bear it? Go enquire,
how the City will like this; and how the Country? The thing is just, But as I
hear, I shall do. Either Hezekiah had none of these thoughts, or he conquered
them.

And yet I urge not this as if the dangers and consequences of just acts might
not be debated. Faith bids us be wise as well as resolute.

Neither do I urge it as if I would have utmost justice on every man, for
every offense. That were indeed to write Laws (as the Athenian Dracoes were
said to be) in blood; which the Rule given before (that justice must not be
rigorous) utterly disclaimes.

My ai^e is only this; That when justice stays her hand, wisdom not
jealousy, mercy to men, not fear of men should stay it; And that as at all
times the Magistrate should be zealous for justice, so especially at this time.
For though there is no time wherein judgment and righteousness are not
seasonable; yet at some times they are more. When God is laying Judgment to
the line, and righteousness to the plummet, Isa. 28. 17. then surely man
ought. That Is our case now, the righteous God is at work amongst us in
Judgment: Happy are they whom he finds so doing.

For when the blast of the terrible ones is as a storm against the wall, Isa.
25. 4. such shall be housed; Is not that the promise by the same Prophet? Isa.
26. 2. Open ye the gates, that the righteous Nation which keeps the truth may
enter in, him will thou establish in perfect peace, etc. The word is peace,
peace, in a double peace, in all peace, in everlasting peace, in that peace
which the world can neither give nor take away.

If we follow righteousness, we shall be sure that either our war will
quickly conclude in peace, or that our peace shall be a concurrent with the
war: It is true, that war and peace, in propriety of speech are
inconsistent: Such contraries as that, a whole Kingdom is not big enough to
hold them. But take peace in a qualified sense, and then not only
righteousness and peace, but also war and peace may kiss each other. A
prosperous war, is accounted peace; So David enquired, 2 Samuel 11. 7. of
Vriah. concerning the peace of the War, (which we translate) he enquired how
the war prospered.

I confess it is very hard to say, what we can call the prosperity of this
war. Ours is a sad war. Only we must not be scandalized; for Christ (the
Prince of Peace) has told us, that he came (not that it was intended but
occasioned by his coming) to set a man at variance against his Father, and the
Daughter against her Mother, and the Daughter in Law against the Mother in Law.
And a man's enemies shall be they (not only of his own Kingdom, but) of his
own household. Be not offended if in some cases where nature bids agree, the
Gospel bids devide. Yet, (if we may have it, and Christ no looser peace is not
only better then war, but better then victory.

We will therefore briefly look upon the last Point, which is the Means, by
which such Endowments may be obtained for Princes and Magistrates, by which
they executing judgment and righteousness, fill their Lands, and fill their
houses, and (which is best of all) fill their own hearts with peace in kind,
and with peace in the fruit of it, blessings of every kind. That is Prayer;

Give the King thy judgments O God, and thy righteousness unto the Kings
Son; David has a great request to God, and it was his dying request, That
Solomon might be endowed with judgment and righteousness. His practice is our
duty, let our hearts and tongues join in this great petition; Give the King
thy judgments O God, he shall bring forth our peace. The Apostle charges us
with the same duty, and encourages us with the same hopes, 1 Timothy 2. 1. I
exhort (says he) that first of all supplications, prayers intercessions and
giving of thanks be made for all men: For Kings and all that are in authority,
that we may lead a quiet and peaceable life in all godliness and honesty.

We are engaged to this, First, while we consider that a spirit of government,
is the special gift of God; And that which God gives, prayer must obtain; The
right government of a people is a thing so high and noble, as that God will be
acknowledged the Author of it; Administrations of justice, and the ruling of
men, is too excellent a fruit to spring from the stock of man; and therefore
give the King thy judgments O God.

No mere man was ever borne fit to govern himself, much less to govern
others; Many have bin borne heirs to a Kingdom, but none were ever borne
qualified to rule a Kingdom. The best of nature has not the least mixture of
Gods righteousness in it.

The art of tilling the earth comes from Heaven, Isa. 28. 24. Does the plowman
plow all day to sow? does he open and break the clods of the ground? when he
has made plain the face thereof, does he not cast abroad the Fitches, and
scatter the Cummin, and cast in the principal Wheat, and the appointed
Barley, and the Rye in their place? Yes that he does. But whence has he this
skill: He is Gods Scholar, even he, so the Prophet goes on to tell us, v. 26.
For his God does instruct him to discretion and does teach him. When his crop
is in the Barn, he threshes it with a threshing instrument, etc. And of whom
learnt he this? Learn the answer from the Prophet, v. 29. This also comes
forth from the Lord of Hosts, who is wonderful in council, and excellent in
working.

If the Husbandman be taught of God to plow the ground and thresh his corn;
works which seem to lie level with Nature; Then surely Kings must be taught
of God, that transcendent mystery, To govern Men, to manure Nations. They who
are borne of the most Noble Progenitors, yea, they who are borne of the most
Holy Progenitors, are borne with nothing as from nature, but with cruelty in
their hearts, and with violence in their hands; Therefore pray, Give the King
thy judgments O God.

Secondly, If we consider the condition of Kings, we had need to pray this
prayer; the estate of Magistracy is an estate full of care; The Crown of a
King is set with rich stones, but it is lined with cares; And they who have
many cares, had need of many prayers: prayers of their own, and prayers from
others; The Apostles counsel is, Be careful in nothing, but in all things
with prayer and supplication make your requests known to God; as nothing, that
care would eat a man out quickly, unless prayer do preserve him.

There is many a man consumed, with the care of a single family, yea some are
consumed with the care of single self: what then think you, may the cares of
a whole Kingdom, what the care of three Kingdoms do upon one man, unless
prayer prop him up: therefore pray, Give the King thy judgments O God.

Thirdly, They that are encompassed with temptations, had need be encompassed
about with prayers, and intercessions; To be a King is a temptation; No man
knows what his heart wo^ld be, if he had so much power as a King, in his hand;
as he said once, can you tell me what you would be, if you were a Lion? if to
be a rich man be a temptation, if to have riches be a temptation, then much
more to be a King, to be the Earthly Center of Power, is a temptation; To be
rich is so great a temptation, that Christ tells us, It is a hard thing for a
richman to enter into the Kingdom of Heaven, harder then for a Camel to go
through the eye of a needle; If baggs of money, if Lands and Houses be such
temptations, what are Crowns and Scepters?

And as the very estate it self of a King is a temptation, so there are
multitudes of temptations waiting upon, and hanging about that estate: A King
can hardly set his foot out of his Chamber-doore, but he treads upon a
temptation. A King can hardly hear a word, I was about to say a Sermon, but he
hears a temptation, (some Sermons have more temptations in them, then
instructions,) he can hardly cast an eye, but he looks upon a temptation; Now
seeing a King has so many temptations about him, let him have store of prayers
about him. Prayer is the best Antidote against temptation. Especially when we
pray for Him, as Christ teaches every one to pray for himself with others.
Lord, lead not the King into temptation.

Lastly, The Kings heart is in the hand of God, Pro. 21. 1. And the hand of God
is (ordinarily) in the prayers of his people. God moves Kings, and prayer moves
God. A Kings heart is so high, that nothing can reach it but God. And God is so
high that nothing can reach him but prayer. When a people have lost the key of
their Kings heart, prayer is a golden pick-lock to open it.

Further, prayer does not only prevail with God to open the lock of a Kings
heart, but (when need is) to fashion it anew.

The Lord (says David, Psalm. 33. 13, 14, 15.) looks down from Heaven, and
he beholds all the sons of men: From the place of his habitation, he
beholds all the Inhabitants of the Earth, he fashioneth their hearts alike
(Alike) Not that the hearts of all men are cast in the same mould. Indeed the
hearts of all men by nature are cast in the same mould, they are of the same
Make, As face answers face in the water, so do the hearts of the children of
men; That is, they are all sinful. But if their hearts were in all respects
alike, their thoughts and counsels, and actions would be a like too; but the
truth is, there is not so much difference in the faces of men, as there is in
the hearts of men; and therefore we cannot understand the Psalm thus, that God
makes all men's hearts of the same likeness: But take the meaning thus; when
God looks from Heaven, and beholds all the Inhabitants of the Earth, he can
fashion the heart of one alike, as he fashioneth the heart of another, that is,
look as ^ee is able to fashion the heart of a mean man, so he is able to
fashion the heart of a mighty man; as he is able to fashion the heart of a
Subject, so he is able to fashion the heart of a King. Thus he fashions their
hearts alike; when we put the heart of a King into the hand of God to fashion,
we put a curious pee^e into his hand. The heart of a King, is the most curious
piece of work in the world. Yet God can alike, namely, as soon, and with as
much ease, fashion and frame that curious piece, as he does the plainest piece
in the world; he fashions all their hearts alike, and therefore if we would
have the heart of a King fashioned, we must put it out to God; who only can do
it, and who can easily do it. Now there is nothing can carry a Kings heart to
fashioning unto God but only Prayer; therefore you see the necessity of this
duty. Then, let the King pray this Prayer for himself. Kings should not put
all prayer-worke out to others, it is better to get a Blessing then to have it.
Then, let us pray this Prayer for the King. It is a duty, which we have as much
need to pay unto our King, as any people under Heaven. Then pay this Tribute of
Prayer unto the King, it may be a richer revenue to him, then all that he has
in the world besides, This may bring him in greater honor, greater glory, and
greater prosperity, then all that ever, our purses, or our persons, our
councels or our endeavors can bring him in.

And me thinks we are now in a special manner engaged to it at this time.

First, The whole Kingdom shakes now; then surely the Throne (that being the
Basis of it) cannot stand so fast as heretofore, therefore pray thus, For His
Throne is established in Righteousness, Prove. 25. 5. Judgment and
Righteousness are the Pillars of the State: and stronger Supporters of the
Kings Arms then the Lion or the Unicorn.

Secondly, We who desire the fashioning of so many things, both in Church and
Commonwealth by the hand of our King, had need pray that our Kings heart may
be exactly fashioned by the hand of God.

Thirdly, We who have complained long, That the heart of our King is stolen
away from us, how shall we rescue and fetch it back again, but by prayer.
Though any other course should gain his person to us, yet no other course can
gain his heart to us. Holy Prayers will at last over-match unholy Counsels.

Again, We complain that Judgment is turned backward, and that
Righteousness cannot enter: What should we do then, but pray that God would
give the King his judgments and his Righteousness; And if we cannot yet say
(as that Bishop resolved Austins Mother, in the case of him, her Son) That a
King of so many prayers (as have hitherto been made) cannot possibly miscarry;
yet let us resolve to add, and to add so many prayers as may (if it be
possible put it to an impossibility, that He should miscarry; or that the great
businesses now before him should. That so His Majesty judging with
Righteousness and his people obeying with cheerfullnesse, The Mountains may
bring forth peace to All, and All may bring Glory to God in advancing the
Kingdom of our Lord Jesus Christ.

I know this uses to be a day of annoynting the King with praises. I believe we
shall do a more acceptable service both to God and His Majesty: If we turn
Praises into Prayers, and our Encomion of him, into a cry to Heaven for him: he
has more of the Subject in him, that commends the King to God, then he that
commends him among men.

I know likewise that this uses to be a day of Rejoicing in and for the King:
What shall I say? May I not say as the Story tells us in Ezra 3. 12. When the
foundation of the second Temple was laid, The voice of the shout could not be
heard from the voice of weeping: Have we not all cause to take up a Lamentation
for our King this day? Ought not our Harp this day (as Job speaks) to be
turned into mourning, and our Organ into the voice of them that weep? Ought we
not (with that Mourner in the Psalm) to eat ashes like bread, and to mingle our
drink with tears? When God makes a change in times, it becomes us to make a
change also. The Storke in the Heavens, the Turtle, the Crane and the Swallow,
These will reprove us, if we know not the judgment of the Lord, Ier. 8. 7. At
such a time as this, we (as Solomon, Eccles. 2. 2.) may say of Laughter it is
madd, and of mirth what does it? Times of trouble are times of Sorrow. Then,
there is nothing now musical but sighs, no Song in Tune, but a Lamentation.

Yea, I hope it will not be distasteful, I know it is seasonable at this time
to say even unto the King and unto the Queen, as the Prophet Jeremiah directs
in the 13. of his Prophecy 18. Say unto the King and unto the Queen, sit
down, humble your selves: I will not add that which follows, I have no
Commission for it, for your Principalities shall come down, even the Crown of
your glory. But thus much I may say to the King and to the Queen, humble your
selves, sit down; for the glory and beauty of your Principalities are very
much darkened and obscured, even the Crown of your glory. O The darkness that
is upon Ireland, O the darkness and the death that sits upon the face of this
your Kingdom of England! Therefore it were seasonable to say unto the King and
to the Queen, if present, and I shall say it of them though absent, Sit down
and humble your selves, for your Principalities are much fallen from their
former beauty; yea I would say thus much more unto the King and unto the
Queen; humble your selves, sit down, that your principalities, may be
restored to their former beauty, even the Crown of your Glory. When Princes
are humbled their Principalities cannot be long unsettled. That which the
Apostle James speaks concerning all, is as true concerning Kings, as any,
Humble your selves under the mighty hand of God, Ye Mighty ones, that Ye may be
exalted in due time.

Let us all humble our selves under the mighty hand of God, let us in stead of
exulting and rejoicing tremble before God in confessing how We and our King,
our Princes, our Nobles, our Magistrates, and our Prophets, have all sinned
before our God, and have therefore given him just cause to cast down this
whole Principality, even the Crown of all our glory. If we shall this day
thoroughly plow up our hearts, and going forth weeping, bear this precious
Seed; we may at the next day of this Solemnity, come hither again with joy,
and bring our Sheaves of Comfort with us. Against that Feast, I hope Christ
will work this miracle for us (little less then a miracle can do it) turn
our water into wine; And give us beauty for Ashes, the garment of praise for
this spirit of Heaviness.

FINIS.
Errata in some Copies.
Page 5 l 12. for Suam read Suum^ Page 14 l 30. for Blood read Bloody.


