A CURSE Against Parliament-Ale.

With a Blessing to the JVNCTO; a Thanksgiving to the Council of STATE; and a
Psalm to OLIVER.

Tom Randal did once, in a merry Tale,
Write the Commendations of a Pot of Good Ale:
Revealing what Cures, and Griefs it did ease,
And all sorts of People comfort and please:
But now our Damned Juncto, to add Sorrow to Grief,
Have Robbed us all, of our best Relief:
That Causes my Muse at the Rebels to Rail,
That Eight Years have Sat, to Reform our Ale.
We praying this Curse may soon on them fall,
Their Wives, and their Children; A pox take them all.
NOD-NOL: Printed for the good of the State. 1649.

A CURSE Against Parliament-Ale.
BAse Miscreants, Rebels, could ye not invent
Some other Plague in your damned PARLIAMENT
To vex good-fellows, but you must put down
Strong-Ale, the chief upholder of the Crown?
Sure, sure you feared (since you have mischief wrought)
That we should curse you every Mornings draught;
Talk of your usurped Power, and in conclusion
Turn off a Double Pott to your confusion.
What made ye else to Act against our good,
And put down ALE, the nourisher of blood?
Alas, I knew your hellish PLOTT before,
'Cause you shed blood, you would have us breed no more.
Or does your tainted souls in reason think
'Cause we want Meat, to keep us from our Drink:
Now against winter too, in snow and Frost,
Basely to rob us of our POTT and TOSSED!
The ancient DRINK of England to forbid!
The cursedst Act the Juncto ever did:
'Twas all our TRADING now, to tell a Tale,
And repeat wrongs over a Pott of ALE:
Tell the sad Story of Good CHARLES his Fate,
How you have Reformed Monarchy to State:
How fruitful since your time the Church is grown,
That has a Thousand Heresies for one.
What Acts and Laws ye make; and what observe,
What ye have done: and what your Deeds deserve;
What Rule ye Rule by; By what Power ye sway,
And seek our good, the clean contrary way;
(...) by Oppressing you do ease oppression,
And of the Deadly sins Vote no Transgression.
How you do thrive by Theft, and live by murder;
Go on in Fraud, till you can go no further;
And when on top of all your haughty pride
Make your selves Saints by acting Regicide.
With such Discourse the time we did beguile,
Whilst every one club'd round his Pott the while,
To season grief, and banish base despair,
And ease our minds of Poverty and Care.
But since Strong ALE is now departed hence,
Thus will we CURSE his Small-beer Excellence.
The Juncto, Army, that procure our woe,
My Curse light on them, and the Peoples too.
A Blessing to the Juncto.
MAY Tom of the North, with Pride and his froath, his Yest-Tubb, Hoggs-heads,
Barrel;
be filled with Small-Beer, that never yet was Clear, that the Rebels may drink
till they Quarrel.
May Noll Cromwels Grace, with his Copper in his Face, drink what a Bogge
invites him:
let his Nose stick in Mudde, as his hands are brewed in Blood, and a guilty
Conscience affright him.
May his Lifeguard Conspire, and his Nose loose the fire, Strong-Ale at first
infused:
may he all Curses have, till he comes to his Grave, that has a whole Kingdom
abused.
May Ireton that Rebel, march quickly to Hell, and for Thirst like Dives
complain:
may Noll and he, and all their Progeny, never drink strong-Ale again.
May perpetual Thirst, make them al still Accursed, in hunger let them pine:
and never let them drink, but water that does stink, or the dreggs of some
poisonous Wine.
May their Food be Hopps and Grayns, and all end their Reigns, at Tyburn take
their Degrees:
like to Absalom, let them come still short home, and end all their lives on
Trees.
Let Bradshaw take a Bribe, to betray all the Tribe, as he has done his King:
and after he has done, into Perdition run, and end his life with a Swing.
Let Sir Harry Mildmay; like Judas betray; their Cause in his whimsy-fitt:
and when with his Maid, he has often played, be taken in the Gravel-pitt.
Let Steel, Cook, and Wild, that have so often beguild, the Kingdom of their
Right:
do Justice at last, and all the Rebels Cast, that against their Sovereign
fight.
Let Pride with his Sling, that Reigns like a King, be sod in his own Fatt:
his Children and Wife, live at variance and strife, and his Cattle die all of
the Rott.
Let Hewson fight his Last, and in his Ends be still crossed, with clean and
pleasant weather:
may his Knife and Threads break, and his Soul spring a leak, and his skin be
tan'd to make Leather.
May Whitlock have his Due, that yet was never True, to Gospel, Law, or Reason:
and when he does depart, I wish with all my heart, he may Suffer for High
Treason.
May Martin and his Punk, be every day Drunk, until a Surfeit speed them:
and when they be poor, run still on the Score, and the Chyrurgion deny to
Bleed them.
May Peter's Preach and Fight, and in Sedition delight, till his Tongue do set
all on Fire:
and in the conclusion, some sudden Confusion, frustrate the Rebels desire.
May Corbet the Jew, that yet was never true, be stoned through Loathbury:
and like Doctor Lamb, be sent from whence he came, or be Chained in Charons
Ferry.
May Okey and his Rout, of Dragoons face about, and once again brew Small-Beer:
may they wait for the Day, and always miss their Pay, or be Rowted twice in a
year.
May Lenthall that Athiest, turn Alcymist, and Cheat the State of their Coin:
that he may Buy Land, and Cole have Command, of all he does Purloyn.
May Whalley and Rich, and Barksteed and such, base scums, as Deshury, Sanders:
when these Wars do cease, and once we have a Peace, be hanged for
High-way-standers.
May Lilburn from the Tower, overthrow all their Power, and his
Levellers Rise and prevail:
may they hang up Committees, that undo Towns and Cities, and lay all
Excize-men in Jayle.
May the old doting Mayor, fall into Despair, and the wise Aldermen of the City:
like Perjured Elves, fall mad and hang themselves, and their Case let no man
pity.
May the Common Counsel sit, without Money or Wit, to Raise a new Sum for the
Army:
then let Noll Return, and your City Sack and Burn, and the Juncto the whilst
dis-arm ye.
May Alderman Bide, get the uper hand of Pride, and Scarlet still adorn him:
and when he does fail, to Brew more Strong Ale, pray Vulcan his Wife may Horn
him.
May all Countries Rise, and Pay no Excize, till King CHARLES be set on His
Throne:
may they Raise new Force, of Money, Men, and Horse, and seek to secure their
own.
May their Navy all Sail, by some unlucky Gale, to Dunkirk or Oastend:
when their Saylors be drunk, let their Ships be all sunk, and their Piracy
come to an end.
May the Blood they have shed, and their King Murdered, aloud for vengeance Cry:
till the Heavens do send, some Plague for their end, that have destroyed
Monarchy.
May the Church Lands, lie still on their Hands, and he be Cursed that Buys
them:
against the will of the Dead, when themselves are Buried, just Heaven will
sure deny them.
May all the Kings Goods, His Parks, Chases, Woods, His Children now distressed:
be delivered from their Paws, that will observe no Laws, and the People that
do it Blessed.
May their several Vows, that no breaking allows, their Oaths and Perjuries:
besides their murder and stealth, and the wronged Commonwealth, procure their
Miseries.
May their Pitts, Nets, and Traps, made for others Mishaps, procure their
sudden woe:
and when they be Dead, lie Unburied, and their Souls to the Devil go.
May their Wives turn all Jades, and live on their Trades, and their Children
be marked like Cain:
may they never have a day, of Comfort or Joy, till CHARLES the Second do Reign.
Amen.
A Thanksgiving to the Army.
MOst Powerful, and Puissant Conquerers, that by your Might in Wickedness, have
overcome and cut off our most Rightful and Gracious King, subdued our Laws,
filled our Land with Schism, Heresy, Prophanness, Murders, Lies, Robberies,
etc. We bless you, we magnify you, we adore you, and acknowledge all we have
to be at the mercy of your Swords, from this time forward, Parliament
everlasting, world without end. Amen.

To the Council of State.
MAy it please you Right Horrible, Damnable, etc. The taking down the
Councel-Board, Star Chamber, and High Commission, was because they were
Tyrannical, and Obnoxious to the good and well-being of the people; And finding
you to be more Tyrannical and Wicked then ever those Courts were, We desire to
know from whence you derive your Power; And are Resolved (God willing) to Down
with you next, notwithstanding your immuring your selves in White Hall, placing
a Guard upon you, till you Commit wickedness with a high hand.

Let Juncto, Army, Devil, do what they can,
Your Ends shall be like Buckingham and Lamb.
A Hymn to CROMWELL.
To the Tune of, Let Cromwels Nose alone.
SING old Noll the Brewer, sing old Noll the Brewer,
With his Copper-face, and Ruby- Nose, now is Routed sure:
Let Cromwels nose still reign, let Cromwels nose still reign,
It Is no disgrace to his Copper-face, to Brew strong Ale again.
Tredagh he took by Storm, and there he got much Riches;
But Ards and Inchiquin, has made him wrong his Breeches.
Let Cromwels Nose still Reign, etc.
Trim and Dundalk was quit, and Noll did forward go,
Before he at Killkenny came, A lack and alas for woe.
Let Cromwels Nose still reign, let Cromwels Nose still reign,
It Is no disgrace to his Copper-face, to Brew strong Ale again.
Ormond with Irish stout, did Charge him in the Van,
And gave him there a Rowt, that killed both Horse and Man.
Let Cromwels Nose still Reign, etc.
Tredagh is now Regained, the Mount was never taken,
Most People now do think, that he will end his Reign.
Let Cromwels Nose still reign, etc.
Hugh Peter's lay for dead, and said he was not well,
One striping him, he said, He new came out of Hell.
Let Cromwels Nose still reign, etc.
Ireton was found dead, Jones had his deadly-blow,
Which made the Ely Bull to Roar, Bellow, and Lo.
Let Cromwels Nose still reign, etc.
Sure Lilly was a Witch, that did persuade his stay,
But he without his Breech, to Ireland would away.
Let Cromwels Nose still reign, etc.
Now they have hemmed him up, within a Castle sure,
The Iuncto little think, what is Lordship does endure.
Let Cromwells nose still reign, etc.
They now do say the Lawrd, did their great Cause betray
And sent them all to heaven -- the clean contrary way.
Let Cromwells nose still reign, etc.
Thus every Tyrant thrives, and every Traitor shall
Aiming to reach a Crown, into Perdition fall.
Let Cromwells Nose still reign, let Cromwels Nose still reign,
It Is no disgrace to his Copper-face, to Brew strong Ale again.
FINIS.

