CULPEPERS LAST LEGACY: Left and bequeathed to his dearest Wife, for the
public good, BEING The Choicest and most profitable of those Secrets which
while he lived were locked up in his Breast, and resolved never to be published
till after his Death.

CONTAINING Sundry admirable Experiences in several Sciences, more especially,
in Chyrurgery, and Physic, Viz.

Compounding of Medicines, Making of Waters, Syrrups, Oils, Electurries,
Conserves, Salts, Pills, Purges and Trochischs.

With two particular Treatises; the one of Fevers; the other of Pestilence; as
also other rare and choice Aphorisms* fitted to the understanding of the
meanest Capacities.

Never published before in any of his other Works.

By NICHOLAS CULPEPER, late Student in Astrology and Physic.

Printed for N. Brook at the Angel in Cornhill, 1655.

Master Culpepers Wifes Account.
HAving in my Hands these my Husbands last experiences in Physic and
Chyrurgery, etc. composed out of his daily practice, which he laid a severe
injunction on me to publish for the general good after his decease; therefore
to stop the mouths of malicious Persons, who may be apt to abuse and slander
his labors, and to discharge that duty and debt of gratitude due to his name
from one so nearly related to him, I do hereby testify that the Copy of what
is here printed is truly and really his own, and was delivered to my trust
among his choicest secrets upon his deathbed, and I do further approve the
printing thereof, and having viewed them see nothing in them but what is his
own. To the truth of all which I do here subscribe my hand.

A. Culpeper.

WORTHY READERS,
My Works have hither to been so well known unto you, and have merited such
just applause in the world, though envyed by some illiterate Physicians, that I
am the more confident to go on doing that good which you have received by my
former Labors. Viz. 1. Dispensatory. 2. English Physician. 3. That
incomparable piece of Semiotica Uranica enlarged. 4. Catastrophe Magnatum. 5.
Directory for Midwifes, etc.

This my last Piece the reserve of all the rest, I had never thought to have
published, till now finding indisposition of body to be such as that I have no
other way left to continue my own fame, and that happy gratitude which I owe
to my Country, but by publishing these my last Remains, which I have left to
my d^^rest W^f^ (...) my Legacy, being the choicest Secrets which I locked up in
my breast, and never made known in any of my former Works.

And now Reader, to speak more fully in the praise of you, be confident what
thou have here, is what I have gained by my constant practice and by which I
have obtained a continual reputation in the World, not doubting but you will
receive that satisfaction and advantage which I was ever assured of my self;
and now if it shall please Heaven to put a Period to My Life and studies, that
I must bid all things under the Sun farewell: farewell my dearest wife and
Child; farewell Arts and Sciences; farewell all Worldly glories, Adiu Readers.

Nicholas Culpeper.

CHAPTER I. Of HEADACHE in general, with its several Names and Kinds.
Three sorts of pain in the head.
OF Headaches or pains in the head simply; there are three sorts, (...) in
Greek in Latin Capitis dolor, in English the Headache.

The second is called in Greek (...), (...)
in Latin Cephalaia, in English, a continued or inveterate Headache. (...).


The third is called in Greek (...), (...)
in Latin Hemicranium, in English the Megrim,

The two former possess the whole head, the latter only the one half of it.

By head I mean in all this treatise, only the scalpe or so much only of the
Head as is covered with hair.

I question whether all internal pains in the head afflict the eyes, but only
such whose seat is near the optique nerves.
And here is pain engendered sometimes without the scul, sometimes within, If it
lie within the scull, there is pain at the roots of the eyes, by reason of the
immediate influence from thence to the brain; if without the scull there is no
pain there.

The first sort of headache, called (...) comes of diverse causes, as heat,
cold, dryness, blood, choler, wind, vapor from the stomach, drunkenness,
fevers, each of which to discourse of, will require a several Chapter.

Several sorts of (...).
CHAPT. II. Of the Headache (...) coming of heat.
(...) coming of heat.
BY Heat I mean only a hot distemper without any kind of moisture or humor. It
is caused for the most part by the vehement heat of the Sun; note, that it is
extreme hurtful to the brain, to stand bareheaded in the Sun. The cause.
It is also caused by immoderate running, jogging or moving; especially to such
as are not used to it, though it be most perilous to those that are used to
it; it is caused also by being long near the fire, through anger and
furiousness, and by hot diseases, and smells of hot things.

The Signs of headache coming by heat; are besides immoderate pain, Signs.
you shall feel their Head burning hot when you touch it, their skin dryer
then it was wont to be, their eyes look red, they sleep little or not at all,
and are delighted by sprinkling or anointing their head with cold things, and
find ease by it; other causes may be known by the relation of the Patient.

Cautions for the sick.
Let the air and Chamber where the sick abides, be cold by nature, or else you
must make it so by art, as by keeping it continually washed, by strewing there
flowers and herbs, and branches of trees that are of a cold nature, Air.
as Roses, Violets, Waterlillies, Vine-leaves, Bryer-boughs, Willow boughs,
Endive, Succory, or the like, also to pour water out of one Vessel into
another, near him, to let him smell to Nose-gayes of cold flowers.

Great heed must be taken that the Patient sleep well, Sleep.
yea more than he usually was wont to do; if he sleep not well as most
laboring of this disease do not, provoke him to sleep with Diascordium; if
that will not do, use Laudanum, two grains; if that will not do, use three
grains, increasing it till it come to six; if he sleep not sooner, let his
Chamber be quiet, free from noise and wrangling, for that causes perturbation
of mind.

Let his meat be but little, Meat.
and let that little be of good digestion, as chickens, birds that delight in
Mountains and dry places, rabbets, etc. let it be dressed with cold herbs, as
lettice, endive, purslain, and verjuyce; also Almond-milke, Pomgranates,
Raisons of the Sun, Drink. I doubt water is not so good in cold countries. I
think a cool julip were better.
and ripe Pears are wholesome for him; but let him avoid Milk and all other
meats of a dilative quality, for they send vapors into the head, and are
hurtful for him.

Let his drink be water, in which a little Cinnamon has been boiled, or in
which syrrope of the juice of Succory, or the juice of Pomgranates or Lemons is
put.

Let him eschew carnal copulation, exercises, and baths, all perturbations of
the mind, especially anger, Directions negative. Affirmative Perfumes. Unction.
If cause the disease you had better use vervain gathered in the hour of take
this as a general rule.
all things that are binding, all things that cause stupefaction, as crude
opium, Mandrakes, Henbane, Poppeys, Nightshade; those things that bind much,
though they cool, must also be avoided, as juice of Quinces, Medlers, etc.

Let the sick smell to rose water mixed with vinegar, and often snuff some of
it up into his nose. Let also his forehead, temples, and that part of his head
where the pain lies most, be anointed with oil of fleabane. Let the fleabane
be gathered in the hour of Mars, he being (if it be possible) in Aries, in a
good aspect to the Moon. So will the infirmity be the easier and more speedily
cured.

Have a special care that the Patient go to stool, in good order, at the
least twice a day; Stool.
if he do not, provoke him first with a Clister, then with an ownce of lenitive
Electuary, every night when he goes to bed; for the people most incident to
this Infirmity, are such as are of a Cholerique constitution, (though the
trouble of this disease be no absolute sign of a Cholericke-man) which
complexion most commonly causes astringency.

(...) coming of cold.
CHAP. III. Of the Headache (...) coming of Cold.
BY cold I mean simply cold without any Flux of cold humors:
for that causes Lethargies: but only a cold distemper.

The cause.
This pain in the head is caused of outward cold, as by tarrying long
bareheaded in a cold air, also by sudden applying of any wet and cold, or
very cold thing to the head.

The signs of this are contrary to the signs of the other that came of a hot
distemper; for in this though the pain indeed be vehement, yet the head when
it is felt is not hot; their face and eyes do not look red, neither are they
hollow, nor shrunk, but on the contrary their face looks full and pale, and
their eyes are full and swarthy; also they desire not cold things, nor find
ease but pain by them. Cautions.


Sleep.


Air.


Let them forbear all meats cold in operation, Meats.
all fish, water-fowles and milk. Let them eat rear eggs, hens, chickens,
partridge and phesants.

For drink, let them use Wine moderately, Drink.
and generally for the cure thereof you must use things that are hot in
operation; but in the cure as well of this, as other diseases in the head, you
must diligently consider the natural temperature of the brain; for it is such
a thing as cannot endure either violent heat or violent cold.

Directions Negative.
Let not their bodies be costive, but let them have every day a stool; if not by
nature, give suppositories. Let them avoid sadness, deep speculations, and
thoughts, studying, and other immoderate affections of the mind.

Let them use moving of their body, Affirmative.
walking and if strength suffer, riding.

Oil of Vervaine, is medicinal for the disease; Motion.
let it be gathered in the day and hour of Venus, she ascending fortunately.
Also, Rue, Laurel, Unction. If cause the discase use Fleabane an herb of.
Orris, Dill, Chamomel, Mother of time, Marjoram, are Medicinal for the
disease. For the Oil, anoint the forehead temples, nostrills and holes behind
the ears.

Also to boil any of these herbs, especially vervaine, gathered as
beforesaid, in water, Nasalia.
and snuff up the decoction in your nose.

Also quilt these leaves between two caps, Cucufa.
and let the patient wear it upon his head.

The innermost cap being made of fine silk, or Sarsnet, Take Laurel, Mother
of time, Marjoram, Rosemary flowers, of each a handful, Rue half so much,
Penny royal, Calaminth two drams, Cloves, Staechas, one-dram, beat these into
gross ponder, and sew them up in the Cucufa, or double cappe before mentioned,
and having first sprinkled the head with Vinegar, warm it, and apply it.

Also it is very good for the sick to smell to such a Pomander as this.
Pomander.
Take of Storax, Calamitis, two drams, Cloves, Mace, wood of Aloes, of each
half a Dram, Lavender, two Drams, Gallia mofchata a Dram, Musk, Amber greece,
of each two grains, beat them into fine powder, searce them, and with
mussilage made with Gum Tragacanth, and Marjoram water; make it up into a
Pomander.

(...) coming of dryness or moisture.
CHAP. IV. Of the Headache (...) coming of dryness or moisture
BY dryness here,
and moisture also is meant only the baire quality; for although of these
alone, without heat or cold, no pain come, yet hereby the studious in
Physic, may learn and discern when the Headache comes of heat and
dryness, when of heat and moisture, when of cold and dryness, when of cold
and moisture.

The cause.
Headache through dryness is caused through dryness of the air, through
hunger, much watching, extreme studying, by dry medicines, over much exercise,
excessive use of venery, and violent perturbations of the mind.

Headache of moisture is caused through moisture of the air, The fimptomes.
moist medicines, bathes, hot waters, and other things that moisten over much.

Dryness is known by these signs; there come few or no excrements out of the
nose, the eyes be hollow, the patient cannot sleep neither before nor in the
sickness; also the skin of the head is dry as though it were scorched; dry
medicines do not ease the pain but increase it.

Moistness is known by the same that lethargies are, of which hereafter.

Those in whom dryness does trouble the head, let them remain in a moist
air, let them eat meats of good juice and a moistning nature, Diet.
as yolks of eggs, cocks stones and the broth of them, phesants, partriches,
and such meats as moisten and nourish much; let them drink wine always with
water; let them sleep largely, provoke them to it; as in the second chapter;
let them eschew motion of the body and exercise, and use quietness and rest,
let them eschew carnal copulation, hunger, and thirst, and all things that do
dry, let them use baths of sweet waters, that are warm, let them be merry and
pleasant, and avoid all perturbations of mind. For pain coming of moisture,
See Lethargyes.

Let such as have headache of dryness, use to anoint the seame of their head
or os triquetrum, Cure by unction.
with oil of fleabane, (see Chap. 2.) mixed with oil of sweet almonds or
alone by it self.

Let their body be kept soluble.

Also they may bath their head in water in which strawberry leaves, Stool.
Bath.
violet leaves and flowers, mallows and other herbs that have a moistning
virtue, have been boiled.

CHAP V. Of Headache (...) coming of plentitude or blood.
(...). coming of blood.
HItherto I have written of Headache coming through alteration of the bare
quality only; I now come to Headache caused of fullness, and abundance of
blood. I call fullness in this place, that which the Greeks call (...) that
is, when all the four humors abound and be increased in their proportion,
(...).
or when blood only abounds.

The cause.
This is caused commonly of eating all such things as engender abundance of
humors in the body, as meats and drinks of great nourishment, plentifully
taken; as also the neglecting and omitting exercises, bathes, sweatings, and
usual purgings, bleedings and evacuations.

The signs be these, Signs.
the face and the eyes be ruddy, the veins be swollen, so that the least and
smalest may be easily seen; the pulse is great and vehement, the urine reddish
and thick, the veins of the temples beat more hard, strong and vehement then
those at the wrest; the pain of the head is heaviness.

Let the sick be in a cold and dry air; if you can get no such place natural,
Cure.


Let his diet be spare; Air.


Let his drink be barley water in which cold herbs have been boiled as endive,
Meat.
Drink.


Let him use mean exercise, Exercise.
rubbing his body often; if his body be soluble and no fever, let him bath
often.

In the beginning of the disease let him blood in the cephalica of that arm on
which the grief lies most, if that appear not, take the middle vein;
Bleeding.
if bleeding in the arm suffice not, let them bleed in the forehead.

If age or weakness, or both, prohibit bleeding, Cupping.


These done, Unction.
wherewith you are furnished in the second Chapter.

You must in this disease have a special care that the body be kept soluble if
necessity require and neither fever nor weakness hinder, Purging.
give a decoctum Sennae (with rubarbe and agricke at i..) iv..

After this you may apply such medicines to the head Repelling.
as disperse the disease and dissipate and repel the humors, such be mallow
seeds, fenugreck seeds, chamomel flowers, melilot flowers, either in bathes,
liniments, or oils, as you think fit.

Also you may bind the lower parts of the body hard, Bindings.
(as the things) to call or draw back the humors.

(...) coming of Choler.
CHAP VI. Of the Headache (...) coming of Choler.
The cause
Headache coming of choleric humors is caused of all such things as heat
and dry the head unnaturally, as care, anger, pain, labor, watching,
fasting, eating of meats that be choleric, as Garlique, Onions, pickled
herrings, and other meats extraordinary salt, etc.

The signs be these; the pains be like his that has headache by reason of
heat, Signs.
but that only they have a more sharp and pricking pain, as though awles or
bodkins were thrust into their heads; their face is pale and wan; their head is
moderately hot, bitterness of the tongue, dryness of the eyes, nose and
tongue; this disease chances most to young and flourishing years, to such as
are choleric of complexion, to them that take overmuch business in hand, and
the like.

Let the sick abide in a cold and moist air, which may be procured by the Art
specified in the second Chapter, Cure.
Air.
by strewing the Chamber with cold herbs, and moist flowers and branches of
trees their mentioned.

Meats.
give them Endive, Succory, Lettice, Purslaine, small fishes, that live in
gravelly Rivers.

Drinks.
in which a little Cinnamon has been boiled; but let him altogether abstain
from Wine and strong drink.

Sleeps.
and have long sleeps; you may provoke sleep by the rules in the second
Chapter; let him be merry, and refrain from all perturbations of mind. Purges.
You must refrain purging, there be a fever.


In the beginning of the cure you must purge the choleric humor with
medicines fit for the purpose; such be Hiera picra, Electuary of the juice of
Roses, Rubarb, Pillulae aureae, Alephanginae, etc. But if it chance the
choleric humors do rest quietly in any part of the body, as many times it
does, and so becomes adust and burns the place where it lies, and makes
the man incapable of receiving purging medicines, you must use preparatives to
alter and concoct the humor, till it appear by the urine to be digested; the
best way of all to do this, is to administer a spoonful of Vinegar of Squils
every morning fasting, and let the party walk a quarter of an hour after it;
if you find that too hot, as you seldom shall, administer it in an ounce of
Julep of Roses, or Syrupus acetosus.

Also you may give an ounce of pulp of Cassia at night when he goes to sleep,
or lenitive Electuary. Bolus.


If they be very costive, as it is the nature of choler to procure
costivenesse, Mallows, Beetes, Violets, Clisters.
Pellitory and Mercury, of each a handful, boiled in a quart of water to three
quarters of a pint, in which (being strained) mingle Diacatholicon i.. Mel
rosarum i.. species Hierae picrae i.; make it into a clister,

Also you may use Oil of Fleabane for unction in the manner and form
prescribed in the second Chapter. Vnct on. Beware of


If the disease for all these medicines, Boxing.
you may apply cupping glasses between the shoulders, and friction, or rubbing
of the arms and legs, time and care convenient being used. (...). coming of
Wind.


CHAP. VII. Of the Headache coming of Windiness.
The cause.
IT is a cause of eating abundance of windy things; besides, the nature of the
body, and other things were such as were apt to engender wind.

It is known by a distention or stretching within the head, Signs.
and that without heaviness or beating, as also by noise in the ears.

Diet.


If the Infirmity lie only in the Head, and ascend from no other part beneath,
as many times it is caused only by weakness and imbecility of the head, then
inward medicines profit little.

medicines, things that concoct wind, Concoctives.
as Fenugreekeseed, Linseed, Chamomel, Yolks of eggs, Saffron, Hens grease.
Goose grease, etc.

such as be, Oil of Dill, and Rue, Discussivs.
Lupines, Barley meal, Lilly roots; Nigella, etc.

Clisters.
you must empty the belly with a strong Clister that does dissolve wind, made
of of the emollient herbs, Anniseeds, Carraway, Fennel, and Cumminseeds,
adding to the decoction Benedicta, laxativa half an ounce, of the Electuary I
mean, for this glister draws the vapors down from the head.

Cautions.
whether it be the stomach, liver or spleen, it were tedious and superfluous to
recite the manner how to strengthen all those parts, and others beside these,
which may in their own affliction afflict the head also; for I purpose if the
Lord give me life and health, and time to write severally and distinctly of all
the diseases in every part of the body.

Then may you apply to the head things repulsive and driving back, Repulsives.
such be, Vinegar, Pomgranate, rinds and flowers, Wormwood, Merlilot, Mints,
Plantain, Walwort, Shepherds burse, Nutmegs, Purslaine, Housleek, Laurel
leaves, etc.

If heat be joined with wind in the head, Unctions.
use Oil of Roses, which is both repulsive, digestive, and discussive, mingled
with Vinegar, which is both repulsive and discussive, and also attenuating.

But if there be cold mixed with the wind, then use Oil of Dill and Camomell,
mingled with the juice of Rue and Vinegar.

If the headache continue still malignant, Sneezing.
but beware of catching cold of the head after it.

After all this to strengthen the head, Cucusa.
and repel the relicts of the disease, make a Cucusa of these herbs dried,
(that is sew them betwixt two caps; see Chap. 3. Page 7.) viz. Roses,
Knotgrasse, Willow leaves, Nightshade, Marjoram, Mother of time, Hysop, Rue.

Also the savours of Castoreum, Musk, Smells.
are medicinal for the disease.

(...) caused by the Stomach.
CHAP, VIII. Of Headache caused of the Stomach.
HItherto of diseases caused principally in the head it self; Cause.
now a word or two of pain of the head that comes by consent from other places
of the body; and first of that which is caused by some evil affection of the
stomach; and that is caused by some sharp humor for the most part that
abounds in the stomach, especially in the mouth of it, from whence corrupt
vapors arising do ascend into the head.

It may be known by that gnawing and biting pain they feel in their head,
Signs.
by their pronesse and desire to vomit; also if the sick fast and suffer
hunger long, their pain is more vehement; for through long abstinence, the
malice of the humor increases.

Cure by vomiting.
In the cure of this disease, outward medicines will do no good; the best way
of cure is by vomimiting, but first prepare the humors by giving Vinegar of
Squils two or three spoonfuls; Consider the strength of nature in the
proportion of the vomit. Purging.
or four, if two or three work not, diverse mornings before the vomit, (which
may be infusion of Crocus metallorum i.. s.) for many time the humors are
viscous and stick fast.

If you suppose the stomach be furred after vomiting, give a scruple of
Mastich pills every night going to bed for a week or such a matter.

As for strengthening the stomach after the disease is cured, I shall speak
plentifully when I come to speak of the diseases in the stomach.

So also if headache come from the liver or spleen, or any part, you shall have
plentiful remedies when I come to speak of the places where the cause lies,
which is needless here; for take away the cause, the effect cease.

CHAP. IX. (...). coming of drunkenness. Cause.
Of Headache caused by drunkenness.
THe causes are evident enough; for hot Wines, Strong Water and strong drinks
fill the brain with vapors, and so much the more if the brain be hot by
nature, if the os triquetrum be close shut, and the sutoriums close shut; for
they bear drink less before they be drunk then others in which they are
more open.

Cure consisting in evacuation and refrigeration.
The cure consists chieflly in these two things, evacuation, refrigeration.

If the Wine be yet indigested, give a vomit in the first place.

If the headache remain after, you must use refrigeration to drive back the
vapors that ascend into the head; that does especially above all things Oil
wherein Ivy leaves have been boiled, by anointing the head and temples and
forehead.

To prevent drunkenness are many medicines left by the ancients to posterity,
Preventions.
but for mine own part, I, as yet, never tried any of them, as to eat six or
seven bitter Almonds every morning fasting; to drink a draught of
Wormwood-beere sirst in the morning; also to burn swallows in a crucible,
feathers and all, eat a little of the ashes of them in the morning.

CHAP. X. (...) coming of fevers.
Of Headache caused of Fevers.
IF Headache molest those that have Fevers, Praefatio
you must consider whether the body be laxative or not; for astringency in
Feaves always causes headache; Vel caeli vel signi, incertum est, puta signi.
if it be, then you must consider whether it began with the fever, or came
only the fever increasing, near the Crisis, or when the Moon comes to the
opposition of that sign and degree she was in at the decumbiture; if she or
her beams reach but the place, give no physic; for vomiting or flux of blood
by the nostrils will follow.

But if the headache began at first with the fever, it is caused through
vapors dispersed abroad through the vehemence of the fever, Cause.
as it were boiling up and ascending into the brain, and the brain also for the
most part in this disease is weak and not able to repel it, but fit to receive
it.

If age permit, you may use bleeding. If strength permit, you may use
cupping-glasses, but the chief remedy is by remedying the fever; for the cause
being taken away, Cure. Toll causam tollitur effectus
the effect cease; and I intend hereafter to write a tractate only of
fevers, to which I now refer it.

CHAP. XI. (...)
Of the Headache (...)
The dignotions of (...) from (...).
(...) in Greek; in Latin, Cephalaea, in English an old and invetterate
headache; it may be known from (...) by these notes; it has been of long
continuance, exceeding painful, hard to cease; every light occasion (as noise,
loud speech, clear light, moving, drinking of Wine, strong smells, or the like)
causes sharp or violent fits, the diseased desires to lie in the dark, to be
quiet, often supposing that their heads are stuck with a hammer, also some do
feel those things that are about their head, as though they were bruised or
racked; this disease sometimes does continue painful always, sometimes it
comes by fits, with intermission, so that sometimes they think themselves
perfectly whole. This disease does vex Women more then men. In some the pia
Matter (or skin that knits the senses together, which lies round the brain
within the dura matter) is vexed, in some only the Pericranium, or skin that
covers the skull round) is vexed.

It is caused either by abundance of blood and other humors, or by the
sharpness of the humors, Cause.
contained either within or without the scull, inflaming the head; also it is
caused through weakness of the head.

If the pain invade the sick with heaviness, Signs.
it shows the disease to proceed of fullness and abundance of humors; if it
come with pricking, gnawing and shooting, it betokens sharpness of humors;
if it beat like pulses, it betokens inflammation; if there be felt distention
or stretching out, without beating, or heaviness, it comes of wind; if there
be beating with it, it is a hot wind; if heaviness, there are humors as well
as wind; if the pain be felt superficially, or outwardly, the disease lies in
the Pericranium; if inwardly, it lies in the Pia Matter, and then is there
always a pain in the roots of the eyes; for the tunicles of the eyes have
their beginning from the brain.

As for diet and air, the cause being known, Cure.
you may easily gather out of the former Chapter.

If it come through abundance of humors, you may in the first place let blood.

Oil of Vervaine used in Unction, is an approved medicine, unles there be
inflammations or fevers joined with it; for them use Oil of Fleabane, both
considered as in the former Chapters.

Have a great care that sleep be moderate, and the body soluble.

You may also (for fear of Relapsing) purge the head with strong Gargarismes,
made with juice of Leeks, Pellitory of Spain, long Pepper, Mustard, or the like.

Or by sneezing, if the infirmity lie within the scull.

CHAP. XII. Of the Megrim. (...).

(...) in Greek; Description.
in Latin also Hemicranium; in English the Megrim; is a painful evil, lying
in the one half of the head only; the right side, or the left; and is
distinguished by the seame that runs all along the scull, from the middle
part of the forehead, to the hinder part of the head or nape of the neck; this
pain comes often by fits; and in some the grief is felt without the scull; in
some within, and that deep in the brain; in some, in the Muscles near the
Temples.

It is caused by ascending or flowing of many vapors or humors, Cause.
or by the Arteries, or by both; and sometime it proceeds from the brain it
self, thrusting out its excrements and superfluities, when the passages are
stopped.

The Signs whereby you may know whether vapors, Signs.
or humors do abound, whether they be hot or cold; whether within the scull,
or without, may be drawn out of the former Chapters, only this I add; if the
pain lie in the Pericranium, the pain is so vehement that they cannot suffer
their heads to be touched with ones hand.

Their Diet, what they should eat, and what they should eschew, Diet.
may be gathered out of the former Chapters, according to the diversity of the
causes; yet let them by all means avoid all such things as send sharp vapors
up into the Head, as, Garlique, Onions, Mustard, Raddish roots, etc.

If the Infirmity lie without the Scull, Cure.
as most commonly it does, comb the head; if the pain lie on the right side,
with a comb made of the right horn of a Ram, (I suppose it were best the Ram
were killed when the Sun Or at least when Mars is there.
is in Aries) if it lie on the left side, with a comb made of the left horn of
a Ram; and this (for ought I know) may do it, if the disease lie within the
Scull.

If it lie near the Temples among the Musces, rub them often (either with your
hand or with a cloth) till they be hot, when the pain is over, and that many
times remedyeth the disease if it lie there.

Also Euphorbium mixed with Oil, and put into the ear on that side the pain
lies, take more or less Euphorbium, according as the parties senses are dull
or quick; a scruple of Euphorbium is enough for an ounce of Oil, and one drop
is sufficient to put into the ear at one time.

Also Euphorbium dissolved in Vinegar, and applied by way of Unction to the
grieved part of the head, profits much.

But beware you use not Euphorbium, if the disease come of hot Humors, or
Vapors.

Also Earthworms beaten to powder, Snailes, Peach kernels, Goats dung mingled
with Vinegar of Squils, are medicinal.

If it comes of hot Humors, use those medicines prescribed for the headache
coming of hot humors.

If it come of plenitude, use blood betting.

In fine, purge the Humor that causes the Disease.

CHAP. XIII. Of Vertigo or swimming in the Head.
VErtigo is a Disease wherein a man thinks all that he sees turns round;
Description.
it is a Disease my self have been often for many years terribly vexed
withal, insomuch that at the last I many times fell down in a swoon, and
fainted; This Disease often turns to the Falling Sickness, as it had almost
done in my self, though after much and vast expense of Physic, one Vomit
absolutely cured me; therefore I shall be more large in the signs of this
Disease.

This Disease is caused through inordinate moving of Vapors that are windy,
Cause.
contained in certain parts of the Brain; this Disease is caused either,
because the Brain it self is ill-affected, or of Vapors ascending from the
Stomach thither; the Brain it self is offended by a Humor aeriall, from
whence a windy spirit moves inordinately about, and troubles the
apprehension; so that all things the man sees, seem to turn round also; the
Brain is offended by the mouth of the Stomach, when windy exhalations are
carried from thence to the Brain, which happens by corruption or putrefaction
in the Stomach, the Vapors of which being penetrating move about the Brain.

Galen makes a great stir, and so also does Hippocrates to prove two sorts of
Vertigo; the one called Tene^^^^ of a Vertigo; of some Scotoma: and this, say
they, is the most dangerous, because it often turns to the Falling Sickness.
Indeed I grant, the dark Vertigo turns soonest to the Falling Sickness,
because it comes of Atra bilis, or Choler adust: but Fuchsius thinks they
err that think the Diseases to be two, because they differ a Tittle in
quality: and truly so do I. All Gallen's words may not be Authenticks; no, nor
Hippocrates his neither: and neither Fuchsius nor my self were nor are so
simple, but we know Choler yellow, will turn black, and adust in the Tunicle of
the Stomach, and cause no other difference then changing the quality, not the
nature of the Disease. But enough of this; I proceed to the Signs.

A darkness or mist appears before their eyes that are troubled with this
Disease, Signs.
and that upon every light occasion, especially if they drink but a cup of
strong drink, or wine; or if they turn round: for it chances to them if they
turn round once, as it does to others when they turn round often times, so that
sometimes they fall down. Also the same effect it brings to him, to see another
man, or a wheel, or the water run round: therefore let such objects be avoided;
for the vital spirits beholding it, turn about also, and so the moving of the
Humor that causes the Disease, is troubled, unequal and inordinate.

When this Disease lies in the brain only, without relation to the stomach,
there follows sound in the ears, pain in the head, sometimes vehement, and
heaviness there; also the smelling and other senses are detrimented: their
fits are chiefly when the Sun does heat them, or when their head is hot by some
other means: for Heat does dissolve the Humors, and then they turn about the
Brain.

And indeed for ought I know, a clear Sunshine day is hurtful for those in
whom the Disease proceeds from the Stomach, as mine did; and I found the same
extremely prejudicial to me.

Those in whom the Disease proceeds from the Stomach, feel a gnawing in their
Stomach before the fit come, and a disposition to vomit, and are as though they
were heart-burnt.

Also thus you may know of what Humor the Disease comes, by the apparent
color of things to their eyes: for if they appear yellow, the Disease comes of
yellow Choler: if reddish or bloody, it comes of Blood, and is apt to fall into
a frenzy or madness; if dark, it comes of Atra bilis, and is a forerunner of
the Falling sickness, or Apoplexy. And thus much for example sake.

Also these Diseases are most violent in that time of the year that suiteth
best with their nature; as Choler in Summer, Melancholy in Autumn, etc.

If this Disease be caused by Vapors that ascend from the Stomach, Cure.
as mine did, Vomiting is a speedy cure, and the only cure I could find.

Cautions. For only that wind causes Whirlwinds.
Let the sick avoid the beams both of Sun and Moon; all Winds, especially South
winds: nor let him behold any thing that moves round, nor any deep thing.

Let him avoid fasting and fullness, all meats that engender wind, that are of
a dilative quality, and send Vapors up to the head: such be Milk, Onions,
Garlic, Leeks.

Let him eschew sleep in the day, says Galen: but for mine own part I found
ease in nothing else.

Let his Meat be of good Juice, Diet,
and good Digestion.

If the Disease come of Blood, use Blood-letting.

Let the Sick avoid perturbation of mind, anger, fear, sadness, loud crying
and singing.

Let him not keep his Head too hot, nor abide in an Air too hot, or too cold;
and let him stir his Head as little as may be.

In a word, keep his Stomach clean with Vomits, and his Head with Pil.
Alephanginae.

Acetum scilliticum is a sovereign remedy, and Southernwood is the Herb proper
for the Disease.

CHAP. XIV. Of Frenzy.
(...) Description.
(...) in Greek, in Latin also Phrenitis, in English a Frenzy, is a Disease
that troubles the mind, dangerous and difficult to cure: it differs from
Madness thus; Definition
a Fever ever accompanies a Frenzy, but never Madness.

A Frenzy is a continual Madness and Fury, with raging and vexation of
mind, Division.
accompanied with an acute Fever, caused through inflammation of the Brain, or
the films thereof.

Three sorts of Frenzies.
There are three internal senses in the Head; Imagination, Judgment, Memory:
and a man may be frenetick (or as our common English word says, Frantic) in
any of these.

Some are frenetick only in Imagination; imagining they see things they do
not, and yet do give a right judgment of things they do see; and remember every
man, and call him by name: in such fantasy only is distempered.





The Frenzy is caused of abundance of Choler, Cause.
and choleric Blood, either in the Brain, or films thereof; and if the Choler
be adust, the Disease is vehement and pernicious.

Besides, Signs.
a terrible Fever and Madness, for the most part they cannot sleep; if they
do sleep at all, it is troublesome: many times when they do sleep, they start up
out of it suddenly, and rage, and cry out furiously; they babble words without
order or sense, and very seldom answer directly to a question; their Water many
times is thin and clear; and if it be so, it is so much the worse: many times
the softlier you speak to them, the louder they answer.

Their Eyes are blood-shotten, bleared and staring, and sometime dry, and
sometimes full of sharp and scalding tears; most of them pull and tear all the
clothes about them to pieces: their Pulses are small, weak and slow, and they
fetch their breath but seldom: that which comes of Blood, causes inordinate
laughter; and Choler, immoderate fury: also such must be bound in their beds;
they forget every thing speedily that they either do or say. I have seen one
call for a Chamber Pot, and so soon as he had it, either had forgot what it
was, or else forgot to piss in it.

Concerning the usage of the Sick; Air
if it be winter, let the air be warm; if in summer, let it be cold: a whited
wall is best; for diversity of colors or pictures are naught.

Some are troubled with light in their Fits, and some with darkness; therefore
you had best try them both, and let him have light that is afraid of darkness,
and keep him dark that is offended with light: but if the Sick be indifferent,
between both, let the strongest have light, and keep ^^e weakest darkest.

Let his dearest friends come to him, and let some speak friendly to him, and
let some of them speak harshly and roughly to him; for there is no rule with
such persons, unless they stand in awe of some body.

If strength permit, Bleeding.
let him bleed largely in the arm, and two or three days after under the
tongue.

Keep his body laxative. Stool.


Force him to sleep with Opium; Sleep.
if his body be strong, you need not fear to give him four or five grains at a
time: also hang soporiferous things about his Head, as Mandrakes, Nightshade,
Poppy, Henbane, etc. and anoint his head and temples with oil of Poppy, if he
sleep not without these.

Let his drink be water, Drink.
in which Cinnamon has been boiled.

Let his meat be exceeding little, Meat.
and let that little be of very good and speedy digestion.

Also, I have found by experience, Cure
Castoreum to be very medicinal for the Disease, taken inwardly.

For other Medicines, your best way is to labor to remove that Humor which
causes the Disease: of which Medicines you may be furnished in the peculiar
chapter belonging to the particular Humor.

CHAP. XV. Of the Lethargy.
IN direct opposition to a Frenzy, Description.
is the Disease called a Lethargy; which causes sluggishnesse, and an
inexpugnable desire to sleep.

This word Lethargy, is a Greek word, compounded of (...), (...)
which signifies forgetfulness; and (...), which signifies slothful, or dull:
and therefore in stead of Veternus, the common Latin word, it might be better
(or at least better in my opinion) be called Oblivio iners, a sluggish
forgetfulness.

Names. (...). Subeth. (...). It is affirmed by many good Phisicians, that
there is such a Disease as Coma Vigilans, but as yet I never saw any possessed
with it.
This sluggish Disease has gotten many names; it is called by some Grecians
(...), of the Arabians Subeth; of some Grecians (...); and this (...), say
they, is of two sorts: Coma somnolentum, or a sleepy Coma: the other called
Vigilans coma, or a waking Coma; because such as have Lethargies seem to be
awake many times, when they are not. Many have thought these Diseases to be all
different, because different places have given it different names; yet all
confess the cause of them all to be the same, and then the difference can be
only in the Complexion of the party grieved.

It is caused of Phlegm, Cause.
which cools the Brain overmuch, and moistneth it, and thereby provokes
sleep.

They are always in a profound and dead sleep; Signs.
their Pulse is great, and strikes seldom, and beats as though it were in
water; they fetch breath seldom, and weakly, and are so sluggish and sleepy,
that they can hardly be forced to answer to a question: sometimes they will
open their eyes, if you cry aloud to them, but they instantly shut them again:
they are exceeding forgetful, and always talk idly in their sleep; they gape
and yawn often, and sometime keep their mouth open, as though they had forgot
to shut it: some are costive, Cure.
others laxative; their Urine is like Beasts Urine, stinking; some tremble and
sweat all over.

Let the chamber wherein the Sick does lie, Air.
be very light, and very warm.

Let his Diet be such things as extenuate, Diet.
cut and dry, and let it be seasoned with Anniseed, Cummin-seed, Pepper,
Cinnamon, Ginger, Cloves, etc.

For Pot-hearbs, let him use Sparagus, Parsley, Fennel, and such like: and
after eating, bind the extreme parts (viz. the Thighs) hard, that the Vapors
ascend not up into the Head.

You may burn Brimstone under his Nose, Nassali^.
or assa foetida to awake him.

Give him strong Gargarisms, Gargarisms.
made with Pellitory of Spain, and Mustard: also you may safely put a whole
spoonful of Mustard into his mouth at once.

Also you may boil Time, Penny-royall and Origanum in Vinegar, and dip a sponge
in it, and hold it always to his Nose.

You may shave off his Hair, and keep his Head always moistened with Vinegar of
Roses: also it is excellent to let it drop down from some high place upon the
crown of his Head.

Povoke him often to sneeze with white Hellebore. Sneezing.


Also, Clisters.
in this Disease you may safely administer sharp and scowring Clisters, with
Collocynthis, Agrick, Electuary Benedicia laxativa, species hierae picrae, and
the like, in the common decoction.

The Disease declining, purge Phlegm.

Castoreum is also exceeding medicinal for this Disease, Purge,
either taken inwardly, or applied outwardly.

CHAP. XVI. Of Forgetfulness.
THe loss of Memory chances sometimes a-alone, and sometimes Reason is hurt
with it.

It is caused of Lethargies, and other soporiferous Diseases; Cause,
for they being ended many times leave Forgetfulness behind them, and then it
comes of a cold distemper. This coldness has sometimes dryness joined with
it, and sometimes moisture, and sometimes nothing but a bare distemper: to know
this, you must diligently observe the causes whence it arises.

The causes are two; internal, external: if they be internal, either abundance
of Phlegm, or Melancholy is the cause of it; if there be no signs of these
abounding, then it comes of some external cause, (unless it come through
extreme old age.)

of the sick, or those that are about him; if any disease have newly passed and
so turned into oblivion, if medicines were applied outwardly on administered
inwardly, which extremely cooled the brain; or if it came of study, watching,
etc.

If the memory be but a little hurt, Signs.
it shows the brain to be but a little cooled; if reason be also hurt, then
the disease is vehement.

If it come of a dry distemper, the sick watches much, and can hardly be
brought to sleep.

If moisture only offend, then are they heavy, inclined to sleep, and their
sleeps are long and troublesome.

If cold be joined with the moisture, it is a perfect Lethargy, though perhaps
but breeding, and then the excrements are many at the mouth and nose,
proceeding from the brain.

If melancholy be the cause, he will not be very desirous of sleep, nor void
excrements from his brain; besides all circumstances, and the state of his
whole body incline to cold and dryness.

For to give a true judgment of a disease, you must consider the complexion of
the party, the region that he lives in, the times of the year, the state of
the air, and the diet he has used.

Let his diet be different according to the cause of his disease; as for
example, Diet.
if it come of coldness let it be hot, etc.

But what ever the cause be, the air must not be cold, nor the room dark,
Caution.
nor any windows open North or South, for the one cools, I should think the
East were worst.
the other stuffeth the head.

If it come through age, Physic availes little.

If the memory fail suddenly, either falling sickness or Apoplexy is
following, Prognostica.
for cure of which use such means of prevention, as you shall be taught to
cure them when they are come in their proper chapters.

If it come of other causes, viz. of cold, heat the brain; of dryness,
moysten the brain.

Things medicinal, Cure.
are Castoreum, Oleum de lateribus, Rue, Balm, Betony, Rosemary, Marjoram.

Of Compound, confectio anacardina, Diamosebum dulce, Diambra, Mithridate,
Theriacha. These not only remedy memory lost, but help and mend it being dull.

CHAP. XVII. Of Catalepsis.
Name^. (...). detentio, occupatio, congelatio. Description.
(...) or (...) in Greek, is called in Lattin, Occupatio, detention, and
Deprebensio; Modern Writers call it Congelatio, in English it is called
congelation, or taking, and by the ignorant struck with a Planet.

It is a sudden detention and taking both of body and mind, both sense and
moving being lost, the sick remaining in the same figure of body wherein he was
taken; whether he sit only, or whether his mouth and eyes were open or shut, as
they are taken in the disease so they remain.

This disease is a mean between a Lethargy and a frenzy, Cause.
for it comes of a melancholy humor; Therefore in respect of coldness it
agrees with a Lethargy, and in respect of dryness with a frenzy; and the
effects are in a medium between them both; Sometimes abundance of blood is
joined with the melancholy humor, and sometimes only pure melancholy; both
invade the hinder part of the brain.

They that are taken with this disease, are always taken sudddenly, Signs.
both speech and sense are taken from him; he neither speaks nor hears, his
breath scarcely to be perceived; he lies like a dead man, his pulse is small,
weak, and very thick; his egestion and urine are either very little or none
at all, which seems to proceed from want of sense; for the sick abounds (most
commowly) with moisture; For melancholy is an humor dry in operation, not in
quality; Their face is sometimes red, and that is when blood is mingled with
the melancholy; and sometimes swarth, and then pure melancholy oppresses; the
eyes in this disease remain immovable, as though they were frozen.

The diet is different according to the cause; Diet.
only in general let him avoid all such meats and drinks as send vapors up
into the head; also water is hurtful be cause it swells the spleen. Barley
water wherein Cinnamon has been boiled is good.

If blood abound, and strength and years permit; Bleeding.
let him blood in the Cephalique of the arm, as much as strength will permit.

If melancholy abound, Clisters.
cleanse the gutts with clysters made of things proper for melancholy: such be
borrage, buglosse, fumitory, time, epithimum, polipodium, senna, cassia
fistula, confectio Hamech, etc.

If the head be hot, cool it with oil of fleabane; Refrigeration.
if too cold, heat it with oil of vervaine.

Black hellebore corrected with Cinnamon is very medicinal; so is mother of
time. Cure.


If trembling accompany the disease, give Castoreum.

As for other remedies, you may find them in the chapters of frenzy, and
lethargy before; and in the Chapter of melancholy, which is to follow after.

CHAP. XVIII. Of the Apoplexy.
(...) in Greek and Latin, (...).
is also called an Apoplexy in English; and is a disease wherein the fountain
and original of all the sinews is affected, Definition.
and so every part of the body does suddenly lose sense and motion, throughout
the whole body.

If this stopping come only in one half of the body, Cause.
it is called the Palley; of which hereafter.

The Apoplexy is caused by a gross tough and clammy humor, (engendered for
the most part by drunkenness;) which (being crude) fills the principal
ventricles of the brain.

It is caused also by a fall or a blow, which bruiseth and shakes the brain,
and causes the humors to flow thither.

Also those that are brought up in hot countries, when they come to live in
cold countries, many times the cold only congealeth the humors and causes the
disease.

There goes before this disease a sharp pain in the head, Signs.
a swelling of the veins in the neck, the vertigo and brightness before the
eyes, coldness of the extreme parts without cause known, panting of the whole
body, slownesse to move, and gnawing of the teeth, while they sleep; their
urine is little in quantity, and black, like rust or canker of metal, and
has a residence like meal; they lack sense altogether, and lie with their eyes
shut, as though they were asleep and snort.

The vehemence of this disease, may be known by their impediments in breathing;
if their breathing differ but little from another man's that is in health, it
shows the disease is but weak; but when they can hardly be perceived to
breath at all, it is the strongest Apoplexy; and little better is theirs where
the breath seems to be stopped for a while, and then fet with great violence.

This disease happens most frequently to aged people, flegmaticke folk, and to
such as use such diet as increases phlegm.

This disease is seldom cured, and seldomer but it leaves the dead palsy
behind it; and then it is but half cured.

A strong Apoplexy for the most part kills a man in 24 hours; many times in
half the time.

Bleeding is a desperate physic for an Apoplexy, well befitting such a
desperate disease; for it kills or cares quickly.

Provoke him to stool, with mighty sharp and strong clysters. Stool.


Bind the thighs hard, and rub them vehemently. Ligaments:


You may shave the head, and bath it with oil of Rue, Camomel, or Dill.
Unction.


You may fasten Cupping-glasses good store to the shoulders. Cupping.


You may burn stinking things under his nose, as Ca^^oreum, Assa Foetida,
Saga-penum, Galbanum. Nasalia.


You may provoke him to sneeze, with white Hellebore. Sneezing.


You may apply Castoreum, and Euphorbium, with vinegar to his head. Cucufa.
Vomit.


You may provoke him to vomit with turbith minerale, mercurius vitae, or lac
sulphuris, which is the best medicine I know. Lacsulphuris. I take it does not
procure vomit, but is diaphoretical.


Thus much for the cure of an Apoplexy, if it may be cured.

CHAP. XIX. Of the dead Palsy in one side.
(...) in Greek, (...).
in Latin Resolutio, in English the dead palsy; it is a disease wherein the
one half of the body, either the right side or the left, does lose either
sense or moving, Definition.
or both, either totally or partially.

But note here that the palsy that follows the Apoplexy, (...).
is properly and particularly called by the Greeks (...)

In the palsy sometimes sesne only is lost, and not moving, sometimes moving
and not sense, and sometimes both sense and moving; yet the Greek word (...),
signifies properly loss of motion.

A word to satisfy the curious,

You must note that the faculty of motion, diverse members participate in two
kinds of sinews; the one for sense, the other for motion, I do not yet
understand this.
the doubt is easily cleared. One sinew may be hurt; and motion is lost; the
other may be hurt, and that fare; then sense is lost and motion remains; both
are hurt, and then farewell (pro tempore) sense and motion.

If members participate but of one sinew, as few do, (perhaps none) yet Gallen
says some do, and at present I cannot contradict him; I rather adhear to this
judgment.
less virtue is required for feeling then for motion, says he; and so if the
sinew be much hurt, sense and motion are both lost; if it be but little hurt,
only motion is lost.

The matter indeed is scarce worth disputing for, or writing of, and therefore
I proceed.

The Original of this disease lies sometimes in the Brain, Description.
and sometimes in the marrow of the back.

If the disease lie in the back, (as but seldom it does) then is the face
firm, and then sometimes half, sometimes the whole body is paralitick,
according as the half or whole marrow of the back is vitiated.

If it come from the Brain, it lies only in some particular Pellicles thereof;
for if the whole Brain be vitiated, it is an Apoplexy.

These things being first duly considered, we come to the cause.

It is caused through vehement and inordinate cold, Cause*
or through gross and clammy* Humors that stop the passages, that the animal
virtue cannot pass freely from the Center to the Circumference.

If it come from the back, it is caused through Inflammation, or hard swelling
without sense called Schirrus, happening at the back bone, or nigh to it, or
other siinewy part, dependant thereon; whereby the sinews are pressed together,
and so stopped, that the animal virtue cannot pass. It may happen by ablow or
wound.

The Disease is so apparent that it needs no Signs.

The Palsy is no acute o^ sharp Disease, Prognostica.
and for the most part is curable.

It chances (for the most part) to ancient people, and begins (commonly) in
the Winter time.

If the Palsy come by a cut or wound, it is incurable, and very difficult, if
the Paralitique members wane, or wan less and less; for then it shows the
parts to want spirit natural as well as animal.

Let his Diet be extenuating and drying, Diet.
let his Meat be easy of digestion and roasted. viz. Birds that frequent dry
grounds, Almonds, Raisons of the Sun, Pine Nuts.

For Pot Herbs, Herbs.
let him use Fennel, Pursley, Hisop, Marjoram, Sage and Savory.

Let him eschew Waterfowl, Caution.
Fish, and all other meats that are cold and moist, and flegmaticke.

Let the Air he abides in be hot and dry; Air.
if not, make it so by Art.

Let him drink no Wine but Hippocras, Drink.
and let him use Cinnamon in all his drink, or broth.

It is good for him to endure as much thirst as he can.

Let his sleeps be but mean, Sl^epe.
and let him not sleep at all in the day.

Let him use as much exercise as well he can. Exercise.


Let, him be merry and cheerful, Mirth.
and fly anger, vexation, and other perturbations of the mind.

If there be signs of Plenitude, Bleeding.
you may draw out blood (moderately, for fear of over-cooling) of the sound
side; else forbear.

If he have not a Stool once a day, Clisters.
provoke him with a Clister.

Acetum Scilliticum, Cure.
or Vinegar of Squils taken two spoonfuls every morning, fasting, is a
sovereign medicine.

So is also Castoreum. Sneezing.


If it lie in the Brain sneezing is good, which you may provoke with white
Hellebore, but let it be in the Evening, the party in bed, and their head
wrapped warm for fear of after-claps. Unction.


Also use Unctions to the nape of the neck (for their the marrow of the hacke
has its passage* to the Brain) use first weak ones, such as Oil Chamomel,
More properly the Brain has its passage to the spinalis medulla. Bath.
Dill, St John's Wort or Earthworms. Then after some days such as are stronger,
as Oil of Bricks, or Tile-stones, Castoreum and Euphorbium. Wherewith you may
anoint all the paralitique members, wrapping them up hot afterward in a Fox
skin.

Also you may make a Bath with St John's Wort, Rosemary, Staechas, Sage,
Marjoram, and Camomel, boiled in Water, wherewith you may bath the paralique
members before you anoint them. Ceratum:


Also this Cerecloth is excellent to apply to the paralitique members. Take of
Oil ii.. Oil of Pepper, i..ss. Oil of Euphorbium, ii.. Aqua vitae ii..ss.
juice of sage and Marjoram or cowslops of each ii..ss. Galanga iii.. Pellitory
of the wall and pepper, of each a dram, Staechas and Rosemary, of each ii..
Euphorbium.ss. boil it till the Aqua vitae be consumed, then strain it, and
put wax enough to it to make a Cerecloth.

Also you may make a quilt for his head with Hysop, Cucufa.
Marjoram, St John's Wort, Sage, Rue, Bayleaves of each ii.. Spikenard, Mastich,
Castoreum, and Staechas, of each ii.. Cloves, Mace, Nutmegs, of each i..
red-rose-leaves well dried, half a handful, make of them a quilt, as you are
taught Chapter 3.

Use these medicines to the head if the disease lie there; to the nape of the
neck, and the back bone, if the disease lie there.

CHAP. XX. Of the Palsy in one Member.
ALthough any expert man may draw out of what has been written before, the
cure of the resolution of any member, the radix being the same, yet to satisfy
the unskilful, I thought good to write a line or two.

If any member be paralitique, search from what root the sinews come that
supply that member, and mend it there at the root with the former medicines.

There is also a kind of Palsy called by the Greeks (...), (...)
in Latin Tortura oris, in English wrinesse of the mouth; this you may cure
also by the aforesaid medicines: besides, yo^ may hold a looking-glass before
him, that he may see what an ugly face he makes, and so labor to amend it.

CHAP XXI. Of the Falling Sickness.
(...) in Greek, the Latins call it Morbus Comitialis, (...).
and the English, the Falling Sickness.

It is a Convulsion, drawing and stretching of all the parts of the whole body,
not continually, but at sundry times, with hurt of the mind and sense.

It is so called, because it attacheth both the sense and feeling of the head,
and also of the mind.

Three causes of Falling Sickness.
There be three causes of the Falling Sickness.

The first is caused when the disease lies only in the Brain; and that is
caused two ways. 1. When gross, tough and clammy Humors flegmaticke, See my
Anatomy of the brain.
When the same opilation is caused by Choler.





There goes before this disease, Signs.
an unwise state of the body and mind; sadness, forgetfulness, troublesome
dreams, headache, continual fullness in the head, especially in anger,
palenesse in the face, inordinate moving of the tongue; many bite their
tongues, as soon as the fit takes them they fall down, their limbs are drawn
together, they snort and sometimes cry out: many tremble when the fit comes
upon them, and run round, but the pecullar sign of this disease is foaming at
the mouth.

This disease happens most to young folk.

Let the Air the sick abides in, Air.
be hot and dry, if the disease be caused of Phlegm, let it becold and moist,
Diet.
if it be caused of Choler.

Let him eschew all meats that are hard of digestion, and stopping, and such as
are of a dilative quality, Vomit. Cure. My thinks I might have bestowed the
p^ins to have quoted a few more medecines, yet seeing ^is as it is see my recepts.
and all Wine, the older the worse.

If the Disease proceed from the Stomach, clear it by a vomit*

The best remedy, which is most sure and approved, is, a Male piony root dug
up, in rising on sunday morning, the Moon increasing, Aries culminating; hung
about their necks; which by a hidden planetary virtue cures it. Also the juice
of piony roots dog up at that time, and made into a syrrup with Sugar taken
inwardly does the like.

CHAP. XXII. Of Convulsion and Cramps.
(...) in Greek; in Latin Convulsio; in English Convulsion and Cramp:
Definition.
is a Disease in which the sinews are drawn and plucked up together against
ones will.

There are diverse kinds of this Disease, Kinds.
three of these kinds lie in the neck.

The first is called in Greek (...); in Latin Distentio;

Tentio ad anteriora, when the head or neck is drawn down toward the breast.

Tensio ad posteriora, when the head is drawn backward.





This Disease is caused through fasting, fullness, Cause.
pricking of an Artery, or the biting of a venomous beast, that the venom come
to the Nerve.

The fifth of these is only mortal, and takes away many young Children.

For Children: Spirit of Castoreum, Cure.
Aqua paralitica Mathioli, Aqua antepileptica langij, are medicinal.

For aged people; if it come of fullness, Of fulness.
purge and vomit, then use the precedent medicines.

If it come of fasting, Fasting.
it is more perilous; the best remedy that I know then, is the decoction of
China roots.

Pricking of a nerve.
If it come by pricking an Artery, as many times it does in blood-letting
through the unskilfulnesse of the Chyrurgion, or unrulinesse of the Patient. If
it be much hurt, the only way I know, is to cut it quite as^^der, and lose the
use of the limb, to save your life.

Stinging of venomous creatures.
If it come by stinging of any venomous creature, make the wound bigger, and
draw out the poison with Venice treacle applied to it plaster-wise.

Finally, wear for the Cramp, a Ring made of a Rams horn, the Ram slain in, in
the hour of the Sun, he either rising or culminating.

CHAP. XXIII. Of the Mare.
(...) in Greek, (...)
in Latin Incubus, is a Disease that happens only in the night, to people in
bed, wherein they conceive themselves over-pressed with a great weight, which
almost strangles them.

The ridiculous conceits of the vulgar.
The simple sort call it the Mare, and conceit and affirm, that they feel it
with their hand, and hear it fall down in the chamber; yea, I have heard one
affirm, she heard it come in at the gate. The truth (or rather falsehood) of all
this, will appear in the description.

This Disease is caused of excessive drinking, Cause.
also of continual rawnesse of the Stomach; whence are sent gross and cold
Vapors, which fill the ventricles of the Brain, letting the dispersing of the
faculties thereof by the sinews.

This Disease always invades those that are asleep, Description.
and most of all such as lie upon their backs; Signs.
they suppose a great weight lies upon them, and stops their breath, that they
cannot move, and dream that they are almost strangled, and would cry out, but
their voice is stopped; and in^^ed they groan pitifully, at last being
something wakened, and able to stir, the passage is opened and they eased.

This Disease (though seeming light) is not to be neglected, Caution.
by reason of its affinity with the Apoplexy and Falling Sickness.

Let him never lie on his back.

Let his Diet be such as breeds not wind, nor is of a dilative quality. Diet.


Blood-letting. Cure.
If there be signs of fullness, use bleeding.

Let him not go to bed till digestion be perfected; Vinegar of Squils taken two
spoonfuls in the morning fasting; and if digestion be weak, I have been my
self, and have known others strangely troubled with this disease, since the
writing hereof, and in a far different manner from what he e is written; but
the margent is too small to hold the Story.
one spoonful presently after meat digesteth the humors and cures the Disease.

Keep the head and neck always warm. Also you may take inwardly such things as
strengthen the brain, such be, Aromaticum Rosatum, Diamoscum dulce, Diambra,
Dianthon, etc.

CHAP. XXIV. Of Madness.
Difference betwixt (...) and (...).
(...) in Greek, is a Disease which the Latins call Insania and Furor; in
English Madness and Fury, they that have this Disease be unruly like wild
Beasts.

The difference betwixt this and the Frenzy, is this: A Fever always
accompanies a Frenzy, but never this Disease called (...), or Madness.

It is caused of much blood flowing up into the Brain; Cause.
sometimes this blood offends in quantity only, and sometimes in quality, when
it is melancholy: The super fluity of melancholy, causes alienation of mind,
and causes the man to be foolish and beside himself.

I shall only in this Chapter treat of madness coming of blood. Signs.


There goes before Madness, weakness of the head, tickling of the ears,
shinings before the eyes, great watchings, strange thoughts approach the mind,
heaviness of the head, a ravenous appetite, a forwardness to bodily lust, the
eyes stare, and seldom either wink or beckon.

If it come of blood only, they laugh continually, and the sick thinks he
sees before his eyes things to laugh at.

If any Choler be mingled with the blood, then the pricking and swift moving of
the brain, makes them angry, irefull, moving and bold.

In the first place bleed them, Bleeding.
and then by the color of the blood you may discern easily the quality
predomnate.

If it be a Woman, breath a vein in the ankles, for that provokes the terms.

Let their Diet be such as breeds little blood, till they are almost starved.

In many the humors is waxed gross, and settled by long continuance, and such
are worst to cure, though perhaps they be patientest, for the time, yet look
for them to be furious enough, when the humor is stirred, and made thinner.

If it come of blood only, you may draw away blood abundantly, from the arm,
under the tongue from the forehead, from the fundament with leaches

If Choler be mixed with the blood I refer you to the Chapter of Frenzy.

If of Melancholy, the next Chapter shall instruct you, only let him eat
little, drink no strong drink nor wine; sleep much, and go to stool orderly.

CHAP. XXV. Of Melancholy.
BY Melancholy, here I mean, not the simple complexion; for without that, none
can live; but the alteration of the complexion in quantity, quality, or seat.

It comes without a fever, Description.
and is engendered of melancholy occupying the mind, and changing the
temperature of the brain.

It is caused three ways. Sometimes it is caused of the common vice of
melancholy blood, Caused 3 ways.
being in all the veins of the body, and so hurts the brain.

Sometimes the blood only in the brain is altered, Had this been to do again, I
could have done it ten tim^s better.
the blood in other parts of the body being safe.

And sometimes it is engendered through inflammation about the spleen, and so
sending up melancholy vapors thither.

The most common signs be fearfulness; sadness, hatred, strange
imaginations; For some think themselves bruit beasts, and counterfeit their
noise and voice; Signs.


Innumerable such fancies are mentioned by Authors which I forbear to mention.

This is according to the cause; if the cause be fear, then they think others
will kill them; if of grief, they seek to kill themselves; if of love, the
natural blood is infected because the liver is the seat of love, I want room,
guess the rest by these.
As how one conceited he had a fish in his blood, another durst not piss for
fear he should drown the world, a third conceited he had no head, and a
fourth that he was made of butter; all which, and the ways and means by which
they were cured you may read in A. P. his Surgery: but to proceed. Many
desire death, and some do kill themselves, others are afraid of death, and
think their best friends when they see them determine to kill them; some
laugh; some weep; some think themselves inspired with the holy Ghost, and
prophecy of things to come.

Also the state of their body is slender, black, rough dry and hard in
touching, and altogether melancholious.

This is caused through excessivenesse of some passion, as love, joy, grief,
etc. or through much study, watching, stopping of the Hemoroides, or Menstrua,
or the eating of wicked and melancholicke meats.

But in such in whom it is caused by the Spleen, they have rawnesse, much wind,
sharp belchings, burnings and greivousnesse of the sides, the sides are drawn
upwards, and many times they have Inflammations there. Also Costivenesse,
little sleep, troublesome and naughty dreams, swimming in the head, and sound
in the ears.

Let him abhor melancholy Diet. Diet,


Let the Air he abides in be hot and moist. Air.


Let his Meat be hot and moist, of good digestion and breeding good blood.
Young Borrage boiled and buttered is good meat for him.

Black Hellebore corrected with Cinnamon, Purge.
is a good purge for him, so is decoction of Epithimam.

Fumitory is a sovereign herb for the disease, and so is betony.

If the infirmity lie in the whole body, Bleeding.
you have no other remedy but you must bleed him often, because all the blood
is corrupted.

If it lie in the head only, bleeding is needles, only follow his humors, and
comfort him with Cordials and Cephaliques, that strengthen the brain; such be
of simples, Betony, Red-roses, Hart's-tongue, Endive, Borrage, buglosse and
Violet- flowers. Of compounds, Aromaticum rosatum, Diamoscu dulce, Anacardina,
Laetificans, Galleni, Dianthon, species cordiales temperatae, etc. And his best
Doctor is Dr Merry-man.

But if it proceed from the Spleen; for Simples use Centaury, Penyroyall,
Wormwood, and Germander and Bay Berries, apply to the region of the Spleen an
Emplaster of Melilot for the Spleen.

Also you may provoke them to sneeze with Betony in powder snuffed up in their
nose. Sneezing.


There are diverse other manners of cure which I omit here, my scope being in
this place to treat of it, as it annoyeth the brain only; I may happen to write
of the redundance of all the complexions severally and distinctly by
themselves; to which I refer you.

CHAP. XXVI. Of Trembling or shaking of any Limb, called commonly the shaking
Palsy.
THis Disease commonly goes a little before death, especially in acute
diseases and sursers, and then it is an evident sign death is near.

It many times troubles aged people, and then it is incurable.

It is also caused by fear; Cause.
then remove the fear, and the trembling is gone.

Sometimes it comes by accident, as immoderate cold taken, abundance of gross,
thick and clammy humors, much drinking of Wine, etc.

There needs no signs to be showed.

For Diet, Diet.
use such things as cut, divide and extenuate; let him eschew all things that
hurt the sinews; all Wines.

The best cure that I know, Cure.
(which indeed is sufficient) I have known men of ninty years of age, kept
from this infirmity, Question less such things as strengthen the Nerves are
excellent; I am sorry I was so brief.
only at night when they go to bed, by rubbing their fingers between their
toes, and smelling to them.

Yet if you be troubled with it already, your best way is first (when you have
learned what humor it is that troubles you) to purge out that humor.

In this Treatise are many Aphorisms, which are marked with a hand in the
Margent, which the studious in Physic, especially young Students, if they
please to write them out by themselves, may find wonderful useful.

Plures gula periere quam gladio.
FINIS.
FEBRILIA: OR, A TREATISE OF FEVERS In General.

By NICHOLAS CULPEPPER, Student in Astrology and Physic.

Printed in the Year 1655.

I Revised this Treatise of FEVERS; the Method of which was Galen's. This I am
confident, it contains most excellent Truths.

Nich. Culpepper.

CHAP. I. A Table of FEVERS.
A Fever is an unnatural heat engendered In the Spirits. In the Humors. In the
fleshie parts.


In the Spirits it causes Ephemeris, or an one day Fever. Synochus non
Putrida, or a Fever lasting three or four days.


In the Humors it causes a rotten Fever, and the Humors rot Within the
Vessels. Without the Vessels


Within the Vessels All the Humors rot and so cause Sinochus putrida. Only
one Humor, and so by Putrefaction Of Choler, a continual Tertian. Of Phlegm, a
continual Quotidian. Of Melancholy, a continual Quartane.



Without the Vessels by putrefaction. Of Choler, an intermitting Tertian Ague.
Of Phlegm, that is Sweet, an intermitting Quotidian-Ague. Glazen, it causes
Epialos.
Of Melancholy, an intermitting Quartane Ague.


In the fleshy parts it causes Hective Fevers. Marasmos.


CHAP. II. A Comment upon the Table of Fevers.
A Fever is an unnatural heat, which takes its beginning at the heart,
Definition.
and is spread from thence through the whole body by the arteries and veins;
hurting or letting thereby the operation of the parts thereof.

The body of man is generally divided by Hippocrates into three parts; The
things contained, the thing containing, and the thing that gives life and
motion to both.

1. The things contained are humors; 2 The thing containing the humors is the
flesh; 3 The spirits give life and motion to both.
In all these three, distinctly, and severally, happen fevers.

For if this unnatural heat (for a man may be naturally hot, and is hotter at
one time, then at another, yet has no fever;) be kindled in the Spirits, it
causes either a fever which the Greeks call (...) in Latin diaria, in
English an one day fever; (...).
because in this fever, there chances but one fit; and that lasts nor above
a day; For and that lasts not above a day; For as a bottle filled with hot
water heats the bottle, so the spirits being inflamed, heat the body; or

Sometimes it causes a fever, called (...) non putrida, Three sorts of (...)
and it commonly lasts (if it be rightly handled) not above three days, the
Latins call it diaria, but very improperly; Of this (...) there are three
sorts.

Some continue with equal vehemence, from the beginning to the latter end; (...)
(...) and (...) the Greeks call this.

(...).


(...).
and those the Greeks call (...)

Moreover, if only one humor do putrify and rot within the vessels, it
causes a fever the Greeks call (...) which is a continual fever; (...).
for although there be remission in this fever between the shaking fits, yet
the fever never leaves him, before he be either cured of it, or killed by it.

Difference between (...) and (...).
So that here in this lies the difference between Synochos, and Synochys; the
former has no remission in the fit, but only one continued fit; the latter
has always remission, or slacking, though no intermission as is in agues; In
(...) but one fit, in (...) many.

Three sorts of (...).
O^ this (...) are also three sorts; For if the putrefaction be of choler only,
it causes a continual tertian, (...).
(...)

If phlegm putrify within the vessels, it causes a



Dif^^ence between, remitting and interm t ing fevers.
Yet all these differ from intermitting Fevers, called (by the Vulgar) Agues;
far and wide, though the fits are distant alike.

For first, though the humors that cause them both be the very same; ye in
these remitting Fevers,

Secondly, this continual, though remitting Fever, still remains between the
fits, though not with the same violence; but an intermiting Fever or Ague,
totally to the Patients apprehension, cease, till the next fit come.

Of which now, a word or two.

Febris interpolain. Three sorts.
This Fever is very fitly called in Latin Febris interpolata, because the fits
renew at their time; it is called by some, Febris deficiens.



1 Tertian, 2 Quotidian, 3 Quartan.
A pure intermiting Tertian is caused of choler rotting without the Vessels.
Tertian.


An exquisite quotidian is called in Greek (...) and is caused of sweet phlegm
patrifying or rotting without the Vessels; Quotidian (...).
For if the phlegm that putrify be glazen, it causes a Fever called Epialos.

Epialos is a Fever, wherein the Patient feels both heat and cold,
immoderately in all parts, Epialos quid.
both at one time and at one place.

To this Fever, belongs an accident called by the Greeks (...) that is, (...)
when vehement heat is felt in the bowels and entrails; and immoderate cold in
the external parts.

An intermiting Quartan is caused of melancholy rotting without the Vessels,
Quartan.
is governed by Saturas a planet slow, weighty, and ponderous, and therefore
the disease is commonly Chronical and lasting.

I come now to the last sort of Fevers, which the Table shows to proceed of
heat in the fleshy parts; Hectica F^bris.
and that is called Hectica febris, an Hecticke Fever.

For as a hot Vessel heats the water that is put into it, so a Hectike Fever
though the rise of it be in the flesh, after the third concoction, yet it heats
the humors which the flesh contains.

This Fever for the most part, Marasmos.
without speedy cure, consumes the whole body, and then is called Marasmos; and
this Marasmos, says Galen is incurable; Galeus error.
but the good old soul was mistaken; for I have known it cured in more then
one, or two; I have had it my self since the writing of this.

As for the Pestilence, it is also a Fever and a shrewd one too; I have
written of that already, in a treatise by it self; and therefore no more of it
now.

There are other Fevers that come by reason of the inflammation of some
member. Inflammations.


So that Fever which comes in the filme that girdeth the ribbs, Pluretia.
is called pleuretia.

If from inflammation of the lungs, it is called Peripneumonia. (...).
Erraticae febres.


If of the stomach, it is called Typhodes.

Some Fevers also are called Erraticae, that keep no certain time of coming
at all; nor any order of fits, and intermission; and such Fevers come commonly
of Melancholy.

But in every Fever, you must consider diligently, whither the Fever come by
any disease, of any particular member; else you will err egregiously in giving
Physic.

These are all simple Fevers, some Fevers are compound, Compound Fevers.
as diverse Fevers of a like nature join together; as intermiting Fevers
with intermiting, etc. For example, two intermitting Tertians, or two
intermitting Quartaines join together, in which last the party is sick two
days, and well but one; my own child, at the writing hereof, had two
intermiting Tertians; the one far more violent then the other, and they came at
some twelve hours distance.

But sometimes, an intermitting Tertian is joined with a continual Quotidian;
(...)
and this disease is called in Greek (...) and this only is known as yet of
compound Fevers, of different natures; the other are still of Fevers of like
nature, as continual Fevers with continual, or intermiting with intermiting.

And thus much of my paraphrase, which though it be somewhat long, yet I
account nothing tedious that is rational; I know many words might have been
added, but not one might have been left out. For by ignorance in, or negligence
of this, many lives are lost; which by due observance of this, might be
preserved.

CHAP. III. Of (...) or an one day Fever.
(...) in Greek; in Latin Diaria; (...)
in English an one day Fever, because it has but one fit, which continues
but one day, if rightly handled; if not, it turns to other diseases,

It is caused when the breath is inflamed above nature, without any
putrefaction, Cause.
and this chances many ways.

First, through binding or thickning of the skin,

Secondly, by weariness.



Fourthly, by sadness, care and sorrow.











Signs. General. Six.
The Signs are of two sorts.

First general signs; whereby this Fever is



The general signs are six.

1. They change the pulse, in greatness and swiftness, but it keeps that
proportion, in order, softness, and equality, it did according to nature. 2.
The Urine seldom or never turns from a natural state.
A natural Urine is subrufe in color, mean in substance, and if you shake
it, it sparkles like Sack.

Yet I deny not but Vrines alter something according to the predominant
complexion of the party, even in men of perfect health.

3. 4. 5. 6.
Signs. Of watching.
The particular Signs.

If it come of watching, there follows a naughty color, swelling of the face,
heaviness of the eyes, that he can hardly lift them up, the hairs of the
eyelids are moist, and the pulse small; for watching hinders digestion, and
causes crudities, when these signs arise.

Care and sorrow.
If it come of care or sorrow, the body is lean; if sorrow be the cause, the
color is cleerer; if care, darker, hollownesse and dryness of the eyes,
discolored skin.

If of anger, Anger.
the eyes seem to stick out farther then they use to do, the face is red, and
the pulse lofty.

If of sadness, the pulse is small, Sadne^^.
feeble and rare.

If of fear, the face is pale, Fear.
for fear sends the blood from the circumference to the center, the pulse is
swift, unequal and sharp.

If it come through burning and heat of the Sun, their skin is hot and dry,
Sun.
and their head seems to burn, the eyes are red and troubled, and the veins
in the temples forehead, and under their eyes are stretched and puffed up.

If of cold, there follows heavy distillations and rheums, Cold.
astringency; for cold binds and keeps the vapors within the skin.

If of weariness, the skin is exceeding dry, Wearines.
and the pulse exceeding small.

If of drunkenness or hunger, Drunkenness.
the sick may tell you.

If of Kernels, or Impostumation of the throat, Kernels.
the pulse is great, swift and often, their face swollen, their Urine pale.

For cure, Cure.
you must observe the general rule contraria contrariis medentur.

Let their general diet be meats of good juice, Diet.
and easy of digestion.

Give such as have their disease of anger or sunburning, cool and moist diet.

If of cold, a diet that does moderately heat; against watching and sadness, a
diet that moistneth and provokes sleep.

If of weariness; let them eat as much meat as they can well digest.

More over you must regard the Patients strength, his natural temper, the time
of the year, age and usual custom of the sick, and accordingly order your
Physic.

If the natural temper of the body be choleric, you must feed them with meat
at the beginning of the fit, ^^^tio^.
for it is very subject, if the body be kept fasting to turn to an acute rotten
Fever.

See the body be kept laxative; Stool.
if he go not naturally to stool, provoke him with an emollient Clister.

Finally, Bath.
so soon as the fit begins to wane; bath him in a warm bath, made with sweet
herbs boiled in water; for that will open the pores, and let out the vapors.

CHAP. IIII. Of Synochus non pistrida, being a Fever which lasts three or
four days.
THis Fever is caused, (...). quid.
either because the small pores of the skin are stopped, Cause.
or because the body it self is moderately thickened through cold, or after
bathing, or by sharp binding medicines, heat of the Sun, or any other thing
that dries the skin.

It may be thus known.

First, by touching, Signs.
for the skin is harder and more compact, then it was wont to be.

Secondly, by the heat,

Thirdly, the Unine is not much altered from its natural substance and color,

Fourthly, the body falls not away,

Fifthly, the pulse is equal, swift, vehement,

Cure. Bleeding.
For cure of this disease, you may safely draw out so much blood as age,
strength, and the season of the year permit.

After bleeding use things that cleanse and scowr; Abstergents.
such are Oximel, Hysop, Origanum, Smallage, and observe whether the heat abate
by this diet.

For if by the third day you find little heat left, Bath.
you may safely bath him with such things as are scouring, such be Orris and
Aristolochia roots, Smallage, salt-peeter, boiled in water and honey.

But if the Fever then increase, or on the fourth day, then either you were
mistaken at first in the disease, or else the Fever is altered, and some
humor putrified.

CHAP. V. Of a rotten Fever, called Synochus putrida.
Synochus putrida quid.
SYnochus putrida, is a Fever which holds from the beginning to the ending
without any great mutation, or sensible change, and may well be called a
constant or stable Fever.

Of this are three sorts; I described them in the second Chapter.

This Fever is caused by the rotting of all the humors equally within the
Vessels, Cause.
and especially in the great Vessels about the arm-holes and share. and this
chances, when fervent heat is kept in by violent binding and stopping, which
is within the body; for when heat and moist things cannot breath out, they
putrify and rot presently.

Therefore this fever is seldom engendered in thin spare folk, nor in cold
bodies, nor old age, but in such as abound in blood, of gross, fat, or fleshy
bodies, or stuffed with hot excrements.

This is properly known from Synochus non putrida, Signs.
because there are signs of rottenness in the Urine, and the pulse of a man
sick of this, but not so in the former.

The other signs all agree with the former.

The Cure of this fever must begin with blood-letting, Cure. Bleeding.
and that in the beginning of the disease, if you can.

Cold drink is most perilous in this disease; Caution.
first because it causes obstructions, and hinders the attenuation of the
clammy humors.

Secondly, cold drinks hurt weak members; some by drinking cold drink in
this fever, have gotten such sore throats, that they could not swallow; in
some the Stomach is hurt, that they could not digest; in some the Bladder;
generally that part that is weakest is most subject to hurt; and being hurt,
cannot perform its proper office.

But blood-letting you may use at any time, if strength permit, provided it be
not upon a full stomach.

Such as have this fever, have always loosnesse and sometimes vomit up Choler.

Let his drink be barley water, Diake.
sweetened with syrrup of Violets, and a little Oil of Vitrioll to make it tart.

Let his diet be light of digestion, Meat.
and let him eat it at his usual times of eating; for then it will digest best.

Also Oranges, Lemmons, Oxymel, and Verjuyce, are medicinal for him.

CHAP. VI. Of continual Fevers called by the Greeks (...).
(...) in Greek is a continual fever, that has some certain slacking
between the fits; (...)*
yet no absolute intermission, till the end of it, and by this only it is
known from Agues or intermitting fevers, therefore I shall omit the signs
till then. Cause.


This fever is caused by rotting of one particular humor only within the
Vessels; I showed it in the first and second Chapters, I remit you to that.

I shall only treat of that which is called of the Greeks (...) by it self,
in the next Chapter, for that is the most dangerous, and wind up the rest
together in this. A Compendium of the cure of Fevers.


In the general cure of fevers of this sort, these things must be considered.

First, the Fever.

Secondly, the rottenness.

In the Fever.
In the fever two things must also be considered.





In the rottenness.


First, how the humors already putrified may be healed.



Heac, qui non animadvertit, errabit nimis.

In the beginning of the fever, if strength and age permit, Bleeding.
let blood; for that lets out the inflamed blood, and cooles the rest.

Obstructions.
The body thus cooled, you must cure the obstructions, and that without heating
the Patient, lest you increase the fever, and cause more putrefaction.

This is best done by Clysters, Clysters.
and sweates; for Clysters, take only the common decoction with Molossus,
Sweats.
and Diacatholicon.

For sweates, you may use either Venire treacle, Matthiolus his great antidote,
Serpentary roots, Electuarium de ovo: Consideratis considerandis.

To stop and hinder the humors not inflamed from inflaming, use cooling
juleps, made with barley water, Harts-horne, Ivory, Scorzonera roots, Zedoary,
etc. Syrup of Violets, etc.

To prevent putrefaction, avoid all meats, I mean flesh, and all broths of
flesh.

To bring away humors already putrified, boil a white Lilly root in
White Wind, and let him drink it.

For outward medicines, Vine branches, Water Lillies, Lecalia.
Endive, Succory, Wood Sorrel, Sorrel, Lettuce, Knot-grasse, Vinegar, these or
any of these beaten, and the juice mingled with oil of Roses, and wool dipped
in it, and applied to the Stomach, mightily allay the heat.

But have a care by all means, that you do not apply this at the beginning of
the Fever, for then the heat lies inward, and this will add more violence to
it, but only when the heat is come to the external parts, for then it
cherishes the Lungs, and provokes sleep.

Provoke sleep with Diascordium; Sleep.
if that prevail not, use Laudanum.

But have a care of Opiats, at the beginning of the Disease.

For Cordials, Scorzonera-roots, Bezoar, Cordials.
Sirrup of Citron-pils, and Syrrup of Balm of Fernelius, Confection of
Alchermes, and de Hiacyntho, Electuarium de Ovo, any of these may be
administered, consideratis considerandis.

CHAP. VII. Of a Burning Fever, called (...).
(...) Qad Cause.
(...) in Greek, is called in English a Burning Fever, or continual Tertian.

It is caused of Choler, rotting or putrefying within the Veins, together with
the Blood.

Those that have this Disease, Signs.
their Tongue is dry, rough and black, with gnawing of the Stomach, immoderate
thirst, and watching; their Dung is liquid and pale.

Let the place wherein the Sick lies be cool, Cure. Air.
the air sweet; if it be not cool, m^k^ it so by art; of which you have
examples in my Criti a Cephalica, vol. 3. lib. 2.

Let him drink for his ordinary Drink, Drink.
water wherein Barley, Cinnamon, and such Herbs as cool and moisten, such be
Lettice, Sorrel, Wood-sorrell, Purslane, etc. have been boiled.

Also Syrup of Violets, Violet and Straw-berry-leaves, Water Lillies and
Verjuice, juice of Lemmans and Oranges, are medicinal,

With the other Medicines mentioned in the former Chapter; and Bleeding.

If these Medicines prevail not, Blisters.
but the Humors flow up, and lie heavy on the Head, which you may know by
their talking idly, you must apply Blisters to the inside of the Wrests, and
the inside of the Calves of their Legs.

If that prevail not, but you perceive their case desperate, Pigeons.
apply Pigeons to the soles of their Feet.

But if in a desperate case it oppress their Stomach or Heart, I have known
six grains of Mercurius Vitae cure them; yet in my opinion Lac Sulphuris had
been better.

CHAP. VIII. Of an Intermitting Tertian Fever, commonly called a second days
Ague.
OF all Agues, this only is mortal, yet the other two may turn to another
Disease that may kill, but they kill not themselves.

And this Ague, though sometime it be mortal, yet is of all other most
frequent; and if rightly handled, easiest cured.

It vexes young folks most.

I suppose the reason why this Ague is most frequent, to be because Choler by
reason of its heat, Cause.
is most apt to stir with violence.

This Disease is caused of Choler, pure, sincere and unmixed, carried with
violence by the sensitive parts of the Body.

This Disease happens usually to persons Choleric by nature, in their
flourishing age, and in Spring time. Signs.


The signs of this Disease are, a vehement Cold, rigor and stiffnesse in the
beginning of the Fit; the Patient thinks his Body is pricked; soreness of the
Bones, as though they were nipped, an exact order and equality of the Pulse;
for as the Fever increases, the Pulses are raised in strength, vehemence and
frequency.

In the vehemence of the Fever, it causes thirst, and burns up the Patient;
his Breath is swift, and hot as fire, and requires drink immoderately, their
Urine choleric, subrufe, and something yellow.

The longest fit of a Tertian endures but twelve hours.

When these Fits come sooner and sooner, the Disease gets strength over
nature; but if later and later, the Disease loses strength.

Galen's mistakes.
Galen says, men laboring of this Disease, vomit Choler.

At the writing hereof, and it is the seventh of February 1645/6. I have cured
above twenty of this Disease, and it is like seen more, yet never knew nor saw
any vomit at all.

I have known enough vomit sinee.
When I was a Boy, I had the Disease constantly every Spring (though Galen says
it comes only in the heat of Summer: Gal. ad Glauconem.) yet never (to my
memory) had so much as a pronenesse to vomit.

The usual Cure of this Disease, Cure.
is by Vomiting and Sweating. But I have found out a more certain and speedy,
and indeed never missing Cure.

Let the Air the sick abides in, be clear and penetrating. Air.


Both this and Q^otidian Agues I never missed cure, by giving only Cinquefoil,
gathered in the hour of Jupiter, if it be possible, he being above the Earth:
and truly I should think it were the better, if the Moon were aspected to him,
but I never observed it.

This I have given in Powder, both in common Vinegar, and Vinegar of Squils; I
have observed the number of the Leaves I have given, viz. one for a Quotidian,
three for a Tertian, etc. and I have observed it, I have given the Decoction
thereof, and all of them still did the Cure in three Fits, sometimes in two;
therefore I hold it the most sovereign Medicine for Agues in the world.

CHAP. IX. Of a Quartane Fever, or Ague.
THis proceeds of Melancholy putrefying and rotting without the Veins.

This Fever does not invade the Sick with that rigor and stiffnesse that the
former does, Cause.
but the cold is like the cold a man feels in an hard frost, Signs.
as though it would break his Bones, and does not seem to prick him as the
other does.

Their Urine is white and thin, and, as it were, strained from some gross
matter.

Their Urine is white and thin, and, as it were, strained from some gross
matter.

It comes commonly about Harvest, land stays (without cure) till next
Spring; and is a stubborn Humor to be dealt withal.

For many a time and often, this Ague by violent Medicines (as Vomits, etc.) is
turned to a double Quartane, and so the Patient has two sick days, and but
one well day.

Saturn the causer of this Ague, is a sullen Planet, and the Disease takes
after him; therefore deal gently with it at first; you had better please a
sullen potent adversary, then displease him.

I never had any Patient of this Disease, since I knew the virtues of the Herb
Cinquefoil; it is very probable it will cure this, as well as other Agues Since
I have done the Cure with it. Bleeding. I d^si^e these Hellebores may be let
alone in this Disease, for old Saturn will not be Vexe^.
.

Yet if Blood abound, you may let blood in this Ague; and if it look black,
draw out good store.

Also black Hellebore, corrected with Cinnamon, may be given.

And white Hellebore, if it may be given inwardly at all, it may in this
Disease.

But let these be given on the well days, for then they anger the Ague less.

In this Agu^, you must have a great care of the Spleen, for that is the
receptacle of Melancholy.

Therefore you may anoint the left side with oil of Capers, Vng. ex succis
aperitivis, or any opening splenetick Medicine.

CHAP. X. Of a Quotidian Fever or Ague.
IT is caused of sweet Phlegm, Cause. (...).
putrified without the Veins; it is called of the Greeks (...), but if the
Phlegm that putrifies be glazen, (which is the coldest of all flegms) it
engenders a Fever called Epialos.

In this Fever, called (...) by the Greeks, (...).
the Patient feels vehement heat, and vehement cold, both at one time, in all
parts of his Body.

In the beginning of a Quotidian, Signs.
the Pulse is unequal, slow, little and weak, nothing like neither Tertian nor
Quartane, neither for extremity of heat nor cold; neither do they thirst much,
because the Vapor is moist and smoaky.

It most vexes phlegmatic persons.

But this also is completely, perfectly and speedily cured, by that excellent
Herb Cinquefoil, so used as before was specified.

As for all mixed kinds of Agues, I need not write; but I commend this as a
sovereign cure for them all.

And (God-willing) I intend to make proof of it, in continual, Q^otidians,
Tertians and Quartanes.

CHAP. XI. Of an Hectic Fever.
AN Hectic Fever is a Disease, wherein an unnatural heat is kindled,
throughout the fleshy and massy parts of the Body. Hectica Febris, quid.
.

They that have this Fever, feel no pain, neither do they know (the rules of
Art excepted) that they have any fever at all; because all the parts of the
body are equally hot, and so there is no reluctance.

This Disease is caused two ways. Cause.






When these fevers consume and waste the body, (as indeed without speedy cure
they always do) then Galen calls them (...); Gal. de inaequali intemperie.
and this Marasmos, says he, is incurable: and to make this seem as though it
were true, he tells a long tale of the snuff of a candle; which, says he,
being put out, mutters to pieces; but if you put Oil to it, it makes it burn
with more violence: so (quoth he) this fever, if you go about to extinguish
the heat, the party dies instantly; but if you add moisture to him, his fever
burns more violently.

But Experience (the best Artist) makes no difference between Hectic fevers,
and Marasmus, but shows plainly that all Hectic fevers are wasting, and also
curable; therefore I shall leave Doctor Galen, and follow Doctor Experience in
this Disease; and therefore now to the purpose.

The Signs of this Disease are these: Signs.


Their eyes are wonderful hollow, as though they were sunk in their heads,
their moisture is consumed, so that you may see the bones of their Eyebrows
stick out; there hangs at the hair of their Eyebrows gum or filth, as though
they had gone a long journey in the dust; their skin is hard and dry, and their
eyes wink often, as though they were sleepy, when indeed it is far otherwise
with such as have this Disease, for they can hardly be brought to rest; they
pine to skin and bone, and if you look upon their Belly, it looks as if it had
no bowels in it; the Pulse is weak and often, and continually after meat the
fever is increased, and the Pulses are augmented in greatness.

The Cure consists in cooling and moistning, Cure.
which must be done both outwardly and inwardly.

Let the Air the Sick abides in, Air.
be cold and moist; if it be not so naturally, make it so by Art, whereof you
have examples in my Treatise, called Crit. Cephal.

Let his Meats be such as moisten, Meats.
and breed good and active Blood; such are Lamb-stones, Cocks-stones, Lobsters,
Prawns, Eggs boiled soft, Paritich, Larks, etc.

For Herbs, Herbs.
let him use Lettuce, Endive, Succory, Spinach, Mallows, etc.

Let his Drink with his Meat, Drink.
be only water wherein Cinnamon has been boiled.

Let him drink new Milk abundantly, Milk.
provided he have no fever of putrefaction, or rottenness joined with it.

He may eat freely Raisons of the Sun, Fruits.
and Almonds, Cherries, Prunes, Pomegranates and figgs.

Let him eat often, Caution.
and but little at a time.

For Cordials, Cordials.
he may use Diarrhodon abbatis, Diatragacanthum frigidum, Diapapaver and
species Cordiales temperatae, Diamargariton frigidum.

For Syrrups, Sirrups.
let him use Syrrup of Violets, Endive, Lettuce, Water Lillies and Vinegar.

Let him nrink Emulsions made of Barly-water, Emulsion.
Almonds, the four greater cold Seeds, and white Poppy-seeds, sweetened with
Sugar.

Lastly, Unctions.
let his body be kept continually anointed with pure oil Olive, and nothing
else.

Many in this Disease vomit up all their Meat so soon as they have eaten it,
Caution.
(which indeed I forgot before) in such cases make their Emulsion of Mint
water, instead of Barly-water, as before; for only by this Medicine alone, have
I known Galen's supposed incurable Disease, cured.

FINIS.
Physical APHORISMS. Reader, Give me leave to begin, and I will not be
beholding to time for leave to make a Preamble.
APHOR. I
THE whole ground of Physic is comprehended in these two words, Sympathy and
Antipathy; the one cures by strengthening the part of the Body afflicted; the
other by resisting the malady afflicting.

2.
Many People are troubled with strange Visions, especially in the night time;
strange lights, strange sights appear, and sometimes voices are heard: let
such avoid drinking Wine, and as much as may be strong Beer; for Melancholy is
the cause of this, which strong liquor attenuates, and makes it fly upwards.

3.
The ashes of Hens feathers or Hens bones burnt, and applied to the place, is
an excellent remedy to stop bleeding in any part of the body.

4.
Toads, Spiders, and Frogs, or their Spawn, have the same effects, but they do
it by Antipathy, because the blood flies from its enemy; and there if a dried
Toad be but held in the hand of one that bleedeth, the blood presently cease
and retireth back to the Center.

5.
Take two or three Toads and boil them in Oil very well, and this Oil will
by unction quickly cure any red face, or any redness of the skin, out of
question by the former reason.

6.
Take the Seeds of Red Nettles, beat them into powder, and take a dram of it at
a time in white Wine; it procures chastity, they say, and is a far better
medicine to rout Asmodeus the leacherous Devil then the liver of a fish.

7.
The marrow of a Goose wing, and the older the Goose is, it is so much the
better, a little of it being put into the eye, breaks the web there, though it
be never so strong or of so long continuance.

8.
The Milk of a Woman's breast is excellent for the foregoing infirmity of the
eyes, only with this Proviso; if the party afflicted be a Male, let it be the
milk of a Woman that bare a Male; if a Female, the contrary.

9.
When People have gotten an inflammation in any wound, the vulgar say they have
gotten the Ague in it, as it is familiar when Women's breasts are inflamed, to
say they have the Ague in their breasts, a speedy way, and as cheap as speedy,
(that I may not keep such a quarter about the name, as the College of
Physicians did, about the Rickers) is to take malt flower and make it into the
form of a Caraplasme or Pultis with Vertjuyce and apply it, be the place in
Arm, Leg, or Breast, or elsewhere, either with wound or without.

10.
Hollyhock leaves boiled to a Pultis in milk, works the same effect in the
same causes.

11.
A most admirable remedy, if not the best of remedies for a Consumption, is to
go into the Country in Plowing-time, and follow the Plow that so the smell of
the earth being newly broke up may be taken in at the nose; if this may not be
by reason of the season of the year, or poverty of the Patient, then let it
suffice to go out into the field every morning, and dig up a fresh turse and
smell to it an hour or two together.

12.
Take five white pease, and chew them very well, then swallow them down, then
hold thy breath as long as thou can, thou shall find it an excellent remedy
against the heart-burning.

13.
For a Rupture this do, give the Patient two or three spoonfuls of the juice
of comfry every morning (I know no reason but that the curious may make it into
a syrup) then apply the bruised herb mixed with its equal quantity of Dazies
to the place, and let him keep his bed nine days by which time he will be
well.

14.
Take a Jay, pull off her feathers, and pull out her guts, then fill her belly
full of Cumminseeds, then dry her in an Oven, till she be converted into Mummy*
a dram of her being beaten into powder, seeds and all, is an excellent remedy
for the Falling Sickness, being taken in any convenient liquor every morning,
put in Piony water.

15.
Rue bruised and worn under the fect next the skin; is an excellent remedy for
a quartan Ague.

16.
If deafness come of stopping in the passages of the ears, as usually it
does, no better remedy in the World then to inject white Wine into the ear
(being first a little warmed, for the ears abhor cold) and if you mix a little
spirit of Castoreum with it, twill be so much the better.

17.
The powder of burnt Hartshorn (let it be well burnt, viz. till it be white)
and rub your teeth well with it, and it will keep them exceeding white and
safe from rotting.

18.
To eat the liver of a mad dog, being first dried and beaten into powder, (a
dram at a time is sufficient) is an excellent, yea the best of remedies for the
biting of a mad dog.

19.
If an Earwig be gotten into a man's ear, you will say it will kill him, but
presently or so soon as you can conveniently get a mellow, sweet apple, and
having cut a hole in it, lay the hole so cut to the ear, then lie down on that
side, and the Earwig will come out to the apple.

20.
The leaves of Agrimony, bruised, and boiled in honey; and the head that is
open, molded, plaistered with it, helps the disease.

21.
The juice of Rue mixed with vinegar, and the head washed therewith, remedies
all superficial evils of the head, and strengthens it to boot.

22.
A draught of the same, drunk going to bed helps such as speak in their
sleeps.

23.
Rue stamped with honey and salt, helps swellings in the knees.

24.
For broken bones in the head, make an ointment with Agrimony, Betony, and
Hog's Grease, with which anoint the sore, and tent it if need be; also let the
patient drink the juice of Betony, and Agrimony, or a very strong decoction of
them a quarter of a pint every morning.

25.
Take an Owl, pull off her feathers, and pull out her guts, salt her well for a
week; then put her into a pot and stop it close, and put her into an oven: that
so she may be brought into Mummy, which being beat into powder, and mixed with
Boares grease, is an excellent remedy for the Gout; anoyncing the grieved place
by the fire.

I fancy this receipt much, it standing to good reason that a bird of should
help a disease of and therefore define a dram of the powder, may be taken
inwardly every morning.

26.
Also take notice, that the foregoing way is the best way to convert any thing
into Mummy; and so the Jay before mentioned is to be used.

27.
If a man be feverish and cannot sweat, (for sweating usually helps such)
take brook lime and stamp it, and having added a little vinegar to it, apply it
to the soles of his feet: and it will quickly rout the fever; and withal
provoke sweat.

28.
For any ach or swelling in the knees, bruise Rue and lovage; and having boiled
them a little, in a little honey, apply them warm to the grief.

29.
The inner rind of Elder, or dwarf-elder, which is held to be better, boiled in
like manner in bores grease, takes away pains in the feet and thighs.

I know no reason, neither indeed do I believe there is any, why the former
should not take away pains in legs as well as in the knees, both of them being
under the houses of viz. and.

30.
If any sweat too much, bruise lettice and linseed together, and apply them to
his stomach.

31.
Make a strong decoction of Centaury in stale ale, then having strained it well,
boil it with two third parts of honey ( viz. imagine there be a pound of your
decoction, then take two pound of honey) boil it into a syrup, a spoonful of
this taken in the morning helps the yellow Jaundice, strengthens the heart,
helps digestion and provokes Appetite.

32.
A pultis made with linseed and chick-weed bruised, and boiled in water, a
little sheeeps suet being added at the latter end, is excellent good for one
that has met with a woman a little two hot for his turn; I mean to apply it to
his members.

33.
Make vinegar of vervain, as you make vinegar of Roses, only make it of the
leaves, not of the flowers of vervain, and this helps the headache, the head
being bathed with it; this recepts I fancy much.

34.
A most excellent remedy for an imposthume in the head, is to apply warm to it
a red rose Cake moistened a little either with woman's breast milk, or else with
red rose vinegar.

35.
Also a handful of Betony leaves, and half an ounce of Cummim seeds boiled in
stale ale, and the decoction drunk, is excellent good for the same, and
therefore both together cannot do amiss.

36.
For a pain in the periostion, take Alhoofe or Ground Iry, make a strong
decoction of it and ale, and drink it; A strong decoction of mouse-eare, made
in like manner works the like effect; therefore if you please you may use them
both together.

37.
A good ointment for bruises and aches; Take a good quantity of black snails
alive, such as have no shells on their backs, salt them very well, ( viz. throw
salt upon them) then put them into a linen bag, and let them hang til the
water be dropped out of them; take of this water a pound, boil it and scum it
clean, then add as much May butter to it, and boil it to an ointment, viz. till
the water be consumed, then add a little wax to it, and keep it to anoint the
grieved place with.

38.
Vinegar made of Rue, as you make vinegar of Roses, is excellent taken inwardly
for shortness of breath, and stoppings of the breast and lungs.

39.
A good remedy for a Tetter or Ringworm is to take the powder of brimstone, and
having mixed it with black soap, apply it to the sore.

40.
An ointment made with the leaves of Henbane and hogs grease, presently
stancheth the blood and takes away inflammation of any wound whatsoever.

41.
The juice of the leaves or roots of fox-gloves, mixed with the like quantity
of the parties urine is excellent to wash any festered sores with, it will cure
to admiration.

You may boil the juice till it be thick, and so you may keep it all the year.

42.
The juice of Walwort or dwarf-elder, which is all one, drank four ounces each
morning, is an excellent, safe, and speedy cure for the yellow Jaundice; if the
disease be inveterate, you may make a bath of the herb boiled in water, to
bath the diseased body in.

43.
Take a hare, (a march hare says my Author, but he leaves no marks to know a
march hare from another hare) and having taken out her bowels, put all the rest
of her hair and all into a pot, and convert her into a Mummy as you were taught
before. A dram of this powder (being first beaten bones and all, and
exquisitely mixed) being taken in white wine every morning is an excellent
remedy for the stone.

44.
In an old Cock you may find when you have opened his gizzard and looked, a
white stone; sometimes more then one, never fewer, this being born about one
adds valor, and makes one strong in the sports of Venus, and beloved of all;
this is the magical use of it, I come now to the Physical.

45.
A very little of it being beaten in an Iron Mortar, for brass spoils it, and
given in white wine, breaks the stone.

46.
The same stone, or to speak more properly such alike one may be found in the
gizzard of an old Hen; and why might not a man draw a conclusion, and think it
rational when he has done, that the male is medicinal, yea most medicinal
for men; and that which is found in a hen, for women?

47.
The best way to apply Cupping-glasses, is to heat them first in hot water, (by
putting the glasses in when the water is cold, (else they will break) and so
letting them heat with the water) and so apply them close to the part of the
body to be cupped; and as they cool, so the Air in them will condense, and to
avoid Vacuum, draw the humors through the pores of the skin.

48.
By this means, may bowed ribs be drawn to their proper places, and the skull
it self when it is broken, and that without pain; this way is ten times better
then firing them with tow, as the loggerheads of our age use to do.

49.
Centaury usually taken will prevent a dropsy before it come, and help it being
come, viz. by drinking the decoction of it in ale.

50.
The seeds of hen-bane being wrapped up in the leaves of the same herb and so
roasted in the embers well and then bruised, and pressed hard through canvas in
a press, there will come out a precious oil for the gout, the grieved member
being anointed with it.

51.
I make no question but the ingenuous may easily find away to keep this all the
year, the herb being only to be had in the beginning of the Summer.

I fancy the receipt much; it does it by Sympathy; I regard not the opinion of
Artists, most of which hold that Hen-bane is an herb of which I disprove by
this argument.

That herb which delights in Saturnine places, is a Saturnine herb.

But Hen-bane delights in Saturnine places, viz. where they empty jakes, and
naturally springs there in abundance; Ergo it is a Saturnine herb.

52.
Another thing to be admired in our Physicians, (for indeed their ignorance is
admirable to every knowing soul) is that hen-bane (say they) is only profitable
in hot Gouts, not in cold, because it is cold it self, whereas indeed it cures
by Sympathy; and their rule, Contraria contrar^^^ medentur, is but a wooden and
worm-eatene^ (...) for how then could hot things do good in a Fever?

53
Vervain boiled in water, provokes urine exceedingly; but you must drink the
decoction; it is not the boiling of it will do the deed.

54
The distilled water of green-Walnuts, is excellent good to take the freckles
out of the Face, but the oil drawn out of the kernels is better.

55.
Take Cummin and Caraway seed, and having bruised them well, boil them in Ale,
till it be thick; this eaten with a spoon is an excellent remedy for the
Colic.

56.
If any be bitten by a Spider, take a great quantity of flies, and bruise them,
and apply them to the place.

57.
Anoint thy cheek with Horse-grease and thy gums also, and thy teeth will cease
rotting.

58.
An ointment made with Hog's Grease, and Mugwort, and a little vinegar, is
excellent for the swelling of the legs and feet.

59.
Rue infused all night in sack, and the sack drunk the next morning, is
excellent good for the worms, and wringing in the guts.

60.
Beat the white of an egg, and then wet a Colewort leaf in it, and lay it to
the eye that runs a water, at night when you go to bed, and by morning it will
help you.

61.
Take a kid of about a year and an half old, and having fed him nine days
without water, kill him and take his blood, and when it is cold, pour the water
away from it: then dry the blood, till it be hard; a dram of this blood, and
half a dram of Ivy-berries taken in white wine every morning, will break the
stone in the body,

62.
For a wen, bind him about as hard as you can endure, then make a save with
Vertdegrece, Brimstone, Alum and honey, and lay it to it, and it will consume
it.

63.
Take a soft piece of sappy wood, lay it in the fire, and save the sap that
runs out; the which make into a pultise with bran, the which lay between the
navils and the privities of one that has the strangury, and it will help him.

64.
If thy nose bleed, chew the herb pervincle in thy mouth, and it will cease.

65.
Vervain boiled, and the house sprinkled with the decoction, drives flies out
of it.

66.
A suppository made of white soap, and put up the fundament, is a medicine
inferior to none for one that is costive.

67.
The roots of flower-deluce bruised, and boiled in white wine, are an excellent
provoker of urine.

68.
Chamomel and Betony, of each an equal quantity boiled in vinegar to a pultis,
and applied warm to the head, helps the Megrim and the inveterate headache
called (...).

69.
Rosemary tops boiled in ale in like manner, and applied to the temples does
the like.

70.
If thou be costive, ('it is a hundred to one if choler be not the cause, but if
not) boil the herb, Mercury in thy pottage in stead of herbs, and let them be
but half boiled; this pottage so eaten, will not only take away the effects by
making thy body slippery, but also the cause.

71.
Take of Rue, Sage and Cummin seeds bruised, of each a handful, beaten pepper
half an ounce; make a strong decoction of them in water, the which boil into a
syrrup with honey, this syrup will help an inveterate cough by taking one
spoonful of it in the morning, and another at evening.

72.
Three drops of a man's own water put into his ear every morning warm, helps
noise there.

73.
A strong decoction made with Plantane in White Wind, drunk every morning, does
the like.

74.
An ointment made with Ivy-leaves and hog's grease, is excellent for swelling of
the eyes.

75.
Take three or four great Onnions, and having roasted them well in the embers,
take off the outward pill, then bruise them with a few cummin seeds in powder;
this applied plaister-wise, in a few times using helps the headache.

This I am persuaded, the hair being shaven off, it is a good remedy for the
Lethargy.

76.
Take wormwood and mallows, of each alike quantity, boil them in water, till
they be soft, then by adding-barly meal, (or malt-flower which is better) and a
little vinegar and sheep suet to them, they make an excellent pultis for any
swelling whatsoever.

77.
The liquor wherein neats-feethave been boiled is an excellent bath to bath
swolle legs in, and if you will add chick-weed, mallows, and smallage to it,
twill be never the worse.

78.
Also when you have well bathed your Legs therein, you may take out the herbs
and apply them to the soles of your feet.

79.
The juice of Vervain, or if it be time of year you cannot get it, take the
decoction of the dried herb, it mightily increases not barely milk, but good
milk in Nurses.

80.
The blood of a Hare dried and taken inwardly, breaks the stone in the bladder.

81.
The claws of a Goat burnt to powder, and a dram of the powder taken in the
morning, helps such as cannot hold their water.

82.
To drink an Alum Posset is a good remedy for overflowing of a Woman's
Menstruis.

83.
The juice of Sorrel, mixed with the like quantity of Milk, is an excellent
remedy (being drunk) for pissing blood.

84.
Pigeons dung mixed with Vinegar is excellent to anoint Warts with, if you
would be rid of them.

85.
The juice of Primrose-roots snuffed up into the Nose is an excellent remedy
for the Megrim.

86.
Take an Onion, and having cut a round hole in the middle of it, fill it full
of Oil, then roast it by a gentle fire, and having taken off the outward pill,
stamp it together and apply it warm to the deaf ear to restore hearing.

87.
An ointment made with Leek-blades and hogs grease is excellent good for
burnings.

88.
A decoction of Earthworms, Sallendine and Ivy-berries in White Wind; take
equal quantities of each, is an excellent remedy for the yellow Jaundice; and
if toward the latter end of the decoction you add a little Saffron tied up in
a rag, 'twill be the better.

89.
Take the roots of Female Fern, such as in Sussex are called Brakes, and
having bruised them well, mix some raw Cream with them; so have you an
excellent plaster for a scald. He that has any wit may make an Unguent or
plaster of them to keep always by him.

90.
The powder of burnt Garlic helps the Hemorrhoids being strewed upon the
place.

91.
The powder of Anniseeds strewed there, does the like.

92.
A roasted Onion laid to the place works the same effect.

93.
An excellent cool ointment for wounds that have inflammations, is thus made;
take of Litharge of Gold very finely powdered as much as you will, and with
Oil of Roses and Verjuyce of each equal parts, make it into an oinment by
stirring it up and down in a Mortar without the heat of the fire, as it
cooles, so it dries exceedingly.

94.
For Ach in the Legs or Arms, a precious remedy; take very stale Ale, and with
the Gaul of an Ox boil it till it be as thick as Birdlime, when it is cold,
then anoint the grieved member with it by the fire, (it will be fluid when it is
hot) as hot as he can endure it, and when it is dried in once or twice, spread
some of it upon a piece of white leather, and apply to it; when it is hard take
it off and apply to it another, the former will wax soft again; thus doing
three or four days will help you.

95.
For the Megrim, put some Assa foetida into the ear on that side the pain
lies, and the matter causing the disease will come out at the Nose.

And yet it may (by my Authors leave) be some question whether the Megrim lie
within the scul or without.

96.
Take Snails, Shells and all, and burn them in a crucible, till the ashes be
white; half a dram of this taken in White Wind is a great provoker of Urine.

97.
Take a quantity of water-grasse, that part of it that grows above the water,
and having beaten it, press out the juice; this juice a little of it being
dropped into the contrary ear of one that has the toothache, cures him of that
pain (for ever says my Author.)

98.
Take a piece of blew cloth (woollen cloth) the deeper the blew, the better,
burn it to powder; a little of this powder snuffed up the nose, stops the
bleeding of it.

99.
It is certain, and by daily experience verified that Elder bark, if you slip
it upward, will provoke vomiting; if downward, it purges by stool.

100.
Its property is to cleanse the body of crudities and indigestion, and they
cause three quarters of the diseases in man; you need but run to an Elder-tree
for the cure, and you may find one a great deal on this side Arabia; if your
stomach trouble you, slip it upwards; but if the disease afflict not the first
digestion, then slip it downwards:

101.
Polipodium stamped and plaistered upon the feet of a Woman laboring with
Child, causes the birth of the Child presently, either alive or dead.

102.
Take the grease of a Hog, and rub the body of any that is sick, against the
heart, and the soles of the feet, then throw the grease to a dog; if he eat it,
the sick will live, if not, he will die.

103.
Take a green Elm or Ashen stick, and put it in the fire, and save the water
that comes out at the ends, and mix it with the fat of an Eele the like
quantity, boil it a little over the fire, and drop a drop or two of it into the
ear that is deaf at night when you go to bed; let it be lukewarm when you drop
it in, and in three or four days they will hear perfectly.

104.
Also the juice of Bay Leaves dropped into the ears, Pet Hisp.
takes away both deafness and noise in the ears.

105.
For ach in the bones, anoint the place three or four times with good Aqua
composita, and let it dry in by a good fire, then anoint it again, and while it
is wet strew the powder of Olibanum upon it, then sew a cloth round about it,
and let it lie there three or four days, by which time it will be well.

106.
Bay Leaves, a thing known well,
Laid up among your clothes, Dioscorides.

Will give to them a fragrant smell,
And keep them safe from Moaths.
107.
Ants eggs beaten, and strained, and a little of the juice of Knotgrasse put to
the juice of them, and a little of it dropped into the ear, cures deafness
though of long continuance.

108.
Drop a drop of good Aqua-composita into the eye that is anoyed with cold, and
you will find it a present remedy to recover the sight.

109.
For Legs that are swollen by water, this do and you may heal them; sees
Oats in water till they be soft, then hold the swollen Legs over the steeme of
them, covering the Vessel with a Blanket, that the steem may not go out, and it
will draw blisters, out of which (being cut) will come much water and
corruption; a little fresh butter will quickly heal them again; if the cure
be not perfect the first time; do so oftener.

110.
Dandelion (or to write better French, Dent-delion, for our Country Blades are
so nice, that they scorn to call it by the plain English name, Lions-tooth)
being boiled in water, is a special remedy for the knitting of wounds, as also
for the cure of Ruptures, the decoction being drunk and the boiled herb
applied to the grieved place.

111.
Put unslaked Lime into a clean new earthen Vessel, till the Vessel be
almost half full; then having heat some water boiling hot in a clean new
Vessel, pour it into the lime till the Vessel be full, take off the scum from
it clean, and let it stand till the Lime be settled at the bottom; then pour
off the clear water, and keep it in a glass close stopped.

This is a marvelous water for the cure of Ulcers, and chiefly such as spring
from the French Pox, by dipping a linen cloth in it, and laying it as a
Plaster over the sore; it draws the corruption out of Ulcers and putrified
sores, cleanses them, and takes away the inflammation of them; this water
Mizaldus extols to the skies.

112.
A dram of Mirrh given to drink in warm wine brings forth the Child, Pet. Hisp.
alive or dead.

113.
A piece of the root of Crowfoot, either put into the tooth, if it be hollow,
or otherwise, applied to it, instantly eases the pains of it.

114.
Centaury taken, either the juice or powder of it, cleers the voice, and
cleanses the breast marvelously.

115.
Pigeons dung boiled in wine till the wine be consumed, and then applied
plaister-wise to the gout, takes it away (being used morning and evening) in
four or five days.

116.
Nettle-seed beaten into powder, and taken with syrrup of Violets cleanses the
stomach of tough and hard phlegm, and helps the Plurifie.

117.
If the pain of the Gout be very outrageous, take a dram of Opium, two drams
of Saffron; mix them with four or five Yolks of eggs, and plaster the same
upon the grief, it will not only assuage the pain, but also dissolve the
corruption.

118.
Heat two or three Bricks red hot, then put them in a Pan under a close-stoole,
and pour a little Vinegar upon them, and let him that is troubled with the
Hemorhoids (commonly called the Piles) fit over them and receive the vapors up
his fundament.

119.
The juice of broom flowers, of Scala Coeli, commonly called Solomon's Seal,
and of Honey, of each a like quantity boiled to the thickness of Honey, makes
a sovereign ointment for the Gout.

120.
A little Gunpowder tied up in a rag, and held so in the mouth, that it may
touch the aching tooth, instantly eases the pains of the eeth.

121.
Tie Saffron up in a little rag, and bind it to the Navil of one that has the
yellow Jaundice, it gives present help.

122.
Take the roots of Beets, and pare off the outer bark, then stamp them, and
having pressed out the juice, snuff some of it up your nose, and you shall
find it wonderfully purges the head, and helps the Headache, Vertigo or
dissines in the head, and Megrim.

123.
The feet of a great living Toad being cut off when the Moon is void of course
and hastens to the conjunction of the Sun, Cardanus.
cures one of the Kings-evill, being hung about their neck.

124.
Tie up a Spider in a Linen cloth, and there bruise her a little, and hold
her near the nose that bleedeth, but touch not the nose with the cloth, and the
bleeding will cease; the reason is because a spider is so extremely contrary to
the blood of man, that it flies back from its Enemy: Oh Campanella, how acute
was thy judgment! how is the world beholding to thee!

The truth of this Aphorism appears in that a Cobweb, which is but the
excrement of a spider, will stop the bleeding of a wound.

125.
An approved remedy to stop bleeding, which I have proved my self, is this:
Dry some of the parties blood in a fire-shovel to powder, which is quickly
done, and apply it to the place, viz. if the nose bleed, snuff it up in it; if
by wound, apply it to it.

126.
The blood of a Hare dried, and taken inwardly, helps the bloody flux.

127.
So does the bones of a man, or woman, taken in powder, the sex considered.

128.
Also one experience of mine own invention, give me leave to quote, for a
bloody flux.

Take new Tobacco-pipes that were never used, beat them into powder, and give a
dram of them at a time, in any convenient liquor, morning and evening; but so
soon as the flux is stopped, leave off.

This I found out in this manner, when I was a Prentise; a Gentleman in
Tower-street gave a poor boy money, (as I remember five shillings) to eat four
gross of Tobacco-pipes, (which is twelve dozen) the boy did it, but was
troubled with such an astringency, that neither clysters, nor any thing else,
would move him to stool, and so he died; whereupon I apprehended the thing, and
have always used it, in the manner abovesaid, with good success.

129.
Take of black soap, as much as is sufficient, mix it with half the quantity
of yolks of eggs very well, Jo Ardern
then spread it upon fine flax, and apply it to the place grieved with the
Gout; then take whites of eggs, mix them with a little wheat flower, and wet a
linen cloth in it, and bind it over the former plaster, and let it ly so,
four or five days, in which time you shall see the wonderful effects.

130.
Bruise barley, dry-beanes, and liquoris, of each alike, in fair water, and
drink a good draught of the liquor, morning and evening, it breaks and cures
any imposthume.

131.
Agrimony most wonderfully expels poison, Pet. Hisp.
and with great facility helps the bitings of venomous beasts.

132.
The hoof of an Elk (called Vngula Alcis) has a marvelous power against the
falling sickness, either taken inwardly or borne next the skin, whereof you
have plentiful examples in Lemnius, Mizaldus, and Jobannes Agricola.

133.
Torrified Rhubarb taken in the morning, is an admirable remedy for spitting
blood.

134.
Syrrup of Comfry is also very profitable for the same infirmity, and in my
opinion the best of the two, if any vessel be broken.

135.
Bay Salt, dried and beaten into fine powder, and well incorporated with Yolks
of Eggs, is an admirable plaster for Boyles, Carbuncles, or Plague sores.

136.
The leaves or roots of Strawberries, eaten in pottage, is a marvelous remedy
for the Jaundice.

137.
Juniper Berries are a great counter-poyson. Diascorides. Pet. Hisp.


138.
Agrimony, Mugwort and Betony, both roots and leaves of each, made into an
Ointment, with Hogs grease, and Vinegar, is a notable and approved Ointment for
pains in the back.

139.
For Fistulaes, if they appear outward, tent them with the juice of the Herb
Culverfoot [pes columbinus] but if it be inward, drink the juice of it.

140.
Betony boiled in Wine, and drunk, is a notable remedy for a surfeit.

141.
Centaury, either boiled in Wine, or taken in powder four or five days
together, wonderfully helps such as have lost their appetite to their Victuals.

142.
Whosoever drinks the powder of Betony in Wine every morning, no poison shall
hurt him the day following.

143.
The Dung of a Cat dried and mixed with Vinegar till it be pretty soft,
Mizaldus.
takes away hairs, and hinders their growing any more, the place being anointed
with it.

144.
Dragons bound to the Privities of a Woman in Labor, Pet. Hisp.
causes her speedily to be delivered; but then you must quickly take them
away, least they draw down Matrix and all.

145.
The grease of an Eele, boiled a little with the juice of Housleek, and a
little of it dropped into a deaf Ear, recovers the hearing in a short space.

146.
The juice of Plantane cast into an Ulcer or Fistula with a Syringe, Pet. Hisp.
heales it; and so also does the juice of Betony and Cinquefoile.

147.
An accurate and (in my opinion) famous remedy for deafness, is this; Take a
great Onion and cut a little hole in the midst of it, then set it in the Embers
to roast, and fill the hole full of Sallet Oil, and ever as it dries, fill it
up again, till the Onion be roasted well; then take off the outmost skin, and
strain the Onion hard through a cloth, and save in a glass what you have
strained out, which being dropped into the deaf care, cures it.

148.
For the falling down of the fundament, a disease which some are almost
perpetually troubled with all their life long, this do; take the tops of red
Nettles, stamp them and boil them in a Pipkin in white wind, till half the
Wine be consumed; then let the diseased drink a draught of this Wine, morning
and evening, and apply the Nettles so boiled to his fundament.

149.
Engrave the sign of a Scorpion in the stone of a ring, the Moon ascending in
the Scorpion, Alex. Jov. Pontanus.
and seal Frank insence with it, the Moon angular in the same sign (I suppose
the Southern is best because that signifies Physic and help) this
Frankincence thus sealed, being drunk in Wine, instantly cures the stinging of
Scorpions, and for ought I know, by the same rule, the stinging or bitting of
any other venomous Beast.

150.
Take white Soap, and when it is finely scraped, put so much good Aqua-vitae to
it; put them into a large Retort, and lute a large Receiver to it very well;
distill it in sand, Falopius.
first with a gentle fire, then increase the fire by degrees, and there will
come out an Oil mixed with Water.

This Oil is incombustible, and its virtues are many, both in Alchymy, to fix
volatile medicines, in melting, to encorporate Nettles; Remember.
but in Physic which is my present scope, it is of admirable and almost
incredible virtue; for it asswageth all swellings though of never so gross and
clammy humors, heals the most malignant Ulcers, the Gout, Quartane Ague,
French Pox, dry scald heads.

151.
Agrimony is the herb appropriated for the cure of Fistulaes, Pet. Hisp.
Gordonius
use it which way you please as you see occasion.

152.
Break the great bone of the Goose wing (the older the Goose is the better) and
take out the marrow, with which anoint the web or pearl in the eye, and it
will take it away and restore the sight.

153.
The herbs and roots of Tormentill boiled in Wine, and the Wine drunk, and
the herb laid plaister-wise upon the eyes, restore the sight, though it have
been lost many years.

154.
The roots of Hollioke, powdered and mixed with three times their weight in
honey, Emp. Ben. Vict. Favent.
is an admirable remedy for shortness of breath.

155.
For Women's breasts that are swelled (a usual thing in young nurses.)

Take and bruise nine wood-lice (called by some, hog-lice; by others Sows) let
them remain all night in eight or nine spoonfuls of drink; in the morning
strain it, and let the Woman drink it up at one draught, and lay to her breast
a Linen cloth, warmed and doubled three or four times; the next morning let
her take eight of the said Lice used as before, Lady Owen.
the next morning seven, still diminishing one every morning, till she comes to
take but one.

If her breast be not well by that time, let her increase them one by one every
morning, as before she subtracted them.

156.
Take Lin-seed, Brook-lime, Chick-weed, and Groundsell, and Wheat-bran, of each
a handful, boil them in a pottle of White Wind to a Cataplasme (which the
Vulgar call a Pultis) and lay it to any member that is swollen, and it will
take away the swelling, speedily.

157.
Let him whose stinking breath proceeds from his stomach, do this and be well.

Bruise two handfulls of Cummin-seed very well, and boil it in a pottle of
White Wind to a quart, and drink a good draught of it, morning and evening, and
in a fortnight it will help him.

158.
Put the feet of a hen in hot embers, till the skales come off, Pet. Hisp:
then rub your warts with those skales, and they will be gone.

159.
Beat a pound or two of Hemp Seed very well, then moysten it with a little
wine, and set it over the fire, in an earthen pan, well glassed, till it be so
hot you cannot endure your hand in it, then put it into square baggs and press
the oil out.

It is a very precious oil, for taken inwardly, it makes men pleasant and
merry, valiant, and hardy, fierce to fight, void of fear; Outwardly by unction,
it gives a comely face.

160.
A pint of Aqua Composita, a Bullocks gall, and an ounce of Pepper, beaten very
small, and all boiled to a save, cures any Sciatica, ach or gout, being applied
to it, and changed once in twelve hours.

161.
Both Agrimony and Purslain, are such enemies to warts, Pet Hisp.
that they will go away if they be rubbed with the juice of either of them.

162.
For Cods that be swollen, without any rupture, this do; Take of Cummin seed in
powder, barly-meal, and honey, of each alike quantity, fry them together with a
little sheep suet, and apply it to the Gods.

163.
For sore and swelled throats, first rub your hand upon the bare ground, and
then presently rub the throat with it; do so often times, and you shall quickly
perceive both soreness and swelling will quickly go away.

164.
Posset and curd is an admirable thing to ripen any boil, carbuncle or felon;
and when it is ripe, there is nothing better to break it, then unslaked lime,
mixed with black soap.

165.
Fill an Egg-shell newly emptied, with juice of Howseleek set it in the hot
embers, and take the scum from it, then strain it, and you have an excellent
remedy for hot burning, pricking eyes.

166.
Agrimony, Bettony, Sage, Plantane, Ivy-leaves, and Rose-parsley, boiled in
Wine, and the decoction drunk, is a notable remedy for such as are bruised by
falling.

167.
If you burn Turpentine upon a hot plate of Iron, and give two drams of it at a
time, Em. Ben. Vict. Faventin.
in powder, in Saxifrage water, it will break the stone in the bladder; also by
taking it once or twice a week, it keeps such safe from the stone as are
subject to breed it.

168.
Lavender boiled in water, and half a pint of the decoction drunk, morning and
evening, helps such as have the palsy.

169.
Take a pint of Aqua Composita, and put a handful of Ivy-leaves into it, and
stop it close, and they will consume in it; two or three spoonfuls of it taken
at a time, is a most excellent remedy for the Strangury,

170.
Take a pound of black soap, a pint of Sallet oil, half a pint of Aqua vitae,
a quarter of a pint of juice of Rue, boiled together till it be thick, makes an
admirable plaster, for the Sciatica; remove it not in two or three days.

171.
Take of the wood of Ivy, cut it in little pieces, of Ivy-berries, and the gum
of Ivy, of each a like weight; let the wood be dried, then put it in a pot that
has two or three little holes in the bottom; Rogeriu^. and Euonimus
then set another potup to the brim in the earth, and put the bottom of the
first pot into the mouth of the last, luting it round with past, so that the
uppermost pot that holds the ingredients, may be all above the Earth; then make
a fire round about it, and there will a black oil distill into the neither
Vessel, very sovereign for old aches, and pains coming of a cold cause.

172.
Empty an Egg of all the white, and fill up the void place of the shell, with
the juice of flower-deluce; then warm it a little in the hot embers, and give
it every morning to one that has the Dropsey, and it makes them avoid the
Hydropicall humor downwards.

173.
An admirable medicine to stop fluxes of blood in any part of the body, the
menstruis in women, Galen.
any aches, impediments in the back and liver, it allayes the heat in Fevers,
and causes sleep.

Take Cinnamon, Cassia Lignia, Opium, of each two drams, mirrh, white and long
pepper, of each one dram, Galbanum, one dram, all being beaten into powder that
can be beaten, make it into a mass, with clarified honey, and let the party
diseased as before, take two pills of it, no bigger then a pease, at night
going to bed.

174.
Take the quantity of an Almond of a Bulls gall, and mix it with two or three
spoonfuls of wine, Wicker.
and let a woman that has a dead child in her body, drink it, and she shall
instantly be delivered.

175.
An excellent oil for old wounds, sores, Issues, Ulcers, Apsius, quoted by
George Baker.
Aches, pains in the back, Hemorrods, Gout, etc.

Take of old White Wind a quart, old oil three pints, Carduus benedictus,
Valerian, sage with the flowers, if you can get it, of each a quarter of a
pound, of the leaves and flowers of St John's wort half a pound; let the herbs
and flowers be infused in the oil and wine, four and twenty hours, then boil
it in an earthen vessel, well glassed, or a brass Vessel, till the wine be
consumed, stirring it now and then for fear of burning; then take it off, and
strain it, and add to it a pound and an half of Venice turpentine, and boil
it again a quarter of an hour; then add to it, Olibanum, five ounces, Myrrh,
three ounces, Sanguis draconis, one ounce; let it boil a little till the Myrrh
be dissolved, then take it off, and when it is cold, put it in a glass, stop
it close, and let it stand in the sun ten days before you use it.

176.
The body of a Birch tree, Mathiolus Dioscorides.
cut down in the spring time, and laid in the fire, does yield great store of
water, which water being drunk is of wonderful force to break the stone in
the Reins.

177.
The smell of Bitumen, Rue, Mizaldus. Monardus.
or the smoke of it burning, is of wonderful force against the fits of the
Mother.

178.
The leaves and Bark of a Willow tree, sod in Wine, does case the gout, being
bathed with it.

179.
A Diamond held to the head that aches, Hollerius.
quite takes away the pains thereof.

180.
Pieces of Amber tied to the nape of the neck, Mizaldus.
helps the watring of the eyes.

181.
The same hung about the neck, helps distillations of the throat. Mizaldus.


182.
Letharge of Silver, boiled in Vinegar, and the skin washed with it, Mizaldus.
makes it exceeding white.

183.
If any great Beasts, as Horses, Kine, etc. be lame, mark where the lame or
swelled foot does stand, and cut up a turfe where the foot stood, and hang it
up, if the weather be hot and dry, upon a white thorn, else in the chimney
corner; and as fast as that dries, the swelling will cease, and the pain go
away.

184.
The water wherein Lavender has been boiled, will take away any spot or stain
out of any cloth.

185.
Let the Image of a Lion be engraven in a plate of Gold, Andreas Cordulensis.
when Sol is in Leo; let not the Moon behold the sixth house, nor yet the Lord
of the Ascendant behold Saturn nor Mars, (if it be not a Systeam too rare to
find) neither let the Moon behold them; this strengthens the heart being worn
against it, as also pains in the back, being worn against that.

186.
Also if Trochisks be made with Olibanum and Goats blood, Idem.
and sealed with the said plate, and afterward dissolved and drunk in
Whitewine, it breaks the stone in the Reins and Bladder.

187.
The whitest of Frankincense, Razis. Mizaldus.
beaten in powder and drunk in White Wind, wonderfully increases the memory,
and is profitable for the brain and stomach.

188.
Any part of the bone of a man's arm, with the biggest end of a goose-wing being
born about one that has the quartane Ague, Mizaldus. Geber.
cures them.

189.
The powder of earth worms, of mice dung, and of a Hares tooth, put into the
hol^ of a rotten tooth, it will drop out without any instrument.

190.
There is a stone to be found in the head of a long Snaile, Mizaldus.
which being beaten into fine powder, and blown into the eye, takes away the
web, spots, or other infirmities that anoy it.

191.
A spoonful of Aquavitae, Lemnius.
sweetened with sugar, (and a little grated white-bread put in it, that it may
not anoy the brain, nor harm the liver) taken every day, preserves folk not
only from Lethargies, and Apoplexies, but also from all cold diseases.

192.
Take one part of Gentian, and two parts of Centaury, bruise them and infuse
them five days in a convenient quantity of Wine, then distill them;

This water being drunk, preserves the body in health, Julius and Euonimus
resists the plague, causes a good color, cures Imposthumes and Ptisicks,
stuffings of the stomach and spleen, provokes the terms, purges choler and
corrupt blood, heals inward wounds, the biting of venomous beasts, and cleers
the sight.

193.
A most excellent remedy for the Plague, is this: Take Ivy-berries when they
are ripe, ^lexis.
and dry them, then take half a dram of the powder of them in Plantane water,
and sweat upon it.

194.
Stamp Chelondine, and apply it to any tetter or Ringworm, and it will quickly
cure it.

195.
The same herb by like usage, will take away any black spot, from any part of
the body.

196.
Let the party that is troubled with the toothach, lie on the contrary side,
and drop two or three drops of the juice of Rue into his ear, on that side his
teeth ache, and let it remain there an hour or two, it will not only take away
the pain for the present, but he shall never be troubled with it after.

197.
For women's breasts that are sore, beat a handful of figs well, and mix them
with a little hogs grease, and apply it to the breast as hot as can be suffered;
if the breast be ready to break, it will break it, else not.

198.
Take good saffron in powder, and mix it with as much black soap, and spread it
on the fleshy side of a piece of leather, and lay it to the navel of one that
cannot make water, and in one hour you shall see the effects of it.

199.
The Roots of Holly-okes, Pet. Hisp.
stamped with hogs grease, and applied to the Gout, helps it in three days.

200.
Verjuyce sod, and put hot into a tin bottle, with a narrow mouth, and the
mouth of the bottle held to the ear, that the fume may go up into the head,
helps the headache, and noise in the ears; and if any quick thing be gotten
into the ear, it will quickly bring it out.

FINIS.
A TREATISE OF THE PESTILENCE, With its PREVISION, PROVISION, PREVENTION.


By NICHOLAS CULPEPPER, Student in Astrology and Physic.

Printed in the Year 1655.

A TREATISE OF THE PESTILENCE.
COnsidering the reigning and raging of this Disease in London, and diverse
other Towns and Cities in England, and that large experience I have had in it
now these ten years, considering also the terrible horror and affright that
seizes on most men and women to this day (though the disease have been no
stranger to London this twelve years) if the disease be but within a House or
two of them, yea some, if it be but in the Street, as though they were all dead
men, I thought good to write a small Tractate of the Disease, studied from the
grounds of Physic, and confirmed by daily experience, to leave behind me, for
the benefit of Posterity, or my Survivers, be they who they will, which may be
as a Present and a more honest help to them, then running away; for hereby
their minds being guided by more true, charitable and neighbourly principles,
they may do good to themselves and others, and benefit their own experience
in Physic, as I have done before them.

Galens three adverbs, Cito Long Tarde.
And this small treatise (for I hate prolixity) may stand them in as much, and
more stead then Galens three adverbs, Cito, Long, Tarde, to run away
quickly, and far, and to return not in a long time, which he says (though
untruly) is worth three Apothecaries shops well furnished.

Cause threefold.
The causes of this disease are three, yet all subservient, the one to the other.

The first cause, is the great conjunctions of the superior Planets meeting in
Signs;

The second is a corrupted, and unwholesome Air,

The third is putrified humors, hot blood, addust, and burned,

A word or two now to satisfy men, concerning the common fear of infection,
which makes many rich men, which might and ought to maintain poor visited
people, yea many Physicians, whose duties it is to administer physic to them,
to fly away, so that in time of great infection, you may hear more cry out for
lack of bread, and means necessary, then for anguish of the disease.

Hence also came that unnatural and inhumane custom of shutting up houses
that are visited, thereby sadding and dejecting their spirits; and thereby
making way for the disease, as I shall show anon; and taking men from their
usual employments, which is a digester of humors, and a preserver of health;
Nay if the disease be infectious (as in their opinions it is) it is plain
murder, to shut men up in an infected and mortal Air.

But I shall prove by sollid arguments, The Plague not infectious. Arg. 1.
that the Pestilence is not infectious.

My first Argument I frame thus.

That disease that infecteth one man that comes near it, infecteth all men
that come near it.

But the Plague infecteth not all.

Therefore it infecteth none.

The minor is clear, as the Sun.

My Major I prove from the universal course of nature; The fire warmeth one
man, it warmeth all; the water wetteth one man, it wetteth all, because their
nature is so to do; a sword wounds one man, it wounds all that are struck
with it; the universal current of nature runs so; therefore the Plague, if
it infect one man, must infect all.

But some will say, all men's bodies are not full of humors;

I answer, then by my Opposites argument, the fault lies in the humors that
are within the body, not in the infection which is without; if he fly, will
these putrified humors continue in his body, and he remain in health? if so,
how then come diseases?

Or will an infected Air change a disease, (which would be but bad at the
best) if so, show a Rule in Physic, and I am satisfied. You may find some
notable proofs to the contrary, in my Astrologicall experiences.


But cleanse the body of these humors, let all men do so, and then come to a
visited person, and then by my Opposites own confession they will not be
infected; and how then can the disease be infections, and infect no body.

My second Argument I frame thus.

That disease,

But the Pestilence may, and always is foreseen long before it comes.

Therefore you will have it never the soonner, by visiting those that are sick
of it, nor escape ever a whit the longer, by abstaining from it.

The Major is clear; for if the cause come, the effect must needs follow.

Signs of a Plague to come.
For the proof of the minor, I shall produce twelve signs of a Plague to come,
which appear some of them above a year, yea some of them above two years
before it come.

The first is Phanomena in the Air, great meetings of superior Planets,
whereby not only the time, but also the place where the Pestilence will most
rage, may be gathered, as this Autumnall Pestilence in London. 1645. was by Mr
Booker in his Almanac, for that year, which was penned at Midsomer. 1644.
also by Mr William Lilly his Anglicus peace or no peace, left at the Printers,
December. 1644.

The learned in Astrology may satisfy themselves without me; also blazing
stars and other strange meteors, and supernatural sights and apparitions in
the Air.







The fifth is a dark and troubled Air a long time,

The sixth is, when women conceived with child,

The seventh is when in summer time after rain,

of flies, spiders, and creeping things, are seen in the spring.







The twelft is a hot and moist temperature of the year.

But say some,

This might be sufficiently answered by a retortive, All diseases, come by Ill
directions; therefore not by infection. Else no nativity can safely be verified
by accidents. Prevention.
If so be the Plague be infectious; what is the reason; many times but one in a
house has it, and all the rest, though perhaps they kept a worse diet, yet
escape? any that has any judgment in nativities, can give a reason of it
easily.

Well, be it infectious or not infectious, prevented it may be, as may other
demonstrations of the Planets, if discretion be used, and therefore now to the
purpose.

And in the first place, let such as would avoid this disease, avoid the fear
of it; for fear changes the blood into the nature of the thing feared,

Secondly, let your body be kept soluble; if it be not so naturally, take a
scruple of Pillutae Ruffi Pestilentiales, at night when you go to bed.

Thirdly, if your body be full of blood, bleed so much as strength and age
permit.

Take a spoonful of Vinegar of Squils, * three or four times a day, viz.
Fewer times will serve the turn.
at ten of the clock; after dinner; at four in the afternoon; and after
Supper.

Take the quantity of a Hazle nut of this Electuary (invented by Mithridates,
Pontus, and the first Author also of that Electuary that bears his name to
this day [ Mithridate]) every morning, often also used by the Emperor Charles
the fifth; of the virtues of which I have had large experience; it is thus made.
Take of green Rue, gathered in the hour of Sol, half a handful, blew Figgs
six, and as many Walnuts, with forty Juniper berries, and a little Bay Salt,
beat into an Electuary.

passions and perturbations of mind be avoided, together with all violent
motions, for these inflame the blood, so also does drinking much Wine.







cool herbs, as Endive, Lettuce, Purslain, Succory, and let the drink be
Whey, clarified with them.



consideratis considerandis, viz. Angeliica roots, Zedoary, Bole Armenicke,
Terra Lemnia, Mithridate, Treacle, Tormentill, and Petasitis roots, and Citron
pills, with many other things too tedious to rehearse.

And thus much for Preventions.

I come now to Provision for it, when Prevention is too late.

Twelve signs of one infected.
And first of all that Provision may be timely, I begin with the signs of one
infected, which are twelve.

The first is when the outward Members be cold,



The third is pain and heaviness in the head.

The fourth is carfulness of the mind and sadness.

The fist is a marvelous inclination to sleep, for the most part,











Vrina est meretrix, you must have an eye to the precedent and subsequent
signs and sign.



These when they arise show nature is strong and able, Prognostica.
because it thrusts the venom from it in the beginning of the sickness, yea
many times before the body perceives it self sick.

These Carbuncles appearing, show which of the vitals is most affected with the
malady; for if they appear about the ears, the brain is most annoyed,
because that is the purging place of the brain.

If the rising appear under the Arms, the malady lies heaviest upon the
heart, for that is the purging place of the heart.

But if it appear in the Groyne, the Liver is most infected; for the Groyne is
the purging place thereof.

But if no rising at all appear, it foreshews weakness of nature, and is most
dangerous; for nature is weak, and not able to expel the venom.

When those spots appear that are called Tokens, they show the whole blood
universally is corrupted; but of these hereafter.

If you feel your self infected first upon a full stomach, Cure-Vomit.
take a vomit presently.

Also in the beginning of the disease, Bleeding
let him bleed on that fide that the rising appears; if it appear in the
Neck, bleed him in the Cephalica on that arm, viz. if it be on the right,
bleed him in the right arm; if on the left side of the the neck, on the left
arm.

If the rising appear under the arm, bleed him in the Basilica of the arm on
that side the Carbuncle appears.

But if it appear in the Groyne, breath the vein in the Ankles of the same
side.

If none at all appear, consider which parts are most greived, with pains and
aches, and proceed in blood-letting, according to the former rules.

Sweating also is a sovereign remedy, Sweat.
which you may affect by some such medicines as these, Mithridate, Venice
Treacle, Matthiolus his great Antidote, his Bezoar Water, Serpentary roots,
Electuarium de Ovo.

Let his blood be cooled with this or the like Julep, Julep.
and let him drink no other drink.

Take of Harts-horne and Ivory of each ss. of the flowers of Violets, B^rrage,
Buglosse, Clove-gilly-flowers, Rosemary and Marigolds, of each ii. of the
roots of Petasitis and Zedoary of each iii. of the roots of Scorzonera i.
boil them all in a pottle of water to a quart, adding toward the end of the
decoction of Saffron and Cochaneal, of each ten grains; strain it and add to
the decoction syrrup of Violets, clove-gilly-flowers, and Melissaphylli
Fernelii of each an ounce, Oil of Sulphur twelve drops, let him drink a
draught of it so often as he is a dry.

If he be astringent, Clyster.
keep his body soluble with Clysters.

Refresh and strengthen him with Cordials, Cordial.
such be Confectio de Hyacintho, Confectio Alchermes, Electuarium de ovo,
species Cordiales temperatae, Trochisci Galliae Moschatae, Magisterium perlarum
and Corrallorum, pulvis Gasconiae, Bezoar orient. these or any of these,
considerati^ considerandis.

Provoke him to sleep with Diascordium, Sleep.
if he sleep not; but have a care of Opiates in the beginning of the disease.

If he vomit much, (as some vomit up all they eat or drink) stay it with
Spiritus menthae.

If swelling arise, consider first whether it be likely to break, or not, For
risings.
that you may know; if it lie deep in the flesh, and look white, it is not
likely to break; you must then anoint it with oil of Lillies or Chamomell.

If it rise to a head, look red, and lie not deep, it will break; then take a
young Pigeon, pull off the feathers from her tail, and hold her bare fundament
to the swelling, and it will draw out the venom.

Some lay Venice Treacle to it, and with good success; Venice Treacle
attractive.
for Venice Treacle draws the poison to it, and does not cast it from it, as
some Physicians ignorantly affirm; for proof of which consider, that all hot
things are of an Attractive quality; Treacle is hot,

Secondly, if the Attractive faculty be hot,

Thirdly, if the original of all heat be attractive,

But the original and root of all heat is attractive, as the Sun; so then
are the Branches.

But enough (perhaps too much) of this.

Sometimes the swelling falls down again, and black, and that comes through
cold taken, and is a desperate sign; for you must be very careful of taking
cold, in this disease.

But when it is too late to prevent, the remedy is presently to take a Pigeon,
and with a sharp knife, cut her through the breast to the back; break her
open, and apply her (yet alive) to the place.

If this do no good, apply a Cupping-glass to the place; for though this remedy
be desperate, yet I have known it save a man's life.

When the sore is broken, apply a Melilot plaster to it, and tent it with
Linimentum Arcei; and make no great haste to heal it up.

Lastly, if tokens appear, (which by most ignorant people is affirmed, Tokens.
and firmly believed to be an infallible sign of death; although I know two
living at this time, and four or five more, since the writing of this in
London, that were full of them, and yet recovered;) first I will tell you what
I knew my self; a young man was let blood after he had the tokens upon him,
whereby part of the corrupted blood was let out, and the rest cooled, and he
lived above a fortnight after, and then died; his Father denying to let him
have any Physic in all that time, because he said he was marked for death;
whereas Cordialls, and nourishing diet, might happily have preserved his life.

Another remedy for those that have tokens, is something more desperate, which
is this; whilst natural heat remains, wrap him up naked in a blanquet wet in
cold water; and that will set him in a most violent sweat, and purge out the
corruption from the blood.

Venitque Salutifer Orbi. NICH. CULPEPER.

FINIS.
Reader, These Books following are printed for Nath. Brooks, and are to be sold
at his shop at the Angel in Cornhill.
1. TImes Treasury or Academy for Gentry, for their acomplishment in Arguments
of discourse, habit, fashion; summing up all in a Character of Honor, by Ri.
Brathwait Esquire. 2. Morton on the Sacrament. In Folio. 3. That excellent piece of
Physiognomy and Chiromancy, Metoposcopie, the Symmetricall proportions and
signal Moles of the body; the subject of Dreams: to which is added the art of
Memory. By Rich. Sanders. Fol. 4. Theatrum Chymicum. Britannicum, containing
several Poetical Pieces of our famous English Philosophers, which have
written the Hermetique Mysteries in their ancient Language. By the truly noble
Elias Ashmole Esquire. 5. Catholic History, collected and gathered out of
Scripture, Councils and ancient Fathers, in answer to Dr. Vone's Lost Sheep
returned home. By Edw. Chisenhal Esquire. 6. Tactometrica, or, the Geometry of
Regulars, after a new manner, in Solids; with useful Experiments, with new
Experiments never before extant, for Gauging; A work useful for all that are
employed in the Art Metricall, By John Wyberd, Dr. in Physic. 7. An
Astrologicall discourse, with Mathematical Demonstrations proving the
influence of the Planets and fixed stars upon Elementary bodies. By Sir Chr.
Heydon Knight. 8. Magic Astrology vindicated by H. Warren. 9. Catastrophe
Magnatum By N. Culpeper. 10. Ephemerides for the year 1652. by N. Culpep. 10.
Judicial Astrology vindicated and Daemonology confuted. By W. Ramsey Gent. 11.
The History of the Golden Ass. 12. Teratologia: or, a discovery of Gods
wonders, manifested in former and modern times by bloody Rain and Waters. By L.
S. 13. Fons Lachrymarum: or, a fountain of Tears, with an Elegy upon Sr Chapter
Lucas, by I. Quarles. 14. Oedipus: or, a Resolver of Secrets in Nature, and
resolution of Amorous, Natural Problems. By G. M. 15. The Celestial Lamp,
enlightening every distressed soul from the depth of everlasting darkness. By
Tho. Fettrisplace. 16. Noctural Lucubrations, with Epigrams and Epitaphs, By R.
Chamberlain. 17. The unfortunate Mother A Tragedy, By Tho. Nabs. 18. The
Rebellion. A Comedy, By T. R. 19. The Tragedy of M^ssalina, by Na. Richards. 8
20. A Treatise of Contentation, Fit for these sad and troublesome times. By
Jos. Hall late B. of Exon. and Norwich. 12. 21. The grand Sacrilege of the
Church of Rome, in taking away the Sacred Cup from the Laity at the Lords
Table, by Daniel Featly D.D.4. 22. The cause and cure of Ignorance, Error. and
Profaneness: or, a more hopeful way to Grace and Salvation. by R. Young. 8. 23.
A Bridle for the times, tending to still the murmuring, to settle the wavering,
to stay the wandering, to strengthen the fainting; by I. Brinsley Minister at
Yarmouth. 24. Comforts against the fear of death; wherein are several evidences
of the work of Grace, by J. Collins of Norwich. 25. The Zealous Magistrate, a
Sermon, by Tho. Threscot. 26. Britannia Rediviva, a Sermon before the Judges,
Aug. 1649. by J Shaw Minister of Hull. 27. The Princess Royal, A Sermon before
the Judges, Mar. 24. 1650. by J. Shaw Minist. of Hul. 28. New Jerusalem, in a
Sermon for the Society of Astrologers Aug. 1651. 29. Cabinet of Jewels,
discovering the nature, virtue, value of precious Stones: with infallible Rules
to escape the deceit of all counterfeit, by T. Nicholes. 30. Quakers cause at
second hearing, being a full answer to their Tenets. 31. Divinity no Enemy to
Astrology: a Sermon for the Society of Astrologers for the year 1653. by Dr.
Tho. Swadlin. 32. Historical Relation of the first planting of the English in
New England in the year 1628. to the year 1653. and all the material passages
happening there. Exactly performed. 33. Select thoughts: or, Choice Helps for a
pious Spirit, beholding the excellency of her Lord Jesus, by J. Hall, B. of
Nor. A new piece. 34. The holy Order, or Fraternity of Mourners in Zion. To
which is added Songs in the night: or, Cheerfulness under Affliction, by Ios.
Hall, Bishop of Norwich, A new piece.
FINIS.
The first Part of Culpepers last Legacies, his Physical, Chyrurgicall
Remains.
An INDEX for the Treatise of the HEAD.
OF Headache in General with its several Names and Kinds. Chap. 1. Page 1. Of
the Headache called (...) coming of heat. Chap. 2. Page. 2. Of the Headache
coming of cold. Chap. 3. Page. 4. Of the Headache coming of dryness or moisture.
Chap. 4. Page 6. Of the Headache coming of plenitude of blood. Chap. 5. Page 98.
Of the Headache coming of choler. Chap. 6. Page. 9. Of the Headache coming of
windiness. Chap. 7. Page. 11. Of Headache caused from the stomach. Chap. 8.
Page. 13. Of Headache caused by Drunkenness. Chap. 9. Page. 14. Of the Headache
caused by fevers. Chap. 10. Page. 15. Of the Headache (...). Chap. 11. Page.
16. Of the Megrim. Chap. 12. Page. 18. Of the Vertigo, or swimming in the Head.
Chap. 13. Page. 20. Of Frenzy. Chap. 14. Page. 23. Of the Lethargy. Chap. 15.
Page. 26. Of Forgetfulness. Chap. 16. Page. 28. Of Catalepsis. Chap. 17. Page.
30. Of the Apoplexy. Chap. 18. Page. 32. Of the dead-Palsie on one side. Chap.
19. Page. 34. Of the Palsy in one member. Chap. 20. Page. 38. Of the falling
sickness. Chap. 21. Page. 39. Of Convulsion and Cramps. Chap. 22. Page. 40. Of
the Mare. Chap. 23. Page. 42. Of Madness. Chap. 24. Page. 43. Of Melancholy.
Chap. 25. Page. 45. Of trembling* or shaking in any limb called commonly the
shaking-Palsie. Chap. 26. Page. 49. A Table of Fevers. Chap. 1. Page. 1. A
Comment upon the Table of Fevers. Chap. 2. Page. 1. Of (...) or an one day
Fever. Chap. 3. Page. 5. Of Synochus non putrida, which is a Fever that
lasts three or four days. Chap. 4. Page. 8. Of a rotten Fever called
Synochus putrida. Chap. 5. Page. 9. Of continual fevers called by the Greeks
(...). Chap. 6. Page. 11. Of a burning Fever called (...). Chap. 7. Page. 13.
Of an intermitting Tortian Fever, commonly called a second days Ague. Chap.
8. Page. 14. Of a Quartaine Fever or Ague. Chap. 9. Page. 16. Of a Quotidian
Fever or Ague. Chap. 10. Page. 17. Of a Hectic Fever. Chap. 11. Page. 18.
Index to the Aphorisms.
To stop Bleeding. Aph. 3. 4, 5, 40, 64, 98, 124, 125, 133, 134, 173. To
procure Chastity. Aph. 6. For a Web in the Eye. Aph. 7. 8, 60, 190. For the
Ague in women's breasts. Aph. 9, 10. For a Consumption. Aph. 11. For the
Heart-burning. Aph. 12. For a Rupture. Aph. 13. 110. For the Falling Sickness.
Aph. 14. 132. For Deafness. Aph. 16. 86, 103, 107, 145. For a Quartaine Ague.
Aph. 15. For the Teeth, and the Tooth ath. Aph. 17. 57, 97, 120, 196. For the
biting of a mad Dog. Aph. 18. For an Earwig got into the Ear. Aph. 19. For the
Head open molded. Aph. 20. For those that speak in their sleep. Aph. 22. For
swelling in the knees. Aph. 23. 28, 58, 78, 109. For the Gout Aph. 25. 26, 50,
115, 117, 119, 129, 178, 199. For broken bones in the Head. Aph. 24. For a
Fever. Aph. 27. For pain in the feet. Aph. 29. Against sweating too much.
Aph. 30. To help digestion, and provoke an Appetite. Aph. 31. 141. For a Clap.
Aph. 32. For the Headache. Aph. 33. 179, 200. For an Imposthume in the Head.
Aph. 34. 35. For a pain in the Periostion. Aph. 36. For bruises and aches.
Aph. 37. For shortness of breath. Aph. 38. For a Tetter. Aph. 39. To wash
wounds. Aph. 41. 93, 105. For yellow Jaundice. Aph. 42. 88, 121, 136. For the
Stone. Aph. 43. 45, 61, 80, 167. To provoke Lust. Aph. 44. How to apply
Cupping-glasses. Aph. 47. 48. For a Dropsy. Aph. 49. 172. To provoke Urine.
Aph. 53. 67, 96. To take away freckles. Aph. 54. For the Collicke. Aph. 55. For
the bite of a Spider. Aph. 56. For a Wen. Aph. 62. 84. 158. 161, For the
Strangury. Aph. 63. For Costivenesse. Aph. 66. 70. For the Megrim. Aph. 68. 85,
95, 122. For an old Cough. Aph. 71. For noise in the ear. Aph. 72. 73, 104. For
swelling in the eyes. Aph. 74. For the Headache. Aph. 75. For overflowing of the
Menstruis. Aph. 82. For those that cannot hold their water. Aph. 81. 198. To
increase good milk. Aph. 79. For Burnings. Aph. 87. 89. For the Hemorroids.
Aph. 90* 92, 118. To provoke vomiting. Aph. 99. To purge indigested humors.
Aph. 100. For women in Labor. Aph. 101. To know whether a sick man will live
or dye. Aph. 102. To recover the sight. Aph. 108. 152, 153. To cure Ulcers.
Aph. 111. To bring forth the child dead or alive. Aph. 112. 174. For the
Plurisie. Aph. 116. For the Kings evil. Aph. 123. For women in labor. Aph.
144. For the bloudy-flux. Aph. 126. 127, 128. Against poison. Aph. 137. 142.
For a fistula. Aph. 139. 146, 147, 151. For a surfeit. Aph. 140. Against the
stinging of Scorpions. Aph. 149. For falling of the fundament. Aph. 148. A^
incomparable oil. Aph. 150. 175. For women's breasts swelled. Aph. 155* 197. For
swellings. Aph. 156. For shortness of breath. Aph. 154. To make men valiant.
Aph. 159. For the Sciatica. Aph. 160. 170. For Aches. Aph. 171. For a
stinking-breath. Aph. 157. For swelled throats. Aph. 163. Swelled Gods. Aph.
162. For hot pricking eyes. Aph. 165. For the Palsy. Aph. 168. For the
strangury. Aph. 169. Stone in the reins. Aph. 176. 186. For the Mother. Aph.
177. For the Plague. Aph. 192. 193. For a Ring-worme. Aph. 194. For a black and
blew spot. Aph. 195. For Lethargies and Apoplexies. Aph. 191. For lame beasts.
Aph. 183. To make the skin white. Aph. 18^. For watery eyes. Aph. 18^. For
distillations of the throat. Aph. 181. To take spots out of clothes. Aph.
(...) For pain at the back. Aph. 18^. For to increase the memory. Aph. 18^.
For the Quartane Ague. Aph. 188.
An Index to the second Part.
THe matters treated of in the second Part of this second Book you have the
Synopsis in the page succeeding the title page. The matters treated of in the
second Part of the second book you have the Synopsis Page. 51.
A
Aphorisms 62. concerning the quality of Medicines. Page. 39. Arthriticals, or
medicines proper to the joints. Page. 79. Aphorisms 13. concerning
Arthriticals or medicines proper to the joints. ibid.
B
Breast, its infirmities and cures. Page. 120. Back, its infirmities and
cures. Page. 138. Belly, its infirmities and cures. Page. 137.
C
Conserves, their use Page. 23. Cephaliks, or medicines proper to the head,
what they are Page. 53. Cephaliks, or medicines proper to the head, how known.
Page. 55. Cordials their use. Page. 65. Cordials 15. Aphorisiues concerning
them ibid.
E
Electuaries, their use. Page. 17. Eyes certain Aphorisms concerning them.
Page. 58. Ears certain aphorisms concerning them. Page. 61. Eyes, their
several diseases and cures. Page. 96. Ears their several impediments and
cures. Page. 101.
F
Face, its infirmities cause and cures. Page. 114. Fundament, its informities
and cures. Page. 139. Feet, their infirmities and cures. Page. 143.
G
Gums, their infirmities and cures. Page. 112.
H
Of Hepaticals, or medicines proper to the Liver. Page. 71. Hepaticals, 14.
aphorisms concerning them. ibid. Of Hystericals, or medicines provoking the
Menstruis Page. 77. Hystericals, 9. aphorisms concerning them. ibid. Head, its
diseases and cures. Page. 95. Heart, its infirmities and cures. Page. 135.
K
Knees, their infirmities and cures. Page. 142.
L
Lungs their infirmities and cures. Page. 120. Liver, its infirmities and
cures. Page. 132. Legs, their infirmities and cures: Page. 143.
M
Mouth, its infirmities and cures Page. 106.
N
Nose, aphorisms concerning it. Page. 60. Nose, its sever all impediments and
cures Page. 102. Navill its infirmities and cures. Page. 137.
O
Oils their uses and virtues. Page 13.
P
Pills, their use. Page 90. Of Pectorals. Page 62. Purges, their use in
general. Page 81.
R
Of Renals. Page 75. Renals, 7. Aphorisms concerning them. Page 75. Rheum in
the Head, it is cure. Page 94
S
Syrrups their use and virtues. Page 7. Salts, their use and virtues. Page 29.
Of Slpenicals or medicines proper to the spleen. Page 73. Splenicals 14.
Aphorisms concerning them. Page 73. Spleen, it is infirmities and cure. Page
125. Stomach, it is infimities and cures. Page 129. Sides, their infirmities and
cures. Page 134.
T
Troches, their use. Page 33. Teeth, Aphorisms concerning them. Page 61.
Teeth, their diseases and cures. Page 108. Throat, it is infirmities cause and
cures. Page 119. Thighs, their infirmities and cure. Page 140.
V
Vertigo or giddiness in the head it is cure. Page 96.
W
Waters, their use and virtues. Page 1. Wines, their use and virtues. Page 10.
READER,
YOu are desired for the finding the remedy to any disease, (though not
mentioned in the Table) to consider what member or part of the body is
afflicted, and to search in the book for the part afflicted; where you shall
find the cure for those diseases incident to it, etc. For that the Book being
but small, the Table would be too large to insert every particular disease,
(with it is cure) treated of in this Book.

FINIS.
COMPOSITA: OR, A SYNOPSIS OF The chiefest Compositions in use now with
Galenists.

COLLECTED BY NICH: CULPEPER, Gent. Student in PHYSIC.

Meliora Spero. LONDON, Printed by J. G. for Nath: Brook, at the Angel in
Cornhill, 1655.

HAving not long since drawn a Synopsis of Simples, I intend now to do the
like, by the most usual Compounds now in use, which if it serve for no other
use, yet will it be a good preparative to other Studies of greater consequence:

In this I shall observe this order, Of Waters. -- Chap. 1. Of Syrups. -- Chap.
2. Of Wines. -- Chap. 3. Of Oils. -- Chap. 4. Of Electuaries. -- Chap. 5. Of
Conserves. -- Chap. 6. Of Salis. -- Chap. 7. Of Pills. -- Chap. 8. Of Troches.
-- Chap. 9. This is the Method, now to the matter.
CHAP. I. Of Waters.
Waters either Alter. Purge.


By altering they cool Blood. Choler.
heat Phlegm. Melancholy.



Cool the blood overheated, as Waters of Lettice. Purslain. Waterlillies.
Violets. Sorrel. Succory. Fumitory. Endive.


Cools Choler in the Head Nightshade. Lettice. Water Lillies. Poppies.
Breast Violets. Poppies. Coltsfoot.
Heart Sorrel. Quinces. Water-Lilies. Roses. Violets. Bark of Walnuts.
Stomach Quinces. Guords. Roses. Violets. Purslain. Nightshade. Sengreen, or
Housleek.



Cools Choler in the Liver Endive. Succory. Nightshade. Purslain.
Water Lillies.
Reins and Bladder Endive. Winter-Cherries. Plantane. Water Lillies. Melons.
Guords. Citruls. Strawberries. Sengreen. Grass. Black-Cherries.
Matrix Endive. Lettice. Water Lillies. Purslain. Roses.



Heat Phlegm in the Head Betony, Sage. Marjerome. Camomell. Fennel. Calaminth.
Lillies of the valley. Rosemary flowers. Primroses. Eyebright.
Breast Maidenhair. Bettony. Hysop. Horehound. Carduus. Orris. Scabious. Bawm.
Tobacco. Selfe-heal. Comfry.
Stomach Wormwood. Mints. Fennel. Cinnamon. Mother of Thime. Marigolds.



Heat Phlegm in the Heart Cinnamon. Bawm. Rosemary.
Liver Centaury the less. Wormwood. Origanum. Agrimony. Fennel.
Spleen. Birthwort. Watercresses. Wormwood. Calaminth. Gentian.
Reins and Bladder. Rocket. Nettles. Saxifrage. Rhaddish. Pellitory of the
wall. Cinkfoyl. Burnet. Elicampane.
Matrix Mugwort. Savin. Penyroyall. Calaminth. Lovage.



Heat Melancholy in the Head Hops. Fumitory.
Breast Bawm. Carduus.
Heart Borrage. Buglosse. Bawm. Rosemary.
Liver Cichory. Fumitory. Hops. Asarabacca.
Spleen Doddar. Hearts tongue. Tamaris. Thyme.



CHAP. II. Of Syrups.
Syrups. Concoct. vide page sequ. Purge Choler Roses, Violets. Peach-flowers.
Cichory with Rhubarb.
Phlegm Briony. Hermodactills. Oximell. Julianizans Oximell. Helleboratum.
Mixed humors Dyasereos. Diacnicu.




Syrups concoct choler in the Head Water Lillies. Poppies.
Breast Violets. Jujubes. Juice of Pomgranates.
Stomach Vinegar. Pomegranates. Sour Grapes. Roses. Quinces. Mirtles.
Heart Sorrel. Wood Sorrel. Juice of Orrenges. Lemmons and Citrons.
Liver Endive. Succory.



Syrups concocting Phlegm. Head Betony. Stoechas.
Breast Hysop. Horehound. Maidenhaire. Coltsfoot. Scabious. Bettony. Liquoris.
Heart Bizantinus. Bawm.
Stomach Wormwood. Mints. Oximell Symplex, compounds and Scilliticum.
Liver Of the opening roots. Agrimony.
Matrix Mugwort. Calaminth.



Melancholy in the Heart Juice of Aples. Borrage and Buglosse. Citron Pills.
Baum.
Liver and Spleen Epithimum. Hops. Fumitory.



CHAP. III. Of Wines.
Wines Concoct. Purge.


Wines concoct according to Place. Property.


According to place Wines heat the Head Betony. Sage. Rosemary. Fennel.
Stoechus. Eyebright.
Heart Borage. Buglosse. Bawm. Hippocras.
Stomach Wormwood. Black-cherries. Hippocras.
Liver and Spleen. Germander. Tamaris.
Reins and Bladder. Winter-cherries Sage.



In property they bind Quinces. Pears. Roses.
provoke sweat Guajacum.
resist poison Zedoary. Angelica.



Purge Phlegm Vinum scilliticum. Acetum scilliticum.
Choler Rhubarb.
Melancholy Black Hellebore.
Water Spurge. Walworth.



CHAP. IV. Of Oils.
Oils are chiefly for an external use, and so they alter according to
quality. property.


In their quality they are hot. cold.


Oils heating the Stomach Mint. Wormwood. Mastich. Spiknard.
Liver Bitter Almonds. Wormwood. Spicknard. Mastich.
Spleen Capers. Spike.
Joints Spiknard. Rue. Nuts. Nutmegs.



Heat the nerves as Oil of Pepper. Mastich. Euphorbium. Elicampane. Earth
worms. Marjoram. Costmary. Lovage.


Oils cooling the Stomach Quinces. Mirtles. Roses.
Breast Violets. Water Lillies.
Liver Violets. Water Lillies.
Reins Lettice. Water Lillies.
Womb Quinces. Water Lillies. Mirtles. Gourds.



Oils heating the head, are of Rosemary. Bettony. Vervain.


Oils cooling the head, are of Fleabane. Poppies. Mandragues.


Oils altering in property:

So they Bind Wormood. Mints. Mastich. Mirtles.
Mollify Linseed. Styrax.
Loosen Sweet Almonds. Sallet Oil.
Rarifie Dill. Chamomell.
Digest Bitter Almonds. Nuts. Rue.
Cleanse Mirrh. Tartar. Wheat. Eggs. Elder. Rhadishes.



In property they Glutinate Mirrh. Tobacco. Balsum. Maudlin.
Provoke sleep Mandragues. Poppy. Henbane. Water Lillies.
Break the Stone Citron Seeds. Scorpions. Cherry Kernells.
Provoke Lust Emmets. Fistick Nuts.
Ease pain Elder. Wall flowers. Chamomell. Dill. White Lillies. Bay. St. John's
wort. Populeon. Foxes. Dwarf. Elder.



CHAP. V. Of Electuaries.
Electuaries either Alter in Quality Hot. Cold.
Property
Purge Choler. Phlegm. Melancholy. Mixed humors.



Electaries Heating the Head Confectio anacardina. Diamoschum. Diambra.
Diacorum. Diapeonias. Pleres Arcoticon. Theriaca diates.
Breast Diairis. Diapenidion. Diahysopum. Diaprassium. Diacalaminthum.
Heart Arom. Rosatum. Arom. Caryophyl. Dianthon. Diaxyloaloes. Diamargariton.
El. de gemmis. Loetificans. Gal. Conf. Alkerm. Conf. Liberantis. Pler.
Arcoticon.



Electuaries Heating the Stomach Arom. Rosatum. Diagalanga. Dianysum.
Diacyminum. Diacinnamomu^. Diagingiber. Diaspoliticon. Diatrion piperion El. e
baccis lauri. Rosara novella.
Liver Dialacca. Diacurcuma. Diacalaminthes. Diacinnamomu^.
Spleen Diacapparis. Diacostum. Diacalaminthu^. El. e scoria ferri.
Matrix Diambra. Diacalaminthu^. El. e gemmis. El. ex Affafoetida.



Cool the Head Diacodion.
Breast Diapapaver. Diatragacanthum frigidum, and resumptivum.
Heart Diarrhodon. Ab. Diatrion sanct. Diamarg. frig. Conf. de Hyacintho.
Liver Spleen Matrix Joints Triasantalum. Diarhodon. Ab.



In property Bind Diacodion. Micleta. Tryphera minor.
Break the Stone El. Reginae. Lilliontribon. De cineribus.



In property Provoke Lust Diasatyrion. Diacorum. Tryphera Saracen.
Resist poison El. de ovo. Mithridate. Treacle. Antidotus Mathioli. Athanasia.



Purge Gently Cassia with Senna. without.
Diacatholicon. Diaprunum simplex. El. lenitivum.
Strongly, see page seq.


Purge Strongly Choler El. e succo rosarum. Diaprunum Solutivum.
Phlegm Benedict. Laxativum Diaphoenicum. Indum Elect. Diaturbith Majus. Minus.
Hyera picra simp. Hyera cum agar. Hyera Pachii. Hyera diacolocynth.
Melancholy Confectio Hamech Hieralogodium.
Mixed humors Diacarthamum. Diaturbith cum Rhubarb.



CHAP. VI. Of Conserves.
Conserves heating the Head Rosemary flowers. Bettony. Eyebright. Sage Flowers.
Lavender flowers. Marjoram. Peony.
Breast Hysop. Bawm. Maidenhaire.
Heart Borrage flowers Buglosse flowers Rosemary flowers Bawm.
Clove-gilliflowers.
Stomach Wormwood. Alicampane. Mints.
Spleen Cetrach. Fumitory.
Liver Wormwood. Fumitory. Elder flowers.



Conserves heating the Womb Marjarom. Bawm. Rosemary flowers.
Joints Stoechas. Rosemary flowers.



Conserves cooling the Head Water Lillies. Roses. Violets.
Breast Violets.
Heart Sorrel. Wood Sorrel. Roses. Violets.
Stomach Roses. Violets.
Liver Endive. Succory. Roses. Violets.
Spleen Reins Womb Joints Roses. Violets.



CHAP. VII. Of Salts.
Salts purge by Coughing St. John's wort. Polypodium.
Urine Camomell. Wormood. Gentian. Rest harrow. Broom. Beancods.
the Womb Mugwort. Bawm. Chelondine.
Sweat Guajacum.



Salts ease pain as of Man's blood. Stags blood. Goats blood.


Cleanse as Salt of Urine. Honey. Vinegar.


CHAP. VIII. Of Pills.
The Pills I here treat of either Bind, as Pills of Bdellium. Ease pain, as
Pills of Opium. Laudanum. e Styrace. e Cynogloss a Scribonii.
or Purge.


Pills purge Choler from the head, as Auriae. Arabicae.
from the Liver Rhubarb. Agrimony.

Phlegm from the head Cochiae. Hiera cum Agarico. Alhandal.
from the breast Agrick. Hiera cum Agarico.
from the stomach Alephangin. Mastich. Stomachicae Ruffi.
from the Joints Hermodactils. Arthriticae. Foetidae Sagapenum. Opopanax.
Sarcocolla.




Pills Purge Melancholy from the Liver and Spleen. Fumitory. Indi. Lapis
Lazuli.
Mixed humors Head Sine quibus esse Nolo. Lucis Majores Cochiae.
Stomach Assaireth. Turbith. Imperial. Ruffi.
Liver De tribus. Alkekengi.
All parts Agregative.




CHAP. IX. Of Troches.
Troches Alter, vid. page seq. Purge Choler Rubarb.
Phlegm De Agarico. Agaricus trochiscatus. Alhandal de Scilla




Troches alter according to Quality. Property.


Inquality they are Hot as of Lignum Aloes. Saffron. Crocomagma.
Cold as of Spodium. Diasantalon. Camphire.



In property they Bind as Earth of Lemnos. Amber. Barberries. Spodium. Corrall.
Soften as of Capers. Open Bitter Almonds. H^patici. Wormwood. Roses. Bechici
Albi. Nigri.
De Lacca. Alkekengi. Agrimony.



In property they open Aliptae Moschatae. Mirh. Anniseed. Rhubarb.
Cleanse as Cyphios. Resist poison De Vipera. Ramich. Hedicteroi. Gallia
Moschata. Diarrhodon.
Ease pain Diarrhodon. Diaspermaton. Camphire.



APHORISMS: Exceeding requisite for such as intend the noble, (though too much
abused) practice of PHYSIC.

Containing the quality of Medicines.

COLLECTED BY NICH: CULPEPER, Gent. Student in PHYSIC.

LONDON, Printed by J. G. for Nath: Brook, at the Angel in Cornhill, 1655.

Aphorisms.
I.
ALL Medicines operate by a way, either manifest or hidden.

II.
We call that a manifest way, which is obvious to the senses, (especially to
the taste and feeling) but that a hidden way which is obvious to no sense.

III.
All medicines working by a manifest way, perform their office, by heat or
cold, moistning or drying.

IV.
Neither is there any Simple so temperate, but one of these does in one measure
or another prevail.

V.
Medicines temperate.
Yet are those usually called [Temperate] which excel not in cold moisture,
heat or dryness to the first degree.

VI.
These being put in any Medicine, alter not the quality of it.

VII.
These are used in such infirmities, in which there is no manifest distemper of
the first qualities, viz. Heat, Cold, Dryness, Moisture, as for example, in
obstructions of the Bowels, for then we dare not give hot things for fear of
a Fever.

VIII.
Also in such Fevers where the effect is hot and dry, the Cause cold and
moist, that so we may neither increase the Fever, nor make the Phlegm thick by
cold.

IX.
Things contrary are taken away by their contraries, things like, are preserved
by their like.

X.
The degrees of intemperature were observed, that so the part of the body
afflicted, might be brought to its proper temper and no further; for if a
Physician should give a thing extremely cold in a disease but meanly hot, he
might soon cure that, and bring a worse in its room.

XI.
Hot in the first degree.
Those things are said to be hot in the first degree, which do only cherish
natural heat, or restore it being lost, and that without any hurt at all to
the body, chillinesse of the body, and pains coming by such distempers are
remedied this way,

XII.
These also are sometimes given not only in cold, but also in hot afflictions.

XIII.
For it loses and discusseth thick humors, that are compacted together by
its gentle heat, opening the pores and causes sweating.

XIV.
Amongst these, such are chiefly to be used, which are most friendly to our
bodies, viz. suitable to our complexions.

XV.
Such are called Anodines, or easers of pain.

XVI.
Also take notice that such Medicines, whether Simple or Compound, that are hot
and moist, cannot excel their due moderation of heat.

XVII.
Such also take away Weariness, open the Pores, and consume the superfluous
Vapors in Fevers.

XVIII.
Yet may a foolish use of these bring inconveniences, even to the consumption
of the vital Spirits, as happens many times in Inflammations of the Bowels,
etc.

XIX.
This usually happens by applying such a medicine, as is not appropriated to
that part of the body it is applied to, puta the applying a Cephalic medicine
to the bowels.

XX.
Hot in the second degree.
Such things are said to be hot in the second degree, whose heat is greater than
the natural heat of our bodies, besides their heat offends the Palate.

XXI.
Their use is for such whose Stomach is offended by Phlegm, to heat and dry them.

XXII.
They open Obstructions, and the Pores of the Skin, not gently, and by
persuasion, or fair words, as it were, but by threatening.

XXIII.
Their common use is, to cut and discuss tough thick viscous humors.

XXIV.
In the third degree.
Such as are hot in the third degree, work the same effects more violently, for
they open Obstructions by violence and fine force.

XXV.
The heat of these are so great, that many times they stir up Fevers.

XXVI.
Their use is, to divide stubborn and compacted humors, and provoke sweat,
whence it comes to pass, that most of them resist poison.

XXVII.
In the fou^th degree.
Lastly, those obtain the fourth and last degree of heat, which burn and raise
blisters on the Body being outwardly applied.

XXVIII.
I am of opinion, that these ought not to be taken inwardly, but with great
discretion, and in urgent necessities.

XXIX.
It is in vain to urge the common taking of Onions, Garlic, etc. against
this: a man may (if he please) so accustom his body to poison, that for
present it may not poison him, though for present it bring his body to great
inconveniences, and make way for future diseases.

XXX.
Medicines cold in the first degree.
Also Physicians have allotted to cold medicines, four degrees of coldness.

XXXI.
Amongst which those obtain the first degree, which are but lightly and gently
cold.

XXXII.
Nor perse, although per accidens.
Yet because we live and are cherished by heat, no cold thing is properly
friendly to our natures.

XXXIII.
Their use is not only to cool the heat of diet, and bring it to a grateful
temper, but also to repress the unbridled heat of the body, as in internal
inflammations, fevers, etc.

XXXIV.
In such occasions let such as are cold in the first degree, be administered to
Children, and such as have weak natures, as also such whose bodies are little
distempered with heat.

XXXV.
Cold in the second degree.
Such bodies as are stronger, or whose livers are hotter, may use such things as
are cold in the second degree.

XXXVI.
In the third.
If the body be very strong, the stomach and liver very hot, such with due
moderation may use medicines cold in the third degree.

XXXVII.
In the fourth.
Such as are cold in the fourth degree are not inwardly to be taken, without
diligent correction and urgent necessity.

XXXVIII.
Outwardly they are used to take away inflammations, which if they be not great
things, less cold will serve the turn.

XXXIX.
Every remedy ought to proportioned be according to the just quality of the
disease.

XL.
Sometimes the spirits of man are troubled by heat, and in such diseases
immoderate watching follows, neither is there any other way left to help such
but cooling medicines.

XLI.
Cold naturally stops the pores, congeals the humors, stops sweat, stays
motion, and by this means it sometimes so stops the passage of the spirits,
that it consumes the strength both of the heart and bowels.

XLII.
When you read this you will see then what care, wisdom, skill, and diligence
is requisite to a Physician.

XLIII.
The greatest use of things extremely cold is to ease pains, when neither
emollients, lenitives nor anodines will do it.

XLIV.
For things cold in the fourth degree stupifie the senses, thereby allaying
that pain which might else produce a fever, and the fever death, before the
disease or malady afflicting can be cured in a rational way.

XLV.
I have now done with the active qualities, viz: heat and cold; and come to the
passive, viz: dryness and moisture.

XLVI
Of medicines moistning.
No moist medicines can arrive so high as the fourth degree.

XLVII
For seeing all things either heat or cool, things hot are drying, things cold
congeal, both are enemies to moisture.

XLVIII
Yet have moist things their operation also, for they are lenitive and make
slippery.

XLIX
In the first degree.
Things moist in the first degree mitigate coughs, and help the roughness of
the windpipe.

L
In the second.
Such as are moist in the second degree weaken natural strength.

LI
They loosen the belly, and make the blood and spirits thick, and by
consequence the wit dull.

LII
In the third.
But if they exceed this degree, they cause the humors to putrify, and make the
body unfit for any action, open a gate for dropsies, lethargies, and other
diseases of like nature.

LIII
Of drying medicines.
Medicines which are drying have a contrary operation to these.

LIVE
They comsume humors, stop fluxes, and make the parts of the body tenacious,
and strengthen the actions of nature.

LV
Yet although drying medicines strengthen nature, by consuming the offending
humidity; yet by unskilful use, they prove many times destructive.

LVI
There is humidity required to cherish the spirits, which if it be consumed,
they cannot perform their actions, of which if they fail, they also consume
natural strength,

LVII
In the second degree.
This is done by unwise or unskilful administering things dry in the second
degree.

LVIII
In the third.
Things dry in the third degree are subject to spoil the nourishment, and bring
consumptions.

LIX
Thence we may gather, that want of moisture to digest ones meat, causes
consumptions.

LX
In the fourth.
Besides this, there is an humidity in the body called Radical moisture, which
being taken away, man must needs perish, and this is consumed by things dry in
the fourth degree.

LXI
This although it come but as an effect of heat, yet it does it by drying
properly, and not by heating.

LXII
And this shall suffice briefly to have spoken of the qualities of Physic, as
it is hot, cold, dry, or moist.

SELECT APHORISMS: Concerning the operation of Medicines according to place in
the Body of frail Man.

COLLECTED BY NICH: CULPEPER, Gent. Student in PHYSIC, and ASTROLOGY.

LONDON, Printed by J. G. for Nath: Brook, at the Angel in Cornhill, 1655.

I Shall bluntly set about the business, and yet not so rudely neither, but I
shall observe order, and divide the whole business into these Chapters.

Of Cephalicks. Chap. 1. Of Pectoralls. Chap. 2. Of Cordialls. Chap. 3. Of
Stomachicalls. Chap. 4. Of Hepaticalls. Chap. 5. Of Splenicals. Chap. 6. Of
Renalls and Vessicalls. Chap. 7. Of Histericalls. Chap. 8. Of Arthriticalls.
Chap. 9. Of Purges. Chap. 10;
This I intend shall be the order.

CHAP. I. Of Cephalicks.
Part I.
I.
IN treating of Cephalicks, I must be forced to make some distinction.

II.
What the head is.
That is properly called the head, which is between the top of the crown, and
the vertebrae of the neck.

III.
What Cephalicks are.
Amongst which such as are accommodated to diseases of the brain, are properly
called Cephalicks, and shall be the basis of our discourse in this first part.
The other take denominations from the parts they are appropriated to: of which
more anon.

IV.
Of Cephalicks some are hot, some cold, whereby they remedy the affects of the
brain by a manifest way.

V.
The brain is temperate.
For the Brain, seeing it is the Seat of Reason, the rise of the Senses, the
original of the Nerves, is by its own nature temperate.

VI.
Its afflictions.
Therefore is it sooner afflicted, than any other part of the body, for if it be
but a little too hot, Sense and Reason is suddenly and inordinately moved; if
but a little too cold, they languish and are stupefied.

VII.
So then it appears that the Brain of Man is most subject to infirmities.

VIII.
Besides this is peculiar to the Brain, that it is delighted or offended with
smells, sounds, and colors, which the other parts of the body want.

IX.
The Womb also does somewhat partake of this property, for it manifestly flies
from stinking things, and embraces sweet, but of this more in its proper place.

X.
Smells, Music, Sights, are Cephalicall.
Those things therefore may be accounted Cephalicks, which refresh the brain by
sweet sents, pleasing harmony, or delightful sights.

XI.
And yet Physicians account only smells of these to be Cephalicall, I suppose
because they affect the Brain by a more inbred quality, the other two are
objects more properly of the judgment, viz. by Harmony and Aspect.

XII.
(Hence it is clear that the sense of Smelling is more terrene than that either
of Seeing or Hearing.)

XIII.
Or it may be, because they think Music or pleasant Sights are not Medicines,
but the vulgar proverb might have taught them otherwise.

Musica mentis Medicina maestae. Music was held of old, a Physic kind, For a
dejected Melancholy mind.

XIV.
How Cephalicks may be known
Also Cephalicks may be known from the effects of the Brain themselves.

XV.
Therefore because the Brain is usually offended with Phlegm, therefore those
things may be accounted Cephalicks, which (besides a Astrology may reveal this
hidden mystery.
hidden faculty whereby they strengthen the Brain) warm, cleanse, cut and dry.

XVI.
Besides, if you consider the situation of the Brain, viz. in the superior
part of all the body. you may conceive it very apt to receive hot vapors.

XVII.
These afflict men with Watchings and Headache, these must be restrained by
cooling Cephalicks.

XVIII.
Only I would have this general maxim observed, that Opiates and other
soporiferous medicines, universally do the Brain more harm than good.

XIX.
Such Medicines as purge the Head I shall omit to treat of here, even until I
come to the last Chapter, which treats of purges.

XX.
Besides such Medicines as dry, heat, cool, or purge the head, there are
certain other Medicines familiar to the Brain, which may be called proper
helps, the former being but accidental.

XXI.
These work (say Physicians) by a hidden quality, and no reason can be given
for their operation.

XXII.
These by a peculiar instinct, or providence defend the Brain against
particular diseases, one against one disease, another, against another, by a
certain harmony with the Brain, and by a certain Antipathy they have against
those diseases, they fortify and defend the Brain against them.

XXIII.
The ignorance of Physicians.
You see hence what Ignorant Physicians, those of our times are, who being
ignorant of Astrology, cannot give a reason of the Physic they prescribe, a
Parrot may be taught to be as learned in prescriptions.

XXIV.
I trust I shall shortly have ready a treatise called Cephalica Simplicia,
which will furnish you with Simples appropriated to every disease in the head,
and give you the reasons of them too.

XXV.
The time of using.
Seeing then the operations of Cephalicks are diverse, the time of using them
cannot be one and the same.

XXVI.
If the Brain be afflicted, it cannot be strengthened, except it be first
purged.

XXVII.
If it be purged, it must be purged with Cephalicks.

XXVIII.
Neither can it be purged with Cephalicks, before the whole body be evacuated,
for otherwise wife it will soon be filled with vapors.

XXIX.
Cool Cephalicks, (they say) are dangerous near the Crisis.

XXX.
Lastly, the manner of using Cephalicks is various according to the variety of
the disease, the time of its standing, its symptoms, and the season of the
year.

Part II.
XXXI.
Under the name of the Head, as I told you before, are the external parts
contained, viz. the eyes, ears, nose, etc. these shall occupy the second part
of this Chapter.

XXXII.
Of the Eyes.
Of the external senses, the Sight is the chief, the Organs of which are the
Eyes.

XXXIII.
Medicines appropriated to the eyes are of two sorts, such as are appropriated
to the visive spirit, and such as are appropriated to the Eyes themselves.

XXXIV.
There ought to be that constitution of the spirits, that they may not be too
thick nor too thin.

XXXV.
For many times it happens that the subtilties of the spirits dulls the sight.

XXXVI.
The best Medicines for the eyes perform their office (as Physicians say) by a
hidden quality.

XXXVII.
Usually things are said to help, that have affinity with the thing helped,
yet such strange things are in the Universal providence, that they may even
seem miraculous: I will instance in one.

XXXVIII.
A Goats Liver applied to the Eyes, makes a man see very well in the night, and
the reason is, because Goats see as well by night as by day.

XXXIX.
But what affinity is between these two? seeing they having neither the same
substance, nor the same temperature? viz. The Goats Liver with the Eyes. This
then is strange.

XL.
It is most certain, and Wicker confesses it, that Man has learned many
things of the Beasts, which the acuteness of his reason could never reach to,
nor experience teach him.

XLI.
To quote what Simples are appropriated to the Eyes is not my scope here, but
to show how to use them.

XLII.
As for the constitution of the Eyes, seeing they are most exact in sense, so
they will not lightly bear the least inconvenience, therefore every thing is
not proper for the Eyes, which sharpens the sight by attenuating.

XLIII.
But even in external things you must have a special care, that they be not
too hot, nor too sharp, nor hurt by hardness, biting nor viscosity.

XLIV.
Oil in it self is offensive to the Eyes, and ointments because they have Oil
in them.

XLV.
The roughness of the powders, every one knows offends.

XLVI.
Yet this must be taken in by the way, that it is one thing to strengthen the
Eyes, and another thing to take away the matter that offends them.

XLVII.
Nose and Mouth.
Also to the Nose and Mouth, have a care you apply not stinking things to
diseases of the Nose, or things of ungrateful taste to those of the Mouth.

XLVIII.
Things ungrateful in taste, spoil not only the palate, but subvert the
Stomach, seeing the tunicle of the mouth and Stomach is the same. Things
ungrateful to the Nose, hurt the brain as much.

XLIX.
But seeing Mouth and Nose are the ways to purge the brain, I shall let them
alone till I am to speak of purging.

L.
The Ears.
The ears, because they are always open, are most subject to be infested with
cold.

LI.
And because they are very dry in substance, they require Medicines which
vehemently dry.

LII.
The Teeth.
Cold and vehement heat are inimicall to the Teeth, but they are soonest hurt
with sharp, sour and austere things.

LIII.
The reason is, because they are neither covered with flesh nor skin, by which
they might be defended from such injuries.

LIVE.
Things cleansing and binding are helpful to the Teeth, because every light
occasion pesters them with Defluxions, and for this reason the use of sweet and
fat things rot them.

CHAP. II. Of Pectoralls.
I.
MEdicines appropriated to the Breast and Lungs are not of one and the same
kind, for some regard the parts themselves afflicted, others the matter
afflicting.

II.
For instance, sometimes the Lungs are ulcerated, and then we use such things
as are glutenative and binding, yet are binding things naturally most adverse
to the Breast and Lungs, both because they hinder respiration, and because they
hinder the breast from cleansing it self.

III.
The Breast requires naturally Lenitives, both for the freer breathing, and
removing those things which stick to it.

IV.
The Lungs are very obnoxious to distillations from the head, therefore those
especially are called Pectoralls which cause easy spitting.

V.
But the manner of provoking spitting, is not always one and the same.

VI.
Sometimes the matter is so thin, that it slips away and cannot be expelled by
the motion of the Breast. Sometimes so thick, that it cannot be cast out by the
straight arteries of the Lungs.

VII.
These then are Genuine principles, to make thick what is thin, and cut what is
thick, that so they may the more easily be spit out.

VIII.
Of thickning Pectorals, some are milder, which are appropriated to humors
both hot and cold, others more vehement cold, to bridle the fastness, or the
acrimony of the humor.

IX.
Amongst Pectoralls, it were worth the while to speak a word or two of things
appropriated to Phthisicks.

X.
There are three things requisite to such a Cure.

1. To cut and bring away the concreted blood. 2. To cherish and strengthen the
Lungs. 3. To conglutinate the wound.
XI.
And this is one reason that makes Phthisicks so difficult to cure, because so
much the more any thing cutteth and cleanses, so much the more it hinders
conglutination.

XII.
Therefore special regard must be had of the time, that the clensing things be
given at beginning, and glutinative at the latter end.

XIII.
Thus you see what things are accidentally Pectorall, viz. such as are
Emollient, or cut tough viscous phlegm, or make thick thin defluctions, or
qualify sharp humors, or ease the roughness of the Artery.

XIV.
Such are Natural Pectoralls, whose Genuine property is to strengthen the
Breast and Lungs.

CHAP. III. Of Cordialls.
I.
AS the brain is the seat of the Senses, so is the heart of the Affections, it
is also the fountain of Life, and the original of Heat.

II.
Its properties are two.

1. To give Life to the Body by its heat. 2. To give vigor to the Will by its
affections.
III.
Such things as cheer the mind, strengthen the heart it self, or refresh the
spirits, are called Cordialls.

IV.
Yet are not all Cordialls of one and the same nature, for whereas the heart is
variously troubled, either with anger, or love, or fear, or hatred, or
sadness, or other affections, it is refreshed either by temperating or taking
away the same.

V.
But although such things as cause Love, or mitigaty Anger, or take away Fear
or Sadness, etc. may properly be called Cordialls, yet belong they not to my
scope at this time, if my secrets in nature will not yet furnish you with them,
you may in time have those that may.

VI.
The truth is, these are afflictions of the Mind, (or that which I hold to be
the Soul) and therefore are of a higher nature than this Treatise aims at.

VII.
For I hold Man to consist of three parts, a Spirit which goes to God that gave
it, a Soul, [(...)] and a Body which is terrene and must return to the Earth
from whence it came.

VIII.
My scope is here to speak of those things which properly afflict the heart.

IX.
The heart is afflicted by too much heat, by poisons, by filthy vapors.

X.
Against these the heart is assisted in a threefold manner, viz. by cooling the
heat of Fevers, resisting poison, and strengthening the heart by a peculiar
property.

XI.
Yet whatsoever cools is not Cordial, for Lead is as cool as Pearls, yet is
not a Cordial as Pearls are.

XII.
Neither whatsoever resists Poison is Cordial, but only such as succor the
heart oppressed by it.

XIII.
Such things as resist Poison are called Alexiteria and Alexipharmica.

XIV.
Neither do they all operate after one and the same manner, for some
strengthen the heart against Poison in general, others by a certain Antipathy
are opposed to one particular kind of Poison.

XV.
Such things as strengthen the heart, do it either by planetary Influence,
which Doctors call a hidden way, because it is hidden from such, who instead of
viewing the wonders of God in the Creation, are filling their pockets with his
Dunghill.

XVI.
Or else they do it by similitude of substance.

XVII.
Or else by a forcible drawing away of what offends it.

XVIII.
And indeed all Cordialls may be called by the name of Alexiteria, or
Antidotes, or counter poisons, because they strengthen the heart which is the
nature of poisons to assault, however it seemed otherwise to Physicians.

XIX.
So then as Smells refresh the Animal Spirits, Aromaticalls the Natural: so
such things as keep melancholy vapors from the heart, refresh the vital
spirit of Man.

CHAP. IV. Of Stomachicals.
I.
MEdicines appropriated to the Ventricle, are called Stomachicalls, although
the Stomach be not the Ventricle, but the Orifice of it, or the inferior part
of the throat, which you will.

II.
The Ventricle is afflicted with three kinds of Maladies.

1. Appetite lost. 2. Concoction weakened. 3. The retentive faculty viciated.
III.
To provoke appetite.
Those things which provoke appetite, are usually of a grateful sharpness.

IV.
These by the Latins are called Orectica, after the Greek name.

V.
But although appetite be hindered by diverse causes, as the Stomach repleated
by Chollar, or putrefied humors, etc. yet those things, which purge these, are
not properly called Orecticks, but only such things as by sharpness contract
the Stomach, and by a grateful taste delight it.

VI.
Those things further concoction, Concoction.
which either cherish the Ventricle by convenient heat, or Aromaticall faculty,
or strengthen it by Astrall propriety.

VII.
Of which latter, take this one, the internal skin of the V^z he^ G^zz^^d.
Ventricle of a Hen, helps concoction exceedingly, nothing like it, and
thereby resists all diseases proceeding from want of digestion, which are as
frequent as Atoms in the Sun.

VIII.
The Retentive faculty being viciated, Retention.
causes belching, vomiting and fluxes.

IX.
These are corrected by astringent Medicines, and yet some astringent Medicines
are very adverse to the Stomach, therefore use only such as are Stomachicall.

X.
The way of use.
Orecticks ought not be given to a foul Stomach.

XI.
Such things as help Concoction the Greeks call (...), and they ought to be
given before meat.

XII.
The reasons are,

1. Because heat is to be stirred up in the inferior, not in the superior part
of the Ventricle. 2. Because the Ventricle ought to be made warm before it
receive the food.
XIII.
The manner of administration of such things as bind the Ventricle, is to be
regulated according to the end of giving them.

XIV.
Against vomiting give them after repast, against Fluxes before.

XV.
For being given after, they drive the nourishment downwards, and are more
subject to cause a Flux than to stop it.

CHAP. V. Of Hepaticals.
I.
HEpaticks may be divided into these three divisions:

1. Such as delight the Liver. 2. Such as add strength to it. 3. Such as take
away its vices.
II.
Taste and Appetite are sent before, and committed to the Tongue and Stomach,
for the dignotion of food, by which both the quality and quantity is judged.

III.
The Meseraick veins also have their office to draw convenient nourishment.

IV.
Such things then are delightful to the Liver, which are delightful to these.

V.
I put all these together, because many times Taste and Appetite affect that
which the Meseraik veins dislike, and that is the reason many times men affect
those meats which agree not with them.

VI.
Also the Liver is delighted with some Medicines as well as nourishments.

VII.
For all such things as are sweet, the Liver greedily draws to it.

VIII.
Such things as strengthen the Liver do gently bind.

IX.
For concoction requires adstriction, to keep together both the heat and the
humor to be concocted, least it be dispersed.

X.
Yet the Liver needs not so great adstrictions as the Stomach, because the
passages of the Ventricle are more open, and large, but the veins of the
Liver, by which it either draws the chyle, or distributes the blood to the rest
of the body, therefore the adstriction must not be great, least it obstruct the
Liver, or hinder the distribution of the blood.

XI.
Amongst all the rest of the entrails, the Liver is most subject to
obstructions.

XII.
Therefore such Medicines as hinder Obstructions, or help them being made, are
appropriated to the Liver. And they are such, which cut and attenuate without
vehement heat, such as have both a clensing and a binding quality.

XIII.
Inflammations commonly follow obstructions, and they require cooling things,
yet will not any cool thing serve the turn, but such as are hepaticall.

XIV.
Take heed in the use of cool things, that you extinguish not the faculty of
concoction, or so cool the Diaphragma, which lies very near, that you hinder
respiration.

CHAP. VI. Of Splenicalls.
I.
THree excrements are especially beheld in the breeding of blood, a watery
humor, cholar and melancholy.

II.
The proper seat of Chollar is the Gall, the watery humor goes to the Reins,
the thicker part of the blood the Spleen challenges to its self.

III.
This is either adust by too violent heat, and then it is called Atra Bilis, or
thick and terrene of it self, and that is properly called Melancholy.

IV.
From hence now is the force and nature of Splenicall Medicines found out.

V.
For Atra Bilis often produces Madness, and pure Melancholy, hardness.
Scirrhus, and viciates the concoction of the Blood, whence follows Dropsies,
and also breeds obstructions.

VI.
Splenicals therefore are of two sorts, some appropriated to Atra Bilis, some
to Melancholy, for of purging I shall write nothing here, but leave that to the
last Chapter.

VII.
Atra Bilis, is tempered by cooling and moistning, yet is it not so hot that it
should need things extremely cold.

VIII.
Such are those, which we wrote of amongst the Cordialls that cause mirth, by
keeping Melancholy vapors from the heart.

IX.
Melancholy humor is removed by cutting and opening Medicines, which differ
from Hepaticks* because they want adstriction, for the Spleen, seeing it wants
concoction, needs no adstriction.

X.
Moreover the Spleen is not only obstructed by Melancholy humor, but also
made hard.

XI.
The cure of this is wrought by Emollients, which must not be given inwardly,
lest they hinder the concoction of the Ventricle, but applied outwardly.

CHAP. VII. Of Renalls and Vessicalls.
I.
THat the watery humor may be separated from the blood, nature has added the
Reins to the rest of the bowels.

II.
Because a Man should do something else besides continually piss, the Bladder
was added to contain the Urine.

III.
Both of these are easily corrupted by the vices of the Urine.

IV.
The Urine is stopped by Stones or Inflammations, or gross humors, therefore
Medicines appropriated to the Reins and Bladder (which are called Nephritica
and Cystica) and to be distinguished into three parts.

1. Some cool. 2. Some cut gross humors. 3. Others break the Stone.
V.
The constitution of the Reins and Bladder is such, that binding things are
extreme dangerous to them, because they stop the Urine.

VI.
Those Medicines are then proper to the Reins and Bladder, which are lenitive,
cut and extenuate without violent heat.

VII.
Only take this caution, that seeing the Bladder is farther from the Center of
the body than the Reins, it requires stronger Medicines, lest their strength
be consumed before they come at the grieved place.

CHAP. VIII. Of Hystericalls.
I.
TOuching provoking and stopping the terms shall be spoken hereafter in
another Treatise.

II.
The Womb thus resembles the Brain and Ventricle, that it manifestly draws to
Cephalicks, and Aromaticks, and flies from their contraries.

III.
For this is confirmed by daily experience, that in the fits of the Mother,
which is the Womb turned upwards, stinking things applied to the Nose, and
sweet things to the Matrix, reduce it, but sweet things applied to the Nose,
and stinking things to the Matrixe produce it.

IV.
In fallings out of the Womb we use the contrary.

V.
This made some Sots ascribe the sense of smelling to the Womb, whereas indeed
and in truth, that such things please the Brain and nervous parts, is not
because of their smelling, but because they are friendly to it, by their own
substance.

VI.
The Stomach is offended with stinking things, and a man that has no smell
will vomit them up again, why? because they are obnoxious to it.

VII.
So also the Womb is offended with stinking things, not because it smells them,
but because they are adverse to its nature.

VIII.
For Smells are the judges of Medicines, by which nature teaches what is fit
and convenient for it self.

IX.
So then those Medicines are hystericall, which by binding stop the ternes, or
by inciding provoke them, (of which more hereafter) or such as are grateful to
the Womb, which are known by a sweet or aromaticall savor.

CHAP. IX. Of Arthriticalls.
I.
THe Joints are most infested with capital diseases, and therefore cured with
Cephalic Medicines.

II.
The reason is soon given, which is, because they are of a nervous quality.

III.
Those things are appropriated to the Joints, which have a drying and heating
quality, with a certain light adstriction.

IV.
Besides such things as are appropriated to the Joints, by a peculiar
appropriation, or astrall influence, of which knot-Grasse is one, and therefore
by some called Joynt-wort.

V.
Yet take notice of this, that because the joints are more remote from the
Center, they require stronger Medicines than the brain does.

VI.
As to what belongs to pains in the joints, this is the manner of proceeding.

VII.
Pain is either taken away, or assuaged, but its true cure is by taking away
what causes it.

VIII.
Yet sometimes so great is its fury, that we must give Anodines before we can
meddle with the cause and that especially when it causes heat, influxion of
blood or inflammation.

IX.
Besides, the Medicines, which take away the cause of pain, are very hot, and
therefore to be forborne in such cases.

X.
Also the manner of easing pains, is twofold, for if you regard the pain it
self, use Anodines, if the heat, use refrigeratives.

XI.
Also take notice of thus much, that phlegm compacted in the joints, when it is
teazed a little, causes pain and influxion.

XII.
Such Medicines as take away the cause of such pain, are strong cutters and
drawers, which neither agree with Choler nor blood.

XIII.
When you perceive that there is attraction and discussion enough made, so that
the pain is ceased, and the cause of it taken away, use adstrictions to
strengthen the joints, that they may not easy recite more deflexions.

CHAP. X. Of Purges.
THis last Chapter I shall divide into these parts,

Of purging Med cines. 1. Of their Election. 2. Correction 3. Of the time of
purging. 4. Manner of purging. 5.
Part I. Of Purging Medicines.
I.
Physicians (for want of other things to trouble their heads) make a great
business whether Purges work by a hidden or manifest quality, whereas the
Heavens teach me a better lesson.

II.
These two questions are to be answered, 1. What humor is to be evacuated. 2.
What medicine to do it by.


III.
For as the same peccant humor, is not in all, so neither does the same
medicine agree with all.

IV.
Then you must consider by what way to bring it forth, for all humors are not
brought forth by one and the same way; for some are brought out by lenitive,
some by clensing, some by sweating, of which more in another treatise.

V.
Our scope is here to speak of such as draw and cast out humors from the
remote parts of the body.

VI.
The Ancients thought all Purges to be hot, but the Moderns have found out by
experience that some are cold.

VII.
But this is certain, all Purges have a certain pravity in them, which is
inimicall to the Ventricle and Bowels, and this conduces much to their
purging property, for it makes nature hasten expulsion.

VIII.
But what should be the reason of their attractive quality Physicians know not,
and then they run into the old Bush, They do it by a hidden property, The Sots
being not able to see that every like draws its like.

IX.
The differences of Purges are various, for some are addicted to Phlegm, some to
Choler, others to Melancholy, and some to watrey humors, and they are all of
the same natures with those humors they purge.

X.
Some purge gently, some violently, because some are more inimical to nature
than others.

Part II. Of the choice of Purges.
I.
The skill of a Physician is to appropriate the purging medicine to the humor
offending.

II.
Above all things in purges, have a care of trying quaint experiences; it had
once almost cost me my life in doing it upon mine own body.

III.
The humors to be purged I told you were Phlegm, Water, Choler, and Melancholy.

IV.
Such Medicines as are cutting, are convenient for thick and gross humors, as
Phlegm and Melancholy, but Lenitive will serve for Choler and Water, because
they are fluent and fit to be purged out.

V.
Therefore such things as purge Choler, add cutting things to them, and they
purge Melancholy, such as purge Phlegm, take away the cutting things, and they
purge water.

VI.
There are besides, things which properly purge Water, called Hydragoga, which
violently call Water from remote places, being of an exceeding hot penetrating
quality, and dangerous, if not regulated by an able brain.

VII.
Medicines of a binding quality, are deadly enemies to phlegm and melancholy,
because they congeale the gross humors; but very apt for choler and
putrified phlegm, for they often cause fluxes.

VIII.
Also the color will in part show the operation of the Medicine, as Yellow
purges Choler, black Melancholy, white Phlegm: Whitness Rhubarb, black
Hellebore, and Agarick.

IX.
And whereas some medicines work violently, others gently, if the humors be
tough and remote, use such as are violent, else not.

X.
Yet such as work with too much speed, are fit neither for viscous or remote
humors.

XI.
Lastly, some purges work by Stool, others by Vomit.

XII.
Vomits are appropriated to crudities in the Stomach, yet they weaken the
Stomach, Breast and Lungs, and spoil the Eyes.

Part III. Of the Correction of Purges.
I.
MAny things in Purges want correction, some of them are known before the
Purges given, and some after.

II.
All Purges almost are inimicall to nature, correct that with such things as
strengthen the Stomach and heart.

III.
Lenitive purges breed wind, correct them with such things as expel wind.

IV.
Yea even Purges, which are not windy of, themselves, yet by their heat they
stir up the wind that is in the body (of which number Sennar is one) therefore
correct them.

V.
Such as by their sharpness corrode the Bowels, correct them, not with
astringents, but such things as lenifie and make thick, or with Gum Tracacanth
is notable.

VI.
For astringent things detein them long in the body, and does mischief that way.

VII.
The vices of purges is known afterward by their working too fast, or too
slowly.

VIII.
If hot broaths will not perform the latter, a Clister will.

IX.
The former is done by such things as bind and strengthen.

Part. I. Of the Time of Purging.
I.
IF the humor be tough and viscous, prepare them first by cutting Syrups.

II.
Yet do this with wisdom too, lest the peccant humor be thrust into the veins,
and procure a Fever.

III.
If the Purge be strong, empty the Bowels first with a Clister.

IV.
Let the Purge be given two or three hours before meat, neither let any sweet
thing be given after it, lest it convert it into aliment.

Part V. Of the manner of Purging.
I.
MEdicines made up in a dry form, are best to purge remote places of the body,
and the reason is, because they stay longest in the body.

II.
For the contraries give liquids, whether you boil them or not, it matters not.
That must be drawn from the matter purging, for the infusion of some things is
better than the decoction, as Rhubarb, and Polypodium ^s contrary.

III.
If the matter be tough and tenacious, you cannot purge it away at once, but
must do it by degrees, judge the like, if it lie in remote places, for if you
go about to do it at once, you will sooner consume the natural strength, than
the peccant humor.

IV.
And this is the reason melancholy diseases cannot speedily be removed.

V.
The dose of purging Medicines cannot be determined, for they are various both
in respect of their own nature, the nature of the Disease, the strength of the
Diseases, the part afflicted, the humor afflicting, the age, and strength, and
sex of the patient, the season of the year, etc.

VI.
Some things help nature to evacuate by their sweetness or fair language, as
Prunes, Sevesten, Tamarinds, Cassia, Manna.

Others carry away ill humors, by sympathy with them, as Agarick, Aloes,
Myrobalans.

Others fiercely force them out by their Acrimony, Nature being willing to part
with the worst first. As Scamony, Colocynthis, Elaterium, Euphorbium, etc.

Select Medicinal APHORISMS, For most Diseases our frail Natures are
incident to whilst we are upon Earth.

COLLECTED BY NICH: CULPEPER, Gent. Student in PHYSIC.

LONDON, Printed by J. G. for Nath: Brook, at the Angel in Cornhill. 1655.

CHAP. I. Medicimes for the Head, and its Diseases.
1. A general Caution.
LEt such as love their Heads or Brains either forbear such things as are
obnoxious to the Brain, as Garlic, Leeks, Onions; beware of surfeiting and
drunkenness.

2. To purge the Head.
The Head is purged by Gargarisms, of which Mustard in my opinion is excellent,
and therefore a spoonful of Mustard put into the mouth is excellent for one
that is troubled with the Lethargy, also the head is purged by sneezing, but
be sure, if you would keep your brain clear, keep your stomach clean.

3. Another.
Take the juice of Primrose leaves, mix it with a little milk, and get one to
blow it up thy nostrils with a quill, and it will most admirably purge the head.

4. For a Rheum in the Head and the Palsy.
Take a red Onion, and bruise it well, and boil it in a little Verjuyce, and
put thereto a little clarified Honey, and a great spoonful of good Mustard,
when it is well boiled, raise the sick upright, and let him receive the smell
up his nose twice a day, whilst it is very hot.

5. For a Rheum in the Head.
Boil Pimpernell well in Wine, and drink a draught of the Wine in the evening
hot, but in the morning cold.

6. Another.
Stew Onions in a close pot, and bath thy Head, and Mouth, and Nose therewith.

7. For the falling off of the hair.
Beat Linseeds very well, and mix them with Sallet Oil, and when you have well
mixed them, anoint the head therewith, and in three or four times using it will
help you.

8. To purge the Head.
Take some Pellitory of Spain, beat it into powder, and mix it with a little
Stavesagre in powder, then drink a draught of Malmesey, or Muskadell, if you
can get no Malmsey, and when you have so done, put a spoonful of this powder
into the mouth, rouling it up and down (but swallow it not) till your mouth be
hot and full of Phlegm, then spit it all out, and kneeling down with your head
inclined gape as wide as you can, and the phlegm will avoid from all the parts
of your head.

9. For the falling off of the Hair by reason of a scald head.
Warm a little oil of Tartar (that which is made by deliquium) and rub your
head with it, or that part of it which is scabby, and in eight or nine days
the hair will come again.

10. For headache, especially that which comes by drunkenness.
Mix the juice of Ivie-leaves with Oil and Vinegar, and often rub your
Temples, and Nostrills therewith.

11. For Vertigo, or Dissinesse.
Make Tents of Linen cloth, and dip them in Cinnamon water, and put them up
into thy nostrills, and they will instantly give thee help to admiration.

12. To purge the Head.
Chew the root of Pellitory of Spain, and chew it on both sides of thy mouth,
and as the rheum falls down into thy mouth, spit it out, but retain the root
there still, till you think the Head is purged enough for that time.

CHAP. II. For the Eyes and their impediments.
1. Prooemium.
SUch things as offend the Head, usually offend the Eyes, as Garlic, Onions,
etc.

Such things as purge the Head, usually purge the Eyes, as Gargarismes before
mentioned, and Sneezings. Have a care of catching cold after Sneezing.

2. For Eyes that are blood-shot.
Beat the whites of new-laid eggs very well, and moisten a little fine Flax
with it, and apply it to the eye being close shut, at night going to bed, in
the morning take it off, and wear a green cloth before thy Eye all day, the
next night renew it, and in three nights it will cure.

3. For Eyes that are blasted.
Only wear a piece of black Sarcenet before thy eye, and meddle with no
medicine, only forbear wine, and strong drink.

4. An excellent water to clear the sight!
Take of Fennel, Eyebright, Roses white, Chelondine, Vervain, and Rue, of each
a handful, the Liver of a he Goat chopped small (I suppose the Liver of a she
Goat were better for Women) infuse them well in Eyebright water, then distill
them in an Alembick and you shall have a water will clear the sight beyond
comparison.

5. Another.
Take green Walnuts, husks and all before they have shells, as also a few
Walnut leaves: distill them cold, and drop the water into your eyes.

6. For a hurt in the Eye with a stroke.
Take Agrimony, and bruise it very well, and temper it with white Wine, and the
white of an Egg, spread it pretty thick upon a cloth, like a Plaster, and
apply it to the out side of the Eyelid, and although it be almost out, it will
cure it.

7. To preserve a man's sight a long time.
Eat one branch of Rue, and another of Eyebright every morning, with a Fig or
two. This do three mornings every week.

8. To draw Rheum back from the eyes.
Take an Egg and roast it hard, then pull off the Shell and slit it in two,
and apply it hot to the nape of the neck, and thou shall find ease presently.

9. A Medicine not only for sore eyes, but also for the Megrim.
Take the white of a new laid Egg, a spoonful of the best Ginger in powder, a
spoonful of strong white wine Vinegar, and a spoonful of white Rosewater, if
for the Eyes of red Rosewater, if for the Megrim, beat them all together, and
having made two Plasters of Flax, for each Temple one, dip them in this
Medicine, and bind them to the Temples with a cloth; this in three or four
nights has brought sight to such as have been blind eight weeks, if your Eyes
be gumm'd up in the morning, as it is like they will, wash them with a little
white Rose, or Eyebright water.

10. For such as have a skin growing before their Eyes.
Take a Sawcer full of white Rosewater, and as much Mirrh as a Nut, beaten into
fine powder, bind up the Mirrh in a fine Linen cloth, and let it lie in the
Rosewater twelve hours, by which time your Rosewater will begin to look red,
drop this water into the Eye, and it will cure it to admiration.

11. For the Web in the Eye.
Take the Gall of a Hare, and clarified Honey, of each equal proportions, mix
them together, and lay it to the Web.

12. For such as have lost their Sight by reason of the small Pox.
Take Pimpernell, stamp it and strain it, and put the juice of it into the Eye
with a Feather morning and evening.

The same is an excellent remedy for a Pin and web and a pearl: and indeed in
general, Pimpernell is a gallant remedy for the eyes.

13. For a Pin and Web.
Take Ivie-leaves that grow upon an Ash-tree, wipe them clean, stamp them and
strain them, having added a little woman's milk to them: If it be a man that
has the sore eye, (says mine Author) let it be the milk of a woman that bore
a girl; if a woman, the milk of a woman that bore a boy. I can find no reason
for this, but shall deliver my own opinion, and my reason for it: If it be the
left eye of a man, or the right eye of a woman, let it be the milk of a woman
that bore a girl, because those eyes are under the Moon; If it be the right
eye of a man, or the left of a woman, let it be the milk of a woman that bore a
boy, because those eyes are under the Sun. But to proceed. The sorer the eye
is, the more juice you must take. Drop this into the diseased eye with a
Feather four times in a day.

14. For sore eyes proceeding of heat.
Take the juice of Housleek, woman's milk, Rosewater, and the white of an Egg
well beaten, mix all these together, and dip Flax in it, and lay it to your
eyes, when you go to bed, binding it on, it is a most excellent remedy.

15. For Eyes that are swelled.
Take two spoonfulls of Woman's milk, one spoonful of Rosewater, the Pap of a
roasted Apple, and the Yolk of a new said Egg, boil all these in a Pewter
vessel over a Chasing dish of coals till it be thick, then spread it upon a
cloth, and lay it to your Eyes luke warm, when you go to bed, in the morning
wash your Eyes with woman's Milk, and in twice or thrice it will cure you.

CHAP. III. For the Ears and their impediments.
1. For Deafness, with noise in the Ear.
TAke a little black Wool, and dip it in strong spirit of Wine, wring it pretty
hard out, and stop you Ears with it, dip it and wring it out again, once in a
day.

2. For pain in the Ears.
Drop a little Oil of sweet Almonds into the Ear, and it eases the pain
instantly, (and yet Oil of bitter Almonds is our Doctors common remedy.)

3. For an Imposthume in the Ear.
Boil some milk, and put it into a stone Pot, with a narrow mouth, and hold the
sore ear over the Pot, whilst the Milk is very hot, that the vapor of the
Milk may ascend into the Ear, this is an often approved remedy, to take away
the pain and break the Imposthume.

4. To take an Earewig out of the Ear.
Take an old Apple, and cut it in two pieces, and lay one piece to the Ear,
and lie down upon that side, and the Earewig will come out to the Apple, it
seems they love Apples better than Ears, it is a wonder they are not called
Applewigs.

Another was cured by the first remedy mentioned in this Chapter.

CHAP. IV. For the Nose and its Infirmities.
1. For Polypus, or a fleshy substance growing in the Nose.
TAke the juice of Ivy, and make a Tent with a little Cotton, the which dip in
the juice, and put it up in the Nostrill.

2. For bleeding at Nose.
Let them that bleed at Nose smell to a Hoggs Turd.

3. Another for the same.
If it be a Man that bleeds, wrap a cloth moistened in strong white wine
Vinegar about his privities, if it be a Woman wrap it about her breasts.

4. To cleanse the Nose.
Snuff up the juice of red Beet-roots, it will cleanse not only the Nose, but
also the Head, this is a singular remedy for such as are troubled with a hard
congealed stuff in their Nostrills.

5. For bleeding at the Nose.
Put a piece of hot Hoggs-turd as it comes from the Hog up the Nose.

6. Another.
Bind the Arms and Legs as hard as you can, with a piece of Tape ribbening,
that perhaps may call back the blood.

7. Another.
Hold a living Toad near the Nose, it stops the blood instantly, because the
blood flies from its enemy.

8. Another.
They say Smallage born about one, stops bleeding, both by the nose and by
wounds.

9. For a Canker in the Nose.
Boil strong Ale till it be thick, if the Canker be in the outside of the Nose,
spread it as a plaster and apply it, if in the inside, make a Tent of a Linen
Rag, and put it up the nostrill.

10. Another for the Polypus.
The water of Adders tongue snuffed up the Nose is very good, but it were
better in my opinion to keep a Rag continually moistened with it in the Nose.

11. For an Impost hume in the Nose.
Keep a Rag continually in your Nose moistened with the water of yellow
flower-de-luce, such as grow by River sides, the juice of Carduus Benedictus
will do the like.

12. For bleeding at the Nose.
Take Amber and bruise into gross powder, put it upon a Chasing dish of coals,
and receive the smoke up into the Nose with a Funnell.

13. Another.
A certain man that had bled four and twenty hours was thus cured, he took a
scaine of black thread, and put one end of it in his nostrill, and set fire to
the other end, and so soon as the smoke came to his nosttill, the blood
presently stopped.

14. Another.
When no other means will stop the bleeding at the Nose, it has been known
that it has been stopped by opening a vein in the ear.

CHAP. V. Of the Mouth and its Diseases.
1. A Caution.
WHosoever would keep their Mouth, or Tongue, or Nose, or Eyes, or Ears, or
Teeth, from pain or infirmities, let them often use sneezing, and such
Gargarismes as they were instructed in, in the first Chapter; for indeed most
of the infirmities, if not all, which infest those parts, proceed from Rheum.

2. For spitting Blood.
Drink a spoonful of juice of Betony, mixed with Milk, every morning. My
Author says it must be Goats milk, but I know not his reason.

3. For a stinking breath.
Take the juice of Rue, and black Mints, (I think he means Horse-mints) and
snuff it up the Nostrils.

4. To recover lost speech.
Take the juice of Sage and Primroses, and hold it in the mouth, and it will
cause thee to speak presently.

5. For extreme heat of the mouth.
Take Rib-wort, and boil it in red Wine, and hold the decoction as warm in
your mouth as you can endure it.

6. For a Canker in the mouth.
Wash the mouth often with Verjuyce.

7. Another.
Wash the mouth with water of Perwinkle or Lavender, or Fumitory, or Burnet,
but in my opinion the decoction of either is better.

8. Another.
If the Canker be very inveterate, and eating, take old rusty Bacon and Vine
roots, of each an ounce, of Wheat bran a handful, of Brine wherein Flesh has
been salted, two or three pints, boil them together, and when you take them off
from the fire, receive the steem up into your mouth with the Funnell,
afterward wash your mouth with any of the foregoing waters.

9. Of the falling down of the Pallat.
There is a mad fantastical opinion to this day in the brains of the Vulgar,
that there is such a thing in the Mouth which they call the pallat, which will
fall down and be put up again, especially by an old woman, which has no more
Teeth in her head than Eyes, and all of them naught, whereas indeed the truth
is, the Uvula, is a spungy piece of flesh in the mouth, and therefore very
subject to receive either Inflammations or Humors, which any hot thing
dissipates from thence came the fashion of putting it up again with Pepper and
Honey.

10. Another.
I add this only for the conceits sake, it may be true enough, though I can
give no reason for it: it is this. Take a handful of Featherfew, rub it well
between your hands, and lay it to the top of your head, and it will draw the
Uvula up.

CHAP. VI. Of the Teeth and their Medicines.
1. A Caution.
IF you will keep your Teeth from rotting, or aching, wash your mouth
continually every morning with juice of Lemmons, and afterward rub your Teeth
either with a Sage leaf, or else with a little Nutmeg in powder, also wash
your mouth with a little fair water after meats, for the only way to keep the
Teeth sound and free from pain, is to keep them clear.

2. To make Teeth white.
Dip a little piece of white cloth in Vinegar of Quinces, and rub your Gums
with it, for it is of a gallant binding quality, and not only makes the Teeth
white, but also strengthens the Gums, fastens the Teeth, and also causes a
sweet breath.

3. For the Tooth ache.
Boil Wheat bran, stale Ale together, till it be as thick as Mustard, let it
stand while it is cold, then strain what you can out of it, and add to what
you have strained, the like quantity of juice of Rue, make it into paste, which
paste tie up into a little bag of fine Linen cloth, lay one of them between
your Cheek and your aching Tooth, lie down on that side, and let the water run
out at your mouth, this using three or four times, will not only cure the
Toothache, but also cleanse the brain.

4. Another.
Take Hounds-tongue, and stamp it, and fry it with Butter, and make a Plaster
of it, and bind it to the Cheek on that side the pain is on.

5. Another.
Take a pint of the strongest White Wind Vinegar you can get, a handful of
Sage, a quarter of a handful of roots of red Nettles, and as much Oaken rind:
boil all these together, and wash your mouth with it.

6. To make teeth fall out of themselves.
Take the root of a Mulberry-tree, lay it in steep in strong Vinegar, then take
it out and dry it in the Sun, beat it into powder: do but touch a tooth with
that powder, and it will drop out.

7. For rotting of the teeth.
Wash thy mouth often with the water of Mother-wort, the water of Vervaine will
do the like.

8. For the Toothache.
Take Ivy-berries, and bruise them, and when you have done so, boil them in
strong White Wind Vinegar: wash your mouth with the decoction, and lay the
Ivy-berries hot to your cheek.

9. Another.
Roast an egg hard, and when you have done, put to it a spoonful of Salt, and
two spoonfuls of White Wind Vinegar: beat them all together to a pap very well,
and now and then put a little into your mouth.

10. To make childrens teeth cut.
Take the brains of a Hare, or the brains of a Hen, and rub the child's Gums
with them once or twice a day, and it will make the Teeth cut without pain.

11. Another.
Take the Tooth of a Colt of a year old, and hang it about the neck of the
child, and this will do it, if Mizaldus say true. And now give me leave to
quote an experiment of my own, one of my children breeding Teeth extreme
hardly, having read this in Mizaldus, it seemed to me impossible to get a Colts
tooth, (of a year old) wherefore I bought a Calves head, and took one of its
teeth, and hung about its neck, and the very first night three of its Teeth
cut, which because its very unusual so many Teeth should cut in one night, I
cannot but ascribe some virtue to the Medicine. Besides all this, I am of
opinion, that the tooth of a dead man hung about the neck of a child, will do
it far better than either; I am not determined to give my reasons at this time,
yet will I give you a verisimile for it, the Tooth of a dead Man born about a
man, instantly suppresseth the pains of the Teeth, as I have often found my
self, when all other remedies have failed me, and if this be true, why not the
other?

12 To fasten Teeth.
Sees the Roots of Vervaine in old Wine, and wash your Teeth often with them;
and it will fasten them.

13. For the Tooth ache.
Take the inner rind of an Elder tree, and bruise it, and put thereunto a
little Pepper, and make it into balls, and hold them between the Teeth that ache.

CHAP. VII. Of the Gums and their Infirmities.
1. For a Scurvy in the Gums.
TAke Cloves and boil them in Rosewater, then dry them and beat them into
powder, and rub the Gums with the powder, and drink the decoction in the
morning fasting, an hour after it. Use Red-rose water, for that is the best.

2. For a Canker in the Gums.
Take half a pint of White wine, a quarter of a pint of water, an ounce of
burnt Alum, a handful of Cinkfoyle roots bruised, boil all these in an
Earthen pot (for the sharpness of Alum will make vert-de-greese of a Brass
vessel) over a gentle fire till half be consumed, scum it well, strain it and
keep it in a glass till you have occasion to use it, and when you have
occasion, wash your Gums with it.

3. Another.
Take herb of Grass, or Rue, which you will; stamp it and press out the
juice, and mix it with as much strong Vinegar, (the best way is to put the
Vinegar to it, after you have well beaten it) and so strain them out hard both
together, when you have occasion to use it, wet a Linen rag four or five times
doubled in the aforesaid juice, and apply it to the Gums, if the Canker be very
great and eating, mix a little burnt Alum with it.

4. For rotting and consuming of the Gums.
Take Sage water, and wash your mouth with it every morning, and afterward rub
your mouth with a Sage leaf.

CHAP. VIII. Of the Face and its infirmities.
1. The Cause.
IT is palpable, that the cause of redness, and breaking out of the Face, is a
venomous matter, or filthy vapor ascending from the Stomach toward the Head,
where meeting with a Rheum or Phlegm thence descending, mixeth with it, and
breaks out in the Face. Therefore let the first intention of cure be to
cleanse the Stomach.

2. Caution Negative.
Let such as are troubled with red Faces, abstain from salt Meats, salt Fish
and Herrings, drinking of strong Beer, strong Waters or Wine, Garlic, Onions
and Mustard, yea, if it be a Welsh Man, or Woman, he must abstain from toasted
Cheese, and Leeks, and that is a Hell upon Earth to them.

3. Caution Affirmative.
Let them use in their broths and stewed meats Purslane, Sorrel, Wood-Sorrell,
Lettice, Sparagus tops and roots, the tender tops of Hops, Endive and Succory,
let them always keep their bodies laxative, and sleep with their heads high.

4. For a red Face.
Take Sow-thistles, Borrage, Sorrel, Purslane, French Barley, Parsley roots and
Liquorish, boil them together in running water, and drink a draught of the
decoction, first in the morning, and last at night.

5. To make the Face fair.
Boil Rosumary flowers in White wine, and drink a draught of the decoction
every morning, and wash your face with another part of it, yet in my opinion it
were a better way by far, to take a pound of Rosemary flours, and put them
into a rundlet, to a Gallon of White Wind, shake them together, and let them
stand so a Month, then strain it out, and keep the Wine for the aforesaid use.

6. Another.
Wash your Face with Bean flower water, yet in my opinion, Burnet water is the
best, though my Author hold the contrary.

7. For a white Scurfe in the Face.
Take a pint of Vinegar, in which dissolve an ounce of Camphir, let them stand
together close stopped 14. days (says my Author) but it is very probable
half the time will serve the turn, then wash your face with it every morning,
this has helped a* Gentlewoman that had a Scurf in her Face diverse years, as
though she had been a Leaper.

8. For Freckles in the Face.
Anoint thy Face at night going to bed, with the blood of a Hare, or of a Bull,
the next morning wash it off again, and this, though it make one look more
like a Fury than a Man, it will cure him.

9. Another.
Stamp Sellendine, press out the juice, and mix it with the like quantity of
White wine, and anoint your Face with it, at night when you go to bed.

10. For a blasted face.
If it be a Man, take red honey suckles, if a Woman, white honey suckles,
press out the juice of them, and anoint your Face with it, at night going to
bed, this receipt seeming to me very rational, and is therefore most pleasing,
I shall explain what here is meant by Honey suckles, and herein I will Imitate
Aristotle so far, as to tell you

First, what it is not,

Secondly, what it is.

First, it is not those Honey suckles which climb up in Hedges, which the
Latins call Caprifolium, and the English, Wood-bind, or Honey suckles.

Secondly, it is that which is commonly called Meadow trefoyle, by Physicians,
in Sussex it is commonly called Honey suckles.

11. For a face full of red Pimples.
Dissolve Camphir in Vinegar, and mix it, and the Vinegar with Sellendine
water, and wash thy face with it, this cured a Maid in twenty days, that had
been troubled with the infirmity half so many years.

12. Another.
Take Honey suckle leaves, and distill them, and wash your Face with the water
(use the same Honey suckles as I told you before) this cured a woman that had
her face full of white scales, and it so perfectly cured her, that she was
never troubled with them again.

13. Another.
Also another woman was troubled with such an infirmity, that if she had been
by the fire but a little, and afterward gone into the Air, her Face would
have been as full of red spots, as it could hold, just like a drunken woman's,
and she was helped by this following remedy, she took Frankincense, and beat it
into powder with Saffron, and cast the powder upon a Chafing dish of Coals, and
receive the smoke of it with open mouth, and using of it often was helped.

14. To take away the marks of the small Pox.
Take the juice of Fennel, beat it lukewarm, and when the small Pox are well
skabbed, anoint the Face with it diverse times in a day, three or four days
together.

15. Another.
But I am confident the best remedy that is, not only to prevent the Scarres
of the small Pox, but also to cure deep wounds, or Ulcers without a scarre, is
to anoint the place with Oil of Eggs.

16. For a red Face.
Take a handful of Scurvy-grasse, and a handful of Tutsan leaves, boil them
well in Ale, and strain it, and drink a draught of it every mornining.

I desire you to be cautious in using this Medicine, in giving of it to young
people, for Tutsan leaves consume the seed abundantly, and causes barrenness.

CHAP. IX. Of the Throat and its infirmities.
THe vulgar way in curing Diseases of the Throat, which is yet in use with our
pitiful Physicians, is Album-graecum, anglice a Doggsturd, a very sweet
Medicine, no less pleasing than profitable.

2. A Caution.
Diseases in the Throat, most commonly proceeds of Rheum, descending from the
head, upon the trachaea arteria, or wine pipe, in such causes there is many
times no other cure than first to purge the body of Phlegm, and then the head
of Rheum, as you were taught in the first Chapter.

3. For hoarsenesse.
Take of Sugar so much as will fill a common taster, then put so much rectified
spirit of Wine to it as will just wet it: eat this up at night going to bed,
use this three or four times together.

4. Another.
If the body be feverish, use the former Medicine as before, only use Oil of
sweet Almonds, or for want of it the best sallet Oil in stead of spirit of
Wine.

5. Another.
Take penny royal and sees it in running water, and drink a good draught of
the decoction, at night going to bed, with a little Sugar in it.

6. For the Quinsie.
Take notice, that bleeding is good in all inflammations, therefore in this.

It were very convenient that a syrup, and an ointment of Orpine were always
ready in the house for such occasions, for I know no better remedy for the
Quinsie than to drink the one, and anoint the throat with the other, but be
sure you do not drink the ointment, and anoint your throat with the syrup.

CHAP. X. Of the Breast and Lungs and their infirmities.
1. For a Cough in a young child.
RUb his Stomach well when he goes to bed with Oil of Roses, and then lay a
warm cloth to it, and in three or four nights so using, he will be cured.

2. For weakness of the Lungs.
Beat the Lungs of a Fox into powder, and take a dram of the powder every
night, in Rosewater, or if you will, you may take it in the morning.

If any ask the reason why Electuary of Fox-Lungs is not better, tell them that
many compositions consist of so great variety of simples, that the one of them
spoils the operation of the other.

3. For inflammation of the Lungs.
Dissolve Sugar Candy in Rose Water, and drink no other drink.

4. Another.
Also it is very good to anoint the breast often with Oil of Violets, or Oil
of Water Lillies.

5. For stoppings of the Breast.
Take the Gum of a Cherry tree, and dissolve it in old Wine, and let the sick
drink thereof, and it will open his pipes gallantly, better than a sledge and
wedges.

6. Another.
Take Figgs and slit them, and fill them full of Mustard, then boil them in
White wine, eat the Figgs and drink the Wine.

CHAP. XI. Of Women's Breasts, their infirmities and cures.
1. For sore Breasts that are broaken.
TAke Wheat flower, Yolks of Eggs, and the juice of Plantane, mix it together,
till it be thick like an Ointment, spread it upon a cloth, and apply it to the
sore breast, if there be any holes in the Breast, dip a Tent in this ointment,
and tent them with it, and lay a Plaster of the same over it.

2. For sore Breasts.
Take a handful of Figgs, and stamp them well till the kernells are broken,
then temper them with a little fresh grease, and apply them to the Breast as
hot as the Patient can endure, it will presently take away the anguish, and if
the Breast will break, it will break it, else it will cure it, without breaking.

3. An inward medicine for a sore Breast.
Let her drink either the juice or decoction of Vervaine, it were fit that
syrup were made of it to be kept all the year.

4. For want of milk.
Use the former medicine, it will help that also.

5. For hardness of the Breasts.
It is usual to Nurses, when they have newly weaned their children, to have
their Breasts grow hard, and the milk to curdle in them, which might easily be
prevented by wearing a Dyachilon plaster to them, but suppose it be come
already, and cannot be prevented, in such a case take Chick-weed, and chop it
small, and boil it in Plantane water, put a little Sheeps sewet to it, to make
it moist, and apply it for a Poltiss to the Breast.

6. Another.
Take Populeon and Linseed Oil, of each a like quantity, mix them together,
and warm them well, then dip a cloth in it, and lay it to the Breast, it will
not only take away the hardness of the breast, but also dry away the Milk.

7. For want of Milk.
Take green Wheat so soon as it begins to change color, bruise it well, and
boil it in Sallet Oil, then strain it, and keep the Oil till you have need of
it to anoint the Breast.

8. For sore Breasts.
Take Clarret wine, and boil it with Barley flower, till it be thick like a
Poltice, put a little Oil to it, or Sheeps Sewet to keep it moist, and apply
it to the Breast.

9. For want of Milk.
Take Crystal, and beat it into very fine powder, take a dram of it in the
morning, in a draught of Muskadell.

10. For Inflammations in the Breast.
This is that infirmity women usually call the Ague in the Breast, take the
whites of two Eggs, two handfulls of Housleek or Sengreen, which you will, beat
them well together, and lay them Plaister-wise to the Breast.

11. To cure sore breasts without a scarre.
Take the yolk of an Egg, and beat it with fresh grease, and when your Breasts
are almost well, apply that Plaister-wise to them, this will cure not only the
Breasts, but also any other wounds without a scarre, Oil of Eggs will do the
like.

CHAP. XII. Of the Spleen and its Infirmities.
1. A Caution.
THe Spleen is a spungy piece of flesh in the body of man, lying under the
Bastard ribs on the left side, it is the seat of Melancholy, and of the
retentive faculty throughout the body of man, it causes mirth and laughing,
sadness and sighing, according as it is well or ill affected.

2. Another.
The Spleen is seldom afflicted, but it stirs up wind in the body extremely,
because it lies in so great a cavity.

3. Another.
There is a great harmony between the Liver and the Spleen, insomuch that the
one is never afflicted, but it afflicts the other in one measure or another,
neither is any thing medicinal for the one, but in one measure or another it
helps the other.

4. For hardness of the Spleen.
Take the marrow of Beef, and mix it well with the like quantity of Oil of
bitter Almonds, warm it well, and anoint your left side with it.

5. For the Spleen.
Take the inner rind of an Ash tree, bruise it, and boil it well in White wine,
and drink a draught of it every morning: Tamaris bark and Caper roots work
the same effect, used in the same manner.

6. Another.
In the morning wash your left side with your own water.

7. Another.
Take the roots of Nettles, stamp them well, and boil them well in Vinegar to a
Poltise, and apply it warm to the left side.

8. For the Spleen over-burdened.
In this case many times you have no other remedy, than to let blood in the
fundament with horse-leaches.

9. For the Spleen.
My own most approved remedies for the Spleen are these, if the Spleen be
afflicted with cold, rub your left side every morning when you rise with your
hand, then anoint it with ointment of Tobacco, and lay a Tobacco leaf
moistened with the same ointment by the region of the Spleen.

10. Another.
Apply a Plaster of Ammoniacum to the Region of the Spleen, if you can get
that Plaster which is called Emplastrum Ammoniacum cum scicuta, it is one of
the best remedies in the world being applied to the region of the Spleen.

11. Another.
If a man live in the Country where these cannot be gotten, let him get a
handful of Hemlock, and warm it very hot, and apply it to his side, it were
fitting an ointment of it were made, and kept in the house for such occasions,
for Hemlock being an herb of Saturn, is an excellent simphaticall remedy for
the Spleen.

12. A Caution.
When you apply any Plasters to the region of the Spleen, cut them as near as
you can to the same form the Spleen is of, so will they work their effects more
effectual, and speedily.

13. Another.
Let such as are troubled with the spleen, forbear much drinking Wine, for that
makes the vapors of the Spleen thin, and sends them up to the brain pel mel,
whereby corrupting the senses, they make many men think they see the things
they see not, and hear the things they hear not: These vapors of the Spleen I
am persuaded is the reason why mad and fantastical people think they see
Visions, many thinking they are inspired with the Spirit of God, when it is
nothing else but a few poisonous vapors of the Spleen.

CHAP. XIII. Of the Stomach and its Infirmities.
1. A Caution.
INfirmities of the Stomach usually proceed from surfeting.

2. Another.
Let such as have weak Stomachs avoid all sweet things, as Honey, Sugar and the
like, Milk, Cheese, and all fat meats, let him not eat till he is hungry, nor
drink before he is a dry, let him avoid anger, sadness, much travail, and all
fried meats, let him not vomit by any means, nor eat when he is hot.

3. For pain in the Stomach.
Take a slice of Bread, of a pretty thickness, and toast it very hot, then dip
it in Oil of Camomell, or Oil of Spike, which is next hand, then wrap it in a
Linen cloth, and apply it to that part pained.

4. For moisture of the Stomach.
Taste a dram of Galanga in powder every morning in a draught of what wine
you love best.

5. For heat of the Stomach.
Swallow four or five grains of Mastich every night going to bed.

6. For windiness in the Stomach.
Take a scruple of Castorium every morning in good Wine; it is an excellent
remedy for windiness in the stomach; better indeed for women, then it is for
men, to put half a dozen or ten drops in a draught of Beer after their meat.

7. For a stinking Breath caused by the Stomach.
Take three ounces of Cummin-seeds, bruise them well, and boil them in a gallon
of Sack till half be consumed: Drink a draught of it (being strained) first at
morning and last at night.

8. For one that vomits up his victuals.
Take Quincies, the cores and rinds being taken away, boil them in strong
Vinegar till they be soft, then beat them in a Mortar, and make them into a
Poltice, with a little Mustard Seed, and Cloves beaten into powder; spread this
upon a cloth, and apply it warm to the Region of the Stomach. This in three or
four times doing will cure.

9. To stay vomiting.
Take a toast, and bake it very well, then dip it in Vinegar, chew a little of
it in your mouth whilst it is hot, and hold the rest to your nose, and it will
close the mouth of your stomach.

10. For a weak stomach.
Take an ounce of Cinnamon, half an ounce of Galanga, and as much Ginger; beat
them into powder, and with syrrup of Hysop make them up into an Electuary, of
which take the quantity of a Nutmeg every morning, fasting an hour or two
after it; if you cannot get syrrup of Hysop, put half an ounce of Hysop in
powder in it, and make it up with clarified honey.

11. For a stinking breath caused by the stomach.
Take the tops of Rosemary, boil them in wine, and drink a draught of the
decoction, first at morning, and last at night.

12. For a watery Stomach.
Take an Oaken leaf, and lay it upon your Tongue, with the rough side
downward, shut your mouth close, and it will draw the water from your Stomach.

CHAP. XIV. Of the Liver and its Infirmities.
1. A Caution.
IF the Liver be too hot, it usually proceeds from too much blood, and is
known by redness of Urine, the Pulce is swift, the Veins great and full, his
Spittle, Mouth and Tongue seem sweeter than they use to be, the cure, is
letting blood in the right Arm.

2. To cause the Liver well to digest.
Take Oil of Wormwood, and so much Mastick in powder, as will make it into a
Poltice, lay it warm to your right side.

3. For heat of the Liver.
Take Liver-wort, Cinkfoyle, Endive, Succory, Borrage, and Buglosse, of each
equal quantities, boil them in Clarified Whey, and drink no other drink.

4. Another.
Take of Sow-thistles, Dandelion, and Ribwort of equal quantities, either boil
them in clarified Whey, or else in fair water, or if you will, you may tun
them up in small Beer, and drink no other drink.

5. Stoppages for the Liver.
Take Ivie-berries, Agrimony, Hart's-tongue, Liver-wort, and the bark of Ash
Tree, of all these a like quantity, Pollypodium the double quantity of any one
of them, bruise them well, and either tun them up in small Beer, or else make
a decoction of them in water, then make the decoction into a Syrup with Sugar,
to be kept for your use.

6. A Caution.
If the Liver be stopped, the Face will swell, and you shall be as fure to have
a pain in your right side, as though you had it there already.

6. For Stoppage of the Liver.
Use garden-thime in all your drinks and broaths, it will prevent stoppages
before they come, and cure them after they are come.

8. For the Liver.
The Liver of a Hare dried, and beaten into powder, cures all the Diseases of
the Liver of Man.

9. Gently to cleanse and cool the Liver.
Take of Liver-wort, Fumitory and Hart's-tongue, of each equal quantities,
clarify them in Whey, and drink a pint of it every morning, fasting two or
three hours after.

CHAP. XV. Of the sides and their infirmities.
1. A Caution.
IF you have a pain in your side, and question whether it be a Plurisie or
not, take Wormwood and heat it hot against the fire, between two Tile-stones,
and when it is very hot sprinkle it with a little Muskadell, then put it in a
Linen cloth, and lay it hot to your side, if it be only wind, it will take
it away in two hours, but if it be the Plurifie, it will increase the pain,
and then you must seek other remedies.

2. For wind in the side.
Take the leaves of holly, and dry them well, and beat them to powder, take two
drachms of it in Wine, and it will give thee ease immediately.

3. For a Stich in the side.
Take the Urine of him that is ill, and boil Wormwood and Cummin seeds,
bruised very well in it, and anoint the sides, going to bed, with the Liquor.

4. Another.
Anoint thy side going to bed with Oil of Bays.

5. For a Stich in the left side.
Take a quantity of Cummin seed, and bruise them very well, and infuse them in
Malmsey or Muskadell three or four hours, then fry them in a pan till they be
pretty thick, put it in a Linen bag and lay it to your side.

CHAP. XVI. Of the Heart and its Infirmities.
1. For a trembling of the Heart without a Fever.
TAke the Maw of an old Cock, dry it and beat it into powder, and take a dram
of the powder of it in the morning in Wine.

1. Another.
Take red Corrall, and beat it into very fine powder, and take a scruple of it
first in the morning, and last at night, in Borrage water.

3. For fatness about the Heart.
Take the juice of Fennel, and clarify it, and make a Syrup of it with Honey,
and take an ounce of it morning and evening.

4. For knawing about the Heart.
Take Sage leaves and Yarrow, beat them and press out the juice, clarify it,
and drink a spoonful of it in every draught of Beer you drink.

5. A Caution.
Things which strengthen the Heart are, Saffron, Rue, Borrage, Buglosse,
Harts-horne, Mustard, red Roses, Violets, Mace, good Wine, and Spirit of Wine
moderately taken.

6. For Heart Qualmes.
Take half a Drachme of Piony roots in powder every morning, or a spoonful of
Syrup of Pionyes, and to be sure you shall be free from it all that day.

CHAP. XVII. Of the Belly and its Infirmities.
1. For a hard Belly without pain.
TAke Mallows and Mercury, and stamp them together (the herb Mercury I mean,
not Quicksilver) and make a Plaster thereof, and lay it to the Navill.

2. Another.
Take Rue and press the juice out, clarify it, dri^k a spoonful of it in all
the drink you drink.

3. For a hard Belly that is sore.
Beat Penyroyall, and mix a little Ginger with it in powder, and apply it
Plaister-wise to the Belly.

4. For a Bastard Chollick.
Take Wormwood, Rue, Motherwort, Lavender-cotton, stamp them, then mix the
Gall of an Ox with it warmed, and apply it plaster wise to the Belly.

CHAP. XVIII. Of the Navill and its Infirmities.
1. For the swelling of the Navill.
TAke Cows dung and dry it to powder, Barley flower, and Bean flower of each a
like quantity, a little Cummin-seeds, beaten into powder, make it up into a
Plaster with juice of Knot-grasse, and apply it to the Navill, if it happen at
such a time of the year, when juice of Knot-grasse cannot be gotten, add the
leaves of Knot-grasse in powder, in equal proportion to the rest, and make it
up into a Plaster with Ale boiled to the height.

2. Another.
Take Cows dung, and boil it in the Milk of the same Cow into a Plaster, and
apply it to the Navill.

3. For a child's Navell that is sore with crying.
Take a little Bean flower, and the ashes of fine clouts burnt, temper them
with red Wine and Honey, and lay it to the sore.

CHAP. XIX. Of the Back and its infirmities.
1. For weakness of the Back.
TAke Barley flower and Bean flower of each equal quantities, make it up into a
plaster with the Oil of Roses, and the Yolk of an Egg, and apply it to your
Back.

2. Another.
Take Rice in fine powder, and Wheat flower of each equal quantities, temper
it with Claret Wine and Sugar, the powder of Clary and Nutmeg, make it into a
Cake with fresh Butter, and bake it, and eat no other breakfast but it, being
baked for some days.

3. For a pain in the back.
Take fresh Cow Dung and fry it in Vinegar, and apply it Planter-wise to the
Back, you little think how soon it will give you ease.

4. For heat in the Back.
Boil the leaves of Willow trees in water, till they be as thick as a poltice,
apply them to the Reins of the Back hot as you can endure it, if it be at such
a time of the year when Willowes have no leaves, use the inner rind of the Tree
in like manner, and in four or five times dressing it will heal you.

CHAP. XX. Of the Fundament and its Infirmities.
1. For falling out of the Fundament.
BEware of taking cold in that place, be sure keep your Buttocks warm, beware
of costivenesse, sit not upon cold Earth nor Stones.

2. For the Fig in the Fundament.
This impediment is an imposthumation, or lump of flesh growing in the right
gut, proceeding of Melancholy humors descending thither, and therefore first
of all purge Melancholy, either with confection, Hamech, or Pills of Lapis
Lazula.

3. Another.
Take the powder of a Dogs head burnt, mix it with juice of Pimpernell, and
make long Tents of it, and put them up the Fundament.

4. For falling out of the Fundament.
Take Bay Leaves and boil them well in water, put the water in an Earthen pot,
and sit over it as hot as you can endure, that the fume of the water may go up
into your Fundament, so may you put it up with your fingers by little and
little, and when you have gotten it up, sit down with your bare breech upon an
Oaken board, made as hot with the fire as you can suffer it, this will heal you.

5. Another.
Take red Nettles and bruise them very well, boil them well in White wine, in
an Earthen pot, till half the Wine be consumed, let him drink this liquor first
at morning, and last at night, and lay herbs to his Fundament as hot as he can
suffer it.

CHAP. XXI. Of the Thighs and their Infirmitits.
1. For stiffenesse of the Thighs.
TAke Brooklime, Hoarehound, and S. John's wort, Tallow, Hoggs grease, and
Horse-turd, boil them all well together, then strain them out, and keep the
ointment for your use.

2. For aching of the Bones of the Thighs.
Take a pint of White wine, and the Gall of any Ox, boil them to a plaster
with a few crumbs of bread, spread it upon a cloth, and apply it to the
grieved place.

3. To knit the Sinews, and Veins of the Thighs.
Take great Earth-wormes and beat them all to mash, and add unto them a little
Mastick in powder, then boil them in Oil, till it be thick like a Salve, then
spread it upon a cloa^h, and lay it to the grieved place, let it lie on nine
days, and by that time all will be well.

4. For swelling of the Thighs.
Take Hens dung, or Pigeons dung, (Pigeons dung is the best by far, without
any dispute of the Story) Sheeps tallow, smallage and Chickweed, beat them all
together, then fry them well in Lees of Muskadell, if you cannot get the Lees,
use Muskadell it self, and apply it being fried as hot as you can endure it to
the place.

5. For Sinews that are shrunk in the Thighs or elsewhere.
Anoint the place with ointment of Swallows, it is thus made, take young
Swallows out of their Nests by number twelve, Rosemary tops, Bay Leaves,
Lavender tops, and Straberry leaves of each a handful, cut off the long
feathers of the Swallows wings and tails, and put them in a stone Mortar, and
lay the herbs upon them, and beat them all to pieces, Guts, Feathers, Bones
and all, then mix them with three pound of hoggs grease, set it in the Sun a
month together, then boil it up, strain it, and keep ointment for your use.

CHAP. XXII. Of the Knees and their infirmities.
1. For ache or swelling in the Knees.
TAke Rue, and Lovage, and stamp them and mix a litte honey with them, and
apply it to the knee.

2. For an ache coming of an old bruise.
Take a pottle of running water, and a pint of bay salt, boil them together
till half be consumed, then make it thick with Bran, and lay it to the knee.

3. Another.
Make an ointment with juice of Nightshade, and May Butter, to anoint your
Knee with.

4. For the Knees.
The best remedy (in my opinion) is this, take the bones of Goats Knees, and
beat them to powder, and take a dram of the powder every morning in Goats
milk, if you can get it, if not in what liquor you please, and wrap a part of
the skin of the Goat about your Knee.

CHAP. XXII. Of the Legs and Feet, and their Infirmities.
1. For swellings of the Legs.
TAke Wormwood, Southern-wood and Rue, of each equal quantities, stamp them
together, and fry them with honey, till they begin to wax dry, then apply it as
hot as you can endure it, either to your swelled Legs or Hands.

2. For a Leg that is swelled, and will pit after touching.
Take Chickweed and Pellitory of the Wall, of each a handful, Sheeps tallow
one pound, Tartar beaten two ounces, boil these in milk, till they be soft
like a Poltice, and apply it to the Leg.

3. Another.
And this pleases me much better, take a quart of Red wine, and boil it to a
Poltice, with crumbs of Rye bread, and apply it to your Leg, as hot as you
can endure it, in four times dressing this will help you.

4. For ach in the Bones, in the Legs, or Arms.
Take a quarter of a pound of Dill seed, beat it into powder, and boil it in a
quart of good White wine, boil it till half be wasted away, then put to it a
pint of good Saller Oil, boil it again till all the Wine be consumed, then
strain out the Oil, and keep it as a Sovereign remedy for the premises.

5. For a red swelling in the Leg or Arm.
Take Oatmeal and boil it in Milk, and when it has boiled a good while, add
to it a handful of Mallows, and a handful of Houseleek or Sengreen chopped
small together, with some Sheep. Sewet chopped small, boil it to a Poltice, and
apply it to the sore place; if it be ready to break it will break it, if not,
it will cure it without breaking.

6. For a Corn on the Toe.
Take a black snaile and roast him well in a white wet cloth, bruise him and
lay him (...) to the Corn, and it will take it away in a very shor^ time.

7. To make a Nail grow where it is wanting.
Take Cinkfoyle, and bruise it with any fresh grease, and apply it to the place
where the Nail is wanting, and it will make another grow.

FINIS

