A CURRY-COMB FOR A COCKS-COMB: OR, The Trip to Holland Detected.
By the Author of the Trip to Jamaica.
AS a true bred Mastiff walks with Patience through a Country Town, each whifling
Cur, in Emulation of his Greatness, runs Yelping at his heels, till at last
provoked by the insolence of some forward Mungril, who being Ignorant of his
Strength, and thoughtless of his Courage, attempts to bite him by the Breech,
which occasions the disdainful Animal to turn back his Head and Grin; and when
with Contempt he has viewed his feeble Adversary, he holds up his Leg and
Scornfully Pisses upon his Trembling Assailant.

With as little Concern have I endured the Petulent Snarls, and envious
Reproaches of some Deminitive Scriblers till now, without so much as showing
them my Teeth.

But a Scurrilous Preface, by an Unmannerly Sauce-box, to a naked piece of
Plagiarism, published under the Title of A Trip to Holland, I confess has
moved me, not only to do my Self, but the World this Justice.

As for the matter contained in his Ill-bred Pamphlet, (so very Scandalous by
its unseasonable Applycation) it is Stolen from Mr. Feltham Word for word; and
is called by him, Three Weeks Observation upon the Low Countries; and may be
found, annexed to his Resolves, in any Booksellers-shop in Town.

Therefore the PUPPY his Chap (as his well-bred Author calls him in his
unsavory Preface, which is of a far more Beastly Composition than his Dutchman)
might have had so much respect for his Prince's Country, or that honesty
toward the Public, and have used that manners to a Gentleman, as not to have
showed himself, by his publication of a paultery piece of Bombast, so very
Impudent in the face of Authority, so Knavish to the World, and Rude to a
Stranger.

I am sorry a Man who deals in Books should discover his Wit to be so little,
or his Necessity so great, as to force him to the use of such unpracticable
Measures, which every Prudent Author ought to Condemn, and every Honest
Bookseller Detest.

Though the little shallow-brain'd Lampooneer (who could never before now extend
his Mushroon Fancy above Balladian height) has foolishly suffered himself, in
a Dtunken Freak, to be carried beyond his Tallent; and venture, like an
unskilful Swimmer, to wade out of his depth at his own peril: Yet, I thought,
the Bookseller might have had more wit, than to Record himself such a PUPPY in
Print; and lend himself to his Author, to use him as the worst piece of Rubbish
of which he has composed his Dunghill of Reflections. I must confess, till now,
I could not think there was such a Cocks-comb of the Trade.

The Author, in his filthy Quagmire of Nonsense, supposes the West India Poet
to be a Transport Fellon: But I am sure the Dutch Observator, in his pretended
Trip to Holland, (patched up of as many bits and snips, and appears of as many
Colors as a Fools Jacket) has openly committed such a shameful piece of
Theft, that he deserves Transportation into an Island of Fools, where he should
have no oppertunity of playing the Ape with any above the Curse of his own
Capacity.

I would advise him for the future, to confine his Scurrilous and Obscene
Dialect within its proper bounds; and never presume to attempt any thing beyond
a Bloody Murder, Bawdy Ballad, or a Last Dying Speech and Confession. And I
must needs take the liberty of giving him this Caution, Unless he wipes the
Bird-lime off his Fingers, that they may no more stick to a Silver Tankard, or
draw Books after them into Duck-Lane, to the disgrace of his Family, and
scandal of the Purchasers, he may chance to fall into the hands of as scurvy a
Poetaster as himself; and become the lamentable Subject of a doleful Ditty.

I hear, within two or three days, there will an Answer be Published, as a
check to his upstart Insolence. Who it is that thinks it worth their Labor I
know not: I declare to the World it is none of mine, for I shall give my self no
other trouble than this, without a further Provocation: But assure the
Bookseller I Will not forget his kindness; and as for the Author, if this gentle
Correction mend not his manners, the next shall be a Cudgel.

On Wednesday next will be Published the Second Part of the London Spy.

LONDON, Printed in the Year, School.


