THE CASE OF Sarah Monk, The Wife of Mr Christopher Monk, in Answer to a Paper,
touching their Marriage; the Truth whereof is as follows;
THat the said Mr Christopher Monk became acquainted with Sarah his Wife about
Christmas last past, and after six Weeks acquaintance, and earnest Courtship
by him made to the said Sarah, his now Wife, he at the last obtained her
Affections, and her Consent to marry him, and thereupon requested her Father's
Consent, that he might have the said Sarah to be his Wife, who obtained the
same; whereupon the said Mr Monk appointed and fixed the Marriageday to be upon
Shrove-Tuesday last, and desired Mr Hungerford, her Father, to bring his
Daughter, and meet him at the Three-Tun-Tavern, near Grayes-Inn in Holborn;
which the said Mr. Hungerford did, being accompained with his Wife and two
Friends; and the said Mr Monk came accordingly, and no way disordered by Drink,
or otherwise, from whence they all went together: And the said Mr Monk, and
Sarah his Wife, were legally Married and Bedded before credible Witnesses, and
have co-habited and bedded together several Nights since.

That neither at the time of the Marriage, or at any time since, has the said
Mr Hungerford, or the said Sarah been satisfied of any Estate whatsoever, that
the said Mr Monk was then possessed of, or likely so to be, otherwise than by
common Fame and his own Discourses, having never seen, or credibly been
informed of any Estate left him by the late Right Noble the Duke of Albemarle,
or any other Person whatsoever.

That at the time of the Marriage, the said Mr Monk did declare, he was near
Sixteen Years of Age; and being requested by Mr Callender to acquaint his
Friends with the said intended Marriage, made this reply, That let who would or
could oppose his said Marriage, with the said Sarah his now Wife, he was
resolved to Consumate the same.

That the said Mr Hungerford never invited the said Mr Monk before the said
Marriage to his House, nor ordered any body else so to do. And that since the
said Marriage, the said Mr Hungerford has furnished the said Mr Monk with
several sums of Money to buy him Necessaries, he wanting the same. And that
several Times since his Marriage, and in several Companies, he has declared
himself to be well Contented with his said Marriage.

That Mr Hungerford's Wife never personated before, at, or after the Marriage,
or pretended to any person whatsoever to be Mr. Monk's Mother, and is only
Mother-in-Law to Mr Monk's now Wife.

That Mr Matthew Hungerford is a Gentleman, being a Branch of the Ancient
Family of the Hungerfords, and the next Brother unto Edmund Hungerford of
Chisbury, in the County of Wilts Esquire and never was any Pastry-Cook, but a
Merchant, and a considerable Dealer for above twenty Years, as by the
Custom-House Books may appear.


