A RULE FOR Ministers and People, Whereby they may see how they are engaged One
toward Another, by Gods Word.

And (as in a Glass) Herein may be seen when any fail, and when one or both are
faithful.

By N. C. a servant of Christ, and of his Church assembled at Orpington in Kent.

Galat. 6.16. As many as walk according to this rule, peace be on them, and
mercy, and upon the Israel of God.

LONDON, Printed for Giles Calvert, at the black Spread-Eagle near the West End
of Paul's. 1654.

Courteous Reader.
HOw good is it to know Gods mind, and do it? I have here presented in this
small Treatise, some part of his will; to the end you should know, and do, and
be blessed and give up your account with joy. My requests are, that you would be
faithful to God and your own soul, which should be your all-endeavours and
highest reach; and know, I am

Yours to serve you, wherein you serve the most high God, N. C.

To all the Churches in England, constituted and congregated in Gospel Order.
Grace be unto you, and peace from God our Father in his Son our Redeemer the
Lord Jesus.
Dear and Christian Friends,
TAking notice of many precious lines that have been to the view of all, which
have made for the honor of God, and good of his people; yet having not read
any as yet speaking of that I speak to in this Treatise, even the duties of
Ministers and People one toward another; but have heard much complaining, one
speaking hardly of the other, whereby God has been dishonored on both
parties; which was one great motive to this work, wherein you may see how
Pastors ought to be, and what they ought to do, and how people ought to behave
themselves toward their Ministers, in words, and actions, according to the
mind of God, revealed in the Scriptures, so that they might not accuse one
another wrongfully, and bring the anger of the great God on them for so doing.
My whole end, and aim, and hearty desire, is, That both Ministers and People
may walk so, as to discharge a good conscience toward God and one another,
that all may be found blameless, and presented spotless unto God the Father at
the last day, when there will be no respector of persons; which is, and shall
be the Prayers of me

Your brother and fellow servants in the work of the Gospel. N. C.

THe first duty I shall mind, is, that they are to feed the flock of God, as
you shall find a Rule for so doing, even a Command, in Acts 20.28, 29, 30.
where it is thus said, Take heed unto your selves, and to all the flock over
which the holy Spirit has made you overseers, to feed the Church of God which
he has purchased with his own blood. And the reason why they ought to be so
careful in taking heed, he shows in the following verses: For (says he) I
know this, that after my departing shall grievous wolves enter in among you,
not sparing the flock: also of your own selves shall men arise, speaking
perverse things, to draw away disciples after them. And for this very cause, he
lays a more strict charge on them to watch, leaving himself as an example, in
these words: Watch therefore, and remember, that by the space of three years I
ceased not to warn every one, night and day, with tears.

O now consider, To be warned beforehand, is as much as can be desired: and
now, if they that are Ministers or Elders do not watch, they are left
inexcusable. Therefore let these considerations move all they that are
entrusted in so good a work as to feed the flock of God, to be diligent in so
doing:

1. Because God has made them Overseers, and set them as Watchmen over a
people.

2. Because he has such a love to them, that he has purchased them with his
own blood.

3. Because there will be such that will come into the Church, as will not
spare the flock.

4. Because there shall arise such out from among the Church.

And 5. Because the Apostle has left such an example, and has spoken of those
things so plainly, as in the words forementioned, as also in many other
places; God also pronouncing a woe against them that are not faithful, as you
may see plainly, Jer. 23.1, 2. where he reproves and threatens, in these words:
Woe be unto the pastors that destroy and scatter the sheep of my pasture, says
the Lord: therefore thus says the Lord God of Israel against the pastors that
feed my people, You have scattered my flock, and driven them away, and have not
visited them. Behold, I will visit upon you the evil of your doings, says the
Lord.

Oh then, what great care ought those to have that are Elders! for it is a
fearful thing to have the Lord against one: for when the day is come that he
will execute vengeance, who shall be able to stand? Rev. 6.15, 16, 17. Seeing
these things are so, what manner of persons ought such to be? 2 Pet. 3.10, 11,
12. Seeing we have so many Woes pronounced by God against the shepherds that do
not feed the flock, what care and faithfulness!

You may be pleased to take notice of another Scripture, Ezekiel. 34. from verse.
2. to 11. in these words: Prophecy against the shepherds of Israel, and say
unto them, Thus says the Lord God unto the shepherds, Woe be unto them that do
feed themselves: should not the shepherds feed the flock? And shows the
reason why the flock was scattered, there was no shepherd to look after them,
as will appear in verse. 8. they feed themselves, and not the flock. And in the
tenth verse he says he is against them, so as they shall not feed themselves
nor the flock.

What will become of such as God is against, and do his work deceitfully? Of
all men, they shall be cursed: for the mouth of the Lord has spoken. Jer.
48.10.

And seeing you that are Elders are called to the work of the Lord, do not dare
to leave your station, for a more gainful place: do not idolize any thing, so
as to set it up in your hearts, more then the Church of God, which Christ died
for. Consider that saying of the Lord in the Prophecy of Zechariah, chap. 11.
verse. 17. Woe to the idol-shepherd that leaves the flock: the sword shall be
upon his arm, and upon his right eye: his arm shall be clean dried up, and his
right eye shall be utterly d^rkned.

Oh then, take care of the flock; and, as commanded, feed, doing of it
willingly, not having a by-end in so doing, as those that are hirelings. They
are also to behave themselves humbly. 1 Pet. 5.2, 3. he that exhorts them being
an Elder: the words being thus: Feed the flock of God which is among you,
taking the oversight thereof; not by constraint, but willingly; not for filthy
lucre, but of a ready mind: neither as being Lords over Gods heritage, but
being ensamples to the flock.

And further, consider Heb. 13.17. What a charge does he also lay on Timothy, 2 Timothy 4.1, 2.3, 4, 5. I charge thee therefore, before God, and the Lord Jesus
Christ, who shall judge the quick and the dead at his appearing, and his
kingdom: preach the Word, be instant in season and out of season: reprove,
rebuke, exhort, with all long-suffering and doctrine. And shows the reason
why; because of the aversness of some that should be in the Church of Christ:
For, says he, in verse. 3. the time will come, they will not endure sound
doctrine, but after their own lusts shall heap to themselves teachers, having
itching ears. And they shall turn away their ears from the truth, and shall be
turned unto fables. But watch thou in all things: endure afflictions, do the
work of an evangelist, make full proof of thy ministry. For I am now ready to
be offered, and the time of my departure is at hand. I have fought the good
fight, I have finished my course, I have kept the faith. Here is excellent
instruction; and a worthy pattern was this Apostle.

And he did give as good instruction to Titus, which is worthy of due
consideration. And, as has been already showed, they ought not, who are
Shepherds, to leave the Church of Christ, no more then a woman her husband,
though a woman cannot be kept by him. Nay further, she ought not to be at a
distance from him, without leave. If for poverty or loving another, she would
leave her husband, then you may say she is under a temptation; and leaving of
him, that would be the part of an harlot.

Oh then, I pray consider of this, and see if it would not be so, if one that
is made choice of by a Church, a people rightly stated, owning the Ordinances
of God, to be an Elder and Overseer to watch over them, if he should for some
great gain leave his people, then may one conclude, he is not only under a
temptation, but therein commits whoredom. It argues no real love in such a man,
to desert a people in the love of God, and in the strength that God has given
them, keep the commandments of God: and such shall abide in his love, Joh.
15.10. By this you may see how shepherds ought to feed their flock.

And let us further consider the duty of Elders.

Secondly, they must visit the sick, when sent for, as will appear, Jam. 5.14.
Is any sick amongst you? let him call for the elders of the Church, and let
them pray over the sick, anointing the sick with oil in the name of the Lord.
So that it is the duty of Elders to sympathize with the sicknesses of his
people: and if not, see how blamed, Mat. 25.41. Then shall he say to them on
his left hand, Depart from me, ye cursed, into everlasting fire prepared for
the devil and his angels: for I was hungry, and ye gave me not to eat; athirst,
and ye gave me not to drink, etc. And they shall answer, When saw we thee so?
his answer being, Inasmuch as you did it not to one of these little ones, you
did it not unto me. They that are Shepherds, ought to imitate their Master, who
when he saw any hungry, he had compassion on them: Hospitality is that an Elder
ought to be given to, 1 Timothy 3.2. Romans 12.13. Such are to endure hardness, as
good soldiers, as Paul exhorts Timothy to, 2 Timothy 2.3, 4. 2 Timothy 4.5. Such
must give attendance to reading, that they may be able to divide the Word of
truth aright, to convince all gainsayers, or at least to maintain Truth against
them; and this cannot be, except a searching of the Scriptures, which are able
to make the man of God perfect: and therefore Paul charge Timothy to give
attendance to reading, as 1 Timothy 4.13. And in the following verses, he shows
him the benefit of so doing: for, says he, in so doing, thou shall both save
thy self, and them that hear thee, verse. 16. Compare this with 2 Timothy 3.16.
where he says, All Scripture is given by inspiration of God, and is profitable
for doctrine, for reproof, for correction, for instruction in righteousness;
that the man of God may be perfect, thoroughly furnished unto all good works.
Take notice of this, I pray you, That this is the only means, and that which
is very beneficial; and so, such that are Elders will come to be such workmen
as need not to be ashamed; otherwise there may be an erring. Of all actions, do
not omit searching the Scriptures. How shall men be able to appear before God,
that cause the blind to go out of the way? He shall be cursed, and fall with
them that fall. Deuteronomy. 27.18. Cursed be he that makes the blind to wander out
of the way. And the people shall say, Amen. If God did pronounce all those
cursed, that did but direct any that were naturally blind out of the way, how
much sorer punishment shall he be thought worthy of, that shall lead any to the
eternal destruction? As our Lord said, They shall both fall, Mat. 15.14. where
the Lord speaks plainly of the spiritual blind: our Lord therein
prophetically speaks of the downfall of those that slighted the commands of God,
and did observe the traditions of men: and all was for want of searching the
Scriptures, or at least for want of giving heed unto them. O then, let all them
that are the true servants of Christ, and Elders of the Church of Christ, be
warned and moved to search the Scriptures; and in searching the Scriptures,
they shall come to understand one duty more, and that is, how they that are
Elders ought to be patterns and ensamples to their flocks, that they may say,
Follow us. Therefore my exhortation is, once more, as Paul to Timothy, 1 Timothy
4.12. But be thou an example of the believers, in word, in conversation, in
charity, in spirit, in faith, in purity. And so walking, they will be meet
instruments to take care of those that go astray: but if of a corrupt
conversation, then not fit for so good a work, to tell others of their faults,
when faulty; which will but dishonor head and members; and what just cause of
stumbling will be given thereby? Such must not allow of pride, dissimulation,
covetousness, pleasures, no^ ^onours, in this present evil world. In a word,
they mus^ no^ do that themsel^es, that they reprove in others: and if lamelesly
they walk, they will be able to restore those that wander, and d^^s one that
has a hundred sheep, and one of them goet^ ^^tray; he leaves the ninety and
nine in the wilderness, and goes after the one that went astray. So must
careful shepherds do, when any sheep go astray, in drunkenness, in pride, or
any other sin: and also they ought to know, that he that restores the soul,
saves the soul from death, and shall hide a multitude of sins, Jam. 5.19, 20.
Nevertheless he that goes to deal with one that is in error, must be gentle,
meekly instructing them, as will appear, 2 Timothy 2.24, 25, 26. for the reason is
showed, That they might be like their Master, who reviled not, when reviled. In
patience ought they to follow their Master therein. And Christ further says,
He that humbles himself, shall be exalted. Also, Shepherds ought to be
zealous: their Master Christ was zealous; and it was prophesied of him, that
the zeal of Gods house had eaten him up: zealous in warning them. Rev. 3.2, 14,
15. If people, much more shepherds. Ezekiel. 3.17. where it is said, Son of man, I
have made thee a watchman over the house of Israel; therefore hear the word at
my mouth, and give them warning from me. And shows the danger in the
following words: I say unto the wicked, Thou shall surely die, and thou give
him not warning, nor speak to warn the wicked from his wicked way, to save
his life. The same wicked man shall die in his iniquity: but his blood I will
require at thy hand. And if thou warn him, and he does not turn from his
wickedness nor wicked way, he shall die in his iniquity: but thou have
delivered thy soul. O cry aloud, and spare not, says God by his servant
Isaiah, chap. 58.1. and show the people their transgression, and the house of
Jacob their sins: as if he should have said, In so doing, thou shall deliver
thy own soul. And they ought to do without partiality. Jam. 3.17. there it is
said, that the wisdom that is from above by one thing it will be known by, is,
by being without partiality. 1 Timothy 5.20, 21. I charge thee before God, and the
elect angels, that thou observe these things, without perferring one before
another, doing nothing by partiality. Chap. 6.17, 18. where it is said, Charge
them that are rich, that they be not high-minded, nor trust in uncertain riches
but in the living God, who gives us richly all things to enj^^ (...) they do
good, that they be rich in good works, ready t^ (...), willing to communicate,
laying up in store for themselves a good foundation against the time to come,
that they may lay hold on eternal life. It was Timothy's duty, an Elder,
therefore all Elders duty. Oh that they were printed in the hearts of all
Elders! and in performing, Oh what true peace!

Such that are Shepherds, are not to hold false doctrines. Rev. 2.14, 15. I
have a few things against thee, because thou have them that hold the doctrine
of Balaam. And in verse. 15. such that hold the doctrine of the Nicolaitans,
which thing I hate, says God. How men arise, speaking perverse things. It is
the duty of Elders to use all care in suffering any to teach: know they should
their judgments; and if they hold not the doctrine of Christ, they should not
be received, 2 John v. 10. Heb. 13.9. They should not be carried about with
strange doctrines, nor suffer their flocks. Paul writing to Titus, chap. 2.1.
bid him speak the things that become sound doctrine. Chap. 1.9. holding fast
the faithful word, as he has been taught; that he may be able by sound
doctrine, both to exhort and convince the gainsayers.

Lastly, they should work with their hands, as much as in them lies, Acts
20.34. Yea your selves know, that these hands have ministered to my necessities,
and to them that were with me. I have showed them all things, that in laboring
you ought to support the weak, and to remember the words of our Lord Jesus, how
he said, It is more blessed to give then to receive. O that Elders would stop
the mouths of enemies in so doing, and have no by-end in preaching. All that
love God in sincerity, will not be burdensome to any; and if they can get a
livelihood by their own lawful endeavors, they will say with the servants of
God, Having food and raiment, let us therewith be contented. It is the mind of
the true Ministers of the Gospel, so to enjoy earthly things, as not to see
their brethren want, and not supply. How many of the so called Ministers of the
nation have so done? Not of the mind have they been of the servants of God in
old times, that would not be chargeable. How will such stand before God? 2 Thessalonians. 3.8, 9, 10, 11, 12. And whoever walk by this Rule, peace be unto them,
from God the Father, in Jesus Christ.

Now that they that have begun in this work may prosper, and not be weary,
great afflictions have attended the servants of God, must be confessed, as Paul
says, 2 Cor. 6.4, 5, 6. O how did the servants and Ministers of Christ approve
themselves, not in word only, but in deed! in bitter afflictions, in perils
and stripes, and the like. Heb. 11.36, 37. If I should speak of others, it
would be too tedious. None did suffer so as Paul, and none did so encourage.
But for the encouragement of true shepherds, their sufferings are not to be
compared to the glory that shall be imposed on them. 2 Cor. 4.17, 18. Paul also
encourages Timothy, chap. 4.8. A crown of righteousness, not only for him,
but for all that love his appearing. Consider, O shepherds, what the Lord says
to you, Heb. 10.35, 36, 37. Take encouragement from the last words: Yet a
little while, and he that shall come will come, and will not tarry. Heb. 12.2,
3. Consider the practice of your Master; and consider what is also said, Phil.
2.8, 9. Shepherd, keep what is committed to you; and in so doing, you shall
have great reward, Psa. 19.11. Be of Moses's mind, Heb. 11.25, 26. Choose
rather to suffer affliction with the Lords people, then to enjoy the pleasures
of sin for a season. Rev. 22.12. Do not look for reward here, lest it should be
said as it was to the Scribes and Pharisees, doing what they did to be seen of
men, they had here their reward, Matthew. 6.2. There is enough in God; look up,
all true Ministers, to him. If a great rich man on earth, will not let the
favor and kindness of his child go unrewarded; what will Jesus Christ do, in
whom dwells all bowels! Be not idle, but up and doing, lest you be cut asunder.
A glorious crown, a house not made with hands, will be the portion of those
that are faithful to the death. Let not pleasures nor preferments, either by
sea or land, draw away your hearts, and cause you to leave the flocks of
Christ: so much the more, because he has counted you worthy to know his mind,
and to feed his flock. Joh. 21.15, 16. Consider also that Scripture, 1 Pet.
5.4. which is spoken by way of encouragement. Doing their duties, being
instruments in the hands of the eternal Spirit, to convert, they shall shine at
the stars in heaven, Dan. 12.3. Jam. 5.19, 20. Mat. 13.43. Many more Arguments
I hope I need not use, there being others, I judge, in their breasts: and what
has been said, calling upon God for a blessing, will ever engage true
shepherds to be true to their Master, King, Lord, and Savior, and his people
beloved of the Father.

Having spoke without partiality to the duty of Ministers, I shall now show you
the duty of people to their Elders: as first, 1 Cor. 9.7. and so on, where it
is said, Who goes a warfare at any time of his own charge? who planteth a
vineyard, and eats not the fruit thereof? or who feeds a flock, and eats
not of the milk of the flock? Say I these things as a man? says not the Law
the same also? For it is written in the law of Moses, Thou shall not muzzle the
mouth of the ox that treads out the corn. Does God take care for oxen? or
says he it altogether for our sakes? For our sakes no doubt this is written,
that he that ploweth should plow in hope, and that he that thresheth in hope,
should be partaker of his hope. If we have sown unto you spiritual things, is
it a great thing if we shall reap your carnal things? If others be partakers of
this power over you, are not we rather? nevertheless we have not used this
power, but suffer all things, lest we should hinder the Gospel of Christ. Do
you not know, that they that minister about holy things, live of the things of
the temple? and they that wait at the altar, are partakers with the altar? Even
so has the Lord ordained, that they which preach the Gospel should live of the
Gospel. But I have not used these things, says the Apostle. 1 Timothy 5.18. Gal.
6.6. Let him that is taught in the word, communicate to him that teaches, in
all good things. You see it is the duty of those that are taught, to support
those that teach. They are counted taskmasters, that will have work done, and
will not allow of wherewithal. And all that do not do as has been spoken to,
will neglect an Ordinance of God, and be found blameworthy. God has ordained,
that those that preach the Gospel should live of the Gospel: but how shall they
live, if they that are taught do not hand forth to them? Is it not to bind
heavy burdens, and lay them on shoulders, that they that lay them on will not
touch with one of their fingers? Is not this like Pharaoh's Egyptian bondage,
command to make bricks, but allow not straw? If any do groan under the burden
thereof, crying to the Lord, deliverance will be sent: but those will not have
peace, that do not supply. Will not their gold and silver witness against them,
who will not spare of their substance, notwithstanding their brethrens wants,
when there are those that spend their strength, and what they get, in the
service of God? O that these things might take impression upon the hearts of
all those that profess they love God. Although the Lord is angry with all
idol-shepherds, that regard themselves, and not the flock, yet he will have all
those that teach his Word in truth, and do only aim at his honor, and not at
their own ease and profit, to be honored, respected, and obeyed, so far as
they speak and walk in truth, according to the will and mind of God: and it is
not the Lords mind any should slight them, and speak evil of them, as some do,
for want of having their understandings opened. Look and consider for the proof
of the last, 1 Thessalonians. 5.12, 13. And we beseech you brethren to know them that
labor among you, and are over you in the Lord, and admonish you; and to esteem
them very highly, in love, for their works sake: and be at peace among your
selves. 1 Timothy 5.17. Let the elders that rule well, be counted worthy of double
honor, especially they who labor in the word and doctrine. Heb. 13.7, 17.
Remember them which have the rule over you, who have spoken to you the word of
God; whose faith follow, considering the end of their conversation. Obey them
that have the rule over you, and submit your se^ves: for they watch for your
souls, as they that must give account; that they may do it with joy, and not
with grief, for that is unprofitable for you. O that all would lay these words
to heart! then they would be more careful of their words and actions then many
times they are, and would do that which they should do; and that would be
well-pleasing, and it would tend to the honor of the great God, and their
everlasting peace, joy, and well-being.

There is one thing more you are to take heed of, how you receive an
information against those that are Elders: although they as well as other men
are subject to many infirmities, and do that which is not warrantable in the
sight of God, yet Elders shall ha e many a false aspersion cast on them
undeservingly, to the end that they that do hearken to what truth they hold
forth, may be discouraged to go on in the practice of any Ordinances of God.
Consider the rule, 1 Timothy 5.19. Against an elder receive not an accusation, but
before two or three witnesses. For those that are instrumental in bringing
honor to God, shall have many accusers; as Joseph's Mistress accused him
falsely and wrongfully, Genesis 39.17. and Elijah, one that was said to trouble
Israel. You shall find how men made Laws on purpose to entangle the innocent;
as they did concerning Daniel, chap. 6. to verse. 18. O what need have all those
that love God, to manifest love to such that are so hated without cause, by
those that hate holiness! seeing those that hate holiness, and they that love
righteousness, are so few. Besides all this, they shall meet with many abuses
amongst false brethren. 1 Kin. 18.17, 18. Paul also was said to be a teacher of
sedition. Abuses amongst false brethren, as Paul and Jeremiah. Without the
great support of God, those that are Gods Ministers would be discouraged, and
ready to faint, considering the wickedness of some amongst them,
notwithstanding all that care and pains that is taken amongst them, in
reproving, instructing, admonishing, and laboring to bring them out of the
snare of the devil, whereby they are taken by him at his will; as some
following pride, covetousness, drunkenness, uncleanness, and what not? such
that make a show of godliness, for which the souls of true Watchmen do mourn in
secret, and undergo heavy burdens, and few lay it to heart: but God will
comfort them, in good time, when others ashamed shall be. It is no new thing to
be reproached. Christ the great Master of talents was reproached: for they said
he was a friend of Publicanes and sinners, a wine-bibber; and called his
followers deceivers. Jer. 18.18. Let us smite him with the tongue, and let us
not give heed to any of his words. But take notice how God dealt with such,
slighting Moses, smiting one with a leprosy, and causing the earth to open its
mouth, and swallow up those that did rebel against him, Number. 16.32, 33. Some
may say, Those were wicked men, and God destroyed them for their rebellion
against him, and no for their rebellion against Moses. Mind Numb. 12. from
verse. 1. to 12. None should speak against those, that with a single heart
reprove men of sin: nothing justly can be laid to their charge, yet revile.
People ought not to rebuke an Elder, but entreat him as a father. 1 Timothy 5.1.
Rebuke not an elder, but entreat him as a father. Others ought to be rebuked by
him, as verse. 20. of the same Chapter. 1 Timothy 5.20. 2 Timothy 4.2. Tit. 1.13.
Chap. 2 15. Prove. 9.8. No better rule to walk by, then the Scriptures, which
are able to make the man of God wise to salvation. Let all make it their
chiefest work, even their chiefest work, to search the Scriptures, as
opportunity is, that they may well understand this Treatise; and they will be
counted noble in so doing, Acts 17.11. and in so doing, you may be able to
mind those that are Ministers of their failings, when they fail, and also to
caution them. Col. 4.17. And say to Archippus, Take heed to the ministry which
thou have received, in the Lord, that thou fulfill it. So that you may see, men
are to be minded what their duties are, especially those that are chosen and
called to the Ministry, such are men of failings, as well as others, to be
minded lest they should dishonor God in leading them a wrong way: and this may
be laid to the peoples charge, as well as to the Ministers. This will teach you
not to give to Ministers, except they preach the mind of God in the Word of
Truth. Jam. 5.17. Be not discouraged, when you see failings in those that are
Ministers. Those that are true Ministers of Jesus Christ, will take it kindly
to be showed their failings. A servant cannot do his work without wherewithal
to strengthen him: how can others? The People coming short of their duty,
discourage the Ministers in the performing of theirs.

Wherefore does the Lord entrust a people with the talents of good things, but
to be bountiful? And if not improved, God is so just, that he takes away that
he has given, and gives to them that will improve it, in his strength, to his
glory.

Other duties are included, and not plainly expressed. As shepherds are to feed
the flock, and to watch over it; then the flocks are to be at Assemblies
appointed, to be fed there, and watched over; and not to be sheep going, or
rather gone astray. And this is not so considered, as it ought to be. Consider
that Acts 2.41, 42. Heb. 10.25. In these things, let all, both Elders and
People, look up to the Lord, to be blessed, that they may so answer the righteous
will of their God, that he may take pleasure to dwell with them. That it may be
so, shall be the earnest request of

Your brother in Christ, N. C.

FINIS.

