THE CASE OF Colonel Adam Murray, Humbly Represented to the COMMONS, in
Parliament Assembled.
HE was among the first who declared, and took up Arms for Their Majesty's,
King William and Queen Mary, and the Protestant Religion.

When the Earl of Antrim's Popish Regiment was sent to Garrison, the Town of
Derry, he was one of those who rose in the Country, forced them away, and
thereby encouraged the People of the Town to shut their Gates against them, and
consequently to hold out, as they afterward did against the Irish Army.

Presently after he raised a Troop, with which he gave all the opposition he
could to the Irish Forces at Claudyford.

After the Protestants retreated from thence, 400 Horse stuck by him, with
which he continued nigh the Irish Army some days after the Protestants fled
into Derry.

After this when the Irish Army surrounded all that part of Derry, which lay
open from the Sea, the Protestants within the Town, sent a Letter to him, to
come speedily in, otherwise that the Town would be lost; for that Colonel Lundy
was treating with Hamilton, the Irish General about a Surrender.

Upon this Message he forced his way through the Enemies Dragoons, and got into
the Town, but not without the loss of several of his Men.

When he came into the Town, he immediately went to Colonel Lundy, chief
Commander, with a strong body of Men: Lundy told him they had signed to
Surrender upon Honorable terms, and showed him the Instrument they had signed,
upon which he protested against any Treaty with the Irish Army; which hindered
the delivering up the Town at that time.

Afterward he marched to the Main-Guard, and secured the Keys of all the Gates
and Stores, which he kept for two Days, till it was agreed that Colonel Baker,
a very ingenious Man and good Soldier, should be Governor of the City, Mr.
Walker should manage the Stores, and Colonel Murry should Command the Horse.

It Is well known what Service those Horse did, 'till, in extreme necessity,
they were by Order of Council, forced to Eat them.

He was afterward in all the frequent Sallies that were made, and was always
successful, till about Eight days before the Irish Army fled from before Derry,
he was Shot through the Body, as they pursued the Enemy to their Trenches.

After he recovered of his Wounds, and the Irish Army were forced to quit the
Siege, he continued a Reformed Officer, according to the King's Letter to D.
Schomberg, that the Derry Officers should be continued in full Pay, till
provided for in equal or better Posts.

In 1691, General Ginkel sent him from the Camp to the Lords Justices in
Dubl^n, where he was entrusted with a very ample Commission, to Command all the
Militia of the Province of Vlster. This Commission he can show, together with
Letters of Thanks, from General Ginkel, for the Service he did with the
Militia; and particularly those who were sent to James Town and Sligo.

He was three Years and some Months Lieutenant Colonel to the Lord Charlemont,
till that Regiment was broke: The Pay then received, with a small Sum, called
Bounty-Money, and 20 l. from my Lord Conningsby, is all the Reward he has had
for his Sufferings and Services; in mentioning which he thinks it not very
decent, or modest to be too particular he refers to common Fame, and in one
particular, to what the Irish Army generally said, that he killed the French
General Mammoo.

It Is very well known, what great Proposals King James made him, first by the
Earl of Abercorn, afterward by his own Father (sent unto him by the King) if
he would come over to him.

He having no Estate has contracted considerable Debts, and his Family must be
reduced to extreme Misery and Ruin, unless relieved by the Justice and Mercy
of this Honorable House.

Colonel Murray's CASE.


