True and Remarkable PASSAGES From the last of October to this present day.

From these several places following; namely, From New Castle. Durham. Rippon.
The County of Lincoln. Redding. Shrewsbury. Bristoll. Cornwall. Excester.


Wherein are set down the daily Machinations, and perverse practices of the
Malignant Party against the Honorable the High Court of Parliament, with their
ill success in diverse of their attempts and purposes. November. 9th

By W.D.

LONDON, Printed for Fr. Wright.

Remarkable Passages from the last of October, to this pesent day.
Newcastle.
IT is rertainly peported here, and we see it manifested before our eyes, that
my Lord of Newcastle our Governor does all he can possible, to advance the
Cause of the malignants against the peace of the Kingdom and Parliament,
borrowing here, by a certain compulsive way, that they must lend spite of
their teeths, what monyes he can possibly get, using, indeed, more rigorous
exactions here then the Scots did during their abode with us: the said Earl
does what he can possible to incense the number of his forces, taking, as the
Proverb is here, Tag-rag and bob-taile, men of all sorts and conditions,
especially Papists, of which he had a considerable number among his regiment,
being rumored in the Bishopric of Durham and this County, to be eight
thousand strong, when indeed, they cannot be four thousand, with the black
Coats and all: the Clergy especially in the Bishopric, like their leading
Deane, Doctor Cosens, being most pertinacious malignants; he has endevour'd to
seduce all the Sailers that man the Coal-ships, to his part, proffering them
double pay, but those honest men are not to be won to employ their hands to so
bad a purpose, resolving rather to follow their lawful vocations, then to be
traitors to their Country; we wish him. (so does all the poor and honest
people hereabouts), at the devil, they make all things so dear with their
rapine and devouring, that we fear a scarcity, if not a dearth in these
plenteous parts.

Durham.
In this City drums are beating for Volunteers for the Earl of Newcastle, but
he can get but a few, though the preachers exhort them to it in their pulpits.
So odious is the cause, and the very name of Cavalier in these parts, to all
but some few malignants.

Rippon.
HEre we are in great dread of my Lord of Cumberland and his Cavaliers, who
ride up and down, and plunder where soever they come, sparing neither man in
their rage, nor woman in their lust: some half a score of those rutters, or
rather roisters coming two days since to an honest gentleman's house, a
Kinsman of my Lord Farefaxes: demanded of the gentlemen who unfortunately was
at home, whether, he would adhere to the King or Parliament the gentleman made
answer, he would with all his heart serve them both, but not the King against
the parliament For the Parliament, he was certain it would do nothing against
the King. With which honest answer not nothing unsatisfied, but enraged, one of
them calling him Traitor, discharged his petronell quite through his body, so
that the good gentleman fell down dead, they immediately forcing in to his
house, the defencelesse gentlewoman aghast at her husbands death, they took,
and heating a pair of tongs, put them burning to her threat, to make her
confess where the Plate and Money was, which amounting to at least the value
of two hundred pound, they took away: in most vilde manner using the
sorrowful gentlewoman they before her face, forced her two daughters to
satisfy their libidinous appetites. And one of them proffering the like
villainy to the dairy maid, a handsome lusty wench, was by her stabbed to the
heart. A fit reward for such a monster. After their firing the house they
departed. Their General, though complaint was made by the poor gentlewoman
against them, doing her no Justice, Alleging he could not find certainly
who they were. God diliver us from the hands of such blood thirsty Cannobals.

Lincoln.
IN these parts about Bourne and Stamford, as in other places of this County,
there is much sorrow and heaviness for the death of my Lord of Lindsey, slain
in the late battle near Keinton: the malignants, such as Master Harringtou,
Sir William Th^orold, and the like, striving what they can to seduce the people
from their good affections to the Parliament, about Boston they rejoice as
fast, the said Lord having been a great and continual enemy to that good
town, that wishes the like end to all that disturb and oppose the tranquillity
of this Kingdom,

Redding.
HEre we have been in great fear this two or three days of Prince Robert and
his Cavaliers, who like torings Lions go about seeking whom they can devour,
plundering and pilaging the Countries round about us: No man's estate being his
own, or secure from the fingers of those Harpies: as yet he has not
approached us. We could wish we were of ability our selves, to secure our
town against his invasion, we would give him as good a welcome hither, as his
ascociat my Lord of Darby had at Manchester, but we are not so well provided,
and could wish a good able garrison of the Parliaments Forces, to secure our
lives and liberties, which else we are fearful will run into much danger, by
those malignants cruelties.

Shrewsbury.
THe garrison of welsh and malignants in this town do great and daily
mischiefs, taking away both money and victuals and all other commodities from
those that frequent this town with merchandice, so that the Country is afcaid
to trade or traffic to this town at all, whereby it is very likely to fall
in so great distress and want of provision. They forage on every side into
the Countries, so that all people here about, are in great and pitiful
distresses, hunger we hear at last will drive these devilish miscrevants out
of these quarters. Marquis Herford, it is here reported is gone into
South Wales again, where he does all he can possible to seduce those poor
ignorant Mountayners, who with a willing heart, or at least by constraint, come
to wait upon their Prince, whose governor the Marquess is, Sir William
Plimhimmon a Knight of North Wales, being a constant stickler in his affairs,
he living near Llannidlos in North Wales and having a large extent of ground
there, the whole mountains there abouts being the said Sir Williams
Inheritance. God bless us from the said Marquis and his crew of malignants,
for then our miseries will be increase'd upon us.

Bristoll.
IN this rich and populous City, we are here in no danger nor fear of any,
Keeping loyal hearts and valiant hands for the service of the King and
Parliament: our own Forces in this City being sufficient to defend our selves
against any enemy whatsoever. We having fortified our town with out-workes,
as hornworks and a sconce to Sommersetshire ward, whence if we have any we
expect our enemies the malignants, we are in this town eight thousand of
sufficient able armed men, whom we every day practice in the rudiments of war;
good store of excellent Ordnance, brass most of them, at least thirty pieces
of demi Canon, Culvering and half Culvering, mounted upon our works, powder,
shot and match, with other Ammunition, sufficient victuals, we need not fear
the want of having the sea and seavern to friend to bring us in victuals. There
was a ship brought in hither the other day laden with Ammunition and some
spare Ordnance, they reported they were bound from Nants in Britain, for the
low countries. But certain they either were intended for the assistance of the
Rebels in Ireland, or for Milford Haven in Wales to the Marquis Hartford there
being letters found about one of the Mariners, were directed from one Master
Walter Monto to the Lord Marquis howsoever we made of the ship and Ammunition,
and have it in safe custody, Till the. Parliament please to give order for its
disposal.

Cornwall.
Sir.
Ralph Hopton with the friends and Forces of this town of Okchampton my Lord
Mohunes are very ripe hereabouts, riding through this Duchy of Cornwall with
great clamor and outrage some honest gentlemen, men interrested very
sufficiently in the Flameries in this Country, and very well affected to the
Parliaments pleasure, and the peace of the Kingdom, being much disturbed by
those malignants excursions and incurssions, Sir Ralph Hopton and my Lord
Mohuns Forces, being not so formidable here as they are supposed to be. Being
not above fifteen hundred hotse, and two thousand foot: poor Cornish men most
of them that are duced into the quarrel against the Parliament, and easily
vanquished if we had here any succor from the Parliament to join with our
own Country forces, we would live and dye in the cause.

Excester.
ALl the discourse here, is of the Kings and Prince Roberts dissertion of your
parts, and their speedy march with their Cavaliers down into our quarters,
where the enjoining their Forces, with those of Sir Ralph Hopton, and my Lord
Mohun is expected and certainly talked of. For our parts we know we can no
ways have a possibility of serving his Majesty better than in serving his high
Court of Parliament, so that our Mayor and Aldermen with the entire body of the
town, are resolved to stand for the Commonwealth. we already have made good
the decayed walls, and fortified our town with good and hansome outworkes, have
Ordnance planted, and indifferent store of Ammunition, and some quantity of
resolved Soldiers to stand for the King and Parliament. We have, thanks be
to God but few malignants in our City. And if the King come hither, we are
resolved to give his Majesty entertainment as befits loyal Subjects, but
without admitting his Army of Cavaliers, the disturbers of the public peace
and safety.

FINIS.

