A CASE FOR The City-Spectacles.

When we were well at ease and could not see it,
But sought I know not what, I think it is meet
Our Noses should be Spectacled to make's see better,
And read our troubles in a larger Letter:
Now Gentlemen take it not in disgrace,
If I do put your Spectacles in a Case;
For if they fall, you will break them ten to one,
And then you must buy new of Turlington:
As for the horns they will serve for nothing after,
But to show Fentons fortune and more laughter.
Both well preserved help our dim purblind eyes
To see afresh our printed miseries.
Printed in the Year 1648.

A CASE FOR The City-Spectacles.
THe City Spectacle-maker no doubt is an honest man, and a good workman, and
has a special insight in his Trade; yet some flawes I find in the
horne-worke, and a crack or two in the sight, which I needs must have mended
before I put them up into my Case.

He begins well, and fronts his Treatise with a pious Prologue, as the zealous
nose upon which he intends to hang the substance of his ensuing Discourse. And
first he describes the present face of things by way of Comparison, stc parvis
componere magnasolebam: In an Arithmeticall way he deciphers out unto us the
Sects and Heresies of these times in a conjuncture, and the total sum I find
is in all but ten, leaving out the principal Mountebanks, verbi gratia,
Seekers, Shakers, Excize-men, and the damnable Sect of Committee Men, who hold
the taking away of men's lives, and Lands, and Goods by an Apocryphal
Ordinance; a Tenent which neither St. Augustine, Jerome, Chrysostom, nor the
Counsel of Nice ever heard of, besides those Shakers that are troubled with
Enthusiastic divine Agues, and speak idly in their hot fits. Then he reckons
up in a Catalogue the design of Nigh, Goodwin, Symson, and the rest of those
State-Scrupins, with the blessed Generation of pimping Pamphleters, all casting
their heads together (like so many Jewels) to make a Molten Calse of Cromwell,
and set him up up for the sole bringer out of Egypt; when as in truth he has
many victories fathered upon him which good man, he was never guilty of. His
Copper nose began to sound a Retreat at Maston-Moor, but Craford took him by
the care and wrung him a peg higher, and set him to the tune of Loath to depart.

He tells us, Adjutant General Gray was turned out of all only for looking on
the City Remonstrance, that is a base lie; for besides that, he was acquainted
with Major-Generall Skippon, and was a Scot and an honest man, and once was
accused of being drunk, which when they could not prove, by a Metaphor, they
attested that they saw him reeling to the Presbyterian party, and so unfit for
the company of sober Independents.

Next he brings in the new elect Members of the Army, and begins to scandalize
those Gentlemen with a matter of truth: He would not so despise Colonel Baxter
for his rings, thimbles, and bodkins, if he knew the worth of them as well as
Mr. Peter's does, who handsomely persuaded the zealous sisters of the Associate
Counties out of their Thumb-rings, Thimbles and Bodkins in the beginning of
these troubles. As for Watson the Scout-Master Dormant in a Field Argent, I
must needs confess he is a worchy Bull-Finch, that has constantly whistled
these three years to the tune of seven pound per diem: would I had but half
the proportion for making Spectacle Cases. and although Colonel Hewson was a
shooemaker in times past, what then? now he is set up in the instep, and all
his conditions new vampt, and walks uprightly according to the new
translation. Indeed I cannot but say the Specctacle-maker has given a true
copy of Colonel Harrison the Quondam Clerk, the world is well amended with
him, since his Bonds are turned into Commissions, his Pen into a Pistol, and
his Inkhorne into a Mortar Piece: but how he comes to deserve all this, nos
quidem ignoramus, that he got into the saddle and advanced himself by a
fore-game, called Preoccupation, Noverint Vniversi: But how and what he gets by
an after-game called, Corpus cum Cauda, no man can know but by a Scire facias,
alias Fiery facies.

Next to him our Operator brings in Pride (the Emblem of the Army) upon his
Dray, this was he that swelled like puffepast in his March through the City,
and fomed at the Bounghole, as who should say, Here comes strong beer, the
Citizens to quell,
A Dray-man boiled up to a Colonel:
But yet for all his Military Art,
At Nazeby fight he let a Brewers Fart,
Which did promote the working of the Barme,
And made him run out of the reach of harm;
Some say, toward the Windmill, where he found
Many great Officers buried above ground:
By which he escaped a furious assault,
And parl'd with the Miller 'bout the price of Malt.
O what a litter of Trojan Puppies were got into the belly of that wooden
Beast! Had Don Quixot found out that nest of young Giants, it would have
eternally confirmed his wild opinion, and Sancho himself would have been
convinced, and swore it a Shee-Gyant big with Puppy. I cannot blame Hammond for
going thither to comb out his Perriwig, and powder it with flower; Gunpowder
would have spoiled it: and the rest (no doubt) they had tolerable excuses. Some
impute the instability of those giddie brains to this one hansell: I am not of
that opinion, for my Lord Wharton went the clean contrary way, and yet is
troubled with the same disease.

As for Col. Okey the Taylour, I took him to be well descended, and to derive
his Pedigree from John a Leyden, and is a man of fashion, and gets more by
Lists in one day, then in a year heretofore.

In the next place the Spectacles tell us of the design of the reformed
Jesuits, Dell, Peter's, Erbury, etc. to poison the whole Kingdom with errors.
Here the Spectacles show us no more then we saw before, just like those that M.
John Turlington sold to M. Lambert, without Glasses. Who would not at the first
sight (without a Comment) take Peter's for a Buffoone, a Squib, a Hocus Pocus, a
Thimble Catcher, a Pulpit Baboone, an ignit fatuus? He is a mere dunce in
Physiognomy, that cannot spell Jesuit out of Dells aspect; and he that ever
saw Saltmarsh, and could not guess him to be Cromwells Trumpeter, surely he
never saw the picture of the four Winds. Erbury the Seeker looks down on the
ground like a Mole-catcher, and strikes people blind with errors, and has six
pence a piece (for every one that he catches) of the Treasurer. I will assure
you, a very subtle trade.

To proceed; our Informer here tells us of nine ways how the City was betrayed,
and here the Glass multiplies; for I can tell you in two words how it came
about, the Army was wise, and the City was otherwise; a tame thing, a house
Sparrow, a tame Squirrell with a gold chain: what violence could ever have
ravished her, had she kept her self close together, and (according to the
custom) cried out to the neigbouring Counties? I say, these men-Fornicators
that have violated all her younger sisters, with all the Country Milkmaids and
Dary Wenches in the Kingdom, yet they never have entered here: But now she has
lost her veil, and what is become of her credit? it is pawned in the Tower. Now
to the purpose.

In the residue of his Discourse he juggles, and describes the shuffling of the
Cards; Munsterians shuffled in, honest men shuffled out: The man means well,
and speaks truth in the general, but warpes in some particulars. Tichburne
indeed does look like an Ale-bury or a Lemmon posset, but may not his Yard by
a Trope spiritual be turned into a Truncheon? and may not his Counters in time
grow up to Breast-works and Fortifications, and all his coarse linen be made
into tents? I cannot condemn the Parliament or Army for sending our Lord Mayor,
Bunce, Langham, and the rest into the Tower; who bid them be rich? Were they as
poor as I am, their carcasses would never have paid the Tower Fees. But they
have served the Parliaments turn; and Turkish Justice being now most in
fashion, the best reward they can expect from Duke D'Aloa, Don Say and Seal,
must be a bowstring or a mallet: Perhaps their stars may help them to the
favor to be let out at the back-doore in their shirts.

Now here he begins to ring the changes, and in the first place he omits the
great Bell, had we not a Lord Mayor changed? A good sound Bow Bell for a brass
Candlestick, a grave sage Citizen for a wooden Tobacco-stopper with a face
upon it, one whose estate goes upon Crutches, else why should he within this
month take up 1000. l. at 7. l. per cent. to eek out out his Mayoralty,
besides the Christmas frugality into the bargain? But I cannot but say he is a
valiant Commander, and did the other day behave himself courageously against
the Rosemary Idol in Cornhill: but his horse taking Rosemarie and Bays in the
whipping sense, was transported with passion, and ran with his Worship into
Birchen Lane, and like a horse (as he was) as void of understanding as his
Master, would not be persuaded by his Ministers the Sergeans to come back from
his resty opinion, so that Mr. Mayor was forced to march on foot to the
battle, where he routed the enemy, to the great applause of all the
Apprentices.

And so he got himself eternal praise,
With Ivy, Holly, Rosemary and Baies:
Then marched he home with his renowned force,
Which shall yet flourish like a green Bay-horse.
So I took my leave of his Worship, and from the hemne of his Gown I descend
to the skirts of the Buffe Jacket, where I must sit a while and enquire,
whether my Spectacles see equally on both sides.

Wilson and Camfield are gallant men, and know what belongs to beef and cabbade
as well as any of the old Militia; and for Captain Petitoes, you can expect no
great valor of him, since he is all feet, and has a natural inclination to
run: What though Colonel Roe kept a Bull Ordinary, and made his Regiment pay
well for the same, cannot you be content to fare well for your money, but must
cry Roastmeat?

In that which thou call Juxon swearing fantastic fool, I shall desire
thee to turn swearing into squeaking; for those that have both their ears to
hear him, say he speaks like the hinges of a starved buttery door that whines
for grease. All his Oaths before they can be uttered, dwindle into lies.

Lievtenant-Colonell Hewson was unworthily put out, and there indeed they put
by a Man to put in a Manby, of whom, because he is a Scrivener, I will say
nothing, least being somewhat skilled in the Law, he may bring an action of the
Case against me, and to escape a scourging, I will wash my hands of Hayes: yet
I am resolved to have a fling at Cushen, that Merchant Tailor Cushen, that
Floxi, nausi, nihili, pili, and so let him go to the Army where he is much in
use, spurn Cushen being the only recreation after dinner and supper with the
Grandees, instead of throwing of Dice.

In the blew Regiment he brings in Underwood the Tobacco-seller, who looks as
if he fed on nothing but Mundungo, and the stalks grew out at his chin, take
away Under and there remains Wood, add Cock, and that will spell his
behavior at Abbington; for there like a bird of valor he did most
courageously hide his Cockscombe.

All that you can allege against Colonel Harrison, is that he loves Pie and
Custard, I say it is Pap and Custard, and good reason too, for he can eat no
other meat, since his teeth were beat out in a Banquet Battle with sugar
plums. Sir, you are much over-seen in meddling with Estwicke, for since he has
commenced Lord, he looks like the Devil over Lincoln, and walks four stories
high, and makes nothing to take the wall of Sir John Oldcastle.

I wonder you dare be so hardy as to meddle with Fenton the Button-maker, cornu
ferit ille, caveto: you do not tell the story of him right, for he first hid
himself in the Barn, where his arse made buttons, while his wife made loops
at home, and upon his retreat a Cavalier (to set him up in his trade with
credit) bestowed on his Worships tail a button of lead.

And to augment the fest'ring of the sore,
Whilst he was shot behind, his wife was shot before.
But like a careful Husband full of pity,
He Would have her wound searched by a Committee;
Who did at last conclude her credit mortal,
Because the Shot had pierced the Vena Portall:
And so his Vessel proved to be a Nullidge,
Being unfortunately split at Dullidge.
Next Blackwell is excepted against: He looks in hi^ Scarlet Coat like a jack a
Le^ new trimmed.
I am not well acquainted with the man; but if I knew him as well as his
Namesake, the Maiden Champion, I would say he were a Coward. I have heard say
when he was in Cornwell, the Cavaliers threatened if they caught him they would
geld him: after which (to save those small evidences of his Manhood) he could
never be got out upon what Service soever.

It seems you stumble at Stone; yet you cannot but say he is an honest man:
All that you can object against him, is, that he is as unfit to be a Commander
as to build Paul's; and in my mind that Comparison makes for him, for how can
it be built without it? But Doctor Burgess, that ninth Pin of Presbytery, is
much of that opinion; and therefore has converted those profane Quarries to
pave his Kitchen, and sold the rest to buy Printed Sermons to build up the
Spiritual Temple with his long-winded Ciceronian Tone. Oh this 400 l. per
annum is better then green Ginger and Anniseeds to strengthen the Lungs.

The next man that is accused for insufficiency, is one White, in exchange of
one Potter. This Potter is accused for making the Spectacles, because it seems
his valor at Cheriton Down is mentioned but modestly. I do not think he was
the man, though his eyes are so little when he laughes that one would think he
might well need Spectacles. Others say, Captain Haynes the Scrivener made
them, and swears by these Presents be it known: Others Burrowes the
Stationer; and say he found Pen, Ink, and Paper, Haines coppied it out, and
one Lamb (that stole a twelve-moneths wit at Cambridge) made it. But I know
what I know, and I know Master John Turlington too, that stout honest Blade,
and yet it was not he neither, who e're it was: I say as I said before, he was
a good Workman, and they fit the Nose of the Militia very well, and show them
in a full Character the errors of their last Edition.

O yes, if there be any one, Town or Country, Independent, Presbyteriall,
Malignant, or Neuter, that can tell tidings of that notable knave that made the
City Spectacles, let them or any of them bring him (if they can) to Signior
povero Parlator at the Sign of, This House is to be let in Tower-street, or at
the Horns point blanke against the North door of Paul's, and he shall be
well paid for his pains.

I should end here, but I must cover my case with two or three Stories.

And first I will begin with that Arch-Presbyteriall Knight, Sir Peter
Wentworth, a great, enemy to Independency. This Sir Peter de Buckingham-shire
being very vigilant against the Incursions of the Enemy there, exhorted his
Neighbors and Contrymen to raise six hundred Horse and Dragoones, and send
them to him with forty shillings a man in their Furse, and he would secure the
Country. When they were come, he made an Oration to them of the danger of the
Service for such young fresh water Soldiers to undertake; besides the
necessity of their occasions which called them home, being Harvest time, and
the care that he should have to provide sufficient Riders for them, so that
they would contribute every man his forty shillings and. Arms: His gaping
Auditors were scone exhorted to retreat, and he most manfully led his Cavalrie
to Smithfield, where his Worship designed to make Horses cheap by glutting the
Market. I will assure you a brave piece of State Policy as ever I heard of.

Secondly, to divide my Text, I will add one of the contrary Faction, the
Knight of the burning Pestle, Sir Henry Martin, that Cony-catching Senator,
that in a Dearth of flesh ravished the Nossell of a Candlestick, and spoiled the
squinting Maidenhead of a Candles end, which has so enflamed his Cap of
Maintenance, as ever since he seeks to quench it in every Puddle. One of which
the other day he had got not far from the Exchange; and scarce had he tuned
his Instrument, but in comes the pretended Husband, and slackens his
resolutions with two or three handsome Oaths: What offer to abuse my wife?
etc. To be short, our Anarchicall Reformer choaks the flame of his Passion
with ten Pieces in hand, and a Bond for twenty or thirty more. So he marched
away with Bullet in the mouth, Match cockt, Colors flying, with as honorable
composition as Not. Fines did out of Bristoll.

In the next place I must needs unkennell a nest of Independent Cowards and
Vermin. Sanders.
And first I pluck out by the ears Sanders (that Diminiture of Alexander)
Captain under Sir John Gell: The greatest act of Valor that he ever did, was
to shoot a Gentleman through the Arm, and cut him after he was taken Prisoner
and disarmed; when he was to go upon any Service, he had a trick to make his
Soldiers Mutiny; which he did notoriously, when he should have gone with
Colonel Gell to Naisby fight. His Officers are like him: One Hope who has
forfeited his name by his ill behavior. This fellow plundered most
sacrilegiously a Communion Cup (as I hear) and was taken in the act, and
pulled out of his Breeches,

Barton.
Another who is now Major Barton, a Quandam Minister, who seeing a great Party
of the enemies lay down their Arms, yet dare not approach till he gave them
so much time as to recover their Courage and their Arms together.

Sir William Breerton that Tooth-Muster-monster (the greatest Cowards have
longest Teeth, as cursed Cowes have short horns) I say Major General Tooth
being once in fight, together with Sir John Gell on Hopton Heath, wheeled about
and left Sir John to hot service, which he performed with such valor as
gained the day, (no thank to Sir William) there was slain the Earl of
Northampton, and four or five hundred more: after which Sir William appears
again, and makes a fresh onset upon the dead bodies, and plunders them of
their Clothes, and Sir John of his honor; for the credit of the whole
business was laid upon Sir William.

I cannot omit a memorable passage about Cromwell, the Devils Gro^me, that
turns Churches into Stables; the first Church he so converted, in the entrance
his horse rose with him, and ^ckt his profane skull against the top of the
door, that he fell down dead for the time, which was all the hurt he ever
caught since these Wars, except a W^d which a Soldier of his gave him as he
was running away at the Battle of York. Cousin Oliver, the next time thou
waterest thy Horse at the Font, I pray let him be Christened Bucephalus, in
relation to Alexander his Master, and invite Martin and Allen to be
Godfathers, and my Lady Say and Mistress Harrison to be Godmothers, that thy
Palfrey, as well as thy self, may be in a capacity to be Sainted.

I had almost forgot the Independent design, to split Essex in pieces in the
Cornish business. First they endeavored to set him and Sir William Waller at
difference at Islip. Then upon the Generals march up higher after the taking
of Taunton, Weymouth, and the relief of Barnstable, it was voted at a Council
of War not to relieve Plymouth, but to prevent the conjunction of the Kings
Forces with Prince Maurices: upon which the Faction writ Letters to their
friends at London, and possess them that the old Soldiers had a mind to
lengthen out the War, and to return without the relief of Plymouth, or
reducing the Cornish: upon which they made use of my Lord Roberts, (a man that
will go on pilgrimage to the devil for money, for it comes by kind) I say,
they urged him with their desires f^r Plymouth, and Cornwell, which he was
easily persuaded to; and so another Council of War being called, it was
carried by one vote to march that way, and so they were caught in a Purse net,
and neither Manchester, who who was commanded, nor Major Krane suffered to come
with any relief; so they were forced either to hazard all by an unequal
match, or make such Composition as was much disadvantagious. The mean time the
Cony-Catchers had put a selfe-denying Ordinance in pickle, with such pretty
evasions as might let out such as they intended to use, being their own
Creatures, and Coope up the contrary Faction; Just such another thing have they
made of the Covenant; Their own vermin can creep in and out of it like a
Louse through an oylet-hole: but such poor Royalists as have either money or
credit to loose, must either wiredraw their consciences through it, or be
crush't to pieces by it. A very Mouse-trap, a pitfall to catch whom they please
in; Or else why must that Reverend Father, the Bishop of Armagh be fifted with
it, and winnowed out of his place at Lineolnes-Inne? What Faction it was that
moved it first I cannot tell certainly, but I hear that Haslerig first opened
his mouth and spoke: That Parliament Tinder box, that spits nothing but fire
and brimstone against every one that has more wit or honesty then himself;
And eminent Fuller is in the same condition of suspension, either swallow the
tosted Cheese, or not Preach. I will assure you the Parliament is a good
Logitian to make such a dilemma as none can read whom they please to press it
upon. In the mean time they can connive, nay, countenance any man that can
devise any new thing to puzzle the peoples heads, just like the design of the
holy War by which the Pope got so much ground of his neighbors, and all out of
a pretense of the Cause of Religion. Divide and impera: for if the people had
been of one mind, they would never have suffered themselves to be hackneyed
from one stage to another; First they fight only for Religion, then they must
change saddles, and then it is for our Liberties, then they must stand to the
National Covenant, another time they must uphold the Army, the Parliaments
Choppines: For now she goes just like a Venetian Curtizan, dressed with all the
Artifice that policy can devise, and supported by a Musket on the one side, and
a Pike on the other; like juglers, they have fisgigges to amaze and dazzle the
people with strange new lights; some of which are their Emissaries, Dell,
Cates, Nigh, Randall, Erbury, Sympson, Best, that boastly Blasphemy, with such
like Catamountaines that go Catterwaling up and down the Kingdom, to teach
people to scratch out one another eyes. 'Twas a worthy act of Mr Mayor this
Christmas to restrain honest men from Preaching, under that notion only,
because Royallists: I do remember since it was an Independent principle, that
Liberty of Conscience extended as far as hell, did it not impeach the
public Peace of the Commonwealth? I would feign know what Breach of Peace it
could be to Preach an Orthodoxe Sermon on that day, although it only were to
divert the people from worse actions; For I observe every one shut his shop
doors, some out of fear, others out of respect. But to draw to an end, I
shall make but one or two observations more; And I first begin with the
business of Ireland, the delay of its relief is a great mystery, and no
honest man can understand it. The whole pretense of the Army not long since was
the relief of Ireland, and the taking away Taxes, and Excise, which gained
much upon the City and Country, but now I know not what design being brought
about, they do not only neglect, but obstruct both. Before they got the King
into their possession, they gave it out that he was a weak man and unfit to
rule, and their only aim was to take him away from the wicked, but now they
have him in their possession, they cry he is so subtle they cannot trust him,
and too wise to govern; so you may see, whether young or old, wise or simple,
they are resolved to have no such thing as a King, except they have one
revealed from above; Like the Dog in the manger, they will neither rule
themselves well, nor let no body else. But in the next place, I observe they
have made an Ordinance, to let us understand they do now give us free liberty
to build an Hospital general, for all the Beggars they have made, and truly
it was well thought upon in due season; But if a man would know of them how,
and where to get money to raise this Model of Charity; Like Diego, in the
play, they answer, en'e where you please: you are wise and understanding men;
The City is wife, thus say these Cormorants, know off the flesh and throw us
the bones to pick, much good may it do ye Gentlemen: For we are like to have
no better cheer,
Until there come a Parliament Leap-yeare.


I hear also that they have in the heat of their zeal concluded upon an
Ordinance to this effect: ORdered by the Lords and Commons Assembled in
Parliament, That no Person or Persons, shall at any time or times from the date
hereof, superstitiously observe the old Holidaies of Christmas, and Easter,
either by Sermons, Games, Idleness; shutting up of Shops, or the like; and on
the other side, That none shall presume to profane the monthly Fast by
working, riding abroad, hunting or hawking, or sitting in Committee. And it is
furth^r Ordered, that none profane the Sabbath by hunting of Tavernes, or
Alehouses, or at any time to drink to excess and misbehaviour, nor uncivillie
to keep company with such women as prostrate themselves for filthy Lucre; and
above all, the filthiness of the flesh to shun the sin of Sodomy. And
further, That none in Authority be bribed to injustice, but to do right equally
to poor and rich, and fatherless, and widows, that now detain any thing
from the true owner, nor raise himself by the ruin of others, or by
Sequestration, Plundrings, Taxes, Excise, Free Quarter, and the like; That
every man pay his debts, and do as he would be done to.

Provided always, that this Ordinance extend not to any Member of either
House, or their assistants.

Henry Blinkes Cler. Parl.



Now for a pair of silver hinges and a haspe for my Case, and so I will
conclude; I desire the Gentlemen of Goldsmiths Hall to bestow so much Silver
upon me as my Case wants, and their Petitioner shall ever pray that they may
restore to every man his own, or give a good account of their actions at
Tiburne, where I leave them.

Thus Gentlemen I pray in the next place,
Be pleased to consider well my Case;
It Is yours as well as mine, and if it been't
Full big enough, I Am sure it was so meant;
If it is too little, I Will order so the next,
What now I write in small, I Will write in Text.
Postscript.
IF any one desires to know who made this Case, let him enquire at his Lodging
in Toleration street, right over against the Dun Cow, where he may hear
further.

FINIS.

