News from Scotland: OR THE Result of the General Assembly OF THAT KINGDOM in
Order to ENGLANDS PEACE; But opposed by the Sub-Committee of that Kingdom,
called, A Committee for the prevention of Danger.

Together with a relation of Master Marshals Deportment, and the Reasons why he
is not (as yet) permitted to Preach; as also their high estimation of Mr Hearle
a Minister to the English Commissioners at Edinburgh.

Sent from a Gentleman of Quality Residing at Edinburgh to his friend in London.

London, Printed by J. M.

News from Scotland: OR THE Result of the General Assembly of that Kingdom.
Loving Friend,
I Cannot express my thankfulness to you for your kind respects, especially in
sending me these printed papers: As for news here, there is a great Meeting of
the three Estates who have sit these three weeks, began upon weighty and
serious affairs, and are not likely to conclude any thing til the Parliament
sit down, which begins the first day of March next. Our Commission of the
Church, together with most of the Ministry, have openly opposed the levying of
an Army* Notwit^standing there is ^ Sub-Commi^^ee of the Estates called a
Committee for dangers, appointed to prepare things in the most fair and
plausible way they can; but because the said Sub-Committee inclines to have an
Army, there is great opposition to them by the godly and honest party, who
profess they have no quarrel against the Kingdom of ENGLAND, and will labor to
interpose their Medium and best advice for removing of Jealousies, and keeping
of Union betwixt the Kingdoms* Although there be a spirit of strong Mal^^nancy
on the contrary, yet we are (...) God will preserve the Kingdoms from blood, and
in his own time find a way how these Jars shall be removed: The result whereof
will be seen in wisdom of this ensuing Parliament.

As for your Commissioners they are looked upon as very godly and faithful men,
especially by all those who walk by the rule and make conscience of their ways.
There were some of our best men, both of the Estate and the Church, who at
first meeting with Mr. Marshal did look upon him as a bad instrument in these
late distractions at London, but he as a wise and godly man does labor to
vindicate himself* from those aspersions, and we hope before he return shall be
as high in our thoughts as before; Only he has not as yet got the liberty of a
Pu^pit to cle^^ himself, which ere long, we are confident, shall be granted unto
him; The other Minister Mr Errel, Prolocutor of your Assembly, who is likewise
here, is looked upon as an Angel, and we hope will be very instrumental for
Union in spite of Malignancy. Your Commissioners are not all come, and
therefore have not as yet received public audience: The Earl of Stamford and
Mr Stapleton, being as yet in Barwick, are expected upon Saturday next: There
is much need of Prayer and Humiliation to prevent the Lords wrath, which is
gone out against both Kingdoms; We had a Fast upon Sunday last for that
purpose; and all godly men ought very much to be on their knees to confess
their own sins and the sins of the Land, that the Lord may avert his Judgments
from u^, which is the prayer of Yours

A. D.
Edinburgh, Feb. 23. 1648.
Sir,
Whatever the Englishmens apprehensions are of the Scotch Nation, I doubt not
of a fair correspondencie between the two Nations, though it is the hopes and
expectations of many, to see them jar and clash till they ruin each other:
Truly sir, let me tell you (though you and I be of different Nations, and
perhaps of different affections, in order to the end pursued on both sides) if
things be won up on either side so, as not to admit of a fair conclusion
without blows, we are in danger of Potent enemies in our own bowels, but God in
his mercy and goodness Reconcile both nations without blood. I know not what
absolutely to apprehend of our differences till I am acquainted with the Result
of our Parliamentary consultations* which I shall communicate to you by the next
Post, desiring the like from you. I remain

Your humble Servant, A. D.

FINIS.
Imprimatur,

Gilb. Mabbot*


