THE CASE OF Mainwaring, Hawes, Pain and others, Concerning a Depredation made
by the Spanish-West-Jndia Fleet, upon the Ship ELIZABETH.

Restitution sought in Spain, Justice denied, and thereupon, according to
Law, Justice Petitioned of the Honorable Houses of PARLIAMENT.

In which is prayed, That (out of 50000. l Deposited in the PARLIAMENTS hands,
in lieu of Plate and Merchandise by them formerly arrested) Satisfaction may
be made.

Printed Anno 1646.

To the Right Honorable the Lords and Commons assembled in PARLIAMENT.
The humble Petition of Randall Mainwaring, Nathaniell Hawes, George Pain, and
others.
SHOWS:
THat the Ship Elizabeth, her tackle, furniture, and lading, valued at 12000 l
belonging to Joseph Hawes Merchant, and Company: going on a trading voyage for
Virginia, was about 250. Leagues short thereof, surprised and taken by eleven
Sail of the Spanish West India Fleet, all under the command of one General,
in the year 1637. whereof 4. were Galeons of the Kings, the rest Merchants
ships, who shared the goods among them, barbarously abused the Mariners and
Passengers, and carried the said Ship into Spain, and there detain her unto
this day. That the said Hawes proved his loss in Spain, and in the Admiralty
of England, and had certificate thereof, to His Majesty, and the Lords of his
Privy Council; was favored with Letters to the Lord Aston, and afterward to
Sir Arthur Hopton, when they were respectively Ambassadors in Spain, who
endeavored his satisfaction with that State, but could procure no real
retribution, as by the Copies of the said Certificate and Letters, may more at
large appear. Since which time, Joseph Hawes (formerly of good estate) by the
said loss utterly undone, died in prison; and Randall Mainwaring, Nathaniel
Hawes, and George Pain, now Petitioners to your Honors (left engaged in
several great sums of money for him) as next of kindred, have taken out
Letters of Administration, and in December 1642. arested (by Warrant out of the
Admiralty) certain Plate, Moneys, and Merchandise, arriving at Southampton,
in the ship the St. Clare, which were laden into her out of the Spanish West
India Fleet; in which were diverse ships and men that were in the fleet that
robbed the Elizabeth, and made the aforesaid depredation, and both which fleets
were set out by the same authority, and for the same use and purpose. After
which arest made by your Petitioners and some others, (by the Order of the
Honorable House of Commons heereunto annexed) 50000 l was deposited in the
hands of the Parliament, in stead of Bail to answer those Actions, by the
claymers of the aforesaid goods, and the goods in their property were released.
And in pursuance of the said Arest your Petitioners have made so clear proof,
that not only the Judge of the Admiralty, but they who took the Defense of the
Suit upon them against your Petitioners, do acknowledge, That the taking of
the said ship Elizabeth, was a manifest and most shameful deprdation, and that
your Petitioners ought to have repair for the same, which the said Judge must
needs affirm, if he be thereunto required: Notwithstanding all which, the said
Judge (forasmuch as the moneys aforesaid remain deposited in the hands of the
Parliament, and for that the satisfaction of your Petitioners out of this money
is conceived to be matter of State) does defer to give Sentence, for that the
Supreme power has not hitherto declared, That the goods arested are in point
of State liable to make your Petitioners satisfaction.

In tender consideration of all which, Forasmuch as your Petitioners have used
in Spain all means requifite by Law, and possible against the persons of
those that made the depredation, and cannot obtain justice, and have no
possibility of being repaired, but by that supreme power to which they are
subject: And for as much as that power, not only by the Laws of this Realm,
but by the Law of Nations, may relieve oppressed subjects by Letters of
reprizall, being the only and usual remedy afforded in cases of this nature.

Your Petitioners most humbly pray, and beseech this honorable Assembly, to
take their case into your serious commiseration, and to grant Letters of
reprizall to your Petitioners to be repaired of their said losses and damages
out of the money deposited in the Parliament, that so your oppressed
Petitioners, who have been most unjustly spoiled by the Spanyard, and as
unjustly denied restitution; may by the justice of this honorable Assembly,
receive such recompense as the Law will give them, when the supreme power of
this kingdom shall have decreed the Letters of reprizall to your Petitioners.

And your Petitioners as in duty shall continue to pray for your Honors.

The Order of the house of COMMONS. Die Lunae 2. Januarii. 1642.
THe Merchants, Spaniards and owners of the Ship the Clare, having this day, in
obedience to an Order of this House of 29. December. last past, paid in the lumme
of 20000 l which with the 30000 l formerly delivered into the Tower, is to
stand liable instead of bail to all Suits, Arests and Claims according to Law,
as the goods should have been, if they had still continued in custody, made
either by the Spanish Ambassador, or any other whomsoever concerning the
premises; this House does therefore order, that all those persons Sir Jno
Nulls, or whomsoever else here, or at Southampton, in whose custody the
Cochinela, Ginger, Hides, and other goods brought in the Ship the Clare do
remain; do forthwith deliver up the said goods unto Ignatio Landahola, Diego
Descarey, Benedict Stafford, and John Mayo, for the use of themselves, and the
rest of the Merchants and owners, free from any present or future restraint or
trouble whatsoever, they paying freight, custom, and all other charges duly
disbursed by the said Masters and owners, any ways concerning the said goods;
And this House does further order, that the Judge of the Admiralty, and others
whom it may concern, take due notice of this Order, and do nothing in prejudice
of the real execution thereof.

Hen. Elsynge, Cler. Parl. Dom. Com.

Sir Henry Martin's Certificate to the Lords of his Majesty's most honorable
Privy Council.
Right Honorable,
ACcording to your Lordships Order signified under the Petition annexed, the
Petitioners have examined witnesses in the Admiralty-Court, to prove the points
deduced in the Petition, which I conceive to be these four. First, That eleven
sail of Spanish Ships, part of the Plate-fleete, surprised and took the ship
Elizabeth from the Petitioners in 1637. in her course upon a trading Voyage for
Virginia; about 250 leagues short of Virginia, and carried her and all that was
in her into Spain, and there deteineth her. Secondly, That the whole value
thereof with the damage, does amount to above 12000. l Thirdly, That the
Company in the Spanish-fleete, robbed and spoiled the company in the Elizabeth
of all they had, and imprisoned some of the Mariners in Spain. Fourthly, and
lastly, That the Petitioners used all good endeavors to recover their goods,
but all in vain. All which four points, I take to be sufficiently testified
with this, That the Lord Aston, then Lord Ambassador for his Majesty in Spain,
was then made privy to all the premises, and interposed his utmost endeavor
in the behalf of the Petitioners; whose Lordship is best able to inform our
Honors upon what grounds the Spanish fleet did surprise the Petitioners, and
the State there avow the proceeding and deny any restitution to the English.

March 15. 1638. H. Martin.

Their Lordships Letter into Spain.
AFter our very hearty Commendations to your Lordship, We send you enclosed a
Petition presented to this Board in the name of the Merchants and passengers of
the ship called the Elizabeth of London, together with two Certificates
concerning the same; The one from the Lord Aston his Majesty's late Ambassador
resident there; The other from Sir Henry Martin Knight, Judge of the Admiralty:
Whereby you will perceive with what violence and outrage the said ship the
Elizabeth, was heretofore taken from the Petitioners by eleven sail of the
Spanish Plate-fleete, and what proceedings have been since had for the recovery
of the same; Whereof We have taken consideration, and being desirous to protect
his Maies subjects from wrongs and injuries, have thought good thereby in
especial manner to recommend it to your Care to employ your best means and
endeavors on the Petitioners behalf, in representing the great damage and
loss which they have sustained thereby, and pressing the same with all such
Arguments and reasons, as you in your discretion shall think fit, according to
the nature of the Case; to the end a speedy and full restitution may be made
unto the Petitioners, and such satisfaction given them for the damage and
charge which they have hitherto sustained, as to Justice does apperteine, and
as may be expected toward his Majesty's, Subjects from his Friends and Allies.
Whereupon, in case such just restitution as aforesaid be either denied to the
Petitioners, or that such delays be used therein as may be construed and
deemed a denial, you are forthwith to represent the same to this Board in
express terms, that such further course may be taken for the Petitioners
reparation and relief, as to his Majesty and this Board shall be found just.
And so We bid your Lordship very heartily farewell.

From White Hall, the last day of April. 1639. Your loving Friends Signed by
the Lo. Arch. B. of Cant. Lo. Cottington. Lo. Keeper. Lo. Newburge. Lo.
Treasurer. Mr. Comptroller. Lo. Privy Seal. Mr. Sec. Windebank.


The English Ambassadors Answer out of Spain.
Right Honorable,
THE Bearer hereof Benjamin Woolnoe, was Master of the ship called the
Elizabeth; which in his voyage toward Virginia, was on the eleventh of October
1637, seized on by the Squadra of Nova Espania, and brought to Cades, with all
her lading and passengers. For restitution of which ship, and for satisfaction
for the losses and damages, it seeemes my Lord Aston, in the time of his
service in this Court, used all fit diligences, the effect whereof was, a
promise that the ship and goods deposited at Cadiz should be forthwith
restored. But in the execution thereof were interposed some delays, which
continued until the Master and his Company resolved on returning to their
Country; and so nothing was executed at that time, nor before my Lord Aston
returned for England.

Whereupon the Master and the parties interressed in the said ship and goods
petitioned his Matie. and the Board for some course to be taken for their
satisfaction, and accordingly the Lords having consulted with my Lord Aston and
with Sir Honry Martin Judge of the Admiralty, were pleased to direct unto me
their Lordships letter, bearing date the last day of April. 1639. which came to
my hands on the 10/20 of August of the same year; Commanding me to use all due
means for the obteining full and speedy satisfaction for the said loss: And
in case the same should be detained, or that such delays should be used
therein, as might be construed or deemed a denial, then to represent the same
in express terms to the Board.

In humble obedience to which Order, I have from the said 10/20 of August
spared no diligence to the effect above mentioned, having spoken to the King,
and delivered him a paper containing the whole matter, as well in manifestation
of the disorder, as in demand of due satisfaction according to reason and
justice. And I have several times spoken to, and solicited a Resolution
therein with the Conde Duque, as a Minister of general Care and Power; and
with the Conde de Castrillo President of the Council of the Judges, to whose
charge the dispatch of this business does particularly belong.

And although I have received many fair hopes and promises from all sides, and
from time to time; yet until the day of the date hereof, being the 20/30 of
May in the year 1640. I have been able to get no Resolution, nor are the
likely hoods thereof greater now then they were the first day. And the Bearer
hereof, Benjamin Woolnoe, being no longer able to suffer the charge of this
expensive place, has desired me to give my Certificate, according to the
present state of this business, which I have done as above said; leaving a
construction upon the delay and want of Answer hitherto, to your Honors and
their Lordships better judgments, to whom your Honors may please to give an
account hereof as you shall think fit, and I do humbly desire: Humbly
representing herewithall, that if any other business remitted to me by their
Lordships or your Honors, concerning his Majesty's Subjects, I have failed to
give either you or them the Answer that may be expected, It is because I can
get none; which is the ordinary course of this Court, where the doing Justice
is prejudicial to the Kings Revenues; though in other matters their dispatch
be not to be complained of.

I shall trouble your Honors no more, but humbly rest, Your Honors most humble
servant ARTH. HOPTON.
Madritt 2^/30
Articles of the Treaty 18 Aug. 1604.
I.
FIRST It is concluded, and accorded, that from this day forward, there shall
be a good, sincere, true, firm and perfect Amity, League and Peace to endure
for ever, and inviolably to be observed and kept, as well by Land as Sea, and
fresh Waters, betwixt the most renowned king of England, Scotland, France, and
Ireland, etc. And the most renowned king of Spain, etc. And the most renowned
Archdukes of Austrice, Dukes of Burgundy, etc. and their Heirs and Successors
whomsoever, their Kingdoms, Countries, Dominions, Lands, Peoples, Liegemen,
and Subjects now being, or which hereafter shall be, of whatsoever condition,
state, or degree they are or may be, so as the said Vassalls and Subjects from
henceforth are each of them to favor other and to use one another with all
kind and friendly offices.

II.
AND each party shall hereafter abstain from all depradations, offenses and
spoils, as well by Sea, as Land, and fresh waters, in whatsoever the
Kingdoms, Dominions, Places, or Governments of the other: neither shall the
aforesaid Princes consent, that any of the grievances before mentioned, be done
by any of their Vassals, Inhabitants. or Subjects: and they shall also cause
restitution to be made of all depradations and spoils which hereafter shall be
committed and of the damages growing by means thereof,

VI.
AND whosoever shall do any thing to the contrary, he shall be punished not
only criminally according to the merit of his offense, but shall also be
compelled to make restitution, and satisfaction for the losses to the parties
damnified, requiring the same.

Branches of Statutes.
An. XXVII. Ed. 3. c. 17.
ITEM That no Merchant Stranger be impeached for another Trespass, or
another Debt, whereof he is not Debtor, Pledge, nor Mainpernor. Provided
always, that if our liege people Merchants or other, be indamaged by any Lords
of strange Lands or their subjects, and the said Lords (duly required) fail
of right to our said subjects, we shall have the law of Merque, and of taking
them again, as has been used in time past, without fraud or male-engine.

An. II. Hen. 5. c. 7.
THE King willing as well in this case, as in other, to provide the imdempnity
of his liege and faithful subjects, has declared in this present Parliament,
that of all the attempts made by his enemies, upon any of his faithful liege
people, against the tenor of any truce taken before this time, wherein is no
express mention made, that all Marquis and Reprisals shall cease: the same our
Soueraign Lord the King will grant Marque to all them that feel themselves in
this case grieved in due form. And our said Sovereign Lord the King shall
make reparaile to all his liege people that feel them grieved against the
tenor of any truce, which betwixt him and any of his enemies shall be newly
taken hereafter. And to the greater comfort of his said faithful liege peopl,
to the intent that they may the more readily and without long delay have remade
in this case. the same our Sovereign Lord the King will, that if he or they
that feel them grieved against the tenor and form of such truce within the
realm of England, out of the said marches of Scotland, or upon the Sea, or in
the parts beyond the Sea, shall complain to the Keeper of the privy Seal,
which for the time shall be, who after such complaint heard and perceived,
thereof shall make the party complainant (if he the same require) Letters of
Request under the Privy Seal in a due form, and if after such Request made,
the party required do not make within a convenient time due restitution and
satisfaction to the party grieved, then the Chanceller of England for the time
being, shall do to be made to such party grieved (if he that demand) Letters
of Marque under the great Seal in a due form, etc.

Proclamation 1. Car. for encouragement of Trade to Virginia.
THAT the Territories of Virginia, New England, and the Summer-Islands, etc.
Are part of his Royal Empire, descended upon him and that he holds himself
bound, by his Regal Office, to Protect, Maintain, and support the same (and
so is resolved to do) as well as any other his Dominions, etc.

Presidents of foreign practice toward the English.
GIVE us leave therefore to mind your Honors of the practice of other
kingdoms and states in Amity with the Crown of England, who make it matter of
State to relieve their Subjects, pretending injuries done them by any of the
English out of any of their goods which come within their jurisdiction, as will
appear by these ensuing Presidents, of which we could have eited many more,
but that we fear to offend your Patience.

Captain Jones, Captain of one of the Parliaments ships, in the month of
April 1644. seized upon a French ship belonging to one Peter Le Duke of Saint
Mallows (called the Saint Julian) Peter Michelot Master, the ship was laden
with Corn, Gunpowder and other goods; Captain Jones takes out the Gunpowder
and some small trifles more, and sends up the ship and her lading to London as
a Prize, where within four month after she was freed in the Admiralty:
Immediately upon her first taking about, 21. Apr. 1644. Peter Le Duke obtained
a Decree from the Council of State to arrest the Goods or Ships of any of the
English Subjects in obedience to the Parliament, by virtue whereof he obtained
from the Judge of the Admiralty in Saint Mallows a Warrant to break open the
Counting House of Daniel Searles, Factor to English Merchants, and by Letters
and Books there found that in the Anne of London (of which Giles Symmes was
Master) there was goods to the value of 1100. l belonging to Master William
Barkley of London and Company Merchants; the said Officers unladed all her
goods, as well Master Barckleys as others, and kept them in their custody
until the ship was released here, and until full satisfaction was made to Le
Duke for the Gunpowder and other goods taken forth of the Saint Julian, and to
the Master for Saylors wages, freight of the Ship and other charges for the
time they were stayed, which cost Master Barckley and Company 350. l here, and
about 400. l in France, in suites of Law and other charges there. These goods
thus freed from Le Dukes Arrest, and reladen into another Ship for the
Merchants of London, had been again arrested upon a second pretense, by
another party, for damages pretended to be done him by the English, had not
the Master (in which they were re-laden) defended himself, and by force
carried them away: Whereupon the second pretenders met with another Bark in
which was 600. l worth of goods of the said Master Barckleys; arrested them by
a Warrant from the Judge, and the greatest part of them are there to this day,
and no satisfaction can be obtained.

There are diverse other presidents of seizures made both by Land and Sea
frequently by the French, of the goods of Englishmen; for injuries pretended to
be done to them, which is done by virtue of Warrants from the immediate Judges,
and not by Letters of Reprizall, for no other cause but upon a pretense that
some other Englishman had done them an injury as in the Case of Martin De
Lawney, which has been in agitation above twenty years, for Goods pretended
to be taken formerly by a Pirate. William Berkley.

The Treaty 1644. between the King of Denmark, and the Parliaments
Commissioners, was upon this Cause.
IN the beginning of August 1643. The Parliaments Ships took the Ship called
the Christian Arc, belonging to the King of Denmark, laden with Arms and
Ammunition, entering Tinmouth Bay, and bound for Newcastle; brought her up to
London, and by Order of the House of Commons disposed of the Arms and
Ammunition, returning only the Ship. Hereupon his Majesty of Denmark 23. of
the same Month, seized a Ship belonging to the Merchants Adventurers passing
Gluckstadt upon the River Elne, and bound for Hamburgh; as also four other
Ships belonging to the East-land Company passing the Sound, and confiscated
both Ship and goods, without any Process in his Admiraltie, but only by Act
under his own Hand and Seal. After three several Treaties his Majesty of
Denmark did at last agree in April. 1645. To restore so much on his part as
exceeded the value of his Arms here confiscated, which was also done by the
extraordinary way of Treaty, and not by any Process of Law.

THO. SKINNER. Societ. Advent. Secret.


Many Presidents might be alleged in this kind of the practice of the
Spaniards toward the English, who Seize and Condemn their goods in Port, or
otherwise on Shore, upon pretense of injuries done them, and that so
notoriously known that the Plaintiff need give no instances thereon. And
further the Judges in Spain, in the way of a Civil action, by Arrest Condemn
the Ships and Goods of such as are in Company, having no relation to the
persons, or Ships, whereof the persons are that did the pretended damage, as
will appear by the particular Presidents of Captain Davis and Tyddyman lately
acted in Spain, hereafter ensuing.

THESE are to certify unto all those whom these Presents may concern, that in
the year 1642, I Thomas Davis, Commander of the good ship called the
Golden-Fleece of London, being in the Bay of Cadiz, it happened that certain
Mariners belonging to the Port of Dover, took out of the said Bay a certain
Vessel belonging to the kingdom of Ireland, with the lading and Mariners
therein; for which said Act, apprehending and injury to themselves, as in
respect the said ship was taken being under their protection, seized upon me
the said Thomas Davis, committed me to prison, and have since condemned me and
my said Ship, in certain thousands of pounds for satisfaction for the said Ship
and Goods; although I, the said Thomas Davis, had never any Consortship or
interest with the said Dover Mariners, nor to this day know any of them, or
ought proved against me to that effect.

In Testimony whereof I have hereunto put my hand this present 11 of July 1646.
Thomas Davis.


These thing thus premised, your Honors may be pleased to observe that it is
evident,

First, That the King of Spain has Covenanted a Peace with the King of
England, in the behalf of himself and subjects, whereby it is agreed that
restitution shall be made of all spoils, with the damages as aforesaid.

Secondly, That there has been a shameful Depradation done upon the Ship
Elizabeth, belonging to Joseph Hawes and Company; and that they have sought
satisfaction in Spain, but without the desired effect; and the Offenders, in
stead of punishment, continued in their former Commands and Employments.

Thirdly, That Justice being denied by a Prince that has sworn a League, etc,
as aforesaid; It is accounted just, and the practice of all Nations, to
satisfy the Persons suffering, out of the next goods of that Nation offending,
coming within the power or jurisdiction of that Crown under whose protection
the Party that is spoiled inhabiteth; And that the Equity hereof may more
clearly appear, May it please your Honors to consider.

That such is the constant usage of the Spanish Nation toward the English. Our
Laws intend the same, for it is enacted Anno. 5. Hen. 4. That
Merchants-Strangers shall be entreated in this Realm, as Merchants Denizons
are beyond the Seas. In Order whereunto, there was an Act of Parliament in a
particular Case, relating to the Subjects of the Duke of Burgundy, Au. 4. Ed.
4. And an Act of State An. 11. Elizab. concerning the Flemings and Spaniards,
whereby other Nations in league with the English, were kept to an equal
observation of the Articles of Peace; And experience teaches, That there is no
better a means of making a Peace durable, then by being sensible of the first
and least violation. This strict keeping of the Spanyard to a mutual
maintayning of Amity, made him, even against his will (says Cambden) bear a
more favorable mind toward the English, and produced the renewing that Peace
which from the year 1568. to 1573. was somewhat interrupted by the Spaniards
shuffling with this Nation: Queen Elizabeth to her exceeding great honor
(says the said Author) satisfying to the full the damages of the English
Merchants, out of the Nether-landers goods, then within her jurisdiction. And
it was the speech of an Ambassador of Spain to the King of France at Bloys
An. 1599. That if the public Faith did not maintain reciprocal Bonds, the
Peace would be more injurious then War, being impossible to avoid the deceipts
of him that was a friend in show, but in effect an enemy; And by this it is,
that Articles of Peace which are principally made for the defense of the
Innocent, become mates to them, and advantages to the injurious; Et infirmatis
voiolatisque pactis tollitur inter homines commerciorum usus. And in this Case
wherein there is no other remedy, the Law of Nations ordaynes, that by equal
wrong Princes and People that keep not Faith should be enforced to do equal
right. For, is it reasonable that the Nation should have the benefit of those
Articles of Peace, by which themselves will not be bound. It is therefore
enacted by the Laws of this kingdom. 10. Hen. 6. That any Subject of the
Crown of England, that is spoiled by a foreign people, shall have Letters of
Request, under the Privy Seal, for his satisfaction, which if not had in
convenient time; The King by advice of his Council shall provide remedy for
the party grieved, which is further explaned An. 4. H. 5. and it was
accustomed to be done by the rules of natural Equity, for by tedious and
chargeable suites, the burden of the oppressed is made heavier, which at the
best is pitiful, and where they have relation to the Spanyard, most
miserable: My Lords and Gentlemen, you are his Majesty's greatest Council now
oportunely sitting; These honorable Houses have ever been the Fountains of
Justice; Hence we draw the waters of our livelyhoods and liberties: You are
those from whom we expect shelter against the storms of foreign winds, and
the droppings of unjust judgments: You are the refuge and Sanctuary of the
distressed members of this kingdom; Nor is there any thing will be a more
acceptable service unto God, nor render you more honorable to men, then to
relieve the oppressed. Actions of Justice and Mercy are equivalent to the
Majesty and Greatness of this Assembly; with you is Power if there be any Balm
in Gilead; with you is Wisdom to discern the high inconveniences that ensue
upon connivence at injuries of this nature and to perceive that through our
sides the Nation is wounded, when unto other former attempts to discourage the
Navigation of the English to the Western-Plantations; this Depredation is added
in a purposed hostile manner, aggravated by the affronting speech of the
Marquess Cardeneza General of the Fleet, That he would carry us into Spain
to know if the King his Master would give leave to the King of England that
his subjects might plant and trads in Virginia; as if we had begged a
Gibeonitish Peace, and must be content with our lives and enjoy the benefit of
the Articles, as they please to interpret them.

Sure the Honor of the English Nation is not come to this, nor are those
Plantations with so great charge brought to some perfection, to have so short
an end as the Will of the Spanyard would measure them out. The design was
higher, and had a further intent, and may hereafter have a more seasonable
thought; which is left to the Wisdom of this State. It only remains that ex
abundanti We show your Honors the equity of our pretensions; that though by the
Laws of this kingdom, and the practices of other Nations, we ought to have
reparations (out of the goods of any of that Nation that has done us the
injury) yet more especially against these Goods and Persons entitling
themselves owners; And first for the Goods.

They are our most certain hold, proved to be taken out of the Vice Admiral of
the Spanish West India Fleet [ see the profes made in the Admiralty Coure,
Fol. 19.29.32. and fol. 24.34.] and then we allege, That the Spanish West
India Fleet that robbed the Elizabeth in 1637. and this in An. 1640. were one
and the same; set out by the same power and authority, and to the same end, Viz
under the authority of the Contractation House, Persons deputed to manage that
particular Trade, and the Fleet therson depending; the end, To appropriate the
profit of that Trade to the King of Spain and some others that by License he
encorporates to himself, taking an Average of all the Plate and Merchandise
that comes thence, Viz. a third or fourth of the return for the maintenance of
the Men of War that execute the Orders of that House, in the spoil of those
that trade thither without License. That in this Fleet 1637 [ fo. 27.28.] that
took the Elizabeth; That these Goods came to Southampton, not in a way of
Merchandise and Commerce, but casually and by accident brought in, otherwise
bound for Spain.

And for the Persons pretended owners. It is by themselves confessed upon Oath,
that they are all usual Traders to the West Iudies. In particular Hieronimo
Favian Loretto; That he has used to sail to the West Indies and traded for
these 12 years. [ fol 94.] Ignatius Landahola has used to trade by the space
of 11 years, and that he has been 7 voyages in the West Indies. [ fol. 105.]
Marcus de la Rombida, That he has traded about 12 years, and been in the
Indies 8 several voyages. [ fol. 107.] That in this voyage 1640 they were
about two years before they returned; That the Ships that go forth in one
year, return not until the next, whereby of necessity it must follow; That
those very persons were in the Fleet that robbed the Elizabeth, being in all
the voyages for the space of 11 or 12 years, and therefore most just, in all
respects, that the moneys in the Parliaments hands, being the proceed of these
Goods should be the satisfaction of your present Petitioners the Administrators
of Joseph Hawes, in the behalf of themselves and others, the rather for that
upon their first arrival the said Ship and Goods were arrested by them by an
Action out of the Admiraltie. We shall now with Brutus to the Senate of Rome,
only show our wounds, and wait the stirring opportunity of your healings, Our
wounds yet bleeding are too apparent.

Joseph Hawes and Company by the first spoil endammaged above 12000. l The
advantage that was like to have accrued to them by that voyage is proved to be
about 5000. l more.

The want of that stock for 9 years in their Trades may be easily valued, the
parties having paid 8 per cent. themselves. The prejudice that Joseph Hawes had
in the loss of a known fair estate; His imprisonment and death with grief
followed. The consequences of this Depredation in the loss his friends
sustained, who were in natural affection bound to his support, which they were
the rather encouraged to do by the hope they had of his relief out of Silver
and Merchandise by him arrested, belonging to the Spaniards, brought hither in
an English bottom from the Summer-Islands.

The ruin of his natural Brother Nath. Hawes, engaged for him in diverse great
sums of money, part of which he paid, and had Execution served upon his
estate for more, to his damage above 6000. l besides loss of his Trade, which
he is ready upon Oath to testify, being the proof the Law in this case
requites.

Randall Mainwaring and Geo. Pain that married his two Sisters have likewise
paid several great sums of money for him, and rest engaged for more.

There has been spent 1400. or 1500. l in pursuance of satisfaction, These
damages we humbly conceive Justice will make good, besides the sufferances of
the Saylors and Passengers.

We might further move your pity, by putting you in mind of the necessities
of the said Ships company; some Widows and Children, relicts of those
deceased, wanting bread, whom the charity of others supports.

We are therefore bold to cast our selves into the sympathizing Arms of this
Commonwealth, by your Honors represented. It was the saying of the wise Solon,
That that Commonwealth was only Well governed wherein every man took the
injuries done to another as done to himself and to Justice.

The Lord direct the Judgment to be such, that it may be for the public good
of the Nation, the vindicating the Honor thereof, the preventing future
injuries, and manifestation of that Justice which is Gods own work, and you the
faithful dispencers.

In assured confidence whereof, we your humble Petitioners shall bless God for
you, and the happy effects of Justice and protection that flow from these
honorable Houses.

Hac una reges olim sunt fine Creati
Dicere jus populis, injustaque tollere facta.


