THE Morning Exercise METHODIZED; Or certain chief HEADS and POINTS OF THE
CHRISTIAN RELIGION Opened and Improved in diverse SERMONS, BY SEVERAL Ministers
OF THE CITY OF LONDON, In the Monthly Course of the MORNING EXERCISE at GILES
in the Fields. MAY 1659.

Eccles. 12.11. The words of the wise are as goads, and as nails fastened by
the Masters of Assemblies, which are given from one shepherd. LONDON, Printed
by E. M. for Ralph Smith, at the sign of the Bible in Cornhil, near the Royal
Exchange. 1660.

To the Right Honorable, CHARLES, Earl of WARWICK; NICHOLAS, Earl of
SCARSDALE; PHILIP, Lord WHARTON; JOHN GLYN, (late) Lord Chief Justice of
ENGLAND; Sir JOHN BROWNLOW Baronet: And to the Right Worshipful JOHN CREW Esquire;
GILES HUNGERFORD Esquire; JOHN PIT Esquire; THOMAS ROBINSON Esquire; And to the rest of the
Nobility, Gentry, and others the Inhabitants of Giles in the Fields: Grace,
Mercy and Peace, from God the Father, and our Lord Jesus Christ.
Right Honorable and Beloved,
IT is no small advantage to the holy life, to begin the day with God. The
Saints are wont to leave their hearts with him over night, that they may find
them with him in the Morning; when I awake I am still with thee, says holy
David, Psalm. 139.18. Before earthly things break in upon us, and we receive
impressions from abroad, it is good to season the heart with thoughts of God,
and to consecrate the Early and Virgin operations of the mind, before they are
prostituted to baser objects. When the world gets the start of Religion in the
Morning, it can hardly overtake it all the day; and so the heart is habituated
to vanity all the day long; but when we begin with God, we take him along with
us to all the businesses and comforts of the day; which being seasoned with his
love and fear, are the more sweet and savory to us.

If there were no other benefit of the Morning Exercise, than to be an help to
us in this setting the mind on work upon holy things, before it receive taint
from the world, and the distraction of our ordinary affairs, it should upon
that account be a very welcome guest to our dwellings.

But there are other benefits, not a few that do attend it wherever it goes;
namely, that it has become an happy occasion through Gods blessing of
manifesting the Unity and Brotherly accord of the Ministers of this City;
whilst by their mutual labors they strengthen one another hands in the Lords
work; and by a joint testimony confirm those truths which each one apart,
dispenceth to his own Auditory; for in the mouth of two or three Witnesses
shall every word be established. 2 Cor. 13.1.


Besides, that by the course which this Exercise has hitherto held, each
Auditory comes to have a taste of the several gifts which one and the same
Spirit dispenses for the use of edifying; and this not without some conformity
to the ancient pattern, Other fruits and advantages of the Morning Exercise,
see in the Introduction, Sermon. 1. toward the end.
where the several Congregations of the same City, were not plures Ecclesiae
Collaterales, diverse Sister-Churches, but one and the same Church, meeting by
parts in several places, fed and supplied by Officers in common, who by turns
in each place dispensed the word to them, having their Government in common.

Now this Morning Exercise has the Lord once and again sent amongst you; there
is a Providence that goes along with Ordinances; the journeys of the Apostles
were directed by the Spirit, as well as their doctrines, Acts 16.7. The course
of this Exercise, though it has been ordered by man's choice, yet not without
Gods direction.

To you is this word of Salvation sent, (says holy Paul, Acts 13.26.) not come
or brought, but SENT; and that as a message from our heavenly Father, without
whose providnece a Sparrow falls not to the ground. Now it concerns you to
see what use you will make of it: Sermons dye not with the breath in which they
were uttered; If the dust of the Preachers feet bear witness against the
despisers of the Gospel, their Sermons much more; Matthew. 10.14, 15. Wherever
the Word is preached, it is (...); for a testimony; how for a testimony? either
to them, Matthew. 24.14. or against them. Mark. 13.9. God keeps exact account
or reckoning what means and advantages each place or people have enjoyed: Three
years have I come seeking fruit, Luke 13.7. alluding to the three years of his
own Ministry, which then were fully elapsed. This SECOND Miracle did Jesus in
Canaan of Galilee, John 4.54. He takes notice of a first and a second; so 2
Pet. 3.1. This SECOND Epistle write I unto you; and Jer. 25.3. These THREE AND
TWENTY years have I spoken the Word of the Lord, rising early, etc. You see God
keeps a Memorial how many years the Gospel has been amongst a people, yea,
every day is upon account; for so it is added, even unto this day. What
pressing Exhortations you have had; how many, and how long you have enjoyed
them, all is upon the File; therefore it concerns you to see that all this be
not without fruit, and some notable good effect; that your account may be with
joy, and not with grief and shame.

The rather I urge this, because the Exercises of this Month have not been
ordinary Morning Exercises, but all the Arguments were picked and chosen, (as
the Preacher sought to find out acceptable words, even words of truth, Eccl.
12.10.) and disposed into a certain order for the greater benefit. It is
observed that the Psalms of David that are alphabetically disposed, are most
exact in the composure; so I hope I may say without offense, these Sermons
digested into a method, are the more accurate; with what perspicuity and
strength they are managed, as to the Doctrinal part, and with what warmth and
vigor as to the Application, I cannot speak, being strictly enjoined silence
by my Brethrens severe modesty; but the World will judge, and you I hope will
evidence by your own growth in grace, and the knowledge of our Lord Jesus
Christ.

These Sermons which with so greedy attention you formerly heard with the
hearing of the ear, are now written for a memorial; and that they may be
subjected to your view and more deliberate consideration: I say they are
written not only for the Churches use, but yours in special; and oh that they
may be written upon your hearts, engraven there with a durable Character, such
as shall never be defaced!

Honorable and Beloved, I hope I need not press any of you to get these books
into your houses; I can easily presume it of the abler sort amongst you; and
would earnestly press it upon the meanest, even the servants in your Families,
that they would abate not only of superfluous expenses, but deny themselves
somewhat, even of their ordinary conveniences, to purchase these Sermons;
which, if the Ministry should fail, (a judgment which England was never in
such danger of since the Gospel was restored) and all other helps both in
public and private should be cut off, which God forbid; yet this one Book,
next to your Bible, would be a stock of Divinity which might furnish you with
the knowledge of the Essentials of Religion, and be like Manna to you in the
Wilderness, till you come to Canaan.

To that end therefore, that which I would with greatest seriousness urge upon
you, is to get the substance and power of the truths contained in them into
your hearts, and so to inculcate them, especially the general heads of them
upon your children and servants, that they may be trained up in the knowledge
of these vital principles, which are of such use for the begetting and
increasing of the life and power of godliness. It will be sad, if what was
chiefly intended for your use, should find least fruit amongst you; and that
which is a common good, should be not a Monument only, but the aggravation of
your unfruitfulnesse.

But I hope better things of you my dearly Beloved, and things which accompany
salvation, though I thus speak The good Lord who has put this price into your
hand, give you an heart to prize it, and to improve it; that you may not
receive this grace of God in vain. In this hope I commend you to God, and to
the Word of his grace, which is able to build you up, and to give you an
inheritance among all them which are sanctified. I am

Yours in the service of the Gospel, THOMAS CASE.

The Preface to the Reader.
NOt to increase the number of Books already grown into a burden, and more apt
to distract minds with their variety, than to edify them with their Contents;
but for a public testimony to the truth of the Gospel, and to inform the
ignorant, does this Piece crowd into the World. Had many of the Brethren
adhered to their own private inclination, and first aim in this work, these
Sermons had only been published by word of mouth to the Auditory that then
attended on them. To write to the World, is apprehended by them as a thing very
distinct from preaching to a company of a few brokenhearted Christians, (who
were willing to take this help along with them in their way to heaven) and to
need more exactness of care and preparation.

But upon the strong importunity of the Auditors, (some of them persons of
great worth and honor) carrying with it the face of a Call from God, as valid
as that which first invited them to the work, they were contented against their
own private inclination to yield to this way of publication for the profit of
others; but with these CAUTIONS.

First, That it be signified, that it was not intended to make up a Map or
Complete Body of Divine Truths, but only to handle some more necessary points,
till Providence shall give opportunity to consider the rest.

Secondly, That it was not designed to discuss these points in a Polemical,
but positive way; and suitable to a popular Auditory.

Thirdly, That it be understood that the Brethren that preached, were not
acquainted with one another studies; but did every one express his own sense
in the point recommended to him.

Fourthly, That this be not interpreted to be the work of the whole Body of the
London-Ministers, but of some of them, which they represent with the more
tenderness.

Partly, that the other very Reverend Brethren, who were not employed in this
Turn and Course of the Morning Exercise, may not be charged with their
weaknesses.

Partly, because they have not without some regret observed that the larger
English Annotations, in which but some few only of the late Assembly, together
with some others, had an hand, are generally ascribed to the whole Assembly,
and usually carry the name of the Assemblies Annotations, as if done by the
joint advice of that grave and learned convention.

Fifthly, That since the preaching of these Sermons, there has been no general
review, but every one took care of transcribing his own Discourse, and sending
me the Copy, accordingly I sent it to the Press.

Sixthly, That if any of these points seem not to be discussed according to the
full latitude and worthiness of the subject, it be remembered that each Exercise
was to be punctually confined within the straits of an hour; in which time
there was no room for larger excursions.

Under the severity of these terms, my Brethren have consented that I should
(if I saw fit) expose their labors to public view, which I do with all
cheerfulness; Partly, that the world may be conscious to our Unity, soundness
in the faith, and sobriety af judgment: And partly expecting from thence (I
will say it, notwithstanding the restraints their modesty has laid upon me) no
small increase and return of fruit. The Lord by his good Spirit guide you into
all truth.

Yours in our Lord Jesus, THOMAS CASE.

The particular heads in Divinity discussed in these several Sermons, are these.
Sermon. I. Introduct. Methodical systems of the special points of Christian
Religion, useful and profitable for Ministers and people. Page 1. Sermon. II.
That there is a God. p. 29. Sermon. III. The Trinity proved by Scripture. p. 65.
Sermon. IV. The Divine Authority of the Scriptures. p. 85. Sermon. V. Man created
in an holy, but mutable state. p. 105. Sermon. VI. The Covenant of Works. p. 120.
Sermon. VII. The fall of man; or peccatum originale originans. p. 134. Sermon.
VIII. Original sin inhering; or peccatum originale originatum. p. 149. Sermon.
IX. The misery of man's estate by nature. p. 173. Sermon. X. Man's impotency to
help himself out of misery. p. 202. Sermon. XI. The Covenant of Redemption. p.
216. Sermon. XII. The Covenant of Grace. p. 233. Sermon. XIII. The Mediator of the
Covenant, described in his Person, Natures and Offices. p. 261. Sermon. XIV.
Christ's Humiliation, p. 258. alias 278. Sermon. XV. Christ's state of Exaltation.
p. 305. Sermon. XVI. The Satisfaction of Christ. p. 337. Sermon. XVII. Of Effectual
Calling. p. 353. Sermon. XVIII. The true Believers union with Christ. p. 377.
Sermon. XIX. The nature of Justification. p. 403. Sermon. XX. The Believers Dignity
and Duty, or High Birth, and Honorable Employment. p. 433. Sermon. XXI. Saving
Faith. p. 455. Sermon. XXII. Repentance not to be repented. p. 485. Sermon. XXIII.
Of Holiness its nature and necessity. p. 554. Sermon. XXIV. Of the Resurrection.
p. 577. Sermon. XXV. The Day of Judgment asserted. p. 605. Sermon. XXVI. Of Hell.
p. 621. Sermon. XXVII. Of Heaven. p. 647. Sermon. XXVIII. The Conclusion. p. 677.
The INTRODUCTION.
2 TIMOTHY 1.13. Hold fast the form of sound words which thou have heard of me in
faith and love, which is in Christ Jesus.


IT was the Character which our Lord gave of John the Baptist, He was a burning
and a shining light: Such should every Minister of the Gospel be; shining with
light, and burning with zeal; Joh. 5.25.
he should have an head full of truth, that he may disseminate and scatter
beams of Gospel-knowledge into the dark world; and an heart full of love, to
that truth which he holds forth to others; that what he publishes with his
lips, he may be ready to witness with his life, and to seal up the testimony
of Jesus with his dearest blood.

Both these, our Apostle in this Chapter, (after a passionate salutation in the
five first verses) commends to Timothy, scil.

1. To look to his light; by stirring up the gift of God that was in him.

Timothy must not suffer his gifts to lie sleeping under the ashes; but must
blow them up, (as the (...), ignem sopitum suscitare.
word signifies) into a fire, by study, prayer and execrise.

2. He calls upon Timothy to look to his zeal, that that may not be
extinguished; but that his heat may be equal with his light: And this he does
two ways.

1. Negatively. 2. Affirmatively.
Ver. 8.
1. Negatively; Be not ashamed of the testimony of the Lord, nor of me his
Prisoner.

Ministers of the Gospel must neither be a shame to the Gospel, nor ashamed of
the Gospel; no, although attended with disgrace and persecution from the
reprobate world. And what herein he commends to Timothy, he first practiced in
his own person, ver. 11. Though he was a prisoner for the Gospel, yet he was
not ashamed of the Gospel: I suffer, etc. nevertheless I am not ashamed. Romans
1.16.


2. Affirmatively; The Apostle exhorts Timothy to prepare for persecution;
Ver. 8.
Be thou partaker of the afflictions of the Gospel.

The Ministers of the Gospel should be so far from being scandalized at the
sufferings of their leaders, that they should be always disciplining themselves
for the same warfare; to preach the Cross of Christ, and to be ready also to
bear the Cross, makes a complete Minister of the Gospel.

This the Apostle urges upon a threefold account.

1. A good Cause. 2. Good Company. 3. A good Captain.
Timothy and other Evangelists, they have no reason to be afraid or ashamed of
their sufferings; for,

1. They have a good Cause, ver. 12. For the which cause I suffer; what Cause
is that? why, the Gospel, ver. 10. And this he presents under a twofold
commendation.

1. The glory of the Gospel. 2. The manifestation of that glory.
Ephesians. 3.8.
1. The glory of the Gospel: As having wrapped up in it the unsearchable riches of
Jesus Christ; grace and glory, holiness and happiness: He has saved us, and
called us with an holy calling. Believers have begun their everlasting
salvation on this side heaven.

2. The manifestation of that glory: It was given from eternity; but it is
revealed by the appearance of our Lord and Savior in the flesh; it lay hid in
Gods purpose; but it is brought to light in the Gospel, ver. 9.10. Such a
glorious gift, and so gloriously unveiled is worth, not only our sweat, but our
blood; not pains only, but persecution; yea, to suffer in such a cause, is not
more our duty, than it is our dignity.

2. They have good company: Saint Paul himself is in the Van of them; who
though an Apostle, by extraordinary missi n and commission, ver. 11. yet was
not only a Preacher of the Gospel, but a Sufferer for the Gospel, ver. 12. For
which cause I suffer these things: what things? scil. Imprisonment and
affliction, ver. 8. A sufferer, and yet not ashamed of his sufferings:
Nevertheless I am not ashamed. They may be ashamed of their sufferings, Causa
facit Martyrem, non poena.

1 Pet. 4.15.


that suffer for sin; but sufferings for Christ and his Gospel, are matter of
triumph and rejoicing, 1 Pet. 4.13, 16. Here is encouragement for
Gospel-sufferers.

And Thirdly, They have a good Captain: Jesus Christ the Captain of our
salvation. Who, that he might intender his own heart toward his
suffering-followers by his own experience; was made perfect through sufferings;
and accordingly he is very tender of, and faithful to all that endure
persecution for his sake; Heb. 2.10.
this was a ground of the Apostle his confidence, I am not ashamed; for I know
whom I have believed: I know him by report, and I know him by experience: I
know his faithfulness, and I know his All Sufficiency: I have deposited my
liberty, my life, my body, my soul, my all in his custody; and I am persuaded
as he is able, so he is willing to keep all safe, to his glorious appearance: I
may be a loser for Christ, I shall be no loser by him; whatever I lay down now,
I shall take up again one day, with the advantage of immortality; he will keep
the trust I have committed to him; it is but equity that I should keep the
trust which he has committed to me; (...). v. 12. (...). Ver. 14. 1 Timothy 1.11.
even the glorious Gospel of the blessed God committed to my trust; committed
to me upon those very terms, that I should not only publish it with my lips,
but attest it with my blood.

Thus in his own person the Apostle sets Timothy and his Successors a Copy, and
an Encouragement; which he windeth up in the words of my Text; the sum of the
Precahers duty.

Hold fast the form of sound words, etc. q. d. The premises considered; let
neither pleasures nor persecution; the love of life, nor the fear of death,
take thee off from a faithful and vigorous discharge of thy Ministerial office;
but whatsoever it may cost thee,

Hold fast the form of sound doctrine, etc.

Briefly for the opening of the words.

The form] (...) in the Greek, it signifies a Module or Platform, a Frame of
words or things, methodically disposed; as Printers set and compose their
Characters or Letters in a Table. Types.


Words] By words, we are to understand doctrine, evangelical truths, the
principles of Christian Religion.

(...).
Sound] And they are called Sound words, either from the intrinsecal nature,
when they are purely taught and delivered; Evangelical truths without mixture;
the principles of Religion in their native purity and simplicity; Truth and
nothing else but truth. Or else sound words, from their effect and operation,
because they be of an healing virtue and influence, like the waters in Ezekiels
vision, that issued out from under the Ezekiel. 47.1.
threshold of the Sanctuary; which Ver. 9.
healed wherever they came.

Which thou have heard of me] It may be understood of the whole Platform of
Gospel-doctrine in general. Or,

Else (very probably) of a Collection of some principal points of Religion,
which the Apostle had methodically digested, and either preached in Timothy his
hearing, or drawn up in writing, and committed to Timothy as a trust and
treasure, not only for his own help and direction in preaching, but to transmit
over to others, for the use and benefit of succeeding generations in the Church
of Christ, (...). and 1 Timothy 6.20.
so called in the next verse, That good thing which was committed to thee; and
so expounded, chap. 2.2. The things which thou have heard of me amongst many
witnesses, the same commit thou to faithful men who shall be able to teach
others also.

Hold fast] Greek, (...); the word has a double signification; scil. to have,
and to hold; and both of these the Apostle commends to Timothy; namely,

1. To have such a form or collection of Gospel-doctrines, as a Type or
Exemplar to which he should conform in his Ministry.

2. To hold it; i. e. to hold it fast, Not to swerve from it in the course of
his Ministry, but pertinaciously to adhere to it; not to suffer it to be
corrupted by men of erroneous principles, nor to part with it upon any terms
in the world; but to stand by it, and own it against all opposition and
persecution whatsoever.

This I conceive to be the sense of the words; which thus opened, may afford us
some such

Doctrinal Observations, as these;

Evangelical words are sound words; Or:

All Gospel Truth is of an healing nature.

It is of great use and advantage both for Ministers and private Christians to
have the main fundamental truths of the Gospel, collected and digested into
certain Modules or Platforms; Or:

Methodical systems of fundamental Articles of Religion, are very profitable
both for Ministers and people.

Such Forms and Modules are very carefully and faithfully to be kept.

Faith and Love are as it were the two hands, whereby we may hold fast
Gospel Truth.

Other doctrines besides these might be raised from the words; but these are
the main, and lie visibly in the face of the Text: And I intend to speak only
to the second and third doctrine; the one (now) at our entrance upon this
Morning Exercise; the other, at the Close, if God permit.

The first and last of these doctrines may be of use in the handling of these
two: In which does lie the main design, as of the Apostle here, so of the work
which falls to my share in this monthly service. I begin with the first of
them, scil.

Methodical systems of the main and special points of the Christian Religion,
are very useful and profitable both for Ministers and people.

In the managing of the doctrinal part of this Observation, I shall only give
you two demonstrations.

1. Scripture-pattern. 2. The usefulness of such Modules. 1. Scripture-pattern.

The Word of God is full of such Maps and Modules of divine truths necessary to
salvation.

The whole Scripture is a large Module of saving truth. Joh. 18.37.
The whole Gospel (in general) is nothing but the great Platform or Standard of
saving doctrine. It was the great end and errand of Christ his coming into the
world, to reveal unto us the truth of God; so himself testifies, John 18.37.
To this end was I born, and for this cause I came into the world, that I should
bear witness unto the truth. It took up one whole entire office, whereunto he
was anointed of his Father; his Prophetical Office; so he was named many
hundred years before his Incarnation by Moses: A Prophet shall the Lord your
God raise up unto you, like unto me, him shall you hear. The office of a
Prophet was not only to foretell things to come; As Exodus 7.1. Aaron is called.
but to reveal the mind of God, according to the import of the Hebrew word
Nabi, which signifies an Interpreter.

Thus Jesus Christ came to be an Interpreter of his Fathers mind unto the
world. No man has seen God at any time; the only begotten Son which is in
the bosom of the Father, Joh. 1.18.
he has declared him; (...), he has expounded him; The whole Gospel which
Christ preached was nothing else as it were but a public testimony of the
secret transactions between the Father and the Son concerning man's salvation;
a transcript of that truth which was in the divine understanding from all
eternity, John 8.38. and 15.15.

And accordingly it is observable that the Sermons which Christ preached in the
days of his flesh, have more of doctirne in them, than of persuasion; more of
the Teacher, than of the Pastor; as more suitable to his Ministry, wherein he
was to lay down a Module of Gospel Truth; and to leave it to the world, to be
received and believed unto salvation.

The credit of our Religion is founded upon this important truth, that Christ
was sent from God to reveal unto us the mind and will of his Father, and to be
believed in all he delivered unto us; all other Apostles and Ministers of the
Gospel are but Deputy Witnesses to make report of Christ's affidavit to the
doctrine of salvation.

And it is yet further remarkable, that this doctrine which Jesus Christ left
us in the Gospel, is nothing else as it were, but Novum Testamentum in vetere
velatum, vetus in novo revelatum.
a Comment or Paraphrase of what was preached by Moses and the Prophets in the
Old Testament; as he came Matthew. 5.18.
not to destroy the Law and the Prophets, but to fulfill them; so he came to
expound and reconcile them with the doctrine which he himself taught; thus it
is recorded by the Evangelist, that Luke 24.27.
beginning at Moses, he expounded unto his Disciples in all the Scriptures the
things concerning himself. So that the result of all this in general, is this,
that the holy Scriptures of the Old and New Testament are nothing else but a
full and perfect platform or Module of divine truth; given to the Church at
first by Christ himself the great Prophet, and transmitted by the Ministry of
those who were successively the Amanuenses or Secretaries of the Holy Ghost; 2
Pet. 1.21.
from which no man is to recede upon pain of damnation.

But now more particularly, we may observe, that besides this great universal
Map or Synopsis of divine truth; there are to be found in Scripture more
compendious and summary abstracts, and abridgements containing certain of the
main heads and points of saving doctrine, methodized into lesser bodies and
tables for the help of our faith and knowledge.

And we find them accommodated by the Penmen of the Holy Ghost, to two special
ends and purposes. Two ends of such Modules.


1. To instruct the Church and people of God in the more necessary and
fundamental points and principles of Religion.

2. To antidote believers against the infection and contagion of unsound
doctrine which have crept into the Church in the several ages and successions
thereof.

Of the first sort,

In the Old Testament, To inform the Church in the principles of Religion.
(though in a larger volume) is the book of Deuteronomy, which being
interpreted, is the repetition of the Law. And because that (being so large)
might seem too great a burden to the memory; Behold, God himself has
contracted it into a very brief, but full (...), (...)

The ten Commandments, a brief abstract of the whole Law.

Three Modules delivered by Christ in his first Sermon.


or Module in the ten Commandments; which are called ten words, Deuteronomy. 4.13.
because they are the briefest Epitome of the Law.

And thus our Savior as he laid down the great and larger draught of
Gospel-doctrine; so also in his Sermons he has left some shorter forms or
types of necessary points and principles of Religion; exempli gratia; in his
first Sermon after he entered upon his public Ministry, he has drawn up three
very concise and most excellent Modules.

1. Of beatitudes, Man's summum bonum.
The first Module contains the beatitudes. A list of particulars, wherein man's
true and chiefest happiness does consist, Matthew. 5. from the third verse to
the twelfth; wherein he does totally cross the judgment of the blind world;
writing blessedness where the world writes woe; and woe, where the world
writes blessedness.

Credenda.
These we may call the credenda; Articles of faith to be believed by all those
that would be accounted Christ's Disciples.

The second Module contains a list of duties; things to be done by every one
that would be saved. This our Savior does, by asserting and expounding the
Moral Law; from the seventeenth verse to the end of the Chapter; confuting and
reforming the false glosses which the Scribes and Pharisees had put upon the
ten Commandm nts, thereby making the Law of God of none effect.

Facienda.
And these we may call the facienda, things to be done.

The third Module contains a list of petitions, which in the sixth Chapter,
from the ninth verse to the sixteenth, he commends to his Disciples, and in
them to all succeeding generations of the Church, as a form or directory of
prayer: Not that Christians should (always) confine themselves to the words,
Petenda. (...).
but conform to the matter in their supplications at the Throne of grace. After
this manner pray ye:

And these we may call the petenda, things to be prayed for.

The Apostles method in their Epistles. The Epistle to the Romans, the
Christian Catechism.
The holy Apostels tread in our Saviors steps; you may observe in all their
Epistles, that in the former part of them, they (generally) lay down a Module
of Gospel-principles, and in the latter part a Module of Gospel-duties. The
Epistle to the Romans is upon this account justly called by some of the
Ancients, The Christians Catechism: --

As containing an (...), or list of the chief Articles of the Christian
Religion; for although the principal design of the Apostle be to discuss that
prime Evangelical doctrine of justification, in the negative and affirmative
part of it. Neg. not in works. Affir. in a free gratuitous imputation of the
righteousness of Christ applied by faith; together with the grounds,
evidences, and fruits thereof, yet occasionally according to the wisdom given
unto him, he does with a most profound and admirable art interweave other deep
and fundamental points of Religion, scilicet

A parallel between the Chap. 5.
two Adams.

The doctrine of Original sin.

The corruption and depravation of Chap. 7.
nature.

The doctrine of grace. chap. 7.

The merit and efficacy of Christ's death and resurrection. Chap. 6.


The doctrine of AFFLICTION, and the use of it to believers. Chap. 8.


The mysteries of Election and Predestination. Chap. 9.


The excoecation and rejection of the Jews. Chap. 10.


The vocation of the Gentiles, Chap. 11.
with the restituion of the seed of Abraham, etc.

And when he has finished the (...) of doctrinal principles, he winds up the
Epistle with a short, but full delineation of Evangelical duties; wherein he
does bring down those principles unto practice: The former part of the Epistle
is the DOCTRINE, the latter part is the USE; I beseech you therefore brethren
by the mercies of God, etc.

The whole Epistle to the Hebrews is nothing else as it were, but a delineation
of the THREE OFFICES OF JESUS CHRIST; King, Priest, Prophet. The Epistle to the
Hebrews.
Especially his Priestly office with a most profound, and yet dilucid
Exposition of those Levitical types and figures, which did more obscurely Heb.
10.1.
shadow forth Christ under the Law; so that in that Epistle, as in a Table,
Christians may behold the Law to be nothing else but Evangelium velatum, veiled
Gospel; and the Gospel to be no other thing than Lex revelata, unveiled
Ceremony, or the Law with the Curtain drawn.

But there be diverse short Modules or Compendiums of Christian doctrine
occasionally delineated by the Apostles in their several Epistles.

In the Epistle to the Galatians, within the compass of five verses, the
Apostle gives two full Catalogues or Lists, chap. 5.

The one of sins, ver. 19.20, 21.

The other of graces, ver. 22.23.

In the Epistle to the Ephesians, chap. 5. and 6. you have an excellent and
complete Module of Relational duties; Of Ver. 22.
Wives toward their husbands. Ver. 25.
Husbands toward their Wives. Chap. 6.1.
Children toward their Parents. Ver. 4.
Parents toward their Children. Ver. 5.
Servants toward their Masters. Ver. 9.
Masters toward their servants.


The Epistles to Timothy give us a type or table of Ministerial offices and
qualifications; yet so, as most beautifully adorned with other most precious
Evangelical principles; the sum whereof is CHRIST, 1 Timothy 1.15. This is a
faithful saying, etc. And the principal comprehensive parts, FAITH, LOVE; faith
apprehensive, and love active. These two in my Text, many learned men conceive
to be intended by Saint Paul, as the two great comprehensive fundamentals of
this (...) commended by him unto Timothy his care and fidelity: Hold fast the
form of sound words; the two main branches whereof are FAITH and LOVE; but of
this more hereafter.

In the Epistle to Titus, the Apostle will furnish you with two short, but very
perfect systems; one in chap. 2. ver. 11.12, 13, 14. Where you have Ver. 11.
1. Gods grace made the original and fountain of all the good we expect from
God, and perform to God. Ver. 11.
2. And this grace issuing it self by Christ, for the salvation of the creature.
Ver. 11.
3. And appearing by the Gospel; (there you have Scripture intimated;) and Ver.
12.
4. Teaching us as to the Privative part of obedience, to deny ungodliness and
worldly lusts; terms capacious enough to comprise all sin.


As to the positive part, to live soberly; implying all personal duties for the
governing of our selves in our single capacity; Righteously implying all duties
to our neighbors; Ver. 12.
godly, noting our whole Communion with God in the duties of his worship. More
cannot be said as to the duty of man.

Now 5. The encouragements are either from looking forward. backward.
If we look forward, Ver. 13.
there is the blessed hope, the full consummation whereof we receive at the
glorius appearing of the g eat God; the coming of Christ to judgment, ver. 13.
Ver. 13.
and there we have three grand Articles of faith asserted: 1. Heaven. 2. The
day of judgment. 3. The Godhead of Christ.

If we look backward, we are obliged to obedience, not only out of hope, but
from gratitude, or the great benefit of redemption by Christ, ver. 14. and in
that we have asserted, 1. Christ's willingness to dye; for he gave himself.
Ver. 14.
2. The purpose or end of his death; to redeem us from all iniquity. 3. The
foundation of an holy life in our regeneration, And has purified us unto
himself. 4. The nature of a Church, to be a peculiar people. 5. The necessity
of good works, in the last clause, zealous of good works, ver. 14.


So that in this short Map you have a complete summary of all that fundamental
doctrine which does animate and quicken to the life of holiness.

The next body of Divinity according to the exact method of the Palatine
Catechism, is in chap. 3. ver. 3.4, 5, 6, 7, 8. Chap. 3.
where you have, 1. Man's misery by nature, ver. 3. 2. His Redemption by Christ,
ver. 4. set forth, 1. By the spring or first moving cause, the kindness and
love of God, ver. 4. 2. The false cause removed, not by works of righteousness
which we have done. ver. 5. 3. By the effects; justification, justified by his
grace, ver. 7. Sanctification, Ver. 5.
he has washed us in the laver of regeneration, and renewing by the Holy
Ghost; ver. 5. Ver. 7.
The consummation of all in glory, heirs according to the hope of eternal
life. ver. 8. Ver. 8.


3. The thankful life in a fruitful course of holiness and good works, ver. 8.
-- Affirm constantly that they which believe in God may be careful to maintain
good works.


Another systeme of practical divinity you have in the second Epistle of Saint
Peter, chap. 1. ver. 5.6, 7. Ver. 5.
Add to your faith virtue, etc. By virtue is meant the study of holiness,
which there is set forth by its furniture, and subjective parts or branches.

Ver. 5.
1. The furniture of virtue, it is rooted in FAITH, guided by KNOWLEDGE, Ver. 6.
armed on the Ver. 6.
Right Hand by TEMPERANCE, or an holy moderation in the pleasures and comforts
of the world: On the Left Hand by PATIENCE against the crosses and
inconveniences thereof.
2. The branches or subjective parts of this virtue, are Ver. 7.
GODLINESS, a grace that guides us in our immediate commerce with God.
BROTHERLY KINDNESS, a grace that directs us in our duties to our
fellow-Saints. CHARITY, helping us in the duties we owe to all men.

In many other places do the Apostles lay the Doctrine of God in one entire
view before our eyes, lest the mind should be distracted by various and
dispersed explications; or by dwelling too much upon one part, we should
neglect the other.

Second end of such Platforms to obviate error.
A SECOND SORT OF MODULES: Or,

A second end and design of such Modules, is, to obviate errors, and to
Antidote Christians against the poison and infection of rotten pernicious
principles; for no sooner had the good Husbandman sowed his field with good
seed, but the envious man went out after him, and began to scatter tares.

2 Pet. 2.1.
In opposition whereunto, the Apostles in their several Epistles were careful to
furnish the Churches with such Modules and Platforms of truth, as might
discover and confute those damnable heresies.

2 Pet. 1.12. (...).
Hence the Apostle Saint Peter calls them PRESENT TRUTHS; that is, Principles of
the Christian Faith, most seasonable for those times wherein they were writ; as
every Church and age had its present errors and false doctrines, whereby the
false Apostles did labor to undermine the truth, and to seduce the Professors
of it; so the Apostles in that zeal to the truth, and compassion to the souls
of men, did bestir themselves to Countermine those Seducers, and to stablish
the Churches in the faith of Jesus Christ, by collecting some special heads and
points of Gospel Doctrine opposite to those errors, and sending them to the
several Churches, where they had planted the Gospel.

These the Apostle calls the Present truth; Thus Saint Paul (among other
places) in his first Epistle to Timothy chap. 4. from the first verse to the
ninth verse.

The Apostle Peter in his second Epistle, chap. 2. throughout.

St. Jude spends his whole Epistle upon the same design.

But above all, the Apostle Saint John is very large and distinct upon this
account. His first Epistle consists specially of a twofold Module or Platform;
i. e.

1. A form or table of Gospel Principles. Admodum artificiosa est hujus
epistolae methodus; n^m ad modum catenae Christiana fidei mysteria and axiomata
connectuntur. etc. Dicson.


2. A form or table of Gospel-Evidences; both of them in opposition to the
false teachers of those times, those Antichrists, of whose numerous increase he
gives them that solemn notice, 1 Epistle 2. chap. 18. verse. Little children,
it is the last time, and as ye have heard that Antichrist shall come, even now
are there MANY ANTICHRISTS.

To Antidote Christians against the plague of the false doctrines, which such
Sectarian Antichrists had disseminated, does the Apostle lay down,

1. An (...), or PATTERN of Gospel-principles, Ex. gra.

1. That God is a God of an infinite universal perfection and holiness. Chap.
1. ver. 5. God is light, and in him is no darkness at all; This, against them
that most blasphemously asserted, The Carpocratians taught that men must sin,
and do the Devils will, or else they could not enter into heaven. Epiphanius.

Simon Magus, and after him Florinus Blastus, Apelles, Hermogenes, Valentiani,
Marcionitae, etc. Priscillianistae Deum affirmant mendacem. Aug. de haerres. c.
70.


GOD TO BE THE AUTHOR OF SIN, etc. against whom also Saint James contends,
Jam. 1. ver. 13, 14, 15, 16, 17, 18,

2. That conformity to God is an inseparable concomitant of communion with God.

This against them that were not afraid to Eo tempore fuerunt qui ^^m di^imi
societatem cum Deo, propter peccata censebant. The Gnostics, Ebionitae, etc.
ambulantes in tenebris jactitabant se Deo placere; falsitas doctrinae and
turpitudo morum tunc vigebat non solum in philosophorum scholi^, sed and apud
haereticeos. Cypr.
affirm that justified persons being elected, let them live never so impurely,
do remain in the favor of God, etc. (as some amongst us, and such as would be
accounted Stars of the first Magnitude) that a man might have as much communion
with God in sin, as in the duties of Religion. If any man say, etc. It
clearly implies there were that did say so.

3. A third principle he lays down, is the doctrine of original corruption,
even in the regenerate themselves. Pelagiani negant. originate peccatum. Aug.
cont. Mendac.
Against those that taught the Pelagiani. Aug. contr. Mend.
total abolition of original sin in and by Baptism; or that denied the being,
or at least the damnable nature of it; Verse 8. If we say we have no sin, etc.

4. The necessity of confession of sin, not only against them Epiphanius calls
the Novatians, (...), murderers of repentance. Basil. de poenit.
that decried repentance for sin, and confession of sin, but against them that
denied pardon to them Montanistae, and Novatiani. Jerome. Ep. ad Marcel. de
erroribus Montani.
that repent. If we confess our sins, he is faithful and just to forgive us
our sins, etc.

5. He asserts the doctrine of actual sin in the regenerate, against them
that affirmed that The Simonians, Gnostics and other heretics of that age,
taught that there was no sin but unbelief; that to the justified, all things
were clean, however they live. vid. Aug. de perfectione justi. c. 21 Clem.
Alex. etc. conceived the Apostles after the coming down of the Holy Ghost upon
them, nullis esse peccatis aut passionibus ohnoxii Joviniani docebant, justum
nec leviter peccare. a justified person could not sin;
or (which is the same) that God sees no sin in his children. If we say, that
we have not sinned, we make him a liar, etc. If we say we have no sin, there is
the denial of original sin; if we say we have not sinned, there is the denial of
actual sin; both make up the great heresy of the Catharists in the third
Centurie after Christ.
Catharists, who held perfection in this life.

6. The Apostle vindicates the preceptive obligation of the moral Law, even
over justified persons. Against the Antinomian The Simonians, Carpocratians,
Marcionites, Maniches did not only deny the moral law, but curse and blaspheme
it, as given not by God, but by some unlucky nature.
heresy, which presumptuously breaks even that yoke (also) from the neck of
the Disciples, Chap. 2. verse 3, 4, 5. Hereby we know that we love him, if we
keep his Commandments.

So early were these poisonous weeds sprung up in the Church of God. The other
Module which the Apostle lays down, is a Catalogue of Gospel-evidences,
certain marks and signs of an interest in Christ, A Catalogue of
Scripture-evidences.
and of a right and title to life eternal: such as these.

1. Obedience to Gods Commandments, ut sup.

2. Contempt of the world, Chapter 2.15.

3. Steadfastness in the doctrine of the Gospel, verse 8, 19, 20, -- 24.

4. Conformity to Jesus Christ in holiness. chapter 3. ver. 3.

5. Mortification, 6, 7, 8, 10.

6. Love to the Saints, verse 14. and chapter 5.2, 10, 11.

7. A believing confession Most blasphemously denied by the Simonians,
Chrystolites, P^o^t^es. etc. Aug. de. haeres.
of Gods sending Jesus Christ into the world as the promised Messiah; with love
to him, and thankfulness for him, chap. 4.

In the four first verses of the fifth chapter, we have no less than seven
evidences each lincking in with the other, and bearing witness to the other.
As,

1. You have faith in Christ bearing witness to Regeneration; Whosoever
believes, etc. is born of God.

2. Love to God bearing witness to faith. He that loves him that begat, etc.

3. Love to the Saints bearing witness to our love of God. He loves him also
that is begotten. Augustine understands it of our love to Christ; but the
Context expounds it of our love to the Saints, for so it follows, ver. 2.
where we have,

4. Love to God reciprocally witnessing our love to the Saints. Hereby we know
we love the children of God when we love God.

5. Obedience to Gods Commandments bearing witness again to our love; -- And
keep his Commandments.

6. Delight testifying the truth of our obedience. His Commandments are not
grievous.

7. And lastly, Victory over the world bearing witness to Regeneration; For
whosoever is born of God overcomes the world, Verse 4.

It were easy out of this, and the other two subsequent Epistles, to complete
the (...) of Gospel EVIDENCES; which are not thus expressly delineated, that by
them only the Church might describe her members: (as some loose and vain
spirits fancy) but for the members of the Church to try and examine themselves
by, whither they be real and living members yea or no. It were easy I say to
add to the Catalogue; but I have insisted too long upon the first
demonstration; sc. Scripture Pattern.

I come now to the second demonstration: namely

The advantages of such Modules.

1. For the Ornament of the truth.


The excellency and advantage of such Forms and Collections of Evangelical
truths. And,

In the first place it adds much to the beauty and ornament of the truth;
whither it be delivered from the Pulpit, or from the Press in such Systemes and
Platforms, the Hearer or Reader, may, as in a Map or Table, (sometimes of one
sort, sometimes of another) behold divine truths standing one by another in
their Method and Connection; mutually casting light and luster upon each other.

Every truth single, is very precious, and indeed of infinite value, as
purchased with, and ratified in the blood of Christ; but to see the truths of
the Gospel linked together in their proper union, facing one another like the
Cherubims, Exodus 25.20. is very glorious.

As the stones of the Temple, when they were squared and polished in the
Forest, were very costly, for both matter and workmanship; but when they were
laid into the building, and formed up into a Temple, what a beautiful and
magnificent structure did they make? The Disciples beholding it, Luke 21.5.
were filled with delight and wonder!

The Curtains of the Sanctuary, each by themselves were very rich, both for
their materials and curious Embroyderies; but had you seen them in their
Connecture, each Curtain fastened to the other with taches of gold, and so
making up one entire perfect Tabernacle, sparkling and shining in all its
native spendour, it would have been a ravishing sight.

The very representation of many Countries in one Nation; of many Nations in
one of the divisions or quarters of the world; and of all the quarters
described in one Globe or Map, it is very delightful to the eye of an
intelligent beholder; at once discovering the site and cognation, the
Longitude and Latitude, the distance and degree of every Kingdom and County;
such globes and tables are full of delight and profit.

It is in a most eminent manner observable in the Creation of the world; of
every single days work, it is said, God saw that it was good; but when the
whole Compages of heaven and earth was set together into one entire Fabric and
Creation, God saw every thing that he had made, Genesis 1.31.
and behold it was VERY GOOD.

Such a rare piece are Gospel Truths in their variety and uniformity; not less
glorious a d admirable, than heaven and earth, Sun, Moon, Stars, Elements,
in all their order and ornament.

Secondly, 2. Help to knowledge.
Such types and Exemplars of divine truths are of great help to the
understanding; As the Collection of many beams and luminaries makes the greater
light, so it is in tne judgment. A constellation of Gospel-principles shining
together into the understanding, fills it with distinct and excellent
knowledge; 2 Cor. 4.6.
It gives us the light of the knowledge of the glory of God in the face of
Jesus Christ. One truth does irradiate and expound another. The truths of the
Gospel in their method and series, are interpretative one to the other; while
the understanding by means hereof has the advantage of dwelling upon them the
object, and comparing spiritual things with spiritual things, as the Apostle
speaks 1 Cor. 2.13.

The truth is, he knows but little of the truth, that knows it only within it
self; he understands it aright that knows it in its connection and
correspondence with other truths of the Gospel.

That Christ dyed to save sinners, is a most precious truth, 1 Timothy 1.15. but
he knows TOO LITTLE of it that knows it alone (as most of ignorant Christians
do who perish with their knowledge:) he knows this truth to purpose, that
knows it in its connection with a lost estate, that knows it in its references
to the fall, the wounds and bruises, and death contracted by it; he knows
Redemption by Jesus Christ aright, that knows it in order to the GUILT and
POWER of sin, and man's total impotency to save himself from either.

He knows salvation aright, that knows it in the extent and virtue of all
Christ's OFFICES, King, Priest, and Prophet, that understands salvation to be a
saving of the poor creature, from the REIGN of sin by the Kingly Office of
Jesus Christ, a saving of a man from IGNORANCE, ERROR, and those false rotten
principles which are naturally radicated in the understanding by the
Prophetical Office of Jesus Christ, as well as a saving him from HELL and WRATH
TO COME by the Priestly Office of Jesus Christ.

He knows aright the death and resurrection of Jesus Christ, not that knows it
singly and nakedly only in the story and notion of it, but that knows it in
the effectual application of it by the Spirit for mortification and
vivification, that knows it in its connection with, and influence into
justification, and sanctification, etc.

He that thus knows Christ and him crucified, knows him as the truth is in
Jesus; His understanding is full of light.

Alas, the ignorance and misery of our times, is not that people are totally
destitute of the principles of Christian Religion; but that they know them
singly only, and apart; and so they know them but by halfes, yea, not so much;
for I dare be bold to say, the better half of every truth, consists in its
method and necessary coherence with other truths; without which therefore, the
knowledge men have of them, must needs be but dark and lifelesse.

Thirdly, Such Patterns and Platforms, whether of larger or of lesser compass,
Advantage help to memo^y.
are a great help to memory. In all Arts and Sciences, order and method is of
singular advantage unto memory. We do easily retain things in our mind, when we
have once digested them into order; It is not so much multitude of objects, as
their variousnesse and independency which is burdensome to memory; when once
the understanding apprehends them in their natural union and fellowship one
upon another, the memory comprehends them with much more sweetness and
facility.

Hence it is that NUMBER and PLACE are of such rare use in the art of memory.

The reason why people (generally) remember no more of the Sermons they hear,
is for want of Catechizing, whereby they might come to know the principles of
Religion in their order, and methodical contexture. Usually in Sermons, truths
are delivered single and apart; and the ignorant hearer knows not where the
Minister is, nor what place the doctrine delivered obtains in the body of
divinity, nor how they are knit together; and so the memory leaks them out as
fast as they are dropped in; order is the very glue of memory. Method in a single
Sermon, when the hearer is acquainted with it, gratifieth the memory, as well
as the understanding; while it does not only lodge things in their own place,
but locks the door upon them, that they may not be lost. When things are knit
and linckt in one with another (as in a chain) pull up one link, and that will
pull up another, so that the whole chain is preserved. But we may have
occasion to speak again of this point; And therefore,

Fourthly, such Modules serve to quicken affection. 4. Advantage to quicken
affection.
Sympathy and Harmony have a notable influence upon the affections. The
sounding of a single string makes but little music; let a skillful hand touch
them in their musical consent and symphonie, and it affects the hearer to a
kind of ravishment; So it is with evangelical truths: place them in their
proper rooms, that a man may behold them in their mutual correspondencies, and
apt couplings together, and truly, the Seraphims themselves answering one to
another, and ecchoing to another, make not a sweeter harmony in their celestial
Hallelujahs.

Fifthly, It is a marvelous Antidote against error and seduction. Gospel
truths in their series and dependence, are a chain of gold to tie the truth and
the soul close together. People would not be so easily trapand into heresy, if
they were acquainted with the concatenation of Gospel-doctrines within
themselves.

As for instance, men would not certainly be so easily complemented to worship
that Idol of free will, and the power of nature, were they well principled in
the doctrine of the fall; The design of God in permitting of it, held out in
Scripture in such large and legible Characters, that he which runs may read,
Psalm. 51.4. 1 Cor. 1.29, 30, 31, etc.

If they did with sobriety of Spirit observe what the Scripture pr^claimes
concerning the impotency of the lapst and ruined creature, man's helpless
condition in himself, Romans 5.6. Ephesians. 2.1. Of the absolute necessity of the
quickening, helping and stablishing influence of the Spirit of Christ, etc.

When a chain of pearls is broken, a single jewel is easily lost; divine
truths are mutually preservative in their social embraces and coherence.

Sixthly, 6. Advantage, growth in grace.
Growth in grace is one blessed fruit of such systems and tables of divine
truths. When ^oundations are well laid, the superstructures are prosperously
carried on; want of distinct knowledge in the mysteries of Religion, is a great
obstruction to the growth of grace; The great cause of the believing Hebrews
non proficiency was their defect in the foundation; the (...), the first
principles of the Oracles of God, Heb. 5.12. unskillfulnesse in the word of
righteousness, made them that they were but babes in grace, ver. 13.

Use.

Use 1. In the first place, it serves to justify the practice of the Churches
of Jesus Christ, which have their Public Forms and Tables of the fundamental
Articles of the Christian faith, drawn up by the joint labor and travel of
their learned and godly Divines, after much and solemn seeking of God by
fasting and prayer, in the solemn profession whereof they all consent and
agree. Such were those ancient public Creeds.

The Athanasian Creed.

The Nycene Creed, and that which is commonly called the Apostles Creed, which
justly merits that title; if not because compiled by the twelve Apostles, every
one casting in their Symbol or Article, as tradition goes; yet because
collected out of the Apostles writings, and is as it were, a brief form or
abridgement of the Doctrine taught by Christ and his Apostles. An Epitomy of
the Christian faith.

And such are the Confessions which most of the Reformed Churches have drawn up
for their own use, comprehending the most necessary and fundamental Articles of
the Christian faith, to be generally owned and asserted by all within their
Associations and Jurisdictions, whither Ministers or people.

That Confession of faith which was compiled by the Reverend and Learned
Divines of the late Assembly at Westminster, and presented to the two Houses of
Parliament, as their Advice in matters of Religion, was of this nature, and
obtains the primacy amongst all the Confessions of the Reformed Churches, in
the judgment of many Learned Orthodox Divines.

Such Forms and Modules are of excellent use in the Churches.

Partly to be a bank or bulwark to keep error and heresy from breaking into
the Church of God.

Partly to prevent dissents and dissentions, which are very apt to rise amongst
the Pastors and Teachers, as well as amongst the private members of such
Congregations, where every one is left at liberty, to preach and practice, to
hold, and hold forth what is right in their own eyes.

Partly to preserve the truth in its integrity and beauty, and the professors
of it in unity and uniformity, Isa. 4.5.
the glory of the Churches, and the defense upon that glory.

Use 2. It serves to show us the benefit and advantage of public Chatechismes;
whither larger, containing a more general collection of Gospel truths for the
use of such as are of larger understandings, young or old; or lesser,
containing only some few of the most necessary principles of Religion in the
most facile and familiar way, for the help of meaner capacities; amongst which,
(although there be some hundred several forms extant in the Reformed Churches,
yet) those two forms or Modules drawn up by the late Reverend Assembly, their
larger and shorter Catechism, obtain the general vote both abroad and at home
for their excellency and usefulness. And it is the wish of very learned and
judicious men that there were yet some shorter and more easy form drawn up,
that might be reduced to a few heads of the first and most necessary points of
Christian faith for the institution of babes: The great advantage of such forms
of Chatechistical doctrine is that thereby a Minister of the Gospel may
acquaint his people with more of the necessary and saving truths of the Gospel
in a few months, than he can well preach over in many years; and by the brief
and frequent running over the principles of Religion, people of all sorts and
ages, would be incomparably prepared for the Word preached, and profit more by
one Sermon, than unprincipled hearers commonly do by twenty.

Use 3. Hence also I might commend to young Students in Divinity the reading of
systems and compendious Abstracts and Abridgements, as an excellent entrance
and manuduction unto their Theological studies, before they lanch into the
larger tracts and treatises in that vast and immense ocean of Divine knowledge;
of which we may say almost to desparation, Ars longa, vita brevis.

The Shipwright that is to build a large and stately Vessel, does first shape
his work in a very small Module. And he that is to travel into the remote parts
of the world, shall render his labor much more fruitful by reading Maps and
Globes at home; for by that means he shall know where he is when he comes
abroad; his eye and his understanding will mutually interpret one to the other;
thus your curious workwomen do first make their borders and trails, and then
fill them.

Use 4. It serves to commend Methodical preaching; that Minister that is wise
and judicious to observe method in his Sermon, and method between Sermon and
Sermon; a Scriptural connection as (much as may be) between subject and subject,
doctrine and doctrine; omne tulit punctum, he is a Preacher indeed; he shall
not only profit, but delight his hearers; and make them not only knowing
Christians, but distinct and judicious.

Use 5. It commends (not least) constant and fixed hearing; especially when
people sit under a judicious and methodical Ministry; Varia lectio delectat
animum, certa prodest. Sen.
loose hearing may please, but the fixed will profit; skipping hearing for the
most part makes but skeptical Christians; when people hear at random, have a
snatch here, and a snatch there; here a truth perhaps, and there an error;
here a notion, and there a novelty, etc. such mixed hearing makes up the garment
of knowledge, but just like a beggars Cloak full of patches; they are never
able to bring their knowledge into any form or method; ever learning, but never
able to come to the knowledge of the truth; their knowledge is like an heap of
pebbles, upon which a man can never raise a superstructure; whereas they that
sit under a fixed Ministry, (one that is Master of his Art) they are acquainted
with the way and course, and project of his preaching; as the Apostle tells
Timothy, 2 Epist. 3.10. But thou have fully known my doctrine, purpose, etc. i.
e. the design and method of my Ministry.

Such hearers (if judicious) can follow their Teacher through the series and
deduction of his Ministry, from Subject to Subject, and from Text to Text, and
from Head to Head, till at length they have, (before they take notice of it) an
hypotyposis, or collection of Gospel Truths formed in their understanding: Such
an hearer begins where he left the last time, and so from time to time is still
going on, shining and growing, and enlightening unto the prepared day, Prove.
4.18.
from faith to faith, from knowledge to knowledge, and from truth to truth,
till he comes in the unity of the faith, and of the knowledge of the Son of
God, unto a perfect man, unto the measure of the stature of the fullness of
Christ. Ephesians. 4.13.
Various hearing makes variable Christians; St. James his professors (for the
most part) double-minded men, unstable in all their ways, James 1.8.
they are still beginning, but never able to make any prosperous and
successeful progress in the knowledge of Christ.

Sixthly and lastly, from hence give me leave to commend to you the benefit and
advantage of THE MORNING EXERCISE, which the good hand of Providence brings to
your doors this ensuing month, and begins to morrow morning in this place.

Truly God has been pleased to make this morning Lecture a great mercy to this
City, ever since it was first erected, which was, WHEN LEYCESTER WAS BESIEGED;
The fruits of the morning exercise in the City.
it has been like the Ark in the house of OBED-EDOM, a blessing where ever it
has come, a morning cloud which has let fall sweet refreshing showers in
every place.

In special God has made it instrumental

1. For the strengthening of the weak hands, and confirming the feeble knees of
the people of God, Isa. 35.3, 4. Comfort against fear.
who in this time of Englands troubles have been of a fearful heart, and of a
trembling spirit; many poor Christians who in times of public dangers and
confusions have come to these morning Assemblies (like the Mary's to the
Sepulcher of our Lord) with their hearts full of fears, and their eyes full of
tears, have been dismissed those Assemblies with fear and great joy; their
hearts have been revived, Matthew. 28.8.
and their hands strengthened in the Lord their God.

2. A preservative against Apostasy. 2 Pet. 3.17.
God has made use of this exercise for the preserving of thousands from error
and damnable doctrines in these times of sad Apostasy. While many ignorant and
unstable souls being led away with the error of the wicked, have fallen from
their own steadfastness, there want not multitudes (through grace) who are
ready to acknowledge that they owe their confirmation and stability in the
truth, (under God) in a very eminent manner to the labors of those godly
Orthodox Divines, who have bestowed their pains in these early Lectures from
time to time.

3. Conversion.
God has commanded his blessing upon it for the conversion of many souls to
Jesus Christ. Blessed be God, the morning exercise has not been childless
since it was set up; some there be (to my knowledge) who have calculated their
spiritual nativity from the time that this exercise was in the places of their
habitation, as in this place some can bring in their testimony, to the honor
and praise of free grace.

4. It has been a very choice instrument in the hand of the Spirit, for the
building up of Christians in their most holy faith. Edification.
Many of them that have attended daily at the gates of wisdom, waiting at the
posts of her doors in this Ministerial course, Prove. 8 34, 35.
have been observed to have made eminent proficiency in the School of Christ, 2
Pet. 3.18.
to grow in God, in grace, and in the knowledge of our Lord and Savior Jesus
Christ.

To all which blessed ends these morning Exercises have had some advantage
above other Assemblies;

Partly, by reason of the frequency and assiduity of them; Sabbath-day-Sermons,
and Weekly-lectures being distanc't with such long intervals of worldly
encumbrances, are (for the most part) forgotten before the return of their
weekly course; whereas these exercises treading so close upon the heels one of
another, they that have constantly attended them, have as it were, lived under
a constant vision; the Sun of the Gospel arising upon them as assiduously as
the Sun in the Firmament; whereby they have been carried on in a daily
progress of Gospel-proficiency.

And Partly, the Preachers by a kind of secret instinct of the Spirit, having
been directed in their order to preach seasonable things; (...), as the Apostle
calls it, present truth; truth most proper to the present state of things,
carefully obviating the errors of the times; and not only so, but sometimes as
if there had been a design laid by mutual consent, they have been guided to
preach methodical truths; their Sermons have been knit together not without
some natural connection, into a kind of (...), or Module of Evangelical
doctrine; at least so far as it has not been difficult to find out not only
consent, but a kind of dependence between their successive discourses, that
might be of more than ordinary help to their Auditors; as in this The morning
exercise at Giles in the Fields, May 55. printed for Richard Gibbs in Chancery
lane near Sergeants Inn.
place about this time four years; and since in a The word of faith, at
Martins in the fields, Febr. 55. printed for Fran. Tyton, at the three Daggers
in Fleetstreet.
neighboring Congregation; by some short notes published for the help of
weaker Christians, may appear. But now brethren behold I show you a more
excellent way: That which sometime has fallen out providentially, and but in a
very imperfect way, is now de industria, and by prae-agreement and consent,
intended and designed among you in this course of the morning Exercise; viz.
that which the Apostle here commends to Timothy his care and custody, an (...),
or FORM of sound words: A Series or Delineation of some of the chief points and
heads of Gospel doctrine methodically collected and digested as far as the
narrow circle of so few days will contain. AND THIS WE WILL DO IF GOD PERMIT.
What remains Brethren, Heb. 6.3.
but that you stir up your selves in the strength of Christ, Cautions. 1. Prize
these opportunities.


1. To prize such a precious season and opportunity, as Providence puts into
your hand. God is bringing a very precious treasure and depositum unto your
doors; Psalm. 147.20.
He has not dealt so with every Nation, etc. See my Brethren that you put a
due value and estimate upon it, lest God challenge your contempt with that
angry question, Wherefore is there a price in the hand of a fool to get
wisdom, seeing he has no heart to it? Prove. 17.1^. 2. Frequen^ them.


2. To frequent it; Christians, be afraid of losing a morning; let not one such
golden opportunity fall to the ground, you do not know what you lose. Borrow a
little from your sleep, and from your worldly employments (if your Callings and
Families shall not be too great sufferers by it) and bestow it upon your souls;
will it not be fruit abounding to your account in the day of Christ? While ye
have the light, walk in the light: Jer. 6.4.
Know ye not that the Shadows of the Evening are stretched out! Redeem the
time, the days are evil. Ephesians. 5.15.


3. Stir up your selves to prepare your hearts for a solemn attendance upon God
in them: 3. Prepare for them.

Lev. 10.3.


Remember what the Lord said to Moses, I will be sanctified in them that come
nigh me: Oh profane not your accesses to such holy things; I may bespeak you in
the language of Moses to the people, Sanctify your selves against to morrow,
for the Lord will come down amongst you; and remember if he be not sanctified
by you, Ibid.
he will be sanctified upon you; if he be not sanctified by us in holiness, he
will be sanctified upon us in judgment; before all the people I will be
glorified.

Christians, be much in prayer for your Ministers, that they may come unto you
in the fullness of the blessing of the Gospel of peace; say with the Psalmist,
Blessed be he that comes to us in the Name of the LORD. Psalm. 118.


Pray for your selves, Acts 16.14.
that God would open your hearts as he did the heart of Lydia, that you may
attend unto the things which shall be spoken.

Pray that you may Heb. 4.2.
mix the Word with faith, 2 Thessalonians. 2.10. --
that you may receive the truth in the love of the truth, that you may not be
given up to believe lies.

Pray for others that shall hear with you; pray as Christ prayed for his
Disciples: Sanctify them through thy truth, thy Word is truth. John 17.17.


Pray that some may be convinced, some converted, that others may be edified by
the Sermons which shall be preached amongst you.

4. Stir up grace.
4. Stir up your selves to come to these Evangelical exercises with Evangelical
dispositions; those especially prophesied of in relation to Gospel Times, Isa.
2.3.
Isa. 2.3. Many people shall go and say Come ye, and let us go up to the
Mountain of the Lord, to the house of the God of Jacob, and he will teach us of
his ways, and we will walk in his paths. --

In this Gospel-promise you have three Gospel graces, Charity. Faith.
Obediential Resolutions.


Charity.
1. COME LET US GO, etc.] there is their CHARITY, their mutual care and love to
one another souls; they call upon one another, and consider one another, to
provoke one another to a diligent attendance on the means of grace. Come ye,
and let us go; gracious hearts would not go to Church, or to heaven alone;
Psalm. 122.1.
I was glad when they said unto me Let us go into the house of the Lord.

Faith.
2. HE WILL TEACH US OF HIS WAYS] here you have their FAITH; they come to the
Ordinance with good thoughts of God; the same wherewith holy David does
encourage his own soul: Good and upright is the Lord, therefore will he teach
sinners in the way; Psalm. 25.8.
though I am evil, yet God is good; though I am a sinner, yet God is upright,
therefore I shall be taught of God; it is good to come to the Ordinance with
great expectations upon God:

You may easily over-expect men, and indeed for this God sends you home often
with disappointment; you come to a Sermon, and you say (sometimes) Oh there is
a rare man to preach this day; the man fails your expectation, and you return
censuring and complaining of the Preacher, not considering the fault was in
your selves; God withdrew possibly wonted auxiliaries of grace to punish your
carnal confidence, Isa. 2.22.
to teach you to cease from man, etc. I say you may easily over-expect the
creature, but you cannot over-expect God: Psalm. 81.10.
Open thy mouth wide and I will fill it; widen and dilate the desires and
expectations of your souls, and God is able to fill every chink to the vastest
capacity; this honors God when we greaten our expectation upon him; it is a
sanctifying of God in our hearts, he will teach us his ways.

3. WE WILL WALK IN HIS PATHS] Obediential resolution.
there you have their obediential resolutions, highly becoming the children of
God; if God be so gracious to teach us, they resolve not to be so ungracious as
to refus^ to be taught; they come with a desire to know Gods will, and go home
with a resolution o obey it.

This is the method of Gospel proficiency, John 7.17.
If any man will do my will, he shall know my doctrine. Behold, here is the
pattern, GO YE AND DO LIKEWISE.

5. 5. Rest not in the work done.
Take heed of perfunctory and customary use of the Ordinance; Rest not
satisfied in a Popish opus operatum, the work done. As you should prepare
before you come, so you should reflect when you go home, and not take up with
notions in the head, without motions in the heart. Expressions in the lips,
when separate from impressions upon the conscience, makes empty and formal
professors, and gives occasion to standers by to suspect the truth of Religion.
A careless Christian that often hears of the glorious things of the Gospel,
but feels nothing of them, does put a temptation of Atheism upon himself,
and of scandal upon others; and while himself is not made better by his
frequenting the means, others become worse, while he raises up an evil report
upon the ways of God. Surely we need much quickening that we may not receive
THIS GRACE of God in vain.

6. And lastly, when you have this (...), THIS FORM OF SOUND WORDS, let it be
your care to keep it; when ye HAVE it, then HOLD it, which is the second
acceptance of the word (...), and brings me upon the SECOND DOCTRINE.

Doct. 2. SUCH FORMS AND MODULES ARE VERY CAFEFULLY TO BE KEPT:

But of this in the concluding Sermon if God permit.

God is.
HEB. 11.6. But without Faith it is impossible to please God; for he that
comes to God, must believe that he is, and that he is a rewarder of them that
diligently seek him.


IN this Chapter faith is represented as the principle of obedience, conveying
vigor and strength to other graces, whereby they become operative unto several
ends and objects; hence those acts which immediately spring from other graces
as their proper stock, are attributed to faith, that being the principle of
their heavenly, working; in this respect, as the success of an Army redounds
to the Generals Honor, so the Victory which is effected by other Christian
qualities, is here ascribed to faith, which animates them, and leads them forth
as their chief Captain; this is intimated in the Text, in which we may observe,

1. A Proposition, But without Faith it is impossible to please God; that grace
being the medium of our communion with God, as it gives through Christ an
admission and approach to him; and in this respect is opposed to drawing back,
Hebr. 10.38.

This is the Heathens Cred (...).

(...). Epictetus.


2. The Argument to confirm it, For he that comes to God must believe that he
is, and that he is a rewarder of them that diligently seek him: that is, our
Addresses to God, are grounded upon a firm assent to Gods being and bounty.

First, An assent to his being is absolutely necessary, otherwise acts of
worship are as a Ball struck into the open air, which returns not to us;
without the entire assurance of a determinate object, Religion will fail and
vanish, this belief is general and speculative.

Secondly, An assent to his bounty, that he will bless those who diligently
seek him; this is particular and applicative, and it follows from the other;
for the notion of a Benefactour is included in that of a God; take away his
rewards, you ungod him: Now the steadfast acknowledgement of this, can only draw
the soul to perform ingenuous and acceptable service; for the naked
contemplation of those amiable excellencies which are in the Deity, can never
conquer our natural fear, nor quench our enmity against him; the reflection
upon his righteousness and our guilt, fills us with terror, and causes a
dreadful flight from him; but the hope of his remunerating goodness, is a
motive agreeable, and congruous to the breast of a man, and sweetly leads him to
God; Religion is the submission of our selves to God, with an expectation of
reward.

I shall Treat of the first Branch of the argument; He that comes to God, must
believe that he is. The firm belief of Gods being, is the foundation of all
Religious worship; in the discussing of which, my design is to evince that
Supreme Truth, that God is. The ev^dence of this will appear to the light of
reason, and faith, by an appeal to nature, and Scriptures: I shall produce
three Arguments from nature, which may convince an Infidel there is a God. The
first is drawn from the visible world. The second from natural conscience. The
third from the consent of Nations.

First, in the Creation; his essence and Attributes are clearly revealed, his
absolute power, unerring wisdom, and infinite goodness, are discovered to
every capacity; therefore the Apostle urges this as the most proper Argument to
convince the Heathens, Acts 14.15. that they should urn from their vanities, to
the living God which made heaven and earth, and sea, and all things that are
therein; to this they must naturally assent; as shadows represent the figure of
those bodies from whence they are derived; so in the world there are such
traces of the Divine perfections, that it is easy to infer there is a
Sovereign being which is the cause of it; all the creatures and their various
excellencies, are as so many beams which reflect upon this Sun, or lines which
direct to this Center; nay, the meanest being carries some impression of the
first cause, as the image of a Prince is stamped upon a penny, as well as upon
greater money; the beasts will instruct, and the mute fishes teach the Atheist
there is a God; and though he is not discerned by the outward sight, yet the
understanding will as certainly discover him, as it does an invisible spirit in
a living body; and that,

1. From the being of the world, and its parts; it is apparent to sense, and
acknowledged by all, that some things are of a late beginning, but those things
could not proceed from themselves, for then they should work before they were,
and the same things should exist, and not exist at the same instant, and in the
same respect, but this implies a contradiction; it follows then they had their
Original from without; we find the experience of this in our selves; the
number of our days declares there was a time in which we had no being, and
therefore we could not produce our selves.

Now, if man which is the most perfect of visible creatures, presuppose a
Maker, then may we sufficiently infer a Creation, where we find far less
perfection; and this is true, not only of things which are visible, but of all
other beings; till at last we arrive at the Supreme cause, whose being is
necessary and independent.

Besides, if we consider that from nothing he has produced their beings, and
so united those two distant extremes of being, and not being, we may infer his
power to be infinite; the greatest difference imaginable between two finite
beings, admits of some proportion, and measure; but between that which is, and
that which is not, the distance exceeds all apprehension; so that from the mere
existence of things, it is evident that there is a first cause, which is
independent and infinite, and this is God.

2. We may certainly argue the being of God from the consent of parts in the
world, and their perpetual confederations to support the whole. Confusion is
the effect of chance, but order is the product of Art and industry; when we
consider in a Watch, how the different wheels by their unequal motions agree in
distinguishing the hours, and with that exactness, as if they were inspired
by the same intelligence, we presently conclude it to be the work of an
Artificer; for certainly pieces of Brass could never have formed and united
themselves in that method; proportionably when we view the Harmony of all
things in the world, and how disagreeing natures conspire together for the
advantage of the whole, we may collect there is a Divine Spirit, which has
thus disposed all things; we will not make a curious enquiry into this; an
eminent decree of knowledge in several faculties, would but imperfectly
discover the proportion and measures which the eternal mind has observed in
the frame of nature; it will suffice to glance at those which are exposed to
the view of all.

The Sun which is the eye and soul of the world, in its situation and motion,
is a sign to us there is wisdom and counsel in its Author; it is fixed in the
midst of the Planets, that it may dispense its light and heat for the advantage
of the lower world; Quid potest esse tam apertum, tamque perspicuum, cum coelum
suspeximus, caelestiaque contemplati sumus, quam aliquod esse numen
praestantissimae mentis quo haec regantur. Tull. in secundo de natura deorum,
etc. lib 2. de divinatione; esse praestantem aliquam, aeternamque naturam and
eam suspiciendam adorandam que hominum generi pulchritudo mundi o^doque rerum
coelestium cogit confiteri.
if it were placed in a higher or lower Orb, the jarring Elements, (which by
its influence, are kept in an equal poise and proportion) would break forth
into disorders; and those invisible chains and connexions which fasten the
parts of nature, would presently be broken; the regularity and constancy of its
motion discovers a Deity; by its course from East to West, it causes the
agreeable vicissitude of day and night, and maintains the amiable war of light
and darkness; this distinction of time is necessary for the pleasure and profit
of the world; the Sun by its rising, chases away the shades of the night, to
delight us with the beauties of the Creation; it is Gods Herald which calls us
forth to the discharge of our work; Psa. 104.22, 23.
this governes our labors, and conducts our industry; this animates nature,
and conveys a pleasure even to these beings which are insensible; without the
day, the world would be a fatal and disconsolate grave to all creatures; a
Chaos without order, action, or beauty; thus by the Sunbeams we may clearly
see a Divine providence. Besides, when it retires from us, and a Curtain of
darkness is drawn over the world, that proves the wisdom and goodness of
God; the Psalmist attributes the disposition of day and night to God, the day
is thine; Psalm. 64.16.
and with an Emphasis, the night also is thine; notwithstanding its sad
appearance, yet it is very beneficial; its darkness enlightens us, its
obscurity makes v sible the Ornaments of heaven, the stars, their aspects,
their dispositions, their motions which were hid in the day; it unbends the
world, and gives a short and necessary truce to its labors, it recreates the
wasted spirits; it is the Nurse of nature, which poures into its bosom those
sweet and cooling dews which beget new life, and vigor: the divine providence
is also eminent in the manner of this dispensation; for the Sun finishing its
course about the world in the space of twenty four hours, I speak of that part
of the world which is inhabited.
causes that succession of day and night, which does most f^tly temper our
labor and repose; whereas if the day and night should each of them continue
six entire months, this division would be very inconvenient for us: We may
farther observe a wise providence in the diversity it has used to lengthen and
shorten the days and nights for the advantages of several Countries; for that
part of the earth which is under the line, being scorcht with immoderate heat,
wants a continual supply of moisture; therefore the longest and coolest nights
are there; but it is otherwise in the Northern parts, for the beams of the Sun
being very feeble there; providence has so disposed, that the days are
extreme long, that so by the continuance of the heat, the fruits may come to
maturity and perfection. And as the difference of day and night, so the
diversity of seasons proceeds from the motion of the Sun, which is a work of
providence, no less admirable than the former; as the motion of the Sun from
East to West, Psalm. 74.17. Thou have made the Summer and Winter.
makes the day and night, so from North to South, causes Summer and Winter; by
these the world is preserved; Summer crowns the earth with flowers and fruits,
and produces an abundant variety for the support of living creatures; the
Winter which seems to be the death of nature, robbing the earth of its heat and
life, contributes also to the Universal good; it prepares the earth by its cold
and moisture for the returning Sun; in the succession of these seasons, the
Divine Providence is very conspicuous; for since the world cannot pass from
one extreme to another, without a dangerous alteration; to prevent this
inconvenience, the Sun makes its approaches gradually to us, the Spring is
interposed between the Winter and Summer, that by its gentle and temperate
heat, it may dispose our bodies for the excess of Summer, and in the same
manner the Sun retires by degrees from us, that so in the Autumn we may be
prepared for the asperities of the Winter: And to close this part of the
Argument, the invariable succession of times and seasons is a token of the same
providence; the Sun which runs ten or twelve millions of Leagues every day,
never fails one minute of its appointed time, nor turns an inch out of its
constant course, but inviolably observes the same order; so that there is
nothing more regular, equal, and constant, than the succession of day and
night; to ascribe this to hazard, is the most absurd extravagance; for in the
effects of chance there is neither order nor constancy; as we may see in the
casting of a Die, which hardly falls twice together upon the same square; it is
necessary therefore to conclude that an intelligent principle, guides the
revolutions of the Sun, thus uniformly for the advantage of the world. Psalm
19.1, 2, 3. The heavens declare the glory of God, the firmament shows his handy
work. Day unto day utters speech, and night unto night adds knowledge; There
is no speech nor language where their voice is not heard; what is that language
and voice, but a Universal Sermon to the world of Gods being and excellency?

Let us now consider that vast extent of air, which fills the space between
heaven and earth; this is of so pure a nature, that in a moment it transmits
the influences of heaven to the lower world, this serves as an arsenal for
thunders and lightenings, whereby God summons the world to dread and reverence;
this is a treasury for the clouds, which dissolving in gentle showers, refresh
the earth, and call forth its seeds into flourishing and fruitfulness; this
fannes the earth with the wings of the wind, allaying those intemperate heats
which would be injurious to its inhabitants; this is the Region for the Birds,
wherein they pass as so many self-moving Engines praising the Creator, this
serves for the breath and life of man; from hence we may conclude the wisdom
of a God, who so governes the several Regions of the air, as by them to convey
blessings for the necessities of man, and to send judgments for the awakening
the secure to seek after God.

Let us now descend to the Sea, and see how that informs us there is a God;
it is a Truth evident to reason, that the proper place of the waters is next to
the air above the earth; for as it is of a middle nature between these two
Elements, being purer and lighter than the earth, but more gross and heavy
than the air, so it challenges a situation between them; that as the air on
all parts encompasses the Sea, in like manner the Sea should overspread the
earth, and cover the whole surface of it; that its natural inclination is such,
appears by its continual flowings; who then has arrested its course, and stopped
its violence? who has confined it to such a place and compass, that it may not
be destructive to the world? certainly no other, but the great God who first
gave it being and motion; besides, that which renders the power of God more
conspicuous, is that by so weak a bridle as the sand, its rage is bounded; when
it threatens the shore with its insulting waves, you would fear lest it should
swallow up all, but it no sooner touches the sand, but its fury is turned into
froth; it retires, and by a kind of submission, respects those bounds which are
fixed by the Creator. Now, that the fiercest Element should be represt by the
feeblest thing in the world, and that which breaks the Rocks, be limited by the
sand, is a wonder of providence; therefore the Lord alleges this as an effect
only proceeding from his power, and challenges an incommunicable glory upon
this account. Job 38.8, 9, 10, 11, verses, Who shut up the Sea with doors,
when it brake forth as if it had issued out of the womb? when I made the cloud
the garment thereof, and thick darkness a swaddling band for it; and brake up
for it my decreed place, and set bars and doors; and said, Hitherto shall
thou come, and no farther, and here shall thy proud waves be stayed.

Besides, its extent is no less worthy of admiration, it washes the four parts
of the world, and so it is the bond of the Universe, by which the most distant
Nations are united, the medium of commerce and Trade, which brings great
delight and advantage to men, by it the commodities which are peculiar to
several Countries are made common to all; thus may we trace the evident prints
of a Deity in the very waters; if we change the scene, and view the earth, we
may perceive clear signs of a Divine providence: If we consider its position,
it hangs in the midst of the air, that it may be a convenient habitation for
us; or its stability, the air its self is not able to bear up a feather, yet
the earth remains in it fixed and unshaken, notwithstanding the storms and
tempests which continually beat upon it; from hence we must conclude an
invisible, but powerful hand supports it; it is reckoned amongst the Magnalia
Dei, Job 38.4, 6. Where wast thou when I laid the foundations of the earth?
whereupon a e the foundations thereof fastened? or who has laid the
Cornerstone thereof? Moreover the various disposition of its parts, the
Mountains, the Valleys, I might instance in its productions; in plants, their
roots whereby they draw their nourishment, the firmness of their stalk by which
they are defended against the violence of winds, the expansion of their leaves
by which they receive the dew of heaven; or in fruits, which are produced
answerable to the difference of seasons, those which are cold and moist to
allay our heat in summer, and those which are of a firmer consistency in
Autumn, that they may serve the delight and use of man in winter, from whence
the notice of a Deity is afforded to us.
the Rivers which are as the veins which convey nourishment to this great body,
all intimate there is a God.

Thus if we behold the excellent order of the parts of the World, their mutual
correspondence for their several ends, the heavens give light, the air breath,
the earth habitation, the sea commerce; The World is styled by Sa in Basil,
(...); the School of rational spirits, wherein they are instructed in the
knowledge of God.
we must break forth There is a God, and this is his work; but how few are
there who read the Name of God which is indelibly printed on the frame of
nature? who see the excellency of the cause in the effect? who contemplate all
things in God, and God in all things? from our first infancy we are accustomed
to these objects, and the edge of our apprehensions is rebated; the commonnesse
of things takes away our esteem; we rather admire things new than great; the
effects of Art, than the marvails of nature; as the continual view of a
glittering object dazles the eye, that it cannot see; so by the daily presence
of these wonders, our minds are blunted, we lose the quickness and freshness
of our spirits.

I shall finish this Argument by reflecting upon man, who is a short
abridgement of the world; the composure of his body, the powers of his soul,
convince us of a wise Providence; who but a God could unite such different
substances, an immaterial spirit with an earthly body? who could distinguish so
many parts, assign to them their form, situation, temperature, with an
absolute fitness for those uses to which they serve? we must join with the
Apostle, Acts 17.27, 28. The mere consideration of the least part of man's body,
opened the eyes of one of the most learned Atheists in the World. Galen. l. 3.
de usu partium, describing the use of our parts, says, (...).
He is not far from every one of us; we may find him in the activity of our
hands, in the beauty of our eyes, in the vivacity of all our senses; in him we
live, move, and have our being. And to look inward, who has endued the soul
with such distinct and admirable faculties? The understanding which exercises
an Empire on all things, which compounds the most disagreeing, and divides the
most intimate, which by the lowest effects ascends to the highest cause; the
Will which with such vigor pursues that which we esteem amiable and good, and
recoiles with aversation from that we judge pernicious and evil; the Memory
which preserves fresh and lively the pictures of those things which are
committed to its charge. Certainly after this consideration, we must naturally
assent there is a God who made us, and not we our selves.

3. We may argue there is a God from the operations of natural Agents for those
ends which are not perceived by them. Although in men there is a rational
principle which discovers the goodness of the end, and selects such means as
are proper for the accomplishing of it, and so their actions are the product of
their judgment; yet it is impossible to conceive that the inferior rank of
creatures, whose motions flow from mere instinct, can guide themselves by any
Counsel of their own: Now all their operations are directed to their proper
ends without any variation, Si quid est quod efficiat ea quae homo licet
ratione sit praeditus, facere non posset, id profecto est majus, and sortius,
and sapientus homine. Chrysippus.
and in that order as exceeds the invention of man. It is admirable to consider
how brute creatures act for their preservation; they are no sooner in the
world, but they presently fly from their enemies, and make use either of that
force or craft which they have to defend themselves; they know that nourishment
which is convenient to preserve them, and those remedies which may restore
them. By what Counsel does the Swallow observe the season of its passage? in
the beginning of Autumn it takes its flight to a warmer Climate, and returns
with the Sun again in the Spring. By what foresight does the Ant prepare its
store in Summer to prevent that ensuing want which otherwise it would suffer in
Winter? Does the Sun deliberate whether it shall rise, and by diffusing its
beams, become the public light of the World? or does a Fountain advise whether
it shall stream forth in a fluent and liberal manner? even the actions of men
which are purely natural, are done without their direction: Nay, natural bodies
will part with their own property, and cross their own inclination for an
universal good; the air, a light and nimble body that does naturally ascend,
yet for a general good, to prevent a breach in nature, it will descend: And
those things which have a natural opposition, (...). Aristotel. l. de mundo.
yet constantly accord and join together to preserve the whole; certainly then
a Divine Spirit guides and directs them. If we see an Army composed of several
Nations, (between whom there are great antipathies) yet march in rank and
order, and with equal courage fight for the safety of a Kingdom, we presently
conclude there is a wise General who thus united them: And is there not greater
reason to believe that a Sovereign Spirit governs the Host of heaven and earth,
and unites them to maintain the peace of the World? To assert that irrational
creatures act for a general and unknown good, without the motion of a higher
cause, is equally unreasonable, as to say a curious Picture is drawn by a
Pensil without the hand of the Painter which guided it in every line according
to the Idea of his mind. We must then of necessity infer that those particular
causes which cannot conduct themselves, are directed by an universal cause
which cannot err; and thus we see the whole World is an entire and continual
Argument of Gods Being and Attributes.

Secondly, The second Argument is drawn from natural conscience, which is a
subordinate God, and acts all things with respect to a higher Tribunal; as
Saint Paul speaking of those visible Testimonies which God has expressed to men
in the Creation, says, Acts 14.17. that he left not himself without a
witness, giving them rain, and fruitful seasons; by the same proportion we may
say God has not left himself without an internal witness, having planted in
every man a conscience whereby he is dignified above the lower order of beings,
and made sensible of the supreme Judge, to whose Tribunal he is subject; now
conscience in its double work, as it accuses or excuses by turns upon good or
bad Actions, proves there is a God.

1. Natural conscience being clear and innocent, is the lifeguard which secures
from fears: virtuous persons who have not offered violence to the light of
conscience, in times of danger, as in a fierce storm at Sea, or fearful
Thunder at Land, when guilty spirits are surprised with horror, they are not
liable to those fears, being wrapped up in their own innocence; Parcus Deorum
cultor and infrequens, insanientis dum sapientiae consultus erro nunc retrorsum
vela dare atque iterare cursus cogor relictos: Namque Diespiter igni corusco
nubila dividens, f^etumque per purum tonanteis egit equos volucremque currum.
Horat. ad 34. l. 31.
the reason of their security proceeds from a belief that those terrible works
of nature are ordered by an intelligent and righteous providence which is God.

2. It gives courage and support to an innocent person, when oppressed and
injured by the unrighteous; the natural conscience so long as it is true to its
self by adhering to honest principles, it is victorious against all attempts
whatsoever; si fractus illabatur orbis; if the weight of all the miseries in
the world should come rushing upon him at once, it would bear up under them
all, and stand unbroken in the midst of those ruins; the spirit of a man is of
strength enough to sustain all his infirmities; as a Ship lives in the rough
Seas, and floats above them, the waters being without it; so a virtuous person
rides out all storms, and is preserved from sinking, because the fury of
worldly troubles cannot reach beyond his outward man; the conscience which is
the man's strength remains firm and unshaken; yea, as those Roses are usually
sweetest which grow near stinking weeds; so the peace, joy, and glory of a good
conscience is then most sensible, when a man is otherwise in the most afflicted
and oppressed state; now from whence proceeds this calmnesse and serenity, this
vigor and constancy of spirit, but from the apprehension of a supreme Judge,
who at the last will vindicate their cause?

2. We may clearly evidence there is a God, from the accusations of a guilty
conscience; this is that never dying worm which if a sinner treads on, it will
turn again; this is a temporal hell, a spiritual Tophet; what torments are
there in the Regions of darkness, which an accusing conscience does not
inflict on a sinner in this life! so intolerable are the stings of it, that
many have took Sanctuary in a Grave, and run upon the first death to prevent
the miseries of the second. Now the shame, horror, despair, and that black
train of affections which lash an offender for his vicious acts, discovers
there is a principle within which threatens vengeance from a righteous and
angry God: This Argument will be more pressing, if we consider that conscience
attaches a sinner

First, for secret crimes, which are above the cognizance of men; conscience is
Gods spy in our bosoms, which mixes it self with all our thoughts and actions;
let a man therefore take what course he will to hide his offense, let him sin
in the closest retirement that humane policy can contrive, where there is no
possibility of legal conviction, yet his Accuser, his Judge, his Hell is in his
own bosom; when the sin is most secret, conscience brings in the evidence,
produces the Law, urges the penalty, passes the sentence, begins the
punishment; so that the sinner is (...), self-condemned for those sins which
are not punishable by man; yea, sometimes a discovery of concealed sins (though
certainly bringing temporal death) has been extorted by the horror and anguish
of an accusing conscience; the reason of all is because in secret sins,
conscience appeals to Gods Omnisciency, who is greater than our consciences,
and knows all things, 1 John 3.20. And upon this account it is praejudicium
judicii, a kind of antedated day of judgment, a domestical doomsday, and
brings upon a sinner the beginning of his sorrows.

2. It stings with remorse for those sins which are above the power of man to
revenge; those who command Armies, and by their greatness are secured from the
penalties of the Law, yet conscience sets their sins in order before their
eyes; and these as so many armed men charge them through, and overwhelme them;
many instances there are; Belshazzar in the midst of his cups and bravery, how
was he invaded by fear and horror, when he saw the handwriting on the Wall!
the whole Army of the Persians could not discourage his spirit; but when
conscience revived his guilt, and the apprehensions of Gods justice, he sunk
under the burden; the handwriting from without was terrible, because
conscience opened a handwriting within. Tiberius the Emperor who was doubly
died in unnatural lusts and cruelties, could neither evade nor dissemble the
horrors of his mind; Nero after the barbarous murdering of his mother, was
always pursued by imaginary Devils, his distracted fancy representing to him
furies and flames ready to torment him. How many Tyrants have trembled on the
Throne, when the condemned innocents have rejoiced in their sufferings! from
hence we may infallibly conclude the conscience of the most powerful sinner is
under the feeling of a Deity; for if there were no punishments to be feared but
those the Magistrate inflicts in his own Dominions, why are Sovereign
Magistrates themselves under terrors for their vicious actions! and those who
are not subject to any humane Tribunal, why do they with such fury reflect upon
themselves for their crimes? certainly it proceeds from hence, that natural
conscience dreads the supreme Judge, seeing nothing is able to shelter them
from his Tribunal, nor restrain his power when he will take vengeance on them.

In vain does the Atheist reply that these fears are the product of a common
false opinion, which is conveyed by education, to wit that there is a God who
is provoked by sin; and that ignorance increases these terrors, as little
children fear bug-bears in the dark; for it is certain,

First, That no Art or endeavor can totally free a sinner from these terrors,
whereas groundless fears are presently scattered by reason; and this argues
there is an inviolable principle in nature which respects a God. We know there
is nothing more disturbs the spirit than fear, and every person is an enemy to
what torments him; hence the sinner labors to conquer conscience, that he may
freely indulge himself in sin; but this is impossible; for conscience is so
essential, that a soul cannot be a soul without it, and so inseparable, that
death it self cannot divorce a man from it; perire nec sine te nec tecum
potest; it can neither dye with the sinner, nor without him; it is true the
workings of it are unequal; as the pulse does not always beat alike, but
sometimes more violent, and sometimes more remiss; so this spiritual pulse is
not always in equal motion; sometimes it beats, sometimes it intermits, but
returns again; those scorners who run a course of sin without control, and
seem to despise hell, as a mere notion, yet they are not free from inward
gripes; conscience arrests them in the Name of that God whom they deny;
although they are without faith, they are not without fear; desperate sinners
ruffle it for a time, and drench themselves in sensual pleasures, to quench
that scintilla animae, that vital spark which shines and scorches at once; but
all in vain; for it happens to them as to Malefactors, who for a time drown the
apprehension of their danger in a Sea of drink; but when the fumes are
evaporated, and they seriously ponder their offenses, they tremble in the
fearful expectation of the Axe or Gallows. A sinner may conceal his fears from
others, and appear jolly and brave, when conscience stings him with secret
remorse; as a Clock seems to be calm and still to the eye; but it is full of
secret motions within; under a merry countenance there may be a bleeding heart:
To conclude, so far is a sinner from being able to quench these terrors, that
many times the more they are opposed, the more powerful they grow; thus many
who for a time breathed nothing but defiances to conscience, and committed sin
with greediness, yet conscience has with such fury returned upon them, that
they have run from profanesse to superstition, as fugitive slaves are forced
back to their Masters, and serve in the vilest Drudgery, fearing severe
punishments.

2. The best men who enjoy a sweet calmness, and are not disquieted with the
terrors of conscience, they abhor that Doctrine which discards the fear of a
Deity; so that those who are most freed from these terrors, believe them to be
radicated in nature, and grounded upon truth; and those who esteem them vain,
are most furiously tormented with them; in which respect the Divine goodness
shines forth in the greatest luster toward those who love and fear him, and
his justice against those who contemn it; thus Caligula who was the boldest
Atheist in the world, yet when it thundered, ran with trembling under his bed,
as if God from heaven had summoned him to judgment; whereas Socrates, who was
the Heathens Martyr, died with the same tranquillity of spirit wherein he lived.

3. It Is worthy of our serious thoughts that these terrors of conscience are
most dreadful when the sinner approaches death; the sense of guilt which before
was smothered, is then revived; conscience like a sleeping Lion awakes and
destroys at once; experience t^lls us many sinners who have lived in a
senseless, dye in a desperate manner; and from whence does this proceed but
from the presages of a future judgment! conscience anticipates the vengeance
of God; then the Alarums are encreast, and the storm is more violent; for the
soul being sensible of its immortal nature, extends its fears to Eternity, and
trembles at him who lives for ever, and can punish for ever.

Argument 3. The consent of Nations agrees in the belief of a God; although the
Gentiles did grossly mistake the life and essence of the infinite Deity,
imagining him to be of some humane form and weakness, and in this respect
were without God in the world; yet they conspired in the acknowledgement of a
Divinity; the multiplicity of their false gods strengthens the Argument; it
being clear they would rather have any God then none; and this belief cannot be
an imposture, because it is

First, Universal; What Nation so barbarous as not to worship a God? certainly
that which is common to all men, has a foundation in nature.

Secondly, it is perpetual; falsehoods are not long lived; but the Character and
Impression of God is indelibly sealed upon the spirits of men. Thus we see the
Universal Reason of the World to Determine there is a God.

2. The Scripture proves there is a God to faith; Psalm. 19. David speaking of
the double manifestation of God by his Works and his Word, appropriates a
converting power to the Word; this exceeds the discovery of God in the
Creation, in respect of its clearness and efficacy: Psalm 138.2. Thou have
magnified thy Word above all thy Name. There are more apparent Characters of
Gods Attributes and Perfections in the Scripture, than in the Book of Nature;
in the Creation there is Vestigium, the foot-print of God; but in the Word
there is Imago, his Image and lively Representation: As the Angels when they
assumed visible bodies, and appeared unto men; yet by the brightness and
Majesty of their appearance, discovered themselves to be above an humane
Original; so the Scriptures although conveyed to us in ordinary language and
words, yet by their authority and sanctity evidence their Divine descent; and
that there is a holy and righteous God from whom they proceed.

There is a vehement Objection urged by Atheists in all Ages against a Divine
Providence, and consequently against Gods Being: We may hear the Tragedian thus
resenting it: Sed cur idem,
Qui tanta regis sub quo vasti
Pondera mundi librata suos
Ducunt orbs, hominum nimium
Securus ades? non sollicitus
Prodesse bonis, nocuisse malis.
Senec. Hippol.
The afflicted state of innocence and goodness, and the prosperous state of
oppression and wickedness. Honest men suffer, whilst the unrighteous and
profane swim in the Streams of Prosperity; hence they concluded fortuna certa,
aut incerta natura, had the charge of these sublunary things; even the holy
Prophet himself was liable to this temptation, Psalm. 73.9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14.
he saw that as the clean Creatures were sacrificed every day, the Turtle and
the Lamb, the Emblems of innocence and charity, whilst the Swine, and other
unclean Creatures were spared; Plutarch and Seneca, and Cicero, have rendered
satisfaction concerning this method of the Divine Providence.
So good men were harrast with troubles, when the wicked were exempted, and
this shook his faith; but by entering into the Sanctuary of God, where he
understood their end, he comes off with victory; now for the removing this
Objection, Consider

First, we are not competent Judges of Gods actions; we see but one half of
Ezekiels Vision; the Wheels, but not the eye in the Wheels; nothing but the
Wheels on which the world seems disorderly to run, not the eye of Providence
which governs them in their most vertiginous changes: The actions of God do not
want clearness, but clearing: What we cannot acquit, is not to be charged on
God as unjust; the stick which is straight, being in the water seems crooked,
by the refraction of the beams through a double medium; we see through flesh
and spirit, and cannot distinctly judge the ways of God; but when we are not
able to comprehend the particular reasons of his dispensations, yet we must
conclude his judgments to be right, as will appear by observing

Secondly, The sufferings of the righteous do not blemish Gods justice.

1. God always strikes an offender, every man being guilty in respect of his
Law. Now though love cannot hate, yet it may be angry; and upon this account,
where the judgments of God are a great deep, unfathomable by any finite
understanding, yet his righteousness stands like the high Mountains, (as it
is in Psalm 36.) visible to every eye; if the most righteous person shall look
inward, and weigh his own carriage and desert, he must necessarily glorify the
justice and holiness of God in all his proceedings.

2. The afflictions of good men are so far from staining Gods justice, that
they manifest his mercy; for the least sin being a greater evil than the
greatest affliction; God uses temporal crosses to prevent or destroy sin; he
imbitters their lives to wean their affections from the World, and to create in
them strong desires after heaven; as long as the waters of tribulation are on
the earth, so long they dwell in the Ark; but when the Land is dry, even the
Dove it self will be wandering, and defile its self: When they are afflicted in
their outward man, it is that the inward man may be revived; as birds are
brought to perfection by the ruins of the shell: that is not a real evil which
God uses as an instrument to save us. Who will esteem that Physician unjust,
who prevents the death of his Patient by giving a bitter potion?

3. If the Righteous be thus afflicted upon earth, we may conclude there is a
reward in the next World; if they are thus sharply treated in the way, their
Country is above, where God is their portion and happiness.

Thirdly, The temporary prosperity of the wicked reflects no dishonor upon
Gods justice or holiness; for God measures all things by the Standard of
eternity; a thousand years to him are as one day. Now we do not charge a Judge
with unrighteousness, if he defer the execution of a Malefactor for the day;
the longest life of a sinner bears not that proportion to eternity; besides,
their reprieve increases and secures their ruin; they are as Grapes which hang
in the Sun till they are ripe, and fit for the Wine Press. God spares them
now, but will punish them for ever; he condemns them to prosperity in this
world, and judges them not worth his anger, intending to pour forth the vials
of his wrath on them in the next.

Fourthly, The more sober Heathens have concluded from hence there is a
judgment to come; because otherwise the best would be most miserable, and the
ungodly prosperous; from hence they have inferred, that because all things are
dispenc't in a promiscuous manner to the just and unjust in this world,
therefore there must be an after-reckoning.

Fifthly, There are many visible examples of the goodness and justice of God
in this World; either in rewarding afflicted innocence, or punishing prosperous
iniquities. He that shall read the story of Joseph, and consider that wonderful
chain of causes managed by the Divine Providence; how God made use of the
treachery of his brethren, not as a sale, but a conveyance; how by the Prison
he came to the principality, must conclude there is a watchful eye which orders
all things: And how many instances are there of Gods severe, and impartial
justice? there is no State or History but presents some examples; wherein an
exact proportion in the time, measure and kind between the sin and punishment,
is most conspicuous; the unnatural sin of Sodom was punished with a
supernatural shower of fire and brimstone: Pharaoh had made the River guilty of
the blood of the Hebrew Infants; his first plague is the turning of the River
into blood; Adonibezec is just so served as he did by the seventy Kings; Judas
who wanted bowels for his Lord, wanted bowels for himself in life and death;
for he hanged himself, and his bowels gushed out; and thus the punishment as a
hand, points at the sin, and convinces the World of a Deity.

Use 1. This is just matter of terror to Atheists, which are of three sorts; 1.
Vita. 2. Voto. 3. Judicio.


First, To those who are practical Atheists vita, in life, who live down this
truth, denying God in their lives; sad and certain it is, that many who pretend
they know God, yet so live they, as if there were no Deity to whom they must
give an account: Such are the secure, that sleep in sin, notwithstanding all
Gods thunder; and if ever sleep were the true image of death, this is the
sleep. The sensual who are so lost in carnal pleasures, they scarce remember
whether they have a soul; if at any time conscience begins to murmr, they
relieve their melancholy thoughts with their company and cups, like Saul,
sending for the Music when the evil spirit was upon him. The incorrigible, who
notwithstanding the designs of Gods mercy to reduce them; although
Providence, Ordinances conspire to bring them off from their evil ways; yet
they persist in their disobedience: Let such consider it is not a loose and
ineffective assent to the being and perfections of God which will save them;
God is not glorified by an unactive faith; nay, this will put the most dreadful
accent, and the most killing aggravations on their sins; that believing there
is a God, they dare presumptuously offend him, and provoke the Almighty to
jealousy, as if they were able either to evade, or to sustain his wrath; it is
the greatest prodigy in the World to believe there is a God, and yet to disobey
him; this renders them inexcusable at the last.

Secondly, To those who are Atheists voto, in desire, Psalm. 14. The fool has
said in his heart there is no God; the heart is the Fountain of desires, he
wishes there were no God; this Atishem springs from the former; men live as if
there were no God, and then wish there were none; guilt always begets fear, and
fear hatred; and that strikes at the being of the object that is hated; as
Malefactors desire there were no Law nor Judge, that they might escape deserved
punishment. Well their desires are as visible to God as their actions are to
men, and in the day of Revelation there will be a proportion of Wrath
answerable to the Wickedness of their hearts.

Thirdly, To those who are Atheists judicio, in opinion; these low running
dregs of time afford us many of these Monsters; for many to reconcile their
principles with their practices, that they may undisturbedly enjoy their lusts,
take this as an Opiate potion, that there is no God; but this is the most
irrational and impious blasphemy.

1. Irrational; for the Name of God is written in so fair a Character upon this
universal frame, that even whilst men run they may read it; and therefore God
never wrought a miracle to convince Atheism, because his ordinary works
convince it: Moreover, the notion of a Deity is so deeply impressed on the Tables
of all men's hearts, that to deny God, is to kill the soul in the eye, to quench
the very principles of common nature, to leave never a vital spark or seed of
humanity behind; it is as if an ungracious soul should deny he ever had a
Father. He that does ungod God, does unman himself.

2. It Is the most impious; it is formally Deicidium, a killing of God as much as
in them lies; but there are no Atheists in hell, the Devils believe and
tremble; he that willingly quenches that light which is planted in his breast,
he is passing from that voluntary darkness to a worse; like an offender on the
Scaffold, he does but blind his eyes to have his head cut off; he goes from
inward darkness to utter darkness.

Use 2. Let us stablish our hearts in the belief of Gods Being; in the latter
times the World is wholly disposed to Atheism; as the Scripture attributes the
ruin of the Old World to their Atheism and Profanesse, so it foretells the
universal disease of the last Age will be Atheism and Infidelity. Luke 18.8.
Nevertheless when the Son of man comes, shall he find faith on the earth? it
were impossible there should be such a palpable contradiction between the lives
of men and this fundamental of Religion, did they with assurance and certainty
believe it. Psalm. 14.1. The fool has said in his heart there is no God; they
are corrupt, they have done abominable works, there is none that does good.
Atheism is the root of Profanesse; moreover, the spiritual mysteries of
Religion, which exceed the flight of reason, are opposed by many upon the
account of their Atheism; they question the truth of Gods Being, and therefore
disbelieve supernatural Revelations; let us then treasure up this truth:

First, As the foundation of faith; for all the truths of Religion spring from
this as their common principle; the watering of the root will cause the
branches to flourish; so the confirming of this will render our assent to the
doctrine of the Gospel more clear and strong.

Secondly, As the fountain of obedience; the true and sound belief of every
holy truth always includes a correspondency in the believer to the thing
believed; and this must descend from the understanding to the affections, and
the conversation: Now the fundamental duties which we are to pay to God, are,
love, fear, dependence and submission to the will of his Law, and of his
Providence.

1. Love: He is the supreme object of love for his excellencies and benefits.
Psalm. 5.11. Let them also that love thy Name rejoice in thee; the Name of God
imports those glorious Attributes whereby he has expressed himself to us; all
the excellencies of the creature meet eminently in him, and all their
imperfections are removed; in him there is nothing unlovely; in worldly things
how refined soever they be, there is an allay of dregs; the all that is in them
is mixed with corruption; but in God the all that he is, is perfection; in the
most glorious creature as a creature, there is aliquid nihili, some
imperfection, it is not exactly fitted for the soul; but God is the Adequate
and complete object of our love. There is such an infinite eminency in God,
that we are obliged to a proportionable affection; the first and great
Commandment is, Matthew. 22.36. Thou shall love the Lord thy God with all thy
heart, and with all thy strength; all the kinds and degrees of our love are due
to him; we must put no bounds nor limits to it; in him it must begin, in him it
must end; a remisser love is a degree of hatred; we disparage his excellencies
by the coldness of our affections. O had we but eyes to see his beauty, how
would all the excellencies of the creatures become a very Glow-worme that only
glitters in the night!

Moreover, God planted this affection in the nature of man, that it might be
terminated upon himself as its center and treasure, as our natural faculties
are fitted for their several objects; the eye for colors, the ear for sounds,
the palate for tastes; so love is fitted for God, that being as the Sovereign
which sways all our powers. Love is called pondus animae, that sets all the
wheels in the clock of the soul a going; this sets the understanding a work in
the serious contemplation of the Divine excellencies; it diverts the thoughts
from other things, and fixes them on God; it excites strong desires, and
earnest aspirings after him; it stirs up zeal, which is flamma amoris, love in
a flame to remove all obstacles which hinder the most intimate union with him;
it produces joy, when the soul reposes its self in God, and with infinite
sweetness possesses him; it causes the greatest diligence, alacrity, and
resolution in all our ways to please him: for love is ever the spring and rule
of all our actions; such as it is, such likewise will they be: thus we may see
that God (as there is in him a union of all excellencies) challenges the most
intense and vehement degree of our love, he being only fitted for it; and that
our love being a superlative affection, is only proper to God; and therefore to
love any creature without God, or in an equal manner to him, is to Deify the
creature, to place it in the room of God, and so it renders us guilty of
Idolatry in a spiritual sense. But such is the ignorance of men's minds, and the
depravednesse of their wills, that few there be who love God; it is true, there
may be something like love in natural men to God, grounded upon the persuasion
of his glorious being, and the goodness of his nature, which is not terrible
to them; but when they consider his mercy is a holy mercy, and that it is never
dispenc't to the prejudice of his justice, though they cannot hate God for his
goodness directly, yet they hate him with it; for although he is the
perfection of beauty and goodness it self, yet they being evil, there is no
congruity or convenience between God and them; they love sin, and hate
punishment: Now God, as Author legis, by the most strict Laws forbids sin, and
as ultor peccati, inflicts severe punishments; from hence it proceeds, the most
lovely and sweet Attributes of God cannot endear him to them; no more than the
natural or moral excellencies of a Judge, the comeliness of his person, or his
wisdom and knowledge can draw forth the love of a Malefactor when he is
condemned by him.

Moreover, since the general nature of sin is an eternal contrariety to the
nature and will of God; the love of it must needs argue the hatred of God; for
as the Lord Jesus requires an universal, cheerful and constant obedience, as
the most clear evidence of love to him; if you love me, keep my Commandments;
So the Argument will be as strong to conclude backward, If you keep not Gods
Commandments, you hate him; to live in the practice of known sins, is a
vertual and interpretative hatred of God.

2. The benefits which God bestows upon us deserve our love. How great an
endearment did he pass upon us in our Creation? we might have been admitted
into the lowest form of Creatures, and have only enjoyed the life of flies or
worms; but he made us little lower than the Angels, and Crowned us with glory
and honor, and gave us dominion over all the works of his hands, Psalm. 8.5.
Whereas the rest of the Creatures were the acts of his power; the Creation of
man was an act of power and wisdom; in all the rest there was nothing, but he
spoke the word, and they were made, Psalm. 148.5. But in the making of man there
was a consultation about it, Genesis 1. Let us make man; he framed our bodies, so
that all the parts conspire for the ornament and service of the whole: Psalm.
139.15. Thine eye did see my substance being yet imperfect, and in thy book
were all my members written; and therefore Lactantius said truly, hominem non
patrem esse sed generandi Ministrum; man is only the instrument which the Lord
does use for the effecting of his purpose to raise the beautiful Fabric of
man's body: Now if we are obliged to express the dearest love to our Parents,
with how much greater reason should we love God, who is the fountain of all our
beings.

He has breathed into man a spiritual, immortal, rational soul, which is more
worth than the whole World; this is in some sort a spark and ray of Divine
brightness; it is capable of Gods Image, it is a fit Companion for Angels, to
join with them in the praises of God, and enjoy a blessed eternity with them.
It Is capable of communion with God himself, who is the fountain of life and
happiness. The soul is endowed with those faculties which being terminated
upon God, it enjoys an infinite and everlasting blessedness. The understanding
by knowledge rests in God as the first and highest in genere very; the will by
love embraces him as the last and greatest in genere boni; and so receives
perfection and satisfaction, which is the incommunicable privilege of the
rational soul. Beasts can only converse with drossy and material objects, they
are confined to earthly things; but the soul of man may enjoy the possession
and fruition of God, who is the Supreme and Sovereign good. Now this should
inflame our love to God; he formed our bodies, he inspired our souls. Moreover,
if we consider our lives, we shall find a chain of mercy which reaches from
one end to the other of them.

How many Miracles of Providence do we enjoy in our preservation? how many
unseen dangers do we escape? how great are our daily supplies? The provisions
we receive, do serve not only for necessity, but for delight; every day we have
the provisions of meat and drink not only to cure hunger, and all our thirst,
but to refresh the heart, and to make us cheerful in our work; every hour is
filled up with the bounties of God: Now what shall we render to the Lord for
all his benefits? he desires our love; this is the most proper return we can
make; for love is of an opening and expansive quality calling forth the heart;
our love within should break forth to close with Gods love without; the love of
obedience in us, with the love of favor and bounty in him. It Is a principle of
nature deeply implanted in the hearts of men, to return love for love; nay, the
very Beasts are not deficient in this; Esaias 1.3. The Ox knows his Owner, and
the Ass his Masters Crib: Those Creatures which are of all the most stupid and
heavy, respect their Feeders, and express dumb signs of love unto them. How
much more should we love God, who spreads our Table, fills our Cup, and causes
his Sun to shine, and his Rain to fall on us? It Is an Argument of Secret
Atheism in the heart, that in the confluence of mercies we enjoy, we do not
look up to the Author of them, as if common mercies were the effects of Chance,
and not of Providence; if a man constantly relieves our wants, we judge it the
most barbarous disingenuity not to repay love to him; but God loads us with his
benefits every day; his wisdom is always busied to serve his mercy, and his
mercy to serve our necessities, but we are insensible and unaffected; and yet
the meanest mercy as it comes from God has an excellency stamp't upon it. We
should upbraid our souls for our coldness to God; everywhere we encounter
sensible demonstrations of his love to us; in every moment of our lives we have
some pledges of his goodness. Let us light our Torch at this Mountain of fire;
let the renewed act of his bounty constrain us to love him; we should love him
for his excellency, though we had no benefit by him; nay, though he hated us,
we are bound to love him as he is truly amiable in himself; how much more when
he draws us with the cords of a man, with bands of love? whosoever requites the
love of God with hatred, (as every impenitent sinner does) puts off the nature
of man, and degenerates into a Devil.

2. Fear; this is that eternal respect which is due to our Creator; an humble
reverence we owe to him, as he is infinitely above us; the holy Angels cover
their faces when they have the clearest views of his glory: Esaias 6.1, 2, 3..
The Lord is represented as sitting on a Throne, and the Seraphims stood about,
each having six wings; with twain he covered his face, and with twain his feet,
and with twain did he flee; and one cried to another, Holy, holy, holy Lord of
Hosts, the whole earth is full of his glory: The Angels are pure and innocent
Creatures; they fear not his angry justice, but they adore his excellencies and
perfections; his is a dread, when a most Serene Majesty. Penal fear is
inconsistent with the joys of heaven, but the fear of admiration is perfected
there; and in this sense the fear of God continues for ever, Psalm. 19.9. In all
our addresses to him we should compose our spirits, by the awful apprehension
of that infinite distance which is between God and us. Eccles. 5.2. Let not
thine heart be hasty to utter any thing before God; for God is in heaven, and
thou upon earth; the greatest distance in nature is but an imperfect discovery
how much we are beneath God; it is the effect of grace to represent the Divine
being and glory so to the soul, that in the most social duties it may have
impressions of fear; Psalm. 2.11. Serve the Lord with fear, and rejoice with
trembling. We should fear his greatness and power, in whose hands our life and
breath, and all our ways are; the fear of God having its actual force upon the
soul, is operative and instrumental to holy walking, from whence the fear of
God is taken in Scripture for the whole duty of man, it being an introduction
to it. The fear of God, and keeping his Commandments are joined together,
Eccles. 12.13. This is the Prepositus which governs our actions according to
Gods will; this is a watchful Sentinel against the most pleasant temptations;
it kills delight in sin, (by which the integrity of most men is lost;) for
delight cannot dwell with fear; this is the guard and security of the soul in
the days of trouble; the fear of God countermines the fear of men; this cuts
off base and unworthy complyings; therefore the Lord brings this as an antidote
against the base fear of men; Isa. 51.12, 13. Who art thou, that thou should
be afraid of a man that shall dye, and of the son of man, that shall be made as
grass? And forgettest the Lord thy Maker, that stretches forth the Heavens,
and laid the foundations of the Earth? This exalts a Christian above humane
frailty, and makes him despise the threatenings of the world, whereby many are
terrified from their constancy. It is the most unreasonable thing to be Cowards
to men, and fearless of God. Men have but a finite power, and so they cannot do
that hurt they would; and they are under the Divine Providence, and therefore
are disabled from doing that hurt, which otherwise they could do; but the power
of God is absolute and unconfined; therefore our Savior presses with vehemence
upon his Disciples, Matthew. 10.28. Fear not them which kill the body, but are
not able to kill the soul; but rather fear him who is able to destroy both body
and soul in hell: He lives for ever, and can punish for ever; therefore when
duty and life cannot stand together, he that flies the danger by delivering up
his soul, exchanges the pain of a moment for the torments of Eternity: Timent
Carcerem, non timent Gehennam; timent Cruciatum Temporalem, non poenas ignis
aeterni; timent modicum mori, non aeternum mori.
Austin upbraids the folly of such; They fear the Prison, but they fear not
Hell; they fear temporal torment, but they fear not the pains of unquenchable
fire; they fear the first, but not the second death.

3. Dependence, in respect of his al-sufficiency to supply our wants; and
Omnipotency to secure us from dangers

First, his al-sufficiency can supply our wants; he is the Sun, Fountain and
Mine of all that is good; from hence the Prophet glories in God, Habbakkuk
3.17, 18. Although the fig tree shall not blossom, neither shall fruit be in
the Vines; the labor of the Olives shall fail, and the fields shall yield no
meat; the Flock shall be cut off from the fold, and there shall be no herd in
the stalls; yet I will r^joyce in the Lord, I will joy in the God of my
salvation. He expresses not only things for delight, as the fruit of the Vine
and fig tree, but things for necessity, as the meat of the field, and the
flocks of the stall, and the utter failing of these together; for otherwise the
want of one might be supplied by the enjoyment of another. Now in the absolute
loss of these supports and comforts of life, the Prophet saw all things in
God; want of all outward things is infinitely recompenc't in the presence of
God: The Sun needs not the glimmering light of the Stars to make day; God
without the assistance of the Creatures can make us really happy; in the
enjoying of him we have all things, and that to the greatest advantage. The
things of this world deceive our expectations, and draw forth our corruptions;
but in God we enjoy them more refinedly, and more satisfyingly, the dregs of
sin and sorrow being removed; by possessing God there is no burden which we are
not able to bear, but he takes it a^ay, our wants, weakness and sufferings;
and there is no excellency of his which we are able to enjoy, but he conveys to
us, his grace, his glory. There is true riches in his favor, true honor in
his approbation, true pleasure in his peace. He is the treasure and triumph of
the soul. Lam. 3.24. The Lord is my portion, says my soul, therefore will I
hope in him: He is such a portion, that all temporal crosses cannot hinder its
influence on us, and his influxive presence makes heaven; he is a portion that
cannot be lost, he inseparably abides with the soul.

The real belief and application of this will keep a Saint in an holy
independency on earthly things; Cum mundus exarserit, cogitat se nihil habere
de tanta mole perdendum.
the flames which shall burn the World, cannot touch his portion; he may stand
upon its ruins, and say, I have lost nothing.

Moreover, this will keep the soul upright in the course of obedience; for all
the exorbitancies and swervings from the Rule proceeds from the apprehensions
of some particular good in the Creature, which draws men aside. Those who want
the light of faith (which discovers Gods al-sufficiency) only admire present
and sensible things; and to obtain these, they depart from God; but the more
eagerly they seek after these temporal good things, the further they run from
the Fountain of goodness, which alone can sweeten the best things we enjoy;
and counterbalance their absence; the Creatures are but of a limited benignity,
the necessity of their number proves the meanness of their value; but one God
answers all, he is an infinite and indefective good; he is for all the powers
of soul and body, to hold them in their pleasant exercise, and to give them
rest; he is alone able to impart happiness, and to preserve that happiness he
imparts.

Secondly, his Omnipotency can secure us from dangers. The Creation is a
standing Monument of his Almighty Power; for what but Omnipotency could out of
nothing produce the beautiful Fabric of heaven and earth; man cannot work
without materials, but God does; and that which exalts his power, is, that he
made it by his Word; he spoke the Word, and they were made, says the Psalmist,
Psalm. 33.9. There went no greater pains to the Worlds Creation, than Gods
command.

Moreover, the World is preserved from perishing by the power of its Maker.
Certainly, without the support of his mighty hand, the World had long before
this time relapfed to its primitive nothing: Many instances we have of his
power, in those miraculous deliverances which he has shown to his people in
their extremity; sometimes by suspension of the Works of Nature; his dividing
the Red Sea, and making it as a solid Wall, that the Israelites might have a
secure passage! his stopping the Sun in its course, that Joshua might have time
to destroy his enemies! his suspending the nature of the fire, that it might
not so much as singe the garments of the three Hebrews! his shutting the mouth
of the devouring Lions, and r turning Daniel in safety from that dreadful Den!
And are not all these, and many others of this kind, not only the pregnant
testimonies of his love, but the everlasting Characters of his Omnipotency.
Moreover, that which expresses the power of God with as great a luster, is the
turning of the hearts of many cruel enemies from their intended rage to favor
his people; thus did he change the heart of Esau, who had resolved the death of
his brother; that instead of killing him, he expressed the greatest tenderness,
and the most endearing affections to him; thus did he so sway the hearts of the
Egyptians toward the oppressed Israelites, that instead of securing them under
bondage, they encouraged their departure, by enriching them with jewels of
silver and of gold, Exodus 12.35. Now our duty is to glorify this power of God,
by placing our trust on him. Psalm. 121.2, 3. My help comes from the Lord, who
made the heavens and the earth; he will not suffer thy foot to be moved; by
dependence on God the soul is composed in the midst of the most apparent
dangers; as the upper Region of the Air is calm and serene, whatever storms
are here below; thus David expresses the same courage in all Estates; when he
was retired into a Cave to shelter himself from the fury of Saul, he sung the
57. Psalm. which he then composed; My heart is fixed, O God, my heart is fixed,
Psalm. 57.7.
I will sing and give praise; and afterward when he triumphed over Hadadezer
the King of Zebah, he composed the hundred and eighth Psalm, and sung the same
words: O God, Psalm. 108.1.
my heart is fixed, I will sing and give praise; i^ faith taught him the same
song in the Cave, and on the Throne; in all our exigencies we should apply the
power of God; the cause of our perplexing fears, is our low apprehension of
Gods power, and therefore when we are surrounded with difficulties and dangers,
then we are surprised with terror and dispondency; whereas when there are
visible means to rescue us, we lift up our heads: but our duty is in the
greatest extremities to glorify his power, and to refer our selves to his
goodness; and though we cannot be certain that God will by miracles rescue us
from dangers, as he did many of his people in former Ages; yet we are sure he
will so abate the power and force of the most injurious enemies, as they shall
not conquer the patience, nor break the hope of his people.

4. We owe perfect obedience to Gods will; vid. Subjection to his Commands, and
submission to his Providence. 1. Subjection to his Commands. As he is the first
cause, so he is the Supreme Lord; he that gave us life, must give us law: God
has an absolute title to our service as Creator; this made the Psalmist desire
the knowledge of Gods Commandments in order to his obedience. Psalm. 119.73. Thy
hands have made me; and fashioned me, give me understanding, that I may learn
thy Commandments; he may learn this from the universal obedience of all
creatures, those which are without reason, sense or life, inviolably observe
his commands. Esaias 48.13. Mine hand has laid the foundations of the earth, and
my right hand has span'd the heavens, when I call to them they stand up
together, as prepared to execute his commands. The insensible parts of the
World are so compliant with his will, as to contradict their proper natures to
serve his glory; fire descends from heaven at his command; the fluid Sea stands
up as a solid wall in obedience to him; this upbraids our Degeneration and
Apostasy, that we who are most indebted to the goodness of our Creator,
should prove disloyal and rebellious, when the inferior creatures with one
consent serve and glorify him.

Lastly, we owe submission to the will of his Providence; there is no shadow of
exception can be formed ag^i^^t his Sovereignty; he may do by right whatever he
can do by power, therefore we should acquiesce in his dispensations; this
consideration silenc't David, Psalm. 39.9. I held my tongue, and said nothing,
because thou did it; as the presence of a grave person in authority quiets a
disordered multitude; so the apprehension of Gods supremacy composes our
riotous thoughts and passions; unquietness of spirit in troubles, springs from
the ignorance of God, and of our selves; by impatience we cite God before our
Tribunal, and do as it were usurp his Throne; we set up an antiprovidence, as
if his wisdom should be taught by our folly; and sometimes in afflictions we
eye the next cause, but do not look upward to the Sovereign Disposer of all
things, l ke Balaam, who struck the Ass, but did not see the Angel which
opposed him; thus from a brutish imagination we regard the visible instrument
of our trouble, but consider not the Providence of God in all; from hence it is
that our spirits are full of unquiet agitations; we live continually upon
self-created Racks: Now the humble acknowledgement of Gods hand, and the
submitting of our selves to his will, as it glorifies God, so it gives ease to
us; as there is the greatest equity, so policy in our willing stooping to him.
Romans 14.11. As I live says the Lord, every knee shall bow to me, and every
tongue shall confess to God; he engages his life and honor for this: if there
is not a voluntary, there must be a violent subjection to him; the wilful man
never wants woe; the spring of our daily misery, as well as our sins is,
opposition to Gods will; but the cheerful resignation to his Providence, what a
blessed pill of rest is this to the soul? what a Sabbath from all those sinful
and penal disturbances which discompose our spirits; it is a lower heaven; for
as in the state of glory there is an unchangeable agreement between the will of
the Creator and the creature, so according to the same measure and degree
wherein we conform our wills to Gods, we proportionably enjoy the holiness and
blessedness of that state.

THE TRINITY Proved by Scripture.
1 JOHN 5.7. For there are three that bear record in heaven, the Father, the
Word, and the Holy Ghost, and these three are one.


IN the fifth verse of this Chapter, the Apostle had laid this down as an
Article of faith, that the Lord Jesus Christ is the Son of God. Who is he
that ovcrcometh the world, but he that believes that Jesus is the Son of
God: 1 John 5.5.
Now for the proof of so glorious a truth, the Apostle produces six witnesses,
and ranks them into two orders, some bear record in heaven, and some bear
witness on earth; some bear witness on earth, as ver. 8. Ver. 8.
of this Chapter, There are three that bear witness on earth, the Spirit and
the water, and the blood, and these three agree in one; and some bear record in
heaven, in the words of my Text: There are three that bear record in heaven,
the Father, the Word, and the Holy Ghost, and these three are one.

In the words you may take notice of these particulars.

1. The number of the heavenly witnesses, or the number of those witnesses that
bear record in heaven, viz. three.

2. Their dignity or excellency, they are in heaven.

3. Their act, they bear record.

4. The names of the witnesses, the Father, the Word, and the Holy Ghost.

5. Their unity, and these three are one.

I would observe from the context,

That it is not an easy matter to believe that the Lord Jesus Christ is the
Son of God: Whence is it else that the Apostle so often urges this point in
this Epistle? whence is it else, that whereas it is sufficient for any truth to
be confirmed by the mouth of two or three witnesses? here are no less than six
witnesses produced to prove that the Lord Jesus is the Son of God; three
heavenly, and three earthly; and indeed who can declare the great mystery of
the eternal generation of the Son of God: I will give five wonders in five
words.

1. God the Father communicates the whole divine essence unto the Son, and
yet has the whole divine essence in himself: If God communicates his essence,
it must be his whole essence; for that which is infinite, cannot admit of any
division, partition, or diminution; yet methinks, we have a faint resemblance
of this here below. It Is not with things of a spiritual nature, as with things
of a corporeal; spiritual things may be communicated without being lessened or
divided; viz. when I make a man know that which I know, my knowledge is still
the same, and nothing diminished; and upon his account, whether that Argument
against the traduction of the soul, that if the soul of the Father be traduced,
the Father is left soul-lesse be cogent, I leave to the judgment of the
learned: It Is to be granted, that to communicate the notion is one thing, and
the faculty is another, but both are things of a spiritual nature.

2. God the Father, and God the Son are one essence, and yet though the
Father begets the Son, the Son does not beget himself: The Father and the
Son are one God, yet the Lord Jesus is the Son of God, under that notion,
as God is a Father, and not the Son of God, under the notion as God is a
Son, and so not the Son of himself.

3. God the Father begets God the Son, and yet the Father is not elder
than the Son, nor the Son younger than the Father; he that begets, is
not in time before him that is begotten; if God was a Father from everlasting,
then Christ was a Son from everlasting; for relata sunt simul natura, an
eternal Father must have an eternal Son.

4. The Father begets the Son, yet the Son is not inferior to the Father,
nor the Father superior to the Son: The Lord Jesus Christ being in the form
of God, thought it no robbery to be equal with God; it was his right, and
therefore it was no robbery; as he is coeternal, so he is coequal with the
Father.

5. The Father begets the Son, yet the Son has the same numerical nature
with the Father, and the Father the same numerical nature with the Son; an
earthly son has the same specifical nature with his Father, but then though
it be the same in regard of kind, yet it differs in regard of number; but God
the Father, and God the Son have the same individual numerical nature.



1. On earth; there may be some single or one witness, but here are no less
than three.

2. Earthly, witnesses are such as are liable to exception, but these are in
heaven beyond all exception.

3. As for earthly witnesses, it may come to pass that their names may not be
known, these here are named; the Father, the Word, and the Holy Ghost.

4. Earthly witnesses, when they are produced, either may be silent, or it may
be bear false witness, but these bear record, and their record is true.

5. Earthly witnesses may not agree in their witness, as the witnesses brought
against Christ; but there is a sweet consent and agreement amongst these
witnesses, for these three are one.

6. Whereas Earthly witnesses, although they may be one in regard of consent,
yet they are not one in regard of essence; every man has one particular
individual essence of his own, but these are one in regard of essence: Now pray
mark this, for if it be so, then the Father is God, the Son God, and the Holy
Ghost God. And therefore the Socinian, who denies the Deity of the Word, and of
the Holy Ghost, will persuade you to believe that these words are to be
expounded thus, these three are one; that is, says he, these three agree in
one; but that this is not the meaning of the phrase, appears by the variation
of it in the next verse; the words are, Ver. 8.
There are three that bear witness on earth, the Spirit, the water, and the
blood, and these three agree in one: Now if both phrases note unity in consent,
here is an occasion of offense, and falling administered by the variation of
them in these two verses; why is it not said the Father, the Word, and the Holy
Ghost agree in one, as well as the Spirit, water and blood.

And suppose we should grant that the oneness spoken of in the Text is to be
expounded of consent in will and agreement, yet it would prove the Godhead both
of the Father, and Spirit; for in free Agents, where there is the same will,
there is the same nature, indeed with men it is the same specifical nature, not
numerical; because there is but one God only, therefore here it must be the
same numerical nature.

Observe.
The doctrine I would speak more fully to, is the doctrine of the Trinity, or
that there are three persons in the divine essence.

In the prosecution of this point, I shall (by Gods assistance) observe this
method.

1. I shall speak something to the notion of a Divine person.

2. I shall show you that these are three persons in the Divine essence.

3. I shall speak somethi^g to the distinction of those pers s.

4. I shall speak to the order of these persons.

5. I shall enquire whether the mystery of the Trinity may be found out by the
light of nature.

6. The Use and Application.

1. I shall speak something to the notion of a divine person; what a divine
person is, or wherein it consists.

Resol. 1. Negatively; a divine person in the precise notion of it, is not a
being or singularis substantia persona, and natura singularis clare
distinguitur; there is a clear difference between person and nature, as you may
perceive by these following considerations.

1. Our Lord Jesus Christ assumed the nature of man, and yet not the person of
men.

2. Those things which may really be separated are not the same; but that
personality may be separated from nature, appears by the foregoing instance.

3. If a person were a being, it must either be finite or infinite; if finite,
then something finite would be in God; if infinite, then there would be three
infinites in God, or which is all one, there would be three Gods; now Deum
trinum asserimus, Deum triplicem negamus.

2. Positively; a person is modus rei, the manner of a being; and a divine
person is modus divinae essentiae, the divine essence modificated, or the
divine essences considered three manner of ways; for i^stance, consider the
divine essence as the fountain or principle of deity, so it is the first
person; consider it as streaming forth from the Father, so it is the second
person; consider it as breathed forth by Father and Son, and so it is the third
person.

I said before that the Father is the fountain or principle of deity; now this
must warily be understood; I do not say, the Father is the cause of deity, but
the principle; there is a wide difference between p incipium and causam, a
principle and a cause. Omnis causa est pr^ncipium, sed omne principium non est
causa; the cause of a thing may be called its beginning, but the beginning of a
thing is not necessarily its cause; the beginning of a line, is not the cause
of it.

But to return, where we were, a divine person is modus divinae essentiae, the
divine essence modificated, the divine essence considered three manner of
ways; now the manner of a thing is neither ens, nor nihil; it is neither a
thing, nor yet nothing; for instance, the folding of my hands, is not ens, for
then I should be a Creator, and make something; nor is it plainly nothing; for
there is difference between my hands folded, and my hands expanded.

Now we use the word person, because it notes the subsistence of the most
excellent kind of being, and has more in it than subsistence has; we say a
beast does subsist, but it is absurd to say a beast has personality; because a
person notes an understanding subsistent; Heb. 1.3.
besides, the word person is attributed to God in the Scripture; in the Epistle
to the Hebrews, you find these words made use of by the Apostle concerning
Christ; the brightness of his glory, and the express Image of his person.

2. I am to show you that there are three persons in the divine essence, and
that from Scriptures, both in the Old Testament, and in the New.

1. By Scriptures in the Old Testament; to that purpose, take into your
thoughts these particulars.

1. A plurality of persons may be proved by that Scripture, Genesis 1.26. Genesis
1.26.
where God speaks of himself in the plural number; Let us make man in our
Image; this notes more persons in the Godhead than one; it is true, something is
urged by way of Objection.

Object. 1. God speaks by way of Apostrophe unto the Angels, that they should
bear witness of the works of Creation; it is usual in Scripture, for God to
speak to the creatures; as in the Prophecy of Isaiah; Isa. 1.3.
Hear oh heavens, and give ear oh earth, for the Lord has spoken.

Resol. 1. Although God is sometimes brought in in the Scripture speaking unto
the creature, yet it is impossible that this Scripture should be expounded
after this manner; For,

1. Those unto whom God speaks, were companions with him in the work of
Creation; Let us make man after our Image; now God did not make use of Angels
as instruments in the work of Creation, not indeed could he so do; For,

1. Every instrument must have subject matter to work upon; but Creation does
nor presuppose a subject, but make it.

2. Every instrument must have time to work in, but Creation is in an instant;
and therefore when we read that God created the world by Jesus Christ, as in
the Epistle to the Hebrews; Heb. 1.2.
by whom (speaking of Christ) he made the world; this particle per, or by, non
est nota instrumenti, sed nota ordinis, notes not instrumentality, but the
order amongst the divine persons; for as there is an order in regard of
themselves, so in regard of their operations; operari sequitur esse; and hence
it is, that although we read that God the Father made the world by Jesus
Christ, yet we do not read that Jesus Christ made the world by the Father.

2. God speaks unto those persons, after whose image man was to be made; Let
us make man after our image; now man was not to be made after the image of
Angels, but the image of God himself.

Ob ect. 2. God speaks more magnatum, or more pincipium, after the manner of
great ones, who speak in the plural number.

Resol. 1. If God speaks more magnatum, after the manner of great ones, why
does he not always, or at least frequently speak after this manner? you will
find God speaking in Scripture for the most part in the singular number; even
in this very book of Genesis, Behold, Genesis 6.17. Genesis 9.9. Genesis 15.1. Genesis 17.1.
I even I do bring a flood of waters upon the earth. Behold, I even I establish
my Covenant with you. Fear not Abraham (says God) I am thy shield, and thy
exceeding great reward; and elsewhere, I am the Almighty God, walk before me,
and be thou perfect.

2. If God speaks in the plural number after the manner of great ones, then
certainly he would speak after this manner, when he discovers most of his
royalty, and power, and Majesty, as he did at the giving of the Law on Mount
Sinai; and yet there he speaks in the singular number; Exodus 20.2. Exodus 20.2.
I am the Lord thy God, which have brought thee out of the Land of Egypt, out
of the house of bondage.

3. It Is likely the Princes did at first speak in the plural number, not to
note their power and greatness, but their modesty and wariness; that it was
not their design to rule according to will, but according to counsel; that they
were willing to advise with others, and to be guided by others; The wisest
Kings on earth will have their counsel, and it is no more than needs; plus
vident oculi, quam oculus, many eyes see more than one eye; Ephesians. 1.11.
but Gods Counsel is his Will; Who works all things after the counsel of his
own Will. Nor indeed is it safe or fit for any to govern arbitrarily, or purely
by will, but he whose Will is his counsel, it is so far from needing a rule,
that it is the only Rule.

Isa. 63.7, 8, 9, 10.
2. As a plurality of persons, so a Trinity of persons may be proved out of the
old Testament; I shall mention, and only mention for brievity sake, one place
in the Prophecy of Isaiah, in the seventh verse you have mention made of
Jehovah, or the Lord; in the ninth verse, of Jesus Christ, called the Angel of
his presence; in the tenth verse, of the holy Spirit; but they rebelled, and
vexed his holy Spirit.

2. You have this doctrine more clearly delivered in the new Testament, as will
appear by several instances.

Mat. 3.16, 17.
1. At the Baptism of Christ, the Trinity of persons were clearly discovered;
you may read the history; And Jesus when he was baptized, went up strait way
out of the water, and lo the heavens were opened unto him, and he saw the
Spirit of God descending like a dove, and lighting upon him, and lo a voice
from heaven, saying, This is my beloved Son, in whom I am well pleased;
Consider here,

1. We have three names given severally and particularly to three persons.

1. He who spoke with a voice from heaven was the Father.

2. He who was Baptized in Jordan, is called the Son.

3. He who descended in the shape of a Dove, is called the Spirit of God.

2. There were three outward signs or symboles by which those three persons
did manifest themselves.

1. The Father by an audible voice; the Word in heaven, is borne witness to by
a word from heaven.

2. The Son in the humane nature.

3. The holy Ghost in the shape of a Dove.

3. They are described by three distinct actions.

1. The one cries by a voice from heaven, This is my well-beloved Son, hear
him; this could not be the voice of the Son, for then he would be Son to
himself; nor can this be attributed unto the Spirit, for then Jesus would have
been the son of the Spirit.

2. The second, after his Baptism, prays; Luke 3.21. It came to pass, that
Jesus being baptized, and praying, the heaven was opened.

3. The third descended in the shape of a dove, and rested upon Jesus Christ.

Now to close this particular, why might it not be said, that the Father was
baptized in Jordan as well as the Son? or that the Father descended in the
shape of a dove, as well as the Spirit; or that the Son did all this, speak
with a voice from heaven, and was baptized in Jordan, and descended in the
shape of a dove; if this were not a truth, that there are three persons in the
divine essence? hence the primitive Christians used to say unto any one that
doubted of the Trinity, abi ad Jordanem and videbis, go to Jordan, and you will
see a Trinity.

2. This doctrine may be proved from the institution of the Ordinance of
Baptism; Go ye therefore and teach all Nations, baptizing them in the Name of
the Father, and of the Son, Mat. 28.19.
and of the Holy Ghost; and indeed, no wonder if God discovered himself to be
three persons, and one God at Christ's Baptism, when the name of the blessed
Trinity, is as it were in fair and legible Characters, writ upon the forehead
of the Ordinance of Baptism its self; Baptism its self, is as it were,
baptized in the Name of the Father, Son, and holy Ghost; now these I call the
words of institution; for although you have not here the first institution of
Baptism, John the Baptist, who was called so from this very Ordinance,
administering this Sacrament, and the Disciples questionless from the Command
of Christ himself; the Evangelist John tells us, that Jesus himself baptized
not, Joh. 4.2.
but his Disciples; yet here you have a solemn command for baptism, and the
form of the administration thereof unto all generations.

And here consider,

1. Christ commands them to baptize, not in the names, but in the Name of the
Father, Son, and holy Ghost; if you consider them personally, so they have
three names, Father, Son, and holy Ghost; if essentially, then but one name;
unum nomen, una deitas, one God, one deity; and I observe farther, that which
way soever we expound this phrase in the name, either calling upon the name of
the Father, Son, and holy Ghost (as some) or in the name, by the authority, or
at the appointment of God the Father, Son, and holy Ghost (as others) or in the
name, viz. for the service, honor, and glory of God the Father, Son, and holy
Ghost (as a third sort) you must either make these to be three Gods, or else
three persons in the Godhead; for who is the object of our prayers but God? who
has authority to appoint Ordinances for his Church but God? whom are we to
serve and worship but God alone? Thou shall worship the Lord thy God, Mat. 4.10.
and him only shall thou serve.

2. They were to baptize, not in the name of the Father by the Son, or by the
Spirit; but in the name of the Father, Son, and Spirit, which notes the
equality of the three persons.

3. Father, Son, and holy Ghost, are so joined together, that we are no less
baptized in the name of the Son, and of the Spirit, than of the Father; and
therefore their deity is the same, their power and authority the same.

4. An Article is thrice prefixed, and added to every one, baptizate in nomine
(...), that Father, that Son, that holy Ghost; that Father whose voice you have
heard from heaven; that Son, whom as yet you see in the humane nature; that
holy Ghost, whom you have seen descending upon me in the shape of a Dove;
Surely the repetition of this Article, does not want its singular Emphasis,
that Father, that Son, and that holy Ghost.

3. This doctrine may yet further be cleared from that saying of our Savior;
John 14.16.
I will pray the Father, and he shall give you another Comforter; hence is
plainly proved the personality of the Holy Ghost, he is called another
Comforter; now he who is distinguished from the Father and the Son, in the
manner as to be called another comforter, is either distinguished in regard of
his essence, or in regard of his personal subsistence; not in regard of his
essence, for then he would be another God, and therefore he is another in
regard of his personal subsistence.

4. You have a clear proof for this doctrine in the words of the Text; There
are three that bear record in heaven, the Father, the Word, and the holy Ghost,
and these three are one; and to that purpose, consider,

1. You have mention here of three witnesses; now three witnesses are three
persons.

2. The Word and holy Ghost are conjoined in their Testimony with the Father,
which is not competible to any creature; and lest we should doubt of this, it
is expressly said even by Saint John himself, to be the witness of God; Verse
9. If we receive the witness of men, the witness of God is greater; for this
is the witness of God which he has testified of his Son; and concerning
Christ, it is said that he is the true God; ver. 20. This is the true God, and
eternal life; let the Socinian show me where any creature is called the true
God; Concerning the Spirit also in this Chapter, it is said ver. 6. that he is
truth it self; It is the Spirit that bears Witness, because the Spirit is
Truth.

3. If there be three witnesses, whereof every one of them is God, the one not
the other, and yet not many Gods, but one true God; the point is clear, there
are three distinct persons subsisting in one divine essence, or (which is all
one) there are three persons and one God.

3. I am to speak something to the distinction of these three persons; though
they cannot be divided, yet they may be, they are distinguished; many things in
nature may be distinguished, which cannot be divided; for instance, the cold
and the moisture, which is in the water, may be distinguished, but they cannot
be divided; Now that those three persons are distinguished appears,

1. By what has been already said, the Father is not the Son, nor the Son the
Father, nor the holy Ghost the Father or the Son.

2. By the words of the Text; here are three heavenly witnesses produced to
prove that the Lord Jesus Christ is the Son of God, namely, the Father, the
Word, and the holy Ghost; now one and the same person, although he has a
thousand names, cannot pass for three witnesses, upon any fair or reasonable
account whatever; you may be sure that God reckons right, and he says, John
8.13.
Father, Son, and holy Ghost, to be three witnesses; there are three that
bear record in heaven; so in Saint John's Gospel, the Pharisees charge our
Savior that he bare record of himself; (say they) thou bear record of thy
self, thy record is not true; now mark what Christ replies, ver. 17, 18. It is
written in your Law, Ver. 17, 18.
that the Testimony of two men is true; I am one that bear witness of my self,
and the Father that sent me, bears witness of me; where you have our Savior
citing the Law concerning the validity of a Testimony given by two witnesses;
and then he reckons his Father for one witness, and himself for another.

4. I shall speak a few words to the order of these divine persons; in order of
subsistence, the Father is before the Son, and the Son before the holy Ghost.
The Father, the first person in the Trinity, has foundation of personal
subsistence in himself; the Son the second person, the foundation of personal
subsistence from the Father; the holy Ghost the third person, has foundation
of personal subsistence from the Father and the Son.

Now although one person be before the other in regard of order, yet they are
all equal in regard of time, Majesty, glory, essence; this I conceive to be the
reason why in the Scripture sometimes you have the Son placed before the
Father; as 2 Cor. 13.14. 2 Cor. 13.14.
The grace of our Lord Jesus Christ, and the love of God, and the communion of
the holy Ghost be with you all, Amen. Gal. 1.1.
So Gal. 1.1. Paul an Apostle not of men, neither by men, but by Jesus Christ,
and God the Father, who raised him from the dead. Sometimes the holy Ghost is
placed before the Father, as Ephesians. 2.18. Through him we have an access by one
Spirit, unto the Father. Ephesians. 2.18. Rev. 1.4, 5.
Sometimes before Jesus Christ, Rev. 1.4, 5. John to the seven Churches in
Asia, Grace be unto you, and peace from him which is, and which was, and which
is to come, and from the seven Spirits which are before the Throne (by the
seven Spirits there, is meant the holy Ghost) and from Jesus Christ who is the
faithful witness, etc. The consideration of this caused that rule amongst our
Divines; ab ordine verborum nulla est argumentatio; there is no argument to be
urged from the order of words. Now this shows, that although one person be
before another in regard of relation, and order of subsistence, yet all are
equal one with another in regard of essence.

And therefore beware lest you derogate the least jota or tittle of glory, or
Majesty, from any of the three persons. As in nature, a small matter as to the
body, may be a great matter as to the beauty of the body; cut but the hair
from the eye brow, how disfigured will all the face look. If you take away
never so little of that honor, and glory, which is due to any of the divine
Persons, you do what in you lies, to blot, to stain, to disfigure the fair and
beautiful face of the blessed Trinity.

5. I am to enquire whether the mystery of the Trinity may be found out by the
light of nature.

Resol. There are two things in the general, that I would say in answer to this
question.

1. That the light of nature without divine Revelation, cannot discover it.

2. That the light of nature after divine Revelation, cannot oppose it.

1. That the light of nature without divine Revelation, cannot discover it; and
for that purpose take into your thoughts these following considerations.

1. If that which concerns the worship of God cannot be found out by the light
of nature, much less that which concerns Gods nature, essence, or subsistence;
but the Antecedent is certainly true; For,

1. As for the part of the worship and service of God, which is instituted, and
ceremonial, it is impossible that it should be found out by the light of
nature; for instance, what man could divine that the Tree of life should be a
Sacrament to Adam in Paradise? How comes the Church to understand what
creatures were clean, what were unclean? that the Priesthood was settled in the
Tribe of Levi, and not in the Tribe of Simeon, or the Trible of Judah?
certainly these lessons were not learned by the candlelight of nature.

2. As for that part of the service of God, which is moral, all of that neither
is not discoverable by natural light; For,

1. If you consult the seventh to the Romans, you shall find that there were
some secret moral wickednesses which Paul did not see, which Paul could not
have seen by the light of nature; no, although a Pharisee, and by that means
very expert in the letter of the Law; Romans 7.7.
Romans 7.7. I had not known lust, except the Law had said, Thou shall not covet.

2. If the light of nature be imperfect in us since the fall, which I suppose
you will grant, then there may be many things moral now imperceptible by the
light of nature, which it might and did see in its state of perfection; and
therefore it must needs be of dangerous import, to make the Law of nature a
weak, faint, shadowing, imperfect light, the perfect rule, and only measure of
moral duties; to cry up the Law written in our hearts, is in this case to cry
down the Law written in the Scriptures; this is as it were to pull the Sun in
its noonday brightness, in its greatest luster and glory out of the
firmament, and to walk by the light of a Candle, a stinking snuff in the
socket, almost gone out; this is to make the Primmer, the Horn-book, the A. b.
c. of natural light, the highest piece of learning in morality.

The Law of nature (to our shame and grief we may speak it) is so obliterated
and darkened, that it cannot show a man the least part of his wickedness.
Pelagius was a man of great learning, and by his studies and diligence, had
snuffed the Candle of the Lord, and made it burn with a clearer shine; yet how
little could he see into this matter? It was his affection, that we are borne
as well without vice, as virtue, tam sine vitio, quam sine virtute nascimur;
and we see all Popery to this very day, hold motions to sin not consented
unto, to be no sins, but necessary conditions arising from our constitution,
and such as Adam had in innocence.

But I forbear; the issue of this particular is thus much, if that which
concerns the worship and service of God, cannot be found out by the light of
nature, much less that which concerns his essence and subsistence.

2. The doctrine of the Gospel is called by the Apostle a mystery, and a
mystery without controversy; great is the mystery of godliness! and what
greater Gospel-mystery is there than the Trinity, which neither men nor Angels
can comprehend, and both men and Angels must adore! Now if this doctrine be
discoverable by natural light, it is no more a mystery. The works of the flesh
are manifest, Gal. 5.19, 20.
says the Apostle, Gal. 5.19, 20. Now why are they said to be manifest?
because they stink in the nostrils of nature, and are discernable by the dim
eye of conscience.

Object. 1. Possibly some may say, man has as it were the image or likeness
of a Trinity within himself; there are three prime faculties, understanding,
will, and memory, in one and the same reasonable soul.

Resol. 1. A similitude does not prove a thing to be, but only represent a
thing to our fancy, which at present has, or at least had a being one way or
other; for instance, it is impossible that any Son should know his fathers
picture, unless first he has seen or heard, that his father was such a person
as the picture does represent; and by that means has before hand, his fathers
idea and image presented in his own soul.

2. It Is denied that these faculties in man's soul, bear the image or likeness
of a Trinity; neither can any man by a reflex act upon his own soul, attain to
the knowledge of this great mystery; but such notions as these are the
luxuriant extravagancies of some curious brains, that would advance earth as
high as heaven; and do indeed rather darken, then illustrate this truth; as he
who would add any color unto light, does rather blemish it than adorn it;
what a piece of folly would it be to undertake to emblazon a sunbeam?

Object. 2. The doctrine of the Trinity was known to several of the Heathens,
which had not the Scriptures, and therefore is discoverable by the light of
nature.

Resol. 1. If the Heathen had any notions of the Trinity, they might receive
them either by tradition, from those who had read the Scriptures, or out of the
Scriptures themselves, and not by the improvement of natural light.

2. It Is very probable that these notions of a Trinity, which are found in
Plato, and Trismegistus, were not writ by them, but foisted into their works by
some that lived in after ages; my Reasons are these.

1. Those writings which go under the name of the Ancient Fathers, are not all
truly such, but a great part of them supposititious, and forged; as Mr. Dally
proves largely in that learned piece of his, called A Treatise of the right use
of the Fathers; where he gives you an account of whole books that were
published under the names of the Apostles, as Saint Peter, Saint Barnabas, and
others which were not such. Now if men durst be thus bold with the Apostles, no
wonder if they did not stick to deal thus with Heathens. This imposture in the
Primitive times was very ordinary; yea, the fathers themselves have used this
Artifice to promote their own opinions, as you may read largely in the third
Chapter of that book.

2. Some are apt to believe, that there are clearer notions of a Trinity in
some of the books of the Heathens, than in the books of Moses; and so by
consequence, the Heathens should know more of the Trinity, than the Israel of
God, which is flat contrary to the Scriptures. Psalm. 76.1.
Psalm. 76.1. In Judah is God known, his Name is great in Israel; He has not
dealt so with any Nation; and as for his judgments, thy have not known them;
praise ye the Lord.

And thus I have done with the first Assertion in answer to this question,
whither the mystery of the Trinity may be found out by the light of nature?
viz. that the light of nature without divine Revelation, cannot discover it.

2. The light of nature after divine Revelation, cannot oppose it. For,

1. As the judgment of sense ought not to be urged against the judgment of
reason; so the judgment of reason ought not to be urged against the judgment
of faith. The judgment of sense, ought not to be urged against the judgment
of reason; for instance, sense tells us that some of the Stars are as small as
spangles (I am apt to believe, that some Country men think the Sun to be no
bigger than their Cartwheele) here reason interposes, corrects sense, tells us,
that there being a vast distance between us and them, they must needs be very
great bodies, or else they could not be visible. There are thousands of Stars
that cause the white streak in the heavens, called the Milky-way, which are
invisible upon the account but now mentioned. Sense tells us, that the Sun is
of greater magnitude in the morning, and evening, than at noon; here reason
again interposes, corrects sense, tells us, it only apeares so because of the
densenesse, or thickness of the air or medium; and that for the same reason,
if you put a piece of money into a basin of water, it will appear of a larger
size, than if it were in a basin without water; that which I aim at is this,
that as reason does thus correct sense, a pari, faith should correct reason.

2. Philosophical Axioms, must be kept within their proper bounds, and limited
to a finite power; for instance, Ex nihilo nihil fit, that out of nothing
proceeds nothing, is a truth, if it be understood with reference to a finite
power. So A privatione ad habitum non datur regressus, is a truth upon the same
terms. Sic una numero essentia non potest esse in tribus personis; that one
and the same numerical essence, cannot be in three distinct persons, is a truth
limited, as before; I mean, with reference to a finite power; but all this, and
ten thousand Arguments more of this nature, cannot overthrow this principle,
that there are three persons, and one God; for we are not speaking now of that
which is finite, but of that which is infinite. Suppose this Question should be
started; how the same numerical essence can be in three persons? possibly an
answer might be returned thus. Suppose a father begets a son, and
communicates to him the same numerical soul and body which he has still
himself, and both of these should communicate the same soul and body to a
third, here would be three distinct persons, yet the same essence in them all;
but I know a reply would quickly be made, This is impossible; answer must be
made, It is true, as to that which is finite, but not unto that which is
infinite, etc.

The time allotted for this exercise being spent, in the handling of the
doctrinal part of this Observation, I can speak but a few words to the Use and
Application.

Use 1. This doctrine should establish us in the truth of the Gospel, even this
mystery which has been hid from ages, and from generations, but now is made
manifest unto the Church; the Heathens as we have heard, could not attain unto
this knowledge by the light of nature; Oh what a comfort is this, that we serve
an incomprehensible God! one God, and yet three persons; to comprehend is to
environ, and keep in all that God is; for my part, I would not worship that God
that I could comprehend; the doings of God know no bounds, much more his
essence and subsistence. Kings have their Crowns, a circle about their head,
and should also have a circle about their feet, they should not go which way
they please, but keep themselves with n the limits of Law, both of God and man,
and this speaks them to be creatures, though in a greater letter, finite
beings; but it is otherwise with God; as he will not have any Articles put upon
him, so he cannot have any circles or lines drawn about him; for an infinite
God to be finite and limited, is a contradiction in adjecto.

2. Let us study this doctrine of the Trinity; and as a motive to this
consider, we cannot worship God aright, without some knowledge of this truth.
As God the Father, God the Son, and God the holy Ghost, are the object of
divine faith, so are they the object of divine worship; we must worship Trinity
in unity, and unity in Trinity; you may direct your prayers unto God the
Father, Son, and holy Ghost; but you must not pray unto either of the persons,
but as united unto the other. Gerard tells us in Loc. com. de sanctissimo
Trinitatis mysterio, cap. 1. that it is absolutely necessary in some measure to
know this truth; and that not only the denial of the Trinity of persons, but
the ignorance of it is damnable; Ephesians. 2.12.
the Apostle tells the Ephesians, that sometime they were Atheists, we render
it without God in the world, but in the original it is (...), Atheists in the
world; and the reason of this you have in the beginning of the verse, because
they were (...) without the knowledge of Christ; although a man acknowledges
there is but one true God, yet if he knows not this God in Christ, he is an
Atheist.

3. Bless God for the clear discovery of this truth under the Gospel; Blessed
are our eyes for we see, and our ears for we hear; It Is Gods method to
discover himself by degrees; we know more of God now than the Jews did; and we
shall know more in heaven, than we know on earth. Now God the Father, God the
Son, and God the holy Ghost, lead us unto all truth, and bring us at last unto
himself, that we may enjoy him, and have a more full and clear discovery of
him, unto all Eternity, Amen.

READER,
BE pleased to take notice that the worthy Author of this Sermon not long
after he had preached it, by a very sad hand of God fell sick and dyed; so that
he had not opportunity himself to bring it forth into light; you have it here
as it was taken by a good Noter, yet so as it has been compared with the
Authors own Notes; which yet being for the most part wrote in Characters, the
Comparer could not make so much advantage of them as he desired.

Had the Lord been pleased to spare him his life, this Discourse had come forth
more exact and accurate than now it does; but such as it is, it here presents
it self to thee; and it is hoped, though that is wanting which might please the
learned eye, yet there is that in it which may profit the judicious Christian;
you will here see the difference of Treatises put forth by the Authors
themselves, and by others, which is as great as the difference betwixt the
child whom the mother nurses her self, (which is full and fair, and lusty)
and that which is put out after her death, (which is too often infirm, lean,
and starved.)

If thou find any thing in this Sermon that is for thy profit, bless God
for it, and pray that no more such hopeful instruments may be cut off in the
prime of their days.

THE DIVINE AVTHORITY OF THE Scriptures.
2 Timothy 3.16. All Scripture is given by inspiration of God, etc.


YOu have heard there is a God, and you have had a discourse concerning the
Trinity; I am now to clear and prove to you the Divine authority of the
Scriptures; therefore I crave your attention to what the Scripture reports of
it self in 2 Timothy 3.16, etc.

It was motive enough to the Ephesians to plead and zealously to conte d for
the image of Diana, because they said it was that which fell from Jupiter, Acts
19.35. Sure then you will have reason to plead for, and to hold fast this
blessed book which we call the Bible, if I shall be able to make it further
evident, that it is tha book which God himself has writ. An Argument which you
need to hear, and which you had need seriously consider; for (as I shall anon
press it upon you) if you did believe the glory the Scripture speaks of, and
the dreadful misery that remains for impenitent sinners in hell; if things as
they are stated in the Scripture were looked upon as real truths, it would
cause you presently to return to God by godliness.

There were even in the Apostles time seducers, (so you find in the beginning
of this Chapter) persons that would resist the truth, as Jannes and Jambres
resisted Moses; Not only in the present age, (which is like the dregs of the
world in comparison of the Primitive times) but even then also there were
seducers and deceivers; there are Comets among the Stars, as well as ignis
fatuus that creep upon the earth; what must Timothy do? ver. 14. Continue thou
in the things which thou have learned and have been assured of, knowing of whom
than have learned them; and that from a child thou have known the Scriptures,
etc. [From a childe] Jos phus in his book against Apion tells us, the children
of the Jews were so instructed in their Laws, that they could scarce name a Law
to them, but they could tell it; more shame to us Christians that take no care
to teach Religion, that may much more easily be learned than the Jewish
Religion could. [From a child thou have learned the Scriptures] And it would
be a shame for a person so long instructed, not to continue in this doctrine; a
shame for an old professor well educated to desert the principles of his
Religion, and forsake the truths of Scripture; do not forsake them, why? this
verse gives two reasons; first, it is of divine revelation; secondly, it is
profitable for doctrine, for reproof, for correction, for instruction in
righteousness.

A little to explain the words.

All Scripture is given by inspiration of God] Scripture in the Text, is the
same with the Holy Scriptures, ver. 15. for you must know that in the Bible,
the word Scripture is commonly taken for the holy Scriptures; so search the
Scripture; ye err, not knowing the Scripture; John 5.39. Matthew. 22.29. John
10.33.
the Scripture cannot be broken; so you must understand it here, all Scripture,
that is not every thing that is written, but the holy Scripture.

Is of Divine inspiration] the meaning is, that the things written are not of
humane invention, are not the contrivance of any man's wit, or any man's fancy;
but they are the real revelations of the mind and will of God: And yet those
things which were thus revealed, good men were excited to write them, and
assisted in it: I say, the inspiration of God comprehends in it these two
things. First, the truths contained in this Scripture were not inventions of
man's brain ot fancy: Secondly, that they who writ them were excited to it, and
were assisted in it by the Holy Ghost.

The Text is both explained and confirmed by the parallel place, 2 Pet. 1.21.
Knowing this first, that no prophecy of the Scripture is of any private
interpretation; for the prophecy came not in old time by the will of man; but
holy men of God spoke as they were moved by the Holy Ghost.

That you may a little understand this Text, give me leave to gloss upon it.
In ver. 16. the Apostle said, we have not followed cunningly devised fables,
etc. That which we have proposed and preached to you, was nothing cunningly
devised by us, when we made known to you the power and coming of the Lord Jesus
Christ; we saw him transfigured; we did not go about to tell you the story our
selves; but if you will not believe that, ver. 19. We have also a more sure
word of prophecy: There are predictions concerning Christ in the Old
Testament, whereunto ye do very well that ye take heed as unto a light that
shines in a dark place until the day dawn, and the day star arise in your
hearts: Not as some Enthusiasts would interpret this, that men should mind the
Old Testament till the Spirit of God should tell them the truth of this
Scripture, and then throw away the Old Testament: No, it is a light that shines
in a dark place until the day dawns, and the day star arise in your hearts.
I Will give two interpretations; either first, that this heart is the dark place
till the day star arise, and so the word [untill] shall not refer to the word
take heed, but only to dark place; man's heart is the dark place. But I rather
take it till they saw the accomplishment of those Prophesies; till you see that
really fulfilled which has been Prophesied: Take heed, why? knowing this that
no Prophecy of Scripture is of any private interpretation, etc. so we read the
word; in the Greek it is, they are not of any private incitation and impulsion;
for the word has reference to the custom of Racers; now you know Racers do
not set out when they please themselves, but when he watch word is given: Now
no Prophecy is of any private interpretation, they did not go about nor set
about it till God really put them upon it; for it was not the effect of their
own will, choice or invention, but holy men of God spoke as they were moved by
the Holy Ghost. Say the Papists, the Scripture is of no private interpretation;
therefore you cannot understand it; but that is just as if I should say. you
must not put what meaning you will upon my words, and therefore you cannot
understand them: The Scriptures being from God are not to any of private
interpretation; (that is) to put any other meaning upon them than what God
means; but it does not follow what God means, cannot be understood; Luke 1.70.
its said that God spoke by the mouth of the holy Prophets, etc. The Apostles
before they preached, were endued with power from on high, as you read in the
Acts. Paul says of himself, it pleased God to reveal his Son in him, Gal.
1.15, 16. by the Revelation of the Gospel; 1 Cor. 14.37. If any man think
himself to be a Prophet, or spiritual, let him acknowledge that the things that
I write unto you, are the Commandments of the Lord.

Quest. The grand enquiry will be, how may any man be truly satisfied, that
this book is the Word of God? or that it has Divine authority, or Divine
inspiration?

I confess it is an undertaking too great for me, but yet sometimes you have
seen a little boat follow a great ship. That I may distinctly do it, and offer
my own thoughts in this great enquiry, I shall give you what I have to say in
these seven Propositions.

Sol. 1. Prop. That there may be a Revelation from God, no man can doubt but an
Atheist that thinks there is no God. That there has been a Revelation from God
is acknowledged by the Gentiles; for they looked upon their Oracles as answers
of their gods; and it is acknowledged also by the Jews, who tell us that Moses
had their Laws from God upon the Mount, and all the Prophets were moved and
excited by God to deliver their errands to them; since there is a God, God may
make a Revelation of his mind.

2. Prop. That there should be a Revelation of Gods mind and will, every man
cannot but grant it to be highly reasonable; for alas, poor man is a sinner, a
pitiful dark blind thing; now he cannot but confess though he has no Bible,
yet surely he is not what he was when he came out of Gods hand; but he is now
ignorant, and does not know all his duty, and he is backward to do that which
he does know, and if he was not backward, he could tell whether God would
accept of it or not; therefore man cannot but say it is a thing h ghly
reasonable that there should be a Revelation of the will of God, that he might
know his duty; and if he did do it, God would take it kindly at his hand.

3. Prop. We ought to have good satisfaction for that which we entertain as a
Divine Revelation; for there are more persons come in Gods name, than have Gods
commission; a great many more say Thus says the Lord, then ever were bid to
speak Gods Word; As we cannot believe we know not what, so we cannot believe we
know not why; whoever believes any thing, he has some reason why he does
believe it: 2 Timothy 3.14. Continue in the things whereof thou have been assured;
(...). Hesych.

Quorum firma seu plena fides tibi facta est. Fulleri Miscel. lib. 1. cap. 19.


not those things which are concredited and trusted to thee, but those things
of which thou have been assured: Now says our Savior, John 4.22. Ye worship
ye know not what; intimating persons ought to understand what, and why they
worship; we are not born with this notion that this Bible is a beam of the
Sun of righteousness; we must therefore see why we entertain it. That rule is
excellent, though I must not nor cannot give a reason of every thing believed,
(for many things far transcend all that my short understanding is able to
reach) yet I must, and I am bound to give a reason of all that I believe,
because God has said it. When the Gospel was preached, the Bereans were
commended for examining whether those things were so or not. I am satisfied
this Book is Gods Word, I have reason enough to believe whatever is revealed;
for God is too good to deceive, and too wise to be deceived; and therefore show
me but that God has said it, and that it is really Gods mind, I have all the
reason in the world to believe it; but now I must have some reason for which I
believe that this book is the revelation of Gods mind and will.

4. Prop. Where we ought to be satisfied, there it is certain God has given
minds desirous of satisfaction to see some ground for it; I mean since it is so
great a matter, we ought not to be fondly credulous: No question but God has
given sufficient evidence of that he would have us maintain as the
manifestation of his own pleasure; for thus I argue, If we neither have nor can
have any thing to discern what is from God, and what is not from God, then we
must either resolve to believe nothing at all, as never knowing but that we may
be cheated; or else believe what comes first to hand, be it what it will;
therefore I say where God would have us entertain any thing of his mind, it is
certain he gives us sufficient evidence it is so. I say, God intended to give
satisfaction to a mind that is desirous of it; not to a man that is peremptory,
wilful and resolute of his own way, let God say what he will. God will not
satisfy every angry Jew that will hold fast his own prejudices; nor every
sensual Gentile that lives in nothing but profanesse; but an ingenuous spirit
that willingly gives up himself to the truth of God, and lays down every
prejudice, and is willing to be taught by him, this is the person to whom God
intends real satisfaction.

5. Prop. All the evidence which we have of any thing, is either from reason or
sensation: As it is impossible a man should give credit to that which can no
way be made credible; so whatsoever is made credible to us, is made so from
some faculty; now all our faculties are either ratiocination or sensation;
either the workings of our understanding, or else things we feel; believe such
a thing, why? I feel it, see it, hear it.

6. Prop. We have rational evidence this book we call the Bible is Gods Word,
and of Divine Authori y.

7. Prop. Good men have inward sensations that this book is from God.

Now I am come to the grand business. I have told you there may be a
Revelation from God since there is a God; it is highly reasonable there should
be such a Revelation; we ought to have satisfaction in what we entertain as a
Revelation of God; where we ought to be satisfied, God has given it to a mind
willing to entertain it; all the evidences we can have of a thing whereby we
should be satisfied, must either be from our reason or sense; And now we have
rational evidence, this book we call the Bible, is of Divine Authority.

I will dwell but upon this one Argument, and before I speak to it, give me
leave to ask you this one question; What would you desire to give you assurance
that any particular book or Revelation is from God? this is a considerable
question; for whatsoever a sober man could desire to give him assurance this
book is from God, he has it; and if God say, thou had all I could give thee,
it would nonplus all at that day if they be found unbelievers.

I can possibly desire nothing but these three things. First, Methinks
whatsoever should come from God, should press holiness and godliness; should
press such a Religion, that if men love it, they should be happy by it; and
should give such Arguments to engage men to this Religion, as should be proper
to persuade. Secondly, I should think that the Publisher of this Doctrine
should himself be an exemplary person; for I could not easily imagine God would
send such a person to bring in such a Religion as should destroy it by his own
life, and bring to ruin by his works what he had spoken with his mouth.
Thirdly, I should expect such a person should work miracles to give us
assurance he had a Divine Commission.

Now let us make an enquiry whether we have not all these things; this great
Argument Comprehends many things in it.

First, This book presses holiness and godliness so as never did any in the
world before nor since, and gives such Arguments for it as never was heard of,
nor the wit of man could ever have thought of. He that would walk in the
Wilderness of Paganism, might hear and there spy a flower growing amongst many
weeds; now and then a Philosopher that gives you some good directions that
concern righteousness and external behavior; but the Scripture is a garden
wherein whatsoever has been recommended by all the sober men in the world is
put together, and wherein they were defective that is there made up; for they
were defective especially in this one great point, deep humility; and though
you shall find many things that concern the exercise of some Christian graces,
yet in the real practice of humility, a man would wonder how incredibly they
fell short.

But as for the Scripture; what would you have? it bids you live soberly,
righteously, godly; Tit. 2.12.
it bids you lie at Gods feet as his creature, to do with you what he will; it
would have you like God himself; that is the end of the promises, that we should
partake of the Divine nature, 2 Pet. 1.4. it bids you be holy as God is holy, 1
Pet. 1.15. it charges upon you whatever thing is good, is just, is lovely,
Phil. 4.8. it commands your very thoughts; it is so far from suffering you to do
hurt to your brother, as not to suffer you to think hurt; it is so far from
allowing to act rapine and injustice, as not to allow to do any thing that
savours of coveting; it binds the very heart and soul: O what a place of
universal calmnesse would this world be, should all serve one another in love;
should all study each others good, we should never do injury; if any did, we
should forgive him, we should endeavor to be perfect as God is; Trypho calls
them (...).
therefore the Jew could not but say the precepts of the Gospel were wonderful,
great, excellent and transcendent indeed.

Behold the Scripture is a doctrine according to godliness, 1 Timothy 6.3. truth
according to godliness, Tit. 1.1. the mystery of godliness, 1 Timothy 3.16. so
that in one word, whatever God would think fit for man to do to that God that
made him; whatever is fit for a sinner to do to a holy God against whom he has
trangressed; and between man and man; all that is the design of the Scripture.
And what the Scripture thus commends, it presses by incomparable Arguments;
shall I name a few?

1. Behold God is manifested in the flesh for this purpose, 1 Timothy 3.16. Is it
nothing sinner, that thou will live foolishly, vainly? what will thou think to
see God dwelling in humane nature? to see God live a poor, scorned, reproached,
contemned life; intimating this great truth, that it is not so unseemly a thing
for the Son of God himself to live a poor miserable life, as it is for a man
to be an impenitent sinner; if you remain a wilful and impenitent sinner, thou
would in thy pride be like God, and have no Superior above thee: Behold God
condescends and becomes like to thee, that if possible he might bring thee back
again; thou that art a sinner, suspectest whether God will do thee good; behold
how close he comes to thee, he dwells in thy own nature.

2. Behold the beloved Son of God dying upon the Cross for thee. What would
you think if any of your Parents should suffer their child to dye on the
behalf of an enemy? would you not think it should move that enemy? Behold my
Son in whom I am well-pleased! methinks God takes not a quarter of that
content in the whole Creation, which he does when he speaks of his Son; yet
this Son suffered for sin, the just for the unjust, that he might bring us
to God, 1 Pet. 3.18. methinks this love should constrain us, 2 Cor. 5.14. Poor
soul, thou art ready to think God is become thine enemy; when sickness and
death comes, thou art ready to say, have thou found me O mine enemy? here is
trouble in the world; how shall I know whether God intends good? Behold it is
beyond peradventure, God intends good to a sinner because he dwelt in our
nature, and his Son dyed for us, and his Son felt pain and infirmity, and
therefore he may love thee, and you need not question any thing of this nature
is a hindrance of Gods love; the case of a sinner is not so desperate, but that
a man may be accepted and loved of God for Christ's sake; will not this move you?

3. You have promises of eternal life, and threatenings of eternal misery: Never
did any Philosopher or any other man threaten, If you will not observe such and
such precepts, I Will throw you into eternal torments, nor never did any man say
I will give you such glory in heaven; but the Scripture does; behold life and
immortality are brought to light by Christ; there is a future resurrection, and
this body is like an old house pulled down, by and by it will be a brave
building again, a spiritual body, and we shall shine like the Sun in the
Firmament, and be equal to the Angels of God, Matthew. 13.43. and he like God and
Christ: Now we know not what we shall be, but when he shall appear, we shall be
like him; for we shall see him as he is, 1 John 3.1, 2. And having this hope,
who would not purify himself even as God is pure? who would not live soberly,
righteously and godly, looking for that blessed hope, etc? If you did but
apprehend this glory, Tit. 2 13
were not your mind senseless, its impossible you could be quiet without
getting an interest in it. And how great the day of judgment will be, it tells
you; how our thoughts, words and actions, and every thing we go about shall
come under a severe scrutiny.

4. The worth of our souls; we mind our bodies, but a soul is better than a
world. The Scripture says, the Son of God dyed for souls; we never
understood so much what souls were worcester h as now we do, when we see God taking
such care, and having such designs and thoughts from all eternity.

5. The fairest and the most reasonable condition of eternal happiness, and
the greatest strength to perform it, that is offered in the Gospel: Suppose we
were sensible we were liable and obnoxious to Gods wrath, and could go to
heaven and beseech God that he would be pleased not to execute that wrath upon
us, do but think what terms you would be willing to propose to God; would you
come and say, Lord, punish me not for what is past, though I intend to do the
same thing; but he that should say, Lord, forgive me, I am sorry for that which
is done, and it shall be the business of my life to live more circumspectly to
thee; this is the great thing the Scripture proposes to us: Godliness in the
Scripture has the promise of the things of this life, 1 Timothy 4.8.
and of things to come; whatever is good here, we are sure of it in the
practice of piety; and in the world to come as sure of that happiness; but no
more can tell what it is, then we can tell what the thoughts of all men have
been since the first Creation.

What Arguments can you imagine possibly God himself could propose greater or
stronger than these? what should hinder me from returning to God? That Is the
first part of the demonstration.

Secondly, we would expect the Publisher of this Doctrine should himself be
exemplary, and so was Christ; Austin said, the whole life of Christ was
doctrinal, to lead us to piety and good practice, he went up and down doing
good. Did any reproach him? he reproached them not again; was he reviled? he
reviled not again; when he came to suffer, Father, not my will, but thine be
done; there is not such a word as that in all the pieces of Philosophy, not such
an expression of humility and surrender, Father, not my will, etc.

An innocent person, so says the Text; he is always denying himself, he will
not be rich and great in the world; why? he pressed you to lay up treasures in
heaven; he has not a hole where to lay his head; why? because he bids you to
live upon Gods providence; he lived a single life, bacause he would have you be
as though you had not such and such relations; his very enemies could object
nothing against him; have nothing to do with that just person, said Pilates
wife. I find no fault in him, says he that condemned him; not the Jews
themselves were ever able to instance in any evil practice; they only charged
him, (and so do still) that he wrought miracles by the Devil, which was the
greatest miracle; but they never could charge him with any evil practice;
leaving us an example, 1 Pet. 2.21. Learn of me, I am meek and lowly. Now what
servant would not be willing to do that which his Master does before him?

Thirdly, we would expect he should work miracles to testify that he had his
commission from God; for he that shall come to set up a new Law, a new
Economy, a new frame nd constitution of Religion, had need assure us that he
is Gods messenger; if he work miracles, we cannot tell what to have more; for
we certainly conclude that God will not suffer a long series of things
extraordinary and quite beyond the course of nature to be done to attest a lie:
Miracles were bagun by our Savior, and continued many hundred years after,
just as props that are set under weak Vines; so these under the weak faith of
the world when it first began. (...). Basil.
One said excellently, that those whom the speaking tongue did not convince,
the seeing eyes might certainly convince; that these were proper to convince
that Christ came from God, appears, Matthew. 11.3.4. where when John sent to
know, Art thou he that should come? that is, Art thou the Messiah? Go and tell
John what you hear and see; The blind receive their sight, the lame walk, etc.
John 3.2. Nicodemus says, No man can do these miracles that thou do, except
God be with him; and John 9.13. the blind man says he has opened mine eyes,
and how come you to ask how he did it? great signs shall follow them that
believe, Mark 16.17. and these continued in Justin Martyrs, Tertullians,
Cyprians time, Gregory Nyssens time, Vid. Montacut. Apparat. in Praefat.
and some part of Chrysostoms time.

Concerning these miracles, give me leave to lay down three Propositions, then
you will see the strength of the whole Argument.

1. They were famous and illustrious, for they were done before multitudes,
Matthew. 9.8. Matthew. 12.22, 23. not done in a corner, John 9. when Lazarus was
raised, they said, they could not deny it; at his death the Earth quaked, the
Temple rent, there was darkness for three hours which was observed by
Heathens as well as Christians.

2. As they were done before a multitude, so there were a multitude of
miracles, insomuch that John says, they were so many, that if all should be
written, the world could not contain the books that should be written, John
21.25. That is an Hyperbolical expression for a very great number.

A learned man has observed Elisha did but twelve miracles, Elijah not so
many; Moses wrought about seventy six; and they which were done by them and all
the rest of the Prophets from the beginning of the world to the destruction of
the first Temple, amounted but to one hundred and fifty miracles; in three
thousand three hundred twenty eight years there were not as we find in
Scripture, so many wrought; but now Christ went about healing all manner of
sickness, and curing all manner of diseases, Mat. 4.23. Acts 10.38.
Questionless a very vast number.

3. They were of all sorts and of all kinds; a woman that had an issue of blood
twelve years, Matthew. 9.20. and a woman that had a spirit of infirmity eighteen
years, Luke 13.11. and one that had an infirmity thirty eight years, John 5.8.
the dead were raised, the Devils were cast out, the Sea commanded, the winds
obey; they are of all sorts and kinds.

Observe also this, that you do not read or find by any thing that there was
the least of them done out of any ostentation; there was no such thing done by
Christ or his Apostles, to call men out and say, Come, I Will show you what I can
do, that should show any kind of arrogant affectation to themselves; but the
greatest humility and modesty runs through all the exercise of this mighty
power, and this practice was ordinary among the common Professors then; yea,
the Galatians they received that spirit by which miracles were wrought among
themselves.

Secondly, such famous miracles were a sufficient ground to make men believe
this holy doctrine, who saw the miracles wrought by them that preached it; for
if they did not, it must be either because they questioned whether the things
were done, or whether done by God or not; they could not question whether the
things were done; for they saw some raised out of their graves, etc. Nor could
they question whether this was from God or not; for observe, Where I see
miracles wrought, there I am bound to believe that they give testimony to what
is preached by him that works them, except that which is preached, is that of
which I am infallibly assured already, it cannot be true, except God does by
some greater miracle contradict the testimony of those miracles; as now the
Egyptians they wrought miracles, but God contradicted all their testimony by
Moses. Now observe, the end of all Christian Religion is to preach truth, to
glorify God, to honor God, to save a man's soul. Never was there any exerting
of Gods power to contradict it; so that if a man may not believe a doctrine
thus holy, a doctrine thus practiced by him that published it, and confirmed by
miracles, then a man is under an impossibility of ever being satisfied from any
thing from God; for what shall satisfy? If God speak to us from heaven, we
should as much suspect that, as if an Angel come from heaven we should suspect
him; but since we believe and know there is a God, and he is just and merciful,
it is impossible the divine goodness should consent to such Impostors.

But you will say what are these miracles to us?

I say therefore thirdly, they are a sufficient reason to engage us to believe
the divinity of this holy doctrine, though we never saw them. You do not see
Christ your selves, nor did you see him dye nor work miracles, but would you
have had Christ live always among you? If you would, he must then never dye,
and the great comfort of our life depended upon his death; he dyed, is risen,
and gone to heaven; would you have him come down from heaven, and dye that you
might see it? and would you have him dye quite through the world at the same
time? which must be if you would imagine we must see every thing our selves;
it is a great piece of madness to believe nothing but what we see our selves:
Austin was troubled himself in this case, Lib. 6. Con^es. cap. 4.
he had been cheated before, and now he was resolved he would believe nothing
but what should be plain to him; at length (says he) O my God thou shewed'st me
how many things I believed which I saw not; I considered, I believed I had a
father and mother, and such persons were my Parents; how can I tell that? a man
may say, it may be he was dropped from heaven, and God made him in an
extraordinary way; so if I never were out of this Town, it is madness for a man
to say there is never another Town in England; or to say there is no Sea because
I saw it not. Nay, if a man come and tell me there is this doctrine that teaches
me all self-denial, mortification, weanednesse from the world, and say this is
of God, and when he has done ventures life, children, family, have we not
reason to believe it? If you will not believe, it is either because the first
persons were deceived themselves, or else because you think they would deceive
you; now deceived themselves they could not be, when they saw so many miracles
done; and deceive you, that they would not neither; for would any good man to
deceive an other, undo himself? they dyed for it, and writ this book, and
sealed it with their blood; and therefore there can be no reason to doubt of
it; they were witnesses, and delivered what they saw, Luke 1.2.

7. Prop. As we have rational evidence the Scripture is the Word of God, so we
have evidence also from inward sensation; born we are with principles of
conscience, and the truths in this book are so homogeneal to man, that he shall
find something within himself to give testimony for it. 2 Cor. 4.2. By
manifestation of the truth, commending our selves to every man's conscience in
the sight of God. Joh. 5.44. Men believe not, because they receive honor one
of another; and in Scripture they that would not believe, are they that would
not repent, Mat. 21.28 to the 33. men that practice drunkenness, whoredom,
sensuality, covetousness, pride, and know that these things are sins, they
are the great unbelievers, because they are loath to leave their sins; offer the
greatest reason in the world for a thing, if it be against a man's interest, how
hard, and almost next to impossible is it to convince him? A man would believe
that the Romans were in England that reads the Roman History; but if he shall
find the coin of the Roman Emperor, he will much more believe it. Do a bad
action, O the secret terrors that a man finds within him, as if he felt
something of hell already! Do a good action, and the secret sweetness, joy and
peace that attends it, that he cannot but say I believe it, for I feel some
degrees of it already! 1 Cor. 14.24, 25, etc. he speaks to the inward
principles of his conscience. The reason men believe not the Scriptures, is not
because it is unreasonable to believe them, but because they have a desperate
love to sin, and they are loath to entertain that that should check their
interest. There is in every life that certain sagacity by which a man
apprehends what is natural to that life, what nourishes that life; a man that
lives according to the Law written in his heart, finds there is that in this
Revelation that feeds, nourishes, and encourages it; so that this man finds
experimental satisfaction in it. Does the Word of God tell me the ways of God
are pleasant? I thought they were hard and difficult, now I find the yoke of
Christ is easy, and that no happiness like this, and no blessedness like
that; I thought if I did not comply with such things I could never be blessed;
now I find I need nothing to make me happy but my God; he finds and feels
these things are certan, true and real. Thus I have done with the demonstration.

You will easily observe I have neither taken notice of what the Papists tell
us, we must believe the Scripture because the Church says it; we cannot tell
what the Church is till the Scripture had told us.

And though I have not mentioned the testimony of the Spirit, yet I suppose I
have spoke to the thing; for I cannot understand what should be meant by the
testimony of the Spirit, except we either mean miracles wrought, which in
Scripture is called the testimony of the Spirit of Christ, Acts 15.8, 9. the
giving of the Holy Ghost, it is the giving of those extraordinary miracles that
fell down among them, so Heb. 2.4. Acts 5.32. I say if by the testimony of the
Spirit you mean this, then you can mean nothing else but the Spirit assisting,
enabling, helping our faculties to see the strength of that Argument God has
given us, and by experience to feel what may be felt, which comes under the
head of sensation.

APPLICATION.
First, then study the Scripture: If a famous man do but write an excellent
book, O how do we long to see it! or suppose I could tell you that there is in
France or Germany a book that God himself writ, I am confident men may draw all
the money out of your purses to get that book; you have it by you, O that you
would study it: Wnen the Eunuch was riding in his Chariot, he was studying the
Prophet Isaiah, he was not angry when Philip came, and as one would have
thought asked him a bold question; Understand thou what thou read? he was
glad of it, Acts 8, 27, 28. one great end of the year of release was that the
Law might be read, Deuteronomy, 31.9. it is the wisdom of God that speaks in the
Scripture, Luke 11.49. therefore whatever else you mind, really and carefully
study this Bible.

Secondly, in all enquiries into the truths of the mind of God consult those
sacred Oracles; here are Mines of truth, O dig here, make them the rule of
faith and life; while a Papist makes the Church his rule, and the Enthusiast
pretends to make the Spirit of God his rule, do you live by Scripture; consider
what I say, 2 Timothy 2.10. consider (there is thy duty) what I say, (there is the
Scripture) yet Timothy was as good a man as any of us; and the Lord give thee
understanding, (there is the work of the Spirit to assist our faculty.)

But how shall I find out truth by Scripture? For thy own satisfaction
remember this, have an explicit faith in all that plainly appears to be Gods
mind, and have an implicit faith resolving to be of Gods mind in all the
rest; be it what it will be, believe it, because it appears to be of God; while
a person resolves to be of the Churches mind, be thou of Gods; only use all
means whereby thou may come to know; to wit,

1. Take heed of passion and sensual lusts. 2 Timothy 4.3. you read of some that
will not endure sound doctrine, but after their own lusts shall heap to
themselves Teachers. A lust or passion is like a whirle-pit, a man is sucked up
in it; ambition, sensuality, any of these darken and blind a man's mind; when
a man studies any thing the mind had need to be quiet; lusts and passions are
always busy and boisterous, and make a man have a great interest against God.

2. And beware of prejudice; Christ said, Go preach to all Nations, Mat. 28.29.
but Peter lived under prejudice, and he said, Lord, I never eat any thing
common or unclean, when God bade him go to the Gentiles, Acts 10.11.

3. Beware of taking truth upon the Authority of men, for that is fallible:
Modesty requires you should have a fair respect to Preachers, and the Church of
God where you live; but as to the vitals of your Religion, do not take them
upon Authority; though a man would not willingly deceive you, yet he may be
deceived himself in things controverted. In plain things of Scripture, that we
must be humble, holy, believe, repent, all the world should not persuade you
out of your Religion; and as for your duty you understand it; never a one but
knows what he is to love when God bids us love him; if we would but familiarize
our Religion, we could not but understand it; but in matters wherein there is a
dispute and controversy in the world, be quiet and sober, and not confident
that such and such things must needs be so, because such say so? many pretend a
kind of sanctity, and pretend for God, and a Ship may carry very broad sails,
yet not very well laden; but thus it is, one man draws a multitude, and then a
multitude prevails upon particular persons, and shall I go against a multitude?
I say therefore take not things upon authority, see and examine thy self; if it
be plain in Scripture, mind it, and own it, and charge thy self with it: if it
be obscure, think it no farther concerns thee than God has made it manifest.

4. Beware of Idleness; search the Scripture, 2 Timothy 2.7. Consider what I say,
etc. They that are busied for veins of silver, they hold the rod even poized
in their hand, till at length it moves in that vein where it lies in the earth;
So hold your souls even in a diligent enquiry into the Scriptures.

5. Beware of pride; the humble man God will teach; proud men scorn others,
they will not be taught; and pride, that will make a man to neglect prayer.

6. Charge your selves with that which is the end of the Scripture, to live
well; Who would go about to read a piece of law, that he may learn
Mathematics? or read the statutes to learn Logic? you may as well do so, as
read the Scripture to talk only; but the intent of the Scripture, is to show
how you ought to live godly, to be just, righteous, sober, to act by rule.
Nothing hinders knowledge so much as a bad life; for sin brought in ignorance,
and holiness will bring in the best light. There Is a great deal of difference
betwixt wit and wisdom. Many have parts enough to be witty, but none but sober
and conscientious persons will have true wisdom. Prove. 14.9. A scorner seeks
knowledge, and finds it not. Scorners usually are witty men, men of brave
parts; a man that has a mind only to practice wit, is never satisfied in the
things of God. He that does my will, shall know the doctrine that is of God.

There are a thousand things disputed in the world, errors upon errors, but I
thank God it is plainly revealed, God has mercy for a sinner in Christ; I
understand well what it is to live soberly, righteously, godly; I know what it is
to honor my Parents, and do in my relations what becomes me; and I know these
are the conditions of eternal happiness; I can but use all humane endeavors,
I can but beg of God, and charge my self to love what I know; so that I am able
to say at the day of judgment, what appeared to be the mind of God I observed
it; what did not appear, I used all means to understand it; I would not hastily
determine my self till I saw thy mind, because I knew there were impostors; and
if this be done, if men will rangle and make controversies where God has made
none, let them, for there will be no end of vanity and folly.

Thirdly, Seek daily that your belief may be strengthened, that this book is of
divine authority; for what will enable you to resist temptation, if you do not
believe the Scripture? 1 John 2.14. I write unto you young men, says the
Apostle, because ye are strong; Why? the Word of God abides in you, and you
have overcome the evil one; you will never be strong and overcome the evil one
but by virtue of the Word of God. If sin tempts you, if you look into the
Scripture there is peace, good conscience, the joy of God, and eternal life; and
shall I for a trifle lose these? no, while we have Scripture, we have an
Antidote against all the devils poison. Again, what will bear you up under your
afflictions if you lose the belief of the Scriptures? you will need it when you
come to be sick and dye; when you bury your friends and relations, what will
satisfy a man's mind? there is an after-glory; when friends come after me, or go
before me, we shall all meet in joy; Did I but believe this glory, as I believe
when the Sun sets it will rise again, were I but persuaded what God has said
is true, as now I am persuaded I speak, how should I long for this glory? how
would every child wail for this inheritance? how full of prayers? how cheerful
in our spirits? how should we welcome death? how should we long til these
Tabernacles of dust were crumbled to nothing? when affliction comes, how should
I rejoice in that I believe that all shall work for good because I love God?
with what a quiet spirit should I pass through the great Wilderness of this
World? The devil knows if he can but beat you from this sort, he will quickly
beat you out of all other sorts. Let the Word of God come to you with much
assurance, 1 These. 1.4, 5. With the full assurance of understanding, Colossians
2.3. you must not understand there he speaks in reference to their persons, to
assure them they were the children of God, but that their faith had a good
foundation in it self, that this was from God, the truth of a good assurance in
judgment.

Take this further advice, If you would keep up your faith, be true to your
faith; be sure you live well; you will always find men make shipwreck of a
good conscience and of faith together, 1 Timothy 6.10, 21. 2 Timothy 3.8. 1 Timothy
1.19. Remember the Apostles advice, Romans 12.2. Be not conformed to this world,
but be renewed in your minds, that you may prove what is the good and
acceptable Will of God. Never fear it, while thy mind is but willing to be
ruled by God, while thy soul is teachable and tractable, this will give thee
evidence this book is from God, except melancholy overcome thee, which leads
men to be Scepticks, except in that case which is the proper effect of a man's
body, and must be cured by physic; but let a man have a mind to live well, and
to be ruled by the Word, the Bible is the best thing in the World to such a one.

I might have spoken to a case of conscience concerning the assent of
Christians to the Word of God, that it is not equal in all, nor equally in the
same person always; and that a man may really believe that in the general of
his life, which at some particular times he may doubt of; and a man may not be
fully satisfied in the truth of the Scriptures, yet that man may really live
under the power of it.

To conclude all with this: since we have this reason to believe the Scripture
is Gods Word, then never wonder that you find Ministers, Parents, Masters, to
press real piety upon you, and see what great reason you have to entertain it.
Alas, it may be you wonder we Preach and press Religion; we are verily
persuaded, if you do nor love this Religion, you will be intolerably miserable;
and we have so much compassion for you, that since we know this to be Gods
Word, better to be burned in the hottest fire, than to lie in those torments.
We know since God has said it, there is no comfort too great to them that
comply with it; no judgment too terrible to those that will oppose it;
therefore you cannot wonder if we do from day to day press it upon you.

Consider if it be Gods Word, then the threatenings are true, and the Promises
are true, and you shall either have the promises or the threatenings within a
while; God knows which of us shall be next, for it is but a little while before
death, and judgment come; then either Come ye blessed, or Go ye cursed; As a
man has wrought, so he shall have, for he will render to every one according
to what he has done in the flesh; therefore knowing the terror of the Lord,
we persuade you; we know this is of Divine stamp and Authority. I conclude all
with the 20. of the Acts 32. etc. And now, Brethren, I commend you to God, and
to the Word of his grace, which is able to build you up, and to give you an
inheritance among all them which are sanctified.

MAN'S CREATION IN AN HOLY, BUT MVTABLE STATE.
Eccles. 7.29. Lo this only have I found, that God has made man upright; but
they have sought out many inventions.


IN these words you have the result of a serious inquiry into the state of
mankind. In the verse immediately foregoing, the Preacher speaks his own
experience, touching each sex distributively; how rare it was to meet with a
wise and good man, how much rarer with a prudent and virtuous woman (so he must
be understood, though these qualities are not expressed) then in the Text gives
this verdict touching both collectively, tending to acquit their Maker of their
universal depravation, and convict them. Lo this only have I found, etc.

The words contain two Propositions.

The first touching man's perfection by his creation, God made, etc.

The second touching his defection by sin, but they have sought, etc.

Together with a solemn Preface introducing both, and recommending them as
well-weighed truths, Lo this only have I found, etc. q. d. I do not now speak
at random, and by guess; no, but I solemnly pronounce it, as that which I
have found out by serious study and diligent exploration, That God made man
upright, etc. The Terms are not obscure, and are fitly rendered. I find no
considerable variety of readings, and cannot needlessely spend time about
words. Only in short,

By man] you must understand man collectively, so as to comprehend the whole
species.

Making him upright] you must understand so as to refer making not to the
adjunct only, supposing the subject pre-existent, but to both subject and
adjunct together; and so it is man's concreate and original righteousness that
is here meant.

By inventions] understand (as the antithesis does direct) such as are alien
from this rectitude. Nor is it altogether improbable that in this expression,
some reference may be had to that curious desire of knowing much that tempted
Adam and Eve into the first transgression.

Many inventions] seems to be spoken in opposition to that simplicity and
singleness of heart which this original rectitude did include; truth is but
one; falsehood, manifold. God made man upright, (...)
i. e. simple, plain-hearted, free from all tortuous windings, and involutions
(so the word rendered upright in the Text does signify; and Jeshurun derived
therefrom, which God thought a fit name for his people Israel, the seed of
plain-hearted Jacob to be known by; answerably whereto Nathanael is said to be
a true Israelite in whom was no guile) John 1.47.
Such man was at first; now in the room of this simplicity, you find a
multiplicity; he was of one constant uniform frame, and tenor of Spirit, held
one straight, direct and even course; now he is become full of inventions, grown
vafrous, multiform as to the frame of his spirit, uncertain, intricate,
perplexed in all his ways.

Sought out] this notes the voluntarinesse, and perfect spontaneity of his
defecti n; 'twas his own doing. God made him upright; he has sought out means
to deform and undo himself.

The words thus opened, afford us two great Gospel Truths.

God endued the nature of man in his creation, with a perfect and universal
rectitude.

2. That man's defection from his primitive state was purely voluntary, and from
the unconstrained choice of his own mutable and self-determining will.

(Though the latter part of the Text, would afford a sufficient ground to treat
of the state of man now fallen; yet that being by agreement left to another
hand, I observe no more from it then what concerns the manner of his fall, and
that only as it depended on a mutable will.)

In handling these truths, I shall

1. Open them in certain explicatory Theses.

2. Improve them in some few praictcal and applicatory inferences.

1. About the former, that God endued, etc. take these Propositions for
explication.

All created rectitude consists in conformity to some rule or Law.

Rectitude is a mere relative thing, and its relation is to a rule. By a rule,
I here mean a law strictly taken; and therefore I speak this only of created
rectitude. A law, is a rule of duty given by a Superior to an Inferior;
nothing can be in that sense a rule to God, or the measure of increated
rectitude.



It Is certain, there can be no higher rule to creatures than the divine Will;
Romans 7.12. Romans 12.102. Ezekiel. 18.25, chapter 33.
and as certain that the government of God over his creatures, is always
reasonable and just, and gracious; and that this reasonableness, justice and
goodness by which it is so, should be subjected any where but in God himself,
none that know what God is (according to our more obvious notions of him) can
possibly think.



A law is a constitution de debito, and it is the Legislatours will (not
concealed in his own breast, but) duly expressed that makes this constitution,
and infers an obligation on the Subject.

Adam at his creation was partly natural, given by way of internal impression
upon his soul; partly positive given (as is probable) by some more external
discovery or revelation.

That the main body of laws whereby man was to be governed, should be at first
given no other way than by stamping them upon his mind and heart, was a thing
congruous enough to his innocent state (as it is to Angels and Saints in glory)
it being then exactly contempered to his nature, highly approvable to his
reason (as is evident in that being fallen, his reason ceases not to approve it,
Romans 2.18.) fully suitable to the inclination and tendency of his will, and not
at all regretted by any reluctant principle that might in the least oppose or
render him doubtful about his duty.

Yet was it most reasonable also, that some positive commands should be
superadded, that Gods right of dominion and government over him as Creator,
might be more expressly asserted, and he might more fully apprehend his own
obligation as a creature to do somethings, because it was his Makers Will, as
well as others, because they appeared to him in their own nature reasonable and
fit to be done (for so the whole of what God requires of man, is fitly
distinguished into some things which he commands, because they are just; and
some things that are just, because he commands them.)

Adam was endued in his creation, with a sufficient ability and habitude to
conform to this whole Law, both natural and positive; in which ability and
habitude his original rectitude did consist.

This Proposition carries in it the main truth we have now in hand, therefore
requires to be more distinctly insisted on. There are two things in it to be
considered.

The thing it self he was endued with. The manner of the endowment.
1. The thing it self wherewith he was endued, that was uprightness,
rectitude, (otherwise called the image of God, though that expression
comprehends more than we now speak of, as his immortality, dominion over the
inferior creatures, etc.) which uprightness or rectitude consisted in the
habitual conformity, or conformability of all his natural powers to this whole
Law of God; and is therefore considerable two ways, viz. In relation to its
Subject. Rule.


1. In relation to its subject; that was the whole soul (in some sense it may
be said the whole man) even the several powers of it. And here we are led to
consider the parts of this rectitude, for it is coextended (if that phrase may
be allowed) with its subject, and lies spread out into the several powers of
the soul; for had any power been left destitute of it, such is the frame of
man, and the dependence of his natural powers on each other, in order to
action, that it had disabled him to obey, and had destroyed his rectitude; for
bonum non oritur nisi ex causis integris, malum vero ex quovis defectu.
Davenant de justitia habituali, andi.
And hence (as Davenant well observes) according to the parts (if I may so
speak) of the subject wherein it was, Man's original rectitude must be
understood to consist of 1. A perfect illumination of mind to understand and
know the Will of God. 2. A compliance of heart and will therewith. 3. An
obedient subordination of the sensitive appetite, and other inferior powers,
that in nothing they might resist the former.


That it comprehends all these, appears by comparing Col. 3.10. where the image
of God, wherein man was created, is said to consist in knowledge, that has its
seat and subject in the mind, with Ephesians. 4.24. where righteousness and
holiness are also mentioned; the one whereof consists in equity toward men;
the other in loyalty and devotedness to God; both which necessarily suppose the
due framing of the other powers of the soul, to the ducture of an enlightened
mind. And besides, that work of sanctification (which in these Scriptures is
expressly called a renovation of man according to the image of God wherein he
was created) does in other Scriptures appear (as the forementioned Author also
observes) to consist of parts proportionable to these I mention, viz.
illumination of mind, Ephesians. 1.18. conversion of heart, Psalm. 51.10. victory
over concupiscence, Romans 6.7. throughout.

2. Consider this rectitude in relation to its Rule; that is the Will of God
revealed, 1 John 3.4.
or the Law of God; sin is the transgression of the Law; and accordingly
righteousness must needs be conformity to the Law, viz. actual righteousness
consists in actual conformity to the Law; that habitual rectitude which Adam
was furnished with in his Creation (of which we are speaking) in an habitual
conformity, or an ability to conform to the same Law. This habitual conformity,
was, as of the whole soul, so to the whole Law, i. e. to both the parts or
kinds of it, natural and positive. He was furnished with particular principles
inclining him to comply with whatsoever the Law of nature had laid before him,
and with a general principle, disposing him to yield to whatsoever any positive
Law should lay before him as the Will of God. And if it be said (in reference
to the former of these) that this Law of nature impressed upon Adams soul, was
his very rectitude; therefore how can this rectitude be a conformity to this
Law?

I answer,

Aquin. Sum.
1. A Law is twofold Regulans. Regulata.


2. The Law of nature impressed upon the soul of Adam, must be considered

1. As subjected in his mind; so it consisted of certain practical notions
about good and evil, right and wrong, etc.

2. As subjected in his heart, so it consisted in certain habitual inclinations
to conform to those principles. Now these inclinations of the heart, though
they are a rule to actions, they are yet something ruled in reference to those
notions in the mind; and their conformity thereto makes one part of Original
rectitude. And those notions, though they are a rule to these inclinations, yet
they are something ruled in reference to the Will of God signified by them; and
in the conformity thereto, consists another part of this Original rectitude.

2. We have to consider the manner of this endowment. And as to this, it is much
disputed among the Schoolmen, whether it were natural, or supernatural. I shall
only lay down in few words, what I conceive to be clear and indisputable.

1. If by natural, you mean essential (whether constitutively, or
consecutively) so Original righteousness was not natural to man, for then he
could never nave lost it, without the loss of his being.

2. If by natural you mean connatural, i. e. concreate with the nature of man,
and consonant thereto, so I doubt not but it was natural to him.



According to the tenor of the Covenant, it could not but infer it. And
consider this rectitude in it self, it must needs include it: The rectitude of
his understanding including his knowledge of the highest good; and the
rectitude of his will and affections, the acceptance and enjoyment thereof;
Aug. de civitate Dei.
as Augustine in this case, nullum bonum abesset homini quod recta voluntas
optare posset, etc.

Thus far of the holiness and blessedness of man's first state. It follows to
speak of the mutability of it, and of his fall as depending thereon.



For the asserting of this truth, take the following Propositions.



This Scripture is full of 1 Kings 8.46. Psalm. 14.1. Romans 3.12. -- etc. cap.
5.12, 13, etc. 1 John 5.19. etc.
, and experience and common observation puts it beyond dispute.

It Is left then, that sin must have had some Original among men.



This is evident in it self. God disclaims it, nor can any affirm it of him
without denying his very being. He could not be the cause of u^holi^esse, but
by ceasing to be holy, which would suppose him mutably holy; and if either God
or man must be confessed mutable, it is no difficulty where to lay it; whatever
he is, he is essentially; and necessity of existence of being always what he
is, James 1.17.
remains everlastingly the fundamental attribute of his being.

per se, and the cause of all good; the other evil per se, and the cause of all
evil.

Bradwardine de causa Dei.
Bradwardines two Arguments: 1. That this would suppose two Gods, two
Independent beings; 2. That it would suppose an evil God; do sufficiently
convince this to be full both of blasphemy and contradiction.



External objects could not; for that were to reject all upon God; for if he
create objects with such an allective power in them, and create such an
appetite in man as cannot but work inordinately and sinfully toward those
objects, it must needs infer his efficacious necessitation of sin, being it
would destroy the truth already established, that God created man with such a
rectitude as that there was a sufficient ability in his Superior powers for
the cohibition and restraint of the Inferior, that they should not work
inordinately toward their objects. The Devil could not do it for the same
reason, having no way to move the will of man but by the proposal of objects;
yet that by this means (which he could in many respects manage most
advantagiously) he did much help forward the first sin, Scripture leaves us
not to doubt.

i. e. an understanding, will and Inferior powers however originally good, yet
mutably and defectively so.

I shall not insist to prove that sin is no positive bang; but I take the
Argument to be irrefragable, (notwithstanding the Cavils made against it) that
is drawn from that common Maxim, (...). Dion. de Div. nom.
that omne ens positivum est vel primum, vel a primo. And that of Dionysius the
Areopagite is an ingenuous one; he argues that no being can be evil per se; for
then it must be immutably, to which no evil can be, for to be always the
same, is a certain property of goodness; it is so even of the highest goodness.

And hence sin being supposed only a defect, a soul that is only defectibly
holy, might well enough be the cause of it; i. e. the deficient cause.

Nor is it in the least stranage that man should be at first created with a
defectible holiness; for if he were immutably holy, either it must be ex
natura, or ex gratia; ex natura it could not be, for that would suppose him
God; if it were ex gratia, then it must be free; then it might be, or might not
be; therefore there was no incongruity in it that it should not be. And indeed
it was most congruous that God having newly made such a creature, furnished
with such powers, so capable of government by a Law, of being moved by promises
and threats, he should for some time hold him as a viator, in a state of trial
unconfirmed, (as he did also the innocent Angels) that it might be seen how he
would behave himself toward his Maker, and that he should be rewardable and
punishable accordingly, in a state that should be everlasting and unchangeable:
The liberty therefore of the Viators and the Comprehensors Gibieuf well
distinguishes into inchoata or consummabilis, Gibieuf de liberate Dei and
creatur. ae
and perfecta or consummata; the former such as Adams was at his Creation; the
latter such as is the state of Angels and Saints in glory; and as his would
have been had he held out and persisted innocent through the intended time of
trial.

It was therefore no strange thing that man should be created defectible; 'twas
as little strange that a defectible creature should deficere.

For the manner of that defection, (whether error of the understanding
preceded, or inconsideration only, and a neglect of its office) with the great
difficulties some imagine herein, I wave discourse about them; judging that
advice good and sober, for to consider how sin may be gotten out of the
world, then how it came in. Though it is most probable there was in the instant
of temptation a mere suspension of the understandings act, (not as previous to
the sin, but as a part of it) and thereupon a sudden precipitation of will,
Estius in scil.
as Estius does well determine.

6. Man being created mutable as to his holiness, must needs be so as to his
happiness too.

And that both upon a legal account, (for the Law had determined that if he did
sin he must dye) and also upon a natural; for it was not possible that his
soul being once depraved by sin, the powers of it vitiated, their order each
to other, and toward their objects broken and interrupted, there should
remain a disposition and aptitude to converse with the highest good.

The Use follows which shall be only in certain practical Inferences that will
issue from these truths, partly considered singly and severally; partly
together and in conjunction.

From the first.
1. Did God create man upright as has been shown, then how little reason had
man to sin? how little reason had he to desert God? to be weary of his first
estate; Could Gods making him, his making him upright, be a reason why he
should sin against him? was his directing his heart, and the natural course
of his affections toward himself, a reason why he should forsake him? what was
there in his state that should make it grievous to him? was his duty too much
for him? God made him upright, so that every part of it was connatural to him;
was his privilege too little? he knew and loved, and enjoyed the highest and
infinite good. O think then how unreasonable and disingenuous a thing sin was!
that a creature that was nothing but a few hours ago, now a reasonable being,
capable of God! yet sin! Urge your hearts with this, we are too apt to think
our selves unconcerned in Adams sin; we look upon our selves too abstractly, we
should remember we are Members of a Community, and it should be grievous to us
to think that our species has dealt so unkindly and unworthily with God; and
besides, do not we sin daily after the similitude of Adams transgression? and
is not sin as unreasonable and unjust a thing as ever?

2. Was our primitive state so good and happy, how justly may we reflect and
look back toward our first state? how fitly might we take up Jobs words? Job
29.2, 4, 5, 14, 20.
O that I were as in months past; -- As in the days of my youth; -- When the
Almighty was yet with me; -- When I put on righteousness and it clothed me;
-- When my glory was fresh in me, etc. With what sadness may we call to mind
the things that are past, and the beginnings of Ancient time? when there was no
stain upon our natures, no cloud upon our minds, no pollution upon our hearts;
when with pure and undefiled souls we could embrace and rest, and rejoice in
the eternal and incomprehensible good? when we remember these things, do not
our bowels turn? are not our souls poured out within us?

From the second.
1. Did man so voluntarily ruin himself? how unlikely is he now to be his own
savior? he that was a self-destroyer from the beginning, that ruined himself
as soon as God had made him, is he likely now to save himself? is it easier for
him to recover his station than to have kept it? or has he improved himself by
sinning? and gained strength by his fall for a more difficult undertaking; is
he grown better natured toward himself and his God, than he was at first?

2. How little reason has he to blame God, though he finally perish? what
would he have had God to have done more to prevent it? he gave his Law to
direct him, his threatening to warn him; his promise for his encouragement was
evidently employed; his nature was sufficiently disposed to improve and comport
with all these; yet he sins! is God to be charged with this? sins upon no
necessity, with no pretense; but that he must be seeking out inventions, trying
experiments, assaying to better his state, as plainly despising the Law,
suspecting the truth, envying the greatness, asserting and aspiring to the
Sovereignty and Godhead of his Maker. Had we (any of us) a mind to contend
with God about this matter, how would we order our cause? how would we state
our quarrel? if we complain that we should be condemned and ruined all in one
man; that is to complain that we are Adams children. A child might as well
complain that he is the son of a Beggar or a Traitor, and charge it as
injustice upon the Prince or Law of the Land that he is not born to a
Patrimony; this is a misery to him, but no man will say it is a wrong. And can
it be said we are wronged by the common Ruler of the world, that we do not
inherit from our father, the righteousness and felicity we had wilfully lost
long before we were his children? If we think it hard, we should be tied to
terms we never consented to: Might not an heir as well quarrel with the
Magistrate, that he suffers him to become liable to his fathers debts? and to
lie in prison if he have not to pay?

But besides, who can imagine but we should have consented, had all mankind
been at that time existent in innocence together? i. e. Let the case be stated
thus; suppose Adam our common Parent, to have had all his children together
with him before the Lord, while the Covenant of Works was not as yet made, and
while as yet God was not under any engagment to the children of men: Let it be
supposed, that he did propound it to the whole race of mankind together, that
he would capitulate with their common Parent on their behalf, according to the
terms of that first Covenant; if he stood they should stand, if he fall, they
must all fall with him. Let it be considered, that if this had not been
consented to, God might (without the least color of exception, being as yet
under no engagement to the contrary) have annihilated the whole species; for
wherein can it seem hard, that what was nothing but the last moment, should the
next moment be suffered to relapse into nothing again? Let it also be
considered, that Adams own personal interest, and a mighty natural affectton
toward so vast a progeny, might well be thought certainly to engage him to the
uttermost care and circumspection on his own and their behalf. It must also be
remembered, that all being now in perfect innocence, no defect of reason, no
frowardness or perverseness of will can be supposed in any, to hinder their
right judgment, and choice of what might appear to be most for their own
advantage, and the glory of their Maker.

Can it now possibly be thought (the case being thus stated) that any man
should rather choose presently to lose his being, and the pleasures, and hopes
of such a state, than to have consented to such terms? It cannot be thought.

For consider the utmost that might be objected; and suppose one thus to reason
the matter with himself; Why? it is a mighty hazard form to suspend my
everlasting happiness or misery upon the uncertain determinations of another
man's mutable will; shall I trust my eternal concernments to such a
Peradventure, and put my life and hopes into the hands of a fellow creature?

It were obvious to him to answer himself, I but he is my father; he bears a
natural affection to me, his own concernment is included, he has power over
his own will, his obedience for us all, will be no more difficult than each
man's for himself; there is nothing required of him, but what his nature
inclines him to, and what his reason (if he use it) will guide him to comply
with; and though the hazard of an eternal misery be greatly tremendous; yet are
not the hopes of an everlasting blessedness as greatly consolatory and
encouraging? and besides, the hazard will be but for a time, which if we pass
safely, we shall shortly receive a full and glorious confirmation and
advancement. Certainly no reasonable man, all this considered (though there had
been no mention made of a means of recovery in case of falling, the
consideration whereof is yet also to be taken in by us) would have refused to
consent; and then what reasonable man but will confess this to be a mere
cavil, that we did not personally consent; for if it be certain we should have
consented, and our own hearts tell us we should, does the power of a Creator
over his creatures, signify so little that he might not take this for an
actual consent? for is it not all one, whether you did consent, or certainly
would have done it, if you had been treated with? Covenants betwixt Superiors
and Inferiors, differ much from those betwixt equals; for they are Laws as
well as Covenants, and therefore do suppose consent (the terms being in se
reasonable) as that which not only our interest, but duty would oblige us to.
It Is not the same thing to Covenant with the great God, and with a
fellow creature. Gods prescience of the event (besides that no man knows what
it is, yet) whatever it is, it is wholly immanent in himself (as also his
decrees) therefore could have no influence into the event, or be any cause of
it; all depended, as has been shown, on man's own will; and therefore if God
did foresee that man would fall, yet he knew also, that if he would he might
stand.

From both jointly.
1. Were we once so happy? and have we now undone our selves? how acceptable
should this render the means of our recovery to us? That it is a recovery we are
to endeavor (which implies the former truth) that supposes us once happy, who
would not be taken with such an overture for the regaining of an happiness,
which he has lost and fallen from; it is a double misery to become from an happy
estate miserable; it is yet as a double happiness to become happy from such
misery; and proportionably valuable should all means appear to us that tend
thereto. Yea, and it is a recovery after self-destruction (which asserts the
former truth) such a destruction as might reduce us to an utter despair of
remedies, as rendering us incapable to help our selves, or to expect help or
pity from others. O how welcome should the tidings of deliverance now be to us!
Romans 3 24, etc. 1 Cor. 1.30, 31 Ephesians. 1.6, 7. Tit. 2.11. -- 14
how joyful an entertainment should our hearts give them upon both these
accounts? how greatly does Scripture command the love and grace of Christ under
the notion of Redeeming? a word that does not signify deliverance from simple
misery only, but also connote a precedent better state as they expound it, who
take the phrase as Scripture uses it, to allude to the buying out of Captives
from their bondage. And how should it ravish the heart of any man to have mercy
and help offered him by another hand, who has perished by his own? how taking
should Gospel Grace be upon this account? how should this consideration engage
souls to value and embrace it? it is urged (we see) to that purpose Hosea 13.9.
O Israel, thou have destroyed thy self, but in me is thy help; and verse 10. it
follows, I will be thy King; where is any other that will save thee, etc. And
chap. 14.1. O Israel, return unto the Lord, for thou have fallen by thine
iniquity. Now (friends) do but seriously consider this. If you believe the
truths you have heard, how precious should Christ be to you? how precious
should the Gospel, the Ordinances, and Ministry of it be? Do you complain that
formerly you were not treated with? by all these God now treats with you. Now
your own personal consent is called for; not to any thing that has the least
of hazard in it, but what shall make you certainly happy, as miserable as you
have made your selves; and there is nothing but your consent wanting; the price
of your Redemption is already paid; it is but taking Christ for your Savior and
your Lord, and living a life of dependence and holiness for a few days, and
you are as safe as if you were in glory; will you now stick at this? O do not
destroy your selves a second time, and make your selves doubly guilty of your
own ruin.

2. Was our state so good, but mutable? what cause have we to admire the grace
of God through Christ, that whom it recovers, it confirms? It was a blessed
state, that by our own free will we fell from; but how much better (even upon
this account) is this, which by Gods free grace, we are invited and recalled to?

THE COVENANT OF WORKS.
GENESIS 2.16, 17. And the Lord God commanded the man, saying, of every Tree of
the Garden (...)
thou may freely eat; but of the Tree of the knowledge of good and evil thou
shall not eat of it; for in the day that thou eatest thereof, thou shall surely
dye. (...)
-- Hebr. Dying thou shall dye.


THe next head in the body of our Religion which falls this Morning to be
spoken to in Course, is, Gods Covenant made with Adam before the fall, which we
call a Covenant of Works; and we ground our Discourse upon the Text read to you.

When God would communicate his goodness to the creatures, he made the world
out of nothing for his own glory, but especially man after his Image; this
inferior world he provided for man's house and habitation; but he dresseth and
trimmeth one part for him especially, and calls it Paradise. In the Paradise or
pleasant Garden he was not to live idly, but must dress and keep it. In the
midst of all man's enjoyments which the Lord allows him with a liberal hand, yet
he lets him know withal he was under subjection, though Lord of all, and
therefore gives him a command; obsequii examen, and obedientiae quoddam
rudimentum; Calvin.
a test and trial of his obedience to which God trains him up.

As Lords when they let out their Lands to Husbandmen, reserve somewhat to
themselves which the Tenants are not to meddle with, that they may have some
check upon them; Muscul.
so God here. That which the Lord commands Adam was no hard matter; he grants
him a vast latitude to eat of all freely, Oecol.
only one sort excepted, in which exception, as God was not envious to him, (as
the Envious One suggested) so was not this Commandment grievous to him.

Object. It may be objected from 1 Timothy 1.9. The Law is not made for a
righteous man; why then for Adam in his righteousness?

Resol. Paul means good men do not so need the Law as bad men do; for good Laws
rose from evil manners; yet in a sense the Law is given for righteous men, not
to justify them, for it finds them justified already, and past the
condemnation of the Law; it finding them also sanctified, Beza.
it treats them not as enemies, but leads them, and delights them consenting to
it. This serves to explode the error of Antinomians and Libertines; so then
God to declare his Sovereignty, and man's subjection, gave Adam though innocent,
a Law. Mark how God bound man's obedience with a double fence; first, he fenced
him with a free indulgence to eat of all but one, this was an Argument to his
ingenuity; secondly, by a severe prohibition upon pain of death; by the first
the Lord wooes him by love; by the second he frights him by the terror of his
justice, and bids him touch it if he durst.

Observe among all the Trees of the Garden there are two here mentioned in a
more peculiar manner; the Tree of life, and the Tree of knowledge, which are
called by Divines two Sacraments, in a large sense; in which sense also, the
Ark of Noah, the fire which descended and burned the Sacrifice, Polanius.
the Baptism of the Red Sea and Cloud, the Manna, the water out of the Rock,
the pouring out of the blood of the Sacrifices, the Land of Canaan, the
Tabernacle, Temple, Ark of the Testimony, the propitiatory, the golden
Candlestick, the twelve stones taken out of Jordan, with the pool of Bethesda;
all these I say in a large sense are Sacramental Symbols of the Covenant of
Grace, or extraordinary Sacraments; but the Tree of knowledge, and Tree of
life, are called Sacraments of the Covenant of works.

By these the Lord did signify and seal to our first Parents, that they should
always enjoy that happy state of life in which they were made, upon condition
of obedience to his Commandments; i. e. in eating of the Tree of life, and not
eating of the Tree of knowledge.

For it was called the Tree of life, not because of any native property and
peculiar virtue, it had in it self to convey life; but Symbolically, Morally
and Sacramentally, it was a sign and obsignation to them of life natural and
spiritual to be continued to them, as long as they continued in obedience unto
God.

Aug.
In like manner the Tree of knowledge of good and evil was spoken, from the sad
event and experience they had of it, as Sampson had of God departed from him
when he left his Nazaritish hair by Dalilah.

Now that a Covenant of Works lay in this Commandment is clear; 1. Because that
was the condition of man's standing and life, as it is expressly declared; 2.
Because in the breach of that Commandment given him, he lost all.

This obedience as it was Characteristical to Adams Covenant, and
Contradistinguished to the Covenant of Grace, was perfect, personal, and
perpetual. In a sense, though different from the other, those three things are
required in our obedience under the Covenant of Grace, not in reference to the
Covenant, nor to justification; neither is our personal righteousness perfect,
I mean legally; yet is it perfect, though not in us, but in our surety; neither
was the Covenant made primarily with us, but with him, and with us in him, and
on his account; even as God made the Covenant of Works primarily with Adam, and
with us in him as our head inclusively.

Now for our better opening this doctrine to you I shall propound and answer
some questions.

1. What is meant by Covenant?

2. What ground we have to call it Adams Covenant, or a Covenant of Works.

3. Wherein does the Nature and Tenor of it consist?

4. Whether the Covenant of Works was revived and repeated to Israel?

5. How long it lasted; whither till now unto any?

Quest. 1. What is meant by Covenant, name and thing?

Answ. The word in the Hebrew is (...) Berith, which has a threefold
derivation, very fit to be taken notice of for clearing of the nature of the
Covenant.

1. From Barah to choose, because the persons are chosen between whom the
Covenant or Agreement is made: (...)
Indeed Gods Covenant with man is not only with his elect and chosen ones, but
a fruit and effect of our election; yea, the Lord does incline our wills to
make choice of him, and of his terms. I have made a Covenant with my chosen; so
again, Choose you whom ye will serve; ye are witnesses against your selves this
day, Psalm. 89.3. Josh. 24.15, 22
that you have chosen the Lord.

2. Or else this word Berith Covenant may be taken from Barah to eat, Illyricus.
because they were wont to eat together of the Sacrifice slain and provided at
the making of the Covenant, at which time they had a Feast; hence the Apostle
speaking of the Eucharist, the sign and seal of the Covenant, and which is a
spiritual Food and Feast upon a Covenant account, says, This Cup is the New
Testament, or New Covenant in my blood, 1 Cor. 11.25.

3. Or from Bathar to cut and divide asunder, (...)
by transposing a letter; for so the sacrifice was divided, and the Covenanting
parties were to pass between the parts: Thus Abraham entered into Covenant with
God, and he took a Heifer, She Goat, Genesis 15. Ver. 9.10.
and a Ram, and divided them in the midst, and laid one piece against
another, Ver. 9.10. And behold a burning Lamp passed between those pieces, Ver.
17.18.
in that same day the Lord made a Covenant with Abraham. This cutting of the
sacrifice into pieces, and passing through was a lively and dreadful sign, that
the party who should break Covenant, should be cut asunder, and into pieces, as
he well d^se ved, and as he at least implicitly imprecated upon himself;
notable to this purpose is that in the Prophet Jeremy, I will give the men that
have transgressed my Covenant, Jer. 34.18, 19, 20.
which have not performed the words of the Covenant which they made before me,
when they cut the Calfe in twain, and passed between the parts thereof, the
Princes of Judah, the Princes of Jerusalem, the Eunuchs and the Priests, and
all the People of the Land, which passed between the parts of the Calf, I will
even give them into the hand of their enemy, into the hand of them that se k
their life, etc. -- that is, to be slain and cut in pieces by the Sword. And
herein I take the Emphasis of the expression to lie, Lev. 26.25.
I will bring a Sword upon you which shall avenge the quarrel of my Covenant;
i. e. by cutting them asunder.

And this custom was conveyed to the Gentiles, they went between the fire, and
carried a Sword in their hands, and so took an oath; Lib. 10. contra Jul.
as Cyril proves out of Sophocles.

Thus Virgil speaking of Romulus and Tatius, Aeneid. 8. Hinc foedus a foedo
animali foede mactato.
-- Caesae jungebant foedera porcae.

They cut a Swine in sunder, and made a League; and to name no more, Titus
Livius speaking of the League between the Romans, and Albans, the Foecialis,
Herald or Minister of those Ceremonies, cried, If the Romans shall falsify by
public and wicked fraud, in that day O Jupiter do thou so smite the Romans, as
I smite this Swine, and so knocked the Swine on the head with a stone.

By all which it appears that Covenants have been ever held solemn, and sacred
things, and that men by breaking of them deserved dreadful punishments.

In like manner there was the shedding, dividing, and sprinkling of blood at
the making of Covenants, and hence it was called the blood of the Covenant;
Exodus 24.6, 7, 8.
Moses took half the blood and put it in Basins, and half of the blood he
sprinkled on the Altar, and he took the book of the Covenant, and read in the
audien^e of the people, and they said, All that the Lord has said, will we do,
and be obedient; and Moses took the blood and sprinkled it on the people and
said, Behold the blood of the Covenant which the Lord has made with you
concerning all these words: Note, He sprinkled the Altar instead of God, who
being incorporeal, and a Spirit, could not be sprinkled, yet being a Covenant
party, would have the Altar sprinkled for him.

So much shall serve for the first Question, setting forth in our Answer to it
the name and nature of a Covenant in general; the second Question follows.

Quest. 2. What ground we have to speak of Gods Covenant with Adam, and to call
it a Covenant, there being no mention of it here in the Text, nor elsewhere in
Scripture do we read of Gods Covenant with Adam.

Answ. However the name be not here, yet the thing is here and elsewhere,
comparing Scripture with Scripture; it is a nice cavil in Socinians to call fot
the word Satisfaction; others for the word Sacrament, others for the word
Trinity, others for the words Faith alone justifying, others for the word
Sabbath for Lords day, etc. and thence to conclude against Satisfaction,
Sacraments, Trinity, Justification by faith alone, and Sabbath, for want of
express words, when the things themselves are lively set down in other words;
so in this case of Gods Covenant with Adam, we have 1. Gods Command which lays
man under an obligation. 2. We have Gods promise upon condition of obedience.
3. We have Gods threatening upon his disobedience; 4. We have their
understanding it so, as appears in Eves words to the Serpent. 5. Chap. 3.3.
We have the two Trees as signs and symbols of the Covenant. 6. We have a
second Covenant, and a New Covenant, therefore there was a first and Old
Covenant; a Covenant of Grace supposes one of Works.

Object. If any shall say by first and old Covenant was meant Gods Covenant
with Israel, and not with Adam; and so by Covenant of Works the same is meant,
namely that which the Lord made at Mount Sinai.

Answ. Hereunto I answer; There is a repetition of the Covenant of Works with
Adam in the Law of Moses, Hebr. 8.7, 8, 9. Gal. 3.12. Romans 10.5.
as in that of the Apostle to the Galatians, The Law is not of faith, b^t the
man that does these things shall live in them; so likewise to the Romans, Moses
dsscribes the righteousness which is of the Law, that the man who does these
things shall live in them: Thus it was with Adam principally and properly;
therefore he was under a Covenant of Works, when God gave him that command in
my Text.

Quest. 3. Wherein then does this Covenant of Works consist? what is the
nature, tenor and end of it as such?

Answ. 1. This Covenant required working on our part as the condition of it for
justification and happiness; therefore called a Covenant of Works; Gal. 3.12.
thus before, the man that does these things shall live. Working indeed is also
required under grace now; but 1. Not to Justification; 2. Not from our own
Power; Ephesians. 2.8. Jam. 2.20.
3. Not previous to faith, which works by love, and lives by working, but man
lives by faith.

2. A second Characteristical sign of the Covenant of Works is this, that in
and under it man is left to stand upon his own legs and bottom, to live upon
his own stock, and by his own industry; he had a power to stand, and not to
have fallen; this is meant when it is said, God created man in his own Image.
Genesis 1.27.


Eccles. 7.29.
And again, This only have I found that God made man upright.

3. In the first Covenant, namely, that of Works; man had no need of a
Mediator; God did then stipulate with Adam immediately; for seeing as yet he
had not made God his enemy by sin, he needed no days-man to make friends hy
intercession for him.

Genesis 1. ult.
After man's Creation God said, He saw every thing which he had mude, and behold
it was very good; and after the Covenant made in chap. 2. its said, They were
naked, and they were not ashamed; i. e. they had not contracted guilt by
committing of sin, from whence only arises shame; therefore under the
Covenant there needs no Mediator.

And hence Moses Law was not properly a Covenant of Works, Gal. 3.19.
because that Law was given in the hand of a Mediator.

4. The Covenant of Works once broken, God abates nothing of his justice, no
not upon repentance, but the soul that sinned, dyed. Mark our Text, Thou shall
dye the death, by which doubling of the words in the Hebrew Idiom of speech, is
meant Vehemence and Certainty, Vatablus.
which was effected, and so had continued inevitably, without the help of
another Covenant hinted in that first promise, Genesis 3.15.

For the first Covenant gives no relief to a poor sinner when he has broken
it, but leaves him hopeless and helpless under a fearful expectation of wrath
and fury indignation.

5. The Lord in the Covenant of Works accepts the person for the Works sake;
that is, he mainly looks at the work how adequate it is to the command and rule
which he so exactly heeds, that upon the least failer his justice breaks out in
wrath, neither can any personal excellency in the world salve the matter; Deuteronomy.
27. ult.
Cursed is he that continues not in all the words of the Law to do them, and
all the people shall say Amen; a doleful Amen; Jam. 2.10.
and whosoever keeps the whole Law, and offends in one point, is guilty of all:
Note that whosoever, God respects no man's person in that case.

6. The Covenant of Works in performance of the condition leaves a man matter
of boasting and glorying in himself, and makes God a debtour to him.

Where is boasting? it is excluded; by what Law? of works? Romans 3.27.
Nay; as if he had said; the Covenant of Works affords matter of boasting to
him that works to justification by his own personal power and righteousness.

Now to him that works is the reward reckoned, not of grace, Romans 4.4.
but of debt; i. e. it obliges God to pay it him as a due, which is the
language of Pharisees and Papists; which were justly challenged and claimed; 1.
Were we indeed under a Covenant of Works, and not of Grace; 2. Were our works
perfect: 3. Did we not lie at Gods mercy for our guilt; All which declare man
impotent, and grace necessary, and withal Jews and Papists, to be enemies to
the Cross of Christ and Covenant of Grace, and under a Covenant of Works, of
which more anon.

7. The Covenant of Works leaves a man still in doubt while resting in it, in
that state, because it is a mutable state at best; he had all in his own hands,
and then Satan cunningly rooked him of all: God puts him into a good bottom,
and leaves him to be his own Pilot at Sea; the Devil assaults him, and sinks
him; and therefore the second Covenant takes all into Gods hands, that it may
continue safe under his Father by care and custoddy; 1 Pet. 1.4, 5. John 10.28,
29. and so gives the soul good security against death and danger, which Adam
had not while he stood; much less can any rich or honorable man in his fools
Paradise here in this world, say his Mountain is unmovable, his glory
unchangeable, seeing it passes away as a Pageant, 1 Cor. 7.31. if Adams
Paradise was so mutable, much more theirs; if he stood not in his integrity,
how shall they stand in their iniquity?

8. The Covenant of Works was made with all men in Adam, who was made and stood
as a public person, head and root in a common and comprehensive capacity; I
say it was made with him as such, and with all in him: Quo mansit remanente,
and quo pereunte peribat; he and all stood and fell together; for even the
Elect may say, We are all by nature the children of wrath as well as others;
Romans 3.19.
and that of St. Paul, We know that what things soever the Law says, it says
to them who are under the Law that every mouth may be stopped, and all the
world may become guilty before God.

But the Covenant of Grace is a discriminating thing; it takes in some, and
leaves out others; Christ is not a head in Covenant with all, as Adam was, but
of his Elect only; for we find many in the world under the headship of Satan
and Antichrist, and old Adam, who are out of Christ, not only because
unconverted as Saints themselves are before regeneration, but out of Christ in
the account of Gods Election, Donation and Covenant, who have none of his
special love, nor ever shall have.

Thus I have briefly opened the distinguishing Characters of the Covenant of
Works, which might have been more enlarged by those of the Covenant of Grace,
which is easily done by way of opposition and comparison one with the other;
and therefore, and for brevities sake I omit it; and come to the next question.

Quest. 4. Whether this Covenant of Works made with Adam, was revived and
repeated to Israel in Moses time; and if so, in what sense, and why?

Answ. I answer affirmatively, that in some sort the Covenant of Works was
revived and repeated to them, which appears from these grounds.

1. They were tied to Commandments under a curse.

Gal.3.10. Deuteronomy. 28 1, 2. and ver. 15.16.
2. Blessing is promised to obedience; they are both set down by Moses at large
in Deuteronomy, chap. 28. and elsewhere.

3. It is expressly called a Covenant, I mean the giving of the Law for
obedience.

The Lord God made a Covenant with us in Horeb. Deuteronomy. 5.2.


4. It is opposed to the Covenant of Grace as another Covenant upon this very
distinguishing account of obedience and faith, works and grace, as you may see
at large among other places in that of the Hebrews. Hebr. 8.6, 7, 8, 9, 10, etc.


Now there are four principal ends which the Lord had in so doing.

1. That he might hereby make men know what sin is, how prone we are to it, and
how averse and headstrong against all good; this is done by a Law of Works,
Romans 7.7. to the 13. ver. This indeed is Gods clear glass by which he
discovers to us the moral and penal evil of sin; so Romans 3.20.

2. That hereby the Lord might hold men in to obedience by a strong curb;
because we are so apt to break fence, he hedgeth up our way with thorns, Hos.
2.5, 6.

3. That God might stop every mouth, and make all guilty before him, Romans 3.19.

4. That men may hereby be lash't and driven to Christ as with a Schoolmasters
rod, to see an absolute need of him, and to make out hard after him, Gal. 3.22,
23, 24.

For men care not to run to a City of Refuge unless the avenger of blood
follow behind at their heels; neither do the whole need or regard the
Physician, but the sick and wounded.

Yet notwithstanding all this, they were not properly under a Covenant of
Works, neither was the law given to them as such a Covenant merely.

1. Because as the Law was to convince of sin, so it showed the expiation of
sin, and therefore their Sacrifices were killed and the blood shed and
sprinkled, Heb. 9.22, 23.

2. The Covenant at Mount Sinai was not made with all without exception as
Adams was, but only with a select people, even with Israel.

3. Because the Lord still puts them in mind of his promise to Abraham, which
included Christ, and faith in him, Gal. 3.16, 17.
and was not null by the Law.

Quest. 5. The last question is how long this Covenant lasted, and whither any
be under a Covenant of Works?

Answ. Most strictly it was but to the giving of the first promise, for then
the Covenant of Grace began, but was more largely and clearly revealed (till
the coming of Christ) by the Law and the Prophets; but was most perspicuously
and fully by Christ himself in his doctrine and death, and by the abundant
pouring out of his Spirit.

Howbeit all along and to this day every natural man is under a Covenant of
Works, because out of Christ, therefore under the Law, and the curse of it; for
which cause the Covenant of Works is by some called the Covenant of nature.
Faedus naturae.


Again, all they which look for righteousness and salvation by the power of
their wills, by the strength of nature, and by performance of duties, as Jews,
Turks, Philosophers, Papists, Socinians, Gal. 4.24, 25.
Pelagians, these are all under a Covenant of Works, they are not under grace;
they are of Hagar the Bondwoman, of Mount Sinai which answers to Jerusalem
which now is, which is in bondage with her children, as the Apostle speaks in
his elegant Allegory.

I come now to draw some Corollaries from this doctrine of the Covenant of
Works thus propounded, in a practical way of application, and that briefly.

Corol. 1. It serves for admiration, to wonder with a holy astonishment at the
Lords infinite condescending love in making a Covenant with poor man.

1. Because it was a free act in him to do it, he lay under no compulsion to
it; Romans 9.15, 16.
nothing of merit or profit in a despicable worm appears as a motive to it; it
was a royal act of glorious grace from the King of heaven to vile creatures: O
wonderful!

2. Because as it was free for him to do it, so he bound his hands by it, and
as it were lost his freedom by it; for his truth holds him fast to it, Hebr.
6.18.
by which its impossible for him to change. O wonderful!

3. He made the first offer, he prevented us by his grace, he loved us first, 1
John 4.10, 19. all this appeared in the first Covenant with us, Bullinger de
f^^dere Dei unios, and aeterno.
in vouchsafing us to make any at all with him: Ineffabilis misericordiae
Divinae Argumentum quod ipsum numen, ipse inquam Deus Aeternus faedus ipsum
primus offert, nullis ad hoc hominum meritis adactus, sed mera and nativa
bonitate impulsus; nec scio an humanum ingenium hoc mysterium vel plene
toncipere, vel dignis laudibus evehere possit. Unspeakable mercy that the
eternal God should first offer to league with us, moved to it by no merit in
us, but by his own native goodness only; a mystery which the mind of man
cannot conceive, nor his tongue praise to the worth of it; thus a grave
Author, which will the more inhance the love of God; if we

4. Consider that he makes Covenant upon Covenant after breaches and
forfeitures, renews them again, and ratifies them stronger than ever, as he did
the new Covenant after the old was broken by our high and heinous provocation
in the fall; and which he does to every elect soul in the Sacraments, and after
gross and grievous Apostasies; See Jerem. 3.1. Ezekiel. 16.60, 61, 62, 63. Hos.
2. O admire and adore this love!

Corol. 2. Seeing there are two Covenants on foot, one of Works, another of
grace; and very many, yea, the far greatest part of the world are under a
Covenant of Works, which is a most sad and doleful estate, because a state of
wrath and death, a most wretched and accursed condition; O try under what
Covenant thou art; for if thou art in the state of sinful nature, a sprowt of
old Adam, never yet cut off from his root of bitterness, nor graffed into
Christ, thou art undone; to be under such a Covenant is to be an enemy to God,
and to be liable to all his plagues; O make haste then, and flee as a Post, and
as the young Roe into Christ's Arms.

For consider, how thou can stand before the Bar of God in thy sins, in thy
nakedness; Adam fled away from the presence of God afraid and ashamed, hiding
himself in the Thicket, because he was naked; but where will thou hide thy
nakedness in that dreadful day of the Lord! there will be no shelter in that
day for a sinner:

Corol. 3. Labor to understand and discern aright the nature, tenor and
terms of both Covenants.

1. Because they are easiiy mistaken, and many do mistake them; Romans 10.2, 3.

2. Because the mistake is dangerous, like a man in the dark as he travels,
finds two ways; one way is wrong, Prove. 14.12.
yet it seems as good and safe as the other; he goes on in the wrong, which
leads him to a Rock, where he falls down headlong, and breaks his neck; so many
a poor soul imagines he is under a Covenant of Grace, and in a safe way to
heaven, when alas he is yet under a Covenant of Works, and in the highway to
hell; Labor then to discern the difference, search Scriptures, and thy own
heart, go to the Lord by prayer, Job 33.23.
and to his M nisters, that they may show thee thy way, lest thou go on to thy
destruction. And therefore,

Corol. 4. Improve the Covenant of works for the conviction of sin,
righteousness, and judgment; for till the Lord lets thee see what it is to be
under such a state, thou will never see the evil of it, nor ever desire to
change it.

Corol. 5. Renounce thy Covenants with sin, Satan, and creatures, or else thou will never be admitted into Covenant with God; if thou break not with them, God
will never close with thee; if thou be a Covenant-servant to them, thou art no
Covenant-servant of the Lords; for how can thou serve those two Masters,
Matthew. 6.24. 1 John 2.15, 16.
God and Mammon? both which crave thy whole man, and thy whole work, and which
are utterly inconsistent with each other.

Corol. 6. Labor to relieve thy self under thy greatest straits and sears by
Covenant promises; I mean the promises of the new Covenant which are called
better promises, Hebr. 8.6, 10, 11, 12. Joh. 15.
because absolute pr^mises; because they work that in us and for us which God
requires of us, when of our selves we can do nothing.

As the new Covenant is the best Covenant, and the promises of it the best
promises, Isa. 55.3. Acts 13 34.
so the mercies of it are the best mercies, for they are the sure mercies of
David, 2 Samuel 23.5.

Corol. 7. Bless the Lord that ye are under the best dispensation, and
clearest discovery of the Covenant of grace, better than Adams after the
promise was made to him upon his fall; better than Noah's after the flood,
better than Isreal's in the Wilderness, yea, better than the Patriarchs and
Prophets who had much legality and obscurity in their administrations, in
comparison of us who behold with open face the glory of God, 2 Cor. 3.18.

That it is the lot of us Gentiles to be brought into the knowledge and
participation of the Gospel in the last and best time; I mean after Christ's
appearance in the flesh.

The Apostle compares the Church to a Tree, Romans 11.16, 17.
which has the same root Christ, but several branches; now that the natural
branches should be cut off to make way for the ingrafting of us wildings, Pet.
Mart.
is matter of praise to the High God for his rich grace to us Gentiles, Ephesians.
3.8.

Corol. 8. Labor for a spirit of self-denial and debasement; for as the Old
Covenant spirit is a spirit of pride and boasting to advance natural abilities,
Romans 3.27. Romans 10.3.
to glory in our own personal endowments and performances; so a New Covenant
spirit is contrary to that, and is a spirit of faith, self-denial and
debasement.

Corol. 9. Watch against Satan; as soon as ever God and man were in Covenant,
he set himself to break that Covenant, and prevailed; for he beguiled their
simplicity by his subtilty, 2 Cor. 11.3. Genesis 3.


Now albeit the New Covenant stands on a surer foundation, yet he will very
much weaken our comforts, and increase our sorrows by drawing us under Gods
displeasure by sin, forfeiting Covenant mercies by Covenant breaches, which
mercies though they are not lost finally to Gods Elect, yet are they often to
be recovered, renewed and secured to our souls by a clear evidence.

Besides Satan will persuade men to slight and renounce their Baptism, as when
he makes Witches, and turns Christians to be Mahumetans, because thereby he
knows they renounce their Covenant with God to make one with himself; there are
that upon fairer pretenses, neglect or deny the Seals of the Covenant; Satan
had a fair pretense also to draw away our first Parents, and make them break
with God, which they little thought would have cost so dear; but the sad event
showed the sinfulness of that sin; wherefore Wa ch and pray that ye enter
not into temptation; Be not ignorant of Satan's Devices in these backsliding
and fedifragous times, Remember from whence ye are fallen, and walk steadfast in
Gods Covenant; you that stand, 1 Cor. 10.12.
learn by others falls to take heed.

THE FALL OF MAN.
Romans 5.12. Wherefore as by one man sin entered into the world, and death by
sin, and so death passed upon all men, for that all have sinned.


THis doctrine of Original sin, is not more difficult to understand, than
necessary to be known, more full of knots than uses: if we consider, 1. The
several batteries that are planted against this truth, by Rabbis, Pelagians,
Socinians, Flaccians, Arminians, Anabaptists; batteries raised by Pelagius his
pride, Philosophers ignorance, Papists policy, and Heretics idolized reason.
Or 2. if we consider the dependances of other doctrines upon this truth.
Augustine writing against Pelagius, thought the sum of Religion consisted in
the right knowledge of Original sin; As we know the pleasantness of a garden
by the noysomnesse of a dunghill; the gratefulness of a day from the darkness
of a night; so we cannot know the benefits of Christ so well as from the
knowledge of our Original guilt and sin. By a strict survey of Original sin, we
may better understand the honor of justification, the power of grace and
sanctification, the sweetness of a Christ, the necessity of a Gospel, the
preciousnesse of a Ministry; and therefore it was a futilous and malicious
assertion of Celestius of old, to call the doctrine of Original sin, rem
questionis, non fidei; a matter of debate, not faith; and the Heretics of
late, to reproach it with the style of Austins figment. 3. If we consider the
influence of this truth upon our practice; The knowledge of Original sin; it is
the curb of pride, the foyl to set off grace, the glass of man, the spur of
industry; it is that which makes the best of Saints to weep in the best of
duties, and the worst of sinners to look pale in their greatest prosperities;
so that you see the doctrine is most useful, let it therefore be most grateful.
Now this Original sin, Divines usually distinguish in peccatum Originali
Originans, and in peccatum Originali Originatum; into Original sin Originating,
and into Original sin Originated; into the Cause, and into the Subject of this
sin, the fountains and its streams; one man infecting, and all men infected;
the first is my task, the second is referred to a more worthy hand.

In the latter part of this chapter, where the Text is, the Apostle carries on
a double design.

1. To show the excellency of Christ, and grace by Christ.

2. The necessity of faith in Christ; and both these he demonstrates by a full
and large comparison between the first and the second Adam; the loss by the
first, the gain by the second; the sin of the first, the grace of the second;
the condemnation we are obliged in by the first, and the pardon we are enriched
with by the second, the first is a poisonous spring, the second is a cleansing
fountain.

The Text, if you look at the design of it, it points at the postern, where sin
and death first entered the world; and that was by Adams eating the forbidden
fruit; the prohibited Apple, was the first Apple of contention between God and
mankind. If we look at the parts of the Text, they are three.

1. We have an unhappy Parent, viz. Adam; not only by his offense undoing
himself, but making a bankrupt world. By him sin entered the world.

2. In the Text we have an unhappy posterity, not only to be linkt to the
loins, but the sins of the first Parent. The whole world had sin entered into
it, and all have sinned, says the Text, viz. in him.

3. We have an unhappy portion; sin and death the inseparable twins of misery;
so says the Text, sin enters, and death by sin; sin came by Adam, and death
came by sin; the one fell in pell mell into the world with the other; and both
are the unhappy inheritance of every child of Adam; indeed the Saints are
exempted from the second, but not the first death; sin and death were married
in Adam, and they shall not be divorced in any of the sons of Adam; believers
dye temporally, though not eternally; they feel the stroke, though not the
sting of death.

Now for the further clearing of my way, it will not be a digression, to take
off the veil from the Text in a short explication.

By one man] and him we may consider; 1. His name, Adam, and this comprehends
his person, sex, and kind. 2. His order; he was the first man, 1 Cor. 15.45. 3.
His person in the individual. And so Original sin properly is not derived from
the proximate Parents, but the prime-parent. 4. His nature; Adam was one, non
tantum in individuo, sed in specie; one comprehending the whole root,
representing the whole stock, the seed and generation of mankind; so Adam is
taken for the species of man.

Sinne] The Apostle here speaks of sin; not sins, as if he would precisely
determine it of that one root of sin, distinct from those many following
fruits; this sin has been the Original, the incentive, the cause of all sin;
this sin stained the world.

Entered into the world] viz. by propagation; sin entered like death; Now death
is actually propagated, as he said, scio me genuisse mortalem; I know I beget a
dying child, a child subject to death; sin entered not by example, but
generation.

The World] By the world, we must not understand terrenam, and corp^ralem
vitam, the pleasure and delights of the world; for the Saints are crucified to
the world, in this sense, Gal 6.14. and so Original sin should not seize on
believers; Nor, 2. In locum mundi; for as Pareus observes, the Angels first
sinned; and sin first entered by them into the place of the world. Nor 3. In
Paradisum, into Paradise; for sin was first committed by Eve in Paradise. But
4. We must understand the inhabitants of the world; Vniversum genus humanum,
all mankind, Martyr Gorranus.
as Mart. Gor.

And death by sinne] The query among Divines is, what this death is; Some
suppose the death of the body, as Ambrose; some the death of the soul, as the
Pelagians; but as Haymo observes, mors animae and corporis in omnes
pertranstit; the death both of soul and body passed on all; for as Origin
says, Orig.
Mors corporalis umbra est spiritualis, the death of the body, is only the
shadow of the death of the soul; so that by death in the Text, we must
necessarily understand the death of soul and body, with all the antecedents and
consequents of both, Willet.
sickness, weakness, corruption, guilt, horror, despair.

Death passed upon all men] Corporal death on all; the most holy, most
flourishing, most probable to live; spiritual and eternal death on all men, in
the sentence, not in the execution, Romans 3.19. the sentence is reversed, the
execution for ever forborne to believers

For all have sinned] For the opening of this, I shall only give you the glance
of Musculus; In Adam omnes fuimus, in lumbis ejus, etc. we were all in the
loins of offending Adam; from that mass we sprung; and therefore as Levi paid
tithes in the loins of Abraham, Hebrews 7.9, 10. so it is no wonder, if we
being in the loins of Adam, are found sinners in him.

viz. That our first Parent by his transgression, has left an unhappy portion
of sin and death to all his posterity; thus much the Text expresses, thus
much it confirms; we have this unwelcome entail from our first Parent.
Concerning death, I shall not dilate, because the shade of death does always
accompany the body of sin; but I shall only insist on that part of our portion,
sin. We are entitled to Adams sin; It Is a derivation from the root to the
branches; as poison is carried from the fountain to the Cistern; as the
children of Traitors have their blood tainted with their fathers Treason; and
the children of Bondslaves are born in their Fathers condition. Omnes in Adamo
peccaverunt, Aug.
quia omnes unus ille fuerunt, Aug. All were entangled in Adams sin, because
all were folded up in Adams person; And the same Father in another place,
Traxit reatum homo, quia unus erat cum illo a quo traxit; Man drew down guilt
upon himself, because he was one with him from whom he drew it. Greg.
And it is an excellent observation of Gregory, Genus humanum in parente primo
velut in radice putruit; Mankind putrified in the first parent as in a root.
Adam is as the poisoned root, and the clusters are envenomed, because the root
was poisoned; had Adam stood and preserved his perfection, his glory, as a
royalty had descended to his seed, to mankind; but by his offense, forfeiting
his beauty, and contracting on himself both guilt, and an universal
loathsomenesse; both loss and loathsomeness he transmits to his posterity; and
it is upon his breath, that every child that comes into the world, sucks in
poison with his first breach; and is no sooner a living creature, than a
deformed sinner. This truth we find early confirmed in the world; so Adam begat
Seth according to his own likeness, Genesis 5.3. non ad similitudinem Dei, sed ad
similitudinem sui; Brockman.
and it is very considerable the Original phrase, (...), in his image, in his
likeness; the word is as it were redoubled, to set the greater brand upon
corrupt nature; in his image, nay, in his likeness. And to show the necessity
of our drawing corruptness from Adam, holy Job expresses it by a quick and
smart interrogation, Job 14.4. Nay, th s truth David seems to bedue with tears,
and deplore with sighs, Psalm. 51.5. Behold, I was shapen in iniquity, and in
sin did my mother conceive me. In the times of the Gospel, this spot is more
clearly discernable, and from whence we received the contagion, Romans 5.19. By
God we are creatures, by Adam we are sinners; so that Text; By one man's
disobedience, many were made sinners. And so most remarkably, 1 Cor. 15.49. And
as we have borne the image of the earthly, etc. Nor is that gloss of Cyprian
upon the place to be over-passed; Imaginem terreni portavimus, Cypr.
peccandi propens^^nem, and mortem; imaginem caelestis portemus, constantiam in
sanctitate, instaurationem ex morte and corruptione, ad vitam and
immortalitatem; (i. e.) We have borne the image of the earthly Adam, a
propensity to sin and death; let us bear the image of the heavenly, a constancy
in holiness, and instauration from death and corruption to life and
immortality. I shall only add one Scripture more, Ephesians. 2.3. We were by
nature the children of wrath, as well as others.

Now there are three things which are considerable for the dispatch of the
doctrinal part of the Text.

1. To demonstrate more particularly the transmission of Adams sin to us.

Now Adams sin is transmitted to posterity two ways. 1. By imputation. 2. By
inhaesion; the guilt, and the stain of his sin is propagated to all his
posterity.

Adam is derived to us by way of imputation; and that upon a double
demonstration may be evidenced.

Ratione faederis, by the reason of the Covenant of Works which God made with
Adam, we were in him all of us legally; when God first made a Covenant with
man, it was not with Adam, ratione individui, as an individual person; sed
ratione ^aturae, as he bore our nature with him, as the representative of
mankind; God makes his Covenant with Christ as Head and Mediator of his
Church, with Abraham as the father of the faithful, with Adam as the stock of
mankind; Isa. 53.11. Psalm. 40.8.
we were in him parties in the Covenant, and had interest in the mercy which
should accompany the keeping of it, and were liable to the curse which should
follow the breach of it; Now Adam violating the Covenant, the guilt of that
violation descends upon all his posterity, Romans 5.19. Constituti sunt
peccatores, (...). Chry.
they were constituted sinners; It is to be noted, that God never makes a
Covenant with a single person, personally and individually, that all others are
unconcerned in it; but with whomsoever God enters into Covenant, that person is
a representative of others, and is to be looked upon as a public person;
otherwise God should make as many Covenants, as there are persons, which is the
greatest absurdity to assert; and so in Covenanting with Adam, he looked on him
as the stock and root of mankind.

Ratione Collationis. The Apostle in two places makes a remarkable comparison
between Adam and Christ, the first and second Adam, comparing the good of the
last, with the evil of the first, the grace of the one, with the sin of the
other; the life conveyed by the one, with the death transmitted by the other,
Romans 5.12, etc. 1 Cor. 15.45, etc. Now the righteousness of Christ redounds to
believers to justification; so the sin of Adam redounds to his posterity to
condemnation; by Adam we are cast, by Christ we are cleared; by Adam guilty, by
Christ innocent; the comparison would else be wholly insignificant; as by
Christ we are made really righteous, so by Adam we are made really sinners; we
are Princes in Christ, Prisoners in Adam; Crowned in Christ, cursed in Adam;
this is is one great drift of the comparison.

Adam is derived to us, not only by way of imputation, but by way of inhaesion;
we receive from offending Adam, Adamus genus nostrum tabificavit. Aug.
vitiositatem, libidinem, morbidum affectum, a vitiosity, lusting, and a
contagious distemper; we receive not only a defect of holiness, but
deordination, pravity, evil disposition, propension to mischief, Ephesians. 4.22.
John 3.6. Jam. 3.15. Col. 3.5.
aversion to all good; this sometimes the Scripture calls the Old man, the
flesh, divelish wisdom, the hell that sets the whole course of nature on fire,
earthly members. And that Adams sin is propagated to us by way of inhaesion, is
likewise demonstrable by a double evidence.

Psalm. 51.5. The soul of David was no sooner united to his body, than sin was
united to both; he had not only a Crown of gold, but grace; he was not only a
King after man's desire, but a Saint after Gods heart; 1 Samuel 13.24.
yet this sinful leprosy he drew from Adam, this Original stain clave to him;
he was a sinner in the womb, though a Prince in the Throne, and a Saint in the
Sanctuary. And so Paul, that excellent Apostle, how does he moan this inward
spot which he drew from Adam? how does he complain of indwelling sin? Romans
7.17. of an evil within him, verse 19. of a law of his members, verse 23. These
groans of such eminent Saints are too pregnant an argument, that the sin of
Adam transmitted to us, does not only cast guilt on our persons, but filth on
our natures; lay a charge to us, but throw a stain upon us.

1 Cor. 1.30.
so the first Adam not only conveighs guilt to condemn, but filth to defile us;
else the work of sanctification would be wholly unnecessary, and the comparison
between the first and second Adam, would be maimed and imperfect; Christ makes
us heavenly, as well as pronounces us heavenly; and Adam makes us earthly, as
well as leaves us to the punishment of those that are so. The full comparison
between the first and second Adam, speaks this clearly; Adam had sin to defile,
Rev. 1.5. Christus valnera sanarit, quae Adamus portavit. Cypr.
and therefore Christ had blood to wash; Here may that observable passage of
Austin come in, Vidi ego zelantem puerum, etc. I have seen, says Augustine, a
child with his eye full of envy, venting his malice, etc. Whence comes this
incurvation and waywardness of nature, but from Adam? happily the parents of
this child, were true and eminent believers; so that there must be a tabes, a
disaffectednesse transmitted from Adam to his posterity, against the opinion of
Peter Lumbard and the Schoolmen.

2. The second thing to be opened for the dispatching of the doctrinal part of
the Text, it is this, To vindicate the righteousness of God in this
transmission and conveyance; And the justice of God is most glorious in this
propagation of Adams sin; and this may be cleared in a double Demonstration.

Adams sin is ours as well as his; as a Learned man most elegantly, Si quis
peste laborans alios inficiat, hi moriuntur; Pet. Martyr.
dicitur illorum quisque, non aliena, sed sua peste mortuus esse. Now there is
a double Argument to prove Ad^ms sin ours.

1. Else God did punish us for another sin, that fault which is not our own,
which is against divine justice. God does not usually strike the son for the
fathers crime, and make the son feel the bruise of the fathers fall, that the
father should merit the stroke, and the posterity feel it; this is against his
own protestation, Ezekiel. 18.2.

2. The Antithesis between Christ and Adam, would not hold, if Adams was not to
be reputed ours; for as the righteousness of Christ, ita communicatur membris,
ut quisque fidelis dicere possit, illam esse suam, etc. as Bucan well observes,
is so communicated to us, that every believer may say, This righteousness is
mine; so the iniquity of Adam is so communicated to all his posterity, that
every child of Adam may sadly say, This iniquity is mine, and I am righteously
punished for it. And now therefore I say, if Adams sin be ours in the guilt and
stain of it, let us acknowledge Gods justice in the transmission of it.

Adam stood, we expected the entaile of perfection and happiness; that the
Crown should have descended to us as his issue and offspring; we expected that
the beauty of his mind, the harmony of his will, the holiness of his desires,
the absoluteness of his Soveragnty should have fallen to us as a Princely
inheritance; and therefore Adam falling, it is but just that the entaile of sin
and death should be fixed upon us.

3. Now the third thing to be opened, in the finishing of which, the doctrinal
part will be dispatched, is to show, that Adams sin is not propagated to us by
imitation, but by generation, against the heretical Pelagian. And this shall be
briefly coucht under the evidence of a five-fold Argument.

Arg. 1. As our Divines seasonably observe, Christ's righteousness is not only
proposed to us to be imitated; we should then all fall sho t in writing after
the copy; but those that lay hold on his righteousness by faith, they are
changed and renewed in their minds; there is a physical communication of this
righteousness; they feel the power of his death in the crucifying of their
lusts; and the virtue of his resurrection in their newness of mind and life,
Romans 6.5. Phil. 3.10.
as the Apostle most pathetically; So Adams sin is not only our Copy, but our
corruption; it does not only seduce, but defile our natures; not only entice,
but condemn our persons; Adam was not only a sinful pattern, but a sinful
Parent; the plague of his sin has infected the humane nature; not only me, but
mankind.

Arg. 2. Baptism that is administered to little ones, to our infants, it cannot
be thought to blot out sins of imitation; for they are guilty of none; then
Baptism would in vain be administered to our infants; and this raises the feud
of Anabaptists against this great truth of Original sin. They deny the sin of
Infants, that they may deny the Baptism. Now we cannot conceive that tha
blessed Ordinance of Infant Baptism should be administered for no designs and
purposes; and why does the Apostle call Baptism the Laver of Regeneration?
Tit. 3.5. were there no stain in Infants, what need of a Laver, or of washing?

Arg. 3. And as Ambrose observes; David ait, ante usuram lucis, Ambrose.
se accipere originis injuriam: David complains that he lay under the stain of
original sin, before he was blessed with the first light of the Sun; he was dogged
with native corruption; when the womb bore him, it bore a living, but a leprous
child; he was wrapped in sin, before he was wrapped in swaddling clothes.

Arg. 4. And how many offend in the world, who think nothing of Adam; they
transgress, and look not on his Copy: And what is murder, so often acted in
the world, to the earing of an Apple? What proportion is there between those
two Sins, Adams eating of an Apple, and Cains shedding of his brothers blood?
How many transgressors are there in the world, that ne-ever heard of his
offense, or that ever there was such a man in the world? whom did Philosophers
imitate in their sin, that opinionated the world to be eternal, as Aristotle
and his followers?

Arg. 5. And that Argument of a learned man is most considerable; Si peccatum
originis sit tantum ab imitatione, Paulus non dixisset ex Adamo fluxisse
peccatum, sed a Diabolo; quia ipse peccandi exemplum dedit: (i. e.) If original
sin were only propagated in a way of imitation, Paul would never have said,
that sin entered the world by Adam, but by Satan; for he set the first pattern
of sinning. And now the doctrinal part is dispatched, I shall only annex some
few things for the clearer evidence of this truth.

Adams sin be not imputed to us, why do our Infants of en labor under the
wracking torments of some distempers? and why often is the Cradle turned into a
Coffin? why come they crying and moaning into the world? why does palenesse of
face, plenteousnesse of tears, and a multiplic^ty of diseases seize upon them,
as the prisoners of sin? Surely God cannot forget the bowels of a Father; this
could not befall our Infants, were not the hand of justice armed with sin and
guilt; let us not conceive God trying practice upon poor moaning innocents.

2. If Adams sin be not inherent in us, why have we not free will to good? why
do we not naturally burn in love to Jesus Christ? and flourish with all
vivacity in duty; why fly we not to the Sanctuary as to our Paradise? but on
the contrary, why do we draw the Chain of a body of death after us? Duty is our
burden, sin our Element; Romans 7.24.
the world our beloved, the creature our Idol; How are we dragged to service?
we fly to sin, but are drawn to duty: And in a word, how come our
understandings to be prisons of darkness? our wills stages of rebellion, our
affections heaps of dung or dross; for naturally we love sin or the creature;
what was then the inoffensivenesse of infancy, thus to envenome our natures?
how came in the evil heart of unbelief? Hebrews 3.12.

3. This Truth of original sin was generally held in the Church till Pelagius,
who lived in the fifth Century* confirmed by diverse Councels in the Primitive
times; Quis ante Discipulum Pelagii prodigiosum Cael estium, reatu
praevaricationis Adaegenus humanum negavit esse astrictum.
Concilio Melevitano, Concilio Toletano, etc. and the sixth Council of
Carthage. This truth has been acknowledged by Heathens; Plato complained,
Homines natura sua esse pravos, and induci non posse ut justitiam colant; (i.
e.) That men were naturally very evil, and could not be induced to the
embracement of what was righteous: And Cicero lamentatus est homines a natura
noverca in lucem edi; Cicero complains that men were brought into the world by
nature their stepmother; the Heathens themselves universally enjoined a strict
Discipline to curb the rankness and untowardnesse of nature. Actus ille Adami,
quo ipse peccavit, omnibus imputandus est and censendus omnium esse proprius,
etc. A lap.
Nay, this truth has been confirmed by the most learned of the Papists; A
lapide in his Comment on the Romans acknowledges that that one act of Adams in
eating the forbidden fruit, wherein he offended, is to be imputed to all men,
and is to be reputed the sin of all men; and from hence it comes to pass that
every child of Adam has contracted a necessity of sinning even with his first
breath; Nay, the very Rabbis have attested this truth; and we find it
clearly, though sadly witnessed by our constant and much to be bemoaned
experiences, and here we might suppena and summon two witnesses for the further
verification of it; our own averseness to good, and our natural propensity to
evil.

4. Nor was this truth ever opposed, but upon some design: The Pelagians
opposed it to maintain the perfection and power of nature, which is man's proper
Idol: The Papists have opposed it to establish merit: The Socinian to overthrow
the satisfaction of our blessed Lord Jesus Christ: And the Anabaptist, to
subvert the precious Ordinance of Infant Baptism; (as was before hinted.)

But that this truth may leave off its mourning as to us, let us be careful in
the application and improvement of it; which may be diversely.

Use 1. Let this check those who pride themselves in their noble descent; that
they are of a worthy family, of an elder house, of a noble lineage, their
Scutchion is blazond with more than ordinary honor; these should do well to
look back a little further, and observe what their great Progenitour Adam left
them, nothing but poverty, shame and guilt; and this would make them wrap the
silver Star in Cypres, and cover their honor with mourning; this would put a
half Moon into their Scutchion, and clip the Plumes of their boast: Indeed a
noble descent, it may be our privilege, it must not be our pride; such
vainglorious persons should sometimes think of their first Parents: Adam left
them nothing but a stock, not of glory, but of sin to trade with.

Adam be an incentive to us, to pursue advantage in the second Adam: Musculus
observes, Muscul.
this is one of the general uses we should make of this doctrine; ut gratiam
Christi eo subnixius ambiamus; (i. e.) That we should be the more importunate
in our pursuits after the grace of Christ; rags and wants bring beggars to the
door; we are bankrupts in the first, let us look after an estate in the second
Adam; the first Adam has betrayed us, let us study that the second may betroth
us; that our forfeiture in the first may be abundantly repaired in our felicity
by the second; Adams fall should make us more sensible to rise by Christ.

nature; ye observe not the unhappy portion that Adam left him; his immediate
parents may leave him the heir of an Estate, but his first Parent left him the
heir of Condemnation.

Adam, besides the manifold accessions of his own; and what blood must quench
that hell of sin within: Peter Mart.
as Peter Martyr well observes, Commendat malitia hujus peccati, dignitatem
satisfactionis acceptae per Christum. The knowledge of original sin puts a
gloss upon the satisfaction of Christ. The work of Christ upon the soul,
receives its admirable rarity from the full knowledge of our sin by Adam.

Adam left him and thee an equal portion of sin and misery; so that all the
distinction arises not from thy dignity, but from Gods pity; and if God has
had more compassion for thee, will thou have more scorn for thy brother? Gods
pity should not be food for thy pride: Adam left thee as large an enditement as
him, as corrupt a nature as him, as great a loss of original beauty and
perfection as him; and shall the opening of Gods hand to thee, procure the
lifting up of thy heel against him? you and your despised brother, were both
coheirs of original sin; Adam divided that portion exactly between you.

Adam can subject the whole world to pollution and destruction. As we see the
scorching Sun does not only dry up a Field, but bring a drough upon the whole
Land; sin is of a poisonous and propagating nature; if ye would view sin in its
native and real deformity, look on it in the glass of Adams fall; Adam falls,
and his whole posterity feel the bruise; one man (says the Text) is sufficient
to bring sin into the world; sin like chain-shot, it can cut off many as well
as one; how should this raise our holy zeal against sin? and how should we
arm our selves with holy resolutions against this ruinous evil? sin is a ball
of poison that can destroy a world.

Adam; he propagated dea h to his posterity: Oh that Parents would study, as
instruments, to propagate life to their posterity! he propagated sin, let us
study to propagate holiness to our children; I mean instrumentally, as moral,
not as natural instruments; Adams fall should be every Parents Alarm: Our
first Parent unravel'd the happiness of his seed; let us that are Parents
endeavor to build up the felicity of our issue; sinful Parents that are
miscarrying copies to their children, and serve to poison the creature of their
own generation, they are indeed the true children of Adam, they are in some
sense like Sampson, Job. 16.30.
that will destroy others with themselves. But let Adams example be our
caution, his folly our warning piece; sometimes shipwracks make them that
follow more cautelous; and let us study to imitate the second; not the first
Adam; this ruins his offspring, but the other saves his seed and issue: The
forgetfulness of Adam might put bowels into every Parent toward the souls of
their children. Now there are three ways for Parents to preserve their
Families, which Adam left to ruin.

1. By their holy pattern: Fathers are the childrens Looking-glsses for to
dress themselves by; we know the old Aphorism, Ducimur Exemplis, we are
guided and led by Examples; we more follow Copy, than Command; children will
more mind the mothers Conversation, than the Ministers instruction; let us
study to build up our Families by a holy life. Adams sin ruined his issue; let
our holy Conversation preserve our issue; and though Adam were our common
Parent, let him not be our authentic pattern.

2. By their watchful care: When Adam sinned, he more minded his sense than his
seed; to please the one, than to preserve the other: Let Adams neglect of his
posterity move us to a greater watchfulness over ours; we are often very
solicitous to make our children rich in gold; let us be more solicitous to make
them rich in grace: Not so much that they may be rich in Fields, as in faith;
let us watch over them till the morning of conversion appear in them.

3. By their importunate prayers: Adam destroyed his posterity by a wanton eye;
let us study to save ours by a weeping eye, by prayer mingled with tears;
Hannah by prayer obtained a Samuel, let us by prayer endeavor to make our
children Samuels; the God of grace can give grace to our issue upon the account
of prayer: Prayer may obtain that from the second Adam for thy children, which
they lost in the first.

8. Let us consider this with our selves; that though from Adam we receive sin
and death, yet that we charge not our sin and death upon him, as if we dyed by
his fall, and not by our folly; it is true, our original guilt comes from him,
but from whom comes our actual? he left us a stock of sin, but who has
improved this stock? Perditio nostra ex nobis; our destruction is from our
selves; his sin is ours, as we were in him; but O those innumerable iniquities
we our selves have adventured upon! we had the Egg from Adam, but the Serpent
is from us that stings to death; we cocker lust, and warm corruption with our
desire and delight, that it engenders into killing transgressions. Adam has
left us death by original, but we apply this death by our actual sin. And
therefore as our perdition was hatched by Adam, so it is fledged by us; it is
seminally from Adam, but ripened by us, we our own selves perfect our own
misery; we put the seal to our own destruction, by our fostering of our own
lusts, and by our actual rebellions.

OF Original sin INHERING.
Romans 6.6. Knowing this: that our old man is crucified with him, that the body
of sin might be destroyed; that henceforth we should not serve sin.


THe Apostles drift throughout the whole Chapter, is clearly to beat down sin,
and to promote holiness. It was not known in his happy days, how to ascend
the Throne of glory, but by the steps of grace. Those Primitive, and truly
inspired Saints, never thought of commencing any degree in happiness per
saltum; knowing that without holiness they should not see God.

Now to urge his already believing Romans to further sanctity, the Apostle uses
the consideration of their Baptism as a special motive in the 3.4, 5. verses,
and indeed those Ordinances in which we receive most from God, are greatest
obligations of the soul unto God. There are these mercies with him that he may
be feared. When the direct beam of love from God to them is strongest, the
reflection of love and duty from them toward their God is hottest; then they
are constrained, and cannot as it were, 2 Cor. 5.14.
any longer choose but live to him that dyed for them.

This is that which the Apostle in this verse takes for granted. Knowing this;
or we all know and grant this (the participle by an Hebraisme being put for the
verb) which has reference unto the foregoing part of the Chapter. A Lapide in
locum.
Of which the words following in my Text, are the sum and conclusion, viz. That
our old man is crucified with him, etc.

Which words contain, 1. A duty or privilege; for in Religion the same thing
is both; it being our happiness to serve so good a Master, and to be employed
in so good a service.

2. The end of that duty or privilege; That the body of sin might be
destroyed, etc.

But my task being only to speak to some of the terms we here meet withal, I
would not be curious in the division of the words. I am only to unfold a word
or two in each part, Paraeus, Chrysostom.
viz. Our old man, the body of sin, and sin, all which signify one and the
same thing; that is, they all are put here to express our Original pravity,
and inbred corruption.

Concerning which -- I suppose you have in the former Sermon seen this fountain
of death opened. I am only to show you the streams that are from it
overflowing in every one of us.

Original pravity inhering in us, spoken to in the general.
And in the handling of this subject, give me leave to propound some things
first more generally, (remembering that this discourse is intended partly in the
nature of a common place,) and then I shall speak to it more particularly from
the words now before us.

Considered first, that there is such a pravity.
That which more generally I am to speak unto, is,

First, That there is a pravity, naughtiness, and corruption in every one.

Secondly, What this corruption, and spiritual pravity is

1. That there is such a pravity, will partly appear from the forced consent
and common experience of all men. Arguments to prove it.
To prove which I need not quote those passages which Austin has formerly
observed out of Plato and Cicero, or add any other; for certainly the
wickedness man naturally tends unto is so gross, Contra Julian. Pelag.
that the dim sight of nature may easily discover it; were this to be read of
Pagans, I would confirm my assertion as Paul did his, Acts 17.28. Certain of
your own Poets have said it: But I remember I have to do with Christians, and
therefore to the Law and to the Testimony. Alas, these poor men, like those
that admired Nilus's streams, but were ignorant of its springhead, they could
not see so far as to the true cause of all this sinful misery; they could
complain that none were content with their condition; but qui fit, how, or
whence it came so to pass, they could not tell.

Nay more, the wisest Heathen with the plummet of reason could never fathom the
depth of this corruption: St. Paul, Romans 7.7.
till a Convert, and savingly instructed in the Law, did not know this lust.
And this I the rather premise, because I shall take my self tied up to
Scripture-evidence and proofs in the business in hand. Scripture makes only a
full discovery of this disease, and of its cure too. Here only invenitur
venenum, here only nascitur antidotus. Hence then I shall chiefly fetch these
Arguments instead of many.

The first Argument of our sinful condition by nature may be taken from Genesis
5.3. where it is said that Adam who had been created in the likeness of God,
ver. 1. after his fall by sin, Arg. 1. From man's begetting children in his own
image.
begat a son in his own likeness, who had now made himself like unto the beast
that perish, or far worse, for an Ox knows his Owner, etc. Now what is it for
God to create man in his likeness? it is sanctus sanctum. A holy God creared
man holy; and by consequence for Adam to beget Seth in his likeness, is
corruptus corruptum; defiled Adam begat defiled, polluted Seth; and indeed who
can bring a clean thing out of that which is unclean? John 14.4.
if the root be corrupt, the fruit is not sound; if the fountain be poisoned,
the waters are not wholesome; if the Parents be leprous, or infected with some
other disease not to be named, they entail their malady as well as their nature
upon their unhappy offspring. Nothing can exceed the virtue of its cause,
which is the ground of our Saviors assertion, John 3.6. That which is born of
the flesh is flesh.

It is very remarkable that the like phrase is not used when Scripture speaks
of Adams begetting Cain, or Abel, (though both these were begotten in Adams
likeness too) because Abel being to dye without issue, and all Cains progeny
to be drowned by the flood, it is noted the rather of Seth by whom all mankind
has hitherto been continued in the world; that he, (from whom as well as from
Adam we all came) was begat in Adams own image, that into which by sin he had
transformed himself; and not in that likeness which was Gods, in which God at
first made him.

Nay, though the Parents be regenerated, yet their children by nature are
altogether defiled; because they beget children as they are men, not as they
are holy men; though the Parent be circumcised, the child brings into the
world an uncircumcised foreskin with it, as the purest wheat that is cast into
the Field comes up with husks and stalks. I might add that the holiest men
upon earth, are but holy in part, they have a dark side as well as a light
side, and proles (as conclusio) sequitur deteriorem partem; their children are
like to what they were by nature, and cannot without the same Almighty mercy be
like what they are through grace, witness Josiah's and Hezekiah's children;
but there are too many sad Evidences of this amongst us daily.

Arg. 2. From the Redemption of man by Christ.
Our second Argument for to prove our corruption by nature, the Apostle
furnishes us with 2 Cor. 5.14. If Christ dyed for all, then were all dead. And
the stresse we lay upon it, it will very well bear; for what need all that are
saved, to be saved by Christ, if in themselves they are not ruined? Destruction
is first asserted to be from our selves, and then it follows, but from me is
your health; is not Christ made to all those that shall come to heaven and
happiness, wisdom, 1 Cor. 1.30.
righteousness, sanctification and redemption? Does not his death satisfy for
their debts? his Spirit sanctify their hearts? Thus none go unto the Father
but by him, and whos^ever would but see the Kingdom of God, must be borne
again, John 3.3.

This very reason St. Austin urges concerning children. I shall give this, Arg.
de verbis Domini. sermon. 8.
and some larger passages in English that I might not overmuch entangle the
thread of my discourse. Whosoever says, that infancy has nothing from which
Jesus should save us, he denies Christ to be a Jesus to infants baptized in his
Name; for what is a Jesus? Jesus is by int^rpretation a Savior, a Savior is a
Jesus; those which he does not save, be ause they have nothing that he should
save them from, or cure in them, he is not to them a Jesus. Now if your hearts
can endure that Christ should not be a Jesus to such, I know not whither your
faith can be sound, etc.

Thirdly, Scripture Ordinances prove this corruption to be in us; for else what
need their institution to take it from us? Third argument is taken from
Ordinances, Sacraments, etc.
If there be no pollution in the foreskin, why was Circumcision appointed to do
it away? if we have no filth, what needs baptismal washing? and if we may
borrow light from any shadows of the Ceremonial Law, why should women be so
long unclean, and need solemn purification after their childbirth, if the
fruit of their womb had been so immaculate and pure as some would make us
believe? It Is true, the Virgin Mary offered, though she brought forth a holy
Child, Isa. 53.11.
but he was by imputation sin; for we know he bare in Gods account our
iniquities.

Saint Austin upon the bringing of Children unto Christ, August. sermon. 36. In
Evangel secund. Lucam.
observes this also, Children (says he) are brought to be touched; to whom are
they brought to be touched but to the Physician? if they come to a Savior,
they come to be cured; and presently after he adds video reatum, I see there
is guilt in them. Another passage of his I shall the willinglier quote, because
many that oppose this truth, pretend much to reverence antiquity. De verbis
Apostoli. sermon. 8.
Wherefore do thou say this child, or this person is sound, and has no
disease? why then do thou run to the Physician with him? art not afraid
lest he should say unto thee, Take him away that is sound? -- The Son of man
came not but to seek, and to save that which was lost; why did thou bring him
unto me, if he were not lost? Lib. 1.
And in his tract against Julian the Pelagian, the same father quotes several
that were his predecessors in the maintaining of this very truth, as Irenaeus,
Cyprian, Hilary, Ambrose, etc. but I proceed because we have heard a greater
than all these, God himself so abundantly attesting of it.

This corruption shows it self by its effects; if we be so spiritually foolish,
Fourth argument. The sad effects prove it
as not to believe there is such impurity in us from any other Arguments
produced for the proof of it, experience may be our Mistress to teach it.

1. The miserable effects.
1. Experiences of multitude of miseries that flow from it. This is that
Pandora's box, which the Heathens so much talk of, out of which all manner of
mischiefs flow abroad in the world. Why do we come into the world crying,
rather than laughing? but as a sad Omen of the world of evils we are ever after
here to meet with. De Civitate Dei. lib. 21. cap. 14.
But if there were no sin, there would be no suffering in those tender years.
And what have these sheep done? When I see a child lying bound hand and foot
in its swaddling clouts, skreaming and crying out, I cannot believe but God and
nature would never have dealt so hardly with it (so noble a creature
especially) if guilt had not procured these bonds and miseries; nay, methinks
they speak its desert to be bound hand and foot for ever, to be speechless for
ever, and to be cast too (unless infinite mercy prevent) where there is
weeping and wailing, and gnashing of teeth for ever.

And all these things Scripture makes only the products of sin; that only is
the fruitful Parent of all evils. Wherefore does a living man so much as
complain? it is for the punishment of his sin, Lam. 3.39. Death which reigned
over all, Romans 5.14. is the wages of sin, Romans 6.23. Nay, of that sin too
which is communicated to mankind by Adams fall; 1* Cor. 15.21, 22. By man
came death; death is not of Gods making, but of man's, of our sins; and so are
all sicknesses and miseries (the tendencies to death) of sin's making; for God
does not afflict willingly; no, not to a bare grieving of the children of men,
Lam. 3.33. but as it follows in Adam all dye. 1 Cor. 5.22.


2. The sinful effects.
2. As the experiences of misery, so of the abounding of iniquity attest this;
there must be a root of bitterness, where there is so much bitter fruit. Our
Saviors question, Does a man gather figs of thorns? it may in this case with
the same strength of reason be inverted; Does any man gather thorns of a
fig tree, or thistles of a vine? if our nature be yet so sweet and good, whence
do the unsavory fruits of vanity and rebellion (in the youngest ones) that I
do not say of blasphemy and impurity, whence do these grow? why must young ones
be so long under the menaces and rods of their Parents and Masters, and as the
event testifies all too little too, to restrain them from undoing themselves,
and damning their immortal souls? is not virtue as amiable as vice, if we did
but look upon them indifferently? can there be more said for the ways of sin,
than for the ways of God, which are pleasantness. its self, etc? and why then
has God so few, and the world, nay, sin and Satan so many servants?

They that converse with children, or are any way concerned in their education,
can set to their seal that this is true; how often do they see puerum zelantem,
if not worse, wilful and obstinate children; folly so deeply bound in their
hearts, that the rod of correction can hardly drive it out? Prove. 22.15.


I shall omit many other Arguments which might be brought for the further
evidencing of this pollution in us; but I know it is not their number, but
their weight that is considerable: And I hope by these God will reveal so much
of his light, that we may see and be convinced of our own darkness.

The second thing more generally concerning this subject to be considered, is,
2. What this corruption and spiritual pravity is.
what this corruption and inbred pravity is?

There are many names which Scripture and Antiquity have given unto it; those
which the Ancients call it by, you may read more largely in Aug. contra
Julianum, lib. 1. cap. 2. By him, or about his time it began to be called
original sin, which word we shall henceforth more frequently use; for though
it be not found in Scripture, yet that which we intend by it, being so clearly
grounded on Scripture, the name cannot distaste any, who have not a quarrel
against the thing; no more than the name of Trinity or Sacraments, and the
like. 1. From its name.


And in these too, convenient rebus nomina; there is good reason why it is so
called.

For 1. It Is called original sin, because it is in every one from his
original; it may say to every one, as soon as thou were, Rivet in synops. Theol.
I am; Or,

2. Because it is derived from Adam the original of all Mankind, out of whose
blood God has made us all: Acts 17.26.
Or,

3. Because it is the original of all other sin; it is the seed and spawn out
of which they all grow; this is that lust which when it has conceived brings
forth sin, James 1.15.

As for Scripture names, Chemnitius in his Common place upon this subject
reckons up above twenty whereby it is called in the Word of God: I shall not
insist on any besides those which I shall have by and by out of this Text to
speak unto.

Which I should be too much prevented in, if I should set down any certain
definition of it to be here explained, besides what every one may gather from
what has been already said; only I cannot but mention those three things,
which make up as it were, this original sin, and into which Anselm divides
his definition of it.

1. There is in original sin the absence of original righteousness, 2. And
parts it consists of.
which is the image of God in which he made man at first; for he makes him
upright, and all his workmanship (when looked over) is exceeding good.

2. There is present in man its contrary image, that is unrighteousness,
concupiscence, etc. A heart evil, and only evil; vicious habits, even before
there were vicious acts; as afterward a man has the habits of grace infused
before he acts graciously.

This souls disease is like unto those of the body, where there is not only a
privation or absence of the former good constitution, but a present
indisposition, etc. And though original sin be not actual, yet it is active;
actuosum, though not actuale. The flesh l^steth against the Spirit, and sin
works all manner of concupiscence, Romans 7.8. To understand these things the
better, we must know:

1. That the soul of man cannot be indifferent to, or altogether without either
of these images or likenesses; it has either the image of a holy God, or of a
sinful man upon it; to think that it is rasa tabul^, like white paper without
any thing good or bad written in it, is but a Philosophical fiction, which
Scripture no where owns, and Christianity every where explodes; there are but
two Cities made out of mankind, Aug. de Civitate Dei.
Jerusalem and Babylon; there will be but two sorts at the last day, Sheep and
Goats, and unto which should these neuters or indifferent ones belong?

2. As none can be without one of these images, so none have both of them. A
man's soul cannot be as some artificial picture representing on the one side a
beauty, on the other side a Monster; light and darkness; God and Mammon;
Christ and Belial are too much opposite to enter into any fellowship or
agreement in his soul. No, but 'twill be asked, whose image and superscription
(in the singular number thus too) has it?

3. And as by this sin there is both the absence of Gods image, and the
presence of his enemies; that is, man by it, is not what God is, holy, etc. and
is what God is not, unholy, etc. so thirdly in this sin, is considerable that
debt which man owes unto Divine Justice, to satisfy for this h^s irregularity.
God might require, that man should make him satisfaction for this injury; and
'twill be exacted of all men out of Christ. It is no small crime to break the
seal, to throw away the image and picture of any Prince or Sovereign. Now as
the former ingredients into this sin, made us altogether sinful, so this
consideration makes us by nature altogether miserable.

And thus I have spoken to this subject in the general, and more by way of common
place. I shall now confine my self in that which is behind, to speak of it only
under those notions which this Text affords. As, 1. It Is called here our Old
man. 2. The body of sin. 3. This is that also which in the last words is
called sin.


As to the first of these. Original sin spoken to more particularly. 1. As our
old man. 1. Why called man.
Original sin is represented to us under our old man; and that not without
special reason, whither we lay the emphasis upon Old or Man.

We will first enquire why it is called Man; not our old understanding, or
affections, etc. only, but our old Man.

And I will only give you these two reasons for it, Mr. Burgess.
to omit others which are given by that learned Author who has writ so fully
on this subject.

1. Because this sin runs parallel with our being men, 1. It attends us whilst
men.
or partaking of man's nature in this world. This sin and our nature in us are
twins in life and death; they live and dye together; we shall not cease to be
sinful, before we cease to be men. Our whole Fabric is so overspread with this
leprosy, that it can never be sufficiently cleans'd, till it be wholly taken
down. Its strength indeed is abated; it does not rule in a child of God as
formerly; nay, it is deaths wound is received, it is crucified, or fastened upon
the Cross, as my text has it; yet it will not totally expire but with our
latest breath: it can be no more wholly parted with, Gerrhard.
then our very soul it self; Quod natura nobis inest deponi non potest;
Whatsoever is in us by nature, will stick by us till the dissolution of nature.

2. This sin is called man, because it has overspread the whole man; 2. It
overspreads the whole man.
that as the subjectum (...) is every man in a natural way propagated from
Adam: it may be said of every such one, he is guilty of this sin, he is
infected with this Original sin; So the subjectum (...), or the subject unto
which this sin adheres, and in which it is, is every part of every man. It is
not in this spiritual malady as in corporal, where the head aches many times
when the heart is hail; the Foot is wounded, when the hand is whole; but by
this soul distemper, every man is a very hospital of spiritual diseases; neque
manus, neque p^s, neither hand nor foot, neither head nor heart is as it should
be, or does as it should do.

And because this is so material to our present purpose, I will show, 1. It
infects the soul in its chiefest faculties.


1. That this sin cleaves to the soul; and 2. It infects the very body also.

1. The understanding.
First, It has overspread the soul, and that in its most noble faculties; I
mean those two which do so much advance man above the common sort of creatures;
Reason and Will, understanding and affections; the highest and inmost powers
poor man has, are suprized by it.

This sin appears in the mind, the eye of the soul; it is dim-sighted in
natural things; it is quite out as to spiritual truths. 1 Cor. 2.14. The natural
man receives not the things of the Spirit of God. What those things of the
Spirit are, the Context tells us, no other than the plainest truths of the
Gospel; nay, he counts these foolishness. Those things which are the wisdom
of God, the product of infinite wisdom, he slights and disesteems; and no
wonder, for he cannot know them, because they are spiritually discerned.
Spiritual truths as such, are no more within the cognizance of the natural eye
of the soul, than spiritual substances are within the view of the eye of the
body. There is none that understands, Romans 3.11. If Peter and some few other
here and there in the world may be recepted, no thanks to them, but to the
Father, who has revealed these things unto them. Mat. 11.25.
Certainly did we know the things of God more, we should love them better;
Good, when discovered, is attractive; if a child prefers an apple before a
piece of gold, it is because he does not know the difference; and when the
children of men prefer themselves, or any creature else before God, the reason
is, they do not know, they do not consider.

And hence it is that in our spiritual recovery the eyes are anointed with
eye salve. Christ came to open the eyes of the blind; and his Spirit is a
Spirit of illumination and revelation: Luke 4.18. Revel. 3.18. ult.
Believers were darkness, but now they are light in the Lord, Ephesians. 5.8. What
needs St. Paul to have prayed so earnestly that the eyes of the Ephesians
understanding might be enlightened, if they of themselves had not been blind?
Ephesians. 1.18.

The will is distempered with t^is sin also; 2. The will is perverted with it.
it has not seized only upon the head, but upon the heart. The imagination of
the thought of man's heart is evil, and only evil, Genesis 6.5. and Genesis 21.17.
Jer. 9. I forbear glossing upon those places; hence it is that there is so
little love unto, or desire after heavenly things; can any man give a reason
(which he will not be ashamed of at that great day) why he loves God no more?
What iniquity have ye found in me? Non amo -- nec possum dicere quare.
says the Lord.

As the Elements have their proper principles of motion, gravity and levity,
whereby they tend to that place in the Universe that best suits them; and
sensitive creatures have their wings or feet to carry them toward those
objects which are most convenient for them; so God has endued rational
creatures with a will and affections to carry them forth toward the enjoying
of himself who only is the Center of their happiness, and without whom they
can never be at rest.

But does the will of man by nature do him this good office to carry him unto
God as his only bliss? why then do we see and hear of so many that are in the
search of other things, not once to be named with God? how many are there of
whom it may be said, God was never thus to be sure in all their thoughts! like
the Israelites they are scattered up and down gathering straw; nay, dross and
dung in the Apostles sense, is frequently preferred before Jesus Christ. How
many may sadly say as that good man, Quantum Mercator pro lucro, etc. I have
not done so much for my God, as the Merchant does daily for his gain, or the
Hunts-man for his game: and yet what gain or pleasure is comparable to our
enjoying of, and communion with God? but further,

2. The body is not free from it.
The body bears a part with the soul in this sore evil; it is comparatively I
confess but a small part, for it can according to its nature bear no greater.

Our Apostle speaks of sin reigning in our body, Romans 6.12. Every member of
our body is ready to act in a sin; to be an instrument of unrighteousness,
ver. 13. a servant to uncleanness, ver. 19. The temper or rather distemper of
the body enclining often, sometimes to one, sometimes to another sin, which
the Devil (who is best seen in our constitutions) makes much use of in suiting
his temptations; hence he frequently tempts those that are melancholy to
despair, and the sanguine he tempts to presume, with no small disadvantage to
their souls from the several inclinations of their bodies.

To be sure, whilst a man is or should be providing for his soul, the body too
often interrupts him with What shall I eat? what shall I drink? wherewith shall
I be clothed? And if there be any fear of suffering, though for Christ and his
Gospel, the body cries Spare thy self, this may not come unto thee, etc. So
that with Adam by reason of sin we need a clothing for, and may be ashamed
of our very bodies. Even they also should be the Temples of the Holy Ghost, but
are now become Cages for these unclean Birds. 1 Cor. 6.19.


Put but these things together, and it is too sadly apparent that this original
sin is as extensive as any thing in mere man can be.

A short draft of Adams image in us. Aug. de Ger. ad lit. cap. 24.
So that in every one methinks I see another Adam; if you consider the parallel,
you shall find Adams image and likeness in each of his unhappy offspring.
Take it with some enlargement out of Austin.

1. Adam after his fall had his understanding darkened, he thought to hide
himself from that God from whom nothing can be hid, Genesis 3.8. And are we not
thus blind? does not man promise himself more security for a secret, than for
an open impiety? The Adulterer, the Oppressor, the Proud and the Envious person
says, None sees me, Isa. 47.10. Durst men undertake that wickedness under
the sense of Gods seeing of them, which they would be ashamed of if men looked
upon them, were they not thus blind?

2. We find Adam flying from Gods presence; his will and affections were
defiled, or he could not have been averse from communion with God. Being now
stained with sin, he trembles to hear him, whom before it was his chiefest
delight to be with all. And this also sin has brought upon the posterity of
Adam; they do not delight in communion with God; in their hearts and lives too
they forsake God.

We do not read that Adam after the commission of his sin, did so much as once
think of God, till he heard the voice of the Lord, walking in the garden in the
cool of the day, in order to the calling of him to an account for his sin, and
then he is afraid, and flies, etc. So his wretched children ((...)) seldom
think of God, at least seriously, and as they ought, till toward the end of
their lives, when God by the voice of some extraordinary sickness, is a
calling of them to judgment; and then no wonder if they be afraid.

3. I might observe a similitude we have in our bodies unto Adams sinful body,
but that our very clothes as I hinted but now, sufficiently evince it. We have
the same use and necessity of them which he by sin fell into; The best apparel
being but as playsters which this soar calls for; howsoever too too often man
makes himself proud of them.

Now whither these faculties of soul and body being so nearly conjoined, do
corrupt and infect one another; as Ivy while cleaving to the Oak, draws away
the sap from it, and destroys it, I shall not here contend; I confess there
are many difficulties concerning this subject, of which we may say, as of other
depths in Religion, with the Woman of Samaria, John 4.25. When the Messiah
comes, he will teach us all things.

I have been too long upon this first consideration in explaining, why Original
sin is called Man. I must be the shorter in what follows; why it is called Old
man.

1. Because it is derived from the eldest or first Adam; 2. Why Original sin is
called Old man.
for though Christ as God, was from eternity; yet as an Adam, or common head,
he was the latest -- Man must be fallen in the one, before he can be raised in
the other.

Willet in locum. 1 Cor. 15.46.
2. Original sin is the Old man, because corruption is first in every one. Esau
comes out first; first that which is natural, then that which is spiritual.

Heb. 8.13. 2 Cor. 5.17.
3. It Is called Old, because it is to be done away., This old man, all old
things are to be done away. Compare it to the new man, or the work of grace,
and then you will say indeed, There is no loveliness in it, for which you
should retain it; were there not an eternity of happiness or misery to put
into the balance, virtue would outweigh vice.

4. It may be called Old, because of its cunning and craft; as old men by
reason of their abundant experience, are more wise and subtle than others. This
old man, this corruption is cunning to deceive. Oh what excuses does it bring
for sin, what pretenses? you have heard it has much of Adam, but know it has
somewhat of the wise and old Serpent too, for it was begot betwixt them both.

I shall pass this first particular only with this note, instead of further
Application, viz.

Observe (with Paraeus) that when the Apostle calls Original sin our old man,
he distinguishes it from our selves. It is ours, too nearly cleaving to us, but
it is not our selves. Whence we must learn to put a difference betwixt the
corruption of nature, and nature it self. Man's nature is from God, but the
corruption of man's nature is from himself. And this original sin is not
(...), Romans 7.20, 21.
any substantial part of man, but (...) as the Apostle says of it, Heb. 12.1.
The sin that so easily besets us.

Thus at length we are come to the second particular which the Apostle uses to
express original sin by; The second particular expressing Original sin, the
body of sin.
it is the body of sin.

And herein I have only to show how this Original sin is a body; for the other,
how it may be called sin, or a body of sin, will be considered in the third
Appellation which is here bestowed upon it.

Now Original corruption is a body of sin,

Why called a body.
1. In that a body, though it seems never so beautiful and fair, yet it is in it
self but a stinking carcass, made of base, loathsome matter, etc. So sin and
wickedness, though it may seem specious and alluring, yet it is but an
abomination, as Scripture in a hundred places calls it; adultery,
covetousness, excess, and all the parts of this body are not as they seem to
be when varnished or painted over. They say there is no stench comparable to
that of a humane body, when not salted or animated with the soul. I am sure
nothing so noisome as this body of death; Paul that could with rejoicing endure
scourgings and stonings, imprisonments and shipwracks, yet cries out mightily
of this, O wretched man that I am, who shall deliver me! Romans 7.24.

2. As a body being material, is visible; so original sin discovers its self to
every one that without prejudice will look to find it. It is discernable in
its effects daily. Though we cannot see the soul, yet from the motions and
actions it causes, we know a man has a soul; so we may know every one has
original sin, from that vanity and sin that is put forth by it.

3. As the body has diverse members, so this sin; it is not so much one sin,
as seminally and vertually all sin; Peter Martyr.
there is a concatenation of virtues and vices; Scripture speaks of both under
that notion; hence a single eye, a pure heart, etc. And on the other side that
sin is a body, and is thus universally in us, the Apostle shows, Romans 3.13, 14.
and the Prophet says it has overspread us; from the soles of the feet even
unto the head there is no soundness, Isa. 1.6. As the waters in Noah covered
the highest Mountains, so these raging waves of iniquity overflow the highest
and choicest faculties of humane nature.

4. I wish I could not add as a body is beloved and provided for, so is this
sin: We make provisio^ for the flesh to fulfill its lusts; Romans 13. ult.
Who would willingly part with the least member of his body? men do not
willingly forgo any sin; but if something of this body must be parted with,
it is but hair and nails, etc. such as are rather excrements than members, and
will soon grow again, which we are content to cut and pare off. And thus till
that day in which God puts forth his Almighty power to make us willing, we are
loath to leave any sin, unless such as for the present are troublesome to us,
or may ere long grow again, and be with more ease or credit enjoyed by us.

5. This sin as a body has strength in it, and Tyranny is exercised by it. The
body leads poor Captives whether it lists, and says to this man G^, and he
goes, etc. so does this sin, we are held Captive by it, Faius.
till the Son of God sets us free. Man is not ingenuus, but libertus; he is not
by nature born free, but by grace made free; until he be established by the
free Spirit, he goes and comes as the wind and Tide of corruption drives him.

And this is far more sad than to be possessed, or to have our members acted
by the Devil himself; for the incestuous person was given over to Satan (which
some interpret thus) for the good of his soul, 1 Cor. 5.5.
that his soul might be saved; but none are left under the power and command of
their corruptions, but to their certain and inevitable destruction.

6. It is called here especially a body by the Apostle, to answer to the other
Metaphor of crucifying in the words before; only bodies can be crucified,
Paraeus.
and this sin is crucified with Christ.

Which by the way shows the state of original sin in the people of God, and how
it should be in all others, especially such as are baptized; it should by faith
be nayl'd to the Cross of Christ, we should by believing fetch virtue from
Christ's death to crucify it; it must hang on Christ's Cross, (...), a Metaphor
taken from those that are crucified, who hanging on the Cross upon nails,
grow weaker and weaker, till they expire and dye; so must original sin be in
us, (dead already as to its reigning power, and) dying daily as to its in-being
moving power, having every day less strength than other.

The third expression of original corruption in the Text, it is sin.
We have now but the last expression the Apostle uses for this original
corruption; he calls it here sin, to show that it is so; it is sin.

1. Properly and truly. 2. Eminently and especially.
1. Properly.
It is truly and properly sin, it is not only a defect, but a sin; it is against
the holy will of God, and is chargeable upon us by the justice of God; every
soul disease is not only a punishment, but a sin, and therefore far worse
than the worst disease that is incident to the body; and our sinful state
should be more terrible to us than our dying condition. To convince us of this,
know that this original corruption becomes our sin.

1. By imput^tion.
1. In that God imputes the guilt of Adams sin to us, which I suppose you have
had vindicated in the foregoing Sermon: I shall only say this to it, that God
may as well by imputation make Adams sin become our sin for condemnation, as he
may by imputation make Christ's righteousness become our righteousness unto
salvation; and yet Christ is made of God unto us wisdom, righteousness, etc.
and we have no other righteousness to appear in for justification before him
at that great day. In Thesi de peccato Orig.
Hence Rivet well observes, that the Church has ever found and still does,
that those very men who are enemies to the doctrine of Original sin, are
enemies also to the doctrine of the grace of God in Christ. Thus the Socinians,
who deny that we have contracted any debt by Adams sin, deny also that Christ
satisfied, and paid our debts to divine Justice; and if they take away this,
let them take all.

2. Though Original corruption be truly sin by imputation, 2. By inhaesion.
yet it is not sin by imputation only. It is our sin by inhaesion, inhering in
us, and making of us otherwise than God made us. To blot a letter in a fairly
writ Copy, to draw a black line over a beautiful picture, cannot but prove a
fault; what is it then to mar Gods curious workmanship, which this sin does in
man? Consider that God is many months in the framing of the body, (for we are
wonderfully made by him) and when this body is fitted, he unites it to a soul
more worth than a world of bodies. This great-little creature man, Psalm.
139.13, 14
has many prerogatives too that advance him, especially in that Gods delight
is said to be with him. Now when all this care and pains are taken, this cost
and charges expended by God to make man for himself, this corruption comes and
mars all, and will God hold it guiltless?

No, this sin is exceeding sinful; for, 2. It Is sin eminently. 1. Extensive.


1. It Is more extensive than other sins; every actual sin has some particular
faculty in soul or body, which it does defile and charge with guilt, wherein it
was conceived, or whereby it was acted; but original sin stains all alike, so
far as by their several natures they are receptive of its defilement; it
ruins the whole little world of man. It does not only overspread the whole
earth; man's baser part, the body; but his celestial part, his heaven-born soul
is contaminated by it; the sun, moon, and stars in it are turned into blood.

2. This Original sin is diffused, derived, and communicated, 2. Diffusive.
whereas actual sins are not. Personal faults of Parents are not imputed to
Children, and defile not their Children, unless imitated or unbewail'd.
Childrens teeth are not set on edge by the sour grapes their Parents thus eat,
but Original sin being the sin of the nature of the Parent, becomes the sin of
the Child, and will be entailed further to the last man upon earth; for
Children have the nature, but not the person of their Parents.

An Objection answered.
And let it not seem strange, that God should suffer this original sin to be so
vastly diffusive, that he should not exempt his own people wholly from it.
There is the same reason that corruption should remain amongst them, which
there was for the abode of the Canaanites amongst the Israel of God of old; It
tryes them and brings them often to Bochim, and makes their life a vall y of
tears; and whilst they go on their w^y weeping and crying unto God by reason
of it, they bear precious fruit; for God does make good come unto believers
out of this great evil, making it an Antidote against carnal confidence, and
self-love, a means to exercise their faith, and a sure evidence of his own
power and presence in the keeping of them.

Besides, it is far better for us by this occasion to be under the second
Adam, then ever it could have been being under the first. The first Adam was a
head of clay, of the earth earthly. The second Adam is a head of gold, 1 Cor.
15.47.
The Lord from heaven. Though we were made holy in the first Adam, yet having a
mutable will, we might under him perish everlastingly; but they that are in
Christ shall not perish, but have everlasting life; a glory beyond what we
could have had, if we had continued in innocence; for under that first
Covenant, we could have expected only a reward answerable to our own works; but
under the second we hope for glory, in some measure proportionable to Christ's
merits. Though we know not what that glory is, yet this we know, that when he
appears, we shall be like him, 1 John 3.2.

And in the mean while as the Israelites who were before but Brick-burners, and
potters, by reason of the Canaanites amongst them, learned the art of war,
and became Renowned soldiers; so the true Israel of God by this means put on
their whole spiritual Armor, and daily fight the good fight of faith, and
become more than Conquerors (to conquer a lust, being more glorious than to
conquer a Kingdom) through Christ that strengthens them; when these
Philistines are upon them, (as upon Sampson) then the Spirit of the Lord comes
upon them (...), and what lust is able to stand before his Spirit? Josh. 10 24,
25
As Joshuah took the five Kings and shut them up in the Cave at Makkedah till
the Battle was over, and then slew them: So the Lord is pleased to shut up and
restrain the corruption of his people in the Cave of their body, until their
warfare be finished, but then he brings them out and slays them; they shall
then never see these enemies more. And therefore holy Paul who cries out, Romans
7.24, 25.
Who shall deliver me? adds presently, I thank God, etc. as if he had breathed
the same breath out in praise, which he had taken in, in prayer for
deliverance; so soon does God answer prayer made against this sin according to
his will.

And thus we have seen something toward the explaining of this difficult
matter. Application.
The nature of this undertaking being more to inform your judgments, than to
deal with your affections; I shall the rather hope to be excused if I be not
proportionably so large in the Application, which I am now come unto, and shall
lay down what I intend to speak to, under these two heads. 1. Of Instruction.
2. Of Exhortation; to inform your judgment, and to quicken your practice.

1. If we all have corruption thus by nature inherent in us, 1. Use of
Instruction.
it may silence all complaints against God for exposing of us to such wants and
miseries at our very entrance into the world, and so all along during our
continuance in it; (...), whence come evils? was a question which did much
puzzle the Philosophers of old; here we are resolved of it: The evil of sin,
and sorrow com^s from this root. No wonder now that our children are more
miserable than the young ones of Beasts or Birds, because they are more si^ful.

2. Hence it follows that in the very best there is a mixture, borh in their
principles and actions. There was two in Rebecca's womb, there are two in their
hearts; the Old m^n, and the New man; nature and grace; flesh and Spirit: Hence
that striving, that ^ombate betwixt them daily. The unregenerate person this
sin reigns in; his body is as a Temple, and his soul as a Shrine for this his
Diana. This keeps the house, and all things are in peace; In the glorified
Saint, this sin is wholly done away; this unclean thing does not go with him
into the new Jerusalem. Only the gracious person is the field in whom the flesh
warreth against the Spirit, and the Spirit against the flesh. He is like the
Moon which has its spots when it receives the fullest influence from the Sun.
sin in him will not dye willingly, but, as a dying man, multiplies his strokes
at his enemy, though they are comparatively but weak ones.

2. Use of Exhortation.
For Exhortation, let me recommend these following Duties.

1. To a right knowledge of this sin.
1. Get a right knowledge of thy self according to this doctrine; it is folly in
men to have traveled much abroad, and to be strangers in their own Country. It
will be found the greatest folly for thee to be never so knowing in other
things, if thou be a stranger to thine own heart, and do not know that it
is desperately wicked. The very Heathens apprehended this precept, (...), Know
thy self, to be of such consequence, as to grace it the more, they said it came
down from heaven; I am sure it is Gods message unto you from this truth this
day. Know your selves. unless you know your selves thus lost, Christ's coming
will be in vain unto you; John 3.4, 10.
for he came only for the lost sheep. Nicodemus had never doubted so much of
Regeneration, and a new birth, had he understood the defilement of his first
birth. I am afraid there are many Masters in Israel that are ignorant of this
still, or else they would labor not only to reform their lives, but
especially to get new hearts also. thou can not kill one lust unless thou
layest the Axe to the root of it that is in thy heart; if thou cuttest but the
branches off, and for a while refrainest only the outward acts of sin, upon the
next temptation or occasion they will grow the faster; as Rivers that have for
some time been kept up by Banks, run the more violently after they have broken
them down.

2. To confession of, and humiliation for it.
2. Be persuaded to make confession of, and be humbled for this sin, this
original sin; some think that Moses who was the penman of Psalm 90. ver. 8.
understood those words of this sin: Thou have set my secret sins in the light
of thy countenance. Remember this corruption, though never so deeply hid in thy
heart with all the parts of it, is as perfectly seen by God, as if it were set
in the light of his countenance; which is a thousand times brighter than the
Sun in all its glory. We read of Ahabs mourning, as well as of David's; and of
Judas's repenting, as well as of Paul's; and why were not Ahabs and Judas's
sorrow accepted as well as the others? O e remarkable difference I will observe
in them; Ahab that we read of, mourned only for the judgment denounced; and
Judas repented only of the outward act committed, but neither of their tears or
sorrow went to the root, to bewail the Original of all this their impiety,
which we have seen Paul did, and we know David practiced; Psalm. 51.5. He says
not only, Deliver me from bl^od-guiltinesse, but I was conceived in sin, etc.
and that is as well matter of his sorrow, as the other.

Possibly you would think much if I should recommend Austines example to you,
who confessed he had need of mercy not only to pardon those sins which he had
committed, but for those sins, which if grace had not restrained him, he should
have committed; and certainly we owe as much to this soul-physitian, for
preventing those diseases which otherwise we should have fallen into, as we owe
him for recovering of us out of those diseases which we did fall into; nay,
plures sunt gratiae privativae, quam positivae, thus too; And therefore let me
bespeak Gods dearest children in the words of the Prophet to Babylon, Isa. 47.1.
Come sit in the dust. Gods own inheritance is as a speckled bird, as he
complains Jer. 12.8. Oh be not Ingrati gratiae, Unthankful to grace.

You have heard a sad parallel between Adam and you; but Oh that you might be
like Adam in one thing more; Sensus peccati, and conscientiae. stimulus, etc.
Ger.
when he had sinned; it is said, his eyes were opened, Genesis 3.7. by which some
understand that God gave him a sight of his sin, awakened his conscience, so
that he saw from what bliss, and into what misery by sin he was now cast. He
thus by lamentable experience understood good and evil.

Oh that your consciences were awakened, that your eyes were opened too! I
shall pray for you as the Prophet did for his servant, and afterward for the
Syrians that came to take him; Lord open the eyes of these men, 2 King. 6.17,
20. I am sure the more grace ye have, the more sense of this sin you will have
also. Paul a Christian complains of it, though Paul a Pharisee did not.

If ye have been prevailed with by the other exhortations, ye will yield up
your selves to the power of this. 3. Exhortation. Look out for remedy and help
against it.
Did you but understand your condition by reason of this sin, and were humbled
for it, you would engage all that you could against it. First then

In your selves.
Set your selves against this sin in your own hearts. Thou can not be a man
after Gods own heart, till thy heart be cleansed, and made like unto God. A
true Christian takes more care to get rid of the evil, than to rejoice in the
good that is in him (though both be a duty) being it is better not to see a
friend which we know will do us no hurt, then not to see an enemy which
(unseen) will certainly kill us. When Elisha would cure the waters of Jericho,
2 King. 2.21.
he did not cast salt into the pots or dishes (that might take it up) but into
the spring that sent it forth. Labor to get thy heart which is the spring and
issue of life or death, seasoned with grace. Means to be used.
Blessed be God, there are means to cure you of this evil.

1. Faith in Christ. Cast the wood of his Cross into these bitter waters; he
was circumcised, yet had no filthy foreskin of his own, but of ours to do away.
'Twas our filth that was washed off in his Baptism.

2. The in-being of the Spirit of Christ, prevails against the in-dwelling of
sin. Behold I have shown you a mystery, if ye would not all die, and that
eternally, ye must all be changed.

3. Prayer is a means in order to this. David, Paul, others were troubled with
this evil, and they prayed; go thou and do likewise. Let it be thy daily
prayer, Armado homine meipso libera me Domine.
From the evil one my self, good Lord deliver me; thou complainest of bad
times, oh complain more of a bad heart. The flood came upon the whole world,
not so much for their actual abominations though great, as for their
heart-corruptions, Genesis 6.5. Genesis 8.21. If we ever be owhelmed with sufferings,
it is for th s Abomination in chief.

Oppose thy self against this sin in thy relations; weaken the Kingdom of
Satan everywhere, 2. In our relations, childlen especially.
especially in thy children; If their head-ake you pity them, and enquire after
remedies for them; alas, spiritually every part is distempered; they are blind,
lame, poor, naked, and what not that speaks misery? Oh hard-hearted Parents,
that have not once gone to the heavenly Physician for their poor children! it is
usually said, venenati non patiuntur inducias; they that are poisoned must not
be dallyed with, but presently some antidote (if I may so call it) given them.
They do but pledge you in this cup of deadly wine, and will ye not the rather
be instrumental to help them to the cure, being ye have helped them to the
disease? Wherefore do ye think your ch ldren came into the world in such a
piteous manner? what do they cry for? Vox naturae clamantis, etc.
the Naturalist will tell you it is out of want that some body might cloth
them, feed them, care for them, etc. But a Christian will tell you, God has
given them bitter tears and cries to lament their spiritual necessities, and
to beg spiritual remedies. Their insignificant voice signifies thus much;
whilst they are yet dumb, Nihil aliud faciunt nisi deprecantur.
they speak aloud in their manner; Oh carry us to the Laver of regeneration;
let us be washed in the fountain set open for sin, etc. Surely, God who has
not caused their tender voice to be in vain for their bodies, (though they know
not what it means) would not have it to be in vain for their souls; and he
that hears the young Ravens when they call, Psalm. 147.9.
would not have you deaf in this respect, when your Children cry.

Lastly, Let the consideration that Original sin is thus in us, weane us from
the world, 4. Exhortation. Be weaned from the world by reason of it.
and that immoderate desire of living in it. Alas, wheresoever we go we carry
these chains of darkness with us; if it be grievous to be in pain or want, how
grievous is it to a gracious heart to sin? I know gravia non gravitant in eorum
loco; sin seems not heavy to a carnal man, to whose heart it is naturalized;
but if thou be spiritual, and tender, sin is a burden to thee to purpose.
Now by death peccatum, non homo, moritur, it is sin that dies, a Child of God
does not dye, but only changes his life; this life for a better, these
pleasures, relations, etc. for better; and if it be good to live, surely to
live eternally is best of all.

Some have thought that the soul was put into the body for a punishment, as
into a Prison; and who would not willingly be at liberty? If we consider what
pains, care, torments, and diseases (which are but the effects of sin) we
endure, we cannot but be of Theophrastus his mind, that the soul pays a dear
rent for the body which it dwells in; and it is but a house of clay, how finely
soever daubed over. being then we cannot be without these enemies, these
mischiefs, let us be content when God pulls down the house of sin in which
they all are, that he may bury them all in the rubbish of our mortality, and
with the Spirit and the Bride, Rev. 22.17, 20.
let us say Come, even so Come Lord Jesus Christ, come quickly. Amen.

THE MISERY OF MAN'S ESTATE BY NATURE.
EPHESIANS. 2.3. And were by nature the children of wrath even as others.


YE have heard the Doctrine of Man's fall, and of Original sin opened and
applied: This Text genuinely leads to speak of Man's misery through sin. As to
the Coherence briefly, The Apostles scope is, to display the glory of the Lords
grace, by comparing the sinful and cursed estate of the Ephesians and others by
nature, with the dignity and privileges conferred on them in Christ. He
insists mainly on three heads.

1. He describes the natural estate and course of the Ephesians and all other
Gentiles in them; their estate, ver. 1. You were dead in trespasses and sins;
their course, ver. 2. Ye walked wholly in sin, pricked forward by corrupt
customs, which in several Ages had taken place, and were effectual to hold and
hearten you in the same Tracts; and the Devil, that eminently bore sway in
others, ruled and acted you likewise at his very will; this was yours, and the
Gentiles estate and course.

2. He applies the whole equally and indifferently, to himself, and to the
whole body of the Jewish Nation, ver. 3. among whom also we all had our
Conversation, etc. q. d. such children of disobedience were we all to; as deep
in sin, and open to wrath as you Gentiles were. He would by no means have any
think that speaking so of the Gentiles, he exempted the Jews from the same
ground of shame and despair in themselves; though he knew full well that this
point went exceeding cross to the grain of that people, who greatly Ezra 9.2.
John 8.33. Gal. 2.15. Romans 10.3. chap. 11.24.
boasted themselves to be the holy seed, and children of Abraham, and despised
the Gentiles as an idolatrous, unclean, bastard brood; and especially of the
Pharisees, of which Acts 26.5. Phil. 3.5.
leaven himself once was, who not only disdained the Gentiles, but thought and
spoke contemptibly of Gods heritage, viz. the common people of their own Nation
as a base and cursed crew, John 7.49. and chap. 9.34. He pricks this bladder,
affirming roundly of himself and all the Jews without exception, that as to
their course, whilst unregenerate, they did whatsoever their sensual and
carnal man willed, liked and inclined to; And as to estat^; were children of
wrath as much as others, even as the very despised Gentiles themselves were.
The great temporary difference flowing from grace, Psalm. 147.19, 20. hindered
not their being the very same with the Gentiles by nature; this and no other
was the estate and course of the Jews likewise.

3. He sets over against all this, in them both, the quickening and recovering
grace of Christ; in the Gentile, ver. 1. and in the Jew, ver. 4.

The words read, contain a brief comprehensive description of the misery that
Jews, and consequently Gentiles with them, are under by nature. And in the
words observe these two particulars.

1. The Case of all men, Jews and Gentiles alike described, children of wrath;
Do not understand this actively, as children of disobedience, ver. 2. are
disobedient children, so that children of wrath should be angry and wrathful
people; but passively, that are obnoxious unto wrath indefinitely, which though
it principally relates to that chiefest pressing insupportable burden; viz. the
Lords wrath; yet includes consequently the wrath and power of Satan, the
terrors and rage of conscience, the vengeance and assaults of every creature,
etc. The Hebraisme, children of wrath, implies

1. Desert. Deuteronomy. 25.2. It shall be, (...)
if the wicked man be a child of beating, that the Judge shall cause him to lie
down, and to be beaten before his face, etc. which the Sept. solidly renders,
(...), worthy of stripes. And so the Targums in like manner concurrently with
our Bibles, a son guilty and worthy to be beaten; so Mat. 23.15. Ye make him
twofold more the child of hell; that is, more worthy of hellfire, than your
selves.

2. Tendency, bent and addictnesse to involve themselves under wrath, John
17.12. But the son of perdition, which poured out himself in ways of
self-destruction. He had many and excellent means to the contrary, but nothing
would hold him back; self-damnation is not proper to Judas, but a very common
sin; and men ordinarily, Romans 2.5. treasure up to themselves wrath, Prove. 8.36.
love death.

3. The event and issue which shall befall them, if they do abide such; viz.
that they shall be destroyed, and the eternal wrath of God abide upon them; so
Judas gave up himself to those sins, that not only deserved and tended to
destruction, but would certainly destroy him; so 1 Samuel 20.31. he is the son of
death; viz. deserves to dye, and shall surely dye.

Now gather all these things together, our estate and course is such by nature
as deserves destruction, tends and leads to destruction, and will end and the
Lord has peremptorily fixed and ordained without a change, shall end in
Eternal destruction.

2. The rise of this case expressed, by nature, which implies

1. The term from which this commences; viz. the very first receiving of our
natures and beings from our Parents; from the first original, and moment of our
being, we received with all a liliablenesse to the wrath and curse of God,
Psalm 51.5. Behold I was shapen in iniquity, and in sin did my mother conceive
me!

2. The ground for which this wrath impends and hovers; viz. nature, not first
created, for that was upright after God; but the corrupted nature which is
conveyed and derived with our beings: Eccles. 7.29. Genesis 1.27.
This very nature leads to, deserves, and will lodge under eternal wrath, every
mothers child in whom regeneration and transplantation into Christ are not
found.

The Doctrine then comprising the sum of the Text, is this.

Doctr. Every man and woman from their very first conception, through a
corrupted nature, are under the Lords wrath, and continuing such, not newborn
and engraffed into Christ, that wrath shall abide upon them for ever. We may
not mince and extenuate here with the Pelagian, as if this only were by
imitation. Flatterers of nature may lessen the wound, but Heirs of grace
should and will rather magnify their Physician. Nor may we limit and confine
this truth as if it concerned native Turks, Mat. 23.15.
cankered Papists, and the Proselytes of the Pharisees only to be children of
hell, when it knocks at every of our doors, Jew and Gentile promiscuously:
Neither people nor Ministers, not Apostles can exempt themselves; great and
small, rich and poor, those which the Lord has not appointed unto wrath, but
to obtain salvation by their Lord Jesus Christ, 1 These. 5.9. yet by nature are
children of wrath, even as others.

This wrath in the Scriptures has several Names; respectively to the
Lawgiver, it is called wrath; respectively to the Law it self, the curse;
respectively to the effects of both, it is translated vengeance, Romans 3.5. Man
by nature is exposed unto all these.

1. He is exposed to the wrath of the Lawgiver: Here,

1. Take some Cautions, that we may duly conceive of wrath, the root of all
penal afflictions on Gods part, as sin is the meritori^us root on man's part.
All wars with men begin in wrath; Animosities first boil within, and then wars
break out. James 4.1. From whence come wars and fightings among you? Come they
not hence, from your lusts which war in your memb rs? and in special, this of
wrath; so there is somewhat proportionable in God, if understood sutably to his
glorious Being; namely, wrath perfectly clean from all dregs of, 1. Folly; the
fool never more peeps out than in passion. Prove. 14.29. He that is hasty of
spirit, exalts folly; that is, sets it aloft that every body may discern, and
take notice of it; but the Lord is, 1 Samuel 2.3. A God of knowledge by whom
actions are weighed. 2. Injustice; Gods wrath is a clear fire without any smoke
of unrighteousness. Romans 3.5. Is God unrighteous that infers wrath? he
cannot be. We plough with an Ox and an Ass; (...).
mingle dross with our zeal, etc. 3. Perturbation; the wrath of men is the
rage of men, who disjoint and discompose themselves as well as others; but the
Lord acts, and suffers not in his wrath; Prove. 11.17.
he strikes, wounds, destroys from the infinite holiness and justice of his
nature, declaring it self against all sin with the exactest serenity and
oneness of mind and frame within himself from everlasting to everlasting. This
is the root of all wars with sinful men; Moses saw the plague growing up out of
this root. Number. 16.46. Wrath is gone out from the Lord, and the plague is
begun. Job 21.17. He distributeth sorrows in his anger.

2. Consider what this wrath implies; two things.

1. That the Lord is highly displeased with men and women in their natural
estate; though never so goodly a vernish of Religion be above, yet if nothing
but nature be underneath; Isa. 10.6. an hypocritical Nation are the people of
the Lords wrath.

No created understanding can conceive exactly what this displeasure is. Psalm.
90.11. Who knows the power of thy anger? even according to thy fear, so is
thy wrath. Take some short ladders that our thoughts may a little climb up by;
and consider seriously and deeply,

1. What a Kings wrath is. Prove. 20.2. The fear of a King is as the roaring of
a Lion; who so provokes him to anger, sins against his own soul; that is,
acts as an enemy to his own life; and Prove. 16.14. The wrath of a King is as
the Messengers of death, but the wise man will pacify it, as that which he
cannot resist. Eccles. 8.4. Where the Word of a King is, there is power, and
who may say to him What do thou? that is, where not only the name, but the
reality of a King is, he sustains the person of the Commonwealth, and has the
strength and power of all put into his hand; and has power to execute his
wrath, and will not be controlled nor expostulated with. And what can a Branch
do against the whole Tree? The King is wroth, and Hamans face is covered. Prove.
27.3. A stone is heavy, and sand is weighty; but a fools wrath, that is, that
has power, is heavier than them both, to crush a weak person that stands in
his way. All these are but toys to the power and weight of Gods wrath.

2. What an incensed brothers wrath is, that has a little more power. Rebecca
understanding Esau his wrath against Jacob, packs him away till that wrath be
over. Genesis 27.43, 44. If a mother dare not venture a child into an angry sons
presence, nor a brother himself into an angry brothers presence, how
insufferable will the angry presence of the Lord be?

3. What Gods Fatherly refining wrath is against the dross that mingleth it
self with his Worship and Ordinances, and what dreadful Furnaces he has put
the Vessels of mercy into, to take away their tin from them. Mal. 3.2. Who may
abide the day of his coming? and who shall stand when he appears? for he is
like a Refiners fire: If men cannot bear Christ's coming with a refining fire,
to purge out dross, much less not his coming with flaming fire, 2 These. 1.8.
to consume and burn up persons and dross together. We have need of grace to
serve him acceptably with reverence and godly fear; for our God, that is
related to us in Christ, is a consuming fire, Hebr. 12.28, 29.

4. What afflictions are, how very bitter, yet separated from wrath, they may
be born with comfort. The mingling of fire with the hail in Egypt, made it so
very dreadful, Exodus 9.24. The fire of the Lords wrath mingled with storms,
renders them so grievous to be stood unde. Hell it self would not be so
dreadful, did not the breath of the Lord, that is, the wrath of the Lord, like
a stream of brimstone kindle it, Isa. 30.33.

The Prophet submits to any strokes, only deprecates wrath, as worse than any
strokes, and more deadly than death it self. Jer. 10.24. Correct me O Lord, but
not in thine anger. Apprehensions of wrath were the dregs in Jobs Cup. Job
14.13. O that thou would hide me in the grave, and keep me in sec et till
thy wrath be passed over. He cannot stand in the face of Gods wrath, though he
knew it was passing, and not abiding wrath; and therefore begs a hiding
anywhere, and in the very grave, till that wrath be over; who then shall dwell
with abiding wrath? John 3.36. With eve^lasting burnings? Isa. 33.14. with fire
and brimstone, and tempest, that has ^atred in it? Psa. 11.5, 6.

5. What the Lords glory is, when it is proclaimed, and passes forth in a way
of grace; only in a little more luster and brightness. Moses needs putting in
a clift of the Rock, and to be covered with the Lords hand, while the Lords
glory passed by, Exodus 33.22. Peter is swallowed up at a glimpse of the power
of Christ. Luke 5.8. Depart from me, for I am a sinful man, oh Lord; what then,
when he speaks in his wrath, and vexes in his sore displeasure! Psalm. 2.5.

6. What the Lords wrath is passing upon others. All the children in the house
tremble when the rod is taken down, though not with respect to themselves, but
their fellows only. Take a man whose heart is touched with the sense of the
Lords greatness, and that will be his temper. Isa. 2.19. They shall go into the
holes of the rocks, and into the Caves of the earth, for fear of the Lord, and
for the glory of his Majesty, when he arises to shake terribly the earth.

7. What the Lords wrath is, only hanging in the threatening. His rebukes made
both the ears of Eli to tingle. 1 Samuel 3.11. 2 King. 21.12.
There is a terror when a Prince convenes and rates his Rebels for their
conspiracies, and insurrections against him, though not yet brought to the
bar or block. Hab. 3.16. When I heard, my belly trembled, my lips quivered at
the voice, rottenness entered into my bones, etc. Josiah his heart was tender,
2 King. 22.19. When he heard what the Lord spoke against Jerusalem, and against
the inhabitants thereof.

8. What Christ himself did, under the sense of this wrath to be poured forth,
Col. 2.9. Heb. 12 2.
though supported with all the fullness of the Godhead dwelling bodily in him,
and saw the glory beyond, and the certainty of his resurrection, and the fruits
of the travels of his soul that should be; yet sweats, Luke 22.44.
and that clods of blood to the very ground; prays, and that with strong cries
and tears, that if possible, Heb. 5.7. Luke 12 50.
this cup might pass. Though other considerations made him drink it
cheerfully, yet nature droops, and cannot bear up under this burden. Those
pills are very bitter, that very health it self does hardly sweeten.

You that are yet in the mire of mere nature, steep your thoughts in these
things, that ye may have a little taste, what an evil and bitter thing it is,
that Gods wrath and displeasure is out against you. But this is not all; God
may be displeased, and very highly with his own people. Isa. 47.6. I was wroth
and polluted mine inheritance, viz. dealt with it as if a polluted and unclean
thing.

2. God reckons, and will deal with men and women found in their natural
estate, as his enemies. Gods tenderhearted servants, have not been able to
bear the apprehension of this. Job 19.11. He has kindled his wrath against me,
and counts me to him as his enemies; the plural number increases the sense;
as his deadly enemy. He that takes the Bible, and carefully turns it over, and
considers the contents thereof, and what he has said of those he reckons his
enemies, will have a further glimpse of the dreadfulnesse of this condition.
Nahum. 1.2. He reserveth wrath for his enemies; that is, he has built and made
wide the storehouses of hell, that there might be wrath enough in due season to
be drawn forth for them. Luke 19.27. Those mine enemies, that would not that I
should reign over them, bring hither, and slay them before me. Isa. 1.24. Ah, I
will ease me of my Adversaries, and avenge me of my enemies. Heb. 10.27.
Judgment and fiery indignation shall devour the Adversaries. And this must be
applied to both sorts of enemies. 1. Close. That go closely on in ways of sin,
secretly correspond with the Devil and his temptations, and their darling
lusts, and will not lay the bucklers down, though they smile in the Lords face;
and Isa. 58.2. Seek him daily, and d^light to know his ways, as a Nation that
does righteousness, and forsakes not the Ordinances of their God. Flatter him
with their lips, and lie to him with their tongues, Psalm. 78.36. 2. Open
enemies, that proclaim and declare war against heaven, that do and will do
what they please, let the Lord say and do what he will to the contrary. As
Pharaoh, Exodus 5.2. Who is the Lord that I should obey his voice? Psalm. 12.4.
Our lips are our own, who is Lord ov r us? Luke 19.14. His Citizens hated him,
and sent a message after him, saying, We will not have this man reign ver us.

And understand, when the Lord so deals with this sort of sinners, he takes a
kind of comfort in it. Ezekiel. 5.13. Thus my anger shall be accomplished, and I
will cause my fury to rest upon them, and I will be comforted. To others, the
Lord distributes sorrows with sorrow; and speaks of himself as grieved, when he
puts them to grief, Judge. 10.16. Lam. 3.33. Isa. 63.9. But here he is
comforted, in making them the resting place of his fury, Prove. 1.26. The heat
and height of his fury poured forth upon incurable sinners, is comfortable and
pleasing to him. Isa. 30.32. In every place where the grounded staff shall
pass, which the Lord shall cause to rest upon him, it shall be with Tabrets
and Harps. Vengeance on such, is music and delight to the Lord, Rev. 18.20.
and to his people.

This is the first, and not the meanest part of the misery of fallen man, that he
is under the Lords wrath; that is, such as God is displeased with, and will
reckon and deal with as his enemies.

2. Every natural man and woman is exposed to and under the Curse of the Law.
Is this nothing to have the Word against thee? Job 13.^6.
and to have the Lord write bitterly against thee in that very Book which is
the storehouse of comforts and supports to others? Dreadful is that language of
Ahab, concerning Micaiah, 1 King. 22.8. There is yet a man by whom we may
enquire of the Lord, but I hate him, for he does not prophecy good concerning
me, but evil. So that language of a natural man's heart. Gods mind is in that
book, but I cannot abide to read therein, or to hear it opened and applied by a
lively rowzing Preacher; for it only raises storms and tumults in my
conscience, and speaks not a word of comfort to me. The Word,

1. Rings many a sad peale in the ears of conscience, and which he cannot abde
to hear or think of; in that it does declare,

1. His sin; The Word faithfully disovers Gods streightness, and man's
crookedness, and swervings from that platform and rule, to which he should be
conformed as the Counter-part to the Original. This charges omissions,
commissions, and bunglings in the good which he does do, Psalm. 05.21.
and sets all in order before his eyes, if possible, to make him ashamed and
confounded in himself.

2. The due and desert of sin; every breaker of the Law, the Law pronounces
and dooms to be cursed. There is that necessary connection, that it is
impossible to be chargeable with sin against the Law, and not liable to the
Curse of the Law. Gal. 3.10. Cursed is every one that continues not in every
thing that is written in the Book of the Law, to do it. Justification it self
takes not away the desert of sin; pardoned sins are as well sins, and as much
sins as they were; pardon makes not the Malefactor none; makes not that the
fact was not committed, or not faulty, or that it deserved not death; for then
he should have been legally acquitted, not graciously pardoned. Those will
never take heaven of grace, that take not hell as their proper desert. The Lord
will have his own wear this rope about their necks, the desert of hell in
their hearts to the very grave. Assurance, and in the very highest degree,
takes not away the sense of the deserts of sin, but amplifies and enlarges
them. The deserts of sin shall be perfectly acknowledged in the state of glory,
and the Ransomer adored and admired upon this score. Nothing so heightens grace
as this, that persons deserving to suffer, are yet freed in Christ from
suffering eternal wrath, as if they had not deserved it. This desert, was no
doubtful and dark point in the consciences of the Hearthens themselves, Romans 1.
ult. They know the judgment of God, that they which commit such things, are
worthy of death. But the Word more distinctly lays this home to the heart;
Prove. 11.23. The expectation of the wicked is wrath. There is nothing else that
he can justly and solidly expect in that estate; and expecting otherwise, he
does but cozen himself.

3. The sinners exclusion while in that estate, from any part in the great and
precious promis^s of the Gospel. The Word opens the promises, but knocks his
fingers off from touching and eating of this Tree of life. This is none of the
meanest heart-cutting terrors to natural men, to see many come from the East
and West, and sit down with Abraham, and Isaac, and Jacob, in the Kingdom of
heaven, and themselves cast out, Mat. 8.11, 12. incorporated with the
Patriarchs, into fellowship of the same grace, and title to the same glory, and
themselves debarred from both to view the unsearchable riches of Christ
displayed, and themselves justled off from any intermedling, as to present
application or grounds of application of them as their own. I met lately with a
godly woman who heard a Sermon full of choice comforting supporting promises to
weary and heavy laden sinners, which warmed her heart, but in the closure was
stricken through with the first arrows of God, discerning her self excluded in
her present estate, from any part in them. This makes the Gospel a fiery
Serpent to sting them, which is the Pole holding up the brazen Serpent for
healing to others.

2. The Word attaches and binds him over. Ye shall answer this at the day of
Christ; and hangs the writ upon his door; as the man that is in Gods debt, and
is to look for an Arrest, and to be dragged into prison till the utmost
farthing be paid, unless a speedy, timely peace be made; and inforces this
partly from the will and justice of God, that has made indignation and wrath,
tribulation and anguish the portion of every soul that goes on to do evil,
Romans 2.8.9. and partly from the nature and circumstances of sin it self. Debts
may be so great, so long owing, so growing, and the negligence and boldness of
the debtor such, that makes it necessary in point of wisdom, not to keep the
writ longer off from his back.

3. The Word excites terrors. A man bound in a very great sum, in which the
forfeiture will be his undoing, the very obligation troubles. There are no
debts, but where any ingenuity is, induce answerable cares. And the Lord
knowing the frame, and tendering the peace of his people, advises therefore
against all debts, especially sticking under them, and not coming timely and
carefully off. Romans 13.8. Owe nothing unto any man; much more to be over head
and ears in Gods debt, and no care to agree with him, is a very dreadful
condition, Mat. 5.25. If these terrors actually are not, yet they are very
subject every moment to be excited. The Sea may be very calm, but the least
storm makes it nothing but commotions; conscience, though now quiet, has a
very wide and clamorous mouth, when the Lord commissions and commands it to
rebuke for sin. These terrors hold the sinner in bondage, or all his life time
subject unto bondage, Heb. 2.15.

This is the second branch of the misery of a natural estate, to be in all
these respects under the Curse of the Law, and to have the Lord fight against
him with the sword of his mouth, Revel. 2.16. Here is patience, that the Lord
will fight with this sword first, that he may reclaim and lead to repentance,
rather than destroy him; and if this prevail, then is the curse turned into a
blessing, and the bondage ends in liberty indeed; but if this do not prevail,
then there remains nothing else but a certain fearful looking for of judgment
and fiery indignation, which shall devour the adversaries, Heb. 10.27.

3. Every natural man and woman is obnoxious to all the effects of the wrath of
God, and of the curses denounced in his Word.

1. There are manifold effects of Gods wrath that are upon him, or are apt
every moment to be rushing in upon him in this life.

1. Upon the body: Look upon all the breaches, flawes, defects, monstrosities
in the body, and set them upon the score of sin. Every man else had been like
Absalom and much more. 2 Samuel 14.25. From the sole of his foot even to the
Crown of his head there was no blemish in him; these argue not special sin,
Joh. 9.2. yet had never been without sin; look upon all diseases natural or
adventitious, John 5.14. Sin no more, lest a worse thing come unto thee; there
had never been a stone in the reins, or in the bladder, if not first in the
heart. These crumblings by degrees into the dust, flow in by sin. We pity the
ruins which War has made in goodly Palaces, but those are nothing to the
havoc which sin has made in the more noble Fabrics of our own bodies. Look
upon the difficulties, cares, turmoyles for provision of us and ours. Genesis
3.17. Labor is with toil, weariness, vexation, disappointment: We plough and
sow, and reap not; earne and put in a bag with holes. Hag. 1.6. Look upon
shameful nakedness: We have lost our Robes of glory, and need now the spoils
of beasts to cover our shame with. How many trades are there, and what toil in
them, merely for this end, that the dishonor of the body may be hidden! Look
upon the sorrows of the female sex, Genesis 3.16. which though mitigated and
mingled with promises, yet still are arrows which sin has shot into their
sides, and grace does not quite pluck them forth. 1 Timothy 2.15. Look upon the
assaults made even to our ruin, by those things that otherwise were under our
feet, Psalm. 8.6. But now withdraw from the yoke, serve with groans, remissness
and much unserviceablenesse, and often lift up their heel, and turn and tear
us; these are a very small part, and only bare hints of those confusions, and
effects of the Lords wrath, which sin has let into the body, which else had
been invulnerable in the very heel.

2. Upon the soul; Consider,

1. The mind: O what blindness, ignorance, thick darkness in the
apprehensions of God, his very being, most self-evidencing Attributes, in the
very mysteries of the first magnitude, which are the rules of our duty, and the
grounds of our hope! incapableness, dullness, slownesse to believe; lothness to
inquire or receive the light which shines forth from heaven; doubts, distrust,
mistakes, wanderings after that which is not light, and into ways that seem
right, but the end of them are the ways of death, Prove. 14.12. The heresies of
the whole earth are seminally in the blindness of the mind, and would grow up
from thence, though there were none of our many sowers to scatter them, being
nothing else but corrupt imaginations formed into a systeme. Unprofitableness
in the knowledge of truths, which we most clearly and distinctly conceive:
Unsteadinesse, that we cannot fix and close upon holy thoughts, till the
impressions thence be powerful, and work a real change. There is no Spaniel
more wild and running after every Lark and Butter-flye that rises in his way,
than our thoughts are gadding after every thing that comes in our way. Yea, our
mind gathers vanity to it self, when the eyes are shut, and no objects to
divert and inveigle us with. These are sins, and yet are rushing in further, as
the recompenses of former sins, which are meet, Romans 1.27.

2. The memory: Things stick there that a man would gladly learn, and count it
a singular mercy to attain the art of forgetfulness of; and others leak and
slip away though taught ofen plainly; repeated, mused upon, and we felt the
power of them in a degree upon our hearts; what Indispositions to the use of
means in order to a cure? what Proneness to cumber our selves with by-matters,
till they talk with us sleeping, and crowd in and suck away Lords-days
themselves, and leave nothing but scraps of prayer and preaching to us; sin
first brought in these plagues, and wrath binds them on, and leaves judicially,
the reins loose to them.

3. Conscience. The directing part is out of tune; and either gives no
directions, as a Master that is no body in his Family; or gives wrong
directions, as false lights on the shore lead the ships upon the Rocks and
quicksands; forbids where the Lord commands, and urges to that which he
forbids. John 16.2. Tit. 1.15. or gives right directions, and has no
authority. And the judging part of conscience is out of tune, and gives no
judgment of what is done; like a Bell whose clapper is out, or a dumb dog that
cannot bark; or gives perverse judgment, and excuses where it should accuse;
makes sin no sin, or very little; and stays the heart with empty comforts; or
accuses for having done that which he is bound to do, and disquiets with undue
fears; or accuses rightly for the matter, yet with excess, and so sinks the
soul under despair; so that there is as much need for conscience to be
overseen as to oversee, to b^ guided as to guide. These arrows abide in, and
the venom of them invades more and more, and that is a very dreadful effect of
the wrath of God.

4. The Will. There are sad strokes there. Averseness and impotence unto that
which is spiritually good, Phil. 2.13. Psalm. 110.4. Inclinations and byasses,
to drink in the very first, and the very worst motions and suggestions unto
sin. Lustings after evil things, Job 15.16. and against the Spirit, Gal. 5.17.
stubbornness, Romans 8.3. Contempt of the offers of reconciliation, Joh. 5.40.
Ezekiel. 33.11. incompliance with the counsels of the Holy Ghost, Act. 7.51. These
are cords of man's twisting, and the Lord in dreadful wrath says, Be it so; and
pinions him with them to the last judgment.

5. The affections fly upon unmeet objects, headlongly inclining to them, and C
l spe, and cleave there, and cannot be gotten off. Recoile from that which is
good, are stirred in respect of evil to embrace it; and in respect of good to
eschew and be weary of it. Ahab imprisons the true Prophets, and sets the false
at his own Table, and gives them his ear and heart. Are full of disorders; more
offended with our injuries than Gods: merry, Eccles. 2.2.
and the Holy Ghost calls it madness; mourn and swallowed up. Cannot be
raised to things above, and settled on them. 2 Cor. 2.7.
We complain, and justly, of servants that are nimble and expert in any piece
of knavery, and lozels at their work; this is the very temper of our hearts,
nimble and wise to do evil; but in the things and ways of God, and which are
of greatest necessity and advantage, we have no knowledge. And a sharper wrath
is not, than the Lord to leave us to our selves. Psalm 81.12. Psalm. 78.30.
These are hints, and no more of the Lords wrath upon the soul.

3. Upon the estate. Look upon the general estate of the whole Creation,
impaired, groaning, and subject unto vanity; into the Public state,
Confusions, stumbling blocks, underminings of civil and spiritual liberties,
etc. into the particular estates of men, snarles, damages, wrongs, powlings;
men taken and carried whither they would not, build, and dwell not therein,
gather, and it melts as butter against the Sun, etc.

4. Upon Relations. Unequal marriages, yokefellows disloyal, wastful, idle,
withholding more than is meet; troubling their own flesh, dampers in the ways
of God, suddenly stricken, and the greatest comforts leave the smartest wounds
after them, etc. Unfaithful servants looking only to the Masters eye, invading
that which is not theirs, imbezeling or suffering to go to wrack, that which by
care they might and ought to preserve. Children sickly, unnatural, taking to no
Callings, or not diligent and faithful in them, dispose themselves without
consent, run themselves into briars, and see their error when too late to
retreat. This is wrath in Domestique relations. And wrath as terribly mixeth in
Public Relations. Ministers preach not, oversee not, are not ensamples to the
flock, have not experience, nor ability, or care, rightly to divide the Word of
truth, and muzzle the gain-sayer. Misled themselves, and mislead others, etc.
Magistrates mind not the things of Christ, are tight and vigilant over the
good, indulgent to the evil. Bear the sword in vain, etc. Such vials there is
much wrath poured through.

5. Upon the holy things of God, and of his people. Ours come not with
acceptance to God. The Lords, not with savor, closeness, authority, etc. to
us. The very book of the Covenant needs sprinkling, Heb. 9.19. The Law which is
pure and clean, Psalm. 19.8, 9. is made a killing letter, 2 Cor. 3.7. The Gospel
which is the grace of God bringing salvation, Tit. 2.11. is made a savor of
death unto death, 2 Cor. 2.16. the Lords Supper an eating and drinking judgmsnt
to our selves, 1 Cor. 11.29. and Christ himself is made for falling, Luke 2.34.
and a stone of stumbling, and rock of offense, 1 Pet. 2.8. without Christ's
blood taking away sin, the very book of grace had never been opened, Rev. 5.4.
and though the choicest in it self, being opened, would never have been useful
unto us; and sorer wrath cannot be, than to curse our very blessings, Mal. 2.2.
and the very means of grace that they shall be useless, and for judgment.

6. Upon the whole man; the person is under the effects of wrath.

1. Inslaved to the Devil. This is plain, 1. From the Scriptures. Else
converting grace could not Col. 1.13.
deliver from the power of darkness; nor men be said when 2 Timothy 2.26.
God gives repentance, to recover themselves out of the snare of the Devil that
were taken captive by him at his will. 2. From the likeness of man's work with
Satan's; (...); Men of a Trade are ordinarily of a company together; but here
the rule fails not; 1 John 3.8. He that commits sin is of the Devil; that
is, by doing the same work discovers himself of communion with, and in
thraldom to him. The first finders of a Craft, are Fathers; and Successors and
Imitators in the Craft are called children, Genesis 4.20. we naturally and freely
do the Devils work; John 8.44. The lusts of your Father ye will do, and have no
mind to the Lords work, nor can brook the same to be done circumspectly and
exactly by others; Acts 13.10. Thou child of the Devil, enemy of all
righteousness. 3. From the community of principles; the very mind and will of
Satan is engraven upon our spirits, and express themselves inefficacy and
obstinacy of sinning. These principles are Satan's image instead of Gods. 4.
From the natural man's subjection to the guidance of Satan; regenerate persons
are led by the Spirit, but Satan fills the hearts of natural men. He had
possession of Judas his heart, and by a piece of money rides deeper into him,
and prevails to engage him to betray Christ. This is a lamentable branch of the
natural man's misery.

2. He is banished and separated from God, both from conformity to, and
communion with him, and does electively banish and cast himself forth of the
Lords presence: This appears,

1. From the former point; viz. man's fellowship with Satan; there cannot be
fellowship with God and with Satan together. These communions are inconsistent,
in the same Spirit, at the same time, in a reigning intense degree.

2. From Gods end, and his Apostles and Ministers, in the writing, explanation
and application of the Scripture. 1 John 1.3. That which we have seen and
heard, declare we unto you, that ye may have fellowship with us; and truly our
fellowship is with the Father, and with his Son Jesus Christ. Were this
fellowship already in the state of nature, there needed not this means of
rebringing into fellowship with God. Defiers of the evil one with their mouths,
are not the less in league with him in their hearts.

3. From the language of the carnal heart; Job 21.14. Depart from us, we desire
not the knowledge of thee. This they speak internally, and the desire of their
souls is to be rid of God; notions of God are a saplesse and burdensome piece
of knowledge. Romans 1.18. They did not like to retain God in their knowledge. To
banish our selves is the height of man's sin and folly; and to be banished, the
height of the Lords wrath, and of man's misery.

Now do we know what a man loses in the loss of God? that is impossible for
any created understanding to conceive!

The world is a Dunge^n without the Sun; the body a carrion without the soul;
but neither so necessary as God is to the soul. A taste of the goodness of
God, made the world and the lives of the Martyrs nothing to them. Psalm. 30.5.
In thy favor is life; and Psalm. 63.3. Thy loving kindness is better than life.

The very heaven of heaven lies in the enjoyment of God, and the hell of hell
in the loss of him. The loss of him is the loss of the Fountain from which
all kind of good does or can come. The loss of the cause, is the loss of all
the effects, of all the blessed affections, influences, and promises of God;
The loss of all those blessed hopes that fill the soul with joy unspeakable,
and full of glory. No prayer, praises, faith, love, fear, or any spark of other
grace, are to be found in truth upon the hearth of that heart. Now the person
in league with the Devil, and banished from, and without God in the world, must
needs be miserable and accursed.

3. He is discontented and unprofitable in every condition. Romans 3.12. They are
altogether become unprofitable. The Holy Ghost makes a natural man of no more
use, than rotten things, which we cast forth to the dunghill for their
unprofitablenesse; This is a dreadful ruin, that a creature so excellent,
should become unprofitable to others; and very far from comfort to himself in
any condition. The wife having all for use, and the husbands heart; has
nothing, because not the authority, dominion, and disposition, which is proper
to the husband. Israel have bread and quails from heaven, and water from the
Rock that followed them; a table everywise furnished for need, and for delight,
and yet grumble because not meat for their lusts. Many have all things very
good, and the wisdom of heaven could not carve fitter and better things, and
yet all not good enough. Let sin creep in, and Adam will not be content in
Paradise, or the Apostate Angels in heaven, but leave their own habitation. Go
from God, and take thy leave and farewell of contentment and satisfaction.

4. He is grown a Wolf and Devil to his brethren. Biting and devouring, Gal.
5.15. tearing, pulling, catching at advantage, flying upon the necks of the
weaker. Men execute much of the wrath of God in these feuds among themselves;
so that the Caution is very necessary, Matthew. 10.17. Beware of men; in a sort,
as of any wild beast, or the very Devils themselves. This is a glimpse of that
wrath which the Lord draws forth against natural men, in this life before the
sons of men.

2. There are further degrees of this wrath that rush in at the end of this
life. Romans 6.23. The wages of sin is death. The bodies of the very heirs of
glory, and which are Temples of the holy Ghost, lie trampled upon under
rottenness, and suffer loss of their appointed glory till the last day. The
Lord batters them, till the house tumble about their ears. He lays on load
till the heart strings crack; and to whom Hell is remitted, death is not
remitted; those must dye, that shall not be damned for their sins, and death
shall have dominion over them till the morning of the resurrection. There is a
progress in Gods wrath, which will not stop in the midway, but goes on till it
shall be accomplished, Ezekiel. 5.13.

3. The full vials and very dregs of this wrath, Psalm. 78.38.
shall be poured out in the world to come, which now God reins in, and lets not
get loose, and break over the banks; or if it do, calls it back and turns it
away, but then all his wrath shall be stirred up and let forth to the full.

1. There shall be the general judgment of the great day; in which the Lord
himself shall descend from heaven in a shout, 1 These. 4.16.
with the voice of the Archangel, and with the trump of God, and shall be
revealed. 2 These. 1.7. with his mighty Angels in flaming fire, terribly to
execute the curses of that Law which was so terrible in the promulgation. Then
shall the sinner be forced from his grave, dragged to the bar, arraigned, the
books opened, all the secrets of darkness, and of the heart made manifest; and
the Goats put on the left hand, and have that dismal sentence, Go ye cursed,
etc. Mat. 25.41.

2. There shall be dreadful and final execution, and this stands in two things.

1. In loss; expulsion from the Lords face, and presence, and glory. As
incurable lepers, from the Camp and fellowship of the Saints. For the good
things which they never cared for, and from the good things of the world which
they grasped, and were their portion; from all hopes of grace, all preachings
of peace, all strivings of the Spirit; never a friend to comfort, a sun to
shine, a drop of water to cool the tongue, or any blessing to come near them
any more for ever.

2. In sense; which is sometimes termed, suffering the vengeance of eternal
fire, Jude ver. 7. Wrath to come, 1 These. 1.10. where there shall be with the
damned Angels, subjection to the eternal wrath of God, the worm of a guilty
conscience that never dies; where the Lord will bear up the creature with one
hand, that it continue in being, and beat it with the other, that it shall be
ever dying; in death always, and never dead.

Use 1. Inform. We may clearly gather diverse Corollaries hence.

1. This may inform us of the vast and woeful change that sin has made. Men
could not come, possibly, such out of the hands of God. Genesis 1.31. God saw
every thing that he had made, and behold it was very good, and therefore
blessed; but sin has taken him from Mount Gerizim, Deuteronomy. 27.12, 13
and set him upon Ebal; and the misery now is such, that if the Lord should
open the same to the conscience fully, the very view would drive men out of
their wits, and men could not tarry in their beds, or relish a morsel of bread
till delivered, and blessed with some evidence of deliverance out of that
condition.

This may infome us of the causlessnesse of the offense taken at Ministers for
preaching this point.

Now consider seriously,

1. Is there a parallel to the offense, taken here in any other case in the
whole earth? Who is angry with a watchman for giving notice that the house is
beset, and ready to be broken up, or on fire; though all be disturbed, some
half-frighted out of their wits, or wholly with the tidings; and very great
pudder follows till the house be secured, and the fire quenched? men might
otherwise have been undone and destroyed in their beds. Who flies out against a
Sentinel that gives a true Alarm, and rowzeth the Soldiers at the deadest
time of the night? he prevents their surprizal, or throats being cut in their
beds, and the Town from being sacked. Who storms at a passenger that sticks up
a bough in a Quagmire, that other Travelers going securely on, may not be laid
fast ere they think of any danger? Who takes it ill of a friend, that seeing a
bearded arrow coming that would strike the stander next him mortally, pulls him
aside with that force possibly as to draw his arm out of joint, and the arrow
goes not through his heart? Who thinks amiss of a Lawyer that opens the
badnesse of his Clients cause to him, that he may not insist on a wrong point,
in which necessarily he must be cast?

2. Should we to avoid your displ^asure, not give you warning, and so draw
Gods displeasure, Ezekiel. 3.18, 19. Videsis Greenhil, in loc.
and the blood of you perishing upon our heads? is this good for you or us?

3. Do you well to provoke poor Ministers to bauke that part of their office
which flesh and blood makes us too willing to have our edge taken off in?
Desire we to be messengers of sad tidings, or rather to come in the abundance
of the comforts of the Gospel? A pettish Patient makes the Chyrurgion search
the wound less than is necessary to a through cure. Ye tempt us to stop from
speaking needfully of your danger, by your lothnesse to hear on that ear, and
by your rage and regret against the teller. Those which have most need of
faithful intellig^^ce of the Lords wrath, have least upon this very score. Job
21.31. Who shall declare his way to his face, viz. that is respited, and
prospers, and tramples the doctrine under foot, and turns again, and tears the
Preacher?

4. This is no other than what the Scripture speaks, and conscience upon
retirements will speak; and Satan will lay in your dish, and the Lord will pay
into your bosom. Will those fly in the Lords face, and of conscience, telling
this story to them, and pronouncing the sentence against them? Oh profane
partial spirits that cannot endure such Preachers as themselves shall be unto
themselves; that cannot bear the hearing of those terrors that themselves
shall be relators and inflicters of upon themselves! Ye had better have the
commodity at the first hand; conscience will preach in another note and
loudness than we do, and the more, because your ears have been stopped against
our words.

5. There cannot be a greater madness than not to be able to live under the
noise and news of this wrath, and yet stick under the wrath it self; the
hearing makes the ears tingle, but the wrath does not make the heart quake. Ye
had better hear the Heralds in the Princes name denouncing the war, and send
out for peace, than have the Prince himself come with fire and sword into your
bowels upon the contempt.

3. This may inform us of the righteousness and wisdom of the Lord in this
wrath annexed and declared against sin.

1. Consider the high rewards the Lord has propounded: The Law is not so fiery
in comminations against sin, but the Gospel is as full of 1 Cor. 2.9. 2 Cor.
12.4.
grace and promises to ways of duty. Now bring things to the bar of reason it
self, and may not the Lord annex this dreadful wrath to sin, that does annex
such glorious incomprehensible promises to the duties and weak services of his
people? sin strictly deserves; these not. May not he punish severely, that
rewards eminently? how just is it that persons invited to the Supper, Luke 14,
24.
and making excuses, should not taste thereof? that despisers of the
recompenses of God should suffer eternal loss of them, and be scourged with
the contrary to them?

2. Consider the Ends the Lord has designed to reach.

1. In the Elect. 1. To startle. Luke 12.5. I will forewarn you whom ye shall
fear: Fear him which after he has killed, has power to cast into hell; yea, I
say unto you fear him: Faith in the threatening engenders fear, as faith in the
promise genders hope; faith and fear were conjoined in Noah, Heb. 11.7. and
wrought together in his obedience and preservation. 2. To make all things else
little that meet them in the world, to shoulder them off from the truth and
homage of Christ. A Merchant in a Storm throws his goods overboard; the wrath
of God makes the startled sinner part with any thing, and incur any thing
rather than incur that: Moses had rather incur the wrath of a thousand
Pharaohs, than the wrath of God, because he knew the power of his wrath. As
Gods people have rewards promised that outweigh all that they are called to
part with; so terrors propounded that all other terrors may be over-looked,
and incurred rather than these. 3. To worm out the esteems of the world, and
the sensual pleasures, honors and profits thereof, the fuel of lust; there is
need of violence to pull out of this fire. Now he that propounds an end,
pitches upon means fitted to compass that end. A Cleaver of knotty timber,
must have a wedge that will go through. The mother that will mean the child,
must lay such bitter things on the breast, as will make the child loath the
milk: So the Lord has declared those wages to sin, that shall turn the edge of
love and liking to sin. That had need be very bitter, that shall make those
very sweets bitter to us: No lesser evils would work the sense of that evil of
sin into the conscience. And those secretly grudge and complain of the pains as
too great, to whom they are too little to awaken and lead them to repentance.

2. In the Reprobate. 1. That he may discover his perfect and infinite
displeasure against sin; and in these great letters, that all the world may
read his full hatred of it. Eli his faint checks, proclaimed his faint dislikes
of his sons sins. High dislikes produce answerable checks. Affections in men,
are the feet the soul goes forth upon; and s rong affections go a very nimble
eager pace. The Lord much more, because of his infinite contrariety to sin. 2.
That he may discover the power of his justice and wrath. Romans 9.17. For this
same purpose have I raised thee up, that I might show my power in thee, and
that my Name might be declared throughout all the earth. Those which glorify
not God in that manner which he would, he will glorify himself in the manner
that they would not. Pharaoh said, Who is the Lord? and trampled his authority
and commands under foot. Now as he did sometimes bring light out of darkness;
and the Apothecary does Preservatives out of rank poisons; so the Lord not
actively glorified, does fetch the glory of his power and vindictive justice
out of sin it self. The walkers in greatest pride and scorn of God, the Lord
will have everlasting glory in their everlasting smart; and he will so punish,
that heaven and hell shall ring of his justice and power, and displicence
against sin, and that his threatenings to the utmost are made good, and were not
scare-crowes.

3. Consider the dreadful aggravations of sin. It is,

1. A confederacy with the devil. A sworn servant about the Princes person, to
contract amity, and hold correspondence with the worst of his enemies, makes
the sin rise, and his judgment without pity. Should a Christian fall from a
mild and gracious Prince without a cause, and side with the Turk, or worshipper
of the devil, against him, we should think no punishment too much for him.

2. A defection from, and insurrection against God, and ateasing the Lord into
the lists and field. 1 Cor. 10.22. Do we provoke the Lord to jealousy? are we
stronger than he? Goliath challenges and defies the Host of Israel, till David
comes forth, and sends a stone into his brains, and cuts his head off with his
own sword, and gives his flesh to the fouls of heaven; so sinners, till they
draw the Lord, and the weight of his infinite and eternal displeasure forth
against themselves, even that weight which sinks them, and they are never able
to rise from under it again. Now sins rise, as the quality of the person that
they are done against. He that flies in my face, and gives me blows and wounds
thereby, there is an Action of battery and damages to be had against him; He
that does the same against the Judge of Assize, or the King upon the Throne,
that is Treason, and his life and estate are hardly enough to make amends for
it. The infinity of God, makes the infinity of the evil and meritoriousness of
wrath in sin. The Majesty rises, and so the guilt and demerit rises infinitely.

3. The contempt of all means used for fetching the Rebel in. How often would I
have gathered you? Mat. 23.37.
-- and ye would not. Men stand out, and if they could have stood, would have
stood out, and continued hostility against heaven for ever. How equal is it,
that a creature nigh to God, falling off to the devil without a cause, and
which chooses to have God his enemy, and that no means can reduce, though the
danger and evil of sin be evidenced, and his inability to stand, an act of
oblivion offered, and highest preferment, and yet will not come in: How just is
it, that he reap the fruit of his continuing at a distance from his Sovereign,
and in disobedience against him?

4. This may inform us of the distemper and pride of man's heart, that will
charge his misery anywhere rather than upon himself. 1. Upon instruments
foreign that do inflict, rather than sin within, for which the same is
inflicted. The Lord scourges sin by that which is the inflicters sin too. They
have no Warrant to do, and yet we justly suffer from them as Organs of wrath in
Gods hand. 2. Upon God himself. Prove. 19.3. The foolishness of man perverteth
his way, and his heart fretteth against the Lord. The Malefactor blames the
Judge, when it was himself that delivered himself over into the Judges power,
and Armed the Law with power of doing all that is done against him.

5. This may inform us of the gr^unds and advantages the Lord has given us to
humility, and self-abasement. Wipe the sweat off from thy brows, and say, This
is the fruit of sin. See the clothes on thy back, and these are the coverings
of that shame which came in by sin; look into thy body, soul, estat^,
relations, person, whatsoever is crooked and afflictive, pertains to this
account, and is to be set at the foot of sin. When beaten, consider the fault
that thou art beaten for, and accept of the punishment of thy iniquity, Lev.
26.41. Thy eye cannot turn, but there are remembrances of sin, and provocations
to lay thy self in the dust before the Lord.

6. This may inform us of their folly, that kindle this wrath yet more. The
Princes spoke well to the two Tribes and a half, Josh. 22.17. Is the iniquity
of Peor too little for us, from which we are not cleansed until this day? etc.
So are those wrath-provoking pollutions of nature too little for us, by which
we are so far defiled and troubled unto this day, that by increases of sin we
should augment yet the fierce anger of the Lord? Number. 32.14. while abiding in
this estate, ye do this more and more continually.

Use 2. Exhort. and this is double.

1. To carnal and unregenerate persons: Arise ye and depart, for this is not
your rest, Micah 2.10. This is not an estate to be quietly abode one moment in.

Motive 1. Who can dwell with this wrath which God describes to be 1. Burning
wrath; Job 19.11. He has kindled his wrath against me. 2. Tearing wrath; this
set the Bears awork, 2 Kings 2.23. Consider this yet that forget God, lest he
tear you in pieces. Psalm. 50.22.
3. Piercing wrath, that goes down into the very inwards of the conscience,
when all visible blessings stand entire round about, and not a hair of the
head is ruffled. This curse often works in the middle of blessings, and ripens
by them insensibly for hell it self. 4. Abiding wrath; the prisoners of which
are bound hand and foot, and there is no starting, Zach. 5.4. 5. Surprising
wrath; Job 20.23. When he is about to fill his belly, God shall cast the fury
of his wrath upon him, and shall rain it upon him while he is eating, and so
of all other times, is most cheerful. 6. Reserved wrath; Job 21.30. 2 Pet. 2.9.
which like a woman with child will travel, till it have brought forth judgment
against all the enemies of the Lord though upon Thrones, and having Nations
under their feet, Psalm. 78.30, 31. Was Sodom a City fit to be dwelt in,
especially for Lot, when the Lord had given him notice of the cloud of fire and
brimstone hovering, and ready to come down upon the same? This Climate is too
hot for any that have spiritual senses, to dwell a minute in.

2. Shall all our warnings be lost, that tell you of the storm, merely to
drive you under covert; and that ye may understand and favor that glorious
name, 1 These. 1.10.
Jesus that delivers from wrath to come! The Avenger of blood is in your necks,
to quicken your haste into this City of Refuge. Why should ye make the
Furnace-hotter, and to the Fathers wrath which is quenchable in the blood of
Christ, superadde the wrath of the Lamb, which is absolutely unquenchable?
Shall we only stand forth to clear the justice of the Lord against you in the
last day?

3. The great and swaying care of all Gods people as soon as ever they saw
themselves in the glass of the Law of liberty, Jam. 1.15.
was to be found in Christ, Phil. 3.9. This was Paul's prevailing care, when
sought for, and to be set to Gods bar, to be found clothed with Christ's
righteousness, and to have his Image legibly engraven upon him; the like care
should be ours.

Directions.
1. Stir up shame, and sorrow, and fear, and indignation against your selves; no
sins are heavier than those we count light of; Ezekiel. 8.17. Is it a light thing
to the house of Judah that they commit the abominations which they commit here?
Take this oppositely to a double evil. 1. Men pare and lessen their sins, and
make a very small matter of them, and consider not, that lessening their own
indignation, they increase Gods. Prove. 14.9. Fools make a mock at sin; chap.
10.23. It is a sport to a fool to do mischief: So those, Isa. 57.4. Against
whom do you sport your selves? Against whom do ye make a wide mouth, and draw
out the tongue? They fell to other gods, and laughed the Prophet to scorn,
that made such a business of it; so when Christ and grace, and life were
offered, Mat. 22.5. they made light of it, and went their ways; that is, made
light of grace, and of the sin of contempt of grace. 2. Men stick in vile
practices, and think their sacrifices and prayers will salve all up again,
which the Lord so earnestly declares against, Isa. 1.14. But stir ye up sorrow,
2 Cor. 7.11.
shame, displeasure; repentance has these adjuncts, and proceeds to, and deals
with, and chiefly, with this first bottome-sinne.

2. Lie down meekly at the Lords feet; this follows upon the practice of the
first direction. 1. In submission to any the sharpest dispensations. As
passions stir up passions, and one Coal kindles another; so our frettings, the
Lords wrath. There are tangs of this sin in the godly themselves; 2 Samuel 6.8.
Jonah 4.5.
but grace takes it by the throat. Psalm. 51.4. 2. In supplication. Jer. 10.24.
Psalm. 6.1.
The Lords servants have humbly and earnestly deprecated wrath.

3. Embrace the Lord Jesus in the force of all his blessed offices, and then go
fly to, and lift up thy face without spot before the Father in him. Know 1.
That it is a dreadful thing to have a settled War and plague in a Nation;
much more to be in the Jews case, that rejected, and would not be under the
blessing of Christ, and are under the curse of God, and wrath is come upon them
to the uttermost; and has rested already these One thousand six hundred years.
1 These. 2.16.
2. That there is no other remedy propounded to remove this wrath, which we
came into the world children and heirs of, but only Christ. He has the keys
of hell and death, Acts 4.12. Rev. 1.18.
to let the soul out of the body, and into hell when he will; to infer and
remove wrath. If any receive not him, this wrath tarries still, and will cleave
to, and abide upon him for ever. John 3.36.
He speaks with authority. Luke 19.27. Those mine enemies -- bring them and
slay them before me; and it shall be done. 3. That the Psalmist makes it (as it
is) a point of wisdom in the greatest, to kiss the Son with a kiss of homage
and subjection, Psalm. 2, 11, 12.
least he be angry; what is the danger of that? and ye perish in the war; of
your hopes and purposes, and never compass grace nor glory. If his wrath be
kindled but a little, blessed are all those which put their trust in him. 4.
That then ye may plead with the Lord with humble boldness. Psalm. 74.1. Why
does thine anger smoke against the Sheep of thy Pasture? remember thy
Congregation which thou have purchased of old, the rod of thine inheritance
which thou have redeemed, etc. 5. And assure your hearts of welcome. Prove.
21.14. A gift in secret pacifieth wrath, and a reward in the bosom strong
wrath. Mark their policy, Acts 12.10. and be assured the relations of Christ,
are beloved of the Father. Job 33.24. Then he is gracious to him, and says,
Deliver him from going down to the pit, I have found a ransom.

2. To those which the Lord has translated out of their natural condition.

1. Bring the work often to the touchstone, that you may not boast in a false
gift; gold will endure the test, and be more fully manifested to be gold
indeed; and finding the work to be right, live with an enlarged heart to the
praise of that grace which has made this change.

2. Deal seriously in the mortification of sin, which God only strikes at; and
in order thereto, count sin the worst of evils; if this were done; and
thoroughly, and fixedly done in our spirits, there is nothing of any other
directions would be left undone. To set up this judgment, there needs,

1. Ploughing carefully with the Lords heifer, viz. search into the Oracles of
God; there, and there only are lively portraitures of sin, and the genuine
products and train of sin.

2. The eye salve of the Spirit. We are blinder than Batts in this matter; and
are indisposed very much, or rather wholly, to let this truth sink down into
our hearts.

3. Applications to the Throne of grace. None but those which deal in good
earnest in heaven, will see the hell and mystery of sin in themselves. He gives
the Holy Ghost to them which ask him.

4. Excussions and communings with your selves. Prove. 20.27. The spirit of man
is the candle of the Lord, searching all the inward parts of the belly; and
duly made use of, will tell many stories correspondent to the Word of truth;
use conscience, and use therewith another and bigger candle, to rummage the
dark room of thy heart with. Superadde to conscience, the succors of the Word
and Spirit, and thou shall do something in the search; and find out
convictively, the swarms of evil in thine own heart.

5. The work of grace. There will be else a beam in the eye, and plain things
will not be plain to us; Gods work holds intelligence, and is of amicable
affinity with his Word; grace has the only excellent faculty in looking
through sin.

6. Attendance to the Lords administrations against sin; God writes in great
letters in the world, what he had first written in the Scriptures; every breach
by sin, should lead down into more hatred, brokennesse of spirit, and shame
before the Lord for sin. This is the engaging evil; this engages God and the
holy Angels, and Devils, and the very man against himself. Nothing can be his
friend, to whom sin has made God an enemy. Woe to the man that is in this sense
alone, and has heaven and earth, and hell, and all within the Continent of
them, against him; it is impossible for that man's heart and hands to stand
strong. This is the mighty prevailing evil. Never was man so stout, as to stand
before the face of sin, but he shivered, and was like a garment eaten up of
moths. This has fretted the joints of Kingdoms in pieces, Psalm. 39.11.
and made the goodliest houses in the world a heap of rubbish; Zech. 5.4.
will make Bab lon that sits as a Queen, an habitation of Devils, Rev. 18.2.
and the hold of every foul spirit, and a Cage of every unclean and hateful
birds; made the Angels Devils, and heaven it self too hot for them. Never were
the like changes made as by sin; grace makes not changes of richer comfort,
than sin does of dismal consequence; it is made by the Holy Ghost an argument
of the infinity of the power of God to pardon and subdue sin, Micah 7.18.

3. Bear all afflictions incident to an holy course cheerfully. The Martyrs
went joyfully into the fire, because the flames of hell were quenched to them;
bore their Cross easily, because no curse and damnation to them in Christ
Jesus, Gal. 3.13.

4. Reduce your anger to the similitude of Gods, which is very slowly kindled,
and is an intense holy displicence only against sin; Psalm. 103.8.
and is cleans'd from all dregs of rashness, injustice and discomposure; such
zeal should eat us up. John 2.17.


MAN'S IMPOTENCY TO Help himself out of that misery.
ROMANS 5.6. For when we were yet without strength, in due time Christ dyed for
the ungodly.


IN this Chapter there are two parts; in the first the Apostle lays down the
comfortable fruits and privileges of a justified estate; in the second he
argues the firmness of these comforts, because they are so rich that they are
scarce credible, and hardly received. The firmness and soundness of these
comforts the Apostle represents by a double comparison. 1. By comparing Christ with Christ; and 2. Christ with Adam. Christ with Christ, or one benefit
that we have by him with another, from the Text to ver. 12. then Christ with
Adam; the second Adam with the first, to the end of the Chapter.

In comparing Christ with Christ, three considerations do occur.

1. The efficacy of his love toward us before justification, with the efficacy
of his love toward us after justification; the argument stands thus; if
Christ had a love to us when sinners, and his love prevailed with him to die
for us, much more may we expect his love when made friends; if when we were in
sin and misery, shiftless, and helpless, Christ had the heart to die for us,
and to take us with all our faults; will he cast us off after we are justified
and accepted with God in him? this love of Christ is asserted in the 6. verse,
amplified in the 7. and 8. verses; and the conclusion is inferred verse 9. much
more then being now justified by his blood, we shall be saved from wrath
through him.

The second Comparison is of the efficacy of the death of Christ, and the
efficacy of the life of Christ; it is absurd to think that Christ rising from
the dead, and living in heaven, should not be as powerful to save, and bring us
to God, as Christ dying was to reconcile us to him.

The third Comparison is the privative mercy, or being saved from hell, with
the positive mercy, or obtaining a title to heaven. Verse 11. and not only so,
but we joy in God, as having now received the atonement.

2. For the comparison between Christ and Adam, the sum of it is, that Christ
is more able to save, than Adam to destroy; and therefore justified persons
need to fear nothing. As Adam was a public person, and root of mankind, so
is Christ a public person; for Adam was The figure of him that was to come.
Romans 5.
(...). Adam was a public person, but a finite person, having no intrinsic
value in himself, and only was all us by divine institution; but Christ besides
the institution of God, was an infinite person; and therefore there is a (...),
a much more upon Christ; his sacred virtue exceeds that cursed influence of
Adam in many particulars, amply set down in the latter end of the Chapter by
the Apostle.

The words begin the first Comparison. In them,

1. The condition wherein we are by nature, is set forth by two notions,
ungodly, and without strength; the one notes we have no worth to move God to
help us, for we were ungodly; the other, that we have no power to help our
selves, for we were without strength; we were without strength, and so need
help; ungodly, and so refused help.

2. The means of our recovery, Christ died for us.

3. The s asonablenesse of our redemption, in due time.

For the first notion whereby our natural estate is expressed [ungodly] I shall
pass it by; the next notion [without strength] will yield us this point:

That man fallen, is destitute of all power and means of rising again, or helping
himself out of that misery into which he has plunged himself by sin.

This will appear if you consider his condition with respect to the Law, or
with respect to the Gospel, and those terms of grace which God offers in
Christ; the former more properly falls under the consideration of this place;
but because of the method of this exercise, you expect the discussion of the
latter also, I shall take occasion from hence to speak of that.

1. With respect to the Law; that will be understood by a view of that
Scripture that expresses the tenor of the Law; Gal. 3.10. Cursed is every one
that continues not in all the words of this Law to do them; where is
considerable, 1. The duty is exacts. 2. The penalty it inflicts. 3. The
operation that both these have upon the fallen creature.


1. The duty it exacts; an innocent nature that is presupposed for the person
must continue; it does not say Now being; the sentence of the Law, does not
suppose man as lapsed and fallen, or as having already broken with God, but as in
a good and sound estate; and then universal, perpetual, perfect obedience is
indispenceably required; he must continue in all things with all the heart, and
that continually; if he fails in one point, he is gone; this is personally
exacted of all men, as long as they abide under Adams Covenant; he that does
them shall live in them, and the sold that sins shall dye. Now if God should
call us to an account, for the most inoffensive day that ever we passed over,
what would become of us? Psalm. 130.3. If thu should mark iniquities, O Lord,
who could That is, rectas in curia, be able to make a bold defense.
stand? better never born, than to be liable to that judgment, when the Law
shall take the sinner by the throat, and say, Pay me that thou owe; what
shall he poor wretch do? so that here we are without strength, altogether
unable to come up to the obedience of the Law of works. Romans 8.3. The Law can
make nothing perfect, because it is become weak through our flesh; to fallen man
it establishes a course of punishing sin, not of taking away sin; we may
increase the debt, but we cannot lessen it; if our obedience were exact for the
future, (let us suppose it) yet the paying of new debts does not quit old
scores; they that could not keep themselves when entire and innocent, cannot
recover themselves when lost and fallen.

2. The penalty it inflicts, Cursed is every one; how cursed? cursed in all
that he has, Deuteronomy. 28.15, 16, 17, 18. All his enjoyments become a snare, and
temporal comforts do but harden him, and prepare him for a greater misery.
Cursed in all that he does; his prayer is turned into sin; his hearing, the
savor of death unto death; all his toil and labor in outward service is to
no purpose. Prove. 21.27. The sacrifice of the wicked is abomination, how much
more when he brings it with a wicked mind? At the best it is but an
abomination, God will not accept an offering at his hands, much more when it is
pulluted with sinful and evil aims; but this is not all; he is cursed for
evermore, the Law binds him over body and soul to everlasting torments, and
in time he shall hear that dreadful sentence, Matthew. 25.41. Go ye cursed into
everlasting fire prepared for the Devil and his Angels; there is but the
slender thread of a frail life that hinders the execution of this sentence
upon him; a sinner stands upon the very brink of hell, and ever and anon is
ready to be cast in, where he shall eternally lie under the wrath of God; so
that here we are without strength, because we cannot satisfy the justice of
God for one sin, but are always satisfying, and can never be said to have
satisfied; like a poor man that pays a debt of a thousand pounds by a farthing
a week.

3. Consider how this works with him; an exaction of duty under so severe a
penalty, does either terrify, or stupifie the conscience; he that escapes the
one, suffers the other; or else thirdly, does irritate corruption; or
fourthly, obtrude us upon a sottish despair, so as to give over all endeavors
and hope of salvation.

First, Sometimes it terrifieth, that is easily done; the conscience of a sinner
is a sore place; they are all their life time subject to bondage, Hebr. 2.14.
There is a hidden fear in the heart of a wicked man not always felt, but soon
awakened, either by a sound conviction from the Word, or some sore judgment, or
by the agonies of death, or serious thoughts of the world to come; Foelix
trembled when Paul did but mention Gods judgment, Acts 24.25. the Prisoner
makes the Judge tremble; a sinner is afraid to think of his condition; if God
do but a little break in upon his heart, do what he can, he lies under the
bondage of a wounded spirit, and where ever he goes (like the Devils) he
carries his own hell about with him.

Secondly, If it terrifieth not the conscience, it stupifieth the conscience,
that they grow senseless of their misery, past feeling, Ephesians. 4.19. and that is
a dangerous Crisis and estate of soul, when once a man comes to that, and goes
like a fool to the correction of the stocks.

Thirdly, it irritateth their inbred corruption. Romans 7.9. The Commandment
came, that is, in full conviction and power, and sin revived, and I dyed; the
more we understand of the necessity of our subjection to God, the more opposite
is the soul to him; as a Damm makes a River or strong stream the more violent,
or as a Bullock at the first yoking becomes the more unruly.

Or Fourthly, It breeds a sottish despair. Jer. 18.12. There is no hope,
therefore we will walk after our own devices, and do every one according to the
evil imaginations of our own heart; it is to no purpose to speak to us, or
strive further about us; (as if they had said) there is no hope, and therefore
we will live as we list without any further care of turning to God; this is the
worst kind of despair, when a man is Psalm. 81.12.
given up to his own hearts lust, and runs headlong in the way of
destruction without hope of returning; there is more hope of them that are
under despairing fears, or a terrified conscience, than there is of those which
are under despairing resolutions, or a stupid and sottish obstinacy: thus as to
the Law man is helpless.

2. Consider man as to terms of grace offered in the Gospel; he is still
without strength, not only in a damnable condition by the Law, but without
grace, unable to accept the Gospel; this will appear by two considerations.

1. By those emphatical terms of Scripture by which the Case and Cure of man is
set forth.

2. By those positive assertions whereby all power is denied to man to convert
himself to God, or to do any thing that is spiritually good.

1. Those emphatical expressions which represent His Case. His Cure.


1. His Case; the Scripture sets forth man's condition thus, that he is born in
sin, Psalm. 51.5. and things natural are not easily altered; greedy of sin, Job
16.15. He drinks in iniquity like water; it notes a vehement propension; as
greedy to sin, as a thirsty man to drink; thirst is the most implacable
appetite, hunger is far better born; but this you will say is but now and then
in a great temptation, or vehement passion; no, Genesis 6.5. Every imagination of
the thought of his heart is evil, only evil, and that continually; by how many
aggravating and increasing circumstances is man's sin there set forth! there is
in him a Mint always at work, his mind coining evil thoughts, his heart evil
desires, and carnal motions, and his memory is the closet and store house
wherein they are kept. But may not a man be reclaimed, is not this his bondage
and trouble? no, his heart is a heart of stone, Ezekiel. 36.26. that is,
inflexible, insensible; when God uses the Word, some common motions of his
Spirit, some rouzing providence, yet all in vain; for man's heart is deceitful
above all things, and desperately wicked, Jer. 17.9. inventing shifts and
excuses to avoid God, and to cheat it self of its own happiness. But is not
the New Testament more favorable than the Old? or is not man grown better,
since there was so much grace discovered! I answer, No; there is a perfect
harmony between the Testaments; there you will find man represented as a
child of wrath by nature, Ephesians. 2.3. even the Elect as well as others, to be
a servant of sin, Romans 6.17. Never such an imperious Master, never such a
willing servant; sin never leaves commanding, and we love the work; you will
find him again expressed as one averse from God, alienated from his life,
Ephesians. 4.18. It Is a melancholy thought to a carnal heart to think of the life
of God, as an enemy to the Law, Romans 8.7. One that neither can, nor will please
God; as blind, and knows not what to do, 2 Pet. 1.9. and this blindness
spiritual, is worse than bodily; a man that is blind in body, seeks for a fit
guide, as Elymas when he was stricken blind, sought about for one to lead him
by the hand, Acts 13.11. as weak and without strength here in the Text, yea,
stark dead in trespasses and sins, Ephesians. 2.5. yea, worse than dead; a dead man
does no more hurt, his evil dies with him; but there is a life of resistance
and rebellion against God that goes along with this death in sin. Now put all
this together, and you may spell out man's misery, what a wretched impotent
creature he is in his natural estate; the Scripture does not speak this by
glances or short touches; neither is it an Hyperbole used once or twice, but
every where, where it professedly speaks of this matter; certainly man
contributeth little to his own conversion; he cannot hunger and thirst after
Christ, that drinks in iniquity like water; there is nothing in nature to carry
him to grace, who is altogether sinful; if the Scripture had only said that man
had accustomed himself to sin, and was not born in sin; that man were somewhat
prone to iniquity, and not greedy of it; and did often think evil, and not
continually; that man were somewhat obstinate, and not a stone, an adamant; if
the Scripture had only said that men were indifferent to God, and not a
professed enemy; if a captive of sin, and not a servant; if only weak, and not
dead; if only a neuter, and not a rebel; then there might be something in man,
and the work of conversion not so difficult, but the Scripture says the quite
contrary.

2. The Cure; certainly to remedy so great an evil requires an Almighty power,
and the al-sufficiency of grace; therefore it is good to see how conversion is
described in Scripture; sometimes by enlightening the mind, Ephesians. 1.18. and
the eyes of your understandings being enlightened, etc. Man the wisest creature
on this side heaven, is stark blind in the things of God; though he has the
light of nature, and can put on the spectacles of Art, and dress his notions
of divine things by the glass of the Word, yet ere the cure is wrought,
something must be done upon the faculty; the eyes of our understandings must be
enlightened, as well as the object revealed; I but this infusion of light is not
all; the Scripture speaks of opening the heart. Acts 16.14. He opened the heart
of Lydia; God does not only knock at the heart, but open it; he knocks many
times by the outward means, but finds no entrance; yea, as one that would open
a door, he tries key after key, till he has tried all the keys in the bunch;
so does God use means after means, but till he Cant. 5.4, 5.
puts his fingers upon the handles of the lock, the door is not opened to
him; well then the mind must be enlightened, and the heart opened; if these
words are not emphatical enough, you will find conversi^n expressed by
regeneration. Joh. 3.3. Except a man be born again, etc. Mark, we must not only
be reformed, but regenerated. Now because generation is an ordinary work of
nature, and often falls out in the course of second causes, therefore it is
expressed by the Metaphor of resurrection, Ephesians. 2.5. But that which has
been, may be again; therefore it is called a Creation, Ephesians. 2.10. we are (...)
his workmanship, 2 Cor. 4.6. 2 Cor. 5.17. Psalm. 51.10. yea, further it is
expressed by victory, 1 John 4.4. or the beating and binding the strong man, by
one that is stronger than he. Luke 11.21, 22. by bringing into Captivity every
proud thought, 2 Cor. 10.5. All these expressions does the Scripture use, to
set out the mystery of grace; one expression may not enough be heeded, and
therefore are many types and figures of it used, that what is w^nting in one
notion, may be supplied by another; as let us gather them up a little, there
must be not only light in the mind, but the heart must be moved, and that not a
little stirred, but changed, fashioned anew, born again; and because generation
supposes a previous disposition in the matter, not only is it called
regeneration, but the term resurrection is used, in which the matter is wholly
unprepared; but yet because still here is matter to work upon, therefore it is
called Creation, which was a making all things out of nothing; God works faith,
where there is no faith; and repentance, where was no repentance; and calls the
things that are not, as though they were; but now because sin makes us worse
than nothing; and as in Creation, as there was nothing to help, so there was
nothing to resist and hinder; therefore it is expressed by victory, implying the
opposition of Gods work, and the resistance that there is in the heart of man,
till it be overpowered by grace.

2. The next proof is from those assertions, whereby all power is denied to man
to convert himself to God, or to do any thing that is spiritually good; as when
it is said he cannot know, 1 Cor. 2.14. he cannot believe, Joh. 6.44. he cannot
obey, Romans 8.7. nay to instance in single acts, he cannot think a good thought
of himself, 2 Cor. 3.5. he cannot speak a good word, Mat. 12.34. How can ye,
being evil, speak good things? he cannot do any thing, John 15.5. He does not
say, nihil magnum, but, nihil; not no great thing, but without me ye can do
nothing. Well then, when man can neither know, nor believe, nor obey, nor
think, nor speak, nor do any thing without grace; surely man is without
strength, wholly impotent and unable to turn himself to God.

But here is an Objection; If it be so, how can these things stand with the
mercy of God, as the Creator of man kind, to require the debt of him that is
not able to pay? with the Justice of God as the Judge of the world, to punish
him with eternal death, for the neglect of that which he could not perform? or
with the wisdom of the supreme lawgiver, to exhort him by promises which has
no power, to do what he is exhorted unto?

I answer to the first; God does not lose his right, though man has lost his
power; their impotency does not dissolve their obligation; a drunken servant is
a servant, and it is against all reason the Master should lose his right to
command by the servants default; a Prodigal debtour that has nothing to pay,
yet is liable to be sued for the debt without any injustice; God contracted
with us in Adam; and that obedience he requires is not only due by Covenant,
but by Law; not only by positive Law, and contract, but by immutable right;
it is harsh men think to suffer for Adams fault, to which they were not
conscious, and actually consenting; but every man will find an Adam in his own
heart; the old man is there, wasting away the few remains of natural light and
strength; and shall not God challenge the debt of obedience from a debtour that
is both proud and prodigal? we are proud; for when we are miserable, we think
our selves happy; and when we are poor, we think our selves rich; and when we
are blind, we conceit our selves very seeing; and when we are naked, we think
our selves well clad, Rev. 3.17. and therefore God may admonish us of our duty,
and demand his right, if for no other reason, but to show us our impotency, and
that we may not pretend that we were not called upon for what we owe; and as
man is proud, so he is Prodigal; we spend what is left, and throw away those
relics of conscience, and moral inclinations, which escaped out of the ruins
of the fall.

2. As to the second, How God can with justice punish him for the neglect of
what he could not do?

I answer, our natural impotency is voluntary. We must not consider man only as
impotent to good, but as delighting in evil, and loving it with all his heart;
as man cannot, so he will not come to God, John 5.40. our impotency lies in our
obstinacy, and so man is left without excuse; we refuse the grace that is
offered to us, and by continuing in sin, increase our bondage, our inveterate
customs turning to another nature.

3. As to the last, how God can exhort and persuade us.

For answer, suppose we should say, This is only for the elects sake, who
certainly are the called according to purpose, Romans 8.28. whereas others are
called obiter, by the by; and as they live intermingled with them; if the elect
did dwell alone, and were a distinct community by themselves, the objection
were plausible; but they are hidden amongst others, and therefore the Reprobate
have the like favor in the external means with them; the world stands for
the elects sake, yet the Sun does not shine upon them alone, nor the showers
fall upon their fields alone; or let me illustrate it thus, The sun shines,
though blind men see it not; the rain falls upon the Rocks and Mountains, as
well as the fruitful Valleys; so are exhortations of duty promiscuously rendered
to good and bad; this might be answer enough: but that which I rather say, is,
that these exhortations have their use, for they carry their own blessing with
them, to them to whom God means them for good; the word has a ministerial
subserviency to the power of God; as when Christ said, Lazarus come forth, it
raised him out of his grave; as for others that are not converted by them, it is
for their conviction, and to bridle their fierceness, and a means to civilize
them, and keep them from growing worse, whereby many temporal blessings do
accrue to them; as Pagan Rome flourished in all manner of virtue and success,
as long as moral precepts were in force; but of this more in the next objection.

2. Objection. If man be so altogether without strength, why do ye press him
to the use of means?

I answer, though man cannot change himself, yet he is to use the means; and
that for several reasons.

1. That we may practically see our own weakness. Men think the work of grace
is easy, till they put themselves upon a trial; the lamenesse of the arm is
found in exercise; apply thy heart to understanding, then cry for knowledge,
Prove. 2.2, 3. Whosoever sets himself in good earnest to get any grace, will be
forced to cry for it before he has done; we never seek strength at Gods hands
in so feeling a manner, till our experience convince us of our weakness; when
a man goes to lift up a piece of timber heavy, above his strength, he is forced
to call in help.

2. The use of the means we owe to God, as well as the change of the heart; we
lie under a moral obligation to use them; God that has required faith and
conversion, has required prayer, hearing, reading, meditating; and we are
bound to obey, though we know not what good will come of it; as Heb. 11.8.
Abraham obeyed God, not knowing whither he went; and Peter, when there was
little hope, says, Luke 5.5. Howbeit, at thy command, etc. our great rule is,
We are to do what he commands, and let God do what he will.

3. To lessen our guilt; for when men do not use the means, they have no
excuse, it is plain laziness, and want of will, not want of power; when we
will not so much as try to come out of our condition, we love our bondage, and
shut the door upon our selves; or as that phrase is, Acts 13.46. judge our
selves unworthy of eternal life; pass sentence upon our own souls; it is a sign
you care not whether God show you mercy yea or no, for you will not so much as
bestow a thought upon it; and so come under the censure of wicked and sloathful
servants, Mat. 25.26.

4. There is encouragement in the use of means, many ways.

1. If we do not something, we shall gr^w worse; standing pools are apt to
putrify; man is of an active nature, either growing better or worse; when we
do not improve nature, we deprave it; Jude 10. They corrupt themselves in what
they know naturally; voluntary neglects, draw on penal hardness, and so your
impotency is increased; there is this benefit of using means; it prevents much
sin and hardness of heart; it is like the embalming of a dead body; it keeps
it from stinking, though it does not restore life.

2. Without the use of means they can never hope for any thing. Romans 10.14. How
shall they believe without a Preacher? If ever I meet with God, with Christ, it
must be in this way John 5.3, 4, 5
; it is good to lie at the Pool, as the poor man did who was unable to get in
when the Angel stirred the waters; marriage is instituted for the propagation
of mankind; yet the soul is of God only: no man abstaineth from marriage
because he cannot beget a reasonable soul; so grace is of God; but hearing,
reading, praying, are the instituted means, and we must not abstain from
these means, because grace is not of our selves, but of God.

3. It may be God will meet with us; it is the ordinary practice of his free
grace so to do, and its good to make trial upon a common hope. Acts 8.22. Pray
if it be possible, etc. There is a great uncertainty; yet pray; it is Gods usual
way to meet with them that seek him. Luke 11.8. For his importunities sake;
(...), for his And so fitly expressing our restlessnesse in the use of means.
impdence, God is not engaged, but who knows what importunity may do? he may,
and he may not give grace, but usually he does; it is Gods usual way to bless
man's industry, and yet all they that labor have not an absolute certainty of
success; who would forbear ploughing because in one year of ten there may
happen a dearth or a lean harvest? Act, God may come in (for usually he does)
with his influence and blessing.

Let me now give you some reasons why God permits this weakness and want of
strength to lie upon the fallen creature.

1. To exalt the freeness, and power of his grace; first, the freeness of his
grace, for God has shut up all under the curse, that there may be no way of
escape but by his mercy; their eternal ruin and damnation is else certain and
inevitable. Romans 11.32. God has concluded them all under unbelief, that he
might have mercy upon all; (...), that is the word, the state of unbelief is
there compared to a prison; made sure and fast with iron bars and bolts, and by
Gods permission man has shut up himself* in such a prison, that mercy alone
might open the door to him; Jew and Gentile lies fast bound with a chain that
can be Loosened by no hands but Gods; so Gal. 3.22. The Scripture has
concluded all under sin, that the promises by faith might be given to them that
believe; it is the same word and notion, we may mourn and sigh through the
grates of the flaming prison, but can never get out till God look upon us in
mercy thorough Christ: And so also the power of his grace, in rescuing us out
of this misery; it is a mighty power that works in them that believe, Ephesians.
1.19. When we consider it, we may wonder at it that ever such a change should
be wrought in us that are so carnal, so obstinate. 1 Pet. 2.9. Woe has called
us out of darkness into his mavelous light; it is indeed mavelous that ever
we should get out of the prison of sin; more miraculous than Peter's getting
out of prison, having so many chains and doors, and keepers upon him, Acts 12.

2. To humble the creature thoroughly by a sense of their own guilt,
unworthiness and nothingness; in our natural state we are ungodly and without
strength; why has God permitted it? that every mouth might be stopped, and all
the world may become guilty before God. Romans 3.19. (...), liable to the
process of his revenging justice, and so to humble us for our inability and
obstinacy that we may go complainingly to God, saying, Lord, I am as a Bullock
unaccustomed to the yoke. Jer. 31.18. Whosoever has passed this trial, does
sensibly find it.

Use of all; 1. To the unconverted, to be sensible of their condition, and
mourn over it to God, acknowledge the debt, confess your impotency, beg pardon
and grace, and in an humble sense of your misery endeavor earnestly to come
out of it. By such Doctrines as these, men are either cut at heart, Acts 7.54.
or pricked at heart, Acts 2.37. which is the far more kindly work; some men's
hearts and lusts are exasperated, and they rage and starme when they are warned
of their danger by a closer application; Oh it is better to bemoane your selves,
than fret against the Lord, and yield to a sottish despair; there is some hope
when conviction ends in groaning rather than murmuring: And you do not fret
against the Lords Sovereignty, but complain to him of the naughtiness of your
hearts, begging his grace for Christ's sake; therefore go and lie at his feet,
and say, Lord, I have a blind mind, a froward heart, none more; I shall never
of my self fly the evil forbidden, perform the good commanded, renounce these
bewitching lusts, take up such a course of service to thy blessed Majesty; O
take away this stony untractable heart, etc. You are in Prison, but you are
Prisoners of hope if you do so.

2. To press the Converted to thankfulness; we were once in such a pitiful
case till God plucked us as brands out of the burning; we were utterly
miserable and destitute of all good. O blessed be God that opened the Prison
door, and proclaimed deliverance by Christ to poor Captives, and not only
proclaimed it, but wrought it for us; none but an Almighty arm could loosen
the Bolts, and shut back the many Locks that were upon us. Peter, when the
Angel made his Chains fall off, considered the matter, Acts 12.12. and went to
give thanks among the Saints: Oh when there were so many Doors and Bolts upon
you, such difficulties and disadvantages in the way of your conversion;
Consider it, and bless God for your escape. Blessed be the Lord that gave me
counsel in my reins, Psalm. 16.7.

3. Let us compassionate others that are in this estate, poor souls in what a
sad condition are they! We have not usually such a deep sense of their misery
as we should have; Israel was to pity strangers, because they were once
strangers in the Land of Egypt; we our selves have been in the house of
bondage: O pity poor captive souls: Especially does this concern the Ministry;
they that do induere personam Christi, that stand in the stead of Christ,
should induere viscera Christi, put on the bowels of Christ. Phil. 1.8. God is
my Record how greatly I long after you in the bowels of Christ Jesus; when we
were ungodly, and without strength, Christ dyed for sinners, and wilt not thou
labor for them, and employ thy Talent to Edification? Oh if we had more
weighty thoughts about the worth and danger of souls, we would not do the Lords
work so sleepily as usually we do, but as co-workers with God we would beseech
you with all earnestness not to receive the grace of God in vain, 2 Cor. 6.1.
Every advantage should be taken hold off; as a sinking, perishing man, if it be
but a bough in the waters catches at it, so should we press you to improve
all closer applications and Ministerial helps, and that with compassion and
tenderness, as having our selves been acquainted with the heart of a poor
impotent captive sinner.

THE COVENANT OF Redemption OPENED.
Isa. 53.10. When thou shall make his soul an offering for sin, he shall see
his seed, etc.


O Fall the Prophets, this Prophet Isaiah was the most Evangelical Prophet; (
Non tam Propheta dicendus est quam Evangelista. Ep. ad Paulam and Eustochium.
tom. 3. p. 9. Quanto Propheta hic aliis antecellit Prophetis, tanti haec ejus,
c. 53. edita Prophetia caeteris ejus praestare videtur oraculis. Mo^us. in
Praef. ad com. in c. 53. Isaiae.
Hierome calls him Isaiah the Evangelist) Of all the Prophesies of this
Prophet, that which you have in this Chapter, is the most Evangelical
Prophecy. I do not remember any one piece of Scripture in the Old Testament,
so often cited in the New Testament, as this 53. chapter of Isaiah, it being
cited there no less than eight or nine times.

The Eunuch you read of in the Gospel, was converted by a part of it; after God
by the Ministry of Philip, Acts 8.30, etc.
had opened his eyes to see Christ held out in it.

In the whole Chapter you have a most lively and full description and
representation of the humiliation, death and passion of Jesus Christ; which
indeed is so exact, and so consonant to what has fallen out since, that Isaiah
seems here rather to pen an History, than a Prophecy.

That Christ all along is here treated upon, Ingenue pros^^cor illud insum
c^put ad fidem Christianam me adduxisse; nam plus millies, illud caput perlegi,
etc. Joh. Is. Levit. vid. Horneb. contra. Jud. l. 6. c. 1. p. 408.
and not the sufferings of the Jewish state, I shall not now insist upon.
Philip when he had this Scripture before him, he preached Jesus, Acts 8.35. --
Christ brings it down to himself, Mark 9.12. -- And the matter of it is so
convictive, from that clear light that goes along with it, that several of the
Jews in the reading of this Chapter, have been brought over to the Christian
Religion, as not able to stand out against the light and evidence of it.

The time allotted for this exercise being but short, I must fall upon my work
presently.

I come to that Branch which I am to insist upon, When thou shall make his soul
an offering for sin, he shall see his seed, etc.

In the verse before you have Christ's innocence, he had done no violence,
neither was any deceit in his mouth; why then did he undergo so much? It
pleased the Lord to bruise him, and to put him to grief. How could the Father,
salva justitia, deal thus with an innocent person, and with his own Son too? I
answer, Christ had now put himself in the sinners stead, and was become his
(...), his surety, and so obnoxious to whatever the sinner had deserved in his
own person; and upon this the Father might, without any injustice, and actually
did, for the manifestation of the unsearchable riches of his wisdom and love,
bruise him and put him to grief. The Lord Jesus had no sin in him by inhaesion;
he was holy, harmless, undefiled, Heb. 7.26.
etc. but he had a great deal of sin upon him by imputation; He was made sin,
that knew no sin, that we might be made the righteousness of God in him. 2
Cor. 5.21.
It pleased Christ to put himself thus under our guilt, and therefore it
pleased the Father thus to bruise him.

If you ask further, what had Christ to encourage him either to, or in these
sufferings? Though there was infinite love in Christ to put him upon all this,
and to carry him thorough all this, yet there must be something more; you have
therefore here very precious Mr. B. looks upon these rather as Prophesies, than
as promises. Append. p. 39. Verse 10. Ver. 11. Ver. 12.
promises, made to Christ upon this his undertaking; as that, he should see his
seed, he should prolong his days, the pleasure of the Lord should prosper in
his hand, he should see the travel of his soul, and God would divide him a
portion with the great, and he should divide the spoil with the strong,
because he had poured out his soul unto death, etc.

This very briefly to clear up the Coherence of the words; I pass over the
various readings of them; and also what might be spoke for the explication of
them (that will come in afterward) because I hasten to that which is my
business this morning, namely, the opening of the Covenant of Redemption. You
have heard of the misery of man by Nature, of the inability of man to help
himself in this lost condition, etc. I am now to speak something to his
recovery or restoration, or rather to that which indeed is the foundation of
his recovery, and that is the Covenant here called, The Covenant of Redemption.

By which Covenant, I mean that faederal transaction that was betwixt God the
Father, and the Son from everlasting, about the Redemption of lost and fallen
man. Understand me here aright; I am not to speak to the Covenant of grace, but
to the Covenant of Redemption. We make a difference betwixt these two. It Is
true, the Covenant of Redemption is a Covenant of grace, but it is not strictly
and properly that Covenant of grace, which the Scripture holds out in
opposition to the Covenant of works; but rather the means to it, or foundation
of it. Amongst other things wherein these two Covenants do differ, this is one,
they differ in the faederati; for in the Covenant of Redemption, the faederati
are God and Christ; but in the Covenant of grace, the confederates are God and
Believers. I lay down this as my judgment with much submission, because I know
herein I differ from some of great repute, Masculus, etc. Dr. Preston, Mr.
Rutherford, Assemblyes greater Catech.
whom I very much honor in the Lord. The Lord Jesus I grant is the very kernel
and marrow of the Covenant of grace; the Mediator of this better Covenant, Heb.
12.24. the surety of this Covenant, Heb. 7.22. the Testator of this Covenant,
Hebr. 9.16, 17. The Messenger of this Covenant, Mal. 3.1. All this is very
clear; all that I say is this, that Christ is not the per^ona foederata, but
believers. The Covenant of Grace was not made with God and Christ, (as a common
head) but it is made with God and believers; and therefore whereas the promise
is said to be made to the seed, and that seed is Christ, Gal. 3.16. you are to
take Christ there not personally, but mystically as you have it taken, 1 Cor.
12.12. So also is Christ.

I only say this to clear up my way, Bulkely on the Cov. page 28, etc. Bl^ke on
the Cov. chapter 6. p. 24. Baxter, his Append. to his Aphor. p. 35, etc.
and therefore shall not lay down any Arguments for the confirmation of this
opinion; he that desires satisfaction in th is point, let him peruse the
Authors cited in the Margent. To the Business in hand:

The Covenant of Redemption (I say) is that foederal transaction, or mutual
stipulation that was betwixt God and Christ in the great work of man's
Redemption. I call it a foederal transaction, or mutual stipulation, because
therein lies the nature of a Covenant; it is (as Civilians define it) a mutual
stipulation or agreement betwixt Party and Party upon such and such Terms,
with Reciprocal Obligations each of the other.

That the business of Man's Redemption was transacted betwixt the Father and
the Son is very clear. Zech. 6.13. The Counsel of peace shall be betwixt them
both; the Counsel of Reconciliation: How man that is now an enemy to God, may
be reconciled to God, and God to him; (for whatever the Socinians say. the
Reconciliation is not only on the sinners part, but on Gods also) this Counsel
or Consultation shall be betwixt them both; (that is) Father and Son. I know
some interpret it of Christ's offices; the Priestly and the Kingly office of
Christ, both conspire to make peace betwixt God and man; but I rather take it
in the other sense.

That this transaction betwixt these two glorious persons, was also foederal,
or in the way of a Covenant, and that too from everlasting, is to me a very
great truth, (though I am not ignorant that some learned men are not so well
satisfied about it.)

For the Explication and Confirmation of this great mystery, I will lay down
these seven Propositions.

God the Father in ord^r to man's Redemption stands upon Satisfaction; the
sinner shall be justified, but first God will be satisfied. Man is now fallen
from that happy state wherein at first God made him, and by this fall he has
offered an affront to God, and wronged God (so far forth as he was capable of
such a thing;) in this case therefore God will have satisfaction, in the
Reparation of his Honor, in the Manifestation of his Truth, in the Vindication
of his Holin^sse and Justice. It Is true, He being the Personal laesa, he might
freely have remitted the offense, and done what he pleased; but supposito
decreto, (some go higher, even to Gods nature, which necessarily puts him upon
the punishment of sin.) I say, supposing Gods decree, he having decreed thus
and thus, and also threatened thus and thus, he will have satisfaction; and
therefore though he does in Election give such and such freely unto Christ; yet
for the carrying on, and execution of his purpose herein, he stands upon terms
for the satisfying of his justice, (which Attribute God will advance as well as
his Mercy; for all are alike dear to God) he will have an offering for sin in
an expiatory and propiatory way; a price and ransom shall be paid him down,
Isa. 33.10. ^ Tim. 2.6.
or the Captive shall never be released: And in order unto this, or for the
manifestation of this, you do not only read in Scripture of Election as to
believers, but also as to Christ, whom God calls his Elect, Isa. 42.1. The
Father chooses him, (...).
and sets forth, or ^ore-ordains him, as it is Romans 3.25. To make satisfaction,
without which fallen man shall not be taken into his favor again: who shall be
redeemed and justified, but in such a way that God may declare his
righteousness: The Apostle doubles his Expression as to this, To declare his
righteousness for the remission of sins; To declare I say his righteousness,
that he might be just, and the justifier of him which bel^eveth in Jesus, Romans
3.25, 26. You will have this great truth more fully insisted upon by another in
the carrying on of this exercise; I will here say no more to it.

To this he annexes many excellent, great and preci^us promises; that if Christ
would engage in this work, and undertake thus to satisfy, (for he alone could
do it) he would do thus and thus for him; as that he would fit him for the
work, own him and strengthen him in the work, succeed and prosper him in the
work, and then reward him for it. And all this the Father makes good to Christ.

1. He fits him for this work, both in a large effusion of the graces and gifts
of the Spirit upon him. John 3.34. God gives not the Spirit by measure unto
him. And also in the preparing of a body for him, Hebr. 10.5.

2. He strengthens him, and supports him in the work. Isa. 42.1. Behold my
servant (Christ is our Lord, but in the work of Redemption he was the Fathers
servant) whom I uphold; and therefore you find when Christ was put upon the
greatest trials, God gave in eminent succor to him; as in the case of
temptation, Matthew. 4.11. and in his agony in the Garden, Luke 22.43. And there
appeared an Angel unto him from heaven, strengthening of him. And certainly if
Christ had not had support and strength from the Godhead, he had never been
able to have bore up under, and carried thorough his terrible sharp work: You
find him encouraging himself, and acting faith upon this, that God would own
him, and stand by him in this undertaking. Isa. 50.7, 8, 9. The Lord God will
help me, therefore shall I not be confounded; Therefore have I set my face like
a flint, and I know that I shall not be ashamed; He is near that justifyeth me;
who will contend with me? Psalm. 16.8, etc. I have set the Lord always before
me, because he is at my right hand, I shall not be moved, etc.

3. Further, God the Father succeeds and prospers him in the work. When thou
shall make ^his soul an offering for sin, he shall see his seed, the pleasure
of the Lord shall prosper in his hand. This was promised, and also made good to
Christ in the numerous body of believers, past, present, and to come. I might
here enlarge upon a threefold gift which the Gospel holds forth* There Is the
Fathers gift, the Sons gift, and the Believers gift. The Fathers gift lies in
Election; such and such individual persons he gives to Christ; Thine they were,
and thou gave them me, John 17.6. We are a free gift to Christ in El^ction,
as Christ is a free gift to us in Redemption. The Sons gift lies in the giving
of himself for us, Who gave himself for us, that he might redeem us from all
iniquity, etc. Tit. 2.14. And then there is the Believers gift, and that is, he
gives up himself to Christ, to be ruled by Christ, disposed by Christ, saved by
Christ; he gives up himself to the Lord, 2 Cor. 8.5. The Father giving
believers to Christ, and promising that believers in time should also give
themselves to him, was a great encouragement to Christ to give himself for
believers; and if you read John 17. you shall see there, that Christ when he
had done his work, takes much notice of the accomplishment of this promise to
him, in believers (who are his seed) owning of him, and closing with him.

4. Lastly, God will and does reward Christ upon his undertaking to redeem man;
he tells him he shall not lose by it, His days shall be prolonged; Isa. 33.10.
( i. e. his Kingdom shall be set up in the world to endure for ever) God
would divide him a portion with the great, and he should divide the spoil with
the strong, because he has poured out his soul unto death. Ver. 12.
And many such promises you have made to Christ; Accordingly; God has exalted
him far above all principality and power, Ephesians. 1.21, 22.
has put all things under his feet, made him to be head over all things to the
Church, given him a Name which is above every name, that at the Name of Jesus
every knee should bow; Phil. 2.9.
and all because (to give satisfaction to his Father) he made himself of no
reputation, and became obedient unto death, Ver. 7.8.
even the death of the Cross. And thus you see what the Father demands, and
what he does indent and promise to his Son, in case he will engage in this
undertaking; not as if the Son was unwilling so to do, (you must not so
understand it) but the work being of such a nature, so hard, so grievous, it
pleased the Father thus to Treat with him.

The Lord Jesus Christ engages in the work, accepts of the terms and
conditions set before him, and undertakes to satisfy his Fathers demands. And
in order to satisfaction, (which God stands upon as you have heard before)
Christ is willing to fulfill the whole Law, which was the rule, or measure, or
standard for this satisfaction: God had been dishonored by the violation of
his Law, and the disobedience and nonperformance of it was that which kept God
and the sinner at a distance, and therefore he will only be satisfied and
reconciled upon the fulfilling of it; here is my Law says God, satisfy it,
and my justice is satisfied.

You must know this, that though a sinner as to himself, is justified upon the
terms of the Covenant of grace, yet as to his surety, he is justified upon the
Covenant of works; for the surety must pay the whole debt, and the Father will
bate him nothing.

Object. Where is then, some will say, the freeness of grace in the justifying
and acquitting of a sinner? if God will be satisfied to the utmost, what
becomes of mercy? if the surety pay the debt to the Creditor, is it any great
favor for the Creditor to let the debtor out of prison?

Sol. To this I answer, Free grace is very well consistent with full
satisfaction; and notwithstanding the latter the former is very glorious,
partly because God himself found out this way of satisfaction, partly because
God accepts it for the good of the sinner, as though he had made it in his own
person: That place of the Apostle is observable, Being justified freely by his
grace, through the Redemption that is in Jesus Christ, Romans 3.24.
Notwithstanding Redemption by Christ, yet we are justified freely; as freely as
though Christ had done and suffered nothing at all. But this is a digression.

I say, the Father demanding the fulfilling of the Law, Quod requi^it lex,
nempe tum plenam paenae reatibus nostris debitae luitione^ ut a condemnatione
liberemur; tum plenam legis praestatione^ ut ad aeternam vitam (...)
inveniamur, ex illa promissione, Hoc fac and vives. Beza.
Christ undertakes to do it; and therefore he willingly puts himself under this
Law. When the fullness of time was come, God sent forth his Son, made of a
woman, made under the Law, to Redeem them that were under the Law, that we
might receive the adoption of Sons, Gal. 4.4, 5. And he submits not only to
the duty of the Law, but also to the penalty of the Law; not only to do what
the Law enjoynes, but also to suffer what the Law threatens; and the former he
makes good by his active obedience, the latter by his passive obedience.

To open this a little further, Christ here does two things.

First, He undertakes to perform the whole moral Law; and therefore when he
comes into the world, his eye was upon this; Thus it becomes us to fulfill all
righteousness, Mat. 3.15. I am not come to destroy the Law, but to fulfill,
Mat. 5.17. And all this Christ did for our good, that the righteousness of the
Law might be fulfilled in us, Romans 8.4. a very convincing place for the
imputation of Christ's active obedience.

Secondly, Whereas a special Law was laid upon him, as he was our Meditour; he
is willing also to obey that in order to our redemption. That Christ should die
was no part of the moral law, but it was a positive special law laid upon
Christ; well, he makes it good: I lay down my life, this Commandment have I
received of my Father, Joh. 10.18. Christ as Mediator had a command from his
Father to die, and he observes it; And to be short, whatever the Father put him
upon in his whole Mediatory work, he did it all; so he tells us, I have
finished the work which thou gave me to d^, Joh. 17.4.

In this faederal transaction betwixt the Father and the Son, both parties were
free; here was no necessity, co-action, or any thing of this Nature, but both
were free.

The Father was free in his demands of satisfaction; he might have let man
alone in his state of guilt and wrath, he might have suffered all mankind to
have perished, and to be thrown into hell; he had been infinitely happy in
himself, though there had been no such thing as Redemption by Christ. It Is
true, without this, God had not had satisfaction to his justice, (for if Adam
and his posterity had burned in hell to all eternity, all would have been
nothing in a way of satisfaction) but there had not been the least diminution
of his essential glory and blessedness in himself.

The Son is free too on his part; he freely consents to the terms of this
Covenant; and in the fullness of time, freely engages in the making of them
good. Heb. 10.5. Lo I come to do thy Will, O God. Psalm. 40.8. I delight to do
thy Will, O God, yea, thy Law is within my heart. Ver. 6.
And therefore he says there, Mine ears have thou bored. As the servant in the
Law, when he was willing to stay with his Master, Exodus 21.6.
and to do his work, h^s ear was bored; so 'twas with Christ, he was willing
to serve his Father in this business, the greatest that ever was carried on in
the world, and therefore says he, Mine ears have thou bored. Christ was free
in all his obedience; and if it had not been free and voluntary, it would not
have been satisfactory or meritorious: whatever he did or suffered, it was from
love, not necessity. This truth is so evident from the whole current of the
Gospel, that I need not enlarge upon it.

Th se two persons in this blessed Covenant, they do mutually t^ust each other;
I say they do mutually trust each other, for their respective making good the
terms of this Covenant: the Father trusts the Son, and the Son trusts the
Father; the Father trusts the Son for the making of his soul an offering for
sin; the Son trusts the Father for the seeing of his ^eed: To bring th^s
assertion down to time; in the times of the Old Testament, the Father trusts
the Son; in the times of the New Testament, the Son trusts the Father. Before
the coming of Christ, the Father takes up the Patriarchs and others to heaven,
upon assurance of this, that Christ in the fullness of time, would take our
nature upon him, and therein make full satisfaction: Christ having promised to
do thus, the Father takes his word, and so takes up old Testament-believers to
glory. Since the coming of Christ, the Son now trusts his Father; for he has
offered up himself, paid down the full ransom, and yet he does not reap the
full benefit of it, many believers being not yet glorified; but he trusts his
Father, that one by one they all shall be so in due time. This may seem to be
but a notion. I confess we have no place of Scripture positively asserting
this, but the nature of the thing demonstrates it; for there being some
distance of time in what was to be done by both persons, there must be a mutual
trusting each of the other.

These two persons all along in their proper and peculiar transactions, they
deal each with the other as under a Covenant, and they hold each other to the
terms of the Covenant that was betwixt them. (Not that there is any question of
their breaking of it; but thus we may with an humble reverence conceive of it)
The Father holds the Son to the engagement on his part; he will not spare him,
or bate him any thing; satisfaction he will have to the utmost, though it cost
his life and blood; Romans 8 32.
And therefore you may observe the prayer of Christ, John 12.27. Father, save
me from this hour; he seems to check or recall himself, but for this cause
came I unto this hour: this is but that which I engaged to go through, and
therefore I must do it: And his Father answers him there accordingly. Ver. 28.
Father, glorify thy Name; (still Christ's eye was upon that, his Fathers glory)
well, says the Father, I have both glorified it, and will glorify it again:
He speaks thus not only upon the account of his Sovereignty, but of the
Covenant also that I am speaking to.

The Son also stands upon the terms of this Covenant; and therefore having
performed the conditions on his part, he now makes his claim both for himself
and his members, that the Father will make good the conditions on his part.
Father, says he, John 17.4, 5.
I have glorified thee on earth, I have finished the work which thou gave me
to do; And now, O Father, glorify thou me with thine own self, with the glory
which I had with thee before the world was. And for his members he speaks more
in the language of a Covenant; Verse 24.
Father, I will, that they also whom thou have given me, be with me where I am,
that they may behold my glory, etc. I will; not only I pray, or beseech, but I
will; I ask this as my right, by virtue of the Covenant betwixt us; I having
done thus and thus, it is but my due (for though glory is a gift to us, it is a
debt to Christ) and so I claim it, that those whom thou have given me, may be
with me in glory.

This federal transaction betwixt the Father and the Son, it was from all
eternity. Here lies the difficulty, and this is that which stumbles some; I Will
speak but a word to it. I say, this Covenant of Redemption; it was from all
eternity; it was not made when Christ was just coming into the world, but from
everlasting. Two Scriptures seem to hold out this, 2 Timothy 1.9. Who has saved
us, and called us with an holy calling; not according to our works, but
according to his own purpose and grace, which was given us in Christ Jesus
before the world began. Here is the purpose of God, here is grace given in
Jesus Christ; how? in the Covenant betwixt the Father and him; when was this
given? before the world began, (h. e.) from all eternity: So, Tit. 1.2. In hope
of eternal life, which God that cannot l^e, promised before the world began.
How was this life promised before the world begun, but in this everlasting
Covenant, wherein the Father promised unto Christ eternal life for all his seed?

I have been speaking to you of a very great mystery, of which the Scripture
speaks but little signanter; we have not the terms, but we have the sense and
substance of this Covenant of Redemption there laid down: If in any assertion I
have seemed too bold, I am very ready to take shame for i^. I am sorry my work
did lie in such an untrodden path, wherein I have but very few to give me any
direction. I will shut up all with a little Application.

And first, Application.
I would from hence stir you up to an high admiration of the great and infinite
love of God, of God the Father, of God the Son; what manner of love has the
God of Grace revealed in this Covenant! Love, that for the freeness of it, and
greatness of it, we should admire in this life, as we shall admire it in the
life to come. Both persons have discovered unconceivable love in this
transaction; Oh let both of them be admired with the highest admiration.

1. Admire the love of the Father; we are more apprehensive of the love of the
Son, than we are of the love of the Father. I would not speak any thing to
diminish the love of the Son; God forbid; Oh 'twas wonderful superlative love!
only I would heighten your apprehensions of the Fathers love in the great work
of our Redemption; Redemption was not only brought about by Christ, but the
Father had a great hand in it; therefore it is said, The pleasure of the Lord
shall prosper in his hand: And I have found a ransom; God so loved the world,
Isa. 53.10. Job 33.24. John 3.16.
that he gave his only begotten Son, etc. I might instance in several
particulars to set out the Fathers love in our Redemption; but take only that
which I have been upon: That the thoughts of God should be upon poor lost man,
so as to find out a way for his recovery; that he should call his Son, and
say, Come, let us consult together, (I speak after the manner of men) Is there
no way to be found that man may yet live? he is now obnoxious to me, and I
might throw him into hell; but may not I be satisfied, and he saved too? I am
not willing he should utterly perish. I say, that God should thus set his
thoughts on work for wretched man, and treat with his Son, and strike up a
Covenant with his Son, and therein lay such a foundation for man's recovery; let
Angels and men, and all creatures adore this love; and oh that you would return
love for love; return your drop for Gods Ocean. We must honor the Son as we
honor the Father, John 5.23.
and we must love the Father as we love the Son.

2. And then admire the love of the Son too; he is willing to engage in this
Covenant, he knew the terms of it, what the Redemption of man would cost him,
even his life and precious blood; yet for all this he willingly and freely
binds himself to redeem poor sinners, whatever it cost him. O the heights,
depths, breadths of this love! Ephesians. 3.18.
Blessed Jesus, that ever thou should consent to lay down thy life for me, to
wash away my sins in thine own blood, 1 John 3.16. Rev. 1.5.
to give thy soul as an offering for sin, upon this encouragement and motive,
that thou might s^e such a poor worm as I brought in to God, that thou
should set thy self as a Skreen betwixt Gods wrath and my poor soul, and do
and suffer ten thousand times more than what tongue can express, or heart
conceive! What shall I, what can I say to all this? but fall down, and wonder
at that Love which can never be Fathomed! So much for the first thing.

for the encouraging and strengthening of faith: Faith sometimes is ready to
question the blessings of the Covenant of Grace, and the Continuance or
Perpetuity of the Covenant of Grace; that is the great Foundation of Faith, and
when it staggers about that, it is very sad with the soul.

Now I Will lay down two things for the help of Faith.

1. The blessings of the Covenant are sure. 2. The Covenant of Grace it self is
sure.
First, The blessings of the Covenant are sure. They are called the sure
mercies of David, Isa. 55.3.
Isaiah 55.3. They are sure for Continuance, and they are sure for Performance.

1. For Continuance; common mercies are dying, perishing, uncertain things; but
Covenant mercies are stable, durable, lasting things. A great estate may come
to nothing, Prove. 23.5. Riches are uncertain things, Imaginaria in saeculo, and
nihil very. Tertul.
1 Timothy 6.17. And so in all worldly comforts, they are but a fashion, matters
of fancy, rather than of reality, and they pass away, 1 Cor. 7.31. But now
grace, pardon of sin, adoption, etc. these are blessings that abide for ever,
Romans 11.29.

2. They are sure also for performance; I mean, whatever blessing God has put
into this Covenant, (as it is full of blessings) all shall certainly be made
good to believers; otherwise God would not be faithful to his Covenant, which
certainly he will be; Men may be false in their Covenants to God, but God will
certainly be true in his Covenant to men. Heaven and Earth shall pass away,
rather than there shall be the least entrenchment upon Gods truth, in the not
performing of his Covenant.

Secondly, The Covenant of Grace is sure in it self; a Cov^nant firm,
unalterable, never to be broken; it is called an everlasting Covenant, Genesis
17.7. Hebr. 13.20. a Covenant that shall stand fast, Psalm. 89.28. a Covenant
ordered in all things, and sure, 2 Samuel 23.5. The Covenant of Grace is so
firmly ratified, that there can be no nulling of it.

1. God has ratified it by his Oath, Genesis 22.16. Hebr. 6.13, Si non credimus
Deo promittenti, at credamus Deo juranti. Hierom. Amant Scripturae pro pacto
ponere Testamentum. Aug.
14, 15, 16, 17, 18. His promise is enough, but surely h^s oath must put all
out of question; there is no room for unbelief, now God has sworn to it.

2. God has ratified it by the death of his Son: A man's last Will as soon as
he is dead, is in force, and cannot then be disanulled. The Covenant of Grace
is a Testamentary Covenant, which by the death of the Testator is so settled,
that there is no altering of it. Gal. 3.15, etc. Hebr. 9.15, 16.

Again, the Covenant of Grace is ratified by the seals which God has annexed
to it. What was sealed by the Kings ring could not be altered: Esther 8.8. God
has set his seal to this Covenant, his broad seal in the Sacraments, his privy
seal in the witness of his Spirit; and therefore it is sure, and cannot be
reverst.

And further than all this, it is ratified in and by that Covenant which has
been now opened; The Covenant of Redemption betwixt God and Christ, secures the
Covenant of Grace betwixt God and believers. What God promises us, he did
before promise unto Christ, and the F^ther would not make good his promise unto
Christ, if he should not make good his promises to the Saints. And therefore as
in other respects, so in this also, the Covenant may be said to be confirmed of
God in Christ, Gal. 3.17. with respect to that paction and stipulation that was
betwixt them.

I lay all this before you for the strengthening of your Faith, as to the
stability of the Covenant of Grace; so long as that Covenant stands, you are
safe; and you see there is no question but that Covenant will stand, which God
has set upon such firm pillars. This promise in the Text, He shall see his
seed, will assuredly bring every believer into heaven. O that faith might
triumph in the consideration of this, the Covenant of grace is sure. David's
Faith did so, when death was in his eye, and affliction in his eye; Yet he has
made with me an everlasting Covenant, ordered in all things, and sure; for this
is all my salvation, and all my desire, 2 Samuel 23.5. When Faith begins to
faint, look up to this Covenant, and reason thus; God will not alter his
promise to me, but to be sure he will not alter his promise to his Son. I may
fail in such and such conditions, but Christ has been faithful in all; every
child of God may take much comfort from this.

this Covenant of Redemption is to you. Here Is a blessed Covenant betwixt the
Father and the Son; how far are you and I interested in it, or like to receive
benefit by it? Was it universal that all men should have an equal share in it?
Some very learned men I know tell us of Pactum universale betwixt the Father
and the Son; Daven. de morte Christi, etc.
but I crave leave to differ from them.

1. Because that which they make their Pactum universale, is rather a
Proposition or a Promise, than a Covenant; as he that believes shall be saved.

2. I know not how to believe that there should be a solemn Covenant betwixt
the Father and the Son, upon which never any man should be the better; Did ever
any sinner get any thing by this universal Covenant?

3. We may preach the Gospel to all upon an indefinite Proposition, He that
believes shall be saved; and we need not to assert an universal Covenant, for
the universal preaching of the Gospel. This was the great reason that prevailed
with these worthy men to assert such a Covenant. I know no Covenant but that
special Covenant into which the seed of Christ were only taken. I am loath to
fall into the dusty road of Controversies; all along in this Discourse, where
I could not avoid them, I have but just crossed them over, and so presently
fallen in again into some more quiet and private way.

Passing by therefore this universal Covenant of men more moderate, and the
universal Redemption of others who go higher; I shall only lay down that which
I judge to be a great truth, viz. That it is the Elect only who are concerned in
this Covenant: Such and such persons there were, ( individually considered)
whom God the Father in his Electing love does freely give to Christ; for these,
and only for these, does the Lord Jesus engage to lay down his life: Redemption
on the Sons part shall be no larger than Election on the Fathers part, that
there may be a perfect Harmony and Agreement betwixt them in their love.

So then Beloved, if you would draw down comfort to your selves from this
Covenant, you must find out this, that you are the Elect of God, chosen of him
to be Vessels of his mercy before the world was; Christ undertook to give his
life only for those whom the Father had first given to him; these he only
prayed for, and therefore surely these he only died for.

You Will say I put you upon a very difficult search; it is true, it is very hard
for a man to know his Election, but yet it may be known; otherwise the Apostle
would never have urged this as a duty upon Christians, To make their Election
sure, 2 Pet. 1.10. Paul knew that the Thessalonians were elected of God, 1 Thessalonians. 1.4. And he did not know it by Revelation only; No, he gives another
account of it; he knew it by way of inference from what he saw of God in them:
Ver. 5. For our Gospel came not to you in Word only, but also in Power, and in
the Holy Ghost, etc. If Election may be known by others, why not by our selves?

I grant a part ante, so it cannot be known, so the book is cl^sped and
sealed, and none can open it, Rev. 5.3, 5.
but the Lion of the Tribe of Judah; but a part post, by such and such effects
and operations upon the heart, so it may be known.

Several of these might be set before you out of the Word, but I Will only
instance in the grace of Faith. He that believes, is certainly in the number of
Gods Elect, he is a chosen Vessel of mercy. All the Elect shall believe, sooner
or later they shall close with Christ upon the terms of the Gospel. John 6.37.
All that the Father gives me (there is Election) shall come to me. (there is
Faith) Acts 13.48. As many as were ordained to eternal life, believed. None but
the Elect can savingly believe.

The sum of all then for the clearing up of your interest in this Covenant of
Redemption is this, Have you the precious Faith of Gods Elect? Are your hearts
wrought up to a blessed accepting of Christ? Tit. 1.1.
Have you ever had such a sense of sin and guilt, and misery, as to go out of
your selves, and only to rest upon the Lord Christ? Do you venture your souls
upon his all-sufficient merits? And is this Faith a working Faith, an heart-
purifying Faith, a sin- mortifying Faith, James 2.14.
a world- overcoming Faith? a Faith that closes with Christ as a Lord, Acts
15.9. 1 John 5.4.
as well as a Savior? a Faith that is for obedience, as well as privilege? Oh
you that have this Faith, go away in peace, be of good comfort; This
everlasting Covenant betwixt the Father and the Son is yours, your good was
promoted and secured in this Treaty and foederal Engagement. How much does this
Covenant speak for the benefit of believers? if you be such, it is all yours. By
it you are already brought into a state of Grace; by it you shall hereafter be
brought into a state of glory. Upon this Covenant Christ now sees you as his
seed, upon this Covenant you shall hereafter see him as your Savior face to
face unto Eternity. To this Father, to this Son, with the Holy Spirit be glory
for evermore.

THE COVENANT OF GRACE.
Heb. 8.6. But now has he obtained a more excellent ministry, by how much also
he is the Mediator of a better Covenant, which was established upon better
promises.


THE general design of this Epistle, is my special design in this Text, viz. to
demonstrate to you, that you live under the best of gracious dispensations;
that Jesus Christ our deservedly adored Mediator of the New Covenant, has
obtained a more excellent Ministry; and by the faithful discharge of that
Ministry, more excellent benefits than either Moses, the Messenger-Mediator, or
the Levitical Priests, the Stationary-Mediators of the Old Covenant.

But now] now is not here a note of time, but of opposition; as in Romans 7.17.
now then] i. e. after the Law received; so Grotius; or if you will have it to
note the time, it is the time of the Gospel, this last time.

Has he obtained] not by usurpation, but by election; he has of divine grace
freely received Anselm.
.

A more excellent ministry] (...), a Minister, is he that does something at the
command of another, Heb. 1.7. and so it is said of Magistrates, Romans 13.6. they
are Gods Ministers; but it is chiefly spoken of the Priests, Nehemiah 10.39. The
Priests that minister; because they offer those things that God requires, they
are said to minister, Exodus 28.35, 43. Christ's ministry is more excellent
thatn the Levitical; he executes it partly on earth, and partly in heaven; but
he amplifies the excellency, chiefly from the excellency of the Covenant
Paraeus.
; and therefore it follows,

[By how much also he is the Mediator of a better Covenant;] If you take the
old Covenant for the whole dispensation under the old Testament, as well
Gospel-promises as those things which are more strictly legal; then we may
truly say, he old and new Covenant, are for substance the same; and therefore
the Comparison relates rather to the form, than to the matter of the Covenant
Calvin.
. The Covenant of grace is dispensed with more latitude, clearness, and power
of the Holy Ghost D^odate.
; and therefore it may be called a better Covenant.

Which was established upon better promises.] (...). Chrysostom. He names that which
may most affect them with joy, in saying it is established upon better
promises. All Cove^ants consist in promises. The Covenants of Kings and Princes
amongst themselves; consist in promises, of either not hurting, or helping one
another; the Covenants of Princes and people consist in promises; the Prince
promises justice, clemency, and defense; the people promise love, obedience,
and gratitude; so in the Covenant of grace, the first and chief part, whereof
is [I will be thy God, and of thy seed] and we promise faith, obedience, and
worship; the promises of the Old Covenant run more upon temporal good things;
the promises of the New Covenant, are chiefly remission of sins, sanctification
by the Spirit, etc. and the Covenant is said to be established; the word is
(...), q. d. Legislatum. Law and Covenant are joined together in Scripture;
They kept not the Covenant of God, and refused to walk in his Law, Psalm. 78.10.
The New Covenant contains certain precepts, which every one must obey that
will obtain the promise. Thus you have the meaning of the words; The
[Observation] I shall commend to you, is this.

The Gospel Covenant (or the new Covenant) is the best Covenant that ever God
made with man.

I will not stay you long in the general notion of a Covenant; the word
sometimes signifies an absolute promise of God, without any restipulation; as
Gods engagement to Noah, Genesis 9.11. And I will establish my Covenant with you,
neither shall all flesh be cut off any more, by the waters of a flood, neither
shall there any more be a flood to destroy the earth. Whatever man's carriage
shall be, God promises that he will no more drown the world. So the promise of
perseverance, Heb. 8.10. This is the Covenant that I will make with the house
of Israel after those days, says the Lord; I will put my Laws into their
minds, and write them in their hearts: and I will be to them a God, and they
shall be to me a people. Our perseverance does not lean upon imperfect grace,
but upon divine favor; but I wave this, and shall speak of Covenants, as they
note the free promise of God, with restipulation of our duty Camero.
.

A Covenant is, amicus status interfaederatos; so Martin. a friendly state
between Allies; 'pray 'consider the several Covenants the Scripture mentions,
and they are three; namely the Natural, Legal, and Gospel Covenant; the Natural
commonly called the Covenant of Works, that flourished till the first sin; the
Legal Covenant that flourished till the Ascension of Christ, and the pouring
out of the holy Ghost upon the Apostles, though it began to languish from John's
preaching, and began to grow old throuhout the course of Christ's Mini^try; the
Gosp l Covenant that flourishes from Christ till the end of the world.

I shall speak but little of the first, something more of the second, but dwell
upon the last.

1. The Natural Covenant, is that whereby God by the right of Creation, does
require a perfect obedience of all mankind, and promises a most blessed life
in Paradise to those that obey him, and threateneth eternal death to those that
disobey him, that it may appear to all how he loves righteousness and
holiness; how he hates impiety and wickedness. In this Covenant I shall
consider but these three things.

1. Gods condiscention, that he would enter into Covenant with man; God was at
liberty whether he would create man or not; and when God had made this glorious
Fabric, there could be no engagement upon him, besides his own goodness to
keep it from ruin. Matthew. 20.15. Is it not lawful for me to do what I will
with mine own? but man having an understanding, and will, to comprehend, and
observe, the Laws given him, had a natural obligation to duty, which can no way
be dissolved; there is no power in heaven or earth can disoblige man from
loving and obeying God. Now that God will deal with man not summo jure, not
imperiously, and threateningly; but magna comitate, that God will deal with
man, as with his friend; and though he may give what Laws he will, yet he will
give none but what are easy, and yet make them more easy, by bountifully
rewarding an easy obedience; this speaks wonderful condiscention.

2. The second thing considerable in the Natural Covenant is man's duty, which
consisted in the knowledge, and love of God; whence would have proceeded piety
to God, justice and love to man, this was man's natural duty; for we must
distinguish the duty from the Symbol of duty. Natural duty consists in those
things that are good in their own nature, and not in those things that are only
good because God commands them; the Law about the forbidden fruit, was only for
the trial of man's obedience; for had not the divine command intervened, it
would have been as lawful for man to have eaten of that Tree, as any other Tree
in Paradise; but,

3. The last thing I shall mention concerning this Natural Covenant, is the
Promise of Reward; now that consisted in a perpetual life, flowing with all
manner of good things, agreeable to the soul and body of man in that perfect
estate.

2. The second Covenant was the Legal; now the Legal Covenant, is that whereby
God did r^quire of the people of Israel, obedience to the Moral, Ceremonial and
Judicial Law; and to that obedience, he promised all sorts of blessings in the
Land of Canaan; and to the dis bedient, he denounced most severe curses and
death; and all to this end, that he might bring them to the future Messiah.

Here I shall propose the same considerations, as in the former Covenant; only
something more. Therefore consider:

1. Gods condiscention is singularly observable, that ever he would enter into
another Covenant with man when the first was broken; this Moses uses as a
mighty Argument to persuade Israel to observe the Covenant, Deuteronomy. 4. from the
32. to the 40. verse. Ask now of the days that are past, which were before
thee, since the day that God created man upon earth; and ask from the one side
of heaven unto thie other, whether there has been any such thing as this great
thing is, or has been heard like it. Did ever people hear the voice of God
speaking out of the midst of the fire, as thou have heard, and live? Or has
God assayed to go and take him a Nation from the midst of another Nation, by
temptations, by signs, and by wonders, and by war, and by a mighty hand, and
by a stretched-out arm, and by great terrors, according to all that the Lord
your God did for you in Egypt before your eyes, etc. thou shall therefore keep
his Statutes, and his Commandments, which I command thee this day, that it may
go well with thee, and thy children after thee, etc.

2. Consider man's duty in the Legal Covenant, and that is obedience to the
moral Law; to which was added the Ceremonial Law, for a Rule and Direction in
the worship of God; and the Judicial Law, which was their divine policy for the
government of the State.

All these are comprehended in the ten Commandments; but the more-particular
their directions were, the more plain was their duty; and the truth is, it was
but need that they should have particular direction, when their Legal Covenant
neither admitted of faith in the Redeemer, nor repentance of sin; for pardon of
sin, and curse for sin are inconsistent. Gal. 3.10. As many as are of the works
of the Law, are under the Curse; for it is written, Cursed is every one that
continues not in all things which are written in the book of the Law, to do
them; As many as depend upon the works of the Law for Justification, are under
the curse; and the Law discovered no other way of Justification but by Works.

3. The third thing considerable in the Legal Covenant, is the promise that God
made to those that obeyed it, and that was perpetual happiness in the Land of
Canaan.

[By the way to prevent mistakes, I do not say, neither will the Scripture at
all warrant any such assertion, as that the Fathers under the Old Testament had
only temporal promises; they had salvation promised them, and pardon of sin
promised them; but thanks to the Gospel for those promises; the Apostle tells
us, Gal. 3.17. The Covenant that was confirmed before of God in Christ, the Law
which was four hundred and thirty years after, cannot disannull, that it
should make the promise of none effect; the Morning Star of the Gospel Covenant
that shone upon Abraham four hundred and thirty years before the Legal
Covenant was given, did shine thorough that dark dispensation.]

But to speak of the Legal promises as L^gal, so they are of temporal good
things, and they were made to works, not to faith; Romans 4.4. To him that
works is the reward not reckoned of grace, but of debt.

4. The fourth thing considerable in this Covenant which had no place at all in
the former, is a Mediator; Now the Mediator of the Covenant strictly legal was
Moses; for That needed only a mere man, it not admitting of satisfaction, nor
reconciliation, of mercy, nor pardon; Moses might serve as a Messenger to make
known the mind of God unto the people. Deuteronomy. 5.5. I stood b^tween the Lord and
you at that time, to show you the Word of the Lord; in the Natural Covenant,
communion with God was natural unto man, and so there needed no Mediator. In
the Legal Covenant, man was rather considered, as what he should be, than what
he was; and so a mere man was able in the name of the people to promise
obedience, and in the name of God to promise a reward, and this Moses did; you
have both very plain in Deuteronomy. 5. The people do as it were say, Go to God from
us upon this Errand; Ver. 27. Go thou n^ar, and hear all that the Lord our God
shall say, and speak thou unto us all that the Lord our God shall speak unto
thee, and we will hear it, and do it; and God does as it were say, Go, dismiss
them with this blessing if they will be obedient: Ver. 28.29, 30. And the Lord
heard the voice of your words when ye spoke unto me, I have heard the voice of
the words of this people which they have spoken unto thee, they have well said
all that they have spoken; O that there were such an heart in them that they
would fear me, and keep all my Commandments always, that it might be well with
them, and with their children for ever; Go say to them, Get you into your Tents
again; q. d. If they will keep their promise, assure them I will keep mine, and
thus much concerning the Covenant strictly Legal.

3. The third Covenant is the G^spel-Covenant, and here Beloved, here is (2 Samuel 23.5.) the Everlasting Covenant, ordered in all things, and sure; This is
all our salvation, and all our desire: Here is the better Covenant, established
upon better promises! But I must explain it, before I admire it: The Gospel
Covenant is that whereby God upon the condition propounded of faith in Christ,
promises remission of sins in his blood, and a heavenly life, and that for
this end, that he might show forth the riches of his mercy Camero.
.

Here I shall propose the same considerations as in the former Covenant, only
still something more, and more comfortably considerable; in the consideration
of the persons contracting, namely, God and man, according to the proposed
method.

1. Consider Gods gracious condescension. And now Beloved, that I have named
Gods gracious condescension, were my heart but duly affected with it, it would
constrain me to stop, and put in a large Parenthesis of admiration before I
should speak a word more. Will God after the loss of the natural communion,
wherein he created man; will God, when man d^eads his Majesty, and trembles at
his revenging justice; will God then as a merciful Father, enter into a
Covenant of peace with poor undone sinners, affrighted with the sense of sin
and wrath! O the incomprehensible ^ondescention of such unsearchable riches of
grace! that grace should abound according to sins abounding, when sin overflow
d all its banks; that God should make a way thorough the deep into the heavenly
Canaan, never can we enough admire such Extasying grace! This is the first
thing considerable.

2. The second thing considerable, is the duty which God requires in this
Gospel Covenant, and that is Faith; faith whereby we embrace the remedy offered
us: We want a pardon, and nothing but faith can receive it; we want perfect
Righteousness, and nothing but faith can furnish us with it; we want that
which may make this Covenant effectual to us, and make it a blessing to us, and
nothing can do any of these things but faith; faith is the Antecedent
Condition, for which the Reward is given.

3. The third thing considerable in the Gospel Covenant, is the promise: Now
the promise of the Gospel Covenant is comprehended in the word Salvation;
therefore the Gospel is called the salvation of God: Acts 28.28. And this is
the great business of Christ to be a Savior; Isa. 49.6. That thou may be my
salvation to the end of the earth; when the Angels preached the Gospel, they
thought they could not express their news in better language, than to tell
people of salvation; that must needs be great joy to all people. In short, when
Gospel Ministers come clad with garments of salvation, as Heralds do with the
garments of their Office, then Saints may well shout aloud for joy, Psalm.
132.16. Now this promise of salvation contains all Gospel promises in it, but
they are reduced to these four.

1. Justification; this is a privilege which other Covenants were unacquainted
with; and without this what would become of poor sinful man? And this may well
be the first great Gospel promise; I might name, not some Verses, but whole
Chapters to prove it. Romans 4. and 5. Gal. 3. and 4. but in a word, if you would
know the preciousness of this promise, Ask those that have but felt what sin
is, and they will tell you.

2. The second promise contained in Gospel salvation, is Sanctification. Romans
8.2, 3, 4. The Law of the Spirit of life in Christ has made me free from the
Law of sin and death; for what the Law could not do in that it was weak through
the flesh, God sending his own Son in the likeness of sinful flesh, and for
sin condemned sin in the flesh, that the righteousness of the Law might be
fulfilled in us, who walk not after the flesh, but after the Spirit: q.d. The
efficacy and power of the sanctifying Spirit which gives life to believers,
frees us from the tyranny of sin and death; and whereas the Law by reason of
the corruption of our nature, could not make us pure and perfect, but rather
kindled than extinguished corruption; God has clothed his Son with our flesh,
to take away the guilt and power of sin, that his perfect righteousness might
be imputed to us, and fulfill^d by us; that we might not live according to the
motion of our sinful nature, but according to the motion of his holy Spirit.

3. The third promise, is the resurrection of the body: You know the penal^y of
sin, is the death of soul and body; though the soul be immortal, yet its being
miserable for ever, may sadly be called an Eternal death: Now let the guilt of
sin be abolished, and you do therewith abolish the punishment of it; for gu^lt
is only an obligation to punishmen^; let sin be pardoned, and the sinner is
freed from death; and though believers dye, yet it is as a corn of wheat falls
into the ground, they thereby ob^ain a multiplied life. John 6.54. Whosoever eats
my flesh, and drinke^h my blood, has Eternal life, and I will raise him up at
the last day.

4. The last promise is Eternal life, a spiritual, blessed, and immortal life
in heaven. John 3.16. God so loved the world, that he gave his only begotten
Son, that whosoever believes in him should not perish, but have Everlasting
life: The Covenant of Grace is excellent fitted to bring us to the chiefest
good: Now the chiefest good consists in communion with God; that was broken by
sin, and can never be perfectly recovered, till sin be abolished; therefore
when the guilt of sin is taken away by Justification; and the filthiness of
sin is taken away by Sanctification; and the penalty of sin taken away by
Resurrection; then, what can hinder our communion with God? when we have once
obtained perfect holiness, nothing can hinder us of perfect happiness. Thus
you have the promise of the Gospel Covenant, which was the third considerable
in it.

4. The fourth thing to be considered in the Gospel Covenant, is the Mediator
of this better Covenant, and that is Jesus Christ, God-man blessed for ever,
through his dignity he has purchased salvation. Hebr. 9.12, 14. By his own
blood he entered in once into the holy place, having obtained Eternal Redemption
for us; how much more shall the blood of Christ, who through the Eternal Spirit
offered himself without spot to God, etc. And he is not only the Author of
Eternal salvation by his merit and efficacy, but the most absolute example and
pattern to us, how we should walk that we may obtain his purchased salvation.
Romans 8.29. God did predestinate us to be conformable to the Image of his Son,
that he might be the first born among many brethren. 1 Cor. 15.49. And as we
have born the Image of the Earthly, we shall also bear the Image of the
heavenly. And this is the only Covenant whereof Christ is Mediator; the first
Covenant needed no Mediator; the Old Covenant as Legal, take it without its
sprinkling of Gospel, and so chiefly Moses, but in all respects mere men were
Mediators; but of the New Covenant Christ was Mediator; but this I shall leave
to be enlarged by another.

5. The fifth thing to be considered in the Gospel Covenant, is the efficacy of
it. I did not so much as mention the efficacy of the former Covenants; for
there was never so much as any one made happy by them; it is sadly true, that
the threatenings of punishment for the neglect of duty took hold of them; the
threatenings seemed plainly to belong to the nature of those Covenants; but in
the Gospel Covenant it is otherwise; for it is said, John 3.36. (...) abides]
which shows that the wrath was brought upon them by the violation of the former
Covenant, he speaks as of that which was upon them already.

[But yet mistake not, as if refusing the Gospel were no sin, or not punished;
they sin more grievously, that sin against Gospel love, than they that sin only
against Legal goodness; but wrath does not properly belong to the Essence of
the Gospel.]

Thus you have the first thing I undertook, namely, the nature of the Covenant
positively considered; the second is the comparative excellency of the New
Covenant above others: I will be brief in showing its excellency above the
Covenant of Works, more large in showing you how it is better than the Old
Covenant of Grace.

[Only suppose, to prevent mistakes, that each Covenant is in its own kind most
perfect, and most accommodated to the state of the people, and to the purposes
for which they were instituted.

This premised:]

First, The New Covenant of Grace is better than the Covenant of Nature; I
forbear to speak of the agreement and diff^rence of them, I shall speak only of
the excellency of this better Covenant.

1. The Covenant of Works was a Declaration of Gods Justice, than which nothing
can be more terrible to a guilty sinner; but the Covenant of Grace is a
Declaration of Gods mercy in Christ, and let the overwhelmed conscience speak,
is not this better?

2. The Foundation of the Covenant of Works, was the Creation of man, and the
integrity of his nature; the Foundation of the Covenant of Grace, is man's
Redemption by Jesus Christ.

3. The Promise of the Covenant of Works, was eternal life in Paradise; the
Promise of the New Covenant, is eternal life in Heaven.

4. The Covenant of Works had no Mediator, no possibility of recovering the
least slip; the New Covenant is ratified in the blood of the Son of God; it is
composed on purpose for our relief Camero.
: Thus the New Covenant is better than the Covenant of Works.

Secondly, The Gospel Covenant is better than the Old Covenant of Grace.
Beloved, you may observe, I do not say better than the Covenant strictly Legal;
but better than the whole Dispensation which the Jews, and all other Believers
lived under, before Christ's Incarnation; better than the Old Doctrine of
spiritual grace delivered by Moses and the Prophets, openly promising Eternal
life unto the Fathers; and the Dull people of the Jews, under the condition of
perfect obedience to the Moral Law, together with the intolerable burdens of
Legal rights, and yoke of most straight Mosaical policy; but covertly under the
condition of repentance, and faith in the future Messiah, prefigured in the
shadows and types of Ceremonies, that by this form of Divine worship and
policy, a stiff-necked people might partly be tamed, and partly be brought to
Christ, that lay hid under those Ceremonies. So that in short you see the Old
Testament, or the Old Covenant, (for by a Metonymie they are chiefly one and
the same thing; and the Apostle plainly so expresses himself, 2 Cor. 3.14.
Until this day remains the same veil untaken away in the reading of the Old
Testament, which veil is done away in Christ; and this) contains these three
things.

1. The old kind of doctrine which was openly and principally Legal; covertly,
and less principally, Evangelical.

2. The old way of worship, and Legal Priesthood.

3. That Mosaical policy which was tied to one people Paraeus.
.

This Covenant was made by God to Adam, presently after the fall, G n. 3.15.
afterward to Abraham and his posterity, Genesis 17.1, 2, 7, 8. The symbol of this
Covenant was circumcision; from verse 10. to the 14. I forbear further
particularising to whom it was often renewed and confirmed, whereupon it is
called the Covenants, Romans 9.4. Ephesians. 2.12. Now the New Covenant of
Reconciliation to God by Christ exhibited in the flesh, is the better Covenant.
The Gospel is the Table of the New Testament, long divinio^ quam smaragdina
Hermetis, far beyond the Emerauld Table of Hermes, which the Chemists vainly
boast to yield the Philosophers stone to enrich all persons; and the Panacea
that cures all diseases; here is the elect and precious stone. 1 Pet. 2.6 Crocii
Syntag.
. But I will come to particulars, only premising this Caution.

Caution.
Let not any thing I shall say be interpreted as if I put an hostile contrariety
between the Old Covenant and the New; in spiritual practice they yield
spiritual help to each other; Justin Martyr says, that grace is not according
to the Law, nor against the Law, but above the Law; therefore they are not
adversa, but diversa; the Gospel in Scripture, is called the Law, Isa. 2.3.
only it is the Law of faith, Romans 3.27. and the Law of the Spirit, Romans 8.2.
therefore when we advance the Gospel, Romans 3.31. do we then make void the Law
through faith? God forbid, yea, we establish the Law. Gal. 3.21. Is the Law
then against the promises of God? God forbid; for if there had been a Law
given, which could have given life, v^rily righteousness should have been by
the law.

The believers in the Old Testament, were saved by the free mercy of God in
Christ. Gerhar. l. c.
Heb. 9.15. He is the Mediator of the New Testament, and by means of death, for
the Redemption of the transgressions that were under the first Testament, they
which are called, might receive the promise of eternal inheritance. And their
Sacraments and ours, Maccov. l. c.
sealed the same thing, 1 Cor. 10.3, 4. They did all eat the same spiritual
meat, and did all drink the same spiritual drink, for they drank of that
spiritual Rock that followed them, and that Rock was Christ.

This premised, I shall now show you the excellency of the Gospel Covenant.

1. The Gospel Covenant is a better Covenant than the Legal, in respect of its
Original, and manner of patefaction; it is true, they have both one principal
efficient cause; but the Law may in some sort be known by nature; it was
written in man's heart at the first, and the character is not wholly worn out;
Romans 2.15. The Gentiles show the work of the Law written in their hearts; but
now the Gospel was immediately manifested from God to the Church alone. Joh.
1.18. No man has seen God at any time; the only begotten Son, which is in the
bosom of the Father, he has declared him. Mat. 16.16, 17. And Simon Peter
answered, and said, Thou art Christ the Son of the living God; and Jesus
answered, and said unto him, Blessed art thou Simon Bar-Jona: for flesh and
blood has not revealed it unto thee, but my Father which is in heaven; It so
far transcends the capacity of humane reason, that reason cannot so much as
approve of it, Gerhard. Alting.
when it was revealed, without inward illumination, and persuasion of the Holy
Ghost; 1 Cor. 2.9, 10, 14, 15. Eye has not seen, nor ear heard, neither has
it entered into the heart of man, the things which God has prepared for them
that love him; but God has revealed them unto us by his Spirit; for the Spirit
searches all things, yea, the deep things of God; but the natural man
receives not the things of the Spirit of God, for they are foolishness unto
him; neither can he know them, because they are spiritually discerned; but he
that is spiritual, judges all things; and hereupon it is called the N^w
Covenant; not in respect of the time, that it had no being before the
incarnation of Christ, but in respect of the knowledge of it; the knowledge of
the Legal Covenant was born with us, and it was fore-known to nature; but the
Gospel Covenant was who^ly new, revealed from the bosom of the Father, it was
administered by new Officers, confirmed by new Sacraments, let into the hearts
of people by new pourings out of the Spirit; therefore the Apostle prays,
Ephesians. 1.17, 18. Maccovius.
That the God of o^r Lord Jesus Christ, the Father of glory, may give unto you
the Spirit of wisdom, and revelation in the knowledge of him; the eyes of your
understanding being enlightened, that ye may know what is the hope of his
calling, and what the riches of the glory of his inheritance in the Saints. God
would never have instituted the Legal Covenant but for the Gospels sake, Galat.
3.24. Wher^fore the Law was our Schoolmaster to bring us unto Christ; The Law
was a sharp Schoolmaster, by means whereof, the refractory and contumacious
minds of the Jewish people might be tamed; for Romans 10.4. Christ is the end of
the Law for righteousness to ev^ry one that believes.

2. The Gospel Covenant is better than the Legal, in respect of the manner of
it; the Law was a Doctrine of works, commanding and prescribing what we should
be, and what we should do; Gal. 3.12. And the Law is not of faith, but the man
that does them, shall live in them. But now the Gospel requires faith in Christ
for righteousness and salvation. Romans 3.21. But now the righteousness of God
without the Law is manifested; therefore says Augustine, faith obtaines what
the Law commands: we have no help from the Law Gerhard.
; the condition of the Law is simply impossible; it finds us sinners, and
leaves no place for repentance Camero.
; and notwithstanding the sprinkling of Gospel that there was with the Law, yet
it was but obscure. And that shall be the next particular.

3. The Gospel Covenant is better than the Legal, in respect of the manner of
holding forth Christ in it; though the Gospel is one and the same whereby all
Saints are saved in all times; for there was not one way of salvation then, and
another since. Acts 10.43. To him give all the Prophets witness, that through
his Name, whosoever believes in him, shall receive remission of sins. Yet
the Doctrine of the Gospel was more obscure in the Old Testament; Umbratili and
per se inefficaci ceremoniarum observatione. etc. Amyrald.
partly through Prophesies of things a great way off, and partly through types;
Christ was wrapped up in shadows, and figures; in the Gospel, the body of those
shadows, and the truth of those types is exhibited; the Land of Canaan was a
type of heaven; Israel according to the flesh, was a type of Israel according
to the Spirit; the spirit of bondage, of the spirit of Adoption; the blood of
the Sacrifices, of the blood of Christ; the glory of divine grace was reserved
for Christ's coming; they had at most but starre-light before Christ's coming *.
When Christ first came, it was but daybreak with them; Christ was at first but
as a morning star, 2 Pet. 1.19. though soon after he was as the sun in the
firmament, Mal. 4.2. The Apostle says, Heb. 10.1. The Law having a shadow of
good things to come, and not the very image of the things; and in this respect
it was that the Apostle says, the Gospel was promised to the Fathers, but
performed to us, Romans 1.1, 2. It was hid to them, and revealed to us, Romans
16.25, 26. and not only by fulfilling of Prophesies, which we may see by the
comparing of Scripture, but by the Spirit, Ephesians. 3.5. The mystery of Christ in
other ages, was not made known unto the Sons of men, as it is now revealed unto
his holy Apostles, and Prophets by the Spirit; They had but a poor discovery of
Christ, but we have the riches of this mystery made known unto us, Col. 1.26,
27 Alting.
. The old Covenant leads to Christ, but* it is a great way about; the Gospel
Covenant goes directly to him; their Ceremonies were numerous, b^rdensome, and
obscure; those things that represent Christ to us, are few, easy, and clear
Synops. pur. Theol.
.

4. The Gospel Covenant is the better Covenant, in respect of the form of it,
the promises are better promises; the promises of the Law are conditional, and
require perfect obedience. Lev. 18.5. Ye shall therefore keep my statutes and
my judgments, which if a man do, he shall live in them; the condition you see
is impossible. Beloved, 'pray 'mistake not; there is express mention of
eternal life in the Old Testament, Isa. 45.17. Israel shall be saved in the
Lord with an everlasting salvation; ye shall not be ashamed, nor confounded,
world without end. Dan. 12.2. Many of them that sleep in the dust of the earth
shall awake; some to everl^sting life, and some to shame and everlasting
contemp; and that the Law cannot save us, that is accidental, in respect of our
d^filement with sin, and our weakness that we cannot fulfill the condition.
Romans 7.12. The law is holy, and the Commandment holy, and just, and good; and
it is the Word of life. Acts 7.38. Who received the lively Oracles to give unto
us; and the Apostle brings in Abraham and David for examples of Justification
by faith, Romans 4.6, 13. but yet their promises were chiefly temporal; we have
the promise of temporal good things in the New Testament, as well as they in
the Old, only with the exception of the Cross. Mark 19.29, 30. Verily I say
unto you, There is no man that has left house, or brethren, or sisters, or
fathers, or mother, or wife, or children, or lands, for my sake, and the
Gospels, but he shall receive an hundred fold, now in this time, houses, and
brethren, and sisters, and mothers, and children, and lands, with persecutions;
that was the exception, with persecution.

We have three notable advantages in our temporal promises, beyond what they
had in theirs.

1. The Old Covenant had special promises of temporal good things in the Land
of Canaan, for the preserving of their Mosaical policy, until the time of the
Messiah to be born of that people; promises of long life, etc. The New Covenant
has promises of all good things necessary, without any such clog. All good
works shall be rewarded, and he promises to give a present temporal reward, in
part of payment. Ephesians. 6.8. Whatsoever good thing any man does, the same shall
he receive of the Lord, whether he be bond or free; and which is more, 1 Timothy
4.8. Godliness is profitable unto all, having promise of the life that now is,
and of that which is to come.

2. The temporal good things promised in the Old Testament, were symbolical;
they prefigured spiritual benefits by Christ; we have them without any such
adjoined significations, Col. 2.17. They had a shadow of things to come, but
the body is of Christ; They had a more sparing taste of heavenly good things in
earthly benefits; we have a more straight and direct way unto eternal life.

3. Promises of temporal good things, were in the Old Covenant more frequent,
in the New Covenant more rare; and this I name as their excellency, because
they are thrown in, as mere additions to spiritual promises Alting.
. Ma. 16.33. Seek ye first the Kingdom of God, and his righteousness, and all
these things shall be added unto you; this for temporal promises. And for
spiritual promises, which are the best of the Gospel Covenant; not only the
conditions of those promises are more easy; for whereas it was, Do this and
live, Gal. 3.15. now it is, Believe, and thou shall not come into condemnation
Camero.
, Joh. 3.18. but the condition is also promised, Jer. 31.34. I will make a New
Covenant with the House of Israel, and with the House of Judah; not according
to the Covenant, that I made with their Fathers in the day that I took them by
the hand to bring them out of the Land of Egypt, which my C^venant they brake,
although I was an Husband unto them, says the Lord; but this shall be the
Covenant that I will make with the House of Israel; after those days, says
the Lord, I will put my law into their inward parts, and write it in their
hearts, and will be their God, and they shall be my people, and they shall
teach no more every man his Neighbor, and every man his brother, saying, Know
the Lord, for they shall know me, from the least of them unto the greatest of
them, says the Lord; for I will forgive their iniquity, and I will remember
their sins no more. Gods hearty good will is herein manifested. Jer. 32.41. I
will rejoice over them to do them good, and I will plant them in this land
assuredl^, with my whole heart, and with my whole soul. If you say, these are
Old Testament promises, and belonged to them to whom they were spoken, and were
not only Prophetical, so as to concern another people Calv. Instit.
, I grant it. Romans 3.19. We know that what things soever the Law says, it
says to them who are under the Law. But they had not that efficacy of the
Spirit to make these promises so effectual, as was Prophesied and promised, for
the times of the Gospel Synop. pu. th.
; Joel 2.28. And it shall come to pass afterward; mark that, afterward, I
will pour out my Spirit upon all flesh, etc. The measure of the Spirit which
they did receive, tended mostly to bondage, Gal. 4.24, 25. but the Spirit is to
us a Spirit of Adoption, Romans 8.15. And therefore the Gospel is specially
called the Word of Gods grace, Acts 20.32. as if all the grace that God had
formerly expressed, had been nothing in comparison of this. Romans 6.14. Ye are
not under the Law, but under grace; Law and grace, are opposed as condemnation
and mercy; thus the Gospel is the better Covenant, in respect of the promises
of it.

5. The Gospel is the better Covenant, in respect of the effects of it; the Old
Covenant shows us sin, does accuse us, and declares us guilty before the
judgment of God. Romans 3.19, 20. That every mouth may be stopped, and all the
world may become guilty before God; therefore by the deeds of the Law, there
shall no flesh be justified in his sight; for by the Law is the knowledge of
sin. It subjects us under the curse, and condemns sinners, for the
transgressing of Gods commands. Deuteronomy. 27.26. Cursed be he that confirms not
all the words of this Law to do them: and all the people shall say Amen. So
Gal. 3.10. it is the ministry of death, 2 Cor. 3.6, 7. but now the Gospel that
proclaims pardon of sin, and lifts up with quickening consolation, Isa. 61.1,
2. in the Law God is considered as reproving sin, and approving righteousness;
in the Gospel, as remitting sin, and repairing righteousness; and therefore
the Word of the Gospel is called good seed, Mat. 13.3. The seed of
Regeneration, 1 Pet. 1.23. The Word of Reconciliation, 2 Cor. 5.18, 19. The
Ministration of the Spirit, Gal. 3.2. The Word of faith, Romans 10.8. The Word of
life, Phil. 2.16. The power of God, Romans 1.16. That whereby the righteousness
of God is manifest, Romans 3.21. The destruction of unbelievers is not the end of
the Gospel; but that is through their own fault, Polan. Syntag.
eventus adventitius, an accidental event. God abundantly declares in the
Gospel, that he delights not in the death of sinners, but in the saving
translation of them by faith and repentance, from the power of darkness, into
the Kingdom of his dear Son. The best effect of the Legal Covenant, is the
bringing man into the Gospel Covenant; and 'pray 'observe, how, when it is most
effectual, it turns over the sinner to the Better Covenant.

1. It discovers sin to us. Romans 7.7. I had not known sin but by the Law; but
wherefore is it that we know sin at all? that we might be compelled to seek
reparation in the Gospel Covenant. Gal. 3.21, 22. The Scripture has concluded
all under sin, that the promise of faith in Jesus Christ might be given to them
that believe.

2. The Old Covenant restrains sin; there is a natural stupidnesse in men's
consciences; but then when the dreadful threatenings of the Law still sound in
their ears, man is somewhat affrighted, and has some reluctance, though
afterward the Law of the mind is led captive by the Law of the members, and
man forbears sin, as having a bridle put upon him; Ringente interim, and intus
tumultuante appetitu corrupto; though he be restrained from sin, yet it is but
a kind of coactior; it ends best, when it ends in a spontaneous and voluntary
inclination of the mind to forsake sin, and hate it, and that is the work of
the Gosp^l-Covenant.

3. The Old Covenant works fear; when sin has been committed, and the raging
of the affections are a little appeased, then the mind returns unto its self,
and the Spirit that was resisted, brings to remembrance those grievous and
unavoidabl^ threanings which the Law denounces, whereupon there follows (...)
(...), a Legal repentance; that is, a wishing that the Fact were undone, and
that he had not committed the sin that causes that trouble; but not that he is
any better than before; for show him a new temptation, and he presently runs
after it, though under trouble of mind, and though expectation of wrath,
incredibly full of anguish, does sting and vex him intolerably. But now
Beloved, where this ends well, there the Spirit insinuates something to put him
upon panting after a Redeemer, and to get power against sin, and this brings
unspeakable joy, and begets peace past all understanding; thus you see the best
effects of the Law is the bringing men to the Gospel, which shows the fifth
excellency of the Gospel Covenant.

6. The Gospel Covenant is the better Covenant, in respect of its objects or
persons taken into Covenant, and that under a double consideration, their
multiplicity, and their quality.

1. In respect of the number: The Old Covenant belonged only to one people; the
New, to Jews and Gentiles; Abraham and his posterity were taken into Covenant,
and all the world beside were excluded; those few others that were admitted, it
was by extraordinary grace, and they were as it were planted into Abraham's
family; but now the partition Wall is broken down, which as it were, shut up
the mercy of God in the confines of Israel: Now peace is proclaimed to those
that are far off, as well as to those that are near, that they might become one
people; this is a great mystery, Colos. 1.26. Certainly all may well say so, as
we are poor Gentiles, and we are made nigh by the blood of his Cross, Col.
1.20, 21.

2. The Gospel Covenant is better in respect of the quality of the persons
taken into it; the Law is proposed to wicked, secure, and hardened sinners. 1 Timothy 1.9. The Law is not made for a righteous man, but for the lawless, and
disobedient, for ungodly, and for sinners, for unholy and profane, for
murderers of fathers, and murd^rers of mothers, for men-slayers, for
whoremongers, etc. to restrain and bridle them; but the Gospel lifts up
brokenhearted sinners. Luke 4.18. He has sent me to heal the brokenhearted,
to preach deliverance to the captives, and recovering of sight to the blind, to
set at liberty them that are bruised, to preach the acceptable year of the
Lord: The Law is to terrify the conscience, the Gospel is to comfort it
Gerhard, l. c.
.

7. The last excellency I shall name, is this, the Gospel Covenant is every way
faultlesse, it is the last and best Dispensation of Divine grace. Hebr. 8.7. If
the first Covenant had been faultlesse, then should no place have been sought
for the second; as if he should say, the Covenant from Mount Sinai was not
such, Quo non alterum posset esse perfectius Grotius.
; that man could not desire a better. Hebr. 7.18, 19. There is verily a
disanulling of the Commandment going before, for the weakness and
unprofitableness thereof, for the Law made nothing perfect, but the bringing in
of a better hope did, by the which we draw nigh unto God; plainly, this is so
excellent, we cannot desire a better.

The Old Covenant is abrogated:

1. As to the circumstance, de futuro, it all related to the future Messiah;
Christ is come, and that consideration therefore cease.

2. It Is abrogated as to the impossible condition of perfect obedience; the
Gospel sincerity of the meanest believer, is better than the exactest obedience
of the highest Legalist.

3. It Is abrogated as to the burden of Legal Ceremonies, Priesthood and
shadows; God gave these things to them, and the Gospel to us, as we give (
nuces parvulo, and codicem grandi Beda.
;) things of smaller value to a little child, but a good book to him when he
is grown up. They have lost their Temple, their Priesthood, their Unction;
(...), Chrysostom.
etc. We have Heaven for our Temple, and Christ for our Priest, and the Spirit
for our Unction.

4. The Old Covenant is abrogated as to the yoke of Mosaical policy; we have
nothing to do with the Judicial Laws of the Jews, any farther than they are
Moral, or of a Moral equity: Luke 16.16. The Law and the Prophets were until
John. Hebr. 7.12. The Priesthood being changed, there is made of necessity a
change of the Law: And thus I have doctrinally showed you the excellency of the
Gospel Covenant.

APPLICATION.
1. This retorts wicked men's Reproaches into their own faces. They cry out
against the Ministers of the Gospel for preaching terror to them. Be it known
to you, the Gospel is properly employed in celebrating the mercy of God in the
pardon of sin, and comforting drooping sinners; but in your doing what you can
to put out this comfortable light, you force us to fetch fire from Mount Sinai
to take hold of you. It Is true, the Law was given with Thunder and Lightning,
and terrible Miracles; the Gospel was attested with a comfortable voice from
heaven, and healing Miracles; but as sinners broken by the Law, needed some
Gospel-balm to heal their wounds; so secure Gospel sinners need Legal
threatenings to fright them out of their sluggishnesse, and sleepy security. If
whispers of peace will not awaken them, we must cry aloud, to stir them up if
it be possible, to break off sinning, and to mind salvation. Sirs, it is no
pleasure to us to speak words unpleasing to you; you hinder us from work more
purely Evangelical, and which it is a thousand fold more pleasure to us to be
conversant about. 'Pray take notice that were it not in love and faithfulness
to your souls, we would never be so poorly employed, as to be pelting at your
base lusts. Do but try us: Break off your soul-undoing wickedness, and you
shall never hear us rate you any more, you your selves being Judges; ex. gr.
Ask a sober man whether the lashing of drunkenness makes him smart or not? Ask
a chaste person whether the naming of such Texts as Prove. 22.14. The mouth of
strange women is a deep pit; he that is abhorred of the Lord shall fall
therein. Prove. 23.27. An whore is a deep ditch, and a strange woman is a narrow
pit; reproach him? in short; Ask one that is conscientious, whether he thinks
the Minister has a spite at him in his Sermon, because he names, 1 Cor. 6.9,
10. Know ye not that the unrighteous shall not inherit the Kingdom of God? Be
not deceived; neither Fornicators, nor Idolaters, nor Adulterers, nor
Effeminate, nor Abusers of themselves with mankinds, nor Thieves, nor Covetous,
nor Drunkards, nor Revilers, nor Extortioners shall inherit the Kingdom of
God. Alas! all these will tell you they have no such thought, nor any cause for
any such thought; through grace they abhor these sins, and wonder that any
are so besotted as to quarrel with a Minister for speaking against them. You
see then, it is your consciences that reproach you, and not the Ministers of the
Gospel.

2. Here Is matter of Admiration, Admiration of Gods rich Grace, and
unparalled Providence to us; that God should cast our Lots in to such places
and times, wherein we enjoy the best of the best gracious Dispensations. Acts
17.26. God has made of one blood all Nations of men for to dwell on all the
face of the earth, and has determined the times before appointed, and the
bounds of their habitation. God has been pleased so to dispose of Christ's
little flock, that there shall be some in all times of the world, and in all
places of the world, where he makes known his Name, to be the salt of the
Earth. But now for us to be so disposed of, that among the several thousand
years of the worlds continuance, and among the innumerable millions of places
of the worlds Inhabitants; that we should be brought forth in such a nick of
time, and in such a spiritual Paradise of place, that there is none in the world
to equal it! Sirs, what does this call for? what shall we render to the Lord
for this -- (I know not what to call it, it is such) unspeakable love? Beloved,
I must both give, and take time to answer this question; And O that you, and I
may give a suitable answer to it. I know not at present what to say to it,
unless we could, as overcome by it, faint away in a love-sickness into the
bosom of our dearest Jesus; that Cant. 2.4, 5, 6. seeing he has brought us
where we may not only taste a draught out of a Bottle, but are brought to the
great Vessels of spiritual comforts, where we may not only enjoy Christ a
little, but even to spiritual ecstasy. O that we now as sinking down in a
Swoun, and as unable to stand under the thoughts of such love, might be even
strowed and boulstered up with the comfortable doctrines of the
Gospel Covenant, and all through impatience of love. The love of God to such
inconsiderable persons, should carry the soul out of it self, to do more than
languish with desire after more extasying communications; so that none but
Christ with his right hand of Divinity, and left hand of Humanity may be
acceptable to us to embrace us. O Christians, I should be glad to send you all
home heart-sick of love to Christ. But,

3. By way of Inference; Everyone of you that is not in the Gospel Covenant, is
in a dreadful state; it is your own wilfulness, you will not believe the
Gospel. Though it is through Divine Grace that persons do close with the Gospel,
yet it is your own sin you do not close with it; for you are willing to be
strangers to it, you are willing to enjoy your lusts, which you must part with,
if you embrace it. You may observe the dreadful estate of persons out of
Covenant in these three particulars.

1. The sin against the Gospel Covenant is most dreadful. This sin has the
guilt of all other sins in it. John 15.22. If I had not come and spoken unto
them, they had not had sin, but now they have no cloak for their sin. Sodom and
Gomorrah, Publicans and Harlots go into the Kingdom of heaven, before those
that refuse the Gospel. God the Father invites men to the Marriage Supper; nay,
you are wooed and entreated to be Christ's Bride: You make light of it, you have
the profits and the pleasures of the world, to take up your thoughts, you will
not be persuaded to believe that Christ is better than your lusts; you will not
be beat out of it, but that a bag of gold, is better than a Crown of glory; but
that a filthy lust, is better than communion with God; but that the Devils
slave and fool, is better than to be Gods Child and Darling; Is this your
choice? Then consider,

2. The penalty for the contempt of this Gospel Covenant is most dreadful. John
3.19. This is the condemnation that light is come into the world, and men love
darkness rather than light; this brings persons under the very utmost of the
wrath of God. 1 Thessalonians. 2.16. when the Jews sinned against the Legal
Dispensation, then Dan. 9.12. Daniel complains, Under the whole heavens has
not been done as has been done upon Je^usalem; but what now will become of
those that refuse the Gospel? Heb. 10.29. Of how much sorer punishment, suppose
ye, shall he be thought worthy, who has trodden under foot the Son of God? Can
any thing be worse than to dye without mercy? yes, says the Apostle; what is
that? nay, he leaves it to your consideration, as being unpossible to be
expressed. To pour contempt and scorn upon the precious blood of Christ,
wherewith the Covenant betwixt God and his people was made, and ratified; to
offer a spiteful affront unto the Spirit of God, by contemning, and opposing
his gracious motions; O what remains for such persons but a dreadful
expectation of Gods terrible Judgment! But there is a third thing that I would
have you consider, which is sensibly more dreadful than either of these.

3. The sentence against Gospel Covenant breaking is most irreversible and
peremptory, mercy, and grace, and patience, and compassion, when these are
abused, all these become the sinners enemy; for that which is ordained a life,
to prove death unto them, oh this is dreadful! for the blood of Christ to cry
to heaven against sinners, this is dreadful! this made Christ to weep over
Jerusalem, Luke 19.40.41. These persons pass judgment upon themselves, though
not with their lips, yet with their lives; they pronounce themselves unworthy
to be saved, Acts 13.46. O Sirs, I beseech you consider, though persons brake
the Covenant of Works, there was salvation to be had by another Covenant; but
if this be violated, there is no other Covenant to relieve this: The
Gospel Covenant is our Refuge, when the other Covenant pursues us. Hebr. 6.18.
Contemptuous carriage against Grace is beyond all help; I beseech you therefore
take heed of sinning against Gospel Light, and Gospel-love. O you will have
that sting of conscience that no other sinners in the world have, that have not
refused a Redeemer. Beloved, I would I could say, with due meltings of heart,
it grieves me for you, to think how many hundreds in this Congregation are yet
without Christ, being Aliens from the Commonwealth of Israel, and strangers
from the Covenant of promise, having no hope, and without God in the world,
Ephesians. 2.12. O Sirs, do you know what you do, when you cocker your lusts in
despite of Christ? Can you hear Sermons, and go on in sin? You do well to
hear, but you make a desperate adventure, to do what you know, discovenants you
from God, and hazards your eternal separation from God. Beloved, I must be
plain with you; I beseech you consider how Jews and Pagans, and Devils will
rise up in judgment against you.

1. The Jew may say, I had a Legal yoke upon me, which neither I, nor my
Fathers were able to bear; Christ invited me only into his Garden of Nuts,
where I might sooner break my teeth with the hard Shell of Ceremonies, than get
to the (little more than bitter) Kenel of Gospel promises; you have those
promises in abundance with more ease. Cant. 6.11. q. d. Their Nuts were ripe,
but their Pomegranates full of sweet Kernels of Gospel Grace, were not then
budded. The Jew may complain, that in the best of their Sacrifices the smoke
filled their Temple; smoke only to provoke them to weep for a clearer
manifestation. 2 Cor. 3.14. Those of the Jews that were most enraged against
Christ, yet had they known him, they would not have crucified the Lord of
glory. 1 Cor. 2.8. The Jew may say, Though we could but groap after Christ,
your eyes are dazzled with his glory: We had but the Old Edition of the Covenant
of Grace, in a Character very darkly intelligible; you have the Last Edition
with a Commentary of our Re^ection, and the Worlds Recep ion, and the Spirits
Effusion; you have all that heart can wish! Oh had we but one of your days of
the Son of man, we would not have sinned against so great salvation! Sirs, what
do you think your consciences will be forced to reply?

O true, true, must the Gospel-sinner say; I have known, owned, and professed
Christ, and have been angry with Ministers and Friends, when they did but
question my being in Covenant; but I have not in any measure walked worthy of
the Gospel. But I pass by the Jew; let us hear what the Pagan has to say
against you. 2. I perish Eternally, may the poor Pagan say, without all
possibility of Reconciliation, and have only sinned against the Covenant of
Works, having never heard of a Gospel Covenant, nor of Reconciliation by a
Mediator. Alas! should I have improved my Naturals to the highest,
Reconciliation by Christ could never have entered into my head. Oh had I heard
but one Sermon! had Christ but once broke in upon my soul, to convince me of my
undone condition, and to have shown a righteousness unto me; but woe is me, I
never had so much as one offer of Grace!

But so have I, must you say that refuse the Gospel; I have, or might have
heard thousands of Sermons; I could scarce escape hearing one or other, showing
me the danger of my sin, and my necessity of Christ; but notwithstanding all I
heard, I wilfully resolved, I would have nothing to do with him, I could not
endure to hear strictness pressed upon me; it was all the hell I had upon earth,
that I could not sin in quiet. 3. Nay, may the Devil himself say; it is true, I
was ever since my fall maliciously set against God: But alas, so soon as ever I
first sinned, God kick't me out of heaven, and told me he would never have
mercy on me. And 'though I lived in the time of all manner of gracious
Dispensations; I saw Sacrifices offered, and Christ in the flesh, and the
Gospel preached; yet how could this choose but enrage me the more, to have God
as it were say, Look here Satan, I have provided a remedy for sin, but none for
thine! this set me upon revenge against God, so far as I could reach him. But
alas, alas! had God ever entered into any Covenant with me at all; had God put
me upon any terms, though never so hard, for the obtaining of mercy; had Christ
been but once offered to me, what do you think would I have done? would I have
hearkened to any thing you could say, to Refuse Christ and Salvation? Could
you, or all the Angels in heaven have kept me from minding Christ? But, Woe to
me, may the Gospel-sinner say: I have as good a Remnant of the Covenant of
Works in my nature, as the Pagans have. I have all the discoveries of God in
the Legal Covenant, that the Jews ever had. I am under a Better Dispensation
than the Devils were under before their Fall. The Gospel of Grace is urged upon
me. And therefore, O poor Jew! whatever may be said against thy breach of
Covenant, there is a thousand fold more to be said against mine. O poor Pagan!
whatever is to be said against thy breach of Covenant, there is ten thousand
fold more against mine. O wretched Devils! whatever may be said against your
sins, there is infinitely more to be said against mine. I am the most Foolish,
Mad, Wilful Rebel that ever waged war with the grace of God.

Sirs, Is all this nothing to you? Can you hear these things quietly? I know
you dare not think them over again, and sin at the same rate as before; if you
think your souls any thing worth, or heaven and glory any thing worth, now
offer up your selves to Christ in the Gospel Covenant. Thus much for the first
Inference, That their estate is dreadful that are not in the Gospel Covenant.

The second Inference is this; That their estate is comfortable that are in the
Gospel Covenant; I will only instance in two things.

1. The weakest and poorest faith, and service, is accepted through Christ in
the Gospel Covenant. The Covenant of Grace is made to poor, weak, sinful,
frail man through a Mediator; God does not expect that we should be perfect
here: Poor Christians have more ado to pardon themselves, than to have God to
pardon them. They quarrel more with themselves for want of holiness, than God
quarrels with them for it. Beloved, here are some comfortable Riddles of Grace
for you to resolve. The Covenant is merely of Grace, Grace runs through all the
veins, and arteries of it; all the life, blood, and spirit of the Covenant, are
Grace, Grace, through Jesus Christ. And yet Beloved, though it be wholly of
Grace, it is of Debt by being a Covenant; God is pleased to enter into Bond to
make good his Deed of Gift. What God does for the heirs of promise, it is no
more than what is debt to Christ, and what through him he is graciously engaged
for us. O the comfort of being in Covenant with God! you will say so indeed if
you add,

2. This Gospel Covenant is so made, that it can never be disanul'd. Alas, we
do not know where, nor how to make a Covenant sure in the world; he that is my
friend to day, may be my enemy to morrow; his Bond may be good to day, and may
be to morrow insoluble. There are ways more than we know of to evade the
strictest Covenant, to disanull the strongest Oath; but now God has sworn by
himself, ( Hebr. 6.13.) that he will certainly bless those whom he takes into
Covenant with him. God has sworn by his holiness, Psalm. 89.34, 35. As if he
should say, Let me not be accounted a holy God, if I break Covenant with any of
my people. Nay, he swears by his life, Isa. 49.18, 18. The Prophet speaks there
of Sion, as of a Mother-City, and of multitudes that should be brought home to
her by the Ministry of the Gospel, and that they shall be as Jewels and
Ornaments, matter of much honor to her by their e dowments with spiritual
graces: Thus Gospel-Covenanters shall be qualified. But you will presently say,
there is no danger of Gods breaking Covenant, all the danger is on our part;
but Christians, there is not so much danger on our part, as many fear; it is
not every sin that presently breaks the Covenant; a wife may be foolish and
passionate, yet the marriage is not thereby broken. And when we do slip into
Covenant-breaches, Christ is ready to pardon us, and the Spirit of Christ ready
to piece up our breaches. Provided that we do but make conscience in the whole
course of our lives to keep Covenant with God. Christians, I hope by all that
has been spoken, you will be persuaded to enter into Covenant, and to keep
Covenant with God; if so, I have my End, and so has my Sermon.

THE Mediator OF THE COVENANT, Described in his Person, Natures, and Offices.
1 Timothy 2.5. And one Mediator between God and men, the Man Christ Jesus.


COmmunion with God is our only happiness; it is the very heaven of heaven, and
it is the beginning of heaven here on earth. The only foundation of this
communion, is the Covenant of Grace; and it is the great excellency of this
Covenant of Grace, that it is Established in such a Mediator, even Jesus Christ.
And one Mediator between, etc.

This Epistle (as ot the substance and main design of it) is a short directory
unto Timothy, how he might faithfully discharge that great Office to which the
Lord had called him in the Church of Ephesus. In the first Chapter, he
instructs him concerning the doctrine he should Preach. In this Chapter
concerning the persons for whom he should pray.

1. More generally. For all men, ver. 1. i. e. men of all ranks, conditions,
and Nations in the world. 2. Particularly, and especially for Magistrates, ver.
2.
The Magistrates of those times, were not only Pagans, but Persecutors;
Diversus orandi modus ac scopus in diversis hominum generibus accurate
observetur. Non enim quidvis pro quovis orandum est -- quia sic precatio nostra
divinae voluntati repugnaret. Conrad. Vo^st. in loc.
strangers to Christ themselves, and enemies to every thing of Christ in
others, yet pray for them. There are indeed some persons, whom Christ leaves
out of his prayers, Joh. 17.9. and would have us leave o^t of ours, 1 John
5.16. But yet thus far we may and ought to pray for all men, the worst of men,
that the Lord would either make them truly good, or else restrain them from
doing evil; that he would either show mercy to them in their own souls, or
else keep them from being instruments of mischief unto others. That under them,
you may lead a quiet and peaceable life, in all Godliness and Honesty.

The encouragements unto prayer in this extent, are,

Non omnes sine discrimine, sed ex omnibus ordinibus. Parae. in loc.
1. The good will of God to all men, ver. 4. i. e. men of all ranks and degrees;
for though God by his preceptive Will commands every individual man in the
world, to mind his salvation, Acts 17.30. and by his approving Will, delights
in saving lost creatures; nay, though he vouchsafe to all men, so much grace as
will leave them inexcusable in their neglect of salvation: yet can we not from
hence stretch the grace of God into that unlimited and boundless universality,
as the Pelagians do from this Scripture; for did God peremptorily and
determinately Will the salvation of every particular person in the world, man's
stubbornness could not be too strong for God, nor could our impotency resist
his Omnipotent Will.

2. The Mediation of Christ, which lies open to all men to make use of; as God
is not the God of Jews only, but of the Gentiles also, Romans 3.29, 30. so is
Christ a Mediator for all. And one Mediator, etc.

In the words 1. The only way of friendly intercourse between God and man, it is
through a Mediator. 2. The only Mediator between God and man, one Mediator, the
Man Christ Jesus.


1. The only way of friendly intercrouse between God and man, it is through a
Mediator; that is employed. Burgess Vindic. Leg. page 133.134, 135.
Whether man in the state of innocence needed a Mediator, is disputed among
persons learned and sober; but in his lapsed state, this need is acknowledged
by all. God cannot now look upon men out of a Mediator, but as Rebels,
Traitors, as fit objects for his Vindictive wrath. Nor can men now look up to
God but as a provoked Majesty, an angry Judge, a consuming fire. And therefore
were not it for a Mediator, ( i. e. a middle person interposing between God and
us who are at variance, to procure reconciliation and friendship, as the word
(...) imports) we could not but so dread the presence of this God, that like
our first Parents (in that dark interval 'twixt their sinning, and the succor
of that promise, Genesis 3.15.) we should have endeavored to hide our selves what
we could from the presence of the Lord. Genesis 2.8.


2. The only Mediator between God and men. One Mediator, i. e. but one. Papists
acknowledge one Mediator of reconciliation, but contend for many of
intercession. But as God (in the former part of this verse) is said to be one
God by way of exclusion of all others; so is Christ said here to be one
Mediator, i. e. but one.

This Mediator is here described partly by His Nature, The man. His Names,
Christ Jesus.


1. His Nature, the man, i. e. that eminent man; so some; Singularis ille homo.
Vorst. Paraphr. in loc. q^i factus est homo. Versio Aethiop.
he that was made man; so others.

Object. But why is this Mediator mentioned in this Nature only?

Answ. 1. Negatively: Not by w^y of diminution, as if he were not God as well
as man, as the Arrians argue from this Scripture; nor as if the execution of
his Mediatorship, were either only, In Christo non solus Deus est M^diator n^c
solus homo, sed Deus-homo.
or chiefly in his humane Nature, as some of the Papists affirm, though others
of them deny; as Cornel. A Lap. in loc. asserting Christ's Mediatorship secundum
utramque naturam, according to both Natures.

2. Positively, to prove that Jesus Christ was the true Messiah whom the
Prophets foretold, the Fathers expected, and who had in that Nature been so
frequently promised; as in the first Gospel that ever was preached, Genesis 3.15.
he is promised as the seed of the Woman. Besides, the Apostle mentions Christ
in this Nature, only as an encouragement to that duty of Prayer he had before
persuaded; to the like purpose he is mentioned in this nature only, Heb. 4.14,
15, 16.

2. His Names, Christ. Jesus, this was his proper Name; Jesus. Christ, his
appellative Name.


Jesus; that denotes the work and business for which he came into the world,
as appears from the reason which the Angel (that came from heaven as an
Herald to proclaim his incarnat^on) gives of the imposition of this Name. Thou
shall call his Name Jesus, f^r he shall save his people from their sins. This
Name, though it be given to others in Scripture, yet to him eminently; to them
as types of that complete Savior who should come after them, and save his
people from their sins.

Christ; that denotes the several Offices, in the exercise whereof he executes
this work of salvation. Christ in the Greek, being the same with Messiah in the
Hebrew; i. e. anointed. Under the Law, the solemn ordination, or setting apart
both of things and persons to special services, was by anointing; thus we read
of three sorts of persons anointed, Kings, Priests, Prophets; and in respect of
all these Offices, Jesus is called Christ.

From the words thus briefly explained, arise these two Observations.

1. That there is now no other way of friendly communion between God and man,
but through a Mediator.

2. That there is no other Mediator between God and man, but Jesus Christ.

Doctr. 1. That there is now no other way of friendly communion between God and
man, but through a Mediator; and indeed considering what God is, and withal
what man is; how vastly disproportionable, how unspeakably unsuitable our very
natures are to his, how is it possible there should be any sweet communion
betwixt them, who are not only so infinitely distant, but so extremely
contrary. God is holy, but we are sinful; Isa. 6.3. with Genesis 3.5. 1 John 1.5.
with Ephesians. 5 8. Romans 7.1^.
in him is nothing but light, in us nothing but darkness; in him nothing
that is evil, in us nothing that is good; he is all beauty, we nothing but
deformity; he is justice, and we gui^tinesse; he a consuming fire, and we but
dried stubble; in a word, he an infini^ely and incomprehensibly glorious
Majesty, and we poor sinful dust and ashes; who have sunk and debased our
selves by sin, below the meanest rank of creatures, and made our selves the
burden of the whole Creation; and can there be any communion, any friendship
between such? Can too walk together, Amos 3.3.
except they be agreed? And what agreement can there ever be but through a
Mediator?

If ever God be reconciled to us, it must be through a Mediator; because of
that indispensible necessity of satisfaction, Romans 8.7.
and our inability to make it.

If ever we be reconciled to God, it must be through a Mediator, because of
that radicated enmity that is in our natures to every thing of God, and our
impotency to it; and thus in both respects, that God may be willing to be a
friend to us, and that we may not be unwilling to be friends to him, there
needs a Mediator, 2 Cor. 5.19. compared with Joh. 14.6.

Doctr. 2. That there is no other Mediator between God and man but Jesus Christ.
And one Mediator, i. e. but one. Opus est Mediatore ad Mediatorem istum.
Bernard p. 262 Leo. 1. Papa. Roman. Epist. 83. ad Palestinos Episcop. c. 4.
The fondness of Papists in their multiplicity of Mediators, not only unto
God, but to our Mediator himself, having no other foundation than only their
superstition, cannot be of moment with them, who labor to be wise according to
Scripture. That those members of the Church who are contemporary here on earth,
do indeed pray for one another, cannot be denied; but that they are therefore
Mediators of Intercession, has been denied by the more Ancient Papists
themselves. This Title of Mediator, is throughout the New Testament
appropriated unto Christ, Heb. 8.6. H^b. 9.15 Heb. 12.24. and indeed there is
none else fit for so high a work as this, but only he.

Resol. 1. The singular suitableness of his person to this eminent employment.
To interpose as a Mediator betwixt God and men, was an employment above the
capacity of men, Angels, or any creature; but Jesus Christ in respect of the
dignity of his person, was every way suited for this work. Which you may take
in these four particulars.

1. That he was truly God, equal with the Father, of the same nature and
substance; not only (...), but (...), of the like nature, but of the same
nature, as is excellently cleared by that famous Champion for the Deity of
Christ against the Arrians, Athanasius. Col. 2.9. In him dwells the fullness
of the Godhead bodily; Non (...) sed (...) non divinitatis sed deitatis. D.
Prideaux. fasc. p. 76.
it is not the fullness of the Divinity, but of the Deity; thereby intimating an
identity of essence with God the Father, and holy Ghost. Though the Divine
essence be after a several manner in the several Persons of the blessed
Trinity; in the Father (...) without receiving it from any other; in the Son by
an eternal generation; and in the holy Ghost by proceeding: yet it is the same
essence of God, that is in all three persons; Tylen. Syntagm. p. 401. Lysord
his plain man's senses exercised. p. 82.
because such is the infinite simplicity of this essence, that it cannot be
divided or parcelled. Thus Christ (not to speak any thing concerning the other
persons) is styled so the Son of God, as one equal with the Father; for upon
this it is that the Jews ground their charge of blasphemy against him, that he
said God was his Father, making himself equal with God, Joh. 5.18. The force of
their reason lies in this; the natural Son of God is truly God, and equal with
God; as the natural son of man is man, equal, and of the same substance with
his father. Angels and men are the Sons of God by Adoption, Lyford. p. 93.
but Christ is the natural Son of God, the only Son of God, and therefore truly
God. I and my Father are one, Joh. 10.30. he thought it no robbery to be equal
with God, Phil. 2.6. For the further confirmation of this, take these Arguments.

1. He whom Scripture honors with all those Names which a^e peculiar unto God,
must needs be God. That Christ has these Names ascribed to him, appears from
these instances. He is not only styled God, the Word was God, Joh. 1.1. but God
with such additional discrimination^, (...) neither Magistrates (who because
they are Gods Depu^ies and Vicegerents here on earth, Psalm. 82 6.
are sometimes called Gods) nor a^y creature is capable of. The great God, Tit.
2.13. The true God, 1 John 5.20. The mighty God, Isa. 9.6. Over all, God
blessed for ever, Romans 9.5. The Lord of glory, 1 Cor. 2.8. The Lord from
heaven, 1 Cor. 15.48. Yea, that great Name Jehovah the Lord (or Jehovah) our
righteousness, Jer. 23.6.

2. He in whom are those high and eminent perfections, those glorious
attributes, of which no c^eature is capable, must needs be more than a
creature, and consequently God.

1. He that is Omnipotent, whose power is boundless and unlimited, must needs
be God. The highest power of creatures has its non ultra, Thus far may it ^o,
but no further; but Christ is said to be Almighty, Rev. 1.8. The Lord God
Omnipotent, Rev. 19.6.

2. He that is Omniscient, that searches hearts, that has a window into every
man's breast, that can look into all the rooms and corners of our souls, that
can see through all those Veils and coverings, which no creature-eye can
pierce, must needs be God; and these are the excellencies ascribed to Christ.
He needed not that any should testify of man, because he knew what was in man,
Joh. 2.25. I am he which searches the heart and reins, Rev. 2.23. He knew
their thoughts, Luke 6.8. so Mark 2.8. Joh. 13.19, etc.

3. He that fills heaven and earth, and all places with his presence, must
needs be God; and thus was Christ in heaven, while he was on earth. The Son of
man which is in heaven, Joh. 3.13. That where I am, Joh. 14.3. Christ as God,
was then in heaven, when as man, he was on earth. So as God he is still on
earth, though as man he sits at the right hand of God in heaven. I will be with
you to the end of the world, Matthew 28.20.

4. He that is immutable and eternal, must needs be God. The heavens are the
work of thy hands; they shall perish, but thou shall endure, etc. but thou art
the same, and thy years shall have no end, Psalm. 102.25, 26, 27. so is Christ
the everlasting Father, Isa. 9.6. The same yesterdy, to day, and for ever, Heb.
13.8.

5. He that has life in himself, and is the fountain of life to others, must
needs be God; and thus is Christ the Prince of life to others, Acts 3.15. and
has life in himself, Joh. 5.26.

3. He to whom those works of infiniteness are ascribed, to which no less a
power is sufficient than that of Omnipotency, he must needs be more than a
creature. He that laid the foundation of the earth, that by a word commanded
all things out of nothing, that preserves them from mouldring, and sinking into
their first nothing again; that could pardon sin, destroy him that had power of
death, Mark 2.5, 7, 8, 9, 10, etc. Heb. 2.14.
subdue principalities and powers, Redeem his Church, carry his people
triumphing into heaven; he must needs be God. And all these works of
infiniteness are ascribed to Christ; the work of Creation, Without him was
nothing made of all that was made, Joh. 1.3. Of conservation, Upholding all
things by the Word of his power, Heb. 1.3. of redemption, which he purchased
with his blood, Acts 20.28.

4. He whom Angels adore, before whom the highest and best of creatures fall
down, giving that worship which is peculiarly due to God, must needs be more
than a creature; and thus it is to Christ. Let all the Angels of God worship
him, Heb. 1.6. so Mat. 2.11.

I might add the equality of Christ in all those solemn benedictions and
praises upon Record in the New Testament; all which argue strongly, that he
must needs be truly God.

2. As he is truly God, so is he complete and perfect man; having not only an
humane body, but a rational soul; and in all things was like to us, sin only
excepted.

That he had a real, not an imaginary body, appears from the whole story of
the Gospel. He that was conceived, born, circumcised, Gerhardi Loci Commun.
Forbes Disputat. Historico. Theolog. L. 2.
was hungered, athirst, swet drops of blood, was crucified; he that went from
place to place, and had all those sinlesse affections, which are proper unto
bodies: had a true and real body; and such was the body of Christ.

That he had an humane soul, is clear also from the story of the Gospel. He
that grew in wisdom and knowledge, as it is said of Christ, Luke 1.80. Luke
2.40. he whose knowledge was bounded and limited, as was also said of Christ.
Of that day, and that hour knows no man; no not the Angels, Propterea totum
hominem sine peccato suscepit, ut totum quo constabat homo, a peccatorum peste
sanaret. August. Sicut totum hominem Diabolus decipiendo percussit; ita Deus
totum suscipiendo salvavit. Fulgent.
neither the Son of man, but the Father, Mark 13.32. As God he knew all
things; as man, his knowledge was but the knowledge of a creature, and
therefore finite; all which argue he had a humane soul, as well as body, and
was complete man. The whole Nature of man was corrupted, destroyed, and
therefore 'twas needful Christ should take upon him whole man, that the whole
might be repaired and saved.

3. He is God and man in one person. He had two Natures, but was but one
person: there was a twofold substance, divine and humane; but not a twofold
subsistence; for the personal being which the Son of God had before all worlds,
Hooker Eccles. pol. page 293.
suffered not the substance to be personal which he took, although together
with the Nature which he had, the Nature which he took continue for ever; thus
both Natures make but one Christ. He was the Son of God, and the Son of man,
yet not two Sons, but one person. He was born of God, and born of a Virgin,
Lyford. p. 100.
but it is in respect of his different Natures. Thus was Christ David's Son, and
David's Lord; Mary's Son, and Mary's Savior and Maker too.

By the right understanding of this, we may be very much helped in reconciling
those seeming contradictions, which frequently occur in Scripture concerning
Christ. He is said to be born of a woman, and yet to be without beginning of
days; Zanch. in Ephesians. p 35.
himself says his Father is greater than he, and yet he is said to be equal
with the Father. All which may be cleared by this. He was but one person; and
therefore as in man, who consists of soul and body, the actions of each part
are ascribed to the person: the man is said to understand; it is not his body,
but soul that understands; yet this is ascribed to the person, Lyford. p. 101.
though it be but the formal act of one part: so in regard of this hypostatical
union of two Natures in one person, the acts of each Nature are ascribed to the
person. Thus it is said the Jews c^ucified the Lord of glory, 1 Cor. 2.8. i. e.
they crucified that person who was the Lord of glory. Acts 20.28. God is said
to purchase his Church by his blood; as God he could not shed his blood, but
'twas that person who was God. Thus is Christ said to be in heaven, when he was
on earth; i. e. as God, he was in heaven. And so what is proper to each nature
by reason of the hypostatical union, is ascribed to the whole person.

4. This union of two natures in one person, is without confusion or
transmutation; the natures remaining distinct, and the properties and
operations of both natures distinct, notwithstanding this union. Some things
are proper to the Godhead, of which the Manhood is incapable; and some things
proper to the Manhood, of which the Godhead is incapable: We cannot say the
Godhead was athirst, weary, dyed; neither can we say the Manhood was the
Fountain of all being, the Creator and Preserver of all things; or that it is
ubiquitary or omnipresent, though we may say all of the same person. It Is
observed by learned Writers, that the dividing of the person which is but one,
Hooker Eccles. Pol. p. 299.
and the confounding of the natures which are two, has occasioned those grand
Errors in this Article of faith, by which the peace of the Church has been so
much disturbed. And sutably to these four heads that have been spoken to,
there have arisen four several heresies.

1. The Arrians, denying the Deity of Christ, against whom the Council of Nice
Determined that he was (...), truly God. Hooker ibid.


(...).
2. The Apollinarians, who maimed and misinterpreted his humane nature, against
whom the Council of Constantinople Determined that he was complete and perfect
Man.

3. The Nestorians, who divided Christ into two persons, because of his two
natures, (...).
against whom the Council of Ephesus Determined that he was God-man in one
person.

4. The Eutichians, who confounded these two natures in one person, (...).
against whom the Council of Chalcedon Determined that he was God-man in one
person without confusion or mutation of natures.

But in the four abovenamed heads enough has been said by way of Antidote
against those dangerous mistakes. And all being duly considered, we cannot but
see great reason why he should be called wonderful, Isa. 9.6. Well might the
Apostle cry out by way of admiration, Without controversy great is the mystery
of godliness, God was manifest in the flesh, 1 Timothy 3.16.

5. The singular fitness of Christ for this work of Mediation, arises from his
being God-man in two natures, united in one person without Confusion or
Transmutation.

1. Had he not been truly God, he had been too mean a person for so high an
employment; it was God that had been offended, an infinite Majesty that had
been despised. The person therefore interposing must have some equality with
him to whom he interposes. Had the whole society of persevering Angels
interposed on man's behalf, it had been to little purpose; one Christ was
infinitely more than all, and that because he was truly God.

2. Had he not been completely man, he had been no way capable of performing
that indispensibly necessary condition, upon which God was willing to be
reconciled; viz. The satisfying of that righteous sentence God had pronounced.
Genesis 2.17. In the day thou eatest thereof, thou shall surely dye. That
therefore he might be capable of dying, (which as God he could not) and that
the justice of God might be satisfied in the same nature by which it had been
offended, 'twas necessary he should be man.

3. Had he not been God and man in one person, the sufferings of his humane
nature could not have derived that infinite value from the Divine nature.
Mediat^o Christi est (...).
We could not have called his blood the blood of God, (as it is called Acts
20.28.) it would have been no more than the blood of a creature, and
consequently as unavailable as the blood of Bulls, etc. Hebr. 9.12. Hebr. 10.4.

4. Had he not been God-man without confusion of natures; his Deity might
either have advanced his humanity, above the capacity of suffering; or his
humanity might have debased his Deity below the capability of meriting, which
is no less than blasphemy to ima^ine. And this is the first reason, the
singular fitness of Christ for this work, because of the Dignity of his person.

Reason 2. The singular fitness of Christ for this employment in respect of
the sutablenesse of his Offices. There is a threefold misery upon all men, or a
threefold bar to communion with God.

1. The guilt of their sins which themselves are never able to expiate, or
satisfy for.

2. The blindness of their minds, the cure whereof is too difficult for any
creature Physician.

3. Their bondage and captivity to sin and Satan, which are enemies too strong
for man to deal with. Sutably to these three great necessities, Jesus Christ is
anointed of God to a threefold Office, of a Priest, a Prophet, a King; the
former of which Offices he exercises on our behalf to God, and the two last,
from God to us.

1. The Priestly Office of Christ is the great, the only relief we have against
the guilt of sin; the work of the Priesthood consisted under the Law, chiefly
of these two parts.

1. Satisfaction for the sins of the people. Lev. 4.16, 17, 18, 19, etc. 2.
Intercession unto God on their behalf, Levit. 16.12, 13.
Both which were verified in Christ our great high Priest, Hebr. 4.14. And
hence it is that the Apostle encourages us to come with boldness unto the
Throne of Grace, Hebr. 4.16. What was done by others Typically, was done by
Christ Really.

1. His satisfaction in discharging those debts which his people had run into
with Divine justice to the utmost farthing, and this he did by offering up that
one single sacrifice which was infinitely more worth than all those multitudes
of sacrifices offered up of old, and from which all former sacrifices had their
virtue and efficacy. Ephesians. 5.2.
The Priests of old offered up creatures, but this high Priest offers up
himself; they offered the blood of Bullocks, etc. Hebr. 9.13, 14. but Christ
the blood of God, Acts 20.28. They offered many sacrifices, and Christ but one,
but such a one as infinitely exceeded all their many; such a one as perfected
for ever them that are sanctified, Hebr. 10.14. One Sun is worth more than
thousands of Stars, and one Jewel than millions of ordinary stones; and so one
Christ is more effectual than all Lebanon, or the cattle on a thousand hills.

2. His intercession; this is the other part of his Priestly Office; his
satisfaction, that was performed on earth; his Intercession is performed
chiefly in heaven: by the former he purchased pardon and Reconciliation, 2 Cor.
5.19. compared with Verse 21. by the latter he applies the benefits he has
purchased; his sufferings, though they were but while he was on earth, yet the
benefit of them extends to all ages of the Church, both before and since his
passion; and his Intercession is that which sues out these blessings for his
people; and therefore that great Apostle joins both together as the foundation
of all his comfort, Romans 8.33. Christ has died, who still makes Intercession;
and both these are so full, so sufficient a relief against the guilt of sin,
that as we have no other, so we need no other; as the High Priests bore the
names of the people before the Lord, so does Jesus Christ the names of his
Elect; Heb. 9.25. Heb. 9.12.24. Heb. 10.12. Heb. 11.25. 1 John 2.1.
but the High Priests of Old, were at certain times only to appear before the
Lord, once a year to enter into the holy place; but Christ our spiritual High
Priest, is not only entered, but sat down at the right hand of God, to
negotiate constantly on his Churches behalf; He ever lives to make
Intercession, Heb. 11:25. And besides the constancy, consider the prevalency of
his Intercession; that God that regards the cry of Ravens, that will not
altogether neglect the humiliation of Ahab, that God that is so ready to answer
and honor the prayers of his own people, cannot but much more regard the
prayers of his only Son, praying by his blood, and praying for nothing more
than what himself has deserved and purchased. He that is such a great High
Priest, is excellently fitted in respect of this Office, for the work of
Mediation.

2. The Prophetical Office of Christ, is the great, Deuteronomy. 18.15. Joh. 1.24, 25,
45. John 6.14.
the only relief we have against the blindness and ignorance of our minds. He
is that great Prophet of his Church whom Moses foretold, the Jews expected,
and all men needed; that Sun of Righteousness, who by his glorious beams
dispels those mists of ignorance and error, which darken the minds of men,
and is therefore styled by way of eminency, that light, John 1.8. and the true
light, Joh. 1.9.

The execution of this Prophetical Office, is partly by revealing so much of
the Will of God as was necessary to our salvation, partly by making those
revelations powerful and effectual.

1. In revealing the Will of God; for no man has seen God at any time; the
only begotten Son, which is in the bosom of the Father, he has declared him,
Joh. 1.18. The manner of revealing the mind of God, has been different in
several ages.

1. Sometimes making use of instruments; who were either ordinary; as under the
Law, the Priests whose lips should preserve knowledge; and under the Gospel,
Pastors and Teachers: Mal. 2.7. 2 Chronicles. 15.3. Ephesians. 4.11, 12, 13.
Or else extraordinary; as Prophets under the Law; and Apostles, and
Evangelists, in the first plantation of the Gospel.

2. For sometime instructing his Church immediately in his own person, Heb.
1.1, 2.

2. In enlightening effectually the souls of his people: in causing the blind
to see, and making them who were once darkness, to be light in the Lord, Ephesians.
5.2. Thus he instructs by his Word, and by his Spirit, 1 Pet. 1.12. and by that
Sovereignty he has over the hearts of men, opens their hearts to receive his
counsels. He that can thus speak, not only to the ear, but to the heart, is
also in this Office, excellently fitted for the work of Mediation.

3. The Kingly Office of Christ, is the great, the only relief we have against
our bondage to sin and Satan. He to whom all power is given in heaven, Mat.
28.18. Ephesians. 1.20, 21, 22. Heb. 2.8. Phil. 2 9, 10, 11. 1 Cor. 15.27, 28. Isa
61.1.
and in earth, Mat. 28.18. He whom God has raised from the dead, and set at
his own right hand in heavenly places, far above all principality and power,
and might, and dominion, and every name that is named, not only in this world,
but also in that which is to come; and has put all things under his feet, and
gave him to be the Head over all things to the Church: It is he that restores
liberty to the captives, and opens the Prison doors to them that are bound.
This great Office of a King, he executes chiefly in these Royal acts.

1. In gathering to himself a people out of all kindreds, Genesis 49.10. Isa 55.4,
5. 1 Cor. 5.4, 5. 1 Pet. 1.3, 5. Ephesians. 4.12, 13. 1 These. 4.16, 17.
Nations and tongues; and in making them a willing people in the day of his
power, Psalm. 110.3.

2. In governing that people by Laws, Officers, and Censures of his own
ordaining, Isaiah 33.22. Ephesians. 4.11, 12. Mat. 18.17, 18.

3. In bringing all his elect into a state of saving grace, and preserving that
grace alive in their souls, which himself has wrought, though it be as a
spark of fire in an Ocean of water, in carrying it on to perfection, and
crowning it with glory.

4. In restraining, overruling, and at last destroying all his and his
Churches enemies, Psalm 110.1. those who will not submit to the Scepter of his
grace, he rules with his Iron rod, and will at last dash them in pieces like a
Potters Vessel, Psalm. 2.9.

And thus is Christ not only in respect of the dignity of his person, but the
suitableness of his Offices, the only fit Mediator between God and man.

The doctrinal part of this Scripture being thus cleared, take one word by way
of application.

Use. This may inform us of the unspeakable folly and misery of all such as
despise this Mediator; there is but one Mediator, but one way of Reconciliation
unto God, but one way of having sin pardoned, our natures cleansed, the favor
of God restored, our lost condition recovered, and that is through the
Mediation of Christ; and shall it be said of any of us? as Christ himself
speaks of those foolishly obstinate Jews, they would not come unto him, Col.
3.4.
that they might have life, Joh. 5.40. There is in Christ the life of
Justification, to free us from that eternal death the Law sentences us unto;
the life of sanctification to free us from that spiritual death we are under by
nature; there is in him a sufficient relief against whatever is discouraging;
and shall we be so little our own friends, so false to our own concernments, as
to reject his proffered help, notwithstanding we do so highly need it?

1. In rejecting this Mediator, you sin against the highest and greatest mercy
that ever was vouchsafed to creatures; it is mentioned as an astonishing act of
love in God, that he should so love the world, as to give his only begotten
Son, etc. Joh. 3.16. so] beyond all comparison, Phil. 2.6, 7, 8. John 15.13.
compared with Romans 5.8.
so] beyond all expression; and oh what an amazing condescension was it in
Christ, who though he th^ught it no robbery to be equal with God, was yet
pleased to make himself of no reputation, and took upon him the form of a
servant, became obedi^nt unto death, even the death of the cross; and all this
as our Mediator? there is not any mercy we enjoy, but it is the fruit of this
mercy.

Ephesians. 2.12.
2. You hereby read your condition, the same with Pagans; the emphasis of whose
misery, consists in this, that they are without Christ, and therefore without
hope. Nay, the same with Devils, who have no Mediator interposing on their
behalf to God; but as they sinned with a Tempter, so they perish without a
Savior; this is their misery, and shall this be any of our choice?

3. Your condition is hereby rendered in this respect worse than theirs, in that
you despise that mercy which they were never proffered.

The danger of this sin, you may find awakeningly set down by the Apostle,
Hebrews 2.3. Hebr. 10.28, 29, 30. Hebrews 12.25.

Use. Be persuaded then to make use of Christ in all his Offices, in whom you
have an universal antidote against all discouragements.

Heb 12.24.
Are your consciences alarmed with the thunder of Scripture-threats, and curses
of the Law, fly to that blood of sprinkling, the voice whereof is much louder
than the cry of your sins.

John 3.14.
Are you stung with the sense of your corruptions, look up to Christ as your
Brazen Serpent, that he may cure these wounds and deliver you from death.

1 John 2.1. Heb. 4.14, 16.
Are you discouraged from prayer, because your prayers have hitherto been so
sinfully defective? consider the Intercession of Christ, and take encouragement
from thence.

Are you afflicted with your own unteachablenesse? look up to him as the great
Prophet sent of God, and beg of him the inward and effectual teachings of his
Spirit, and he would speak as powerfully in his Word to your dead hearts, as he
once spoke to dead Lazarus. John 12.43.


Are you disquieted with doubts and fears, in respect of your own
perseverance? though temptations are boisterous, Col. 1.11.
and corruptions violent, look up to him who sits at the right hand, till all
his enemies become his footstool, that he would strengthen you.

Are you full of fears because of Zion, the afflictions, dangers, Psalm. 110.1.
Col. 1.21.
enemies of the Church? remember he is the Head over all things to the Church.

In a word, whatever your afflictions or troubles are, the Mediation of Christ
is a sufficient relief; and therefore sit not down dejectedly mouring, Genesis
21.19.
like Hagar weeping at the fountain side.

OF CHRIST'S Humiliation.
PHILIP. 2.8. He humbled himself, and became obedient unto death, even the
death of the Cross.


THis Chapter begins with one of the most pathetical and powerfully pressed
Exhortations that we meet with in the whole Scripture: The Apostle is in one of
his high streins and raptures of Rhetoric, conjuring the Philipians (as it
were) by all that they accounted dear and precious, unto brotherly unity and
amity, Nullus jacentem suscitat nisi inflexione sui. Nierem.
and to this end, to humility of mind, and a mutual condescension. He that
will lift up, and embrace another that is fallen, must himself stoop down; and
because men are rather drawn by example, than driven by precept, he propounds
to them a pattern beyond all parallel: Let this mind be in you which was also
in Christ Jesus; who being in the form of God, thought it not robbery to be
equal with God, but made himself of no reputation, etc. As if he had said,
Jesus Christ was as high as the highest, coequal with God, it was his right to
stand upon even ground with his Father, and without any wrong to him might have
pleaded his Peerage, and yet he strangely humbled, and abased himself; here is
your Copy. How lowly should Christians be? seeing humanity, the form of a
servant, nay, death it self were not accounted too low for their Lord; Christ
himself has just such another Argument; John 13.14. If I your Lord and Master
have washed your feet, ye ought also to wash one another feet. Let no
Christian stand upon his pantofles, seeing Christ humbled himself, and became
obedient to death, the death of the Cross.

In which words we have, 1. The depth of Christ's humiliation: 1. Specified,
death. 2. Aggravated, even the death of the Cross.
2. The Manner of his humiliation, where we may note these two remarkable
circumstances. 1. His voluntarinesse, he humbled himself. 2. His obedience, he
became obedient unto death.



The Scripture has observed to us these three special steps of Christ's
humiliation.

1. He stoop't down to become a man. 2. He condescended to put his neck under
the yoke of the Law. 3. He appeared in the likeness of sinful flesh.
1. He stoop't down to become a man; he left the warm bosom of his Father,
and took himself lodgings in the womb of a Virgin; he stripped himself of his
Robes of glory, to put on the course homespun, and threadbare tatters of a
frail humanity; and he that thought it no robbery to be equal with God,
submitted to an estate lower than some of his own creatures; this is the first
Riddle in the Apostles great mystery of godliness: God was manifest in the
flesh. And sure, 1 Timothy 3.16.
that the most magnificent Monarch in the world should become a Toad, that the
whole Host of Angels should be degraded into worms; that this goodly frame of
the Creation should be unpinned and annihilated, or crowded into the narrow
compass of one single a^ome, is infinitely a less wonder, than for God to
become a man; had Christ been made an Angel, it had been infinitely below
himself, and yet then he had remained a spirit, and stayed something nearer
home; but he clothed his Divinity with a body; the Word was made flesh; he
made himself of no reputation, (...).
and was made in the likeness of men, Ver. 6. He emptied himself of his credit;
to become a man was so much beneath him, that upon the matter it undid him in
point of reputation. The greatest step of Christ's humiliation, was his
Incarnation; for that being man he should dye, is nothing so astonishing a
wonder, and inconceivable, as that being God he should be made a man.

2. He condescended to put his neck under the yoke of the Law. God (says the
Apostle) sent forth his son made of a woman; Gal. 4.4.
and though that be very much, yet there is more added, made under the Law.
Though every man that is born of a woman, every mothers child among us, be
necessarily subject to a Law, and it is no condescension, its no whit below the
greatest Prince on earth that gives Laws to many thousands; yet this was a very
great submission in Christ. Adam while he continued in a state of integrity and
perfection, was then under a Law, and did not yield or abate any thing of his
right by it; the blessed and glorious Angels continue under an obligation to
obedience, and they do not by this lose any of their birthright for a
creature; as a creature, is indispensably subjected to the Law of its Maker, by
virtue of its creatureship and dependence; and should any one of them attempt a
disobligation, it were an essay toward a prodigious and praeternatural
Antinomianisme. But the Son of God, the Eternal and Independent Lawmakers did
admirably abase himself, to come under the obediential observance, and
poisonous malediction of that Law, upon which there was only the print of his
own authoririty; for though the humane nature abstractly considered, is as a
creature bound to the observance of a Law, yet being in conjunction with the
second person in the Trinity, and assumed into the personality of the Son of
God, it was exempted from obedience, and indemnified as to curse and penalty.
Christ submitted to the Ceremonial Law in his circumcision, put his neck under
the yoke of the moral Law, to fulfill the preceptive part by his Perfect
obedience, and satisfy the maledictive part by his complete sufferings; all
which subjection was not a debt that God could have challenged of him, but a
pure voluntary subscription; The Law is not made in some sense for a righteous
man, 1. Tim. 1.9.
but it is not made in any sense for the glorious God.

3. And which is a step beneath both these; he appeared as a sinful man, or in
the likeness of sinful flesh; Romans 8.3.
subjection to the Law made him very low, but the similitude of sin, which is
the violation of the Law was a far greater abasement. Christ's appearing in the
likeness of sinful flesh, must not be understood as though his flesh were only
a likeness and appearance, Non in similitudine carnis quasi caro non esset
caro, sed in similitudine carnis peccati, quia caro erat, sed peccati caro non
erat. Aug. Heb. 9. ult.
or he had only an aerial, and fantastical body; as some of old absurdly
fancied and affirmed; he had true real flesh, though but the similitude and
resemblance of sinful flesh; the word likeness relates not to flesh, but sin;
not flesh in likeness, but sin in likeness; a being under a Law implies nothing
of sin; it was the case of Adam, and the Angels, and both without sin, or any
thing that looked like sin; but our blessed Lord condescended not only to
subjection, but to the print and appearances of transgression. He shall appear
(says the Apostle) the second time without sin unto salvation. Intimating,
that the first time he appeared with sin upon him; when he returns in glory, he
shall have no dints of sin upon him; the smell or fingeing of it shall not be
upon his garments; but his first entrance was with many of those prints and
marks that sin (where ever it is) uses to leave behind it. Sin was neither
inherent in him, nor committed by him; but imputed to him. Sin never defiled
him, but it defaced him; he had nothing of its impurity, but much of its
penalty; he was not tainted with that plague, but he was pleased to take upon
him the tokens. In the same Chapter the Prophet tells us, He had done no
violence, neither was any deceit in his mouth, and he was numbered with
Transgressors. Isa. 53.9, 12.
He trod not one step awry in sin, but many of the footsteps of sin appeared
upon him; to instance in a few.

1. Poverty: he came in a low and mean condition, and that's the very likeness
of sin, the great bankrupt that brought all to beggary. Though he was rich, yet
for our sakes he b came poor. 2 Cor. 8.9.
When he rode to Jerusalem, it was not in state, in a gilded Coach with six
horses; or mounted like a Lord Mayor with embossed trappings; but as one might
rather say, like a Beggar that is sent with a Pass from one Town to another;
Matthew. 21.5.
Sitting upon an Ass, Matthew. 8.20.
and a Colt, the fool of an Ass. The Foxes have holes, and the Birds of the
Air have nests, but the Son of man had not where to lay his head. He was at
such a very low ebb as to worldly riches, Matthew. 17. ult. (...) valet, 2 s. 6 d.
that once he, and one of his Apostles, could not both of them make a purse for
half a crown to pay their tax without the working of a Miracle.

Isa. 55.3. 2 Thessalonians. 2.3.
2. Another likeness of sin was sorrow: He was a man of sorrows, and acquainted
with griefs; as Antichrist is called a man of sin, his very make and
constitution is sin, so was Christ a man of sorrows, and as it were made up of
them, they were in a manner his complexion. We read often of his weeping, but it
is not observed that ever there was a smile upon his face. Now sin and sorrow
are so near of kin, that the Hebrew language compriseth both in one word; (...)
they are as like as mother and daughter, and both called by the same name.

3. A third likeness of sin was shame and reproach: Sin was the inlet of
shame; when our first Parents had sinned, their eyes were opened, Genesis 3.7.
Chap. 2. ult.
and they knew that they were naked, and sewed fig leaves toge her. Why they
were naked before, and were not ignorant of it, but then it was no shame to
them; sin gave them a sight of their nakedness, so as they never saw it
before: This similitude of sin was upon Christ, when he was called Glutton,
Wine-bibber, Conjurer, Blasphemer, Devil, and what not, that might cause and
increase contempt? We hid (as it were) our faces from him, (says the Prophet)
he was despised, and we esteemed him not; Isa. 55.3.
how vile and contemptible is that person, upon whom we turn the back in scorn?
to whom we will not vouchsafe so much as a look, or the glance of an eye! I am
a reproach of men, (says the Psalmist in the person of Christ) and desp sed of
the people. Psalm. 22.6.


4. Another similitude of sin, was the withdrawment of his Father, and clouding
the li^h^ of his counte^ance. His fathers forsaking him, whereof he makes that
heavy heartbreaking complaint, Matthew 27.46.
My God, my God, why have thou for^aken me? The frown of his Father, and
brow-beating of his displeasure, was the very likeness of sin; for from that
noisome vapor only arises a cloud to over-cast the light of his countena ce.
Nothing but that builds up a partition wall betwixt him and us. Your iniquities
have separated betwixt you and your God, and your sins have hid his face from
you. We hid our face from Christ, Isa. 59 2.
and in that there was reproach; but alas, this was nothing in comparison; a
Prince need not trouble himself that he has not the smile of his Groom: What
if all creatures in heaven and earth had hid their faces from Christ, he could
well have born up under it; but the hiding of his Fathers face even broke his
heart, as a burden intolerable.

5. And lastly, Christ submitted to death, and that is another likeness of sin.
Sin entered into the world, and death by sin; Romans 5.12.
they came together as it were, hand in hand; this was ^he penalty inflicted
upon sin, In the day thou e^test, thou shall su^ely dye. Genesis 2.17.
Now in this respect Christ abased himself to look like a sinner; Humbled
himself, and became obedient to death, the death of the Cross.

In the further Amplification of this, I shall endeavor to show three things.

1. What kind of death Christ humbled himself unto. 2. In what manner Christ
underwent that death. 3. Upon what grounds Christ thus humbled himself to
death.
1. What kind of death Christ humbled himself unto; and this I cannot omit,
the Apostle having added such a remarkable Emphasis by way of reduplication;
Death, even the death of the Cross. It was not only a violent death, and
there is much in that, that he dyed not a natural, but a violent death: Nor
indeed could he, both because there was no sin in him to be the inlet of a
natural death, nor would that have been satisfactory for the sin of others. It
was not only (I say) a violent death; but such a violent death, as had in it a
more than ordinary violence, a death by crucifying, which has these three
imbittering Circumstances. 1. Pain. 2. Shame. 3. Curse.


1. Pain: The easiest death is painful; a deathbed, though a down-bed, is for
the most part a little ease. Oh my gowty feet, says Asa! O my cold benumbed
body, says David! O my leprous skin, says Uzziah! O my pained a king head
cries the son of the Shunamite! but in the death of Christ there was the pain
of many deaths put together; in the very dawning of the Gospel, the very first
time we find the death of Christ mentioned, it is set out by bruising; Genesis
3.15.
It shall bruise the head, and thou shall bruise his heel, Isa. 53.10. (...)
Matthew. 26.39.
viz. his humane nature, that which could be bruised: It pleased the Lord to
bruise him, he has put him to grief; bruised him as with a Pestel in a Mortar;
hence was it he prayed so earnestly that the Cup might pass; it was so full of
worme-wood and gall, and the pain so violent which he was to encounter, that he
screwed up his request to the highest pin, if it be possible; wise and resolute
men do not use to complain of a little; they will not cry oh at a flea-bite, or
the burning of a finger; and some of the Martyrs have born up with such
Christian courage, and gallantry in death, that being on the Rack they would
not be loosed; they were tortured, Heb. 11.35.
not accepting deliverance, (says the Apostle) the incomes and supports of
Divine Grace, made an abatement of their pains; oh but what shall we say of the
bitterness of that death, where the Author of all their strength, God and man
bewrayes passions? how much dregs was there in that Cup which Christ was so
loath to drink of?

Three things made Christ's death so exceeding painful.

Optime complexionatus. Aquin.
1. The piercing his hands and feet, those sinnews and sensitive parts. Christ's
body was all over excellently well tempered, and so his sense admirably acute;
but to be pierced and dug through hands and feet, parts so full of nerves
and sinnews, must needs aggravate and augment the smart; They have pierced my
hands and my feet, Psalm. 22.16.
was the Prophetical complaint of the Psalmist, fulfilled in Christ.

2. Another thing that adds much to the pain of Christ's death, was the
extension and distortion of his body; the Cross was a rack to him, and he was
stretched as upon the Tenters; for when any persons were to be crucified, the
Cross you must understand, l^y all along upon the ground till the party was
nailed to it, and stretched out at his full length, and afterward erected; and
to this the Psalmist had respect in that sad complaint of his, I may tell all
my bones; Psalm. 22 17.
he was so racked, that his bones were almost ready to start out of the skin.

3. The death of Christ was more painful, by reason of its slownesse, and
gradual approach. Christ was from the third, Compare Mar. 15.25. with 34.
to the ninth hour in dying; from nine in the morning, till three in the
afternoon, six complete hours -- When bloody Tyrants would make any man's death
more than ordinarily painful, they have devised ways to cause a lingering
death; and when news was once brought to one of them, that such a one was dead
suddenly, he cried out, Evasit, he has made an escape. When death comes, the
slower its pace, the heavier its tread; the longer the Seige, the fiercer the
storm; but this is true of Christ, more than others; for when they are long in
dying, they usually faint, and their spirits abate, they are brought step by
step to deaths door, and dead before death; but with Christ it was otherwise,
he stood all that while in perfect strength; the vigor and acuteness of his
senses was no whit blunted, or made less sensible of pain. That is a notable
Scripture, Mark 15.37, 39. Jesus cried with a loud voice, and gave up the
Ghost; and when the Centurion, which stood ov^r against him, saw that he so
cried out, and gave up the Ghost, he said, Truly this man was the Son of God; a
very strange inference, this man dies, and gives up the Ghost, and therefore he
is the Son of God. The Argument one would think, were strong to the contrary;
but here lies the strength of his reason, When he saw he so cried out, and
died, he said he was the Son of God. He very well knew, that in other men
strength abated leisurely, their speech grew low, and they used to fumble and
falter, and rattle in the throat; but as for this man, he gave such a cry at
the last gasp as he never heard, and thereupon infers, Truly he was the Son of
God.

2. Another bitter ingredient unto the death of Christ was shame; and this was
much more than the former. There is nothing so sharp and cutting, so
intolerable to an ingenuous and noble spirit as shame. The pain of an hundred
deaths, is more easily undergone by such, than the reproach of one. Now in this
respect, the thieves fared much better than he did; we read of no irrision, no
inscription, no taunts, or sarcasms cast upon them; they had only pain to
encounter; Christ both pain and scorn; the soldiers, the Jews, the very
thieves flouted him. He endured the Cross, Heb. 12.2.
(says the Apostle) and despised the shame. The Cross was it self a^
ignominious death, the death of a slave; Fecinus est vincire civem Romanum,
scelus verbera e, quid dicam in crucem tollere? Cic. Zach 11.13.
no Free man, or man of fashion was ever put to it; and to this day, we say of
one that is hanged, He dies like a dog; yea, but Christ did not only dye such
an ignominious and reproachful death as this, but he was sold to it, and a
goodly price that he was prized at; the death it self was shameful, the death
of a slave, and this was an aggravating circumstance of ignominy, that he was
sold to it as a slave; all the while he was dying, he stood naked upon the
Cross. Now nakedness is our shame; he was scorned and derided on all sides;
they mocked and shook the head at him; all his Offices were derided; his
Priestly Office; He saved others, himself he cannot save; his Prophetical
Office, Mar. 27.42.
when they blinded him, and bid him proph^sie, who it was that smote him. His
Kingly Office, when they put a robe upon him, and in mockery said, Hay^e King
of the Jews. Thieves, and notorious Villains were crucified with him, and he
put in the midst, as though he were worse than both of them, and all their
vill^inies, and mis-demeanours had concentred in him; they spit in his face,
and that is a notable mark of infamy, such an one as God allotted for the
reproach of him that refused to build up his Brothers house. Deuteronomy. 25.9.
And all this was acted without the Gate; they thought him not worthy to suffer
within the Walls of their City, lest forsooth, he might have polluted it. This
the Apostle takes special notice of; Jesus, Heb. 13.12.
that he might sanctify the people with his own Blood, suffered without the
Gate; which in the next verse he explaines, and calls his reproach; as under
the Law, the Blasphemer was by Gods appointment to be stoned without the Camp;
and amongst us at this day, Levit. 24.14.
the most base and villainous Malefactors are carted away to Tyburne, and not
executed upon Tower hill, that is honorable.

3. The sting of Christ's death is yet behind, it was envenomed with a curse;
Deuteronomy. 21.23.
though pain be bad, and shame worse, yet the curse is worst of all. He that is
hanged, is accursed of God. That was (it is true) a Ceremonial Curse, but it
was typical, and had special relation to Christ, who was under a real, moral
curse; and so it is applied by the Apostle, Christ has Redeemed us from the
curse of the Law, Gal. 3.13.
being made a curse for us; for it is written, Cursed is every one that hangs
on a Tree. And here the Apostle Peter puts a remarkable accent, speaking of
Christ to the Jews, Whom ye slew, Acts 5.30.
(says he) and hang d on a Tree; intimating that bare slaying him, would not
have been so much as hanging him on a tree; the Jews had many other ways of
putting people to death, as stoning, strangling, burning, beheading, but only
crucifying had a curse annexed to it. Christ was made sin for us, that we might
meet with, and intercept that wrath and curse that was due to us, and breaking
out upon us. We read in the story of his passion, that when Christ was going to
wrestle with that dreadful agony in the garden, he passed over the brook
Cedron. John 18.1.
And if we consult the History of the Kings, we shall find that when any godly
ones amongst them, as Hezekiah, Asa, Josiah, reformed and purged the City and
Temple of Idolatry, they cast the abominable and cursed things into the brook
Kidron. 2 Chronicles. 15.16.29.16.30.14. Psalm. 110. ult.
Christ was in his sufferings, to drink of the brook in the way, to pass over,
and wade through a River full of curses.

2. In what manner Christ underwent this death. It behooves us to consider the
manner of our performing duties to Christ, for their acceptance; and it will
be worth the while for us to ponder the manner of Christ's shedding his blood
for us; both for our consolation and imitation.

Now as to the manner of his death, three circumstances call for our
consideration.

He dyed Willingly. Obediently. Humbly and Meekly.


1. Willingly; he was a Volunteer in death; and his offering up himself in
sacrifice, was a free will offering; his Fathers determination made it
necessary; and thus, Christ ought to suffer, and the Son of man must be lifted
up; but his Fa^hers preordination gave not his death the formality of a
Sacrifice. In regard of men it was violent, They slew him with wick^d hands;
this makes it not the sacrifice neither; they were not the Priests, but the
butchers of Christ. In respect of himself it was voluntary; that made the
Sacrifice; Then said I, Lo I come; in the volume of the Book it is written of
me, I delight to do thy Will, Psalm. 40.7, 8.
oh my God, yea, thy Law is within my heart. As if he had said, John 10.17, 18
(...). Theoph. in loc. Ibid.
My very heart is ready for the shedding of my heart-blood. I lay down my life,
(says Christ) no man takes it from me, but I lay it down of my self; though
the Jews took it away, yet not against his Will; it was their murtherous will
to have it, and his gracious Will to give it. I have power to lay down my life,
and I have power to take it again. As if he had said, were it not my pleasure
to part with it, with all the power they could make, they were never able to
wrest it out of my hands.

Mat. 26.53.
When one of Christ's followers struck off the High Priests servants ear, Christ
gave him a check; Think st thou, says he) that I cannot now pray to my Father,
and he shall presently give me more than twelve legions of Angels. As if he had
said, I need not such weapons, I could commission Twelve Legions of Angels to
be of my lifeguard: one were sufficient to do the business; as what a rout
did one Angel once make in Sennacheribs army? 2 King. 19.35.
but I could put twelve legions into battle array for my rescue, were not I as
ready to be crucified, as they are to crucify me. And when the soldiers came
to break his legs, John 19 33. Suffixus spiritum cum verba dimisit prevento
carnificis officio. Tertul. Luke 12.50.
they forbore, because he was already dead. Such was his forwardness to die,
that he saved them a labor. Nay, there was not a bare willingness, but on his
part, strong desires to dye. I have a baptism to be baptized with, and how am
I straightened till it be accomplished? his death was full of pain, but his heart
was so set upon it, that he was in a manner pained, till he came to dye; and
not to have dyed, had been a death to him.

Heb 5.7. Mat. 26.39.
Object. But it will be objected, Christ feared death, he prayed against it,
and therefore his Will had a repugnancy against it:

Answ. This does not oppose, but rather testify and evidence Christ's
willingness to dye; for he may be considered as a private person, of the same
natural affections, desires, and abhorrencies with other men; and so the bitter
cup was justly feated, and declined; or in a public relation, as Mediator, a
merciful and faithful High Priest, and so he most willingly submitted himself
to it; and this willingness of Christ, ratione officii, was so much the
greater, because rati^ne naturae, he could not but have strong reluctancies
against it.

2. Christ humbled himself to death obediently. It was his will to dye, and yet
he dyed not of his own will, but in obedience to his Fathers. We have them both
conjoined, Heb. 10.7. Lo I come to do thy Will, O God. And Joh. 10.18. I lay
down my life of my self; this Commandment have I received of my Father; he
became obedient unto death, (says the Text) In respect of God, Christ's death
was justice and mercy; in respect of man, it was murder and cruelty; in
respect of himself, it was obedience and humility. To obey, is be^^er than
sacrifice. Christ's obedience was the best of his sacrifice; when he prayed to
his Father, that the cup might pass, it was with this Clause of exception, Not
as I w^ll, but as thou will.

3. Christ submitted himself to death humbly, and meekly; he was oppressed, and
afflicted, yet opened he not his mouth; not that he spoke nothing at all, but
he was silent as to murmurings and revilings; that was the work of his
persecutors; not a word passed from him that might argue passion, or
impatience, as from one of the Thieves that were crucified with him; he was
brought as a Lamb to the slaughter; he was not enraged, or exasperated, with
all the injustice, cruelty, and oppression of his enemies; not one word in heat
of blood, to them whose errand was to shed his blood. Friend (says he) to
Judas, betrayest thou the Son of man with a kiss? (...). Chrysostom.
What meekness was here? though I confess there was a tart rebuke in that
kind compellation, and Christ calling him friend, smartly checked him for his
unfriendly carriage. When one of his Disciples cut off Malchus his ear, Put up
thy sword, (says he) We Will have none of that club law; he touches his ear,
and heales it. When he was reviled, he reviled not again; 1 Pet. 2.23. Psalm.
64.3.
when he suffered, he threatened not; his enemies shot their arrows, even
bitter words; but they recoyled not upon them. Nay, he returned not only no ill
words, but gave prayers in exchange for their taunts and revilings; Father
forgive them, Luke 23.34.
for they know not what they do. It had been meekness to have gone through his
sufferings without murmuring; but it was an high and heroical act of meekness
indeed, to pour out prayers for them, that were such busy instruments in
pouring out his blood; he was so far from biting the stone, that he kissed it,
and the hand that threw it.

3. Upon what grounds Christ thus humbled himself to death: What cogent
necessity was upon him; for we may not conceive that Christ thus humbled
himself to death upon trivial and impertinent considerations; as David said
once of Abner, Died Christ as a fool dies? 2 Samuel 3.33.
No sure, it was upon these six weighty grounds.

1. That Scripture prophesies and Predictions might be accomplished; all which
represent him as coming in died garments from Bozrah. Genesis 3.15.
The first Scripture that ever mentions Christ, shows him a bleeding and
crucified Savior. Now Christ was to make good to a tittle every thing that had
been before written of him. In Saint Matthews Gospel this is very remarkable,
who above all the rest has most punctually observed the fulfilling of
Prophesies, with whom the burden and under-song of almost every event is, ut
impleretur, that it might be fulfilled which was spoken by the mouth of the
Prophets. Christ himself renders this account of his sufferings in that
Discourse of his with his Disciples upon the Road; Oh fools, Luke 24.25, 26.
and slow of heart, to believe all that the Prophets have spoken! Ought not
Christ to have suffered these things? The Prophets have all spoken this with
one mounth, and is it possible I should make them all liars?

2. That Scripture types might be fulfilled; many whereof were to decipher and
prefigure the death of Christ, as Isaac's being offered, the slaying of the
Sacrifices, the lifting up of the Serpent; Now had not Christ's blood been shed,
and he lift up upon the Cross, there had been no correspondency in the
Antitype; as Moses lift up the Serpent in the Wilderness, so must the Son of
man be lifted up. Joh. 3.14.
Had not Christ been made a Sacrifice, most of the Legal Ceremonies, and
precedent prefigurations had either spoken lies, or at least nothing to the
purpose.

3. That his Will and Testament might be firm and effectua^; in his life he
had given many precious Legacies, and they had been all void, and to no more
purpose than a Deed without a Seal at it, unless ratified and confirmed; had
not Christ given himself to death, all his other gifts that he had bequeathed
in his Will, had been gif^lesse; this is the Apostles Argument, Where a
Testament is, there must also of necessity be the death of the Testator; for a
Testament is of force after men are dead, Heb. 9.16, 17.
otherwise it is of no force at all while the Testator lives. A man that makes
a Will, does not intend that any body should be the better by it, but upon his
death: Suppose a man have a Legacy of a thousand pounds given him, he is not
one whit the richer so long as his friend lives, the Will holds not good in
Law, nor can he sue for one penny of it. This Cup (says Christ) is the New
Testament in my blood; Luke 22.20.
that New Testament which is ratified by my blood: Christ's death gives life not
only to his people, but to his promises. It is expedient for you that I go
away, John 16.17.
(says he) for If I go not away, the Comforter will not come: The sending of
the Comforter was one principal clause of his last Testament; but till the
death of the Testator, the Will could not be put in suit, it signified nothing,
and was not pleadable. The Holy Ghost was not yet given, because that Jesus was
not yet glorified; what? had they received nothing of the Spirit? yes; John
7.39.
but not according to that plentiful proportion, which he intended and promised
in his Will. The Legacy was paid but in part, because the Testator was yet
alive; he was no sooner dead, and got to heaven, but he makes all good to a
tittle, as you may read, Acts 2.2, 3, 4.

4. That justice may be satisfied; the sentence upon sin was passed from the
mouth of a righteous Judge; now though justice might admit of a change of
persons, there was no room for a change of penalties; death was threatened, and
death must be inflicted. If Christ will save sinners from death, justice will
not let him save himself from death; Heb. 9.22.
without shedding of blood there is no remission: Christ undertaking to cross
out, and cover the black lines of sin, must draw over them the red lines of
blood: What the chief Priests said concerning Christ, is true in some sense,
though false in theirs, He saved others, Matthew. 27.42.
himself he cannot save: Justice was to have its penni-worths out of our
Surety, and nothing could be abated of blood. God has set forth Christ to be a
propitiation through faith in his blood, to declare his righteousness for the
remission of sins, that he might be just. Romans 3.25, 26.


5. That he that has the power of death might be destroyed; Hebr. 2.14.
through death he destroyed him that has the power of death, that is the
Devil. Satan has the power of death, not as a Judge, but as an Executioner;
and Christ's death has destroyed him; not taken away his being, or undivel'd
him; but shattered his Forces, broken, and subdued him. The crucifying of
Christ was the Devils plot; he put Judas upon betraying him, the Jews upon
accusing him, Pilate upon condemning him, the Soldiers upon executing him; but
our Lord out-shot him in his own Bow, and cut off Goliah's head with Goliah's
Sword: It fared with Satan, as it is storied of a certain Soldier, who being
cu iously inquisitive after the time of his death, went to an Astrologer, who
of a long time would make him no answer, till at the length overcome by his
importunity, he told him that he should dye within three days; whereat the
Soldier being angry, draws his Sword, and kills the Astrologer; for which
murder within three days compass he was executed: And thus Satan plotting the
death of Christ, to put by his own ruin, promoted, and procured it: Our
Saviors death gave him such a deaths wound, as he will never claw off. The
Lion is terrible, (says Chrysostom) not only awake, but sleeping: And so
Christ, not only living, but dying, came off a Conqueror; Judge. 16.30.
as Sampson at his death pulled down the pillars of the house, and made a
greater rout among the Philistines, than in all his life; and therefore it is
very observable when the death of Christ approached, and being in view, Satan
perceived how great disadvantage was like thereby to accrue to him and his
Kingdom; how he laid about, and bestirred himself by all means possible to
hinder it; he put Pet^r upon dissuading him, Master, favor thy self, and let
not this be unto thee; and Christ presently smelt him out in that advice, as
appears by his rebuke, Get thee behind me Satan; Matthew. 16.23. Matthew. 27 19.
he buzzed dreams into the head of Pila es wife, and thereby endeavored to
take him off, and divert him from pronouncing the sentence upon him.

6. To take away the meritorious cause of death; viz. sin: And verily had all
the Devils in hell been routed, and sin, that Devil in the bosom remained
undisturbed, it had been an inconsiderable victory; God sending his own Son in
the similitude of sinful flesh for sin; Romans 8.3.
tha^ is, by a sacrifice for sin, (we have such another Ellipsis, Hebr. 10.6.)
condemned sin in the flesh. Christ by his blood wrote a^ ill of Indictment and
Condemnation against sin, he sued it to an out-lary, and undermi^ed it as to
its dominion and damnation; Romans 6.10.
in that he dyed, he dyed unto sin once: The Saints dye unto sin, namely, by
Mortification; Verse 11.
Reckon ye your selves also to be dead indeed unto sin; but thus there was
never any alive in Christ, but he dyed unto sin, namely, the utter ruin and
undoing of sin: The Messiah shall be cut off, to finish transgression, and make
an and of sins. Dan. 9.24.
There is a double finishing of sin, by consummation, and by consumption; the
meaning is not as though Christ completed that which sinners had left
imperfect, or varnisht over those sins which came out of their hands rude and
unpolished; no, he could neither put an hand, nor set a tool to such work as
this; but to make an end of sin, to eat into the heart, and tear out the bowels
of it; such is Christ's hatred of sin, that rather than it shall live, himself
will dye.

APPLICATION.
Three Uses may be made of this Doctrine; for 1. Information. 2. Exhortation.
3. Comfort.




1. This lets us see the transcendent and inexpressible love of Christ to poor
sinners. Let such as can entertain hard thoughts of Christ, look upon him as
nailed to the Cross, and shedding his blood, and then tell me if they do not
think him in good earnest in the business of saving souls: Oh how was his
heart set upon sinners, that would thus shed his heart-blood for sinners! The
Rabbis have a saying, that upon every apex or tittle of the Law, there hangs a
Mountain of sense and doctrine: In every drop of Christ's blood there is an
Ocean of love; Who loved me, Gal. 2.20.
and gave himse^f for m: The death of Christ was such a demonstration of love,
as the world never saw. When God made the wordl, he intended the evidence of
his power; he ordained hell, dug Tophet, and filled it with fire and
brimstone, and thereby manifested the severity of his j^stice; he humbled
himself to death, and therein his purpose was to demonstrate the transcendency
of his love; this made the love of Christ of such efficacy, and constraining
influence upon the Apostle Paul, Be ause we thus judge, that if one dyed for
all, than were all dead. 2. Cor. 5.14.
When Christ once wept at Lazarus his grave, bystanders made this inference
upon it, Behold how he loved him; John 11.36.
but if weeping at the grave for his death argued such love, what love was it
then to dye, and go down into the grave for Lazarus? It were an easy thing to
lose our selves in this delightful Maze and Labyrinth of love; the righteous
Judge of all the world unrighteously accused and condemned; the Lord of life
was dying, the eternal and ver blessed Son of God struggling with his Fathers
wrath; he that had said I and my Father are one, crying out in his bitter
agony, My God, my God, why have thou forsaken me? He that has the keys of hell
and death, lay sealed up in another grave. Blessed and dear Savior, whither
has thy love to sinners carried thee? Well might the Apostle in an holy
rapture and ecstasy express himself in an elegant contradiction, when he
desired the Ephesians might know the love of Christ, which passes knowledge.
Ephesians. 3.19.


2. Hence learn the horrible and cursed evil of sin; there is sure an
abominable filthiness in that, which nothing but the blood of God could purge
and expiate. We may guess at the depth and breadth of the sore by the plaster
that is prepared and applied. Its a desperate disease that requires such a
desperate cure; sin is an infinitely mischievous evil, which nothing could
remove, but infinitely precious blood. You that view sin in its right features
and proportions, take a prospect from Mount Calvary, look through the
perspective of Christ's blood, and seriously ponder the bitter and dreadful
agonies of the Son of God, when he sweat, and bled, and groaned, and dyed under
the burden of it. You have not yet resisted unto blood, Heb. 12.4.
(says the Apostle) striving against sin; as if he had said, you are not yet
come to the hottest of the battle; it may be you have gone through some light
skirmishes, a few ill words, or outward losses; but when Christ was challenged
by this Goliath, and none durst take up the Gantlet, he resisted unto blood; and
verily the evil of sin is not so much seen, in that thousands are damned for
it, as that Christ dyed for it. If you should see a black vapor arise out of
the earth, and ascend by degrees, till it covered the face of the heavens, and
obscure the Sun in brightest Noonday luster, you would doubtless conclude
there must needs be a strange and preternatural malignity in that vapor. What
shall we then think of sin, that brought down the Son of God from heaven,
darkened his glory, took away his life, laid him in the dust? After whom is the
King of Israel come out? (says David to Saul) after whom do thou pursue,
after a dead dog, after a flea? As if he had said, 1 Samuel 24.14.
methinks the King of Israel should never trouble himself about such a sorry
and inconsiderable thing as I am; a dead dog cannot bite; when alive, indeed he
is a fierce creature, he may fly in a man's face, and tear out his throat, but
death tames him: A dead dog needs no chain, and a flea cannot bite very much,
the mark it makes is but a fleabite; you that have slight thoughts of sin, do
as good as say, that the God of Israel entered into the lists, and armed himself
for the Battle against a dead dog; nay, that he lost the Field, and was worsted
by a flea; the evil of sin is not so much seen, that it is a knife that cuts
our fingers, as that its a knife redded over with the blood of our dear
Redeemer.

3. Hence note the exact and impartial justice of God, and his most righteous
severity against sin; that rather than that shall pass unpunished, his only
begotten, and everlastingly beloved Son shall shed his blood, and become
liable, and obnoxious to a curse. In the blood of Christ as a mirror, is
represented the most condescending mercy, and inflexible severity that ever the
world saw. Son (says God) if thou will undertake for sinners, and undergo that
penalty that is due to sin, thy blood must go for it, and nothing can be
abated; he prays the Cup may pass if possible; but justice was inexorable, he
was upon such terms that it was not possible: God has set forth Christ to be a
propitiation through faith in his blood, Romans 3.25.
to declare his righteousness that he may be just. One would have thought he
would have said to declare his love and mercy, that he may show himself
gracious; nay, but (though there be a truth in that) the Apostle pitches upon
another Attribute, To declare his righteousness that he may be just. If there
were any respect of persons with God, or if exact justice could have warp't,
and been drawn away with any accessory and circumstantial considerations,
doubtless Christ should have gone free, and an indemnity from suffering should
have been the Sons privilege.

4. This is sad and dreadful news to all impenitent and unbelieving sinners;
What will be their doom that have no share in this blood of Christ, and not
only so, but trample it under foot as an unholy thing? Let them look to it, it
will one day rise up against them as a witness for their certain damnation;
for such there is a much sorer punishment; Heb. 10.29.
woe to those that have not the blood of Christ to plead for them; but ten
thousand woes to them that have the blood of Christ pleading against them: And
where it cries not for pardon, it cries out for vengeance with a witness. They
are the enemies of the Cross of Christ, (says the Apostle) whose end is
destruction: Phil. 3.18, 19.
And what better end could it rationally be hoped they should come to, that
have an enmity against the Cross of Christ? If that which is light in th e be
darkness, Matthew. 6.23.
how great is that darkness? If the healing, saving blood of Christ be
destruction, how dreadful is that destruction? the death of Christ is to a
wicked man one of the saddest stories, and most dreadful tragedies that he can
read or hear of; because having no interest in it, he understands what must
certainly be acted upon himself; and if God would not hearken to the prayers of
his Son, how is it likely he should be moved with the cry of Rebels and
Enemies? When God sent the Prophet Jeremiah upon his Errand to the Nations with
the Cup of his fury, that they should drink, and be drunken, and spue, and
fall, and rise no more; upon case of their refusal to drink, tell them (says
he) that lo I begin to bring evil on the City which is called by my Name, Jer.
25.29.
and sh uld ye be utterly unpunished? ye shall not be unpunished. As if God had
said, Carry a Cup, and if they refuse, tell them Jerusalem has been before
them, and I am resolved it shall go round. My own people shall not drink
unpledged, and they shall not be unpunished. God has prepared a Cup for all
Christ-rejecting sinners, warmed with fire, and spiced with brimstone, and if
they wince, and make a sour face, let them know Christ has had it, Gods only
begotten and beloved Son has drunk deep on it, and how, or with what face can
they expect to escape? What! will God say to such a one, Behold, he whose
judgment was not to drink of the Cup, Jer. 49.12.
has assuredly drunken, and art thou he that shall altogether go unpunished?
thou shall not go unpunished, but thou shall surely drink of it.



1. Has Christ shed his blood for sin? let us then shed the blood of sin; let
sin never live one quiet quarter of an hour in our souls, that would not let
Christ live in the world. Christ dyed unto sin for Satisfaction; let us dye
unto sin by Mortification: He died unto sin once, likewise reckon ye also
your selves to be dead indeed unto sin. Romans 6.10, 11.
Every Saint should be (...), as the Apostles phrase is, Romans 6.5. planted
together in the likeness of his death; And he further explaines his meaning,
Ver. 6. Knowing this, that our old man is crucified with him, that the body of
sin might be destroyed, that henceforth we should not serve sin.

And verily, unless by the death of sin in you, you can have no comfortable
evidence, that the death of Christ was for you. Christ was crucified, and they
that are Christ's, Gal. 6.24. Gal. 5.2.
have crucified the flesh with its affections and lusts. If ye be circumcised,
Christ shall profit you nothing (says the Apostle) I Paul say unto you; he
affixeth his name, and sets to his hand, q. d. I say it, and I will stand to
it; and so, if your heart be uncircumcised, by not putting off the body of the
sins of the flesh; if you live in any one known, approved sin, Christ and the
death of Christ shall profit you nothing. Ah! revenge the blood of your dearest
Lord, upon your dearest lusts; and when Satan presents to you a sugared, spiced
cup, tempting you to the commission of any sin, say as David of the waters of
Bethlehem, Far be it from me, oh Lord, 2 Samuel 23.1^.
that I should do this; is not this the blood of my Savior, that not only
hazarded, but laid down his life for sin?

2. Did Christ let out his blood for us? let our lives then run out for Christ
in a vigorous activity, and unwearied exercise of grace. It is the Apostles
argument, and it is very forcible. We judge that he dyed for all, that they that
live, should not henceforth live unto themselves, but unto him that dyed for
them. 2 Cor. 5.15.
Christ did not shed two or three drops of his blood only, or breath a vein;
and shall two or three duties, a few shreds, and odd parcels of holiness
serve to return back to Christ? What can we think too much for him, Tit. 2.14.
that thought not much of his blood for us? the blood of Christ is as well for
the purity, as the purchase of his people.

3. Did Christ thus humble himself to death for us? let us then prize him
exceedingly, and raise him in our esteem above riches, honor, pleasure,
father, mother, husband, wife, friend, yea life it self, Quanto pro me vilior,
tanto mihi charior. Ber.
or any other thing that we are apt to account precious; how ought he to be
prized and preferred above all things, that prized such in considerable
nothings as we are, at so high rates as his own blood? if you put Christ into
one end of the scale, be sure he out-ballances every thing that can be laid in
the other. To you that believe he is precious. Other things may be rated
according to that particular excellency that he has put into them; 1 Pet. 2.7.
but you will be careful to keep the highest Room for the best friend, and say,
Come down this, and to other vanity, this friend must take place; whatever
other things may make twelve, Christ shall be thirteen; to a carnal heart,
nothing so low prized and undervalued as Christ; but with believers that have
an interest in him, and know the worth of him, he is in highest esteem. Cant.
5.9.
What is thy beloved more than another beloved? (say the daughters of
Jerusalem) they have slight, low thoughts of him, and another, (be it who it
will) is to them as good as he; but what answer makes the Spouse? My Beloved is
white and ruddy, Ver. 10.
the chifest among ten thousand. If there were a general Muster, and all the
sons of men stood together, Christ would be above, and beyond them all; and
Paul is of the same mind, who desired to know nothing but Christ, and him
crucified; 1 Cor. 2.2.
as if he had said, Let me but be acquainted with Christ and his Cross, (such
a superlative esteem he had of him) that I care not this, if I burn all my
Books. Whatever he had heretofore accounted excellent, when his judgment was
biased with wrong apprehensions, he now accounts dross, dung, dogs meat,
Phil. 3.8.
for the excellency of the knowledge of Christ Jesus his Lord; all not worthy
to be named the same day with Christ. Nay, Christ himself has told us, they
are not worthy of him, that do not think him most worthy. Mat. 10.37.


4. Christ humbling himself thus low, should teach us highly to prize our
souls; by the price that was paid for them, we may conceive at what a ra^e God
values them. If God should have said concerning any soul, I so esteem it, that
rather than it shall perish, I Will dissolve, and unpin the whole Fabric of
heaven and earth, that (you will say) had evidently demonstrated an high
valuation of souls; but the course God has taken, shows a much higher esteem
of them. Now let this dear bought ware be precious; ah let none of us
adventure a soul, for the satisfying of a base lust; let not any sin steal
that away upon easy terms, which put the Lord of glory to such expenses.
Christ that best knows the worth of souls, for he paid for them, so values
them, that he tells us the gain of the world were no sufficient or
satisfactory compensa^ion for he loss but of one of them; Mark 8 36.
and a man that should make that bargain (as too many do) might put all his
gains in his eye, Ingen^i hominis nulla si aestimatio.
and see never the worse after it. What the Civilian says of a Freeman, is
much more true of an immortal soul, Nothing can be valued with it. Tradesmen
know, that buying dear, and selling cheap, will undo them; but it will much
more undo you, to sell ch^ap that which Christ has bought so dear. Do not
pawn your souls to Satan, that is, do not adventure upon the commission of any
sin, with this reserve, I will repent before I dye, and then all is well; that
is as if thou should say, Here Satan, I give thee my soul to pawn, in lieu
of the pleasure or profit of this or that sin, and make it in my bargain, that
if I repent I will have it again, till then I deliver it into thy custody, and
if I never repent, take it, it is thine own for ever. Nay, but ask Satan when
he comes thus higgling for thy soul, and bids thee pleasure, profit,
preferment, or any such toys and trifles, but can thou subtle Tempter, give
any thing aequivalent to the blood of God, the price that has been already
paid for it? our souls were not Redeemed with silve^ and gold; 1 Pet. 1.18.
and let us never sell them for that with which Christ could not purchase them.

5. Did Christ humble himself to the shedding of his blood? let us then be
willing (if need be) to shed our blood for Christ. We needed Christ's death, and
possibly Christ may need ours, though not for merit and satisfaction; No, that
was our need, for which his death was abundantly sufficient, and needs not ours
to make any additions, or heapt overplus measure; but Christ may need our death
to seal his truth, and credit his Gospel; Act. 20.24.
the Apostle Paul counted not his life dear, that he might finish his course
with joy, to testify the Gospel of the grace of God. And the Holy Ghost gives
an honorable character of some Heroical, noble-spirited Christians, that they
loved not their lives unto the death; Rev. 12.11.
and the blood of the Lamb animated them to such valor, that they overcame and
conquered by the loss of their lives. Ye have not yet resisted unto blood,
(says the Apostle) but how soon it may come to that ye know not. Heb. 12.4.
It Is your duty, and will be your wisdom to prepare for such a black bloody
day as that; there are two things in the death of Christ, that may animate and
embolden us into a willingness to dye for him. 1. A motive, one good turn
requires another. 2. A pattern, Christ suffered for us, leaving us an example,
that ye should follow his steps. 1 Pet. 2.21. Verbi verba sunt nobis Documenta;
verbi facta sunt nobis exempla. August.
A place very much abused by the Socinians, as though there were no more in the
death of Christ, then an example; but one end of Christ's death must not exclude
another; in the blood of Christ there is both a price and a pattern; he has set
us a Copy, and upon his call, we should be ready to write after him with our
blood.

6. By Faith, and an hearty acceptance of Christ, let us put in for a share,
and get an interest in the blood of Christ. He has (it is true) dyed for
sinners; but without faith, what is all this to you though ye be sinners?
Without blood Christ could not save you; and without faith, the blood of Christ
cannot save you. Romans 3.25. Heb. 9.14. Acts 15.9.
God has set forth Christ to be a propitiation, through faith in his blood;
the conscience is purged by his blood, and the heart pur^fied by faith. This
precious blood of Christ, does no other way purify, than as applied and
sprinkled by faith. Every man was under the Law to lay his hand on his
burnt-offering of atonement; Lev. 1.4.
he must own it for his Sacrifice; thou must stretch out an hand of faith, and
put it on the head of thy sin-offering, owning Christ as thy Lord and Savior;
for it is not Christ's blood as barely shed upon the Cross, but as received
into the heart, that justifies and saves. The Son of man is lifted up, John
3.15.
that whosoever believes on him, should not perish; Universal causes act not,
but by a particular application; as Adams sin pollutes no child, till applied
by the generation of the Parent. The Sun though it enlightens the whole world,
helps no man to see, till its light be received into the eye. Suppose the blood
of Christ were as extensive, and universal a cause of salvation, as any men
pretend to, and contend for, it could produce no such effect, till faith has
wrought a particular application; a great gift enriches not the beggar, in the
rich man's hand, but in his own, having received it.

Use. 3. Here Is abundant comfort to all them that have by faith, applied and
interested themselves in Christ crucified; here is blood that will interpose
between you and harms; Christ's treading the Wine press, leads you into the
Wine Celler; though to him it was very painful, to you it is very comfortable;
that which he felt as blood, believers may taste as wine. Never was there such
a Cordial for drooping and disconsolate souls, as that which came from Christ's
heart, when his side was broacht, and set running upon the Cross. Comfort in
five particulars.

1. Your enemies are foiled. A Believer has many enemies; this blood of Christ
has either reconciled, or disarmed them; either made them friends, or left
them impotent enemies. To give a short list of a few of them.

1. The justice of God, that is satisfied; out of Christ it has a dreadful
quarrel, and implacable controversy; and poor believers are many times afraid
under their misapprehensions that exact and inexorable justice will either
nonsuit, or give a verdict against them; but they are more afraid than hurt;
this blood has made justice their friend. Being justified by faith, Romans 5.1.
Rev. 4.3.
we have peace with God; and in Christ he now sits with a rainbow about his
Throne. God once drowned the world in wrath, but smelling a sweet savor of
rest from Noah's sacrifice, he purposed and promised never to do so any more;
and as a badge and token of his favor, and the firmness of that Covenant of
Peace, he put his Rainbow in the clouds. If you can upon good grounds say that
Christ is yours, there is a Rainbow about Gods Throne, his Bench of Judicature,
and condemnation is turned into a mercy-seat; justice will set hand and Seal
to your acquittance, and be so far from pleading against you, that it turns
your Advocate; Romans 3.25, 26.
and Christ having shed his blood, because God is just, the believer must be
justified.

2. The Law is fulfilled. To be under the Law, is a state full of danger and
terror; and Saints are many times afraid that it will be put in as a black
bill of indictment against them, but the blood of Christ has scracht the
curses out of the Roll; He has Redeemed them from the Curse of the Law, Gal.
3.13. Romans 6.14.
being made a Curs^ for them; they are not under the Law, but under grace. Not
under the Law, as to its invenomed curses, inexorable severity, and intolerable
penalties. The Law it self to every believer, 1 Timothy 1.9.
is as it were nonsuited by the death of the Lawmakers. It is not made for a
righteous man; it was given to Adam when he was righteous, and yet strongly
obliges such as are righteous; but it lies not against a righteous man (so the
word signifies) as to his condemnation; (...).
it is not laid as an Axe to the root of the tree.

Col. 2.15.
3. Satan is subdued. Christ's bruised heel has broken his head; He spoiled
principalities and powers, and made a show of them openly, triumphing over them
in his Cross. The whole Host of Hell, with all their train of Artillery, was
led Captive by him on the Cross, and tied to the Chariot-wheels of this
triumphant Conqueror. When the door-post was sprinkled with blood, the
destroying Angel passed away; the blood of Christ sprinkled on the conscience,
is a choice Antidote, and preservative against this devouring Abaddon; not but
that he still may be a Tempter and a troubler, but he shall never be a
conqueror, never a tormentor. Christopher Haasse, a Swedish Senator, being at
the point of death, the Devil appeared by his bed side, with pen, ink, and
paper; Come (quoth he) reckon up thy sins in order, as thou have committed
them, that I may carry them in a Catalogue to Gods Tribunal, whether thou art
going; Well Satan (says he) if it must be so, let the Catalogue be under this
head and Title, The seed of the woman shall break the Serpents head, and away
flew the Devil in a great rage; ah sirs, had we but the right art of pleading
the blood of Christ, it would make this roaring Lion more to tremble, than the
Lion does at the cock-crowing.

4. Sin is abolished; and that is a far worse enemy than the Devil. Many a
Saint is able, and apt to say, Were it not for sin, I would not much care for
Satan; I could defy, and bid him do his worst; it is the Devil within, that
makes the Devil without so formidable.

Now plead but this blood, and the guilt of sin is done away,

Either as 1. Imprinted on the person to condemnation. 2. Or reflected by the
conscience in accusation.


1. Sin is done away by this blood as it binds over to wrath and punishment:
it is a spiritual aqua fortis, that eats off the souls prison-shakkles. Romans
8.1.
There is no condemnation to them that are in Christ Jesus. Sin may remain, but
it shall not condemn; and whence believers have their discharges the Apostle
there shows, Ver. 3. Suscipiendo poenam and non suscipiendo culpam, and culpam
delevit and poenam. Aug.
God sent his own Son in the likeness of sinful flesh, and for sin, condemned
sin in the flesh. If the channel of Christ's blood runs through thy soul, thou
have shot the gulf as to condemnation; this Scripture brings thee in not
guilty, and that is the verdict of a thousand Juryes.

2. The blood of Christ abolishes sin as reflected by the conscience, in a way
of accusation, as it raises tumults, and turmoyls in the soul, and Arms a man
against himself. It Is a Malignant and mischievous property of sin, that it does
not only put the soul into hell, but puts hell into the soul. Conscience is to
sin, what the burning-glasse is to the sun-beame, twists all together, till it
scorches, smoaks, burns, and flames; but Christ's blood has that in it, which
is abundantly sufficient to silence and stop the mouth of an angry, accusing
conscience; it is a sovereign balsome, to cure that cancer in the breast; a
mollifying ointment, and cooling fomentation, for those invenomed, sin-rankled
ulcers that fester, and bleed inwardly. The blood of sprinkling speaks better
things than that of Abel. Heb. 12.24.
Abels blood was very clamorous in Cains conscience; he carried an hue and cry
within himself; conscience as a blood-hound, hunted him at every turn; and its
continual cry and echo in his ears, was, Vengeance upon the murderer; but the
blood of Jesus has in it a pleasant and peaceable voice, and hushes all
unquiet and tumultuary janglings. Applied by faith, it says to the souls
rolling billows, that cast up mire and dirt, what Christ once said to the
raging Sea, Peace, be still, and there is a great calm.

5. And the last enemy, whose enmity the blood of Christ has slain, is death.
Not that death is so destroyed to believers, that they shall not dye; but
unstinged, that it shall not wound in the vital parts, or at once kill bodies
and souls. The Apostles triumphant (...) is very remarkable, O death, 1 Cor.
15.55, 57
where is thy sting? O grave, where is thy victory? thanks be to God, who
gives us the victory through our Lord Jesus Christ. When a Be has fastened
its sting in a man's flesh, and thereby lost it, it ever after (they say) turns
a drone; death once fastened its sting in Christ, and has ever since, to them
that are in Christ, been like a drone, that can humme and affright, but not
sting and hurt them. Death now drives a poor trade amongst them; it may destroy
the body, and when it has played that prank, it has done all its fears; as a
fierce Mastiffe, whose teeth are broken out, it can bark, or rend and tear the
tattered and threadbare coat, but it cannot bite to the bone. How feeble an
enemy is death, since it traveled, and took a walk to the top of Mount Calvary?

2. A Believers enemies are not only foiled, but through the blood of Christ
his person is accepted, Ephesians. 1.6, 7.
he has made us accepted in the beloved; he has begraced us in Christ (that
is the proper importance of the phrase) in whom we have Redemption through his
blood. (...).
If thou art sprinkled with the blood of Christ, God will know his own mark
upon thee, thy person is accepted, and services cannot be unacceptable.

3. If a believer, here is comfort, in that thou may be assured that Christ
is willing to do any thing for thee. He is ready in heaven upon all occasions
to plead this price, and solicit thy further affairs; show but Christ's
blood, and I dare warrant the golden Scepter held out. The Apostles reasoning
is unanswerable; He that spared not his own Son, but delivered him up for us
all, how shall he not with him also freely give us all things? Romans 8.32.
Saints need never fear putting Christ to too much trouble, in any thing they
have for him to do; for the shedding of his blood (and that he has already
done) has been more troublesome and chargeable, than any thing they can set
him about for the time to come; thou need not fear his denying any thing to
thee, who has thus far denied himself for thee.

4. Here is comfort to a believer, in that his grace shall be preserved; such a
soul is too costly a purchase for Christ to lose; he paid so dear, that he may
be trusted to demand and challenge the making good of his bargain: if true
grace could be totally and finally lost, it might be said, Christ pays the
price, and the devil gets the prize. Phil. 1.6.
He that has begun a good work in you, will perform it until the day of
Jesus Christ; And it lies Christ in hand so to do; otherwise he will come off a
loser. Christ is the good Shepherd, John 10.11, 28
that gives his life for the Sheep, and gives unto them eternal life, and they
shall never perish. Ah how little do they consult Christ's honor, or the
comfort of souls, that tell us, Believers may perish in sin, like rotten sheep
in a ditch; if so, how then shall Christ save his stake, that has been thus
much out of purse upon them?

5. Here Is yet further comfort to a believer, in that by the blood of Christ
heaven is opened, Heb. 10 19.
and we have boldness to enter into the holiest, by the blood of Jesus. Man
had no sooner sinned but God sent an Angel to stand Sentinel, and keep him from
Paradise with a flaming sword; the blood of Christ has opened that passage, at
once blunting the sword, and quenching the flame. Christ gave up the Ghost at
the ninth hour, at three in the Afternoon, the time of the evening Sacrifice;
and at the very instant the Veil of the Temple, that parted the holy place and
holy of holyes, was rent asunder, so that the Priest who was then Ministering in
the holy place, had on the sudden a fair and free prospect into the holiest of
all; which excellently typifies, that the death of Christ has removed, and
rent away all obstacles and obstructions that might interpose betwixt
believers, and the blessedness of glory. The Rivers lead to the Sea, the
stream of Christ's blood (if thou be imbarqued by faith) runs directly into
the Ocean of endless, boundless, bottomless happiness. If thou have opened
the door of thine heart to let Christ in, the blood of Christ has opened and
unlocked the door of heaven, and thou can not be shut out. A crucified Christ
entertained, will one day make glorified believers; his Humiliation is the
ready Road both to his, and his peoples exaltation.

CHRIST'S EXALTATION.
Phil. 2. 9, 10, 11. Wherefore God also has highly exalted him, and given him
a Name which is above every Name:

That at the Name of Jesus every knee should bow, of things in heaven, and
things in earth, and things under the earth:

And that every tongue should confess that Jesus Christ is the Lord, to the
glory of God the Father.


THE former Verses-speak of the deep humiliation of Jesus Christ; these words
contain the Doctrine of Christ's most glorious Exaltation.

If you view Christ in the words before going, you will behold the Sun of
righteousness ecclipsed; but in this Text you will see him shining forth in his
strength and splendor.

The Doctrine of Christ's Humiliation leads you to Mount Calvary, but this
Doctrine will lead you to Mount Tabor, to Mount Olivet.

There you may see Christ standing at the Bar, but here you see him sitting on
a Throne of Majesty and glory.

The former Doctrine shows you the Son of man in the form of a servant, but
this represents Christ to you the Son of God like himself, in the glorious
estate of Triumphant Majesty.

You have heard how Christ died for our sins, Romans 4.25. Romans 5.10.
and how we are Reconciled by his death; and now you shall hear how he rose
for our justification, and how we are saved by his life.

In his Humiliation there was neither form, nor beauty, Isa. 53.2. Heb. 1.2.
nor comeliness did appear; but now you will see him in the excellency and
brightness of his Fathers glory.

In Christ's Humiliation you hear how he was reproached in his Person, Name,
Doctrine, Ministry, and Miracles; but he is now exalted, and has a name given
him above every name.

And whereas in his Humiliation his enemies bowed the knee in scorn to him,
yet in his Exaltation they must bow the knee with fear and trembling. Then they
cried after Christ, Crucify him, crucify him; but God has exalted him so, as
every tongue must confess that Jesus is the Lord, to the glory of God.

And thus Contraries are illustrated by their contraries; the sufferings of
Christ (like a dark shadow to a curious picture, Contraria ^juxta se posita
magis elucescunt.
or a black veil to a beautiful face) do make the glory of his Exaltation the
more glorious.

The height of Christ's Exaltation, is best known by considering the depth of
his humiliation; the Cross of Christ (as one says) being the best Jacobs staff
to take the height of this morning Star, or rather Sun of Righteousness,
breaking forth most gloriously from under a dark Cloud.

In these three verses we have these Particulars considerable.

1. The Connection between the Humiliation and Exaltation of Christ in these
words, (...), Wherefore also God has exalted him.

2. The Doctrine of Christ's Exaltation laid down, God has highly exalted him.

3. The end of Christ's Exaltation, it was for the glory of God the Father.

Before we come to the Doctrine of Christ's Exaltation, we will a little
consider the connection of these three Verses with the three preceding Verses,
viz. 6, 7, 8. -- where it is said, that Jesus Christ being in the form of God,
and thought it not Robbery to be equal with God, but made himself of no
Reputation, and took upon him the form of a servant, and was made in the
likeness of men, and being found in fashion as a man, he humbled himself, and
became obedient unto death, even the death of the Cross; wherefo^e God also
has highly exalted him, etc.

It is a Question amongst Divines, whether the Humiliation of Christ be the
Meritorious cause, or only the Antecedent of his Exaltation; and yet they that
dispute this, do all agree in this, That Jesus did not by his Humiliation and
sufferings merit such things as he was invested withal before he suffered; for
that which is meritorious, must always precede the reward; and therefore it
cannot be said, that Christ did merit the personal union of his Divine and
Humane Nature, nor the happiness of his soul, nor his Habitual Graces, which He
had from the first Moment of his Incarnation.

Christi humiliatio est exaltationis meritum; and ejus exaltatio est
humiliationis praemium Aug. Hac enim particula (...) (seu propter quod) meritum
Christi denotat quibus and sibi suam exaltationem and nobis totam salutem
promeruit. Zanch. in loc.
First, There are some Divines who interpret the particle (...) as a causal; and
so hold that Christ by his Humiliation, did merit his Exalta^ion; and of this
opinion was Augustine, who calls Christ's Humiliation the meritori^us cause of
his Exaltation; and his Exaltation the r^ward of his Humiliation. The Popish
wr^ters go generally this way. I find also amongst Protestant Writers, the
Learned Zanchy of this Opinion, who upon this Text has this Note. By this
Particle (...) (wherefore) The Apostle notes the merits of Christ, whereby he
has merited his own Exaltation, and our Salvation.

And that which favors this Explication, is that saying of the Apostle
concerning Christ; Heb. 12.2,
That for the joy that was set before him, he endured the Cross, and despised
the shame, as if having an eye to the Recompense of the Reward, enabled Christ
to persevere with more patience, when he became obedient unto death, even the
death of the Cross.

Neither does it derogate from the freeness of Christ's sufferings, that he was
rewarded for them; for even that glory that Christ has in heaven, is for our
good and comfort. Nor was it out of indigence and necessity, that Christ
accepts of glory in a way of Reward of his obedience; but herein he commended
his love the more to us, that would so far condescend, and so far even in his
Exaltation humble himself, to receive glory in the way of obedience, which he
might have challenged by virtue of his personal union. Even as a Prince, who
though he has right to a Kingdom by Inheritance and Succession, yet he will
accept of it as a Reward of his Obedience, and Conquest over its enemies.

2. But others understand the (...) in the Text, not as signifying the
Humiliation ^f Christ to be the meritorious cause, but only the Antecedent of
his Exaltat^on; and so they make this particle to be not causal, but connective
only; and so I find some of the Ancient Translations, as the Aethiopick Version
does only ioyn the Humiliation and Exaltation of Christ together; Humilavit
seipsum and magnificavit eum Deus. -- And for this may be rationally urged,

1. That in the whole wo^k of our Redemption effected by Christ, Jesus Christ
had a respect no^ unto himself, but unto us. It is for us, that he humbled
himself to the Death of the Cross, for us men, and our Salvation.

2. Jesus Christ had right to all the Honor, Glory, and Majesty, which now he
is possessed of in Heaven, by virtue of his being the Son of God; and the
glory which he has now in Heaven, John 17.5.
he had with God before the world was.

3. The freeness of Gods love in giving Christ, and of Christ's in giving
himself for us, was such, that the main intention of God, was, that not
Christ's, but our estate might be bettered; John 1.^18. Romans 9.5.
if the Son of God had never left the bosom of the Father, he had been for
ever God bl ssed in himself. But such was the love of the Father, that he gave
his only begotten Son that we might not perish, Joh. 3.16.
who believe, but might have everlasting life.

4. It is fit to be considered, that the glory which Christ has in Heaven, in
sitting at the right hand of God, is such, that it cannot be merited by the
sufferings of the Humane nature of Christ. And therefore it is said, (...), he
has fr^ely given him a name above every name.

This last interpretation of the Particle (...), is that to which most of our
Protestant Divines do incline.

I will not here undertake to determine the Question; I find it the judgment
of some of our Learned Divines, Dr. Featly. Mr. Anthony Burgess.
That there need be no Controversy about this thing, for the Particle (...)
notes order; but whether the order of causality or antecedency, or both, may be
consistent with the Analogy of Faith.

1. For if we look upon Jesus Christ as rewarded for his sufferings for us, we
may thence be assured, that our sufferings for him (though of another nature)
shall be eternally rewarded. Psalm. 58.11.


2. Or if you note the order only, that Jesus Christ was first humbled, and
then exalted, we may thence learn that before honor is humility, Prove. 18.12.
1 Pet. 5.6.
and that if we Humble our selves under the mighty hand of God, in due time he
will exalt us.

Leaving therefore this Question, I proceed to the Doctrine of Christ's
Exaltation, as it is laid down in this Text.

Doct. It pleased God the Father for his own glory, that the Lord Jesus Christ,
after he had been deeply humbled, should be highly exalted.

Thus it pleased God, that he who had humbled himself to the death of the
Cross, Heb. 7.26. Phil. 2.7. Acts 3.15. 1 Cor. 2 8. Acts 2.36. Heb. 2.16. 1
Pet. 3.22.
should be made higher than the Heavens; and he who had taken on him the form
of a Servant, should now appear in Heaven like himself, the Prince of life; and
he that made himself of no reputation, should now be in Heaven the Lord of
Glory; and the same Jesus who was crucified, God has made both Lord and
Christ; and He who took not on him the nature of Angels, but took on him the
seed of Abraham, is exalted above Angels, being gone into Heaven, and is on the
Right Hand of God; Angels, and Authorities, and Powers, being made subject unto
him.

There is a word in the Text that is very Emphatical, which is (...), he has
highly exalted. The Elegancy of the Greek tongue is singular; The Apostle has
a notable word, Ephesians. 3.8. (...), Ephesians. 3.8 (...). Minimorum minimus. Beza.
Minor minimo. Cor. a Lap. (...) Emphaticus est hic notandus Pleonasmus. q. d.
Super omnem altitudinem exaltavit, super-exaltavit. Ambros. Multiplicavit
sublimitatem ejus. Sir. Sublimitate sublimavit eum. Arab. Insigniter extulit.
Justinianus.
less than the least of Saints; and here we have a no less remarkable word,
(...), he has highly exalted him; God has exalted Jesus Christ above all
Exaltation; the Exaltation of Jesus Christ, was supersuperlative. The Latin
Version of the word (...), Exaltavit eum, he exalted him, is too low to express
the sublimity of the Greek word. We have here an elegant and an emphatical
Pleonasme, which the Greek tongue borrows of the Hebrew, as is frequently used
in the New Testament, as it is said of the Magi, when they saw the Star, they
rejoiced with great joy; Mat. 2.10. (...).
and so when Christ came to Celebrate his last Passover, he says to his
Disciples, Luke 22.15. (...).
With desire have I desired to eat this Passover. So it is sa^d here, the Lord
Jesus Christ was very highly exalted; he was exalted with all Exaltation. Jesus
Christ in his Resurrection was exalted; in his Ascension he was highly exalted;
in his sitting at the right hand of God, he was very highly exalted above all
Exaltation. Christ in his Resurrection, was exalted above the Grave; in his
Ascension, above the Earth, and in his Session at Gods right hand, he was
exalted above the highest Heavens.

It is very Remarkable how the steps of Christ's Exaltation did punctually
answer to the steps of his Humiliation.

There were three steps by which Jesus Christ descended in his voluntary
Humiliation.

Heb. 2.16. 2 Cor. 5.21. Gal. 3.13. Gal. 4.4. Heb. 7.22. 1 Cor. 5.7.
First, His Incarnation, by which he was made of a woman, and so became man; he
was made sin, and so became out Surety; he was made a Curse, and so became
our Sacrifice. This was the largest step of Christ's Descension and Humiliation;
for it was more for the Son of God to become the Son of man, than for the Son
of man to die, and being dead, to be buried, and being buried, to continue in
the state of the dead, and under the power of death until the Third Day.

Answerable to this degree of his Humiliation, was his Resurrection; for as by
his Incarnation he was manifest in the flesh, Romans 1.3, 4.
the son of man, made of the seed of David according to the flesh, so by his
Resurrection from the dead, he was declared to be the Son of God, with power
according to the Spirit of holiness. The Resurrection of Christ was the first
step of his Exaltation, He was declared to be the Son of God. Clarificatio
Christi ab ejus resurrectione sumpsit exordium. Aug.
He was always the Son of God, even during the days of his flesh; but then he
was openly declared to be the Son of God, that he could by his own Almighty
Power, raise up the Temple of his Body, which the Jews had Destroyed.

The second step of Christ's Humiliation, was his poor, painful, and
contemptible life, and his painful, shameful, and cursed death of the Cross;
Heb. 5.7.
He was found in the form of a Servant. He was despised in his Person,
Ministry, and Miracles in the days of his flesh; that is, whilst he lived here
upon earth. He was poor in estate, followed by the poor; he had not where to
lay his head, Mat. 11.5. Mat. 8.20.
he was reproached, and counted a Sabbath-breaker, a wine-bibb r, an enemy to
Caesar, a Blasphemer, he was counted every thing but what he was.

Answerable to this great Exinanition of Christ, is his ascension into Heaven,
and sitting at the right hand of God. Man did not so despise and disparage, but
God has honored him, to sit on the right hand of God; note the great honor
that Jesus Christ is invested withal; as he was man, Psalm. 8.5.
so he was lower than the Angels; But in that he has said unto him, Sit thou
on my right hand, he has e xalted him above the Angels; for to none of the
Angels has he said at any time, Psalm. 110.1.
Thou art my Son, Sit thou on my right hand.

To sit at Gods right hand, is to be next in dignity and honor unto Almighty
God; and this is that which the Apostle speaks of, showing how God raised Jesus
Christ from the dead, and set him at his own right hand in the Heavenly places,
Heb. 1.13. Ephesians. 1.20, 21, 22.
far above all principality and power, and might, and dominion, and every name
that is named, not only in this world, but also in that which is to come, and
has put all things under his feet, and gave him to be the Head over all things
to the Church.

Thus all the dishonor and reproach that was cast upon Christ in his life, and
the ignominy of his shameful, painful, and cursed death of the Cross is now
taken away by Christ his ascending up into heaven, sitting at Gods right hand,
Heb. 1.6.
and all the Angels of God worshipping him.

And thus our Lord Jesus was exalted from a death of shame, to a life of glory,
and that not to a temporary, but an eternal life. Christ was raised up, not as
Lazarus to die again, but Christ died but once, but lives for ever at the
right hand of God to make Intercession. So speaks Christ of himself, Romans
6.10. Heb. 7.25. Rev. 1.18.
I am he that lives, and was dead, and behold I am alive for evermore.

Thus he that descended in his burial into the lowest parts of the earth, is
the same also that ascended up far above the Heavens. Ephesians. 4.9, 10. (...).


3. His coming to judge the world, answers his being judged in the world, and
by the world. Mat. 25.31, 32 Veniet judicaturus qui venit judicandus.
As Christ's Exaltation began at his Resurrection, so it shall be completed
when he shall come in his glory, and all the holy Angels with him; then shall
he sit upon the Throne of his glory, and before him shall be gathered all
Nations. He that came at first to be judged, shall come the second time to
judge the world. We have in the Scriptures several descriptions of Christ's
glorious coming to judge the world; but when he shall come indeed, he will make
known his power and glory to all the world. Joh. 5.22, 27. 1 Cor. 1.8. 2 Cor.
5.10. 2 Timothy 4.1. 1 Cor. 11.26. 2 These. 1.8. Acts 10.42.
God has given the judgment of all things and persons into the hands of his
Son Jesus Christ; the day of judgment is therefore called the Day of Christ;
and the Judgment Seat, is the Tribunal of Christ; the appearing, the coming,
the revealing of Jesus Christ the judge of quick and dead.

The Apostle gives you the first and last part of Christ's Exaltation in one
Text; and make the first part of it as an assurance of the last; God (says he)
has appointed a day in the which he will judge the world in righteousness,
Acts 17.31.
by that man whom he has ordained, wher^of he has given assuranc^ unto all
m^n, in that he has raised him from the dead. John 5.22, 23.
Whence we may believe, that as certainly as Christ did rise, so certainly
shall he come to judge the world. God has given us assurance of the one by the
other. And this committing all judgment to the Lord Jesus Christ, is that he
might be glorified; the Father has committed all judgment to the Son, that
all men should honor the Son, as they honor the Father.

Sedebit Judex qui st^tit sub judice; damnabit vere reos, qui falso factus est
reus. Aug.
Then shall our Savior appear in his glory, and judge those wicked ones that
judged him. We read how the Jews by the help of Judas and the Soldiers, took
him and bound him, and led him to the High Priest, and afterward to Pilate,
and how basely he was betrayed, falsely accused, unjustly condemned, and
cruelly murdered.

But there will be a day, when Judas and the wicked Jews, when Herod,
Demonstrabit in judicio potentiam, qui ostendit in cruce patientiam. Acts
17.31. Isa. 53.10.
and Pontius Pilate, and the Soldiers, and all his enemies shall be dragged
into his presence; and then the Lord Jesus who before showed his patience, will
show his power; and he who was so unjustly condemned, shall judge the world in
righteo^sness; and he that was numbered amongst Transgressors, shall at that
great day judge and punish all transgressors.

And thus as Christ humbled himself in his Incarnation, in his Life, Death, and
Burial, so God the Father has exalted him in his Resurrection, Ascension,
Session at the right hand of God, and in constituting him Judge of quick and
dead.

Jesus Christ by his Resurrection overcame all his enemies, Heb. 2.14. Col.
2.15.
death, and him that had the power of death, the Devil. By his Ascension, and
sitting on the right hand of God, he has Triumphed openly over them; and by
his being appointed Judge of all, he will avenge himself of all his enemies,
when all must appear before that High Court of Justice, from which there is no
appeal. So that the Lord Jesus Christ by his Resurrection, Quanto humilius sese
dejecit, tanto sublimius exaltatus est. Brent. in loc.
is exalted above the grave; by his Ascension, above the earth; by his sitting
at Gods right hand, he is advanced above the heavens; and by being the Judge of
all, he is Exalted above Angels, Principalities, and Powers; and as he was
abased more than others, he is Exalted above all others.

Thus in part the glorious Exaltation of Christ has been set forth in the
several degrees thereof. For the further Demonstration of the Doctrine of
Christ's Exaltation, let us consider the particulars thereof, as they are
contained in this Scripture, and they are these three.

1. God has given him a name above every name.

2. That every knee, of things in Heaven, and things on the earth, and things
under the earth, shall bow to the Name of Jesus.

3. That every tongue must confess that Jesus Christ is the Lord.

For the first of these we will enquire,

1. What we are to understand by the Name given unto Jesus Christ?

2. How this Name is a Name above every Name?

3. How we are to understand this, that God has given (...) to Christ, a Name
above every Name?

In Answer to the first.

First, Some by this Name do understand the Name Christ Jesus, and so take it
literally; but neither Jesus nor Christ is a name above every name.

1. Not Jesus, for that was the name of Joshua the Son of Nun; the famous
Captain of Israel, called Jesus by the Apostle, Hebrews 4.8. And of this Name
was the High Priest Joshuah, the Son of Josedek, Haggai 1.1.

1 Samuel 24 7. (...) Unctus sive Christus Domini. Isa. 45.1. Nomen supra omne
nomen non intelligendum est de aliquo externo cognomine vel Jesu vel Christi.
Brent. Heb. 1.4, 5.
2. Neither is Christ a name above every name, for Saul is called the Lords
anointed, Christus Domini. And so also the Prophet speaking of Cyrus, calls
him the anointed of the Lord. We cannot therefore understand this of any name,
either of Jesus or Christ; for Paul is here speaking not what the name of our
Savior was, but of the Honor, Dignity, Power, and Majesty, to which Christ
was advanced.

Secondly, Others, as Hierome and Theodoret do think, that in, that Christ was
called the S nne of God, he had therein a name above every name; and this
Exposition is gathered from that passage of the Apostle, that Jesus Christ was
much better than the Angels, as he has by Inheritance obtained a more
excellent name than they; for unto which of the Angels said he at any time,
Thou art my Son, this day have I begotten thee?

But though this be true, that to be the eternal Son of God, is a Name above
every Name, yet this cannot be meant here, for it is spoken of that which
Christ was exalted to after his Humiliation; but from Eternity he was the Son
of God, and did not cease to be so by his Incarnation and Humiliation.

Thirdly, By Name therefore we are to understand that Power, Dignity, Per nomen
potestas and dignitas significatur. Calvinus. Genesis 6.5. (...) Viri nominis. 1 Chronicles. 5.24. (...) Viri nominum. John 1.14.
and Authority which Christ was invested withal, after the days of his flesh,
and Sufferings were finished.

1, Sometimes in Scripture Phrase, Name is put for glory and Renown. So we read
of men of Renown, it is in the Hebrew, Men of Name, and of famous men, Heads of
the House of their Fathers. What we read famous men, is in the Hebrew, Men of
Names; and thus the glory which Christ is invested withal, is the Glory of the
only begotten of the Father.

2. By Name in Scripture Phrase, is meant power, and Authority, and the
Sovereignty by which Christ is King of Nations, and King of Saints; and thus
the Scripture speaks; The works (says Christ) that I do in my Fathers Name,
John 10.25.
they bear witness of me; in my Fathers Name, i. e. by the Power of God. Acts
3.6. Acts 4.7.
Thus P^ter speaks to the Criple In the Name of Jesus Christ of Nazareth arise
and walk, i. e. by the Power of Christ; for so it is expressed; when the
Council questioned them for this thing, they are asked, By what power, or by
what name have you done this?

So then, we are to understand by Name, that Honor, Authority, and Dignity,
which Christ now enjoyes in Heaven, of which he spoke when he was ascending
into Heaven, All power is given me in Heaven and Earth; Mat. 28.18.
and the Glory of Christ's Name is such, that it shall be celebrated through all
the Ages of the World; Heaven and Earth shall Ring with the praises of his
Name, as the Angels praised his Name at his Birth; Behold I bring you good
tidings of great joy, Luke 2.10, 11, 13, 14.
which shall be unto all people; for unto you is borne this day in the City of
David, a Savior, which is Christ the Lord; and suddenly there was with the
Angel a multitude of the Heavenly Host, praising God, and saying, Glory be to
God in the highest, on earth peace, good will toward men.

So they do now praise him and worship him in Heaven, Heb. 1.6. Rev: 5.12.
saying, Worthy is the Lamb to receive Power, and Riches, and Wisdom, and
Strength, and Honor, and Glory, and Blessing.

Secondly, How has Christ obtained a Name above every Name?

This Nomen super omne nomen, a Name above every Name, is a demonstration of
Christ's Super-Exaltation, and it notes four things.

First, This is a Name above every Name, that Jesus Christ should be the only
Savior of the World, that his Name should be the Only One Name by which we are
saved.

Of this the Apostle, The stone which the builders refused, Acts 4.11, 12.
is become the Head of the Corner, neither is there any Salvation in any other,
for there is none other Name under heaven given amongst men, John 4.42. (...).
whereby we must be saved. He is indeed the Christ, the Savior of the World;
which we may understand not only emin^ntly, but exclusively; He is the Savior,
there is none besides him. We read that God did raise Saviors to his people;
Israel so acknowledged the Levites in their solemn Fast Day; Nehem. 9.27.
Thou (O Lord) deliveredst thy people into the hands of their enemies who vexed
them, and in the time of their trouble, when they cried unto thee, thou
heardest them from heaven, and according to thy manifold mercies, thou gave
them Saviors who saved them out of the hand of their Enemies. Such a Savior
was Moses to the Israelites from the Egyptians, Joshua from the Canaanites,
Gideon from the Midianites, Jeptha from the Ammorites, and Sampson from the
Philistims; but all these were but partial, petty, and temporal Saviors. These
saved the body from misery, and that but for a time; Christ saves our souls
from our sins, Mat. 1.21.
and that for ever. All these Saviors stood in need of the Savior. Joshua
himself had eternally perished, had it not been for Jesus

Jesus Christ was the only Savior, to whose most precious and saving Name, all
the Old Testament pointed at. He was the Savior in whom all the Promises were
performed, all the Types accomplished, and all the Prophesies fulfilled.

Acts 10.43. Gen 49.10. Psalm. 110.1. Isa. 7.14. Jer. 23.5. Dan 9.29. Hag. 2.9.
Mat. 12.21.
It was unto this only Name, the Savior, that all the Prophets bare witness.
He, he it was, that was Jacobs Shiloh, David's Lord, Isaiahs Immanuel, Jeremies
Branch, Daniels Messiah, and Haggie's desire of all Nations. It is in his name,
and his Name alone that all Nations shall trust, and that for salvation.

Secondly, Jesus Christ has a Name above every Name, in that he is exalted to
sit at the Right hand of God, which is a Name or honor which never the Angels
nor Archangels had. This I prove from that passage of the Apostle in his
Epistle to the Hebrews, where it is said concerning Christ; Who having purged
our sins, is sat down on the Right hand of the Majesty on high, Heb. 1.3, 4.
(...).
being made so much better than the Angels, as he has by Inheritance obtained
a more excellent Name than they; for to which of the Angels said he at any
time, Sit on my right hand, till I make thine enemies thy Foo^-stoole? Heb.
1.13.


Thirdly, He has a Name above every Name, because it is through this Name,
that the Name of God becomes a comfort unto us. The Attributes of God, are the
Name of God; Now without an Interest in Christ, we shall have no comfort in any
Attribute of God.

To a Christless sinner, all the Attributes of God are against him; as for
instance,

1. God is wise; that is the worse for a wicked man; for he knows all that
wickedness thine own heart is privy to, and much more evil by thee, Jer. 17.10.
1 John 3.20.
than thine own heart knows.

2. God is holy, and therefore he must needs hate those that are Filthy, Being
of purer eyes than to behold iniquity.

3. God is just; and if the righteousness of Christ do not Skreen thee, the
wrath and vengeance of God must needs break out upon thee for thy guilt. Hab.
1.13.


4. God is Almighty; and how shall the Potters Vessel endure the least touch of
his hand? how shall the chafe stand before the Whirlwind of his wrath? how
shall the stubble dwell with everlasting burnings? and such are all Sinners out
of Christ.

All the thoughts of God must needs be terrible to all those souls that are out
of Christ.

But the Name of Christ, is that which makes the Name of God a Sanctuary and
strong Tower; the face of God shines upon us in the face o^ Jesus Christ. Prove.
18.10.


As Moses when he was hid in the Rock, could with delight hear the Name of God
proclaimed; so how sweet, 2 Cor. 5.6. ^ Exodus 33.21, 22. 1 Cor. 10.4.
and lovely, and comfortable, are all the Attributes of God to all those that
are in the Rock, the Rock Christ Jesus!

1. God is a wise God, the more is my comfort, Psalm. 73.24. Mat. 6.32.
may a Believer say, for he knows how to guide me; he knows what I want, and
how to supply it.

2. God is a holy God, and that's a comfortable Attribute, for in Christ he is
our sanctification. 1 Cor. 1.30.


3. God is a merc^ful and gracious God, so he is in himself; but in Christ
Jesus he is most merciful, gracious, and full of compassion to pity and pardon
his children, Even as a Father pitieth his Children, Psalm. 103.13.
so the Lord pitieth them that fear him.

4. He is an Almighty God, mighty in power, and thus his Name, Prove. 18.10.
Romans 8.31.
through the Lord Jesus is a strong Tower, the righteous fly unto it, and find
succor; and through Christ a believer can say, If the Lord be for us, it
matters not who are against us.

5. Lastly, Even the Justice of God through the Lord Jesus Christ becomes an
Attribute of comfortable Consideration; for because God is just, therefore he
will not condemn those for whom Christ has satisfied. Romans 8.1. Mal. 3.17.
There is no condemnation to them that are in Christ Jesus; God will not
condemn those that are in Christ, but for his sake will spare them, as one
spar^th his Son that serves him.

And thus the Name of Christ is a Name above every Name, because through his
Name, it is that the Name and Attributes of God become comfortable unto us.

Fourthly, And Lastly, The Name of Christ is a Name above every Name, because
his Name should be most precious and powerful in his Church throughout all
Generations; thus all the Assemblies of the Church should be in the Name of
Christ; Matthew. 18.20. John 14.13. 1 Cor. 5.4.
they must meet in his Name; all Prayers are to be made in the Name of Christ;
All Church Censures are to be in his Name; Mat. 28.19.
Ministers must Preach and Administer the Sacraments in the Name of the Lord
Jesus; and thus he has a Name above every Name.

3. The third thing propounded, is, How are we to understand the word (...) God
has given him a Name, etc.

I answer, This must be understood of Christ; as Mediator, for so considered,
and so only he was capable of Exaltation.

1. There are some that hold, that Christ as God was exalted; that now in
Heaven the glory of the Godhead, which lay hid, and was veiled in the
Tab^rnacle of his flesh, John 1.14. (...).
is now exerted, and so exalted. But the manifestation of the Deity, is no
exaltation of the Deity. When the Sun shines out of a dark night, the air is
illustrated, but the light of the Sun is not increased. The Lord Jesus was
exalted in that Nature in which he was humbled, and that is his Humane Nature.
(...). Greg. Nyss.
As the Divine Nature could not suffer, neither can it be exalted.

God being the highest, cannot be exalted. It was the Humane Nature of Christ
that is thus exalted.

If we look upon the Divine Nature of Christ, John 10.30. Phil. 2.6. Non nova
indigeb at exaltatione a Patre, qui aequalis erat Patri. Calv. Non ea accepit
Christus quae non prius habebat, sed accepit ut homo, quae habebat ut Deus.
Theod. In qua forma crucifixus e, stin ipsa exaltatus est. Aug.
so he was one with the Father, and equal to the Father; and thus it must not
be thought that Christ could be capable of Exaltation.

When God gave him a Name; Theodoret excellently unfolds this great Mystery
thus, Christ (says he) did not receive that which he had not before, but he
did receive that as man, which from all eternity he had as God.

2. But we answer that the (...) of the Text, has Relation unto Christ as
Mediator God-man; not as God, so he could not be exalted at all; nor as a mere
man, for so he could not be capable of so great Exaltation. The Humane Nature
of Christ being a Creature, cannot be capable of Divine Worship, or of sitting
at the right hand of God. But the Humane Nature of Christ by the personal
inseparable union it has to his Divine Nature, is thus advanced.

Having finished the first particular of Christ's Exaltation, that God has
given him a Name above every Name; I now proceed,

Secondly, Another particular of Christ's Exaltation, is this, That at the Name
of Jesus every knee should bow; In the handling of which, I will endeavor to
resolve these Questions.

Quest. 1. What are we to understand here by bowing the knee?

Answ. 1. Some take this literally, as the Papists, who in their worship bow
the knee as often as they hear the Name of Jesus mentioned. The Learned Zanchy
is of an opinion, that some of the Ceremonies in use amongst the Papists, might
have an innocent Original; as their signing with the Cross, to show that they
were not ashamed of the Cross of Christ, with which the Heathens did reproach
them; and so the standing up at the Creed, to note their resolution to strive
together for the Faith that was once delivered to the Saints. So genuflection
to the Name of Jesus, was (say some) in opposition to the Arrians, who denied
the Divinity of Christ; but whether these things were so innocent at the first;
seeing they are all of humane institution, and have been abused to
superstition, we have justly laid the use of them aside. And this Text cannot
be so understood; for if by Name we understand the power of Christ, then by
bowing the knee, must be meant our submission and subjection to this power.

By bowing, therefore, to the Name of Jesus, is understood that obedience and
subjection which is due to the Sovereign power and Auhority of Christ. Thus
when Joseph was exalted to that Dignity and Authority in Egypt, Genesis 41.43.
Joh. 5.22, 23. Mat. 28.18. Acts 3.15. 1 Cor. 2.8.
that there was none greater than he, but Pharaoh himself, They cried in the
streets where Joseph went. Bow the knee. Thus God the Father, gave Jurisdiction
and Authority to the Son, that they which honor the Father, might also honor
the Son. All power (says Christ) is given me, both in Heaven and in Earth.
He is the Prince of Life, and the Lord of Glory, to whom all obedience, service
and subjection is most due.

Quest. 2. Who are they must bow the knee to Christ, and be in subjection unto
him?

Answ. All Creatures; for the Enumeration is full; which Chrysostom thus
Expounds; (...). Chrysostom. in loc.
Things in Heaven, on Earth, and under the Earth; i. e. Angels, Men, and
Devils, which Theodoret does more clearly Explain.

1. Things in Heaven, i. e. good Angels, and glorified Saints, spirits of just
men made perfect.

2. Things on Earth; all men living, both good and bad.

3. Under the Earth; (...) infernalia; i. e. Devils and damned spirits.

All these must bow the knee, and must yield subjection unto Jesus Christ.

I. All knees in heaven shall bow to Christ voluntarily.

1. The good Angels, they did always honor and obey the Lord Jesus. It was
the joy of the Angels of Heaven, to be Subject and Serviceable unto Jesus
Christ.

1. Before the Incarnation of Christ, an Angel instructed Daniel concerning the
Messiah, Dan. 9.24.
and how long it should be before his coming.

2. When the fullness of time was come, an Angel comes to the blessed Virgin,
and said, Fear not Mary, for thou have found favor with God, Luke 1.30, 31.
and behold thou shall conceive in thy womb, and bring forth a Son, and call
his Name Jesus.

3. As soon as ever he was born, an Angel brings the glad-tydings of it; and a
whole Host of them who sang together, Job 38.7. Luke 2.13.
and shouted for joy at the Creation of the world, do with a song Celebrate
Christ's Nativity, Glory be to God on High, etc.

4. When Jesus Christ was in danger to be killed by Herod, an Angel warnes of
the danger, Mat. 2.13.
and directs his Mother to flee with him into Egypt.

5. When he was tempted by Satan forty days together, a little before he
entered upon the work of his Ministry, Mat. 4.11.
behold Angels came and Ministered unto him.

6. When he was in his Agony in the Garden, ready to take the cup of trembling
out of his Fathers hand, there appeared an Angel from heaven strengthening him.
Luke 22.43.
This blessed Creature out of love and duty, seeing his Lord and Master in such
distress, came in to succor him.

7. And as the Angels gave the first notice of his Birth, so also of his
Resurrection; an Angel told the woman, He is not here, Mat. 28.6.
he is risen.

8. The Angels attended Christ's Ascension into Heaven, for they told the
Disciples, Acts 1.11.
That as they saw him ascending into heaven, so he should come again from
Heaven in like manner.

9. And with infinite delight did they welcome Christ to heaven, where, Heb.
1.6.
upon his first coming, all the Angels did worship him.

Mat 25.31. 2 These. 1.7. Mat. 24.31.
10. And Lastly, When Christ shall come at the last day to judge both quick and
dead, he will come with all his holy Angels with him, and shall be Revealed
from Heaven with his mighty Angels; who then most willingly will be employed,
to gather together all his Elect, from the four Winds of Heaven.

Col. 1.16.
All this service the good Angels perform unto Christ, not only as he is their
Creator (for by him were created even the things that are in heaven) But they
yield him this Subjection as he is their Head and Governor; Col. 2.10. Ephesians.
1.21, 22.
and so he is called the Head of all Principality and Power; i. e. Of Angels.

And this voluntary subjection to Jesus Christ, is because they have benefit by
Christ, though not in a way of Redemption, yet they owe their Confirmation unto
Christ.

The good Angels, though they were created good and excellent creatures, Hoc
ipsum, quod sancti Angeli, ab illo statu beatitudinis in quo sunt, mutari in
deterius nullo modo possunt, non est iis naturaliter insitum, sed postquam
creati sunt, gratiae divinae largitate collatum. Aug. de fide ad Pet. Diac.
cap. 23. Qui erexit hominem lapsum, dedit Angelo stanti ne laberetur. Bern.
yet as creatures their state is mutable; and they had in them a potentiality
and a possibility to sin and fall, as well as those Angels which left their
first station. But this possibility is removed by Christ, who by his grace did
lift up fallen man, and by his Powen, preserves the Angels that they shall not
fall. And therefore it is, that in a way of thankfulness the Angels in Heaven
do bow their knee in Subjection and Service unto Christ.

2. As the glorious Angels bow the knee to Christ in heaven, so the spirits of
just men made perfect; the souls departed do in Heaven, praise, adore, and
worship the Lord Jesus Christ, and do yield voluntary subjection and obedience
to him; unto which duty, they are more carried by a principle of thankfulness,
that Christ has Redeemed them: this is shadowed out unto us by the Vision of
Saint John; who having seen the Lord Jesus taking the Book with seven Seals,
and opening it, he heard the Saints in Heaven singing a new Song, and saying,
Thou art worthy to take the Book, and to open the Seals thereof; for thou wast
slain, and have Redeemed us unto God out of every kindred, and tongue, and
people, and Nation; Rev. 5.9, 10.
and have made us unto our God, Kings and Priests, etc.

This is the daily work of glorified Saints in Heaven, to cast down their
Crowns before that Throne where Christ sits. The Saints departed, Rev. 4.10.
are discharged from those weights and clogs of corruption, which did hinder
them from this duty while they were in the body, Heb. 12.1. Romans 7.24. Rev. 4.6.
and cumbred and pestred with the body of death. They are never weary, though
they never rest day nor night, saying, Holy, holy, holy Lord God Almighty,
which was, and is, and is to come.

And thus I have showed you how things in Heaven do bow the knee, and are
subject to the Name and Authority of the Lord Jesus.

II. Things on earth, i. e. Good men, and Bad men.

1. Good men; Psa. 110.3.
the Children of God who by the grace of Christ, are made a willing people in
the day of his Power; for such is the heart-turning power of Gods Grace, that
of unwilling, Isal. 48.4.
he makes us willing; God by degrees removes out of our necks the Iron sinew,
that hinders us from stooping and bowing to Christ.

Grace by degrees does take away that enmity in our minds, Col. 1.21. Romans 8.7.
and that carnal-mindedness, which neither is, nor can be subject to the Law of
God.

By nature we are Children of disobedience as well as others; Romans 7.23. Ephesians.
2.3.
and are willingly subject to no Law but the Law of our Members; nor to no
will, but the wills of the flesh; but the Grace of God removes that stoutness
of heart, contumacy, and Rebellion, which is in us naturally against Christ,
and so sweetly and powerfully inclines their wills, Psalm. 119.6. 1 John 5.3.
Veniat, veniat verbum Dei, and si sexcenta nobis essent colla, submittemus
omnia.
that they follow the Lamb wherever he goes, and have Respect unto all the
Commandments of Christ, and not one of them is grievous. A Child of God
willingly submits his Neck to the Yoke of Christ.

2. Evil men, they also must bow the knee to Jesus Christ; and though their
subjection be not voluntary and ingenuous, yet bow they must, and bow they do;
and partly through the awakening of a natural conscience, partly by a spirit of
bondage, and fear of wrath, they are as it were compelled to render many
unwilling services and subjections unto Christ.

Non peccare metuit, sed ardere. Aug.
Which compulsory subjection arises not from a fear of sin, but from a fear
of Hell.

All these because they do not willingly bear the yoke of Christ, they shall
unwillingly become his footstool. Mat. 11.29. Psalm. 110.1.


And they do not so much honor Christ, as Christ may be said to honor himself
upon them. The wicked do give honor to Christ as unwillingly as ever Haman
clothed Mordecai, and proclaimed before him, Hester 6.11.
Thus shall it be done to the man whom the King will honor.

III. And Lastly, The Devils in Hell are forced to yield subjection unto Jesus
Christ; and so (...), things under the earth, infernalia, things in hell do bow
their knee unto him. For if in the days of Christ's Humiliation, he has
exercised power over the damned spirits, and they have acknowledged him, and
his Sovereign power over them, much more are they subject to him now in the
days of his Exaltation.

I shall not need to show you how often the Devils crouched to Christ whilst he
was here on earth. The Devils were not only subject to his Person, but to those
that commanded them in his Name; for so the seventy Disciples returning, gave
Christ an account; Luke 10.17.
Lord (say they) even the Devils are subject unto us through thy Name.

In one story we find that the Devils did three times prostrate themselves at
the feet of Christ. Saint Luke relates the Story of the man possessed with a
Legion of Devils.

1. First one of the Devils in the name of all the rest, thus supplicates
Christ, Luke 8.28.
What have I to do with thee, Jesus, thou Son of God Most High? I beseech
thee Torment me not.

2. When Christ commanded the unclean spirits to come out of the man, Ver. 31.
they besought him that he would not command them to go out into the deep, that
is, into Hell.

Ver. 32.
3. The Devils a third time besought Christ that they might go into the Herd of
Swine.

Thus those proud and rebellious spirits were forced to bow, even in the days
of Christ's flesh. James 2.19.


And therefore much more now Christ is exalted, do the devils tremble; We read
that Christ spoiled principalities and powers, Col. 2.15.
and made a show of them openly, Triumphing over them; In which Scripture we
may observe, that Christ has disarmed, and triumph't over Satan. The word
(...), alludes to the manner of the Conqueror, who disarmed the Captives, and
afterward they led their Captives in chains, when they made their Triumphant
entrance; so the words, (...), do signify, alluding to the Roman Conquests
and Triumphs.

Thus the Lord Jesus Christ by his death overcame the Devil, Heb. 2.14. Ephesians.
4.8. Duo in cruce affixi intelliguntur: Christus visibiliter, sponte sua, ad
tempus; Diabolus invisibiler, invitus, in perpetuum. Orig. Missilia Triumphalia.
and by his Ascension he led Captivity Captive, and gave gifts; alluding still
to the manner of the Roman Triumphs, when the Victor in a Chariot of State,
ascended up to the Capitol, the Prisoners following his Chariot; or else
drawing it, with their hands bound behind them; and there were pieces of gold
and silver thrown amongst the people, and other gifts and largesses bestowed
upon the friends of the Conqueror.

The Devil ever since the death, Resurrection, and Ascension of Christ, has
been overcome and spoiled. For by the death of Christ, the Devil was unarmed,
and shackled; but presently after he was gagged and silenced, and all his
Oracles struck dumb and speechless; and so the Devils divested of their
long-enjoyed power, and they forced to bow, though unwillingly to Jesus Christ.

Hence it is said that the Devils tremble, Jam. 2.19.
because they know Christ as their Judge, but not as their Savior. They must
bow, because they cannot help it.

But it may be objected.

Object. If all the Devils in Hell, and all the wicked men here on earth, do
bow the knee to Christ, how comes it then to pass, that the Devil and his
instruments do continue their Rebellion and mischief against Christ and his
Church.

1. To this is answered, that even the Devils of Hell are bound to bow the knee
unto Jesus Christ, though like wicked Rebels they have refused to do it. And so
much we gather from that Answer of Christ to the Devil, who when he had the
impudence and audaciousness to bid the Son of God fall down and worship him;
Mat. 4.9, 10.
Christ said, Get thee behind me Satan, for it is written, Thou shall worship
the Lord thy God, and him only shall thou serve. The Devils are bound to bow,
though they refuse.

2. The Devil Rebels, and wicked men do not bow to, but blaspheme the Name of
Christ; and yet Jesus Christ has and does exercise Authority over them, 1. In
limiting them. 2. In punishing them.


1. In that he does limit them. The Devil could not take away either Jobs
Cattle, Job 1.11, 12. Luke 8.32.
Servants, Children, or Health, but as far as Gods permissive Providence was
pleased to lengthen the chain; and though God does lengthen the chain, yet he
always keeps the chain in his hand.

The Devils could not go into the Herd of Swine, till they had first ask't
leave of Jesus Christ.

And so persecuters, they are limited too; the Devil and his instruments they
are limited. The Devil shall cast some of you into Prison, that you may be
tried, and you shall have tribulation ten days. Thus the Devil and his
instruments are bounded.

1. As to the Persons, whom they shall persecute; the Devil shall cast some of
you, not all into Prison.

2. As to the kind of trouble, the Devil shall cast you into Prison, not into
hell. Rev. 2.10.


3. As to the time, you shall have tribulation ten days, and not for ever.

2. God will punish them, and so they shall be Subject to Christ.

1. In this life; for though the patience of God be long-suffering, yet it is
not always suffering; 2 Pet. 2.8. Luke 18.7. Psalm. 110.11. Luke 19.27.
and though he do bear long, yet he will avenge his elect.

2. At the last day. The unjust are reserved to be punished at the day of
judgment; then will Christ put all his enemies under his feet; and then Christ
will say, As for those mine enemies that will not that I should reign over
them, bring them forth, and slay them before my face; the total, final subject
on of the Devil and Wicked men, of all the enemies of Christ unto him, shall be
at the last day; then shall all knees bow before God. Thus the Lord speaks in
the Prophet. I have sworn by my self, the word is gone out of my mouth in
righteousness, Isa. 45.23.
and shall not return, that unto me every knee shall bow, every tongue shall
swear. To this Scripture it is that the Apostle alludes in this place; and if
you ask when shall this universal subjection be unto Christ? the Apostle will
answer you in his Epistle to the Romans. To this end Christ both died, and
rose, and revived, Romans 14.9, 10, 11*
that he might be Lord both of dead and living; but why do thou judge thy
Brother? or why do thou set at naught thy Brother? we shall all stand before
the judgment Seat of Christ; for it is written, As I live, says the Lord,
every knee shall bow to me, and every tongue shall confess to God.

And so I am come to the third and last particular of Christ's Exaltation; viz.
Every tongue shall confess that Jesus is the Lord. In the handling of which, I
shall resolve these Questions.

Quest. 1. What are we to understand by every tongue?

Answ. 1. Some understand every tongue for every Nation; and then the meaning
is, Omnis linguae pro quavis Gente. Dan. 3.4. Rev. 5.9. Psalm. 67.7. Psalm. 2.8.
Psalm. 72.9. Romans 10.18.
that the Name of Christ shall be acknowledged and worshipped by every Nation;
and so in Scripture Phrase, Tongue, and Language, and Nation, they are (...)
words of the same notion and import. And this is true, that before the end of
the world, all the ends of the earth shall worship the Name of Christ. The
Heathen shall be his inheritance, and the uttermost ends of the earth his
possession; and they that dwell in the Wilderness, shall bow before him; and
the Sunne-light of the Gospel shall shine all the world over.

And it is very remarkable, how God did repair the confusion of tongues by the
gift of tongues. Genesis 11.7. compared with Acts 2.11. Romans 10.10.


2. But I rather conceive, that by every tongue is meant every person; as by
every knee, every person; for with the heart man believes unto righteousness,
and with the mouth confession is made unto salvation.

Quest. 2. What are we to understand here that Jesus is the Lord?

1 Cor. 2.8.
Answ. Jesus Christ is the Lord, the Lord of glory in several respects.

1 Cor. 8 6. Romans 11.36
1. He is the Lord, as he is Creator of heaven and earth; to us there is but
one Lord Jesus Christ, by whom are all things, and we by him. For of him, and
through him, and to him are all things.

Heb. 1.4. (...). Heb. 1.2. 2 Cor.. 4.5.
2. As he was the Son of God, so he is the Lord, and so he has obtained by
inheritance, this most excellent Name, to be Lord and Christ; thus Christ is
Lord of all; jure haereditario, as he was the Heir of all things.

Jesus Christ is the Lord; so speaks the Apostle, We preach Christ Jesus the
Lord.

1. Christ is a Lord to command us; he has that Authority, that he has an
absolute Sovereignty over our consciences; men are but Servants of our Faith,
Stat pro rationibus universis, Deus vult.
but Christ is the Lord of our Faith and Consciences. It is enough that Christ
has said it, that he has commanded it.

Heb. 7.25.
2. Christ is a Lord to save us; and he has power and ability, to save to the
uttermost, all those that come unto God through him. And thus as he has the
Authority of a Lord to command us, we should willingly obey him; and as he has
the power and ability of a Lord to save us, we should cheerfully trust in his
Name. To confess that Jesus is the Lord, is so to believe on him, as to say,
Mat. 8.26. Acts 9 6.
Lord, save us, or else we perish; and so to obey him, as to say, Lord, what
would thou have me to do?

Now as every knee must bow to the Dominion of Christ, so every tongue must
confess that Jesus is the Lord.

1. The Devils and Wicked men shall be forced at the last to acknowledge the
power of Christ, whose Authority they have always rebelled against. And as
Pharaoh and the Egyptians cried out, Exodus 14.15.
Let us flee, for the Lord fights against us; So shall the stoutest-hearted
sinner one day, flee from the presence of Christ, Rev. 6.16.
and call to the Mountains to shelter them from the wrath of the Lamb. And all
the implacable enemies of Christ, they shall be forced, through spite and rage,
to gnaw their tongues, and gnash their teeth, and say as that Cursed Apostate
Julian, Thou have overcome me, (...).
O Galilean.

2. All the Saints and Angels, shall with one consent, own, acknowledge, and
praise Jesus Christ, as the Lord, and as their Lord. They shall acknowledge him
to be the Lord their Maker, and their Savior, and so they shall cry Hosanna to
him, and they shall acknowledge him to be their Lord and Sovereign, and so they
shall cast down their Crowns at his feet, and with everlasting Hallelujahs
sing, Worthy is the Lamb that was slain, Rev. 5.12, 13.
to receive Wisdom, Power, and Riches, and Strength, and Honor, and Glory, and
Blessing.

There is but one thing more to be opened in this Scripture, and that is the
end of Christ's Exaltation, which was (...), to the Glory of God the Father.

1. Some by (...), do understand that Jesus Christ is exalted unto the same
glory with the Father in Heaven, being now sat down at his right hand; and so
they make these words to signify not the end wny, but the end whereunto Christ
was exalted.

And thus the Arabic, and the Vulgar Latin. Omnis lingua confileatur quia
Dominus Jesus Christus in gloria est Dei Patris. Rev. 3.21.


And though I believe that there is a truth in this; viz. that Jesus Christ
after he had overcome his enemies, sat down in his Fathers Throne; yet I
cannot see how the Greek will bear this Interpretation.

2. We shall therefore take these words, Unto the glory of God the Father, as
signifying the great end of Christ's Humiliation and Exaltation, to wit the
glory of God. As God had no motive without himself, so he had no end beyond
himself, John 3.16. Deuteronomy. 7.7.
in giving of Christ. God gave Christ for us, because he loved us; and
wherefore did he love us, but because he loved us? and the maine end of all,
was, Ephesians. 1.6.
that all might be to the praise of the glory of his grace. Thus Christ's
Exaltation was for the honoring of God the Father. Jesus Christ prayed,
Father, glorify thy Name; then came there a voice from heaven, saying, I have
both glo^ified it, and will glorify it again. As if God the Father had thus
answered Christ, Son, I have glorified my Name in thy Humiliation, John 12.28.
and I will glorify it again in thy Exaltation. God the Father glorifies his
Son, that he might glorify his own Name; Luke 10.16. John 5.22, 23.
He that despise^h Christ, despises God that sent him; and he that honors
the Son, honors the Father.

Having spoken of the Exaltation of Christ, as the Apostle handles the Doctrine
of it in these Verses, I shall conclude all with the improvement and
Application thereof.

I. Use of Information; If Christ was first humbled, and then exalted; Luke
24.26. Act. 14.22.
we may learn from hence, that as Christ first suffered, and entered into his
glory, even so must we, through many Tribulations enter into the Kingdom of
Heaven. As it was with the Head, so may we expect it will be with the Members;
the Crown of Thorns, before the Crown of life; the Cross of shame, Joh. 19.2.
Rev. 2.10.
before the Throne of Glory; Humiliation before Exaltation; Christ got not the
Crown sine sang^ine and sudore; he sweat drops of blood for it; and we cannot
expect an easier and shorter way to glory. Our way to heaven, is like that of
the Israelites to Canaan, Psalm. 66.12.
which was through fire and water, into a wealthy land.

2 Timothy 2.11, 12.
This is a faithful saying, If we suffer with Christ, we shall reign with him;
first suffer, and then reign; we pass through Marah unto Elim, through Bacah to
Berechah, through bitterness to blessedness.

II. Use of Exhortation; Is Jesus Christ thus exalted? then let us, our
tongues, our knees, our hearts, and our lives, acknowledge him to be our Lord.

Joh. 19. Joh. 19. Rev 4.10. Rev. 15.3.
1. What the Jews, and Pilate, and Herod, and the Soldiers did in scorn, let
us do in sinc^rity. They put a Crown of Thorns on his head, let us cast down
our Crowns at his footstool. They bowed the knee, and cried, Ave Rex
Judaeorum, Hayle King of the Jews; Ubi thronus Christi? ubi sceptium, ubi
Corona, ubi Pu^pura, ubi Ministri? Crux fuit thronus, sceptrum clavi, purpura
sanguis, Corona spinae, and Ministri Carnifices. Aug. Tanto charior es mihi,
quanto vilior factus es pro me. Bern.
let us bow the knees of our souls unto him, and say, Ave Rex Sanctorum,
Blessed be thou, O King of Saints; whereas the Cross was his Throne, the nails
his Scepter, his Robe was made Purple with his own blood, his Crown was
Thorns, his attendants were the Executioners; Say then, O blessed Savior!
thou art the more p ecious to my soul, because thou wast so much vilified for
my sake.

2. Let us take heed that we do not violate our allegiance to him, whom God
has exalted to be Lord and Christ. Sinners! Exodus 5.2. Psalm. 12.2. Luke 19.27.
do not say, Who is the Lord, that we should obey his voice? Do not say, Who is
Lord over us? Do not, O do not say, We will not have Christ to reign over us.

1. Consider, Christ is a Savior only to th^se that su^mit unto him. He is the
Author of eternal life to them that obey him. Heb. 5.9.
It is a vain thing to expect the Privileges and Dignities that come by
Christ, and not to submit to the duties and services which are due unto Christ.
Tit. 2.11, 12.
The Gospel is a Message of Eternal life, only to those to whom it is a rule of
a spiritual life; What? will you cry to Christ to save you, and in the mean
time serve the Devil and your lusts? But the true believer does not only cast
himself into the arms of Christ to be saved, but also casts himself at Christ's
feet to serve him; and is as willing to be ruled by him, as to be Redeemed by
him. Many love Christ, but it is for their own sakes; who desire to find, but
will not be at the pains to seek him; Multi amant Christum, sed non propter
Christum; amant benedictionem; non jurisdictionem multi cupiunt Christum
consequi, qui nolunt sequi; desiderant inv^nire quem nolunt quaerere.
M^retricius amor est plus amare annulum quam sponsum. Aug.
and so instead of serving the Lord Christ, they do but serve themselves upon
him.

2. Consider (O foolish sinner) that every knee must one day bow to Christ; O
then! what folly is it to rebel against him, to whom thou must at last be
forced to bow! Would the Brethren of Joseph (think you) have so despised, and
despitefully used Joseph, if ever they had thought that there would come a day,
that they must supplicate to him for their lives and liberties? The proudest
sinner will at the last day, Mat. 7.21.
cry, Lord, Lord, etc. Do not then lift up the heel against him, to whom thou
must one day bow the knee.

3. Consider, That the sins of Christians are far greater, than of the Jews
against Christ. They sinned against Christ in the state of his Humiliation, but
we sin against Christ who is now exalted on the right hand of God. The Jews put
Christ to death for saying, Mat. 26.64.
Hereafter you shall see the Son of Man sitting on the right hand of power, and
coming in the Clouds of Heaven; and shall we, we Christians, put the Lord of
glory to open shame, who do believe that he is sat down at the right hand of
the Majesty on High? Acts 3.17.
The Jews many of them, both Rulers and people, knew not that Jesus was the
Christ; they had a hand in his death, but it was through ignorance; for had
they known it, Cor. 2.8.
they would not have crucified the Lord of Glory; but it must be horrible
wickedness for us to rebel against Christ, who do believe his Exaltation.

Sub pedibus ejus eris, aut adoptatus aut victus. Aug.
4. And Lastly, Consider, That Christ at last will be too hard for the most
hard-hearted sinner. If you will not bow, you will be broken (O obstinate
sinner!) if thou will not kiss the Son, thou will lick the dust under his feet;
if thou will not bow as a Child, thou will be made to bow as a Slave; if thou will not bow to his golden Scepter, Mat. 11.29. Psa. 110.1.
thou will be broken with his Iron Rod; In a word, if thou will not bear his
Yoke, thou shall become his Footstool.

III. Use of Comfort to Bel^evers; great is the Consolation which does arise
from the doctrine of Christ's Exaltation.

1. Is Christ exalted to the right hand of God? then we may comfortably
believe, that he has perfectly satisfied Gods justice for us; John 16.9.
we may now rest upon Christ's righteousness, that he has accomplished fully
all his undertaking, because he is gone to the Father. Christ by his Death
overcame his enemies; by his Resurrection he scattered them; by his Ascension
he triumph't over them; by his Death he paid the debt; by his Resurrection he
came out of Prison; and by his Ascension he shows himself openly to God the
Creditor, and pleads satisfaction. The Humiliation of Christ confirmed and
ratified the New Testament; his Exaltation gives him opportunity to execute his
last Will and Testament; for he is now exalted as a Conqueror, Rev. 1.18.
and has the keys of death and hell delivered to him.

This comfort the Apostle urges upon the Doctrine of Christ's* Exaltation; for
if when we were enemies, Romans 5.10.
we were reconciled to God by the death of his Son; much more being reconciled,
we shall be saved by his life. Our salvation began in the humiliation, but it
is completed in the Exaltation of Christ. Heb. 7.25. (...).
He did not undertake what he was not able to finish; for he saves his people
to the uttermost.

2. This is our comfort, though Christ be highly exalted, yet he is mindful of
us. He is not only a faithful High Priest in things pertaining to God, to make
reconciliation for the sins of the people, but he is a merciful high Priest,
Heb. 2.17, 18.
to remember the sufferings of his people, and to succor those that are
tempt^d. The Lord Jesus though he be safely landed upon the shore of eternal
glory, yet he has an eye to, and a care of his poor Church, Heb. 4.15. Heb.
5.2. (...).
that is tossed with tempest, and afflicted. He is not only (...), one that can
be touched with the feeling of our infirmities, but he is (...); he does pro
magnitudine miseriae condolere, he bears a share with us in our afflictions and
temptations.

The manner of men is, that great preferments makes them forget their former
poor acquaintance: Honores mutan^ mores.
but it is otherwise with Christ. He is exalted above the Heavens, and yet he
is not unmindful of his Church on earth. The days of his Passion are ended,
but not of his compassion; as Joseph, though he was the Favorite of Egypt, yet
was not ashamed to own his Brethren who were poor Shepherds; Heb. 2 11. Heb.
6.20. (...). 1 John 2.1. (...). Joh. 20.17. Exodus 28.9, 10.
no more is Jesus Christ ashamed to call us Brethren. Christ is gone into
heaven as our F^re-runner, and there he is an Adv^cate for us with the Fa her.
Just when Christ was going into heaven, he sends this comfortable message to
his Disciples, I ascend to your God and my God, to your Fa her and my Fa her.

Our great High Priest has all the names, and necessities of his people
written upon his Breast Plate; Believers are engraven upon the palms of his
hands; Isa. 49.16. Cant. 8.6.
yea, they are set as a Seal upon his heart.

Videmus caput nostrum super aquas. Greg.
3. And last Consolation is this, Christ is exalted to heaven, and so shall all
believers in due time; the Head has taken possession of heaven for all his
Members.

In all the several parts of the Humiliation and Exaltation of Christ, he acted
not as a single person, but as the Second Adam; representatively, as a public
person; so that all those who are in Christ Jesus, have an interest in that
Redemption he has purchased for Believers.

Gal. 2.20. Romans 6.8.
Christ was crucified, and a believer is crucified with Christ; Christ dyed, and
a believer is dead with Christ.

Col. 3.1.
Christ rose from the dead, and believers are risen with Christ. Christ is
ascended up to heaven, and believers sit together with Christ in heavenly
places. Ephesians. 2.6.


1 Cor. 6.2.
Christ will come to judge the world; and the Saints, as Assessors to Christ,
shall judge the world.

Rev. 3.31.
Christ is sat down in his Fathers Throne, and believers shall sit with Christ
in his Throne.

In a word, our Lord Jesus Christ, who is now possessed of the glory of heaven,
John 14.3. Joh 16.24.
will come again to fetch us to heaven, that we may be where he is, that we may
not only see his glory, but partake of it; for when he shall appear, we shall
appear with him in glory. Col. 3.4.


THE SATISFACTION OF CHRIST DISCUSSED.
COL. 1.20. And (having made peace through the blood of his Cross) by him to
reconcile all things unto himself, by him; I say, whether they be things in
earth, or things in heaven.


THE Apostle having congratulated the Colossians, their faith, and love, and
other graces, and poured forth a prayer for them; in the 14. verse he enters
upon a Declaration of the Gospel-mystery, the Person, and Offices, and work of
Christ. His person, ver. 15, 16, 17. he is God, etc. his Office, ver. 18. he is
the Head of the body, the Church, etc. His work in the 20. verse. Having in the
19. verse, asserted Christ's fitness for that work, it pleased the Father, that
in him should all fullness dwell, etc. Besides that infinite fullness which he
had as God, by natural and necessary generation, there was another unmeasured
fullness depending upon Gods (...) and good pleasure, and thereby imparted unto
Christ. Now he comes to show his work described

First, By its nature, To reconcile to himself, to make peace.

Secondly, By its instrument, that is, the blood of the Cross by him.

Thirdly, The object of it, which are, All things, whether they be things in
earth, or things in heaven: By which learned Davenant understands the Angels
spoken of as the things in heaven; and so many others, supposing that the Elect
Angels were confirmed in their estate by Christ: But with submission to better
judgments, I conceive

1. that there is not sufficient evidence in Scripture, to show that the holy
Angels had their confirmation from Christ; nor does it seem to be necessary;
forasmuch as it is commonly acknowledged, that Adam (who was under the same
Covenant with the Angels) if he had continued in the observation of Gods
precepts; for so long time as God judged meet, he should have been confirmed by
virtue of the Covenant of Works some other way. And therefore it was rather to
be thought, that the Angels have their confirmatiom from Christ, as God and
Head over all things, than as Mediator (The actions of Christ as Mediator,
supposing a breach, according to that place, Gal. 3.20. A M^diatour is not a
Mediator of one; i. e. of two parties which are one politically; i. e. which
are agreed in one, but of parties at variance.)

2. Howsoever if the Angels had been confirmed by Christ, yet surely they were
not reconciled by Christ; for Reconciliation implies a former enmity, as these
things in heaven are said to be. And therefore I rather understand it of
departed Saints, Patriarchs, Prophets, etc. who, as they went to Heaven, not to
any Limbus; so this expression is used to insinuate, that they were saved by
the grace of Jesus Christ, even as we, as it is, Acts 15.11. and that the blood
of Jesus Christ did expiate not only those sins which were committed after his
death, but those also which were long since past; Romans 3.25. as Sol nondum
conspictus illuminat orbem, The light and influence of the Sun is dispersed
among us, before the body of the Sun does appear above our Horizon.

So then here you have man's Reconciliation, Justification, and Salvation
described, together with the procuring cause of it, set forth

1. More generally, By him.

2. More specially, By the blood of his Cross, by the shedding of his blood for
us, by his death and passion completed on the Cross.

The doctrine I intend to handle, is this,

That the death of Jesus Christ is the procuring cause of man's justification
and salvation.

Amongst all those heresies which God has suffered to spring among us (that
they that are approved, may be manifest) none are more dangerous than those
which concern the person and office of Christ; of those many streams of error
which run into the dead Sea of Socinianism, these are two; They deny the
Godhead, and the satisfaction of Christ, and so indeed subvert the whole
Fabric of the Gospel. This latter I shall here endeavor to discuss, and shall
proceed in this Method.

1. I shall explain it. 2. Assert. 3. Defend. 4. Apply it.

1. For the Explication of this great Gospel-mystery, (which truly if it fall,
we are without hope, and so of all creatures most miserable) I shall lay down
these steps.

First, God made the world and man in it for his own service and glory: And
this end he cannot be disappointed in, but must have it one way or other.

Secondly, Man by sin thwharted Gods end, and cast dirt upon his glory, and so
does every sinner: Every sin is a reflection upon Gods Name, a blot in Gods
Government of the world; so that some make it a pretense for their Atheism,
saying, That if there were a God, he would not suffer sin to be in the world.

Thirdly, God is inclined by his Nature, and obliged by his interest, to hate
sin, and punish the sinner, and so to recover his glory.

1. I say God is inclined by his nature, to hate and punish sin; I do not
positively conclude, that he is absolutely obliged; I shall not here meddle
with that nice question, Whether God was so far obliged to punish it by his
nature, that he could not pardon sin without satisfaction; but this is
manifest: look upon man as a sinner, and so Gods Nature must needs be opposite
unto him; The Scripture describes God in such manner, not only in regard of his
Will, but also in respect of his Nature, Hab. 1.13. Thou art of purer eyes than
to behold evil, and can not look on iniquity, etc. Exodus 34.6. where the
nature of the Divine Majesty is represented; among other parts of the
description this is one, He will by no means clear the guilty. Psalm 11.5.
The wicked -- his soul hates; -- and the reason is added from Gods Nature,
ver. 7. For the righteous Lord loves righteousness, his countenance does
behold the upright. And it may further appear, that here punishment of sin is
not an act of Gods Will, but of his Nature. Because the Actions of Gods Will
are only known by Revelation, not by reason, or the light of Nature; but that
God should and would punish sin, this was known by natures light, to such as
were unacquainted with Revelation-light. Hence came the Conclusion, Acts 28.4.
(This man is a Murderer, whom though he has escaped the Sea, yet Vengeance
suffers him not to live.) Vengeance, (...), a supposed Goddess, but indeed
nothing else but Divine Justice.

2. God is obliged by his interest to punish him, as he is the Ruler of the
world. By sin there comes a double mischief.

1. God is wronged.

2. The world is wronged by a bad example, and hardened in sin; so that if God
might pardon sin as it is a wrong to himself, yet he is in a manner obliged to
punish it to right the wronged world, and to make such sinners patterns of
severity, that the world may not make them examples of ungodliness; even as
King James might pardon the Powder-Traytors, so far forth as his Person was
concerned; but if you look on it as a wrong to the whole Nation, to the
Protestant Religion, so he was obliged to punish them, to make them warnings to
others in the like cases; so that you see man's punishment was necessary for
Gods glory, and the Worlds good.

Fourthly, The punishment to be inflicted, must be suitable to sins Nature, and
Gods Majesty; and therefore an infinite punishment for this is justice to
observe an exact proportion between sin and punishment.

Fifthly, The only way whereby this punishment might be suffered, and yet man
saved, was by the incarnation and passion of God-man. Man being every other way
finite, must have suffered infinitely in regard of duration, even to eternity.
And none but Christ who was infinite in regard of the subject, and dignity of
his person, as he was God, could have so speedily and effectually delivered us
from this punishment, by suffering it himself, whereby Gods justice was
satisfied, his hatred against the sinner removed, and his mercy at liberty to
act in the pardon of the sinner.

Sixthly, This passion of Jesus Christ, God was graciously pleased to accept
for us, and impute to us, as if we had suffered in our persons, and so he
receives us into mercy. And this is the substance of the Doctrine of the Gospel
about man's salvation. So much for the first thing, the Explication of the point.

2. I now come to the Assertion or Demonstration of it, that you may receive
this Doctrine as a Truth, not built upon the traditions of men, but revealed in
the Word of God. Now to prove this point; viz. That the death of Jesus Christ
is the procuring cause of man's Justification and Salvation, I may use two sorts
of Arguments.

First, Some from the consideration of Christ's death.

Secondly, Some from the consideration of man's Justification and Salvation.

1. From the consideration of Christ's death I shall offer six Arguments. 1. Its
Possibility. 2. Necessity. 3. Nature. 4. Cause. 5. Vicegerency. 6. Peculiarity.


First, From the possibility: Let me be bold to assert; had it not been for
this purpose, it had not been possible for Christ to dye; as it was not
possible for Christ to be holden of death, Acts 2.24. the price being paid, and
so the Prisoner of course to be released; so it had not been possible, because
not just (Id tantum possumus, quod jure possumus) to put him into a prison, if
it had not been to pay a debt. And a debt of his own he had none, he was a Lamb
without blemish, and without spot, 1 Pet. 1.19. Holy, blameless, undefiled,
separate from sinners, Hebr. 7.26. He knew no sin, 2 Cor. 5.21. which I the
rather mention, because S^cinus has the impudence to lay down this blasphemous
Assertion, That Christ, like the Jewish High Priest, did offer for himself as
well as for the people. You have seen he had no debt, no sin of his own, (he
professes of himself that he did always those things which pleased his
Father, John 8.29.) and therefore he must needs dye for our debts; it is plain
that Adam, had he continued in integrity, should not have dyed; death is not
the effect of nature; (then the Saints in glory must dye again; for they have
the same nature) but the fruit of sin; death entered into the world by sin; Romans
5.12. And the Apostle proves the sin of Infants (expressed by that Periphrasis,
such as have not sinned after the similitude of Adams transgression) from the
death of Infants; and in Adam all dyed; i. e. by his sin, 1 Cor. 15.22.
Therefore Jesus Christ being purified from the guilt of Adams sin, by his holy
birth, and no less perfect than Adam should have been, could never have dyed,
if not for our sakes.

Secondly, From the necessity of Christ's death; it was necessary for our
Salvation and Justification, without which end it had been in vain. The
Socinians mention two other reasons and ends of Christ's death; the one to be an
example of obedience; but such we have many others upon far less charge; the
other to be a ground of hope for the remission of sin, and the fulfilling of
Gods promises; but properly it is not the death, but resurrection of Christ,
which is the ground of our hope, 1 Cor. 15.14. If Christ be not risen, your
faith is vain; so that those ends are improper and insufficient: And to strike
it dead, I urge but one place, Gal. 2.21. -- If righteousness come by the Law,
Christ is dead in vain. What can be more plain, if righteousness be not by
Christ, that the death of Christ be not the procuring cause of our
Justification, Christ is dead in vain, to no end, or (as Grotius, and others
rather understand) without any meritorious cause; i. e. our sins; however all
comes to one.

Thirdly, From the nature of Christ's death, it is a Sacrifice; this consists of
two Branches.

1. Sacrifices did expiate sin.

2. Christ's death is a Sacrifice, and a sin-expiating Sacrifice.

1. I say Sacrifices did expiate sin, Levit. 1.4. He shall put his hands upon
the head of the burnt-offering, and it shall be accepted for him; and many such
places. And this they did typically, (which strengthens the cause we have in
hand) as representing and fore-signifying Christ, without which it was not
possible for the blood of Bulls and Goats to take away sins, Hebr. 10.4. And the
sins pardoned under the Old Testament, were pardoned thorough Christ, and not
through any virtue of their Sacrifices, Christ being a Mediator for the
Redemption of the Transgressions that were under the first Testament, Hebrews
9.15.

2. And this brings in the second Head, that Christ's death is a Sacrifice, and
a sin-expiating Sacrifice, if either the names or nature of it may be regarded;
for the names and titles proper to Sacrifices, they are attributed to it; (and
God does not give flattering titles, nor false names, but such as discover the
nature of things) it is called (...), an Oblation, or offering up of himself,
Ephesians. 5.2. (...), 1 John 2.2. (...), Romans 3.25. to omit others; and for the
nature, by virtue hereof sin is atoned; he is our High Priest for this end, to
make reconciliation for the sins of the people, Heb. 2.17. (...), being by an
Enallage put for (...), to pacify God, reconcile God, turn away his wrath. You
meet with all things in Christ, which concur to the making of a Sacrifice.
The Priest, he is our High Priest; the Sacrifice himself, Christ was once
offered; the shedding of blood, and destroying of it, (...) being the essential
part of a Sacrifice. Add to these, 1 Cor. 5.7. -- Christ our Passover is
Sacrificed for us; where is a double Argument; 1. That Christ is expressly said
to be Sacrificed. 2. That he is called a Passover, which at the best seems to
have been both a Sacrifice and a Sacrament: Now then Christ's death being a
Sacrifice, it appears that it appeased Gods wrath, procured his favor.

Fourthly, From the cause of Christ's death I might urge a double cause.

1. The inflicting cause it was Gods displeasure: Nothing more plain than that
he had a very deep sense of, and sharp conflict with Gods wrath, from those
dreadful horrors in the Garden (where his soul was exceeding sorrowful unto
death; not certainly at the approach of an ordinary death, which many Martyrs
have undergone with undaunted courage; but at the apprehension of his Fathers
anger) and upon the Cross, where he roared out that direful complaint, My God,
my God, why have thou forsaken me? Now then, seeing God being naturally
gracious, and perfectly righteous, cannot, will not be displeased with any
without cause; and Christ had in himself no cause, There was nothing in him,
Joh. 14.30. and (as you read) he always did those things which pleased him: It
remains therefore that the cause of this displeasure, and of Chrsts death, was,
our sins laid upon him, and our peace to be procured by him: And that brings in
the

2. Head, which is the procuring or meritorious cause of Christ's death; the
guilt of our sins laid on him, brought death upon him, as the just punishment
of them. And this is written with so much clearness, that he that runs may read
it. It is observed of the Ancient Writers of the Church, That those of them
which lived before the Pelagian heresy was raised, spoke more darkly, and
doubtfully, and carelessly in those things, not being ob iged to stand much upon
their Guard when they had no enemy in view, and having to do with enemies of a
contrary make, while they avoided one extreme, (...), as it often happened,
they ran too near the other: But in this point, the Apostles who Writ so long
before Socinus had a being, have Written with as much perspicuity against that
heresy, as if they had lived to see the accomplishment of that Monster, the
conception whereof some of them saw in those. Primitive Heretics. Two things
are written with a Sunbeam.

1. That Christ died for our good as the final cause. Dan. 9.26. -- The Messiah
shall be cut off, but not for himself.

2. That he died for our sins as the deserving cause; Romans 4.25. Who was
delivered ( viz. unto death) for our offenses; not only upon the occasion of
our sins (as the Socinians gloss it) but for the merit of our sins. To suffer
for sin, always implies sin to be the meritorious cause of it. 1 Kings 14.16.
He shall give up Israel because of the sins of Jeroboam. Deuteronomy. 24.16. The
Father shall not be put to death for the children; -- but every man shall be
put to death for his own sin. And many other places there are to the same
purpose: And it is sufficient to confirm any judicious man in this Truth, to
read the miserable evasions which the Socinians use to shift off the force of
this Argument, which as time will not give me leave to mention, so they are
neither fit for this, nor worthy of any Assembly: This is plain, that Christ
died for our sins; and to stop all holes, the holy Ghost uses various
prepositions; if one be more emphatical than another, all shall concur to
assert this truth, (...), Romans 4.25. (...), 1 Cor. 15.3. (...), 1 Pet. 3.18.
And that all these should signify the final cause, or occasion only, and never
the meritorious cause, when a man has put out his eyes, or God has taken away
the Scripture, and other Greek Authors too, he may believe it, but very hardly
before.

I shall strengthen this Argument with this consideration, That Christ is said
to bear our sins; which is so evident, that Crellius that Master Builder of
the Socinian Fabric, confesses, That for the most part to bear sins, is to
endure the punishments due to sin: And he said no more than he was forced to by
the invincible clearness of Scripture-expressions; Lev. 5.1. and 7.18. and
20.17. Notorious Offenders, it is said of them, They shall bear their
iniquity. It is said of Christ, not only (...), which the Socinians say, may
signify to take away iniquity; albeit a Learned man lays down this
assertion, That it never signifies to take away sin, as Socinus would have it;
but also (...), which is to bear upon his shoulders, as a Porter bears a
Burden, but never to take away. Isaiah 53.4. He has borne our griefs, and
car^yed our sorrows.

Object. (Which is one of the most plausible Arguments they have in this cause)
But Mat. 8.16, 17. where Christ took away diseases which he did not bear, it is
said the saying of Esaias was fulfilled therein.

Answ. (To omit those many Answers given by others, of which see Brinsleys one
only Mediator, and Calovius his excellent discourse De satisfactione Christi,
in his Socinismus prostigatus) A Scripture is said to be fulfilled, either
wholly, or in part: Now then you must know, that although it be a truth, which
we conclude against the Papists, That there are no more than one of literal and
coordinate senses of every place of Scripture, yet there may be diverse of
several kinds, one subordinate to another, and one typified by another, and
one accommodated to another; And when any one of these senses are accomplished,
that Scripture is said to be fulfilled, though indeed but one piece and parcel
of it be fulfilled. Thus the fulfilling of the same Scripture, is applied to
the spiritual preservation of the Apostles, John 17.12. and to the temporal
preservation of them, John 18.9. And as it were false and fallacious reasoning
for any man to infer, that Christ's keeping of his Apostles, cannot be
understood spiritually of keeping them in his Name, and keeping them from
Apostasy, as it is said John 17.12. because John 18.9. it is said to be
fulfilled in a rescue of them from a temporal destruction; but rather it must
be said, it was fulfilled both ways, and the one was subordinate to the other,
and typified in the other; So is it in this case: This place in Isaiah, (that
it may appear to be exactly a parallel case) was fulfilled two ways; The one
expressed, 1 Pet. 2.24. Who his own self bare our sins in his own body upon the
Tree. The other in this, Matthew. 8.17. In the former is expressed the cause,
Christ's bearing the burden of our sins upon his shoulders. In the latter, the
effect, Christ's taking off the Burden, or part of that Burden of sin from our
shoulders, or from the shoulders of those diseased persons; for it was laid
upon his shoulders, that it might be taken off from us. So that Matthew rightly
tells us that Isaiah was fulfilled, and that the cause did appear by the
effect; as by the dawning of the day, we see the approach of the Sun. And this
may serve for the untying of that hard knot, which I had almost said, is the
only thing of moment the Socinians have in this Controversy. But to return,
Isa. 53.5. He was wounded for our transgressions, he was bruised for our
iniquities; the chastisement of our peace was upon him, and with his stripes we
are healed. If it were lawful for the highest Antisocinian in the world to
coin a Scripture for his purpose, he could not devise a place of a more
favorable aspect to his cause than this. And Ver. 6. The Lord has placed on
him the iniquity of us all. But indeed the Arguments which might be drawn out
of this one Chapter, Isa. 53. might afford matter for a whole Sermon.

Fifthly, From the Vicegerency of Christ's death; Christ dyed

1. For our good.

2. For ou^ sins, (of both those you have heard.)

3. In our place; of this I now come to Treat Briefly (for I have been
wonderfully prevented) 1 Pet. 3.18. Christ suffered for sins, the just for the
unjust. 2 Cor. 5.14. If one died for all, then were we (...) ^^d; i. e.
juridically, we were all as dead, condemned per^^^^, because he died in our
stead. He is said to die (...), and (...). Now the word (...) always signifies
a commutation, says the then famous, but afterward Apostate Grotius, eye for
eye, (...), Matthew. 5.38. that is, one instead of the other, Matthew. 2.22.
Archelaus reigned (...) in the room of his Father Herod. So 2 Samuel 18.33. Would
God I had died for thee O Absalom; i. e. in thy stead, so that thou had
lived. Thus Christ died for us; so John 11.50. Caiaphas said, It is expedient
for us, that one man should die for the people; i. e. in their stead, to save
their lives, as a public (...). The Gentiles being used in case of some great
and common calamities, threatening destruction to all, to offer up some one man
in the name and stead of all, which was a shadow of that great truth of Christ's
dying for all. And Socinus himself being put to it, cannot deny this; Even in
Heathen Authors, it is a common phrase, To do a thing for another; i. e. in
his place. Ego pro te molam, I will grind for you, and you shall be free.
Christ is called (...), a Ransom, or Price, a (...); (there is one Argument,
that his Blood was the price of our Redemption) and a Ransom in our stead. 1 Timothy 2.6. Who gave himself (...) a Ransom for all. Gal. 3.13. Christ has
Redeemed us from the cu^se of the Law, himself being made a curse for us; i. e.
he underwent that Curse due to us, that Curse from which we are freed, that
Curse which others who receive not Jesus Christ, shall undergo. What a cluster
of Arguments might be gathered here? It is prodigious boldness in Socinians to
turn this Article of Faith into a stream of Rhetoric, Paulus amavit in voce
execrationis argutus esse: But Manum de tabula.

S^xthly, And lastly, From the peculiarity of Christ's death. It is undeniable
that Christ died for us, so as no man in the world ever did, nor can do.
Therefore not in the Socinian sense, not barely for the confirmation of our
faith, or excitation of our obedience, or strengthening of our hope, or
encouragement of us in our sufferings; for in this sense, thousands have died
for you. Paul tells the Co (...) he suffered for them, i. i. for their good;
Col. 1.24. and yet ^^lls the Corinthians, he did not suffer for them. 1 Cor.
1.13. Was Paul crucified for you? i. e. in your stead, or for your sins?

And this for the first Head of Arguments, where I see I must take up, though I
thought to have urged diverse other Arguments from the Nature of man's
justification and salvation. But I will not be too tedious. What has been said
may be enough to convince any indifferent man; and others will not be
convinced, though they are convinced.

Thus much for the second particular, the assertion of this truth. The third
should have been the vindication of it from the cavils of Socinians; but I am
cut off, and it is not wholly necessary; for if once a truth be evident from
plain Scriptures, we ought not to be moved with the cavils of wanton wits, or
the difficulty of comprehending those great mysteries by our reason; when the
Socinians can solve all the Phenomenon of nature, (which are the proper Object
of man's Reason) then, and not till then, we will hearken to their rational
Objections. And Aristotle somewhere lays down this Conclusion, That when once
man is well settled in any truth, he ought not to be moved from it by some
subtle Objection, which he cannot well answer. All this I speak, not as that
there were any insolubilia, any insuperable Objections against this truth that
I ever met with; for though there are many things here which are hard to be
understood, yet nothing which cannot be answered.

As when they tell you he did not suffer eternal death which was due to us. It
is true, he did not; but a moment of his sufferings was equal in worth to our
eternal sufferings, the dignity of the person being always considerable in the
estimation of the action, or the suffering.

So when they say one man cannot dye for another, it is false; you heard David
wish he had dyed for Absalom; and Jehu threatens those who should let any of
them escape, That his life shall go for his life, 2 Kings 10.24. and Histories
tell us of one man dying for another.

So when they say it is unrighteous that God should punish the just for the
unjust.

Answ. It is not unjust, if any will voluntarily undertake it; volenti non sit
injuria. Besides that, God gives Laws to us, Deuteronomy. 24.16. but not to himself.

The fourth and last Head was by way of Application.

Is it so, That the death of Jesus Christ is the procuring cause of our
Justification and Salvation?

Use 1. Hence see the excellency of Christian Religion, which shows the true
way to life, and settles doubting consciences. Heathens were miserably plunged;
they saw their sins, their guilt, and had terrors of conscience, an expectation
of wrath; this (...) was written in their hearts, that they which do such
things are worthy of death; -- They saw the need of atoning God, reconciling
God; they saw the insufficiency of all their Rites and Sacrifices.

Ah nimium faciles qui tristia Funera caedis
Tolli fluminea posse putatis aqua!
Some of them saw the necessity of a man's death, and that sine humano cruore,
without man's blood the work could not be done; but then that seemed an act of
cruelty, and the addition of a sin instead of the expiation of it; and here
they stuck; they could go no further. Now blessed be God who has discovered
those things to us which were hid from others; who has removed difficulties,
and made our way plain before us; who has given us a Sacrifice, and accepted
it, and imputed it to us, and thereby reconciled us, and given us peace, a
solid peace, as the fruit of that Reconciliation.

Use 2. See the dreadfulnesse of Gods justice, how fearful it is to fall into
the hands of the Living God; Christ himself must suffer, if he be a sinner
though but by imputation.

Use 3. It shows us, the malignity of sin that could be expiated only by such
blood.

Use 4. It shows us the stability and certainty of our Justification and
Salvation. It is procured, purchased, the price paid, received, God cannot now
recall it.

Use 5. Study the death of Christ, and eye it as the great pillar of your
faith, in troubles of conscience, and settle your selves upon it.

OF EFFECTUAL CALLING.
ROMANS 8.28. To them who are called according to his purpose.


THe sacred Scriptures are a Paradise, or Garden of delights: This Epistle to
the Romans is a most curious and artificial knot in that Garden; this Chapter
is the richest division in that knot, furnished with sweetest flowers of
Consolation, antidoting the remnants of corruption that there are in our
hearts, and the various afflictions that we meet with in the World. This Verse
that I have read unto you, is the fairest flower in that Division; for what can
sooner revive a drooping soul, than to be assured that all things shall work
together for good? We (says the great Apostle) do not think, imagine,
conjecture, but know, partly by Divine Revelation, partly by our own
experience, that all things; not only all Gifts, Graces, Ordinances; but all
Creatures, all Providence, all Changes, Events, Occurrences, even those things
that appear most formidable; (Homo oppugnans, Ferus.
Diabolus insidians) the persecutions of men, the temptations of the Devil,
shall work not singly and apart it may be, but together for good.

For good! Yes, but it is unto those that be good. Hands off wicked and profane
wretches; you have no part nor lot in these heavenly consolations. Away base
Swine, to your sties, to your muck and mire, these pearls are not for you. Out
ye Dogs, to the garbidge that lies upon the Dunghill, the childrens bread is
not for you. We know that all things shall work together for good unto those
that love God: why so? because they are called according to his purpose; so
Paraeus expounds the place, and with him I perfectly agree:

Isa. 14.27.
That which God has purposed, shall not be frustrated: The Lord of Hosts has
purposed, and when shall disannul it? his hand is stretched out, and who shall
turn it back? What man will suffer his purposes, those purposes that he takes
up with best advice, and most mature deliberation, to be disappointed if he
have power to accomplish them? the holy purposes of God, as they are ordered
and directed by infinite Wisdom, so they have infinite power to bring them to
pass; so that if I can say God has a purpose to save me, I may securely smile
at all the attempts of men and devils against me; and if I can say, God has
Effectually Called me, I may be sure God has chosen me, and has a Purpose to
save me; for all the links in the golden Chain of salvation are even wrought,
not one of them wider or narrower than another; if God have Chosen, he will
Call; if God Call, he has Chosen. Once more, if I can say I love God, I may be
sure I am Called; for I cannot love God, except I have some acquaintance with
him, some sense and experience of his love toward me. So then all our
consolations are ultimately resolved into the Purpose of God; this is the basis
and foundation of them all; that Purpose appears by our Effectual Calling;
and that Calling appears to be Effectual by our love to God. Hence the
conclusion is certain, That all things shall work together for good to them
that love God, to them that are Called according to his Purpose.

But I forget my self; you have heard in former Discourses, under what a sad,
soul-killing disease poor man labors in his natural condition; you heard
likewise of a Sovereign remedy provided in the blood of Christ: I am now
engaged to speak to the application of that remedy in our Effectual Calling.

This Effectual Calling, according to Saint Augustine, is ingressus ad salutem,
our entrance into a state of salvation; the first step whereby God his
predestination descends to us, and we again ascend to the glory
predestined. The Doctrine I present from my Text may be this; There are some
persons in the World that are Effectually Called; or which is all one, which
are Called according to the Purpose of God.

There is a Call of the Gospel that is not Effectual; of this our Savior
speaks, when he says, Many are Called, but few are Chosen. How many of the
poor Ministers of the Gospel may complain of multitudes in this generation,
saying, with the children that sat in the Market place, Luke 7.32. We have
piped unto you, and ye have not danced; we have mourned to you, and ye have not
lamented! Neither the delightful airs of mercy, nor the doleful dities of
judgment have moved you; but the Election will certainly obtain; and the Call
that is according to Gods Purpose, reaches not ears only, but hearts also. The
hour is coming, and now is, when the dead shall hear the voice of the Son of
God, John 5.25.

This work of grace is presented to our view in a various dress of words; in
the Scriptures it is sometimes a teaching, sometimes a drawing, sometimes a
conversion, sometimes a regeneration; and all these in diverse respects, which I
cannot stand to unfold. Gratia prima. Praeveniens. Operans.
In the Schools it is the first grace, preventing grace, operating grace; among
Divines of the Reformed way, it is an Internal and Effectual Call; Vocatio Alta
and Efficax, after the mind of St. Augustine.

When it is offered to our consideration under this notion, it presupposes two
things.

1. That natural men stand at a distance from God; we do not use to call those
that stand hard by us; this was once the condition of the Ephesians, Ye
sometimes were far of; sometimes; Ephesians. 2.13.
when? surely in the time of their unregeneracy; far off; from whom? from
Christ, from the Church, from God, and consequently from themselves; but how
could they be far off from God? Zanchius.
not in spaces of place; for God fills all places with his presence; as to
his Essence, and providential works, he is not far from every one of us, Acts
17.27.
for in him we live and move; but as to their hearts and affections, all
natural men are far from God; God is not in all their thoughts, they do not
know him, fear, love and delight in him, they do not breath after communion
with him; even when they draw nigh unto him with their lips, their hearts are
far from him. If it sometimes happen that we call those that are at hand, then
usually they are such as are asleep; sin is a deep sleep of the soul; and as
sleep binds all the senses of the outward man, so sin all the powers of the
inward; a man under the dominion of sin can do nothing for God, neither can he
enjoy any thing from God; it may be he dreams of great satisfactions he
receives from the worlds dainties; but when he awaketh his soul is empty. Or
further, if they be not asleep, they are such as mind something else than he
would have them. All natural men mind something else than God would have them,
Phil. 3.19.
they mind earthly things. Herod minds the dancing of a lewd Strumpet, more
than the preaching of the holy Baptist; the young man minds his great
possessions; the Epicure his belly; the Farmer his barn; Judas his bag; the
Silversmith his Shrines; the Gadarenes their Swine; Pila e the favor and
applause of the people. Let the best men speak ingenuously, and they must needs
confess that there were many things (if I may call them things, rather
nothings) which they minded more than God or Christ, or Heaven, more than the
highest concernments of their immortal souls, the weightiest business of
Eternal salvation; they were all Gallios in respect of these things, they cared
for none of them, till they were rouzed out of their waking dreams by the
Effectual Call of the most gracious God. This is the condition of every natural
man.

2. It presupposes, That it is an easy thing with God to bring us home to
himself; though we be never so far distant from him; to awaken us to his
service, though in a dead sleep of sin; to raise our minds to higher objects,
though they be never so deeply immersed in the things of this present world. Is
any thing hard to the Almighty? with a word he made us, with a word he can
renew us: When darkness covered the face of the deep, he did but ay Let there
be light, and there was light; with the like facility can he shine in our
hearts, giving us the light of the knowledge of the glory of God in the face of
Jesus. He utters his voice (says David) and the earth melts. Let but God
utter his voice, and the Rocks and Mountains of our corruptions will melt away
like wax.

Come we now closer to the Point.

Toward the opening of which, I shall entreat your Attention to the resolution
of sundry Questions.

Question 1. What is this Calling?
It is the real separation of the soul unto God; and a clothing it with such
gracious abilities, whereby it may be enabled to repent of its sins, and to
believe in his Son. It is our Translation from the state of Nature which is a
state of sin, wrath, death, and damnation, to a state of Grace, which is a
state of Holiness, Life, Peace, and Eternal Salvation. This Translation is
wrought

1. By strong convictions of the mind.

First, Of the guilt and filth of sin, of the danger and defilement of sin, of
the malignity of sin, and the misery that attends it. Once says the soul (that
is under this dispensation of Gods Grace) Once I looked upon sin as my wisdom;
now it is madness and folly: Once I accounted it my meat and drink to fulfill
the wills of the flesh; sin was a sweet morsel, (...).
I drank iniquity like water, now it is a cup of trembling to me, and I fear it
may prove a cup of Condemnation; Once I hugged, embraced, and delighted in sin
as the Wife of my bosom; now I clearly see that the fruit and issue of the
impure copulation of my soul with her, is nothing else but the shame of my
face, the stain of my reputation, the Rack and horror of my conscience; and
(which is more than all these) the provocation of the Almighty; and therefore I
begin to think within my self of an eternal divorce from her; I slept securely
in the lap of this Dalilah, she robbed me of my strength, she delivered me up
to Philistines that dealt unworthily with me, that put me upon base and low
employments; what now should I think of? but (if it please the Lord to give new
strength) the death and destruction of them all.

Secondly, Of the vanity and emptiness of the creature, which we have Idolized,
confiding in it as the staff of our hopes, breathing and pursuing after it as
the perfection of our happiness.

Thirdly, Of the absolute need of Christ, that if he do not save us, we must
perish.

Fourthly, Of the absolute fullness of Christ, and that in him we may be
complete; if we be guilty, he can justify us; if we be filthy, he can purge
us; if we be weak, he can strengthen us; if we be poor, he can enrich us; if we
be base, he can ennoble us; if we be deformed and ugly, he can make us
beautiful and lovely; if we be miserable, he can bless us, and that with all
Blessings in Heavenly places.

Fifthly, Of the clemency, goodness, meekness, sweetness, graciousness of his
disposition, that if any man come to him, he will in no wise reject him: John
6.37.
These things the mind is strongly convinced of, yet if there be not a farther
work, a man may carry these Convictions to Hell with him. Therefore

2. In the second place, this Translation is wrought by a powerful inclination,
and conversion of the will to close with Christ upon his own terms, to embrace
him as Sovereign as well as Savior; to take him as men use to do their Wives,
for better for worse, for richer for poorer; to stick to him on Mount Calvary,
as well as Mount Tabor; to welcome him into thy bosom, by bidding an
everlasting farewell to thy sins. In a word, to make a voluntary tender, and
resignation of thy self unto him, solemnly avouching, that from this time
forward, thou will count thy self more his, than thou art thine own; and the
more thy own, because thou art his.

This work is carried on with a most efficacious sweetness, so that the liberry
of the will is not infringed, whilst the obstinacy of the will is mastered and
overruled.

If you ask me, How can these things be? I never studied to satisfy curiosity;
but if you can tell me how the bones do grow in the womb of her that is with
child, I also will tell you how the parts of the new man are formed in the
heart; but I suppose, silence and humble admiration will be best on both sides;
if there be so great a mystery in our natural generation, surely there is a far
greater in our spiritual Regeneration; if David could say of the former, I am
fearfully and wonderfully made; much more might he say of the latter, I am
fearfully and wonderfully renewed.

Question 2. Who are the Called.
First, Among creatures, none but men are of the number of the called; The
Angels that kept not their first estate, but left their own habitation, are
never recalled, Jude ver. 6.
but reserved in everlasting chains under darkness, to the judgment of the
great day. Lord, what is man that thou art mindful of him? Psalm. 8.4.
or the son of man that thou so regardest him?

Secondly, Among men, none but the Elect are capable of this grace; the call is
limited by the purpose; Whom he has predestined, them he also called. Romans 8.
Touching these Elect Persons, diverse things fall under our Observation; As,

1. In regard of their internal condition; before this call, they are dead in
sins and trespasses, blind in their minds, stony in their hearts, corrupt in
their ways, even as others.

2. In regard of their outward condition; both before and after this call, they
are for the most part poor and vile, and contemptible in the eye of the world.
God puts not the greater value upon any man for a gold ring, or goodly aparrel,
though the world does. He has chosen the poor of this world, rich in faith,
and Heirs of the Kingdom. Jam. 2.5. 1 Cor. 1.29.
Ye see your calling, Brethren, how that not many wise m^n after the flesh, not
many Mighty, not many Noble are called. Some it may be, but not many; God so
orders his Call, as that it may appear, there is no respect of persons with
him.

3. Whatever the outward condition of these men be, there are but very few that
are effectually called; few (I say) in comparison of those that are left under
the power and dominion of their lusts, One of a City, and two of a Tribe. I
tremble to speak it, but a truth it is, and must out; Satan has the Harvest,
God the gleanings of mankind; which by the way may serve to convince them of
their vanity and folly, that make the multitude of actors an Argument to prove
the rectitude of actions, as if they could not do amiss, that do as the most:
Whereas a very Heathen could say, Argumentum pessimi turba, The beaten Tract is
most deceitful; Sheep go the broad way to the Shambles, Seneca lib. de vita
beat.
when a more uncouth path might lead them to fresh Pastures.

Question 3 Who is he that Calls?
Who but God, that calls things that are not, as if they were? all heart-work
is Gods peculiar, the restraining and ordering the heart; he withheld
Abimelech, not suffering him to touch Sarah Abraham's Wife; Genesis 20.6.
and the heart of Pharaoh, while it was least conformable unto the Rule of his
Law, was absolutely subject unto the Rule of his providence; and well it is for
us, that it belongs to God to restrain and order hearts; otherwise sad would be
the condition of this Nation, of the whole world; but now if it be Gods
peculiar to restrain and order hearts, much more surely, to turn, change,
break, melt, Coluerunt Ethnici Venerem Verticordiam, Val. Max. lib. 8. cap. 15.
Lilius Girald. Synt. 13 Jer. 31.33.
and new-mould hearts. It is his Sovereign grace which we adore as the only
Verticordia, as the real turn-heart; therefore may we observe, that

1. God does especially challenge this unto himself. You know whose expressions
those are, I will give a new heart; and again, I will take away the heart of
stone; are they not Gods? who dare make any challenges against the Almighty?
has not he a Scepter strong enough to secure his Crown? those that will be
plucking Jewels out of his Royal Diadem, and ascribe that to themselves, or any
creature; which is his Prerogative, shall find him jealous enough of his
honor, and that jealousy stirring up indignation enough to consume them. But

2. As God may justly challenge this work to himself, so it is altogether
impossible it should be accomplished by any other. For

1. This effectual vocation, is a spiritual resurrection of the soul; while we
are in a state of Nature, we are dead; not sick or languishing, not slumbring
or sleeping, but quite dead in trespasses and sins; when we are called into a
state of grace, then are our souls raised to walk with God here, as our bodies
at the last day shall be raised to walk with the Son of God unto all
eternity. Now if it be not in the power of any creature to raise the body from
the grave of death (upon which account it is used as an Argument of the
Divinity of Christ, that he raised himself) much less is it in the power of any
creature to raise the soul from the grave of sin. And therefore do all true
Believers experiment the power of God, Ephesians. 1.19, 20.
even that exceeding greatness of power; that Might of his Power, as the Greek
has it, whereby he raised up Christ from the dead.

2. This effectual vocation, is a new Creation of the soul, whence we are said
to be Created in Christ Jesus, when we are called unto an experimental
knowledge of him, and unfeigned Faith in him; upon which account it must needs
be Gods workmanship; for power of creating, is not, cannot be communicated to
any creature. Though the Angels excel in strength, Psalm. 103.20.
and wonderful things have been performed by them, when they have as Ministers
executed Gods pleasure in the punishment of the wicked, and protection of the
righteous; yet the mightyest Angel cannot create the meanest worm that is; the
only product of infinite power. And let me tell you, if infinite power be
manifested in the Creation of the world, it is more gloriously manifested in
the conversion of a sinner. There is a worse Chaos, a worse confusion upon the
heart of man, when God undertaketh his new Creation, than there was upon the
face of the earth in the Old Creation: In the earth, when it was without form,
and void, there was only indisposition; Genesis 1.2.
but in the heart of man, there is both indisposition and opposition.

Well then, I peremptorily conclude that the work is Gods; Gods by the way of a
principal efficiency, and not only by way of motion or persuasion, as some
would have it, wherein I fear a piece of cursed brokeage for their own glory.

For were it so, they would be but very mean acknowledgements that do belong to
God, for the change of a most miserable and unhappy estate. Suppose I should go
to some wealthy Citizen, and present him an object of charity, using the most
cogent Considerations which my Art and Wit could invent, to enforce a liberal
Contribution; thereupon he freely parts with his money for the relief of that
indigent person; tell me now to which of us is he mainly engaged to return
thanks? to me the mover, or to him the bestower? I make no question but your
Judicious thoughts have made an award of the chief acknowledgement to the
Latter. The case would plainly be the same betwixt God and us, if his only were
the motion, ours the act of Conversion; his the persuasion, ours the
performance; and if we go to Heaven, we should have more cause to thank our
selves, than to thank God for all the happiness we meet with there.

Beloved, I beseech you take heed of such an opinion as this, it has blasphemy
written in the forehead of it; if it be rooted in your minds, Scriptas habet
in front blasphemias. Ennodius lib. Epist. 2.
it will breed in your hearts a confidence of your own power and abilities, and
that is no better than a fine-spun Idolatry, and shall find little better
resentment with God, th^n if you worshipped stocks and stones.

Question 4. Upon what account does God Call?
What moves the Divine Majesty thus to busy himself about a lump of sin and
misery?

What but mere mercy? what but rich and abundant mercy?

1. It is mere mercy; When by our own merits, we were bgotten to death, by his
mercy he begat us again unto life: Cum nostris meritis, generati essemus ad
mortem, sua misericordia nos regeneravit ad vitam. Beda.
Not by works of righteousness which we have done, but according to his mercy
he has saved us, Tit. 3.5. Indeed we cannot do any works of righteousness
before our Calling; that righteousness which natural men are subject to glory
in, is rather seeming than real; and that which shines so bright in our own
eyes, and perhaps in the eyes of other men, is an abomination in the sight of
God; Luke 16.15.
God and men do not measure our righteousness by the same standerd; men account
them righteous that conform to Customs, Laws, and Constitutions of men, if at
least they be likewise conformable to the Letter of the Law of God. But God
reckons none righteous besides those that have a singular regard to the Spirit
of the Law, (if I may so call it) which lays an Obligation upon the inward
man as well as the outward, which binds the heart as well as the hand; and
commands not only that which is good, but that good be done upon a good
principle, in a good manner, to a good end: A pitch of obedience that no
natural man can possibly arise to; so that in the sight of God there is none
righteous, Romans 3.10. Ephesians. 2.3.
no not one. We are all by nature, children of wrath as well as others:
Children of wrath we are by our own desert; if ever we become Children of
Grace, it must be by his mercy.

2. As by mere mercy, so by rich and abundant mercy in God, it is that we are
called. There is a greatness of love, in the quickening of those that are dead
in sins together with Christ. There is mercy in that we have our lives for a
prey; Ephesians. 2.4, 5.
mercy in all the comforts and accommodations of life; mercy in the influences
of the Sun; mercy in the dropping of the Clouds; mercy in the fruitfulness of
seasons; mercy in the fullness of barnes; the year is crowned with the goodness
of the Lord; but this is a mercy above all mercies, That we are called from
darkness unto marvelous light, and from the power of Satan, to the service of,
and fellowship with the only living and true God; other benefits are extended
to the worst of men; nay, the very Devils have some tastes of mercy; but this
of an Effectual Calling is (as I said before) communicated to none but those
that God has chosen; Other blessings and benefits, though they be good in
themselves, yet they cannot make us good; they are but as trappings to a Horse,
which if he be a Jade, make him not go the better, but the worse; but here God
works a marvelous change for the better; once the man ran away from God and
himself, but now he instantly returns; once he was a hater, a fighter against
God; but now the weapons of his hostility are laid down, and he thinks he can
never do enough to express his love; once he was darkness, but now he is light
in the Lord; once dead, but behold he lives. Finally, Other blessings and
benefits can never make us happy, but as they find us miserable, so they leave
us; we may, and are too apt to bless our selves in them, yet God never intended
to bless us in the sole enjoyment of them.

But oh how happy is that man, that God has effectually called to himself! his
bosom shall be his refuge in all storms; his grace, his sufficiency in all
temptations; his power his shield in all oppositions; But let the Text speak,
All things shall work together for his Spiritual and Eternal good.

Before I part with this Point, I shall acquaint you with an Exposition of my
Text, utterly inconsistent with the Doctrine I have delivered, and the truth it
self, and very unworthy of the Authors of it. This it is, That here we are
said to be called not according to Gods purpose, Chrysostom. Theod. Theoph.
but according to our own purpose; to hear and obey his call. And perhaps upon
this the Papists have grounded their merit of congruity; but this must needs
fall, if we consider but this one thing among many, that those that have been
farthest off the Kingdom, have been fetched into it; and those that have not
been far from the Kingdom of God, have never come nearer it. God does not
always take the smoothest, but the most knotty pieces of Timber, to make
pillars in his house. He goes not always to places of severest and strictest
Discipline, to pick out some few there to plant in his House; but he goes to
the Custom House, and calls one thence; to the Brothel-House, and calls
another thence: And if yet you insist upon the purpose of man, as an inducement
to the call of God, pray tell me what was Saul's purpose, when God met with him
in the way to Damascus? Had he any other purpose than to persecute the
Disciples of the Lord?

Enough of that.

Question 5. By what means are we Called?
Sometimes without means; as in persons not capable of the use of them; there
is highest Caution amongst the people of God to avoid that sin; (nay, the very
appearance) of limiting the holy One of Israel.

Sometimes by contrary means, the greatness of a sin being ordered by God to
set on the conversion of a sinner, as when a man is wounded with the sting, and
healed with the flesh of a Scorpion; Gaffarel.
or as when we make triacle of a Viper (a most poisonous creature) to expel
poison.

Sometimes by very unlikely means; as when by some great affliction we are
brought home to God, which in its own nature, one would think should drive us
farther from God; as there is no question but it does the Reprobates, who are
ready to tell all the world what King William Rufus told the Bishop (if the
partial Monk do not belie him) God shall never make me good by the evil I
suffer from him; Nunquam me Deus bonum habebit pro malo quod mihi in^ulerit.
Edmerus in Hist. Ser. 2. de Spirt. Sanct. tom. 4.
or which is yet more unlikely, when we are brought home by prosperity, God
overcoming our evil with his good, heaping as it were Coals of fire upon our
heads, and so melting us into kindly contrition. Gerson in a Sermon of his,
tells us of a most wicked Priest, that when he was preferred to a Bishopric,
became exemplarily holy; but such a Convert is (rara avis) seldom to be found.

Always this work is carried on by weak means; Thus I have heard it credibly
reported, that a sentence written in a window, and accidentally read by an
inveterate sinner, pierced his heart, and let out the corruption thence; the
sentence was that of Austin, He that has promised pardon to the penitent, has
not promised repentance to the presumptuous sinner. Thus Austin was converted
with a Toll, lege, Take up the book and read; the Book was the New Testament;
the place he opened was the Epistle to the Romans, where he first cast his eye
upon the thirteenth Chapter, the words these, not in gluttony, and
drunkenness, not in chambering, and wantonness, etc. This stroke him home.

But the most ordinary means of our Effectual Calling, is the Preaching of the
Word; which though the world account foolishness, 1 Cor. 1.18. An esse sibi cum
Christo videtur. Qui adversus sacerdotes Christi facit? Cyprian de unit. Ec.
Edit. Goul. Sect. 15. 1 Cor. 4 15.
is the power of God unto Salvation. And though by other means men may be
called, yet seldom or never any are called that neglect and contemn this; God
delights to honor his own Ordinances, and to credit and encourage his
Ministers; and because he is pleased to make use of the Word they Preach as
seed, therefore it it his Will and pleasure that his people should own and
reverence them as their Fathers. In Christ Jesus I have begotten you through
the Gospel; and therefore I am confident, they can have no good evidences of
their Christian Calling, that secretly despise, openly revile, secretly
undermine, openly oppugn the Ministerial Calling. Christ will not own them as
his Children, that refuse to honor his Ministers as their Fathers. He that
despises you, despises me. Luke 10.16.


So much for answer to the fifth Question.

Question 6. What is the end of this Call?
What but that which is the end of all things, the glory of God? what but that
which should be the end that all men should aim at, the salvation of their
souls? Here we may see the glory of Gods free grace and mercy, the
immutabilitie of his purposes, the holiness of his nature, in that he makes us
fit for communion with himself, before he admits us to it; Col. 1.
the wisdom of his Counsels; and last of all, the exceeding greatness of his
Power; For though the Effectual Calling of a soul be no miracle, yet there is
as much power manifested in it as in any miracle that Christ wrought; yea, as
in all the miracles which he wrought if they be put together: For here the
blind eyes, and deaf ears are opened, the withered hands, and lame legs are
restored, the bloody issue stanched, the Leper cleansed, Legions of Devils cast
out, the dead soul raised to walk before God in the Land of the Living; In a
word, the water is turned into wine; the water of contrition, into the Wine of
sweetest spiritual Consolation.

Question 7. When is the time that God calls?
As the persons are chosen, so the time is appointed; called therefore the
acceptable year of the Lord, the accepted time, the day of visitation, the day
of Salvation. What hour of the day God will please to call any person in, is to
us uncertain; this only is certain, that we must be called within the compass
of this present life, or else we shall never be called. There Is no Preaching to
souls in the Prison of Hell, no constituting of Churches there; if the Spirit
of God be not our Purgatory fire here, in vain shall we look for any other
hereafter. Thus briefly of the seventh Question.

Question 8. What are the Properties of this Call?
2 Timothy 1.9.
First, It is a Holy Calling; holy is the Author of it, holy are the means of
it, holy are the ends of it, holy are the Subjects of it; God is the Author,
the Word is the means, holiness it self the end, none but holy men the Subjects.

I cannot but wonder at the impudence of profane men, that they should call
themselves Christians, that they should call God Father, that they should call
Christ Savior; if they be Christians, where is the savor of those precious
ointments, those special graces that run down from the head unto all his
members, and give the only just reason why we should be denominated Christians?

I wonder the mere civil person can sleep so securely with his short covering;
he boasts of a righteousness, and is a mere stranger to holiness; he separates
those things which God has perfectly and inseparably united. Holiness and
Righteousness God has so knit and coupled together, To serve him in holiness
and righteousness, Luke 1.
that he reckons no service performed to him where either of these is wanting.
It is a part of our Righteousness to be holy in our converse with God. It is a
part of our Holiness to be Righteous in our converse with men. Therefore I
shall add the deceitful hypocrite unto the deceived equillist; the one drawing
as near to God with his external righteousness, as the other does with his
pretended Holiness; both stand at a distance from him, he beholds them afar
off; and though he has Called them to be Saints, 1 Cor. 1.2.
yet they are not Saints by an Effectual Calling.

Phil. 3.14. Hebr. 3.1.
Secondly, It is an high and heavenly Calling; a learned Critic supposes that
the Apostle in bestowing this Epitath (high) upon our Calling, Grotius. Dr.
Hammond. (...).
alludeth unto the Olympic games; (an allusion which indeed he much delights
in throughout all his Epistles) there the Master, a Ruler of the game, who was
also the Keeper and Bestower of the prize, stood upon the higher ground, called
to those that were engaged to that noble exercise, to begin the Race;
proportionably unto this, Christians having a Race set before them, Hebr. 12.1.
which they must run with patience at the call of their great Director, who
utters his voice from heaven unto their hearts, they first start; so that the
Calling is high, because we are Called from on high; but this is not all; for
besides that, it is an high way, though it be no common way that we are Called
to run in; all the exercises and employments that a Christian is Called to,
they are exceeding high; such as are the service of God, the mortification of
lusts, the fighting against principalities and pow^rs of darkness, the
trampling upon all the gilded glisterring vanities of this world; such are the
denial of a man's self, the taking up the Cross daily, the following of Christ,
and the showing forth all his virtues that has called us; such are warm
devotions, spiritual meditations, fervent supplications, holy breathings and
aspirings after communion with the ever blessed God, in a conscientious use of
his Ordinances; all these are employments too high for those that are skild in
nothing else but Satan's and the Worlds Drudgery; too high for any but those
that are endued with grace and power from on high to perform them.

Yet farther, this Calling is high, not only in regard of the Director and the
Race; but in regard of the prize, as the reward that we shall receive from the
righteous Judge. What is the end of our faith, but the salvation of our souls?
1 Pet. 1.9. All the prizes were not equally valuable, See Learned Dr* Hammond
upon Phil. 3.
when we come to the Goal, here we find no Tripodes, Shields or Caps; but
Crowns, and no mean Crowns, but glorious ones; no fading Crowns, but
everlasting ones: Who would not (with the Apostle) but pressed toward the mark?

Lastly, That we may have greater comfort and assurance, that we shall not wax
weary, and faint in our course, and consequently not miss of those glorious
rewards. There Is no Calling that has so high and heavenly assistances as this
has; God that calls to this Race, engages his power to carry us through it:
The Son of God intercedes for us; the Spirit of God is ready to comfort us; the
Angels of God have the charge of us to keep us, so that we shall not dash our
feet against a stone; the spirits of just men made perfect, though they be not
acquainted with our particular wants, yet in general they tender our
conditions, and help us by their prayers; all the people of God are constant
sollicitors for us at the Throne of Grace, besides those helps they afford us
by their watching over us by their counsels, instructions, admonitions,
rebukes, examples; the cheerfulness, and alacrity of some in the ways of God
having a great and happy tendency to prevent the weariness and discouragements
of others. Thus it is an high Calling.

Thirdly, It is a Call without a sound; or if it have any, it is heard by none
but them to whom it is directed. A good Divine calls it an in visible Call.
Vocatio invisibilis. Alting.
Occultis itineribus sapor nobis vitalis infunditur, as Ennodius speaks, by
hidden paths and passages the vital savor is infused into us; the seed grows
up we know not how; Mark 4.26.
the Spirit secretly winds himself into the soul. Christ comes into our hearts,
as he did into the house where his Disciples were met, John 20.26.
the doors being shut. Thus it is ordinarily, though I will not deny but that
sometimes it may be o^herwise. Acts 2.1.
The Spirit may come with a mighty rushing, and Christ with holy violence break
open the doors of our hearts. Saul could well tell the time and other cir
umstances of his conversion; Divina gratia adhuc in utero matris impletus.
Cypr. in Epist. ad Jubaianum.
but it is likely the holy Baptist could not, in whom the Father says, there
was a Spirit of grace as soon as a Spirit of life. The corruptions of some will
out as it were by insensible breathings; but so obstinate and inveterate are
the spiritual distempers of others, that they must have strong Vomits, violent
Purges, and all little enough to clear them; for a man of a good nature, (as
they call it) liberal education, much restraining grace, to take and give
notice punctua^ly when his state is changed, is very difficult; whereas this is
no hard matter for a gross and scandalous piece of debauchery, becoming
afterward an example of piety. We must not expect the same account from Mary
Magdalen, and Mary the mother of our Lord in poi t of Conversion; yet they both
rejoiced in Christ as their Savior.

This I have the rather spoken, that I might enter a Caveat against those rig^d
and severe Tryers of men's spiritual estates, whom (as I have heard) nothing
will satisfy but the Precise time of Conversion. I acknowledge these men great
Artists, and good Workmen, but it is in frami g New Racks for men's
Consciences, since the Old Popish ones are broken. I make no Question b t a
weak Christians soul may be as sadly strained to give an Account of his Graces,
as it would have been to give an Account of his Sins, had he lived in the
days of Auricular Confession. Beware my Fr^ends of the Devils Sophistry.

Fourthly and lastly, It is an Immutable Call; immutable as God Himself, as his
Electing Love the living Fountain from whence it springs: Not as the World
loves, does God love; they love to Day, and hate to Morrow, wearing their
Friends like Flowers, which we may behold in their Bosoms whilst they are
fresh and sweet, but soon they wither, and soon they are laid aside: whereas
the love of God to his people is Everlasting, and he wears them as a Signet
upon his right Hand, which he will never part with: Not as the World gives,
does God give; Men give liberally, and repent suddenly; but the Gifts and
Callings of God are without Repentance. Romans 11.29.


So much for the properties of this Call; and so much for the opening of the
point.

Shall I speak a word or two of Application?

APPLICATION.
Beloved in the LORD, I have answered you many Questions; I beseech you answer
me a few. Me, said I? Nay, answer them to God and your own Consciences.

First, Are you of the number of the Called? Called by the Gospel I know you
are; but that may be your misery. Are you Called according to the purpose? that
only can be your Happiness. Is your Calling Inward and Effectual? We hope it
is: why? we have some Convictions, some Inclinations to good; so had Herod, so
had Agrippa; so may a Reprobate by the common work of the Spirit. I would be
loath you should be but almost Christians, lest you be but almost saved. Tell me
then, is the whole frame of your hearts altered? Is sin odious? Is Christ
precious? Does the prcie of heavenly Commodities rise in your hearts, and the
price of earthly Trumpery fall? Do you love God, and his Son Jesus Christ in
sincerity? Then I can assure you, not in the word of a mortal man, which is as
good as nothing; but in the Word of God that cannot lie, even in the words of
my Text, You are Called according to his purpose.

Secondly, If you be Effectually Called, Why do you not answer that Call, in
receiving Christ in all his Offices, in obeying Christ in all his Commands, in
meeting Christ in all his Ordinances?

Why do you not give all Diligence to make your Calling and Election sure?
Shall the Children of this World still be wiser in their Generation than the
Children of light? They rest not till they have assured (as they suppose) their
Earthly Tenements; Why do not we bestir our selves as much to Assure an
Heavenly Inheritance?

Why are you not more thankful for this Grace? Why are you not more joyful in
it? How did the Wise men of the East rejoice, when they found Christ born in
Bethlem? Is it not matter of greater joy to find Christ born in your hearts?
Tell me, is it nothing to have your Names written in the Book of Life? To have
God for your Father? Christ for your Husband and Brother? The Spirit of Christ
for your Comforter? The Angels for your Servitors? All the Creatures at your
Beck?

These are the Noble Privileges of those that are Called according to the
purpose of God: How can they but rejoice in them, and sing of the mercies of
the Lord for ever?

Why are you not more careful to walk worthy of this Grace? There is a Decorum,
Ephesians. 4.1.
a seemlinesse that appertains to every Calling. This made Scipio that he would
not accept the offer of an Harlot, because he was General of the Army: And when
Antigonus was invited to a place where there was none of the best Company, he
was well advised by one to remember he was a Kings Son. When you suffer your
selves to be drawn away by your lusts, to be ensnared by the World, to be
captivated by the Devil, you forget the Decorum, that should attend your
Christian Calling: Remember I beseech you,

Holy Calling, and therefore be ye also Holy in all Manner of Conversation.
Methinks it should sound as harshly in our ears to hear of a dark Sun, as a
wicked Christian.

High Calling; Do you live High, Scorn Baseness, Blush to appear in your Old
Rags, To be seen Catering for your Lusts as you use to do; Crown your selves
with the Stars; Cloth your selves with the Sun; Tread the Moon under your
Feet; Let the Gospel be your Crown; Let Christ be your Clothing; Let the World
be your Footstool; Let Hidden Manna be your constant Diet; Keep Open House to
all Comers; Set your Spiritual Dainties before them; Bid them feed Heartily and
Welcome: And for Discourse, Tell them what great things God has done for your
Souls!

Heavenly Call; Let your Conversations be in Heaven, you have a good
Correspondent there: Maintain a constant Trade and Traffic thither; Expect
Returns thence: Lay up your Treasure there, where neither Moth nor Rust does
corrupt, nor can Thieves break through and steal; Be always preparing for your
passage thither.

Immutable Call: Do not droop and hang your Heads for the Changes and Mutations
there are in the World; The Foundation of God stands sure, (though the
Foundation of States be Overturned, Overturned, Overturned) the Lord knows
who are his, and will cause all things to Work together for their good.

But what if now there be many amongst you that are not Effectually Called?



Men and Brethren, if you have any sense of the excellency of your Immortal
Souls, any Love to them suitable to that excellency; any care and
solicitousnesse suitable to that love: Do not resist the Holy Ghost; Make the
best Use you can of the Means of Grace: To day if you will hear his Voice,
harden not your hearts; If he now Knock at the Door of your hearts, and you
will not Open; you know not how soon you may come to Knock at the Door of his
house, and he will not Open.

Diog. Laertius. Thal.
It is Reported that Thales, one of the Grecian Sages being urged by his Mother
to marry, told her at first, it was too soon; and afterward, when she urged him
again, he told her it was too late. Effectual Vo^ation is our Espousal unto
Christ; all the time of our life God is urging this Match upon our Souls; his
Ministers are still wooing for Christ; if now we say it is too soon, for ought
we know the very next Moment our Sun may set, and then God will say it is too
late. They that are not Contracted to Christ on Earth, shall never be Married
to him in Heaven.

THE TRUE BELIEVERS Union with CHRIST JESUS.
1 COR. 6.17. But he that is joined unto the Lord, is one Spirit.


YOU have lately seen the Portraicture of our Lord Jesus drawn, as it were at
length, Introduction.
both as to his Person and Offices, together with the Means and Mann^r, how he
has dearly purcha'st Redemption for us. Method now requires that we lay before
you how that Redemption, and the benefits thereof come to be effectually
applied unto us. There we had the balm of Gilead, and the plaster spread;
what remains, but that it be now applied. There we had a Bethesda, an healing
Fountain opened; but the Pool of life heals not, unless the Patient be put in,
and the Angel of the Covenant Stir the waters. Salvation for sinners cannot be
obtained without a pu^chase; this purchase is not significant without
possession; this possession not to be procured without application; this
application made only by union; this union clearly held forth in the Text, viz.
He that is joined unto the Lord, is one Spirit.

Coherence.
In the close of this Chapter, our Apostle seriously dehorts his Corinthians
from that gross, that soul-polluting sin of Fornication. His Arguments
(which he lets fly as so many Barbed Arrows at the fifth Rib of Uncleanness)
are drawn

1. Partly from the end to which the body is appointed. The body is for the
Lord, Ver. 13. The body was made for the God of holiness, therefore not to be
prostituted to Lust and uncleanness. Ver. 19.
The Holy Ghosts Temple ought not to be converted into a Stye for Satan. That Is
the first.

2. Partly from that honor which by the Lord to our bodies is vouchsafed. Know
ye not that our bodies are the members of Christ? Ver. 15. Believers bodies are
the members of Christ, therefore not to be debauched so far as to be made the
members of an Harlot. This second Argument is backed and amplified by the words
of the Text, He that is joined to the Lord, is one Spirit: q. d. There is a
near and dear union betwixt the Lord Jesus and true believers, much what
resembling that which is betwixt the head and members: Only here is the
difference, that union is carnal, this spiritual. He that is joined to the
Lord, is one Spirit: i. e. he is spiritually one, or one with the Lord in
Spirit, therefore ought not to be one with a strange woman in the flesh.

Having thus beaten up and l^vel'd our way to the Text, I shall not stand to
shred the words into any unnecessary parts, but shall extract out of them such
an Observation as I conceive strikes a full eighth to the mind of the Spirit
of God in them. And it is plainly this.

Observation.
True Believers are closely united unto Christ Jesus.

The word which we render (...), Agglutinatus.
joined) imports the nearest, strictest, closest union. This truth I shall
endeavor, (...), cleanly to explain, solidly to confirm, practically to appy.

1. For the Explication of this truth, Explication.
It will be of consequence to lay before you

Whom we understand by true believers?

Sol. 1. Not such as are united unto Christ by a mere external prosession,
Sacramental admission, or presumptuous persuasion. Such as these are said to
believe in Christ, John 3.23. and yet they are such, so hollow, so false, that
Christ dares not trust them, Ver. 24. These are dead Branches, John 15.2.
Saplesse stakes in the Churches hedge: Reformad^'s and Hangby's only in Christ's
Regiment, whose names are not registered in Aeternitatis Albo: Wooden legs of
Christ's body, such as have no true, spiritual, vital functions and operations.
Such as have a f^rme of godliness, but deny the power thereof, 2 Timothy 3.5.
Sardys-like, they have indeed a name that they live, but are dead, Rev. 3.2.
With th se our Proposition meddles not.

2. But true believers; i. e. such as are united unto Christ by Internal
Implantation, Living, fruit-bearing branches, John 15.5. Such as have not only
Christ's picture drawn on their foreheads, but Christ's Spirit quickening their
hearts, Ephesians. 3.17. Nathanaels, Israelites indeed, John 1.47. Jews inwardly,
Romans 2.29. Such as are really and effectually by the Spirit and Word of God
called out of a state of sin, enmity, misery, into an estate of grace, union,
reconciliation; so that now Christ is in them, and they in Christ, John 17.21,
23. They reposing themselves in Christ's bosom by love, and Christ dwelling in
their hearts by faith. These are the Believers our Observation intends.

What kind of union it is that is betwixt the Lord Jesus, and true Believers?

Sol. 1. Negatively; what kind of union it is not.

1. Not a gross, carnal, corporeal union; not a union of bodies. Christ is in
heaven, Acts 1.11. and 3.21. we on earth.

2. Not an hypostatical, persona^ union; such as is that ineffable union of the
Divine and Humane natures in the person of our Immanuel, the Lord Jesus. It Is
indeed a union of persons, but not a personal union. Believers make not one
person with Christ, but 1 Cor. 12.13.
one body, and that not one body natural, but mystical. True indeed, the Church
is called Christ, 1 Cor. 12.12. but that is meant of the whole Church, made up
of head and members, which is Christ mystical. Now it is not rational to apply
that to any one single Believer, which is proper only to the whole body.
Besides, should there be a personal union betwixt the Lord Jesus and true
Believers, then would there be as many Christ's as Believers. But to us as there
is but one Father, so but one Lord Jesus, 1 Cor. 8.6. Add, that then very
action of Believers would be of infinite value, as is the obedience of Christ's
Humane nature, by reason of its hypostatical union.

3. Not an essential, substantial union; not such an union as makes Believers
in any wise partakers of the substance of Christ's Godhead. Those expressions of
Nazianzen, (...), and (...), of old, and English't by some of us of late; viz.
Being Godded with God, and Christed with Christ, are harsh and dangerous, if
not blasphemous. To aver that Believers are partakers of the substance of
Christ's Godhead, is to ascribe that to Believers, which we dare not affirm of
Chrissis Manhood it self; concerning which we say that it was inseparably
joined together with the Godhead in one person; but yet (...). Council.
Chalcedon.
without the least conversion, composition, or confusion. True indeed,
Believers are said to be partakers of the Divine 2 Pet. 1.4.
nature; but how? not of Gods substance, which ^s wholly incommun cable; but
Believers, by the exceeding great and precious promises, as by so many
Conduit-pipes, have excellent graces conveyed unto them, whereby they are made
like to God in knowledge, righteousness, and true holiness, wherein the Image
of God which was stamp't on man at his Creation consists. Ephesians. 4.24. Col.
3.10.

4. Not such an union as mounts up Believers to an equality with Christ in any
respect. He is the blessed and only Potentate, the King of Kings, and Lord of
Lords, 1 Timothy 6.15. In all things he has, and must have the pre-eminence, Col.
1.18. The best of Saints have but their Ephah, their Homer, their stint and
Ephesians. 4.16.
measure of excellencies and Divine Endowments. But now Jesus Christ in his
Humane nature united to the Divine, was sanctified and anointed with the Holy
Spirit John 3.34. Psalm. 45.7. Hebr. 1.9.
above measure; we have but our mites, drams, scruples, in him are hid all the
treasures of wisdom and knowledge, Col. 2.3. Our Lord Jesus is his Fathers
Gazophylacium, the great Magazine and Storehouse of infinite excellencies. It
pleased the Father that in him should all fullness dwell, Col. 1.19. Yea, in
him dwells all the fullness of the Godhead bodily, Col. 2.9. Three gradations,
the Godhead, the fullness of the Godhead, all the fullness of the Godhead
dwells in Christ bodily; (...); i. e. not only truly and really, in opposition
to the Ark and Temple in which the Godhead was typically; but personally, to
distinguish the indwelling of the Manhood of Christ from all accidental,
extrinsecal, and integral unions.

Thus Negatively.

2. Positively. What kind of union it is, that is betwixt the Lord Jesus and
tru^ B lievers: Nostra and ipsius conjunctio, non miscet personas, nec unit
substantias, sed affectus consociat and confaederat voluntates. Cypr.
Cyprian tells us in the general, it is not such an union as speaks a
conjunction of persons, or a connection of natures; but a consent of wills, and
confederation of affections; but this is too lax and general; more
particularly; therefore; it is

1. A spiritual union; He that is joined to the Lord, is one Spirit; i. e. one
with Christ, not in a gross and carnal, but spiritual manner. As man and wife
united make one flesh, Genesis 2.24. so Christ and Believers united by the Spirit
and Faith, make up one spiritual Christ. Believers are made partakers of one
and the same Spirit with Christ; Christ's Spirit is really communicated to them,
and abides in them.

2. A mystical, deep, profound union: This is a great mys ery says the
Apostle, but I speak of Christ and the Church, Ephesians. 5.32. We read of three
great mystical, dazzling unions; of three distinct persons united in one God, 1
John 5.7. of two distinct natures meeting in one person, in our Immanuel, Luke
1.35. Col. 2.9. of two distinct natures and persons united by one Spirit,
that is the union betwixt Christ and true Believers. This is a great mystery, a
deep union. Hence it is that it is compared to the mystery of the very Trinity,
as being like to the union of persons in the Divine nature. Christ in the
Father, Believers in Christ, and Christ in Believers, Joh. 14.20. So Christ
prays, Joh. 17.21. that they all may be one, as thou Father art in me, and I
in thee, that they also may be one in us. Hence may be gathered a likeness,
though not an equality of union. In the union betwixt Christ and Believers, is
shadowed out the union betwixt Christ and his Father. This is one of the great
Arcana Evangelii; it is a mystical union.

3. And yet it is a true, real union; not a fancy only, not an imaginary union,
not like the union of the mouth, and meat in a dream, Isa. 29.8. No, but we are
as really united unto Christ, as the members of the body are to the head. Hence
are we said to be Ephesians. 5.30.
members of his body, of his flesh, and his bones: As the head communicates
real influences to the body, so does Christ to Believers; communicates to us
his Spirit, graces, fullness, spiritual light, life, strength, comfort, Joh.
1.16.

4. A close, near, dear, intimate union: Like that of the food with the body
which it nourishes. Hence Believers are said to eat Christ's flesh, and to
drink his blood, John 6.54. Such an intimate union, as that one possessive
particle is not sufficient to express it; not said, my Vineyard is before me,
but my Vineyard which is mine, is before me, Cant. 8.12.

5. An inseparable, perpetual, indissoluble union. A marriage knot which
neither men, sins, sorrows, death, nor Devils are able to dissolve. Who, or
what can separate us from the love of God? The Apostle clearly resolves his own
question: Rom 8 38 39
I am persuaded that neither life nor death, etc. Believers are held in Christ's
hand; he that would break this union, must first be too hard of fist for
Christ, yea, and for his Father too. No man shall pluck them out of my hand; my
Father is greater than all, and no man can pluck them out of my Fathers hand,
Joh. 10.28, 29. And thus we have dispatched the second Question.

3. What are the efficient causes of this union?

Sol. 1. The efficient causes of this union are either principal, or less
principal.

1. Principal; and so this great work of union being opus ad extra, it is
indivisum, and so ascribed

1. In common to the whole 1 Pet. 5.10. John 6.44, 45. Ephesians. 2 6, 7.
Godhead. Hence we are said to be called by God the Father into the fell^wship
of his dear Son, 1 Cor. 1.9. So likewise this union is ascribed to the Son.
The dead shall hear the voice of the Son of God and live, Joh. 5.25. and Joh.
10.16.

2. But more especially the Spirit of God in a more peculiar sense, is said to
be the principal Author of this union: He it is that knits this marriage knot
betwixt Christ Jesus and true Believers. Look as Acts 4.24.
Creation in some respect is appropriated to the Father, 1 Pet. 1.18.
Redemption to the Son; so the Application of that Redemption to the Holy
Ghost. It Is by one Spirit that we are all baptized into one body, 1 Cor. 12.13.
It Is by the Holy Spirit the Comforter, That we are convinced of sin,
righteousness and judgment, Joh. 16.7, 8, 9. It Is by the Holy Ghost that we
are renewed, Tit. 3.5.

2. Less principal, or the means or instruments of union. These are twofold;
outward, inward.

1. Outward: Generally all the Ordinances of God; by the Ordinances it is that
we come to have Job 22.21.
acquaintance; that is, union and communion with Jesus Christ. It Is by these
golden pipes that golden oil is conveyed to us from that golden Olive, Zech.
4.12. More especially.

1. The Word read, preached, meditated on, believed, improved. It Is by hearing
and learning of the Father that we come to Christ, Joh. 6.44, 45. The Holy
Scriptures were written for this end, that through them we might have
fellowship with the Father and his Son, 1 John 1.3. The way to have Christ's
company, is to keep Christ's words, Joh. 14.23.

2. The Sacraments, those spiritual Seals and Labels which God has fixed to
his Covenant of Grace.

1. Bapti me: By one Spirit we are baptized into one body, 1 Cor. 12.13. Hence
we are said to be buried with Christ by Baptism into death, Romans 6.3, 4.
Baptism styled the Laver of regeneration, Tit. 3.5. By Baptism we put on
Christ, Gal. 3.7.

2. The Lords Supper; this is a great means of strengthening and evidencing our
union, and advancing our communion with Christ Jesus. We are all made to drink
into one Spirit, 1 Cor. 12.13. Hence that, 1 Cor. 10.16. The bread which we
break, is it not the communion of ( means, arg^ments, evidences of our
communion with) the body of Christ. The wine which we drink, is it not the
communion of the blood of Christ? Thus much for the external means of union.

2. Inward, internal, intrinsecal means of union on man's part; i. e. faith: Not
a bare historical, miraculous, temporal dead faith; No, but a living, working,
justifying, saving faith. Christ comes to dwell in our hearts by faith, Ephesians.
3.17. It Is by faith alone that we receive Christ, Joh. 1.12. That we come unto
him, and feed upon him, Joh. 6.56. It Is by faith that a Believer lives in and
to Christ, and Christ lives in and for a Believer, Gal. 2.20.

Thus much for the Explication of the terms of our Proposition, for the fixing
of it on a right Basis. I now proceed to the second part of my discourse; viz.

Now That there is such a spiritual, mystical, real, close, inseparable union
betwixt the Lord Jesus and true Believers, 2. Confirm.
appears three ways.

1. From those many synonymical terms, and equivalent expressions whereby the
Scriptures hold forth this union. Christ is said to be in Believers, Col. 1.27.
Romans 8.10. To dwell in them, Ephesians. 3.17. To walk in them, 2 Cor. 6.16. So are
Believers said to abide in Christ, as he abides in them, 1 John 4.16. and Joh.
15.17. To dwell in Christ, as Christ in them, Joh. 6.56. To put on Christ, to
be clothed with him, Gal. 3.27. Each of these expressions clearly import that
near and intimate union that is betwixt the Lord Jesus and true Believers. The
King of Saints has two Mansion houses; one in heaven, the Throne of his glory;
another on earth, a Tabernacle of flesh, the heart of a Believer, which is the
seat of his delight, Prove. 8.31. his lesser Heaven, Isa. 57.15. -- 66.1, 2.

2. From those several similitudes by which the Scriptures shadow out this
union. Believers are said to be lively stones, 1 Pet. 2.4, 5, 6. Christ the
living foundation, the chief cornerstone on which they are built, Ephesians. 2.20,
21. Believers are styled living branches. Christ the true Vine, into whom they
are engraffed, and in whom they bring forth fruit, Joh. 15.1.5. Christ the
faithful, loving, discreet Bridegroom; Believers his Loyal, Affectionate,
obedient Spouse, Ephesians. 5.31, 32. Cant. 2.16. -- 5.1. Believers are entitled
Christ's body, Ephesians. 1.23. Bone of his bone, flesh of his flesh, Ephesians. 5.30.
Christ, the Believers head, Ephesians. 1.22. In a word, the head and mystical body
are called Christ, 1 Cor. 12.12. In all these Resemblances, he that runs may
read the union betwixt Christ and Believers, pourtrayed out to the life unto us.

3. From that communion which there is betwixt Christ and true Believers. Omnis
communio fundatur in unione: Communion where ever it is, of necessity argues
union; as the effect necessarily implies the cause. Believers, they communicate
with Christ in his fullness, Joh. 1.16. In his 2 Cor 5.21. Solus pro nobis
suscepit sine meritis malis poenam, ut nos per illum sine b^nis meritis
consequermur gratiam. Aug.
merits, which are as fully imputed to Believers for Justification, as if his
sufferings had been by them endured, or the debt by them satisfied. In his life
and graces, by habitual and real infusion, and in-dwelling of his Spirit to
Sanctification, 1 Cor. 1.2. In his privileges and dignities; such I mean as
are communicable. Is he a King? a Priest? So are Believers, Rev. 1.6. A Royal
Priesthood, 1 Pet. 2.9. Is he a Son? an Heir by Nature? Saints are so by
Adoptior, Joint-heirs with Christ, Romans 8.17. In his Victories; Believers are
more than Conquerours through him, Romans 8.37. In the midst of their enemies
insultations, and their own distresses; yea, even in and by death it self, the
victory is still theirs: In his Triumphs and Glory; they share with him in his
Throne; all that Believers are is from the Grace of Christ, 1 Cor. 15.10. All
that they do, is from the strength of Christ, Phil. 4.13. So that they do not
so properly live, as Christ in them, Gal. 2.20. On the other side, Christ
communicates in the Believers graces, affections, duties. He gathers myrrh and
spice out of their Gardens, eats of their honey and honeycomb, Cant. 5.1.
Their man-drakes are laid up for their Lord. As they live in the Spirit, so
they walk in the Spirit, Gal. 5.25. They tune their souls to his key; their
Cant. 2.14.
voice is sweet in his Ears; their countenance is lovely in his Eyes; all that
Believers are is from Christ, and therefore all that Belivers have is to
Christ. What they receive in Mercy, they return in Duty. Thus from this mutual
communion, we conclude a close and dear union.

And now our Proposition being thus cleared and confirmed, I descend to the
third thing promised, and that is

3. Application, which I shall couch under these four Heads, viz. Information,
Examination, Consolation, Exhortation.

1. Information. Are believers thus closely united unto Christ? Hence see,

1. The crimson, Tyrian tincture, the scarlet dye of their sin, who oppo e,
oppress, persecute true believers. Poor souls, little do they think or know
what they do; viz. that they wound Christ through believers sides. Believers
are united unto Christ; therefore when the seed of the Serpent Genesis 3.15.
bruises their heel, it must needs have an influence on Christ their head; who
though he has no passion, yet has he much compassion, and in all their
afflictions, is afflicted, Isa. 63.9. In touching them, they touch the apple of
his eye, Zech. 2.8. Saul, Saul, why persecutest thou me? Acts 9.4. so cries the
Head in heaven, while Saul treads on the foot on earth.

2. Hence learn, the height, length, depth, and breadth of the love of Christ
that passes knowledge, to believers beyond and above all others in the world.
Oh Beloved, that the Lord should leave other plants in the woods and waste
ground, let them alone in the Wilderness, suffer them to grow up to be fit
fuel for eternal flames, and make choice of them (who by nature are as wild
Romans 11.17.
olives, as the worst) and ingraffe them into himself, who is the True O^ive,
and make them partakers of his fullness! that he should cull them out, who are
by nature dead in trespasses and sins, and implant them into himself, raise
them up together, and make them sit together in heavenly places with himself!
Oh this speaks love beyond expression, beyond imagination! This argues grace,
riches of grace, exceeding riches of grace, Ephesians. 2.1, 4, 5, 6, 8.

3. Observe hence not only the love which Christ vouchsafes to, but the high
honor which he casts upon believers. Was it an honor for Mordecai to be
cloat^ed with Ahashuerus Royal apparel, to ride on the Kings H^rs^, having the
Royal Crown on his head? Esther 6.11. what an honor then was it, for a poor
Esther to be taken into the Kings bed and bos^me? Esther 2.17. If it seemed not
a light thing in David's eyes, but rather an high dignity to be son in law to a
King, what is it then to be united to a God? the highest pitch and pinnacle of
honor; This; the Ela, the Neplus ultra of true dignity; an honor not
vouchsaft by God to those glistering Courtiers of heaven, the Angels. True
indeed, they are Christ's servants, subjects, not his members. To which of the
Ang ls said he at any time, Thou art bone of my bone, flesh of my flesh? Christ
took not on him the nature of Angels, but is united to the seed of Abraham,
Heb. 2.16.

4. Hence we conclude the stability, fixednesse, perseverance of the Saints in
their estate of grace. Here, here, believers, is a firm basis, on which to
build the Sai^ts c^nstant progress in the paths of holiness, till they fully
arrive at their Port of happiness. True believers are united unto Christ; They
live in Christ, and Christ in them; their life is hid with Christ in God, Col.
3.3. Therefore mauger the malice and power of all unruly corruptions from
within, of all subtle temptations, violent assaults, decoying smiles, or
threatening frowns from without, they must and shall persevere. (...) Kept as
by a Garrison.
Kept they are, and shall be by the power of that Christ, to whom they are
united through faith unto salvation, 1 Pet. 1.5. Whilst there is sap in Christ
their root, it shall ascend into the true Branches. Joh. 11.16. and 4.14. Let
the rain descend, and the floods come, and the winds blow, and beat upon these
living stones, these spiritual Houses, they shall not Mat. 7.25. Isa. 26.4.
fall totally, finally, for they are built on that Rock of Ages. True believers
are Christ's Members, and should he lose the least of them, he would be a
maimed, an imperfect Christ, 1 Cor. 12.27. Of those whom thou have given me, I
have not lost one, Joh. 17.12. True Believers are Christ's Spouse, married to
him, and whatever men have done, or may do, Christ will not give a Bill of
utter Divorce, Jer. 3.14.

5. See here a rational, solid ground, for the Protestant Doctrine of the
imputation of Christ's righteousness, and the merit thereof to true Believers,
against the cavils and calumnies of the Pharisaical, self-justifying Papist.
Our union unto Christ, is the great foundation on which we build our communion
with Christ. Christ is united to believers; one with them, their Head, their
Surety, (who in conspectu fori, is but one person with the debtor) and this by
his own voluntary undertaking, the debtors consent, and the Judges approbation:
therefore it is rational, just, equal, that what our Christ, our Head,
Representative, Surety, has done and suff^red for us; and that not only bono
nostro, for our good, but loco nostro, in our stead, should by God our Judge be
imputed to us. That since our Head and Surety was made sin for us, who knew no
sin, we should be made the righteousness of God in him, 2 Cor. 5.21. That
since he has borne our griefs, and carried our sorrows; since he was wounded
for our transgressions, and bruised for our iniquities, it is but just that our
Peace should be obtained by his chastisements, and that by his stripes we
should be healed, Isa. 53.4, 5, 6, etc.

6. If believers, etc. Hence we gather a cogent, and conclusive Argument for
the Saints blessed Resurrection at the last day. Christ the believers Head is
risen: risen as their Head: risen as the se^ond Adam. From hence the Apostle
strongly argues for the Saints glorious resurrection, 1 Cor. 15.13, 14, 15,
etc. If the head be got above, surely the body shall not away lie under water.
True indeed, the ungodly and unbelievers shall be raised also, Dan. 12.2. Joh.
5.29. There shall be a 2 Cor. 5.10.
general resurrection of the dead, both of the just and unjust, Acts 24.15. and
17.31. But here is the difference; The bodies of the wicked shall be raised up
in dishonor by Christ, as a powerful and offended Judge, John 5.27, 28, 29. To
receive their just sentence and condemnation, 2 These. 1.6, 8, 9. Matthew. 25.33.
But the bodies of believers, by the Spirit of Christ, and by virtue of his
resurrection, as their Head, shall be raised in power, spiritual,
incorruptible, and made like to his glorious body, 1 Cor. 15.20, 22, 23, 42,
43, 44. Because he lives, they shall live also, and have livery and seisin
given them of those joys and gloryes, which neither eye has seen, nor ear
heard, nor can enter into the heart of man to conceive, 1 Cor. 2.9. and so
shall they be ever with the Lord, 1 These. 4.17. Thus much by way of Corollary
for information of the judgment. I now proceed to the second Use, which more
immediately reflects on the heart and life; and that is an Use of,

2. Examination, Whether there be really and indeed such a spiritual, close,
intimate union betwixt our souls in particular, and the Lord Jesus. To this
purpose give me leave to put the probe into your consciences, by a serious
proposal of these five Questions.

Quest. 1. Has Christ given unto you his holy Spirit? He that is joined to the
Lord, is one Spirit, says the Text. If any man have not the Spirit of Christ,
he is none of his, 1 John 3.24
Romans 8.9. Whatever member is really united to the Head, has a natural spirit;
a soul enlivening of it, and acting in it. So says the Apostle, Hereby know
we, that we dwell in him, and he in us, because he has given us of his S^irit,
1 John 4.13.

Now this Spirit where ever it is, it is,

1. A praying Spirit, a Spirit of supplication; of faithful, sincere, fervent,
constant, humble supplication, Zech. 12.10. Ask then thy soul, Can thou, Do
thou go to God, and cry as a child, with reverence and confidence, Abba-Father,
Romans 8.15. Does this Spirit help thine infirmities? Romans 8.26. and enable thee
to understand both for whom, and what, and how thy prayer is to be made? Does
it work and quicken in thy heart (at least at some times, in some measure) such
apprehensions, affections and graces, as are requisite for the right and
acceptable performance of so heavenly a duty?

2. A mourning Spirit. It puts a believer into a dove-like frame, Ezekiel. 7.16.
mourning for the loss of its Mate: yea, mourning for the offense of a gracious
God, as for the loss of an only son, Zech. 12.10. Tell me then poor soul,
Art thou apt ever and anon to strike on thy breast with the contrite Publican?
Jer. 31.19.
to smite on thy thigh with brokenhearted Ephraim, and in an holy
consternation of spirit, to ask thy self, What, oh Jer. 8 6.
what have I do^^? Does thy Gods bottle, and thy tears therein, for sin as sin,
speak for thee?

3. A sanctifying Spirit; 1 Cor. 6.11.
1 Pet. 1.2. and that with respect to sins, graces, duties.

1. Sins. The Spirit, where ever it is, 2 These. 2.13.
mortifies the deeds of the flesh, Romans 8.13. Speak then, is thine old man
crucified (at least as to dominion) with thy Christ? Romans 6.6. more especially,
(not to speak of thy more gross, dangerous, dishonorable sins) Do thou spit
out the sweet morsel under thy tongue? Do thou with Samuel, hue thy delicate
Agag in pieces? with David, keep thee from Psa. 18.23.
thine iniquity, that iniquity to which thy constitution, custom, calling,
interest, mostly incline thee? what say thou to thy Isaac, Benjamine,
Absalom, Dalilah, Herodias, the Calves at Dan and Bethel? Tell me, Art thou apt
sadly to remember thine own evil ways, and to loath thy self in thine own
sight for all thine iniquities, and for all thine abominations? Ezekiel. 36.31.

2. Graces. Speak Believer, Art thou renewed in the Spirit of thy mind? has
the Spirit of God re-instampt that glorious Image of God, viz. Knowledge,
Righteousness, and true Holiness, which thou lost in Adam? Ephesians. 4.24. As
thy clothing is of wrought gold, so especially is all thy glory, thy chiefest
glory within? Do thou find thy graces stirred up, increast, and strengthened
with might by the Spirit in the Innerman? Ephesians. 3.16. Has the North Wind so
risen, the Southwind so come, and blown upon thy Garden, that the spices
thereof flow forth? Cant. 4.16. In a word, Do thou more and more grow in
grace? 2 Pet. 3.18. Beholding the glory of the Lord, art thou changed into the
same image from glory to glory, even as by the Spirit of the Lord? 2 Cor. 3.18.
Art thou still perfecting holiness in the fear of God? 2 Cor. 7.1.

3. Duties. Where ever the Spirit is, it causes, effectually causes the man
to walk in Gods S^atutes, to keep his judgments, and to do them, Ezekiel. 36.27.
It works in believers, both to will and to do, Philip. 2.13. To perform
natural, moral, spiritual duties, to spiritual ends, in a spiritual manner: and
that,

1. Freely. Where the Spirit of the Lord is, there is liberty, 2 Cor. 3.17.
Christ's people in the day of his power, are a willing people; volunteers in his
service, Psalm. 110.3. What say thou, art thou dragged to duty, as a Bull to a
stake, as a Swine to slaughter? or rather, is it thy meat and drink to do thy
Gods Will? John 4.34. Do the ways of wisdom, seem ways of Prove. 3.17.
pleasantness to thee? and all her paths, do thou look upon them as peace?

2. Regularly. Those that live in the Spirit, walk in the Spirit, Gal. 5.25. i.
e. by the Spirits light, according to the Spirits rule, the Word of God, the
great standard of Truth. What then, do thou kindle a fire on thine own
hearth, and compass thy self about with thine own sparkles? d^st thou walk in
the light of this fire, and in the sparks that thou have kindled? my meaning
is, Do thou forsake the Law and Testimony, Gods cloud and pillar, and follow
the guidance of that ignis fatuus, thy refined reason, or others corrupt
example, or a pretended tradition, or some extatical Revelation contrary to the
Word? All these will lead thee into boggs, and this shall thou have of Gods
hands, Thou shall lie down in sorrow, Isa. 50.11. But if so be the infallible
Word be thy Rule, and thou walk according to it, then peace be upon thee, as
upon the Israel of God, Gal. 6.16. So much for the first query.

Quest. 2. Does Christ Ephesians. 3.17.
dwell in thy heart by faith? viz by such a faith as purifies the heart, as
works by love, to God. the Word, Saints, enemies, as overcomes the world, its
Midianitish smiles, its Anakimlik frowns? If thou have such a faith, remember
it as an infallible and momentous truth, That faiths Application of Christ to a
Believer, i^ saving, is always joined with a Believers Application of himself
to Christ. If the Spouse avers Christ to be hers, My Beloved is mine; she as
freely acknowledges that she is Christ's, I am his, Cant. 2.16. 'T s with a
Believer and Christ in this case, not as with a man clasping about a Tree, but
as with two loving friends mutually embracing each other. Ask then thy soul,
thy conscience, Can thou truly say with David, Lord save me, I am thine?
Psalm. 119.94. Do thou indeed, not only lean on thy Beloved, but cleave to thy
Christ with full purpose of heart? Acts 11.23. Does it content thee to apply
Christ to thy soul, only as a plaster to a wound, to have healing from him? or
not rather as a seal to the wax, which takes an impression from it? Has thy
faith two hands? as with the one thou pretendest to lay hold on Christ, do
thou with the other, resign up thy self to Christ? Art thou apt with the Roman
Spouse to say, Vbi tu Caius, ibi ego Caja? Art thou as ready, when he proposes
the strictest Precepts, to say, Lord I am thine, as when he proclaims the
sweetest promises, to say, Lo d thou art mine? Art thou as ready to offer up
thy self a burnt-offering, an Holocaust Romans 12.1. to God in obedience, as to
tender for thy self, thy Christ, as a sin-offering for satisfaction? Lev. 5.7.
2 Cor. 13.5.
Oh examine thy heart sincerely, whether thou art thus in the faith; or rather,
whether such a faith be in thee. That Is the second.

Quest. 3. Do thou crucify the flesh with its affections and lusts? They
that are united unto Christ do so, Gal. 5.24. Romans 8.13. Do thou detest,
loath, hate sin, all sin, in thought, word, deed; and that not so much for its
effects, as its nature? do thou hate it rather as hell, than for hell? That
is our duty, (...).
Romans 12.9. is it our sincere endeavor? Did thou ever groan out under the
sense of that intolerable burden? of that Wolf that lies in thy bosom? does
it make thee cry out as Paul, O wretched man that I am, Romans 7.24. Do thou
when thou appearest before the Lord in prayer, or at his Word, or at a
Sacrament, put thy Uriah, thy dearest darling sins in the front of the
Battle, that when Christ discharges his keenest arrows, they may be sure to be
hit and slain? When God sends a Tempest, is it thy first, greatest care to
throw those Jonahs overboard? when God seems to beleaguer thee with sharp and
threatening providence, is it thy main endeavor to cast the heads of those
Sheba's over the Wall? But,

Quest. 4. Art thou a new creature? he that is in Christ, is so, 2 Cor. 5.17.
Have thou a new head, heart, lip, life? can thou now properly say, Ego non
sum ego? is the Lion become a Lamb, the Raven a Dove, the Wolf a Kid, the
persecutor a Preacher, or more, an Adorer of Christ Jesus? Do thou act from
new principles, the Spirit of Christ, Ezekiel. 36.27. faith, Gal. 2.20.
constraining 2 Cor. 5.14.
love, filial fear? Jer. 32.40, Do thou act for new principles, that thou
may preserve them in thy self, and propagate them to others? Acts 26.29. Do
thou now level at new ends, the best, the highest ends? is thy main scope and
aim now not so much at a clod of earth, a vapor, a puff of honor, a tickling
pleasure? No, but rather is it thy chiefest end, plot, design, to advance thy
Creators, Redeemers, Comforters glory? and with it, the spiritual, eternal
salvation of thy precious and immortal Soul? Is this thy white, thy mark, thy
center? Can thou in sincerity of soul, say with the Psalmist, Whom have I in
heaven but thee, etc. Psa. 73.25.

Quest. 5. Do thou bring forth fruit? Every branch in Christ, is a
fruit-bearing branch, John 15.5. Art thou filled with all the fruits of
righteousness? first and second Table-fruits? art thou fruitful in every good
word and work? Col. 1.10. Do thou bring forth fruit suitable to the means
vouchsaft? or does the seed of an Homer bring forth only an Ephah? do thou
remember, that where much is given, not a little is required? Luke 12.48.
Briefly, do thou bring forth fruit like the Land of Egypt, by handfulls? Have
thou any bunches of Pomgranates to show? is thy soul a spiritual Eshcol? and
then too, art thou so desirous of bringing forth more, that thou look on the
Vintage of thy seize only as gleanings? In a word, do thou bring forth
fruit constantly, every month, in old age? Psa. 92.14. Art thou ever green and
flourishing? do not those Apples of Sodom, bitter fruits of Apostasy, in
principles, in practices, spring from thee? Are not thy grapes turned into
thorns, thy figs into Thistles? Art thou not like Orpah, that the other day kissed
and complemented, but now forsakes? but rather like Ruth, do thou resolve and
say concerning thy God, thy Christ, Whither thou go, I will go; where thou
dyest, will I dye, and there will I be buried? Ruth 1.16, 17.

If thy heart and conscience can give a comfortable answer to these Quaeries,
then Believer open thy mouth, open it wide, that thou may suck and be
satisfied with the next Use of our Point, which is a Breast of,

3. Consolation. True Believers are closely united unto Christ Jesus; Oh what
marrow, what fatness drops from this Truth! what an Hybla is it in the mouths,
what music is it in the ears of true believers! How blessed are the people
that are in such a case! Psalm 144.15. Their happiness will more distinctly
appear, if we reflect on it, either with relation to Christ, or believers.

1. With relation to Christ to whom believers are united. On their Union with
him, there redounds to them a peculiar Interest in his Person, Properties,
Promises, Providence, All.

1. In Christ's Person; Christ himself is theirs, Jer. 32.38. Isa. 9.6. A Christ
that is not like creature c mforts; those (...), bitter sweets; like the
Panther, which has a sweet sent, but an ugly face; No, but he is an Ocean of
sweetness without the least dram of gall: Christ, that perfect beauty, without
the least spot; That fairest of ten thousand, Can^. 5.10. That altogether
lovely one, Ver. 16. This Christ is theirs; Christ that indeficient,
never-failing good is theirs, Heb. 13.5. True indeed, creature comforts and
earthly interests like Absoloms Mule, are apt mostly then to fail us, when we
most need them. Yea, but Jesus Christ is such a Sun of righteousness, that he
knows no setting, no declining, Mal. 4.2. He is a Fountain of life ever
running. In a word, Christ that full, filling, sufficient, all-sufficient
person, Genesis 17.1.
in whom Quae faciunt divisa beatum, in hoc mixta fluunt.
concenter all the scattered excellencies of the whole Creation; in whom is
completely treasured up whatsoever an angry God can require for his
satisfaction, or an empty creature desire for its perfection. This is the
person in whom Saints by union have a real interest.

2. In Christ's properties. My horses are as thy horses, my Chariots as thy
Chariots, said Jehoshaphat to Ahab; all his Councels and Forces devoted to his
service. Son, all that I have is thine, Luke 15.31. Believers! has Christ an
Arm of power, it is for your protection? has he an Eye of knowledge, depth of
wisdom? it is for your direction. A Stock, a Treasury of perfect
righteousness? it is for your justification: A Spirit of holiness? it is for
your sanctification. Has he rolling, yearning bowels of mercy? it is that he may
show you compassion. A Lapp of All Sufficiency for your provision; Arms of
Grace, an heaven of glory for your reception, Psalm. 73.24.

3. In Christ's promises: In all those great, rich, precious, gracious promises,
2 Pet. 1.4. wherein all they wan^, and infinitely more than they can desire or
imagine, is made over to them, 2 Cor. 1.20. Christ's promises are the Believers
Magna Charta, to the confirmation whereof God has been pleased to add both his
Oath and Blood, Hebr. 6.17, 18. for Seals.

4. In all Christ's Providence, let them seem never so black and gloomy. The
hottest Furnace they are thrown into, does but loose their bonds, and the
scorching flames become a warm Sun, Dan. 3.25. This is the fruit of Gods
sharpest rods, Isa. 27.9.
the taking away of their sin. The Lion affords them meat; the Anakim himself
proves their bread. All things work together for their good, Romans 8.28. Every
wind, though it blow never so cross, speeds them to their Port. Not a stone
thrown at them, but it is to them a pr^cious stone. Not a Thorn in their Crown,
but i^ turns into a Diamond. Not a twig in their Rod, but is sweetened and
sanctified. The saddest Providence like the Snow falling on them, and
descending to the hem of their garments, there freeze into a gem to deck them.

5. In all: i. e. True Bel^evers have such an universal interest in all that
Christ is, has, could speak, suffer, or can do, that the Apostle going about
to take an Inventory of their large Revenue, and as it were despairing to give
in an exact acc^unt of the particulars, is feign to couch them in one sum
total: All are yours, 1 Cor. 3.22, 23. Wherein are observable, 1. The Believers
portion, the fullest imaginable, All are yours: Then the term, for life and
death too; in possession and reversion: Things present, and things to come.
Lastly, the tenure, the surest, the high st that can be, they hold in ^apite;
for their better assurance, their demesns are entailed on the Crown; All yours,
because you are Christ's, and Christ is Gods.

Thus you see what comfort flows from this Doctrine of Union with Relation unto
Christ. There Is yet another Dug which swells with Consolation, and that is to be
drawn

2. With respect to Believers themselves, in a threefold regard; viz. of their
persons, graces, duties.

1. Their persons. Believers being united unto Christ, they are, they cannot
but be his Fathers Jedidiahs, Beulahs, Hephziba's, dearly accepted in the
Beloved, Ephesians. 1.6. They are also his own delight, Prove. 8.31. He rejoices
over them, as a Bridegroom over his Bride. They are to him as the Seal on his
Arm; as a Cant. 8.6.
Signet on his right hand. He carries their names on his breast continually,
Exodus 12.29. And as for the Spirit of God, that like Noah's Dove, finds no where
to rest the sole of his foot, but the soul of a sincere Believer, of whom it
says, here is my rest, here will I dwell for ever, for I have a delight herein.

2. Their graces. True Believers graces are in themselves very defective and
imperfect: The eye of their faith, like that of Leah, a blear-eye. The hand of
their confidence, like that of Jeroboam, much withered and blasted. The fire of
their love, like that of green wood, apt soon to expire. The anchor of their
hope very much cracked; shoulders of patience sorely bruised; feet of obe^ience,
like Mephibosheth, lame; yet because united unto Christ, all accepted, all hold
scale and weight in heaven, though not as to merit, yet as to acceptance, 1
Pet. 2.5. There is much alloy in the metal, however I see my Sons stamp, and
Picture on the coin, and therefore says God, it shall pass for current in
heaven.

3. Their duti s. Oh the defects of Saints duties: How often do they pray, as
if afraid to be heard; hear, as if afraid to learn; learn, as if afraid to do;
do, as if afraid to please; and yet being united unto Christ, how acceptable
are their persons and performances! Their weak prayers sound like melody. Their
broken sighs smell like Incense; Their very stammerings seem Rhetorical, Cant.
2.14. Not a good word falls from their lips, but it is recorded, Mal. 3.16. Not
a tear drops from their eye, but it is taken up, and bottel'd, Psalm. 56.8. Mites
received as if they were Talents. Cups of Cold water, Ram-skins, Goats-hair,
any thing; desires instead of performances; the will for the deed; grief for
want of will, for the will it self, 2 Cor. 8.12. and all because from such as
are united unto Christ, in whom the Lord is so well-pleased, Matthew. 3.17. that
he looks on the very smoke of his Saints performance, mixed with Christ's merits
as a sweet perfume. Having done with the Consolation arising from this truth,
we proceed to the last Use, which is of

4. Exhortation. In it I shall address my self, 1. To sinners, then to Saints.

1. To sinners, that are as yet Ephesians. 2.12.
without Christ, God, Hope in this world. Oh be you yet persuaded to give your
eyes no sleep, your eyelids no slumber, till you are really and closely united
to Christ Jesus. Methinks poor forlorn creature thou should not need a
Spur, if thou do, consider.

1. The dreadful, dismal danger of thy present estate. A soul not united unto
Christ, lies open to all danger imaginable; it is in the very Suburbs of
destruction: It walks in the valley of the very shadow of wrath, death,
damnation. True, it may be thou perceivest it not; but that speaks thy
s^curity, not thy safety; and thou art s^cure, because hood-wink't. Thy
security is not from want of danger, but discerning. Alas, how dreadful is thy
condition, that lie every minute exposed to the cruel courtesy of every
Devil, Lust, Temptation, Judgment! The sentence is past against thee; in the
next Scene expect the Executioner. He that believes not, is condemned already,
Joh. 3.18, 19. Poor soul, a deluge of wrath is pouring down in full streams
upon thee, and thou art as yet shut out of the Ark. The Avenger of blood is at
thy heels, and thou not yet got into a City of Refuge. A shower of brimstone
falling on thee, and thou have no Zoar to fly unto. The destroying Angel with
his drawn Sword at the threshold, and the lintel posts of thy door not
sprinkled with blood. But

2. If the wind do not, lets see whether the Sun cannot prevail. Poor
self-destroying Caitiff, Look yonder on that amiable Jesus Christ; (for a
marriage between whom and thy precious soul I am now woing) Do but observe his
condescending willingness to be united to thee: That great Ahashuerus courts
his own captive Hester. The Potter makes suit to his own clay; Wooes thee,
though he wants thee not; is infinitely happy without thee, yet is not, cannot
be satisfied but with thee. Hark how he commands, entreats, begs thee to be
reconciled, 2 Cor. 5.20. Swears and pawns his life upon it, that he desires not
thy death, Ezekiel. 33.11. Seals this his oath with his blood; and if after all
this thou art fond of thine own damnation, and had rather be at an agreement
with hell, than with him; see how the brinish tears trickle down his cheeks,
Luke 19.41, 42. He weeps for thee, that do not, wilt not weep for thy self:
Nay, after all this obdurate obstinacy, is resolved still to wait, that he may
be gracious, Isa. 30.18. Stands yet and knocks, though his head be wet with
rain, and h^s locks with the dew of the night; fain he would have thee open the
door, that he may come in and sup with thee, and thou with him, Rev. 3.20. Thus
much for a whet to sinners; my next address is

2. To Saints that are indeed united unto Christ Jesus. Four words of advice I
have for you: Oh that they might stick as Goads, as Nails fastened by the
Masters of the Assemblies.

1. Be very fearful of that which may in any sort weaken your union with
Christ. Beware of committing, of approving thy self in the least compliance
with any the least sin. Say not as Lot of Zoar, is it not a little one? Sin
approved is that very Dalilah that cuts off the locks, and makes a Believer a
prey to every Philistine. Sin is that that separates between us and our God;
the great makebate between heaven and earth, Isa. 59.2. It Is true, a Saint
shall never be left so to himself or sin, as that sin shall bereave him of his
Jewel, his Grace, or God; but may, and does often steal away the key of his
Cabinet, his evidence his assurance. I opened to my Beloved, but my Beloved had
withdrawn himself, and was gone, Cant. 5.6. Sin is that that will soon grieve
away that holy Spirit, by which we are sealed to the day of Redemption, Ephesians.
4.30.

2. Wis^ly improve this your union with Christ. Frustra est potentia, etc.
It Is not enough to have, unless we use Christ: Not enough to have a Well of
salvation, but we must draw water, and drink it too, Isa. 12.3. if we intend a
benefit by it. 'Twas the looking on the Brazen Serpent that cured those that
were stung: Not enough for Saints to have faith, by which to live; but they
must live by the faith that they have, Gal. 2.20. i. e. they must by faith draw
continual supply of grace, comfort, strength from Christ, as the branch does
sap from the root, as the members do influence from the head, as the pipe does
water from the fountain. This your union then must be improved

1. Under the fear and sense of wrath. When God begins to thunder, and to write
bitter things against thee: Now, now let faith recollect it self and say, Why,
I am united unto Christ, in whose wounds is room enough to hold, and in whose
heart readiness enough to receive all that fly unto him, Matthew. 11.28. True
indeed, there is a terrible storm of justice gathering over my head, ready to
fall upon me; but my Christ to whom I am united, is my Isa. 32.1, 2.
shelter; a flood of vengeance, but I am got into the Ark. Destruction near,
but Christ is my Passover, my little Sanctuary. Able, willing, to save to the
uttermost, with all kinds and degrees of salvation, Hebr. 7.25.

2. In solicitations unto sin; when sin comes like a Potiphars wife, and offers
deadly poison in a golden Cup. Now, now let faith answer, I would consent, but
that I am united unto Christ. How can I do this great wickedness, and sin
against my Christ! Genesis 39.9. I could easily do this and this, if I were not
Alexander: But now I cannot gratify this lust, but I must needs be disloyal to
my Christ, my Husband to whom I am married. If I take the cold in my feet,
'twill immediately fly up into my head; every sin is an affront to my Christ.

3. In the use of all Ordinances; let faith use them frequently, reverently;
but not in the least rest on them, or be satisfied with them, any farther than
they advance our union and communion with Christ. Look on prayer without a
Christ, as mere words and sounds. Sacraments without a Christ, as empty Vials
without a cordial. Hearing without Christ, as a Cabinet without a Jewel. Be
only so far satisfied with the Ordinances, as thou find them to be Zech.
4.12.
golden pipes, conveying golden oil into thy soul.

3. Labor more and more for a frame of Spirit suitable to this union.

1. An humble self-abasing frame: Say, Alas Lord, what am I? what my Fathers
house? that so great a Christ should so far stoop beneath himself, as to be
united to so poor a worm, a clod of earth, a mass of sin, a nothing, a less,
a worse than nothing, Isa. 40.15, 17. That strength should be united unto
weakness, light unto darkness, life unto death, heaven unto earth, unto hell!
That incorruption should marry it self unto corruption: Immortality to
mortality: The King of Kings, the Lord of Lords, to such a captive, unpared,
unwash't, unshaven captive as I! Ezekiel. 16.4, 5, 6.

2. A trusting, relying, depending frame o^ spirit for supply of all temporals
Qui misit filium, immisit Spiritum, promisit vultum, quid tandem denegabit?
: He that has given thee his Son, what can he deny? Romans 8.32. He that has
given thee an Ocean, will not deny thee a Drop. If thou have the Kernel, thou
shall not want the Shell; if thy Father vouchsafe thee bread, Manna, the Ring,
a Kiss, he cannot well deny thee husks. If thou have his Benjamin, thou shall
be sure not to go without thy Mess, thy five Messes: Matthew. 6.33.
Seek first the Kingdom of God, and all these things shall be (...).
added; i. e. cast in as paper and packthread to the bargain.

3. A loving affectionate frame. Believer, thou art married to Christ Jesus,
that Relation calls aloud for union of hand, heart, spirits, all. He is bone of
thy bone, flesh of thy flesh, therefore to be dearly loved; (...). Graecus* Aug.
count all that thou art, and have, too little for him. Love him dearly for
what he is, for what he has, for what he has done, suffered, purchased,
promised. Love him more for what he is, than for what he has; more for his
person, than for his rings, bracelets, jewels, jointure. Love him with a
cordial, active, conforming, constant, transcendent love, Psalm. 116.1, 2.

4. A truly, noble, heavenly frame; such a frame whereby thou may truly
contemn this poor dunghill world. Believer, being united unto Christ, thou art
indeed clothed with the Sun, and therefore thou should like uhy mother,
tread the Moon under thy feet, Rev. 12.1. We should never fix our hearts on
that whereon our God would have us put our feet. Such Eagles as Believers
should not stoop at Flies; it is not for persons united unto Christ to be fond
on these beautiful vanities, fair-faced nothings, chases in Arras, handsome
pictures drawn on Ice; such are all enjoyments on this side Christ. Believer,
thy head, thy husband, thy treasure is above, there let thy Anima illic potius
sit ubi amat, quam ubi animat.
heart be also. Having Christ for thy portion, let a little, a very little of
the world serve thee for thy passage.

5. A pitiful, compassionate frame, to those that are not as yet united unto
Christ. That are yet without hope, because without Christ. Oh as the Elect of
God put on Col. 3.12.
bowels toward such. Poor souls they are sinking, drowning; thou art safe on
the shore, got into the Ark. They are frying, burning in Sodom; Thou safe in
Zoar, a brand plucked out of the fire. Oh pity those that do not, will not,
cannot pity themselves. That Is the third advice.

4. And lastly, walk worthy of this union; Let your Conversation be suitable to
your Condition. This I shall dispatch in these three particulars.

1. Walk zealously; Be wisely Gal. 4.18.
zealous in and for the promoting the honor of this Christ to whom you are
united. Make it your only plot and business to advance his honor; it is your
own peculiar interest so to do. Be jealous of any thing that does or may
eclipse, or sully his glory. He that touches him, his Person, Natures,
Offices, Days, Ordinances, Ministers, Servants, let him be thought to touch the
apple of thine eye, Zech. 2.8. Let the zeal of his house even eat thee up,
Psalm. 69.9.

2. Walk fruitfully; so it becomes every branch ingraffed into Christ the true
Vine, Phil. 1.11. Thy fruitfulness adds much to thy Christ's honor; the plenty
of the crop sets a gloss on the Husbandmans care; The fully laden branch
reflects an honor on the root: If men see our good works, our fruitfulness in
every good work, they will then glorify our Father, Matthew. 5.16. John 15.16.

3. Walk lovingly, tenderly toward believers, fellow members; They that are so
happy as to be united unto one head, should be very careful to be of one heart.
Believers formerly were so, of one heart, and Acts 4.32.
one soul, as if animated with one and the same soul; suitable to the
Philosophers description of true love; (...); Arist. Formerly Believers were
like Scilurus his bundle of Arrows, so trust up together, no breaking of them.
But alas, now, it is sad to see how those that agree in one common faith, should
yet disagree as implacable foes. Oh Beloved, that Brethren, Joseph and
Benjamin, Moses and Aaron, Abraham and Lot should fall out, especially when the
Canaani^e is in the Land. Shall Gebal, Ammon, Amal k, and the Philistines,
shall these agree? and shall Ephraim and Judah be at variance? shall the Wolf,
Lion, Bear, Leopa^d associate? and shall not Lambs and Doves! O let such their
sin and shame never be published in Gath, nor spoken in the street of Askelon.
Believers, you have heard the fable of the contest between belly and members.
The moral of it bids you consult; if not your duty, yet your safety. By your
divisions, you do but dig your own graves. Remember Saints, we are all one by
spiritual relation; why should we not be 1 Cor. 12.13, 27. and 1.9, 10. 1 John
4.12, 16 Gal. 3.28.
one in our affection? I shall close all with that of the Apostle, Ephesians. 4.3.
to 7. wherein he draws this arrow to the very head. Keep the unity of the
Spirit in the bond of peace: Why? because there is one Body, one Spirit, one
Hope, one Lord, one Faith, one Baptism, one God. Let me add, you are one with
Christ the head, it is your duty therefore, and 'twill be your privilege,
honor, safety, to be one with one another.

THE NATURE OF Justification OPENED.
Romans 5.1. Therefore being justified by faith, we have peace with God, etc.


THE words present us, for the Argument of this morning exercise, with the
great doctrine of Justification, first to be opened, and then improved.

1. To be opened. And that we may not with Aquinas and the Papists, in ipso
l^mine impingere, stumble the very first step we take, and so quite ever after
lose our way, by confoundi^g justification with sanctification. I shall only
premise, that as in sanctification ^he change is absolute and inherent, so in
justification the change is relative and juridical; the former is wrought in
the sinners person, he becomes a new creature; but this latter is wrought in
his state, he becomes absolved at the bar of divine Justice. For Justification
is a law-state ((...) from (...)) it abolisheth the convincing power of sin, or
its guilt. Our business therefore is to discover the process at Gods bar, in
the justification of a sinner, which will be best done by comparing it with
that at man's, which we are familiarly acquainted with.

To be justified, therefore implies in general three things. 1. The person is
charged with guilt. 2. Pleads to the charge. 3. Upon that plea is discharged by
the Judge.

1. A justified person must be charged with guilt. Now guilt is the Relation
which sin has to punishment; for sin is the breach of the Law, and punishment
is the vengeance which the Law threatens for that breach. And as the
threatening it self is in the nature of it a guard to the Law, to prevent the
breach of it, bidding as it were the transgressour come at his peril, break the
Law if he dare, be wise before hand, lest he rue it too late; so the punishment
in the very nature of it, is a vindication of the equity of the injured Law,
the reparation and amends it makes it self for the wrong done it, by damnifying
the person, injuring her proportionally to the injury: Now that a justified
person must be charged with guilt, i. e. with the breach of Law; and by
consequence with desert of punishment, appears, because otherwise if a man be
pronounced tighteous, whom no body ever accused or questioned, he is only
praised, not justified.

2. The person to be justified, must plead for himself; either in person, or by
his Advocate who sustains his person; for to refuse to plead, is to despair
quite of being justified; and to abandon ones self over unto punishment,
silence gives consent; it argues the accused person has nothing to say for
himself, why he should not be condemned. Our Law, you know, shows no mercy to
one that will not plead, he is to be Pressed to death.

An endited person must plead therefore something in his own behalf, why he
should be justified, if he would be. Now either the man is guilty of the
charge, or not guilty. I must speak to both cases, and show what pleas are
requisite in each, and which of them is the plea upon which a sinner is
justified at the Bar of God.

Case 1. If the endited person be not guilty of the charge, justice it self
must justify him upon that plea. Si accusasse sufficiat, quis erit innocens?
an innocent person may be accused, he can never be convinced; for that that is
not, can never be demonstrated; the Judge or Jury were themselves guilty, if
they found innocence guilty. Now to be justified thus, is to be purely and
merely justified, not at all to be pardoned; for such a one stands upon his
terms, bears himself upon his own righteousness, begs no mercy. It Is no
favor to justify him, it is his due; he is not beholding to the Judge a jot,
the exact rigor of the Law acquits him.

To bring this to the present business, I shall demonstrate that we can never
be justified at the Bar of God, by pleading not guilty; For,

First, the plea is false. Although in a very restrained sense, there is none
so wicked but he may plead not guilty, and be justified as to this or that
particular fact charged upon him. Nimrod was not guilty of Abels murder. Nay,
a Saint may be guilty of some sins which the Devil may plead not guilty too, as
grieving the comforting, the sealing Spirit, abusing the Redeemers grace, etc.
yet nothing short of universal innocence, nothing but a perfect righteousness,
a total exemption from all manner of guilt will entitle us before Gods Tribunal
to this plea; James 2.10.
For whosoever shall keep the whole Law, and yet offend in one point, is guilty
of all.

1. Because the punishment due to the breach of the whole Law, viz. the curse
of God is due to every breach of every part. Gal. 3.10. Deuteronomy. 27.26.
Cursed is he that continues not in all things which are written in the book
of the Law to do them. The wages of sin ((...) of every single sin) is
death, Romans 6.23.

2. Because he that offends in one point, affronteth the authority of all, as
is excellently observed in the next verse; For he that said, James 2.11.
Do not com^ it adultery, said also, Do not steal. Every sin has Atheism in
it, it denies the God that is above; to trample upon the Majesty of God shining
in o^e Commandment, is at once to trample upon that Majesty which enacted all.

3. Because thereby he becomes infected with a contagious disposition to be
guilty of all; the same principle which emboldened him now, will another time
(if but excited with equal strengths of temptation) to commit any other sin, or
to repeat the same sins again and again, (though excited with still weaker and
weaker temptations) for as frequent acts strengthen the habit of sin, so the
habit facilitates the acts.

From hence it appears, that the holy Angels, that Adam in innocence, that the
man Christ Jesus might indeed plead not guilty before God, and be justified
upon that plea; but now impossible for us, Romans 3.20.23. Psa. 14.1. 1 John 1.8.

Secondly, the plea being false, there is no hope upon this issue to be
justified, unless there were some defect in the Judge, or in the evidence. In
the Judge either of prudence, in not understanding; or of integrity or power,
in not executing the Law aright: But in our case these are alike, that is,
infinitely impossible; for we have to do with the All-wise Legislator himself,
who is also the Holy, Holy, Holy Lord God Almighty, and shall not this Judge of
all the earth do right? Genesis 18.25.
Nor can there be any defect in the evidence; for the books shall be opened at
the last day, Rev. 20.12.
and the dead shall be judged out of those things which are written in the
books, according to their works. Nay, even now there are two day-books a
filling, down goes (every hour, every moment) all we do and think, and speak,
in the book of Gods remembrance fairly written; not an iota, not a tittle
either mist or blurred; of this God has given us a counterpart to keep in our
own bosoms, the Register of conscience (though a very imperfect copy, full of
blots, mistakes, omissions, yet) enough alone to convince us instead of a
thousand witnesses; for every sinner will be his own accuser and condemner,
rising up as an Advocate in the behalf of the great Judge, against himself at
the day of judgment.

-- Prima est haec ultio, quod se
Judice, nemo nocens absolvitur --
Case 2. And this was the first plea, not guilty; but the case is not ours, and
therefore this plea will never justify us. I come therefore to the other
(which in our case) is guilty; and here are two ways of pleading. First, mere
mercy, for mercies sake; but indeed this is not to plead at all, but to beg.
And as in the last case, when an innocent person upon his pleading not guilty
is discharged, that is pure justification, but no pardon: so here quite
contrary; when a guilty person is discharged out of mercy, this is pure pardon,
but no justification; for there shines not one beam of Justice in such a
discharge, mere mercy is all in all. Whence it follows, that the Socinians, who
to avoid the necessity of acknowledging Christ's satisfaction to Divine Justice,
affirm that Justification is nothing but mere Remission of sins, do abuse the
Wo^d, and contradict themselves; for who sees not that to be pardoned gratis,
out of pure mercy (without the least reparation made either for the injury and
indignity done to the Law, or satisfaction to the honor, justice and authority
of the Lawgiver, by the sin affronted) is not to b^ justified at all, (...),
but only to be gratified, (...); i. e. discharged upon the sole account of
mercy, without any consideration had of justice. This is the first way of
pleading when guilty, mere mercy for mercies sake; but to be justified upon
this plea, is an evident contradiction. Therefore secondly, the only plea for a
guilty person to be justified upon, is to plead mercy for the sake of some
satisfaction made to the justice and honor of the Law. And by how much the
fuller this satisfaction is, by so much the fuller is the justification of such
a person as is upon this plea discharged.

Now a full satisfaction may be made two ways.

1. By suffering the whole penalty due.

2. When a valuable consideration is accepted by the offended party or Judge,
wherein the honor of the Law is as much saved, as if it had never been broken;
or as if being broken, the full penalty had been inflicted on the breaker.

And here I have these two things to prove. 1. That man could never make such
satisfaction to the justice of God, nor any creature for him. 2. That the Lord
Christ has made such full satisfaction, that it stands now with the honor of
the holy God, to justify sinners upon the terms of the Gospel.



1. Not by suffering the penalty; for that being infinite, requires an infinite
continuance under it (there being no other way for an finite creature to suffer
infinitely) and so the whole penalty will ever be suffering, but can never be
suffered; for in etetnity, stop where you will, and there is yet as much to
come, as is already past; nay, infinitely more, for that which is past, is but
a finite time of suffering; though millions of ages are past, but an eternity
of suffering is yet to come; and after as many more millions of ages, still,
still an infinite eternity is future, that never can be so exhausted, but an
eternity will still be left.

Secondly, not by any act of service, which amounts to a valuable consideration
worthy to be accepted of the Judge as satisfactory to his affronted justice,
for two Reasons.

1. Because God is more dishonored by one sin, than honored by an eternity of
obedience; for God is not at all obliged to Cherubims and Seraphims for obeying
him; all the Creation naturally owes its utmost possibility of service, as an
eternal debt to its great Creator. Now the least act of disobedience or sin,
being injury and Treason, thereby a new obligation is contracted, viz. to
suffer condign punishment, the former obligation unto duty remaining eternally
in as full force as ever; which if we could discharge, yet were we but
unprofitable servants, Luke 17.10. Can a man be profitable to God? Job 22.2. If
thou be righteous, what give thou to him? or what receives he of thine hand?
Job 35.7. An eternity of service in the highest perfection, is every creatures
debt as a creature; and besides this, an eternity of suffering too, is every
delinquent creatures debt, as delinquent. But one debt cannot pay another;
since therefore all that the whole Creation can do for ever, would but just
satisfy the first natural obligation unto pure justic^, viz. the debt of
obedience; it ^s qu^te impossible that ever any creature should supererogate,
or spare any thing from hence, toward satisfying the secondary superadded ob
igation unto offend d justice, viz. the debt of punishment, either in its own
behalf or another.

Secondly, The other reason why neither man, nor any creature for him, can ever
satisfy the offended Creator by the highest services, because they all have it
from him when they do obey him; of his own do they give him; for in him we
live, and move, and have our being; What have thou, O man, nay, O Angel, O
Archangel, that thou have not received? all our, nay, all their springs are in
him; without him we can do nothing. The more we do for God, the more he does
for us; and consequently, still the more we owe him. So that acts of obedience
are so far from satisfying our Obligations to God, as that they contract new
ones, for even for them are we obliged.



1. The matter of this satisfaction.

2. The form, or that which makes it infinitely satisfactory and meritorious.

3. What are those Gospel terms.

First, For the matter of Christ's satisfaction, I humbly conceive that the
whole state of his humiliation, from his conception to his resurrection (for at
his resurrection began the second state of Christ as Mediatior; viz. his
exaltation, to be continued to the general Resurrection, and then he shall
resign up the Kingdom to the Father, and God shall be thenceforward all in
all, 1 Cor. 15.24, 28.) that this state (I say) of our Redeemers humiliation,
is entirely looked upon by God as the valuable consideration, wherein his
justice with honor acquiesceth, and rests satisfied. It has two parts. First,
his taking the form of a servant at his incarnation. Secondly, his management
of, and deportment in that state.

First, his Incarnation, and this presents God with a double satisfaction,
whereby he may with honor entertain thoughts of love to mankind.

1. In that humane nature is in Christ unstained with either original or actual
sin; for by his divine conception by the holy Ghost, he received of his
Virgin Mother, a pure, undeflowred, Virgin humane nature; the second Adam
revives the in^ocency of the first; those eyes could without disparagement
behold his manhood, which are purer than to behold iniquity; and even in their
sight, though no other flesh living could, yet this flesh must be justified.

2. In that humane nature is in him dignified with union to the divine, and is
become the seat and mansion of the Godhead; so that how loathsome soever sin
has rendered it in us, yet in him it is highly exalted; even as highly, as the
Divine Nature in him was abased; for the Humane Nature ascends just in the same
proportion, as the Divine descended, that is, to the utmost possibility; for
God could stoop no lower than to become a man, nor man rise higher than to be
personally one with God.

Thus you see Christ's entering into his state of Humiliation, has rendered the
nature of man very considerable again in the sight of God; so that he can now
with honor, exercise good will toward it.

Secondly, His management of this state, consists in his active and passive
righteousness.

By his active Righteousness, I mean his obedience to the whole Law; to the
Ceremonial, in being circumcised, baptized, keeping the three yearly feasts,
etc. To the moral, in not committing one sin, or neglecting one commanded duty,
even to subjection to his Parents, and paying Tribute to Caesar.

By his passive Righteousness, I mean all that he suffered in his lifetime,
as the meannesse of his birth and education; his persecution by Herod in his
infancy, after by the Scribes and Pharisees, his hunger and temptation in the
Wilderness, his poverty and straits, he had not where to lay his head; in a
word, he was all his life long in all things tempted as we are (yet without
sin) Heb. 4.15. but especially what he suffered at his death.

First, in his body, he was scourged, spit upon, crowned with Thorns, and
latength crucified; which was, 1. A cruel death; the Latin cruciari, to be
tormented, is derived a cruce, from being crucified. 2. A reproachful one, Gal.
3.13. Heb. 13.13. it was the Roman death for slaves and Malefactors.

But secondly, most of all he suffered in his soul, witness those
expressions, (...), Mat. 26.37. Mark 14.33. add his bemoaning himself to his
Disciples in the following words, and his passionate prayer thrice repeated,
Abba Father, if it be p^ssible let this cup pass; Add further yet his
sweating drops of blood, in that bitter agony which so spent him in the Garden,
that an Angel was sent to comfort him; but above all, his desertion upon the
Cross witnesses that he suffered unutterably in his soul, when he cried, My
God, my God, why have thou forsaken me? The Socinians are here puzzled to give
any tolerable account, how the infinitely good God could find in his heart to
exercise his only begotten Son, that never sinned, with all these horrors in
his soul; for certainly it stood not with his goodness, had not Christ as the
second Adam been a public person, a Representative, on whom the Lord laid the
iniquities of us all, Isa. 53.6. But if we consider (which they deny) that
Christ was then satisfying his Fathers Justice, we need not wonder at those
horrors and consternations of the manhood; for he knew the vastness of his
undertaking, the numberless numbers, and aggravations of sins, the dreadful
weight of his Fathers wrath, the sharpness of that sword, Zech. 13.7. which he
was going now to feel (not that God was angry with Christ upon the Cross,
quoad affectum; no, he never more dearly loved him; but quoad effectum) add
Christ's infinite abhorrence of the sins he bore, and that infinite zeal
wherewith he was inflamed to vindicate the honor of Divine justice. Now his
infinite love to his Church struggling with all these, produced those agonies,
and overcame them all, when he said, It is finished, Joh. 19.30. we meet him
next triumphing in his Resurrection.

But here to resolve that great question, whether Christ's passive
Righteousness alone, or active and passive jointly, are the matter of Christ's
satisfaction, which believers plead at Gods Bar for their Justification, and
which being accepted by God as a plea good in Law, is said to be imputed ( viz.
in a Law-sense) for Righteousness. Let these Reasons be weighed by such as do
disjoyne them.

First, each of them has its proper interest in, and its respective
contribution toward the satisfying the injured honor of Gods Law. For the
honor of Gods Law, is the equity of both its parts, its command, and its
threatening; Christ's active Righteousness honors the equity of the first,
which man had dishonored by his disobedience; but the great God-man has
repaired the honor of Gods Commandments, by yielding a most perfect obedience
to every one of them, and therein proclaimed the Law to be holy, just and good.
Then Christ's passive Righteousness in like manner honors the equity of the
threatening; for as by obeying, he acknowledged Gods authority to make a Law,
and his unexceptionable righteousness in every single Branch of the Law made;
so by suffering, he proclaims that man is bound to keep it; or if he do not,
to bear the penalty. He himself dies to justify that the sinner is worthy of
death, and offers himself upon the Cross as a Sacrifice to the Divine Justice;
and hereby he has proclaimed sin to be exceeding sinful, and God to be so
jealous a God, as rather than sin should go unpunished, and his justice want
its glory, the righteous, eternal Son of God must be made an example, what
guilty man had deserved. Thus God by two equal miracles (of everlasting
astonishment to be adored) has satisfied both his contending Attributes, and
rendered each of them Triumphant, in making his righteous Son an example of his
sin-avenging justice, that guilty sinners (repenting and believing) might be
made examples of his sin-pardoning-goodnesse.

In the second place, as each has its respective interest in satisfying the
injured Law, so neither of them can be anywhere severed from the other; and
those which God has so indissolubly joined, let none part asunder; for Christ's
active Righteousness was everywhere passive, because all of it done in the
form of a servant; for in our nature he obeyed the Law, but in his very
incarnation he was passive, for therein he suffered an eclipse of the glory of
his Godhead. And his passive Righteousness was everywhere active; because what
he suffered was not by constraint, or against his Will; no, it was his own
voluntary act and deed all along; let me instance in the greatest of his
sufferings; his very dying was the product both of the freeness of his love,
and the Majesty of his power, John 10.17, 18. Rev. 1.5.

In the third place, both Christ's active and passive Righteousness, what he
did, and what he suffered, partake in common of the form of ^atisfaction;
therefore they are both integral parts, or joint ingredients thereof; for forma
dat esse: but this brings me to the second enquiry.

Col. 2.9. John 1.14. Now for the work of a servant to be done by the Lord of
all, renders his active; and for him to suffer as a Malefactor between
Malefactors, who was God blessed for evermore, renders also his passive
righteousness infinitely meritorious; no wonder the blood of Christ cleanses
from all sin, for it is the blood of God, Acts 20.28. 1 John 1.7. And this is
the Reason why the Righteousness of one, redounds unto all for the
justification of life, Romans 5.18, 19. because his active and passive
Righteousness is infinitely of more value, than all, that all the creatures in
heaven and earth could have done or suffered to eternity; the very man Christ
Jesus, is above all the Angels, Heb. 1.6. for he is the man that is Gods
fellow, Zechary 13.7. And this infinite worthiness of the Redeemers person,
you have excellently described, as irradiating and infinitely exalting all he
did and suffered, Phil. 2.6, 7, 8, 9. Heb. 7.24, 25, 28.

2. The active and passive Righteousness of Christ are of infinite merit,
because not at all due, but both mere supererogations of an infinitely glorious
person.

And first for his active Ri^hteousnesse, i^ stood in his obedience to the
Ceremonial and Moral Laws.

1. His obedience to the Ceremonial Law was a mere supererogation, for the
substance to comply with the shadows, the Antitype to do homage to its ow^
types; besides, he submitted to those very Ordinances, whose end and
institution supposes guilt, and whose Nature argues them designed only for the
use of sinners; what foreskin of impurity had he to be cut off in circumc^sion?
what filth to be washed aw^y in baptism? did the holy child Jesus defile his
mothers womb, as common mortals do that are conceived in sin, and brought forth
in iniquity? And yet he was circumcised and baptized, and his mother offered
for her purification, Luke 1.21, 22. chapter 3.21. No imaginable obligation lay on
him to these submissions, being to him mere ciphers wholly insignificant.

2. His obedience to the Moral Law; Although it must be granted that as man it
was his duty, Gal. 4.4. yet was it not his duty to become man. True, a
creatures homage was due from him, when a creature; a servants work, when in
the form of a servant; but the whole was free and arbitrary, because his
entering into that state was so; for what but his own infinite love could ever
move the eternal Word to pitch his Tent in our Nature? what obligation lay on
the Heir of all things to take the form of a servant? who bound the eternal Son
of God to become in the fullness of time the Son of man?

And as his active righteousness, so secondly, his passive too was a mere
supererogation; for his Almighty Fathers Holy, All-seeing Eye could never espy
the least iniquity in him to punish; what had the Divine Justice to do with
him? for he was a sinlesse person, he suffered not for himself, Dan. 9.26. No,
for us; 2 Cor. 5.21. And therefore since no obligation lay on him to do what he
did, or to suffer what he suffered, he may impute the merit both of the one,
and the other, to whomsoever, and upon what terms soever he and his Father
please.

But before I come to consider the terms upon which Christ's satisfaction is
applied, I must answer some questions, and clear the scruples in the way.

Adam in Paradise? Genesis 2.17. repeated again to the Jews, Deuteronomy: 27.26. The sum
of which you have fully expressed, Ezekiel. 18.4. The soul that sins, it shall
dye.

I answer: It is not executed nor abrogated, but released, or dispensed with.

First, it is not fully executed; for there is no condemnation to them that re
in Christ Jesus, etc. Romans 8.1.

Secondly, It ^s not abrogated; for it is in part executed upon Believers; they
are liable to the first, or natural death, which is the wages of sin, although
the second death has no power over them; besides all manner of chastisements
and afflictions, Psalm. 89.30, 31, 32. And also that Law is totally executed
upon finally impenitent unbelievers, over whom not the first only, but the
second death also has power, 2 Thessalonians. 1.8. For he that believes not is
condemned already, John 3.18. That is, the Gospel finds him, and every one in a
state of condemnation; but those who believe, it proclaims deliverance to;
those who through unbelief reject it, (judging themselves unworthy of
everlasting life, see Acts 13.46.) it leaves such as it found them; viz. under
the condemnation of the Old Covenant, since they refuse the pardoning mercy of
the New.

Thirdly, I answer therefore positively, that the first Covenant is released,
and dispensed with, by super-inducing a New Covenant of Grace over it, that
whosoever closes with, and comes into the terms of the New, should be exempted
from the rigor and extremity; i. e. from the eternal condemnation of the Old,
Joh. 3.16. It is not said, He that believes shall not be sick, shall not be
afflicted, shall not dye; No, but he shall not perish. Thus you see the
Covenant of Works as to its execution upon such as are in the Covenant of
Grace, is in the chief part restrained; but yet in some part inflicted: They
never shall complain under the eternal and destructive; yet they do complain
under the temporal and corrective punishment of their sins, Lam. 3.39.

Yet more particularly for the clearer understanding of this, we must consider
that the first Covenant lays a double obligation on sinful man.

First, In reference to what is past; and here it requires satisfaction and
reparation from us for our sin in breaking it.

And secondly, In reference to the future; after such satisfaction and amends
made, it requires perfect conformity still as at first, absolute obedience to
all Gods commands being the eternal debt of the reasonable creature to that God
that made it in his own Image; if therefore we could (which has already been
proved to be impossible) ever have satisfied Gods injured Law for our past
breach, the Law would still have come upon us for future, exact conformity to
pay the residue of that eternal debt; and its language would be, Sin no more,
lest a worse thing befall thee; as a Felon, though butn't in the hand, is yet
bound to live honestly for the future at his peril. Now the New Covenant of
Grace relieves us as to both these cases, and dispences with the rigor of the
Law.

As to the first, It comforts us with the good news, that the Son of God has
satisfied his Fathers Justice; and if we believe but in him, God will accept of
us, as if we had satisfied in our own persons. The case the Law leaves us in,
is well expressed, Isa. 33.14. and Hebr. 10.31. But the relief the Gospel
brings us in St. Paul's language, Romans 8.33, 34. You have both together
excellently, Ezekiel. 33.10, 11.

As to the second Obligation, the New Covenant dispenses with the rigor of
that too; for woe to a justified and pardoned person, if he must lose all
again, upon the least defailance; therefore the Gospel proclaims pardon of sin
upon repentance, and acceptance of sincere endeavors to obey him. Gods
language now is, Sinners be but in good earnest, do but love me heartily, and
my ways; let me but see a childe-like ingenuity in you, and I will put down
your upright, though imperfect performances, in the book of my remembrance,
Mal. 3.16. and blot out your transgressions when repented of, out of the book
of my remembrance. Mandata Dei tanquam facta reputantur, Aug. Retr. l. 1.
quando quicquid non fit ignoscitur. Thus does the candor of the Gospel
dispense with the rigor of the Law; God deals not with us as an Egyptian
task-master, but as a Father with his children whom he loves: Christ's yoke is
easy, his burden light.

He that believes shall never dye, but have eternal life. John 11.26.


I answer: We must look upon threatenings as a part of the Law, declaring the
duenesse of the punishment, what the offender has deserved to suffer; not as
predictions of the event, any more than Thou shall, and Thou shall not in the
command, are predictions: but only are expressive of the duenesse of obedience.
Nor will it hence follow, that we have the least cause once to suspect that God
may (if he please) revoke his promises, as well as his threatenings; and then
what would become of us? for there is a wide difference in their essential
natures and properties. In a promise, the obligation lies upon the party
promising; he has past away his own liberty, and the thing is now no longer
his, but the others, who may if he please, release and quit-claim to his
pretensions; he may dispense with, and surrender his own right; but if he
claim his right to, and interest in the benefit, by virtue of the promise, it
cannot be detained without notorious wrong and injury, which God forbid we
should charge him with; for he were not God, if he were not infinitely true and
faithful. How should he ^lse judge the world? But now the Obligation unto
punishment lies contrarily upon the sinner threatened; he has past away his own
indemnity, and given God the right of punishing him: I say the right, not the
necessity; if God will claim this right, he may; but if he please, he may
dispense with it. It is no injury if he punishes; yet no Obligation lies upon
him but his own honor: And that indeed obliges him not, never to dispense
with his Law; but never to dispense with it upon a light cause, or upon terms
misbecoming his Glorious Attributes. And the dispensation we now speak of is an
honorable one; for

1. There are weighty inducements moving God hereunto. If he had not dispenc't
with the rigor of it,

First, He had lost the opportunity of the highest possible way of glorifying
his own goodness, which now so infinitely endears him to the world, and lays
such Obligations on us to admire and adore him.

Secondly, As all Israel lamented over Benjamin, Judge. 21.6. that a Tribe was
lost; so the Creation would have mist a Tribe; which is the reason some Divines
have given why Christ took not on him the nature of Angels, but the seed of
Abraham; because only some of the Angelical Tribe lost their birthright; only
some kept not their first estate; but man being in honor continued not, but
became like the Beast that perishes.

Thirdly, All Religion had been extinguish't, and frozen by despair
unavoidably; if there had been no hope, the fear of God, his worship and
service had for ever utterly perish't from off the earth. But now his Name is
excellent in all the earth; even that Name Proclaimed to Moses, Exodus 34.6. The
Lord is known in Judah, and his Name is great in Israel, Psalm. 79.1.

2. As the causes inducing are weighty, so the terms on which he dispenses
with his Law are as honorable; which was our third Query propounded in the
opening the point. For since Christ Redeemed us, not by way of Solution
(strictly) as a Surety, paying the Debtors proper debt to the Creditor; but by
way of Satisfaction, as a Mediator and Intercessor, offering a valuable
consideration to the offended Judge of the world, in lieu of the Laws executing
the penalty threatened upon the sin er: It necessarily follows that no right at
all in the benefits of this satisfaction can accrue to the Delinquent, but upon
such terms precisely as the offended party, and the Mediator that satisfies
him, shall agree unto; and upon mutual treaty and compromise, jointly ratify;
so that justification by way of satisfaction provides no^ only for the sinners
indemnity, but in such a manner, as also to consult the interests and honor
both of the party sa^isfying, and satisfied; and this latter is the rule and
measure of exhibiting the former, and of making over the satisfaction for
discharge of the offender.



I answer: first, faith, which is a hearty receiving Christ as he is tendered by
the Gospel, and here the soul quits all pretensions of being justified by any
righteousness of its own, and rolls it self upon the Lord its righteousness;
and therefore has faith the honor to be the justifying grace, because it so
highly honors Christ; it is the nuptial knot whereby the soul joins it self
to its Lord-Redeemer in an everlasting Marriage-Covenant; it denies its self,
and forsakes all its other Lovers, and clasps about its Lord and Husband, as
its all in all. Look what a wife does in a Marriage-Covenant to her husband,
that does a soul in believing unto Christ, it says unto him, (...) thou art my
husband, Hos. 2.16. And he says unto his Spouse, (...) you are my people.

But then this justifying faith has two daughters that inseparably attend her.

1. Repentance: Here sinful man retracts and undoes his faults, cries peccavi,
weeps, wrings his hands, smites upon his breast, and cries What have I done?
Laments after the Lord, and abhors himself in dust and ashes: He calls himself
fool, mad man, beast, traitor to his God, and to his soul: In a word, executes
the Law upon himself; and since God excuses him from the punishment, he
accuses himself of the guilt, and condemns himself to the shame of his sin;
and hereby the sinner honors the equity of the threatening, by his tears
acknowledging that his blood was due.

2. Newness of life; here the sinner acknowledges perfect obedience to be
still his duty; this honors the equity of Gods Commandments. And the Redeemer
by making this one of the conditions of the Gospel Covenant, has given his
Father his Law back again; he does not repeal it; no, its still the rule of
life, and every Commandment still obliges a Believer. Christ has only
released us from the condemning power of it, not the commanding power of it. We
must still press after perfection; but though we fall short of it, we shall
not dye for it: Christ has redeemed us from the curse of the Law, being made a
curse for us; but has left us under the government and command of the Law. The
whole matter is excellently expressed, 1 John 2.1. My little children, these
things I write unto you that you sin not; and if any man sin, we have an
Advocate with the Father Jesus Christ the righteous.

3. Having thus discoursed to the three general points first propounded, and
showed that the person justified is charged with guilt: And secondly, that he
pleads to the charge, (where I have largely opened the nature of that plea) I
come now to the third general point, to show how upon his plea he is discharged
or justified.

A sinner is then actually justified, when he is constituted or made righteous
in Law. Righteousness is a conformity to the Law; he that fulfills the Law, is
righteous in the eye of that Law; he is (...), within the protection of it; as
he that transgresses the Law, is (...), guilty in the eye of the Law, and
without the protection of it. Now the Law of the New Covenant runs thus, He
that believes shall not perish; so that a Believer keeps and fulfills this
Law; and therefore faith is imputed to him for righteousness, Romans 4.22, 23,
24. because faith is the keeping of the New Covenant, which therefore is called
the Law of faith, Romans 3.27. in opposition to the Old Covenant, called there by
the Apostle, the Law of Works. As therefore innocence, or perfect obedience,
would have justified Adam, had he stood by virtue of the Law of Works, or Old
Covenant, whose tenor is Obey and live, for then he had fulfilled that Law; and
as his Disobedience actually condemned him by virtue of the same Law, --
Disobey, and dye for it, Genesis 2.17. So now believing in Christ justifyeth by
virtue of the Law of faith; for it is the keeping and fulfilling of the
Gospel Covenant, whose tenor is, Believe in the Lord Jesus Christ, and thou
shall be saved: And again, unbelief actually condemns by virtue of the same
Law, -- He that believes not is condemned already, because he has not
believed in the Name of the only begotten Son of God, Joh. 3.18. That is,
because the unbeliever is (...), without the protection of the Gospel, or Law
of faith, he comes not up to its righteousness; he is condemned already, as a
sinner by the Law of Works; and yet once more with a witness condemned as an
unbeliever, as a monster that has twice been accessory to his own murder;
first, in wounding himself, and secondly, in refusing to be healed: The Law of
works includes us all under sin, we are all dead, our case was desperate; but
God who is rich in mercy, through his great love wherewith he has loved us,
Ephesians. 2.4. John 3.16.
(his immense (...)) when we were dead in sins and trespasses, has sent his
only begotten Son, that whosoever believes in him, should not perish, but have
everlasting life. And this is that Law according to which he will judge the
world; according to my Gospel, says Paul, Romans 2.27. Every Believer therefore,
though he wants the righteousness of the Law of Works, (viz. innocence) yet he
shall not be condemned, because he has the righteousness of the Gospel, (viz.
faith) which is the New Law in force, according to which God now deals with
us, and shall judge the world at the last day.

And here it will be richly worth our very heedful Observation, that although a
Believer has not the righteousness of the Law of Works, i^herent in himself;
(for if he had, he were not a sinner, but should be justified by that Law) yet
by faith he lays hold upon Christ's satisfaction, which in the very eye of the
Law of Works is an unexceptionably perfect, an infinitely glorious
righteousness: So that faith justifies us even at the Bar of the Law of
Works, Ratione objecti, as it lays hold on Christ's satisfaction, which is our
Legal righteousness; it justifies us at the Bar of the Gospel, or Law of
faith; formaliter, and ratione sui, as it is Covenant-keeping, or a fulfilling
of the Gospel Law: For he that keeps a Law is righteous, where that Law is
Judge, the Lawmakers by his very making of the Law, makes him righteous, and
the Judge that pronounces according to the Law, (for a Judge is (...)) will
infal^ibly pronounce him so.

But that with all requisite distinctnesse we may apprehend this great affair,
let us take a view of some of the most considerable and important causes which
concur to the producing this excellent effect, the discharge and justification
of a sinner, and state their several interests and concernments in their
respective influences upon, and contributions toward it.

1. How free grace justifies.
And first, The free grace of God is the first wheel that sets all the rest in
motion. Its contribution is that of a proegumenal cause, or internal motive,
disposing God to send his Son, John 3.16. That sinners (believing) might be
justified freely by his grace, through the Redemption that is in Christ Jesus,
Romans 3.24. For Christ dyed not to render God good, (he was so eternally) but
that with the honor of his justice he might exert and display his goodness,
which contrived and made it self this way to break forth into the world.

2. How Christ's satisfaction.
Secondly, Christ's satisfaction is doubly concerned in our Justification.

1. In respect of God, as a procatartick cause of infinite merit, and
impetrative power; for the sake of which God is reconciling himself unto the
world in Christ, not imputing their trespasses unto them, 2 Cor. 5.19.

2. In respect of the Law of Works, Christ's satisfaction justifies us
formally, as our proper Legal righteousness; I call it our righteousness,
because it becomes imputed to us upon our believing; faith being our Gospel
title, by pleading which, we lay claim to all the benefits accruing from the
merit of Christ's performance, to a^l effects, uses and purposes, as if it had
been personally our own; I call it our Legal righteousness, because thereby
the Law of God owns it self fully apaid, and acquiesceth in it, as in full
reparations and amends made unto it for the injury and dishonor received by
the sin of man. We must plead this against all the challenges and accusations
of the Law: Who shall lay any thing to the charge of Gods Elect? it is Christ
that dyed, etc. Romans 8.33. And thus our Legal righteousness required in the
first Covenant, that of Works, is wholly without us in our Redeemer, yet
imputed upon our account.

Thirdly, The Gospel justifies qua Lex lata, 3. How the Gospel.
as it is the Law of faith; for the very tenor of the Gospel Covenant is,
Believe, and thou shall be saved.

Fourthly, Faith justifies vi Legis latae, 4. How faith.
as it is our Evangelical righteousness, or our keeping the Gospel-Law; for
that Law suspends justification upon believing. Faith pretends to no merit or
virtue of its own, but professedly avows its dependence upon the merit of
Christ's satisfaction, as our Legal righteousness, on which it lays hold, nor
can it show any other title to be it self our Evangelical righteousness, but
only Gods sanction, who chose this act of believing to the honor of being the
justifying act, because it so highly honors Christ; So that as a most
judicious pen expresses it, the act of believing is as the silver; but Gods
Authority in the Gospel-sanction, is the Kings Coin, or Image stamp't upon it,
which gives it all its value as to justification. Without this stamp it could
never have been current; and if God had set this stamp on any other grace as
love, that then would have been current, and have justified us as faith does
now.

Fifthly, God justifies in a proper sense two ways: first, 5. How God.
As a Legislator; secondly, as a Judge.

1. As a Legislator, enacting by his Sovereign Authority that sweet and
gracious Law of the New Covenant, by virtue of whose tenor, every sinner that
believes is justified from the guilt of sin; from which he could not be
justified by the Law of Moses, Acts 13.38, 9. This Law of justification by
faith, is Gods own act and deed, the great Instrumentum pacis, between God and
man; he has proclaimed his Letters Patents; the King of heaven and earth has
in the Gospel (our Magna Charta) given his Warrant under his own broad Seal,
that he that believes, shall not be condemned.

2. As a Judge, the God of heaven may in three respects be said to justify a
Believer.

First, Forthwith upon his believing, God owneth him secretly within himself,
as a person justified; God esteems and approves of him as in that state, unto
which he has by believing a title good in Law, an indefeasible right; a
justified estate emergeth actually, as soon as faith, the Law-title thereunto
emergeth as a necessary resultance by virtue of the tenor of the Gospel-Law,
which only justified vertually, potentially, and conditionally before every
Believer in general; but now actually, absolutely, and in particular it
justifies him as a Believer, when he is so.

Secondly, At the moment of dissolution God justifies as the Judge of all the
earth, passing a private sentence and award unto everlasting life upon every
believing soul.

Thirdly, But eminently at the last day, when the Ancient of days shall take
the Throne, and in open Court, before the whole Creation, by public sentence
for ever acquit and discharge Believers at that great and last Assizes.

6. How Works.
Sixthly, Shall I need to add that Works are said to justify us? Jam. 2.4.
because they justify our faith, or demonstrate before God and man, and to our
own consciences that our faith is not a dead and barren, but a true and living
one by its fruitfulness in well-doing.

7. How the Spirit.
Seventhly, But I must not forget, lastly, that the Spirit of God is said to
justify us: 1 Cor. 6.11. and that two ways; first, directly, by working faith
in the heart, which is one of the fruits of the Spirit, Gal. 5.22. Now Causa
causae est etiam causa causati; the Spirit justifies as it is the Author of
the justifying grace. Secondly, reflexively: The Divine Spirit clears up
justification to a Believers conscience, by discovering the truth of faith, by
working assurance, and by sealing a Believer to the day of Redemption. The
Spirit it self bears witness with our spirits that we are the children of
God; and if children, then heirs, etc. Romans 8.16, 17.

Thus I have at length done with my first Task, the opening of the Point, which
finds it self summed up in this definition. Justification is a judicial act of
God, as Lawgiver and Judge of the world, gracioussly discharging a Believer
for the sake of Christ's satisfaction, from the condemnation of the Law of
Works, by the tenor of the Gospel-Law, or New Covenant which requires of,
accept h from, imputes unto sinners faith in Christ Jesus as their
righteousness; see Romans 3.25, 6, 7, 8. Romans 4.5. Phil. 3.9.

To improve it now, (which was my other task) by way of refutation, I infer
against the Antimonians, first, Use. Refut.
That justification is not from eternity.

1. Because a person must be charged with guilt before he is justified or
discharged; but nothing can be before eternity; if discharged from eternity,
when was he charged? what from eternity too? then he will be at once eternally
charged with, and discharged from guilt, which if any excuse from a
contradiction, they are much wiser than I am.

2. My Text convinces them, actual faith is not from eternity, therefore not
justification before God; for if faith justify us not before God, but only at
the bar of conscience; then there will be no justification at Gods bar at all
once mentioned in Scripture; for works do it at man's bar; what is it I wonder
that justifies from eternity? Not Gods decree to justify; for then his decree
to glorify, would make glorification from eternity too; -- but Decreta Dei
nihil ponunt actu in subjecto. Gods decrees are immanent acts, and pass
nothing actually upon the creature.

3. A justified person was actually under condemnation whilst he was an
unbeliever, Romans 3.18. He that believes not, is condemned already; but he
could not be at all condemned, if justified from eternity.

4. Saint Paul expressly affirms that the believing Corinthians were not once,
but now were justified, 1 Cor. 6.11. Such were some of you, but ye are washed,
but ye are sanctified, but ye are justified in the name of the Lord Jesus, etc.

Secondly, I infer against them, that they are dangerously mistaken, in
thinking that a Believer is righteous in the sight of God, with the self-same
active and passive righteousness wherewith Christ was righteous, as though
Believers suffered in Christ, and obeyed in Christ, and were as righteous in
Gods esteem as Christ himself, having his personal righteousness made
personally theirs by imputa^ion. This is their fundamental mistake, and from
hence (tanquam ex equo Trojano) issue out a throng of such false and corrupt
deductions and consequences as these.

That God sees no sin in his children; that affliction and death are not proper
punishments of sin to Believers; that all future sins are already actually
forgiven, as well as past and present; that a Believer must not pray for the
pardon of sin, but only for the manifestation of it; that God loved Noah when
drunk; Lot when so, and besides incestuous; David, when acting Adultery and
Murder; Peter, when he was cursing and swearing, and denying Christ, with as
high a love of complacency and delight, as when co^versant in the most
spiritual exercises of grace; that all which God requires as a sinners duty in
the Gospel, is to believe that Christ dyed absolutely for him in particular;
that this is alone true Gospel faith; and the doubting or questioning this, the
unbelief which the Gospel so much condemns; that to argue our justification
from our sanctification, and gather assurance of Gods love from our love and
fear of him, is a Legal principle; that obedience to Gods Commandments is not
properly a Believers debt, but that all the obligation which lies upon him to
holiness, is only the voluntary expression of his love and gratitude to God,
not as what is due, but what is comely: And lastly, (for I should be tired to
name all) that Christ has kept the Gospel Covenant for us, as well as
satisfied the Law; So that not only our Legal righteousness is without us in
Christ our Surety, but our Evangelical righteousness it self also.

Now to pluck up all these desperate consequences by the root, there needs no
more than a right understanding of the true and proper notion, and manner of
Christ's redeeming us; it is not by way of Solution, but of Satisfaction.
Clearly thus, our case to God is not properly that of debtors, but that of
criminal Subjects. Gods aspect to usward, not properly that of a Creditor, but
that of a Rector and Judge: The person Christ sustained, and the part he acted,
not in a strict sense that of a Surety, paying the very debt in kind, and so
discharging a bond; but that of a Mediator expiating our guilt, and making
reparations to Divine Justice another way than by the execution of the Law. And
indeed the very nature of a Law is such, as it is quite impossible that the
obligation either of its threatening or command, should in a proper sense be
fulfilled, by any other than the very person threatened and commanded; alius
here makes aliud. If another suffer the penalty, the threatening is not
fulfilled: Nor if another performs the duty, the command; for the obligation as
to punishment lies on the person threatened, (noxa caput sequitur) and that to
duty on the person commanded, it cannot be fulfilled in kind by another, but it
ceases to be the same thing, and becomes another thing from that in the
Obligation; yet it may be such another thing (and Christ's Righteousness (both
active and passive) really is such) as the Rector or Judge may accept of with
honor, and be satisfied with, as if the very same thing had been suffered and
done just in the same manner, as the Law threatened and commanded it.

That Christ has paid not the idem, but tantundem, i. e. not fulfilled the Law
(as for us) in kind, but satisfied it for us, is most evident. For,

1. The Law obliged the sinners person to suffer; Christ was no sinner.

2. All men to suffer, forasmuch as all had sinned; Christ was but one man.

3. The punishment due by Law was eternal; Christ suffered but for a season,
and is entered into his glory; thus Christ paid not the same thing that was in
the Obligation, but something equivalent thereunto.

This being obtained, that the Lord Christ has Redeemed us, not by way of
solution, or discharging a Bond, by payment in kind, but by way of
satisfaction, or making amends to the injured justice of the Law: It follows
from the reason and nature of the thing:

1. That God pardons freely; we are not only beholding to Christ for
satisfying, but to God too infinitely for accepting of any satisfaction at all;
he might have refused it; he had done sinners no wrong if he had executed the
rigor of the Law, without hearkening to terms of Reconciliation. Quite
contrary, a Creditor does not pardon the debtor, when the surety has
discharged the Bond by full payment in kind; the Debtor is beholding indeed to
his friend the Surety, but not at all to the Creditor, who cannot refuse to
cancel the Bond; nay, it were wrong and injustice in him if he did.

2. That none has or can have actual interest in, or benefit by this
Redemption, but upon such terms as God and Christ have mutually compromised
in, and agreed to, viz. the conditions of the Gospel Covenant above mentioned.
See the answer to the third quere.

1. The Reason hereof is partly from God, the injured Lawgiver of the world;
who seeing it was at his liberty to accept of satisfaction or no, has of
necessity the right to make his own terms, when, and how far forth, and in
what manner and method he will condescend to admit the sinner to the actual
benefit of Christ's satisfaction.

2. And partly too from Christ; for as he is the (...), or Mediator between God
and man, a friend to both parties; nay, a person consisting of both natures;
the offended, and offending; he is engaged necessarily by virtue both of Office
and person, to espouse with equal tenderness of regard he interests of both
parties; for he is really concerned in them both; they are his concernments as
well as theirs. True indeed, a Surety that discharges a Bond by full payment
in kind, he sustaines and bears only the person of the Debtor, minds only his
indemnity; does what he does upon his account, and for his sake. But our great
Mediator must consult not only our impunity, but his Fathers, yea, and his own
honor; and therefore (...), get you hence all you that either yet never did,
or that do not now repent, believe, and conscientiously endeavor to obey;
here is not the least jot of benefit for you in the case you are in, from this
Redemption: for how infinite soever the merit of Christ's satisfaction is, it
conferreth nothing actually upon any person that has not actually a
Gospel-claime and title to plead it before God. The immediate effect actually
resulting from Christ's performance, is the procuring the Gospel Covenant to be
ratified by his Father, as a Law, whereby sinners upon the terms propounded,
become reconcilable unto God; actually it is of force to all that have, but to
none that want the conditions of it. Now the keeping this Gospel Covenant, God
expects from us in person (though by the assistance of his Spirit, which he
has promised to give to them that humbly and earnestly ask it of him, Luke
11.1.) To affirm that Christ has kept the Gospel for us too, is to utter the
most self-contradicting blasphemy and absurdity imaginable; as if he could
repent, or believe in himself, free, except, or cancel our Obligation to obey
the Moral Law, by his own obeying it; as if Christ had so done all, that
nothing remains to be done on our part. Such strange extremes do some men run
into, that to avoid Justification by works (by an (...)) are as extravagant on
the other hand, thinking the grace of God cannot be free, except the sinner
become either a senseless statue, merely passive, or (which is yet worse) have
a Writ of ease to be quite idle, or (which is worst of all) a License to sin by
Prerogative. Let the Apostles (...) chastise this insolence. Romans 6.15. Shall
we sin because we are not under the Law, but under grace? God forbid. If Christ
had obeyed the Law for us in the sense of paying a debt, or discharging a Bond,
the Apostles answer could not stand, Romans 3.31. Do we then make void the Law
through faith? yea, we establish the Law. When a believer breaks the Law, he
sins (for sin is the transgression of the Law) nay, he cannot break it
wilfully, but he breaks the very Gospel Covenant (one condition whereof is
sincere obedience) and the guilt of that sin lies upon him unpardoned, until
by hearty repentance, and fresh applications by faith to the blood of
sprinkling (which are the only Titles good in Law, the only Gospel-claimes to
pardon) he has sued out a new pardon (for actual Remission is only of past
sins, Romans 3.25.) according to the tenor of the New Covenant, which is a
perpetual Law of pardoning, repenting and believing sinners, whomsoever,
whenever, but as such.

Neither was Christ's suffering like the Cancelling of a Bond, a total discharge
of us, from suffering the penalty threatened in the Law; we dye still, and
afflictions are punishments still. True, indeed upon Christ's satisfaction made,
God and he are agreed, that a believing sinner should not be punished with the
everlasting destructive penalty threatened (for whosoever believes shall not
perish) but they are not, that he shall not be, John 3.16.
for he is, punished with the temporal corrective punishments of the
threatening, as sickness, and natural death; yet even these (through infinite
goodness so ordering and disposing it) prove much more a benefit, than a
penalty to a believer.

Use 2. What cause have we then with the lowest and profoundest Humility, to
adore the Majesty of the living God?

First, To adore his holiness. Reverence those eyes of his, that are purer
than that they can endure to behold iniquity, Hab. 1.13. Let this God be thy
dread and awe. Dare not to make a mock of sin; tremble at the horrid guilt and
sinfulness of the least sin; look upon it as an affront and treason against an
Eternal Majesty, as worthy the Curse of the Law, and the wrath of an Almighty
God, as that which could not be expiated at a lesser rate than the blood of
God, Acts 20.28.

Secondly, to adore his wisdom in finding out such a person to satisfy his
justice as our Redeemer; Consider here, that God could not suffer, could not
dye; Nay, could not (properly) satisfy himself; (for it had not been a
satisfaction to his justice at all, but mere mercy; and so no justification of
a sinner, but mere pardon, if the person satisfying had been only God.) Again,
Consider that a mere creature could never satisfy, as I before demonstrated, a
mere creature had perish't in the attempt, would have been overwhelmed, and
crush't to pieces with that insupportable load, the guilt of sin, and the wrath
of God. The person therefore that must satisfy, must neither be finite, nor
infinite; neither the creature, nor the Creator; neither God, nor man; yet must
be both. Here now, the understandings of men and Angels must have been tired to
all eternity, Romans 11.33. see also Ephesians. 1.7, 8. fully hereunto.
and lost for ever in a bottomless gulf of horror and amazement to find out
such a person. O the depth of the riches of the wisdom and knowledge of God!

Thirdly, To adore the infinite riches of his grace, Romans 3.24. in
justification; and here consider,

1. God might have let man alone, seized the forfeiture; as the Tree fell, it
might have lain for ever; what obliged God to accept of satisfaction?

2. The Redeemer has trodden the wine press alone; what ever was done in this
satisfaction, he did it; Of the people there was none with him. The sinner has
not the least hand in it, could not pay one, Christ paid every, to the utmost
farthing.

Thirdly, It was the Judge himself who contrived this way to justify us, and
it was at his cost, he gave his Son; herein God commended his love to us, as
Abraham once did his faith to God, in that he spared not his son, his only
begotten son whom he loved. So that if we rightly weigh it, it will appear,
that by how much the satisfaction is the fuller, by so much the pardon is the
freer; by how much his justice is the more, by so much too is his mercy the
more glorified, and still, still infinitely the more are we obliged.

Use 3. Consol. Here Is unspeakable comfort for every humble, though doubting
soul, every contrite spirit that hungers and thirsts after righteousness.



Secondly, Consider he inviteth thee as a sinner to come in unto this
Gospel-righteousnesse, in the general tenor of his Proclamation, Whosoever
believes, etc. If any man sin, 1 John 2.1, 2.
we have an Advocate with the Father, etc. An Whosoever, excludes none that
excludes not himself.

Thirdly, Consider, Christ assures thee, (that art the person I now speak to)
he who is the Truth assures thee thou shall be welcome: Matthew. 11.28. Come unto
me all ye that labor, and are heavy-laden, and I will give you rest, etc. This
is your very case: Hark, the Master call^th you, will you not be of good
courage, and Go, when he says Come! he that never yet cast out any that came
unto him, that never will, he says so himself; Thou may believe him, he
never broke his word yet, he will not begin with thee, he cannot deny himself.

Fourthly, Consider those standing Monuments of Gods free justifying grace that
are on record in the Scripture. What has been done, may be done again: Nay,
will be done again (in the case we speak of) by the God that changes not; God
has pardoned as great sinners; see Ephraims case, Jer. 31.18. see the
Corinthians example, 1 Cor. 6.10, 11. see Paul's, 1 Timothy 1.13. Whoever goes and
does likewise, shall receive likewise; for Christ is yesterday and to day, and
the same for ever.

Fifthly, Consider it is the very design of God in giving his Son, and of
Christ in giving himself to dye for us, to justify such as thou art, Isa.
16.1. Luke 4.19, 20. Jer. 3.12. 1 John 5.9.

Use 4. Exhort. First, To the Unconverted.

Use 4. Exhort. Let me then beseech sinners not to love death; Why should
iniquity be your ruin? There is balm in Gilead, there is a Physician there;
Why are ye unwilling to be healed? Turn ye, Turn ye, why will ye dye? Would it
be a hard matter to persuade a condemned person to be willing not to be
executed, were he not distracted? if having a pardon offered upon the easy
terms of confessing his fault, and serious promising amendment, he should bid
the Prince keep his Pardon to himself; for his part, he was in love with his
chains, he would not be released, he would dye. Thou art the man whoever thou
art that neglectest Gospel Grace; what fury and raging madness is it that thou
art guilty of? Thy soul with all its eternal interests lies at stake, and as if
it were neither here nor there, what became of thee for ever, thou despisest
the riches of Gods forbearance, after thy hardness and impenitent heart, Romans
2.4, 5.
treasuring up wrath against the day of wrath. Is it well done of thee sinner?
is this thy kindness to thy own soul? is this thy thanks to thy Redeemer? How
inexcusable art thou? thy self being Judge, thou can not answer it to thy
conscience, to thy God, with the least color or shadow of a reason. God sends
his Gospel proclaiming, Acts 3.19.
-- Repent ye, and be converted, that your sins may be blotted out: His
Ministers proclaiming, -- We then are Ambassadors of Christ, 2 Cor. 5.
as though God did beseech you by us; we pray you in Christ's stead be ye
reconciled unto God. Why do thou hate thy soul, and say I will not? why will thou not? Is it because it does not concern thee? or because eternal life and
death are trifles, small, little things, not worth thy considering? or does any
body hinder thee? No, no; our Savior gives the true account, Ye will not come
unto me that ye might have life. Let me entreat this small request of thee for
Gods sake, for thine own, take the next opportunity, and spend half an hour
alone; let thy spirit accomplish a diligent search, pursue this inquiry to some
issue; am I justified or no? if not, what will become of me, if it should
happen (sometimes such things fall out) that I should dye now presently? I
cannot promise my self that I shall see to morrow morning. Thus go on, and
bring it to something before thou leavest; give not over till thou art not only
clearly convinced of; but heartily affected with thy guilt; not only to see,
but feel thy self to be the man who art undone without an interest in this
justification. Be in good earnest; thou can not mock thy God; and is there
any wisdom in mocking and cheating thy own soul? What thou do, do it
heartily as unto the Lord, as for thy life, as one that would not rue thy
self-deceiving folly, when it cannot be recalled; and if thou art hearty and
serious in these reflections;

1. Thou will deeply humble thy self before the Majesty of the Judge of all the
earth, with that self-abhorrence and confusion, that becomes one who feels
himself (even himself being Judge) most righteously condemned.

2. Thou will solicit and assail the Throne of Grace with all redoubled
favors, and holy passionate importunities of prayer and supplication, giving
God no rest till he has given thee his Spirit, according to his own promise,
Luke 11.13. Ezekiel. 36.26, 27. To help thee to perform the conditions of the
Gospel Covenant, plead his own promise with him. Wrestle with him for a broken
and clean heart; for faith, for repentance unto life; for these are not of thy
self, they are the gift of God, let him not go till he has blessed thee with
these blessings in Christ Jesus. This will confound every sinner at the day of
Judgment, that when he might have had grace; yea, the Spirit of grace for
asking; he either asked not, or if he did, it was so coldly, as if he were
contented enough to go without. Now if thou art in good earnest, God is I
assure thee in full as good earnest as thou; he is ready to meet thee; Try but
once whether it be in vain to seek him; all that ever tried, found it good to
draw near to God, and found him easy to be entreated; he uses not to send the
hungry empty away. He that commands us to work out our salvation with fear and
trembling, he it is that works in us both to will and to do of his own good
pleasure, Phil. 2.12, 13.

Secondly, To them that are the children of God by faith in Christ Jesus. Let
me beseech them,

1. To walk worthy of God who has called them to his Kingdom and Glory, to
adorn their holy profession; take the Exhortation in Paul's words, Col. 2.6. As
ye have received Christ Jesus the Lord, so walk ye in him. Receive not this
grace of God in vain; the interest of your comfort obliges you hereunto;
hereby you will know that you know him, that you are in Christ Jesus, Romans 8.1.
that there is no cond mnation to you, if you walk not after the flesh, but
after the Spirit; and herein will your Father be glorified, John 15.6.
if ye bring forth much fruit.

2. To live up to the comfort of their state; 1 John 3.1. Ye are already the
sons of God, it does not yet appear what you shall be. Who shall lay any thing
to your charge? it is God that justifies, who is he that condemns? it is
Christ that dyed, etc. Romans 8.33. Go eat thy bread with joy, and put on thy
white raiment, God now has accepted thy works, Eccles. 9.7, 8.

I conclude this particular (and the whole discourse) with, the happy effects
and fruits of Justification, which every Believer has as good a right and
title to, as the Gospel it self, the Word of the God of truth can give him, as
I find those sweet effects and consequences set down in my Text, and the words
next following it. -- 1. Being justified by faith we have peace with God
through our Lord Jesus Christ. 2. By whom also we have access by faith into
this grace wherein we stand, and rejoice in the hope of the glory of God, 3.
And not only so, but we glory in tribulation, knowing that tribulation works
patience, 4. And patience experience, and experience hope, 5. And hope makes
not ashamed, because the love of God is shed abroad in our hearts by the holy
Ghost which is given unto us.

Wherefore, the righteous shall be glad in the Lord, and all the upright in
heart shall glory, Psalm. 64.10.

THE BELIEVERS DIGNITY and DVTY, LAID OPEN, In the High-Birth wherewith he is
PRIVILEGED, And the honorable Employment to which He is called.
John 1.12, 13. But as many as received him, to them he gave power to become
the Sons of God, even to them that believe on his Name:

Which were born, not of blood, nor of the will of the flesh, nor of the will
of man, but of God.


IN this Chapter, Christ the principal Subject of the Gospel, is admirably and
Seraphically described.

1. By his Divintiy, as coeternal and co-essential with the Father, verse 1.
and 2.

2. By his discovery or manifestation. 1. In the work of Creation, ver. 3. and
10. 2. In the work of common providence, ver. 4.5, 9. 3. In the work of
gracious providence, he being in the world, and coming to his Church, as our
Immanuel, God incarnate, ver. 11. and 14.

3. By his entertainment; which was 1. Passive; his entertainment was poor; the
world knew him not, ver. 10. He was as a Prince disguised in a strange Country;
the Church slighted and rejected him, as Rebels do their natural Prince, ver
11. And such entertainment Christ meets with at this day, in his Truths,
Ordinances, Graces, Ministers, and his poor members, etc.

Object. Was not Christ entertained by them? what else means their harboring
him at Capernaum, their flocking after him, admiring of him, seeking to make
him a King? etc.

Answ. True, they entertained him for a while civilly and formally upon
self-interest, but not spiritually by saving Faith, Love and Obedience, John
6.26. Matthew 11.21, 23.

Quest. 1. Did Christ find no entertainment at all?

Answ. This rejecting of Christ was not universal; some did receive him
cordially, verse 12. and were more graciously entertained by him, ib. and this
was his active entertainment, he dignifying all who received him with the
privilege of Adoption, ver. 12.

Quest. 2. How came it to pass that some received Christ, when the generality
rejected him?

Answ. Not from their own free will, or good nature, but from the especial
grace of God regenerating them, whereby they were made able and willing to
close with Christ, whom others (as likely, or more likely than they) being
devoyd of grace rejected.

And thus I have brought you to the Text, as it stands in its relative
consideration.

In the words absolutely considered, you have a singular commendation or
Encomium of Faith. 1. From its nature, a receiving of Christ. 2. From its root,
Regeneration, or being b^rne of God. 3. From its consequent or s^uit. Adoption,
he gave them power to be the Sons of God.

Passing sundry useful points, I shall pitch only upon that which comprehends
the marrow and substance of both Verses.

Doctr. Every true Believer is a child of God by Regeneration and Adoption.
They were born of God, and so were Sons by Regeneration; they had a great
privilege given them, and so were made Sons by Adoption.

In handling this excellent Doctrine, my work shall be Explication,
Confirmation, Application.

The Explication shall be first general; secondly, particular. That respects
the doctrine of Filiation or Sonship in general; this the doctrine of
Regeneration and Adoption in particular, they being distinct kinds of Filiation.

For the first in general, General Explication. A fourfold Sonship.
a Person may be a Son four ways.

1. By Creation; and thus, 1. The Angels, Job 38.7. 2. Adam, Luke 3.38. 3.
Christ according to his Humane Nature was the Son of God, Luke 1.35. Not that
Christ's Humane Nature was a Son or a Person, lest we make two Sons or two
Persons in one Christ. And thus believers are Gods Children, by virtue of their
new and spiritual Creation.

2. By Generation; and this is, 1. Eternal or temporary; eternal, as in Christ,
John 1. ver. 1, 14, 18. compare Isa. 53.8. Temporary, as in other men. 2.
Natural or spiritual; natural, as in the Son of God, and the sons of men,
though with infinite disproportion; spiritual, as in Regeneration, James 1.18.

3. By contract of Marriage; Or as some think, the legal Son of Jacob, the
natural Son of Heli.
and thus Joseph was the Legal son of Heli, Luke 3.23. but the natural son of
Jacob, Mat. 1.16. And thus we are Children of God by marriage with Christ his
Natural Son; as Leah and Rachel, were both daughters of Isaac by marriage
with Jacob, See 2 Cor. 11.2.

4. By Adoption; which is, 1. External and federal, Exodus 4.22. Romans 9.4. by
virtue of external profession and Church-member-ship, Genesis 6.1. compare Job
1.6. By Sons of God in this last place, may be understood either Professors, or
the Angels. This Sonship may be lost, as is evident by the Jews who are now cut
off, Romans 9.7, 8. and 11. ver. 15, 19, 20, 23, 31. yet so high is this
privilege, that in comparison of such Adopted Children, Persons without the
Pale are called Dogs, Matthew 15.26. 2. Adoption is internal and real, which
leads me to the particular Explication. Only, before I proceed, let me subjoyne
a word of general Application, in two Heads.

General Application.
1. What comfort does this speak to every Believer, who bears so many indearing
relations to God in point of filiation and otherwise! Relations, we say, are
minimae entitatis, but maximae efficaciae: and if one endearing relation draw
so much love, what wi l all do? especially considering God and Christ will be
sure to fill every relation with love and grace; the Church (and by proportion
every true believer) is Christ's child and mother, his brother and sister, his
Spouse, body and member, Cant. 5.1. Matthew. 12.50. and 1 Cor. 12.27. Yea, his
Child not one way, but every way, by Creation, Regeneration, Marriage,
Adoption external and internal; how much love may such expect from Christ in
every kind? No wonder Gods people are such gainers by their losses and
sufferings for Christ, who is an hundred fold better to them in this life, than
all the relative comforts they part with for his sake, Matthew 19.29.

2. How does this by proportion, oblige us in point of reciprocal duty, who
stand in all relations of subjection to God and Christ, as owing to him all the
duty of a Creature, Servant, Chi^de, Subject, Friend, Wife, etc. and
particularly, the duty of four filial relations, as chi^dren by Creation,
Marriage, Regenerat^on and Adoption, both external and internal!

Particular Explication.
I shall now proceed to the particular Explication: and open,

1. The doctrine of Adoption, according to the order of the Text.

2. The doctrine of Regeneration; and remember we are now speaking of internal
and real Adoption.

Quest. 1. What is this Adoption?

Answ. It Is considerable; 1. For its name or notion. 2. For the thing it self.

For the first, Its name.
The word (Adoption) is used but five times in the New Testament, Romans 8.15,
23. and 9, 4. Gal. 4.5. and Ephesians. 1.5. In the Original, its (...), as (...),
and signifies the putting or placing one for a Son. It Is applied to other
things besides man; thus we are said to Adopt a name, when we take a new name;
to Adopt a Plant when we give it a name, as Lysimachus did to the herb
Lysimachia, and Artemisia to the herb Artemisia; and thus one branch is said to
adopt another by inoculation, according to the Poet, Venerit insitio, fac ramum
ramus adoptet; which Metaphor, as it is very elegant, so it serves to
illustrate the Nature of Adoption, Compare Romans 11.24.

For the thing; Its nature.
Adoption is the acceptance of a stranger into the Relation and Privileges of
a Son. It was much in use among the Romans; and was ratified by the Law of the
chief Magistrate, and the approbation of their Pontifices or chief Priests;
wherein great respect was had to the ho inesse and dignity of persons (whence a
Patrician might not adopt a Plebeian, etc.) lest the dignity of the Adopter
should be stained by the meanness of the Adopted: There was also great care
used to prevent all fraud on the part of the Adopter or the Adopted. Thus our
Adoption is ratified by the Law and gracious sentence of God the Father, and by
the Approbation of God the Son our High Priest; without any fraud on Gods part,
or any reflection on the dignity of God, and the holi^esse of Christ; though in
this gracious act those two most glorious persons stoop infinitely below
themselves. Thus Moses was the adopted son of Pharaohs daughter, Exodus 2.10.
and Esther was the adopted child of her cousin Mordecai, E^ her 2.7. both
which illustrate Gods singular grace to us, who are before Adoption Captives,
slaves, and lost creatures. By effectual vocation we are translated into a
twofold state.

1. Absolute, namely a state of sanctification and glorification.

2. Relative, namely a state of Justification and Adoption; in which last upon
our believing, we are by Gods gracious Sentence, accepted into the number, and
have a right to all the Privileges of the Sons of God. Adoption then is our
Relative state, which puts no real worth in the Adopted, though it presuppose
an absolute state of holiness, and a double act. 1. Of free grace, on the
Adopters part. 2. Of faith, on the part of the adopted.

From all has been said about the Nature of Adoption, note these following
Corollaries.

Corollary.
1. Hence it follows, that Adoption presupposes effectual vocation,
Regeneration, Faith, Justification, and Reconciliation, which are (as it were)
its secondary foundations; compare Romans 8.30. and 5. ver. 1. and 2.

2. Hence it follows, that Believers expect heaven by a double Title. Besides a
Title of Marriage-Joynture.
1. Of Redemption. 2. Of Adoption. See both together, Romans 8.23.

3. This shows how Christ is applied in Justification, namely as a fountain
and garment: how in Adoption, namely as an elder Brother, and Prince of
Salvation, Hebrews 2. ver. 10, 11, 12.

4. Hence its evident, our Sonship far excels Adams filiation. He indeed was
Gods Son by similitude and dependence, but not by special union and communion
with Christ the Natural Son of God, as we now are, Gal. 4. ver. 4, 5.

5. Hence we have the true reason, why Gods Name is called upon us ( Jerem.
14.9. and 1 John 3.1. compare Genesis 48.5, 6, 16.) as well as called upon by us,
1 Pet. 1.17.

6. This shows why we are in an especial manner of Gods Household, Ephesians. 2.19.
not as Bastards, Sojourners, Borders, Hirelings, Slaves, Exodus 12.45. Judge.
11.1, 2. Heb. 12.8. but as his honorable Servants, his Spouse, and his Adopted
Children. Compare 2 Samuel 9.7, 11, 13, and Esther 2.7.

Quest. 2. Wherein does Divine Adoption differ from, and excel Humane
adoption? This Head is a powerful motive.

Answ. 1. In its properties. 2. In its Privileges: both which concur in the
substance, but are distinguished here for Doctrines sake. The Properties of
Adoption are four. The properties of Adoption.


1. It Is a precious Relation, cost as much as our Redemption, an infinite
price; compare 1 Pet. 1.18, 19. and Gal. 4.4, 5. allude to Acts 22.28. with a
great sum Christ obtained us this Freedom.

2. It Is an high and honorable Relation. Every Believer is an High-borne
Person; and as his Birth, so his Adoption is high, even as high as heaven, John
1.12, 13. It Is honorable to be the Son of a King, much more to be the Son of
God; to be Gods Servant, 2 Samuel 7.5, 8. (Witness Theodosius the Emperor) much
more to be Gods Son, 1 John 3.1. The honor of Sonship ever rises or falls with
the honor of Fatherhood.

This second property flows from the first. That which is precious must needs
be Honorable, Isa. 43.4. Whence the same word signifies both preciousnesse and
honor, (...)
compare Psalm. 45.9.

3. It Is a free Relation. It Is free, 1. In an active sense, making its subject
free, Gal. 4.7. A slave adopted, is by that act made a Free man. 2. In a
passive sense; and first as to the Adopter, who is not moved by any thing in
the Creature, to bestow this high favor, Ephesians. 1. ver. 4, 5. God adopts not
out of necessity, but liberty; who can compel or necessitate him? not out of
indigency (he had a Natural Son, and many created Sons, who were very like him,
and liking to him) but out of redundancy of goodness. 2. In a passive sense
its free also as to the adopted, without, yea, against their deservings. We may
all with shame take up the words of Mephib^sheth, 2 Samuel 9.8. and 19.28. This
property flows from the two former; that must needs be freely given, which is
so precious and honorable. None is worthy to be the Son of God, but only the
Natural Son of God. He that cannot deserve a bit of bread, much less can
deserve this Divine Relation; we deserve an hellish, not an heavenly Sonship,
each of us being by Nature children of Belial.

4. It Is a permanent Relation. Once a child and for ever so. John 8.35. A
Servanr, a created Son, a Natural Son may sometimes be turned out of doors,
witness the Angels, and Genesis 21.10, 12. But an adopted Son is never cast off,
Psalm 89.26, 30, 33, 34. and that upon the following accounts.

1. From the freeness of Adoption; God chose them not for their
well-deservings, nor will he reject them for their ^ll-deservings; if
unworthiness foreseen, did not hinder the purpose of Adoption, then
unworthiness present shall not hinder the completing of Adoption; and thus
the fourth Property flows from the third.

2. Divine immutability is engaged in the Covenant of grace, of which Adoption
is one great Branch. Compare Romans 9.4. and 11.29. and Heb. 6.17, 18.

3. If any thing unchild them, it must be their Apostasy: But,

1. They can fall no further than their Father permits.

2. Fall they never so foully, he can mend and recover them as he pleases.

3. He will never permit them to fall finally and totally, Jer. 32.40. And what
Parent would cast off a son, had he this power over him? We never cast off a
child unless incorrigible; Deuteronomy. 21.18, 19 20.
but to our heavenly Father, no child is incorrigible.

The Privilege of Adoption. Likeness to God.
2. Divine Adoption differs from, and excels humane, in its Privileges, as well
as in its Properties.

The General Privilege is, Likeness to God. All Gods adopted Children bear
their Fathers Image, as Gideons Brethren d d his, And 1. In holiness.
Judge. 8.18. They are like God, 1. In holiness. 2. In dignity. In holiness;
as Christ bears their Natural, so they bear his Spiritual Image. Compare Heb.
2.7. and Romans 8.29. Their principles and actions prove them the children of
their heavenly Father, Matthew. 5.45. This one truth unchilds most Professors,
who look not at holiness as a Privilege: with Machiavels Prince, they like
the show of virtue, but fly virtue it self as a burden: Such bewray themselves
to be Bastards; but let genuine children remember, that holiness is not only a
duty, 1 Pet. 1.14, 15, 16. but also a prerogative, Exodus 19.5, 6. and 1 Pet.
2.9. Many hope to be like God hereafter, who affect not to be like him here;
but genuine Sons affect the one, as well as they hope for the other, 1 John
3.2, 3. The hope of the former, will at farthest dye with themselves, Job 8.13,
14, 15, and 11, 20.

2. In dignity.
Next, Gods adopted children are like him in Dignity. This Dignity appears,

Which appears
1. In their Titles.

2. In their Offices.

3. In their Dominion.

In their Titles, they are called his treasure, 1. In their titles.
Exodus 19.5. his jewels, Mal. 3.17. his first fruits, and holiness to the
Lord, Jerem. 2.3. Heirs, Gal. 3.19. firstborn Heirs, Heb. 12.23. compare
Deutr. 21.16. yea, joynt-heires with Christ, Romans 8.17. each of them having
right to, and possession of that Inheritance which has no Corruption,
Succession, Division.

1. No corruption, 1 Pet. 1.4. It Is not corrupted by outward principles, as
fire, violence, etc. Nor by inward principles, as sin and other taints which
defile; or prutribility, as the best things here below, are from their own or
their subjects innate principles, Isa. 29.14. and 1 P^t. 1.18. compare James
5.2.

2. It has no Succession; the Father and Children always living upon the same
Inheritance; whence, as Christ's Priesthood, so their inheritance is
unchangeable, Hebrews 7.24.

3. It has no Division; for every Heir enjoyes the whole, God being infinite
and indivisible: as every eye enjoyes the whole Sun, etc. Hence there will be
no occasion of jealousy or quarrelling among the Brethren; for, let others
have never so much, I shall not have one jot the less. To his Isaacs, his
Heirs, his Conquerours, God gives his all; not half (with Ahashuerus and
Herod) but his whole Kingdom. Compare Genesis 25.5. and 2 Chronicles. 21.3. and Rev.
21.7. It Is otherwise with Heirs and Wives here below, because their interests
are divisible, Luke 12.13. Genesis 30.15. and 1 Samuel 1.6, 7.

Their Dignity appears, 2. In their high Offices. 2. In their Offices.
Like Christ their Head, they are Gods anointed ones, 1 John 2.20, 27. and that
to a threefold Office, Prophetical, Priestly, Kingly, Psalm 105.15. Revel.
1.6. Where the Prophetical Office is not mentioned, probably upon this account,
because included in the Priestly Office. The firstborn in every Family were
typical Kings, Priests and Prophets, Exodus 24.5. which therefore were the
Birthright of Reuben, who by his sin forfeited the Government to Judah, the
Priesthood to Levi, and the double portion or inheritance to Joseph, 1 Chronicles.
5.1, 2. see Numb. 3.45. But Gods adopted ones shall never forfeit their Unction.

3. In their Dominion.
Their Dignity appears, 3. In their Dominion; and this by five particulars.

1. By their Ministers or attendance, an heavenly Guard, Heb. 1.14.

2. By the extent of their property, they are Lords of all, 1 Cor. 3.21, -- 23.
Compare Psalm 8. Their Title is as good, as large, they holding all in Capite,
which is the worst Title among the Sons of men, but the best among the Sons
of God.

3. By their Right, and pure use of all, Tit. 1.15. Job 5.24.

4. By the benefit and advantage redounds to them out of all, Romans 8.28.
There Is no creature but owes homage, and pays Tribute to these Lords. A Saint
gets more good by other men's estates, than the Possessours themselves. The
first fruits, and fat of all, come to those who are the first fruits of God and
of the Lamb.

5. By their immunities. Kings children have great immunities, Matthew. 17.25,
26. but Gods children have all immunities, being privileged from the hurt of
every thing, Luke 10.19. Romans 8.35, 38, 39.

Second branch of the doctrine.
This for the Explication of the first Branch of the Doctrine: The second Branch
is, That every true Believer is a child of God by Regeneration.

Explication.
I shall first explain this Head; then prove and apply both together.

Quest. What is Regeneration? Here I shall endeavor to open,

First, The Name.

Secondly, The Thing.

The Name.
The Name is (...). It Is used but twice in the New Testament, Matthew 19.28. and
Tit. 3.5. happily in several senses; the one glorious, the other gracious. Yet
both may very well be understood in a gracious sense; and so in the former
place Judas is excluded, as having no hopes of a glorious Session, because he
wanted a gracious Regeneration.

Its Synonima's in Scripture are very Emphatical. Thus its called a quickening,
Ephesians. 2.1. a formation, Gal. 4.19. a Birth, John 3.3, 8. a Baptizing, Matthew.
3.11. a renewing of the mind, Romans 12.2. a new heart and spirit, Ezekiel. 36.26.
that being renewed by saving knowledge, this by saving grace; a new creature,
which is the product of Omnipotency, Gal. 6.15.
2 Cor. 5.17. The new man, it renewing the whole, Ephesians. 4.24. and the Divine
Nature, in respect of its transcendent excellency, 2 Pet. 1.4.

For the thing it self; Regeneration is taken, 1. Absolutely, The thing.
and so it is really the same with effectual vocation, both which are either
active or passive; that in Relation to the party Regenerating and calling, this
in reference to the party Regenerated and called. 2. It Is taken Relatively; and
so it is the foundation of our first Filiation or Sonship, whereby we are
begotten Sons: Generation is the foundation, as of humane, so also of Divine
Filiation; and as by faith we are adopted Sons, so by Regeneration we are
begotten Sons.

Quest. What is Regeneration?

Answ. It Is the production of a new and spiritual being, by the Introduction of
a new and spiritual form. Its nature.
As therefore Isaac before generation, was a non entitie in nature; so every
child of the promise before Regeneration, is a non entity in grace, 1 Cor.
13.2. Gal. 6.3. and as in Generation there is a formation, or the introduction
of a new form, which gives being, distinction and operation; so is it likewise
in Regeneration, Gal. 4.19. This form is nothing else but truth of grace
infused. 3. As in nature the corruption of one thing is the Generation of
another; so in grace, the corruption of the old man, is the Generation of the
New, Romans 6.4, 6, 11. And lastly, as in natural Generation no form is
introduced but by various preparations and previous dispositions; so in
Regeneration, much Legal and Evangelical preparation ushers in the New Birth;
which preparation consists especially in Conviction, Illumination, etc.

The Nature of Regeneration will appear more distinctly, by comparing it more
particularly with natural Generation; The terms of convenience.
and 1. In the terms of convenience or similitude. 2. In the terms of
difference or dissimilitude. They agree, 1. In the causes. 2. In the manner of
production. 3. In the matter produced.

For the first; in both there is, 1. A principal cause; and thus God is the
Regenerate man's Father, witness the Text, Isa. 6.9. and Heb. 2.11, 13. the
Church is his Mother, Gal. 4.26, 27. 2. There are subordinate and instrumental
causes; such are Christ's Ministers, who are therefore sometimes called Fathers,
1 Cor. 4.15. and sometimes Mothers, Gal. 4.19. Compare 1 These. 2.7. 3. The
constitutive cause; a seed, which is partly material^, namely the Word, 1 Pet.
1.23. partly spiritual, the influence and efficacy of the Holy Ghost, John 3.5.
without which the material seed or letter is ineffectual, 2 Cor. 3.6.

2. They agree, 2. In the manner of production. In both there is,

1. A conception; Christ spiritual (as well as personal) is ever conceived by
the power and overshadowing of the Holy Ghost. This holds true in other
Generations, Matthew. 13.23. unless the seed of the Word be received and
retained, there can be no new man, no good and honest heart.

2. There is a formation. Gods Art is wonderful in the formation of our outward
man, Psalm 139.14, 15, 16. but far more stupendous in the formation of our
inward man, Gal. 4.19. which is no mean part of the mystery of godliness, 1 Timothy 3.16.

3. Quickening, 1 Cor. 15.36. Ephesians. 2.2. Gal. 2.20. which is perceived by
spiritual motion.

4. Longing. Sometimes the Parents long, sometimes the child; here both
Parents and child; How does God, Christ and his Ministers long for the natural
man's conversion? Ezekiel. 18.23. Luke 13.34. Phil. 1.8. Never did a teeming woman
long more for fruit, or deliverance, than these do for a newborn babe in
Christ. I, but this is not all, the Babe himself longs also, 1 Pet. 2.2.
Compare 2 Cor. 7.11.

5. Travail with pain. Oh the pangs of our spiritual Mothers, Gal. 4.19. do
not increase them by sticking in the birth! Hosea 13.13. Compare 2 Kings 19.3.
Oh the fear and danger of miscarriage, both before and after this spiritual
childing! Gal. 4.20, 11. and 1 These. 3.5. and in this miscarrying age, how
frequent is the curse of Ephraim? Hosea 9.13, 14. But is the Babe exempted from
pain, sorrow and danger? In no wise. Every newborn babe comes crying into the
world: The New, as well as the Old Creation, travails with pain, Romans 8.22,
23. The foundation of the second Temple, is ever laid in weeping, Ezra 3.12,
13. and God still lays the beams of his Chambers in the waters, etc. Psalm
104.3. Each of these may be a taste and touch of our new birth; and prove the
greatest part of Professors to be in an unregenerate estate.

3. They agree in the Subject produced, the new creature with new actions and
new Privileges. As in Generation, so in Regeneration, there is,

1. A new nature with new principles, 2 Cor. 5.17. Gal. 6.15. In Generation
there is still the same first matter, but under several and successive forms;
and when ever a new form is introduced, the Subject is called new: so in
Regeneration, Old things pass away, behold all things b come new, ib.

2. There are new actions or operations, 2 Cor. 4.16. and Ephesians. 4.22, 24.
There Is a new eye, a Circumcised ear, a spiritual taste, appetite, language,
motion, etc.

3. And lastly. There are new privileges. According to the degrees of
Generation the degrees of Privilege vary; a plant has higher Privileges than
an Element, a beast than a plant, and a man than a beast: But how transcendent
are the prerogatives of the new man? Heb. 12.22. -- 24. See more of this Head
in the Explication of Adoption.

Next follow the terms of difference or dissimilitude, The terms of
difference.
which may be applied to each of the Heads of Agreement, the second Birth far
excelling the first Birth, even in those Terms wherein both agree. But I pass
that for brevities sake, and shall content my self to note the difference of
both Births in four Properties. And,

1. Regeneration is rare: As few men are generated in comparison of all other
creatures, so few persons are newborn, in comparison of those who are borne:
No more are Regenerated, than shall be saved, and those are but few in
comparison, Mat. 7.14. compare Luke 13.23.

2. Its far more secret than the natural birth; compare Eccl. 11.5. Joh. 3.8.
and Colos. 3.3. John 3.4, 9.
Whatever Solomon might understand of Generation, both he and every man else is
very purblinde in discerning the nature of Regeneration; nor could the wisest
or the holiest (excepting Christ) ever fathom either the mystery of iniquity,
or this mystery of godliness.

3. Regeneration is constant and progressive; once born, and ever born; once
born, and always bearing. Its like the Generation of the Son of God, who was
begotten from eternity, and is still a begetting, Psalm. 2.7. Hebr. 13.8. In
natural Generation, sooner or later, death marrs the birth; but its otherwise
in Regeneration, he that is born again shall never dye; the soul and body may
part; but Christ, grace and the soul shall never part.

4. Regeneration is spiritual; the very soul it self is carnal, if compared to
the Spirit of Grace communicated in Regeneration, Zech. 12.10. John 3.6. The
grace of Regeneration, though but a quality, far exceeds the most refined
substance, humane or angelical, as is evident in the Apostate Angels, who by
their loss of holiness became Fiends and Devils; yea, worse than nothing.

This for the Explication of the terms in general, and in particular. Proof of
the Doctrine.
I proceed to the proof and demonstration of the doctrine; In the management
whereof I shall need to go no further than my Text.

1. Adoption and Regeneration are distinct Sonships.
And First, It will appear from the Text, that the Sonship by Adoption and
Regeneration are distinct filiations, though never separated as to the subject;
for whoever is a Child by Adoption, is also a Child by Regeneration, and
contra. That they are distinct filiations is evident;

1. Because they are noted as distinct; ver. 12. and 13.

2. Their foundations are distinct; the one is of gift, and by actual faith;
the other is of birth. There Is a wide difference between (...), applied to
Adoption, and (...), which expresses Regeneration; compare Matthew. 2.1. Joh.
1.2.14. and Gal. 4.4. where both words are joined together. An adopted person
is made a Son; but he is not born a Son as to the Adopter. Its evident then
these two relations are distinct.

Secondly, It appears also from the Text, 2. Believers are Gods children by
both. (...).
that every Believer is a child of God by both these filiations; Namely, by
Adoption and Regeneration. The former is evident, because Believers are
dignified with a sonship which follows as a privilege upon their faith, and
that by deed of gift, which can be no other than the Sonship of Adoption; for
the Sonship of Regeneration precedes actual believing. The second is as
evident; for they who are born of God must needs be Sons by Regeneration, as he
that is born of man, is a Son by Generation: But Believers are expressly said
to be born of God, as is evident by comparing both the Verses of the Text, and
therefore are Gods Sons by Regeneration as well as by Adoption. If you ask
further, Whence it is that Believers are Sons of God by this double filiation;
the Text holds forth a fourfold ground, partly explicit, and partly
implicit.

The first ground is free grace; Adoption is a gift therefore not deserved;
Regeneration cannot be deserved; 1. Because all merit is impossible to the
creature; (...).
2. Because before Regeneration the creature was in a state of Corruption; and
what can a corrupted creature deserve but wrath and curse?

The second ground is Christ's merit, whence probably the bestowing of the
privilege of Adoption is singularly attributed to Christ, because he purchased
our Adoption as well as our Regeneration, Ephesians. 1.5. Tit. 3.5, 6.

The third ground is Divine glory, which is the end of all Gods Works, much
more of such gracious Dispensations as are Regeneration and Adoption, Ephesians.
1.5, 6. Isaiah 43.21.

The fourth ground is encouragement unto faith by the favors and privileges
vouchsafed unto Believers, 1 Timothy 1.16. And these are more implied than
expressed in the Text, yet flow naturally enough out of it.

Information: About the sad condition of all unbelievers, by rule of
contraries. Are all Believers Gods children, etc? Then no unbeliever is a
child of God either by Regeneration or Adoption: Not by Regeneration, as
having no life of grace, which initially infused is the new birth. And hence
every unbeliever is,

First, A dead man, as dead in Law, Joh. 3.18. dead in sin, Ephesians. 2.1. dead
under wrath and curse, Joh. 3.36. Gal. 3.10. compared with Genesis 2.17. dead in
expectation and fear, Hebr. 10.27. Whoever has not a part in the second Birth,
shall be sure to have a part in the second Death.

Secondly, Unbelievers being not children of God, can expect nothing from God
as a Father. Now the state of unregeneracy excludes them from both filiations;
for unless God be a Father by Regeneration, he will be no Father by Adoption.
Nor can unregenerate persons be children by Adoption because they have no
faith. Hence they are Orphans, and so helpless; for God will be no Father to
such fatherless Children. But are they altogether fatherless? No verily;
therefore

Thirdly, They have woeful parents; namely, sin and disobedience, Ephesians. 2.2.
wrath and curse, Ephesians. 2.3. and 2 Pet. 2, 14. and lastly, Satan, Joh. 8.44.
who is also their God, 2 Cor. 4.4. as God is the Believers Father. Oh miserable
wretches as destitute of an heavenly Father; and more miserable as the woeful
children of most hellish and cursed Parents, who have nothing to make over to
them but sin and cutse, and that they will do with a vengeance.

Humiliation: And that not only for profane Esau's, who despise their
birthright; nor only for barely nominal and foederal children, Deuteronomy. 32.5, 19.
compared with 1 Cor. 7.14. but even for such as groundedly call God Father, yet
carry not themselves as children to such a Father. They are children of the
greatest, wisest, and most Ancient King, (allude to Isa. 19.11.) yet walk not
up to their principles as Regenerate Sons, nor up to their privileges as
Adopted Sons, as is evident by the following particulars.

1. They think not of, rejoice not, glory not in, nor walk up to the dignity of
Divine filiation; but are mean-spirited, and sink almost at every difficulty,
Isa. 49.14, 15. the natural Son of God did not so.

2. They are palpably worldly, as if they had no Father to care for them, no
hope nor portion but in this life, Jerem. 45.5. Matthew. 6.28, 30. That
worldliness which reigns in Natural men, tyrannizeth too often in Regenerate
men.

3. They behave not themselves as Brethren of Christ, and as Children of one
Father; compare Hebr. 2.11. with Ephesians. 4. ver. 3. to ver. 6. and Malach. 2.10.
How do Brethren fall out by the way? how great is their difference, when the
matter of difference is so little? what quarrelling about the hedge, when both
agree about the inheritance: We all profess to believe the holy Catholic
Church, yet mind not the Unity of the Church; but rather the promoting of a
party and faction in the Church, to the shame of Religion, the scandal of the
weak, (who by reason of our differences are puzzled which way to choose) and the
opening of the mouth of the enemy. May we not justly fear (as one notes well)
that the neglect of true Religion, and true Catholic unity is making way for
Atheism, or for Popish Catholic unity? Exhort. and 1. Unto strangers.


Exhortation: And first, unto strangers; secondly, unto children.

For the first, Art thou an Alien? Oh never rest till thou get into a state of
Sonship; and to this end,

1. Be convinced of thy Orphanhood, and hellish Filiation.

2. Make good thy effectual vocation, justification, and reconciliation; this
is done outwardly by conscientious attendance on the Ordinances; inwardly by
the spiritual Baptism and faith, Gal. 3. ver. 25. to ver. 29. 2. Unto children.


Secondly, If thou be a child of God, then

1. Evidence thy Sonship; this is done by evidencing thy vocation, 2 Pet. 1.10.
and is necessary. First, In order to Gods glory. Secondly, In order to thy duty
and comfort. Thirdly, In order to others conversion and edification; neither of
which will proceed to purpose, without some comfortable evidence of thy
filiation.

2. Carry thy self as a child of God. This will blow up the fire of grace,
light the candle of comfort, and beam forth in thy conversation to the
conviction, conversion and edification of others.

To this end; First, Honor thy Father, Directions.
Mal. 1.6. acknowledge and testify his dignity and excellency. This do,

1. Negatively; take heed of dishonouring God passively, by omission: What
child can see or hear his father wronged? or converse needlessly with
dishonourers of his father? 2 Cor. 6.17, 18.

2. Affirmatively; dishonor not God actively by commission, as David, Peter,
and others did. How many, not only Bastards, but genuine Children are either
ashamed of, or shame to their heavenly Father? especially in evil company.

^econdly, Obey thy Father, 1 Pet. 1.14. this flows from the former, and is
part of the honor Children owe to their Parents, ( Ephesians. 6.1, 2. Colos.
3.20.) and much more we to our heavenly Father, Hebr. 12.9. whose commands are
all of them so holy, equitable, profitable; compare 2 Kings 5.13.

Thirdly, Imitate thy Father, Ephesians. 5.1, 2. This flows from both the former;
and by it we do both honor and obey God. Children are apt to follow their
Parents in Naturals, in Civils, in Morals; and if we be Gods children, we must
walk not only with him, but also like him, 1 John 4.17. and 2.6. Especially
imitate God in endeavoring to bring many to glory, Hebr. 2.10. Our imitation
of God is a great part of our following the Lord, Ephesians. 5.1, 2.

Fourthly, Submit to his chastisements, Hebr. 12.7. As afflictions, piously
born, are evidences of our Sonship, so the holy, humble, and fruitful bearing
of them, is our duty as Children.

Fifthly, Depend universally upon Divine provision and protection; casting all
thy fears, cares and burdens upon thy Father, Matthew. 6.25. and 1 Pet. 5.7.
Psalm. 55.22. Faith is both the mother and nurse of Adoption. Be not worse than
thy own Child, who can live without carking upon thy fatherly love and
providence.

Sixthly, Abound in filial affections; as love, delight, and fear to offend thy
Father. Thy sin is exceedingly aggravated by the d^gnity of the party offended,
and offending, (as well as by Gods singular love to thee) Lev. 4.3, 13, 22, 27.
and 21.9. God may well say to thee, Et tu fili!

Seventhly, Wait and long for the perfecting of thy Adoption, Romans 8.23. Here
below, children cannot without impiety desire and long for the full inheritance.

Filius ante diem patrios inquirit in annos. But its otherwise with heavenly
heirs, who could have no inheritance unless their Father lived, who inherit
the whole together with their Father; yea, their Father is their main
inheritance, all other Comforts being but accessory.

Consolation, to Gods children; for the effectual application of which comfort,
two things are very considerable.

First, The grounds of Consolation.

Secondly, The trials and discoveries of our filiation whereby we may be
assured of our r^ght to, and interest in these comforts. The general ground of
Consolation, is our filial privileges; Filial privileges are.
which are more particularly.

1. Fatherly affections, which for tenderness and vehemence, are called
mothers bowels, Isa. 49.15. As a Father God pities his children, Psalm. 103.13.
and spares them, Mal. 3.17. Parents bowels yearn most toward their weakest
Children; and such a Father is Christ, Matthew. 12.20. We pity a Child that is
poisoned, not so a Serpent to whom poison is natural. If thou favor not thy
self in sin, God will favor and pity thee because of thy very infirmities,
Hebr. 4.15.

2. Fatherly provision; God will never fall under the foul aspersion of being
worse than an Infidel, which he blames so much in unnatural Christians, 1 Timothy
5.8. This privilege Relates to the necessities of Gods Children. Its well
observed by a Modern Writer, To have no necessity at all, is Gods sole
privilege; To have necessities immediately supplied, is the happiness of
glorified Saints; To have necessities mediately supplied, is the comfor of
Saints on earth; To have necessities without any supply, is the misery of the
damned. Now Divine provision undertakes for all these supplies, mediately here,
immediately hereafter. Fatherly provisions are fourefold, answerable to the
proportionable wants of Children.

First, for maintenance; and God provides no less than all good things for his
Children, Psalm. 34.9, 10. and 1 Timothy 4.8. especially the best things. Compare
Matthew. 7.11. and Luke 11.13.

Secondly, A calling. Gods care extends to the particular calling of every one
of his Children, much more to their general calling, 1 Cor. 7.20. Romans 1.7.

Thirdly, Marriage; their civil marriages are made in heaven, Prove. 19.14. much
more their spiritual match with Christ, Joh. 17.6, 9.

Fourthly, an inheritance: Though their portion be not here below, yet God
gives them portion in things here below, which sweetens and sanctifies all
their enjoyments, Genesis 33.5. But the best portion here is nothing to their
heavenly inheritance, 1 Pet. 1.4.

3. Fatherly protection, Deuteronomy. 32.6, 10, 11, 12. which is ever seasonable for
time, suitable for kind, proportionable for degree, universal against every
danger, and constant as long as danger threatens: immediate by God himself,
Isa. 27.3. Or mediate by Creatures, Ordinances, Providence, Comforts, Crosses,
Graces, Temptations, etc. 2 Cor. 12.7.

4. Fatherly education, with all requisites thereunto; for which this Father
alone can undertake; as

First, Dociblenesse; God alone can make his children apt to learn:

Secondly, Teaching, by precepts, direction, examples, illumination,
manuduction, exercise and inclination, making them willing to learn, Job 36.22.

Thirdly, Correction, and that

1. By chastisements, bodily or spiritual.

2. By crossing their will and worldly designs.

3. By teaching them to cross their own wills, Psalm. 94.12. This correction is
a great branch of the Covenant, Psalm. 89.30. -- 34. All these privileges God
affords them gratis. Children pay nothing for provision, protection, education,
etc. Matthew. 17.26.

5. Fatherly Communion. A Father is very familiar:

First, With his little Children.

Secondly, With his grown Children. To assure us hereof, God is pleased to take
upon him a threefold Relation.

1. Of a Friend.

2. Of an Husband.

3. Of a Father; compare John 14.21, 23. and Revel. 3.20. This for the grounds
of Consolation, which every one is ready to catch at; but only children have a
right unto: This makes way for the last head, and a grand case of conscience;
Namely, How shall I make it out that I am a genuine Son, and not a Bastard or
Stranger? In managing this discovery I shall mix together the trials of both
filiations, by Regeneration and Adoption.

And first, Sons are like their Father; 1. Trials of our sonship.
they are usually the Natural and Moral Pictures of their Parents. This in its
measure holds true of Gods Children, who resemble their Father.

1. In light, Ephesians. 5.8.

2. In love, 1 John 4.7.

3. In life, Ephesians. 4.18. and 5.1.

Secondly, Children honor their Parents, 2. Obedience is both a negative and
affirmative trial, John 8.47.
Mal. 1.6. and that

1. By Reverence, 1 Pet. 1.17.

2. By Obedience, 1 Pet. 1.14.

3. By pliablenesse, Romans 8.14. Slaves are driven, but Children are led.

4. By coming often into, and delighting in his presence; Compare Job 1.6. and
P^al. 139.18.

Thirdly, We may know our Sonship by our spirit; every Child of God has

1. A Spirit of faith and dependence, 2 Cor. 4.13.

2. A Spirit of prayer, Romans 8.15. The first cry after the New Birth, is Abba,
Father, Acts 9.11. God has no Child but can ask his heavenly Father blessing.

3. A Spirit of Evidence, Romans 8.16. Ephesians. 1.13, 14. and 4.30. The Spirit
always witnesses, though his witness be not always heard.

4. A Spirit of liberty, 2 Cor. 3.17. of liberty from the bondage of sin,
Satan, the world and fear, Joh. 8.32. Hebr. 2.15. of liberty to Christ and
duty, Psalm. 119.32.

5. A Spirit of waiting, Romans 8.23.

Sixthly and lastly, A Spirit of love; not only to God and his children, 1 John
5.2. but also to our very enemies, Mat. 5.44, 45. Hence Gods Children, (like
their Father) are peacemakers, Mat. 5.9.

To conclude; Art thou like God? do thou honor God as a Father? have thou
the Spirit of God? then may thou comfortably claim and enjoy all the
forementioned privileges, and infinitely more than heart can conceive, or
tongue express. Art thou covetous? here is a treasure for thee; Art thou
ambitious? here is the highest honor. Art thou voluptuous? here is an Ocean of
pleasure. Art thou in danger? here is an Ark and Haven of security; all these
in the hand of filiation, and that above any created desire or comprehension,
with infinite security to all eternity.

OF Saving Faith.
ACTS 16.31. Believe on the Lord Jesus Christ, and thou shall be saved.


THe words are the satisfactory Answer of Paul and Silas to their Keepers
serious demand, to whose strictest care and custody they were committed by the
Magistrates of Philippi upon the complaint of the covetous Masters of a gainful
Servant-maid possessed with a spirit of Divination, upon whom the Apostle
wrought an undesired and displeasing cure, after eminent Testimony born by her
to them and their Doctrine; God answers their courageous singing in Prison by
an earthquake shaking the foundations of the house, and the stout heart of the
Jailer; the doors were opened to, and fetters fell off from the prisoners, and
therewith the door of the keepers soul was opened, and his fetters of ignorance
and corruptions in which he was holden captive by Satan were broken. At first
(poor man!) he was afflicted with fear of his Prisoners escaping, so as to make
attempt against his own natural life; not knowing that God intended good by
all, and to make his Prisoners his Releasers and Deliverers; But by and by his
amazement and trouble strikes the right way, and he is not only willing to keep
a natural life, but is desirous of, and inquisitive after an eternal life;
Sirs, what must I do to be saved? And they said, Believe, etc.

My allotted work at this time is from this clear and full Text to speak of
Saving Faith; in the entry whereof let me once for all premise;

First, I purposely wave Controversies, as wanting both time and fitness to be
an Umpire, and give a final decision.

Secondly, I shall endeavor to confine my discourse to my Subject, without
trespassing upon others ground, by repeating what belongs to preceding, or
preventing what belongs to following Subjects.

Thirdly, I am not solicitous about, nor is it possible to please all in method
and terms belonging to it (those (...):) Method and words I always account are
servants to matter.

Fourthly, In this great part of the Body of Christian Religion, I can only
show the Sceleton, without reading an Explanatory Lecture; or give the bones
and sinews without clothing them with a due proportion of flesh, for that
would take up too much room.

To engage attention, consider, This is that great Joh. 6.29.
Work of God, a main part of the 1 Timothy 3.16.
Mystery of Godliness, a Heb. 6.1.
Principle and foundation; at this when excelling, Mat. 8.10.
Christ wondered; by this Romans 4.20.
Glory is every way given to God; to this Mark 9 23. Heb. 11.33.
all things are possible (it sharing with God in his otherwise Mat. 19.26.
incommunicable Omnipotency) and accordingly the Mat. 9.22.
Effects of the Divine Power are attributed unto Faith; 2 Pet. 1.1.
Precious and Jam. 2.5.
enriching Faith, though in it self, and to its Subject the most indigent and
emptying Grace; Poor, yet making rich; having nothing, yet entitling to all
things. This is that which all the promises, types, and prefigurations of the
Messiah did lead the Patriarchs unto, and by which they obtained a good report:
Heb. 11.2.
This is the end of the Law (subordinate unto Christ, Romans 10.4.) and the sum
of the Gospel, commonly named and pretended to, but little known, and rightly
understood, Luke 18.8.
less enjoyed and exercised in the World.

I shall reduce all to these Six Heads, The Nature, Subject, Causes, Effects,
Properties, and Opposites of Faith.


To open the Nature of it, 1. Nature.
I shall remove the ambiguity of phrase, and state what I shall prosecute by
giving the Distinctions and Description of it.

Fides quae creditur; Distinctions
Faith which we believe is the Doctrine of the Gospel, or any word of God; yea,
the essential Word of God, Gal. 3.23.
the promised Seed, the Object of Faith, is by that word understood by learned
persons. 1. Fides qua creditur, Faith by which we believe; and this (to begin
at the remotest and meanest) is either First, Without knowledge, the ignorant
implicit Faith and profession of many owning Christ as the founder of their
Order and way; but this is not right, which only distinguishes Christians from
others.

Secondly, With some knowledge without assent (which scarce deserves the name
of Faith) and this is a Profession of the Faith, either customary, following
education and example; or compulsive, through fear; or gainful, for outward
advantages, as theirs that followed Christ for the loaves, and Simon Magus's.

Thirdly, With knowledge and assent, of which some Faith respects the Truth
of God (for Doctrine sake I may thus distinguish) which is called Historical;
Jam. 2.19.
thus the Devils believe and tremble; wicked men believe and sometimes tremble,
and sometimes rejoice as if they had enough; the only difference is the want of
applicability to the Devils; in neither is affection to the Revealer or things
revealed: This is not right though it believe never so rightly concerning
Christ's Person, Natures, Offices, etc.

Some Faith respects the Truth and power of God, and has for its ground
ordinarily some special Word, Mat. 10 8.
and this is called Faith of Miracles; and this is either active, Matthew. 17.20.
(which is peculiarly the Faith of Miracles, and that to which the special Word
refers) or passive, Act. 14.9. and 3.16. and which the woman with the bloody
issue had. The Promises that were the ground of this Faith, were peculiarly
suitable to those times, and now not improveable, or not ordinarily; and the
Faith it self though grounded on a special word, yet is but a common gift (in
it self) as opposed to saving; as appears in Judas, and those that at last
would cry Lord, Mat. 7.22.
Lord; and in the nine Lepers: Though sometimes indeed it had the actings of
the best, even Saving Faith twisted with it, Mat. 8.10.15.28.

Some Faith respects the Truth, Power, and Goodness of God, and this grounded
upon General Promises, and words of encouragement of an unlimited truth and
concernment to time and persons: Mat. 6. from verse. 25.
Now this respects either the General love of God to his Creatures, and Man
as a peculiar one, affording support, preservation, provision necessary; or the
peculiar love of God to man through the undertakings of Christ, making man to
look for better things than the effects of common providence, even God himself
for his portion, and full happiness in him. Now that bold affian^e is not true
Faith, whereby men carry it at that rate of confidence as if Christ died to
save all from hell, that are not willing to go thither; for in some it is
without savor and affections suitable (which I may call altogether fained
Faith) as in the generality of Formalists now, who presume all is well, God
loves them, and Christ died for them. In others it is joined with a savory
gust and relish of the Word and Promise; which in regard of its continuance,
and thereby usefulness to its end Salvation (though I make not that the only
difference) is called either temporary, springing from sleighty and perishing
causes, as that of the Luke 8.13.
stony ground, and the Mat. 25.8.
Virgins: Or else lasting, durable, altogether true and 1 Timothy: 1.5.
unfeigned, justifying and saving Faith. This indeed is but Ephesians: 4.5.
one, as well as the Object; and therefore those Peter wrote to, had 2 Pet: 1.1.
obtained like precious Faith; yet differs in degrees and Rom: 12.3.
measure; in some it is Mark 9.24.
small and Isa: 42.3.
weak, as a bruised reed; through dimness and scantiness of knowledge; (as a
building laid upon a weak or narrow foundation cannot be strong) weakness of
assent; strength of temptations; natural timorousness, Rom: 4.19, 20. Act: 6.
suspiciousness and lowness of spirit: In others it is strong, and they are
full of Faith, as Steven, having clear and large knowledge, etc. Both weaker
and stronger may be considered either as Habitual in the root and principle, or
Actual as exercised toward Christ and the promises.

For the Definition or Description of Faith, I shall not heap up words in
mentioning many, but take up with that full and excellent one of the late
Judicious Assemb^y, in their larger Catechism (that Christians may with more
readiness and safety entertain it.) Description.


Faith is a Saving Grace, wrought in the heart of a sinner by the Spirit and
Word of God, whereby he being convinced of his sin and misery, and of the
disability in himself and all other creatures to recover him out of that lost
condition, not only assenteth to the truth of the promise of the Gospel, but
receives and rests upon Christ and his righteousness therein held forth for
pardon of sin, and for the a cepting and accounting of his person righteous in
the sight of God for salvation.

It has here for its Genus (or general and common nature) a Grace, it being
compared with Love, Hope, etc. they herein agree. The word Grace distinguishes
it from other Habits even good and virtuous that are acquired; this is a Grace
or gracious disposition or habit infused. A Saving Grace to distinguish it
from, and set it above common Grace, and make it one of those better things
that accompany salvation. Heb: 6.9.


The Subject is twofold, Subjectum Recipiens, and Occupans; 2. Subject.
Subjectum recipi ns.
The first the Subject receiving it, or in which it is, most ordinarily called
the Subject, and this is The heart of man, a sinner elected and called.

1. It is Man that believes, not Angels; for of their Faith we have no ground
to speak. It is Man; not God, and the Spirit in us, but man through them. Yea,
Man singularly, not of another, but of him that hops for life; the Just shall
live by HIS Faith, not by another.

2. It is the Heart of man; with the heart man believes; Rom: 10.10.
the Heart includes Will and Affections; it is not the Understanding only,
nor so much, though that necessarily makes way; Coming to Christ is a
spontaneous motion of Will and Affections renewed, and this is beleiving: there
is assent to things revealed as true; and acceptance of things offered as good,
receiving, Joh: 1.12.
embracing with suitable affections to the Revealer and things revealed.

3. The heart of a man a sinner; for man upright is not capable of this Faith,
which is in God through a Mediator: Believing the word of another concerning
restoral and reparation speaks loss and decay; acceptance of alms, poverty.
Indeed Adam might and must thus far exercise Faith in beleiving and trusting
God (it belongs to the first commandment) that he continuing upright, there
would be a continuation of Gods love and his happiness; but Faith apprehending
the promise of God of acceptance through the righteousness of another,
necessarily speaks man a sinner, Romans 4.5.
as Justification which is by Faith is of the ungodly.

Romans 11.7.
4. The heart of man a sinner elected; the election obtained it, the rest were
hardened, Tit. 1.1.
and therefore is it called the Faith of Gods elect. Remarkable is that
expression, As many as were ordained unto life believed; Act. 13.48.
and our Lord says, all that the Father gives him come unto him; Joh 6.37.
and the Jews not believing was because they were not his sheep, and therefore
heard not his voice.

5. The heart of man a sinner elected and called, is the Subject of Faith. Romans
10.17.
Faith is by hearing; it is the souls answer to, and compliance with Gods call;
God vailing his omnipotency under, and putting it forth with words of command.
Uncalled and unbelievers are the same; and therefore calling is one of the
links of the golden chain of Salvation, Romans 8.28, 30.
and goes before Justification by Faith; in which Call, the Terminus a quo is
Satan, sin, misery, death, we are called from; and the Terminus ad quem we are
called to, Christ, God, Holiness, and Life.

Subjectum Occupans. Materiale.
The Subject about which Faith is employed, or Object; that which and in which
we believe, is not God immediately though primarily, Heb. 6.1. but Christ
immediately, and the Promises which are in him yea and amen, 2 Cor. 1.20.
and God through Christ, 1 Pet. 1.21. he that believes not in the Son,
believes not in the Father; and he that has not the Son has not the Father;
Act. 20.21.
Repentance is peculiarly referred to God, and Faith to the Lord Jesus Christ.
Faith also and the Promises, Heb. 10.23.
or God through Christ promising, are Correlates; and of all Promises those
that concern righteousness and life through the blood of a Mediator, are the
peculiar object. Act. 10.43. 1 John 5.10, 11.
Believing the witness of remission, and the recrod of giving eternal li e is
mentioned: it is called believing the Gospel, (...), glad tidings in the
Gospel, promises of remission and salvation. Mark 1.16.
It is true that Faith does believe and apply every word of God: Some things
reductively and secondarily are the object of Faith in a sequacious Spirit,
credulous to whatever is contained in Scripture, as that Abimelech had a wife,
etc. Gen: 20.
Some things are more directly the Word of God expressed and asserted in the
History of the Bible, yet being believed have not an immediate connection with
Justification and Salvation thereby: But the grand testimony of and through
Christ, Faith as saving principally respects, and as assenting in the mind
looks upon the Promise, as accepting in the Will and Affections respects
Christ.

The ground on which we believe, Formale.
called the Formal Object of Faith, shall be referred to the Externally moving
Cause to believe; of which afterward.

Of all Four Causes I shall speak in order, 3. Causes. Efficient. Principal.
and first of the Efficient, which is either Principal or less Principal. The
Principal Cause may be considered, as that from which the beginning, acting,
continuance, growth, and perfection of Faith do proceed; and this is the
Blessed Trinity, or God the Father through the Son by the Spirit.

1. The beginning, root, and habit of Faith is from God; if of every Phil: 1.6.
good work, and Jam: 1.17.
gift, then this; and therefore it is called the Ephesians: 2.8:
gift of God; and to you it is Phil: 1.29.
given to believe; Heb: 12.2.
Jesus also is called the Author; this is wrought by the Spirit, it is called
one of the Gal: 5.22: 2 Cor: 4.13.
fruits thereof, and he called the (g) Spirit of Faith, for indeed the word and
letter is dead, the Spirit quickneth; and this powerfully and certainly, yet
sweetly, making willing to believe in the day of his power; Psalm: 110.3. 2 Cor:
6.7. and 10.4.
for it is not the Word of truth only, but the power of God that made the
Apostles warfare so victorious in subduing souls to the obedience of the Faith;
It is so great a thing to bring blind, proud, self-destroying man to own Gods
way of Salvation by the righteousness of another, to accept all from another,
and him a crucified Savior, that it is a great part of the great mystery of
godliness, 1 Timothy: 3.16.
that Christ should be believed on in the world; so that it needs an exceeding
greatness of Divine Power, Ephesians; 1.19.
the working of a mighty power in them that believe, even such as raised Christ
from the dead. (...), est facultas ipsa: (...), ipsius sese exerentis virtus;
(...), ipsisius effectus sive (...). Bez: in loc. though other sense is put
upon that place, yet by many judicious Expositors is this sense followed, which
we find in the Gr. Schol. (...) (...), etc. None can come to the Son except the
Father draw them, Joh. 6.44.
in which the Author and powerful manner of operation in causing Faith are
contained. And all this in effectual calling and regeneration, (before which is
no part and degree, no act and demonstration of spiritual life, Ephesians. 2.1.
Joh. 1.12, 13. Act. 14.27.
for we are dead:) which is not of him that wills, not of flesh and blood,
and the will of man, but of God, and this is spoken of the Believer, to whom
God opens the door of Faith.

2. The actings, and operations of Faith are from God; as in him we live, Joh.
15.5.
so we move, and without him can do nothing; he works to will and to do
((...) Velle bonum, aeque ac voluntatem bonam) he works habit and principle,
and by supervening Grace exciteth to, and assisteth in acting it.

3. The continuance and perseverance of Faith are from above: Christ causes
our Faith not to fail, Luke 22.32. 1 Pet. 1.5.
and we are kept by Gods mighty power through Faith unto Salvation, and Faith
is by the same preserved: The 1 Thessalonians. 5.23, 24.
faithful God, that effectually calls, will safely keep, in Jude 8.
Jesus Christ 1 Cor. 1.8.
and confirm to the end; for this is the Joh. 17.11, 12, 24.
desire of the Son unto the Father, and Joh. 6.39. Mar. 9.24. Luke 17.5.
will of the Father concerning the Son.

4. The growth and increase of Faith are from God, who gives all increase; and
therefore it was well prayed for unto the Lord to help unbelief, and to
increase Faith.

5. The perfection of Faith is from God and Christ; Jesus is as the author,
Heb. 12.2.
so the finisher of our Faith; and this either by bringing it to its (...), and
highest degree it can reach, or is necessary for the Saints it should reach to
in the world, fulfilling all the good pleasure of his goodness, and the work of
Faith with power, Phil. 1.6.
and because he has begun, perfecting it, (...). Or by perfecting it in
vision, 1 Pet. 1.9.
for it is God that gives the end of our Faith, Salvation.

Less Principal.
The Less Principal Efficient Causes are either Impulsive or Instrumental.

Impulsive.
The Impulsive or Moving Cause, is either External or Internal.

The Inwardly moving Cause, Proegumena, is 1. On Gods part, his free grace and
love, self-moving goodness; in which sense it is called the Ephesians. 2.8.
gift of God, and the Romans 11.7.
election obtain it, even those that are ordained to life believe. Act. 13.48.
Not improvement of Reason, not use of means appointed for the attainment of
Faith, that merit this gift, but God works all of his own good pleasure,
Phil. 2.13.
(...), which appears in that not many noble, and wise, but poor receive the
Gospel.

2. On the sinners part, who does believe, and being quickened, moves; acted,
acts, and that freely, the moving Cause is sense of misery, and undonness
without Christ, and interest in the promise through Faith, there being no other
name, Act. 4.12. Joh. 3.18.
and he that believes not being condemned: So that here is the necessary
condition, and causa sine qua non, of Faith, sense of misery and inability in
self, and all creatures to recover a man out of his lost estate, whence arises
renouncing and throwing away all our own righteousnesses, those filthy rags,
Isa. 64.6. Phil. 3.9.
not having or not depending upon our own righteousness, or any thing short of
Christ.

The outwardly Moving Cause, Procatarctica. 1. On Gods part to give Faith, is
Christ and his merit; for every good gift is through Christ: Omne donum gratiae
Dei in Christo est. Ambr. in Ephesians. 1. As from the father of lights, so through
the the Sun of righteousness; none come to the Father, nothing comes from the
Father but by him, whom by this means the Father will make to be honored as
himself. Joh. 5.23.
As salvation was purchased by Christ upon terms of believing, so Faith also
whereby we lay hold upon Christ for Salvation: and therefore that Spirit which
is called the Spirit of Faith is by Christ promised, upon his purchase making
and ascending to be sent to convince the world of that great sin of unbelief.
Joh. 16.9.


2. The externally moving Cause to believe on the sinners part (which may be
called the Formal Object) is twofold.

1. As to God and his Word, Gods Veracity, and infallible truth, Heb. 4.13. and
6.18. Titus 1.2. 1 Thessalonians. 2.13. Joh. 3.33. Heb. 10.23.
he can neither be deceived, nor deceive; God which cannot lie has promised,
is joined to Hope, and therefore Faith. He that believes receives the Word of
God as the word of God, and seteth to his seal that God is true, accounting him
faithful that has promised; the ground of Faith being Gods faithfulness, and
the object the Promise. God's having spoken, (...), was enough to Abraham, Romans
4.17, 18.
in a difficult case. Here is the Resolutio fidei into its stable foundadation,
Gods unquestionable Truth, who is Prima veritas, and (...), 1 John: 5.10:
so that the believer has the witness in himself, and his evidence is better,
and assent stronger, as to his (...), than any ones, as to things apprehended
by sense, (...), or by reason, (...): Therefore sometimes divine testimony is
added to rational discovery (as in this point, that there is another life,
etc.) because of the certainty and distinctness of knowledge by revelation,
above all other ways.

2. As to Christ offered in and by the Promise (for more full explanations
sake, I sever the consideration of God promising, and Christ offered, which
otherwise I would always unite) the moving Cause of Faith in the sinner, Heb:
7.25.
is his power, as an All-sufficient Savior, able to save to the uttermost,
being anointed with authority and abilities, commission and qualifications for
that work: and his love to sinners, having laid down his life for them, Joh:
6.37.
he will in no wise cast them out that come to him by Faith. These are the
solid props of a true Christians Faith, which make the former (believing God
and the Word) not to be a wavering opinion, and the latter (believing in
Christ) not an adventurous hazard. Instrumental Cause.


The Instrumental Cause of Faith, is either the begetting or preserving Cause.

1. The Instrument by which the Spirit of God produces Faith is the Word of
God, in whatever way coming to us, to be Joh: 5.38. Luke 2.19:51.
considered and meditated on by us: The Word 1 John: 3.15.
read by us or to us, the Word expounded and enforced by the Public Ordinance,
preaching Ex Officio; the private Ordinance, conference ex fraterna charitate.
By believing the soul answers to Gods call, which supposes a Word, To. 10.8,
14, 17
therefore it is called the Word and Doctrine of Faith; and Faith comes by
hearing, men cannot believe in him of whom they have not heard: Christ must be
preached, 1 Timothy: 3.16, Rom: 1.16.
before believed on; for by the Gospel preached, God puts forth his power in
making men believe to salvation, the efficacy whereof (it being accompanied
with that spiritual and powerful demonstration, 1 Cor: 1.18, 21 etc.
mentioned 1 Cor. 2.4.) the Apostle to the Corinthians explaineth and
extolleth, God having in due time manifested his Word through preaching. Tit.
1.3. Act: 24.14.
Now this Instrument is All the word of God, not excluding the Law from being
the means as well as the object of Faith; Gal: 3.21, 22.
for the Law is a useful Schoolmaster to prepare us for Christ, driving us out
of our selves, and following us with the lashes of the Curse, that we may run
to the Grace of the Gospel, and make mention of Christ's righteousness only.
Psalm: 71.16.
So that knowledge must always go before Faith; we must know whom, what, and
wherefore we believe, 2. Tim: 1.12. Ephesians: 1.18, 19
and give a reason of our faith and hope: the eyes of the mind enlightening,
goes before the working of Gods power in our believing: so Paul's sending was to
turn from darkness to light, before Faith in Christ is mentioned: Act: 26.18.
Joh: 6.40.
every one that sees the Son and believes on him, etc. a seeing in Scripture
light makes way: In so much that the knowledge of the Word and Christ, as the
means to get Faith, Joh: 17.3. Isa: 53.11.
is highly advanced and called life eternal; yea, put for believing to which it
leads, by his knowledge, Objective. Or the knowledge of him, shall my servant
justify many.

Secondly, The Instrumental Causes of Faiths maintenance and increase are,

1. The Word of God, Causa procreans and conservans: Ab iisdem nutrimur ex
quibus constamus, It is seed to beget, 1 Pet: 2.2.
and milk for growth in babes; yea, strong meat for strong ones in Christ.

2. Sacraments, as Seals of the righteousness of Faith, Tesserae, and pledges
of Gods love superadded to his promise. They signify and help to clear the
understanding, and so consequently promote Faith: they seal and confirm (seals
are for this end to confirm the Faith of him to whom the Deed is delivered:)
and ('it is usually said by learned Divines) they actually exhibit for our growth
by feeding.

3. Prayer, as in that man, Lord help mine unbelief; Mark 9.24. 2 These: 1.10, 11
and the Disciples, Lord increase our faith; and St. Paul for the
Thessalonians. Quoties de Fidei constantia (and incremento) agitur, ad preces
confugiendum est. Calv. in Jud. 20. v.

I might add another Ternary of means for the increase of faith, inferior to
the former.

1. The Cross, Afflictions, Temptations; 1 Pet: 1.7.
Therefore the trial of Faith is called pr cious, because it burnisheth and
increases precious Faith; the trial of Faith works patience, Jam: 1.3.
patience experience, and that is a good ground for more Hope and Faith; Rom:
5.4.
they are conjoined, 2 Thessalonians. 1.3, 4.

2. By frequent actings and exercise, Faith is increased: though Graces
beginning is different, yet their improvement is in great measure after the way
of other habits.

3. By seeing and considering the Example of others, the cloud of Witnesses,
Heb. 12.1, 2. Heb. 13.7.
whose Faith the Apostolical command is that we follow: Thus many were of weak
made strong, beholding the faith of the Martyrs, and the eminent effects of it.

Material Cause.
For the Material Cause of Faith; Genus habet rationem materiae; that which is
its general and common nature, wherein it agrees with others is the matter of
it; Now as Saving Grace in the Description was the Genus wherein it agrees with
other Graces; so comparing true Saving Faith with other Faiths, that may
tolerably pretend to the name, Assent is the common nature and matter of it,
even the nearest and immediate Genus; Faith historical, of miracles, temporary,
all have Assent, but not all Assent belongs to true Faith. There must not
only be knowledge (...), but also (...), acknowledgement, as necessary and
essential to Faith, Col. 2.2. 2 Timothy 3.14.
and that arising from the full assurance of understanding, (...): There must
be a Faith Doctrinal and Assertive, as the foundation of Faith applicative and
fiducial: if I assent not to the promise of another as true, I cannot rely upon
the person for the good mentioned. There is a double acknowledgement (I mean
not verbal profession,) 1. That the things revealed in Scripture, and by us
known are of God: 2. That they are true (which naturally flows from the
former) and shall all be fulfilled: Romans 4.21.
Abraham was persuaded before he trusted. Now to this end that this full assent
and acknowledgement of the mind, which is a necessary ingredient of true Faith,
may be had, The Divine Authority of the Scriptures, confirmed by miracles and
other characters, is to be studied, that we may build our Assent, and thereby
our Faith upon a stable foundation.

Formal Cause.
The Formal Cause, which does straiten the general nature of Faith, and
distinguish true Saving Faith from all other Faiths (forma vel aliquid formae
analogum ponitur differentiae loco) in which may be Notitia and Assensus, is
Fiducial receiving of Christ offered by God in the Promises of the Gospel. In
which are two things formally constitutive of Saving Faith.

1. Acceptance of Christ and the Promises; Faith is that hand which does touch
the top of the golden Scepter, or that closes with and entertaineth what God
offers, receiving Christ; hence a weak Faith is true Faith and saving, Joh.
1.12.
as well as strong, because it indeed receives the gift, though with a
trembling hand: This is the coming unto Christ, Joh. 6.35.
and appropriating what before lay in common; the applying what before was only
applicable, making the soul to say with Thomas, believing, Joh. 20.28.
My Lord and my God. Zanch. in Coloss. 2.6. Sicut accepistis, and quomodo
accipitur? Fide. So the good things purchased by Christ, and following upon our
receiving of Christ, are said to be received as the atonement, abundance of
grace, the gift of righteousness, To. 5.11.17.
(...), and (...), fidei videl. manu oblata (...), and expressly remission of
sin, is said to be received by Faith. Act. 26.18.


2. Innitency, recumbency of soul upon a Christ received, entrusting him
entirely with, 2 Timothy 1.12. Isa. 50.10. Cant. 8.5.
and committing to him the care of Soul and salvation, staying the soul upon
him, leaning upon the beloved, rouling the soul upon him, resting with whole
weight upon him, as faithful, able, loving: and this is truly fiducia; this is
truly Credere in Christum, To believe in or upon Christ; more than Credere
Christum, and Christo, to believe a Christ (that he is) and to believe Christ
(or his word.) It is a phrase in Profane writers unusual, as the thing it
self, salvation by Faith was unknown. To this belong those expressions of the
eyes being toward God, 2 Chronicles. 20.12 Psalm. 123.2. Isa. 45.22. Joh. 3.14, 15.
and looking to him: even as the Serpent was lifted up, to be looked upon with
expectation of healing virtue; so Christ to be looked unto by the Soul, with a
longing expectation and confident dependence.

The End of Faith is the glory of God in man's salvation, Final Cause.
the one as supreme and ultimate, the other as subordinate: that God might save
his Creature to whom he wished well in a way of demonstration and exaltation of
his glorious justice and mercy, therefore was Saving Faith and Salvation by
Faith ordained. Justice, that he might be just, Romans 3.26.
that is demonstrated and declared to be just (as Psalm, 51.6.) both in not
pardoning without satisfaction, and therefore punishing sin upon the Surety;
and then in pardoning the sinner through faith, uniting to, and interesting in
the Surety, therefore says the Apostle, God is faithful and just to forgive.
Me^cy, in that he accepts the satisfaction of another, and imputes his
righteousness to the sinner, by Faith receiving it: and that he found out and
provided alone this way of salvation by Faith: It was of Faith, that it might
be of Grace, Romans 4.16. Ephesians. 2.8.
for by Grace are we saved through faith: and thereby works, as meriting, and
so man's confidence in, and boasting of himself are excluded, Romans 27.
and Gods glory entirely secured and advanced by men's submit^ing to the
righteousness of God by Faith; Rom: 10.3. Hab: 2.4.
Faith and Pride being utterly inconsistent. Indeed trusting God upon his bare
word, not having merit nor humane probability, Rom: 4.20. Heb: 10.39. 1 Pet:
1.9.
gives great glory to God. That Man's Salvation is an end of Faith, all the New
Testament witnesses, even that we believe to the saving of our souls, and
receive the end of our Faith, in the salvation of our Souls.

4. Effects.
The Effects (more proper or less proper) and Consequents of true Faith.

Col: 3.4.
1. Union with Christ, who is our life, and so we live by Faith: What can more
necessarily and immediately follow upon the offer on Gods part in the Gospel of
Christ to be ours, and our receiving him by Faith, than union to his person,
though no personal union. 2 Cor: 13.5. Ephesians: 3.17.
Hence having Christ in us, and our being in the Faith, are made the same,
because Christ dwells in our hearts by Faith. Whatever the Spirit on Christ's
part does before by way of uniting us to Christ, apprehending us for Christ
Jesus (as some understand, Phil. 3.12.) Faith is the hand on our part that
receives, and the band that fastneth Christ to us: This I take to be the fruit
of the first consummate Vital act of the quickened soul; and then is the marriage
knot tied.

2. Hence follow Remission of sins, and justification of the person through
Christ and his righteousness apprehended and appropriated. This Peter testifies
to be the witness of the Prophets, Act: 10.43.
even that through his name, whosoever believes in him, shall receive
remission of sins: The pardoned alone live, for the guilty are dead in Law,
which the people sensibly bewailed in saying, if our iniquities be upon us,
Ezekiel: 33.10.
and we pine away in them, how shall we then live? Join this with our living by
Faith, and you see Faiths necessity and efficacy toward pardon. It was St.
Paul's ardent desire, that he having won Christ (got him, been united to him)
might be found in him, having the righteousness which is of God through faith
in Christ. Nothing more frequent than the assertions and demonstrations of
Justification by Faith; in S. Paul's Epistles, especially to the Romans and
Galatians: The manner of Faiths efficacy wherein, is by a judicious person of
our own well expressed, for the cutting off those two eager controversies about
the Instrumentality and conditionality of Faith. It is (says he) the general
opinion of the Orthodox, wherein all agree, That Faith is a means appointed by
God, in the use whereof the chi dr n of men are made partakers of Justification.

3. Adoption; That our receiving into the number, and having a right to the
Privileges of the Sons of God (the Spirit of Adoption, boldness at the Throne
of Grace, present supply, future inheritance) is the fruit and product of
Faith, appears from Scripture and consequence. To as many as received him, Joh.
1.12.
or believed on his name, gave he power to become the Sons of God. For indeed
we being by Faith united to Christ, and the faultiness of our persons taken
away through Christ, what more immediately follows from this loveliness in him,
and oneness with him, than communication of Sonship, which cannot be in that
way that Christ is a Son, Ephesians. 1.5.6.
and therefore is by the Adoption of children by Jesus Christ: Adoption
therefore is the effect of Faith, through union to, and Justification through
Christ, intermediately caused thereby; Causa causae est causa causati.

4. Audience and answer of prayer: Our Lord has given universal proof to this,
Mat. 21.22.
in assuring that all things whatsoever shall be asked in prayer, believing,
shall be received: By St. James, Jam. 1.6, 7.
asking in Faith, without wavering, is required, and he that wavereth is bid
not to think he shall receive any thing. Yea, Jam. 5.15.
the efficacy of the prayer of Faith is by him asserted; and throughout
Scripture by remarkable expressions and instances abundantly confirmed and
proved. Fidelem si putaveris, facies, is true as to God, Sen.
as well as man. And that of the Roman Historian, Live.
Vult sibi quisque credi, and habita fides ipsam plerumque obligat fidem. But
it does not produce this eminent effect, as to Prayer only, rendering it
acceptable; but also,

5. Acceptance to the person in all services, together with the distinction of,
and denomination of Good given to habits and actions flows from Faith. Heb.
11.6. verse. 4. verse. 5.
Without Faith it is universally and utterly impossible to please God. By Faith
our Sacrifices become excellent, and we with them, we and they please God; and
therefore it is not without good reason usually accounted that Wedding garment
which renders our presence welcome to the Lord in any Ordinance or service.
Mat. 22.11.
Faith takes away the savor of the flesh (which whatsoever is born of the
flesh has) and gives a divine tincture and relish: it is like a vein of gold
running through all duties, which makes them precious, though still they be
somewhat earthly. That it is Characteristically denominative of other Graces,
and distinctive of them from moral virtues, those splendida vitia, may appear,
if it be considered, That even that eminent Grace of Love is nothing without
Faith, 1 Cor. 13.2. Gal. 5.6.
(as no Faith without it could be any thing) and does nothing without it, Faith
works by Love; not Love, but Faith by it; Faith being first and chief in
being and working: Humility was eminent in the woman and Centurion, Mat. 15.27,
28 Mat. 8.8, 10.
yet not Humility, but Faith was taken notice of; this being the main tree,
that a sprig from its root, receiving its excellency from it, and by faith
accompanying and overtopping it, becoming true humility, and not a degenerate
meanness, and abject lowness of Spirit. Sorrow for sin would not deserve the
name of Repentance, nor Confession be ingenuous, but for the hand of Faith laid
on the head of the Scapegoat: Faith believing Gods promise, concerning the
Moderation, Sanctification, removal of Affliction, works in a way of
Patience, Jam. 1.3.
and this Faith accompanying ennobles Christian Patience, and makes it not to
be Obstinacy, or Insensibility: So it makes a Christians contempt of the World,
not to be a Vainglorious pretense, or a sullen morose reservedness: Thus might
we run through many more.

6. Conquest over Adversaries, and hindrances in the way to heaven. Isa. 9.6.
Heb. 2.10. Ephesians: 6.16.
Faith in the mighty God, the Captain of our salvation, who has led captivity
captive, disarmed the powers of darkness, and triumphed over them (and we in
him our head) makes courageous, and that victorious, for if we resist, the
General of the adverse party will flee; Jam. 4.7. 1. Pet. 5.9.
only we must resist him steadfast in the Faith, holding up that shield, that
will repel and quench all his darts: For the life of sense, in the lusts of the
flesh and of the eye, 2 Cor. 5.7.
and the pride of life; the life of Faith is diametrically opposite thereto,
(by Faith not sight, etc.) and does necessarily weaken it, as we find in those
Worthies, Heb. 11. that by Faith denied themselves in so many things pleasing
to flesh and blood, and did and suffered so many things contrary thereto. For
the World, as that same eleventh of the Hebrews gives remarkable instance; so
St. John bears testimony in most significant phrase to the power of Faith
herein, 1 John 5.4.
calling it the Victory whereby we overcome the world, because certain victory
attends, and shall crown all that fight the good fight of faith against the
World; as the God and Prince of this world; so the pleasures of the world, the
honors, the profits, the friendship of the World, with their contrary troubles,
and the snares and temptations of both.

7. Confession and profession of the Faith. This is an inseparable adjunct and
consequent of true Faith, though I call it not a property, because this may be
where true faith is not, but where Faith is this will be also; all is not gold
that glisters, but that is not gold that does not glister. Can a man carry fire
in his bosom and not discover it? Can a man have the Spirit of Faith, 2 Cor.
5.13.
and believe, yet not speak? The Apostolical command is, not only that we stand
fast in the Faith, 1 Cor. 16.13. Heb. 10.23. Romans 10.10.
but also that we hold fast the profession of our Faith; for as with the heart
man believes to justification, so with the mouth confession is made to
salvation. Let our unchristianly and irrational deriders of Professors and
Profession, consider this.

8. It gives the soul a sight of things invisible, Heb. 11.27. Joh. 1.18.
Exodus 33.20. 2 Cor. 4.18.
and an enjoyment of things to come: By Faith Moses saw him that is invisible,
Jehovah, whom otherwise no man has seen, nor can see and live. Yea, by the
same St. Paul and others of the faithful looked at those eternal good things
which are not seen, and 5.7.
for they walked by Faith and not by sight. By this the Saints can look within
the vail: By Faith the soul takes a prospect of the promised Canaan, this being
the Pisgah of its highest elevation: Joh. 8.56.
By this Abraham saw Christ's day and rejoiced: It gives a present subsistence
to certain futures, and is the evidence of things hoped for, Heb. 11.1.
and not seen; for which cause the believers conversation will be in heaven,
where he sees his treasure is, and where therefore his heart is.

9. Joy and Peace in some degree is an immediate effect of true Faith, (and no
true Joy is without Faith) though higher degrees flow through Assurance. Romans
15.13.
There is joy and peace in believing; and a joy of Faith, especially when
conjoined with growth, Phil. 1.25. It is expressed by leaning and staying upon
the Lord; which speaks support, fixation, quietation of mind: For which cause a
child of God under desertions prefers his life of Dependence, before the
Worldlings life of enjoyment, and finds some satisfaction in present
unsatisfiedness, has some glimmerings of light in the dark night of
unassuredness. God has promised to keep him in peace, in peace (translated
perfect peace) whose mind is staid on him, 2 Isa. 26 3. Ch ron. 20.20
because he trusts in him: Believing in the Lord brings establishment, not
only as to the condition and state of the person, but also as to the
disposition and frame of the mind. We find it in other cases, believing the
promise, and relying on the power and love of another, affords a great calm,
and some secret joy to a mind otherwise disturbed and perplexed. Thus Faith in
its own nature, and direct tendency: But still understand Faith as acting,
Faith as exercised produces this effect; the Christian, so far forth as he
lives by Faith, and in the Improvement of Faith, enjoys this quiet sedate
mind, even when he wants the full-blown joy of a life of Spiritual sense. And
not only from the nature of Faith does this arise, but also as Faiths hand
casts out the Anchor of Hope which keeps the soul steady; and also as it
represents and foretastes the recompense and joy to come. This leads to the
next Effect of Faith.

10. Assurance and further joy thereby. I make not this Constitutive of Faith,
nor inseparable from Faith, lest I condemn and sadden causelessly the Generation
of the just, but wherever it is it proceeds from Faith. Unbelief is shut out
from the Promise, and can have no true Hope, much less Assurance: Heb. 10.22.
Therefore it is called The full assurance of Faith; and that (...), boldness
and access with confidence and assurance is by faith in Christ. Ephesians. 3.12.
And thus believing does through assurance (the soul by a reflex act preceiving
its own Faith, and thence interest in the O ject of Faith) brings the joy
unspeakable and full of glory. This, though not absolutely necessary, 1 Pet.
1.8.
all believers should labor after, that the comfort of it may confort
(according to the notation of the word) and strengthen them, Nehem. 8.10. 2
Pet. 1.10. 2 John 5.13.
for the joy of the Lord is our strength. The Apostle P^ter bids, give
diligence to make our calling and election sure, even to our selves rather than
in it self. And St. John wrote to those that believed, that they might know
they had eternal life.

11. And lastly, Salvation is the effect and inseparable consequent of true
Faith, according to the Text. Now this being that great and last effect which
the others made way for, the object of our desires, the reward of our
endeavors, the only and perfect happiness of man: I shall speak more
distinctly to the connection between Faith and Salvation under these three
heads, That, How, Why.

First, That Faith and Salvation are conjoined; and this is peculiarly one of
those things which are called (...), Heb. 6.9.
having, accompanying, laying hold of salvation. It is the Testimony of Truth
it self, John 3.16.
that this is Gods great end in sending his Son into the world, that whosoever
believes might have eternal life: The Purchaser of salvation, John 6.40.
declares this to be the Will of him that sent him, that every one that sees
the Son, and believes on him, might have eternal life; Accordingly he that has
all power committed to him, gives commission and command to his Disciples to
preach, that whosoever believes shall be saved: Mark 16.16.
And ascertaines their salvation by his prayer for all that should believe
through his Disciples word, John 17.20. Saint Paul testifies, Romans 10.9, 10.
Romans 5.17.
he that believes in his heart shall be saved; declares that they that have
the gift of righteousness (which he defends to be by Faith) shall reign in
life, Romans 8.30.
and accordingly conjoynes justified (viz. by Faith) and glorified; and
asserteth this to be according to Gods design in Election, and terms in
Vocation; 2 These. 2.13, 14. 1 Timothy 1.14, 15, 16.
sets forth himself as an encouraging example of the exceeding abundant grace
of our Lord through Faith, to all though great sinners like himself, that
should believe on Christ to life everlasting. (...). Cyril. This Saint John
accounts so clear and unquestionable, that he writes to them that believe, 1
John 5.13.
that they may know that they have eternal life: So unlimitedly true is that of
Habakkuk, The Just shall live by his Faith. Hab. 2.4.
Deus oleum misericordiae (and gloriae) ponit in vase fiduciae. Bern.

Secondly, How Salvation is the effect of Faith. Here consider these three
things.

1. The natural aptitude and fitness of this grace of Faith, to be made use of
in the way of saving man that had broken the first Covenant, and could not be
saved thereby; yea, so fit is faith as to be necessary upon supposition of Gods
saving sinners by a New Covenant in the hands of a Mediator, and Surety, and
his Righteousness: There must be an appropriation of that to the sinner, and
making all his own; and this must be by voluntary acceptance; self-confidence
and boasting must be prevented; now faith alone could do this, as before has
been shown.

2. The institution of God making this fitness of Faith useful and effectual
to this end Salvation; for be it never so fit, yea, necessary, so that
Salvation could not be brought about without it; and suppose (per hypothesin
impossibilem) which yet could not be, that man had believed upon the Redeemer,
and God had not said, Believe, and thou shall be saved, Faith had not reached
Salvation; Phil. 3.9.
therefore it is called the righteousness of God, which is by Faith in the Son
of God, even of his finding out and appointing. Even as Sacramental signs, are
and must be fit to represent what they are appointed for; (as Aug. Epist. 23.
ad Bonif. Oportet similitudinem habeant earum rerum, quarum sunt Sacramenta,
quam si non haberent, non essent Sacramenta) yet they work not naturally, but
by Divine institution, as a means of Faiths maintaining and increase; so Faith
to Salvation.

3. The Dignity and Merit of the object of Faith is to be considered; for
though it be said, 1 Pet. 1.9. Receiving ((...) mercedem, as Beza renders it)
the end, the reward of your Faith; yet is it not of merit; for the way of
Salvation by Faith, is altogether of Grace, as Saint Paul industriously and
abundantly proves. Faith therefore may be considered either qualitative, or
relative; in it self, or with respect to its object: Now not as an habit in us,
or act exerted by us, (though acting, not dead faith saves) not as a work of
the Law required in the first Commandment does faith save, but through the
righteousness of Christ which it apprehends and appropriates: in it self it is
the most indigent and soul-emptying grace that is, and cannot by its own merit
do this; for it is due, being by God commanded, ( Luke 17.10.) imperfect in it
self; for who attaines the highest degrees of faith? and if perfect in its
kind, yet but an imperfect Righteousness, being the fulfilling but of one
Gospel-command.

Thirdly, Why there is this undivided connection between Faith and Salvation The
Prime reason, and that which it must be ultimately resolved into, is the good
pleasure of God, according to which he works all things. There is nothing in
faith bearing proportion to this effect and attainment, so that we may
admiringly say, Even so Father, because it pleases thee.

Secondary and Subordinate reasons:

First, On Gods part, upon supposition of his institution.

1. His Justice, having received a valuable price for Salvation; and this price
being made the sinners own in the way of Gods own appointment; so that
believing sinners may humbly plead with God as a righteous Judge for their
Crown, 2 Timothy 4.8. Romans 3.26.
Gods justice being not only secured, but obliged (in a sense) by Faith.

2. His faithfulness, having in his Word promised Salvation to Faith, as has
been shown.

Secondly, On Faiths part; the reason why God has conjoined certain Salvation
with it, is, because it gives most glory to God of any thing; Romans 4.20. 1 Samuel 2.30.
therefore God entailes glory on it peculiarly; it honors God, and God will
honor them that have it. He that believes, sets to his seal that God is true,
John 3.33.
and every way justifies and advances him.

Properties and notes of Trial, convertible with true Faith, 5. Properties.
and reciprocal (where Faith is, there is this and that; where this and that
are, there is Faith; where Faith is not, there these are not, etc.) and farther
differencing it from other Faith, 2 Cor. 13.5.
which is a needful work; for there is true and false, feigned and unfeigned,
alive and dead; Of these some indeed belong to the former Head of Effects; and
some of them seem not altogether unsuitable to be referred to this Head.

The First shall be a more general Note. True and saving faith receives a
whole Christ upon judgment and choice on Gods term^s. Lord to rule as well as
Jesus to save, the object of Faith in the Text; no separating what God has
joined, and to have a divided Christ, not a whole Christ; salvation, but not
self-denial, etc. True Faith is a considerate thing, (that which has least
depth, Mat. 13 5.
springs up most suddenly) the soul sits down, and weighs, and casts up all
accounts, and compares all things together, misery by sin, undonnesse in self,
terms of salvation, self-denial a fundamental one, taking up the Cross,
following Christ, universally sincere obedience, and what the world, lust, or
Satan can say to the contrary, and says CONTENT to Gods terms, and here the
bargain is made; the soul trusts God contentedly for his part, even privilege,
and resolvedly sets about its own part, even duty. Hence true faith proceeding
deliberately upon Gods terms, is willing to be tried by the Word declaring
those terms: which farther trial according to the Word follows.

Secondly, True and saving Faith is ush^r'd in by godly sorrow, and humility in
a good degree, though they are farther completed afterward upon the sense of
Gods pardoning and accepting love; Ezekiel. 16.63. Mark 1.15. Acts 20.21.
Then shall thou be ashamed, etc. Repent and believe; Repentance toward God,
and Faith in our Lord Jesus Christ, this is Gospel order: The inconsistency
between Faith and Pride, Hab. 2.4.
is evident in that opposition of the souls lifting up, and living by Faith;
and the hinderance of the Jews believing, John 5.44. The Centurions and woman's
Faith were attended with eminent humility. Did not humility and godly sorrow
accompany and bring in faith, the Law could not be our Schoolmaster to bring
us to Christ. This shuts out that easy, merry, proud faith, that springs up
without the dunging of humility, or watering of sorrow according to God.

Thirdly, True and saving Faith is abiding and perseverant, and this upon
supposition of temptations and assaults; for otherwise a mock-faith may have a
continuance, and men dye in a pleasing dream of ungrounded presumptuous
confidence. Now it must be such, or cannot be saving; for as it is said, He
that believes shall be saved: Mark. 16.16. Mat. 24.13.
so he that endures to the end shall be saved. They that have true Faith, have
the seed of God abiding in them, the prayer of Christ for them, are kept by the
power of God; for he that has begun a good work will finish it, his gifts
being without repentance. Believing and sealing for security are conjoined:
Ephesians. 1.13.
The true believer is the wise man that built on the Rock, Mat. 7.24, 25.
his house therefore stood; the good ground that has death of earth, Mat. 13.
Heb. 10.38, 39.
that what springs may not wither. The just shall live by his faith, continue
therein, and so believe to the saving his soul, being rooted and established
therein through Christ. Col. 2.7.
See more of this before under the efficient cause, principal and instrumental.

Fourthly, True and saving Faith is growing, though this growth be not always
discernable, or alike: That prayer for increase of Faith, flowed from the very
nature of Faith; Luke 17.5.
it is the good fight, which must be carried on to a complete conquest; running
a race, 1 Timothy 6.12. 2 Timothy 4.7. Prove. 4.18.
speaking progress to the finishing our course; for the way of the just is as
light that shines more and more to a perfect day. Whatever has life has
growth, till it reach a state of consistency. 1 John 5.13.
Saint John wrote to those that did believe, that they might believe, Vt
credatis, credere pergatis (which belongs to the last Head) and fide crescatis.
Beza in loc. i. e. grow in faith, according to the general Apostolical precept
of growing in all grace. The same Author accounts this the most plain and
natural interpretation of that of Paul, from Faith to Faith, Fide, Romans 1.17.
quae quotidie incrementum accipiat; confirming it by that of Clement of
Alexandria, The Apostle speaks not of a double Faith, but of one, and that
receiving growth and perfecting. The Apostles (...) furtherance of faith, Col.
2.7.
Phil. 1.25. and (...), establishing and abounding in the Faith; speak increase
and growth in root and branches; more fixed habit, more frequent acts. They
therefore that have believed ever since they were born, and always alike, never
believed at all truly.

Fifthly, True and saving Faith is Purging; Act 1 Rom 8.1, 4
purifying their hearts by Faith: Believing and walking not after the flesh are
joined: where there is Faith (and much more assurance of Faith) there will be
heart and body cleansed and washed; Heb. 10.22, 23 2 Cor. 7.1. 1 Pet. 1.4. 1
John 3.3.
pollutions of flesh and spirit taken away by faith, receiving the promise of
the undefiled inheritance; the believer will purify himself, as he is pure in
whom he trusts and hops. Living flesh will purge out the Sanies and
corruption in it; a living Fountain, the mud that is stirred up; so living
faith: And indeeed hereby it is permanent, for purity preserves; pure Faith
cannot be kept but in a good, even a clean conscience. 1 Timothy 1.19.


Sixthly, True and saving faith has other graces accompanying it, in a good
measure, with a proportionable increase, strength and activity; I know some are
more eminent for this, others for that grace; as Moses for meekness, Job
patience, Abraham Faith, etc. yet in good measure must other graces accompany;
for this is an indispensable duty, to add to Faith temperance, 2 Pet. 1.5.
patience, brotherly kindness. Faith with many other graces, are called in the
singular number ((...)) the fruit of the Spirit, because connex and
inseparable, Gal. 5.22. Besides that the growth, and strength, and activity of
other graces have dependence upon it; both as it pleads with Christ in prayer
for all, and pleads with the soul to act, stir up, and abound in all. Abraham's
faith had self-denial accompanying it; there will be patience, for he that
believes will not make have. See more tending to this under the fifth effect
of faith. Let not men speak of their faith then, when other graces are no way
suitable.

Seventhly, True and saving Faith is working and fruitful; though love and good
works are not the form of it, (as the Papists plead) yet it always has love
accompanying. Gal. 5.6. James 2.17.
Ephesians. 1.15. and works by love, and without works is dead. Per opera
consummatur fides, non ut formatum per suam formam, sed ut forma per suas
operationes, actus primus per actum secundum. Alting. Faith alone justifies,
but Faith which justifies is not alone. Bona opera non praecedunt
justificandum, sed sequuntur justificatum. They that are in Christ Jesus by
Faith, are described by walking in Christ, and according to the Spirit: Quomodo
accipitur? fide: quomodo ambulatur in eo? ad praescriptum voluntatis ejus vitam
instituendo, and ex ejus Spiritu vivendo. Zanch. in Col. 2.6. Faith is
obediential, Romans 16.26.
and cannot but be so; for he that believes really, his labor shall not be in
vain in the Lord, cannot in reason and holy ingenuity, 1 Cor. 15.58.
but think it meet he be fruitful and abounding always in the work of the Lord;
Alii cogitant, pii credunt. Aug.
for others they do but think, not know the greatness and certainty of the
reward. Yea indeed that assurance I before spoke of, proceeds from Faith
through obedience; By this we know that we know him (know put for believe,
Zanch. in loc. as Isa. 53.11.) if we keep his Commandments: I shall therefore,
according to St. Paul's command to Titus, affirm constantly this as a faithful
saying, Tit. 3.8.
That they which have believed, must be careful to maintain good works.

Eighthly, True and saving Faith trusting God for the greater, will trust him
for lesser mercies. To them that through Christ do believe in God, 1 Pet. 1.21.
this will seem forcible arguing, and a necessary inference, He that spared not
his own Son, but delivered him up (I believe) for me, Rom 8.32.
how will he not with him give me also all things freely? God has made all
sorts of promises to true Faith; and accordingly many of the Servants of God
have expressed confidence in God when things have gone worst with them; they
would not be afraid what man can do unto them, nor of evil tidings; Psalm. 11.7.
their hearts were fixed trusting in the Lord: The just's living by Faith is
true in this sense also: Gal. 2.20.
and that of Paul's living the life in the flesh by the Faith of the Son of God,
has much in it. Though I know natural timorousness, and living too much the
life of sense may occasion some worldly fears in a Believer; as boldness of
temper, carelessness, false confidence may much bear up an unbeliever: Yet in
great measure their pretenses to faith are questionable (I might say their
faith is but pretense) who say they can trust God with their Souls, but will
not trust him with bodies and estates.

Ninthly, 1 Pet. 2.7. Verse. 8. Isa. 53.2. Cant. 5.9.
True and Saving Faith makes Christ very precious to them that believe. (...),
but to the unperswadable, he is a stone of stumbling, without form or
comeliness; they ask the believer What is thy beloved more than another? And no
wonder; for none but the believer has a cleared eye to behold things that a^e
spiritually discerned: Toll meum and toll Deum. Psalm. 34.8. Psalm. 104.34.
None but he has that special interest which inhanceth the price and
valuation: None but he has that experience, by which it is tasted and seen
that the Lord is good: But sight, propriety, and experience will make him
inestimably precious, and the meditation of him sweet; Faith that sees his
necessity, sees also his excellency, and takes him not upon constraint but
choice.

Those things that are ^pposite to true Faith, are of two sorts. 6. Opposites.


First, Such as speak the soul void of it, and are simply inconsistent with it.

Secondly, Such as actively war against it, and repel it. These I shall call
Contrarily Opposite, those Privatively Opposite; though the terms may seem not
fully suitable to all the particulars.

Some things are Privatively Opposite to true and Saving Faith, Privatively.
as relating to the Understanding; others as to the Will; others as to the Life.

First, As to the Understanding and Assent.

1. Ignorance, bilndness, darkness (of the inconsistency of which with Faith,
see before of the Word, the Instrumental Cause) This either is invincible
Ignorance, Act. 17.30.
where means of cure are wanting: Or Vincible, which carelessness, sloth, or
affectation causes; for there are some persons willingly and wilfully
ignorant, 2 Pet. 3.5. Joh. 3.19.
and love darkness.

2. Unperswadableness to assent to the truth of the Word and Promise: (...),
Impersuasibilitas: Rom, 11.30, 31
When men are not satisfied in the grounds of believing, and so assent not:
wherein yet sometimes there is a battery shaking the Assent, and by parley
bringing near a surrender; Act. 26.28.
an almost persuasion, which yet is ineffectual.

3. Error in Fundamentals; especially those that concern Faith, Christ, the
Promises, Justification and salvation. Corrupt minds are reprobate concerning
the Faith, 2 Timothy 3.8. Therefore doubtful Disputations, Romans 14.1.
where on one side is error, are dangerous to the weak.

Secondly, As to the Will, Affections and Consent.

Heb. 2.3.
1. Unbelief, not accepting the good things promised through ignorance or
careless neglect of great salvation.

2. Disbelief, when men through dissatisfaction with the reasons to believe, or
through pride, stubbornn^ss, uncompliance of spirit, Joh: 5:39, 40, 44.
WILL not come to Christ for life, will not submit to the righteousness of God.

Thirdly, As relating to Life, practice and profession.

1. Heresy is Privatively Opposite: Such as join obstinacy and promulgation to
their errors, 2 Timothy: 2.16.
whose words eat like a gangrene, Tit: 3.10.
are to be rejected, as men void of, and enemies to the Faith.

2. Apostasy from the truth and profession of the Gospel called denial, viz.
after knowing and owning. These never were of the Faith, 1 John: 2.19.
else would they not have gone from it. This is a dangerous thing, drawing back
to perdition; in such God has no pleasure: Heb: 10.38. 2 Pet: 2.21.
It had been better for them never to have known, etc. This commonly ends in
bitterest enmity to the Faith and true professors of it.

3. All sins laying waste the Conscience are inconsistent with faith: because
Faith and a good conscience are inseparable companions. 2 Timothy: 3.9.


Contrarily.
By way of Contrariety, there may be considered these things (possibly some also
under the former head, in part,) as Opposite to true Faith.

First, Flesh and blood; these cannot enter into the kingdom of G d, and oppose
faith that would bring thither. I name this first, because it is the greatest
enemy, and gives advantage to all others, and then indeed are we tempted (to
unbelief, or any thing else) when we ^re drawn aside of our own hearts. By
Flesh and blood is meant Sense, 2 Cor: 5.7.
living by sense is the great hinderer and supplanter of Faith: Also Carnal
reason judging every thing by its own unsuitable apprehensions, and so
misrepresenting the things of God: to it the Gospel is foolishness, though it
is the wisdom and power of God to them that believe: This takes notice of the
meanness of the faithful in the world, and stumbleth at it, etc. Abraham left
both these Servants below when he went up into the Mount to the Lord, to
exercise that eminent Faith of his: Rom: 4.18.19, etc.
Yea indeed Sense and Reason appeared eminently contrary to him in his
entertaining the ^romise at first; else had not the great strength of his Faith
been manifested, nor God glorifi d so much.

Secondly, Satan's assaults: He not only at first keeps out Faith, by blinding
men's minds, 2 Cor: 4.4.
but afterward does with Faith as the King of S ria charged his Captains to do
with the King of Israel: He knows what an enemy to h^s kingdom Faith is; 1
King. 22.31.
by it we resist him, and consequent^y put him to flight and quench his darts:
He knows if our Faith fail, all fails, Luke 22.31. Luke 8.12.
and therefore he desires to winnow the soul, and get the go^d seed out of our
hearts, lest we should believe and be saved.

Thirdly, The World is a great adversary: 1 John 5.4.
Why else is Faith called the Victory over the world, but that there is
hostility between the world and it?

Fourthly, I might add m ns own delays. 1. Causing hardness in their hearts
from themselves: To day, to day believe, Heb: 2.15. Joh: 12.38, 39, 40.
unless you would harden your hearts. 2. Provoking God to seal men up under
their injudicious unperswadable minds, for their long opposition to the light
and word of Faith. Gen: 6.3. Act: 7.51.
The Spirit of Faith will not always strive, when men still resist him.

I shall improve all that has been spoken by some few Uses, and conclude.

Uses shall be Corollaries for Information.

1. Of the certain and u ^peakable misery of ^he unbeliever, Information.
from the sure happiness of the believer. Contrariorum contraria est
consequentia. Remember what has been spoken before of the excellent Effects
and Consequents o^ Faith, Union with Christ, Justification, Adoption, etc. and
that great and everlasting fruit Salvation: upon all which we may conclude with
the Apostle, Gal: 3.9.
blessed are they which be of Faith (or believe) with faithful Abraham: Luk 45.
yea therefore blessed is he tha b^liev^th, because there shall be a
performan^e of ^ll tho e things which have been spoken of the Lord: Now turn
the Table, invert the sense, read all backward, understand all contrary of the
unb^liever: No union with, but separation and distance from Christ: No pardon
of sin, reconciliation and justification, but guilt in fu l force, the curse of
the Law, John 3^.36.
(and so he is left to stand or fall by himself) and the wrath of God are upon
him: No Adoption of Sons, but rejection as spurious, and a Sonship to the
Devil, the god of this world, etc. No Salvation, Mark. 16.16. Joh. 3.18.
but inevitable condemnation; He that believes not shall be condemned, yea is
condemned already, because he believes not in the name of the only begotten
Son of God: i. e. his present state is a state of certain damnableness, as sure
as if he were condemned already: Not that there can be no believing afterward,
and recovery thereby; 1 Cor. 6.11.
for who then should be saved? for such were some (yea all) of them that are
justified by faith in the name of the Lord Jesus, as the Apostle speaks of
other sinners. He that believes not makes God a liar; 1 John 5.10. Joh. 3.36.
but he shall find him exactly true to his cost, in such words as these, He
that believes not the Son shall not see life: The unbelieving (as well as more
carnal sinners) shall have their part in the lake which burns with fire and
brimstone, Rev. 21.8.
which is the second death. Heb. 3.12. Joh. 5.40. Act. 13.46. Matthew. 13.58.
Men by unbelief depart from the living God; will not come for life; and judge
themselves unworthy of eternal life; and bring a kind of impotency upon the
Omnipotent as to the doing them any good: No wonder then if Jesus wondered at
their unbelief that held his hands from helping them. Mark 6.5, 6.
Oh! how much better were it for them among us that believe not, that they had
never had offers of Salvation, never heard the Gospel of the Grace of God!

2. It is no small matter to be saved, since Faith is such a thing as before
described, and without it there is no Salvation: Should Christ now come, should
he find Faith on the earth? Alas, the small number of those that shall be
saved, there being so few Believers, though so many Professors of Faith among
Christians! This is sadly manifest in the gross Ignorance of the most, and
suitable apprehensions in the Doctrine of Faith of very few: In the Errors,
Heresies, Apostasies of many, even denying the Lord that bought them: In the
altogether contradictory life of most to that Faith they pretend to have, which
(as well as Repentance) should have fruits meet for it brought forth, and
accordingly it is known. No wonder if they that take true Saving Faith to be no
more than Assent, and a professed owning the Doctrine of the Gospel, a
Confidence (at all adventures) of Gods love, etc. or some such thing, think the
way to heaven broad, and wonder at any speaking of the paucity of those that
shall be saved.

3. Hence take notice of the Reasonableness of the Christian Religion. 1. That
God requires no more but Believe: Other things indeed are required, but they
naturally flow from faith, are inseparably linked with faith, and faith cannot
be without them; faith is the great work of God, and command of the Gospel. 2.
That this is so suitable: Without faith no salvation can be apprehended as
attainable by the new Covenant; by it comes union to, and interest in the
person of the Mediator; by it is the appropriation and application made of what
he has done and suffered in sinners behalf; by it is acceptance given to Gods
gracious offers in the Gospel. What more meet, and just, and necessary? are not
Gods ways in requiring faith equal?

4. Behold the danger of ignorance, or mistake in this great fundamental point,
upon which salvation or damnation have such immediate and necessary dependence;
in other matters not so great danger: How justly censurable then is the folly
of those that cannot patiently hear the doctrine of faith, but think of time
laid out upon it, as Judas of the ointments expense, What needs this waste? But
truly, if you are ignorant of Gods righteousness (which is by faith in the Son
of God) you will take other ways in which ye cannot find salvation, ye will ye
will go about to establish your own righteousness, Romans 10.3.

5. The usefulness and needfulnes of a Gospel Ministry is hence manifest.
Faith comes by hearing; Romans 10.14, 15.
How shall they believe on him of whom they have not heard? and how shall they
hear without a Preacher? etc. How beautiful upon the Mountains are their feet,
that bring the glad-tidings of salvation, and as workers together with God,
build up precious souls in their holy Faith.

The second sort of Uses shall be made up of conjoined Exhortation and
Admonition; Admonitory exhortations. Exhort.


First, Labor after this Faith, Heb. 3.12
and take heed lest there be in you an evil heart of unbelief; Evil it is to
God, it dishonors him, and disappointeth him; Evil to us, deprives us of our
offered happiness, and brings upon us swift destruction; certain and
aggravated condemnation; take heed of this gross self-murder of unbelief; make
use of the means before prescribed for the begetting and increase of Faith, and
beware and oppose those things that are Opposite unto faith: This Exhortation
is to al.

Secondly, To those that pretend they have faith. Try whither your faith be
right or no: and to th^s end make use of, and apply those notes and properties
of faith before handled: Yet spend not so much time in trying whether you have
it, as in exercising it, (in this many weak Christians are very faulty;) and
this will be the way to make all sure for you, and in due time clear to you.

Thirdly, To those that upon trial find they have this excellent grace of faith.

1. Rejoice and comfort your selves against all your sins, fears, the worlds
troubles, Satan's temptations; for as to all thou art more than Conqueror. Romans
5.2.
If thou believe, rejoice in hope of the glory of God; for he that believes
shall be saved.

2. Bless God and boast not; there is no cause of boasting, faith is the gift of
God; there is cause of thansgiving, it is the hand to receive all other gifts. If
ye hope for salvation by faith, be humble and glory not, for boasting is
excluded by the Law of Faith, Romans 3.27
the constitution of faith for the salvation of sinners thereby. If ye stand by
Faith, be not high-minded; if ye abound in Faith, Col. 2.7.
abound therein with thanksgiving, for ye ow the more.

Romans 1.17
3. Live by faith. Paul from Habakkuk asserts the just shall live by faith, and
propounds his own example of living by the faith of the Son of God. Be much in
the actings and exercise of Faith, and make your lives full of the fruit and
efficacy of faith; yea, peculiarly exercise faith in dependence upon God for
the support and perseverance of your faith. Draw down to practice what you know
of faith, and ye shall know more satisfactorily the Doctrine of faith, than the
wisest in the world according to the letter. Live by the Faith of the Son of
God (it is not notion, but action; not word, but life) and then wait till faith
shall be turned into vision, and being perfected be abolished, having done its
work, and then at least ye shall be fully satisfied concerning it.

2 Timothy 2.1.
4. Labor to be strong in the grace of Faith that is in Christ Jesus; not only
for your own sakes, to avoid those anxieties which weakness of faith causes;
but for Gods sake, that by strong faith ye may with Abraham the father of the
faithful, Romans 4.20.
give much glory to God, who has annexed glory to believing.

5. Pity them that do not believe, and labor to propagate your faith. Whose
soul, that by faith are themselves secured, would not bleed in consideration of
the dangerous, yea, certainly miserable estate (as before described) of
unbelieving friends, relations, acquaintance? Warn them, exhort them while it
is called to day, pray for them; yea, strengthen the weak in faith, and offend
them not by going to the utmost bounds of your Christian liberty.

6. Esteem them precious that have this precious faith, and have not the Faith
of Christ with respect of persons: Jam. 2.1. Verse 5.
Let the poor of the world that are rich in faith, and heirs of the Kingdom,
be honorable in your esteem, as they are in Gods.

REPENTANCE NOT TO BE Repented, Plainly Asserted, and Practically Explained.
Acts 5.31. Him has God exalted with his right hand to be a Prince and a
Savior, for to give repentance to Israel, and forgiveness of sins.


REpentance being the Subject of this day, in the course of this months
exercise to be discussed: I must wave the Coherence and Connection of the Text;
only desire you to note, that the Apostles assert the prerogative of Christ, as
their Apology for their disobedience to humane commands; when they forbidden,
did proceed to preach, and a reason thereof is demanded; the answer is made in
short, Whether we obey God or man, judge ye: Jesus Christ is exalted to be a
Prince and a Savior, to subdue his enemies by Repentance, and support his
Subjects by Remission of sin.

The Text presents us with two parts considerable.

1. A Donor, Jesus Christ exalted to be a Prince and a Savior.

2. The Donation, and that is double. Repentance. Remission of sin.


Answerable to the parts of the Text, the Doctrines which might be inferred to
our instruction, would be two.

Doct. 1. Repentance and Remission of sins, are the especial acts and
advantages of Jesus Christ his exaltation.

Doct. 2. It is the sole prerogative of the Lord Jesus, to give Repentance and
Remission of sins.

But I must not insist on a formal discussion of either of these doctrines; my
work and intention being to unfold, and practically explain the nature of that
most necessary (at all times, though now more especially) grace of true
Gospel-Repentance; And therefore praetermitting the doctrines, let me propound
to your serious consideration, these four things, viz. the, 1. Nature Of
Gospel-Repentance. 2. Necessity Of Gospel-Repentance. 3. Notes or Characters Of
Gospel-Repentance. 4. Next way or means Of Gospel-Repentance.


First then of the nature of Repentance; and in opening it I shall not trouble
you with the curious and critical considerations of the word, or the various
descriptions of the thing set down by many sound and pious Ambrose de poenit.
Aretii problem. tom. 1. l. 3. Dani. Dike. Stock, with many others. Repen. de
fin.
Authors: but briefly propound unto you this general description, as that
which comprizeth in it the nature and particular parts of true Repentance, viz.

Repentance is a grace sup^rnatural, whereby the believing sinner sensibly
affected with, and afflicted for his sin as committed against God; freely
confessing, and fervently begging pardon, turns from all sin to God.

Instead of a logical division, and discussion of this description, I shall
distribute it into these Theological conclusions, as most proper for your
capacities, and profitable for your instruction.

1. Repentance is a grace supernatural.

2. The believing sinner is the subject of true Gospel-Repentance, whereby the
believing sinner, etc.

3. Sense of, and sorrow for sin as committed against God, are the precursive
acts of true Repentance: sensibly affected with, and afflicted for his, etc.

4. A turning from all sin to God, is the formality of true Repentance.

5. Confession of guilt and supplication for pardon, are constant concomi^ants
of Gospel-Repentance.

These several Conclusions I shall briefly and distinctly explain, whereby I
hope you will well understand the nature of Repentance; and first of the first,
(viz.)

Repentance is a grace supernatural. It is a grace in its nature, supernatural
in its Author, Original, quality and operation; Repentance is a grace in its
nature; not only as it is freely given us of God, without the least merit of
ours, but also as it is a gift animating and enabling unto action; That which I
intend you especially to note, when we say Repentance is a grace, is this,
(viz.) that it is an habit, power, principle, spring, root, and disposition;
not a bare, single, and transient action, as the Papists, and some ignorant
souls do imagine: Repentance is different and distinct from all penitential
acts; sighing, self-castigation, and abstinence from all sinful actions, are
fruits and expressions of repentance, but not the grace it self; for that
diffuseth it self into the heart, and disposes, habituateth, and enableth to
all acts of sorrow for, and cessation from sin: The repentance which is given
of God, is not an action, but power, principle, and frame of spirit: The power
and principle is divine, but act and exercise of repentance is humane; God
plants the root whereby man brings forth fruit worthy repentance, Matthew. 3.8.
Repentance is no other but a spirit of grace, animating men to mourn, Zech.
12.10. Repentance is not the work of an hour, or a day, but a constant frame,
course and bent of the soul, on all renewed guilt flowing afresh, and bringing
forth renewed acts. When the mighty hand of God does smite the flinty heart of
man, it loses its stone and hardiness, becomes pliable to divine pleasure, is
inclined to relent, and prone to distill its heavenly dew: and therefore it is
called a grace; as in its nature Repentance is a grace, so in its Original and
operation it is supernatural; a grace freely given from above, not acquired by
any means or merit of our own, but springing into the soul by the mere good
Will of God, and immediate power of the holy Ghost; however Repentance must be
acted, it cannot be acquired by man; it lies out of the reach of humane arm,
and must be the effect of an Almighty hand, even the influence of God himself;
there is not in man the least merit of condignity or congruity, that can engage
divine justice to bestow it: No; it is a good and perfect gift, James 1.17.
and comes down from above, and is given by the Father of lights. In vain do
men seek Repentance in any natural means; for birth, breeding, education,
instruction, art, knowledge, moral swasion, friendly advice, 1 Cor. 3.6, 7.
and Gospel Ministry it self cannot work it, without the immediate operation of
an omnipotent Spirit; that will, and that indeed only can work above, and
contrary to the course of Nature; God only can take away the stony heart, and
give an heart of flesh. Ezekiel. 36.26.
It is the sole and singular prerogative of Christ Jesus exalted, to give
Repentanc; all means and Ministry are but a Moses Rod, a mere passive
instrument; only the might of Gods hand can make man's Rocky heart relent;
Ministers must indeed preach in season and out of season, yet it is but a
peradventure that God will give repentance, 2 Timothy 2.25. In vain do men dally
with, and delay repentance, when God calls, determining to themselves time
wherein to repent, as if it were within the reach of their own arm, or at the
command of corrupt nature, whilst (God knows) they may see their set time
(though that it self is doubtful) and yet find no place for repentance, though
they seek it with tears; Repentance is not the result of purest nature, nor
yet the effect of the Law, but a pure Gospel grace; preached by the Gospel,
Dykes Treat. of Rep. p 3, 4.
promised in the Covenant, sealed in Baptism, produced by the Spirit, properly
flowing from the blood of Christ, and so is every way supernatural; so that
every returning sinner must pray to God, Je^. 31.18, 19.
Turn thou me, and I shall be ^urned; and the praise of Repentance obtained,
must be returned to God alone, 1 Pet. 1.3.
as him from whom it has been derived; for it is a grace supernatural; But
secondly,

The believing sinner is the subject of Gospel-repentance. Whosoever repents,
charge himself with guilt, and must needs be a sinner. Adam in innocence had
no repentance, because no sin; and the Lord Jesus says, he came not to call
the righteous, but the sinner to repentance, Matthew. 9.12. Returns do follow
upon deviations, remorse upon disobedience, and repentance is the work of a
transgressor.

But the Subject of Gospel-Repentance, must be a believ^ng sinner; a sinner not
only of sense, but also of hope; not only of conviction, but also of
confidence, seeing a pardon procured for sin committed. Faith must be the
formal qualification of a Gospel-penitent, as the very foundation and fountain
of true repentance; unbelief is the very ground of impenitency, and lock of
obduracy. Gods common complaint of impenitent Israel, is, they believed not,
Psalm. 78. Then faith must needs unlock and release the soul unto its return
to God; for contrariorum eadem est ratio, the reason is the same to contraries.
Saint Ambrose calls faith incendium poenitentiae, the spur of repentance; and
the Scripture does suggest to be the pumpe of repentance. Psalm. 130.4. There is
mercy with thee, that thou should be feared. Hence it is that the objects of
faith become arguments, and the promises of grace, persuasions to repentance,
Jer. 3.13. The approach of the Kingdom of God, is the only argument urged by
John the Baptist, and our Savior, Mat. 3.2, 4, 17.
to enforce Repentance; mercy apprehended, animateth the miserable sinner to
return to God. Israel mourned, but made no return until Shecaniah cried,
There is yet hope in Israel concerning this thing, Ezra 10.2. The Assyrians put
halters on their necks, knowing that the Kings of Israel are merciful. The Law
shutting the door of hope, may stir up grief, and horror, but it staveth off
Repentance; sin seeming unpardonable, sets the soul at a distance from God,
and sinks it in despair, whilst the pardon proclaimed provokes Rebels
submission. Nemo possit poenitentiam agere nisi qui speraverit indulgen iam; no
hope, no help to repentance, says Saint Ambrose. Repentance is argued from,
Gerhard. meditat. secund. Exercitium poenitentiae ex dominica passione.
and effected by the death of Christ; Mount Calvary is the proper Bochim; the
sufferings of a Savior the sad comments upon sin; the sighs and groans of a
Redeemer, most rending to r^gardlesse hearts; and the sweat and blood of the
Lord most soaking and suppling to an Adamantine soul; but faith only
apprehends and applies a crucified Christ: Repentance the souls Pump is
dry, and distills no water, until faith pour in the blood of Christ, and
water of Gospel-promises; so that Faith must precede Repentance, as the cause
to the effect, the mother before the daughter; for it must qualify the true
Penitent: It is a mystery beyond the reach of nature, that a Son should coexist
in time with the Father; but neither reason nor faith can allow a priority of
the daughter before the mother.

I well know many Divines assert the precedence of Repentance unto faith; but
to my judgment it is more than probable, yea, positively clear, that in order
of time, Faith and Repentance are infused together into the soul; in order of
sense, and man's feeling, Repentance is indeed before faith; but in Divine
method, and the order of nature, Faith is before Repentance, as the Fountain
is before the Stream.

But it is objected that the order of Scripture does set Repentance before
faith; so in preaching, Mark 1.15. Mat. 3.2. Luke 3.3. Acts 2.38. and 3.19. And
Repentance is required as the qualification which must entitle to the promises,
remission of sin is only offered to the penitent; so that Repentance is the
reason of faith, and ground on which we believe sin is pardoned.

In Answer to this Objection; I shall propound unto your Observation three
Rules which make a full and ready resolution to it.

Order of Scripture does not always conclude order of nature; in 2 Pet. 1.10.
Calling is mentioned before Election, yet who will deny Election to be first in
nature? for whom God predestined, them he also called, Romans 8.30. Again, in 1 Timothy 1.5. Acts 15.9.
The pure heart, and good conscience is mentioned before faith; yet none can
deny them to be the effects of faith, which purifieth the heart; for to the
unbelieving, nothing is pure, but their very mind and conscience is defiled,
Tit. 1.15.

Humane sense is in many things the Dictator of Scripture order: The Holy Ghost
speaks of things as they are, obvious to our sense and capacity, rather than
as they are in themselves, and their own order: Hence it is that the promises
of peace, pardon, and the like privileges are propounded unto Repentance, as a
qualification obvious to our sense, and evidencing our faith: Faith and
Election must be known a posteriori, by their effects, Repentance and Vocation,
and therefore are mentioned after them: For though we Believe before we Repent,
we Repent before we know that we do Believe.

Misappreh^nsion of the nature of Grace, does easily lead into a mistake of the
order of Grace. Such as deem common illumination and conviction to be
Repentance, and Assurance of pardon, joy and peace to be the formality of
faith, may very well place Repentance before Faith; but such as understand the
acceptance of Christ in order to pardon, to be true and saving faith; and a
ceasing from sin, and serious application of our selves to piety, to be the
formality of Repentance, will plainly see that faith uniting us to Christ, and
deriving to us the efficacy of his death and sufferings, that we may be holy,
does Precede, and must needs be the cause of true Repentance.

Let me then dismiss this Rule with this Note or Observation. Note.
Faith in its existence and essential acts, but without its reflection, fruits
and effects, is the foundation and fountain of true Repentance. Such therefore
on the one hand, as apprehend and assent unto the History of the Gospel, and
are sometimes affected with, and afflicted for their sin, but do not accept of
Jesus Christ as tendered to be Lord and Savior, do fix their Engine too low to
force the waters of Repentance into the soul; yet this Devils faith may produce
a Judas Repentance; for an Hypocritical Repentance is the result of an
Historical faith. And on the other hand, he that seeks assurance of his sin
pardoned as an argument of Repentance, makes the effect both cause and effect,
and concludes himself into a condition not needing Repentance, whilst he
pretends to enforce it; but the true frame of a Gospel Penitent, is by saving
faith to see salvation (through the satisfaction of Christ our Savior)
extended to sinners, himself not excluded; and so closing with, accepting of,
and appropriating to himself the general tenders of grace, and terms of the
Covenant, to prostrate himself at the feet of mercy, and pursue his pardon,
until by acts of sincere Repentance, he assure himself his aimed at happiness
is attained, and shall with certainty be possessed; and so he experienceth in
himself, and evidenceth unto all others, that the believing sinner is the
subject of Gospel Repentance; and now I pass to the third Conclusion
considerable in the nature of Repentance.

Sense of, and sorrow for sin as committed against God, are the procursive acts
of true Repentance.

True Repentance (as most Divines determine) does consist in two parts; (viz.)
Humiliation and Conversion; the casting down the heart for sin, 2 Cor. 12.21.
(...). Revel. 9.20. (...).
and the casting off sin: A Repenting for uncleanness and sin, with grief,
shame and anguish; and Repenting from iniquity, Acts 8.22. and from dead works,
Hebr. 6.1. This distinction, or rather distribution of Repentance, is not only
dictated by the denominations of Repentance, which in the Hebrew is called
Nacham, (...).
An irking of the soul; and Teshubba, A t rning from iniquity; so in the Greek,
Metamelia, After-grief; and Metanoia, After-wit; and in the Latin,
Paenitentia, and Resipiscentia; the one expressing the sense and sorrow of the
soul; the other, the retrogradations and returns of it from sin; but the
Scripture also does clearly suggest, nay, speak out these distinct parts of
Repentance, Humiliation and Conversion; requir^ng sometimes the one, sometimes
the other, when Repentance is the duty to be discharged; calling sometimes for
fasting, weeping, and walking in sackcloth and ashes; nay, the rending of the
heart, and not the garmen^s, Joel 2.11, 12. and sometimes, and that very
commonly, for turning to the Lord; nay, the whole work of Repentance is in
Scripture expressed by Humiliation; in the promise of pardon to the penitent,
their Repentance is described to be an humbling of the uncircumcised heart, and
acceptance of the punishment of their sin, Lev. 26.41. So when Rehoboam and
Manasseh Repented, they are only said to humble themselves, 2 Chronicles. 12.6. and
33.2. And under the Gospel we read of Repentance for sin, as well as from sin;
and it is denominated godly sorrow, which works Repentance: 2 Cor. 7.10.
Working not only as a cause but complement, perfecting, finishing, and
completing Repentance, and therefore the Apostle James requires them that draw
nigh to God, and clean their h art, and purify their hands, that they be
afflicted, mourn and weep, and humble themselves under the hand of God, James
2.8, 9, 10. And the Covenant of Grace promising Repentance, does express it
self by these two acts; you shall see the evil of yo r ways, and loa h your
selves because of your iniquities and ab^minations: And I w^ll put my Spirit
within you, and cause you to walk in my ways, Ezekiel. 36.27, 31.

So that according to the expressions of Scripture, as well as the experiences
of the Saints, Humi^iation of the s^ul is an essential act, and eminent part of
Repentance; and this is that which I in the description do denominate sense of,
and sorrow for sin, as committed against God, thereby intending to note unto
you, that the soul must be humbled that will be lifted up by the Lord; and his
humiliation does, and must consist of these two parts, Conviction and
Contrition, sight of, and sorrow for sin.

The first part of humiliation is, A Spirit of Conviction, First part of
humiliation.
or sight of sin in every penitent soul, which is no other than the operation
of the Holy Ghost opening the blind eye to see the deviations of the soul, and
the destruction inevitably attending the persistance in it; this act of
Repentance and Humiliation, is no other but the Prodigals return to himself in
sense of his own starving condition, whilst his fathers servants have bread
enough; Luke 15.17.
Romans 7.9.
the arrival of the Law unto the reviving of sin in Paul's sense and feeling;
the communing with our hearts, that we may tremble, Psalm. 4.5.
and not sin; a searching and trying our ways, that we may return unto the
Lord; a smiting on the thigh, with a What have we done? Lam. 3.39.
the smiting of David's heart, 2 Samuel 24.10.
with an I have sinned against the Lord; the judging of our selves, that we may
not be judged of the Lord; the Spirit of bondage, which goes before the Spirit
of Adoption: In a word, it is the souls serious erection of a Court in its own
breast, and setting conscience in the Throne, and making a judicial process to
descry and determine its eternal condition; in order to which

1. It spreads before it self the Law of God, as that which must be the Rule of
life, and reason of death and condemnation; the will of God dictating duty, and
dissuading iniquity; awarding recompense according to obedience or
disobedience: In a word, determining of men, Thus do and live, or thus do and
dye; thus I will be worshipped, and you shall be rewarded; in this if you
transgress, you shall be thus punished; the soul sees clearly that the Law is
in nature and necessity, a Schoolmaster to bring us unto Christ, whilst by
serious consideration of its genuine sense, and due extent the soul stands
convinced this is du y enjoined; this is sin inhibited; herein if I offend, not
only in deed and word, but thought or imagination, I am a Transgressor bound
under guilt, and the expectation of judgment; thus the coming of the Law into
Paul's mind, becomes the revival of sin; and Josiah his reading in the Law of
Moses, led him to the tremblings of heart, and renting his garment before the
Lord, 2 Chronicles. 34.18, 19. For as indeed without the Law there is no
transgression, so without the knowledge of the Law there can be no conviction;
ignorance of Divine pleasure is the great obstruction of Repentance; and
therefore the Prince of this world does daily endeavor to blow out the light
of the Word, or to blind the eyes of the sons of men, that they may not see,
and be converted; but God sends his Prophets rising up early, and sending them
to read the Law in the ears of men, that Israel may see his sin, and Judah
her transgression: The first act of Repentance, is the falling of the scales
from off the sinners eyes; the first language of a turning soul, is Lord, what
would thou have me to do? So that the soul humbling, self-examinant, seeing
the Law to be holy, just and good, that which must be the rule and reason of
its condition, it being to arraign and condemn it self, becomes studious of the
Law in its full sense, and due extent, in commands, prohibitions, promises and
threats, and sets before its eye every particular precept, and pondereth the
righteousness of that God who has declared a curse against every one that
continues not in the Law to do it; and so by the justification of, and insight
to the Law of God, exciteth the soul to self-reflexion, and is constrained to
cry out What have I done? whereupon it

2. Surveigheth the past course of his own life; summoneth together all
faculties, powers and members of both soul and body, to make rehearsal of his
past conversation, in word, thought and deed, and to give an exact account of
their conformity or disagreement with the Law of God established, and rule by
which it must be judged; and now he communeth with his hear^, considers his
ways, examineth him ^l^, makes an exact comparison of his life with Gods Law,
lays the li^e close to h s carriage: and so convinces himself of his
deviations and ^rregularities, insomuch that sin reviveth, and he dies; guilt
appears, and grief and shame abounds; his own heart condemns him as
disobedient, and a Transgressor of the Law, that he is constrained to c^y out,
What I should do, I have not done; and I have left undone what I ought to have
done. Romans 7.19.
I have sinned against the Lord; if God be severe to mark what is amiss, I
cannot abide in his presence; for I have not only offended in part of his holy
Law, and broken the least of his Commandments, but I have violated the whole
Law, and am a Transgressor against every Command; nay, he comes on this
consideration to be convinced of his anomy and ataxy, the pravity of his
nature, that enmity to the Law, which is implanted in his very being, and that
irregularity whereby evil is ever present; but to do good he has no mind; so
that he must needs cry out, I have sinned, and must return, or else I perish;
now reproof finds ready acceptance from him; the Ministers of God shall meet
with no murmuring, if they cry unto him Thou art the man; for he is apt and
ready to draw up a Bill of Indictment, and read a large accusation against his
own soul, his iniquities now finds him out, and follows him every where, that
it becomes alive, and appears against him with vigor, not admitting the least
of Apology, but leading him to Condemnation, and laying him open to the Curse
due unto them that break the Law, and therefore he now

3. Sentenceth himself as accursed of God, and bound over to Divine fury; the
conscience of his guilt concludes him under the condemnation of the Law, that
he sees cause to wonder at his very being, concludes himself unworthy the
least of mercy, and God to be just in the greatest of judgments which lie upon
him; and so proceeds to judge himself, and seal up his own soul under the
curse, standing under the continual expectation of Gods fiery indignation to be
revealed from heaven; determining it self a debtor to the Law, and as such,
liable to justice, and in it self unable to make the least satisfaction; so
that now the soul does not only assent unto the Law as true in all its threats,
but app yeth them unto himself, confessing unto him belongs shame and
confusion, hell and horror, woe and eternal misery, that he knows not how to
escape, but if God proceed against him, he is most miserable and undone
forever; and so is constrained with anguish of soul to cry out, What shall I do
to be saved?

This is then the first part of humiliation, when the soul in this due order,
and judicial method of conviction, is brought to a sight of sin, to see God
offended, the Law violated, the soul damned and destinated to everlast^ng woe,
if not Redeemed by the mercy of a God, who has established Jesus Christ his
Son to be a Lord and Savior, to g ve Remissi^n and Repentance, and so it
proceeds to the sorrow for his sin as committed against God.

Second part of humiliation.
The second part then of penitential humiliation, is contrition, or sorrow for
sin as committed against God: Herein the soul is not only acquainted with, but
afflicted for its guilt, seeeth not only that it is a sinner, but sorroweth
under, and is ashamed of so sad and sinful an estate; the stony heart is
broken, the Adamantine soul dissolved; he rends not his garment, but his heart,
and goes out and weepeth bitterly: He sees with shame his many abominations,
and rendeth with soul-distressing sorrow and anguish, the Curse of the Law that
is due unto him; and considers with almost soul-distracting despair, the
doleful estate into which his sin has resolved him; for he sees God with whom
he is not able to plead, to be highly offended, and therefore must with Job
confess that he is n t able to answer when God reproves; Job 40.4, 5.
he is vile, and must lay his hand on his mouth; though in his pride he has
once spoke, yet now he has no answer; yea, twice, but he dare proceed no
further. Well, seeing that all contending with God, is but a da kening counsel
by words wi hout knowledge, and so he becomes submisse and silent under the
saddest of affliction inflicted by God; Psalm 51.4. Lam 3.39.
Crying out, Against thee, thee only have I sinned. And why should a living man
complain for the punishment of his sin? the soul is in it self, confounded on
the sense that God claps his hands against him for his sin, therefore his heart
cannot endure, or his hands be strong, Ezekiel. 22.13, 14. Compunction of spir^t
is the only condition of the convinced Penitent; he sees he is liable to the
curse of the Law, and his only outcry is, What shall we do to be saved? He
being convinced that he has crucified the Lord of life, is pricked at the
heart; and in all approaches unto God he is ashamed and amazed, because a man
o^ polluted lips; nay, Isa. 6.6.
sadly seeing that sin overspreads him, Isa. 64 6.
his very righteousness is as a menstruous cloth; he like the poor Publican,
stands afar off, and dares not so much as lift up his eyes to heaven; and his
only note and echo is, Lord, be merciful to me a sinner; Luke 18.13.
he humbles himself under the hand of God, as having deserved the most heavy
of plagues; his haughty spirit is now laid low within him, he is wholly
resolved into sorrow, even godly sorrow; it is his grief that guilt is on his
spirit; but his greater grief, that his sin is gone out against God, a gracious
and an holy God, a just and an holy Law; his sorrow is a sorrow of candor and
ingenu ty; not so much that he is liable to the lash, and obnoxious to the
curse, as that a Father is offended, the image of his God defaced; his grand
complaint is, I have sinned against God; his soul-affliction, and
heart-trembling is, God is offended; the frowns of God sink deeper, and seize
more sadly on his spirit, than the sharpest of his sufferings; his earnest cry
is for the joy of Gods salvation; he is not only afflicted with the terrors of
the Law, Psalm. 51 12.
which he confesses belongs to him, but is melted with merciful
Ministrations of the Gospel of which he is so unworthy; he cannot look unto
Christ but with a spirit of mourning, moved by the strength of the remedy, to
see the height of his malady, and by the dolor of a Savior, Zech. 12.10.
made sensible of the depth of his misery; by the mercy and love manifested to
so great a sinner, he is led to mourn over a gracious Savior, like Mary
Magdalene, he loves much, and manifests it by lamenting much, Luke 7.47.
because much is forgiven.

Thus then the believing sinner comes home by weeping-crosse, finds
conviction, and contrition, antecedaneous acts unto his conversion, a sense of,
and sorrow for his sin, precursive parts of his Repentance; and God holds this
method in g ving Repentance for sundry wife and gracious ends which he has
propounded to be effected. As,

1. To suit them for, and engage them to set an esteem on Christ Jesus, and the
Remission of sin in him. The whole need not the Physician, but the sick, and
Christ came not to call the righteous to repentance, but the sinner, Mat. 9.12.
The hunted beast fl es to his Den, and the pursued Malefactor to the horns of
the Altar, the chased man-killer to his City of Refuge, so the humbled sinner
unto Jesus Christ; like Paul slain with the sense of sin, and constrained to
cry out, O wretched man that I am, who shall deliver me from this body of sin?
Rom 7.24, 25.
it soon sees and saluteth Christ for his Savior, with an, I thank God
through Jesus Christ, I have gained the victory. The weary and heavy laden are
the men invited to Christ for ease and refreshment; Mat. 11.28.
for indeed such on^y seek him, and can be satisfied in him, and duly savor
him; the full stomach of a proud Pharisee, loathes the honeycomb of Christ his
righteousness; whilst to the hungry appetite of the humbled sinner, the
bitterest passions of a Savior are exceeding sweet; the deeper the sense of
misery, the sweeter is the sense of mercy. How acceptable is the fountain of
living waters to the chased panting heart, Deus oleum non infundit nisi in vas
contritum. Bern.
and the blood of Christ to the thirsty soul and conscience scorched with the
sense of Gods wrath! the broken and the contrite heart is the only Sacrifice
acceptable to God; the wounded Samaritan is the fit object of his compassion; a
Mary Magdalene cannot but love much, when looking on her sins, she sees much
is forgiven.

2. To set them at enmity with sin, and in due submission to his sacred Will.
Sin is natural to the sons of men, and only smart for it will make us sick, and
willing to be rid of it: until God bring Israel into affliction, they regard
him not, but then they seek him daily, Hosea 5.14. An unbroken sinner is as
unfit for Gods instruction, as an unbroken Colt for the saddle, or unfallowed
ground for seed. Manasseh his Bonds break in him the power of his sin; ^ Chron.
33.12
and the shakings of the prison to the heart-ake of the Jailer, makes him
pliable to divine pleasure, Act. 16.30.
What shall I do to be saved? Sense of sin is a principle of submission under
affliction; Why should a living man complain for the punishment of his sin?
Sins revival unto remorse of conscience, constrains Paul's outcry, O wretched
man that I am, who shall deliver me from this body of corruption! the humbled
heart gives an heedy ear to divine instruction; They are not stiff-necked, but
give their hand to the Lord to be led by him, 2 Chronicles. 30.8. and therefore God
will teach the humbl^ his way, Psalm. 25.9. A bruised heart is like soft wax
prepared for divine impression; so that to the end Christ may be of esteem as a
Lord and Savior, the penitent soul must on due conviction cry out, Wherewith
shall I come before the Lord, and bow my self before the High God? shall I come
before him wit^ burnt-offerings, with Calves of a year old? will the Lord be
pleased with thousands of Rams, or ten thousand rivers of oil? shall I give my
fi^st-born for my transgression, or the fruit of my body for the sin of my
soul? Micah 6.6, 7. And to the end we may be set against sin, it must sting the
conscience, and so work us into a willingness to do or suffer the Will of God,
making us with earnestness and resolution, cry when pricked at the heart, What
shall we do to be saved? so that a sight of, and sorrow for sin as committed
against God, are parts of, and essential to true repentance; only before I
pass from this Conclusion, let it be noted, that they are precursive acts:
Repentance cannot be constituted without them; but they are precursive, such as
always go before; sometimes, yea, too often (at least in show and appearance)
without true Repentance. Judas is convinced of, and cast down for sin unto
utter despair, crying out, I have sinned in betraying innocent blood. And Ahab
may humble himself in all external expressions, and many internal operations of
the soul, and yet never be turned unto the Lord. We may not indeed deny that
humiliation, especially in the external acts and expressions goes many times
without conversion and completed repentance, and so we must needs conclude,
Conviction is not true grace, or an estate of saving holiness; but that sad
complaints of guilt may pass from Reprobates and damned souls; yet we must
remember, Repentance or conversion never goes without humiliation, sight of,
and sorrow for sin. In the order of nature men must be convinced of, and
confounded for the evil from which they are converted; we cannot hate and avoid
the evil we do not know, and know to afflict us; and the order of Scripture
does always call to a communing with our hearts, that we may stand in awe, and
not sin; Psalm. 4.5. a searching and trying our ways, before we turn unto the
Lord; the Law must do its work, as a Schoolmaster, to every soul that is
brought to Christ; and the Gospe^ ever sends the prick into the h art of such
as repent unto remission of sin, Acts 2.37, 38. and the spirit of bondage,
before the spirit of Adoption, of power, love, and a sound mind, Romans 8.15.
Preaching Repentance is the opening the blind eye, and the bringing the
Prodigal into his right mind, that in the sense of his sad estate, he may go
unto his father and seek mercy. The work of the Word, is to make them sinners
of sense, that shall come to Christ for cure, to cast down all proud
imaginations, and every high thought which exalts it self, and so to bring
into obedi^nce to Christ, 2 Cor. 10.5. to affect men with guilt and danger,
that they may with fervency cry, What shall we do to be saved? to convince that
the issues of death, will be the end of the way in which they now walk, that
they may flee with desire, and return without delay. In a word, to affect the
heart with the high transgressions of Gods holy Law, the disobedience of a
gracious Father, and offense done to infiniteness, that the soul may down on
its knees, prostrate it self at the footstool of mercy, fly to Jesus Christ
as its Redeemer, Surety, and alone satisfaction, and so sue out its pardon by a
serious return to God; and these are as it were, the pangs of the New Birth,
natural, and necessary, though sometimes abortive and miscarrying; the first
part of sincere repentance, though not always successeful to perfect and
complete it; for although we must not call the convinced conscience a
Gospel-Convert, yet the Convert is always convinced; sense of, and sorrow for
sin, is no infallible sign of saving grace; yet saving grace and sincere
repentance, is never wrought without a sight of, and sorrow for sin as
committed against God; for this is the precursive act of true repentance; and
whenever God will seal up under impenitency, he stops the passage and
possibility of humility, making the ear heavy, and the eye dim, and the heart
hard, lest they should see with their eyes, hear with their ears, and be of
humbled hearts, and so be converted, Mat. 13.15. And so much for the third
Conclusion; but again, in the nature of repentance we must Note,

Turning from all sin to God, is the formality of true repentance. Sincere
conversion is the summa totale, and ratio formalis of a Gospel-penitent;
Remorse for sin without a return from sin, will afford you no comfort; sin is
an aversion from God; and repentance a conversion to God; the common call of
sinners unto repentance, is to turn, and return to G d, Isa. 44.22, 55, 7. Jer.
4.1, 18, 11. and many other places; whenever repentance is promised or
predicated, and spoken of in Scripture, it is ordinary by this term, of
turning, and returning to the Lord, Isa. 19.22. Isa. 59.20. and that not only
in the Old, but also in the New Testament, 1 Pet. 2.25. We were like sheep that
were going astray, but are now returned unto the Shepherd and Bishop of our
souls. Every sinner is toward God, like Hagar resisting the Will, and then
running from the presence of her Mistress, until by the Angel of the
Covenant, called to repentance, and caused to return by weeping-crosse, and
submit under his hand. Like Travelers we are out of the way, and running upon
our ruin, and had need to call one on another, Come, and let us return to our
God, Hos. 6.1. Like the Prodigal we are out of our wits, until by a spirit of
repentance we recover our sound mind, and return to our Father, from whom we
have madly run away, so that the very formality of repentance, is returning.
All Judas conviction and confession, nay, contrition and condemnation will not
constitute a Gospel-penitent for want of conversion. Repentance when it is true
and saving, makes the sinner sadly smite on his thigh, and say, What have I
done? and speedily to face about and say, I will do so no more; the
Gospel-penitent is a positive Changeling, no more the same he was, Old things
are done away, all things are become new; he is really and thoroughly changed;
not in his substance, as the Familists fondly fancy; nor in quantity, measure,
and degree, as common Christians too commonly dream, but in quality, nature,
frame, and disposition; the soul and body in regard of their essence, powers,
faculties, proper and natural actions, remain the same after that they were
before repentance; sorrow, fear, joy, love, desire, natural passions and
affections, are indeed altered, not annihilated, restrained, nay, regulated,
not ruined; but the whole man is in respect of property, bent and disposition
no more the same, but a very Changeling, that it may be said of them as of
Onesimus in time past, unprofitable, but now profitable, Philem. 11. Or as of
the Corinthians, they were Thieves, Fornicators, Idolaters, Adulterers,
Effeminate, Covetous, Drunkards, Revilers, Extortioners, What not; but they are
washed, they are cleansed, they are sanctified; the very best of men before the
grace of God their Savior appear, by the working of Repentance, and renewing
of the Holy Ghost, are as the Apostles themselves were, Foolish, Disobedient,
Deceived, serving diverse lusts and pleasures, rebellious to Gods holy will,
running from his gracious presence, and continually going astray; but when by
the grace of Repentance they see, and are sadned for their aberrations, and
sinful course, they speedily return from all sin to God; so that turning is
their general act and business, and it consists of two parts answerable to the
terms about which it is conversant, and they are, Recession from sin. Reversion
to God.


Or as the Prophet (in the Name of the Lord) phraseth it, a ceasing to do evil,
and learning to do well, Isa. 1.16. Or the wicked man's forsaking his evil way,
and the unright^ous man his thoughts, and returning to the Lord, Isa. 55.7. Or
as the Apostle James, a cleansing your hands you sinners, and purging your
hearts you double-minded; and drawing nigh unto the Lord, James 4.8. The work
of Regeneration does consist in putting off the Old, and putting on the New
man. It is not being conformed to the World, or fashioned ac^ording to the lust
of ignorance; but being transformed by the renewing of our mind, to be holy as
God is holy, Romans 12.2. 1 Pet. 1.14, 15.

First part of conversion.
So that the first part of Conversion is a Recession from all sin; which the
Psalmist calls, a departing from iniquity, Psalm. 34.14, 37.27. as the
original word will bear it, (...)
a substracting from sin, that the number and increase of it may be small, and
at the length amount to just nothing; (...).
and as the Prophet Isaiah, a ceasing from evil; as the Septuagint renders it,
a resting, and being quiet from the practice of iniquity, so in Isa. 1.16. and
at after a forsaking of his evil ways, utterly deserting and relinquishing sin,
Isa. 55.7. this is that which the Apostle calls a casting off, flinging from
us with detestation, and anger the works of darkness, Romans 13.12. so as never
more to have f^llowship with the unfruitful works of darkness, but rather
reprove them, Ephesians. 5.8. Nay, it is an Apostasy from sin to break League
with, and violate all those bonds in which we stand bound to profanesse; and
with rage and resolution rebel against the Sovereignty of sin which it has
exercised over us; if we will call on the Name of the Lord, and become his
Subjects, we must recede, rebel against sin, bid open defiance, and proclaim
open war against it, notwithstanding all those engagements that lie upon us;
(...).
let him depart says our Translation, in the Original, Apostatize from
unrighteousness, 2 Timothy 2.19. Sin has an interest in, and engagement upon
men, by nature they are obliged to follow it, and the whole man is too much
devoted to pursue and obey the dictates of lust; but Repentance discharges
all, and turns the whole man into an estrangednesse to, nay, enmity against
sin; so that both soul and body in faculties and members do withdraw from sin,
the thoughts are now no more engaged to contrive and devise iniquity, nor the
heart to embrace it, or hands to act it; the members of the body are no longer
yielded to be the instruments of unrighteousness; but the contrary is now
effected by Repentance. In a word, the penitent soul recedes and turns from all
sin. First, By the apprehension of his mind, seeing sin and its sinfulness,
he discerns the contrariety of it to the Image of God, by the Law, which is by
the Spirit of Repentance engraven on his heart; he now knows sin, which he
never knew before; he discovers abundance of evil, in what he deemed
exceeding good; he now sees he sinned to the damnation of his soul, in what he
thought to have been good service to God; he is now freed from error, and
readily disowns, and damneth as desperately wicked what he sometimes allowed
and argued for as eminently good; with Jobs proud friends, when penitent, sees
he has need of Gods pardon, and Jobs prayer for the very things he spoke for
God; and like pharisaical Paul, sees horrid unrighteousness in all his
self-righteousnesse of which he had vaunted; so that sin shall no more impose
on his judgment, but he will try all its dictates, and discover the falsehood
that is therein. Secondly, By the alteration of his will and affections; that
he shall not more disallow, than detest the sinfulness of sin; he no sooner
sees his iniquity, but he loatheth himself because of his abominations; sin
was never so much the object of his affections, as now it is the object of his
passions; what he before loved, desired, delighted in, he now by Repentance
hates, fears, envieth with David, he hates every false way, and the very
workers of iniquity; if he be surprised by the difficulty of his estate, or
distemper of his mind, with an act of sin, he loatheth himself because of it,
and with Paul professes, I do the things that I would not do; the very
existency of sin in him, is his intolerable burden, Oh wretched man that I am,
who shall deliver me from this body of corruption, is his outcry? death is
desired, because he would sin no more; he would rather be redeemed from his
vain conversation, than from wrath to come; penitent An^elme had rather bein
hell without, than in heaven with his iniquity, and therefore he yet recedes.
Thirdly, Into an abstinence from, nay, actual resistance of sin; he puts away
the evil of his doings, forsakes his way, abstains from the appearances of
evil; he is now ashamed of what he has sometimes acted with eagerness; he now
preaches the Gospel he sometime destroyed; and blesses the name he
blasphemed; he is not only restrained himself, but he labors to reclaim
others from iniquity; nay, not only is his hand withheld from sin, but his
heart is set against it; his study is to mortify his earthly members, and his
resolution that sin shall not reign in his mor^al body, that he should obey it
in the lust thereof; he is careful to avoid all occasions and inducements unto
evil, he fears to make provision for the flesh, to fulfill the lust thereof;
his hearty prayer is, that he may not fall into temptation, but be delivered
from evil; he resists all sinful assaults, striveth against sin unto very
blood; his righteous soul is grieved for the sins of others; all his complaint
under sorrows is against sin; his care is to be rid of sin, his fear of falling
into sin.

So that the Gospel-penitent makes a perfect recession from sin, all sin, sin
in its kind, not in its species or degree; not only this and that sin, but sin
which is contrary to Gods Law and Image, be it sin small or great, natural, and
near allied unto him, it is his care to keep himself from his own iniquity; the
sin of his complexion, calling, constitution, or condition; he will not indulge
his right eye, or right hand in opposition to Gods holiness: No pleasure,
profit or honor shall willingly hi^e him to the least iniquity; the penitent
eye judges sin by its complexion, not its composition; by its color, not by
its weight; he determines of it, not by comparison with it self, but its
nonconformity to Gods Law; so that if you say of any thing there is sin in it,
you have said enough to set the Gospel penitent against it; for he is turned
from all evil; yet take along with you this cautionary Note, that you run not
into sinful despair and despondency, in observing your penitent Recession from
sin. (viz.)

Sins existency, and sometimes prevalency, Caution.
is consistent with a penitent recession, and turning from it. Sin may remain,
though it does not reign in a gracious soul. Who is there that lives, and sins
not: If we say sin is not in us, we are liars, and the truth is not in us. The
righteous themselves often fall; Noah, the Preacher of Repentance to the old
World, becomes the sad pattern of impiety to the new World. Penitent Paul has
cause to complain, when I would do good, evil is present with me: Sin abides in
our souls, whilst our souls abide in our bodies; so long as we live we must
expect to bear the burden of corruption; sin exists in the best of Saints by
way of suggestion, natural inclination, and violent instigation, and
enforcement of evil; and so taking advantage of the difficulty of our estate,
and distemper of our minds, it drives us sometimes into most horrid actions,
even David's Adultery, or Peter's denial of Christ; which of the Saints have not
had a sad experience hereof; nor must it seem to us strange; for Repentance
does not cut down sin at a blow; no, it is a constant militation, and course of
mortification; an habit and principle of perpetual use, not action of an hour,
o^ little time, as we have Noted before; it is a recession from si^ all our
days, though sin run after us; if once we be perfectly freed from sins
assaults, we shake hands with Repentance, for we need it no more; so that let
it not be the trouble of any that sin is in them, but let it be their comfort
that it is shunned by them; that you fall into sin, fail not in your spirits,
let this be your support, that you fly from, fall out with, and fight against
sin; the true penitent does evidence the truth and strength of his Repentance,
by not admiting sins dictates without resi^^ance; not acting sins precepts
without reluctance; when he devises evil, his minnde is to serve the Law of
God; and he approves of that as good; he does what he would not; the Law in
his members rebels against the Law of his mind, and leads him captive; and
therefore he abides not under sins guilt or power without remorse; if he be
drawn to deny his Master, he goes out, and weepeth bitterly; he is in his own
eye a wretched man, whilst oppressed with a body of corruption; nay, he
retireth not into sinful society without repining; his soul soon thinks he has
dwelt too long in Meshech, and in the Tents of Kedar; the wicked are to him an
abomination; whilst then any soul maintains this conflict, and so visibly
disalloweth what he sometime does; he may safely say it is no more I, but sin
that dwells in me; for his servants you are to whom you yield your selves
servants, Romans 6.16. and comfortably conclude that as a Gospel-penitent he
turns from all sin; and that is the first part of the formality of
Repentance, the second naturally follows, and that is,

Second part of conversion.
Reversion to God, a reception of God, God and God only, becomes the adequate
object of Gospel Repentance; man by sin has his back on God; by Repentance he
faceth about; all sin does agree in this, that it is an aversion from God, and
the cure of it by Repentance must be conversion to God; when God calls for true
Repentance, it is with an if thou will return O Israel, return unto me; Jer.
4.1.
and when Repentance is promised, it is promised that the children of Israel
shall return, and seek the Lord their God, and David their King, and shall fear
the Lord and his goodness, Hosea 3.5. And when they provoke one another to
Repentance, it is with a come let us return unto the Lord; and when provoked by
others, it is to return to the Lord their God, Hosea 14.1. and when God
calls, and charge their Repentance with hypocrisy, it is with this
complaint, They cried, but not unto me; and they returned, but not unto the
most High, Hosea 7.14, 16. The Gospel penitent turns not from sin to sin, as
do the profane; nor from sinful rudeness to common civility, or only moral
honesty, as do the civil honest man; but unto piety, acts of Religion, unto
God: God is the sole object of his affection and adoration; the true penitent
is prostrate at the feet of God, as him only that pardons iniquity,
transgression and sin: And pliable to the pleasure of God, as him only that
has prerogative over him; the whole man, soul and body is bent for God, and
pursues communion with, and conformity to God; not only does Repentance turn
us from what is grievous and contrary to God; but unto that which is agreeable,
and acceptable God, the mind returns from the devising of evil, to the
review of the mind, and will of God; Psalm. 1. v. 1, 2.
from sitting in the seat of the scorneful, unto meditating on the Law of God
night and day, his earnest outcry is, Lord, Acts 9.6.
what would thou have me to do? for he is transformed in the spirit of his
mind to prove what is the good and acceptable will of the Lord! Romans 12.3. and
full well knows it is life eternal to know God, 1 Pet. 2.2.
and Jesus Christ, and therefore having once tasted that the Lord is gracious,
he as a newborn babe desires the sincere milk of the Word; Gods Word is his
great delight, and beautiful in his eyes are their feet that bring glad tidings
from Zion. Romans 10.15.
The will and affections return from all evil, unto a resolution, and ready
acceptance of the good, and acceptable will of God; not only does the Gospel
penitent pray, Wherein I have done amiss do thou show it me, I will do so no
more; but also speak Lord, for thy servant hears; for it is wholly resolved
into the will of God approving what is good, prizing every act of worship, and
purposing an exact observance of it, sincerely praying, Let thy will be done on
earth as it is in heaven; and accounting it his meat and drink to do the will
of God; his desires and affections run out to God, and God alone, there is
nothing in all the earth to be compared with God, nor any in heaven acceptable
to the soul besides God, Psalm. 73.25. The Lord becomes his very dread and
delight; he rejoices in the Lord, and continually fears before him; such are
his affections now toward God, that he can leave all to follow him, father,
mother, sisters, brethren, wife, children, lands, houses; nay, life it self
becomes nothing in respect of God. A Gospel penitent stands convinced, that if
any man love the world, the love of the Father is not in him, 1 John 2.15. And
if any man love any thing better than Christ, he is not worthy of him, Matthew.
10.37. and so he accounts all things dross and dung in comparison of Christ,
Phil. 3.7. The Lord is his chiefest among ten thousand, his all in all; and so
his outward man is ready in the utmost of endeavors to do the will of God; he
is wholly resigned to Divine pleasure, to do or suffer any thing: God shall not
enjoyne what his attempts and utmost industry shall not be to perform, or
inflict what he shall not in patience and silent submission endure; Repentance
is no other than the obedience of faith; 1 Pet. 1.2.
the penitent Romans do obey from the heart the form of sound words unto them
delivered; or as the Greek bears it, (...).
into which they are delivered; as in a mold which leaves its shape and
impression on that which passed through it, Romans 6.17. For the stony heart
removed, the Law of God is imprinted in the soul, the Spirit of Repentance
makes us walk in Gods way, Ezekiel. 3.26.
and to do his Statutes. The command of God carries the truly penitent
contrary to the commands of men; nay, corrupt dictates of their own soul. J
seph dare not sin against God for all Potiphars possession; nor Daniel slack
his devotion for fear of a Lions Den; nay, it is irksome to a penitent Peter,
to be once and again provoked to obedience, as half angry, he cannot but cry
out, John 21.17.
Why Lord, thou know I love thee; he is ready to execute Divine prescription
against the utmost of opposition; he never desires other Apology than whether
we obey God or man judge ye; for Christ is exalted to be Lord and King, to give
Repentance, etc. Not only does he believe, but is also ready to suffer for the
sake of Christ; he is contented to be at Gods carving, as unworthy any thing;
under sharpest sorrows he is dumb, Psalm. 39.9.
and opens not his mouth because God did it; in saddest disasters he
complains not, because he has sinned against the Lord; 2 Samuel 16.10.
let Shimey curse him, he is quiet; nay, grieved at the instigations of
revenge, for that God has bid Shimey curse; in all his actions and enjoyments,
he is awed by, and argues not against God. However he may with Hezekiah, slip
and fall in his life time, yet the support of his soul at death is, Lord,
Remember I have walked before thee with an upright and perfect heart, and have
done that which was right in thine eyes, Isa. 38.3. And with Paul, he may find
a Law in his members rebelling against the Law of his mind, yet can thank God,
that with his mind he serves the Law of God, Romans 7.25.

So that true Gospel Repentance does not only convince and cast down, but
change and convert a sinner, sense of, and sorrow for sin as committed against
God, are necessary and essential parts, but not the whole, or formality of
Repentance; no, that is a turning from sin, all sin unto God, only unt^ a God;
it indulgeth not the least iniquity, nor takes up short of the Lord; it
stays not with Jehu at the extirpation of Baal; but with Hezekiah and Josiah,
Rest reth the Passover, the worship of the Lord; and that is the fourth thing
considerable in the nature of Repentance.

Confession of sin, and prayer for its pardon, are constant concomitants of
true Repentance. The true penitent is not only the sinner of sense, but of
hope, and therefore a supp^iant at the Throne of Grace, prostrate at the
footstool of mercy, confessing sin, and suing for pardon, freely accusing, and
fully condemning it self before God; every penitent soul comes to God, like
Benhadad to the King of Israel, wi^h an Halter about his Neck, praying, Forgive
us our trespasses. David is no sooner brought to Repentance by Nathan, but he
is brought on his knees before the Lord, with an I have sinned before the Lord,
2 Samuel 12.13. Returning Israel must take with them words, and say, Receive us
graciously, take away all iniquity; Ashur shall not save us, we will not ride
upon Horses, neither will we say any more to the work of our hands, ye are our
gods, Hos. 14.3. When the Prodigal comes to himself, he goe^h to his father,
and cries, I have sinned against heaven, and against thee; I am no more worthy
to be counted thy son; make me as one of thy hired servants, Luke 15.21.
Confession of, and prayer for sins pardon, are such inseparable concomitants of
Repentance, that the whole work of Repentance is expressed by them, as if they
were the formality thereof; thus when Repentance is the result of Gods
chastisements, God observes, if they shall confess their iniquity, and the
iniquity of their Fathers, their trespass whereby they have trespassed against
me, and that they have walked contrary unto me, then will I be merciful, Levit.
26.40. When Achan is called to Repentance, he is required to give glory to God,
and confess his iniquity, Josh. 7.18. and so Israel is required only to
acknowledge her iniquity, that she has transgressed against the Lord her God,
and has scattered her ways to the strangers, etc. Nay, the very promise of
pardon to the penitent, is entailed on an humble suppliant confession of sin;
if we confess our iniquity, he is merciful and gracious, ready to forgive us
our sins, 1 John 1.8. So that there is no coming to God but with confession of
sin, and prayer for its pardon, and indeed there is great reason that these
should accompany true Repentanee, because confession and supplication are;

First, The vent of grief; they give ease and quiet to the penitent perplexed
soul; conviction concealed, is like a burning bile, in which the ill humors in
a man's body do rancour and swell, burn and pain the whole body, as willing to
be gone, and only gives ease by being lanced, opened, and let out by
confession and supplication; guilt concealed, is like the wind confined in the
bowels of the earth, making roaring ruptures and dreadful earthquakes;
unconfest sin is the spring of horror, and principle of all amazement; David
found it so on his sad experience, Psalm. 32.3. When I kept silence, my bones
waxed old through my roaring all the day long, but I acknowledge mine iniquity;
until then he could find no comfort.

Secondly, The vomit of sin, so Origin did usually call confession; for it is
the loathsome rejection of sin, an easing of the soul by evacuation of what
burdened it; casting up with grief and pain what we cast off with detestation;
confession is the emptying the soul of sin by expression of all passion against
it self; accusation and condemnation turn the heart and whole man against sin;
shame makes us shun evil; the penitents in the Primitive times did confess
their iniquities to God in the sight of the Church, and if they again relapsed
into the same sin, and apostatized to their old course, were said to return
with the Dog to his vomit, and the Sow to her wallowing in the mire, 2 Pet.
2.22.

Thirdly, The vindication of Gods justice in all the afflictions by him
inflicted. David acknowledges, and cries out, Against thee, thee only have I
sinned, and done this evil in thy sight, that thou may be justified when thou
speak, and clear when thou judge, Psalm. 51.3. and therefore confession is
said to be a giving glory to God. Josh. 7.19. Jerem. 13.16. Lam. 3.39.
It quells all quarrelling passions against God, Why should a living man
complain? a man for the punishment of his sin. The language of a confessing
penitent is, Thou have punished us less then our Iniqui ies do deserve, Ezra
9.13. And to us belong Confusion of face, but to the Lord belongs
Righteousness, Daniel 9.

(...) Fourthly, The voice in which God is well-pleased; God loves to see his
people with ropes about their necks. Only acknowledge thine iniqu^ty is Gods
demand; this soon meets with acceptance. I have sinned, is no sooner spoken
by David, 2 Samuel 12.13.
but the Lord also has taken away thine iniquity is replied by the Prophet;
nay, Psalm. 32.5.
David can witness, I but said I will confess, and thou forgavest mine
iniquity. God will nor stay his correcting hand, until the stubborn heart
acknowledge his iniquity; but then he will do it; Levit. 26.
the compassions of God give an affectionate check to the sharpest corrections
of his children, if but moved by their confession and complaint; Ephraim cannot
sooner relent under Gods hand, than he repent of his anger. I heard Ephraim
bemoaning himself, saying, I was as a Bullock unaccustomed to the yoke, I was
ashamed, I was confounded; turn me, and I shall be turned, moves Gods very
bowels to pity, Is not Ephraim my dear son? Is he not a pleasant child? I will
surely have mercy upon him, Jer. 31.18, 19, 20.

We see then that there is much reason why the Gospel-penitent must be a
confessing suppliant; but before I pass this Conclusion, let me briefly
propound unto you the Rules which must guide our Confession, evidencing and
accompanying our Repentance; and they are these.

1. Confession must spring from Conviction, and spread it self unto
Condemnation. Soul-sense of guilt unto sighing, must make the tongue speak of
it unto shame; compunction of spirit must be expressed by supplication: Then
shall you remember your own evil ways, and your doings that were not good, and
shall loath your selves; our common Translation reads it, But shall judge your
selves not worthy to live, as other and better Translations read, for your
iniquities, and your abominations, is the promise of the Covenant of Grace,
Ezekiel. 36.13. Confession of sin wh ch springs not from sensible conviction, and
spreads not to self-condemnation, is an historical narration, and verbal
recitation of sin; like the cursory reading of an ordinary Indictment, no
penitential confession of sin; the penitent prodigal begins with I have sinned,
and ends with I am not worthy; it is an easy matter for Saul to say I have
sin^ed, I have transgressed the Commandment of the Lord, but still he staves
off the sense of it, and not only disputes against reproof, but at length
diverts his conviction by an Apology, I feared the people, and obeyed their
voice, 1 Samuel 15.24. Conscience is placed in us, the Law spread before us, and
self-scrutiny imposed on us, as precursive to our repenting confessions; we are
required to judge our selves, which imports to be convinced, we deserve to die,
and so to put halters on our own necks.

2. God always, and men ordinarily must be the object of our confessions and
supplications. Whatever sin is committed, God is the object of it; his holy Law
is violated by it; though some sins are committed against God immediately, and
extend not unto men, as all breach of the first Table of the Law, and
miscarryings of acts of Religion; yet all sins against men, are also against
God, who is no less concerned in the second than the first Table of the Law.
If David sin against Bathsheba her chastity, or Vriah his life, yet he must
confess unto God, Against the have I sinned, and wrought this wickedness in
thy sight; however the trespass is against man, the transgression is against
God; the sin which is committed against God, is to be only confessed unto God,
not unto man; but the sin which is committed against man, must be confessed
unto God, and likewise unto men; to God always who can pardon the eternal
punishment; to men ordinarily, as when the Church is scandalized, or the
particular person is offended and damnified; James 5.16.
and in this last case, restitution must be added to our confession, Luke 19.
Zacheus like; where we have wronged any, we must make acknowledgement and
reparation; and in all offenses to men, when we come before God, we must
consider, whether our brother has ought against us, Mat. 5.24.
and go and be reconciled; the God that binds men to forgive till seventy times
seven times, binds the offender so, often to return and say, I have offended.
Luke 17.4.
The auricular confession of the Papists, is vanity, superstition, and evil;
but particular acknowledgements of sin to God, and sometimes to men, is duty
indispensable; in vain does Saul say to Samuel, I have sinned, whilst he never
seeks to God for the pardon.

3. Confession of sin and prayer for pardon must be free, and not extorted. The
natural, not forced language of the penitent; the confession of constraint,
falls equally under suspicion with the unrequired accusations of malice, both
which are frequently false; true repentance does convince of the sinfulness of
sin, and constrain the soul to confess it with candor, ingenuity and
freedom, as weary of it, as the stomach of nauseous matter, that it naturally
without any co-action casts up. Confession springs from the Saints, as Elihu
his plea for God against Job, I am full of matter, the Spirit of the Lord
constrains me, says he to Job, Job 32.18, 19, 20. The confession of the
wicked is constrained, and no longer does he cry to God, than he is under the
cudgel of his judgments, or on the Rack of his own conscience; so Pharaoh his
plagues, and Judas his anxiety may extort an I have sinned; however the
children of God must be sometimes pinched and whipped into their complaints,
yet their cry is natural, and confessions free and voluntary, a ready echo to
the least reproof, Psalm. 141.5.
and desiring that the righteous may smite, and God show them their iniquity.

4. Confession and supplication must not be more free than full; not straightened
any more than extorted; sin must be confessed, not only in general, and in the
lump, with a Lord have mercy upon us miserable sinners; but in its particular
species and parts; as Israel, We have forsaken the Lord, and served Baal; in
Judge. 10.10. and we have to all our sins added this evil, to ask us a King, to
go about to change our Government, 1 Samuel 12.19. not only open, known, heinous,
and flagitious offenses, but even secret and particular lusts. David bewails,
and confesses not only his murder executed on Uriah, but his self-revenge
intended against Nabal, and the very cutting off the lap of Saul's garment; not
only sin simply in it self, but with all its aggravations of time, place,
manner, occasion; sin must be taken up by the roots, and spread before God in
all its branches, In iniquity was I conceived, in sin brought forth; as well as
against thee have I sinned. In vain does Caine confess his cruelty to A^el,
and conceal his irreligion to God; or Judas complain of betraying innocent
bl^od, whilst he makes no mention of his covetousness.

5. Shame and sorrow must seize on the confessing suppliant for sins pardon.
Contrition of heart, and confusion of face, must be the result of confession;
days of atonement, Lev. 23.27, 28.
were days of soul-affliction, because of confession of sin; David's complaints
makes him water his couch, and mingle his bred with tears; lying in the dust,
and renting of Garments, were required from such as came to confess iniquity;
the spirit of repentance is a spirit of mourning.

6. Confession must be made with confidence and supplication in hope of pardon;
the true penitent is prostrate before God as a Father, not as a Judge; men may
confess and be hanged, but the children of God cry with Shecaniah, We have
transgressed, but yet there is hope in Israel concerning this thing, Ezra 10.2.
they pray in faith, Father forgive us our trespasses; not in fear; mercy my
Lord mercy. Judas's confession was therefore false, because fearful, and flying
to his own destruction, not the innocent blood by him betrayed, that he might
have been saved; we have showed you the subject of repentance must be the
believing sinner; hopes of mercy puts halters on our necks; confidence of
pardon seats us in Gods Chair to condemn our selves; the confessions of
despair, are the outcries of the damned in hell.

Thus then Beloved, I have laid before you the true nature of true repentance.
I well know it is a common Theme, and much Treated of, but little practiced;
nay, indeed little considered and understood: How many pretenders are there
among us, that may yet ponder the nature of Gospel-repentance? which if it be
well understood, will neither appear to be so lightly come by, nor slightly
performed, as it is deemed; we must know that every common repentance will not
serve our turn unto the Remission of sin; but that repentance which Christ
gives, is in respect of nature,

1. A grace supernatural, without the reach of man's arm or acquirement.

2. Whereby the believing sinner apprehensive of his own guilt and Gods grace,
in and through Jesus Christ;

3. Sensibly affected with, and afflicted for his sin as committed against God,
under conviction and contrition for all his sin as sin;

4. Does return from sin, all sin, unto God, and God only as his all in all.

5. Freely confessing, and frequently begging pardon for his iniquity.

Consider my Brethren this description of Repentance you have had unfolded, and
the nature of the grace discovered; for it will be very useful to you as a
touchstone of doctrine and practice; for the confutation of all false notions
about Repentance; as that, 1. Repentance is the result of nature, and at man's
command; we may repent when we will, as the Arminians teach; but you must
remember its supernatural. 2. That penance is a transient act of confession
and self-castigation, as the Papists teach; you must know it is a grace or
habit. 3. That repentance is before faith, and not the result of the Gospel,
and effect of the blood of Christ, as some Divines suggest. 4. That c^nviction,
contrition, and confession, are not necessary to repentance, as the Antinomians
teach; or sufficient repentance, as the Legalist and Pharisee teach; that a
turning from sin to sin, or at least not to God and holiness, as the Quakers,
and our sinful age suggest, is the formality of repentance: but you may find
and make it specially useful to conviction, and discovery of false repentance,
with which men are apt to take up and content themselves; and if this which you
have heard be the nature of true Repentance, then these are false Repentances,
with which take heed you be not deceived.

1. Popish penance, 1. False repentance.
which is indeed scrued very high by the Church of Rome, unto a detracting from
the satisfaction of Jesus Christ, and making man's own sufferings, Partners and
Peers to Christ his satisfaction; wherein it is not only Heretical, but
blasphemous; but indeed in it self is very low and weak, not able to afford us
the least of comfort, because a false and fained repentance, consisting in
auricular confession to the Priest, never instituted by God; and
self-castigation in a most cruel and violent manner, or Pilgrimages interdicted
by the very light of nature, and never enjoined by the Lord, and is different
from true Repentance, in that it is merely external on the body, not at all
seizing on the soul; chastisements of the outward, without any serious
conviction or contrition of the inward man; tearing the flesh without renting
the heart; nay, and that in a way of superstition, and will worship like the
self-cuttings, and torments of the Priests of Baal, 1 King. 18.27, 28.
and like to find the same acceptance; and a transient action, without any
inward principle, habit, and disposition; and too often under the p^rpose of
continuing in sin; nay, many times making way to sin, as the Popish
Conspirators in the Gunpowder Treason confessed, and did penance for the
wickedness they intended; so that it is every way inconsistent to the nature
of true repentance; for it has man, not God for its object; nature, nay, lust
for its principle; action, not frame and disposition, for its form; is
external in its property and intention of sin for its end; and so must needs
be sinful, and soul-damning Repentance in its quality.

2. False repentance.
Pagans Repentance, which is effected in men as men, without any the least
respect unto Religion; all men have a natural conscience, and some remainders
of the Law of God discovering a Deity, and directing duties of preservation to
themselves and humane Society; by this they are checked on all miscarriages,
and gross exorbitancies; and not only grieved and offended at the present, but
also curbed and restrained for the future. Thus Alexander when sober, repents
the slaughter of his friend Clitus, in a drunken humor, and consults the
Philosophers as so many Ministers for the pacification of his conscience; and
so Polemo though in his drunken fit, he came to the School of Xen^crates, and
heard him read of sobriety, yet went home, and repenting his drunkenness
became sober ever after; yet this is no other than a false repentance effected
by the only power of nature, whose best things are but splendida peccata,
shining sins, and is merely a restraint of action, no renewing of disposition;
it wants both principle and power to make it saving; this light within them
without supernatural grace, does but lead them a smoother way to hell; for at
the best, virtue contrary to their natural vice, not God and his Will is the
object of their conversion.

3. False repentance.
The profane man's repentance, Pharaoh-like, repenting of good, and returning
to evil; having let Israel go, pursues them to bring them again to bondage;
and like the children of Israel, Jer. 34.12, 13, 14, etc.
who let every man his servant go free, and then fetch them back again. Like
the repentance of Ananias and Saphira, who run as far as others in selling
their estates for the common good of the Church, Acts 5.5.
but soon repent to the retaining some part, and lying to the holy Ghost. How
many amongst us do now repent their sighing and sad thoughts that their sin
has cost them, and the serious discharges of holy duties, fasting, praying,
reading, hearing, and the like, which they have done; bewailing themselves that
ever they looked toward heaven, or left the way of hell; this is a most sad
and sinful repentance, in every respect opposite to the nature of repentance,
being an inversion of the very terms; instead of turning from sin to God, a
turning from God to sin; these men's latter end must needs be worse than their
beginning, because having begun in the spirit, they end in the flesh; and it is
happened unto them according to Proverb, The dog is returned to his vomit, and
the sow to her wallowing in the mire.

The formalist and legal repen^ance; these men are eminent, 4. False repentance.
and exact in the external and precursive acts of repentance; they humble
themselves before God, and confess iniquity, and seek for pardon of sin; rent
their garments, and ^ie in sackcloth; Ahab-like they are alarmed by the
Prophet Elijah for their sin, 1 Kings. 21.27.
and therefore humble themselves before the Lord; they are full of conviction
and seeming contrition, but never reach unto conversion; they lament sin, but
lie in sin; like Herod, hear John gladly, but retain their Herodias; and like
Foelix, tremble to hear of righteousness, temperance, Act. 24.25, 26, 27.
and judgment to come; but yet look for a bribe, and dismiss Paul till some
other time, that so they may quiet conscience, and grant a truce to the Devil;
those like the young man in the Gospel, are not far from the Kingdom of God,
but yet fall short; they never come at repentance.

The Slaves repentance, which is extorted and extenuated, 5. False repentance.
neither free nor full; like the repentance of Saul or Pharaoh; so long as they
are constrained, they confess their guilt; when they can no longer hide their
villainy they own it, though with an endeavor to extenuate it; thus Saul by the
dint of Argument, is at length driven to confess to Samuel, I have sinned; yet
he that staved off the Prophets reproof as long as he could, at last stifleth
his conscience, by pleading the fear of the people whom he pretended to fear
and obey; and seeks no more than to avoid the present blow; Hon^ur me, says he
to Samu l, in the sight of the people. So Pharaoh when under the cudgel, will
confess he has sinned, and will let Israel go; but Gods hand is no sooner
staid, but his obduracy returns; it were well for many penitents, if they could
go from a sick bed, a prison, an anxious conscience to heaven; for so long as
they are in this condition, they are in a good mood, but no longer; these men
like flint stones fly in sunder by the hammer, but still retain their
hardness; there is in them no principle that may make them candid in
confession, or free in the forsaking of sin.

6. False repentance.
A sullen and self-destructive repentance; these men in an angry humor, and by
the anxiety of conscience are constrained to repent of their miscarriage, like
Shimei his repentance for cursing David, occasioned only by the change of
David's condition, 2 Samuel 19.20. 1 King. 2.39, 40.
and cross of his own expectation, which yet at length leads him to sin
against his soul, and break his bounds unto his own ruin; and like Judas in a
dogged humor, deploring his sin unto self-destruction; many men turn out of
sin, because it turns Wife and children out of doors, deprives them of expected
preferment, disposes them into distress and anguish of soul or body, or both;
these men have no natural enmity to sin; but are like a Bowl turned out of
its Biasse by some more than ordinary rub to their desires.

Give me leave to add one more, and that is the Quakers Repentance, 7. False
Repentance.
not fit to be mentioned, nor worthy the least refutation, it is so notoriously
profane and ridiculous, were it not too much successeful in these sad times,
in which God has given us up to a spirit of delusion, so as that the most
palpable of errors find entertainment; this is the Repentance whereby men
following the pretended light within them, are suddenly converted from extreme
looseness, to extreme strictness of behavior; it is to be wondered at, to
see what a sudden leap the lewdest men make by this rude spirit, from the most
horrid lewdness, to the most strange, solitary, and self-affected way of
behavior; these men we must not deny to be changed, unless we will deny our
senses; nor own to be Gospel-penitents, unless we deny our Religion, and very
reason; for themselves profess it to be from no other principle than the light
within them, which they say also is common to all men; and so is at the best
but natural, though in them plainly visible to be diaboli al, whilst it
carries not so far as the light of nature, but is contrary to the dictates
thereof in natural and civil society, darkening, nay, declaiming against those
very notes of distinction, which God and nature has in all Nations made
between man and man; being violent, sudden, and precipitate by some absession
or enthusiastique impulse as from the Devil, not by any moral swasion or
intellectual conviction, which is proper to a reasonable soul, and therefore
acts wilfully with rage and rabid expressions, not able, and so refusing to
render a reason of their actions or persuasions; but with obduracy persisting
in their own self-affected profession, without the least possibility of
conviction, or capacity of discourse, reducing them into a direct Bedlam
temper, fit for nothing but Bedlam Discipline, so that in the very form
thereof, men of reason and the least measure of Religion, must needs conclude
their conversion Devilish, not Divine; yet in the effect of it, their
repentance must needs appear not to be true Gospel, and saving repentance, as
being dissonant to the nature in the very formality thereof; for however it
turns them from sin, yet not with due contrition and confession, or on due
conviction, not from sin as sin; they retain pride, railing, disrespect to men,
are void of natural affection, despise dominion, speak evil of dignities,
whilst they damn drunkenness, swearing, and other the like abominations; but
it never turns them unto God, nay, it keeps them at an equal, nay, a greater
distance from God, than from the Devil, from heaven than hell, whilst they deny
civility, and the common reverence children owe to Parents, Servants to
Masters, and all Inferiors to Superiors, decline God, disown and declaime
against holiness, praying, hearing Sabbath and Sacraments are to them as the
vices they do detest; Gospel Ministers and Ministrations, are to them an
abomination; whilst they refuse to swear, they refuse to pray; drunkenness
and devotion are equal in their account; if with Jehu they drive furiously
against Baal and Ahab, yet they mind not to walk with God, but follow the way
of Jeroboam, both for Rebellion toward men, and confusion in the Church, so
that they appear far from Gospel-penitents.

I have done with the first general part considerable, viz. the nature of
repentance, and shall now proceed to the second, and that is,

The NECESSITY of Repentance.

Repentance in the very nature of it, which has been explained, does appear
useful and necessary. It is not a thing base and vile, to be despised,
neglected, and contemned, but admirably excellent, and to be prized and pursued
by every soul that is studious of true excellency; for however proud men
profanely deem and damn it as a puling property, and pusillanimous temper of
spirit, below a man, on every ordinary action to sit drooping and pensive, and
not dare to do as nature dictates, and good company requires; yet the children
of wisdom well pondering what has already been spoken of it, cannot but see
it sparkle with such splendid notes, as engage them to esteem it, and employ
themselves in it night and day; making it their work and business, saying as
Tertullian, Nulli rei natus nisi poenitentiae, I am born for nothing but to
repentance. For from what has already been spoken, it is apparently excellent:
in its

First, Nature; being a remorse for guilt, and return from sin; which who even
among the Heathen did not esteem; remorse for guilt is the rejoicing of heaven;
returns are the delights of God; in Luke 15.7, 10. the tears of sinners is the
wine of Angels, says Bernard.

Secondly, Author and Original, a grace supernatural grows not in natures
Garden, cannot be acquired by the most accurate industry or endowments of
nature; it is from heaven by the immediate operation of the holy Spirit; Christ
himself is exalted to be a Prince and a Savior, to give repentance; Shall
divine works, celestial influences lose their esteem?

Thirdly, Ground and principle; ^t flows from faith, and is the result of
hope; it is not the lamentation of despair, but complaint of candor and
confidence affording comfort; streami g with pleasure from the soul; the
privilege of the Gospel, and Covenant of grace; it flows from the fountain
of Divine favor.

4. Concomitants; Confession and Supplication; access to God with assurance of
acceptance. Confession is the souls physic, says Nazianzen; and Supplication
is the Child's portion.

And indeed what is there in the Nature of Repentance, which renders it not
desirable by every gracious heart, or good nature? so that to men that seek
excellent endowments, and are for high and honorable achievements, I must
say, Repent, Repen^: This is Alexanders honor, this is the only ornament of
nature; the way to highest preferment, is to be humbled under the hand of God.

But not only is it in it self excellent, and to be esteemed by such as can,
and do obtain it, but also necessary; not of indifferency, but of absolute and
indispensable necessity; men may not choose whether or no they will repent, but
must do it with all care and diligence, with all speed and alacrity; and
amongst the many Demonstrations which might be urged, I shall enforce the
necessity of Repentance from these two grounds.

1. The Anticipation, and removal of Gods wrath and judgments.

2. The Answer unto the call of the Gospel.

First, Then Repentance is necessary to anticipate, and remove the wrath and
judgments of God. Repentance is the only fence to be made against feared
judgments; there is no way to appease Divine fury, but by Repentance; judgments
threatened may be thus diverted and prevented, and evil inflicted may be thus
removed; the Lord threatens before he strikes, that the fear of approaching
evil might force men to Repentance; thus God sent Jonah to cry to Nineveh, Yet
forty days, and Nineveh shall be destroyed; and so the Lord sent his Prophets,
Rising up early, and sending them to Judah, and to Samaria. The threatenings of
God are but Summons unto Repentance, that his hand might be stayed; and
therefore every threat does either express or imply a promise of escape on the
condition of Repentance, and an assurance is given by the Lord that Repentance
shall appease his anger, and anticipate the denounced judgments. Behold, at
what time I shall speak against a Nation or Kingdom, if that Nation against
whom I have pronounced, shall turn from their evil, I will repent of the evil I
thought to do unto it, Jerem. 18.8. Accordingly Gods hand is stayed by the
but-seeming Repentance of men; Ahabs formal Repentance procures a reprieve of
the judgment, though not a remission of sin; because Ahab humbles himself
before me, I will not bring the evil in his days, says the Lord to the
Prophet, 1 Kings 21.29. And so Nineveh repenting at the preaching of Jonah were
spared, Jonah 3.10. God saw that they repented, and turned from their evil way,
and God repented of the evil that he said he would do unto them, and he did it
not. Impenitency is the enforcement of Divine plagues; for all denunciations
run with an unless ye repent, ye shall likewise perish. Repentance is the main
errand of Gods judgments, and if it will be effected by reproof and threatening,
God will never handle the rod, or inflict evil; the judgments of God thunder
not over Jerusalem, until they mocked the messengers of God, despised his
Word, and misused his Prophets; and then the wrath of the Lord was kindled, and
arose against his people until there was no remedy, 2 Chronicles. 36.16. God is so
solicitous of Repentance, that like the Lord of the Vineyard, he sends his
servants one after another to the rebellious husbandmen, and at length his Son,
whom he expects they should reverence, to call them to Repentance, before he
come with force and arms to subdue them, Mat. 21.36, 37, 38, 39, 40. Gods
judgments are never inflicted, until men's impenitency be upbraided; he always
begins his corrections with an how often would I have gathered you, Mat. 23.37.
and ye would not; and aggravates the affliction with a thy destruction is of
thy self; and enforces his utter rejection with an Oh that thou hadct known,
Luke 19.42.
at least in this thy day, the things which concern thy peace! but now they are
hid from thine eyes; he drowns not the old world without the warnings of an
hundred and twenty years; he damned not the souls which are now in Prison,
until by Noah the Preacher of Righteousness, he had called them to
Repentance, and sealed them up under disobedience. We are now the Subjects of
sin, and that stirs up Gods wrath; if we will escape that, we must return from
this; Sin kindles, and Repentance quenches Gods fury. Man is not bound to
pardon and pretermit an offense, but on Repentance of the offender; neither
Nature nor Scripture does require it; how much less is the Lord thereunto
obliged; therefore agree with thine adversary quick^y, whilst th u art in the
way with him, lest he bring thee before the Judge, and the Judge deliver thee
over to the Jailer, and thou be cast into Prison. How many plagues are there
impending over our Nation, Families, Persons? how high are the provocations of
our sins? have we any heart to escape evil, and fear of the judgments
impending, deserved, and ready to fall on our heads? Let us humble our selves
under Gods hand; let the Nation repent, every Family repent, and every
particular soul repent; for Repentance is our only remedy of absolute
necessity to divert the denounced judgments, and anticipate impending plagues.

Repentance is not only a means to prevent judgments threatened, but to remove
them when inflicted. Impenitency kindles Gods fury, but obduracy makes it
flame. Impenitency pulls the judgments of God on us, but obduracy seals us
under them to our ruin; it is the very height of obduracy not to repent under
the Rod; they that fear not, yet cannot but relent when they feel the smart of
Gods anger; the proudest Pharaoh that can outface a threat with a What is the
Lord that I should let Israel go, is yet apt to cry under his plagues poured
out, I have sinned against the Lord. Gods wrath is never so severe, or his hand
so smarting, but it will be stayed by sincere Repentance; but never without it;
Repentance is the errand of his Rod, as well as of his reproof; where this
prevails not, that must walk; I will go and return unto my place; Hosea 5.15.
for in their affliction they will seek me early. The least remorse of a
repenting Ephraim moves God to pity and Repentance, and stays his correcting
hand; but stubbornness in sin must meet with bitterness and severity in God;
when God takes stubborn hearts to task, he adds to the number and nature of
his chastisements, until their sturdy stomachs are taken down. He walks
contrary unto them that walk contrary unto him, Lev. 4.26.
and comes on them with seven times more plagues, until the uncircumcised
heart be humbled, and they confess their iniquities; this God will effect, or
he will break in pieces; none must strive against him, and prosper; they that
are hardened under his hands, he handles to their utter ruin; Repentance is
the natural genuine result of the Rod; of heart-rending plagues; it is a note
of the highest impiety to persist in sin under punishment; of all the Kings of
Israel, Ahaz is marked with this brand of incorrigiblenesse: This is that King
Ahaz, who in his distress did trespass yet more against the Lord, 2 Chronicles.
28.22. Where there is any ingenuity, there will be a repenting under the Rod by
them that resisted the Word. It is the ordinary note of most obstinate Israel,
when he slew them, then they sought him, Psalm. 78.34. Though they were not good
any longer than whilst they were beaten; yet they were indeed exceeding bad,
when they resisted correction; the worst tale that ever was told against Gods
children, is that by the Prophet Jeremy, Thou have stricken them, and they have
not grieved; Thou have consumed them, but they have refused to receive
correction, and have made their faces harder than a Rock, they have refused to
return, Jerem. 5.3. Well may the Prophet conclude, They are poor and foolish,
and know not the Lord, o^ the judgment of their God, ver. 4. For even iron and
steel is soft whilst in the fire; and impenitency under the Rod exposes unto
inevitable ruin; they are reprobate from Gods favor who repent not in the
time of his fury; the saddest symptom of displeasure, is to hear God determine,
You shall be smitten no more, Isa. 1.5.
for ye will revolt still more and more. God seals up to everlasting
vengeance by a spirit of impenitency, My people would not hearken to my voice,
and Israel would none of me; so I gave them up to their own hearts lusts, and
they walked in their own cuonsels, Psalm. 81.11, 12. The proud Pharaoh that is
not melted by, and repents not under Gods many judgments, is raised for this
very purpose, that God might show his power, and make known his mind unto the
ends of the earth by their certain and severe destruction. Romans 9.
Whilst then the sons of men are by nature the children of wrath, subjects of
sin, and liable to sorrows, obnoxious to Gods chastising hand, and
land-destroying judgments, provoking Divine displeasure, and Repentance the
only means to divert or remove the same, must they not call one upon another?
Come let us return unto the Lord; though he have wounded, he will heal us, Hos.
6.1, 2, 3. And for us in this Land and Nation, Are we not the subjects of sin,
and most horrid, God-provoking sins which God cannot but punish! pride and
perfidiousnesse, profanesse and perjury, blasphemy, and base contempt of his
Ordinances, and what not! iniquity unto the very despising the Word of the
Lord, and mocking his Messengers, that his wrath could no longer forbear, but
has made us the subjects of shame and sorrow. The furious footsteps of an
angry God are to be found among us; God has smitten us with pest^lence, after
the manner of Egypt, our young men have been slain with the edge of the Sword,
and yet his wrath is not turned away. Our Fou^dations are removed, Laws
violated, and Liberties invaded; his Name and Truth blasphemed, his Church laid
waste, and his People sadly subjected to a spirit of delusion: And what
Confusions, Commotions, sad because sinful Revolutions compass us about,
making us a shame among the Nations, and a burden to our selves: And yet his
wrath is not turned away, but his anger is stretched out still, because we have
not returned unto the Lord. How many, and heavy judgments hang over our heads?
threatening the extirpation of the Church, eradication of the Gospel, and
desolation of our Nations: And what is our remedy to remove what we feel, or
prevent what we fear? is it not Repentance? is not this ENGLANDS Unum
Necessarium, One thing necessary? Should not all the Ministers of God cry,
Repent ENGLAND, Repent, Repent? Must not all conclude in this respect,
Repentance is a grace of absolute necessity; but

Secondly, Repentance is necessary to answer the call of the Gospel. We are
called Christians, and do profess subjection to the Gospel of Jesus Christ;
our care must be in all things to walk as becomes the Gospel. Hippocrates took
an oath of his followers, Phil. 1.27.
to keep their profession unstained, and their lives unblameable: Sure I am,
that in our Baptism we are dedicated, and engaged to yield obedience to the
Gospel, and show forth its holiness and power by due acts of Repentance,
renouncing the flesh, the world, and the Devil; for indeed Repentance is the
great duty imposed by the Gospel; and all such as will conform unto the
commands of the Gospel must repent. Acts 17.30. Now God commands all men
everywhere to repent. The light of Nature, and of the Law, did direct men unto
Repentance; but the light of the Gospel, is a loud call unto all men to repent;
times of past ignorance, were times of Divine Indulgence; but these Gospel-days
are seasons of imperious injunction; God now c^mmandeth all men; not pity or
patience must now be expected without serious penance; there are many things
considerable in the Gospel, whereby it calls to Repentance, which does evidence
the indispensable necessity thereof, and binds all men to answer; viz.

1. The positive duty directed in, and required by the Gospel, is Repentance.
This is the main matter prescribed in it, and preached by it; John the Baptist,
the harbinger of the Messiah, and first publisher of the Gospel, came preaching
Repentance; and therefore his whole Doctrine and Administration, is called the
Baptism of Repentance, Mark 1.4. And the Lord Jesus, the great Prophet and
Apostle of the Gospel, made his first appearance in the world, at the
imprisonment of John, preaching Repentance, for that the Kingdom of God was at
hand; and the great disrespect he charge on the Jews, was, that they repented
not, either at the preach^ng of John, or himself, though both differently
administered; to anticipate their caption; so that the great work of both
appears to have been to bring men to Repentance. The first Sermon that ever
Peter preached after Christ his Ascension, was to persuade Repentance; this
was, and is the matter of all Preaching, and the main end of all Ministry; for
the sole errand of the Gospel, is to open the blind eyes, Acts 26.18.
to turn men from darkness to light, and from the power of Satan unto God; and
hence Repentance from dead works is reckoned as one of the first, and
foundation principles of the Gospel, Hebr. 6.1. And certainly principles are
positively necessary, undeniable, and indispensable truths; Contra principia
negantem non est disputandum; he is to be declined as mad that denies
principles; so that Repentance is the first, chief, and main lesson taught by
the Gospel, and its call thereunto then must needs be great.

2. The prime privilege of the Gospel is Repentance. This is the royal gift of
our Redeemer Jesus Christ; he is exalted and made a Prince, and a Savior to
give Repentance; the prime grace conveyed unto us by the Covenant of grace
contained in the Gospel, is Re entance; he taking away the st^ny heart, and
giving us hearts of flesh, making us to see the evil of our ways and doings:
The great Errand for which the Gospel is sent into the world, is Repentance;
they that receive the Gospel and not Repentance by it, shall be upbraided as
were Bethsaida, Matthew. 11.
Chorazin, and Capernaum, as unworthy so high a favor; nay, they shall have
their torments aggravated by the enjoyment, but non-improvement of so high a
favor. It shall be more tolerable for Tire and Sidon, Sodom and Gomorrah; they
never enjoyed a Gospel to call to Repentance; this is the end of all the
promises of God; to make us partakers of the Divine nature, escaping the
corruptions that ar^ in the world through lust, 2 Pet. 7.4. The proposals of
glory and happiness, are the principles of purity and holiness; we have these
great and precious promises, that we may cleanse our selves from all
filthiness of flesh and spirit, and perfect holiness in the fear of God. 2
Cor. 7.1.
The whole work of the Gospel is to carry on, and complete Repentance, this is
the profit to be reaped by every Ordinance; the Word preached, persuades
Repentance; the Sacraments received, stir up and seal Repentance; the communion
of the Saints carries on the work of Repentance, Exhorting one another daily,
lest any be hardened by the deceitfulness of sin, Hebr. 3.13. The Gospel is the
great Charter of our privileges purchased by Jesus Christ, and they all run
into this, Repentance; this is the benefit by Christ's death, Resurrection and
Ascension; this is the fruit of the Spirit of Adoption, Zech. 12.10.
it is a Spirit of prayer and mourning over him whom we have pierced; in brief,
Repentance is the contract of the Covenant of Grace; the Law cannot give it,
and the light of nature cannot give it; only the Gospel can effect it; the
Covenant of Grace confers on us, an access to, and communion with God; as our
God, not as we are innocent; for we are guilty of the breach of the first
Covenant; but as we are penitent, sorrowful for, and turned from the evil of
our ways; so that in this respect we must needs conclude Repentance is a grace
of great necessity; we reap no benefit, enjoy no privilege of the Gospel but
by Repentance; the mystery of Redemption, Christ's Incarnation, Death,
Resurrection, Ascension and Exaltation, and all the Ministrations of the
Gospel, are in vain to the impenitent.

3. Most pregnant Arguments persuading to Repentance, are proposed in and by
the Gospel; this is light so powerfully convincing, that all others which past
before it, is but darkness in comparison of it; whether it be the light of
nature, making known sin as it is specifical and particular, contrary to
certain standing dictates; not in its contrariety to the image and holiness of
God; and that without any clear and certain way of escape, and Repentance; or
the light of the Law, which lays men under full, plain, and clear conviction,
even unto self-condemnation, but coucheth the pardon and possiibility of
Redemption, under such dark figures and expressions, that with much difficulty
it may direct and provoke Repentance; but in the Gospel, the Sun of r
ghteousnesse shines brightly unto conviction, and self-condemnation, nay, unto
speedy and cheerful conversion. There is no Argument in Nature, or in the Law
to enforce Repentance, but it is urged in the Gospel; I, and much more: does
Nature stir up Repentance by sins inconveniency to man's state, or the Law by
sins incongruity to the holy, just, and good command of God; the Gospel does
the same; nay, and further adds its inconsistency with that estate into which
we are resolved by the Redemption of Jesus Christ; and so it presents us with
two most pregnant, Powerfully Convinc ng, and Persuasive Arguments unto
Repentance; such which no Professed Religion in the World (it self excepted)
does propound, and they are these:

1. The death of Jesus Christ.

2. The day of Judgment.

The first Argument propounded in the Gospel to persuade Repentance, is, The
death of the Lord Jesus Christ; This is an Argument potent in operation to
every true believer; faith does no sooner touch the hem of its garment, but it
cures; like the bones of Elisha, quickens the dead man that is but let down
into this Grave; and pregnant in persuasion to every rational soul that is but
candid, and ingenuous. It is storied of Antonius the Senator of Rome, that he
intending to provoke the people to r^venge the death of Caesar slain at the
Senate by Brutus and Cassius, brought out his bloody Robe, and cried out, Here
is the bloody Robe of your Quondam Emperor. Thus the Gospel presents to our
faith a crucified Christ, and slain Savior, slain for, and by our sins, that
we may look on him whom we have pi^rced, and mourn over him; that we may see
him whom our lusts have slain, and be revenged on them by Repentance. The
contemplations of a crucified Christ, cannot but constrain Repentance. Mount
Calvary is a place of heart-melting to every ingenuous soul that makes it his
walk; for that it presents unto his observation a man; nay, more than a man, a
God under the most grievous sufferings, not for his own, but the sins of
others, exposed unto that sad estate, not by any constraint or necessity, but
his own choice, pity and compassion, in whom we reads these three heart-moving,
Repentance-provoking considerations: (viz.)

1. The great severity of offended justice, and fury provoked by his iniquity.
Here he sees the vileness of his sin, and fierceness of Gods anger, who
would not, nay, in justice could not spare man without satisfaction; he had
said it, and now sees it executed: In the day thou eatest thereof, thou shall
dye the death. Here is furious justice which falls fearfully on a Surety, a
Mediator; and fierce fury that favors not a Son, an only begott n Son. Surely
sin is heinous, greatly provoking to God, that his displeasure thus rages. It
is sure a fearful thing to fall into the hands of the living God, who makes the
Son of his love thus roar out, My God, my God, why have thou forsaken me? Oh
Impiety, horrid Impiety, that cannot be expiated by any thing, but the very
heart-blood of God! O fury! fearful fury! that forsakes a Son, (only) become a
Surety for sinners; what pensive thoughts must needs arise in the serious
observer of this sad spectacle, especially when he proceeds to the next
consideration, which is this:

2. Great love and pity of a Savior; who willingly endures these sad
sufferings out of choice, not constraint, for the sins of others, not of
himself. Oh unconceivable love, ineffable pity, that we sinned, and he thus
suffered! he left glory, to be exposed to shame; he undertakes an Atonement and
Reconciliation between God and man, and endure h infinite fury to effect it; no
guile was ever found in his mouth, whose soul undergoeth this grief; the debt
was ours, and he pays the utmost Mite for us. All we went astray, and on him
was laid the punishment of us all; Isa. 53.3, 4.
he is wounded for our transgressions, and bruised for our sins; and that
whilst we were sinners, that slighted and rejected him. Greater love can no
man show than to dye for his friend; but behold here is matchless love!
whilst we were yet enemies, Christ gave himself for us. These Torments we must
have endured to Eternity, if they had not been inflicted on him.

3. We here see the gracious acceptance we have with God; the great liberty of
access to God, which is to us afforded; the wrath of God thus poured forth on
his Son, is pacified toward sinners; and the Covenant of Works being thus
accomplished, is abolished; and man that was at distance from God, draws nigh
unto him; for this crucified Christ was thus lifted up, that he might draw all
men unto himself; and is exalted, to give remissi^n of sin, and Repentance; and
to consecrate us unto himself, a peculiar people. These Lessons, and every of
them are written in such legible Characters in the death of Jesus Christ, that
he that runs may read them; and each of them are pathetical persuasions to
Repentance; whilst they are read by any seriously observant soul, they reflect
these serious and pensive thoughts! How vile is mine iniquity that has
provoked so great severity, and exp sed my Surety to so much misery? how great
peril was my soul in, which is r^deem d by so great a price? how dangerous
those wounds, which are only cured by the death of the Chyrurgion? how
dissonant to holiness, and daring to justice is that sin, which but imputed,
exposed the only begotten Son of God to be deserted by his Father? how fierce
that fury, which could not be appeased without suffering? it must needs be
fearful to fall into the hands of an angry God; for how will he fume at the
servant, that thus frets at his Son? how will he tear the Principal, that thus
tormenteth the Surety? how shall God punish us for our own sins, who is so
wrathfully displeased with his Son for other men's sins? Oh what shall be the
sufferings of the Reprobate, if these be the sufferings of his dearly beloved?
needs must frail man sink under the burden of Divine fury, when the God of
Angels needed the support of an Angel: If my Repentance will avenge the quarrel
of my suffering Savior, shall I not do it? if Repentance will rescue me from
wrath to come, shall I not perform it? had I not better weep a few days here,
then in hell for ever? and the rather for that I weep not without cause, nor
mourn without hope. The sin was mine, the sorrow my Saviors; the transgression
mine, the satisfaction my Sureties. Oh the depth of his pity, that endured this
for mine iniquity! What he endured for a time, I must have endured for ever, if
in him the Father had not been well-pleased! Shall that be my delight, which
cost my Surety so dear? Shall I call on the Lords Name, or be called by the
Name of Christ, and not depart from iniquity? was Jesus Christ thus broken for
me, and shall not my heart be broken for and from sin? has he R deemed me from
this wrath to come, and shall he not Redeem me from my vain conversation? shall
I expect Remission, and not accept repentance through his blood? Oh what reason
have I to return to God, and glorify him with my soul and body which are his!
for he bought them at a price, and a dear price, his own blood; he has
consecrated a way of access unto the Father, through the veil of his own
flesh; but shall I dare to approach, not having my heart sprinkled from an evil
conscience, and my body washed with pure water? he is reconciled, but shall I
again rebel? I am healed, shall I again sin? a pardon is to me extended,
shall I not receive it with a pensive and prostrate soul?

Thus then we find that there is much of strength in this Argument, even above
a thousand Arguments to enforce Repentance; if but right reason keep the
Throne, what reply can be made, or reason rendered, why the call of the Gospel
should not be obeyed, whilst it pleads with so much clearness for our
repentance from the consideration of the death of Christ?

But the second Argument urged by the Gospel to induce us to repent, is, the
day of judgment. 2. Argument to enforce repentance.
The former Argument does assault our affections, this our passions, that the
soul may be surrounded with suggestions unto repentance; and if either the one
or the other, are under the command of right reason, the design of the Gospel
may not miscarry; the dread of the day of judgment, drives the Ministers of
God to Preach and persuade repentance. Knowing the terrors of ^he Lord, we
persuade men, says the Apostle; for that we must all appear before the
judgment seat of Christ, that every one may receive according to the things
done in the body, according to that he has done in the body, whether it be
good or bad, 2 Cor. 5.10, 11. This is sure a profitable proper Argument to
persuade repentance; which provokes unto the Preaching of it; and therefore the
same Apostle does in Acts 7.30, 31. urge it; but now he commands all men
everywhere to repent, for that he ha h appointed a day wherein to judge the
world in righteousness, etc. And this Argument is so pregnant and profitable
to persuade repentance, that it is urged by John the Baptist, The Kingdom of
God is at hand, therefore repent; nay, the axe is laid to the root of the tree,
and every tree which brings not forth good fruit, must be hewn down, and
thrown into the fire; therefore bring forth fruits meet for repentance, Matthew
3. and very often by the Lord Jesus himself: This is so proper an Argument to
enforce repentance, that it is noted to be set at a distance to the thoughts of
the impenitent; they live as having made a Covenant with death, and an
agreement with hell, Isa. 28.15. put far away this evil day; it is noted that
the Doctrine which increases ungodliness, denies the resurrection, 2 Timothy
2.16, 17, 18. And such as walk after their own lusts, are scoffers at the day
of judgment, 2 Pet. 3.3, 4, 5. And it is to be observed, that those in Athens
who repented not at Paul's Preaching, mocked when he made mention of the
resurrection, and last judgment. But certainly there is much in the day of
judgment to move the hardest heart, and most stubborn sinner to repentance:
the same Spirit which is to convince the world of sin and of righteousness,
convinces also of judgment; for the day of judgment answers all the
sinners pleas, whereby he defends and encourages himself in sin; for it
assures of certain detection and conviction of sin. It is a day which
allows not the least encouragement from secrecy; for therein every man's
deeds must be made manifest, whether they be good or evil; nay, the very
secrets of all hearts shall be laid open; and sinful thoughts themselves must
then be judged; the day of judgment determines a period to all impiety, and
denies the duration of its props and Pillars, profits and pleasures in the
world; determining all the advantages of sin, to be at the best but pleasures
of sin for a season; calling on rich men to howl and weep, though they live in
pleasure on earth, in James 5.1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8. The day of judgment
assures of the punishment of the wicked; however they escape scot-free in this
life, and by their present power, Gods patience, and humane strength, they
evade and escape many evils which befall the godly, yet they are but reserved
to this day of vengeance; and this is the day in which the wicked must appear
Cursed, and manifests that it shall not go well with the wicked; this day of
judgment, is the day of recompense to the righteous, wherein it shall be made
manifest, it is not in vain to serve God, or walk mournfully before him; the
iniquities of the penitent shall not be found when sought for, but appear
blotted out of Gods remembrance; for that if there be in the soul any sense of
sin, and fear of judgment, this is one eminently forcible argument to persuade
repentance: shall men continue in sin which shall erelong be laid open to their
shame? or pursue the pleasures which shall shortly end in perplexities? and not
rather judge themselves, that they may not be judged by the Lord?

Thus then the Gospel does by plain and powerful arguments call unto
repentance, and witness its necessity: But yet again,

The most powerful helps conducing to Repentance, are afforded by the Gospel:
and thereby it calls most loudly to Repentance, leaving us altogether without
excuse, and sealing us under inevitable condemnation in case we do not repent:
the Gospel affords the fullness of knowledge for the enforcement of Repentance;
ignorance and unbelief, those bars and locks of impenitency are broken open;
the Gospel opens the blind eyes, and turns us from darkness to light; makes
all men from the least to the greatest, to know the God that is offended, to be
a God of jealousy, that will not endure iniquity; he is a consuming fire to
the hypocrite in Zion: The Law that is violated, is just, holy and good; the
guilt contracted, is so contrary and provoking to justice, that in it there is
no possibility of approach to God; that therefore Christ is exalted a Prince
and a Savior, to give Repentance before Remission of sin: Repentance is a free
gift conferred by the Covenant of grace, signified and sealed in Baptism;
Christ Jesus the Donor; we need but ask and have; the death of Jesus the
efficient cause of Repentance, it is wrought by union with the same; so that
the Gospel makes us to see the necessity, nature, next way, method, and order
of repentance; we cannot now plead we knew not what it was to repent, where or
how to gain repentance, or that there was so great a need of it.

The Gospel helps us to the Spirit that works Repentance. The Ministry of the
Gospel is the Ministry of the Spirit; this awakeneth the most sleepy
conscience, and shakes the most rocky heart; this makes Herod hear John
gladly, and the Jews to rejoice in his light; this makes Foelix himself to
tremble, and Simon Magus to fall down like ligh^ening; none can continue
impenitent under the Gospel, but by quenching the Spirit, grieving the Spirit;
nay, with rage resisting the Spirit, and counting themselves unworthy of
salvation. The great work of the Gospel, is to send forth the Spirit to
convince the world of sin, Act. 13.46, 7, 51.
righteousness, and judgment; and the Spirit by the Gospel works conviction,
unto very opposition with rage, and violence, and malicious attempts, to
extinguish its light, and destroy the Ministers that publish it, if it do not
convince unto conversion and repentance; hence the sin unpardonable
(constituted say some) but I am sure completed by impenitency, is called
blasphemy against the Spirit; for and by reason of its spite and rage against
the Gospel. We see then that the Gospel teaches repentance as its maine
doctrine, offers repentance as its prime privilege, urges repentance as its
chief duty, and enforces repentance as its only end; and so loudly calls
unto repentance, that we are bound to the obedience of the Gospel as the last
of Divine instructions, and after which we must expect no direction to our
happiness; but this must stand as the high aggravation of impenitency, as a
sin against the humiliation and exaltation of Jesus Christ, the death,
sufferings, resurrection of the Son of God, the Covenant and Spirit of grace:
Repentance is absoultely and indispensably necessary.

So that in order to the anti^ipation of divine fury, and answer of the call of
the Gospel, we see the necessity of repentance: And this is the second general
Head propounded, which give me leave to dismiss with a brief, but plain
rebuke and blame unto the sinful demeanor and carriage of men in the world,
demonstrating an insensibility of this indispensable necessity of Repentance;
and it consists in two things, (viz.) the Contempt Of Repentance. Neglect Of
Repentance.


1. Note of insensibility of repentance.
The sinful carriage of men evidencing their insensibility of its necessity, is
the contempt of Repentance, whereby men scoff at repentance, despising all
calls thereunto; scorning it as a base and contemptible melancholy humor,
below the spirit of men; they live like men in Covenant with hell, and at an
agreement with the grave, who need no repentance, and therefore make their
hearts hard, and necks stiff, become obdurate and rebellions to all calls to
repentance; approve themselves a scornful people; nay, scoffers at the Doctrine
of the Gospel, and day of judgment, which calls them to Repentance. In the
haughtiness of their spirits, they

1. Disesteem the mercies and common providence of God, which should lead them
to repentance. They say not in their hearts, Let us fear the Lord our God that
gives rain, both the former and latter in its season, and that reserveth to us
the appointed weeks of the Harvest, Jer. 5.24. but despise the patience and
long-sufferance of God, which should lead them to repentance.

2. Decline, nay, despise the Word of God; when preaching repentance, they will
not hearken to the sound of the Trumpet, Jer. 6.17. have line upon line, yet
will not hear, Isa. 28.13. Nay, pull away the shoulder, and stop their ear,
lest they should hear, Zech. 7.11.

3. Disregard the judgments of God denounced, or inflicted upon others for
their warning; all that God does to treacherous Israel, never affects or
frightens treacherous Judah to make her return, Jer. 3.10. The falling of the
Tower of Siloa, and Pilates mingling the blood of men with Sacrifices, may
occasion censorious thoughts, Luke 13.1, 2, 3, 4, 5.
these were worse sinners than others; but never any serious reflections, that
unless we repent, we must all likewise perish. Obdurate children never relent
at their Brethrens correction; nay, when threatened themselves, they bless
themselves in their heart, and say, We shall see no evil, though we go on to
add drunkenness to thirst, Deuteronomy. 29.19. By their stubbornness they tire and
stay Gods correcting hand, with a Why should you be smitten any more? you
revolt still more and more, Isa. 1.5.

4. Are desperate and daring in their impiety; sinning with an high hand, and
brazen face, with utmost resolution; Come say they, we will fetch wine, and
fill our selves with strong drink, and to morrow shall be as this day, and more
abundant, Isa. 56.12. are not ashamed when they commit abomination, nor can
they blush, Jer. 6.15. they sin as Sodom, not so much as seeking to hide their
iniquity, Isa. 3.9. out-facing vengeance, out-daring heaven, out-vying hell,
Isa. 28.15. deriding judgments denounced, because deferred, with O Watchman,
What of the night? Isa. 21.11. Where is the promise of his coming? 2 Pet. 3.
nay, blasphemously saying, God is such an one as our selves, Psalm. 50.21. and
because sentence against an evil work is not speedily executed, their heart is
fully set in them to work wickedness, Eccles. 8.11. so that they do every way
demonstrate a contempt of repentance, and are so far from owning a necessity
of it, that they deem it vain and vile, and so witness themselves to be
desperately wicked, wedded to their lusts, and sold to work wickedness; who wi
l not hear of parting from impiety, though on hope of pardon, or fear of
hell; and so justly called a stubborn people, deeply disingenuous, despising
all dictates of self-preservation, and escape of everlasting woe, the deepest
discoveries of divine wisdom, which prescribes repentance as man's remedy, the
displayings of divine affection, soliciting repentance to prevent their ruin,
and so are foolish, dolefully self-destructive, denying the way of their
safety, and defying a God of power and jealousy, to arise in his wrath against
them, and so aggravating their sorrow with an I would have healed thee, but
thou would not be healed; thy destruction is of thy self, O Israel.

2. Note of insensibility of repentance.
But the second sinful carriage of men evidencing their insensibility of the
necessity thereof, is the neglect of Repentance; these men own it as a duty to
be done, and remedy to be used, and dare not admit any contemptible thoughts of
it; yet they are slack unto, and sleighty in the performance of it; And of
these there be three sorts.

1. Sort of neglectors of repentance.
1. Self-justitiaries; men that are right in their own eyes, see Repentance a
needful grace, but not needful unto them; they are honest among men, pay all
their own, live civilly among their Neighbors, nay, holy toward God; they
Pharisee like fast twice aweek, pay tithes, give alms, hear Sermons, read
Scripture, pray, and the like; these pity their profane Neighbors, and apply
every reproof to them; but as for themselves, Bellarmine-like they have no sin
to confess; they must strain conscience for some venial sins, that they may
pass the form of absolution; these are the whole who need no Physician, and
the righteous whom Christ calls not to repentance; Until convinced that this,
and more than this, is consistent with Reprobation, and is not enough to keep a
soul from hell; certainly these are, 1. Ignorant of natures pollution, Ezekiel.
16.2. Romans 11.24. 2. Vnobservant of the Law its exaction, which concludes all
under guilt, Romans 3.17. 3. Unaffected with the prescribed way of salvation,
Repentance and Remission. 4. Insensible of Divine scrutiny and judgment which
they must pass, Prove. 16.2.21. 2. Matthew. 9.13. 5. Unacquainted with, and
unaccustomed to, or indirect in the work of self-examination, altogether
strangers at home, or seeing their faces in the false glass of comparison with
their vilest Neighbors; for otherwise they could not but see Repentance
absolutely necessary for themselves more than others; for Publicans and Harlots
will enter into heaven before them.

2. Superficial penitents; these see Repentance a duty, 2 Sort of neglectors of
repentance.
but deem it needs not much ado; there is no such necessity of it, as that a
man should be taken up with it as his serious business; therefore they regard
not the quality of the act, but pass themselves as penitentials, with some
formal careless performances, some short sighs or sobs for sin, trembling with
Foelix at Paul's Preaching, or quivering with Belshazzar, on sight of Gods
handwriting; and casting off some gross profane acts with Alexander or
Polemon, but never strike at the root of sin, and mortify lust, or make a
serious return to God, but show themselves void of the grace, and ignorant of
the nature of true repentance, and fall under fallacious hopes of heaven, which
like the hope of an Hypocrite, will fail them in the evil day, when they shall
be too late convinced that such is the necessity of Repentance, that the matter
there cannot be separated from the manner of performance,

3. Such as set Repentance at a distance, 3. Sort of neglectors of repentance.
and post it off from time to time; these men are, and indeed by daily
subjection to the Gospel, cannot but be convinced Repentance is indeed a duty,
and exceeding necessary unto the remission of sins; and sitting under the Word,
these men meet with many strong heart-shaking convictions, which they bid
welcome, and unto the truth and goodness of what is required they assent, and
their affections work within them, they cannot but sigh on sense of their sad
condition, and confess it has been bad with them, but it shall now be better;
they conceive and declare good purposes, but alas they prove abortive; like
Ephraims righteousness, an early dew soon gone; like the Son in the Gospel,
when called into Christ his Vineyard, they answer, I go Sir, ^ut go not; like
lingering Austin, pray, but fear God will too soon say Amen to their prayer;
they protract time, persist in sin, and many times quench the motions of the
Spirit within them; suggesting to themselves, though repentance be necessary,
it requires no haste; these men do sinfully

1. Determine their own time, not considering the uncertainty thereof, that
they are Tenants at the will of another, in the hand of the God of time, who
may not give them another time; sense of repentance should make us say, Multis
annis crastinum non habeo, I have no to morrow.

2. Deem grace to be within the reach of man's arm; they think they can repent
when they list; not considering it is Gods gift, so that they may enjoy their
time, but not repent; were it at men's Command, what disingenuity is it to
defer Repentance! but in this case it is Grand presumption.

3. Do what in them lies, to quench the Spirit, stifling convictions,
disobeying persuasions, deadning affection; the Spirit will not move for ever,
Genesis 6.3.

4. Disesteem grace and holiness, accounting it the shame of strength, and
burden of youth, thinking repentance the work of old age and weakness, and the
quality of fools.

5. Deaden the hopes of their friends, who know not how to deertmine their
eternal estate, are indeed cheered in their pensive posture in sickness, and
at death, if it be not too late to be true, on which account they are
constrained to check their hopes, and dare make no conclusion, but say as
Austin in the like case, Non dico damnabitur; non dico salvabitur; sed tu dum
sanus es poenitentiam age, Repent in health.

6. Make difficult repentance; undertaking that in infirm age, which requires
the utmost of strength; nay, rendering sin by its custom natural and obdurate.
Can the Ethiopian change his color? Jer. 13.23.
then they that are accustomed to sin may repent; sickness employeth the whole
man, and shuts out all list or leisure to repent.

7. They are in danger dolefully to outdate the day of grace. God does manifest
graces beauty, and magnify the necessity of Repentance, by limiting its time;
to day if ye will hear his voice, well and good; if not, he will swear in his
wrath you shall not enter into his rest; if the day of grace be once expired,
Repentance may be sought with tears, but not obtained; and then the pleasures
of sin will be shortning; conscience will grow clamorous, and torment with an
expectation of fiery indignat^on to be revealed from heaven, lamenting too
late, Oh that I had known in that my day, Luke 19.42.
the things which Concern my Peace, which are now hid from mine eyes!

Such as in time will not, when it is too late shall see that repentance is the
One Thing Necessary of man's life, is even of absolute Necessity.

I have laid before you the two first general things considerable, (viz.) the
Nature and Necessity of Repentance, wherein I have been longer than intention,
but shall be more brief in the two remaining; I pass then to the third thing
propounded, viz.

The Notes and Characters of true Repentance.

And concerning this, I might return back to the description of Repentance, and
make that an examination of the truth of your Repentance; but I will leave that
to your own private meditations, and only examine your Rep^ntance by the
Characters propounded by the Apostle Paul to the Corinthians; For behold this
self-same thing, that you have sorrowed after a godly sort, what carfulness
it has wrought in you; yea, what clearing of your selves, yea, what
indigna^ion, yea, what fear, yea, what vehement desire, yea, what zeal, yea,
what revenge! 2 Cor. 7.11. in which we have two remarkable Notes and Characters
of true Rpentance.

First, The general nature of it, godly sorrow.

Secondly, The Concomitants thereof, care fear, etc.

1. Mark of Repentance.
The first Note or Mark of Repentance, is godly sorrow: I have before Noted
sorrow to be essential to Repentance; God never calls to Repentance, but he
calls to weeping; or promises Repentance, Mr. Calamies Sermon before the house
of Commons, October. 22. 1644.
but he promises a spirit of mourning; excellently well says an eminent
Minister of this CITY, God has tied sin and sorrow together with Adamantine
chains. A woman may as soon look to be delivered of a Child in a dream, as a
man to repent without sorrow. Sorrow is indeed the daughter of sin; but God
has made the daughter a means to destroy the mother; you must not look to
dance with the Devil all day, and sup with Christ at night; to lie in Dalilah's
Lap all your lives, and go to Abraham's bosom when you dye. To the merry
Greeks, and Boon Companions of the world, Repentance seems madness, because it
calls for mourning; for wheresoever there is true Repentance, there must, there
will be sorrow for sin. This sorrow must be godly sorrow after a godly sort;
it is (...), sorrow according to God. Godly in its Author, Occasion, Object,
End and Effects; it must be godly sorrow in its Author, springing from God, and
God alone; the working of natural passions by a supernatural power and
principle; a spirit of mourning, even the Spirit of God melting and making the
hard heart to mourn; a rock relenting on the stroke of Gods rod; the stony
heart is taken away, and an heart of flesh given by the Lord; this sorrow is
Gods gift from Golgotha; the death of the Son, of the Son of God, depresseth in
us all joy and comfort. Nature is no Author, though an Actor in this grief. It
is godly in its Occasion; Divine offense, rather than Humane loss; sin, not
smart, is the ground, reason, occasion of it; it is most in their hearts, who
in respect of the world have least cause to mourn; it is not for loss of wife,
children, goods or credit, but breach of Divine Law; its complaint is not I am
undone, but God is offended, the Law violated, Christ is dishonored; it is
more for deformity, than deserved misery; for extinguished holiness, than
miseries to be endured; a mourning for sin as sin, as it is offensivum Dei,
aversivum a Deo, an act of disobedience, an act of unkindnesse. It is dolor to
God, Against thee, thee only have I sinned. The souls unlikenesse to God,
unlocks its passion; the utmost of perplexities cannot abate its joys, if God
appear well-pleased; nor the highest of enjoyments silence its sorrow, whilst
God stands offended. It is godly in its object; it is s rrow toward God, Acts
20.21. A lamenting after the Lord, 1 Samuel 7.2. A looking unto Christ, and
mourning ove^ him whom we have pierced, Zech. 12.10. As a man runs with bleared
eyes to the party offended, Oh Sir, I have offended, wronged you, will you
forgive me? So penitent David runs to God, and with remorse cries, Against
thee, thee only have I sinned: And the Prodigal cries to his father, I have
sinned against thee. In days of affliction and atonement, Israel assembled, and
mourned before the Lord; penitent Ephraim cries, Thou have chastised me, and I
was chastised. This sorrow speaks not in the ears of men, but God; it is not
open and seen to the world, but secret, serious toward God. It is godly in its
end and effects; it is expressed to God, that God may be enjoyed; this sorrow
speaks unto God the vindication of his justice; That thou may be justified
when thou judge, and righteous when thou speak. It is not a mourning of
murmuration, but of justification: Why should a man complain, a man for the
punishment of his sin! it is a sorrow that sets a luster on the least mercy; it
is of the Lords mercy we are not consumed; We are less than the least of his
mercies, is its language; this sorrow is of submission, I have sinned, let the
Lord do what seems him good; it lies prostrate at the feet of God for mercy,
and resigned into the will of God: Wherein I have done amiss show it me, I will
do so no more; and so devotes it self unto God, to suffer or do his will; its
outcry is, Lord, what would thou have me to do? it is every way godly
sorrow: This is the first Mark of Repentance.

The second Note or Character follows upon it, 2. Mark of Repentance.
and is the Concomitants; some call them adjuncts, properties, effects; but I
shall only say inseparable Concomitants of this godly sorrow; and these are
seven in number.

First, Care; by some rendered study; in the Original (...), 1. Concomitant of
godly sorrow.
which as Cicero renders, is a very earnest application of a man unto
something with great delight: And as Interpreters render, it signifies serious
intention of mind, and speedy, sedulous execution of hand; so that it stands
opposite to security and slothfulness, and intends to Note the diligence and
dexterity of the soul, in a shunning and avoiding sin, and setting against all
occasions and temptations thereunto, and studying the will of God, making it
his meditation night and day; and having in all things respect unto it, as the
rule of his life and conversation; so that the very anxiety of his spirit is to
shake off and avoid his sin, to subdue and weaken his lusts, Qui paenitet,
sollicitus est ne peccet. Ambr. in Text.
to stand against temptations unto evil; for whoever repents, says Ambrose,
is careful not to sin again. He is made whole, he would sin no more, but with
all care, caution, circumspection and vigilance strive against corruption, and
study to know and to do the will of God; with the Church at Ephesus, To
remember from whence we are fallen, and do our first works; Revel. 2.5.3.1.
or the Church of Sardis, to awake and watch, not to be slothful in business,
and secure against sin, until surprised therewithal.

2. Concomitant of godly sorrow.
Secondly, Clearing of our selves; (...), an Apology, or answer by way of
defense unto the calumnies of an Accuser; which is not done by denial of guilt,
and excuse of sin, but by confession; Paenitentia non habet excusationem, nisi
confessionem. Amb. in Text.
for says Saint Ambrose, Repentance has no excuse but confession. This is an
humble deprecation of Divine judgment, and silencing of the Accuser of the
Brethren by self-condemnation; the true penitent does judge himself with shame
and sorrow, that he may not be judged by the Lord; he is ready to aggravate
all, not extenuate any his sins; only finds an acquittance from them in the
blood of Christ, and concludes not against the charge of the Accuser, and
clamor of his own conscience: I was an Extortione^, a Drunkard, an Adulterer,
a Blasphemer; but I am washed, I am sanctified, I am justified; Repentance
renders guilt as if it had never been, and so becomes the souls Apology.

3. Concomitant of godly sorrow.
Thirdly, Indignation; (...), wrath unto grief; the rising of the very stomach
with rage, and a being angry unto very sickness again; it is only used in this
one Text of Scripture, as it has sin for its object; but in reference to other
things it expresses the very height of anger, fretting unto fuming; thus the
rage of the Ruler of the Synagogue on a conceived breach of the Sabbath, is
expressed, Luke 13.14. Religious wrath is the hottest, it will make a meek
Moses break the very Tables of the Lord: Thus the discontent of envy is
expressed in Mark 10.41. The Disciples stomach rose against Jam^s and John; so
that it here imports the turning of the unquiet passions of the soul wholly
against sin; a fretting and fuming at our selves for sin; an hating and being
ashamed of our selves for sin; this wrath breaks out in a penitent David, into
disgraceful speeches against himself, so foolish was I and ignorant, when
distrust prevailed on him, Psalm. 73.22. And I have done very foolishly, when he
sinned in numbering the people, 2 Samuel 24.10. Nay, breaks into disgraceful
demeanor toward sin, as impenitent Israel to the defiling the graven images
of silver, and the ornaments of their golden Idols, and casting them out with
contempt, as a menstruous garment, and an angry rejection of them, with a Get
you hence, Isa. 30.22. So that sin is the object of hatred, scorn, rage,
reproach, and contumely, and ground of grief and shame to the peni ent; the
soul cannot think of sin without stomachization, heart-rising, and redning of
face; he is indeed angry, and sins not the whole of whole anger, runs out
against sin.

Fourthly, Fear, a rare companion of wrath, 4. Concomitant of godly sorrow.
but always of care; the truly penitent are of a trembling and timorous
spirit; and no marvel; for the burnt child dreads the fire; they have paid
dear for past guilt, and may well beware to fall again; the whole work of
Repentance is expressed to be a fear of the Lord and his goodness, Hos. 3.5.
The fear of the Lord is the only fence against temptations unto sin; here note
that this fear is a fear of sense, affecting us with the evil sin procures,
and dreadful judgments of God by it deserved, trembling at the Word of
threatening; a fear of reverence, awefully apprehending the holiness and
Majesty of God, and that vast disproportion and disparity between God and us,
sorrowfully crying, How shall dust and ashes, polluted man, come nigh to an
holy and glorious Majesty! and a fear of diligence and vigilancie, watching and
warring against sin, that it may not surprise us by the difficulty of our state
and distempers of our soul; and thus the penitent works out his own salvation
with fear and trembling; but it is not a fear of diffidence and despondencie,
of distrust and despair, which deadning all hope of prevalency, dulleth all
diligence, discourageth vigilance, and industry, and at length drives to
self-destruction; the fear of Repentance springs from sense of mercy, and is
spurred with the confidence of success, being assured it is God that works
in the soul to will and to do, Phil. 2.13.1.6
and will perfect what he has begun.

5. Concomitant of godly sorrow.
Fifthly, Vehement desire, (...), a desire of fervency, that can admit of no
delay, says Dr. Slater: Of dil^gence and activity, say the Greek Critics,
which puts on with industry and violence; the sour sauce of godly sorrow does
ever sharpen the appetite of holy desire; the hu^ted Heart thirsts for the
water, the sin-wearied soul for Christ; it is a desire to be wholly rid of sin,
and therefore breaks out into complaints against the remainders of sin in the
soul, as Paul, Oh wretched man that I am, who shall deliver me from the body of
this death? Romans 7.24.
the death of nature, and day of judgment is desired, and delightful, because
the destruction and discharge of sin; it is also a desire of all sin-subduing
and grace-strengthning administrations; they that by Repentance have once
tasted that the Lord is good, do as new born babes desire the sincere milk of
the Word, 2 Pet. 2.2. This desire is vehement against all difficulties and
discouragements, running out with all fervent dil^gence for obtainment; and
bitter complaints for want, finding no satiety without its very object.

6. Concomitant of godly sorrow.
Sixthly, Zeal, an affection compounded of love and anger, and is the edge of
our desire, enforcing all means, and encountering all difficulties and
opposition to our end; this is that whereby the penitent persists in his godly
sorrow under all checks and diversions; and persevereth in his course of
mortification against all opposition of the world, or his corrupt self,
fighting against what hinders, and flinging off all encumbrances, and following
heaven with force and violence, that if it were possible, it would draw all men
with it, but however it bears down all before it, and never shows the
strength that is in these godly streams, till stopped by some temptation; but
then it roareth and swells, and overfloweth its banks, that all men may see
the penitent is full of the Holy Ghost; and this is always a Note of
Repentance; Be zealous and repent, is Christ his own Call; sorrow must not be
for sin, as if we minded not to part with it; but must manifest our fullness of
resolution to be rid of it, whatever it costs us.

Seventhly, Revenge; the due result of zeal; by zeal we are carried with that
vigor, that the world concludes us mad for God, 7. Concomitant of godly sorrow.
and for Religion, especially when our indignation boiles into revenge upon our
selves for our sins by self-castigations, Acts 26.24.
not of our body, with whips and scourges, as do the Papists, but by the
abatement of lust, which stirs in us, buffetting the flesh, and bringing it
into subjection, giving it the blew eye, a blot in the face, as the Greek word
signifies, (...).
withdrawing those lawful comforts which make it to wax wanton; as Hilarion,
when he felt his lusts wax big and strong, and wanton, provoking to
filthiness, Ego faciam Aselle ut non calcitres, I will by abstinence keep this
Ass for kicking; and our Henry the second, being inclined to incontinency,
prayed to God that he might rather have a constant weak body, than so s^rong
lusts; this is that which carries the penitent to wreak his quarrel on the
occasion and instruments of their impiety; Exodus 38.8.
as the daughters of Israel in dedicating their looking glasses, by which they
had offended unto the service of the Temple; and as did the Ephesians, burn
their books before all men, Act. 19.19. as holy Cranmer thrust his right hand
which subscribed his recantation, first into the fire, revengefully crying out
This unworthy right hand as long as he could speak; and this revenge leads them
to satisfaction for offenses done, either by public confession unto open
shame, or ready restitution, as Zacheus, threefold to the injury done; as
penitent Bradford, that parted with his whole estate to satisfy the wrong done
by one dash of his pen when a servant; so that revenge works all the
disgrace, dishonor, disadvantage, and destruction that is possible against
sin; thus then you have here the Notes and Characters of Repentance, laid down
by the Apostle, the best looking glass that can be, by which to dress your
penitent souls. Let it be to every of us a Use of Examination, and clearly
convince us that if we be strangers to sorrow, or our sorrow be to the world,
not toward God, godly sorrow, we have not repented; never let us think of
celebrating a celestial Passover without these sour herbs. Again, if under
our sorrow we continue careless of required duty; clamorous by continued guilt
on the conscience; fearless of common danger, and dese^ved misery by the
increase of sin, foolishly pitiful toward our lusts to be rebuked with rage;
faint in our desires to be rid of sin; lukewarm in our work of mortification,
or indulgent to our lusts, not str king home, whilst we smite at sin, we are
not the Subjects of true Gospel-Repentance; for these must always accompany it.

Having laid before you the Characters of true Repentance, I shall proceed very
briefly to propound the fourth and last General head to be considered, (viz.)

The Next way and means to gain Repentance.

And herein I shall not insist on the method and order of procuring repentance,
which is hinted to you before; or the lets and hindrances of repentance which
are to be removed, this would tire your patience (on which I have already too
much trespassed) but I shall only give you some special directions, which you
must observe, and carefully practice, if ever you will obtain Repentance; As,

1. Help to repentance.
First, Sit with care, constancy, and conscience under the Word of truth, and
Gospel of Grace. Repentance you have already heard, is the great work of the
Word, and loud call of the Gospel. This was the voice of John the Baptist, nay,
of Jesus Christ himself, and his Apostles; the Ministers of the Word, are the
Ambassadors of Reconciliation, and so Preachers of repentance; hearing is
prescribed of God the way to happiness. Isa. 55.2. Hear, and your soul shall
live; The Preaching of the Word, is the power of God to salvation; so long as
God continues the Word to a people, they are in a possibility of repentance;
but where the vision fails, the people perish, Prove. 29.19. If ever God bring
the Jews to Repentance, it will be by the Preaching of the Gospel, the lifting
up of the root of Jesse as an ensign, Isa. 11.11. God seals up under
impenitency by the withdrawing of his Word; the removing of the Candlestick of
the Gospel, is the saddest doom can be denounced: Rev. 2.5.
Refusing to hear, is the great reason of impenitency; Psalm. 81.11.
my people would not hearken, is Gods complaint; and We will not hear, the
language of the obstinate, Jer. 6.17. Rejection of the Word, pulling away the
shoulder, and stopping the ear, the property of an hard heart; Zach. 7.12.
never did Foelix fail so much; as when trembling at Paul's Preaching, he sends
him away, and would hear no more of that matter; nor did the Jews fall under
final Apostasy, until they put the Gospel away from them; the very Heathen
concludes Repentance to be the result of audience and attention.

Invidus, Iracundus, iners, vinosus, amator; Horace in Epist. 2.

Nemo adeo ferus est qui non mitescere possit,
Si modo culturae patientem accommodat aurem.
There is no profaneness but it is curable by patient audience; As ever you
will repent, hear the Word, attend unto instruction, abide the heart-shaking
convictions of the word; if you slight the Ministry of the Word, the sound of
the Trumpet, the call of the Gospel, you are sealed up under impenitency; the
very cry of the Gospel-call to Repentance, is, Let him that has ears hear.

Secondly, Study the nature of God; 2. Help to repentance.
God must be the object of Repentance; we must sorrow toward God, return to
God; it is a great inducement therefore to know God; ignorance of God is the
mother of impenitency; the times of impenitency are denominated times of
ignorance, Acts 17.30. This is observed to be the very cause of obduracy; the
Gentiles walk in the vanity of their minds, having their understanding
darkened, being alienated from the life of God by the ignorance which is in
them, because of the blindness of their heart, Ephesians. 4.17, 18. Ignorance of
God was the very principle of Isreal's persistence and progress in sin; They
proceed from evil to evil, but know not me, says the Lord, Jer. 9.3, 6. The
devil labors to keep all light out of man's soul, that so he may sleep in sin,
and be locked up in impenitency; he hinders the Gospel from being Preached; if
possible, he would blow out the light, and hinder men from hearing, but chiefly
from understanding; if our Gospel be hid, it is hid unto them that perish; the
eyes of whose mind the god of this world has blinded, lest the light of the
gl rious Gospel of Christ (who is the Image of God) should shine unto them, 2
Cor. 4.4. And when God brings to repentance, he breaks these bars of
ignorance, he pulls off these scales of blindness, and begins with the
understanding; true grace begins always at the renewing of the mind; the
transforming of the mind to know the good and acceptable Will of God, is the
formality of the Gospel Grace, true repentance, Romans 12.2. And the knowledge of
God being the princ^ple of it, is put for repentance: They shall know God, Hos.
2.20. and God will be known by the Egyptians, Isa. 19.21. are the promises of
repentance; There can be no conviction of a contrariety to God, where there is
not a right conception of God; and affection must follow apprehension; ignoti
nulla cupido; how can we fear God or his goodness, if we do not know him? what
reason of return to God, when men know not his holiness offended, justice
provoked, power irresistible, mercy in pardoning iniquity? It is a seeming
fair Apology for Pharaohs obduracy, Who is the Lord, that I should let Israel
go? The work of the Gospel is to open the blind eyes, in turning from Satan
unto God; the enquiry of Saul is first, Lord, who art thou? Act. 9.
then, What would thou have me to do? Did men know who it is they sin
against, they never durst be so bold. Study therefore the nature of God,
acquaint your selves with his Attributes, his Holiness, Power, Justice, Mercy,
and the like: Your souls will never be drawn from sin, or driven into a course
of true repentance, until God become your dread.

3. Help to repentance.
Thirdly, Sit close to the work of self-scrutiny; be serious in
self-examination; no man sits so fast in impiety as the stranger at home; none
so soon run upon their ruin as the regardlesse of their accounts. This is a
remedy of Gods immediate prescription, Commune with your hearts is on your
beds, Psalm. 4.4. Search and try your ways, and turn unto the Lord, Lam. 3.40.
Judge your selves, Mat. 7.1. When we approach his Table, where we are eminently
to act repentance, the whole work of preparation is resolved into
self-examination, 1 Cor. 11.28. Nay, this is a receipt transmitted to us with a
probatum est thus by David, Psalm. 119.59. I examined my ways, and turned my
feet into thy Testimonies. And when the Prodigals wits returned to consider his
wickedness, he would home to be a servant, where he had been and might have
been a son; Gods rod is but a calling us to reckon with our own souls; he never
reasons with any by correction, that read their own estate in his instructions.
You have heard before that conviction must go before conversion; man's
conscience is a Register which will bring to remembrance; and Judge that will
clearly determine of man's ways; the worst of men by a short conference with
their own soul, would soon see a necessity of repentance; censure others less,
and your selves more; enquire not into other men's condition so much as your own
Conversation; let no day return without accounts, be serious in
self-examination.

Fourthly, Sit loose to the world; 4. Help to repentance.
the world is the great pull-back to heaven, and hinderance of repentance; you
may observe, the reason the Rebellion and impenitency of Ezekiels hearers, was,
their hearts went after their covetousness, Ezekiel. 33.31. otherwise they took
delight to hear. That sad sentence, A Camel may sooner go through the eye of a
Needle, than a rich man enter into the Kingdom of heaven, was occasioned by a
rich man's refusal of Christ his call to repentance, Matthew. 19.20. Riches choke
the work, and lift up the heart too high; great men in the world think they
live above all reproof; for Tyrus-like, they set their hearts as the heart of
God, Ezekiel. 28.6. and think to live without control; he that loves the world,
finds (when called to repentance) he is loath to leave pleasures; it is hard to
renounce riches; it cuts deep to despise Wife, Children, Father, Mother,
Friends, and dear Relations; he cannot but be dismayed at reproach and
sufferings; sin is the common property of the world; the things of this world,
is the recompense of impiety; they that sin highest, ordinarily succeed most;
yet this is the great stumbling stone of the godly; the world makes David
almost repent his repentance, Psalm. 73. They that will follow God, must be
strangers to the world; true Penitentiaries must be pilgrims in the earth.

Fifthly, See the shortness of life, 5. Help to repentance.
and limitaton of the day of grace. Hopes of long life, and thoughts of
repentance at pleasure, help many a soul to hell; our life we must consider is
but a bubble, a blast, a shadow, gone before it well appear, in which there is
no certainty; our time is in Gods hand; he has numbered our days, but to which
of us has he declared the number? has he given any man a legible Lease of his
life? have the youngest, strongest, most healthful among us, an assurance of to
morrow? and does not eternity depend on the well-husbanding of this uncertain
time? is there any remembrance of God in the grave, or repentance among the
dead? does not death determine the eternal estate of men? Dives eyes cannot
disti^l one tear in hell; though he call to Abraham for mitigation of torments,
never so much as begs the pardon of sin; no, that is too late; see we not men
pensive and sad at the thoughts of death? Chrysostom has told us, the cause
of the fear of death, is, because we live not in the austerity befitting
Christianity, but lead d^licate and voluptuous lives. Could we make every day
our dying day, it would quicken us to repentance. Hilarion never had a to
morrow; and when he comes to die, he has the comfort of it; Oh my soul, get
thee out of this house of clay, what do thou fear? Septuaginta pr pe annis
servivisti Christo and mortem tim s! Have thou served Christ almost seventy
years, and do thou now fear death? If we will live for ever, we must die
daily; if we will not defer repentance, we must not determine to our selves any
other time than the present.

Again, if we know our time in nature, who knows the date of the day of
grace? It is a limited day, but the bounds thereof are not pub ished, that to
day, whilst it is called to day, we may hearken to his voice, Heb. 4.4, 7.
lest he swear in his wrath we shall not enter into his rest. A season of
salvation is allotted to the sons of men; the old world had its day, Jerusalem
had her day, every of us have our day; but our day of nature may out-date our
day of grace, (yet of this we have no assurance) but if so it do, it were
better the day of our being had never been; for the opportunity lost, we are
lost for ever; whilst we enjoy the Word, and motions of the Spirit, we have
hope; but if ever these cease, we are undone; Let us startle our souls with
these sad thoughts; This may be the last day or hour of my life, but if not,
the last day and hour of grace; would we hear every Sermon as the last, it
would rouse our souls to repentance.

Sixthly, Seriously exp^ct approaching judgment; it is an Argument to
repentance, 6. Help to repentance.
and very persuasive thereunto, as you have before heard; the thoughts of the
last judgment, will cool the courage of the prophanest sinner, when he sees
the day approach in which his secr^t sins must be laid open, a severe sentence
cannot be respited or suspended for the least moment, but must be executed with
speed, certainty and severity; the Judge is just, and will then be inexorable.
All the shel^ers of his power, might, policies, riches, honors, by which he
staved off repro^f, will now b^ scattered; a d fame vain and bootlesse; the
Judge is no respector of person; a day stored with; indignation, which will not
be mitigated, but be poured out in full vials; can the heart but tremble, that
is the subject of these thoughts? They that sin with boldness, set the day of
judgment at a distance from their soul; but if we will provoke repentance,
think with Jerome you always hear the Trumpet of the last day sounding in your
ears, Arise ye dead, and come to judgment. Excellent was the stratagem to stir
up repentance, which is storied of a Christian King of Hungary, who being on a
time sad and pensive, his brother a jolly Courtier, would needs know the cause
of his sadness; O Brother (said the King) I have been a great sinner against
God, and know not how to die, or to appear before God in judgment; his Brother
making a jest of it said, These are but melancholy thoughts; the King replied
nothing at present; But the custom of the Country was, that if the Executioner
came and sounded a Trumpet before any man's door, he was presently led to
execution; the King in the dead time of the night sends the Executioner to
sound the Trumpet before his brothers door, who hearing it, and seeing the
Messenger of death, sprang into the Kings presence, beseeching to know in what
he had ^ffended; Alas Brother (said the King) you have never offended me; And
is the sight of my Executioner so dreadful; and shall not I who have greatly
offended, fear to be brought before the judgment seat of Christ! a singular
cure for jovial contempt of repentance; the sense of judgment is a strong
summons to repentance.

Seventhly, Seriously apprehend the possibility, nay, probability, nay, the
positive certainty of pardon. I have before told you, 7. Help to repentance.
Repentance is the result of faith; despair deters duty; hope in Israel, is the
great help to repentance; the Law leads to conviction, but the Gospel to
conversion; despair is the devils lock to impenitency; look up therefore, see
there is mercy with the Lord, that he may be feared, and plenteous Redemption,
that he may be sought unto; apprehend then the price of man's sin paid, the
justice of God satisfied, the pardon sealed in and by the blood of Christ, and
proclaimed in the Gospel; so that it is thine with certainty, if received with
a prostrate soul, and sued out by serious repentance; nothing needs to deter;
God is reconciled, therefore return unto him.

8. Help to repentance.
Eighthly, Soak the heart in the blood of Jesus; take every day a turn of
meditation in Mount Calvary; cast thy eyes on a crucified Christ; read the
nature of thy sin, the provoked wrath of God, and passionate loves of a
Savior; it is suppling to the Adamantine heart, and swasive to the most
obdurate soul: I have before noted its force and efficacy to repentance; be
persuaded daily to contemplate the Cross of Christ.

9. Help to repentance.
Ninthly, Speed will much facilitate repentance; sin may be removed, before it
be settled by custom; but then it is difficult; youth is pliable to precepts,
strong under burdens, dexterous and active in business; when old age is
infirm, and impotent; the piety of youth is the horror of the devil, the
honor of Religion, the case and joy of the soul; let not sin become customary,
if you will ever cast it off; for it will become a second nature; linger not in
what you will be rid of; for the longer you linger, you will be more loath to
part, like Austins modo sine modo, and paululum quod ibat in longum; your anon
will never come; and our little longer in sin, will last for ever by the good
will of nature; singularly good is the counsel of Basil, If the thing be
honest, keep it to the end; if filthy and hurtful, why do thou continue in
it? does any that desires to ease the stomach of choler, increase it by a
continued bad and intemperate diet? if ever you will repent, repent betimes;
late repentance is rarely true, but ever difficult.

10. Help to repentance.
Tenthly, Sue for it at the hands of God. Repentance is Gods gift, and therefore
must be begged; it is Christ's purchase, the Covenants promise, and may be
begged with confidence; Jesus Christ is exalted to give Repentance, therefore
go to him in Faith; all means is ineffectual without Gods Blessing. Let
therefore Prayer enforce all means to this end; whilst you sit under the Word,
study the nature of God, examine your selves, sit loose to the world, see life
its brevity, and the limitation of the day of Grace, seriously expect the day
of judgment, sensibly apprehend a pardon, soake the heart in the blood of
Christ, and speed Repentance, second all with earnest Supplication; say with
Ephraim, O Lord turn thou me, and so shall I be turned; so shall your stony
heart be taken from you, and you shall possess this necessary grace of
Repentance in the truth of it, which God of his mercy grant us.

OF Holiness.
HEB. 13.14. Follow peace with all men, and holiness, without which no man
shall see the Lord.


HEre are two duties enjoined together in one and the same precept, though not
enjoined with the same penalty, (peace and holiness) the latter has a sad
threat added, if we miss it, without which no man shall see the Lord. It is
somewhat like that charge, Exodus 28.34, 35. that the Vest of Aaron should be on
the skirt with a Pomegranate, and a Bell, both of gold; yet the use of the Bell
was far above that of the Pomegranate, that the sound thereof may be heard when
he goes in before the Lord that he dye not. So are peace and holiness two
golden graces or blessings; peace is like the Pomegranate, whose smell is
fragrant, odoriferous, and so full of seeds, as no fruit more; such is peace,
of all outward blessings the chief, and full of the seed of all blessings, it
is therefore called the bond of peace, Ephesians. 4.4.
as if other blessings were the bundle, but peace the bond that did comprehend
them all: Yet holiness is that which bears the Bell, and makes the music
in the ears of God; and if the sound thereof be not heard before the Lord, we
shall surely dye. Therefore it is observed that the Relative [which] is not
plural, as referring to peace and holiness both; nor is it feminine, as
referring to peace at all; but (...), (not (...), nor (...)) as referring only
to (...), holiness.

Here are two great points contained in this Text.

Doct. 1. P ace is a high duty, rich blessing, and singular benefit that a
Christian is bound to follow, pursue, press after, and labor for, and that
with all men.

The duty is pressed strictly in the word (...), rendered here with the softest
follow; and in other places it is rendered to follow after, 1 Cor. 14.1. Phil.
3.12. to pursu^, 1 Pet. 3.11. to press unto, Phil. 3.14. And we have a full
proof for all; Romans 12.18. If it be possible, as much as in you lies live
peaceably with all men. We must see there be no default on our part (that all
the world is not in peace) but that we follow, pursue, press hard after peace,
(as far as possibly we may, and to the utmost that lies in us) and that with
all men; so says the Text also.

But I must leave this small Pomegranate peace, that I may ring out the Saints
Bell of holiness, the sound and force whereof I heartily pray may reach all
your hearts, (not ears) or rather that the sound thereof in all your hearts may
be heard in the Lords ears, (not ours) that ye dye not; yea, that Religion dye
not; otherwise I may fear that Englands passing Bell is tolling at the
departure of our glory, and we may call the next generation Iohabod.

But the other, and present point is this; viz. That true and real holiness is
the grace; the duty, the state, the trade which every Christian is bound to
follow, pursue, press after with might and main, as he ever thinks to look God
in the face. 2 Cor. 7.1. Having these promises, let us cleanse our selves from
all filthiness of flesh and spirit, perfecting holiness in the fear of God;
perfecting holinesse] what is that, but to follow it, follow after, pursue,
press hard to it? so 1 Pet. 1.15. Be ye holy as God is holy; there is as much
or more, pursue, follow it still, that you take up with no scant measure, no
low degree of it.

I call it, 1. A grace, and so it is; yet more; it is not one single grace
alone, but the conjunction of all graces. To say it is a star, is too little,
it is a constellation; or the way of holiness is as the lactea via, altogether
starry, so holiness is all grace.

2. I call it a duty, and so it is; but much more, it is the sum and Epitome of
all duty. All duties of the first Table are referred to holiness, as all of the
second Table to righteou ness, Luke 1.75. Yea, duties of the second Table are
called holiness, 1 These. 4.3. and 7.

3. I call it a state; it is not an act or habit, but a state; nor a state of a
Christian, but the state of Christianity, the state of consistency and
continuance or growth; there are some states we pass through, (as the man
through Infancy, childehood, youth, but abides in the state of Manhood) we
pass through the New birth to be born no more; of mortification, Romans 6.9, 11.
Romans 8.15.
to dye no more; of bondage, to fear no more; but in this state once, we must
persist, persevere, live, dye in it.

4. I call it our trade, and so it is our noblest profession, and course of
life, 1 Pet. 1.15. Be holy in all manner of conversation, 2 Pet. 3.11. What
manner of persons ought we to be in all holy conversation! This is the trade
and business we should ply in the whole course of our lives.

Now it may be asked what this holiness is? And I would answer, and (if the
time would bear it) open, the definition, which is this:

True holiness is that inward, through and real change, wrought in the whole
man, of a formerly vile sinner, by the Spirit of God, What holiness is.
whereby his heart is purged from the love, and his life from the dominion and
practice of fo^mer sins, and whereby he is in heart and life carried out after
every g^od.

1. I call it a change, and so it is; it is not from nature, custom,
education; it is not an habit, form, but a change. Christiani fiunt non
nascuntur, creantur non generantur; and a mighty and manifest change it makes,
it is therefore called a new birth, new creation, a new creature, resurrection,
etc. Is there not a change when a child is born? when a dead person raised? a
blind man receives sight?

Yea, whatsoever is called holy, is eo nomine, changed from its common use;
when a person, or a garment, or a place, or a vessel, or a day were called
holy, all such were changed, as to their use, serving now for sacred and
Religious Services; such is Soul-holinesse, a Soul-change.

There are three great changes wrought in a Christian at times.

First, One in Justification; 1. Ne imputetur.
when a guilty sinner has sin taken away, that it is not imputed.

The second in Sanctification; when a sinner living and wallowing in sin, has
sin taken away, 2. Ne regnet.
(the power of it) that it does not reign.

The third is in Glorification; 3. Ne restet, aut omnino sit.
when the sanctified person has sin taken away, (all remainders of it) that it
has no being left.

Now though the first and last of these are both perfect changes, and
Sanctification is not perfect here; yet upon some account, some have called
that change wrought in Sanctification the greatest change of the three; for
compare it with Justification, Justification is a change of the state, not of
the person; a change without, not within the man.

In Sanctification, there is a real change, and that within the man.

In Glorification also is a perfect change, (it being the highest state of the
three) but the change is not so great as in Sanctification; glory and grace
differ but gradually, there being no opposition between them, as between grace
and sin. The change is not so different between the Morning light and the
Noonday brightness, as between the Morning light and the Midnight darkness.

2. I call it an inward change] to distinguish it from civil hon^sty.

3. A through change] to distinguish it from restraining, or conforming grace,
which produces some particular and partial change, but not a total and
universal.

4. A real change] to distinguish it from hypocrisy, which makes show of a
great and goodly change, but is only outward and seeming, not inward and real;
which three are often taken (but as often mistaken) for holiness.

5. Wrought] it is neither natural nor acquired, or taken up by the power of
our own free will, or force of others persuasion, strength of reason,
convictions, resolutions from within or without. Hence we are said to be Gods
workmanship, Ephesians. 2.10. To be wrought to the same thing, 2 Cor. 5.5.

6. In the whole man] 1 These. 5.23. The God of peace sanctify you wholly; and
I pray God your whole soul and body, and spirit be k^pt blameless, etc. So
that if you ask where is the seat of this holiness? is it in the head? or
heart? or conscience? or outward man? I answer, in no one, but all of them; it
is as leaven that leaveneth the whole lump; it is as the soul, tota in toto,
and tota in qualibet ^arte. The understanding in a new sanctified person is
enlightened to discern spiritual things, which before he understood not; his
memory sanctified to retain what is good, and shut out what is hurtful;
conscience awakened to check for sin, and exc te to duty; will subdued to
embrace good, resist evil; affections orderly placed, to love, fear, desire,
delight it, and to hate, and what is suitable to holiness; and the whole
outward man for speech, actions, behavior, yea, habit and dress is composed
as becomes holiness.

7. Of a formerly vile sinner] grace makes a mighty change when it works
effectually; none so bad, so far gone, but it can br ng home; Ezekiel. 16.6. Esaias
55.13.
it finds one in his blood, and leaves him clean; it finds a thorn, and
leaves a mirtl^; it meets with a Publican and Harlot, and leaves a Sa^nt; it
meets with a bloody Persecutor, and hellish Blaspheme^, and turns him into a
Preacher, or Martyr, as Paul; it finds men as bad as bad can be, and leaves
them in as good a state as the best, 1 Cor. 6.9, 10, 11.

8. By the Spirit of God] we may not ascribe it to the virtue of Ordinances, or
worth of Instruments; 1 Cor. 9.11. But ye are washed, but ye are justified, but
ye are sanctifi^d; -- by the Spirit of our God. Art, nature, education can do
nothing here; it is not by might or power, but by the Spirit of God, Zach. 4.6.

9. Whereby the heart is purged, etc.] here the parts of holiness, which are
two, mortification and vivification; Esaias 1.16, 17
Cease to do evil, learn to do well. The first is privative. The second
positive.

Grace works right, when there is first a leaving of old sin: it is not putting
a new piece on an old garment; or clapping a new Creed to an old life; or new
duties to wonted courses; Deuteronomy. 22.9, 10, 11.
this were to sow with diverse seeds, or wear a garment of woollen and linen
which God hates; but there must be as to the privative part

1. A heart purged from the love of every sin] there may be sin left in the
heart, no sin loved and liked; the evil that I do, I have; sin and grace may
stand together, Romans 7.15.
not love of sin and grace.

2. A life from the practice and dominion of sin] sin remains still, but raigns
no more; he was a servant of sin, Romans 6.17, 18.
and had members enough to be instruments of sin; a mouth to speak it, a tongue
to speak for it, a wit to invent for it, reason to argue for it, hands and feet
to work and walk fot it, purse to spend upon it; there is none of these now.

Secondly, and the other part is yet much better; he is in heart and life
carried out after every good] it is not a bare breaking off of sin that makes a
Christian; (it is one half of a Christian) but there must be a turning from
sin, and bringing forth fruits meet for Repentance. You have both these
parts, 2 Cor. 7.1. Let us cleanse our selves from all filthiness of flesh and
spirit, and perfect holiness, etc.

To come to the Reasons of the point, which are four.

Reas. 1. This is Gods great design; therefore should be ours. It is the
greatest design God has upon his people in all he does to and for them. All
the immediate acts of God, and all his mediate tend to this.

1. All Gods immediate acts: Pitch where you will; carry it to the first of
Gods acts toward man in Election; God has chosen us before the foundation of
the world, Ephesians. 1.4. 2 These. 2.13.
that we should be holy. So that I may not say, If I am Elected, I shall be
saved, though I live in sin; but if Elected, I must be Sanctified, and dye to
sin.

2. Take all the acts of the three persons apart.

1 Pet. 1.14, 15. 1 These. 4.7.
First, The Father if he adopt, if he regenerate, if he call, it is that we
should be holy.

Secondly, It is the end designed by all that Christ did; his Incarnation,
Hebr. 2.11. Hebr. 13, 12 Ephesians. 4.26, 27.
Life, Death, Doctrine, Example, Humiliation, Exaltation, Prayers, Promises,
Threats, Miracles, Mercies; yea, of his Intercession in heaven that we might be
sanctified.

Thirdly, It is the end of all that the Holy Ghost does. All the works of the
Holy Ghost may be referred to three heads. 1. His gifts. 2. Graces. 3.
Comforts; and all these tend to holiness.

1. All the gifts of the Holy Ghost; if a gift of prayer, of conviction,
terror, etc. it is to sanctify thee; if of knowledge, utterance, etc. it is to
make others holy.

2. A l his graces; What is Knowledge, Faith, Repentance, Love, Hope, Zeal,
Patience given for; but to make thee holy? yea, they are the several parts of
thy holiness it self, which is made up of nothing but the graces of the holy
Spirit.

3. All the comforts of the Spirit are given to strengthen our hands in
holiness; What is the peace of God, love of God, pardon of sin, assurance of
salvation, joy in the Holy Ghost, Spirit of Adoption given for, but to make us
more watchful, humble, lively in holiness? The Privy Seals of Justification
must be attested in Letters Patents, under the broad Seal of Sanctification, or
it may be well suspected. Jeremy had two Evidences of his purchase, Jerem.
32.10.
one sealed, the other open; so must we.

2. The mediate acts of God, whatsoever they be in Providence or Ordinances.

First, All ways of Gods Providence to his people, tend to their sanctifying.

1. If God afflict, he says to sickness, Go and pull me down that proud
sinner, that he may be sanctified; Go says the Lord to the winds and storms of
the Sea, blow and beat the Ship to awaken me that sleepy Jonah; Jonah 1.17. and
2.10.
swallow him up says he to the Whale, ( the Lord spoke to the fish it is said)
that he may learn to pray there, and preach after. Go Temptation, winnow me
that man well, that he may not be full of self-confidence, that he being
converted, may strengthen his brethren; Go death, says he, smite such a woman's
husband, that she may be destitute of worldly comforts, then will she trust in
me, 1 Timothy 5.5.
and fall to prayer and supplication. Go ye Caldeans and Sabeans, and work your
will on my servant Job; yea, Go Satan, and do thy worst, make ye him poor, I Will
make him honest and pious, and more than a Conqueror, and bring him forth as
gold; I will leave a poor people, says the Lord, and they shall trust in me.
In a word, the Lord says, Zeph. 3.12.
the end of all chastisement, is, That we should be made partakers of his
holiness. Hebr. 12.10.


2. If God deliver, it is that we should serve him in holiness and
righteousness. Go says the Lord to Moses, Luke 1.74, 75.
deliver me that people, that they may be to me a Kingdom of Priests, and an
holy Nation. Let Naaman be healed, Exodus 19.5, 6.
that he may become a Convert to that God that has healed him. Sanctify me
that firstborn son, 2 Kings 5. Exodus 13.2.
whom I have given thee again.

Secondly, In all Ordinances; whose sole and proper end is Sanctification. The
Word is to sanctify, John 17.17. The commands, 1 These. 4.3. The promises to
sanctify, 2 Cor. 7.1. The Sabbath is a sign between God and us, that he is
the Lord that does sanctify us, Exodus 31.13. The Sacraments; Baptism is to
sanctify, Ephesians. 5.26. The Lords Supper; so Discipline, Censures, Absolution,
etc. Church Communion, private Conference. All Ordinances agree in this; some
of them are for Conversion, some for Confirmation, all for Sanctification.

Reas. 2. This is that which constitutes a Christian, and from which he is
denominated. All the Christians, and Church Members of old were called Saints;
the Saints at Rome, Corinth, Ephesus, etc. That is, the Christians of those
places and Churches, (not Saints departed, and Canon zed, but such Saints as we
are or should be) visible Saints, followers of holiness: And therefore as one
is called a Scholar because he follows learning; another a Merchant, because
he follows Merchandise; so is the Christian to follow holiness; To imagine a
Christian without holiness, is to call one rich that has neither goods nor
lands; a Scholar without learning; to imagine a Sun without light, and fire
without heat, which is a pure contradiction.

It is holiness which constitutes the Christian, as it is the soul which
constitutes the man, who without it is a dead carcass, hand, foot, heart, move
not; neither can the eye see, ear hear, or tongue speak without the enlivening
soul; so is the Professor a carcass or shadow without holiness; all his works
dead works; his prayers dead, praises dead; yea, his faith, hope, repentance
without holiness (mortua, and mortifera) all dead and deadly.

Reas. 3. Without this no man shall see the Lord. This is the Menacing reason
of the Text, where there are two things to be explained.

First, One employed.

Secondly, The other expressed.

1. That implied is, That in seeing the Lord is the complete beatitude of the
soul; Blessed are the pure in heart, they shall see God, Mat. 5.8. i. e. see
the Lord Jesus; for the Godhead is inv^sible; No man has seen God at any time,
nor can we see him, 1 Timothy 6.16. But the holy person shall see Christ, and the
glory of the Divine Essence, as much as finite can comprehend of infinite; yea,
see God and live; see Christ, and be like him, 1 John 3.1, 2. Jesus Christ seen
in heaven, is the glass of the Trinity; in him we shall see the fullness of the
Godhead bodily: And he is a transforming glass to those that see him, who
shall be changed into the same image from glory to glory, 2 Cor. 3.18. And the
sight of Christ will be to us a transfiguration sight; when I look into another
glass, I see the image and representative of my self, and as it were, another
self; but when I shall look into this glass, I shall see another image and
representation, (as a Parelius by the reflection of the Sun) and as I may say,
another Christ. Hence we commonly call the vision of God the beatifical vision;
as one says elegantly, Fides justificat, Charitas aedificat, Spes laetificat,
Visio beatificat; Faith justifies, Charity edifies, Hope pacifies, but it is
Vision which glorifies: And I may add, Sanctitas qualificat, holiness
qualifies, that Vision may glorify. And this leads me to the second thing
which is expressed.

2. Without this no man shall see the Lord. Mark the word, no man; Be he rich
or poor, Prince or Peasant; yea, be he a Prophet, Apostle, Minister, Martyr;
yea, we may carry this (...) higher, no Angel shall see the Lord; what parts
soever the man has, whatsoever duties he performs; let him be this or that,
or any other the best profession, way, Church; let him do, let him suffer, let
him be, let him give, let him hold what he will, ^f he be not holy, he comes
not into Gods beatifical presence, he enters not into the holy hill of God. But
were he as the Signet o^ the right hand, he must off, were he an anointed
Cherub, he must out; down came the Angels, when they had laid down the r
holiness, and Adam was driven out of Gods presence, when he had driven out
holiness.

Reas. 4. The fourth and last Reason, is that thundering one of Saint Peter, 2
Pet. 3.10, 11, 12, 13. When the last Trumpet shall sound, and sound louder and
louder; when the day of the Lord shall come as a Thief in the night, in the
which the Heavens shall pass away with a noise, and the Elements shall melt
with fervent heat, the Earth also and all the works therein shall be burnt up;
Seeing then all these things shall be dissolved, what manner of persons ought
we to be in all holy Conversation and godliness, looking for, and hastening
unto the coming of the day of God, wherein the heavens being on fire, shall be
dissolved, and the Elements shall melt with fervent heat! Nevertheless we
according to his promise look for new Heavens, and a new Earth wherein dwells
righteousness. Here is nothing but terror in the Text, Lamentation and
mourning, and woe. A Thief in the night, a great noise, fire, melting, burning,
dissolving, yet is holiness and righteousness secure. The new Creature looks
for a new Heaven, and a new Earth, wherein there will be room for holiness, if
there be none here as for Lot in S^dome. This holiness is like the blood of
the Passover on the door posts, when the destroyer was abroad, and a dreadful
cry all Egypt over, then were the Israelites ready with their loins girt, and
staves in their hands, expecting the good hour of their last Redemption.

We have seen (it may be some of us) sad days already; but there are too sadder
to be expected; they are called the day of the Lord, and not days; because as
death leaves us, judgment finds us; Death being the morning, and Judgment the
evening, and eternity the night of the same day) They are both days of
dissolution; the one is of the body; a sad dissolution, when the soul shall
pass away with a sad noise of many a doleful groan, and this elementary body
shall melt with fervent heat of burning diseases, etc. The other is of the
Universe, when the whole world shall be in a conflagration, and hell shall come
up to heaven, as once hell came out of heaven to consume Sodom; when the body
of the Universe shall groan with the groanings of a deadly wounded dying man,
as was said of Egypt, Ezekiel 30.24. Cum mare, cum Tellus, Correptaque Regia
Caeli, Ardeat, and mundi moles operosa laboret; When the stars of heaven
shall fall, and the powers of heaven be shaken, the Sun turned into darkness,
Moon into blood, and all the kindreds of the earth mourn, and the hypocrites
cry out, Who among us shall abide with devouring fire, and dwell with eternal
burnings? Isa. 33.14. Then shall the godly soul lift up his head, at death and
destruction he shall laugh; he shall walk loose in the midst of the flames, as
did the three Children without so much as the smell or least dread of the fire;
and they may touch these live coals, as the Angel did, Isaiah 6.6. without any
dismay.

Oh holiness, holiness! what a munition of Rocks will thou give thy followers
in that day of the Lord! oh let me press you to get a holiness that is
Scripture Proof, and you your selves, and your state, and comforts will be
death-proof, hell-proof, judgement-proof; you need not fear any fear of man,
any day of the Lord, any furnace-fire, elementary fire, conflagration-fire,
hellfire; when the Kings, and the Captains, and the Mighty shall cry out to
the Rocks to fall on them, and the worshippers of the Beast, and the rich
Merchants of Rome shall cry out for the smoke of the burning, then shall the
Sons of Sion sing out their redoubled Hallelujahs at the coming of the
Bridegroom, and the day of the Lord, their day of Marriage and Coronation.

Use 1. Lament the loss of holiness. We may complain; Holiness is lost and
fallen in the streets. Some complain of loss of Trade; in these sad times Trade
is dead, there is no Trade; we may say this Trade is lost or dead, there is
little holiness stirring. Many complain of the loss of peace, p^ace is gone,
but we have cause to say, Holiness was gone first. In midst of many
Professions, many contentions, many op nions, changings, turns, returns, little
holiness to be seen. In midst of great parts, high expressions, much light,
powerful Ordinances, many years attempted Reformation, a little holiness goes a
great way. Our shadows are long, our contentions sharp, our holiness low, our
Corn runs out into straw and stalk, not ear and kernel. Our nourishment turns
to Rickets, the head swelled, and extended, the child feeble and infirm; we
have left our company, and our work, and are scattered all the Land over, to
pick up strawes, and gather stubble. Some observe, that our buildings now
adays, are not so solid and substantial as of old; our spiritual buildings are
not I am sure; And as some say, our English cloth is not of so good a name and
esteem, as heretofore abroad, not so pure and well wrought; our name and Crown
for holiness is lost, it not being so pure and well wrought.

Use 2. It informs how little some have to evidence their Christianity, and
their Title to heaven, that can speak of no Holiness, make no proof of any
real change or work of the Spitit, of dying to sin, living to God; what are all
these hopes but lying hopes. Without holiness no man shall see the Lord.

Visible Saintship may justly gain admittance into Church Fellowship; But it is
real holiness that makes meet to partake of the inheritance of the Saints in
light. Seeming holiness in profession, sets thee in the outward Court, but into
the inner Temple, and the Holy of Holies, only true holiness qualifies to an
admission. It is noted, though the outward Court was laid with stone, yet the
Inner Temple, 1 King. 6 30.
and the Holy of Holies had the very floor of gold. True Holiness makes a
Member of the Church Militant and Tryumphant.

Use, Reproof, or terror to such as hate, deride, or scoff at holiness. Many
if reproved, will say, I cry you mercy, you must be so holy, I am none of your
Saints, nor of the holy Brethren, etc. Oh unclean swine, or unclean spirit
shall I say; know thou not whose language is that in thy mouth, What have I
to do with thee thou holy one of God? Thy speech bewrays thee (as one says)
to be a Hellilean, no Galilean, no Disciple; do thou call thy self a
Christian, and deny the Saint? then blot out Saint in Paul's Epistles, and teach
him to call Christians by some other name, of Drunkards, Swearers, and Scoffers
at holiness. Blot out Saints out of thy Creed. Do thou say thou art none of
the holy Brethren? then tear thy name out of Gods Book, and the Church
Register; The Apostle calls all the Christians to whom he writes, Holy
Brethren, partakers of the heavenly calling. Heb. 3.1.
Do thou glory that thou art none of the holy ones? then glory in this threat
of the Text, that thou shall never see God; glory in this, that thou have no
part nor lot in this matter, no part in Election, Redemption, in the gifts,
graces, comforts of the Spirit, in the promises and privileges of the Gospel;
go and glory that God is not thy Father, Christ thy Savior, that thou shall
never be troubled with the Communion of the Saints in Heaven, and the spirits
of just men made perfect.

Use 4. A worse Reproof and Use of terror follows to such, who instead of
following holiness, and perfecting holiness in the fear of God, are fallen from
it, declined, and turned aside after vain opinions, and employ speculations.

Caepisti melius quam desinis, ultima primis oedunt, dissimilis hic puer, ille
Senex. Ovid.
A young Saint and an old Apostate leads to a sad end. Look to it you young
Professors, that had the Dew of Grace, and seeming holiness in youth, and are
now dried up by the roots. Look to it you old Professors, that you hold out,
watch, and keep your Garments white, and seek to bring forth more fruit in your
age. The Tree that bears evil fruit, is cut down. That which leaves only
cursed, but that which is twice dead worst of all; this is the desperate case;
and of all sins, this is only the unpardonable sin. Heb. 6.4, 5, and 10.
All the unrighteousness of the greatest sinner, repenting and leaving his
sin, is forgotten and forgiven; but the righteousness of the greatest Saints,
repenting and leaving his righteousness, is forgotten, but never forgiven,
Ezekiel 18.24.

Use 5. The last Use is an Exhortation, and the whole Text is an Exhortation to
follow holiness; to pursue, press after it, and proceed in it with growth and
perseverance. He that is holy, let him be holy still. For motives and
Arguments, Rev. 22.
let that of the Text never be forgotten, without holiness no man shall see
the Lord. When God comes to judge the world, it will not be asked of what
Church, or Congregation thou wast, how great a Professor, but how holy thou
have been. The way of holiness, is the Kings high way to Heaven. Read that
notable place, Isa. 35.8. And a way there shall be, a high way, and it shall be
called the way of holiness; the unclean shall not pass ever it; the
wayfaring men, though fools, shall not err therein. There is much ado now
about the way; many say, Which is the way? some say this, some that; would you
not mistake, enquire for the old way, the way of holiness, and follow it, and
thou shall not perish. Some would go a new way, some a shorter, some an easier
way. The simplest Saint (in the worlds sense) a fool shall not err therein.
The least dram of holiness is above a Talent of parts, a drop of grace above a
Sea of knowledge. In knowledge we are said to be as Angels of God; in holiness
like God himself; 2 Samuel 14.20. 1 Pet. 1.15.
so much as God is above an Angel, so much is holiness above knowledge. Look if
thou can make out the first change, then thou need not fear any other
change; if thou art partaker of the first Resurrection, thou art secure against
the Second Death; thou have crossed the Line; another Style, and thou art at
home.

I shall only name two properties of holiness, three Companions, and four
Opposites to holiness, and so conclude.

1. It must be Conversation-holinesse, 1 Pet. 1.15. and 2 Pet. 3.11. The Greek
word (...); and the Latin, Conversatio, come of a Verb that signifies to Turn;
q. d. which way soever you shall turn your self, you shall find them holy at
every turn; holy in the Church, and follow them home; observe them alone, or in
company, merry, angry, in Shops, Closets, Counsels, Commerse, they are holy
still; he is not Publicanus, but Privatanus as one says; and true Holiness is
like that Famous Queen Elizabeth, Semper eadem.

2. Which is yet more, it must be God-like-holinesse, 1 Pet. 1.15. Be ye holy
as G d is holy. God is infinitely and essentially holy, so we cannot be; but
God is imitable in his holiness. As he is,

1. Universal^y holy; holy in all his ways, works, commands, precepts,
threats, promises, his love, anger, hatred, all his Attributes, all his Actions
holy.

2. He is Communicatively holy; communicating holiness to all his, Angels and
men.

3. App obativ ly holy; this he likes, commends, promotes in all,
discountenancing all unholinesse, in persons, actions, things.

4. Remuneratively holy, rewarding and exalting holiness, punishing want of
it, so be you Universally holy in all your actions, speeches, writings,
Letters, Counsels, Designs, in all Companies; let your anger, love, zeal,
pity, etc. be all for holiness, seek to communicate and spread holiness in
your famil^es, charge, Societies; let this be that which attracts the hearts,
draws your eyes to any person, etc. And to your power suppress, curb all
unholinesse, and promote, exalt, commend holiness.

2. There are three Companions of holiness.

1. In the Text, Peace and holiness; he is most for holiness, who is most for
peace in a right way; seek the peace of the Land, Isa. 8.12, 13.
make no Conspiracies; say no confederacy, b^t sanctify God in your hearts;
seek the peace of the Church, by preserving the unity of the Spirit in the bond
of peace; take heed of Schisms, Rents, Divisions, Separations; Pray that the
Church may have rest; Act. 9.31.
that walking in the fear of the Lord, and comforts of the holy Ghost,
Believers may be multiplied and edified.

2. Holiness and righteousness are often matched together; Luke 1 75. 1 These.
3.10. Prove. 11.1.
Righteousness in Pactions, Words, Promises, Oaths, Bonds, Righteousness in
dealings, Weights, Measures, a just Balance, Ephah. Righteousness may
possibly be without holiness, but holiness without righteousness never.

3. Holiness and unblameablenesse; 1 These. 3.10. Ye are Witnesses, and God
also how holily, justly, and unblameably we have had our Conversation in the
world. 1 These. 3.13.
The Christian must be tried by God and the world. Unblameableness in speech,
behavior, dealings; yea, in habit, gestures, that w^ may be without all
offense, toward God, and toward man. The Kings Daughters Garment must be of
diverse colors, holily, justly, unblameably.

3. The four Opposites, and enemies to holiness, which we must avoid, are,

1. Filthiness of the flesh; sensual and brutish lusts, 2 Cor. 7.1.
Fornication, uncleanness, drunkenness, which defile the body, do utterly
destroy holiness, and cannot consist with it; therefore often opposed. 1 Thessalonians.
4.3. This is the Will of G^d, even your sanctification, that ye abstain from
fornication, etc. God has not called us to ancleannesse, but holiness, ver. 7.

2. Filthiness of spirit; 2 Cor. 7.1. which is as destructive to holiness, as
brutish lusts. Idolatry, false Religions, wantonness in Opinion, error,
corrupt Doctrine are as dangerous as Fornication; By these we go a whoring from
God and Truth. The mind is to be kept chaste and pure, as well as the body;
error is not so harmless a thing as many dream.

3. Overreaching men by craft, fraud, power, policy; and making use of such
means, Arguments, devices, stratagems, as corrupt reason, and carnal Counsel
(not Gods providence, or approbation) does furnish us withal, and put us upon.
1 Thessalonians. 4.6, 7. That no man go beyond, or overreach his Brother in any
matter; for God has not called us to uncleanness, but holiness; and God is
an avenger of all such. The word is (...), that no man overtop, overreach, go
beyond his Brother; not in hol^ness (would we did seek herein to go beyond each
other) but in craft and policy to undermine, or overreach them; as Simeon and
Levi overreached the over credulous Shechemites, pretending conscience, and
harboring bloody intentions in their hearts. God is an Avenger of such. There
is a direful threat added of Divine Vengeance; this word (...), is but once
more used in the New Testament, Romans 13.4 then applied to the Magistrate; he is
a revenger of wrath to him that does evil; he must see execution done; So in
this case, God is the revenger himself, and he will be this man's Executioner.

4. The fourth opposite to holiness, is an ill kind of holiness; a
supercilious, censorious, disdainful, and distance-keeping holiness; which like
the Pharisee, Luke 18. exalts it self, and Canonizeth himself, and his own
party, and unsainteth all others. Isa. 65.5. Which say, Stand by thy self, come
not near me, for I am holier than thou; these are a smoke in my nose, and a
fire that burns all the day, says the Lord. This is the worst spot in the
beauty of holiness; a spice of that pride that was in Lucifer, and his
fellow-aspiring Angels that made the first Schism and separation in the purest
Church, even in heaven it self, among the Angels that were wholly perfect. Take
heed of this, as of the very pest of the Church, and the bane of all Religion,
which is best preserved in unity and humility.

I shall shut up all with a wish, and that an hearty Prayer alluding to what I
said at first; Oh that all our garments (our Profession) might be adorned with
these Bells and Pomgranates, peace and holiness. That as we call on God, who
is called holy, holy, holy, Rev. 4.6. and on Christ who is called King of
Saints, Rev. 15.6. and as we profess the Gospel, which is a Rule of holiness,
and are members of the Church, which is called a Kingdom of Saints, an holy
Nation, 1 Pet. 2.9. and as we look to be partakers of that Kingdom wherein
dwells righteousness and holiness, that according to that promise, Thy people
shall be all righteous, Isa. 60.21. that holiness to the Lord may be engraven
upon all our hearts, as with the engraving of a Signet (the Spirit of God) and
holiness to the Lord upon all our foreheads, as to our conversation; that as
we have had a year, which we call Annum Restitutae Libertatis, we might have a
year Restitutae Sanctitatis; this we might safely call Annum Salutis, or Annum
Domini, the year of our Lord. That our Officers might be all peace, our
Governors holiness, Isa. 60.17. that our Ministers might be clothed with
righteousness, and our Church Members with holiness; that all of different
persuasions might (not contend, but) labor for peace and holiness. Herein let
us agree, and all is agreed; that the bells of our Horses, and Bridles of our
Horsemen (Commanders and common Soldiers) might be holiness to the Lord, Zach.
14.20, 21. that there might not be a Canaanite, or hypocrite in the house of
the Lord; then might our Land, Church, Parliament, Army, City, Min^stry, be
called Jehovah Shammah, the Lord is there, Ezekiel. 48.35. yea, then would this
holiness settle us in peace here, and bring us to see the Lord, where peace and
holiness shall never be separated. Even so come Lord Jesus, come quickly. Amen.

OF THE Resurrection.
ACTS 26.8. Why should it be thought a thing unreasonable with you, that God
should raise the dead?


THese words are part of St. Paul's Apology for himself, before King Agrippa,
against the unjust accusations of his implacable enemies; wherein,

1. He demonstrates the innocence of his life.

2. The truth of his Doctrine; and shows, That there was nothing either in
his life or doctrine, for which he could justly be accused. The Doctrine he
taught did consist of diverse particulars enumerated in this Chapter; one of
which (and that not the least) was, That there should a day come, in which
there would be a Resurrection of the dead, both of the just and unjust. Now
that this Doctrine was not liable to any just exception, he proves three manner
of ways:

1. Because it was no other Doctrine, but such which God himself had taught: It
had a Divine stamp upon it; as it is Verse 6. And now I stand, and am judged
for the hope of the promise made of God unto our fathers.

2. Because it was that which all the godly Israelites, instantly serving God
day and night, did hope for, and wait and expect in due time to be fulfilled;
as it is Verse 7. Unto which promise our twelve tribes hope to come; for which
hope sake, King Agrippa, I am accused of the Jews; and therefore it is called,
The hope of Israel, Acts 28.20. for the hope of Israel, I am bound with this
chain.

3. Because it was a Doctrine which God was able to bring to pass. This is set
down in the words of the Text, Why should it be thought a thing incredible with
you, that God should raise the dead? The emphasis lies in the words with you:
Why should you, O King Agrippa, who art a Jew, and believe in the God of
Israel, and that he made the world out of nothing, think it incredible for this
God to raise the dead? indeed it may seem incredible and impossible to the
Heathen Philosophers, who are guided only by Natures Light; but as for you,
who believe all things which are written in the Law and Prophets, why should
you think it either impossible or incredible that God should raise the dead?
This interrogation is an Emphatical Negation, and it is put down by way of
Question, Vt oration sit penetrantior, that so the Argument might take the
deeper impression; and the meaning is, that it is not (...), or (...): It is
not a doctrine exceeding the bounds of faith, or contrary to right reason, that
God should raise the dead. The Observation which arises naturally out of the
words is:

Doctrine. That the Doctrine of the Resurrection of the dead, both of the just
and unjust, is neither incredible nor impossible, neither against right reason,
nor true faith.
Though it be above reason, yet it is not against reason, nor against the
Jewish or the Christian Faith: For the explication of this Doctrine, I will
briefly speak to six particulars:

1. What is meant by the Resurrection of the dead.

2. Who are the dead that shall be raised.

3. The absolute necessity of believing this Doctrine, and believing it firmly
and undoubtedly.

4. The possibility and credibility of it.

5. The certainty and infallibility of it.

6. The manner how the dead shall rise

What is meant by the Resurrection of the dead? The first Particular.


man that dies when any man dies. Man consists of soul and body; and when he
dies, his soul does not dye; it is the body only that dies. Death is not an
utter extinction and annihilation of the man (as some wickedly teach) but only
a separation of the Soul from the Body, It is called a departure, Luke 2.25. 2 Timothy 4.6. And an uncloathing, 2 Cor. 5.4.
and a Departure of the Soul out of the body either to Heaven or Hell. When
Stephen was stoned, his soul was not stoned; for while he was stoning, he
prayed, Lord Jesus receive my spirit. When Christ was crucified, his soul was
not crucified; for while he was crucifying, he said, Father, into thy hands I
commend my Spirit. The Wiseman says expressly, That when a man dies, His body
returns to the earth from whence it came; Eccles. 12.7.
but, his spirit returns to God who gave it: And our Lord Christ commands us,
Not to fear them that kill the body, 1 Luke 2.4.
and after that have no more that they can do: The soul cannot be killed; a man
by sin may make his soul miserable and cursed, but he cannot make it miserable
and corruptible. And therefore by the Resurrection of the dead is not meant (as
he who writes that dangerous Book of the Souls Mortality would have it) the
Resurrection both of body and soul, but of the body only: For the body only
dies, and therefore it is the body only which rises again. Thence it is, that
in the Creed, (commonly called the Apostles Creed) it is put down in express
terms, John 5.28, 29.
I believe the Resurrection of the Body: Not of the Soul, for that never dies,
but of the Body.

The second particular.
The second particular propounded, is, to show who are the dead that shall be
raised at the last day: The Answer to this is easy, All that are in the grave,
whether godly, or ungodly; whether just or unjust, Acts 24.15.
shall be raised. This Christ says expressly, The hour is coming, Revel. 2.13.
Isa. 26.19.
in which all that are in the graves shall hear his voice, and shall come
forth; they that have done good, unto the resurrection of life; and they that
have done evil, unto the resurrection of damnation. All shall come forth,
without exception of any; Acts 24.15.
and the Apostle likewise tells us, That there shall be a Resurrection of the
dead, both of the just and un ust. The Earth and the Sea are Gods Stewards,
with whom he has betrusted the bodies of men and women: And when God shall
call them to give an account of their Stewardship, they will faithfully
discharge their trust, Revel. 20.13.
and not keep back one dead body: The sea shall give up her dead, and so shall
the earth also. They are but the bodies withdrawing room, or sleeping-place;
and the time will come, Isa. 26.19.
when all that are asleep in the dust of the earth shall awake: They shall all
awake, some to everlasting life, and some to shame, and everlasting contempt.
This is the second particular, All the the dead, great and small, rich and
poor, from Adam to the coming of Christ, both good and bad, shall be raised at
the last day.

The third thing proposed, is, The third particular.
To demonstrate the absolute necessity that lies upon all Christians, firmly
and undoubtedly to believe the Doctrine of the Resurrection of the dead.

This appears in an especial manner from the spiritual mischiefs, and
soul-ruinating consequences which necessarily flow from the denial of it. For,

1. The Doctrine of the Resurrection is an Article of our faith. The Author to
the Hebrews puts it amongst the principles of the Doctrines of Christ; and
therefore he that denies it, Heb. 6.2.
erres fundamentally, and is an Heretic, one wh^m we must not receive into our
houses, or bid him God speed.

2. It is not only an Article of our faith, Sine hoc Articulo tota fides and
tota religio vana est. Streso in Act.
but one of the chief Articles, without which all the other Articles of
Christian Relion are vain and unprofitable. This the Apostle speaks in express
terms, 1 Corinthians. 15.13, 14, 15, 16, 17, 18, 19, 28, 29, 30, 31, 32. If there
be no resurrection of the dead, then is not Christ risen; and if Christ be not
risen, then is our preaching vain, and your faith is also vain, etc. If the
dead rise not, let us eat and drink, for to morrow we shall dye. This therefore
is not only an Article of our faith, but the foundation of all other; for, if
there be no Resurrection, there is no life everlasting. Saint Austin says,
That the Resurrection of the dead is propria fides Christianorum: The proper
faith of a Christian, without the belief of which, no man can be justly
accounted a Christian. A man may hold many errors, and yet deserve to be
esteemed a Christian; but he that denies the Doctrine of the Resurrection,
does unchristianize himself: For a Christian is one whose hope and happiness is
in the other world: (For if we had hope only in this world, we were of all
peopl most miserable;) and therefore, he that renounceth his belief of the
other world, renounceth Christianity.

Add,

foundation of our faith, but of all our comfort and consolation; Resurrectio
mortuorum est fiducia Christianorum: The chiefest comfort the Saints of God
have under all the distresses of this life, is, That there will a day come, in
which they shall be raised out of their graves, to the Resurrection of Life;
and shall have their vile bodies made like to the glorious body of Christ. Job
19.23, 26, 27.
This comforted Job upon the dunghill; and therefore it much concerns all those
who tender either their consolation or salvation, to be firmly and undoubtedly
persuaded of this great truth, That there shall be a Resurrection of the dead:
This leads me to the fourth particular.

The fourth Particular.
In the fourth place, I am to show you the credibility or possibility of this
Doctrine. I confess, it is very hard and difficult to believe, that the bodies
of men (when eaten up by worms, or devoured by wild beasts, birds, or
men-eating men; or when burnt and consumed to ashes, and these ashes scattered
in the air, or thrown into the river) should ever rise again. It is easy to
believe the Immortality of the soul; (for many Heathens have written in defense
of it) but as for the Resurrection of the body, it is very difficult to believe
it firmly and undoubtedly; therefore there are, Acts 17.18, 32.
and have been multitudes of persons in all ages who have denied it. The
Epicures and Scoi^ks laughed Paul to scorn, when he preached to them of the
Resurrection of the body: The Sadduces in Christ's time denied it. 1 Cor. 15.12.
Many in the Church of Corinth were infected with the same leprosy; Hymenaeus
and Philetus begangreen'd many Christians, and overthrew their faith, by
preaching to them that the Resurrection was past already. 2 Timothy 2.17, 18.
Danaeus tells us of nineteen Heretics, who opposed this truth. The Familists
also renounce it: And the Socinians say, That the same body shall not rise; but
an aerial and spiritual body, which shall have no eyes nor ears, nor head, nor
feet, etc. It must be acknowledged, that this Doctrine is very hard and
difficult; but yet it is not (...), or (...): It is not a thing impossible or
incredible. Sure I am, that Job in the Old Testament did believe it; for, he
knew that his Redeemer lived, etc. Job 19.25, 26 27.
And though after his skin, worms destroyed his body, yet in his flesh he
should see God; and then he adds, Whom I shall see for my self, and mine eyes
shall behold, and not another, though my reins be consumed within me. Job did
not only believe, that his body, when devoured with worms, and his skin spent,
and reins consumed, should rise; but, that the same body, not only the same
specifical, but the same numerical body should rise; therefore he puts in those
emphatical expressions, I shall see God, I shall see for my self; I, and not
another; and, mine eyes shall behold him: Though his eyes shall be glorified
eyes, yet they shall be the same eyes for substance. As the Patience of Job was
very great, and very exemplary; so surely his Faith was as great, and as
imitable: O Job, great was thy Faith! This one Text is sufficient to prove,
that the Doctrine of the Resurrection is not a thing incredible: And give me
leave to speak to you in the words of S. Paul to King Agrippa, Why should it be
thought incredible that God should raise the dead? especially, if you consider
who this God is, That he is Omnipotent and Almighty, infinite in power, and
able to do all things: He that believes the first Article of the Creed, will
quickly believe the eleventh Article: He that believes that God is Almighty,
maker of Heaven and Earth, will easily believe that he is able to raise the
dead. For if God (says Tertullian) can make a body, being nothing, out of the
dust of the earth, he can certainly repair it out of the dust when it is
something. It is as easy to God to restore a body to a soul at the
Resurrection, as to breathe a soul into a body at the first Creation.

Objection.
But how is it possible, that when a man has lain rotting in the grave a
thousand years, he should rise again?

Answer.
This is above reason, but not against reason: For there are many resemblances
of this even in nature; which though they be not sufficient proofs, yet they
are great inducements to cause us to believe this truth. Both Philosophers and
Divines write of the Phoenix, that first she is consumed to ashes by the heat
of the Sun, and that afterward of her ashes arises a young one, which is the
same Phoenix risen from the dead. The Apostle tells us, That the corn must
first be cast into the ground, and there dye and rot, before it will spring up;
which shows, that a Resurrection from the dead is possible, even in nature.
Add to this, That Swallows, Flies, and Worms, which lie dead in the
Winter-season; in the Spring, by virtue of the Suns heat, revive again. And
what is every night but the grave (as it were) of the days light? and the
morning, but the Resurrection of the day? What is Winter but the death of the
fruits of the earth; and the Spring, but the Resurrection of them? What is
death, but the blowing out of the candle of our lives? and what is the
Resurrection any more, but the lighting of this candle again? What is death,
but a pulling down of the house of the body? and what is the Resurrection, but
the rebuilding of the same house? And why then should any man think it a thing
incredible for God to raise the dead? We see by experience, that our curious
glasses are made by the art of man, even out of ashes: And cannot the
Omnipotent God raise men's dead bodies, when turned to ashes? There is no
contradiction in this; and therefore an infinite power is able to effect it.
And to show that God can effect it, he raised up many from the dead, both in
the Old and New Testament, as helps to our faith, to enable us to believe, That
that God who raised those few, will in due time raise all the dead, both just
and unjust.

Objection.
But you will reply, How is it possible that the same body should rise, when as
the dust of men are so mingled together, as that it seems impossible to
separate the dust of one man from another?

Answer,
With man this is impossible, but with God all things are possible: It is easy
to God to give to every man his own dust; if it be possible for a Gardner that
has thirty several seeds in his hand, to be able to distinguish between seed
and seed; and for a Chemist, to extract the four Elements out of an herb, and
sepa^ate them one from the other; and for a Watch-maker, to take his Watch in
pieces, and mingle the pieces together, and yet afterward put them together as
before: Much more is it possible for the Omnipotent God to distinguish one dust
from another, as well as one man from another, and one stone from another.

Objection,
One man is eaten by another, and turned into the substance of another; how can
both these arise with their distinct bodies?

Answer.
Every man shall arise with his own flesh; but yet not so, as that he shall
arise with every thing that was once a part of him: But he shall arise with so
much of his flesh as shall make a perfect man, and the same man. A man has a
piece of his flesh cut off by a sword, and new flesh growing in its room; now
he shall not rise with both these, but with so much as shall make him a perfect
man, and one and the same man for substance. One man eats another man's flesh,
and it becomes one with his; yet he shall not rise with that flesh, but with so
much as shall make him a complete man, and the same not only for kind, but
for number; For with God nothing is impossible. So much for the fourth
particular.

The fifth particular.
The fifth thing propounded; is, to show the certainty and infallibility of this
Doctrine: For this is not only a Truth that God can make good, but a Truth
which God cannot but make good. As there must be a day of Judgment, 2 Cor.
5.10. So there must be a Resurrection of the body; not only there may be, but
there must be, and of the same body; not only the same specifical, but the
same numerical body: Otherwise it were not a Resurrection, but a Surrection;
not a Resuscitation, but a Suscitation. And (as Estius says) not a
Regeneration (as it is called, Mat. 19.28.) but a Generation. A Resurrection is
of the same body that dies, or else it is a new Animation, and a new Creation,
and not a Resurrection.

Now that there must be a Resurrection; appears,

1. From the promise of God: God has promised that all that are in the graves
shall hear his voice, Joh. 5.28, 29.
and come forth, etc. and, all that are in the dust shall awake. And that this
corruptible, shall put on incorruption; and this mortal, shall put on
immortality; Isa. 26.19.
and, We must all appear before the judgment seat of Christ, that every one
may receive the things done in his body, according to that he has done, 2 Cor.
15.53.
whether it be good or bad: And therefore the ancient Christians, when they
rehearsed that Article of the Creed, I believe the Resurr ction of the body,
would point to some part of their body; and say, Even of this body. God can do
it, because he is Almighty; and he must do it, because he has promised it.
This is Paul's Argument to King Agrippa, Verse. 6. And now I stand, and am judged
for the hope of the promise made of God unto our Fathers, etc. And this is
Christ's Argument by which he proves the Resurrection against the Sadduces,
Matht. 22.32. I am the God of Abraham, and the God of Isaac, and the God of
Jacob: God is not the God of the dead, but of the living.

Objection,
This Argument of Christ proves only the Immortality of the Soul, but not the
Resurrection of the Body.

Answer.
It proves also the Resurr ction of the body, because God is the God of
Abraham, Isaa, and Jacob; not only the God of one part of Abraham, but of
whole Abraham; not only the God of his soul, but of his body: And therefore
whole Abraham must live for ever; for Gods Covenant with Abraham, Isaac, and
Jacob, is an everlasting Covenant.

2. From the justice of God: God cannot but raise the dead, because he is a
just God, and must reward every man according to his works. Now in this life
men are not rewarded; the Righteous in this life are oftentimes persecuted, and
the wicked are in prosperity: And therefore there must come a rewarding time;
and if so, then first there must be a Resurrection: For dead men cannot be
rewarded.

Objection.
Is it not enough that our Souls be rewarded?

Answer.
No: For our bodies are partakers in good and evil actions with the soul; and
therefore it is just that they should be Partakers also in rewards and
punishments. Shall God require services of the body, and shall he not reward
those services? Do not the Saints of God beat down their bodies, and bring them
into subjection? Do they not fast often, and mortify their earthly members,
and suffer Martyrdom with their bodies? And therefore God cannot but raise
their bodies to the Resurrection of Life, and raise the same bodies; for it
cannot stand with Gods justice, that one body should serve him, and another be
rewarded; or that one body should sin, and another body be punished. A just
Judge will not suffer one man to fight, and get the victory; and another to be
crowned. The same body that sins, must dye; and the same body that conquers,
must be crowned. What justice can there be, for God to cast a body that never
sined into Hell, and that never was in Adam?

3. From the end of Christ's coming in the flesh; which was, to destroy all the
Enemies of our Salvation. Now the last Enemy which must be destroyed is death,
1 Cor. 15.26. and death cannot be uttetly and totally destroyed, unless there
be a Resurrection of the dead.

4. From the Resurrection of Christ: This is Saint Paul's great Argument; 1 Cor.
15.12, etc. If Christ be risen, how ^ay some that there shall be no
resurrection of the dead? For Christ rose as a Public Person, and as the Head
of his Church: And if the Head be risen, all the members must also rise; and
therefore he is called the First Fruits of them that sleep, 1 Cor. 15.20. and,
the Firstborn of every creature: And if the First Fruits be lifted up out of
the grave, the whole lump will certianly follow. Hence also it is, that Christ
is called the Second Adam, 1 Cor 15.21.22. and Paul argues strongly, That as
by man came death, so by man also came the resurrection of the dead; and, as in
Adam all dye, so in Christ shall all be made alive. But now in the first Adam
all dye, not only spiritually, but cor^orally; and therefore in the second
Adam, all must be corporally made to live: And live again in the same bodies;
for Christ rose with the same body that he dyed with. And therefore he rose
with his scars and wounds, and he convinced his Disciples that the body he rose
with was a t^u^ body, and not a Spirit; For a Spirit has not flesh and bones
(says Christ) as ye see me have, Luke 24.39.

Objection.
Does not the Apostle say in that very Chapter, 1 Cor. 15 44.
That the bodies of men shall be spiritual bodies at the Resurrection; And
therefore they cannot be the same bodies? 1 Cor. 15.50.
Does not the same Apostle also say, That flesh and blood cannot inherit the
Kingdom of God? Hence the Socinians, and diverse others, gather, That the bodies
of men shall not have flesh, and blood, and eyes, and heads, and feet, at the
Resurrection, but shall be airy and spiritual bodies.

Answer.
There is a vast difference between mutation and perdition: The same bodies
shall be raised for substance, but marvellously altered in regard of
qualifications and endowments, as you shall hear in the next particular. Non
aliud corpus, sed aliter. We read, Exodus 4.6, 7. That M ses put his hand into
his bosom, and when he took it out it was leprous as snow; and again he put his
hand in his bosom, and plucked it out, and it was turned again as his other
flesh: Here was the same hand when belepred, and when whole. A Beggar when he
puts off his rags, and puts on the apparel of a King, is the same man, though
outwardly altered or changed; So shall it be at the Resurrection; the bodies
shall be the same for s^bstance, though altered wonderfully as to their
Qualifications and Endowments.

And as for that saying of the Apostle, That flesh and blood shall not inherit
the Kingdom of God; the meaning is not, That the substance of flesh an^ blood
shall never enter into Heaven; (for Christ in his Humane Nature is now in
Heaven) but that flesh as it is corrupted and sinful, clothed with
infirmities, and subject to mortality and death; flesh and blood as it is in
this transitory estate, liable to corruption, should not enter into Heaven; and
therefore it follows in the Text, Neither shall corruption inherit
incorruption. 1 Cor. 15.50.


5. I might argue lastly from the Immortality of the S ul: For the soul was
made by God to dwell in the body; and though it can subsist of it self without
the body, yet it still retains appetitum unionis, a desire of reunion with the
body; and therefore is in an imperfect estate, and not completely happy, till
it be reunited to the body: And therefore that the souls of the godly may be
completely happy; and of the wicked completely miserable, there must of
necessity be a Resurrection of the body, that so soul and body may be
reunited, and partake together, either of complete happiness, or complete
unhappiness. Add to this, what is said by Durand (that great Schoolman) That
when a man dies, not only the soul of that man continues alive, but some
substantial part of that man's body, and God also, the great Creator, and first
cause of all things. And why should any man think it incredible for God to
re-collect the parts of the matter of any man's body which are perished, and to
reunite the same body to the same soul again? Post mortem hominis (inquit
Durandus) s^perest quae potest utrumque unire anima; superest etiam materia,
and praeterea, causa, scilicet Deus; ergo poterit fieri reunitio earundem
partium, scilicet animae and materiae ad idem totum constituendum. Upon which
Argument Estius has this Comment, Si parts substantiales hominis. anima and
materia non poreant (qu^d rei veritas habet, and Durandi argumentum assumit)
sed in rerum natura permaneant, hinc facile probatur resurrectionem esse
possibilem. Sic enim ad resurrectionem non aliud requiritur quam u^ tota
materia quae fuerat hujus hominis, re olligatur and compingatur in eandum
figuram m^mbrorum quam aliquando habuit, eique anima pristina ut forma
restituatur. Quod totum Deo possibile esse non est difficile creditu iis qui
Dei omnipotentiam attendunt. So much for the fifth particular.

The sixth particular.
The last thing propounded, is, to show, After what manner the dead shall rise,
and what difference there will be between the Resurrection of the just and
unjust.

Answ. It is certain (as has been proved) that both just and unjust shall
rise, and rise with the same bodies for substance; but yet there will be a vast
difference between the Resurrection of the one, and of the other; which will
consist in three particulars:

1. The bodies of the just shall rise out of their graves, as out of their
beds, with great joy and rojoycing; and therefore it is said, Isa. 26.19. Awake
and sing ye that dwell in the dust. As soon as ever they awake, they shall sing
and rejoice: The godly shall come out of their graves, as Jonah out of the
Whales belly; as Daniel, out of the Lions Den; as the chief Butler out of
Prison, to be restored to all his former dignities; and as Joseph, who was
taken out of Prison to be made Lord of Egypt: So shall the bodies of the Saints
be taken out of the grave, to be crowned with everlasting glory. And who can
sufficiently express the great joy and rejoicing that will be, when the body
and soul shall be reunited together; when the Soul shall come down from
heaven, to be married again to its former body? Look what sweet embracements
there were between Jacob and Joseph when they first saw one another, after that
Jacob had thought he had been dead, and looked upon him as one raised from the
dead; such, and a thousand times more will be at the souls re-possession of the
body: Look what joy between Jonathan and David, when David came out of the cave
to him; and what embracements between the Father of the Prodigal and the
Prodigal, when his Father ran to meet him, and embraced him, and kissed him;
and said, My Son was dead, but now he is raised again; such, and much more,
will there be, when body and soul meet together. O how will the soul bless God
for the body, which was an instrument to it in the service of God! and how will
the body bless God for the soul, which was so careful to get an interest in
Christ, and to get to be justified and sanctified! and how will both body and
soul admire the free grace of God in Jesus Christ, who has picked them out to
be heirs of so much mercy! Surely, we shall never understand the greatness of
this joy, till we do taste of it.

But now on the contrary, The bodies of the wicked shall come out of their
graves, as out of their Prisons, and as so many malefactors, to appear before
an angry Judge. They shall come out of their graves (as the chief Baker did out
of Prison) to be executed in Hell for ever: They shall arise with great fear
and trembling; and shall call to the hills and mountains to cover and hide th m
from the pres nce of the Lamb. And Oh the horror and astonishment that shall
be, when the soul of a wicked man shall come out of Hell, and be again united
to its body! How will the body curse the soul, and the soul the body! How will
they be fool one another! certainly, this greeting will be very terrible: The
Lord grant we may never come to have experience of it.

2. The bodies of the Saints shall be raised by virtue of their union with
Christ: For the Body of a Saint, even while it is in the grave, 1 Cor. 15.24.
is united to Christ, and is asleep in Jesus, and shall be raised by virtue of
this union. The Head will raise all its members; and cannot be perfect (as he
is Christ mystical) without every one of them: 1 Cor. 15.22.
As in Adam all dye, so in Christ shall all be made alive; that is, All that
are in Christ by faith, shall be raised by the power of Christ, as a Head, and
as a merciful Savior and Redeemer: By the same power by which Christ raised
himself, he will raise all his members. But now the ungodly, they shall rise
out of their graves; but it shall be a Resurrection unto Condemnation, and it
shall be by virtue of Christ's power as a terrible Judge, and as an angry God,
to their everlasting shame and confusion.

3. The bodies of the wicked at the Resurrection, shall be as so many ugly and
loathsome carcasses to look upon; and their faces shall gather darkness and
blackness, Isa. 66.24. They shall arise to ev^rlasting shame, as well as to
everlasting torment, Dan. 12.2. But the bodies of the godly shall be made very
glorious and beautiful: They shall shine as the Sun in the firmament, Mat.
13.43. and, their vile bodies shall be made like unto the glorious body of
Jesus Christ, Phil. 3.21. Now surely the body of Christ is wonderful glorious:
We had a specimen of this in his Transfiguration, where his face did shine as
the Sun; Mat. 17.2.
and yet this was but a glimse of that glory he now has, and which our vile
bodies shall one day have.

Question,
How can this be?

Answer.
This is according to the working of his mighty power, Phil. 3.21.
by which he is able to subdue all things unto himself. God can do it, for he
is Almighty, and with him all things are possible: Indeed, the substance of our
bodies shall not be altered, but the qualities shall be much altered. They
shall have glorious endowments and qualifications: As Wool, when died into a
purple or scarlet die, is not changed in the substance of it, but only is made
more glorious: So when the bodies of the Saints shall rise, the substance of
them shall not be changed, but they shall be made more glorious, and more
excellent.

Question.
If you ask me, what those Endowments are which God bestows upon the body at
the Resurrection?

Answer.
It is impossible to set out all the glory which God will bestow upon the
bodies of his Saints at that day. For eye has not seen, nor ear heard, neither
has it entered into the heart of man to conceive, what God has prepared even
for the bodies of those who love him, and wait for his appearing. Aug. de
Civitate Dei, lib. 22. cap. 21.
Quae sit and quam magna spiritualis corporis gloria, quoniam nondum venit in
experimentum, vereor ne temerarium sit omne quod de illa profertur eloquium.
The Schoolmen reduce them to four heads, Impassibility, sibility,
Impassibilitas, Subtilitas, Agilitas, Claritas.
Subtilty, Agility, Clarity. The Apostle also comprizeth them under four
particulars, It is sown in weakness, it is rai^ed in power; It is sown in
corruption, and raised in incorruption; It is sown in dishonor, and raised in
glory; It is sown a natural body, and raised a spiritual body.

Objection.
If it be a spiritual body, how is it the same body?

Answer.
It is called a spiritual body, not in regard of the substance of it, but of
the qualities of it; and that in two respects,

1. Because it shall have no need of meat or drink, but shall be as the Angels
of Heaven, Mat. 20.30. not that we shall have Angelicam essentiam, but
Angelicas proprietates; not the essence, but the properties of Angels: We shall
neither eat nor drink, but shall be as the Angels. We shall have (as Tertullian
says) corpora reformata and Angelificata: Even as a Goldsmith (says
Chrysostom) puts his silver and gold into a pot, and then melts it, and forms
of it a gold or silver b wl, or cup, fit to be set before Kings; so the Lord
melts the bodies of his Saints by death, and out of the dead ashes and cinders
of the bodies of his servants, he frames, and will make goodly vessels of
honor to stand before him, and to praise him for ever in heaven.

2. It is said to be a Spiritual body, because it shall be absolutely subject
to the soul. In the state of glory the soul shall not depend upon the body, but
the body upon the soul. In this life the soul is, See this more fully handled
in the Sermon preached at Dr. Bollons Funeral.
as it were, carnal, because serviceable to the flesh; but at the Resurrection,
the body shall be, as it were, spiritual, because perfectly serviceable to the
Spirit. But the time will not give me leave to insist largely upon this point.
So much in answer to the six particulars propounded for the explication of this
Doctrine: Now for the Application.

Use 1.
LEt us believe this great truth, and believe it firmly and undoubtedly, That
there shall be a Resurrection of the body, and that the same numerical body
shall rise again; the same for substance, though not the same for qualities.
The great God can do this, for he is Almighty, and to an Almighty power nothing
is impossible: God can do it, because he is Omnipctent; and he cannot but do
it, because he has promised to do it. He cannot be true of his word, if the
body do not rise again, nor can he be a just God (as I have showed;) for it is
just with God, that as the body has been partakers with the soul in good or
evil actions, so it should be partakers with the soul in everlasting rewards,
and everlasting punishments: And it is just with God, that the same body that
serves him should be rewarded; and the same body that sins against him should
be punished: And the truth is, if the same body does not rise, it cannot be
called a Resurrection, but rather a new creation (as I have showed:) Let us, I
say, firmly believe this truth; for it is a fundamental truth, and the
foundation of many other fundamental truths: For if the dead rise not, then is
not Christ risen; and then is our faith vain, and our preaching in vain.
Remember Job in the Old Testament believed this.

Use 2.
IF there be a Resurrection of the dead, Resurrectio mortuorum est consolatio
and fiducia Christianorum.
here is great consolation to all the real members of Jesus Christ: For the
Resurrection of the dead is the comfort, and the hope, and confidence of all
good Christians. This was Jobs comfort upon the dunghill, Job 19.26, 27. and
David's comfort, Psalm. 16.7. and Christ's comfort, Mat. 20.19. -- But the third
day he shall rise again. It was Christ's comfort, and it is the comfort of every
good Christian.

1. Here is comfort against the fear of death: As God said to Jacob, Genesis 46.3,
4. Fear not to go down to Egypt, for I will go with thee, and I will bring thee
out again. So give me leave to say to you, Fear not to go down to the house of
Rottenness, to the Den of Death, for God will raise you up gain. Your Friends
and Acquaintance leave you at the grave, but God will not leave you. The grave
is but a dormitory, a resting place, a storehouse, to keep you safe till the
Resurrection: Christ has perfumed the grave. 1 Samuel 26.
As David, when he found Saul asleep, took away his spear and cruse of water;
but when he awoke he restored them again. So will death do with us: Though it
take away out strength, and our beauty; yet when we awake at the Resurrection,
they shall be restored again unto us. God will keep our dead ashes, and
preserve them safe; as a Druggist keeps every whit of the drug he has beaten
to powder. A Saint while he is in the grave, is united to Christ, he sleeps in
Jesus, and Jesus will raise him up unto life everlasting.

John 11.24.
2. Comfort against the death of our friends: Though they be dead, yet they
shall rise gain; as Martha told Christ, I know that he shall rise again at the
Resurrection. 1 Thessalonians. 14.
The Saints who dye in the faith of Christ, are dead in Christ, and such he
will raise and bring with him to judgment. If a man be to take a long journey,
his wife and children will not weep and mourn, because they hope that ere long
he will return again. A man that dies in Christ, and sleeps in Christ, does but
take a journey from Earth to Heaven, but he will come again shortly; and
therefore, let us not mourn as men without hope for our godly relations, for we
shall meet again; and in all probability, shall know one another when we meets
though not after a carnal manner; for we shall rise with the same bodies. And
if Lazarus was known when raised, and the Widows Son known by his Mother; if
Adam in Innocence, knew Eve when he awoke, and Peter knew Moses and Elias in
the Transfiguration (which was but a dark representation of Heaven) it is very
probable that we also, when we awake at the great Resurrection, shall know one
another, which will be no little addition to our Happiness.

3. Comfort to those who have maimed and deformed bodies: At the great
Resurrection all these deformities shall be taken away; therefore it is called,
A Day of Restitution, Acts 3.21.
wherein God will set all things in joint. If there were a Physician who could
cure all bodily deformities, what flocking would there be to him for help; such
a Physician is Death. As Job had all things restored double, when raised from
the dunghill; so shall a child of God have all bodily deformities removed, and
his body shall be raised in glory, and shine as the Sun in the firmament. And
why then should we be so afraid of death? it is initium vivae spei, the
beginning of a living hope. The Heathen man's Motto is, Dum spiro spero, while
there is life there is hope; but a Christians Motto is, Dum expiro spero, when
I dye, then my hope begins to live.

4. Comfort to those who forgo any members of their bodies for Christ: If thou
losest thy leg, or arm, or ear, God will restore it again at the Resurrection.
The same leg, etc. as Christ healed the ear of Matchus; he did not give him a
new ear, but the same again. Famous is the story that Josephus tells of one of
the seven children in the Maccabees, who when he was to have his tongue cut
out, and his hand cut off, said to his Mother, These I have received from the
Heavens, and for the love of my God I despise them, and trust that I shall
receive them again.

5. Comfort to the people of God, when in the lowest condition: When upon the
dunghill, and past help of man, then let them remember, That the God whom we
serve can raise the dead; and therefore can deliver them out of all their
troubles, though never so great and incurable. This was Jobs comfort, when in
the saddest condition, Job 19.25, 26, 27. It is proper to God to deliver from
the lowest grave, Psalm. 86.13. And for this very end and purpose, God
oftentimes brings his children into a very deplorable and desperate condition,
that they might learn to trust in that God who raises the dead, 2 Cor. 1.12.

6. Lastly, Here is singular consolation in reference to the sad times in which
we live. It is with us now as it was with the Disciples when Christ was
crucified; their hopes dyed, when Christ dyed; their faith in Christ, was dead
and buried with Christ; therefore they say, Luke 24.21. We trusted that it had
been he which should have redeemed Israel; and besides all this, to day is the
third day since these things were done: As if they should have said, Christ
has now been so long in the grave, that we have no hope of salvation by him;
it is now the third day, and we hear no tidings of him. Even so the people of
God are ready to say of these times, We had thought that this had been the time
wherein Christ would have made the Churches of England very glorious, and have
taken away all our tynne and dross out of his Church, and perfectly have
purged his floor, and made a most happy Reformation: But we see that Christ is
still in the grave, and there are mountains upon mountains rolled over him, to
keep him still in it. We are in as bad a condition as ever, and our hopes as
desperate; and it is now not only the third day, but the thirteenth, nay the
sixteenth year, and yet we are not delivered. But now hearken to a Word of
Consolation: As Christ rose in spite of the Jews; they rolled a stone upon the
mouth of the grave, and sealed it, and set a watch to keep it, and yet he rose
in spite of them all: So shall Religion, and the Gospel, and Church of Christ
rise, notwithstanding all the opposition made against it. Though never so many
Mountains ^e in the way, God will in time roll away all these Mountains; Mat.
16. Isa. 54. Zach. 12.3.
for Christ haih said, That the gates of H^ll shall not prevail against his
Church; and, that no weapon formed against Jacob shall prosper; and, that he
will make Jerusalem a burdensome stone for all people; all that burden
themselves with it shall be cut in pieces, though all the people of the earth
be gathered together against it. As the children of Israel, the more they were
oppressed, the more they multiplied; so the more the Church of Christ is
trodden under foot, the more it will prosper. As Moses his bush burned, and was
not consumed, because God was in it; so the Church of Christ may be burning,
and full of troubles and afflictions (which shall purge it, Rev. 11.7, 8, 9,
10, 11.
and refine it) but it shall not be consum^d; for Christ is risen, and his
Church shall rise: The God whom we serve is a God who can raise the dead. It is
related of the two Witnesses, that when they shall have flnished their
estimony, they should be slain, and lie three days and an half unburied; and
that the people that dwell upon the earth should re^o^ce over them, and make
merry: But yet notwithstanding, the Spirit of God should after three days and
an half enter into them, and they should stand upon their feet, and ascend up
to Heaven in the sight of their Enemies. By these two Witnesses are meant, all
the eminent Opposers of Antichrist, whether Magistrates or Ministers; who,
though they prophecy in sackcloath 1260 years, and toward the end of them
(which is yet to come) be in a more then ordinary manner massacred and killed,
yet they shall after a little while rise again (in their successors) stand upon
their feet, and ascend up to a more heavenly and glorious condition: There will
be a happy and blessed Resurrection of the Church. Famous is the Parable of the
Dry Bones, Ezekiel. 37. God says to the Prophet, Son of man, can these bones
live? The Prophet answered, O Lord God thou know. Then God tells him, That
he would cause breath to enter into the dry bones, and make them to live, etc.
Though the Church of Christ be in as sad a condition as the Israelites in
Babylon, and be as dry bones in a grave; and though the Prophets know not how
they can be raised, 2 Pet. 2.9*
yet God knows how to deliver his people: He can and will in due time raise
them up to a more pure and happy estate, even in this life. Let us comfort one
another with these things.

Use 3.
OF Terror to all the wicked and ungodly that cannot say with Job, I know my
Redeemer lives; but, I know my Revenger lives. There will a time come, when
they that now stop their ears, and will not hear the voice of Christ speaking
by his Word and Ministers, shall hear a voice whether they will or no, and
shall come out of their graves to the Resurrection of condemnation, just as
Pharaohs Baker out of Prison, or as Malefactors out of Newgate, to be executed
at Tiburn. Happy were it for such that there were no Resurrection, that their
souls did dye as the souls of Brute Beasts: But let such know, That there shall
be a Resurrection of the unjust, as well as of the just; and that there will a
day come, in which they must, whether they will or no, behold the Lord Jesus
with those very eyes which have been the casements to let in iniquity into the
soul: They shall see that Christ whose Sabbaths and Ordinances they have
despised, and whose Laws they have trampled under their feet: That drunken and
adulterous body, that swearing tongue, those hands of thine which have been
workers of iniquity, and those feet which have been swift to shed blood, shall
rise at the last day to be tormented in everlasting flames: That flesh of thine
for which thou have made such provision to fulfill the lusts of it, shall arise
into everlasting con em^t and punishment. O consider what howling and
lamentation will be when thy soul and body shall meet again, and shall curse
one another, and call to the Mountains to fall upon them, and rocks to hide
them, from the wrath of the Lamb, but all in vain: When thy godly Minister
shall say to thee, as Reuben to his Brethren, Genesis 42.22. Did I not tell you
before of these things? but you would not hearken unto me; and as Paul to the
men in the ship, Acts 27.21. If you had hearkened unto me, you might have
escaped this loss. O quam miserum est Deum videre, and perire, and ante Pretii
tui perire conspectum! Suppose a man were to go to bed at night with an
assurance that the next morning he should be hanged, drawn and quartered, he
would have but little comfort in that nights rest. And did a wicked man
consider that whenever he falls asleep, and is laid in the grave, he shall
awake to everlasting condemnation, this would make his joints to loose, and his
knees to smite one against the other, as Belshazzars did at the sight of the
Handwriting. The Lord give you grace to perpend and weigh these things, and
lay them to heart, before it be too late.

Use 4.
IF there shall be a Resurrection of the dead, let us labor so to live, that
when we dye we may have a happy Resurrection, that we may arise to the
Resurrection of Life; that there may be a necessary connection between the
eleventh nd twelfth Articles of our Creed; and that immediately after the
Rvsurrection of the body, we may be received into life everlasting. Here I
shall briefly answer unto two Questions: 1. How shall we know whether we shall
have a blessed and happy Resurrection? 2. What must we do that we way have a
happy Resurrection?


Question 1.
How shall we know whether we shall have a blessed and happy Resurrection?

Answer.
1. If thou be a just man, thou shall have a happy Resurrection. The Apostle
tells, Acts 24.15. That there shall be a Resurrection both of the just and the
unjust: The unjust shall come out of their graves to the Resurrection of
damnation, but the just to the Resurrection of life. If thou be a just man,
just in thy dealings, just in thy words and oaths, just both to God and man,
and labourest to give God his due in the duties of the First Table, and man his
due in the duties of the Second Table; if thou joynest justice with holiness,
and holiness with justice, thou shall certainly have a joyful Resurrection. Job
was a just man, and one that feared God, and therefore he believed that with
those very eyes of his he should see God to his everlasting comfort.

2. If thou refusest earthly Resurrections upon base terms, thou shall have a
happy Resurrection. The Apostle tells us, Heb. 11.35. of many blessed Martyrs,
who would not accept deliverance, that they might obtain a better Resurrection.
They might have risen to great preferments, if they would have complied upon
base terms; but they would not accept of an earthly Resurrection, that they
might obtain a better Resurrection. When S. Basil was offered great preferments
if he would have subscribed to the Arian Heresy, he refused them with scorn
and contempt, etc. he would not accept deliverance upon such unworthy terms.
When Hormisdas a Persian Nobl^man was divested of all his Honors for his
Religion, and afterward restored again, and offered greater advancements if he
would renounce it: He answered, Si p opter ista me Christum denegaturum
existimas, ea denuo, accipe; If you think I will deny my Christ for these
things, take them back again. But if you accept of earthly Resurrections upon
base and sinful Conditions, you shall have a sad and woeful Resurrection.

3. If thou glorifiest God with thy body here, thy body shall be glorified at
the Resurr^ction: If thou beatest down thy body, and bring it under
subjection; 1 Cor. 9.27. Romans 12.1. and 6.13.
if thou offerest up thy body a living sacrifice, holy and acceptable to God;
if thou make thy body an instrument of righteousness; if thy body be
erviceable to the soul in the worship of God, then shall it be made a most
glory us body: But if it be the Devils instrument unto sin, if thou make it a
slave to thy lust here, it shall rise at the last day unto everlasting misery.

4. If thou have a gracious soul here, thou shall have a glorious body
hereafter; for the body follows the soul, it is but as the souls shadow. If
when thou dyest thy soul goes to Hell, thy body will come thither at last; and
if thy soul go to Heaven, thy body will come thither also: And therefore
examine what kind of soul thou dyest withal; if thy soul be beautified with
grace, if sanctified and regenerated; if thou mindest thy soul more then thy
body, and labourest for Soul-riches, and Soul-honours, and Soul-food, then thy
body shall be happy at the Resurrection: But if thy soul be polluted and
deformed, if starved by the neglect of Gospel Ordinances, if poisoned with sin,
if infected by evil company, if thou dicest and cardest it away, if thou losest
thy soul for want of looking too, thy body will arise to the Resurrection of
Condemnation.

5. Lastly and especially, If thou have got a real interest in Christ and his
righteousness, then thou shall have a most blessed Resurrection; for Christ
Jesus is the Resurrection and the life, John 11.25. and whosoever believes in
him, shall rise to life everlasting: If thou gettest into Christ while thou
live, thou shall dye in Christ, and sleep in Christ, and be raised by Christ
unto eternal happiness: But if thou have not got into him by a
Christ-appropriating faith, thou can not dye in him, nor sleep in him, nor
rise by him as Head, unto life everlasting, but as a revengeful Judge unto
everlasting damnation.

Question 2.
What must we do that we may have a happy Resurrection?

Answer.
1. You must labor to be just persons, that you may partake of the
resurrection of the just.

2. You must refuse earthly resurrection upon base terms, as the three Children
and Daniel did.

3. You must glorify God with your bodies, you must make them helpers to your
souls, not hinderers; you must make them Temples of the Holy Ghost. The body
which has fasted, and prayed, and joined sincerely with the soul in holy
services, shall one day behold the face of God with comfort. Christ will say,
Are not these the eyes which have been lift^d up unto God in my service? Are
not these the ears which have hearkened to my word? Remember this when your
bodies are wearied and tired in the worship of God, The more thou servest God
with thy body, the more glory it shall have at that day.

4. Labor to get gracious souls here, and you shall have glorified bodies
hereafter.

5. Labor to be united to Christ by a lively faith, and he will be your
resurrection and your life: It is the great promise of Christ, that he will
raise up the body at the last day, John 6.39.40, 54, 58. that is, raise it up
to life everlasting.

6. Labor to have part in the first resurrection, Revel. 20.6. Blessed and
holy is he that has part in the first resurrection. I know this Text is
differently interpreted; but sure I am (according to the judgment of all
learned men) there is a double resurrection; the one spiritual, the other
corporal; the one of the soul, the other of the body: Those Texts, Ephesians. 2.1.
Col. 2.13. John 5.25. do (without all doubt) speak of the spiritual
resurrection. By nature we have dead souls, dead in sins and trespasses, void
of spiritual life, as perfectly under the power of sin, as a dead man is under
the power of death, and as unable to do any thing that is spiritually good, as
a dead man is to do any work. Now a soul dead in sin, shall be damned for sin;
but if thy soul be quickened and made alive, if the Lord has infused principles
of grace into thee, and given thee a new heart, and a new spirit; if
regenerated and born again, then thy bodily resurrection shall be happy: It is
very observable, That the Resurrection is called Regeneration, Mat. 19.28. --
In the regeneration, that is (as many interpret it) in the resurrection: If
spiritually regenerated, thy resurrection shall be most happy and glorious. O
pray unto God, and labor for regeneration, and a new creation, and that thou
may have a share in the first resurrection.

7. Heaken to the voice of Christ, and of his Spirit; and of his Ministers, and
of his Rod, and then his voye at the resurrection (when he shall call thee out
of the grave) shall be a happy voice. If thou stoppest thine ears, and wilt not
hearken to the voice of the Rod, nor to the voice of his Word, and the
Ministers of it; thou shall hear the voice of the Archangel calling thee out of
the grave whether thou will or no, and the voice of Christ saying, Go ye cursed
ito Hellfire, etc.

8. Count all things dung and dross, that thou may gain Christ, and be found
in him at that day, not having thine own righteousness, but the righteousness
which is of God by faith in Christ; and be willing to do any thing, if by any
means you may attain to the resurrection of the dead, Phil. 3.8, 9, 11. that
is, either to a happy resurrection, or rather to such a degree of grace which
the Saints shall have at the Resurrection.

9. Remember and carry daily in your mind, that saying of S. Jerome Whether you
eat or drink, or whatsoever you are doing, think with y ur selves, That you
hear the Trumpet sounding, and the voice of the Archangel, saying, Arise ye
dead and come to judgment.

Use 5.
A Divine Project how to make your bodies beautiful and glorious, and beautiful
in an ominent degree, in a supersuperlative measure, beautiful, as the Sun in
the Firmament, as the beautiful Body of Christ, which so dazzled Paul's eyes,
that it put them out: To make your bodies Majestical, Immortal, and Impassible;
and that is, by laboring to glorify God with them, and to get an interest in
Christ, and to get gracious and beautiful souls. O that this word were mingled
with faith! Methinks if any Motive could prevail with you that are Gentlewomen
and rich Ladies this should: Behold a way how to make your bodies eternally
beautiful. What trouble and pains do many women that are crooked endure, by
wearing iron-bodies to make themselves stait: What labor and cost are many
women at to beautify their rotten carcasses! Hearken to me thou proud dust and
ashes, thou gilded mud, that labourest to beautify thy body by vain, foolish
and sinful deckings and trimmings, and think thy self decked in the want of
decking: That pamperest thy body in all voluptuousness, and make thy self by
thy strange fashions so unlike thy self, as that if our civil forefathers were
alive again, they would wonder what strange monster thou were: Hearken unto me,
I say, and consider thy madness and folly, by laboring so much to adorn thy
body with the neglect of thy soul, thou undoest both body and soul. The only
way to make thy body beautiful, is (as I hove said) to gain Christ, to have a
part in the first resurrection, and to get a gracious soul, and then thou shall
be sure hereafter to have a glorious body. Excellent is that saying of Bernard,
Christ has a treble coming, Once he came in the flesh for the good of our
souls and bodies: now he comes in the Spirit (by the preaching of his
Ministers) for the good of our souls: At the last day he shall come for the
good of our bodies, to beautify and glorify them. Noli O homo praeripere
tempora; Do not O fond man mistake the time! This present life is not the time
for thy body; it is appointed for the beautifying of thy soul, and adorning it
with grace and holiness. The Resurrection is the time wherein Christ will come
from Heaven to make thy body glorious. How quite contrary to this do most
people live? Let it be our wisdom (with the children of Issachar) to have
understanding of the times. 1 Chro. 12.31.
Let us labor to get our souls beautified by Christ's second coming, with
Justification and Sanctification, and Christ at his third coming will make our
bodies glorious above expression.

The Day of Judgment asserted.
ACTS 17.31. Because he has appointed a Day in which he will judge the world,
etc.


SAint Paul perceiving the Idolatry at Athens, his spirit was stirred in him,
ver. 16. (...), his spirit was sowred and imbittered in him; Paul was a bitter
man against sin. That anger is without sin, which is against sin: Or the
word may signify, he was in a Paroxysme, or burning fit of zeal; and zeal is
such a passion, as cannot be either dissembled, or pent up; with this fire he
discharges against their Idolatry, ver. 22.23. Ye men of Athen^, I perceive
that in all things ye are too superstitious; for as I passed by, and beheld
your devotions, I found an Altar with this Insc iption, (...); To the unknown
God. Nor does the Apostle only declaime againg the false god, but declare to
them the true God; and he does it ab effectu; That God which made the world,
and all things therein, is Lord of heaven and earth, ver. 24. To Create is the
best demonstration of a Deity: And this God being everywhere by way of
repletion Jer. 23.24.
, cannot be locally confined; He dwells not in Tem^l^s made with hands, ver.
24. And though in former times, when the veil of Ignorance was drawn over the
face of the world, God seemed less severe. ver. 30. The times of this
ignorance God winked at. (...) He did as it were overlook them, not taking the
extremity of the Law; yet now he commands all men everywhere to repent, ver.
30. And if it be asked why now repent? why may we not take our full sleep? The
Reason is, because now is the broad daylight of the Gospel, which, as it
discovers sin more clearly, so judgment upon sinners: He has appointed a day
in which he will judge the world.

Which words are Gods Alarm to the world, to awaken it out of security: This
is a sweet, yet dreadful point. When Saint Paul discoursed of judgment to
come, Faelix trembled, Acts 24.25. He that is not affected with this Truth,
has an heart of stone.

For the illustration of this, there are six things I shall discuss.

1. That there shall be a day of judgment. 2. Why there must be a day of
judgment. 3. When the day of judgment shall be. 4. Who shall be the Judge. 5.
The order and the method of the Trial. 6. The effect or consequent of it.


1. Dies particularis, a particular judgment; at the day of death, immediately
upon the souls dissolution from the body it has a judgment passed upon it
Hebr. 9.27.
: Eccles. 12.7. Then shall the dust return to the earth as it was, the spirit
shall return to God that gave it. As soon as the breath expires, the soul
receives its particular sentence, and knows how it shall be with it to all
eternity.

2. There is Dies universalis, a general day of judgment; which is the great
Assizes, when the world shall be gathered together; and of this the Text is to
be understood, He has appointed a day in which he will judge the world. I
might impannel a whole Jury of Scriptures giving in their verdict to this; but
in the mouth of two or three witnesses the truth will be confirmed. Eccles.
12.14. God shall bring every work into judgment with every secret thing,
Eccles. 12.14.
whether it be good or evil. Mat. 12.36. Every idle word men shall speak, they
shall give account thereof in the day of judgment Mat. 12 36. (...). Psalm. 96
13.
. Now is the day of Arr ars, then will be the day of Account. Psalm 96.13. For
he comes, for he comes to judge the Earth. The Ingemination denotes the
certainty and infallibility of his coming.



Candle of God shines upon the wicked Job 29.3.
. They that tempt God are delivered Mal. 3.15.
. Diogenes seeing Harpalus a Thief go^on prosperously, said, sure God had cast
off the government of the world, and minded not how things went here below; 2
Pet. 3.4.
2 Pet. 3.4. There shall be in the last days Scoffers, saying, Where is the
promise of his coming? Therefore God will have a day of Assizes to vindicate
his justice; he will let sinners know that long-forbearance is no forgiveness.

white which was shot at; they who prayed and wept, had the hardest measure;
those Christians whose zeal did flame most, met with the fiery trial. Romans 8.36.
Romans 8.36. For thy sake we are killed all the day long. The Saints (as Cyprian
says) are put in the wine press, and often the blood of these grapes is pressed
out; God will therefore have a day of judgment, that he may reward all the
tears and sufferings of his people; They shall have their Crown and Throne, and
White Robes; though they may be Losers for him, they shall lose nothing by him
Rev. 7.9.
.



It Is certain there shall be a judgment, uncertain when; the Angels know not
the day, nor Christ neither as he was man. Matthew. 24.36. And the reason why the
time is not known, is,

1. That we may not be curious: There are somethings which God would have us
ignorant of. Acts 1.7. It is not for you to know the times or seasons which the
Father has put in his own power. We must not pry into Gods Ark, or intermeddle
with his Arcana imperii; it is a kind of Sacrilege (as Salvian speaks) for
any man to break into the Holy of holies, and enter into Gods secrets.

2. God has concealed the time of judgment that we may not be careless. We
are always to keep Sentinel, having our Loins girr, and our Lamps burning, not
knowing how soon that day may overtake us. God would have us live every day
(says Austin) as if the last day were approaching Ideo latet ultimus dies, ut
observentur omnes dies. Austin.
.

-- Omnem creed diem tibi diluxisse supremum. -- This is the genuine Use our
Savior makes of it; Mark 13.32. Of that day and hour knows no man, no not the
Angels in heaven; Take ye heed, watch and pray, for ye know not when the time
is.

But though we cannot tell precisely when this day of the Lord shall be, yet in
probability the time cannot be far off. Hebr. 10.3.7. He that shall come, Hebr.
10.37.
will come, and will not tarry. Chrysostom has a simile; when says he, we
see an old man going on Crutches, his Joints weak, his radical moisture dried
up, though we do not know the just time when he will dye, yet it is sure he
cannot live long, because natures stock is spent: So the world is decrepit, and
goes as it were upon Crutches, therefore it cannot be long before the worlds
Funerals, and the birthday of judgment. The Age which Saint John wrote in,
was the last time, 1 John 2.18. in the Greek it is (...), 1 John 2.18.
the last hour; then sure the time we now live in, may be called the last
minute; Psalm. 96.13. For he comes to judge the Earth. Not, (...) he shall
come, but he comes (...)
; to show how near the time is. It is almost daybreak, and the Court is ready
to sit. Jam. 5.9. The Judge stands at the door.

Verily, if Security Mat. 24.37.
, Apostasy 1. Tim. 4.1.
, Decay of Love Mat. 24.11.
Inundation of Sin 2 Timothy 3.1.
, Revelation of Antichrist 1 John 3.18. Non secus ac slavescente arista colonus
colligit pro foribus adesse messem.
, be made in Scripture the Symptoms and Prognostics of the last day, we
having these gray hairs among us, the day of judgment cannot be far off.

He will judge the world by that man whom he has ordained. That man, who is
God-man. We must take heed of judging others; this is Christ's work. John 5.22.
The Father has committed all judgment to the Son Judicium erit totius
individuae Trinitatis, quoad consensum and authoritatem; Christi vero quoad
visibilem actum, promulgationem, and executionem. 1. Sagacitas.
. He who once had a Reed put into his hand, his Father will now put a Scepter
into his hand; he who had a Purple Robe put upon him in derision, shall come in
h^s Judges Robes; he who hung upon the Cross, shall sit upon the Bench. There
are two things in Christ which do eminently qualify him for a Judge.

1. Prudence, and Intelligence to understand all Causes that are brought before
him Hebr. 4.13.
. He is described with seven eyes, Zech. 3.9. to note his Omnisciency; he is
like Ezekiels wheels, full of eyes Ezekiel. 10.12. 2. Potestas.
; Christ is (...), an heart-searcher; he does not only judge the fact, but the
heart, which no Angel can do *.

2. Strength, whereby he is able to be revenged upon his enemies. Christ is
armed with Sovereignty; therefore the seven eyes are said to be upon one stone,
Zech. 3.9. To denote the infinite strength of Christ; and he is described with
seven horns, Rev. 5.6. As Christ has an Eye to see, so he has an Horn to
push; As he has his Balance, so he has his Sword; As he has his Fan and his
Sieve, so he has his Lake of fire, Revel. 20.10.

1. The Summons. 2. The Judges coming to the Bench. 3. The Process and Trial
it self.


These. 4.16. The Lord shall descend from heaven with the voice of the
Archangel, and with the Trump of God. Saint Hierom says, that whatever he was
doing, he thought he heard the noise of this Trumpet sounding in his ears,
Surgite mortui -- Arise ye dead, and come to judgment Hierom in Mat.
: Note 1. The shrilness of the Trumpet, it shall sound so loud, that the dead
shall hear it. 2. The efficacy of the Trumpet; it shall not only startle the
dead, but raise them out of their graves, Matthew. 24.31. Vere vox magna, vox
tubae terribilis, quae petras scindit, inferos aperit, vincula mortuorum
dirumpit; haec autem omnia citiuss peragenda quam sagitta in aere transit, in
momento, in ictu^oculi:
They who will not hear the Trumpet of the Ministry sounding, but lie dead in
sinne^, shall be sure to hear the Trumpet of the Archangel sounding.

Glorious, yet dr^adful.

the glorious appearing of the great God and our Savior, Titus 2.13. 1.
Christ's Person shall be glorious. His first coming in the flesh was obscure;
his glory was veiled over. Isa. 53.2, 3. All who saw the Man, did not see the
Messiah; but his second coming will be in vigore, and fulgore, very illustrious
and resplendent. He shall come in the glory of his Father, Mark 8.38. that is,
he shall wear the same embroydered Robes of Majesty as his Father. 2. Christ's
Attendants shall be glorious. He shall come with all his holy Angels, Mat.
25.31.
Mat. 25.31. These Sublime Seraphick Spirits, who for their luster are compared
to lightning Mat. 28.3.
; are Christi Satellitium, part of Christ's Train and Retinue. He who was led to
the Cross with a Band of Soldiers, shall be attended to the Bench with a guard
of Angels.

ignis conflagrationis, a fire burning round about him. 2 These. 1.7. He shall
be revealed with his Angels from heaven, in flaming fire Si talis sit horror
venientis, qualis, erit judicantis. Aug.
, etc. When God did give his Law upon the Mount, there were thunders and
lightnings, and Mount Sinai was altogether on a smoke, because the Lord
descended upon it in fine Exodus 19.16, 18.
, Exodus 19.16, 18. If God was so terrible at the giving of the Law, O how
terrible will he be when he shall come to require his Law!

The 1. Universality Of the Trial. The 2. Formality Of the Trial. The 3.
Circumstances Of the Trial.


Universality of the Trial; it will be a very great Assizes, never was the like
seen. 2 Cor. 5.10. For we must all appear before the judgment seat of Christ 2
Cor. 5.10.
. Kings and Nobles, Councels and Armies; those who were above all Trial here,
have no Cha^rter of exemption granted them; they must appear before Christ's
Tribunal, and be tried for their lives; neither power nor policy can be a
sub^er-fuge. They who refused to come to the Throne of Grace, Hebr. 4.16.
shall be forced to come to the Bar of Justice. And the dead as well as the
living must make their appearance. Rev. 20.12. I saw the dead both small and
great stand be ore God, etc. We do not use to cite men to our Courts when they
are dead, but at that day the dead are called to the Bar; and not only Men, but
Angels. Jude 6. The Angels which kept not their first estate, he has reserved
in chains to the judgment of the great day.

Formality of the Trial, which consists in the opening of the Books Rev. 12.20.
. Dan. 7.10. The judgment was set, and the books were op^ned. There are two
books will ba opened.

Gods Omnisciency. God not only observes, but registers all our actions. Job
14.16. Thou numbrest my steps. The word there (...) to number Unde (...) liber.
, signifies to put a thing into the book; as if Job had said, Lord, thou
keep thy day-book, and enterest down all my actions into the book; we read
of Gods book of remembrance, Mal. 3.16.
Mal. 3.16. This book will be produced at the last day.

book of Conscience. Let there be never so much written in a book, yet if it be
clasped, it is not seen. Men have their sins written in their conscience, but
the book is clasped; (the searing of the conscience is the clasping of the
book) but when this book of conscience shall be unclasped at the great day,
then all their Hypocrisy, Treason, Atheism shall appear to the view of Men
and Angels Luke 12.3.
; the sins of men shall be written upon their forehead, as with a Pen of Iron
Cunctis agminibus patebunt universa scelera tua. Bern.
.

Circumstances of the Trial; where consider four things.

1. The Impartiality. 2. The Exactness. 3. The Perspicuity. 4. The Supremacy.
Impartiality of the Trial; Jesus Christ will do every man justice; he will (as
the Text says) judge the world in righteousness. It will be dies (...),
justice holds the scales. The Thebanes did picture their Judges blind, and
without hands Reusner.
; blind, that they might not respect persons; without hands, that they might
take no bribes. Christ's Scepter is a Scepter of righte^usn^sse Hebr. 1.8.
, Hebr. 1.8. He is no (...), or respecter of persons; it is not nearness of
blood prevails: Many of Christ's Kindred shall be condemned. It Is not
gloriousness of profession; many shall go to hell with Christ in their mouths.
Mat. 7.22. Mat. 7.22.
Many will say to me in that day, Lord, Lord, have we not prophesied in thy
Name, and in thy Name cast out Devils, etc? Yet though they cast out Devils,
they are cast out to the Devil. It Is not the varnish of a picture that a
judicous eye is taken with; but the curiousness of the work. It Is not the most
shining profession Christ is taken with, unless he see the curious workmanship
of grace in the heart, drawn by the Pensil of the Holy Ghost. Things are not
carried there by parties, but aequa lance, in a most just balance; Christ has
true weights for false hearts; there are no fees taken in that Court; the Judge
will not be bribed with an hypocritical tear, or a Judas kiss Veniet dies
illa, in qua plus valebunt pura corda quam astuta verba, conscientia bona quam
marsupia plena; judex enim non falletur verbis, nec flectetur donis. Bern.
.

Exactness of the Trial; it will be very critical; t^en, will Christ thoroughly
purge his floor, Mat. 3.12. Not a grace, or a sin, but his Fan will discover.
Christ will at the day of judgment make an heart-anatomy; as the Chyrurgion
makes a dissection in the body, and does criticize upon the several parts; or
as the Goldsmith, does (...), bring his gold to the balance and touchstone,
and (...), pierce his gold through, to see if it be right, and genuine, and
whether there be not a baser metal w thin: Thus the Lord Jesus, (whose Eyes
are as a flame of f^re, Revel. 1.14.) will pierce through the hearts of men, and
see if there be the right metal within, having the Image and Superscription of
God upon it. Paint falls off before he fire; the hypocrites paint will fall off
at the fiery Trial, nothing then will stand us in stead but sincerity.

perspicuity of the Trial; sinners shall be so clearly convicted, that they
shall hold up their hand at the Bar, and cry guilty; those words of David may
be fitly applied here, Psalm. 51.4. that thou may be clear when thou
judge. The sinner himself shall clear God of injustice. The Greek word for
vengeance (...), signifies justice. Gods taking vengeance, is doing justice;
sin makes God angry, but it cannot make him unrighteous; the wicked shall drink
a Sea of wrath, but not sip one drop of injustice; Christ will say, Sinner,
what Apology can thou make for thy self? are not thy sins written in the book
of conscience? had thou not that book in thy own keeping? who could interline
it? now the sinner being (...) self-condemned, shall clear his Judge; Lord,
though I am damned, yet I have no wrong done me; thou art clear when thou
judge.

Supremacy of the Court; this is the highest Court of Judicature, from whence
is no appeal. Men can remove their causes from one place to another; from the
common Law to the Court of Chancery: but from Christ's Court there is no appeal;
he who is once doomed here, his condition is irreversible.



Segregation. Christ will separate the godly and the wicked. Mat. 25.32.
Matthew. 25.32. He shall separate them one from another, as a Shepherd divides
his Sheep from the Goats; Then will be the great day of separation; it is a
great grief to the godly in this life, that they live among the wicked. Woe is
me that I sojourn in Meseck, Psalm. 120.5. Wicked men blaspheme God, Psalm.
74.18. and persecute the Saints, 2 Timothy 3.12. They are compared to dogs Psalm.
22.16.
, to Bulls Psalm. 68.30.
, to Lions Psalm. 57.4.
; they roar upon the godly, and tear them as their Prey. Cain kills, Ishmael
mocks, Shimei rails; The godly and the wicked are now promiscuously mingled
together Mat. 13.30.
; and this is as offensive as the tying a dead man to a living; but, Christ
will ere long make a separation; as the Fan does separate the wheat from the
chaff: as a Furnace separates the gold from the dross: or as a searcer strains
out the spirits from the dregs; Christ w^ll put the sheep by themselves, who
have the ear-mark of Election upon them; and the Coats by themselves; after
which separation there follows

Sentence; which is twofold.

Matthew 25.34. Come ye blessed of my Father, inherit the Kingdom prepared for
you. After the pronouncing of which blessed sentence, the godly shall go from
the Bar, and sit upon the Bench with Christ. 1 Cor. 6.3. Know ye not that the
Saints shall judge the world? The Saints shall be Christ's Assessors; they shall
sit with him in Judicature, as the Justices of Peace with the Judge; they shall
Vote with Christ, and applaud him in all his judicial proceedings. Here the
world does judge the Saints, but there the Saints shall judge the world.

Matthew. 25.41. ite maledicti -- Depart from me ye cursed into everlasting fire.
I may allude to that, James 3.10. Out of the same mouth proceeds blessing and
cursing; out of the same mouth of Christ, proceeds blessing to the godly, and
cursing to the wicked; the same wind which brings one ship to the Haven, blows
another ship upon the Rock. Depart from me; the wicked once said to God,
Depart; Job. 21.14. They say unto God, Depart from us; and now God will say to
them, Depa t from me; this will be an heart-rending word. Chrysostom says
this word. Depart, is worse than the fire. Depart from me in whose presence is
fullness of joy Psalm. 16.11.3.
.

Execution; Mat. 13.30. Bind the tares in bundles to burn them. Christ will
say, Bundle up these sinner; here a bundle of hypocrites, there a bundle of
Apostates, there a bundle of profane; bundle them up and throw them in the
fire. And now no cries or entreaties will prevail with the Judge; the sinner
and the fire must keep one another company; he who would not weep for his sins,
must burn for them; and it is everlasting fire. The three children were thrown
into the fire, but they did not stay in long; The King came near to the mouth
of the burning fiery surnace, and said, Come forth, Dan. 3.26. but the fire of
the damned is everlasting; this word ever breaks the heart; length of time
cannot terminate it; a Sea of-tears cannot quench it. The wrath of God is the
fire, and the breath of God is the Bellows to blow, it up to all eternity. O
how dreadfully tormenting will this fire be! to endure it will be intolerable,
to avoid it will be impossible.

Use 1. Let me persuade all Christians to believe this Truth, that there shall
be a day of judgment. Eccles. 11.9. Rejoice O young man in thy youth, and let
thy heart cheer thee in the days of thy youth, and walk in the ways of thy
heart; but know thou that for all these things God will bring thee into
judgment. This is a great Article of our faith, that Christ shall come to
judge the quick and the dead; yet, how many live as if this Article were
blotted out of their Creed? we have too many Epicures and Atheists, who drown
themselves in sensual delights, and live as if they did not believe either God,
or day of judgment; the Lu^ianists and Platonises deny the immortality of the
soul; the Photinians hold there is no Hell. I have read of the Duke of Silecia,
he was so infatuated, that he did not believe either God or Devil Usque adco
ins^nus, ut neque inseros neque superos esse dicat.
; I wish there be not too many of this Dukes opinion. Durst men swear, be
unchaste, live in malice, if they did believe a day of judgment? Oh, mingle
this Text with faith, the Lord has appointed a day in which he will judge the
world; There must be such a day; not only Scripture, but reason confirms it.
There is no Kingdom or Nation in the world, but have their Sessions, and Courts
of Judicature; and God who sets up all other Courts, shall not he be allowed
his? that there shall be a day of judgment, is engraffed by nature in the
consciences of men. Peter Martyr tells us that some of the Heathen Poets have
written, that there are certain Judges appointed ( Minos, Radamanthus, and
others) to examine and punish offenders after this life.

Use 2. See here the sad and deplorable estate of wicked men; this Text is as
the handwriting on the wall, which may make their knees to smite one against
another, Dan. 5.6. The wicked shall come to judgment; but they shall not stand
in judgment, Psa. 1.5. in the Hebrew it is (...) they shall not rise up. When
God shall be decked with glory and Majesty, his face as the appearance of
lightening, his eyes as Lamps of fire, and a sword of justice in his hand, and
shall call the sinner by name, and say, Stand forth, answer to the charge that
is brought against thee; what can thou say for thy pride, oaths,
drunkenness, etc. these sins thou have been told of by my Ministers, whom I
sent rising up early, and going to bed late Jer. 7.25.
, but thou did persist in thy wickedness with a neck of iron Isa. 48.4.
, a brow of brass Ezekiel. 36.26.
an heart of stone; all the tools I wrought with, were broken and worn out upon
thy rocky spirit; what can thou say for thy self that the sentence should not
pass? O how amazed and confounded will the sinner be! he will be found
speechless, he will not be able to look his Judge in the face. Job 31.14.
Job 31.14. What then shall I do when God r^seth up? and when he visits, what
shall I answer him? O wretch, thou that can now outface thy Minister, and
thy godly Parents when they tell thee of sin, thou shall not be able to
outface thy Judge; when God rises up, the sinners countenance will be fallen
Genesis 4 6.
; -- and when he visits, what shall I answer him? Not many years since, the
Bishops did use to visit in their Diocese, and call several persons before
them as criminal; all the world is Gods Diocese, and shortly he is coming his
visitation, and will call men to account. Now, when God shall visit, how shall
the impure soul be able to answer him? 1 Pet. 4.18. Where shall the ungodly and
the sinner appear? Thou that dyest in thy sin, art sure to be cast at the
Bar; John 3.18. He that believes not, is condemned already; that is, he is
as sure to be condemned as if he were condemned already; and if once the
sentence of damnation be passed, miserable man, what will thou do? whither will thou go A dextris erunt peccata accusantia, a sinistris infinita daemonia,
subtus horrendum chaos inferni, desupor judex iratus, soris mundus ardens,
intus conscientiaurens heu miser peccator quo fugies? Ansel.
? will thou seek help from God? he is a consuming fire; will thou seek help
from the world? it will be all on fire about thee; from the Saints? those thou
did deride upon earth; from the good Angels? they defy thee as Gods enemy;
from the bad Angels? they are thine Executioners; from thy conscience? there is
the worm that gnaws; from mercy? the Lease is run out. O the horror and
hellish despair which will seize upon sinners at that day! oh the sad
convulsions! their heads shall hang down, their cheeks blush, their lips
quiver, their hands shake, their conscience roar, their heart tremble. What
stupifying Physic has the Devil given to men, that they are insensible of the
danger they are in! the cares of the world have so filled their head, and the
profits of it has so bewitched their heart, that they mind neither death nor
judgment.

Use 3. Exhortation. 1. Branch. Possess your selves with the thoughts of the
day of judgment; think of the solemnity and impartiality of this Court.
Feathers swim upon the water, Exhortat. 1. Branch.
gold sinks into it; light, feathery spirits floate in vanity, but serious
Christians sink deep in the thoughts of judgment; many people are like
quicksilver, they cannot be made to fix. If the Ship be not well ballasted, it
will soon overturn; the reason why so many are overturned with the vanities of
the world, is because they are not well ballasted with the thoughts of the day
of judgment. Were a man to be tried for his life, he would bethink himself of
all the Arguments he could, to plead in his own defense; we are all shortly to
be tried for our souls; while others are thinking how they may grow rich, let
us bethink our selves how we may abide the day of Christ's coming. The serious
thoughts of judgment, would be, 1. A Curben-bit to sin; am I stealing the
forbidden fruit, and the Assizes so near? 2. A spur to holiness Nihil est
quod magis proficiat ad vitam honestam etc. Amb.
. 1 Pet. 3.10. But the day of the Lord will come as a Thief in the night;
seeing then all these things shall be dissolved, what manner of Persons ought
ye to be in all Holy Conversation?

2. Branch. 2. Branch.
Let us solemnly prepare our selves for this last and great Trial! that is, by
setting up a judgment seat in our own souls; let us begin a private Sessions,
before the Assizes; it is wisdom to bring our souls first to trial. Lam. 3.40.
Let us search and try our ways; let us judge our selves according to the Rule
of the Word, and let conscience bring in the Verdict. The Word of God gives
several Characters of a man that shall be absolved at the day of judgment, and
is sure to go to Heaven.

Character is humility. Job 22.29. The Lord will save the humble person. Now,
let conscience bring in the Verdict; Christian, art thou humble? not only
humbled, but humble; do thou esteem others better than thy self? Phil. 2.3.
do thou cover thy duties with the vail of Humility? as Moses put a vail on
his face when it shined; if conscience brings in this Verdict, thou art sure to
be acquitted at the last day.

Character, love to the Saints. 1 John 3.14. We know that we have passed from
death unto life, because we love the Brethren. Love makes us like God, 1 John
4.19. it is Aug.
radix omnium virtutum, the root of all the graces. Does conscience witness
this for you? are you perfumed with this sweet spice of love? do you delight in
those who have the Image of God? do you reverence their graces? do you bear
with their infirmities? do you love to see Christ's picture in a Saint, though
hung in never so poor a frame? this is a good sign, that thou shall pass for
current at the day of judgment.

Character, a penitential frame of heart. Acts 11.18. Repentance unto life.
Repentance unravels sin, and makes it not to be; Jerem. 50.20. In those days
the iniquity of Israel shall be sought for; and there shall be none. A great
ball of Snow is melted and washed away with the rain: great sins are washed
away by holy tears. Now can conscience bring in the evidence for thee? do
thou tune the penitential string? thou that have sinned with Peter, do thou
weep with Peter Qui secutus es Petrum errantem, sequere poenitentem. Ambros.
? and do thy tears drop from the eye of faith? this is a blessed sign thou art
judgement-proof; and that when thy iniquities shall be sought for at the last
day, they shall not be found.

Character, Equity in our dealings; Psa. 24.3, 4. Who shall ascend into the
hill of the Lord? mundus volis, he that has clean hands. Injustice does sully
and defile the hand; what says conscience? is thy hand clean? it is a vain
thing to hold the Bible in one hand, and false weights in the other. Beloved,
if conscience upon a Scripture-trial, give in the verdict for us, it is a
blessed sign that we shall lift up our heads with boldness at the last day.
Conscience is Gods echo in the soul; the voice of conscience is the voice of
God; and if conscience upon an impartial trial does acquit us, God will acquit
us. 1 John 3.21. If our heart condemn us not, 1 John 3.21.
then have we confidence toward God. If we are absolved in the lower Court of
conscience, we are sure to be absolved at the last day in the High Court of
Justice. It were a sweet thing for a Christian thus to bring himself to a
Trial. Seneca tells us of a Roman, who every day ca led himself to account;
quod malum sanasti? what infirmity is healed? wherein art thou grown better?
then he would lie down at night with these words, O quam gratus sonnus! O how
sweet and refreshing is my sleep to me!

Use 4. Here is a fountain of Consolation opened to a believer; and that in
three Cases. Consolation.


In case of 1. Discouraging fear. 2. Weakness of grace. 3. Censures of the
world.


John 2.1. If any man sin, we have an Advocate with the Father, Jesus Christ
the righteous; 1 John 2.1.
What though Satan be the accuser, if Christ be the Advocate? Christ never lost
any Cause he pleaded; nay, his very pleading alters the nature of the cause;
Christ will show the debt-book crossed with his own blood; and it is no matter
what is charged, if all be discharged; here is a Believers Comfort, his Judge
will be his Advocate.

Amos 9.9. Ne lapillus in terram, yet shall not the least grain fall to the
earth. He that has but a grain of grace, not the least grain shall fall to
Hell.

John Baptists Head in a Charger, is a common dish now adays; it is ordinary to
bring in a Saint Beheaded of his good name; but at the day of judgment, Christ
will unload his people of all their injuries, he will vindicate them from all
their calumnies. Christ will be the Saints Compurgator; he at that day will
present his Church sine macula and ruga, Ephesians. 5.27.
not having spot or wrinkle.

OF HELL.
MATTHEW. 25.41. Then shall he say also unto them on the left hand, Depart from
me ye Cursed into everlasting fire, prepared for the Devil and his Angels.


IF any in the broad way upon the hearing of this terrible Text, shall say to
me, as the Devils in the Gergesens said to our Savior, Art thou come hither to
torment us before the time? Mat. 8.29.
I say no, but to warn you to flee from the wrath to come; and reduce you from
the broad, into the narrow way; -- 3.17. -- 7.13, 14.
for all the while you are in a state of nature, going on in sin against God,
you do but wrong your own souls; and by hating wisdom love death, Prove. 8.
ult. Romans 6. ult.
yea, eternal death, though you like not to hear of it. Let not prejudice take
away your judgment; and then a Boanerges Mark 3.17. with Joh. 12.29.
, a son of thunder to day, may fit you to give better entertainment to a
Barnabas Acts 4.36. with Rev. 4.5.
, a son of Consolation to morrow.

For my part, I hope I am not studious, neither do I expect to please men, Gal.
1.10. 1 Cor. 4.3.
in treating on this severe point; their censure is a small thing to me, if I
may approve my self the servant of Christ our Judge, which I shall endeavor in
not erring from the scope of this his last sentence in my Text, wherein we have

Text divided. (...).
1. The persons sentenced or judged; viz. the wicked described by their station
[on the left hand.] condition [cursed.]


2. The person sentencing; viz. Christ who is Lord Chief Justice of all the
world, [me.]

3. The punishment, or sentence it self pronounced by this Judge who cannot but
do right; namely, [Depart from me into everlasting fire prepared for the Devil
and his Angels] from God who has no beginning, into Hell which has no end;
noting the pain of 1 Timothy 1.7.
Ter. a quo. ad quem.

Loss, [Depart from me.] Sense, [into everlasting fire, etc.]


Where we have Hell Torments set forth by their quality, extremity and
eternity. and quantity, extremity and eternity.


(1.) Extremity aggravated by their inflammation, [fire.] the preparation of
them [prepared]. the association in them, [the Devil and ^his Angels.]
(2.) Eternity, which makes all Hell ^ndeed, [evalasting fire.]
Take the sum in this Proposition.

The wicked shall depart from Christ into the greatest Torments.

Or if you will have it shorter, take it in David's words. Psalm. 9.17.


The wicked shall be turned into Hell.

I shall endeavor to prepare this for Application, by Explication, and
Confirmation.

I. Explication of the Subject. Predicate. I. Explicat.



The Subject, [the wicked.] i. e. All ungodly men and women who dye in their
sins, unclean, unsanctified; Rev. 21.27. 1 Cor. 6.9, 10. 2 These. 1.9. Colos.
3.6.
who know not God, nor obey the Gospel; the Goats on Christ's left hand, at the
great day in my Text denominated [the cursed (...), execratio horrenda and
abominanda. Camerarius and Ger. Harm. Evang.
] with a dreadful execration, detested of God with abomination, and destinated
to all misery without remedy.

The Predicate, [the greatest punishment] or Hell, of which I shall say
somewhat to.

First, The name, Hell, answering to the Hebrew (...) Sheol, and the Greek
(...); quid nominis. quid rei.

which though the former primarily signifies the grave; and the latter the
valley of the son ^f Himmon, yet they do (also) signify extreme and eternal
torment; especially the latter in the new Testament, where Christ speaks (...).
Mat. 5.29, 30. with -- v. 22. (...).
of the whole body being cast into Hell, (the fiery Hell) which Mark explains
to be inextinguishable Mark 9.43. (...). with Mat. 18.9.
Hence our Savior elsewhere bids fear him who is able to destroy soul and
body, (...), in Hell, Mat. 10.28.23.15.33. Luke 12.5.
Men could not cast the soul into the proper Gehinnom, but God can cast that
into Hell after the body is killed; which several of the Ancient Jewish Doctors
Targ. Jonath. B. Uz. Hierus. Paraph.
in Genesis 3. ult. Praeparavit Gehennam improbis, infuturo seculo. (...) etc.
apprehending, they did by Gehinnom Metaphorically describe the infernal fire;
as the Learned Targ. Jonath. B. Uz. Hierus. Paraph.
in Genesis 3. ult. Praeparavit Gehennam improbis, infuturo seculo. (...) etc.
have proved, notwithstanding what is said to the contrary, in that abominable
Treatise of Hell, (justly sentenced to be burnt about two years ago) (wherein
the Jesuited Penman P. Cheitomaeus, Beza, Scapula, Minshaw, Usher, Fulk,
Buxtorf. Lex. Talm. (...). and (...), ider^ sonant apud Ignatium. Epist. ad
Ephesians. 4. S. R. Land. printed 1657.
, whither out of ignorance or malice, or both, has most shamefully wronged our
best Authors. But could he and any others (which they cannot) evade the
Tropical signification of Gehenna; yet all the strength of their Arguments to
shake and remove Hell Pillars, will be but just enough (as it fared with
Sampson in a far more lawful undertaking, Judge. 1.16, 28.
when he shook the Pillars of the house in which the Philistines were) to pull
down the rotten Fabric of their hellish Tenet upon their own Pates; sit'h
there are abundantly more of Scripture expressions noting an extreme and
eternal misery after this life is ended; viz. Destruction by way of eminency:
Mat. 7.13.
utter darkness, where weeping and wailing, and gnashing of teeth; -- 22.13.
and the worm dies not; Mark 9.43.48.
damnation, Mat. 23.33.
everlasting punishment, -- 25.46.
eternal fire, chains, blackness, and mists of darkness, Jude ep. 6, 7, 13.
the Prison where the spirits of the disobedient be; 2 Pet. 2.4, 17. with 1
Pet. 3.19.
wrath to come, 1 These. 1.10. -- 5.9.
the furnace of fire, Mat. 13 42.
the second death, bottomless pit, place of torment, lake of fire and
brimstone. Rev. 2.11. and 9.2. and 14.10. and 20.10. and 19.20. and 21.8.


The nature of Hell may be thus described; it is no less than the eternal and
second death in its latitude, as opposite to eternal life; i.e. The most
miserable state of the wicked, wherein they are everlastingly separated from
the sight of God, and all comfortable good, The description of Hell.
locked up in chains of darkness under the fresh, lively and afflicting sense
of the wrath of God, justly kindled, and ^ontinually flaming against them for
their sins, and according to the measure of them, so that they are filled with
never ceasing horrors of conscience, and scorched in soul and body, with such
grievous flames as will for ev^r torment, but never consume them to an
annihilation.

The description explained.
More particularly this Description suggests two things agreeable to them,
already noted in the Text further to be explained; viz. the Punishment it self.
Properties of it.


1. Punshment it self. Paena damni. ^nsus.
(...). Acts 1.25. Abi^^iendi in illud (...) quo infernus. Gerh.
(1.) The punishment it self, to which the wicked are adjudged, and that is the
pain of Loss, absence of infinite mercy. the Sense, presence of unspeakable
misery.


1. The pain of loss, the privation of all good; Depart from me says Christ,
get ye gone from my presence into your proper place; away with you, here is no
comfort for you; Depart from all the good you were once (while on earth)
invited to have in me, and with me in heaven; yea, and from that you chose and
preferred before me; you must now lose all real, and all you and others reputed
good things, whither

[1.] Natural, (your sins will go along with you) but all your pleasures,
profits, honors, with the vain hopes of greater content in your sinful courses
will leave you. The covetous Cormorant shall not have his bags, nor the
ambitious his honor, nor the voluptuous his pleasure: Acts 1.18.
Judas left his silver which he prized more than out Savior; Haman his honor;
the deceased Gentleman in the Gospel his delicious fare, with which he had
pampered himself in his life time, and glad he would have been upon his
importunate begging to have had one drop of water from the end of Lazarus his
sorest finger, to cool the tip of his tongue, when he was tormented in flames;
but alas! he must remain deprived with this sharp answer, Luke 16.24, 25 with
Jam. 5.5.
Remember that thou in thy life time receivedst thy good things. Though wicked
men be Rebels and Traitors to God, yet here he gives them meat and drink to
keep them alive for a time; he deals not with them as the cruel Duke D' Alva
did with his prisoners, whom he starved after he had given them Quarter,
saying, Though I promised your lives, I promised not to find you meat: He gave
Egypt to Nebuchadnezzar, and vast Dominions to Alexander; but in Hell wicked
men shall be deprived of all. There they shall have no houses, nor lands, nor
moneys, nor good cheer, nor mirth, nor credit, nor friends, nor servants; no
stately Italian Palaces, no rare Coaches of Naples drawn by the Horses of
Barbary; no artificial wares of Quinsaio and Alexandria; no Indian gold; no
Bisnager Diamonds; no Scythian Em raulds; no Topazes of Aethiopia; no Molucca
spices; no Canary Sacks nor Sugars; no Candie oiles; no Spanish sweet meats; no
French wines; no V lvets nor Tiss^e, nor Scarlet, nor purple clothes, but
purple flames.

[2.] Sp^ritual good things they had here, and might have had in common with
the Saints; in Hell no offers of Christ, Vide part 3. of Baxters Saints rest.
nor pardon by him; no Pr achers nor promis^s, nor p^ssibility of heaven, as
there was here in the w^ckeds apprehensions, which will be exceedingly
enlightened to see what they are deprived of; yet then can see no Wells of
salvation, only the pit of d^mn^tion.

[3.] Eternal good things; the wicked lose God himself, and heaven with him; oh
unspeakable loss to the understanding soul! infinite loss! to want an infinite
good, to be separated from the chief good! to depart from God, this is a most
sad departure, In his meditations on the four last things. Psalm. 139.8. Hebr.
12.14.
the worst of all (as Reverend and Learned Bolton well observes from the
Ancients) it is true, wicked men cannot depart from Gods essence; for he is
essentially in Hell; but they depart from his comfortable presence, not to see
God, nor to have one comfortable glance at the great Creator, merciful
Redeemer, and gracious Sanctifier. And with this loss of losses, they are
deprived of heaven, and those admirable perfections, and ravishing beauties,
with which the Spouse of Christ is for ever, endowed, and are shut out with the
foolish Virgins from those inconceivable pleasures, Mat. 25.10. with c. 8, 11,
12 Psalm. 16.11.
and joys which are at Gods right hand for evermore.

2. The pain of sense; Depart from me says Christ, whither may the damed say?
why from my face into the fire of Hell; not a purifying, but a tormenting fire;
in the last verse called everlasting fire; Mat. 13.30. (...). Chrysostom. Hom.. 31.
in Romans 16.
in my Text [the fire] as more notable than any other; but what, and where this
fire is, I have only this to say negatively; neither the fire, nor place of
Hell are merely fantastical or imaginary; i.e. such only as have their being in
the operation of the mind; but positively, that both are real, such as have a
certain physical being; however Scripture gives me not a warrant distinctly and
demonstratively to particularize of what kind, and where. Some style this more
gross part of Hell punishment positive, vexation and torment, considering it
concretely; yet abstractively considered, even the pain of sense may be
privative; as these torments deprive a man of that due perfection which would
otherwise be in him; ex. gr. though the sensible vexation of a man in a
Cauldron of scalding liquor be in the materality of it positive; Salamandra est
animal vivens in igne, tamen non comburitur. Isid.
yet the formal nature of that punishment precisely considered, lies in this,
that the scalding takes away from the man some perfection belonging to him,
else the scalding liquor would be no more an evil to him, than fire is to the
Salamander; Exercitatione de malo.
for it is impossible (says the Learned Barlow) that should be evil to a man,
which does not in some respect make him worse; as that which does not deprive
him of any perfection cannot do, and by consequent could not be evil; this I
only premise, that I may not be understood by any to have a mind to cavil.

There are three things requisite to constitute the nature of this pain of
sense. Requisite to the pain of sense three things.


[1.] The real presence of all evil; that which some term the position of all
horror, anguish and vexation; some resemblance we may have of it, by supposing
what the person sustains, who is cast into a furnace of scalding lead or
brimstone, still remembering that all the tortures which ever seized upon all
the senses of any body in this world, are but shadowy resemblances of this more
sensible part of Hell torments.

[2.] The strong impression of vindictive justice, Omnis poena, si i^sta ^st,
peccati poena est. Aug.
in reference unto sin, else the most vehement tormentings could not properly
be punishments; when one undergoes the cutting off a rotten leg, ne pars
sincera trahatur, that pain is not properly called a punishment, because it is
not inflicted for any f^ult, it is for cure, not in vengeance; but in Hell
torment, which is the execution of the just wrath of God, the Lord Chief
Justice comes in flaming fire, inflicting vengeance, 2 These. 1.8. (...),
infligens ultionem. Bez.
which relates to the fault, by reason it is fit that the punishment be
apportion'd to the fault in the execution of justice, as maybe more plain in
this case. Suppose Titius for Treason should justly deserve death, yet so, that
none living know his crime; then imagine Caesar in a rage take away Titius his
life, ^his crime of Treason all this while neither considered, nor discovered,
why! the death of Titius (though in it self it be a natural evil, yet) in order
to Caesar is no proper punishment, sit'h it is not the execution of justice in
reference to the crime; however it may be so in respect of God, Latet culpa ubi
non latet poena. Aug.
who k^ew not only that Titius so dyed, but that he deserved so to dye; this
may illustrate that in the punishment of the damned, there is an impression of
Divine justice; and therefore because of Gods just judgment, this punishment
is called the damnation of Hell Mat. 23.12. Quia Deus ex ^u^icio hanc poenam
^impiis infligit. Gerh.
thereby noting the keen impression of Gods wrath, wherein not only the
Almighty Punisher does respect sin; but the finite creature who is punished,
knows that he is cast into the furnace of fire for his sin against the
infinite God; whereupon there is further requisite to this punishment:

[3.] That the party punished have an acute feeling himself spoiled of all his
perfections; a lively sense of all that he is deprived of, by reason of his
sin, otherwise it would not properly be punishment, as I hinted before; the
damned has always quick and terr^ble apprehension of an angry God impressing
his wrath, and persisting to deprive him of all that glorious good was offered
to him; instead of which (that being refused) he is more and more assured of
lying in a consuming fire, that is, and will be continually burning up all
those perfections he had; not purging, but plaguing him worse and worse; yet
not so, that the flames devour his essence, or that the torments utterly, i.
e. absolutely destroy his substance; but that they are continually feeding upon
all that it should otherwise have been, his simple being nevertheless
remaining; thus of the punishment it self both of loss and pain.

The two properties of Hell punishiment. 1. Extremity.
(2.) The Properties of Hell punishment inseparable from it, are its Extremity.
and Eternity.


Extremity; it infinitely exceeds all other punishment; no pain so extreme as
that of the damned, who sustain the absence of all good, and the presence of
all evil; all the cruelties in the world cannot possibly make up any horror
comparable to the horrors of Hell.

I noted in the Analysis of my Text, that the Extremity of Hell Torments is
aggravated by (...). Beza. Annot.
their inflammation, [the fire.] the preparation of them [the prepared.] the
association in them, [the Devil and his Angels.]


There is a great force and Emphasis in these praepositive Articles, in the
Original thus repeated, demonstrating and defining this punishment to exceed
all others in its Extremity.

[1.] The grievous inflammation, setting forth the extremity of these torments;
fire is the most furious of all Elements; but this is the fire, hotter than
Elementary or culinary fire, importing the torments to be of a more violent
nature than any other. Geogr. l. 16. Col. 764. Cit. Full.
Strabo relates that there is a Lake near Gadara in Galilie, infected with such
malignant and pestiferous qualities, that it scaldeth off the skin of
whatsoever is cast into it; yet this is not comparable to the fiery Lake of
brimstone, where the extreme anguish of the damned is.

(1.) Most exquisite; Damnati exquisitissimos dolores sentient, quibus majores
non dari nec c^gitari possunt. Gerh. loc. com. Long. four last things.
all the exquisite torments that ever were heard of, cannot express it to the
full; Nebuchadnezzars fiery furnace could but cause horrors like flea-bitings,
in comparison of those the damned in hell do suffer in every sense; the little
Monasyllable Hell, though it is easily over-look't by many at present, yet it is
the most unexpressibly grievous Rack in the world. They say Gehenne (which we
translate Hell in the New Testament) does in French signify a Rack, which (as
the Strappado) is thought to be the most exquisitely tormenting; those terrible
allusions to Tophet, 2 King. 23.18. with Isa 30.32, 33.
to the shreeks and yellings of Children sacrificed there, are but shadowy
representations of their pain who dye the second death.

(2.) Intolerable; soul and body shall be ever supported by God in being, but
neither be able to avoid, nor yet endure hell-pain; if Cain the foreman coming
within the sight of hell here, cry out, My punishment is greater than I can
bear; Genesis 4.13. Prove. 18.14. Psalm. 88.15. -- 90.11. Hos. 13.8. Rev. 19.20.
Heb. 11.36.
(for a wounded spirit who can bear?) if the apprehensions of hell even
distract the Psalmist; if an angry God but meeting the soul of a sinner, rent
the caul of his heart, how will he be able to bear burning in the Lake with
fire and brimstone? hanging, sting, racking, roasting, suffering under harrowes
and sawes of Iron, fleaing of the skin, scratching off the flesh with Thorns,
etc. unheard of merciless miseries, are nothing to the unsufferable tortures
of Hell. I grant there are degr^es of torment in hell, yet the least is int
lerable, whether,

1. We look up on the Omnipotent hand of God executing the vengeance of eternal
fire; ah, it is a fearful thing to fall into the hands of the living God, Heb.
10.30, 31.
the Judge to whom vengeance belongs, who takes the wicked immediat^ly into his
own hands, as if none else were strong enough to inflict the fierceness of his
wrath. Or,

Romans 9.19.
2. Look down on the impotent punished creature, no way able to make any
resistance, or lift up his head under the burden of divine indignation, but
must crouch under it; for alas! what can a leaf driven too and fro do against
the blast of Gods displeasure! how should the weak back of a poor feeble man,
bear the pile of fire and much wood, Isa. 30.33. -- 33.14. Job 20.26.
which the breath of the Lord does kindle? who among us shall dwell with
everlasting burning? they that suffer least in hell will find the torments
intolerable. So that when our Savior says, Mat. 10.15.
'I will be more tolerable for Sodom and Gomorrah in the day of judgment,
than for that City which despises the offers of Gospel Grace, he means not
that any damned Sodomites should find hell-paines tolerable at all; for Jude
writing by the same spirit that Matthew did, says, They suffer the vengeance
of eternal fire; Jude ver. 10.
and eternal fire with a vengeance can be no tolerable pain. Christ will come
in flaming fire taking vengeance on those that know not God, 2 These. 1.8.
as well as on those that ^bey not the Gospel; yet the disobedient and
despisers of the Gospel (especially as to the pain of loss) shall be more
fearfully plagued than Sodomites. If Turks and Tartars be damned, than
debauched Christians (as their sins have been double died, so) shall be double
damned, deeper in hell, by reason here they were nearer to heaven; Ingentia.
beneficia flagitia suplicia


if there be heinous sins against wonderful mercies, they must needs bring
tremendous pun^shments; oh, consider it England, City and Country, Courtiers
and Commonwealths men. Again, the anguish is

John 3.36. Rev. 20.10. Jam. 2.13. Ezekiel. 7.4. Job 7.9. Isa. 5.14. Luke 16.26.
Vestigia nulla retro^sum; cradumque retro slectere hand unquam sinunt umorae
tenaces. Senec. Herc. Furens. Rev. 1.18.
(3.) Easeless and remediless; the wrath of God abides; in hell no cooling fits,
but continued burnings, the worm perpetually gnawing, the same torment
remaining both day and night; there no Remission of sin, dismission of pain,
intermission of sense, or permission of comfort; but judgment without mercy,
mischief without measure, crying without compassion, pain without pity, sorrow
without succor, bitter lamentation without any consolation, descending without
hopes of ascending; the Prisoners being locked up in this dungeon without
possibility of release, no passage out of this darksome fiery Pit of no ease,
where the Prisoners would not live, yet cannot die, nor get out; Christ the
Supreme Keeper, who has the Key in his own hand, affirms with an
asseveration (if thou be cast in) Veri^y thou shall not come out, till thou
have paid the uttermost farthing Mat. 5.25. with Luke 12.58. Mark 12.42.
nay, cue or mite, which will never be.

(4.) Universal, and various, both in respect of the subject tormented, and
the objects tormenting; even as the toothach, stone, gout, fever, plague, etc.
concurring to torment one man in every part; every power and faculty, Isa.
66.24. Romans 2.9. Mat. 22.13. -- 13.42. -- 25.30.
sense and member, both of soul and body, will be filled with anguish and
vexation, within and without; the never-dying worm of conscience, and
unspeakable tribulation that follows upon it, manifested in weeping and
wailing, and gnashing of teeth, to confound the eye, and perplex the mind; as
all have joined in sin, so they shall in suffering; the soul indeed was
ringleader in sin, and so will be chief in suffering, Psalm. 120.4. Job 6.4.
and -- 20.25.
when the sharp arrows of the Almighty are within, and the poison thereof
drinks up the spirit. Thus of the inflammation greatened by the four
Ingredients.

[2.] The preparation further aggravates the extremity of the torments; the
Text acquaints us that it is [the prepared] fire by way of transcendency, as if
the wisdom of God had devised on purpose the most tormenting temper for this
formidable fire, Deuteronomy. 32.22. Isa. 30.33.
which the Lord kindled in his anger of old; In Gods secret purpose 'twas
prepared from eternity, and actually made ready for the fallen Angels when they
fell from God. The Talmudists conceive, that by reason to the things created in
the second day, there is not added (as in the rest) that it was good; Genesis 1.6,
7, 8. Buxtorf. Talm. Lexic.
therefore the fire of hell was then created; but to leave such a conjecture,
we are certain it is the prepared fire, and that for the Devil and his Angels;
Calvin, Beza, Baxter, etc.
not as if it were not prepared also for wicked men, but chiefly to show 'twas
first assigned to the Devils, to note the extremity and inevitableness of the
torment of the wicked, who have the Devil and his Angels for their companions.
Hence,

[3.] The Association, in hell, the Devil and his Angels contribute to the
extremity of the damneds punishment: Mat. 12.24. -- 10.25. -- 9.34. Rev. 12.13.
John 12.31. -- 14.30.
The Devil so called, because he first calumniated God to Eve, as elsewhere
Satan, because the capital enemy of God and man. It should seem there is one
notorious Beelzebub in the Kingdom of darkness, over the rest of evil
spirits, who may be called his Angels, probably by reason he being one above
the rest, Facti perduelles ad exemplum sui principis, atque adeo semen illius
audiunt. Dr. Arrows. Tactica sacra. l. 1. c. 2. Sect. 4. Mat. 18.34. 1 Pet. 5.8.
(as Head of the Faction) drew multitudes of others into the party, who with
him sinned, and fell; but because the distinction in the o^der of Angels is not
so evident, we may take it of the evil Angels coll^ctively, rather than
distributively, miserable comforters, indeed tormenting companions. Oh! think
how sad it is to be chained with the Devil in his fiery fetters, shut up in the
darkest den with the roaring Lion, with ravenous Wolves, to live in a Nest
among stinging freckled Adders, having your loins encircled with the girdles
of Serpents, to lie in a Pit amongst millions of ugly to^ds, to be everywhere
bitten with venomous Asps, to have Cockatrites killing you with their eyes,
Dragons spitting fire in your faces, Vipers eating out your bowels; and then
tell me, if the companions in hell, (who are infinitely worse than these) can
be desirable, that we should any of us be so mad (as too many are) to choose
them, rather than the Society of Saints. Wier speaks of a Charmer at Satlsburg,
Moore Atheism. l. 3. c. 2.
that when in the sight of the people he had charmed a company of Serpents into
a Ditch, and killed them, at last there came one huge one, far bigger than the
rest, which leaped upon him, winded about his waste like a girdle, and rolled
him into the Ditch, and so killed the Charmer himself in the Conclusion. Alas!
how may men and women can sport themselves with the Devils temptations here,
till at last the grand Old Serpent come out with his strength, Rev. 12.9.
Peccato Diabolorum nullum paratum remedium.
and roll them into the pit of hell, where they shall live in misery, and lie
sprawling with no other companions but the Devil and his cursed fiends, who
will be continually tormenting one another, and stinging them with horrors to
all eternity! Hence,

2. Eternity.
The second Proprety of this punishment is its Eternity, in the Text (...), the
everlasting fire; and verse 46. everlasting punishment, which is there directly
opposed to eternal life, that blessed state of the righteous which will never
have an end; and therefore according to the Rules and Maxims of reason
Oppositorum est eadem scientia. and Oppositorum sunt opposita consequentia.
Can. Logic.
, does necessarily import a punishment of the same duration that the reward is;
now that is acknowledged by the Socinians themselves, to be eternal, absolutely
so, as never to end; and therefore the punishment cannot, but be so too. The
damned are in everlasting chains of darkness, suffering no less than the
vengeance of eternal fire, in the blackness of darkness for ever, Jude ver. 7,
6, 13. Rev. 14.7.
and their smoke goes up for ever and ever. A part post, it is an interminable
duration; as beyond measure in extremi^y, Psalm. 90.2.11.
so beyond time in eternity; None but he who was from everlasting to
everlasting, can fully describe this most permanent duration. They that by the
help of the best spiritual and rational prospective, can see furthest into it,
will be forced to cry out, O the Ocean that cannot be looked over, the depth
that cannot be fathomed! there is never an exit to this saddest Tragedy, this
eternal judg^ment; God sets an end to all other darkness, Heb. 6.2. Job 28.3.
Mat. 3.17.
but none to the darkness of hell; when the wrath of God is come upon the
ungodly, 'twill still be wrath to come; this fiery durance is not measureable
by our petite particles of time; alas! it is for ever, woe! woe! woe! O Eternity!
Eternity! Mat. 23. (...), q. d. (...). Drexelius, Gerhard^, Birkebock, etc.
Eternity! this word ever, ever, everlasting, will even break the hearts of the
damned. Mark what I say, suppose with me, (after others) the whole world were a
Mountain of Sand, and a little Wren com^ but once every thousandth year to
fetch one grain of Sand, what inc mprehensible millions of millions (not to be
numbered by a finite being) would be spent before this supposed wonderful
Mountain could be fetched away? (when it would be millions beyond reckoning,
before the sands in an hourglass could be carried away after this rate; but
six thousand years, and so but six Sands would be gone since the Creation of
the world) Well! but supposing yet this wonderful astonishing thing should be
effected; if a damned person should stay in torment so long, and then have an
end of his woe, it were some comfort; but when that immortal bird should
(according to the presupposed portion) have carried away this Mountain ten
thousand times over, Alas! alas! and woe! his anguish and torment will be as
great as ever it was, and he no nearer coming out, than he was the very first
moment he entered into Hell. Beloved, think seriously on this sad supposition, I
know not whether your hearts tremble, but I am sure mine does when I dwell on
these things in my thoughts: Oh! who are so flout-hearted among us, Isa. 33.14.
that they can dwell with everlasting burnings? that they can strugle with this
wrath to come, which will never be overcome, never come to an end? believe it
friends! the worm dies not, the fire is not quenched; they are not mine, bur
the most sure (yet sad) words with which the most Evangelical Prophet Isaiah
shuts up his long and sweet Prophecy; Isa. 66.24. John 7.46.
and you know our Lord Jesus, who spoke as never man spoke, did frequently
utter his mind in the same style. Thus for Explication.

II. C^nfirmation.
II. For Confirmation, That the wicked shall depart from Christ, into an
extremity and eternity of torment, as has been descr^bed, take these
Particulars, which laid together are cogent.

forementioned Explication grounded upon evident Texts of Scripture (not
wrested from their genuine meaning) does imply the quod sit, i. e. the
existency of the Subject, viz. that there is an Hell, as the basis or
Hypothesis upon which not only the quid, but quale is founded in Scripture; i.
e. the essence and essential properties, Non entis nec est essentia nec modus
essentiae Maxim.
viz. that there is a real punishment appointed to some, consisting in the pain
of loss and sense, both extreme and eternal; for of that which is not, there
can neither be essence, nor manner of being described; but from what has been
said, you see there are both predicates in Scripture answering to the
Questions, what pain? and what manner of pain? and therefore it must
necessarily follow, that there is some subject on which they are affirmed, and
to which they do appertain; Certum est vivere omne quod dolet, doloremque omnem
nisi in re vivente esse non posse. l. 21. de Civ. Dei. c. 3.
to this purpose Augustine says truly, That whatsoever is grieved does live or
exist; and that there cannot possibly be any grief, but there must be some real
subject to sustain it; if then the Scripture speaks of an Eternal pain, it does
certainly suppose some must endure it.

The beams of natural light in some of the Heathens, have made such impressions
on the heart or natural conscience, that several of them have confused notions
of an Hell, as well as of a judgment to come. Profound Bradwardine and others,
have produced many proofs concerning their apprehensions of this Truth Bradw.
de causa Dei. l. 1. c. 1. Corol. 39. Raynaud. Theol. Not. Disp. 8. Q. 4 Windel.
Phys. Part 1. Sect. 2. Justin. Hist. Adrianus.
; what made the Heathen Emperor when he lay a dying, cry out? O animula vagula
blandula, etc. O my little wretched wandering soul, whither art thou now
hastening, etc. Oh, what will become of me? live I cannot, dye I dare not! but
some discoveries of the wrath to come. Surely, it was not merely the
dissolution of nature, but the sad consequent that so startled and terrified
Belshazzar, when he saw the handwriting on the Wall; Dan. 5.5, 6. Heb. 2.15.
guilty man when conscience is awaked, fears an after-reckoning, when he shall
be paid the wages of his crying sins, proportionable to his demerits. Tert
adversus Gentes. p. 78. and de Resurrect. c. 3. Chrysostom. Hom. 8. in 1 These.
sub fin. (...), etc. (...), Plat in Phaed. p. 52. Edit. Franc. 1602. (...). Ita
ille in Gorgia sub fin. Trismeg. c. 10. Ascelp.
Hence Tertullian in this matter appealing to the consciences of the Gentiles,
and after him Chrysostom affirms, that Poets and Philosophers, and all sorts
of men speaking of a future retribution, have said that many are punished in
Hell. Plato is very plain, that whoever are not expiated but profane, shall go
into Hell to be tormented for their wickednesses, with the greatest, most
bitter, and terrible punishments for ever in that Prison in Hell. And
Trismegistus affirms concerning the souls going out of the body defiled, that
it is tossed too and fro with e ernal punishments; and another Lucian. de luctu.
(...), etc. (...). Tart^rus horriseros eructans fontibus oestus. Lucr.
Tartareae seeds and formedabile regnum mortis inexpletae. Stat, Viscera
praebebat Titius Lanianda. Ovid. Perfidus Ixion; Horat. Saxum ingens volvunt
al^i, radi^sque rotarum Districti pendent: sedet aeternumque sedebit Infelix
Theseus, Ph^^gy^sque miserrimus omn s Admonet, and magna testatur voce per
umbras: Discite justitiam moniti and non ^en^e^e divos. Virgil. Nec mort is
poenas mors altera siniat hujus, Horaque erit tantis ultima nulla malis. Ovid.
, that it was the comm n opinion among them, that the wicked were held in
chains by Pluto (so they call the Prince of Devils) in chains which cannot be
loosed. 'Twould take up much time, and not be so fit for your Christian ears to
mention what conceits the Poets have of Tartarus (i. e. in plain English Hell)
and the judgment there, wherein for want of Scripture Revelation, they are
much out in their fictions concerning the manner of this punishment; yet these
imaginations of theirs, give some evidence to the thing it self written in
their consciences, about which the Word of God does inform us more fully and
clearly. Every ones guilty conscience (not seared and stifled) calls for our
assent to this same Doctrine; the secret checks in our own bosom, do sometime
affright and appale us, even anticipating torments, and giving the sinner an
earnest of that sum of misery (which is the wages of sin) the payment whereof
shall never have an end; Romans 6. ult.
so that every conscious wretch may find and feel such a worm crawling in his
own breast, which unless it be killed by the Physician, who only cures
sin-stung souls with his own blood, will never dye. The very Turks speak of the
house of perdition, Alcoran Mahom. c. 14. p. 160. etc. 20. p. 198.
and affirm that they who have turned Gods grace into impiety, shall abide
eternally in the fire of hell, and there be eternally tormented.

Thirdly, It cannot but be equitable, that the wicked who despised everlasting
happiness, should suffer eternal miseries: They would not be heirs of an
Everlasting Kingdowe; Joh. 5.40. with Isa. 9.6, 7. and Dan. 7.14, 27. and Rev.
14.6. Mat. 2.12, 46 and -- 18.8. Joh. 5.39, 40. with Jude Epist. ver. 21.
Factus est malo dignus aeterno, qui hoc in se peremit bonum, quo esse posset
aeternum. August. Dan. 12.2.
and therefore no marvel they are everlastingly shut out. They slight and
refuse Gods eternal mercy, and the honor which the Heirs of glory do accept of
upon the terms of the Gospel; and therefore they must arise to shame and
everlasting contempt, and undergo eternal misery, according to the terms of the
Law. For

Fourthly, The violation of those everlasting obligations which lie upon them
unto God, do demerit an answerable punishment. Sit'h the wicked have trampled
upon the blood of the Covenant, Heb. 10.28, 29.
and abused the many favors God tendered to them to make them meet for glory
(by which they have fitted themselves for destruction) it is but reasonable they
should be punished with the mist and blackness of darkness for ever, Romans 9.22,
23. 2 Pet. 2.17. Jude ver. 13. Romans 1.18, 25. Isa. 60.19. Rev. 14.6. Romans 16.26.
who by their profaneness and errors, did seek to cloud the beams of Gods
infinite goodness, Everlasting light, and eternal truth. To draw to a period,

Fifthly, If wicked impenitents after this life, shall not be punished by God
with everlasting torments, then something must hinder Either on Gods part, or,
Theirs.


If on Gods part, then it is either,

will not: Now what his will is, you have heard revealed, and may know further
if you consult the Scripture: My Text acquaints you plainly with Christ's mind,
and that is the mind of God. Or

cannot, which to affirm, were to deny his Omnipotency, to say he is not God.
Or

dare not; what were this, but to suppose the Sovereign Judge upon the Bench to
be (as it were) a cowardly Underling to the trembling Prisoner at the Bar! when
his very breath can kindle the fiery River of brimstone into which he
sentenceth every impenitent Malefactor. Isa. 30.33.
Or

with bribes; Genesis 18.25.
but shall not the Judge of all the World do right?

If the hindrance be on the wickeds part, then I conceive it must be either

living and sinning but a short time here on earth, does not deserve eternal
punishment in Hell; for the evil of punishment should be but commensurate to
the evil of sin: Now there is no proportion betwixt finite and infinite. I
confess this pretense is ready to shake the faith of many in this point; but
if the ground of it be rightly understood, it may confirm the point; for

(1.) If the wicked had lived always, they would always have separated
themselves from God by sinning against him, and never have repented of their
sin, nor been weary of sinning; neither then will God be weary of plaguing, or
repent of punishing: The Schoolmen from Augustine argue, Pe^cant in aeterno
suo, ergo puniuntur in ae^erno Dei; Aquin. Supl. Scot. in Sent. Thom. 1.2 dae.
Q. 99. l. ult. Q 87. Arts. 5.
which will never have an end, but remain while God is God. This may be
illustrated by a similitude; as men addicted to pleasure, do in the night time
eagerly and earnestly pursue their game at Chesse, Tables, or the like, by an
inch of candle, which unexpectedly goes out, would questionless have played
willingly all night had the light lasted: So wicked men they desire to spend
all their inch of time in the pursuit of their sins, if that would continue,
they would continue in sin, and not leave sinning, wherefore they shall not
leave suffering; had they lived for ever here, they would have sinned for ever;
Rev. 9.6.
but in Hell, where they would not live, they must be kept alive, because of
their will of sin upon Earth: Oh! wicked wretch, is it not a righteous thing
with God (what think thou? Ad magnam justitiam judicantis pertinet, ut
nunquam careant supplicio qui in hac vita nunquam voluerunt carere peccato.
Gregor.
) that thy punishment for thy sin should never cease in Hell; who should thou
live for ever here, thou would be an Eternal standing provocation to his
Majesty? I deny not, but the wicked will sin Eternally in Hell, yet I lay not
the stresse on that, (which some do) as the reason of their Eternal punishment,
but because they ^^ven ceased, nor would have ceased to transgress Gods Law,
Genesis 2.17. Romans 6. ult. and -- 5.12. Gal. 3.9.
whiles upon earth; and Eternal punishment was denounced against the first
transgression, which every one that lives and dies in sin, is not only guilty
of, but will not repent of; he would not be reconciled to God here, Isa. 30.15.
Matthew. 23.37. John 5.40. Ezekiel. 33.11.
and God will not be reconciled to him hereafter, but will say to him always,
as Tyberius once said to one that requested death, rather than long
imprisonment; Suet. in vita. Tyber.
nondum tecum redii in gratiam; I am not yet reconciled to thee, that I should
show thee such a favor.

Prove. 8.36. Deuteronomy. 30.19. John 6.40, 54. and 3.36. Ezra 8.22. Hos. 13.9.
(2.) The sinner has but his choice and option; if he be plagued with Eternal
death, it is no other than that which he preferred before Eternal life. The Lord
sets life and death before us, (as by Moses the typical, so by Christ the true
Messiah) if we will choose Christ, and accept of him, we may have Eternal life;
if not, we must be sure of Eternal death; he that refuses the Eternal weight
of glory in one end of the scale, chooses Eternal punishment in the other end;
as our first Parents did choose the curse by their voluntary refusing of the
blessing; which bad choice of theirs, laid obnoxious unto Eternal pain both
themselves and their posterity, who cannot complain of God for inflicting the
death they are by corrupt nature liable to; since besides their choice in their
first parents, and in their own persons, they who live under the Gospel have as
great a mercy tendered by the second Adam, as Eternal death is a grievous
punishment; yea, the Atheist (who (as 'twas said of Antiochus Epiphanes) takes
more pains to go to Hell, Buntings Itinerarie.
than some others to go to Heaven) must confess that he deserves his wages of
Eternal death as his Pay, since he has toyled and drudged all his life long in
the Devils Service, only to fit himself for misery.

(3.) The Schoolmen have observed from the Philosopher, Aquia. Supl. Q. 99.
Art. 1.
that the punishment ought to be levied according to the dignity of him against
whom the offense is committed. He is more severely punished, who gives his
Sovereign a box on the ear, than he that does so to his equal: Now wicked men
(and that without Repentance) sin against the Eternal God by the violation of
his Honorable Law, which he resolves to magnisie: Isa. 42.21.
And as they ought not in their own case (so they are unqualified) to be
competent Judges of their Own offenses; (sit'h they cannot see the thousandth
part of that evil there is in the least sin) and therefore unfit to apportion
the punishment which ought to be levied by the Judge of all the World, (who
knows what is meet, Genesis 18.25.
and will do nothing but what is right) proportionable to the offense committed
against the supreme Majesty; Peccatum in Deum crimen laesae Majestatis: --
Adsit Regula peccatis quae paenas irroget aequas. Horatius.
for where there is satisfaction required, there must be proportion, which
would not at all be here in this case, without some kind of infiniteness; and
because that cannot be found in any mere creature in value, it must necessarily
be in duration; for if after millions of years it could ever be said the damned
had fully satisfied Gods justice, it might be said they shall be set free, as
the prisoner from the Goal, having paid the debt; Luke 12:58, 59
(a thing impossible) but because the sufferings of the damned (which are all
the satisfaction they can give infinite justice) in regard of the subject,
being finite, Ex part subjecti.
and consequently not of nifinite value, they must be so in duration; at least
a part post, as to the future, for the defect of satisfaction in the temporal
finite punishment of any mere creature.

Excep. If it be excepted, Excep.
neither by the Eternal punishment of men is Gods justice satisfied; for then
this punishment would not be Eternal, Contradictio in Adjecto.
(which is a contradiction in the very thing it self) if ever it could be said
of Gods justice now it is satisfied.

Repl. I Reply; [1.] Let it be very well considered, Repl.
whether Gods justice, being infinite, and consequently an essential Attribute
in God, does not require from man (upon his delinquency) that satisfaction
which is of infinite value, Infiniti valoris.
he the party offended being essentially of infinite dignity. Now such a
satisfaction, i. e. of infinite value, could only be made by Christ, who (being
the Surety of the Covenant, and suffered in our stead) is God-man in one
person, (...). Acts 20.28.
and gave plenary satisfaction unto God.

John 1.14. 1 Timothy 3.16. Romans 3.25.
[2.] Though Eternal punishment may not be called a satisfaction made or given
to the party offended, yet it is that which the party offending must ever be in
making or giving, Parti laesae.
(by the order of the Supreme Judge who is to hear the cause and apportion the
punishment to the fault) because he the delinquent wanting that infiniteness
in dignity of person, which does bear a proportion to the dignity of the party
offended, must make this up by an infinite duration of punishment, which may
perhaps in some sort be termed satisfaction performed to the Law, it being the
payment of the whole in the obligation; Satisfactio legi praestita. Peysolutio
totius quod est in obligatione.
for upon defailance of paying the debt of duty and obedience, what more is
required of the debt of penalty and suffering to be paid, Debitum officii.
Debitumsupp li cii.
than death in its full latitude, temporal, spiritual, and Eternal? so that in
this respect it is no error to call it satisfaction; but if we speak of a
complete satisfaction made to the party offended, Parti offensae.
it must be granted that none but the only Son of God did, or could give it;
thus for the first great impediment pretended in regard of the Subject. Or

It is because there is a possibility of freedom from the Prison of Hell; and
then this must be either by Covenant and Compact, which whoever affirms,
proferat tabulas; for it is fan y, not faith which believes any such thing
without the written Word. Or by commutation; and what place for such a fancy?
Is any so absurd as to think there are any in Hell who belong to God, and in
Heaven who belong to the Devil? that there should be matter for such a
Chimaera, such a strange fiction? Or by force, and what were this but to
overpower Omnipotency? Or by fraud, and what were this but to out-wit Divine
Wisdom, and to put a trick upon him whose understanding is infinite? Or by a
price paid, and what is it that offending man can lay down as a sufficient
compensation or satisfaction to an offended God, who is infinite, for the
injury done unto him, which God should accept of, 1 Samuel 2.25. Godw. Romans
Antiq. l. 1. Sect. 2.^ ^. Ephesians. 5.6.
is hard to fancy; and woeful experience (if nothing else will) may convince
vain man, that it is impossible to procure. Or by manumission; now this does
belong only to obedient servants, not to ch^ldren of disobedience. Or,

3. The impediment is because there is an impossibility in regard of the
subject (as is pretended) of undergoing torments of an eternal duration by a
finite creature; Ex part subjecti
and therefore all the Hell, Socinians, etc. grant, Socinus, Racov. Cat.
Crellius, Bidle, Richardson, etc. 2 Thessalonians. 1.8, 9.
is Annihilation, by reason it is said, The wicked shall be destroyed. But to
remove this, remember

(1.) The same infinite power of God which preserves Angels and men vessels of
mercy, to the glorifying of his grace, Romans 9.22, 23.
can preserve Devils and wicked men vessels of wrath, to the glorifying of his
justice; and God will do so, by reason his mercy annot contradict his justice
and truth; Christ who at the last day will judge others for unmercifulness,
best knows what it is to be merciful; and it concerns us to credit the verity
of his sentence in my Text, though upon harkening to the shallow reasonings of
flesh and blood we may be apt to apprehend severity in it: but as Gregory says
truly, He that cannot find out a reason of Gods doings, may easily find in
himself a reason why he cannot find it out.

(2.) The destruction mentioned, is rather in a continual fieri, than in facto
esse, in a perpetual doing, never finally done; the living of the wicked in
hell, is a dying life, and their dying is a living death; one arm of Gods
power is always bearing up what the other is always beating down.

(3.) They shall be destroyed in a moral, not in a natural sense; a man that is
dead in Law, may live a natural life, but is deprived of that which before was
due to him; the wicked have their b ings in hell, but are deprived of all that
which makes to their well-beings; sequestered from the fruition of God, and all
comfort with him, who is the Fountain of life; instead of which they cannot be
freed from all that tends to their ill-beings. Christ says expressly, they must
depart into everlasting fire, and everlasting punishment; therefore certainly
not to be annihilated, but to abide and remain in torment. For

[1.] He that shall be everlastingly punished, must needs remain in being
everlastingly; his punishment cannot continue when he is not; Non entis nulla
sunt praedicata. Ejus quod falsum est nulla potest esse scientia. (...). Ut
Philopon. in Arist.
he that has an end, cannot be punished without end after he cease t, be; so
that if the wicked should be annihilated, or absolutely destroyed, and deprived
of being, then nothing should be tormented with the never-dying worm; (if the
worm dye not, it must live in some subject) and nothing should dwell in
unquenchable fire, as the Scripture affirms there shall. Again,

[2.] Men as well as Devils, may have their essence and being eternally
preserved, and yet not inherit eternal life, but remain in a moral condition of
eternal death; for eternal life promised and purchased in Scripture, does not
only note our physical or natural being in life, but chiefly our moral
well-being in bliss and happiness; and therefore eternal death does not deny
wicked men being naturally alive, but their being morally alive; they live
indeed, but miserably, in a condition absent from all comfortable good, present
with all evil; there shall be weeping and wailing, and gnashing of teeth for
ever; Mat. 8.12.
therefore there shall some be who shall so weep, etc. and they are the wicked
that shall still remain in these remaining torments beyond expression, which
are called the Second death; not that this death is a consumption of their
persons, an absolute wasting of their substances, as to the continuance of
their beings (for though they seek to have their beings destroyed, yet they
shall not find their desire accomplished) yet as it is said of Roger Bishop of
Salisbury, Revel. 9.6. Vivere noluerit, mori nescierit. Nulla major aut pejor
mors quam ubi non moritur. mors. Aug.
in King Stephens time (he would not have lived (that life in Prison) yet could
not dye; they would be annihilated and cannot) but this which is the worst
death, is a deprivation of all the comfortable good of life natural, spiritual,
and eternal, with an infliction of the greatest evil, the wicked are then
su^ported and capacitated to lie groaning under for ever.

Thus for the Confirmation of the Point, wherein we have had likewise (implied)
a confutation of the most considerable Adversaries to this infallible Doctrine
of Hell, there remains

III. A short Application to be enlarged in your meditations; learn hence, III.
Application.


fear sin, and its sad consequent, Hell; the clear evidence of an eternity and
extremity of hell-tortures, should stir up in us an holy affection of fearing
God, and being afraid (by reason we are guilty) of eternal vengeance; the
truth is, we should be so afraid of sin and hell, as to be afraid of nothing
else, if we would copy out in our practice, the Lesson Christ commands; Mat
10.28.
viz. Fear not them which can kill the body, but are not able to kill the soul,
but rather fear him who is able to destroy both soul and body in hell; yea, I
say unto you, Fear him; Christ repeats his precept, Luke 12.5.
that it may not be forgotten; an urgent necessity lies upon us to pass the
time of our sojourning here in fear; 1 Pet. 1.17. Phil. 2.12.
we must work out our own salvation in fear and trembling; we may, we ought to
fear the pain of losing the sight of Jehovahs blessed face and favor; for
this is a filial affection consistent with the greatest love; he that truly
loves God, Res est soliciti plena timoris Amor. Jeanes Schol. and Practic.
Divin.
will solicitously fear nothing so much as to displease and lose him. Yea, and
(though we may not with an irrationl, or selvish, uneffectual, slavish fear,
(which dishonour-God) fear the pain of sense; yet) because hell torments are
such extreme and eternal violations of the Primitive integrity of our nature,
we may and ought also with a rational fear to be afraid of the pain of sense,
but not immoderately and immeasureably more than we are afraid of sin, which is
a worse evil in its own nature, than hell it self; for all the evil that is in
hell, does arise from sin as the mother of it. Oh! if we should but hear the
bitter complaints of those suffering in Hell for their sin^, I need not then (I
might hope) persuade the stoutest to be afraid of sin and hell; for our ears
would even tingle, our hearts tremble, our blood curdle, and our spirits as it
were congeal to ye, at the noise of their most horrible lamentations. Learn,

flee speedily from sin by real Repentance; having this warning to fl e from
the wrath to come, which will inevitably seize upon impenitent sinners; Oh!
let us all learn of our Savior and Judge, from this consideration, to bring
forth fruits meet for Repentance; Mat. 3.7, 8, 12.
his reason is in effect the same with this Doctrine; viz. Every fruitless Tree
is cast into the fire unquenchable fire; yet of our selves we can bring forth
no acceptable fruit, till we be ingraffed into Christ the true Vine: John 15.4,
5.
Oh! let us then labor to see, and be truly sorrowful for all our sins! and
pray, Lord, Turn thou us, Jer. 31.18.
and we shall be turned from all our sins, and accept of a whole Christ for our
only Lord and Savior; oh! since we cannot wash our hands in innocence, lets be
washing them daily in the tears of true penitency; let us go to the Fountain
opened to wash in for sin, Z^ch. 13.1. Isa. 30. ult. Rev. 20.10.14, 15.21.8.
and for uncleanness, that we may not be cast into the River and Lake of fire
and brimstone; Oh! let us now bathe our souls in the blood of Christ, that
everlasting burnings may not hereafter seize upon us. Hence Learn,

Not to blame Gospel Ministers for preaching of terrors: hereby they would
stave us off from running headlong into Hell, and bring us to repentance, that
we may not be cast into that prison, where there is no place for repentance: 2
Cor. 5.11.
Knowing the terrors of the Lord we persuade men: in love to their precious
souls we are bound (being assured we must give an account) to awake our
hearers, Hebr. 13.17.
lest they forget God and be turned into hell: we dare not betray your precious
souls to gratify you at present, Psalm. 9.17.
and indulge you in your sins; as the Apostle says, -- We must not for meat
destroy the work of God; Romans 14.15.20.
for preferment, favor or respect from you at present; we dare not suffer your
immortal souls to perish without warning; oh friends, be not angry with us the
Ambassadors of Jesus Christ, when we see any of you hastening down the broad
way which leads to Hell, (as sure as we are here now) if we then cry fire!
fire! to bring you back. You have no more reason to think us your enemies for
this warning of you, and telling you the truth in love, Gal. 4.16.
than any of your children have to think the most dear and tender Parents
amongst you, were their enemies when seeing them (through carelessnesse) ready
to fall into fire or water, they should cry out, oh! take heed Children, or you
are irrecoverably lost. Learn,

Not to grudge sinners their portion in this World: David's advice should be our
practice, enforced from this very Doctrine; viz. Not to fret our selves at evil
doers, nor to be envious against the workers of iniquity; Psalm. 37.1, 2. and --
9.17. Prove. 24.20.
for they shall soon be cut down as the grass; they shall be turned into Hell;
their foolish prosperity will destroy them, their candle shall be put out, and
that in a snuff which will never cease stinking; why then should we be offended
at their prosperity here, who are reserved to an extremity and eternity of
torment hereafter! Mal. 3.15.
it is a gross mistake to call the proud happy, or to think the godly most
miserable, 1 Cor. 15.13.19
because they are here sometimes a little under a cloud. The Psalmist was
tempted to it; but the knowledge of this Doctrine in the Sanctuary, Ps.
73.3.18, 19
did soon rectify his judgment, and made him conclude that God had set them
in slippery places to be cast down into destruction, Job 20.6, 7.
and utterly consumed with terrors, and perish for ever; we had more need to
pity than repine at our wicked Neighbors, Mat. 19.24. with Luke 16.25.
having their good things here: when we consider how hard a matter it is to have
good things here with Dives, and with Lazarus too hereafter in Abraham's bosom.
Learn,

To admire, and be greatly affected with the superlative love of Christ in
undergoing that punishment in our stead, (if we will receive him for our Lord
and Savior) which will be extreme and eternal torment to all that do refuse
him. And if he be Judge, Mat. 10.14.15, 39, 40.
they who receive not his Ambassadors in his Name, are of that number: Oh! who
would not then kiss the Son, that believe the wrath of God will inflict these
eternal torments. Oh! Christians! (such I wish we may a l be in deed and truth)
let us bless and kiss this blessed Son of God, that bare for us this
insupportable wrath, Psalm. 2.12. 1 These. 1.10. Colos. 2.15. Hosea 13.14. 1 Cor.
15.54, 55. Mat. 23.14. Hebr. 2.3. Gal. 3.13. Hebr. 2.9.
even Jesus which delivered us from the wrath to come, and triumphed over
principalities, and over tho Grave and Hell; the greatness of the damnation we
are exposed to by nature, does greaten the salvation purchased by grace! Oh!
blessed Jesus! thou wast cursed here, and tasted'st the death that was
accursed; even this in thy sentence; Isa. 53.5, 7, 8. Romans 8.1. Mark 3.29. with
Heb. 6.2. and 5.9. Acts 2.24. Psalm. 116 3. John 8.51.
thou wast bruised, afflicted, and broken of God for us; but thou was taken
from Prison, and from judgment, and everlasting condemnation; for it was not
possi^le that Thou should be holden of any pains; so that though every
Believer shall see a Temporal, yet shall he never see Eternal Death, but
inherit Eternal Life.

OF HEAVEN.
MATTHEW. 25.34. Come ye blessed of my Father, inherit the Kingdom prepared for
you from the foundation of the world.


THE Description of Heaven is a work fitter for an Aaron the High Priest of the
Most High, when upon Mount Hor he is stripping himself of the vile body of sin;
or for a Moses when on the top of Nebo, after a Pisgah prospect Deuteronomy. 34.5.
(as the Jews comment) he died at the Cant. 1.2.
kiss of God, refunding that Genesis 2.7.
breath of life, and expiring his soul into the bosom of God; Nay, more fit to
be described by a pen taken from the Wing of a Cherubim, than the stammering
tongue of any mortal man. For whoever attempts to speak of an heavenly state
while himself is on earth, his discourses of that, must needs be like the dark
dreams and imaginations of a child concerning the affairs of this world, while
it self is yet swadled and cradled in the womb. Yet discourses of Heaven were
never more seasonable upon earth. When (...). Dio. Laer.
Anaxagoras was accused as not studying Politics for his Countries good, he
replied, I have a very great care of my Country, pointing up to heaven; if ever
Christians had cause to make all honest haste to heaven, it is in a sinful and a
perverse generation; when the waters cover the earth, whether should a
Dove-like soul fly, but to the Ark of God? when Gods judgments and his
Avengers of blood threaten us on every hand, what City of refuge can we run to
but the Sanctuary of God? when we know not how soon the members of Christ's body
in conformity to their Head, may be called to sweat drops of blood; it is wisdom
for us with our bitter herbs to keep the Passover, and to think on that Luke
22.12.
large upper Room, wherein we may be Feasted at the Supper of the Lamb.
Therefore with holy David, when the floods of ungodly men made him afraid,
Psalm. 18.4.
let us take the wings of a Dove, fly away, and be at rest, in that desert of
men, but Paradise of God, while we meditate on these words, Come ye Blessed,
etc.

A little before the Text, you have such a division of this world, as you shall
never see (as many divisions as there are) till you come to judgment; a Herd
of hairy, rough, lustful Goats on the left hand, which (like Pythagoras his
second number) are accursed for departing from unity, and have a sharp sentence
with the unprofitable servant, (...). Mat. 24.51.
Cut him in sunder, and appoint him his po^tion with the hypocrites. But the
sheep on the right hand, are all folded up in the arms of Christ, Come ye
blessed, etc.

In which words, you have

1. A Possession.

2. The admission into that possession.

In the Possession,

1. The nature and qualification of it, it is a Kingdom.

2. The Preparation of it, From the foundation of the World.

In the Admission,

1. The Title, and that is, Inheritance.

2. The Heirs, The blessed of my Father.

3. The formal Introduction, Come ye blessed of my Father, inherit, etc.

First, The Possession, and in that its nature and quality, it is a Kingdom;
Psalm. 47.7.
God is King of all the earth; Psalm. 97.1.
the Lord reigns, let the earth rejoice, and the multitudes of Isles be glad
thereof; for no places so subject to tempests, inundations and changes in the
air and state, as they. Every creature pays him allegiance in the K^ngdom of
his power. But the Scepter of his grace is stretched out over Zion, Rev. 14.3.
he is King of Saints, who are not only Subjects to his power, but his holy
Will, being Psalm. 110.3.
made willing in the day of his power. But yet the seeds of Rebellion are in
their hearts; but when they enter the Kingdom of his glory, they shall not only
become perfect Subjects, but Kings and Conquerours over his and their enemies;
Come enter into this Kingdom prepared for you. Now in every Kingdom erected,
there is something to be deposed, which they are to be divested of, something
to be imposed, which they are to be invested in.

First, Therefore to make way for this Kingdom, the black Regiment of errors,
ignorance, and misapprehension, shall be disbanded; though all the Subjects of
Christ's Kingdom here, are freed from 2 Pet. 2.1.
damnable heresies, and recovered from the absolute dominion of the Prince of
darkness, yet they are subject to such errors and mistakes, as may make them
troublesome not only to the Church of God, but to the worcester d. Te tullian
Montanizeth, Cyprian rebaptize h, and Cujus ingenium Ecclesiae Sacramentum.
Origin brings others from those errors himself fell into, as he did Saint
Ambro^e from the Valentinian Heresy, to the (...). Eusebius. Hist. Eccl. lib. 6.
c. 13.
Orthodox faith. Bu^ these and all other shadows on the minds of Saints shall
vanish, when the morning shall appear as the darkness of the night is routed by
the rising Sun. All those groundless scruples that now gravel tender hearts;
and Mat. 13.41.
whatever offends, shall be gathered ^ut of this Kingdom. All laborious
studies, Controversies, and Polemical Disputations, shall then have a final
determination. All subtle distinctions, Jesuitical aequivocations and evasions
(the usual masks, and genuine Vermilion of that Scarlet whore, whereby to
render the fowlest actions specious to the eye of the world) shall be then
swept away as a Refuge of lies; Death will be the (...).
molting time to deplume men of all those fantastic opinions, and Mercurian
fancies, which they now wing their heads withal; all those. Act. 9.18.
Scales of ignorance wherein they Job 41.15. and 31.
pride themselves as the Leviathan, and fling the world into aestuations, shall
then drop off their eyes; their Jer. 13.23.
Leopards spots, and Ethiopian skins contracted by too hot a Sun, and too open
a converse with the prosperities of this world, shall be taken off. And though
now upon our eyelids sits the very shadow of death, Job 16.16.
yet there the meanest understanding shall confute the ignorant determinations
of a whole Sanerdrim of Rabbi's, and look down upon all the grandeur of Humane
Policies, and reasons of State, with as scornful an eye, as we now look up with
to the meanest Cobweb in our Windows.

2. All that turbulent Rout of affections shall be cashiered; as all those
clouds of ignorance shall be blown over, so all that thunder and lightning of
passion which they involve and travel with, shall pass away. All those furious
waves which now ebb and flow in men's hearts, according to the various and
lunatic impressions of worldly interests and imaginations, which make men
storm like the winds, rage like the Seas, and foame forth their own shame,
shall be reduced to a calm; these murmuring Gadarens, and their swinish lusts
shall be buried in a dead sea. Aeolus sis affectuum tuorum Neirim^. de art
volun.
We shall hold all these Prove 30.4. Isa. 40.12.
winds in our fists, and these waves in the hollow of our hands. All those
peevish, fiery Policicks, Ecclesiastics, and blinders of natural conscience,
wherewith men sting one another in these days of sin, shall be eternally
extinguished; those mutinous commotions of spirits, which now dethrone
jugement, and conscience in men's breasts (and therefore enforce judgement-seats
without them to be set up) shall be as calmly subdued, as the Sun puts out the
fire; thunders, lightnings, pestilences, earthquakes, shake not the world so
much, as men's passions. The pride and envy of a Caesar and a Pompey, were able
to inroll three hundred thousand Heads in the dust. The impetuous motions of
these lustful affections, breed those miserable necessities men talk of; but as
Augustine says Tum fin^untur istae necessitates quum vincuntur illae
cupiditates. Aug. in Episto. 70.
, those necessities will be ended, when these lusts are conquered; then men
will be Romans 8.37. (...).
more than conquerours; and shall be able to conquer themselves, their
passions, which Victors themselves obtain not to do here. Men are now like
bruits, staked down to particular interests, humors and lusts; but then, and
not till then, Liberum arbitrium crit liberatum. Aug.
free will it self shall take up its freedom, and all those Ephesians. 2.3. (...).
Wills of the flesh, shall have a totaI and final circumcision, when this
eighth day, and great Sabbath of the Saints is come.

3. The whole body of bodily infirmities shall be shaked off. So long as the
soul wears the body, it carries an Almanac about it, by virtue of those
passions which (...). Jamb. in vi. Pyth.
button soul and body together, and convey its distempers to the mind; and the
soul on the other hand, as primarily affected with sin, as a rusty sword
infects the scabbard; but when the body called the sheath of the soul by the
Prophet Chap. 7.15. (...) vagi^^.
Daniel, shall drop off, the soul like the Genesis 3.24.
flaming sword or Cherubim rather, shall enter into the Paradise of God. How
long is the soul, that Prove. 20.27.
Candle of the Lord, in the dark Lan ho^n of the body, ere it shine at all? and
when it begins to flame forth, the Lanthorn burns; one feverish distemper or
other comes, and that is raked up as a spark in its ashes. That great Sen de
brev. vi.
Pub^ican of time, Sleep, what an Excise upon custom has it out of our lives?
and our Venture vitae Charybdis.
bellies are the graves of a great part of our days; But meats for the b^lly,
and the belly for meats, but God shall destroy both it and them; that is, as to
their present use 1 Cor. 6.13. quoad usum. Ut in carina prora puppisque, etc.
Tertul. de Resurrect.
. As in a Ship, all the Masts, Sails, Poop and Stern abide when in the Haven,
as ^hey were in the Voyage, so all the Tackling of the bo^y may remain in
heaven; Elijah dropped his Mantle, none of his clothes; so the looser humors,
dull phlegm, and melancholy, which clog us with indispositions, and make us
(...). Anton. (...). Psalm. Sept. 4.2. Psalm. 30.5.
heavy-hearted, and dull-spirited in holy duties, shall be all drawn off, and
then we shall serve God without any lassitude, fainting or tediousness;
Heaviness may endure for this night, but joy comes in that morning, when with
the Sun, Psalm. 19.5.
we shall rejoice as a Giant, to run our race.

4. All that Legion of foul spirits, with their armoury of tentations, shall
be confined for ever in their Jude 6.
chains of darkness; the Prince of this world shall be deposed when this
Kingdom takes place; the Rev. 20.3.
great old Serpent cast into the bot^omelesse pit. No Serpent shall hiss in
that Paradise. And though all this world, the Job 7.1. (...). 70
scene of his tentations, should remain after its purifying by fire, and all
creatures as man's servants be clothed with a better Livery, when their Master
is advanced; yet they could no more fasten a tentation on a Saint in glory,
then you can now shoot an arrow into the heart of the Sun. Though Satan and the
world are now always nibling at a Christians heels, that as many ej^culations
as the soul has to God, it finds as many injections from the Devil, yet the
God of peace will then finally bruise Satan under their feet. Romans 16.20.
The ground that now Lords it over men, and is the Lordship, not the man, and
plows up his heart with c^reful solicitudes, and casts its furrows, and
wrinckles in his face, shall never give Thorns and Thistles to his eyes more;
but he shall be able to serve God 1 Cor. 7.35. (...).
without any Vellications, Convulsions, Cramps, of Distractions, from the sour
Fermentations of the Flesh and the World.

Secondly, As these enemies shall be deposed and disappear; so there is
something to be super-induced, in order to the confummation of this happiness.

1. Therefore all the Subjects of this State, shall Rev. 19.8.
be clothed with long white R ^bes, whi h is the righteousness of the Saints;
they shall be Psalm. 110.3.
in the beauties of holiness, from the very womb and first opening of that
morning; every infant-grace shall then have its adolescence into a perfect man,
Ephesians. 4.13.
and to the measure of the stature of the fullness of Christ. Here is
imperfection, intermission, and remission in our devotions of the highest
elevation. David himself when his heart was most strung with Divine affections,
and in the best tune; yet he had his Cadences. His Hallelujahs, and highest
strains of praise, came off with (...) prostravit. Buxt.
Selah, a Prostration of voice, and an affectionate pause; but in that Quire of
souls once entered Sanctum sanctorum.
the holy of holies, shall sing, Blessing, and glory, and honor, and power, to
him that sits on the Throne, and the Lamb for ever and ever, with an Rev. 5.13.
Amen Hallelujah, with the most distended faculties and intentions of soul to
all eternity, in that Rev. 19.4.
house of praises, and at the Marriage Supper of the Lamb. Here every Christian
has (...) Hebraeis domus nuptialis dicitur candore sanguinis.
his Garments made white in the blood of the Lamb, being justified from his
iniquities by Faith in Jesus; but when they shall be translated to that
Mountain of Bliss, Rev. 7.14.
their faces shall appear as the Sun, and their Garments of light as the top of
Lebanon, Mat. 17.2. Mark 9.2. Candore nivis.
shall shine as white as Snow. Here like poor common Soldiers, some get one
piece of Armor, others another, one is skilled at one weapon, others at
another; Job gets a Helmet of Patience, David a Girdle of Truth on his Loins,
and Peter a Shield of Faith, after they had been trained up to the use of them
in many combats; but there every one shall have put upon him, the whole Romans
13.12.
Armor of Light, not to fight but triumph in; for 1 Cor. 15.28.
God will be to them all in all: and the Psalm. 48.11.
Sun himself being their Shield, Rev. 21.22.
Sanctuary, and holy temple of his holy ones; yea, the Rev. 12.1.
clothing of his Saints; all sublunary glories, like your half-mooned honors,
shall be under their feet, but an asterism and Crown of everlasting
Righteousness shall be upon their heads.

2. As they shall have this Royal Apparel when they enter into this Kingdom as
their Robes, so they shall have their Rev. 7.9.
palms in their hands; the 1 Kings 6.33.
doors of the holy of holies were made of Olive Trees, Palms, Cherubims, and
open flowers canved on them, which signified that absolute Peace, complete
Victory, Angelical felicity, and an 1 Pet. 1.4.
incorruptible Crown of glory, that never fades away, to be their inheritance
that enter into that place. There is no worm in the fruit of this Paradise, Pax
est traaquillitas ordinis. Aug. de civ. Dei 19. l. 14. Ordinata requies
appetitionum, etc.
but tranquil order in the soul, Isa. 32.17. 1 Cor. 6.17.
the fruit of rightoousness here being * peace, and the effect of it joy and
assurance for ever; Surely there where we shall * be joined to the Lord, and
become one Spirit, his mind and will perfectly taking place in us; Isa. 48.18.
our peace will be as a River, when our righteousness shall be as the waves of
the Sea. No reflections upon sins or sorrows passed with bitterness of spirit,
as now we have in our greatest Triumphs and festivities, as the Jews in their
Feasts of Tabernacles, Lev. 23.40.
had their willow boughs among their Palms, while they remembered the dangers
they passed in the Wilderness on their Festival Revolutions, but every review
(if actual felicity can possibly give way to it) will only widen and dilate the
soul for a more ample fruition of the present state, even Si quaeris de visione
Dei qualis est actio aut quies potius ut rerum di came, vescio. Deciv. 22.29.
that peace of God which passes all understanding. So that as Augustine says,
if you ask what this enjoyment is of God, what kind of action, or rather rest?
to speak truth, I know not; and no wonder when that which is enjoyed here Phil.
4.7. (...).
, contains more than any understanding can comprehend.

3. To make up the Kingdom there must be a Crown, and so there is; but this
Crown is the King himself; here the King of glory enters in at our everlasting
gates, but there we shall enter in to the King of glory; Genesis 15.1.
I am thy exceeding great Reward. But there are three wreaths in this Crown.

1. God as considered the object of Vision, the Crystal Ocean of all Truth;
and there we shall be able to read every truth in the Original, and see it in
him as our faces in a glass; not only those truths that are so mainly conducing
to our happiness, but those more speculative to Etiam curiositas satietur.
Anselm.
the satisfaction of curiosity it self. Luther discoursing at Supper the night
before he died, said, That as Adam after his sleep knew his Wife to be bone of
his bone, and called all the Creatures by their names; so after Psalm. 17.15.
we shall awake, we shall not only be satisfied with Gods image, but shall know
one another; yea, all things to be known; Philosophy will then be not a dead
contemplation, but a meditation of life; and every idiot now, shall then have
the collection, and pure extract of all the notions in the world, while the
book of life lies open and legible before his face, the idea's, and
Representations of all beings in God the Father, the mirrors of all grace and
truth in Jesus Christ, the beauty of all delights and sweetnesses imaginable in
the holy Spirit, and all these in all, and all in one, with infinite variety in
unity transcendent to all imaginable reflections of glory. But who of us (...),
etc. Aris.
dark creatures can bear this inaccessible light? and therefore he 1 King.
8.10, 11.
appeared in the Temple in Divine darkness, all the purest light in the world
being but a shadow of God. If an idolatrous Temple of Diana's was so bright,
that the door-keepers cried always to them that entered in, Take heed to your
eyes, it is difficult to imagine how, even an immortal Exodus 33.20.
eye should see him and live. Therefore Rev. 2.28.
to him that overcomes, he will give the morning star, a Lumen confort ans
uti Scholastici loquuntur.
light to strengthen the eye to behold this glory, as all the Stars can look
upon the Sun; we shall then not only have all the Riddles of providence
unfolded, seeing how one Politician was used to crack another Crown, and one
Serpent broke the head of another; but the glorious Majesty of God shall be
reflected to us in the all-glorious body of Jesus Christ as the rainbow about
the Throne; Rev. 4.3.
nay, some think the very Angels shall assume aerie bodies to feed the eyes of
the Saints with all, and to be in a nearer capacity of conversing with them.
Yea, Saint Augustine says, De civit. Dei. lib. 22. c. 29.
we shall see God in his Saints and their glorious actings, as well, and as
manifestly as we now see men's bodies in the vital actions of the bodies.

2. The next wreath in this Crown, is the perception of Divine goodness to the
satisfaction of our love as all other desires; this is the great Sabbath of
loves, and the soul like a Phaenix shall lie down in a bed of Spices, and live
like a Salamander in those Cant. 8.6.
Coals of Juniper, desiring exstatically to be in its best self, and archetypon
God himself. Isa. 33.14.
But who of us can dwell with devouring flames? who of us can lie down with
everlasting burnings? even the love wherewith God loves himself, and loves
his Saints; but then we shall find his love strengthening of us to love him
with his own love; and these dull earthly hearts of ours by beholding of that
Sun, shall be converted into fixed Stars, reflecting back his own glory; we
shall then feel the sweetness of Gods Electing love from all eternity; the love
of our blessed Jesus, which was Cant. 8.6.
stronger than death; yea, we shall then enjoy the Spirit of love, who is 1
John 4.8.
love it self, and whose Psalm. 63.3. Sicut ferrum immissum in ignem totum fit
lignis, sic Paulus accensus charitate totus fit charitas.
loving kindness is better than life. And as one says of Paul, that as Iron
put into the fire becomes all fire, so Paul enflamed with charity and love,
becomes altogether love. If The Philosophers say the reason of the Irons
cleaving to the Loadstone so constantly, is because the pores of both bodies
are alike, and so there are effluxes and emanations that slide through them,
and unite them together; now this will be the magnetism of heaven, that our
wills shall perfectly fall in with the Divine Will, and nothing seem good to
us, but what is good in Gods esteem, so that we shall then need no threatenings
to drive us, nor promises to lead us; but Divine goodness will so perfectly
attract us, that we shall be naturalized to God and goodness, and be no more
able to turn off from that ineffable sweetness, than the Loadstone is to
convert it self to the West.

3. The last wreath is the result of both the former; from vision and fruition
of infinite truth and goodness, reflected in the Center of the soul, springs up
delight to all eternity; Heaven is nothing but Gaudium de veritate. Aug.
Alicubi.
the joy of truth. After a tedious Racking of our brains on a knotty problem,
if we discover any satisfaction, with what an exultancy do we break out into
the Mathematicians phrase, (...). Archimed.
I have found, I have found, what I a long time studied for. What joy will it
be then, to see every truth in God as our faces in a glass, without all
studying? for the joys of heaven are therefore oftener compared to drink, than
meat in Scripture, because there is no labor in chewing upon them, nor any
diminution of them, but they slide in smoothly, and fully replenish the soul
with delight; the pleasures of sense are short, no longer than the Oesophagus,
a (...). Aristip. in Dio. Laer.
glib swallow, a grateful hogough; but there the quire of Divine powers shall
be fixed in an everlasting fruition of eternal felicities. Now the Saints may
have some fits of that joy, but then they shall have their fill. Now they have
many a Suavis hora brevis mora. Bern.
sweet hour, but a short one, but then joy shall be a standing dish, and we
shall be Psa. 36.8.
satisfied with the fatness of Gods house. Now their memories are slippery, but
then there shall be an actual sensation of Divine joys continually, when we
shall see God face to face; Concupiscibile replebitur font justitiae,
rascibile perpetua tranquillitate. Bern.
the concupiscible part shall be filled with a Fountain of righteousness, the
irascible with perpetual tranquillity. We shall come within the verge of Gods
own happiness; when Mat. 25.21.
we shall enter into our Masters joy, when we shall joy more in his happiness,
than in our own; there shall be joy upon joy, joy above all joy, joy without
which there is no joy. Gaudium super gaudium, gaudium vincens omne gaudium,
gaudium ext^a quod non est gaudium. Aug. de civ. 22.
We shall be perfectly at leisure for God, and see him, we shall see him and
love him, we shall love him and praise him in the end without all end; for as
the seventh day Vacabimus and videbimus, videbimus and amabimus, amabimus and
laudabimus, in fine sine sine. Aug. deciv. 22. 30.
had no evening mentioned, and the New Genesis 2.2.
Jerusalem has no night; its Revelat. 21.25.
length, breadth, etc. all alike cubed for perpetuity. And if ever we be happy,
we must be assured of the eternity of that state; for else, fear of the loss
does lessen our joy, or else we think it is perpetual, and yet it is not, and
so we are miserable in our ignorance and mistake; Verse 6.
and as the joy of that state is not lessened by future fears, so neither by
passed or present sorrows, Revelations 21.4.
all tears being then to be wiped from their eyes; and the view of their
nearest Relations in the bottomless Pit, shall no more be an allay to their
joy, than if they saw so many fish caught in a Net; but they shall rejoice as
well in the Justice of God glorified in the ruin of his incorrigible enemies,
as in the glory of his mercy in their own Salvation; all those feeble
affections that are now so strongly contracted to poor particularities, shall
be divorced when once we come to be Espoused to those dilated joys in the
Immense Deity.

But yet there are two accessory Coronets we may add to this Crown of happiness
as compleaters of it.

1. When the bodies of the Saints shall be reunited to their souls, there
shall be an accession of joy; as the Schools say, The body must have its
dowry, ere it be Espoused to Christ. If the vile body of an ambitious and
imperious Reference Qu. Curtio.
Alexander, had such a crasis and temperament, that it gave a perfume to the
air when he was dead, doubtless those that have conquered the world, and are to
triumph for ever in the world to come, their very bodies shall give (as the
flowers of that Paradise) a very fragrant smell, being members of the body of
Christ, whose very crucified body was an Ephesians. 5.2.
offering of a sweet smelling savor unto God. Anselme tells us, the bodies of
Saints shall be so endued with strength, that they will be able to remove the
whole earth with one touch of their foot, when on the contrary the wicked shall
be so weakened by sin and wrath, that they shall not be able to a move a very
worm from feeding upon their eyes; and the Ezekiel. 32.27.
Prophet says, that Meshech and Tubal are gone down to hell with their Weapons
of War, and they have laid their Swords under their heads, but their iniquities
shall be upon their bones, though they have been the terror of the mighty in
the Land of the living. But the bodies of the Saints shall be 1 Cor. 15.44.
Spiritui subdita.
spiritual bodies; that is, every way subject to the motions and desires of the
soul, full of agility; as Macarius says, God made not man wings as birds,
though his Nest be above the Stars, because after the Resurrection, he should
have in Tertullians Phrase Carnem Angelificatam; de resur.
Angelified flesh; and as the Apostle says 1 These. 4, 17. and 1 Cor. 15.52.
(...).
, In a moment we shall be all snatched, and changed in the twinkling of an eye
to meet the Lord; there shall be such agility of body, and nimble collection of
the parts, that the body shall be no more liable to a stroke or a wound, than
the air, or the heavens, or the Sun it self. And as the soul now drinks in dark
informations, obscure apprehensions, and cloudy notions by the corporeal
senses, those painted Windows of these Houses of clay; yet when the soul is
become a Vessel replenished with immortal and unspotted light, it will transmit
such rays into the very body, that it shall shine as the Dan. 12.3. Mat. 13.43.
stars, nay, as the glorious body of the Sun in the Firmament for ever.

2. The second accessory to this Crown, is the blissful society of all the
Saints and Angels about the Throne. In this life it is the happiness of true
believers; that whether Paul, Apollo, or Cephas, all their eloquence, learning,
gifts, and graces, they are all theirs for their benefit and spiritual
advantage. But then, whether Prophets, or Apostles (whose imaginary relliques
some go many a weary Pilgrimage to see) all the Martyrs with their glorious
scarres of honor; nay, Angels, Cherubims, Seraphims, and all that blessed
Quire of Spirits, who have done them, while they were in dangers here, many an
invisible courtesy which they could never thank them for, they being Heb. 1.14.
ministering spirits sent forth to minister for them, who shall be heirs of
salvation; all these are theirs. If a Diagoras when he saw his three Sons
crowned in one day at the Olympic games as Victors, died away while he was
embracing them for joy; and good old Simeon when he saw Christ but in a body
subject to the infirmities of our natures, and had him in his arms, cried out,
Luke 2.29.
Now Lord let thou thy servant depart in peace, for my eyes have seen thy
Salvation. What unspeakable joy will it be to see your Christian Friends and
Relations; to whom you have been instrumental in their New Birth and
Regeneration, all Crowned in one day with an everlasting Diadem of Bliss which
never shall decay. There shall be no hypocrite then for you to lose your love
upon, which is now the great cooler of your charity, and keeps your affections
in a greater reserve; but there none but true Eagles, and heaven-born souls
will be able to look upon that Sun in glory; you shall then rejoice, that there
are so many pure spirits able to praise and love that God whom you could never
yet, nor will then be able to love and praise enough, or as you desire. When
the glorious Angels begin their Hallelujahs, the Saints shall also join in one
common Quire, Psalm. 149, 5.
they shall be joyful in glory, and sing aloud upon their everlasting beds of
rest. Oh how the Arches of heaven will echo, when the high praises of God
shall be in the mouths of such a Congregation! for as when one eye moves, the
other roles; and when one string in concord with another is struck, the other
sounds; such a blend and sympathy of praises shall there be in that heavenly
Chorus, with these Psalm. 150.6.
high sounding Cymbals in most flourishing expressions, and anthems upon the
divine glory. If the Sun, Moon, and Stars did as Ignatius says, make all
(...), in Epist. ad Ephesians. Luke 15.7.
a Quire as 'twere about the Star that appeared at Christ's Incarnation, * and
there be joy in heaven at the conversion of a sinner; no wonder then Job 38.7.
the morning stars shall sing together, and the Sons of God shou^^ for joy,
when there shall be Heb. 12.23.
a general Assembly, and Church of the firstborn, and the spirits of all the
just shall be made perfect. And though there may be one Star differ from
another in glory, yet there will be no Videbit civitas illa quod inferior non
invidebit. Aug. de civ. 22. 29.
envying one another happiness, but every one bear his part whatever it be in
the lower or higher praises of the God of glory, with a most harmonious variety
in perfect symphony; for there we shall love one another as our selves, love
God and our blessed Savior, better than our selves, and he will love us better
than we can love our selves, or one another. Oh quot and quanta gaudia
obtiniebit qui de tot and tantis beatitudinibus sanctorum jubilabit. Ans.
alicu. ni fallor de beatitu.
Oh how many, and how great joys shall he possess, who shall keep an eternal
Jubilee in the enjoyment of so many and so great beatitudes and felicities of
others as truly as of his own!

I have done with the possession and its qualification, it is a Kingdom.

I now come to its preparation, prepared for you from the foundation of the,
etc.

But how is this Kingdom of so long preparation, when Christ tells his
Disciples, I go to prepare a place for you, when he departed hence? John 14.1.


1. Therefore this Kingdom was prepared even when the foundations of the world
were laid Job 38.7.
, for there the morning stars did sing together. God Created the Heavens, and
then the earth, and the spiritual world of Angels above, before the foundation
of the earth below: though as some judge, Moses mentioned it not, being to
teach a dull people by sensible objects, concealed the notion of spirits, lest
they should Idolatrously worship and attribute the Creation of the world to
them. And so the Empyrean Heaven, and seat of glory, some venture to say, God
then made; and determinately too in the Aequinoctial East of Judea, called
therefore the Navel of the whole earth; to confirm it, they tell us Adam was
made with his face toward the East, and so they worshipped Eastward three
thousand and odd years. And thence Christ called the Luke 1.79. (...).
East, or dayspring from on high, and Zac. 3.8. (...) Lev. 16.14.
the blood was to be sprinkled on the mercy-seat Eastward seven times. But we
may answer the curiosity of this enquiry about the Ubi and determinate place,
as he of old was answered, that asked what God was doing before he created the
world? he was making Hell for such unbelieving Querists, and Heaven for the
reward of an humble Believer.

2. It was prepared from the foundation of the world, in regard of divine
predestination, for that which is last in obtaining, is first in the intention
of rational agents; so God from eternity designing his own glory in the
salvation of the Elect, and their blisseful fruition of himself, may be said to
have set the Crown upon them, while they were in the womb of his Decree; and to
have prepared them a Kingdom before they were born. And though God made all
the world for man, yet it was to be kept under his feet; he reserved himself to
be the Crown of his hopes, and Portion of his heart. He chose us in Christ
before the Foundation of the World, therefore Ephesians. 1.4.
all was ready. But

3. In regard of Divine D^spensation, the carrying on the whole economy has
been from the Foundation of the World, and so being, the Kingdom is not yet
given up all unto the Father; it may be still said to be preparing; for though
God being our heaven, it was always ready, yet by our fall we lost our title to
this Paradise; Christ intervenes to divert the flaming Sword of vengeance,
enters a Covenant with his Father, sends the glad tidings of it into the World
Gal. 3.8.
before he came Levit. 16.6. Hebr 9.7.
, typifies in the Gal. 4.4.
fuln^sse of time, makes Romans 5.11. 1 John 2.2.
atonement, proclaims reconciliation and pardon to penitent sinners, sends his
Word and Spirit to wait to be gracious, to solicit the World, till all that
are the truly called guests are invited and brought in; then he shuts up the
door of mercy, opens the grave, summons all to judgment by the last Trumpet,
makes the separation, and then pronounces this Benediction; so that though the
Kingdom was from the Foundations of the World prepared, yet in regard every
Kingdom includes Subjects as well as Sovereign, Christ when he was going, that
so he might send his Spirit to comfort his Disciples, and to gather in more
Subjects, may be said to prepare a place for them, though most significantly he
went to prepare them for that Kingdom. But Parabolical and Metonymical
Expressions must not have too rigid an Interpretation exacted from them; but
our Savior having bid his Disciples to go before and prepare a place for him
to eat the Passover with them in, he tells them that he is going to prepare
the Supper of the Lamb, and a place for them, to which Luke 13.28.29.
they shall come from the East, and from the West; from the North, and from the
South; and sit down with Abraham, Isaac and Jacob in the Kingd^me of God; and
this to raise the appetites of their faith and hopes, when a Supper of so many
thousand years preparation is the entertainment they are invited to.

And so I come to the second Part of the Text, and that is the admission into
this prepared Possession, Come ye blessed of my Father, etc.

When a Kingdom is proposed, every man is ready to be catching at a Crown; but
therefore our Savior tells us it must be had by inheritance; that is the title
by which we must be admitted; (...).
inherit, as the Jews had Canaan divided and apportioned to the several Tribes
by Numb. 26.55
lot; so some too curiously and boldly adventure to assign to every Saint a
Mansion bigger than the whole earth, which is true indeed in this sense, in
regard immensity and God himself is the Psalm. 16.5.
lot of their inheritance; but it is an inheritance in regard

1. There is a claim made to it only by the newborn and firstborn of God, and
so by right of birth except John 3.3.
a man be b^rn again, cannot see the Kingdom of God; the spirit of a slave
cannot manage the Scepter of a Prince; nay, they that look to sit on Thrones of
glory with Christ Mat. 19.28.
, must follow him in the regeneration of the body 1 Cor. 15.36.
, that must dye ere it be quickened 1 Cor. 15.50.
; for flesh and blood in corruption, moral or Exodus 33.20.
natural, cannot inherit the Kingdom of God, which made the Moriar ne moriar,
ut te videam. Aug. confessii.
Father cry out, Oh then Lord let me dye, lest I dye, that so I may see thee.
Now if an unregenerate body cannot enter, much less an unregenerate soul. An
infamous person Turpis persona. Myns. in instit.
in the Civil Law may be excepted against as not fit to be an heir; and shall
the Laws of men be purer than the Laws of God? If the pure in heart Mat. 5.8.
only can see God here in reflections, and 1 Cor. 13.12.
through a glass darkly, then surely they must be without 2 Pet. 3.14.
spot or wrinkle, who must see him face to face: Heaven is entailed upon holy
souls; it is their birthright; for no other but Rev. 22.14.
they that keep the Commandments of God have right to eat of the Tree of life,
or enter in through the Gates into that Jerusalem, and vision of peace.

2. They inherit by right of Adoption; for Christ is heir, and we heirs of his
righteousness, and so coheirs of his glory; and Romans 8.17.
h^irs of God; if sons, then heirs; now we are the sons of God by Adoption;
Regeneration makes us not perfectly holy, and so not perfectly sons, and so not
heirs, and therefore we Gal. 4.5. 1 John 3.1, 2.
receive the Adoption of sons, and being called to be we are sons, and if sons,
then heirs; for if a son be passed by in his Fathers Will, and not named, and a
reason of the passing of him by, the Testament is invalid in Civil Law, when
another is made he^r; and God, his nature and love transcends all the
compassions of men, and is a greater obligation than any Laws among them; so
that if thou can make it out that thou have the spirit of Adoption, thou art
as sure to inherit this Kingdom, as thou may be sure thou art not by name
excepted from the inheritance in the Gospel of Christ, which is his Will and
Testament.

3. It Is inherited by right of Donation and Gift; Luke 12.32.
Fear not l^ttle fl^ck, it is your Fathers will to give you a Kingdom; and
though the wages of sin be death, and men are but justly rewarded therein for
their demerit, yet Romans 6.23.
eternal life is the gift of God; and it is not such a gift as is a salary or
stipend for our work, (...).
pay for our service; for Luke 17.10.
when we have done all that we can, we are but unprofitable servants, and
deserve nothing, unless it be to be Luke 12.47.
beaten with many stripes: It is not an honorary gift, as he that had lost an
Arm in Battle, his Commander General gave him an Arm of gold, as an
honorable reward of his service; but alas, Matthew. 5.47. (...).
What singular thing can we do to emerit any thing at Gods hands? when the more
we do, we are the further from merit, in regard we are the more indebted to our
Master, who gave us the opportunity and grace to perform it: Nor is it an
Eleemosynary gift of charity, such as we extend to poor fellow creatures; for
that is but a piece of justice, and self-love, if we have that in abundance,
which others want to relieve them. Every act of charity is but a piece of
equity, a paying of our debts; for we are to Romans 13.8.
owe every man love; but God ows us nothing, nor is he bound to pity our
poverty, which we have by our own default contracted on our selves; but this
gift of God is a mere (...).
gratuitous act of bounty and grace; but when it is promised and given, then it
is but an act of justice to grant possession, and so the title is inheritance,
but by way of free Donation.

4. By right of Redemption they may be said to inherit; for under the Law the
next of Kin was to redeem a sold or morgaged possession; accordingly Christ
took our nature upon him, Ruth. 4.5.
that he might be of our consanguin^ty; he became Gal. 3 13.
a curse for us, 2 Cor. 5.22.
was made sin, that he might ransom penitent believers from the curse; and
Hebr. 7.25.
having satisfied to the utmost, and 1 Cor. 6.20.
bought us with a responsible price, he has right to give his sheep John 10.28.
eternal life; and therefore it is cal^ed Ephesians. 1.14.
the purchased possession. In Law, he that buys a slave, may dispose of him as
he please by his will; accordingly Christ has made h^s will to dispose of all
those he has bought: John 17.24.
Father, I will that where I am, these may be also: And so they are heirs by
Will and Testament of him that took upon him the right of Redemption.

Now I come to the second thing in the second general, and that is the heirs of
this inheritance, described in these words, Ye blessed Patris est benedicere.
of my Father; it is the Fathers work to bless his Son; and when Isaac blessed
Jacob, he made him his heir; so Gods blessing makes us a title to this
inheritance.

1. Then ye that are blessed of my Father from the foundation of the World in
his Electing love, and they whom he has so blessed, they shall be blessed; the
(...).
word signifies well-spoken to; now Gods Eternal thoughts are Verba mentis.
his words; and they that were in his thoughts from Eternity, their names were
written in the book of l fe: God had Eternal purposes of grace to them, John
17.6.
thine they were, and thou gave them me; they were blessed in the thoughts of
his heart before all generations; this is an Elective Kingdom, yet we are
saved not according to the merit of 2 Timothy 1.9.
our works done o^ foreseen, but accord ng to his own purpose and grace, which
was given in Christ Jesus before the World began. And in vain ^id Christ
Covenant with his Father, or make a Testament for us, unless the he^rs
purchased were fore-known Haeres caput Testamenti.
, heirs being the groundwork of a Testament.

2. Well spoken to in the Word of God by the powerful vocation of his Spirit
Romans 1.7.
; they are called to be holy, and he Ephesians. 1.3.
blesses them with all spiritual blessings in heavenly places by Christ Jesus.
There are none come, but they that are Rev. 19.9.
invited to the Supper of the Lamb; they that God has Genesis 9.27. Cant. 1.4.
persuaded to dwell in the Tents of Shem; whom Hosea 11.4.
he has drawn with the cords of his love, and made them a Psalm. 110.3.
people of a free will offering in the day of his power; whom the Luke 1.78.
dayspring from on high has visited, and the womb of the morning of the day
of grace has brought them forth; those that God Hos. 2.14.
has allured and brought into the Wilderness, that he might speak to their
hearts. None shall be followers of the Lamb but those that are Rev. 17.14.
called faithful and chosen.

3. Well-spoken of in the Word and Promises of the Gospel; those that are Mat.
5.3, etc.
meek, poor in spirit, pure in heart, merciful, persecuted for righteousness
sake, and merciful; for all these shall obtain mercy; as it follows in the
Verses after the Text, Come ye blessed, etc. For Mat. 25.35.
I was an hungry, and ye gave me to eat; I was thirsty, and ye gave me drink; a
stranger, and you took me in; naked, and you clothed me; sick, and you visited
me; in prison, and you came to me: And he said, Verily inasmuch as you have
done it to one o^ these my brethren, these littte ones, you have done it unto
me; for Romans 2.13.
not the hearers, but the doers of the Word are blessed; the Hebr. 6.17. and 17.
heirs of these promises are the only heirs of glory.

4. Blessed in the final pardon, absolution and justification which shall be
pronounced at the last day. Ye shall inherit, whom the righteous Judge of all
the world shall acquit and discharge from your sins, to whom God shall say
Matthew. 9.2.
, son be of good cheer, thy sins are forgiven thee; nay, Euge, well done Mat.
25.1.
good and faithful servant, enter into thy Masters joy; thou have been faithful
over a few things, I will make thee Ruler over many. Oh how good a word will
this be to a soul, as soon as it is got up out of the Wilderness of this
World! yet Psalm. 128.4.
thus shall thou be blessed that fear God. He will give thee then to be sure
Rev. 3.12.
a new name, and a white stone, and write upon thee, as a Pillar, or a Trophy
erected after victory, his own Name; and when God shall thus bless thee, and
speak to thee, thou will need never a word more to make thee happy, but the
generations that come up after thee, shall when they rise up to heaven, call
thee blessed.

And so I come to the third particular, the formal introduction of these
blessed heirs into their inheritance, Come ye blessed, etc.

1. This is the speech of one that gives us an everlasting avocation from the
troubles and vanities of this present world. (...) vox avo^antis.
Christ will speak to them in this manner, only in more emphatical
significancies, Come poor souls, where have you been all this while? poor
sheep, where have you been wandering upon the barren Mountains of the earth,
climbing the cliffs of preferment and worldly honors, as if you had been of
the number of the Goats, and had no title to the blessings on my right hand? In
what a pickle have you been in, in a nasty World which John 5.19.
lies altogether in filthiness, in a muddy body of sin, pepsed with a number
of tentations; you have lain a long time Psalm 68.13.
among the pots, griming your selves, and defiling your garments amongst the
Egyptians on my left hand. I but now you shall have the wings of a Dove, which
are all covered with silver, and her feathers with yellow gold. I will never
more Psalm. 74.19.
give the soul of my Turtle Dove into the hands of her enemies; you shall never
more be cooped up in a Cage with such a company of unclean Birds; no, Cant. 5.2.
Come my Love and Dove, and fly away.

Vox admittentis.
2. It Is the speech of one that admits us into this inheritance; Christ is
pleased to condescend so low as to style himself John 10.7.
the door; nay, the Keeper of the door; he opened a door of hope by his death,
a door of faith by his preaching the Gospel, a door of life by his
resurrection, and heaven-gates also by this admission; and when he has
admitted his heirs of glory, and taken them out of this deluge of sin and
sorrow into that Ark of salvation, he will Genesis 7.16.
shut them in as God did Noah; and though they have an 2 Pet. 1.11.
abundant entrance ministered to them into the everlasting Kingdom of our Lord
and Savior Jesus Christ; yet when entered, the door is shut, and no egress or
backdoor of Apostasy can be found in that state. Adam was created out of
Paradise to show that his admission, even in his innocence, was of grace; much
more is it of grace upon a recovery from his fall. Christ while in the Kingdom
of his patience, does call his to many a penitent groan, to mournful prayers,
and many tribulations, which make a very bed of dust to be a soft couch of
repose; and he calls them thither, Isa. 26.20.
Come my people, enter thou into thy Chambers, shut thy doors about thee, hide
thy self for a little moment, till the indignation be over-past. Come child, go
to bed in the grave; oh but then his Cant. 2.14.
v ice will be sweet, when he shall call to them to come up to Isa. 25.6.
this Mountain, to a feast of fat things, a feast of wine on the Lees, of fat
things full of ma^row, of wines on the Lees well refined.

Laetissime excipientis.
3. It Is the speech of one that bids us welcome to the feast too; Come my
friends; I, it is Come and welcome now; Come poor heart, thou have been coming
a long time, I went my self to call thee; I 2 Chronicles. 36.15.
sent my Messengers, rising up early, and sending them continually to invite
thee to come in. I sent my holy Spirit also like a Dove from heaven, and it did
light upon thee, and gave thee an Olive branch of peace in the Wilderness of
thy fears; when it allured thee, and called thee from all thy wanderings, then I
sent my black rod for thee by that grim Sergeant death, to strip thee of thy
soul body of sin, not to be touched, but by the Angel of death; then I sent my
Angels to bring thy soul to the Courts of thy God, and now by the sounding of
the last Trumpet I have called for thy sleepy body to arise out of the Psalm.
22.15.
dust of death: And now after all these Messengers thou art come, I will not
upbraid thee for thy delays, but come, come blessed soul with as many welcomes
as there are Saints and Angels in glory; I have John 14.2.
prepared a place for thee, Cant. 5.1.
thou at come into my Garden; Eat oh friends, Drink, yea drink abundantly, oh
beloved!

And so I have done with the explication of the several branches of the Text;
now let us see what fruit they bear that may be Cant. 2.3.
sweet to oru taste.

First, 1. Infer.
Then if there be a Kingdom prepared before the foundation of the World for
the blessed Saints and holy ones; then what manner of persons are 2 Pet. 3.11.
we in all unholy Conversation and godlessnesse in this generation? Men are as
dead to Religion, as if heaven was but a dream; and as hot upon sin, as if hell
had no fire, or was all vanished into smoke; as atheistical and wretched, as if
neither heaven, hell nor earth, neither did feel a God, or any memorandum's of
his Providence. Therefore a little to fortify this notion, which artificial
wickedness has endeavored to expel, and expunge out of natural consciences,
I shall endeavor to confirm your faith by Scripture and reason. The Socinians
deny the revelation of eternal life, and a state to come, to have been
propounded under the Old Testament; and the reward being only earth, their Law
and obedience to be but carnal and low, which is to level the Jews to the order
of brutes, that so the Gentiles under the Gospel might be advanced to the state
of men, and so by virtue of the new prize of immortal life proposed, they
should have a new command, as their care to run; which is all as true as that
all the Tribes of Israel were converted into Isacar's, Genesis 49.4.
strong asses couching down between two burdens; but Luke 7.35.
wisdom is justified of her children; and the Chaldee paraphrase renders those
words, Genesis 4.7. Remittetur tibi in saeculo futuro.
if thou do well, shall thou not be accepted? by this gloss, Amend thy works
in this world, and thou shall be forgiven in the world to come; and the ^argum
says, the very dispute betwixt Cain and Abel, was concerning a world to come;
and those carnal Heretics that Jude ver. 10.11, 19.
are sensual, not having the spirit; in what they know naturally as brute
beasts, corrupt themselves, they are gone into the way of Cain: But when God
tells Abraham Gen 15.1.
I am thy exceeding great reward; and Jacob cries out, Genesis 49.18.
I have waited for thy salvation O Lord, even when about to dye; God stiling
himse^f their God, is not by our Saviors authority Mat. 22.32.
the God of the dead, but of the living; therefore God held out eternal life in
the promises, yea and in the very command too, Levit. 18.3. and Genesis 3.12.
do this and live; the reward of that obeeience there enjoined, was no less
than this everlasting life, as appears by our Saviors interpretation when
the Lawyer came to him, Luke 10.25.28.
saying, Master, What shall I do to inherit eternal life? and he said, What is
written in the Law? how read thou? and he answered, thou shall love the
Lord, etc. and Jesus said, Thou have answered right, this do and thou shall
live; that is, thou shall have that thou desiredst; viz. inherit eternal life;
and the very reproach of the Sadduces, and the distinction of their Sect from
Pharisees and others, argues sufficiently the world to come was a very common
notion among all the Jews; and indeed the whole land of Canaan was but a
comprehensive type and shadow of heaven, and all their Religion but a Hebr.
10.1.
shadow of good things to come in the Kingdom of heaven, as well as in the
Kingdom of the Messiah John 8.56.
whose day they then saw, and were glad; and if the Gospel contain the promise
of eternal life, then they had it in Abraham's days; Gal. 3.8.
for the Gospel was preached before to him; yea, and before to Adam, Gen 3.15.
that the seed of the woman should break the S rpents head; and the skins of
the Sacrifices wherewith he was clothed might suggest the putting on of that
promised seed and his obedience, who was Isa. 53.5.
to be bruised for the iniquities of his people: But now to awaken Atheistical
souls that deny not only the revelation of this Kingdom of God under the old
Testament, but its reality and existence under old and new; consider these
four things very briefly, as the limits of this Exercise command.

1. The whole Creation is a Book which always lies open, wherein we may read
that there is a God who made the goodly Structure and Fabric of Heaven and
Earth; Who else could be able to Job 26.7.
hang the vast body of the Earth upon nothing! or to Ver. 10.
girdle the Sea, and all its mountainous Waves with a Rope of Sand, Psalm. 104.2.
to spread the heavens as a Curtain, and hang up those vast Vessels of light in
the Skies; there must be a being existent from, and of himself; and so being
improduced, is infinitely perfect, and comprehends all those perfections
dispersed through the whole Creation, and infinitely more; yet what he makes,
is like himself; every creature bears his footsteps; but Psalm. 8 3. Genesis 1.27.
the heavens are the works of his fingers, and man bears the very image of God.
We see in the several stories and degrees of the Creation, love and
communicativenesse to their offspring, grows more and more; the higher you
go it grows, more in brutes than plants, in men than in brutes; in God
therefore love and goodness, which are most communicative, are most
transcendent: Now God himself is the heaven we plead for; he is the Region of
souls and spirits; and for the resurrection of the body, his infinite power can
surely 1 Cor. 15.38.
give to every seed its own body; though one part of our flesh was sublimated
into the fire, another precipitated into ashes, and cast into the midst of the
Sea, devoured by a fish, taken and eaten again by men; and another part
dissipated into the Air, and sucked into some other body; Borel. Med. Pari.
ita refert.
yet if a Chymick can out of the ashes of a flower reproduce the flower in its
former beauty; nay, out of the dung of beasts reproduce the very herbs they
have eaten, notwithstanding what is passed into nourishment, by the
architectonical parts and spirits yet abiding in those Relics; much more can
God recover our bodies from all possible dispersions, and conversions into
other bodies, when all the World shall be his Furnace, and every thing resolved
into its first seminal parts by the reverberation of the flames, and give to
every body Florem Resurrectionis. Tert. de Resur.
the flower of resurrection, and a reflorescence into glory.

2. As there is a God, and so that Kingdom, so there are heirs, and they are
immortal souls, and therefore fitted to be (...), uti Platonici.
in Divine conjunction; for that which is contiguous to an Eternal, Omne
contiguum aeterno spirituali, est aeternum spirituale.
Spiritual Being, is Eternal and Spiritual; but man is here only himself, when
in communion with God and spiritual things: And God when he infused the
reasonable soul, he breathed into man the Genesis 2.7. (...).
breath of lives. And Tertullian who had too gross a conception of the nature
of the soul, yet calls it Vaginam afflatus Divini, liberalitatis suae haeredem,
Religionis suae sacerdotem, Christi sui sororem.
the sheath and scabbard of Divine breath, heir of his bounty, etc. in the
exercise of those acts of apprehension, judgment and argumentation; it is
impossible such steady and orderly consequential actions should be performed by
a fortuitous concurse of atoms; or its reflexive acts much less by the purest
flame, no body being able to penetrate it self, nor to dive into it self
without a disorder of its parts. But Religion rather then Reason being the
great Religio pene sola quae hominem discernat a mutis. Lactan. de divi.
praemio l. 7.
difference of a man from brutes, it is a sign he is made for communion with a
better being; and therefore as Augustine says, Thou have made our heart O Lord
for thee, and it will never Quum tibi inhaesero ex toto, me viva erit vita mea,
plena te tota nunc autem quia plenus tui non sum oneri mihi sum. lib. de confess.
rest till it come to thee; and when I shall wholly inhere and cleave to thee,
then my life will be lively; but now being not full of the enjoyments of thee,
I am a burden to my self: The World was made for brutes to live in, but for man
to (...). Lact. ibid.
contemplate the Wisdom and Power of God; he made many brutes, but one man,
that he might be chieflly for the Dei socius. Aug. de Civ. l. 12.20. ut
cohaereat autori. lib. 22.1.
society of God, and keep coherence to his Maker. And alas the World is but a
dry Morsel to an immortal soul, whose vast Chaos of desires cannot be satisfied
by it, though every drop of comfort in it was swelled into an Ocean. There is
upon the soul such a drought without God, as Cant. 8.7.
all the waters in the world cannot quench it; such an endless thirst after
truth, and goodness in the general notion, as it can never be satisfied, till
it find out the Psalm. 36.9.
fountain of this water of life.

3. This Eternal state is the common sense of the World; and the voice of
natural conscience has in all Ages proclaimed it. Every Nation has some Diety
or other, and so a Religion; Heathens sacrifice, though it may be it be to the
Devil, who cruelly sucks their very blood. Turks and Saracens must have the
black drop cut out of their breast, and their circumcision; every Religion puts
some restraints upon men's lusts and lives. Now though I believe, though there
were no reward, or a future state, Religion would be as good for our bodies, as
prunings are to Trees, Prove. 3.8.
health to our navels, marrow to our bones; yet its severities would in no
degree down with men, were it not for the urgings and prickings on of natural
conscience. But Christians above 1 Cor. 15.19.
all men were most miserable, if in this life only they had hope, whose
principles enjoin the highest degree of self-denial, patience and bearing of
the Cross. But every good man, let the mad World prate as it will, and vomit
all its gall and bitterness in reproaches and persecutions, yet if he suffer
for righteousness sake in innocent patience, his own conscience gives him an
acquittance, and a secret absolution, so as he can Romans 5.3.
glory even in tribulation; yea, every devout soul more or less tastes of
those first fruits of heavenly delight, in being conscious 2 Cor. 1.12.
of his duty discharged in simplicity and godly sincerity, whatever calamities
may attend him in this life; which if they were not pledges of a fuller crop in
that future harvest of joys, the best men were most unhappy by that great
frustration and disappointment of their expectations. And so wicked men, though
the World may applaud their actions as highly virtuous by a sordid spirit of
flattery; yet Men's habet attonitos and surdo verbere coedit. Per.
their own consciences affr ght them, and smite them with many a deadly and
deaf blow, which no body else does hear or observe Cain may build his Cities
and his Walls as high as the Clouds, yet there is that within as he said to the
Emperor, that will ruin all; Genesis 4.5.
his countenance falls, and the guilt of his Brothers blood makes his soul to
blush, and pulls down his high looks. The highest-formed sinners that have
sinned themselves into despair, have nothing left them Heb. 10.27.
but a certain fearful looking for of judgment, and fiery indignation, which
shall devour such Adversaries. Others that have sinned themselves into the
highest presumptions, never come to any senseless ease, till they attain to
Isa. 28.15.
make a Covenant with Hell, and can be content to Heb. 11.25.
suffer torments to eternity with the enemies of God, rather than to part with
the pleasures of sin which a^e bu^ for a season; and seem to have that wrote
on the tables of their hearts, which that Wretch subscribed under the Image of
God and the Devil, Domine, si tu non vis, iste me rogitat.
Lord, if thou will not, here is one that begs of me to be his, and his I will
be. Now if there be a Law, a Judge, punishments, and rewards in some degree
here, then every man is a Prophet, in this case of this Future state.

4. The promiscuous dispensations and providence of God in this world, Eccles.
9.2. Psalm. 17.14. Lam. 3.16.
all things coming alike to all; nay, the wicked it may be have their belly
full of a large portion in this life, when the godly have their teeth broken
with gravel stones, and covered with ashes; these argue,

1. There is a day to come when the scales shall be turned; Abel is slain for
his piety, when Cain lives and builds Cities; Herod reigns, Herodias danceth,
when John Baptists head is served in in a Charger. And though God sometimes by
extempore and sudden justice hangs up some wicked wretches in chains, yet many
times the most wretched oppressors are too strong and high for justice in this
world; and they that live like Lions, die like Lambs; they have liberty in
their lives, and Psalm. 73.4.
no bands in their deaths. Dionysius a bloody Tyrant, dies quietly in his bed,
when David lies Psalm. 32.3.
roaring all night, and a good Josiah falls in Battle; which made the Prophet
cry out Hab. 1.8.
, Wherefore does the wicked devour one more righteous than himself? the just
must therefore live by his Faith in the world to come, or else all Piety will
die; therefore there shall be a judgment hereafter; for Heb. 6.10. Psalm. 58.11.
God is not unrighteou^ to forget their labor of love, and patience; doubtless
there is a reward for the righteous; verily there is a God that judges in the
earth.

2. Is the life to come such a Kingdom? then here is field-room for all our
ambition, avarice, and contention, to show it self; be ambitious for something;
if we must be ambitious, let us all King it here. What scuffling and scrambling
is there for Crowns and Scepters in the world, out of that impetuous lust of
dominering; whereas a profane Esau sold his Birthright, which had a Kingdom
and a Blessing too in it, Genesis 25.34.
for a mess of pottage! Lysimachus when inflamed with thirst, proffered his
Kingdom for a draught of cold water; and how much gold, or how many Kingdoms
would Dives give, if he had them, Luke 16.24.
for a drop of cold water, or to be delivered from that one Kingdom of the
Devil? and shall Christians contend about these things? Alas, Christian
Religion was never made for a secular Engine; we may as soon turn Axioms of
Truth into Swords and Spears; the Rules of holy living, into Canons and
Muskets; and prayers and tears into powder and shot, as to make Religion a
troubler of the order and peace of the world; that is of a Dove-like Mat. 10.16.
innocent temper, full of Jam. 3.17.
meekness, humility, gentleness, easiness, to be entreated, without
partiality, without hypocrisy, can suffer any evil, but do none; can live and
secure it self better by suffering, than the crafty world by acting; to use
sinful means to avoid suffering, or preserve worldly greatness, is like him
that when one hoped to see him at his Diocese ere long, Replied, He feared he
should be in heaven before that time should come. It is not Christian Religion,
but that Antichristian spirit, which diffuseth it self all over Christendom
in its Doctrines and Agitations, its Philtres and Poisons, that inflames it
more with contentions and Wars, than any part of the world besides. For
Religion truly Christian, Mat. 12.25.
takes only the Kingdom of Heaven by violence. Let one Roman Emperor busy
himself in catching flies, another gather Cockle-shells with his Army on the
Sands, after great preparations for an Expedition; silly emblemes of the most
valiant attempts of many highly-famed Mortals; but let Christians March with
all Zeal only for the holy Land of Promise. All those tittles of Honor (for
we pronounce them too long) which the world plays with, as children with
Farthing Candles, blowing them in with one breath, puffing them out with
another; if they had never so good a Membrana dignitatis. Sen.
Pattent, yet what will they come to, Isa. 34.4. Rev. 6.14.
when the Heavens shall role up as a Scrole? much more shall these shrivel up
as a piece of Parchment before the Flames, when all the Arms and Ensigns of
Honor, shall be blazoned alike in a Field ardent at the judgment day. Beauty,
that blossom of flesh and blood, which now carries so many Captives at her
Wheels, tyrannizing over fond mortals affections, when we come to those
beauties of Glory, will be no more comely than a dry skull, in comparison of
the Ravishing Luster that will be in the most deformed body of the Poorest
Lazarillo, whose Brightness will transcend the loveliest face more, than the
rarest Jewel does a vile piece of Jett. And though perhaps difference of Sexes
may remain for all Scotus his Gloss, That in Christ Jesus there is neither
male nor female; yet Delectent intuitum, non inflectent ad vitium.
they will only delight the eye, not incline to any vicious thought, all lust
being fired out, and no spark of concupiscence left in the Saints, but Grace
triumphing in those objects that conquered it here, when Mat. 11.12.
they shall be as the Angels of God, only pure flames of Divine Love and joy.
When all the pure gold in the World shall be melted out of the veins of the
Earth, and men's Coffers into one common stream, and all Pearls, and precious
Stones should lie as the gravel on the side of that River, yet they would
scarcely be thought fit then to make a Metaphor of for the very Pavement of the
new Jerusalem, one sight whereof will dimm and deface all the glory of the
World.

3. Must the Title be Inheritance? then look to your evidences, Regeneration,
and Adoption; as ever you look for this Kingdom, prove your Fathers Will, and
your selves Sons; it is no matter how your names are wrote on earth, in dust
or Marble, in reproach or renown, if they be written in Heaven. Some say this
world is but a shadow of that above (and it was so before sin had blotted and
defaced all) therefore look for the lineaments of that Kingdom above, to be
pourtrayed on you; all are for an Heaven; but as Eusebius says, there were many
Ebionitarum, Encratitarum, Nazaraeorum, etc.
spurious Gospels, so Basilis asserted one hundred sixty five Heavens, as many
Heavens as days in a year. The Turks delighting in flowers, and their
Tulipomania, dream of such a Paradise. A silly Country Woman coming upon the
Exchange, was so amazed at the view, that she fell down, and said, She had often
heard of Heaven, but never was in it before; The voluptuous Epicure will have
his a Poetical Heaven of Nectar and Ambrosia; the ambitious an Heaven of
honors and Gallantry. But holy Abraham passed all these, by Heb. 11.10.
looking for a City that had foundations. The Kingdoms of the world want legs
and foundations to stand upon; and while men dream of such Paradises, they do
but build Castles in the air, without any basis but imagination. But look you
for the new Heavens, Isa. 65.17.
wherein dwells Righetousness; get a Copy of grace in your hearts out of
Scripture-Records, the Court-Roles of Heaven, and then you have 1 Timothy 6.19.
laid hold upon eternal life. It Is easy to be a Saint of the earth, a
State-Saint, a designing Saint; nay, a Church-Saint; but it must be a heavenly
Saint, one truly holy, that is Col. 1.12.
meet to be partaker of the Inheritance of the Saints in light. Examine
therefore what Authority and entertainment have the most searching truths, and
cutting Providence of God with you? what spiritual wickedness that never hurt
your body, Purie, or Fame, have you forsaken for Christ? This sincere beauty of
holiness, ^s able to make you Ornaments even to heaven it self.

4. Is this Kingdom prepared for those that are Blessed of the Father? Oh then
labor to obtain your Fathers blessing, though Heb. 12.17.
you seek it with tears. Now the Father says, Blessed are the pure, the poor
in heart, the merciful, they that pray for them which persecute them; be
careful not only Mat. 25.4.
to have oil in your Lamps, grace in your hearts, but get your Ver. 7.
Lamps trimmed, be upon your Watch, Ver. 13.
for you know not what hour your Master comes. Look how you improve your
Talents, what good you do in the world; Remember it runs thus in the last
account, I was an hungry, you fed me; naked, you clothed me; in Prison, you
visited me; and Mat. 16.27.
every man shall be rewarded according to his Works; and the more you have of
Heaven and Divine love here, the more you shall have hereafter; for one piece
of it will lie in comfortable reflections upon what good we have done in the
world; though every one has his Mat. 20.9.
penny, that comes in at the Eleventh hour; viz. all that is essential unto
happiness, yet 1 Cor. 15.41.
one Star differs from another in glory. Art thou therefore in Authority? use
it for God? Art rich? alas, Prove. 23.5.
riches make themselves wings and fly away; Up then, and be doing good, and
make thy self wings of thy Wealth for Heaven, by all charitable expressions;
there is no way to lay your treasure up in Heaven, but by laying it out here;
no way to lend God any thing, but by giving to the poor; How will hopes of
Preferment nourish Conformity?

Tully tells us, A Prince is to be fed with glory, and drawn to worthy acts by
the allurement of Honor and Renown. Did but Christians feed more upon the
Heritage of Jacob, Isa. 58.14.
and their Immortal hopes, they would act more for their immortal honor; such
Meditations do as the Philosopher says of speculations, (...). Arist. E^^.
immortalize men, and make them spiritual ones indeed, or as Ambrose phraseth
it, carry them upwards, as Birds of Paradise, Volucris in Spiritu factus. Exodus
19.4.
all upon Eagles Wings to soar on high.

Fifthly, Will Christ say, Come ye blessed, etc. then here is an Io triumph
over all the World; Let it look as grim as it will upon thee, yet Christ will
smile; though it gnash its teeth upon thee, yet Christ will open his lips, and
Cant. 1.2.
kiss thee with the kisses of his mouth; Lapides loquitur.
though the world speak words as hard as stones about Stephens ears, yet Christ
will speak comfortably. If the World say Go, Get you hence; yet Christ will say
Come; if that say Go, ye Cursed; Christ will say Come ye Blessed. Though men
say Go ye Cursed Generation who are hated of all men; yet Christ will say Come
ye blessed of my Father. They say Turn out; Christ will say Turn in; they cry,
Away from houses and lands, and wives, and children, and all for Christ's sake;
yet be not discouraged poor heart, for Christ will recompense thee a hundred
fold, and thou shall have a Kingdom for thy Cottage. And when they have done
all, this, they rejoice that their Plot has taken effect, for they designed
your ruin long ago; I but Christ's thoughts of love run higher yet, Come
blessed soul, inherit the Kingdom prepared for thee from the foundation of the
World. The World may thrust thee out with both hands, Christ will receive thee
with both arms. When Cyrus gave one of his friends a kiss, another a wedge of
gold, he that had the gold, envied him that had the kiss, as a greater
expression of his favor; what if thou have not the onions of Egypt, if thou
have the Quails and Manna in the Wilderness, Psalm. 17.14.
if thou be a man of G ds hand, if thou be one of his heart, there is
small ground to complain. Upon all, if an Epicurus was the best of the
Philosophers without an Elysium; If a Platonic lecture of the immortality of
the soul made another cast his life away that he might enter upon that state;
If an Aristotle upon Euripus banks being not able to resolve himself of the
cause of its motion, dissolved himself, by casting himself into the stream,
saying, If I cannot take thee, take thou me; when we have such a glory as eye
has not seen, nor ear heard; nor can it enter into the heart of man to
conceive what God has 1 Cor. 2.9.
prepared for those that love him; how shameful^y are we run a ground, if we
cannot have a kind of Phil. 1.23. (...). Rev. 22.20.
lust to be dissolved; and when Christ holds this price in his hand, and cries,
Come ye blessed, we do not answer, Come Lord Jesus, Come quickly!

THE Conclusion.
2 TIMOTHY 1.13. Hold fast the form of sound words which thou have heard of me in
faith, and love, which is in Christ Jesus


AT the beginning of this Months Exercise I entered upon this Text, and then
resolved the matter contained therein into these four Doctrinal Observations.

1. Evangelical words are sound words. Or, All Gospel Truth is of an healing
nature. 2. It is of great use and advantage both for Ministers and private
Christians to have the main Fundamental truths of the Gospel collected and
methodized into certain Models and Platforms. 3. Such Forms and Models are very
carefully and faithfully to be kept. 4. Faith and Love are as it were the two
hands, whereby we may hold fast Gospel Truth.
I fingled out the second of these Doctrines to be the subject of that first
introductive Sermon which fell to my lot in the course of this morning Exercise.

I shall now for the CONCLUSION of this Service, make choice of the third
Doctrine. Scil.

Such Forms and Collections of the special Heads of Gospel-Doctrine are to be
kept and observed with all care and diligence.

The other two Doctrines, namely the first and last, may be useful some where
or other in the managing of the present Truth; which is,

That Forms and Models of Gospel Truths are carefully to be kept, etc.

The Greek word (...) has both significations in it, scil. to Have and to
hold; to get such Models, and to keep them when we have them: Our English word
implies the first, and expresses the second;

Hold fast, i. e. first have them, and then, let them not go when you have
them: And the word in the next verse expounds this to the same sense, both in
the Greek and in the English, (...), Custodi, keep; keep as in safe Custody, as
under Lock and Key. That good thing which was commtited to thee; what was that?
Some extend it to his whole Evangelical MINISTRY, which was committed to
Timothy with the gifts and graces conferred therewith by Divine Ordination:
Others restrain it to the form of sound Doctrine in my Text, which Timothy had
received either by word of mouth: or in scriptis from Saint Paul, whichsoever,
or both, as he must have it, so he must preserve it safe and sound; Hold fast,
keep, etc.

Thus in the Old Testament the Kings and Princes of Israel must get a Copy of
the Law of God; and when they have it, they must keep it, and keep close to it,
Deuteronomy. 17.18, 19, 20. for

First, He must write him a Copy of the Law in a book.

And then it must be WITH HIM, and he shall READ therein all the days of his
life.

The good King Hezekiah caused his Secretaries to make a Transcript of Solomon's
Proverbs, a bundle or Model of Divine Aphorisms, both for knowledge and
practice: These are also the Proverbs of Solom^n which the men of Hezekiah King
of Judah copied out. Prove. 25.1.
These were to be laid up safe as a sacred depositum; and carefully preserved
for the public use and service of the Church.

The Jews Phylacteries mentioned by our Savior, Matthew. 23.5. were in their
first institution of the same nature, that is to say, The Hebrews call them
Totaphoth; the Greek (...), from (...). Conservatoria quibus memoria legis
conservabatur.
certain Memorials appointed of God, by the help whereof they might have the
Law of God always in their minds and memories, which the pride of the Scribes
and Pharisees (not contented with the command of God) had enlarged into broad
scrolls of parchment, upon which were written certain abridgments of the Law,
which they wore ( over and above Gods institution) about their arms, and necks,
and heads; which practice of theirs although a superstitious addition to the
Divine appointment, yet it held forth Gods design, which was the having and
preserving Models of divine principles, both for knowledge and practice.

It is the express command of God in the close of all the Prophets in the Old
Testament, Remember the Law of Moses which I commanded him in Horeb for all
Israel, Mal. 2.2.
with the Statutes and Judgments. Though Gospel times were drawing nigh, yet
the Law of Moses must not be forgotten, but must be kept exact and entire, as
an eternal rule of righteousness.

In the New Testament the frequent repetition of those words of command,

HOLD, 2 These. 2.15. Heb. 3.14.

HOLD FAST, 1 These. 5.21. 2 Timothy 1.13. Heb. 3.16. Heb. 4.23. Rev. 2.25. and
3.11.

KEEP, 1 Cor. 11.2. and 15.2. 1 Timothy 6.20. 2 Timothy 1.14. Rev. 1.3. and 22.9.

CONTINUE, Joh. 8.31. Acts 14.22. Gal. 2.9. Col. 1.23. 1 Timothy 4.16. 2 Timothy 3.14.

ABIDE, Joh. 15.7. 1 John 2.14, 24. 2 Ioh. 9.

These I say, and other of like nature, all of them relating to
Gospel-doctrine, either in general, or in some of the special forms and Models
thereof give sufficient testimony to the Point in hand.

For further proof whereof, I shall need to add no other Grounds or Reasons
then what we made use of to the Confirmation of the first Doctrine.

Those very Considerations which commended to us the having of such Collections
and Models of Gospel Truths, do commend also the keeping and holding of them
fast as a sacred treasure. The end of having is keeping, and the end of keeping
is using; we cannot use unless we keep; and we cannot keep unless we have: The
Reasons therefore why we should get such Models of Evangelical Truths, will
sufficiently evidence the necessity of holding them fast.

All then that I shall do in the prosecution of the Doctrine shall be to show
you

HOW, or in what RESPECTS such Collections or Forms of Doctrine are to be HELD
FAST.

Now the Rules and Directions for the keeping of them are to be suited to the
several Orders and Sorts of Persons concerned in this great Trust and Depositum.

And they are of three Ranks and Conditions; Scil.
Rulers and Magistrates. Ministers. Christians of a more private rank and
relation.
suitable to each Station and Capacity must the Rule be;

Magistrates concerned in this charge.
First Rulers and Magistrates, they are to hold fast such forms of sound words.

1. Rulers and Magistrates, they are to keep these Models and Platforms of
Fundamental Truth; and that for thee Reasons.

1. For a test of the public Ministry.
1. That there may be a certain test for the public Ministry, that so they may
know whom they ought to encourage with their countenance and maintenance, as it
was Hezekiahs praise that he spoke comfortably to all the Levites that taught
the good knowledge of the Lord, 2 Chronicles. 30.22. Certainly Magistrates are to
take notice what kind of Doctrine is preached in their Dominions; for they are
bidden to be wise, and to be instructed, Psalm. 2.10. which imports more than
a bare negative act that they should take heed only they do not oppose Christ's
Doctrine; but something positive, that they should protect and countenance it.
The Magistrate has a great trust as to sacred things, for which he is
responsible to God; and many ways may he offend in the not discharging of it,
as by opposing the truth, by tolerating Errors, and which is a higher degree,
by countenancing those that broach them; to tolerate false Doctrines is a sin,
but to share out his respects equally to the Heterodox and Orthodox, is a
greater; much more when the Heterodox are only countenanced, and those that
preach the good word of the Lord in the Land are burdened with reproaches and
all manner of contempt. Certainly the least that can be expected from him, is
that the true Religion by his civil sanction should be preserved from reproach;
and the professors of it from being affronted in the exercise thereof.

2. Because without preserving of unity and uniformity in Religion, civil peace
cannot be long maintained; 2. Because civil peace is bound up in Ecclesiastical.
no differences being carried on with so much heat and earnestness of
contention as differences in matters of Religion; for, that which should be a
Judge of strifes, then becomes a party; and what should restrain our passions
feeds them: Therefore when one scorneth what another adoreth, Summus utriuquc
Inde furor vul^o quod nomina vicinorum O^it uterque lotus. Juvenal. Noununquam
tumultus Ecclesiarum antegressi, Reipublicae autem confusiones consecutae sunt.
Socrat. Scholast. Hist. Eccles lib. 4. in Proaemio. 3. For the keeping of youth
untainted.
there must needs be great contentions and exasperations of mind* and when
every man is left to hold what he lists in matters of Religion, all manner of
mischief and confusions must inevitably follow; and every one stickling for the
precedence of his party, there can be no solid union of heart under so vast and
boundless a liberty. Tumults in the Church do necessarily beget confusions in
the Commonwealth; for the Church and State, like Hippocrates twins, they
weep, and laugh, and live, and die together.

3. That youth may be kept untainted, and seasoned with good Principles in
Churches and Schools; the durable happiness of the Comm n-wealth lying much in
the education of youth which is the seed-plot of future felicity; and we use to
say that Errors in the first concoction are hardly mended in the second; when
youth are poisoned with Error in their first education, they seldom work it out
again in their age and riper years. But because the power of Magistrates in
Sacred things is much questioned, and we are usually slandered as a Rigid sort
of men that would plant Faith by the Sword, and are more for compulsion of
conscience than Information; I shall a little give you a taste of what we hold
to be the Magistrates duty in and about Sacred things.

We say therefore that Religion may be considered as to be planted; o^ as
already planted in a Nation. What is to be done when Religion is to be planted.
When it is to be planted, and has gotten, no interest or footing among a
people, the Preachers and Professors of it must run all hazards, and boldly own
the Name of Christ, whatever it c^st them; the only weapons which they have to
defend their way, are, Prayers and tears; and whatever Proselites they gain to
the faith of Christ, they must use no resistance, but only overcome by the
blood of the Lamb, and the word of their testimony, not loving their lives to
the death, Revel. 12.11. And thus did the Christian Religion get up in the face
of the opposite World, not by any Ne videretur Authoritate traxisse aliquos,
and veritatis ratio non pompa gratia praevaleret. Ambr.
public interest and the power of the long sword, but merely by its own
evidence and the efficacy of Gods grace accompanying the publication thereof;
And though it were a Doctrine contrary to nature, and did teach men to row
against the stream of flesh and blood, yet it prevailed without any Magistracy
to back it. The Primitive Christians, how numerous soever they were, never made
head against the Powers then in being, but meekly and quietly suffered all
manner of butcheries and tortures for the conscience of their duty to God. And
what we say concerning Religion in the general, holds true also concerning
Reformation or the restitution of the Collapsed state of Religion; when men
oppose themselves against the stream of corruptions which by a long succession
and descent run down against them, and are armed by Law and Power, they are in
patience to possess their souls, and to suffer all manner of extremity for
giving their testimony to the truths of God: And in this case we only press the
Magistrate to be wise or cautious that he do not oppose Christ Jesus, Psalm.
2.10.
by whom Kings Reign, and Princes decree Justice.

What the Magistrates duty is when Religion is planted
But when Religion is already planted, and received among a people, and has
gotten the advantage of Law and public Edicts in its favor, not only for its
security and protection, but also for its countenance and propagation, then it
becomes the peoples birthright as the Law of Moses is called the inreritance
of the Congregation of Jacob, Deuteronomy 33.4. and ought to be defended and
maintained by the Magistrate as well as other Laws and Privileges which are
made for the conservation, welfare, and safety of that Nation. Yea much more;
because if the Magistrate be the Minister of God for good, Romans 13.4. then he
is to take care of the chief good, which is Religion, as concerning not only
the bodies but souls of the people committed to his charge; and therein to take
example from the holy Magistrates of the people of the Jews who were zealous
for God in this kind.

The Government of Christ is to be owned publicly.
For first it is the will of Christ who was appointed to be King of Nations as
well as King of Saints, Rev. 15.3. not only to erect himself a Government in
the hearts of his people; but also to be publicly owned by Nations, as to the
Religion which he has established. There is a National acknowledgement of
Christ, as well as a Personal and Ecclesiastical. Christ is personally owned
when we receive him into our hearts: He is Ecclesiastically owned by his
worship in the Churches of the Saints: And Nationally owned, when the Laws and
Constitutions of the civil Government are framed so as to advance the interest
of his Scepter, and the Christian Religion is made a National Profession; this
is spoken of in many places of Scripture, Genesis 18.8. Isa. 55.5. Isa. 60.12.
Matthew. 28.20.

2. When Religion is thus received and imbodied into the Laws of a Nation, A
contempt to Christ when his interest is slighted.
it is the greatest scorn and affront that can be put upon Christ, that such an
advantage should be lost and carelessly looked after, when other Privileges and
birthrights of the people a e so zealously and with such heat and sharpness of
contest vindicated and asserted.

In Scripture God often debates the case with Nations upon this account, Jer.
2.9, 10, 11, 12, 13. He calls upon the Sun to look pale upon such a wickedness,
and the Creatures to stand amazed that any people should be so foolish as to
cast off their God, So Isa. 43.22. God complains of Israel they were grown
weary of him, and Mich. 6.2, 3. Hos. 8.12. The sum of all those Scriptures is
this; If Magistrates who are to open the gates for the King of glory to come
in, Psalm. 24. and to welcome Christ into their Dominions, should be so far from
opening the gates to him that they should turn him out when once entered, and
should look upon the great things of his Law as a strange thing, Hose 8.12.
that wherein they were not concerned, or which they knew not what to make of,
what a vile scorn is this put upon the Majesty of God?

It will be more tolerable for a Nation who had never known Christ, than after
a public and National owning of him, they should be cold, indifferent, and
negligent in his interest; if the business had been to introduce a Religion,
the crime of refusal were not so great, The Magistrate is to see that Religion
when once established, be not violated.
as when the business is to conserve and defend a Religion already received,
that it may be transmitted to posterity.

Briefly then, that which we say, is this, that a Religion received by a
Nation, and established by Laws, should not be violated, and the Magistrate is
to see that it be preserved against all open opposition and secret
underminings, and in no case contemned and- scorned. The consciences of men are
liable only to the judgment of God; but their words and practices come under
the Magistrates cognizance. Inquisition into men's thoughts we condemn; but
taking notice of their hard speeches and contemptuous revilings, and public
opposition against the truth, is that which we commend in the Christian
Magistrate; the Law of Theodosius concerning Heretics does fully express our
sense: Sibi tantummodo nocitura sentiant, aliis obfutura non pan dant.
If men will perish by holding pernicious Doctrines, let them perish alone; but
let not others perish with them by their holding them out. The Canon in this
case, is, Tit. 1.11.
Their mouths must be stopped; we contend not punishment so much (unless in
point of The Blasphemer must die, Levit. 24.16.
blasphemy) as prevention. If Seducers be not severely chastised, yet (like
wild beasts) they must be (...). Romans 15.1.
muzled, (that is the Metaphor) that they may do no harm; their mouths must be
stopped, lest by teaching things which they ought not, they subvert whole
houses. Once more; we are not such Rigid Imposers as the world does make us to
be, as that in lesser things wherein good men may err or differ, we should
presently call in the power of the Magistrate to avenge our quarrel; we know
there is a due latitude of allowable differences wherein the strong should bear
with the weak; and are so far from making use of civil censures in such
cases, Ministers Gods witnesses and Trustees to keep the truths of God.
that we think the Church should not use any extreme course, but rather all
manner of patience and indulgence. And thus much for the Magistrates duty.

The Minister's follows.

Secondly; Ministers are to hold fast this form of sound words; By Catechysing.
for they are Gods Witnesses to the present age, and Trustees for the future. 1 Timothy 1.11. The glorious Gospel of the blessed God which is committed to my
trust; and 1 Timothy 6.20. O Timothy, keep that which is committed to thy trust,
etc.

Now they are to keep it,

First by Catechizing and instilling these Principles into the hearts of young
ones: 2. Preaching.
Foundation stones must be laid with great exa^tness and care; for they support
the whole building. It seems by Heb. 6 2. that there was an Ap^stolical
Catechism wherein some Principles were laid as a foundation f^r all other
Christian Doctrine.

Secondly by assiduous preaching, that they may explain and apply these
Principles, and still keep up the remembrance of them in the Church: God that
has appointed Apostles and Prophets to write Scriptures, has also appointed
Pastors and Teacher^ to explain and apply Scriptures; Therefore are Evangelic l
Ministers called Prophets, because they are to interpret the Oracles of God:
Nabi signifying an Interpreter as well as a Foreteller of truths to come,
Ephesians. 4.11. It Is a part of our trust to keek these things still a foot. 2 Timothy
2.2. The things that thou have heard of me among many witnesses, the same
c^mmit thou to faithful men, who shall be able to teach others, by solid
explications, without innovating either as to the matter or expression; for
uncouth words make way for strange Doctrines.

Thirdly to vindicate them from the glosses and oppositions of Seducers; for
the good Shepherd must not only fodder the sheep, but hunt out the Wolf. (...).
This is part of our true;st for we are set (says the Apostle) for the defense
of the Gospel, Phil. 1.17. And we are to convince gainsayers, to hold fast the
Word of Truth, Tit. 1.2. (...), the word signifies to hold fast a thing which
others would wrest from us, Ministers must not be of too easy a spirit.
and implies that Ministers should be good at holding and drawing, and be able
to maintain the truth, when others would force it out of their hands.

Two things will hinder us in the discharge of our duty herein.

First a faulty easiness; the wisdom that is from above is gentle and James
4.17.
easy to be entreated, but it is in that which is good; in other things we must
be obstinate and resolute, and not betray the truths of God by our
condescentions and compliances. It is said of Chrysostom that he was (...), by
his own simplicity and candor often drawn into inconveniences; when this
goodness of nature is apt to abuse us, Ministers should awaken themselves by a
zeal for Gods glory; shall we be yiedling when his Truths are despised, his
Name blasphemed? No, let us resist them to the face, and give not place, no not
for an hour, Gal. 2.5, 11. as also by a comp^ssion over souls; shall we suffer
them to be seduced, and by droves led into error, and be sinfully silent? God
forbid.

Secondly, by a fearful cowardice; the Prophet complains, Act. 20.24.
none are valiant for the truth upon the earth, Jer. 9.3. We must stand to
these Principles, though it cost us bonds and imprisonments, yea life it self;
a good Shepherd will lay down his life for the sheep, Joh ^0. Christ did for
their Redemption, and we must, for their confirmation in the Faith, and not be
light and vain, off and on as our carnal interests be more or less befriended.
Thus for the Ministers duty.

The peoples follows.

Thirly, The people are to hold fast these Truths. Christians of all Ranks and
Sizes, People must hold fast.
they are to hold them fast in their judgments, memory, practice, and in
contending for the truth.

First, In their judgments; every Christian should have a Platform of sound
Doctrine; In their judgment.
not only some scraps and fragments of knowledge but a distinct and clear
deleination of Gospel Truth, that they may know things not only at random, but
in their order and dependence, Christians liable to two mistakes.
how they suit one with another: Two faults are Christians usually guilty of:
Either they content themselves with warm affections without knowledge; and then
are like a blind horse full of mettle, To rest in affection without judgment.
but ever and anon stumbling; their wild affections misguide them, not being
directed and governed by an answerable light. Or secondly, they content
themselves with loose Notions, without seeing the truths of God in their frame,
and so are never stable and ro^ted in the Faith; In loose Notions without
method.
therefore this should Christians first look after, Col. 2.2.
the riches of the full assurance of understanding in the Mysteries of
godliness.

Secondly, Christians must keep such Models of truth in their memory; the
memory is like the Ark wherein the holy things of God are to be kept. The
Spirit of Christ Jesus is given not only to teach us all things, but to BRING
ALL things to our REMEMBRANCE, 2. In their memories.
Joh. 14.26. and Scripture is written upon this occasion, not to lay in new
truths, but to keep the old in remembrance, 2 Pet. 3.1. This second Epistle I
write unto you by way of Remembrance. His first Epistle was like the Sermon,
the second as the Repetition; the first to inform the judgment, the second to
help their memories; so must Ministers pegge in one Sermon with another, never
leave repeating the same truths, till they are fastened upon their Auditors.
Phil. 3.1. To write the same things to you, to me it is not grievous, but to
you it is safe. Men's understandings are dull to conceive, hard to believe, and
their memories apt to forget; therefore we should press, if not; (...),
always the same things; which Hippius liked not; yet (...) much about the same
matters, as Socrates advised. The memory is a leaking vessel, therefore as the
Apostle exhorts, it concerns us (...), more abundantly to attend, to give the
more diligent heed; lest we let them slip, and thereby we lose the 2 John 8. To
live truth.
Ministers and our own labor;

Thirdly, Hold fast the Models of Divine Truth in your pratice a; practical mem
ry is the best memory; to live the truths which we know, is the best way to
hold them fast.

There are Heretical manners as well as Heretical Doctrines. Infidelis disputat
contra fidem, improbus Christianus vivit contra fidem Aug.
Profane Christians live against the Faith, whilst Heterodox Christians
dispute against the Faith: There be not a few that live Antimonianisme, and
Libertinisme, and Atheism, and Popery, whilst others Preach it: Apostates are
practical Arminians; a profane man, a practical Atheist. Whilst others
therefore live Error, do you live the truth; whilst others deny the Gospel, do
you live the Gospel: As you have received the truth as it is in Jesus, so walk
in it, to all well-pleasing; without this a man forsakes the truth while he
does profess it. They profess to know God, Tit. 1.16.
but in their works they deny him, being abominable, and disobedient, and unto
every good work disobedient.

Yea to live the Truths we hear, is the way not to hold them only, but to hold
them forth to others; as the Apostle speaks, To hold forth truth to others.
holding forth the Word of Life, (...). It is a Metaphor taken either from
Fire-lights upon the Seacoasts burning all night, Phil. 12.6.
the use whereof is to give notice to Seamen of some neighboring Rocks and
Quicksands that may endanger their Vessel; or else from Torch-bearers in the
nightime, who hold out their lights, that passengers may see their way in the
dark; according to which Metaphor our Savior calls true real Christians the
Lights of the world, a City set on a hill, Matthew. 5.14.
to enlighten the dark world with their beams of holiness.

It is a blessed thing when the Conversations of Christians are practical
Models of Gospel Truths, walking Bibles, holding forth the graces or
excellencies of him who has called them out of darkness into his mavelous
light. (...). 1 Pet. 2.9.


Fourthly, To contend for the truth.
Christians are to hold fast Models of truth by contending for the Truth,
against all the opposition of the reprobate world, in contending and publicly
owning the truth, whatever it cost them; God orders the love which the people
show to the truth, not seldom to be a restraint to carnal Magistrates when they
would introduce mischiefs into the Church by force and power, Matthew. 14.5. He
feared the multitude. Matthew. 21.46. They feared the multitude, because they
took him for a Prophet. Acts 4.21: They let them go because of the people: Thus
does God make use of the people, though contemptible for their quality, yet
considerabe for their number, as a bank of sand to keep back the waves of
furious and opposite greatness: Yea when the flood of Persecutions is already
broken in upon the Church, their zealous owning of the Truth keeps it alive,
and is a means to propagate it to after ages. We owe our present truths not
only to the disputations of the Doctors, but the death of the Martyrs who were
willing to resist unto blood, striving against sin, Heb. 12.4: By whose
flames, after ages see the truths of the Gospel more clearly.

USE.
The first Use may serve for Lamentation.

We live in a frozen and dull age, wherein men have learned to hold fast every
thing but the Truth; Rich men will hold fast their Estates, though Christ, his
Church and Cause have never so much need of them. Ignorant People will hold
fast their Ignorance; ever learning, but never able to come to the knowledge of
the truth: Superstitious people will hold fast their Superstitious Customs and
Idolatries: Vain people will hold fast their Fashions and Modes: Seduced
wrerches will hold fast their Errors; Non persuadebis etiamsi persuaseris; yea
they are bold and impudent in justifying and propagating their false Doctrines;
they bend their tongue like their bow for lies, but they are not valiant for
the Truth upon the Earth; Jer. 9.3.
while multitudes are outrageous against the Truth, few, very few are
courageous for it. We may take up that complaint, Isa, 1.21, 22. How is the
faithful City become an Harlot? how is our gold become dross? and our Wine
mixed with water? who would have thought England could have so quckly forgotten
Jesus Christ, and changed the truth of God into a lie? have the Nations been
guilty of such a thing! Jer. 2.9. The World once wondered to see itself turned
Arrian; England may wonder and be astonished to see itself turned Arminian,
Antinomian, Socinian, Anabaptist, Quaker, Papist, Atheist, any thing but a
Christian! This is a lamentation, and shall be for a lamentation; Oh that mine
head were waters, and mine eyes rivers of tears, etc.

And now my Brethren, to make some brief Application of what what has been
said, in order to this morning Exercise.

As you have heard, so you have seen, Application to the morning exercise.
this Month now elapsed has brought to your view an (...) or Model of sound
words; you have had as it were, the Sum and Substance of the Gospel preached
over in your hearing: I know it falls far short both in respect of Matter and
Method, of a perfect body of Divinity, an exact and full delineation of all the
chief Heads and Principles of Religion: But considering the smallness of the
Circle of this monthly course in which this Model was drawn, I dare take the
boldness to say, there has as much of the Marrow and Spirits of Divinity been
drawn forth in these few Morning Lectures, as can be rationally expected from
men of such various Studies, and assidnous labors in the Ministerial work.
Former ages have rarely heard so much Divinity preached over in many years, as
has been read in your ears in twenty six days: These few Sermons have
digested more of the Doctrine of faith, than some large volumes, not of a mean
consideration, now extant in the Church of God,

Truly, every single Sermon has been a little (...) within itself. Each
Subject in this morning Exercise has been handled in so ample a manner, and
with so much judgment, acuteness, and perspicuity, that it may well pass for
a little Treatise of Divinity; wherein many profound Mysteries have been
discust, and stated, not with more judgment in the Doctrine, than with life and
vigor in the Use and Application.

The Preachers have sought to find out acceptable words, Eccles. 12.
and that which was spoken was upright, even words of truth. Insomuch that a
man that had never heard of a Gospel before, this months conduct had been
sufficient, not only to have left him without excuse, but with the wise men's
STAR to have led him to Christ.

The more I dread to think what a tremendous account you have to make, who
after twenty, twirty, forty years Revelation of the Gospel, have the addition
of this month of Sabbaths also, to reckon for in that day when the Lord Jesus
shall be revealed from heaven in flaming fire, etc. if while in this Mirror, 2
These. 1.8.
beholding as in a glass the glory of the Lord, you are not changed into the
same image from glory to glory by the Spirit of the Lord.

I shall not undertake ( as Morning Exercise, May 1654.
formerly) to extract the Sum and Substance of what you have heard; I have
some hope to be saved that labor upon a better account.

I shall recount to you the Heads only, and Points of Christian Doctrine which
have been handled in this Monthly Exercise, that now in the close of all, you
may behold as in a Map or Table, the Method and Connection which they hold
amongst themselves.

(...), Or a Summary repetition of the Heads of Divinity preached upon in this
Course.

The first Divine (after the preparatory Sermon) that preached to you, began
with that which is the first and chief object of Knowledge and Faith; that a
and o in Divinity,

THERE IS A GOD,

Heb. 11.6. He that comes to God, must believe that GOD is, etc.

Hereupon, because if there be a God, then he is to be worshipped; and if to be
worshipped, then there must be a Rule of that worship; and if a Rule, it must
be of Gods own appointment; therefore

Second days work was, against all other Books and Writings in the world, to
Evince this Truth, the

SCRIPTVRES CONTAINED IN THE BOOKS OF THE OLD AND NEW TESTAMENT, are THE WORD
OF GOD;

2 Timothy 3.16. All Scripture is given by Inspiration of God.

By these Scriptures that great Mysterious Doctrine of the Trinity, which the
light of nature can no more discover than deny, was asserted and opened as far
as so profound a Mystery can well admit; and so

The third mornings work was to show,

THAT IN THE GODHEAD THERE IS A TRINITY OF PERSONS IN VN^TY OF ESSENCE; GOD THE
FATHER, GOD THE SON, AND GOD THE HOLY GHOST, God blessed for ever;

1 John 5.7. There are three that bear Record in Heaven, the FAHER, the WORD,
and the HOLY GHOST, and these three are ONE,

Creation of Man in a perfect, but mutable Estate, by the joint Power and
Wisdom of these three glorious Persons, was the

Fourth Subject opened from that Text, Eccles, 7.29. God made man upright, but
they have sought out many inventions.

Man thus Created, God entered into a Covenant with him, and so the COVENANT OF
WORKS which God made with Adam and all his posterity; succeeded in order to be
the Subject matter of the

Genesis 12.17. In the day thou eatest thereof, thou shall surely die.

This Covenant no sooner made (almost) then broken; the work of him that
preached the

THE FALL OF ADAM, and therein more specially of PECCATVM ORIGINALE ORIGINANS,
or ORIGINAL SIN IN THE

FIRST SPRING and fountain of it; the Scripture Romans 5.12. By one man, sin
entered into the world, etc.

The Fruit and sad effect whereof being the loss of Gods image, and the total
depravation and corruption of man's nature;

Peccatum originale originatum, or, Original corruption in the STREAM and
DERIVATION OF IT TO POSTERITY; from

Psalm. 1.5. Behold, I was shapen in iniquity, and in Sin did my Mother conceive
me.

This is the Source of all that evil that has invaded all Mankind; that
therefore which naturally succeeded in the

MAN'S LIABLENESS TO THE CURSE; or the MISERY OF MAN'S ESTATE BY NATVRE;

Deuteronomy. 27.1. Cursed is every one that continues not in all the things of the
Law to do them; or Ephesians. 2.3. By nature the children of wrath;

Man's impotency to help himself out of this miserable estate, was the next sad
Prospect presented to your view, by that Reverend Brother that preached the
ninth course, and he took his rise from Romans 5.6. When we were without
strength, Christ died for the ungodly.

That the doctrine of man's impotency, when it had laid him in the dust, might
not leave him there; the

COVENANT OF REDEMPTION, consisting of the transaction between

God and Christ from all Eternity; from that Text, Isa. 53.10. He shall see the
travel of his soul and be satisfied.

In the eleventh place, THE COVENANT OF GRACE REVEALED IN THE GOSPEL, came next
to be unfolded, as being (if I may so say) the Counterpart of the Covenant of
Redemption, which the Preacher to whom the

Heb. 8.6. Jesus Christ, has obtained a more excellent Ministry, by how much
also he is the Mediator of A BETTER COVENANT.

This done, it was very seasonable to let you hear of the Mediator of the
Covenant; which was performed by the

JESUS CHRIST in his PERSON, NATVRES, and OFFICES, from that Scripture,

1 Timothy 2.5. There is one God, and one Mediator between God and man, the man
Christ Jesus.

Next to his Natures and Offices, it was proper to treat of the two states of
Jesus Christ; and therefore the

Christ's state of Humiliation, out of

Phil. 2.7, 8. He made himself of no reputation, and took upon him the form of
a Servant, and being found in fashion as a man, he humbled himself, and became
obedient to death, even the death of the Cross.

CHRIST'S STATE OF EXALTATION, out of the ninth verse, Wherefore God has highly
exalted him, and given him a Name which is above every Name, etc.

Time not allowing a more copious and distinct enquiry into this great Mystery,
God manifested in the flesh; that which came in the THE SATISFACTION WHICH
CHRIST MADE TO DIVINE JUSTICE; and that was done on that Text,

Col. 1.20. And (having made peace through the blood of his Cross) by him to
reconcile all things unto himself; I say, whether they be things in earth, or
things in heaven.

And because the Redemption made by Christ upon the Cross, signifies nothing
in effect without the Application of it to the conscience: The Minister to whom
the

EFFECTUAL CALLING, from Romans 8.30. Moreover, whom he did predestinate, them he
also called.

In, and by which Call, the soul being really, but yet Spiritually joined and
united to Jesus Christ; that which fell next under consideration in the

The SAINTS UNION WITH JESUS CHRIST.

His Scripture was, 1 Cor. 6.17. He that is joined to the Lord, is one Spirit.

And inasmuch as Union is the Foundation of Communion, Interest in Christ the
Fountain and Springhead of Fellowship with Christ; the Subjects which followed
naturally to be handled, were Justification, and Filiation.

JUSTIFICATION in the eighteenth Course, out of Romans 5.1. Being justified by
Faith, we have peace with God. And the Nineteenth,

FILIATIN, or Divine Sonship to God; which branching it self into these two
great privileges of the Covenant ADOPTION. REGENERATION;
the one whereby out State is changed; by the other, our Natures, they were
twisted together into one Sermon, on that portion of Scripture, John 1.12. To
as many as received him, to them he gave power to become the SONS of God,
even to them that believe on his Name.

In which Filiation, it being evident by the Scripture quoted, that Faith has
such a special ingrediency, therefore it was seasonable in the next place to
speak of SAVING FAITH; which was the Subject preached on in the

Believe on the Lord Jesus Christ, and thou shall be saved, and thy house.

And although Repentance be usually before faith, in the order of sense and
feeling; yet faith being before Repentance, in the order of Nature and
operation, it being the primum mobile in the orb of grace, (as unbelief in the
orb of sins, Heb. 3.12.) hence it was proper, next after Faith, to speak to
you of REPENTANCE, Him has God exalted to be a Prince, and a Savior, for to
give repentance, and remission of sins.

Matthew. 3.8.
And because true repentance is always accompanied with fruits meet for
Repentance; therefore as the great and comprehensive fruit thereof,

Nature, necessity, and Excellency of HOLINESS from these words of the Apostle,

Heb. 12.14. Follow peace with all men, and holiness, without which none shall
see the Lord.

This gives the Believer a capacity, though not a merit of a joyful
resurrection, and the next Preacher took therefore the RESURRECTION

Twenty third morning, and for his Text, those words of St. Paul. Acts 26.8.
Why should it be thought a thing incredible with you, that God should raise the
dead?

And as upon the Resurrection follows the day of Judgment; in the same Method,
the discourse of the LAST JVDGEMENT succeeded, and was the work of the

G^d has appninted a day in the which he will judge the world in Righteousness,
by that man whom he has ordained.

sentence of that day was the next thing in order to be considered: and
although the sentence of the Elect be first in the process, yet because it is
last in the execution, as appears in comparing the 34. verse of the 25. of
Matthew. with the 46. therefore the TORMEMTS of HELL was the sad and startling
Subject which the twenty fifth Preacher insisted on, from Math. 25.41. --
Everlasting Fire prepared for the Devil and his Angels, etc.

And when the Righteous have had the honor as Assessors with Christ, to behold
with their eyes that sentence executed upon the Reprobate, and their persons
dragged away into everlasting burnings by the Ministry of the infernal Angels:

Then the joyful sentence shall be accomplished upon the Elect of God, and they
shall ride in triumph with Jesus Christ the King of Saints, into the gates of
the New Jerusalem; and so the

Subject with which the last Minister did most sweetly close this morning
Exercise, was the JOYS of HEAVEN; and his Text was Matthew. 25.34. Receive the
Kingdom prepared for you from the foundation of the world.

And thus honorable and beloved, I have prese ted you with the Epitomy or
Compendium of sound words, which has Methodically been delivered in the course
of this month in diverse of the chief Heads and Points of Gospel-D^ctrine.

There is no man that is acquainted with the Body of Divinity, but may easily
observe this Method or S^st^me to have been in some Points (possibly)
redundant, but in more defective: He that will object the former, may consider
that every man sees not by the same light; insomuch as if twenty Divines should
have the drawing up of twenty several Models of Divinity, not two of them would
meet exactly in the same heads or order; in this case therefore, veniam
p^timusque damusque vicissim.

And he that will object the latter, must also remember, that if we had taken
in more Points, there must have been more days, which the course of this
Exercise does not allow.

Sufficient to the days has been the labor thereof; and when we cannot do
all we would, it his honorable to do what we can: To the glory of God be it
spoken; since this Exercise was first set up, such a month has not been known
in this City.

A word of Exhortation.

What now remains, men and brethren, but that the Ministers of the (...).
Cyril. Hieros. praef. Cat. Nostrum est dicere, vestrum vero agere, Dei autem
perficere.
Gospel having done their work in holding out unto you a Form or Model of sound
words; you stir up your selves in the strength of Jesus Christ to do yours? and
what is that, but that which is commended here to Timothy, That you hold fast
the form of sound words, which you have received of them?

They have held it forth, it concerns you to hold it fast.

First see therefore that you hold it fast in your understandings.

My brethren, in this Months Exercise you have had many of the chief Heads and
Points of the Christian Faith unvailed to you, (...). Idem ut supra. Non
existimes institutiones istas homiliis esse similes, etc. Sed haec quae per
ordinem tradimus documenta, etc.
not only as so many single truths, and several precious Jewels to lie by you,
but (that to which possibly most of you have been strangers hitherto, as far as
the design could well suffer) Methodized as it were into a Chain of Pearls to
wear about necks; truths fitly joined together and compacted into a body, by
that which every joint supplyeth.

Now your duty is, to wear this Chain or Bracelet carefully that it may not be
broken. Your labor must be to imprint this Method of truth in your minds and
judgments, by virtue whereof you may be able to know them in their Series and
Connection; and when you hear any of these Points handled in Sermons, you may be
able to know one truth from another, where they are to be fixed in the Orb of
Divinity, and so to refer them to their own proper place and station; which
will prove to be a greater advantage to your proficiency in the knowledge of
Christ then you can easily believe. It is observable, Romans 8.28. when the Holy
Ghost having hinted effectual calling as the ground of that blessed truth, that
all things work for good to those that love God; yet he mentions it again in
the very next verse; and why? but to show us what place it obtains in the
golden chain of salvation; how it takes its room between Predestination and
Justification; Whom he did predestinate, them also he CALLED, and whom he
CALLED, them he justified; of so great moment it is not only to know
Gospel Truths, but how to posture them in their proper rank and file, where
every truth is to stand: This advantage in a great measure you have had by this
Months Exercise; see that you improve it to the clearing of your
understandings in the Method of Gospel Doctrines.

Secondly, Hold them fast in yor Memory.

Truly the Order of this Months Exercise, if you be not wanting to your
selves, will not contribute less strength to your memories than light to your
understandings. The truths themselves have been a Treasure given you by your
heavenly Father; and the Method will serve you for a sack or purse to keep them
in: and truly it would be a labor neither unprofitable nor uncomely to take
so much pains your selves, and to teach your Families to do so too, scil. to
Conne this Model without book; and the Lord teach you to get them by heart.

You may once a week, or so, revolve them thus in your minds.

I. There is a God. II. The Scriptures are the Word of God. III. In the
Godhead there be three Persons or Subsistencies, Father, Son, and Holy Ghost,
God blessed for ever. IV. God Created man in a perfect, but in a mutable
estate. V. The Covenant of works God made with man in his innocence. VI.
Original sin in the first spring of it, in Adams first transgression. VII.
Original corruption derived from thence into man's nature. VIII. Man's
liablenesse to the curse, or the misery of man's state by nature. IX. Man's
impotency to help himself out of this estate. X. The Covenant of Redemption, or
the transaction between God and Christ from all Eternity, about man's salvation.
XI. The Covenant of Grace revealed in the Gospel. XII. Christ the only
Mediator between God and man, considered in his Person, Natures, and Offices.
XIII. Christ's state of Humiliation. XIV. Christ's state of Exaltation. XV.
Christ's satisfaction to Divine Justice. XVI. Effectual calling. XVII. Union
with christ. XVIII. Justification by Christ's Righteousness. XIX. Sonship to
God, consisting in Adopition. Regeneration.
XX. Saving Faith. XXI. Repentance. XXII. Holiness. XXIII. The Resurrection.
XXIV. The last Judgment. XXV. Hell. XXVI. Heaven.
Christians, this, and other such like Catalogues or Forms of the Articles of
Christian Faith imprinted upon your memories, will be of great benefit and
service to you. Do ye serve your memories, and your memories will serve you;
(...). Cyril. Hieros. praef. Catechis.
labor to get them so imprinted upon your memories, that they may never be
blotted out.

Thirdly, Hold fast; yea hold forth these precious Truths delivered to you in
your lives and conversations.

Christians, let it be your care (and behold it shall be your Deuteronomy. 4.6.
wisdom in the eyes of all the beholders) to live this morning Exercise, the
glory whereof has filled this Assembly for a month together. To engage and
quicken you herein, let me mind you of one rare advantage this Model carries
with it, above most of the acute and learned Treatises of Schoolmen, or solid
Tractates of Catechetical Divines, who have taken great pains in opening and
stating the Principles of Christian Religion.

The Reverend Divines who have traveled in this service of your Faith, have in
their several Sermons with singular skill and piety, brought down Principles
unto practice, and improved all their Doctrines to Use and Application; wherein
they have showed themselves Workmen that need not be ashamed; wise Builders
that know how to handle the Trowel as well as the Sword; and that made it their
design to build up their hearers in holiness as well as in knowledge: The
School and the Pulpit met together; the Doctor and the Pastor have kissed each
other. Omne tulit punctum qui miscuit utile dulci.
They have not discust the Doctrines of Faith in a jejune frigid speculative
way only; but what they cleared to the judgment, they wrought it home upon the
heart and affections, with such warmth and sweetness, as that the hearers
seemed for the present to be carried into the mountain of transfiguration,
where they cried out with Peter, It is good for us to be here: So that although
their Sermons were very large, yet the greatest part of their Auditories
thought they had done too soon; and went away praising God that had given such
gifts unto men.

Oh let it be your care, dearly Beloved, that as this Model has been delivered
unto you, so you may be delivered into it: Romans 6.17. (...). The Form of
doctrine into which ye were delivered. Efficacius vitae quam lnguae
testimonium. Ber. Confession. Bernard.
What a sore judgment will abide such as suffer all these morning influences
to pass away as water over a swans back; that come the same from these morning
visions, they came to them. How shall we escapt, if we neglect so great
salvation?

Hold it forth I say Christians, in your lives; the Conversation is a better
testimony to the truth then the confession.

I have met with a general vote in the Auditory, that attended this morning
Ordinance, that these Sermons might be Printed; that so what has once past
upon your ears, might be exposed to your eye; whereby you might stay and fix
upon it with the more deliberation. Whether I may prevail with the Brethren, or
no for their second travel in this Service, I know not.

There is one way left you, wherein you may gratify your own desires, and
Print these Sermons without their leave, though I am confident, not without
their consent, and that is,

PRINT THEM IN YOUR LIVES AND CONVERSATIONS.

Live this morning Exercise in the sight of the world, that men may take notice
you have been with Jesus:

You have been called up with Moses into the Mount to talk with God. Now you
come down, oh that your faces might shine; that you would commend this morning
Exercise by an holy life, that you may be manifestly declared to be the Epistle
of Christ ministered by US. 2 Cor. 3.3.


Let your light so shine before men, that they may see your good works, and
glorify your Father which is in heaven. Matthew. 5.16.


To that end

Take along with you these two great helps in the Text FAITH. LOVE.


Hold fast the form of sound words in FAITH and LOVE. I know some Expositors
interpret these as the two great COMPREHENSIVE HEADS of sound words or
Gospel-Doctrine, in this (...); Faith and Love: Faith toward God, and Love
toward men: Faith the sum of the first Table, and Love of the second; or
Faith in Christ, and Love to Christ; or Faith as comprehending the Credenda,
things to be believed; Love as comprehending the Facienda, things to be done.
But I am sure it is not against the Analoge of Faith, or the Context to improve
these two as Mediums to serve this command of holding fast sound Doctrine. And
so in the entrance it was propounded, as the fourth Doctrine, scil. Faith and
Love are as it were the two hands whereby we hold-fast the Form of sound words.

1. Faith.
First then (Christians) look to your Faith; that is an hold-fast grace, which
will secure your standing in Christ. As unbelief is the root of Apostasy, and
falling back from the Doctrine of the Gospel, Heb. 3.12. So Faith is the spring
of Perseverance. 1 Pet. 1.5. Kept by the power of God through faith to
salvation. Faith keeps the Believer, and God keeps his faith; Now faith keeps
the believer close to his Principles upon a twofold account.

Faith realizeth Gospel Truth.
1. Because faith is the grace which does REALIZE all the Truths of the Gospel
unto the soul. Evangelical Truths to a man that has not faith, are but so many
pretty Notions, which are pleasing to the fancy, but have no influence upon
the Conscience; they may serve a man for discourse, but he cannot live upon
them: suffering Truths (in particular) are pleasing in the Speculation, in
times of prosperity; but when the hour of temptation comes, they afford the
soul no strength to carry it through sufferings, and to make a man go forth
unto Christ without the Camp, bearing his reproach.

Heb. 13.13.
But of Faith, says the Aposte, it is (...), and (...); the substance of things
hoped for, and the evidence of things not seen; faith makes all Divine Objects
(although very Spiritual and subtle in their own nature) faith makes them (I
say) so many realities, so many solid and substantial verities; it gives them a
being, not in themselves, but unto the believer: and of invisible it makes them
visible; as it is said of Moses, he saw him that was invisible; How? by faith,
verse 23.24: that which was invisible to the eye of nature, was visible to the
eye of faith. Faith brings the object and the faculty together. Heb. 11.27.
Hence now men yet in their unregeneracy, though happily illuminated to a high
degree of Gospel-Notion, in time of tribulation will fall away, and walk no
more with Jesus, because through the want of Faith. Divine Truth had no rooting
in their hearts; all their knowledge is but a powerless notion floating in the
brain, and can give no reality or subsistence to Gospel-verities: Knowledge
gives luster, but Faith gives being; knowledge does irradiate, but Faith does
realize; knowledge holds ou^ light, but faith adds life and power.

It is Faith my Brethren, whereby you stand; 2 Timothy 1.12.
Faith is that whereby a man can live upon the truth, and die for the truth; I
know whom I have believed; and I am persuaded that he is able to keep that
which I have committed unto him against that day. Look to your Faith
Christians. For again, Faith fetches strength from Christ.


Secondly, Faith will help you to fetch strength from Jesus Christ, to do, to
suffer, to live, to die for Jesus Christ, and the truths which he has
purchased, and ratified by his own blood, Phil. 4, 13. I can do all things
through Christ which strengthens me. Faith invests the soul into a kind of
Omnipotency; I can do all things: Other men's impossibilities are faiths
triumph: Faith is an omnipotent grace, because it sets a work an Omnipotent
God. In the Lord I have righteousness and strength, is the boast of faith, Isa.
45.24. Righteousness for Justification, and strength for Sanctification; and
for carrying on all the duties of the holy life: this is insinuated in my Text,
Hold fast, etc. in FAITH which is in CHRIST JESUS: So that if it were demanded
How shall we hold fast? the answ. is by Faith: how does faith hold fast? in
Christ Jesus; scil. as it is acted by, and as it acts upon Jesus Christ. Jesus
Christ is a Fountain of strength, Psalm. 71.16.
and that strength is drawn out by faith; hence David's Resolve, I will go in
the strength of the Lord God, I will make mention of thy Righteousness, even
of thine only. 2. Love.


The second grace which you must look to is LOVE. Love is another hold-fast
grace, I held him, and would not let him go, said the Spouse of her Beloved,
Cant. 4.3. I tell you sirs, Love will hold fast the truth, when Learning will
let it go; the reason is, because Learning lies but in the head, but Love
rests in the heart, and causes the heart to rest in the thing or person
beloved.

I cannot dispute for Christ, said the poor Martyr, but I can dye for Christ.

Love will say to the truth, as she said to her Mother in Law, Whether thou
go I will go, and where thou lodgest I will lodge; thy people shall be my
people, and thy God my God; where thou die, I will die, and there will I be
buried; the Lord do so to me, Ruth. 1.16, 17.
and more also, if ought but death part me and thee.

Genesis 34.3.
Love is the glue that makes the heart cleave to the Object; as it is said of
Shechem, His soul clave unto Dinah the daughter of Jacob.

Minuit Felix octa.
Love is the twist of souls Crederes unam animam in duobus esse divisam, it is
but one soul that informs Lovers.

Christians, if you would hold fast the truth, LOVE IT. Love hates putting
away: 2 These. 2.11, 12
when ever your love begins to decay, you are in danger of Apostasy. For this
cause God shall send them strong delusions to believe lies; for what cause?
why, because they received not the love of the truth.

Christians, look to your standing; there is much of this judicial blast
abroad; the generality of Professors have contented themselves with, and
rejoiced in the Light of the Truth, and in the Notion of the Truth, and in the
expressions of the Truth, but they have lost their love to the truth. Parts
without grace has been the precipice of this evil and adulterous generation:
the foolish Virgins of this age have got Oil only in their Lamps, but none in
their Vessels, and so perish.

2 Pet. 3.17.
You therefore Beloved seeing ye know these things before, beware lest you also
being led away with the error of the wicked fall from your own steadfastness.

Let it be your care to receive the truth in the power of the truth, in the
impressions of the truth upon your hearts, in the love of the truth: Love the
truth, even when the truth seems not to love you; when it makes against your
Carnal interests; when it calls for your right eye, and your right hand: The
right eye of your sinful pleasure; the right hand of your dishonest gain: when
the truth comes to take away all your false Principles, and to take away all
your false evidences; not to leave you worth a Duty, or a Church-priviledge,
not to leave you so much as a Creed, or a Paternoster, or a good meaning: but
casts you out of all, which self, and flesh has counted your gain in point of
salvation, Ezech. 16.5.
( Phil. 3.7.) to the loathing and abhorring of your persons, etc. Yet even
then I say, Receive the truth in the love of it: God intends you more good in
it then you are aware of: and therefore say with young Samuel, Ure se^a,
corripe, ut ae^ernum parcas, Bern.
Speak Lord, for thy servant hears; and with Bernard, do Lord, wound me,
scorch me, slay me, spare me not now, that thou may spare me for ever.

Thirdly, There is yet another means, Ver. 14. (...).
and that is in the verse next to my Text, relating to the same duty, though
under a various expression.

That good thing which was committed to thee. KEEP. The good or excellent trust
and depositum; was either the Ministerial Office, with the gifts and graces
which Timothy received by Ordination for the edifying of the Church; or else

The form of sound words here committed to him in my Text: whichsoever, this
duty is incu^cated upon Timothy again and again, that he must keep it, (...);
preserve it as under Lock and Key; and says Beza, He keeps his depositum that
improveth it so, that the depositor finds no cause why he should take it away.

But how shall Timothy, or any other Evangelical Minister or Christian be able
so to keep it? it follows (...), etc. Occupatio est.
by the Holy Ghost; The duty indeed is very difficult, but by calling in the
help of the Spirit of God, Believers shall be enabled to do it; and he is not
far from every one of them; Romans 8.26. Col. 1.29.
for so it follows by the Holy Ghost WHICH DWELLS IN US; He is IN them as a
Principle of life and power by his virtue and influence helping their
infirmities, and working in them mightily: Great is the opposition that
Believers meet withal: and Satan, and this present evil world has been too
hard for many; not Professors only, but Ministers also, men that seemed to be
stars of the first magnitude, they have proved to be but falling-stars, mere
Comets, that for a time make a great blaze, but quickly extinguish: They went
on from us, because they were not of us, 1 John 2.19.

But real Saints, true Believers shall hold out; why? because, greater is he
that is in them, then he that is in the world, 1 John 4.4. -- keep, by the HOLY
GHOST THAT DWELLS IN US.

Christians, walk in the Spirit, and pray for the Spirit; cry mightily to God
for the continual presence and operation of the Holy Ghost; and for your
encouragement, Luke 11.13.
take along with you that blessed promise of our Savior.

If ye then being evil, know how to give good gifts unto your children, how
much more shall your heavenly Father give the holy Spirit to them that ask him?

Now to the King eternal, immortal, invisible, 1 Timothy 1.7.
the only wise God, be honor, and glory, for ever and ever. Amen.
FINIS.
Books Printed for Ralph Smith, at the Bible in Cornhill.
THE works of that learned and laborious Divine John Weemse, in four Volumes,
4. Mr. Byfield on the Collossions, fol. Mr. Thomas Edwards Gangraena, four
Volumes in 4. Ainsworths works, fol. And his communion of Saints, 12. Dr.
Staughtons heavenly conversation, 12. Bp. Downam on the Covenant of grace, 12.
Robins Essays, 12. Mr. Dicksons Exposition on Matthew. Mr. Brinsley a learned
Treatise of Christ's Mediatorship, and the souls implantion, 8. Mr. Brinsley
Brazen Serpent, and Christ's Membership -- Mr. Dicksons Exposition on the whole
book of the Psalms, one Volume, 8. second edition. Mr. Watsons works, viz. 1.
The Art of Divine Contentment, the fourth edition. 2. The Christians Charter,
showing the privileges of believers in this life, and the life to come, the
fifth edition. Mr. Ashes Sermon, at Mr. Whitakers funeral -- Dr. Spurstow on
the Promise, second edition. Retorford on the Covenant of grace -- Mr. Cottons
Exposition on the book of Ecclesiastes and Canticles, second edition. A learned
Treatise, proving the Deity of the Holy Ghost, by Mr. Estwick. Mr. Gurnals
Christian Armor, third Edition. Mr. Hutcheson on the Gospel according to St.
John, in fol. On the twelve small Prophets, second edition. Mr. Gurnals
Christians Armor, the second part. Dr. Guile on the Canticles.
AN ALPHABETICAL TABLE Relating to the chief Heads handled in this TREATISE.
A.
ADAM able of Creation, to keep the Law. p. 108, 109. The one man by whom sin
entered into the world. p. 136. His sin is entailed on all his seed. 137, 138.
transmitted by imputation. p. 139, and 140. made ours without any impeachment
of Gods justice. p. 141. by generation, not imitation. p. 142, 143. hurt
received by him, must quicken the acceptance of the second Adam. p. 145. his
sin will not be our acquittance. p. 148. Advantage great by systems and modules
of Religion. p. 16, 17, 18, 19. Adoption, its kinds. p. 436. its name
explained. 437. Divine differs from humane Adoption. p. 438. Adoption
presupposes Vocation, Regeneration, and Justification. p. 438. it entitles to
God, Christ, and Heaven. ibid. Adoption, the properties. p. 439. and
privileges of it. p. 440. Adoption is different from Regeneration, yet not
divided from it. p. 446. Adoption an effect of faith. p 469. Affections unruly,
cashiered when we come to heaven. p. 650. Angels, their service to the Lord
Jesus Christ. p. 323, 324. not confirmed, not reconciled by Jesus Christ as
Mediator. p. 338, 339. Antinomians refuted. p. 423, 424. Apparel of Saints in
heaven. p. 652. 653. Atheism three sorts. Vita. page 51, 52. Voto. page 51,
52. Judicio. page 51, 52.
Assent to Gods being and bounty, ground of Addresses to him. p. 30. Assurance
an effect of faith. p. 472.
B.
Bars to communion with God, three; and how removed. p. 272. Barring sin,
imports punishment. p. 346. Belief of Gods being, the foundation of Religion.
p, 30. fountain of obedience. p. 54. Belief of Christ to be the Son of God, is
not easy. p. 66. Believing sinner, the subject of Gospel-repentance. p. 489.
Believers, their dignity and duty. page 433. Believers united to Christ. p.
278. Believers whom. p. 379. Believers persons, graces, and duties, relate to
Christ. p. 395, 396. Birthright despised, is dreadful. p. 448. Blessedness of
mans-natural rectitude. p. 111. Blessed estate of the New Covenant. p. 254,
259. Blessed, how said of the Saints. p. 664, 665. Bodies of Saints reunited
to souls. p. 657. Bodies of Saints and sinners differ at Resurrection. p. 591,
592. Body of man subject to Gods wrath. p. 184. Body, its very self-same
substance shall be raised. p. 591, 592, 593. Its prime endowments at
Resurrection. p. 593, 594. Bodily infirmities shaken off in heaven. p. 651.
Blood of sin to be shed for the blood of Christ. p. 296. Bowing at the Name of
Jesus, what it means. p. 321. by whom to be done. p. 322, 323.
C.
Cause encourages to suffer. p. 2, 3. Captain encourages contest. ibid.
Calling effectual. p. 353. what it is, and how wrought. p. 357, 358. Called,
who. p. 359. few. p. 360. by what. ib. from what causes. p. 361, 362, 363. by
what means. p. 365. to what end. p. 366. when. p. 367. Call is holy. ib.
heavenly. p. 368. without noise. p. 370. immutable. p. 371. Care accompanies
true r pentance. 541. Case of man fallen, helpless by nature 207. Catechismes
commended. 21. Children of God by Regeneration and Adoption. 435. Children of
God, their carriage directed. 448, 449, 450. Christ is Lord, how. 330, 331. a
good Captain. 2, 3. Christ is truly God. 266, 267. and truly man. 268. God and
man. 269. Christ and promises, not God the immediate object of saving faith.
460. Christians changes, three. 557. Christian Religion reasonable. 483. Come
ye blessed, what kind of speech. 666, 667. Command to Adam and Covenant of
works. 122. Complaints against God, charmed. 267. Compassion to brethren,
shows a sense of our own natural weakness. 215. Communion an evidence of
union with Christ. 385. Conditions in order to man's Redemption between God the
Father, and God the Son. p. 222, 223. Conquest of enemies, an effect of Faith.
470. Conscience proves that there is a God. 43, 44. Conscience engenders
fear. 46, 47. Consent of Nations universal and perpetual, proves that there is
a God. 48. Confession of sin a part of Repentance. 509, 510. How to be made.
511, 512, 513, 514. Conviction, wherein it consists, and how it acts. 493, 494.
Contrition, wherein it consists. 496, 497. Conversion, its parts. 502. Crown of
Saints in heaven, what. 654. Its threefold wreath. 655, 656. Covenant what it
means. 123, 124, 235. Covenants in Scripture. 235. Covenant Natural, what it
is. 236. Legal, what it is. 237, 238. Evangelical, what it is. 239. Covenant,
an act of condescension in God. 130. Imports Gods promise, and man's duty. 239.
Gods dealing with Adam in Paradise, how and why called a Covenant. 125.
Covenant of Works wherein it consists. p. 126, 127. How and why given by Moses.
128, 129. Israel was not under it; ibid. Men out of Christ, yet under it. 130.
Covenant of Redemption what it is, and between whom. 216, 217, 218, 219. It is
to be particularly improved by Believers. 230, 231, 232. It confirms the
Covenant of Grace, its blessings. 228, 229. Covenant what. 233. Gospel Covenant
the best of Covenants. 235, 239. Covenant of Works and Grace, are to be
differenced by men. 131. Covenant of Redemption different from Covenant of
Grace. 218. Creation the work of God. 31. Man created holy and mutable. 105.
Creatures execute Gods wrath on man. 189. Themselves liable to Gods wrath. 190.
Creeds, Apostles, Athanasii, Nicene, etc. justified. 20. Curse of the Law due
to man by nature. 181. Cure of fallen man, Omnipotent. 208.
D
Death of Christ its kind, manner and grounds. p. 283. The Reasons thereof.
290, 291, 292. Death of Christ a sacrifice, and only so possible. 342.
Deserving cause of Christ his death. 345. Death of Christ was in our place and
stead. 347. Diligence in duty and readiness to dye for Christ, but a
reasonable recompense for his death for us. 297, 299. Christ dyed willingly,
obediently and humbly. 287, 288, 289. Death of Christ a pregnant Argument to
Repentance. 528, 529, 530. Death destroyed by the death of Christ. 303. Desire
accompanies Repentance. 544. Dependence on God the duty of such as believe God
is. 60, 61. Devil an enemy to Faith. 481. Devils subject to Jesus Christ. 326,
327. Devil limited by Christ. 328. Doctrine of Trinity to be prized. 82.
Dominion of Saints. 442.
E
Elect dead in sin before called, and poor in the world. p. 359. Entrance of
sin into the world, what and how. 136. Enemies of man foiled by the death of
Christ. 301. Entertainment of Christ. 434. Epistle to the Romans, a Module of
Religion. 8. to the Hebrews. 9. to Galathians. ibid. Ephesians. 10. Timothy and
Titus. ibid. Errors are obviated by a Module of Religion. 12, 14. Errors about
Repentance. 55. Error in fundamentals inconsistent with Faith. 480. Morning
Exercise when it begun, and how profitable it has been, 23, 24. Duties toward
it. 25. Extremity of hell torments by their inflammation, fire, and
preparation, and association with Devils. 628, 629, 630, 631. Eternity the
property of hell torments. 632, 633. Evidences of eternal life laid down in a
Module. 15. Exaltation of Christ opposed to his Humiliation. 306, 307. Its
priority to his humiliation, as a merit or mere antecedent, discussed, 308 309.
it was exceeding high. 311. Exaltation of Christ by three steps 312, 313, 314.
F
Faith commended. p. 455, 456. Faith distinguished into its kinds. 456, 457.
Faith defined. 449. By its genus and subject. 460. causes 461, 462, 463, 464,
465, 466, 467. Effects. 468, 469, 470, 471, 472, 473, 474. properties. 475,
476, 477, 478. and opposites. 479. 480, 481. Faith if saving, receives whole
Christ on judgment and choice. 475. Faith grows and persevereth, and
purifieth. 477, 478, 479. Faith and salvation how connexed. 473, 474. Faith
strengthened by the Covenant of Redemption. 228. Faith how it justifies. 421.
Faith greatly opposed. 480. Faith goes before Repentance in order of nature as
its cause. 490. Faith in its essential acts without its reflections, is the
cause of Repentance. 491. Faith of Scriptures authorities to be strengthened.
103, 104. False Repentance seven kinds; viz. Popish. 515. Pagan. 516. Profane.
ibid. Legal. 517. Slaves. ibid. Sullen. p. 518. Quakers Repentance. ibid. 519.
Fall of man was from his own mutable, self-determining will. 111. Federal
transaction did pass between God the Father and Son, and that from all
eternity. 219, 226. Fear of God, the duty of such who believe God is. 58, 59.
Fear accompanies true Repentance. 542. Filiation to God is by Adoption and
Regeneration. 447. Filial privileges Believers comforts. 451, 452, 453. Flesh
an enemy to Faith. 480. Flesh crucified by union with Christ. 391, 392. Form
of sound words to be held fast. 670. By Magistrates how. 674, 675, 676, 677. By
Ministers how. 678, 679. By the People how. 680, 681. Freedom of God, Father
and Son in transacting the Covenant for man's Redemption. 224. Free Grace the
ground of Adoption and Regeneration. 477. Fruitfulness a note of union with
Christ. 392, 393.
G
God is. p. 30, 31. Gods being is evident in nature. 31. and 48. and Scripture.
48, 49. Gods being consistent with the adversity of the just, and prosperity of
the wicked, and evidenced by them. 45, 50, 51. God is the only efficient of
Faith. 461, 462. God could not be the original of sin. 111. Gods glory the
ground of Adoption and Regeneration. 447. God as Judge justifies, how and
when. 122. God the object of beatifical vision. 654, 655. Gospel a good cause.
3. Gospel-means to work Faith. 465. and call loudly to Repentance. 525. Gospel
how it justifies. 421. Gospel Covenant better than the Legal. 245, 246, 247,
248. Gosepl-Manner of propounding Repentance, is by way of duty and privilege.
426 Gospel-Arguments persuading Repentance, most pregnant and moving. 527, 528.
Gospel-Helps to Repentance, most powerful and operative. p. 533. Grace of God
magnified by man's fall. 213, 214. First cause impulsive of justification. 420.
Graces are the fruits of the Spirit. 390. Grudge not the prosperity of the
wicked. 645.
H
Of Hell. 621. the wicked turned into it. 623. its name explained. ibid. nature
described. 624. its pain. ibid. The Properties of its punishment: Extremity.
628, 629. Eternity. 628, 629.
Hell discerned by the Heathen. 635. Hell proved by Equity. 636, 637, 638, 639,
640, 641. Merit. 636, 637, 638, 639, 640, 641. No Bar or hinderance. 636, 637,
638, 639, 640, 641.
Heresy an hindrance to Faith. 480. Heresies and Errors disbanded when we come
to heaven. 649. Hearing must be fixed and constant. 22. So it will help
Repentance. p. 545. Heart the subject of Faith. 459. and seat of Holiness.
558. Heaven. 647. it is a Kidgdome, how. 649. Hindrances to the understanding
Scripture, what they are, and how removed. 100, 101. Holding fast what it
means. 5. Holiness. 554. a state, trade, habit and disposition. 555.
Holiness defined. 556. Holiness the design of God in all his acts. 559, 560.
Holiness constitutes a Christian or Saint. 561, 562. Holiness spreads over
the whole man. 558. Holiness changes a man. 557. Holiness necessary unto
communion with God. 563. Holiness its properties. 567. Companions, peace,
righteousness, unblameablenesse. 268. its opposites, filthiness of flesh, of
spirit, overreaching and hypocrisy. 569, 570. Holiness of the Publisher
proves the Scripture to be the Word of God. 94. And so does the holy matter
pressed in it. 91, 92. and its holy Arguments. 93. Humility the effect of
sensible impotency. p. 214. Humiliation of Christ. 278. three steps of it. 280,
281. the manner of it. 287. Humanity of Christ, a miracle of humiliation. 280.
Humility must go before honor. 333.
I
Ignorance inconsistent to Faith. 479. dangerous. 483. Impotency of man since
the fall very great. 202, 203. Impossible to recover of himself. 204. Impotent
in respect of the Law. 205. Of the Gospel. 206. 207. Impotency determined in
Scripture. ibid. Impotency no bar to the demand of duty, direction of means, or
infliction of punishment. 210, 211, 212, 213. Impotency is to be seen and
known. 214. Infants distempers and death, an effect and evidence of original
sin. 143. So is their aptitude to evil, and backwardness to good. 144.
Inheritance of Saints has no corruption, succession or division. p. 441.
Inheritance, why heaven so called. 661. Inherited by Adoption. 662, 663.
Donation. 662, 663. Redemption. 662, 663.
Inspiration what it imports. 87. Inventions, and many inventions what they
signify. 106. Indignation accompanies Repentance. 442. Judgments of God
prevented. 521, 522. and removed by Repentance. 523, 524. Last Judgment
provokes holiness. 563. and persuades to Repentance. 531, 532, 533, Judge,
whom. 608. Manner of his coming. 610. Last Judgment, its day. 605. It is
particular and general. 606. why it must be, and when. 607. its method and
order. 609. Justice of God satisfied by the death of Christ. 301.
Justification, its nature opened. 402, etc. Differs from Sanctification. ib.
Justified implies guilt, plea and acquittance. p. 403. Justified persons are
acquitted on their plea. 419. Justification its causes. Gods free grace. 421,
422. Christ's satisfaction. 421, 422. The Gospel. 421, 422. Faith. 421, 422. God
Lawgiver. 421, 422. God Judge. 421, 422. Works. 421, 422. Spirit. 421, 422.
Justification by what plea procured. 406. Justification not from Eternity.
423. Justification procured by Christ's death. 341. is evident by the
Possibility. 342, 343, 344. Necessity. 342, 343, 344. Nature. 342, 343, 344.
Cause. 342, 343, 344. Vicegerency. 342, 343, 344. Peculiarity to this end. 342,
343, 344.
Justification does manifest the wisdom, holiness and mercy of God. 428.
Justification the privilege of the Gospel Covenant. 140. Justification the
ground of comfort. p. 429. to be sought by sinners. 430. prized by Saints. 432.
K
Kingly Office of Christ, what it is, and how executed. 255, 256. Kingly Office
the Saints privilege by Adoption. 441.
L
Law Regulans. 110. Law Regulata. 110. Law of God the rule of rectitude. ib.
Law given Adam in Creation, was partly natural, partly positive. 108. Law
requires duty, exacts penalty, terrifieth and stupifieth. 204, 205. Law
general and special obeyed by Jesus Christ. 223, 224. Law fulfilled in Christ
his death. 301. Law given in Paradise was not executed or abrogated, but
released and dispensed with. p. 413, 414, 415. Light burning and shining. 1.
Likeness of sinful flesh what it means, and how Christ was found in it. 281,
282. Likeness to God in dignity, offices and dominion, the privilege of
Adoption. 441. Love of God, Father and Son, manifest in the Covenant of
Redemption. 227. Love of Christ in his death. 293. and union with Sinners. 386.
Love to God the evidence of Faith, concerning his being. 55, 56, 59. Loss of
all good, the pain of Hell Natural. 625, 626. Spiritual. 625, 626. Eternal.
625, 626.

M
Man's composure of body, and powers of soul, prove that there is a God. 41. Man
comprehends the whole species of such a creature. 106. Man made mutable, though
holy, and why. 113. Man is depraved, (...) sinful. 111. Man's misery by sin.
173, 174, 175, p. 176. Man, not Angels, subjects of Faith. 455. Mediator
needful. 263, 264, 265. Mediator of the Covenant of Grace, who. 241, 261.
Mediator one, named man, and why; named Christ Jesus, and why. ib. Mediator is
Christ, and none but Christ. 265, 266, etc. Mediator comfortable in all
conditions, giving man confidence of access to God. 254, 255. Misery
inevitable to such as despise the Mediator. ib. Merit of Christ the ground of
Adoption and Regeneration. 447. Method in Sermons necessary and profitable. 22.
Means of Repentance. 546. Ministry needful unto Faith. 483. Ministers must be
burning and shining lights. 1, 2. Ministers must suffer affliction. ib. Mixture
of grace and sin is in the best men. 167. Mutability the mere cause of man's
sin. 112. Mutability of man's created estate was just and necessary. 113.
Mutability attended man's Happiness as well as Holiness. p. 114. Mutability
and its sequel must lead us to God for confirmation. 119.
N
Name of Christ part of his Exaltation. 315, what it is. 316. how it is above
every Name. 317, 318, 319, 320. how Christ's Name was given by God. 320, 321.
Nature by three Arguments proves that there is a God. 30, 31. Natural Agents
by their operation, proves a God. 42. Natural conscience proves a God. 43.
Nature stained with Adams sin. 151. Nature without Divine revelation
discovers not a Trinity, nor yet opposes it when revealed. 77, 78, 79, 80,
81. Nature of God well studied, a special help to repentance. 547. New Covenant
better than the old. 243. Nobility no cause of boasting. 145. Notes of
repentance. 539, 540.
O
Object External could not necessitate man to sin. p. 112. Object of New,
better than of the Old Covenant. 251. Obedience in Subjection to Commands.
Submission to Providence.
The duty of such who believe God is. 63, 64. Offense at preaching, Gods anger
against sin is groundless. 192, 193. Offices of Christ fit him to be the only
Mediator. 271, 272. Offices of Christ communicated to the Saints. 441. Old
Covenant abrogated. 252. Opposition of Christ consistent with subjection to
Christ, how. 327, 328. Sin Originale originans, discussed. 135, etc. Originale
originatum, discussed. 150, 151, etc. Original sin is a defection. 112.
Original, how said of man's pravity. 155, 156. Original sin is hard to be
understood. 134. Original sin confirmed by counsel. 144. Acknowledged by
Heathens. ib. Original sin is called man, and old man, in what sense. p. 157,
158, 159, 160, 161, 162. a body, and a body of sin. 162, 163, 164. Original sin
has polluted man's nature. 151, 152, 153. Original sin is to be subdued. 170.
Original sin to be conf ssed and bewailed. 165. Original sin imbitters all
worldly comforts. 171. Ordinances argue original sin in man's nature. 153.
Ordinances means of union with Christ. 383.
P
Pain in Christ his death. 285, 286. Pardon of sin freely given, how. 425, 426.
Parents beget their children in their own image. 151. Parents good, yet
children by nature evil. 152. Parents care for posterity, quickened by the
miscarriage of the first Parent of us all. 147. Parents childrens looking
glasses, by which they dress their lives. ib. Penitent must be humbled, and
why. 498, 499, 450. Peace a duty and blessing to be pursued. 556. Peace an
effect of Faith. 47. Pelagius the first opposer of original sin. p. 144. Person
in the Godhead what it is 69. Persons in the Godhead three. 70. Plurality of
persons in the Godhead proved. 71, 72, 73. Persons in the Godhead
distinguished, not divided. 75. their order declared. 76. Person, promises,
properties and providence of Christ, all belong to believers. 393, 394.
Persecution of Saints a crimson sin. 386. Perseverance of Saints certain. 387.
Pleading at Gods bar necessary to justification. 404. Plea of not guilty can
never procure justification at Gods bar. 405. Popish Repentance false. 515.
Pravity and inbred corruption, what it is. 155. the parts of it. 156. Pravity
and a naughty nature is in every man. 150. Pravity of the nature of man
evidenced by Scripture. 151, 152, 153. Salvation of Christ. 151, 152, 153.
Sacraments. 151, 152, 153. Sad effects. 151, 152, 153.
Prayer an help to repentance. 552. Prayer answered, an effect of Faith. 469.
Prayer, its extent and encouragement. p. 262. Preparations of heaven, how from
the foundation of the world. 660, 661. Preparation to last Judgment
characterised. 617, 618. Priestly office of Christ, and its parts. 272, 273.
Price of the soul of Christ his death. 298. Price paid for man, was not idem,
but tantundem. 425. Principle and cause two distinct things. 69. Principles
good and bad, two distinct, blasphemous to assert. 112. Promises were made to
Christ on the account of his satisfaction for man's sin. 209, 300. Promises of
Justification. Sanctification. Resurrection. Eternal life.
The Promises of the better Covenant. 240, 241. Promises of temporal mercy,
better under the New, than under the Old Covenant. 248. Protestant doctrine of
the imputation of Christ's righteousness defended. 387. Profane repentance what
it is. p. 516. Prosperity of profane, no plea against Deity. 50, 51.
Q
Quakers repentance, vile, false and wicked. 518, 519.
R
Reason and sensation evince the Divine authority of the Scriptures. 90.
Revelation from God admitted by all, and reason it should. 88, 89. Revelation
not to be received, until cleared to be of God. ibid. Rectitude is conformity
to a Rule. 107. Rectitude of Adam by Creation, was of the whole man,
understanding, will and sensitive appetite. 109. Rectitude natural, and not
natural to man, how. 111. Regeneration explained. 442. its Synonimas. 443. it
is defined. ib. Regeneration compared with natural generation. 443, 444. they
agree in cause, subject and manner of production. ib. and 445. disagree in
properties. 446. Religion making known Christ's satisfaction most excellent.
350. Relations of men subject to Gods wrath. p. 187. Relation to God, reason of
comfort and duty. 436. Repentance not to be repented, explained 485. In its
Nature. 487. Necessity. 520. Notes. 539.
Next way to it. 546.
Repentance defined. 487. Repentance is a recession from sin, and return to
God. 502, 503, 504, 505. Return to God, the second part of Conversion. 506,
507, 508. Repentance, seven false kinds. 515, 516, 517, 518. Repentance
contemned, when. 334, 335, 336. Repentance neglected, when, and with what
issue. 537, 538. Resurrection possible and credible. 579, 582, 583, 584, 585.
what it means. ib. who to be raised. 480. to be believed. 581. reasons of it.
586, 587, 588, 589. Resurrection the effect of the New Covenant, and union with
Christ. 388. Resurrection after what manner, and with what difference. 591. how
effected. p. 593. it is to be believed. 595. a ground of comfort. ib. 596, 597,
598, 599. a ground of terror. 560. how made happy to our selves. 603, 604.
Revenge accompanies repentance. 545.
S
Sacraments in the Old Testament were various and many. 122. Tree of life a
Sacrament in Paradise. ibid. Sacraments prove corruption of nature. 153. Saints
are good company. 3. Salvation by Christ, an Argument of original pravity. 153.
Salvation the end of Faith. 473. Salvation difficult. 482. Sanctification
Covenant privilege. 14. Satisfaction of Christ explained. 337, 339, 340, 341.
its Matter. 408 Form. 412. Terms. 417.
Satisfaction not made by man himself. 407. but by Christ. 408, 409, 410. and
how done. 402. Satisfaction of Christ the only plea to procure justification at
Gods bar. ib. Scripture the Word explained. 86. Scripture proves a God. 48.
Scripture similitudes show the union between Christ and Believers. 384.
Scripture only discovers man's natural pravity. 151. Sea its course and
confinement, proved a God. 35, 36. Secret sins discovered by natural
conscience. 44. Sense of Scriptures power on the soul, prove them Divine. 98.
Sense of sin, and sorrow for it, are precursive parts of true Repentance. 492.
Sense of a short life helps to Repentance. 349. Self sinful to be studied. 168.
Self examination an help to Repentance. 548. Severity of Gods justice. 295.
Sense its pain in hell. 626. Constituted by Real presence of all evil.
Impression of justice. Personal Feeling.
627, 628.
Sentence of last day. 614. Sight of things invisible, an effect of Faith. 471.
Sin to be feared, and fled from. 643, 644. Sin a defect, nothing positive. 112,
113. it is most unreasonable. p. 114. subjects man to an impotency of saving
himself. 115. justifies God in punishing man. 116, 117. should rather be
gotten out, than inquired how it came into the world. 113. Sins evil seen in
Christ his death. 294. Sin better discovered by the New, than Old Covenant.
250. Sin abolished by Christ his death. 302, 303. Sin is imputed inherent,
extensive, diffusive. 165. Sin may exist and prevail in a true Saint. 505. Sin
mortified by the Spirit. 389. Sinner elect, and called the subjects of Faith.
460. Shame was in Christ's death. 206. Sensible sinner, subject of true
repentance. 489. Society in heaven, what. 658 659. Sons of God, partakers of
the whole essence of the Father, is the same numerical nature. 66. 67. Sonship
to God is by Creation. 435. Generation. 435. Marriage. 435. Adoption. 435.
Sonship by Adoption Honorable. 437, 440. Free. 437, 440. Permanent. 437, 440.
Sonship to God, marks of it. p. 453, 454. Sorrow and humility usher faith.
476. Soul of Christ suffered. 410. Souls in heaven subject to Jesus Christ.
324, 325. Spirit of God in man a sign of union with Christ. 389. Spirit of God
justifies, how. 422. Spirits evil shall be chained, when Saints go to heaven.
652. Speed, facilitates repentance. 452. Sting of conscience a note of Deity.
45. Sting in Christ his death. 286, 287. Study of Scriptures a duty. 99, 100.
Suns situation and motion proves a God. 33, 34. Sullen repentance what. 518.
Systems of Religion profitable for Ministers and people. 5. they instruct in
the faith; antidote error. 7, 12. Adorn the truth. 16. help the understanding.
17. the memory. 18. affections. 19. such are found in Scripture. 6, 7, 8, 9, 10
11, 12, 13, 14, 15. to be studied by young Divines. 21.
T
Temptation of Satan did not necessitate man to sin. p. 112. Things in heaven
subject to Christ, what. 323, 324. Things on earth subject to Christ, what they
are. 325. Things under the earth. 326. Every Tongue, what it means. 329. Terms
of Covenant between God the Father and his Son. 225. Torments of Hell,
Exquisite, Intolerable; Easelesse, Remediless; Universal and various. 629, 630
631.
Trial of last day shall be 1. Universal. 2. Formal. 3. Impartial. 4. Exact. 5.
Perspicuous. 6. Supreme. 610, 611, 612. its consequence. 613. Trinity proved by
Old Testament text. 72. New Testament. 74, 75. Turning from all sin to God, is
the formality of true repentance. 50.
U
Union of two natures in Christ, without confusion or transmutation. 270. Union
of believers and Christ necessary. p. 377. what kind it is not. 379. what kind
it is. 381, 382. its causes. 383. grounds. 385. its marks. 389, 390, 391, 392.
it is to be sought by sinners, and improved by Saints. 396, 397, 398, 399, 400.
Unbelievers miserable. 48. not Gods sons. 447. Vocation, its twofold estate.
437. Vocation a Resurrection, a new Creation. 361.
W
Will of God signified in a rule of rectitude. 107. Witness from heaven differs
in six particulars from witness on earth. 67, 68. we have both to prove Christ
the Son of God. 66. Word of God declares his wrath. 181, 182, 183. World
visible, its being and parts. 31, 32. World an enemy to faith. 481. to be
slighted by ^aints. 549. Works, their use in point of Covenant. 126, 127. how
they justify. 422. Wrath of God, what, and how aggravated. 177, 178, 179, 180.
falls on man here. 184. fully at the day of judgment. ibid. shows his
justice and wisdom. p. 193, 194, 195, 196. it is to be avoided. 197, 198.
Y
Yoke of the Law borne by Jesus Christ. 280, 281.
Z
Zeal Negative. p. 2. Affirmative. p. 2.
Zeal accompanies true Repentance. 544.
FINIS.

