sarkokukema, OR THE VANITY, of Glorying in the FLESH, Opened in a SERMON
Preached at the FUNERAL OF KINGSMEL LUCY, Esquire Eldest SON to FRANCIS LUCY, Esquire

By THO. CASE, M. A. sometimes Student of Chapter Chapter Oxon. and now Pastor of Giles
in the Fields, London.

London, Printed by T.R and E.M. for Robert Gibbs in Chancerylane near
Sergeants Inn. 1655.

To the Honorable, Sir THO WITHRINGTON Knight, and SERGEANT at the LAW, And
one of the Commissioners of the Treasury.
Noble Sir,
THe Dedication of this piece to your Name, may seem strange to one that is a
stranger to you. But the truth is, your interest in this young Gentleman
deceased, gives you too great a title, to this poor, imperfect memorial of him,
while your great love to the worth and goodness that was in him, invited your
Noble Spirit, to adopt him into the Relation of a Son-in-law, a choice, which
truly rendereth you as honorable, as it would have rendered him happy, had he
lived to enjoy it. But oh the instability of all sublunary felicities. You
expected a Marriage, and behold a Funeral. Vanity of vanities! how fitly has
that great Apostle phrased all terrene fruitions, 1 Timothy 6.17
uncertain riches! Ixion-like, they vanish while we hug them in our arms; yea,
we lose them before we are possessed of them. This is the Doctrine, the living
God teach us the Use; To do good, Ver. 18, 19
to be rich in good works, etc. to lay hold on eternal life.

To your interest in these papers, your condescension in pressing me to print
them, as it has laid upon me another engagement to publish, so it has given
me a new encouragement to put them under the protection of your Name, which
though it cannot (I know) secure them from the just censure of many defects;
yet it may free me from the unjust censure of presumption, in this Dedication.

Accept them, Honored Sir, as an evidence of that great respect, which your
integrity has merited, as with others; so with my self. And if in the ensuing
lines there be any thing that may either alleviate your loss, or divert the
sense of it. It shall be a great satisfaction, to

SIR, Your Humble Servant in the Gospel of Christ, THO. CASE.

To my most Honored Friends, FRANCIS LVCY, Esquire and his most Christian and
Virtuous YOKE FELLOW, Grace and Peace.
THe sorrow of the New Convert, lookeing upon Christ crucified, the Holy Ghost
has pleased to shadow forth unto us in Zech. 12.10.
Scripture, by the sorrows for the loss of a firstborn, as one that is in
bitterness for his firstborn; (...) Ut amaresce^e super primogenitum.
rachamim from rechem, which signifies the womb, because of all compassions
the mothers compassions are the most tender
the Hebrew reads it infinitively, not personally. to take in both Sexes;
certainly, because those sorrows, especially on the mothers side, are the
strongest and the most impressive of all natural affections.

What your sorrows then are, for the loss of this Gentleman, whose praemature
death, (if it be lawful to call it so, now Gods work is finished) has
occasioned first the preaching, and then at your too prevailing solicitation,
the printing of this Sermon, cannot be easily imagined. A first born, and such
a firstborn, as few Parents have either boasted of, or mourned over. A Son,
who was what you could wish for a Son, or from a Son. A Son you have lost, for
the loss of whom I can be content to let you mourn, and with all my heart sit
down and mourn with you, for Your, the Nations, and mine own loss.

Yet to keep your sorrows from overflowing the banks, Remember, I beseech you,
that your trial is not parallel with the trial of some of Gods Worthies.

It is not the trial of Job, who had all his Sons and Daughters slain and
buried in one tempest.

Not the trial of David, whose darling son was executed, in the very act of
treason and parricide.

No, nor the trial of Abraham your father, who must resign up his Son, his
firstborn, his only Son, whom he loved; the Heir, not of Abraham's
possessions only, but of the Promises too; and (that which is above all
aggravations tremendous,) Isaac must be the Sacrifice, and Abraham the Priest,
to offer him up with his own hand.

His Piety to God, must be cruelty to his Son, yea, (had not the Command of the
Law giver intervened) most unnatural murder.

Dear friends, your loss though invaluable, is not imbittered with such
temptations.

A Son, a firstborn, but dying in the arms of your Loves and Prayers. Not more
sent for home to his fathers house, (as it were in another The Small Pox
accended into a burning fever.
fiery chariot) then willing to go.

Neither has his death made you or your samily Orphane. A brother he has left
behind him, to inherit your estate and his Brothers virtues: A Brother, in
whom his Brother lives; though Kingsmell be dead, yet Lucy is alive. A Brother
so like his Brother, Minut. Foelix.
that (as he said of the two friends) Crederes unam animum in duobus esse
divisam: You would think one soul animated two bodies, Sic oculos, sic ille
manus, sic ora gerebat.
Both one in Nature, as in Name,
They look, and speak, and act the same.


Three Sisters, also has he left, sharers of the same spirit of sweetness and
Piety with himself; Recruits of your comfort, and vessels to propagate, though
not the name, yet that which is better, the goodness of your family.

Certainly, my worthy friends, God has mixed your Cup with many sweet
ingredients, so that you may well bespeak your own souls with your elder
brother, the Lord Jesus Christ; The Cup that my Father has given me, shall I
not drink it? Behold, it is but a Cup, not a Sea of bitterness, and of a
fathers tempering, not an enemies, and it is a gift, not a cutse; Oh if Jesus
Christ could thus alleviate his Cup, which was full of his Fathers wrath, how
much more may you drink and forget your sorrows, whose cup is mixed with so much
love? The very things which seem to aggravate your loss, do lighten it. The
better your Son was, the easier your trial

It is our great infelicity that we invert our arguments, and when God has put
sweetness into the Premises, we put bitterness into the Conclusion. We are
witty to aggravate our own afflictions, and for the most part mistake the
accent; that which should help us bear our burden, makes it intolerable; we can
tell how it might have been better, and think we could bear any trial but this,
and so we dispute our Cross when we should take it up, and give God counsel
when God looks for obedience.

But God has taught you better things, and things which accompany salvation,
though I thus speak. And I do greatly rejoice, to behold that Christian
meekness and patience, that sweet submission to, Lev. 10.3.
that gracious acquiescence in the Will of God: Your silence before the Lord
where by you evidence to your selves and others, your trial to be the rod of a
Father, the fruit of love. You do not only bear your Cross, but adorn it.

The Lord cause all grace to abound in your souls, perfect the good pleasure of
his grace, and the work of faith with power. And the Lord continue you both
comforts one to another, and blessings to all your Relations, 1 Samuel, 2.20.
give you a rich recompense for the loan which is lent to the Lord; and now one
channel is dried up, cause the remaining to overflow with mercy. Make your
surviving offspring double comforts to you, and blessings to the world. Yea,
the less you have of the creature, fit you for, and fill you with, MORE OF
HIMSELF.

So prays, Your most obliged, and most faithful Friend and Servant in the
Gospel THO. CASE.

To the Choice and every way Hopeful Young Gentleman, Mr. RICHARD LUCY, the
Now, only Son and Heir to FRANCIS LVCY, Esquire Student of Chapter Chapter Oxon.
Learned Friend,
YOu have not the least interest in these papers, whom your desired Brother
has left Inheritor not to his Expectations only, but his Virtues; which here
are presented to you. Not as you have seen them in their own native beauty and
splendour, as they beamed out themselves to the eye of those that did converse
with him, while alive, but as you have seen the picture of a man taken in his
winding sheet, in more dark and lifelesse colors: and yet as to the visage and
air, such as, that, without an Inscription, you might at first sight be able
to tell whose picture and image it is. The view whereof, I know not whether it
may affect you more with grief or joy; grief, becaufe it ls not himself; joy,
because you have so much of his shadow to converse with, as long as you shall
survive. I send it to you, Sir, to perfect the Copy, for the truth is, there is
none that can draw it to life, but your self; it being not only imago tua, but
imago tui; that therefore you would every day add one line to the finishing of
this excellent piece, Nulla dies fine linea.
is the design of this third dedication.

It concerns you highly; for though the death of your honored Brother has
left you the Birthright, it is his Life only that must give you the Blessing:
Your Advantages are rare, a pious fathers counsels, a gracious mothers tears
and prayers, the inspection of a learned and industrious Tutor your daily
converse with silent and vocal Libraries, dead and living monuments of
learning. Above all, that which the great Rabbi among the Jews, and Apostle
amongst Christians, puts as a Crown upon young Timothies head, that from a
child thou have known the Scriptures, 2 Timothy 3.15
which are able to make thee wise to salvation; These are your advantages, and
Prayer your emprovement: the exercise whereof you have learned both by Precept
and by Pattorn; may the Gift of Prayer be accomplished with the Grace of
Prayer, the sweet and secret teachings of the Spirit of Grace and Supplication.
Zech. 12.20.
The Lord make you to abound in that holy duty, our heavenly (...); the
traffic and trade whereby we fetch in the merchandise of the Heavenly
Jerusalem. Great obligations press you to a vigorous emprovement of your
advantages, the recruit of your tender Parents comforts, the honor of your
Noble Family, the expectation of your worthy friends, the name of your
excellent brother; whom dying, me thinks, I hear bespeaking of you thus, Vive
tuo, frater, tempore, vive meo.

That you may do worthily, and answer all these engagements with an overplus of
satisfaction, may a double portion of your Brothers spirit rest upon you. It
is, Sir, and shall be the prayer of

Your real friend and Servant, unfeignedly covetous of your perfection. THO,
CASE.

TO THE READER.
Good Reader,
IT is a judgment threatened by two Prophets against the Jews, Jer. 16 5.
Ezekiel. 24.23.
that they should not mourn, nor lament for their dead. That which was their
judgment is our sin; which the Prophet Isaiah has languaged to our hands:
Isa. 57.1.
The righteous perish, and no man lays it to heart, and merciful men are
taken away, none considering, etc. It was sometime the curse of the worst of
men; that wretched Coniah, They shall not lament for him, Jer. 22.7.
saying, Ah Lord, or Ah his glory. This wanton secure, ungrateful generation,
has most wickedly translated this curse upon them whom the Lord has blessed,
and made blessings to their generations; we lament not over our Worthies,
saying, Ah Lord, or, Ah their glory.

The Hand of God of late is gone out against us in a dreadful manner, and
within a few months last past has taken away diverse worthy Ministers, not
only faithful, but mighty in the service of the Gospel. The last Summer (as I
take it) there died in one Essex.
County only about thirty four godly Ministers; since then, there is fallen
very lately worthy Dr. Hill, Malle is Hereticorum Schismaticorum, flagellum.
Master of Trin. Coll. Cambridge, a man of a singular spirit for Government,
mighty in convincing and suppressing of error and innovations.

Reverend Mr. Gataker, a Treasury of Learning and Religion.

Profound Dr. Gouge, His excellent Comment on the Hebrews, with other of his
learned Labors, will remain as Monuments of his great worth to posterity.
whose indefatigable industry, both in his public Ministry, domestic duties,
and private studies was to admiration.

Judicious Whitaker, mighty in preaching, melting in prayer; whose holiness
was mixed with such sweetness and tenderness of spirit, that it rendered him
useful and acceptable to men of all judgments and tempers.

Excellent Dr. Bolton, a man of singular spirituality and acuteness in all his
Gospel-labours.

Famous Mr. Angel, a man ineeed of Angelical understanding and holiness, a
burning and shining light.

Precious Mr. Robinson Englands Jacob, London Remembrancer, judicious in
preaching, affectionate in prayer, in both incomparably laborious, a man, most
deeply sensible of the evil of the times, and unmovably firm to his principles.

Ingenious Mr. Jaggard, a man of singular parts, and excellent Ministerial
abilities.

Hopeful Mr. Fenton, newly chosen to Croatchet Friars, young in years, but of
great maturity in the knowledge of Christ.

These and many more, some in their full age, others in the midst of their
days, and some (woe unto us!) in their prime and strength of their Ministry
has God removed from us.

To this breach that God has made upon us in the Church, has he added some
deep wounds in the Commonwealth; Besides the death of many worthy Gentlemen,
very serviceable in their generations; that which may set most sad upon our
spirits, is, that God has snaetch't from us, by sudden and unexpected strokes,
many young Gentlemen, of the greatest eminency and hopes which this, or many
generations formerly have known.

That Phoenix of Wiltshire, Robert Strange Esquire Nephew to the late Honorable
Sir Edward Hungerford, Robert Strange, of Somerford-Keynes, in the County of
Wilts, Esquire.
and brought up in his family, a Gentleman of such gravity, wisdom, piety,
humility, weanednesse from the world, and of such a public spirit, that the
whole country looked upon him as a star of the most propitious influence
that has risen in their Horizon these many generations.

The Noble young Gentleman Harbottle Grimstone, Esquire, Son and Heir to the
Honorable Sir Harbottle Grimstone, a Gentleman of greas eminency both for
parts and piety, the honor and hopes of his fathers house.

That never to be sufficiently honored Gentleman, Mr. Holland of Lancashire,
only son of Colonel Holland of Denton Esquire, for solidnesse of judgment,
choiceness of affection, activenesse in Religion, singular usefulness in his
country, highly esteemed among the Gentry, honored by the Ministry, admired
by the Commonalty, beloved of all; the only pillar of his fathers house, the
great expectation of the Country, lamented by all that ever knew or heard of
him.

John Warmstry Esquire, only son to Gervis Warmstry Esquire, of the County of
Worcester.

Ferdinando Leigh, late of Lincolnes-Inne Esquire, fourth son to the Right
Honorable Thomas Lord Leigh, Baron of Stone-Leigh, in the County of Warwick;
Gentlemen of much honoue, and greatly lamented.

Lastly, (though many more might be added to this sad Catalogue) this excellent
young Gentleman Kingsmel Lucy, late of Lincoines-Inne Esquire Son and Heir to
Francis Lucy Esquire, over whom these Funeral Lamentations are poured out, whom
Nature and Grace strove which should make him most honorable.

These, I say, and many more spirits of a sublime extraction, stars of the
first magnitude; the ornaments of the present, and the hopes of the future
generation, have been prematurely cut off b^ the fatal stroke of the Small
pox, and have finished their course, before they had finished (the eldect of
them, as I understand) the twenty fifth year of their age.

And now in the mean time, how little are we affected with these invaluable, I
had almost said irreparable losses. Certainly we do not lay them to heart
according to the nature of the stroke inflicted in their removal: while we
followed their sad Hearses to the grave, and our ears were filed with Funeral
Lamentations, possibly we might fetch a cold sigh, and let fall a few dry
tears, but alas, how quickly do we forget our losses? we bury our sorrows and
our Worthies in the same grave. Our tears are quickly dried up, and our days
(our hours rather) of mourning are soon ended. We have learned an easy way of
comforting our selves over our sorrows, more truly of keeping sorrow from our
hearts: we will not suffer it to come near us. We use to say, he was a great
Scholar, an excellent Preacher, a gallant Gentleman, there will be a great want
of him, but we must be contented if God will have it so, we cannot help it, we
are all mortal, etc. there is an end.

Haw easily do we swallow dawn these bitter pills, and extinguish the sense of
our miseries in sensual fruitions? I find but very few, but they make too much
haste to their comforts and cordials.

Object. But you will say, Why, what would you have us do, should we sorrow as
men without hope?

Answ. No surely, What our duty is in the loss of worthy men.
but this we should do: We should sit down, and tent our wounds; we should
weigh our losses in the balance of the Sanctuary, and take up David's
Lamentation in the death of Abner; Know ye not that a Prince and a great man is
fallen this day in Israel? 2 Samuel 3.38, 39.
and I am this day weak, etc. So many godly Mfnisters, so many worthy Gentlemen
fallen, and we are this day weak; the Ministry weak, noble Families weak, the
Church and State weak by means of these losses. Joseph is not, and Simeon is
not, and will ye take Benjamin too? Genesis 43.36.
all these things make against me: So, etc.

2. We should be sensible of divine displeasure. It is observable, that when
Pelatiah was smitten by a blast of divine Justice, Ezekiel. 11.13. that Ezekiel
presently fell down upon his face, to deprecate the process of judgment. Ah
Lord God, will thou make a full end of the remnant of Israel? Behold, there was
but one man taken away, nnd he a false prophet, a seducer, and yet the good
Prophet cries out, as if God were going about to destroy the whole Nation? why?
what ground of such a fear was there in a single persons untimely death? Oh,
the Prophet was sensible of divine displeasure in that stroke, and when wrath
was once kindled, he did not know where the fire might stay; it might burn down
to the very foundations for ought he knew. How much more ought such an holy
jealousy cause us to put our mouths in the dust, when we see so many of the
precious sons of Sion, comparable to fine gold, suddenly cut off by the sword
of the destroying Angel! Surely that we take no more notice of Gods
displeasure, is not our patience so much as our unbelief.

Thirdly, we should look upon the loss of such excellent ones, as sad
prognostics of approaching judgment; boding symptoms of evil to come: Isa.
57.1.
Merciful (or as it is in the Hebrew) men of godliness are taken away, none
considering that the righteous are taken away from the evil to come; when
righteous men die (especially in the midst of their days,) evil is a coming,
their death makes way for wrath; when Noah was shipp't the flood came; when Lot
was housed, Hell came down from Heaven to destroy Sodom.

Before the besieging Heidlebergh, most of the godly Ministers in the City were
taken away, etc.

Fourthly, We should study how to recruit our losses, and repair our breaches.
Every one in his station laboring to be of an healing influence.

Parents, those especially of superior Orbs, bestowing upon their children,
honorable and religious education, the neglect whereof has bin one of those
putrid sources, out of which the most of the sins and plagues of this miserable
Nation has issued.

Young Gentleman, even from their childhood, to addict themselves to ingenious
Arts and Sciences, especially to the Phil. 3.8
excellent knowledge of Christ in the Scriptures, which is able to make them
wise to salvation. 2 Timothy 3.15,


Tutors in the University, and other inferior schools, by their wise and holy
industry, studying how to improve those ingenious spirits that are under their
tuition so, as that they may send them forth full of knowledge and virtue, fit
to serve their generation, both in Church and State.

Patrons, upon the sad vacations of their livings, by the death of worthy
Ministers, to fill their rooms with learned and godly men, without open
contracts, or secret insinuations of any unworthy Simoniacal expectancies.

Surviving Ministers studying how to pray more, preach better, live more
exemplarily, converse more fruitfully.

Yea, every one in their places and callings, laboring to be more holy and
prayerful, Ps. 12.1.
more useful and active for the interest of Christ's, and for public good.

This, were to do like Christians, worthy of our Name, and the fruit of this
would be excellent and beautiful. For

Fruits of sensiblenesse of our losses.
1. It might help (through grace) to appease divine anger.

2. To avert approaching judgment, as Amos 7.1, 2. compared with ver. 3. and
4.5. with ver. 6.

3. God would take it kindly, behold, precious in the sight of the Lord is the
death of his Salnts; Ps. 116.15
would not our Father take it well, if we were followers of him, Ephesians. 5.1.
as dear chilldren?

4. It would make way for comfort. Comfort is then seasonable and savoury, when
it comes in in Gods method; Blessed are they that mourn, for they shall be
comforted. Mat. 5.4.
The world inverts Christ's order, they begin in comfort, and end in mourning;
true Saints begin in mourning, and end in comfort: it is true all over.

When thus humbled under the mighty hand of God, it might be seasonable to
suggest to our selves and others some such considerations as these.

1. Comforting considerations.
Who made these that are taken away, so excellent and influential? GOD: Well,
as he said, Salvus est Artifex, God never dies; he that made the vessel is
alive, though the vessel be broken in pieces: with God there is abundance of
Spirit, he can easily raise up others in their places to carry on his work.
When Moses was troubled about a Successor, and knew not where to find him,
and therefore begs an immediate choice from heaven, Number. 27.16. Let the God of
the spirits of all flesh set a man over the Congregation, and. God had a
recruit that Moses little thought of, a Joshuah, one under his own roof, his
servant, he must succeed in that great charge, ver. 18.

2. Consider, God can do his own work without the service of men; though he
uses instruments, he needs them not; many times (to speak after the manner of
men) God is more troubled to fit the instrument, then to do the work alone. In
the Creation of the world God was alone, Isa. 44.24. In the Redemption of the
world, Jesus Christ was alone, and of the people there were none with him, Isa.
63.3. And how easily were both these mighty wohks finished: In the reforming of
the Church he uses instruments, and the Church looks upon them many times, as
the oniy men that must do it, and behold, they prove so cross and untoward,
that unless God lay them by, and take the work into his own hand, a
deliverance would end in a bondage, and a glorious Reformation set in a black
and horrid Desolation. This is a comfort were we fit for it,

Though God tie us to means, he does not tie himself to means.

Thirdly, the less there is of the creature, the more God is engaged to
appear, Deuteronomy. 32.36. Our despairing times are Gods rising times, Isa. 33.10.
The comfort is this, GOD will glorify HIMSELF.

Fourthly, as our duty is, when God takes eway the creature to live immediately
upon Himself; when the cisterns are empty, then to go to the fountain; so our
comfort is.

Those are the purest tastes of God which we have immediately from himself.

Our very windows darken much of our light. We see through a glass darkly, 1
Cor. 13.12.
And many times, some of our water [of Life] leaks through the pipes by which
it ir conveyed.

God is most to the Angels and Saints in Heaven, because what HE IS, he lets in
immediately into their souls. They drink of the river of his pleasures, Ps.
36.8, 9.
and in his light do they see light.

Fifthly and lastly, as for our Worthies that are gone, they have made a
blessed change,

Labor for Rest, Sin for Holiness, Earth for Heaven, Rags for Good old Mr.
Dent, when he thing out his last breath, said, Give me my Crown and Robes, and
so gave up the ghost.
Robes, their Cross for a Crown, the company of sinners for the Spirits of
just men made perfect, the creature for the Creator, Father, Son, and Holy
Ghost, God blessed for ever.

Reader, I could add much more upon this Account, but I am sensible how far
already I have exceeded the bounds of an Epistle. It is for thy sake, and
therefore I hope with the ingenuous, it will find net only Pardon, but
Acceptance.

The Lord fit thee for these comforts, and then fill thee with them. It is the
humble and hearty desire of

A poor unworthy Servant of Christ, and of thy faith, THO. CASE.

1 COR. 1.29. with 31. That no flesh should glory in his Presence. But as it is
written, He that glories, let him glory in the Lord.


THe Connection of the words (briefly) stands thus: The Corinthians being
extremely sick of a spiritual plurisie, an overweaning opinion of their own
gifts and graces; the Apostle, like a wise Physician, opens a vein, and lets
out some distempered blood, by calling them back to a sober remembrance of
their original, what they were before conversion, scil. foolish and ignorant,
impotent and ignoble, a people of a low and base extraction, mere non-entities
(as it were) ver. 26, 27, 28.

And yet withal lest they should be too much dejected, and faint by over much
discouragement, he administreth a cordial unto them of singular virtue, and
shows, that they were not so low and abject by their natural generation, but
they were as high and honorable by their divine regeneration; wise, and
righteous, and holy, and redeemed: and yet still that he may keep their spirits
in an equal poise, he lets them know, all their excellency is extraneous, they
owe it wholly to Jesus Christ, Wisdom, Righteousness, Sanctification,
Redemption; all is theirs, but not by inheritance, or their own acquisition, it
was all by virtue of their union with Jesus Christ; Of him are ye in Christ
Jesus, who of God is made unto us Wisdom, and Righteousness, and
Sanctification and Redemption. The Fathers ordination, and the Sons merit was
the fountain of all these transcendent privileges: Of Him, i. e. Of the
Father, and in Christ Jesus; so, Wisdom is yours, and Righteousness yours,
and Sanctification yours, and Redemption yours, All is yours, 1 Cor. 3.22, 23.
and you are Christ's, and Christ is Gods.

Now in these two verses read, the Apostle tells us, that God has a design in
this contrivement, which he sets forth negatively and affirmatively.

1. Negatively, that flesh should not be glorying, verse. 29. 2. Affirmatively,
that he that glories might glory in the Lord.
And for both these he quoteth divine Authority, though he himself spoke by the
afflatus of the same Spirit. As it is written, viz. Jer. 9.23, 24.

I shall not detein you in the opening of the words, what need any clearing,
will meet us in the handling of the doctrinal observations, which do naturally
arise from the words, and they are three.

1. Observe. Flesh must not glory; or, Flesh is not to be gloried in. 2. Observe.
God, and God exclusively to all other things, is to be gloried in. 3. Observe.
This is Gods design, or God has so ordered and contrived the whole state and
condition of the creature, whether in order to Nature or Grace, Grace or Glory,
that he might cut off all occasion of boasting or glorying in any thing but
himself.
I shall insist only upon the former, the other two will serve us, either in
the Explication or Application of the point: which is this:

Doct. Flesh must not glory; or, Flesh is not to be gloried in; for that is the
meaning of it. We are not to boast of, or glory in any thing that is called
flesh.

For the opening of the doctrine three questions are to be resolved: 1. What is
meant by flesh? 2. What by glorying in the flesh? 3. Why flesh is not to be
gloried in?


1. Quest. What we are to understand by flesh?

Answ. Flesh is taken in several acceptations in Scripture.

1. By flesh sometimes is to be understood, Mankind, as Genesis 6.12, 13. All
flesh had corrupted his way; and, the end of all flesh is come before me, i. e.
All mankind have perverted their way, and have done abominably; Therefore
(says God) I will destroy them from off the face of the earth, Noah and his
family only excepted.

2. Flesh is taken sometime for the outward man; in opposition to the soul and
Spirit. So, Psalm. 73.26. My flesh and my heart fails, i. e. my outward and
inward man; all fails, but God never fails. I say, flesh here is taken for
his outward man, or all outward comforts and supports.

3. By flesh is to be understood sometimes creature-confidence; all those
fleshly sufficiencies, wherein men do usually place their trust, which in the
Original Scripture here quoted by our Apostle, Jer. 29.23. are reduced to three
Heads, Policy. Power. Riches.


Jer. 9.23.
Thus says the Lord, Let not the wise man glory in his wisdom, neither let the
mighty man glory in his might. Let not the rich man glory in his riches,
wisdom, strength, abundance of treasure; Heb. 16.
these are the idols which vain man creates to himself to worship, and to
which they sacrifice; these are the Sanctuaries, to which men run for shelter
and safety in the hour of temptation.

Prove. 18.10. The rich man's wealth is his strong City, and an high wall in his
own conceit. I say, these are the things upon which they fix their dependances,
and these the Holy Ghost here calls flesh; it is but an arm of flesh, wherein
men trust, Jer. 17.5.

4. Church Priviledges are called flesh; Phil. 3.4, 5.
I might also have confidence in the flesh, if any other man thinks that he
has whereof he might trust in the flesh.

Flesh, what is that? why, he expounds himself in the immediate following verses.
Circumcision, Pedigree, Parentage, Church Membership, his eminence among the
Jews; An Hebrew of Hebrews, Profession, zeal, legal righteousness, etc.

These he calls flesh, because they be all foreign and adventitious
privileges, which fall upon a man by virtue of his natural and carnal
generation.

5. Flesh is sometimes taken for a sormal Profession in Religion, a pompous and
glittering show in external worship, Gal. 6.12. As many as desire to make a
fair show in the flesh, i. e. to set a good face upon the matter, to draw men's
eyes after them, to get a name, and to be accounted Somebody in Religion, etc.
Vultum opponit veritati, Heb. 9.10. (...). Ut pote in rebus crassis and
terrenis posita.
Circumcision and the Ceremonies to Gospel spiritual worship.

These terms and pompous theatrical shows in religion he calls flesh, in
opposition to the life and power of godliness: because there is nothing in
outward worship, but flesh may do, i. e. a man that has nothing of the life
and Spirit of Christ in him, may do them, and the more pompous and carnal any
service is, the easilier it goes down with men of fleshly minds, and the more
ready they are to rest and glory in it.

6. By flesh the Apostle understands sometimes parts, gifts and grace it self,
as separated from Christ; and so he takes flesh in my text from glorying,
wherein he calls off the Corinthians, vainly puff't up and swelled with a fond
opinion of their own excellencies. He tells them that even these are but
flesh, feeble and ineffectual to justify or save them, abstracted from Christ.

There be other things in Scripture, which fall under the notion of flesh, as
secular affairs, 1 Cor. 7.28. unregeneracy, or the corruption of nature, Romans
8.8, etc. but these are not so proper to our purpose.

In a word therefore, by flesh, we are to understand all humane excellency, the
creature in its beauty and perfection. Thus it is proclaimed,

Isa. 40.6. All flesh is grass, and all the goodlinesse thereof as the flower
in the field; Flesh and its goodlinesse; Heb. Chasdo, the piety, the excellency
and eminency thereof; i. e. all humane or created excellency in its beauty:
Man accomplished with all that which he calls excellency and perfection.

This is flesh; and this is not to be gloried in. But

The second Querie is, what is meant by glorying?

Answ. Glorying does principally import two things, 1. Pride. 2. Trust.

First, glorying does import pride; And pride is made up of two ingredients.

1. Self-opinion. 2. Affectation of praise.
1. Pride consists in Self-opinion, whereby men do ascribe to themselves, and
are lifted up in the inordinate esteem and admiration of their own real or
supposed excellencies, in any of the particulars abovementioned.

2. Pride consists in vainglory, or a foolish affectation of the praise of
men, both which we find in the Scribes and Pharisees, a vainglorious
generation, who only drived a trade of popular applause, Mat. 23.5. John 12.43.
Thus when a man has made himself his own idol, he would have all the standers
by fall down and worship it. And when he has set a rate upon his own parts and
perfections, he is very impatient and discontented if others will not come up
to his price.

This is one way of glorying, and this is specially meant in the text.

Secondly, another is carnal confidence, trusting in any creature-excellency or
sufficiency. And in this sense it is specially taken in the Original Scripture
here quoted,

That nineth of Jeremiah contains two things.

1. A Catalogue of the Jews sins, from ver. 3. to ver. 10. 2. A Bed-roll of
threatened judgments.
Against both these the carnal multitude did cast up a Mount of
creature-confidences.

Some took Sanctuary in their own policies, they thought to shift for
themselves well enough by their wits.

The wise man gloried in his wisdom. Others in the mean time presumed they
could secure themselves by their Power, Arms and Ammunition, Armies of men and
their martial valor, their walls and bulwarks, were the salvation wherein they
trusted.

The mighty man gloried in his might. And others there were that promised
themselves safety from their riches; If the Babylonian Army should invade them,
and the worst come to the worst, they thought if they could not beg quarter
with their prayers, they could bribe it with their treasure, and purchase life
and liberty too with large sums of money, they had enough lying by them. Thus,

The rich man gloried in his riches. This God saw and reproved by the Prophet,
as vain and foolish presumption, and discovers to them a stronger place where
they might take Sanctuary.

Prove. 18.10.
The Name of the Lord is a strong tower, the righteous run unto it, and are
safe. Let him that glories, glory in this, Jer. 9 24.
that he understands and knows me, that I am the Lord. Thus, when the heart
is filled with self-confidence, and goes about to secure it self, not only
without, but against God, as once the Babel-builders, Genesis 11.3, 4. This is to
glory in the flesh, or for flesh to glory.

The third Querie follows eth; and that is, Why? which leads us to the Grounds
or Roasons of the point, Why flesh is not to be gloried in? Briefly these.

1. Flesh is not to be gloried in, because flesh is but grass.

All flesh is grass, Isa. 40.6. i. e. as it follows, tanquam flos, (...)
as the flower: it is like grass. And yet observe, this note of similitude is
not expressed in the first branch, and it makes the sentence much more
emphatical, q. d. it is not only like grass, but truly it is no other then
grass, grass it self, it is no better, of no more strength and continuance,
then the flower of the field.

For, 1. Grass is a feeble, empty, windy creature: so is all created
excellency; it may look beautiful, and please the eye of the beholder, but
there is no solidity in it, you can put it to no stresse in the world.

2. Grass is caducous and fading; it withers while ye touch it and smell it;
your very breath takes away the beauty of it. It is to day in thr garden, to
morrow in the window, and the third day in the oven, or on the dunghill, Mat.
6.30.

Now such is all humane excellency, it is fading and vanishing, Prove. 23.5.
Will thou set thine eyes upon which is not: it is so vain that it deserves not
the name of a being, it is not; a mere none entitie, call it any thing, and you
call it too much; yea, it is not ordinary flesh only, that is thus empty and
aerie, but flesh in its glory. Chasdo; One of the Jewish Masters observes, the
word is used for any excellency or eminency of porfection; so that the best of
that which is called flesh, and take that best in its prime, in its glory, the
best at the best; and it is but grass, a flower, an empty aerie nothing.

A parallel place is that, Ps. 39.5.

Verily, every man at his best estate is altogether vanity. Selah. Man, the
glory of the Creation, Gods Masterpiece, it is the Prophet speaks of; and not
only some men, men of inferior quality, but Col-Adam, omnis homo, every man;
and not every man at sometimes, but take the best man in his best estate, (...)
from (...) ^tetir.
in his prime, take him standing, as the word signifies, watch your advantage,
and take him standing upon his tiptoe in his beauty and bravery, and what is he
then? not only, mixed creature, a compound of folly and wisdom, weakness and
strength, truth and error, light and darkness, flesh and spirit, nature and
grace, beauty and deformity, Col-hibet, Col-Adan.
substance and vanity; but he is altogether vanity: yea, the word is of an
higher emphasis, universa vanitas omnis homo, every man is every vanity, all
men are all vanities, the very sink and eentre of all the vanities in the
world: if man be a compound creature, it is of all the vanities under heaven;
man at his best is the very universe of vanity. And to this the Holy Ghost sets
a double seal, one at the beginning of the sentence, and another at the end;
Verily lets it in, and Selah shuts it up: it is a truth of such illimited and
immutable certainty, that it can be neither met nor overtaken with any
objection. Verily, every man in his best estate is altogether vanity: And is
this a thing to be gloried in? Hear what God says, Cease ye from man whose
breath is in his nostrils, for wherein is he to be accounted of? Consider him
well, and you can find nothing in him that is valuable, much less to be
gloried in. Were it nothing else but this, his breath in his nostrils, Isa. 2
22.
it is enough to obscure all his glory. The Psalmist will interpret the
account: His breath goes forth, he returns to his dust, in that very day his
thoughts perish. Ps. 116.4.


blast all the glory of the creature; this also is in the Original text, Isa.
40.7. The Spirit of the Lord blows upon it, and it withers. As an
East-winde goes forth, and blasteth the beauty of the Tulip and the Lily,
(whose bravery Solomon in all his royal ornaments is not able to match, Mat.
6.29.
) and they stand hanging down their heads as ashamed of themselves; so no
sooner does the breath of the Lords indignation go forth and smite the
excellency of the creature: but that whatever it is wherein the sons of men do
pride themselves, like the tree which Christ cursed, it stands scorch't and
withered, without either fruit or leaf. Behold, how irrational as well as
irreligious, is fleshes-glorying!

Use. There is comfort in it in the first place, for Gods afflicted and
oppressed Church: for whose enemies usually are wise, Jer. 29.23.
and mighty, and rich, abounding in policy, power and treasure, all
creature-advantages, while in the mean time the people of God are simple, and
weak, and poor: like a naked lamb, standing in the midst of lions and tygres,
and ravenous wolves. Yet I say, in the eater there is meat, and in the strong
there is sweetness; here is comfort, that if flesh be not to be gloried in,
neither is it to be trembled at. If the Church may not trust to
creature-excellencies, wisdom, strength, riches, when they are found with her,
then neither need she dread then when they are found with her enemies. Surely
creature-advantages whatever, have as little power to do us harm abroad, as
they have to do us good at home, wherever they are found, they are but flesh.

This is the very design of that famous proclamation, Jer. 40.6, 7, 8. All
flesh is grass, etc.

Partly to unbottom the Jews of self-sufficiency, and so to prepare them for
the comfort published, verse. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5. of that chapter.

Partly to obfirme and fortify their hearts, against all such fears and
diffidences, as the power, and policy, and hugeness of the Babylonian Invader
might inject: in regard whereof many of the unbelieving multitude, sat down,
and giving themselves up to despair, cried out, (when the Prophets would
comfort them with hopes of a return,) Our bones are dried, our hope is lost, we
are cut off for our parts, Ezekiel. 37.10.
q d. Tell us not of returning home to our own places again, our eyes shall
never see Sion any more; it is as impossible for us to break loose from this
captivity, and to escape these tyrants hands, (numerous and armed, potent and
politic; we our selves in the mean time as a poor naked handful of little
children) as for a dead man bound hand and foot, to come out of his grave, our
bones are dried, etc. thus they that would not believe the captivity, while it
was in the threatening, would not believe the deliverance, while it was in the
Promise; they that would not tremble in the day of rest, Heb. 3.
could not rest in the day of trembling.

While in the mean time the Prophet does thus labor to comfort them. Be it
so, your captivity is as the grave, and they as so many dead men, bound hand
and foot, yet their God is the God of resurrections: He can raise the dead, and
make an huge army, to stand up out of dry bones, (of which he gave a notable
type, either to their eyes or ears, in Ezekiel. 37. from verse. 1, to verse. 8. and
then expounds it out of captivity, from verse. 9. to verse. 14) upon the peoples
deliverance; and as for your enemies, whose power and greatness you so much
dread, fear them not; they shall not be able to frustrate Gods thoughts
toward you, they and all their glory are but flesh, no more to be dreaded then
the grass or the flower of the field, which to day is, and to morrow is cast
into the Oven. Mat. 6.30.
Surely the people is grass, the mighty Babylonian Monarch and all his Armies
are but as the grass, which of it self is eaducous, and the least breath of
Gods indignation dorh ptesently resolve into dust and nothing.

This is the sum of the consolation, that the Church and people of God are as
far from being in danger from the confidence of her enemies, as she is from
being in safety from her own.

Ps. 146.5.
Happy is he that has the God of Jacob for his help, whose hope is in the Lord
his Gd. Let the second Use therefore be an Use of Exhortation.

Learn beloved Christians from hence, not to glory in the flesh. Take heed of
pride. Take heed of carnal confidence.

Both these I should press, but time will not permit; and the former only is
most proper to this place; that therefore I shall insist upon, and to that end
give you, 1. Some motives. 2. A few helps and means.


Motives against pride. And these may be reduced to four heads.

1. The things themselves, wherein we are so prone to glory. 2. The Sin it
self, of pride or vain glory. 3. Our own selves, who are so prone to glory. 4.
God, against whom we sin, in glorying in the flesh.
1. Sort of Motives, The things that are the object of our pride. Supposed
perfections.
First, consider we The things themselves, wherein we are so prone to glory in,
and these be either Supposed or Real excellencies.

Many times, and for the most part, the perfections we admire in our selves,
are but supposititious, and are founded merely in our own fancies. Vain man
first forms an idol in his own imagination, and then worships it with the
highest veneration.

The Apostle observes to us, that the excellency of most men, lies merely but
in Thinks and Seems.

If any man think he knows any thing. 1 Cor. 8.2.


He that thinks he stands. 1 Cor. 10.12.


Let no man think more highly of himself then he ought. Romans 12.3


He that thinks himself to be something, when he is nothing; Gal. 6.3.
he seems to be religious, Jam. 1.26.
and yet bridleth not his tongue. Oh sad! (...) and (...).
Thinks and Seems deceive the greatest parts of the world, yea, of the knowing
world. The generality of them that boast, are but Thinkers.

So in the outward man, there are that with Tire seal up the sum, perfect in
beauty, when it is but in their own glass, or their paramours eyes; chaste,
sober eyes can behold no such beauty in them, as once the blind world
blasphemously spoke of Christ, Isa. 53.2, yea, it is sad to confider, what
beauty some can fancy in that, which a man of understanding accounts
ridiculous; a misshapen garment, a feather, a patch, a paint, this passes
with vain spirits, for beauty, though it be nothing else but what a statue, or
a rotten post is capable of. Hence is pride opposed to wisdom, Prove. 11.2. When
pride comes then comes shame, but with the lowly is wisdom; what greater
folly then to be proud of a lie, a thing that is not? Therefore you shall
observe, that the more wisdom, the less pride. Men that have nothing to be
proud of, do boast most.

But then suppose the excellency be real: Outward, Real.
strength, riches, honor, etc.

Inward, wisdom, learning, 1. They are none of our own.
gifts, grace it self, etc. yet now to glory in them, is not only irreligious,
but irrational; for consider,

1. They be none of our own; we may say of them, as the young Prophet of his
axes head, Alas Master, for it is borrowed, 2 Kings 6.5. It is the levelling
question, wherewith the Apohle lays the highest mountains even with the
lowest valleys. Quis te discrevit? Who made thee differ? and what have thou
that thou have not received? 1 Cor, 4.7.
this is the blast of vainglory, that which thou boastest of is none of thine
own; and if thou did receive, why do thou glory? glorying is not for
borrowers, but for owners; He only that is the spring and fountain of his own
excellency, may justly glory; to glory of borrowed perfections, is as if a man
should boast, he were more in debt then others: while we receive the gift from
God, we should ascribe the glory to God; so that in glorying in what we
receive, we rob God of his honor, and add sacrilege to our unthankfulness.

2. They may be lost.
Secondly, if they be none of our own, we are uncertain of the possession. That
which is borrowed will be called for again, and how soon, we know not,
especially when it is lent us sine die, to be paid upon demand. Read rationem,
the expectation of an account, may give check to our presumption, and the
certainty of a devestiture, cause us to let fall our plumes.

I come to a second Motive. 2. Sort of Motives, from pride it self.

1. It is sordid.




Consider the sin it self.

Pride is a stinking weed that will thrive in any soil, a swine that will feed
upon any carrion, there is nothing so honorable, nothing so sordid, but pride
can make use of it; the beggar can be as proud of his rags, as the King of his
robes; a garment of linsey woolsey can make one look as big as well as cloth of
tissue; a few knots of ribbin may puff up, as well as the richest brooches of
Diamonds; Any thing without a man, a pedigree, the nod of a Superior, the knee
of an inferior, a favor, a fancy, any air of popular applause will fill the
vain mind of man. Any thing within, natural endowments, acquired parts will
elate the Spirit; Knowledge puffs up, 1 Cor. 8.1.

Nothing so good, nothing so bad, but pride can turn it into nourishment.

Pride of spiritual gifts was the distemper here which these gifted Corinthians
labored under, especially their teachers, whom therefore Luther calls
Theologos gloriae, vainglorious Doctors. And thus a man may glory in a gift of
preaching, and a gift of prayer, etc. the best of Ministers their calling,
putting them upon the public exercise of their gifts, they are in danger of
pride. And therefore the Apostle will not suffer a novice to take upon him that
calling, 1 Timothy 3.6
as being most subject to that temptation. The higher the Sphere is wherein a
man moves, the more he is followed with temptations of vainglory. Yea, a man
is very prone to be proud of Grace it self,

Proud of holiness; Stand by thy self, come not near me, Isa. 55.5.
I am holier then thou.

Proud of zeal; Come see my zeal for the Lord of Hosts, 2 Kings 10.16.
Vainglorious Jehu had lost his zeal, had it not been seen.

Proud of humility it self: Sic calco fastum Platonis.

Majori fastu.


so one said, he could see pride through the holes of Diogenes his cloak; and
another told him he trod upon Plato's pride with greater pride; none hate one
another so much as proud men, and the reason is, because they think none have
so much cause to be proud as themselves.

But truly that grace which swells the heart, is rather in show then in
substance; we may say of it, as Augustine once of the brag of the Jews, John
8.33.

Non est ista magnitudo, sed tumor, it is not solid matter, but a mere tympany.

As nothing so good, so nothing so bad, but pride can live upon it. What a
sordid spirit is in vain man! rather then not be proud, he will be proud of his
sins.

The Apostle tells of some, who glory in their shame: Phil. 3.19.
Sampson never gloried more in his miraculous victory over the Philistines,
then some Roarers have done in their drunken Conquest, heaps upon heaps have
they laid dead drunk at their feet. I have heard of some, who have made their
boast, how many maids and women they have vitiated in one night.

What a base sin is pride that can feed upon excrements?

A second motive taken from the sin it self may be this: It is the root of all
sin, 2. It is a mother-sin.
indeed it is at the bottom of every sin, Only by pride comes contention:
Prove. 13.10.
whether the contention be with God or man, follow it to the Springhead, and
there you will find self-opinion; when the pot-sherd strives with the
pot-sherds of the earth, contention would quickly cease, but that one thinks
himself too good to yield to another; and why should I stoop, says the proud
heart? let him yield first if he will; I am the better man, etc. Thus also when
man strives with his Maker, Pride is at the bottom.

Sin is an interpretative confronting of God, and gives in a negative vote
against the Command; and therefore it is proclaimed before the Word.

Jer. 13.15.
Hear and give ear, be not proud, for the Lord has spoken. It is pride that
will not suffet men to put the neck under the yoke of Christ.

Verse. 17.
If you will not hear, my soul shall weep in secret places for your pride; it
is pride that stiffens the will, and deafs the ear, the proud man knows no
other God but himself; who is the Lord? I know not the Lord, neither will I let
Israel go?

Thirdly, Pride, 3. It is ashamed of it self.
as one says is a sin that is ashamed of it, self: there is none so proud, but
would be thought to be humble; as humility is so beautiful, that even they that
love it not, would yet have the esteem of it; so on the contrary, pride is so
ugly, that even they that hate it not, are yet ashamed of it.

What was the reason why the Pharisees grace was rejected, God I thank thee, I
am not as other men are, etc.? the doxologie was good in it self, and may in
some cases become a sober Christian: nay, but the proud Pharisee made use of it
only as a stirrup to mount himself up into the saddle of vainglory. The
Pharisees pride durst not appear but in the habit of thankfulness. And thus
you may observe, that men hunt out their praises by stealth, and sail to their
own applause by a side-wind. Pride goes back, as one says, that it may take
the greater rise of glory:

Even this may convince us that it is of the Kingdom of darkness, but it dare
not appear, but under a disguise. Have we not reason, Christians, to be ashamed
of that which is ashamed of it self? we distrust him for a Cheat, that which
dares not pass under his own name.

A third sort of Motives, 3. Sort of Motives, our selves.
we may fetch from our selves.

First, 1. Pride lodges in base spirits.
it is the badge of a low and an ignoble spirit, no temper so sordid and
unmanly; a proud man will be servile, that he may dominere; Jude 16.
having men's persons in admiration because of advantage; a proud man will turn
flatterer, and lick up other men's spittle for his own ends. Curvatur obsequio,
ut aliis dominetur, as one says of Absalom; the ambitious person is first
base, and then cruel. He will creep upon his belly that he may ascend, and when
he is got up, he is insolent and intolerable.

The earth is not able to bear his wrath.

2. Motive from self, it argues little worth.
Secondly, to be sure, a vainglorious person is a man of little worth; the
lightest ears among the corn stand bolt upright, when the well-loaden are
bowed down with their own weight, and look to the earth from whence they
sprang. Heroic spirits can hardly bear their own praises, while a man of
little worth is like an empty bladder, qaickly filled with the wind of
adulation. The wise man observes it, As the fining pot for silveo, and the
furnace for gold: so is a man to his praise. Praise is a furnace that will
quickly try of what metal a man is made. As those metals which have least
solidity are soonest melted, so where there is least solidity of worth, the
heart is soonest dissolved with its own commendation, and as in the furnace,
the light matter evaporates into smoke and air, so by praise bloaty spirits
are soon puffed up and transported into a strange disdain of others, and
over-valuing of themselves.

It is an humbling consideration, pride came in by the fall, and then man began
to be proud, when he had lost his perfection, he never was lifted up till he
had cast himself down from his excellency: empty casks sound most, while the
well-fraught vessel silenceth its own fullness, and gives no echo to
temptation. You may easilier draw it out, hen make it speak: the Holy Ghost
alludes to the metaphor, Prove. 20.5.
Counsel in the heart of a man is like deep water, but a man of understanding
will draw it out: take in the next verse, Ver. 6.
and it makes up the sense: Most men will every man proclaim his own
goodness; the empty multitude will sound out their own praises, but the man of
deep and solid worth, must be pierced, if you will know what is in him. This is
an infallible observation, that pride is found in supposed worth, rather then
in real.

3. A stop to grace.

Jam. 4.6.


Thirdly, Pride is the great obstruction of grace. God resists the proud, but
gives grace to the humble: The Lord loves to pour the oil of his grace into
empty vessels, Intus existens prohibet alienum; a mind stuff't which
self-opinion is not capable of Christ's fullness.

One well observes, Mant^n.
that pride is a greater hinderance to knowledge then ignorance; and the reason
is, because the proud man thinks he needs no knowledge. Seneca observed it,
Many might attain to perfection, if they had not thought they had attained it
already. Humility is the funnel of knowledge, Psalm. 25.9. The meek he will
guide in judgment, the meek he will teach his way: double meekness shall be
honored with double instruction.

Fourthly, 4. A blot with men.
pride is a veil upon our excellencies with men; the unsavory. But in our
commendations, we use to say, Such a man has excellent parts, But he is proud;
such a woman beautiful, but she knows it; it is like Naamans leprosy, a blot
upon a fair character. He was a mighty man of valor, 2 Kings 5.1.
but a leper.

5. A blast from God.
Fifthly, it is worse with God: it is a blot with men; but oftentimes it is a
blast from God. Nebuchadnezzars pride disinherited him of his reason, and
turned him a grazing among the bruit beasts.

I have heard of a Divine in our age, (I cannot forgive my self, that I was not
more inquisitive after his name and place, at least not more careful to record
them) who having read admirable Lectures upon the Creed, and being earnestly
pressed by his brethren to publish them, for the transcendent rarity of his
notions, the poor man was so overset with their incautious applause: that his
over-swolne pride brake out into this hellish blasphemy: Jesule, Jesule,
quantillus tu sine me? (I am afraid to English it) and added, If I would, I
could say as much against thee, as I have spoken for thee. Upon which
blasphemous boast he was immediately blasted, so that never after he was able
to say so much as the Lords prayer to his dying day; A dreadful instance, and
may justly set us a trembling. Our parts are not given us for Ornament, so much
as for service, not for our praise, but for Gods: and therefore when we pride
our selves in them, we invert Gods ends, and provoke his jealousy, If we would
keep what we have, we had need to take heed of glorying.

4. Sort of Motives.
But much more, if we consult the fourth sort of Motives, viz. such as are taken
from GOD.

1. G^d does most hate the sin of pride.

Jam. 4.6.


First, it is a sin that God does most of all oppose. He resists the proud.
God overtakes other sins, but he meets pride; Ps. 140.11.
Evil shall hunt the wicked man to destruction: a metaphor taken from hounds
following the chased creature, by the sent of the foot, till tired out of
breath, they overtake her in her covert, and worry her to death. But this is a
chase of patience, as well as of justice, and gives the sinner time of
repentance, Rev. 2.21.

But God takes a quicker order with the proud; God meets him in his way, and
resists him to his face, (...), he sets himself in battle array against the
proud man; and discharges all his artillery in his face. Thus God followed
Cain, Sin lay at his door; Genesis 4.7.
the punishment of his sin, slept, as it were, at his threshold, waiting his
repentance. But he resisted Pharaoh, that proud Tyrant, who knew not the Lord,
and ten times let fly in his face, and at length unhors't him in the sea, in
the midst of his boastings. I will, I will, I will, said the proud King, and
three times more to that, Exodus 15.9. But while the word was in his mouth God
set his battle array against him. Thou blewest with thy wind, the sea covered
them, they sank as lead in the mighty waters. Quick dispatch.

Thus also God overtook Judas, but he resisted Herod, and while his heart was
lifted up with the blasphemous applause of the people, God blasted him from
heaven; and he that could hear himself cried up for a God, was made a spectacle
of greatest abhorrency before men; Surely he scorneth the scorners, Prove. 3.34.
says the Original text; The proud man scorns others, and God scorns him.
The Hebrew word may seem to have some reference unto speaking by an
interpreter. It is the same word used, Genesis 42.23. And this may hint a notable
instance of pride; the proud man is so swelled in his own opinion, that he
scorns to speak to his neighbor, but by an Interpreter; i. e. he will not
speak himself, but by another; and so God deals with him, he scorns the
scorner: God will not speak to him himself, but by an Interpreter; his
judgments shall interpret his thoughts; he shall speak to them in his wrath,
Psalm. 2.5.
and vex them in his sore displeasure; Yea, the proud man does not scorn his
brother only, but he scorns God too.

And that will make a Second Consideration, 2. Motives on God part.

Pride hates God most.


in reference to GOD.

God does most of all oppose this sin of pride, because this sin does most of
all oppose God. The proud man does most unjustly scorn God, and therefore God
does most justly scorn him. He slights God, and God slights him; Who is the
Lord that I should fear him? says Pharaoh, and what is this Pharaoh, that he
should dare me? might God say; and say so he did by the interpretation of his
judgments.

Other sins oppose Gods Will, but pride strikes at his being; Other sins
withdraw the heart from God, pride lifts up the heart against God. Pride would
not only unthrone God, but un-Ghd him. If pride could help it, God should be
God no longer.

I will be God, said the proud Angel.

And the proud worm man repeats it after him.

Thou have set thine heart as the heart of God. So Tire, Ezekiel. 28.6
Isa. 27.8
Babylon and Zeph. 2.15.
Nineveh, speak the same language, I am God, and there is none besides me.

No wonder pride is the first of the abominations which God hates, Prove. 16.17.
it is that abomination which most of all hates God. A proud look, (...)
Heb. haughty eyes; the eyes are the very looking-glass of pride; and God
hates the reflection of it, it looks so like the father.

The devils first sin was pride: He exalted himself, and therefore God
humbled him into the bottomless pit of darkness. Noluit Deus pati
cohabitationem superbiae.


And thus still (as the Philosopher observed) Gods great work in the world is,
to lift up the humble, and to cast down the proud; you may trace the Srory from
Heaven to Paradise, and from Paradise to this present generation. A proud man
had need of Gods strength, to secure himself from Gods vengeance; else that
shall undeceive him with a witness: Will thou say before him that slays
thee, Ezekiel. 28.9
I am God? that's a contradiction which pride it self cannot be guilty of; for a
creature, suffering the vengeance of God to say, I am the God of vengeance.
Well, look to it; the higher any man lifts up himself, the further he is off
from God.

3. It crosses Gods design.
A third consideration relating to God is, that Pride crosses Gods design,
which the text tells you is, that no flesh should glory, but he that glories
should glory in the Lord.

God has in his infinite wisdom so contrived the whole model, both of nature
and grace, that he might cut off from the creature all possibility of glorying,
and he himself might only be exalted. God has filled the Creation with vanity
and mutability. The toil of getting, the dissatisfaction in possessing, Eccl.
1.8.
and the hazard of losing, makes the whole world but a mockery or baffle, to
the expectation of the sons of of men, vanity and vexation of spirit

And as for grace it cannot preserve it self, that it is not amissable, it is
not from the nature of grace, but from divine compact, Jer. 32.40. and the
intervention of a Mediator, John 14.19. The whole New Covenant is made up of
pure grace, from election to glorification, and all put into the hands of a
Christ, who is made of God, Wisdom, Righteousness, Sanctification,
Redemption; And why all this, but that no flesh might glory, but as it is
written, He that glories might glory in the Lord? This is the plot of divine
Providence, which he has been contriving from the days of eternity; the
miscarriage of the first Covenant, was not of Improvidence but of Ordination:
and it was in order to this very design, and therefore for flesh to be
glorying, is to cross Gods highest project, and to oppose him in that upon
which his heart is set.

I am the Lord, that is my Name, Isa. 41.8.
and my glory will I not give to another. This must needs be an affront that
God cannot bear; And therefore if flesh will be lifting up it self, God must
make good his design in the ruin of the proud creature; and if he be not
glorified by us, he will be glorified upon us. Let us fear and tremble.

Quest. But what shall we do to mortify this great sin of pride?

Answ. The resolution of this question, will be the last thing propounded, scil.

Some Helps and Means briefly.

First, Means mortify pride.
if we find our hearts at any time begin to swell, upon the reflex of any
natural endowments: whether outward, as honor, strength, riches, 1. Outward
excellencies cannot make us happy.
beauty, birth; Or inward, as wisdom, learning, parts, gifts. Let us consider,
These are not the things which will make us happy. As for those external
ornaments, they are but as the trappings of an horse, which add nothing to his
price when he comes to be sold, like jewels which fancy puts the value upon,
rather then their use or virtue.

These are none of the man; neither do they render a man honorable, but with
those only who do not know what honor is. To be taken with these foreign
things, argues gross ignorance, and that's enough to tame our pride.

Be they those inward excellencies, Wisdom, Inward endowments, may leave a man
miserable.
Learning, etc. Though they may be of use, a man may have them and yet be
miserable; Achitophel was a wise man, and yet his own Executioner; Judas wanted
no parts, and yet was the son of perdition; and without controversy, none in
the world so gifted as the Apostate-Angels; the devil has more learning then
all the Universities in the world can give a man, and yet a devil.

A man may attain to rare perfections, and yet never see the face of God, 1
Cor. 13.1, 2, 3.

And even for grace it self, Grace is not ours.
saving graces they are none of our own; nor left in our own keeping, if they
were, we should quickly prove bankrupts as our first Parents did; We cannot
keep our grace, nor our grace us.
kept we are, but not by our own power through works, but the Power of God
through faith; faith keeps us, and God keeps our faith.

We are not justified by inherent right.

Job 4.17, 18. Job 9.20 30.


And when all is done, we are neither justified nor saved by our own graces; for
our very holiness will not endure Gods trial: If I should justify my self,
mine own mouth shall condemn me; if I wash my self with snow-water, and make
my self never so clean, yet shall thou plunge me into the ditch, and mine own
clothes shall abhor me.

It is Christ that is made Wisdom, and Righteousness, and Sanctification, and
Redemption; we are able neither to get grace nor keep grace, nor use grace of
our selves, and though we are not saved without grace, we are not saved for
grace, what room is there for boasting?

Secondly, Second means, compare our selves with God Isa. 6.5.
Let us compare our selves often with God. The sight of God is the humbling
vision; Woe is me, I am undone, mine eyes have seen the King, the Lord of Hosts.

He the infinite Creator, we poor nothing-creatures; he power, we infirmity; he
immutable, we liable to a thousand changes every hour and moment: he
Holiness, we impurity; he Majesty, we misery; he Heaven, and we Hell, as holy
Hooper confessed.

The proud man never saw God, Job 42.5, 6.
Now mine eyes have seen thee, I abhor my self in dust and ashes.

Third means, Reflect upon corruption.
Thirdly, if thy fancied excellencies begin to tickle thee, reflect upon thy
corruption, check the rising of self-opinion, with the remembrance of thy
undecencies before God. A godly Minister being ask't how he kept his heart
humble under such rare abilities as God had given him; made only this reply, I
warrant you I have corruptions enough to keep me humble; the truth is, we have
nothing that we can properly call our own but our corruptions. If men would be
more in confession of sin, and in duties of humiliation, their hearts would not
be so lifted up. Proud men usually are prayer-lesse, fasting and prayer are the
best way to cast out the devil of pride.

Fourthly, Fourth means, especially our pride.
the very sense of our pride were enough to humble us, whatever our
excellencies be, pride turns them into so many idols. Pride turned Angelical
perfection into hellish principles, instruments of darkness to fight against
God. Behold, let us grow humble the same way we grow proud. Pride turns
humility it self into an argument of pride: let grace turn pride into an
argument of humility: the diamond is cut by the diamond, our very pride may be
a great help to the mortifying of our pride.

5. Our Account, Fifth means, R^member: Accomp
that we are to make in the day of Christ, may exceedingly check rising
thoughts: if our receipts begin to puff us up, remember when all these come to
be answered for, where wtli be our glorying then?

Luke 19.16
Improvement will then be our glory, and not our possession, and not that
neither, but as we can put our accounts into the hands of a Mediator.

Ephesians. 1.6.
He has made us accepted in the beloved. Sixth means, Imitate the Saints.
Sixthly, Write after the copy of the Saints and Servants of God in Scripture.
In the whole sacred story you shall find, that the more excellent any have
been the more meek. Jacob less then the least of all Gods mercies; and Paul
less then the least of all Gods Saints. The greatest of sinners, but the
meanest of servants: and when he had done all, more then any, Yet not I, etc.

Oh rare patterns! Go you, and do likewise. Indeed true gtace does humble: the
very work of grace is to abase self, and to exalt God.

Seventhly, Seventh means, Learn of Christ. Mat. 11.29.
But above all patterns, propound to your selves the pattern of Jesus Christ,
and it is indeed his own means.

Learn of me, for I am meek and lowly in heart. The Incarnation of our Lord,
was the greatest condescension that ever was, wherein God himself was humbled,
that man might not be proud; and the whole life and death of Christ, was
nothing else but a copy of humility, that we might learn by pattern as well as
by precept, not to glory, Learn of me. He that will not take Christ as his
pattern, shall never have him as his Savior.

Eighth means, The advantage of humility.
Eighthly, and in a word, Remember, no man ever lost by humility: a man may be
too high, but he cannot be too low, the reason is, because the lower we lie,
the higher do we exalt God; and the less we glory in the flesh, the more we
shall glory in the Lord, which is Gods design, and man's duty. That as it is
written, He that glories let him glory in the Lord.

Consider what I say, and the Lord give you understanding in all things.

(...).
And now for this young Gentleman, whose sad funerals we this day celebrate with
weeping eyes and mournful hearts: if we first take a view of the man, we shall
have a fresh evidence, what little cause there is to glory in any thing that is
called flesh.

There were many excellencies and perfestions concentred in him, which as they
did render his person amiable while he lived, so they may serve as precious
spices to embalme his memorial, and render his name honorable now he is dead.

His incomparable worth, had I time or skill to express it, might appear under
what aspect soever you can look upon a man: I shall speak of him under a
fourefold notion, scil.

Represented under a fourefold notion.
As a
1. Gentleman. 2. Christian. 3. Son. 4. Dying man.


First notion.

He was in the two and twentieth year of his age.


First, as a Gentleman, though he was in the very infancy of his youth, when the
mind usually is impressive to what forms and figures are most generally
presented unto it; yet he was free from all those vain and vicious habits,
which too usually render men of his age and quality, not only unserviceable,
but unsavory.

His Recreations.
His recreations were not only innocent, but honorable; that which he
especially used, was the riding of the great horse, an exercise not only manly,
but martial, by which he did put himself into a capacity of serving his
country in warlike affairs. And yet these honorable diversions were very
rare, to show he did rather use recreation then love it. They that knew him
from a child, have observed that he hardly used any kind of game ten times in
all his life.

The truth is, His Studies.
his studies were his recreations, which from his childhood he did so naturally
affect, that in the climax of literature in which he was ascending, he was
always a form or two before his age, and in every part of learning which he
was put upon, from time to time so eminently proficient, that he was the envy
of his fellow-pupils, and the boast of his Tutours. His studious disposition
was so tempered with sweetness, that it was hard to say, whether he gained
love or learning faster from his teachers.

Parts.
Nature had highly befriended him, as with an excellent spirit, so with rare
parts, and he again did make nature a most ingenious requital, by improving the
stock she lent him, so that he might truly borrow the language of the faithful
servant in the Gospel, to give in his account to nature, Behold, thy talent
has gained ten, He was a meek spirit, Et Pluteum caedit, and demorsos sapit
ungues. Pers.
yet proud beyond parallel only in this, that he scorned to be conquered by any
difficulty in studies. When he was of Christ-Church in Oxon, before he had been
there a year, he obtained the favor to have a Key of the Colledge-Library,
where his friends that came to town, usually found him detained in his studies,
while others were abroad, dispiriting themselves, (at the best) in their vain
recreations. All the while he was there, he submitted himself to keep Exercises
in the Hall, from which till he came to the house, Gentlemen-Commoners
accounted it their privilege to be exempted: that piece of Reformation (if yet
alive,) is a debt that is owing to his genius. Mr. Ford then Student of Chapter Chapter
Oxon.
After he had been two years standing in the University, his Tutour, a learned
and conscientious man, scrupling the then engagement, was put from his place;
and this young Gentleman, his father proposing another Tutour to him; His
Proficiency in the University.
he made it his humble request, that since he and his first Tutour must be
divorced, he might spend the remainder of his Vniversity-life, as it were in a
single state; so immeasurably intent he was upon his studies, that he looked
upon a Tutour, as a kind of diversion rather then advantage, and to that end
he begs leave of his father, to perform his Exercises for Batchelour of Arts,
that by that means he might be manumitted by the University from a Tutour: His
father consented, and he obtained his Grace as eminenter doctus.

The truth is, all the Essays that ever past from his pen, were of that
impression; savouring of a solid judgment, and a sparkling fancy. When he came
to the Innes of Court, His entrance upon the Law.
he improved his studies so prematurely, that he had the favor to be called to
the Bar, before he had completed his full time. And when he had entered upon
the practice of the Law, (which he did not long before his death) his modesty
was mixed with such acuteness, that it did invite countenance and encouragement
from diverse of the grave and learned Sages of the Law, His favor with the
Judges.
some of them calling him to ride circuit with them, and others giving him the
honor of the primacy of motions, whenever he appeared at the bar.

More might be added upon this account. But I had rather present him to your
fuller view, as

Second Notion.
A Christian.

And there you shall find him severe and constant in his devotions, both
public and private.

His great reverence in public worship.
He was a strict Observer of the Lords day, both in the Church and in his
chamber; He was far from their temper, who while they would avoid superstition,
unhappily run into the other extreme of undecency in public worship; some
there be, who as one says, have spiritualized their religion into just
nothing: and as if God had past over his right in the outward man to the devil,
think they can never be rude enough in the service of God; but this Gentleman
had attained to an happy mixture of reverence and spirituality: his outward
deportment of body, was nothing else but an happy indicium of the souls
motion, both which he taught uniformity in the Worship of God; the outward man
did not turn Separatist from the inward, but as bought with a price, 1 Cor.
6.20.
he glorified God in his body and soul, which were the Lords. His ca^e to call
to mind what he had heard.
As soon as he came home from the public Ordinance, he was observed
immediately to betake himself to his chamber, there to meditate and pray over
what he had heard, so observing the rule which some Divines give, to come out
of holy duties, as out of a sweat, by degrees; an argument that he did not set
judgment only, but conscience on work also in hearing, and went not to the
Ordinance to judge the Word, His readiness to communicate to others.
but to be judged by it. When he came down into the family, he would be
imparting what he had got; and like a good Scribe instructed to the Kingdom of
God, Mat. 13.52.
he would bring out of his treasure, things new and old: which he would do with
such judgment and affection, that it seemed to them of the family, a Sermon
rather then a Repetition. I say, them of the family, for he knew his bounds,
within which to be idle, he held it as great a sin as to be excentrick.

His gracious carriage in his fathers house, toward all relations.
He truly carried himself like the firstborn in his fathers house, and minded
the duties more then the privileges of his primogeniture. In his fathers
absence he undertook the care of family duties, reading the Scriptures and
prayer, which he would perform with much judgment and affection, and that even
before he went to the University; and in all other family-offices, as
rebuking, admonishing, counselling, instructing his inferior or coordinate
relations, (as occasion required) he always mixed such sweetness and
prudence, as justly gained him the respect of a father, and the love of a
brother. What a loss has that family suffered in a firstborn!

As to his private devotions His private devotions.
he began and ended the day with God; severe to his closet-duties morning and
evening, as one that had learned to look upon holy duties, not as a burden, but
as a Privilege. He did profit plus orando and cogitando quam legendo and
audiendo. Aug. though he despised neither.

In his studies about (...), matters of religion, he was of a searching, but
not (the distemper of our times,) of a wanton spirit, studying rather the
satisfaction of his own judgment, then the puzling of others: He was very
knowing, but yet extremly modest: His Virgin-minde was not vitiated with any of
the morbid humors of the times; he took great pains to know the truth, His
pains in matters of Religion.
but was not at all (blessed be God) affected with novel and unpractical
curiosities, though never so specious.

It is very sad, to consider, how many fine spirits, through too much delicacy
from searchers are turned seekers and of seekers are at length resolved into
downright Atheists; I would I spoke without book, and if ever, that herein I
were uncharitable.

He was very judicious, but not at all censorious. He despised not other men's
abilities, though short of his own, nor would easily judge them that dissented
from him in opinion.

He expressed a rare respect to godly Ministers; Respect to godly Ministers.
quite contrary to the temper of our times, wherein many do account it a
gallantry to put scorn and contempt upon that despised function. No Gentleman
that ever I knew of his age, could better judge of parts, and yet value
fidelity more then he.

His Meekness
Meekness and humility, which in many are but moral virtues, (and whereof the
major part of men fall short) were in him (we have good ground to believe)
baptized into Gospel-graces, and
by the teaching and operation of the Holy Ghost. He was hardly ever known to
be in passion, and never bestowed an uncomely name, upon any the meanest of his
own or his fathers servants, though peccant. Humility.
He took the greatest notice of other men's excellencies, and the least of his
own, that ever I saw. I say again, he was a Gentleman of excellent parts and
graces, and knew it not.

His scire was enough to him, Pers.
though it was latent to standers by. He carried it the humbliest, under that
rich furniture wherewith Grace and Nature had honored him, that is imaginable.

His temperance was eminent, Temperance.
he did eat rather for necessity then delight, and for many years drank
nothing but water, till with mortified Timothy, the weakness of his stomach,
and his often infirmities necessitated him to make use of the Apostles
dispensation. 1 Timothy 5.23.


Of a liberal disposition, Liberality.
and far from the love of money; he spared much out of his personal allowance
for charitable uses, and would often say, If God should please ever to make him
Master of a large estate, he would bestow the overplus in bringing up of poor
Scholars at the University. Such was his love to learning, that in the morning
of his youth he was studying, not only to be learned himself, but how to
promote the interest of Learning.

Modesty.
His modesty was incomparable: there was nothing unsavory or undecent, that
was ever observed in his language or behavior; yea, his modesty was such, that
by means thereof he obtained an happiness that few of the sons of Adam know,
and that is (as it is believed) he never came within the reach of a temptation.
Happy man!

In a word, the feature of his body, was but Icon animae, his soul made
visible; exceeding beautiful, not a blemish in him from top to toe. As if
Nature and Grace had contended which should outvie the other in her
workmanship, it would not be an hyperbole, if I should say, never soul finer
bodied, The suitableness of the outward and inward Man.
and nebody better soul'd. I have much ado to forbear to call him, Deliciae
humani generis.

They that knew him quite through, have deemed him worthy of such an honor.

Thirdly, Third Notion,
take a view of him as he was

A Son.

And there you shall find him an eminent pattern of filial respect, unto all
Gentlemen of his rank; it is hard to say, whether he loved or honored his
Parents most; he was troubled with nothing but what troubled them, and
ambitious of nothing so much as of their content and satisfaction. It is a
passage worth remembering, that after he had made some entrance on his studies
in the Law, his father and mother, tender of his content, encouraging him
cheerfully to persist, and telling him the worst was past; every day, for the
future, His childe-like care and delight to please his Parents.
would render those studies more pleasing and profitable, He did ingenuously
profess unto them, that the satisfaction which he gave them in that way, would
countervail the greatest difficulty he could meet with; and that if he should
find no other pleasure or profit then that, he would never desist nor be
discouraged. Upon this Model was all his carriage toward his Parents, formed
from his very infancy. 1 Kings 2.19.
He had learned of Solomon to give them the greatest reverence that might be,
and never grieved their spirits, but at last, in dying. It was an high
expression I had once from his father (and I believe it was no hyperbolie) That
his whole life was so satisfactory to him and his mother, that they could not
remember one entire week together in it, which if he were to live over again,
they could wish he should otherwise spend then he did: To which he added as an
acknowledgement of divine favor, that he was so blessed of God all along, that
if God at his birth had promised whatsoever they could have desired for him,
for near twenty two years (the time he lived) upon condition they should then
be willing to resign him back again, they could not have asked more of God,
then he did bestow upon him, for their comfort, and to make his person
valuable. Ah, how few sons be there in the world, the Christian world, to whom
their Parents can give such a testimony! Behold, here a worthy pattern for
young Gentlemen's imitation.

When we read the fifth Commandment, and the Apostle his Comment upon it, Ephesians.
6.2. it might leave some wonder upon our spirits, why such matchles obedience
should fall so short of the Promise.

But that, 1 Timothy 4 8. tells us of a promise of the life to come, as well as of
the life that now is; and therefore if God, instead of a long life on earth,
has translated him into eternity in heaven, Mortality is swallowed of life,
and the Promise made good with infinite advantage.

Thus I have presented him to you, as A Gentleman, A Christian, A Son. Look
upon him but once more, under the fourth notion propounded, scil.

As a dying man, Fourth notion.


and you shall see him no more till the Resurrection. And yet here you cannot
expect much, at least, not to answer the proportions of such a fair and
exemplary life; the nature of the The Small Pox.
distemper, putting him into a capacity, not so fit to communicate what he
felt, or to receive what might have been seasonably tendered from others, though
in this later respect the modesty and tenderness of his dearest relations
toward friends, that desired to have served him in a personal attendance, was
stronger then their friends fears. Yet God was pleased in wonderful goodness,
to put his bridle into the mouth of the disease, so that though it did cast a
cloud upon the bright firmament of his understanding, yet it did not transport
him unto any undecency. It was wonderful to standers by, that during the
tyranny of that froward disease, (which was about a fourtnight) there was
nothing of frowardness that fell from him, but he retained his native
sweetness of spirit till the last breath. His constant patience in his
sickness.
He bare the pains of a violent sickness, with that calmnesse and serenity, as
if he had not so much as wished to be in any condition, but what he was; to
which purpose he most Christianly expressed himself once to his mother; That he
blessed God, God had fitted him for a bed of sickness, and that he could
fancy it all the things which he delighted in.

It has been the commendation of some eminently learned and godly, Ministers
themselves, that under their sore torments they groaned, but they did not
grumble, and indeed it was much, and a mighty power of God to sustain and
restrain the spirit under such mighty burnings, (as they truly phras'd their
agonies:) This Gentleman did neither; even while sense was alive and quick, he
would say of his greatest sufferings,

This is nothing but what might be easily borne, do with me what you will. I
hope God made good to him that promise, Jer. 33.24. The inhabitant (of Sion)
shall not say, I am sick: the people that dwell therein shall be forgiven their
iniquity. Sense of pardon took away the sense of pain.

All his trouble was to see his dear relations troubled for him, whom he
besought with greatest tenderness and humility to be comforted, His cheerful
submission to the will of God.
telling them, I am willing God should do with me what he will.

As his distemper increased, God increased his patience, and finding weakness
growing upon him, the night before he died, he told his Parents, who were
continually with him, that he thought he should see them no more here, humbly
begged their blessings and prayers, in the midst whereof (some hours after) he
fell asteep.

I have said much, possibly some may think, too much; but they must be
strangers to hm. They that knew him, and knew him intimately, will not only be
ready to subscribe this Testimony, but judge me sparing in what I have said on
his behalf.

The Cl^se.
And now what shall I add in the close of all, but only this, scil. that this
young Gentleman lies before us as a witness and evidence to my text and
doctrine, that all humane excellency is but flesh, and therefore not to be
gloried in.

Truly in all this beauty which God put upon him, he himself did not glory;
some are miserable and poor, etc. and yet know it not. He was rich, and
abounding in natural and spiritual blessings, and yet knew it not. And thus by
his example, he being dead, yet speaks to us in the language of the text, Glory
not in flesh.

I have seen, says the Prophet David, an end of all perfection, Psalm. 119.96.
He had seen wisdom, and the perfection of wisdom in Achitophel, and he saw an
end of that.

Beauty, and the perfection of beauty in Absalom, and he saw an end of that.

Riches, and the perfection of riches in Doeg, and he saw an end of them.

Strength and the perfection of strength in Goliath, and he saw an end of that.
Et sic in caeteris.

Surely Brethren, you have seen many excellent gifts and graces in this
Gentleman, and compared with his age, we may add in their perfection, but
behold, excepting those which were founded in Christ and the Covenant of grace;
death has put an end to them all.

His Sun is gone down, shall I say at noonday? nay, verily in the morning,
almost as soon as it began to shine, and who would not mourn to see so much
beauty, learning, modesty, ingenuity, meeknes, wisdom, grace, goodness, so
early buried with him in one sepulcher?

Young Mr. KINGSMEL LVCYE is gone down to the grave, they that can weep let
them weep.

It might well be a wonder to us, that this Gentleman, being of such rare
temperance and moderation in diet, sleep and recreation; death should find
corrupt matter enough to boil up into so loathsome and malignant a distemper.

But Christians, death and our bodies have one conception in the womb, and is
impatient of confinement. Sin is a fuel, which death easily kindles into a
flame, to burn down the most fair and best-built structures of Nature.

And God, as you hear, has his design in it, and let God, ever be magnified
for and in that design; and that is,

That no flesh may glory in his presence, but according as it is written, let
him that glories glory in the Lord. The Lord accomplish this blessed design,
not only upon us, but by us for Christ's sake.

To God only be glory for ever. Amen.
FINIS.
A LETTER from a Gentleman in Oxon. unto the Honored and truly Honorable
FRANCIS LUCY, Esquire
Dearest Uncle,
I Was a sad Hearer of the Funeral Oration that was spoken at the interrement
of my beloved Cousin K. L. wherein although his picture was so excellently well
drawn, and so like him while it was then held forth unto us, as if he had been
alive an hour longer then he was; yet give me leave to put a little varnish
upon it, which, I hope, may not at all deface that curious piece, but thus by
embellishing each line, make his Labors last the longer: Truly I have for some
years past very much studied this deceased Gentleman, and although he soared a
pitch too high for me to reach him, and thereby was above my imitating, yet I
had been a very unhappy Proficient, if I had not boen able to draw some Notes,
and make some Observations from him, whereby not only my self, but those that
read them from me may be the better by it.

It was no hard matter to raise a hansome fabric, upon a foundation so well
ordered and disposed to the receiving it, and in him Nature had so elegantly
prepared the materials, that they were susceptible of nothing, but a most
delicate and beautiful form; so that his Tutors Province was easy and
maginable enough, whose pains consisted more in a methodical (though not an
idle) hindering of his Proficiency, then any way in the quickening and advancing
it, yet thereby the more water he poured upon this learned fire, did not at all
extinguish or abate it, but made it flame out and burn the brighter.

By these degrees and rules of protraction, without any considerable ttouble
did he come to a ripe and early knowledge, and was able to write Man, long
before the perfect date of his childhood was expired, and was fitter to have
been received into an University, before he came thither, then some that had
sweat and toiled under a degree there; into which place he was received with
such approbation, as if he had come warranted under the discipline of a Seneca,
or a Cato: and it might well be so, since he never went wirhout the
Testimonials of Demosthenes and Cicero in his company. The Academy looked upon
him, not only as one of her natural, but most legitimate children, and it could
be no lessening of his interest in your family, that he thought himself most at
home, when he was most from you; He was made up of so gentle, and composed a
temper, as that he would not commit a force upon his learning, neither needed
he to take in the Arts and Sciences by storm or violence, which came in most
willingly, as it were, to sow themselves in a piece of ground so manured and
tilled, to their receiving, in hopes thereby, in so dry and barren a time, to
receive a profitable return, by a more fruitful and plentiful Harvest. Wherein
they were not at all mistaken, for it was inconsistent with his generosity, to
continue long indebted under the obligation of so ingenuous and free a bounty:
Nature was no more beholding to Aristotle, then Aristotle was to him; whose
exploded language and Philosophy had never been repealed, but by so perfect a
scholar of his own; and it was more news, and welcomer, to hear him dispute
upon him out of the Original, then ever the Original was without such a
Commentor. By his care were the Ethics made more intelligible, and by his life
a more moral Philosophy: He taught the Geographer a nearer way to his journeys
end, and could have showed him, not only where his terra incognita was, but how
to have possessed it also: He was Master of so profound a Reason, that he was a
Logician without Art, and was so addicted to the seeking and dispensing of the
truth, that he made conscience of using a fallacy in his Arguments. He was an
exact and perfect Mathematician, yet he studied not so much with Archimedes,
how he might remove this world, as to get a fixed habitation in the other, and
certainly it would have been of much less advantage to him, to have overcome
that great difficulty squaring the Circle, then so often as he did to
demonstrate himself to be the servant and child of God: In brief, he arrived
at so so great a knowledge in a few years, that although he was so modest as
to assume to himself but one Degree, yet deserved to have had many accumulated
upon him, and was so grateful in the dispensing what he had received, as that
the University must still owe to his memory for those many advantages she
received from him.

He was at last by the power and persuasion of his careful and indulgent
Relations, put upon anothet course of life and studies, who admitted him into
Lincolnes-Inne, with fair and promising hopes of doing his Country good and
faithful service in the Profession of the Law, who was so capable of the
impression of that study, as that he deserved the title of a Lawyer before he
had it, and was most eminent under that title so soon as it was bestowed upon
him. It is true, he found much favor at the Bar, and it had been injustice
if he had not, where he brought so much merit to meet with that favor: and it
had been a kind of upbraiding of the calling, not to have looked handsomely
upon a person that had been as well able to have given laws, as to have
received them.

He did maintain a sober and becoming gravity, without affectation or
soreness when he was in his gown, and a cheerful, graceful complacency when
he was out of it: he was the example and the precept of the company, and knew
how to govern them with that ease, as if he had had a dominion over their
affections; and truly he was a kind of Prince of chastity, and surely the
softer sex affected his conversation under that notion, that so they might be
the better justified to the next company. He was incomparably a person of the
greatest sobriety, that our age has been acquainted with, and the severity of
his diet was so much the more commendable, in that it was practiced by him out
of choice and not necessity, in a region of the greatest plenty, who by that
spare refection, thrived so much the better, and out of pulse and fair water,
like Daniel appeared the more beautiful. He was made up of as much courage and
softness as could meet in one person, in whose countenance appeared that
sweetness and magnanimity, as if Mars and Venus had been in conjunction there;
certainly if he had been called to it, he could have done as much as any man,
and by his end, it is evident, he could suffer as much, which was the nobler
fortitude.

We are only to bewail this great loss, and you, Sir, are to be comforted,
that though your son died very young, yet that he died full of honor and
perfection, whose memory and example shall survive, when we all are become as
he is. I wish you all peace, and my self a place still in your memory under the
Title of

Your Humblest Servant, and most Affectionate Nephew.

FINIS.

