Correction, Instruction: OR, A TREATISE OF Afflictions: First conceived by way
of Private Meditations: Afterward Digested into certain Sermons, preached at
Aldermanbury.

And now published for the Help and Comfort of humble suffering CHRISTIANS.

By THO. CASE, M.A. sometimes Student of Chapter Chapter Oxon. now Preacher of the
Gospel in London.

JOB 13.15. Though he slay me, yet will I trust in him. Nihil eo insoelicius,
cui nihil infoelix con^^git. Demet. apud Sen. LONDON, Printed by J. M. for LUKE
FAVVN, and are to be sold at his shop at the sign o^ the P^r^at in Paul's
Churchyard. 1652.

To my Reverend Friend, Mr Thomas Case, Minister of the Gospel, etc.
Sir,
I Thank you for the favor you did me in affording me a sight of your Papers; I
had heard much of your notions concerning afflictions, and therefore was very
thirsty till you were pleased to give me to drink of the fountain: I can now
say as that Queen, 1 Kin. 10.7
The one half was not told me; fame came much short of taste: We are perfect in
no Lessons so much as those into which God whippeth us; and cannot speak of any
argument so warmly and feelingly, as when we speak out of present experience:
To treat of afflictions when we our selves flourish and abound in ease and
plenty, savoreth more of the Orator then the Preacher, the brain then the
heart: Certainly guess and imagination cannot be so good a midwife to such
conceptions as sense and feeling.

It seems when you went into prison, the Spirit of God went into prison with
you; and when you were shut up to others, you still lay open to the visits and
free breathings of his grace; the restraints and enclosures of a prison cannot
prejudice the freedom of his operations: He is a close prisoner indeed that is
shut up not only from the society of men, but converse with the Holy Ghost. I
begin to see there is somewhat more then a strain and reach of wit in
Tertullians consolatory discourse to the Martyrs: Caetera animi impedimenta
usque ad limen carceris deduxerint vos, quousque and parents vestri, exinde
segregati estis a mundo nec hoc vos consternet quod segregati est is a mundo,
si enim recogitemus ipsum magis mundum carcerem esse; exisse vos e carcere quam
in carcerem introisse intelligemus majores tenebras habet mundus graviores
catenas induit mundus, etc. Tertul. ac Martyr.
You went out of prison (says he) when you went into it, and were but
sequestered from the world, that you might converse with God; the greatest
prisoners and the most guilty are those that are at large, darkened with
ignorance, chained with lusts, committed not by the Proconsul, but God, etc.
The Lord often manifested himself to his Prophets in a Wilderness, and to you
in your secession and retirement.

Sir, I could even envy your Prison-comforts, and the sweet opportunities of a
religious privacy: We that are abroad are harrassed and worn out with constant
public labors, and can seldom retire from the distraction of business for such
free converse with God and our own Souls: But we are not to choose our own
portion; crosses will come soon enough without wishing for them; and if we were
wise we might make an advantage of every condition.

Good Sir, be persuaded to publish those Discourses; the Subject is useful, and
your manner of handling it warm and affectionate; do not deprive the world of
the comfort of your Experiences: Certainly my heart is none of the tenderest;
yet if heart answers heart, I can easily foresee much success, and that you
will not repent of the publication: The Lord bless your endeavors in the Gospel
of his dear Son: I am, Sir,

Yours in all Christian Observance, Tho: Manton.

TO THE READER.
Reader,
THou have here in these following Leaves some PRISONTHOUGHTS, I wish I could
say, EXPERIENCES. If I have not written herein what I have FOUND, I bless God,
I have written what I have SOUGHT. I must humbly confess with holy Paul, (...),
Phil. 3.13.14
I count not my self to have apprehended; yet through Grace I can add with that
blessed Saint, But this one thing I do, Forgetting those things which are
behind, and reaching forth unto those things which are before, I PRESS
TOWARD THE MARK. God has taught me somewhat of the Doctrine, if he would
please to teach me the Use; God has in some measure showed me WHAT is to be
gained by Affliction, if He would also teach me HOW to gain it, I should with
Moses, account my sufferings greater riches then the treasures of Egypt. Heb.
11.26
The discovery is sweet; if my heart deceive me not, I would not exchange it
for the wealth of both the Indies; the possession infinitely precious. For thy
advantage I have been persuaded to print; my prayer shall accompany my papers,
That that GOD, who quickens the dead, and calls things that are not as
though they were, would please to make these broken Expressions answer the aim:
Hoc tantum o^o, ut cum petitis etiam Tertulliani peceatoris memineritis. Tert:
Apol.
and for the ayms-sake despise them not, but pray thou also; and when thou
prayest, remember the chiefest of sinners, the poor and unworthy Author, who,
whilst yet in the Land of the Living, will be

Thine, to serve thee, in the Gospel of CHRIST, Tho. Case.

Courteous Reader, before thou read, be pleased with thy pen to correct these
few material mistakes of the Press.
PAge 17. in the margin write affectus for a^ffect^. P. 41 lin. 12. write those
for these, and so l. 18 P. 46 marg. requiescat for requiescet. P. 50. l. 6.
write s^^ce for hence, and l. 7. ^^^abling for (...). P. 67. l. 25. beatifical
for beatifi^ate. P. 75. marg. (...) for (...). P. 83. l. 14. prayerful for
powerful. P. 109 l. 18. va^i^y for veriety. P. 119. l. 10, and 1^. we for they.
P. 126 in the lowest marginal note, write propter for pr^ter, and in the last
line save one, lawful for unlawful. P. 134. l. 18. (...) for (...). P. 153.
marg. does (...) for does. P. 157. at the bottom, make it thus, Crowds of
opposition intercepted and distu^bed his sweet and constant communion with God
sometimes; But he brake, etc. P. 195. l. 2. write sensible for unsensible. P.
197. marg. write, men will give God, etc. p. 262. margin, ditati^ for dictatio.
Some other mistakes there are, literal and punctual, which because they do not
pervert the sense of the Author, I thought not worth troubling the Errata with
them.

(...). Correction, Instruction. THE Rod, and the Word.
PSALM. 94.12. Blessed is the Man whom thou chastenest, O Lord; and teach him
out of thy Law.
THis Psalm being (...), without a Title, it is not so easily determined, when,
or by whom it was penned. Probably by David, when himself, and the rest of the
Godly Party, were under a ^ore and bitter persecution by Non est dubium quin de
oppressoribus domest^cis ^^quatur quorum iniqua dominatio, non minus Sanctis,
infesto and molista erat quam omnes Gentium injuriae. Calv. in loc. Presertim
ad regnum Saulis sanguinolentum ac violentum referri potest. Musc. in loc.
Saul and others of that bloody and hypocritical faction that bare sway under
him.

Briefly, In the Psalm the Prophet does these three things.

1. He does appeal to God for vengeance on the persecutors; describing them by
their pride, v. 2. Profaneness, v. 3, 4. their intemperate virulency of
speech, v. 4. Cruelty, and bloody practices, v. 5, 6. and lastly by their
Atheistical security, v. 7. 2. He diverteth to the Enemies, endeavoring to
convince them of the bruitishness and folly of their Atheism, the Mother and
Nurse of the other impieties charged on them, v. 8. and that by a threefold
Argument. sc. 1. The power and skill of God in creating the hearing and seeing
Organ in Man, v. 9. 2. The Sovereignty of God, and the Righteousness of his
Judgments, which he executes in the world, v. 10. the former part. 3. His
Wisdom and knowledge, in enduing man with such an excellent intellectual
faculty, whereby even the creature it self is able to attain to admirable
degrees of knowledge, v. 10. latter part, and 11.
3. He labors to comfort the godly against all the pressures and persecutions
under which they did groan and languish.
The first Argument which the Psalmist uses to this purpose is in the Text.
sc. The sweet fruit which is to be gathered from the bitter root of affliction,
which being accompanied with divine instruction, is no longer to be esteemed a
punishment, but a blessing.

Blessed is the man whom thou chastenest, O Lord, and teach him out of thy
Law.

This being the subject I intend to insist upon, I shall without any more ado
contract it into this Doctrinal point of Observation. sc.

That man is a blessed man, or, It is a blessed thing when Correction and
instruction go together. The Rod and the Word make up a complete blessing.
I shall take chastisements here in the utmost latitude, for all kinds and
degrees of sufferings, whether from God, or Man, or Satan; whether sufferings
for Sin, or sufferings for Righteousness sake. And for the Doctrinal part of
the Point, I shall endeavor these four things.

1. To show you what those Lessons are which God does teach his people by his
chastisements. 2. What the Nature and Properties of Divine Teachings are. 3. In
what tendency Correction lies in Order unto these teachings: or, what Use God
does make of Affliction for the carrying on of the Work of instruction in the
hearts of his People. 4. I shall lay down the Grounds and Demonstrations of the
Point: or Considerations to evince the happiness of that man whom God is
pleased to teach by his Corrections.
I begin with the Lessons which God does usually teach his people in a
suffering condition. Amongst many which may fall within the experience of the
suffering Saints of God, I shall observe unto you twenty several Lessons,
Cant. 6.6.
most whereof like the teeth of the Spouse, you shall see will bear twins: or
if any of them should fail, the rest will more then make up the account; which
when I have presented at large, 20 Lessons which God teaches by affliction.
I shall then contract into three summary and comprehensive Instructions, which
will contain the substance of all.

The first Lesson which God teaches by Affliction, is, 1. Lesson-Compassion
toward sufferers.
Compassion toward them which are in a suffering condition. Truly we are very
prone to be insensible of our Brethrens sufferings, when we our selves are at
ease in Zion: Partly by reason of that sensuality which is in our natures,
reigning in carnal men, and dwelling even in the regenerate themselves, whereby
we let out our hearts so inordinately to our own comforts, as to quench the
tenderness and sense which we ought to have of the miseries and hardships of
other men. Partly out of the delicacy of self-love, which makes us unwilling to
sour the relish of our own sweet fruitions with the bitter taste of strangers
afflictions. Partly through sluggishness and torpor of spirit, which makes us
unwilling to rise up from the bed of ease and pleasure to travel in the enquiry
of the state of our Brethren either abroad or at home; so that (as the Apostle
says in another case) we are willingly ignorant, and are not only strangers,
but are content to be strangers to their miseries and calamities.

One way or other, even Christians themselves, and such as are truly so called,
are more or less guilty of the sin of the Gentiles; Romans 1.31 (...), and (...).
without natural affection, unmerciful, without bowels, without compassion.

Hence you may find, that it was one of the errands upon which God sent Israel
into Egypt, that in the brickkills there their hard hearts might be softened
and melted into compassion toward strangers and captives. Therefore when God
had turned their Captivity, that was one of the first lessons of which he puts
them in mind, Thou shall not oppress a stranger, there is the duty; which,
though negatively expressed, yet (according to the Rule of interpreting the
Commandments) does include all the affirmative duties of mercy and compassion:
and the motive follows, for you know the heart of a stranger: How came they to
know it? seeing ye were strangers in the Land of Egypt. As if God had said, I
sent you on purpose into Egypt, that by the experience of your own sufferings
and miseries you might learn as long as you live to lay to heart the anguish
and agonies of strangers and captives, that whenever you see a stranger in
your habitations, you may say, O here is a poor Sojourner, an Exile, I will
surely have mercy upon him, and show him kindness, for I my self have been a
stranger and a bondslave in Egypt; I know by experience what a fearful,
trembling, bleeding heart he carries in his bosom, etc.

And upon this very account God still brings variety of afflictions and sorrows
upon his own children; he suffers them to be plundered, banished, imprisoned,
reduced to great extremities, that by their own experience they may learn to
draw out their bowels toward such objects of pity; that they might say within
themselves, I know the heart of this afflicted Soul, I know what it is to be
plundered, to be rich one day, and the very next day to be stripped naked of all
ones comforts and accommodations; I know what it is to hear poor hunger-starved
children cry for bread, and there is none to give them; I know what it is to be
banished from dearest relations, to be like arms and legs, torn out of the body,
and to lie bleeding in their separation: I know what it is to be cast into
prison, to be locked up alone in the dark, with no other company but fears and
sorrows; I know what it is to receive the sentence of death in our selves, etc.
Shall not I pity, and pray, and pour out my Soul over such as are bleeding and
languishing under the like miseries! And this Argument yet makes deeper
impression, when a Christian compares and measures his lighter burden of
affliction with another more grievous yoke, and reasons thus within himself;
Imprisonment was grievous to me, and yet I enjoyed many comforts and
accommodations, which others have not; I had a sweet chamber, and a soft bed,
when some poor Members of Jesus Christ, in the Spanish Inquisition, and the
Turkish Slavery, are cast into the Dungeon, and sink, with Jeremiah, into the
mire; their feet are hurt in the stocks, and the irons do enter into their
Soul; others lie bleeding and gasping upon the cold ground with their undrest
wounds, exposed to all the injuries of hunger and nakedness in the open air. I
saw the face of my Christian friends, sometimes, enjoyed refreshment in
converse with dearest relations, while some of Gods precious people are cast
into dark and stinking prisons, and do not see the face of a Christian, not of
a man possibly in five, ten or twenty years together, unless it be of their
tormenters. I had fresh diet every day, not only for necessity, but for
delight, while other precious servants of God want their necessary bread, lie
starving in the doleful places of their sorrowful restraint, and would be glad
to eat bread that falls into the very loathsome excrements of Nature, and
perhaps (for extremity of hunger) never stand to wipe it; possibly, forced to
rake dead and stinking carcasses out of their graves for their sorrowful food,
to eat the fruit of their own loins, yea to feed on their own dung, and drink
their own piss, etc. Oh shall not my bowels yern, and my compassions be rouled
within me, toward such Objects of misery and compassion?

Truly Brethren, we see it daily in case of the Stone, Toothache, Gout,
Strangury, and the like evils, how experience does melt the heart into tears of
sympathy and fellow-feeling, while strangers to such sufferings stand wondering
at, and almost deriding the heartbreaking laments of poor wretches. Brethren,
that you may not wonder at this, consider I beseech you what the Apostle speaks
of Christ himself: Heb 2.17.
It behoved him in all things to be made like unto his Brothren, that he might
be a merciful and faithful high Priest in things pertaining to God. And again,
Cha. 4.15.
We have not an high Priest which cannot be touched with the feeling of our
infirmities, but was in all points tempted like as we are. And Chap. 5.2. Who
can have compassion, etc. for that he himself also is compassed with
infirmities.

A man would say within himself, Why what need had the Lord Jesus to invest
himself with a body of flesh to know the infirmities of our nature, since he
was God, and knew all things? Nay, but, my Brethren, it seems the knowledge
which Christ had as God, was different from that knowledgwhich he had as man;
that which he had as God, was intuitive; that which he had as man, was
experimental; experimental knowledge of misery is the heart-affecting knowledge;
and therefore Christ himself would intender his own heart, as Mediator, by his
own sense and feeling: And if the Lord Jesus, who was Mercy it self, would put
himself into a suffering condition, that he might the more sweetly and
affectionately act those Mercies toward his suffering Members; how much more
do we, that by nature are cruel and incompassionate, need such practical
teachings to work upon our own hearts? Certainly we cannot gain so much fense
of the Saints sufferings by the most artificial and skilful relation that the
tongue of men or Angels is able to express, no nor by all our
Scriptureknowledg, though sanctified, as we do by one days experience in the
School of Affliction, when God is pleased to be the Schoolmaster.

This is one end why God sends us thither, and the first Lesson we learn by
Affliction, sc. Sympathy with, and compassion to, our suffering Brethren.

I come to the Second Lesson.

And that is, 2 Lesson. 1. To prize earthly comforts more.
By Chastisements God does teach us how to prize our outward mercies and
comforts more, and yet to dote upon them less; to be more thankful for them,
and yet less ensnared by them. This is a Mystery indeed to Nature, a Paradox to
the World; for naturally we are very prone either to slight, or to surfeit; and
yet (it is sad to consider) we can make a shift to do both at once; we can
undervalue our mercies even while we glut our selves with them, and despise
them even when we are surfeiting upon them. Witness that inculcated caution by
Moses and Joshua, When thou have eaten and art full, Deuteronomy 8 10 11, 12. and 6
11, 12.
take heed thou forget not the Lord thy God. Behold, while men fill themselves
with the mercies of God, they can neglect the God of their mercies: When God is
most liberal in remembering us, we are most prone to forget God. Now therefore
that we may know how to put a due estimate upon mercies, God often outs us
short, that we may learn to prize that by want, which our foolish unthankful
hearts slighted in the enjoyment. Thus the Prodigal, who while yet at home,
could despise the rich and well-furnisht table of his father; when God sent him
to School to the Swinetrough, could value the bread that the Hinds did eat; How
many of my fathers hired servants have BREAD enough, Luke 15 17
and to spare! He would have been glad of the reversion of broken meat that was
cast into the common-basket.

I do not believe David ever slighted the Ordinances, yet certainly he never
knew so well how to estimate them, as when he was banished from them; Psalm 84.
then a Porters place, the Sparrows nest, and the Swallows neighborhood to the
Altar of God, were matters of envy to him: The remembrance of the company of
Saints, Psalm. 42 5 and 110.3
the beauty of the Ordinances, and the presence of God, Psalm. 63.2
fetches tears from his eyes, and groans from his heart, in his sorrowful
Exile: When I remember these things, Psalm. 42.4
I pour out my Soul in me, etc. My tears are my meat day and night. Verse 3.
Oh how amiable are the Assemblies of the Saints, and the Ordinances of the
Sabbath, when we are deprived of them! In those days the Word of the Lord was
precious: 1 Samuel 3.1
What days were those? It follows, There was no open Vision. Word and
Prophets were precious when they were not. Carendo potius quam fruendo. Sen. Ep.
Want will teach us the worth of mercies. Our liberties and dearest relations
how cheapand trivial things are they while we possess them without any check or
restraint? While we have the keeping of our mercies in our own hands, we make
but small reckoning of them. Oh, but let God threaten a divorce by death or
banishment, let Taskmasters be set over us and our comforts, who shall measure
out unto us at their own pleasure; let us be locked up a while under close
imprisonment, and there be kept fasting from our dearest enjoyments, then the
sight of a friend through an iron grate, the exchange of a few common
civilities with a yoke fellow under the correction and control of a stranger,
how sweet and precious? when as months and years of arbitrary enjoyments are
past through, and we scarce sit down to reflect one serious view upon our
mercies: seldom spread them before the Lord in prayer, or send up one thankful
Ejaculation to God by night upon our beds, in this or the like manner; Lord,
what mercy is this which I enjoy in my yoke fellow, children, friends, liberty,
estate, comforts and accommodations of all sorts, not for necessity only, but
for delight, while others, better then I, languish under an unequal yoke, have
great rebukes in their children, are separated from friends, despoiled of their
estates, imprisoned, banished, afflicted, deserted, tormented! How comes it to
pass that so much mercy falls to my share? that I want nothing, while others
have nothing? etc. Oh how rarely do we entertain such discourses with our own
hearts, but pass by mercies as common things, scarce worth the owning? whereas
in the house of bondage, in a Land of Captivity, the lees and dregs of those
mercies will be precious, which while the Vessel ran full and fresh we could
hardly relish: In famine the very gleanings of our comforts are better then the
whole Vintage in the years of plenty. 2. Not to surfeit on them.


And then secondly, As God teaches us to prize our mercies, so by affliction
also he does teach us moderation in the use of them, while we value not to
surfeit. And indeed it is the inordinate use of outward comforts which renders
us unfit to prize them; we lose our esteem of mercies in excess: Ex
consuetudine hebescunt affecte and fit prava voluptas dolor.
Surfeits do usually render those things nauseous, which formerly have been our
delicacies: By our excesses in Creature enjoyments, Reason is drowned in sense,
Judgment extinguished in appetite, and the affections being blunted by
commonness of exercise, even pleasures themselves become a burden. Surely the
excessive letting out of our selves to sensual fruitions, is both a sin and a
punishment, while thereby we lose both the creature, and God, and our selves at
once.

Now this distemper God does many times cure by the sharp corrasive of
affliction, and by hardship teaches us moderation. Partly by inuring us to
abatemeuts and wants, whereby that which at first was necessity, afterward
grows to be our choice: Hence says the Apostle, I have learned to want; Phil.
4.12
how? why God had taught him to live of a little: By feeding of us sparingly,
God abates and slackens the inordinacy of the appetite. Partly and especially,
God takes off our hearts from inordinate indulgencies in a suffering condition,
by discovering richer and purer satisfactions in Jesus Christ. It is Gods
design by withdrawing the Creature, to invite, and fix the Soul upon himself:
The voice of the Rod is, O taste and see how good the Lord is; which when the
Soul has once perceived, thrusting the creature away with contempt and
indignation, it opens it self to God, saying, Whom have I in Heaven but thee?
Psa. 73.25
and there is none upon Earth that I desire in comparison of thee. Surely it
was in the School of Affliction that David learned that Lesson, even when the
wicked prospered, and himself, with the rest of the godly, Verse 14.
were plagued all the day long, and chastned every morning.

This is the second, 3 Lesson, Self-denial.
and an happy Lesson, sc. to prize comforts more, and yet prey upon our
comforts less.

A third Lesson, which God teaches by his Chastisements, is, Self-denial and
obediential submission to the will of God.

In our prosperity we are full of our own wills, and usually we give God
counsel when God looks for obedience, as if we could tell God how it might have
been better; and so we dispute our cross when we should take it up; but now
ferendo discimus perferre, by bearing a little we learn to bear more; James 1, 3
the trial of our faith works patience: the more we suffer, the more God fits
us to suffer: partly by working us off from our own wills: folly is bound up in
the heart of Gods children, Pro. 22:15
as well as our own; but the rod of correction drives it far from them. God
fetches out the stubbornness and perverseness of our spirits by the Discipline
of the Rod: So that before he has done with us, we have not a will to lift up
against his will. And surely as we say to our children, Oh, it is a good rod,
which breaks us of our stomachs. Partly by inuring us to the Cross: The Bullock
unaccustomed to the yoke, is very impatient under the hand of the husbandman;
but after she is inured to labor, she willingly puts her neck under the yoke:
and so it is with Christians, after a while the yoke of affliction begins to be
well settled, and by much bearing we learn to bear with quietness: A new Cart
makes a great noise and squeaking, but when once used, it goes silently under
the greatest load. None murmur so much at sufferings as they who have suffered
least: whereas on the contrary, we see many times that they are most patient
who have the heaviest burden upon their backs. He sits alone, Lam. 3, 28
and keeps silence, because he has born it upon him: q. d. He is patient
because he is acquainted with forrows: When people cry out, Oh, never such
sufferings as mine, it is an argument they are strangers to afflictions. Partly
also because by chastisements God works out by degrees the delicacy of spirit
which we contract in our prosperity; mercy makes us tender: They who are always
kept in the warm house, dare not put their head out of doors in a storm: none
so unfit for sufferings as they that have been always dandled upon the knee of
Providence: the most delicate constitutions are most unfit for hardship. But
lastly and chiefly, this comes to pass because by suffering we come to taste
the fruit of sufferings. No chastening for the present seems joyous, Heb. 12, 11
but grievous: At first, chastisements seem very bitter, but afterward it
yields the peaceable fruits of righteousness unto them which are exercised
thereby. The fruit of patience is not found at the first brunt, but after we
are well exercised and acquainted with a suffering condition: affliction is the
true moly, though the root be bitter, yet the fruit is sweet; there is meat in
the eater, out of the strong comes sweetness: and then when the Soul begins to
taste the sweet fruit which grows upon that bitter root, it says with the
Church in the Lamentations, Lam. 3, 26 27
It is good that a man should both hope and quietly wait for the Salvation of
the Lord; it is good that a man should bear the yoke in his youth: i. e. I
shall not be a loser by my sufferings, I see the fruit will abundantly
compensate the smart of a suffering condition.

Thus, I say, one way or other, God works his children into a sweet obediential
frame by their sufferings. Even of Christ himself, the Son of God by nature, it
is said, Heb. 5, 8 (...), i. e. reipsa expertue est.
He learned obedience by the things which he suffered: He experimentally came
to know what it was to be subject to the Will of his Father. It is most
properly true of the adopted children, they learn obedience by the things which
they suffer, and that not only in a passive but in an active sense. By
suffering Gods Will we learn to do Gods Will: God has no such obedient
children as those whom he nurtures in the School of affliction. At length God
brings all his Scholars to subscribe, What God will, When God will, How God
will: Thy will be done on Earth, as it is in Heaven. A blessed Lesson.

A Fourth is, 4 Lesson, Humility.
Humility and Meekness of Spirit.

It is one of Gods designs in affliction, to hide pride from man; Job 33.17
to spread sackcloth upon all his glory, that so man may see no excellency in
all the creature wherein to pride himself. God led Israel forty years in the
wilderness to humble them: By the thorns of the wilderness God pricked the
bladder of pride, and let out the windyness of self-opinion that was in their
hearts. Prosperity usually makes men surly and supercilious toward their poor
brethren; Pro. 18, 23
The rich answers roughly: Even while the poor uses entreaties, makes his
addresses to him with all humility and observance, he holds up his head, or
turns his back upon him with scorn and contempt, and thinks himself too good to
give his poor neighbor a soft and peaceable answer: Ioquuntur lapides, they
speak hard things; these rough-cast Nabals, Riches make men proud, but poverty
humbles the heart.
a man cannot tell how to speak to them. Pride is an humor which naturally runs
in our veins, and it is nourished by ease and prosperity. And therefore to tame
this pride of spirit that is in man, God takes him into the house of
Correction, puts his feet in the stocks, and there teaches him to know
himself: He humbled thee, Deuteronomy. 8.3
and suffered thee to hunger; Hunger brought down Isreal's stomach, and did eat
out that proud flesh which began to rankle. Hence it is that if you take the
children of God either yet in, or newly come out of the furnace of affliction,
you shall observe them to be the tamest, meekest creatures upon the earth; as
it is said of the new Convert, Isa. 11.6. A little child may lead them: whereas
before it may be they were so stiff and high in the instep, that an angel of
God could not tell how to deal with them; now the meanest of Gods ministers or
servants may reprove and counsel, etc. a little child may lead them: That David
whom Sin made so fierce that he put his poor Ammonitish prisoners and captives
to death in cold blood, 2 Samuel 12 31
yea tormented them to death with sawes and harrows, and axes of iron; and
burnt them alive in fiery brick-kils: Him did banishment and persecution make
so tame, that not only the righteous might reprove him, but even the wicked
might reproach him; Psa. 141 5
and he holds his peace, or if he speak, they be words of patience and
submission: 2 Samuel 16.10.
So let him curse, because the Lord has said curse David. A man by trouble
comes to know his own heart, which in prosperity he was a stranger to; sees
the weakness of his grace, and the strength of his corruption; how nothing is
weak but grace, nothing strong but sin; and this lays him in the dust. Oh
wretch that I am! And truly when a man has learned this lesson he is not far
from deliverance. Seek the Lord all ye meek of the earth, Zeph. 2.3
seek righteousness, seek meekness, it may be ye shall be hid in the day of the
Lords anger. This is Gods design, first, to meeken his people by affliction,
and then to save them from affliction. Psa. 149.4
For the Lord takes pleasure in his people, he will beautifis the meek with
salvation.

Fifthly, 5 Lesson, D^scovery of corruption. Dent 8.2
God by affliction discovers unknown corruption in the hearts of his people. He
led thee through the Wilderness these forty years to humble thee, and to prove
thee, to know what was in thy heart; i. e. to make thee know what was in thy
heart; what pride, what impatience, what unbelief, what idolatry, what distrust
of God, what murmur, what unthankfulness was in thy heart: and thou never
tookest notice of it. I tell you Christians, sin lies very close and deep, and
is not easily discerned till the fire of affliction comes and makes a
separation of the precious from the vile. The furnace discovers the dross which
lay hid before. Ier. 9 7
What shall I do (says God) for the daughter of my people? they are exceeding
bad, and they know it not: what shall I do with them? I will melt them and try
them: into the furnace they shall, and there I will discover themselves to
themselves, and show them what is in their hearts. In the furnace we see more
corruption and more of corruption, then ever appeared or was suspected. On
says the poor soul whom God has taught in the School of affliction; I never
thought my heart so bad as now I see it is, I could not have believed the world
had had so much interest in my heart and Christ so little; I did not think my
faith had been so weak and my fears so strong; I find that faith weak in
danger, which I had thought had been strong out of danger; little did I think
the sight of death would have been so terrible, parting with nearest friends
and dearest relations so piercing; Oh how unskilful and unwise am I to manage a
suffering condition, to discern Gods ends, to find out what God would have me
to do; to moderate the violences of mine own passions, to apply the counsels
and comforts of the Word for their proper ends and uses! Oh where is my
patience, my love, my zeal, my rejoicing in tribulation? Ah did I ever think to
find my heart so discomposed, my affections so out of command, my graces so to
seek when I should fall into diverse temptations? what a deal of self-love,
pride, distrust in God, Creature-confidence, discontent, murmur, rising of
heart against the holy and righ teous dispensations of God, is there boiling
and fretting within me! Woe is me what an heart have I?

And besides all this, in the hour of temptation, God brings old sins to
remembrance. We are verily guilty concerning our brother could Joseph's brethren
say, Genesis 42.21.
twenty years after they had sold him for a slave, when they were in danger to
be questioned for their lives (as they feared:) and thus when the Israelites
cry to God in their sore distress for rescue and deliverance, God puts them in
mind of their old Apostacies: Ye have forsaken me and served other gods, etc.
Judge. 10.13, 14
go and cry to the gods whom ye have chosen. Suffering times are times of
bringing sin to mind: i Kin. 8.47
If they bethink themselves in the land whither they were carried captives:
Heb. If they bring back to heart. Captivity is a time of turning in upon our
selves, and bringing back to heart our doings which have not been good in Gods
sight: Thus David under the rod could call himself to account, I thought on my
ways, Psa. 119.19
and turned my feet, etc.

This now is another lesson which God teaches by affliction; and it is of
great use to humble us, and to empty and out us of our selves, to make us fly
to Jesus Christ for righteousness and strength. Isa. 45.24
In a word, God lets us see what is crooked that we may streighten it, what is
weak that we may strengthen it, what is wanting that we may supply it; what is
lame that it may not be turned out of the way, but that it may rather be healed.

Sixthly, 6 Lesson, Prayer.
In the School of affliction God does teach us to pray. They that never prayed
before will pray in affliction. Isa. 26.16
Lord in trouble they have visited Thee, they poured out a prayer when thy
chastening is upon them. They that kept their distance with God before, yea
that said to the Almighty depart from us, in their affliction can bestow a
visit upon God, in trouble they have visited thee: and they that never prayed
before, or at least did but now and then drop out a sleepy sluggish wish, can
now pour iout a prayer when chastisement is upon their loins. a Psa. 107.11,
R^bells, b 17
Fools, c 23
Mariners, even the worst of men, can cry to God in their trouble. The very
Heathen-mariners fall to their prayers in a storm, and can awaken the sleepy
Prophet to this duty; Jonah 1.5, 6
What meanest thou O sleeper! arise and call upon thy God. Hence we use to say,
He that cannot pray, Qui nescit orare discat navigar^.
let him go to sea. Thus I say affliction opens dumb lips, and untyeth the
strings of the tongue to call upon God.

But whom God teaches in affliction, they learn to pray in another manner,
more frequently, more fervently.

First, More frequently; Gods people are vessels full of the spirit of prayer,
and affliction is a piercer, whereby God draws it out. For my love they are my
adversaries, but I give my self unto prayer. Psalm. 109.4
David was always a praying man, but now under persecution he did nothing else;
I give my self unto prayer: as wicked men give themselves up to their
wickedness, so David gave himself up to prayer, he made it his work. Hence you
may observe that most of all the Psalms are nothing else almost but the
runnings out of David's spirit in prayer under variety of afflictions and
persecutions; as his troubles were multiplied, so his prayers did multiply. The
holy man was never in that condition wherein he could not pray, etc. Alas, it
is sad to consider that in our peace and tranquillity, we pray arbitrarily by
fits and starts many times, we suffer every trifle to come and justle out
prayer; but in affliction God keeps us upon our knees, and (as it were) tyeth
the sacrifice to the horns of the altar.

And as he teaches us to pray more frequently, so also to pray more fervently.
Even of Christ himself it is said, Luke 22.44. (...), intentius.
that being in an agony he prayed more earnestly; more intensively; he prayed
till he sweat again; yea till he sweat great drops of blood: he sweltred out
his soul through his body in prayer, the reason whereof was, because he had not
only the pangs of death, but the sense of his fathers wrath to conflict
withal; and so it is with believers many times; outward afflictions are
accompanied with inward disertions. So it was with David, Psalm. 22. and Psalm.
116.3, 4 etc. And then he gathers up all his strength to prayer, and like a
true son of Jacob wrestleth with God, and will not let him go till he gets the
blessing, Psalm 143. verse. 6, 7. etc.

Truly Christians, those prayers wherewith you contented your selves in the day
of your peace and prosperity, will not serve your turn in the hour of
temptation; then you will call to mind your short, slight, cold, dead, sleepy,
formal devotions in your families and closets, and be ashamed of them: Then you
will see need of praying over all your prayers again, and stir up your selves
to take hold upon God. Isa. 64.7
Indeed for this very end God sends his people into captivity that he may draw
out the spirit of prayer, which they have suffered to ly dead within them. Oh
my dove that are in the clefts of the rock, in the secret places of the stairs,
Cant. 2.
let me see thy countenance, let me hear thy voice: for sweet is thy voice, and
thy countenance is comely. Christ's dove never looks more beautiful in his eyes,
then when her cheeks are bedewed with tears; nor ever makes sweeter music in
his ears, then when she mourns to him, out of the rock, and from under the
stairs, in a dark and desolate condition: then says Christ thy countenance is
comely, and sweet is thy voice.

Seventhly, 7 Lesson, Acquaintance with ^he word.
By correction God brings the Children of promise into more acquaintance with
the Word. He teaches them out of his Law. As here: It is good for me that I
have been afflicted, that I might learn thy Statutes. God sent David into the
School of affliction, there to learn the Statutes of God. By Correction the
people of God learn, 1. To converse with the Word of God more abundantly. 2. To
understand it more clearly. 3. To relish it more sweetly.


First, By affliction they come to converse with it more abundantly. It is
their duty a all time to study the Word: Colos. 3.16
To let it dwell richly in them in all wisdom: Job esteemed the words of Gods
mouth more then his necessary food. And it is their happiness as well as their
duty. Blessed is the man that walks not in the counsel of the ungodly, but
his delight is in the law of the Lord and in his law does he meditate day and
night. Psa. 1^ 1 2
But what through distraction without, and distemper within, the children of
God many times grow strangers to their Bibles, they suffer diversions to
interpose between the word and their hearts, and as they pray arbitrarily, so
they read arbitrarily, and suffer their Bibles to ly by the walls while they
are taken up with other entertainments in the world; and therefore God is
forced to deal with them as we do with our children, to whip them to their
books by the rod of correction: It is good for me that I have been afflicted,
that I might learn thy statutes. When they are cast out by the world, then they
can run to the World. Psalm. 119.23
Princes did sit and speak against me; i. e. they sat in Council to take away
his life, that they might condemn him as a traitor against Saul: and what did
he in the mean time? it follows, but thy servant did meditate in thy Statutes.
Ver. 161.
And again, Princes have persecuted me without a cause, but my heart stands
in aw of thy word. While the persecutors are consulting with the oracles of
hell to sin against David, David is consulting with the oracles of heaven, that
he might not sin against God. My heart stands in awe of thy Word: while they
sinned and feared not, David fears and sins not.

2. They learn by affliction to understand the Word more clearly. As it was
with the Disciples in reference to Christ his Resurrection; the Resurrection of
Christ was a lively Comment upon the Prophecies of Christ: Ioh. 12.16
These things understood not his Disciples at the first, but when Jesus was
glorified, then remembered they these things: i. e. they remembered them
understandingly, they remembered them beleevingly, they knew what they meant: So
it is with the people of God many times in reference to affliction; the Rod
expounds the Word, Providence sometimes interprets the Promise. The children of
God had never understood some Scriptures, had not God sent them into the School
of affliction: then they can remember how it is written, etc. they can bring
Gods Word and Gods Works together.

3. Affliction makes them relish the Word more sweetly. In prosperity many
times we suffer the luscious contentments of the world so to distemper our
palates that we cannot relish the Word, taste no more sweetness in it then in
the white of an egg, as Job speaks in another case: but when God has kept them
for weeks, and months, and years it may be, fasting from the worlds dainties,
when they are thoroughly hunger-bitten in the creature; then, How sweet are thy
words to my taste! Psalm 119 103
sweeter then honey to my mouth: They are the words which David spoke in his
affliction, witness Verse. 23. cum 24. Princes did sit and speak against me, but
thy servant did meditate in thy Statutes: and what follows? thy Testimonies are
my delight. And verse. 161. with 162. Princes have persecuted me without a
cause, etc. I rejoice at thy Word as one that finds great spoil. The Rod did
sweeten the Word: It is my delight, my joy, a nest of sweetnesses. Prove. 27.7
The full Soul loatheth the Honeycomb: When we are filled with
Creaturecomforts, we nauseate many times the very Word it self, which is
sweeter then the honey or honeycomb: but to the hungry Soul every bitter thing
is sweet. Let God famish the world round about us, then how cordial is
Scriptureconsolation? How precious are the Promises! Oh, said a gracious woman
reduced to great straits, I have made many a meals meat upon the Promises when
I have wanted bread.

The Word is never so sweet as when the world is most bitter; and therefore
does God lay mustard upon the teats of the world, that we might go to the
breasts of the Word, and there suck and be satisfied with the milk of
consolation. Isai. 66 11
This is my comfort in my affliction, Ps. 119.50
for thy Word has quickened me. Blessed be God for that Correction which
sweetens the Word unto us. 8 Lesson, The need of sound Evidence for Heaven.


Eighthly, God by bringing his people into troubles, especially if
lifethreatening dangers, does show them the necessity of sound evidence for
Heaven and Happiness. Alas, with what easy and slight evidences do we often
content our selves in the time of our prosperity, when the Candle of the
Almighty does shine in our Tabernacles; when all is peace and quiet round about
us! The heart being taken up with other fruitions, we want either time or will
to pursue the trial of our own estates. People mind only what will serve
their turn for the present, and quiet their hearts, that they may follow their
pleasures and profits with the less regret: and therefore, to save themselves a
labor, they take that for evidence, which the sluggish carnal heart wishes
were so. But now in the hour of temptation, fig leaves will cover nakedness no
longer; nothing will serve the turn, but what will be able to stand before God,
and endure the trial of fire in the day of Christ: Oh then one clear and
unquestionable evidence of interest in Christ, and the of love of God, will be
worth ten thousand worlds: Shadows and appearances of grace will vanish before
the Searcher of hearts. It must be perfect love that will cast out fear: 1.
John 4, 17
Truth and soundness of grace only can give boldness in the day of Judgment.
Ah, what idle and deceitful hearts have we in the midst of us, that can take up
with loose conjectures, go to the Word and Sacrament with these evidences, upon
which we dare not venture to dye? And yet good and upright is the Lord that
will teach sinners his way; Psalm. 25, 8
that by the thunderclaps of his righteous judgments will awaken the vain
creature out of these foolish dreams, in which if they should dye, they were
undone for ever. Well, let us be still urging and pressing this question upon
our own Souls; Will this faith save me when I come to stand before the Throne
of the Lamb? Will this Love give me boldness in the Day of Judgment? Will this
Evidence serve my turn when I come to dye? Oh Christians, let us be afraid to
lie down with that Evidence in our beds, wherewith we dare not lie down in our
graves. 9 Lesson, What an evil thing it is to grieve the Spirit.


A ninth is this; In the time of our trouble God causes us to see what an evil
and a bitter thing it is to grieve the good Spirit of God. When we are in the
bitterness of our spirits, and want the Comforter, then we begin to call to
mind how often we have grieved the Spirit, which would have been a Comforter to
us, and have sealed us up to the day of Redemption; and say within our selves,
in reference to the Spirit of God, as sometime the sons of Jacob said one to
another in reference to Joseph; Genesis 42, 21
We are verily guilty concerning our brother, in that we saw the anguish of his
Soul, when he besought us, and we would not hear; therefore is this distress
come upon us. Res delicata est Spiritus sanctus.
In some such language I say will the Soul in the hour of temptation bespeak it
self. Ah, I am verily guilty concerning that tender Spirit of Grace and
Comfort, which has often besought me as it were in the anguish of his Soul,
saying, Ier. 44, 4
Oh do not this abominable thing which I hate; but I would not hear. Is not
this He whose rebukes I have slighted, whose counsels I have despised, whose
motions I have resisted, whose warnings I have neglected, whose warmings I have
quenched, yea whose comforts I have undervalued, and counted them as a small
thing? Ah wretch, how just is it now that the Spirit of God should withdraw?
that he should despise my sorrows, and laugh at my tears; shut out my prayers,
quench my smoking flax, and break my bruised reed? How just were it that He,
whom I would not suffer to be a Reprover in the day of my peace, should now
refuse to be a Repairer of my Soul in the hour of my temptation! How righteous
a thing were it, that I, who so often have carried my self strangely to his
Counsels, should now in my sorrows be a stranger to his Comforts! that I, who
have walked in the sparks of mine own kindling, should now at length lie down
in sorrow. Well, if the Lord shall please indeed to bring my Soul out of
trouble, and to revive my fainting spirit with his sweet Consolations, I hope I
shall carry my self (for the future) more obedientially to the counsels and
rebukes of Jesus Christ in my Soul, and harken to the least whisperings of the
Spirit of Grace.

A tenth Lesson, 10 Lesson, Communion with God.
by Chastisements God draws the Soul into sweet and near communion with
himself. Outward prosperity is a great snare to our communion with God: Partly
because by letting out our affections inordinately to the creature, we suffer
the world to come in between God and our hearts, and so intercept that sweet
and constant traffic and intercourse which should be between God and our
Souls. Gods people offend most in their lawful comforts, because there the
snare being not so visible as in grosser sins, they are the easilier taken; we
are soonest surprised where we are least jealous. Partly also for want of
keeping up our watch against lesser sins: While our hearts are warmed with
prosperity, we think many times small sins can do no great harm; but herein we
do woefully deceive our selves: for besides that, the least sin has the nature
of sin in it, as the least drop of poison is poison; and that in smaller sins
there is the greater contempt of God, in as much as we stand out with God for a
trifle (as we count it,) and venture his displeasure for a little sensual
satisfaction: I say, besides these and many other considerations, which may
render our small sins, great provocations, this is one unspeakable mischief,
that small sins intercept our communion with God, as much as great sins, and
sometimes more: For whereas great sins by making deep wounds upon Conscience,
make the Soul go bleeding to the Throne of Grace, and there to mourn and
lament, and never to give God rest, till he gives rest to the Soul, and by a
fresh sprinkling of the Blood of Christ, to recover peace and communion with
God: Smaller sins not impressing such horror upon the Conscience, are swallowed
in silence with less regret, and so do ininsensibly alienate and estrange the
heart from Jesus Christ. The least hair casts its shadow; a Barley corn laid
upon the sight of the eye will keep out the light of the Sun, as well as a
Mountain. The eye of the Soul must be kept very clear that will see God: Matthew.
5 8
Blessed are the pure in heart, for they shall see God. Little sins, though
they do not disturb Reason so much as great sins, yet they defile Conscience,
and the Conscience under defilement (unlamented) is shy of God, and God of it.

But now affliction fanctified, as it does deaden the heart to the world, so it
does awaken and intender Conscience toward sin; Fecisti nos Domine ad te and
in. quietum est cor nostrum donec requiescet in te. Aug. Med.
the Soul is made sensible of her departures from God, and of the bitter fruits
of that departure, and now begins to lament after God in Augustin's language;
Lord, thou have made my heart for thy self, and it is restless and unquiet till
it can rest in thee; Return unto thy rest O my Soul. The Soul has many
turnings and windings, but with Noah's Dove, it can find no place for the sole
of its foot to rest on, till it return into the Ark, from whence it came. And
now when the Soul has been weather-beaten abroad, if God will please to put
forth his hand, and take it into himself, Psalm. 88.^, 18
when dearest relations are become strangers, as David complains; if God come
and give the Soul a visit; when the poor creature is in darkness, and can see
no light, then for God to lift up the light of his countenance, and shine in a
gracious smile upon the Soul, and say unto it, I am thy Salvation, of what
sweet and unspeakable refreshment and consolation is this to the afflicted
spirit? And what a gracious condescension is this in God, that when the Soul by
prosperity has waxed wanton against Christ, and sported it self in
unspouse-like familiarities with strangers, Jesus Christ should send it into
the house of Correction, and there by the discipline of the Rod correct and
work out the wantonness of the flesh, and when he has made it meet for his
presence, take it into sweet and social communion with himself! This is
stupendous Mercy, Goodness that cannot be paralleled in the whole Creation.
Ier. 3.1


In the eleventh place, 11 Lesson, The Exercise of Grace.
God makes affliction the exercise and improvement of grace. In prosperity
grace many times lies dead and useless in the Soul, which affliction awakens
and draws forth into exercise: the winter of our outward comforts proves not
seldom the spring of our graces: Frosts and Snow do starve the weeds, and
nourish the good corn. Though faith and patience be of an universal influence
into the holy life, Gal. 2.20
The life I live in the flesh I live by the faith of the Son of God: yet
affliction gives them their perfect work. Of the times of persecution it is
said, Rev. 13, 10
Here is the patience and faith of the Saints, that is, now is the time for the
Saints of God to exert their faith and patience, and to let them have their
perfect work: James 1.4
there is a work of patience, and there is a perfect work; Verse 3
The trial of Faith works patience, (i. e. the sufferings whereby our Faith
is tried, as gold is tried in the furnace,) it works, or as the word
signifies, (...).
it perfecteth: The Cross exercises, and exercise perfecteth, the grace of
patience: as sufferings arise, so patience arises also; Be patient, James 5.7
brethren, till the coming of the Lord: i. e. do you bear the affliction till
Christ come and take it off: let your patience be of the same extent with your
sufferings. As Patience, so Faith is not acted only but perfected by
temptations. Sometimes the Soul finds that Faith lively in a suffering
condition, which before it questioned whether it were alive: or if affliction
do not find it lively, it makes it lively: the same furnace of affliction
wherein God tries our Faith he does refine it, and purifieth it more and more
from the dross of infidelity. They are the purest acts of faith, which the Soul
puts forth in the dark: Faith never believes more then when it cannot see,
Isai. 50.10
because then the Soul has nothing to stay it self upon but God. Hence while
it seems to help, difficultates the work of faith by doubting of it: a man must
first believe the insufficiency of what he sees, before he can believe the
Alsufficiency of him that is invisible; We look not at the things which are
seen, 2 Cor. 4.18
but at the things which are not seen: It is harder to live by Faith in
abundance, then in want. The Soul is a step nearer living upon God, when it
has nothing to live upon but God: yea and when God is not seen he is most
believed. Psalm. 22.1
My God, my God, why have thou forsaken me? Observe, and thou shall find a
great deal more of precious faith in that desertion, then of complaint: For
first, Faith (like Pharez) breaks forth first, My God, before forsaken: And
again, you have two words of Faith for one of despair; My God, my God, why have
thou forsaken me? Faith speaks twice before Sense can speak once. And thirdly,
Faith speaks confidently and positively, Thou art my God; Sense speaks
dubiously, why have thou? as if Sense durst not call it a forsaking while Faith
dares say, my God: Surely Faith is never so much Faith as in desertion. Faiths
triumphs lie in the midst of despair, and even in this sense also; Having not
seen, yet believing, 1 Pet. 1.8
we rejoice with joy unspeakable and full of glory.

Godly sorrow, how is it enlarged by sanctified affliction! while that stream,
which was wont to run in the channel of worldly crosses, now is diverted into
the channel of sin: I will bear the indignation of the Lord, because I HAVE
SINNED, Mic^h 7.9
etc. Any burden is light in comparison of sin, the very indignation of God.
The Soul that God teaches by his chastisements can stand under the burden of
Gods indignation for sin, when it cannot stand under sin, which has kindled
that indignation. Ah, cries Job upon the dunghill, I have sinned, what shall I
do unto thee, O thou preserver of men? He forgets his suffering in his sin;
he says not, I have lost all my substance; I am now upon the dunghill as naked
as ever I was born (save that I am clothed with scabs,) my friends reproach me,
my wife curses me, or (that which is worse) she bids me curse God. Satan
persecutes me, and God himself is become mine Enemy, etc. all this is befallen
me; what will thou do unto me, O thou preserver of men? but I have sined, what
shall I do unto thee? etc. Sufferings lead to sin, and sense of sin swalloweth
up sense of sufferings. And what shall I say more? the time would fail to
instance in other Graces, Love, Fear, Holiness, etc. By this shall the iniquity
of Jacob be purged, Isai. 27.9
and this is all the fruit to take away his sin: H^b. 12, 10
He for our profit, that we might be partakers of his holiness.

Grace is never more Grace then when besieged with temptations. The battle
draws forth that fortitude and prowess, which in time of peace lay chilled in
the veins for want of opposition and exercise.

A twelfth Lesson, 12 Lesson, A life of Faith.
which they learn in the School of Affliction, is, The necessity and excellency
of the life of Faith.

1. The necessity of living by faith: 1 The Necessity of it. Hab. 2.3, 4
where Sense ends, Faith begins. The vision is for an appointed time: I,
but what shall we do in the mean time? why the just shall live by Faith; live
by Faith, or dye in despair: when God pulls away the bulrushes of
Creature-supports, the Soul must either swim or sink. God teaches this Lesson,
Partly by the uncertainty of second causes, the vicessitudes that are in
creature-expectations; a little hope to day, to morrow reduced to despair: good
news to day, Pharaoh says Israel shall go; bad news to morrow, he rages, and
swears that if Moses see his face any more, he shall dye, etc. O the ebbs and
flows of sublunary hopes! one speaks a word of comfort, another speaks words of
soul-wounding terror; now a promise, anon a threatening: The sick man is in
hopes of reviving to day, to morrow at the gates of death. What a woeful
heart-dividing life is a life of Sense, a life which is worse then death it
self, to be thus bandied up and down between hopes and fears, to be baffled to
and fro between the may-be's of second Causes! to be like Mariners upon the
billows and surges of the tempestuous sea! Psalm 107 26, 27
They mount up to Heaven, they go down again to the depths; their Soul is
melted because of trouble: they reel to and fro, and stagger like a drunken
man, and are at their wits end; Heb. all their wisdom is swallowed up. And
partly God teaches the necessity of a life of Faith by the disappointment of
the Creature: How often does the Creature totally fail, and abuse our
expectation! Job 6.15, 16
like the deceitful brook, to which Job most elegantly compares his brethren,
which mocks the traveller, and when he comes for a draught of water to quench
his thirst, Verse 20
sends him away with confusion and shame. Surely men of low degree are vanity,
Psalm. 62.9
and men of high degree are a lie: Men of low degree would help, but cannot,
there is vanity; and men of high degree can help many times, but will not; no,
not when they have promised and sworn; there is a lie: both disappoint, the one
by the necessity, the other by deceit; and disappointment is one of the great
torments that a rational creature is capable of: Trust defeated causes sorrow
of heart, Isai. 20.5
and confusion of face; and the stronger the confidence, Ier. 14.3
the more shameful is the disappointment. Agag comes forth singing, 1 Samuel 15,
32 33
Surely the bitterness of death is past; when behold he is going to his
execution: both he and his hopes are hewn in pieces before the Lord. David
himself looked on his right hand, and beheld, and there was no man that would
know him. Peter-like, they knew not the man; they made as if they had never
seen him before. So that Churl, 1 Samuel 25 10
Who is David? and who is the son of Jess? some Run-agate, some idle fellow
that has broken away from his master, etc. And it was not Nabal only that
stood at this distance from him; his nearest and dearest acquaintance cast him
off: Lover and friend have thou put far from me, and mine acquaintance into
darkness, Psalm. 88.18. Refuge failed me, no man cared for my Soul; Psa. 142.3 4
or as the Hebr. has it, no man sought after my Soul. Saint Paul was in no
better condition in the persecution which befell him at Rome; At my first
answer no man stood with me, but all men forsook me: not a man of all them that
sat under that famous Apostle's Ministry that would or durst appear to speak a
word for him, or to him: Oh bitter disappointment, had not he had faith to
support him under it! And truly such is our expectation, Isai. 20.6
whither we flee for help to be delivered, etc. Sorrow and shame is the fruit
of creature-expectation. But now on the contrary, They looked unto the Lord,
Psalm. 34.5
and were enlightened, and their faces were not ashamed. Faith meets with no
disappointment, God is always better then our expectation; 2 Timothy 4, 17
Nevertheless the Lord stood with me, and strengthened me, etc. and I was
delivered from the mouth of the Lion. By such experiences do we learn the
necessity of living by Faith. I had perished in my affliction, unless thy Law
had been my delight: i. e. unless David had learned to live by a promise, he
had been but a dead man. Surely he dies often whose life is bound up in the
dying Creature: as often as the Creature fails, his hope fails, and his heart
fails; when the creature dies, his hope gives up the ghost: He only lives
an unchangeable life, that by Faith can live in an unchangeable God.

We hear such things indeed in the Word, but we believe them not till our own
experience convinces us of our infidelity. A long time do we stick totally in
the creature, knowing no other life then of Sense and Reason; Sacrificing to
our own nets, and burning incense to our own drags: and because the Word tells
us much of living by Faith, we would fain patch up a life between Faith and
Sense, which indeed is not a life of Faith: we do not live at all by faith, if
we live not all by faith; though we may use means, we must trust God, and trust
him solely: and therefore, to bring us to this, God suffers us to be tired and
vexed with the mockery of second causes; and when we have spent all upon these
physicians of no value, then, and never till then, we resolve for Christ. When
David had experienced sufficiently the falseness and hypocrisy of Saul and his
Parasites, They delight in lies, they bless with their mouth, but they curse
inwardly, Psa. 62.4. then he resolves never to trust creature more: My Soul
wait thou only upon God, He only is my Rock and my Salvation, Verse. 5, 6.
Unmixt trust in God is the fruit of our experience of the creatures vanity: we
never resolve exclusively for God, till with the Prodigal we be whipped home
stark naked to our Fathers house. When the Church had run her self Jer. 2.25
barefoot in following her Lovers, who answered her expectation with nothing
but fear, and sent her away with shame in stead of glory, Isai. 20.6. then she
can go home, and confessing her Atheism and folly, gives up her self purely to
divine protection: Ashur shall not save us, we will not ride upon horses,
neither will we say any more to the work of our hands, Ye are our gods; Hos.
14.3
for in thee the fatherless finds mercy.

2. 2 The excellency of a life of Faith.
By the mutability and disappointment of the creature God teaches his people
the excellency of the life of Faith. David, when he learned it in the School of
Affliction, prints it and publishes it to all the world, Happy is he that has
the God of Jacob for his help, whose hope is in the Lord his God: Psa. 146 5,
He had before, Verse. 3. entered a Caveat against creature-confidence, Put not
your trust in Princes, nor in the son of man; and gives the reason of it, there
is no help or salvation in the best of men; nor in the son of man, in whom
there is no help: alas, he is but a little breathing clay; and when that
breath goes forth, he returns to his earth: when the breath is gone, there is
nothing but a little clay remaining; In that very day his thoughts perish: when
the man dies, all his counsels and plots and projects dye with him: And having
thus put in his Caution against creature-dependance, and given in the account
of the vanity thereof, he shows the difference between trust in a dying man,
and a living God; Trust in God is only able to make a man happy: they may seem
happy, who have the great men of the world to trust to; but he only is happy,
who has the God of Heaven to trust to; Blessed is he who has the God of Jacob
for his help: why so? because while they that trust in Princes shall be
disappointed, he that trusts in God shall never be disappointed: For, 1. He is
Jehovah, whose hope is in the Lord, or in Jehovah his God: Isai. 26.4
Jehovah, a F^untain of Beings, He gave a Being to Heaven and Earth, Psa. 146.6
He made Heaven and Earth, the Sea, and all that therein is: and he that gave
Being to every creature, can give Being to his promise also: Can any thing be
too hard for a creating God? and as he can, so he will, for He keeps Truth
for ever: Heaven and Earth may pass away, but not one jot or one tittle of his
promise shall pass away till all be fulfilled. Mat. 5, 18.
Men may prove unfaithful, but God will never prove unfaithful; He keeps
Truth for ever: Faithful is he that has promised, Heb. 10.23. And thus the
soul comes to see the sweetness and excellency of a life of Faith, while others
are mocked, and abused, and slain, by disappointment from the second causes: He
is kept in perfect peace, Isai. 26, 3
whose mind is stayed on God, because he trusts in him: He lives indeed,
that lives in him to whom Always is essential.

The excellency of a life of Faith discovers it self in these four particulars:
1. It is a secure life. 2. It is a sweet life. 3. It is an easy life. 4. It is
an honorable life.


First, The life of Faith is a secure life, the only safe life: He shall dwell
on high, his place of defense shall be the ammunition of rocks: How securely
does he dwell, whose fortifications are impregnable, inaccessible rocks? rocks
so high that none can scale them: In the Hebr. it is, He shall dwell in
heights, or in high places: rocks so thick that no breach can be made in them,
rocks within rocks; ammunition of rocks: and rocks so deep that none can
undermine them: surely a people or person thus rockt on every side, need not
fear storming. Object. I, but though rocks may be a good fence, they are but
ill food, a man cannot feed on rocks; rocky places are barten, though
impregnable; he may be starved, though he cannot be stormed! No, the words
following relieves that fear also, Bread shall be given him; he shall have
bread enough, and it shall cost him nothing; it shall be given him: and whereas
a rock is but a dry situation, without either springs or streams, and
thereupon a man might be exposed to perishing for want of water, Thirst will
slay as well as hunger; therefore it is likewise added, His waters shall be
sure: He shall have waters which neither Summers heat nor Winters frost shall
be able to dry up; never-failing waters shall fill his Cisterns from day to
day; His waters shall be sure. Under such an excellent metaphor is the security
of a life of Faith described; and this metaphor is expounded Isai. 26.1.
Salvation will God appoint for walls and bulwarks: walls and bulwarks shall not
be their Salvation, but Salvation their walls and bulwarks: how safely do they
dwell who are walled about with Salvation it self? The bulwarks are Salvation,
and that Salvation is Jehovah; for so it follows, Trust ye in the Lord for
ever, for in the Lord Jehovah is everlasting strength; or the Lord Jehovah is
the Rock of Ages: His place of defense is the ammunition of Rocks; and the Lord
Jehovah is those Rocks, a Rock of Ages; Ages pass away one after another, but
the Rock abides, and abides for ever: In the Lord Jehovah is everlasting
strength. He that rained Manna in the Wilderness, will give bread; and he that
fetched water out of the Rock, will be a never-failing fountain, his waters shall
be sure. Oh the security of a life of faith!

And secondly, It is as sweet as it is safe. Dulcius ex ipso font bibuntur
aquae.
Is it not a sweet thing to fetch all our waters from the fountain, from the
springhead, before they be degenerated or mudded by the miry channel? Why all
my fresh springs are in thee, says faith to God, Psalm. 87.7. Is it not sweet
to be fixed and composed in the midst of all the mutations and confusions that
are under the Sun? Why this is the privilege of him that lives by faith: No
evil tidings shall make him afraid, Psalm. 112 7
his heart is fixed, trusting in the Lord. And again; Isai. 26.6.
Thou will keep him in perfect peace, whose mind is stayed on thee, because he
trusts in thee: Heb: Peace, peace; that is, multiplied Peace; pure, unmixt
Peace, constant and everlasting Peace is the portion of him that lives by
faith, so far as he lives by faith; unless sense and reason break in to
disquiet, he lives in a most sweet and immutable serenity.

Thirdly, It is an easy life: It is an easy life to have all provisions
brought in to a man without any care or trouble; why such is the privilege of a
Believer; he has a quietus est, that supersedes all his cares. In nothing be
careful, Phil. 4.6.
but in every thing by prayer and supplication with thanksgiving let your
requests be made known to God. Faith leaves a Believer nothing to do but to
pray and give thanks; to pray for what he wants, and to give thanks for what he
has; that is all he has to do. It is true, Believers must labor and travel
in the use of means, as well as the rest of the sons of Adam: but, first, it is
without care; (...).
in nothing be careful; without anxious, heart-dividing, Souldistracting care:
O that is the thorn, the sting, which the sin of man and the curse of God has
thrust into all our labors, care and distraction; and this faith pulls out: so
that now all the labor of faith is an easy labor, like the labor of Adam in
Paradise: Faith uses means, but trusts God; obediently closes with the
Providence of means, but sweetly leaves the Providence of success to God. Yea,
Faith can trust God, when there are no means to use, and say, Although the
fig tree shall not blossom, neither shall fruit be in the Vines, the labor of
the Olive shall fail, and the fields shall yield no meat, the flock shall be
cut off from the fold, and there shall be no herd in the stalls; Heb. 3.18.
yet I will rejoice in the Lord, I will joy in the God of my Salvation. Faith
can live upon God, when there is a famine upon the whole Creation: The Peace of
God is as a Court of Guard, to fence the heart from all surprises of fear and
trouble: In nothing be careful, but in every thing pray and give thanks, Phil.
4.7.
and the peace of God which passes all understanding shall keep your hearts
and minds through Christ Jesus. As faith enjoys God in all things in the
greatest abundance, so she can enjoy all things in God in the deepest want.

Fourthly, and lastly, The life of faith is an honorable life. It is the honor
of the Favorite that he can go immediately to his Prince when strangers must
trace the Climax of Court-accesses. Yea, without all peradventure, it is an
honorable life to live as God himself lives; and this is the glory of God,
that he lives in himself and of himself: and truly in their proportion such
honor have all the Saints. They live in God and upon God here by faith; and
they shall live in God and upon God hereafter by sight, in the beatificate
Vision.

This is the excellency of the life of Faith, and this the people of God
experience by their sufferings, whereby God calls them out of the world, and
taking them into himself, he does reveal to them by degrees the mystery and
privilege of living upon God, and upon God alone.

In the next place, 13 Lesson, God takes us off from selfconfidence.
By afflictions and distresses God takes us off from selfconfidence, and
teaches us to trust HIM more, and our selves less. This is the same with the
former, save only that we speak now of trust in God, in opposition to
confidence in our selves, and not in others; a distemper that prevails much in
our natures: Ever since we rendered our selves able to do nothing, nothing but
sin, we think our selves able to do any thing: We fancy to our selves a kind of
omnipotence, when all our strength is to sit still: Naturally we are prone to
entertain and nourish high presumptions, of our own strength, and of our own
wisdom.

1. Of our own strength: In our prosperity we think our selves able to carry
any cross; we fancy our selves strong enough to carry away even Sampsons gates
upon our shoulders, and mettled to encounter any affliction in the world; but
when the hour of temptation comes, we find we are but like other men, and are
ready to sink, with Peter, if but one wave rise higher then another. Usually
sufferings before they come are like a Mountain at a great distance, which
seems so small, that we think we could almost stride over it; but upon nearer
approaches, when we come to the foot of it, it appears insuparable, and looks
so huge, as if it would fall upon us, and crush us in pieces. Peter is so big
with love to Christ, that he will dye with Him, rather then forsake Him; yea
though all the rest should betake themselves to their heels, he will stand by
him to the last drop of blood: and yet behold, when it comes to the trial, a
weak silly Damosel is able with a single question to fright him out of his
confidence, and he does not only forsake, but forswear his Lord. Pendleton, in
the Book of Martyrs, will fry out a fat body in flames of Martyrdom, rather
then betray his Religion; but when the hour comes that Christ and Religion had
most need of him, he had not one drop of all that fat to spare for either.

And, 2. As we are prone to presume of our own strength, so we are very apt to
idolize our own wisdom; to lean to our own understanding, and think by our
policy to wind our selves out of any labyrinth of trouble and perplexity. But
we find it otherwise; when we come into the snare, we then are forced to cry
out with the Church, He has hedged me about that I cannot get out, Lam. 3.7.
he has made my chain heavy: Like a malefactor that has broke prison; he
thinks to run away, but he has an heavy chain upon his heel, that spoils his
haste; and being fenced in round about, he goes to this corner, hoping to find
some gap, but there he finds the hedge made up with thorns; and to another
corner, and there also the briars stop him, etc. I, but mark ye, that is not
all; read on in the Churches complaint, and you shall find greater
obstructions: Verse 9. Verse 9.
He has enclosed my ways with hewn stones. Suppose a man would venture the
scratching of his flesh, to break through an hedge to save his life, (skin for
skin, and all that a man has will he give for his life,) yet that would not
do, God had taken away the hedge, and built a wall in stead of it; a wall so
high, that they could not clamber over; a wall so thick, that they could not
dig through: The meaning is, Man in affliction thinks to make his way through
by his own art and cunning, but upon the attempt he finds difficulties arising
still higher and higher, so that when all is done, escape is impossible,
without an immediate rescue by the arm of omnipotence. This was Paul's case: 2 Timothy 1.8, 9
When we come to Asia, we were pressed out of measure beyond strength, in so
much that we despaired even of life: A great strait, (what it was in particular
you may read Acts 19. from 22. so forward; in all probability it was that
uproar at Ephesus, wherein Paul was like to have been pulled in pieces, for it
was a trouble that befell him in Asia, verse. 8.) I say, it was a great strait,
a strait wherein the Apostle was at his wits end: Dicitur (...) qui non novit
quomodo sese ex aliqua difficultate expediat. Beza.
(...), i. e. we were bereft of all counsel how to expedite our selves out of
the danger: As David complains, Psalm. 13.2. How long shall I take counsel in my
Soul! i. e. When he was persecuted by Saul, and beset with innumerable dangers,
he took counsel, he thought of this means, and the other means, cast about this
way, and that way, how to escape, but in vain, all his counsels left him as
full of sorrow and despair as they found him: How long shall I take counsel in
my Soul, having sorrow in my heart? He had his sorrow for his pains. Thus it
was with the Apostle; all his counsel left him in the hand of despair: We
despaired even of life: His case was no other then the prisoner at the bar, at
what time the sentence of death is past upon him; he looks upon himself (and so
do standers by) as a dead man; he is legally dead, dead to all intents and
purposes of the Law; there wants nothing but execution: Why so it was with
Paul; We had the sentence of death in our selves: The sentence was past in his
own breast; and now says Paul, I am but a dead man: This was his strait, and it
seems God had a plot in it, a design upon Paul; and what was that? Himself
will tell you; We had the sentence of death in our selves, Verse 9.
that we should not trust in our selves, but in God which raises the dead,
etc. See here, the design is expressed negatively and affirmatively. Negatively,
that we might not trust in our selves: God saw, even in that great Apostle
himself, a disposition to selfconfidence, a proneness to be exalted above
measure, 2 Cor. 12.7
through the abundance of Revelations: And therefore, as to prick the bladder
of pride, God gave him a thorn in the flesh, etc. so, to work out this
self-trust, God reduces him to a state of despair, as to outward and visible
probabilities: We had the sentence of death in our selves, that we should not
trust in our selves; there is the negative branch of the design. And then the
Affirmative follows, But in God which raises the dead: By this desperate
exigence God would teach Paul ever after where strength and counsel was to be
had in the like extremities; no where but in God, and in him abundantly: The
God of Resurrections can never be non-plust; Resurrectio mortuorum, fiducia
Christianorum. Tert. de Resur. carnis.
He that can raise the dead, can conquer the greatest difficulty; He that can
put life into dead men, can put life into dead hopes, and raise up our
expectations out of the very grave of despair: That God can put life into dead
bones, is a consideration able to put life into a dead faith.

To this purpose it is very observable, that even those to whom God has
indulged the largest proportions of faith and courage, not only above other
men, but above other Saints; yet even them God has suffered not only to
languish under fears, but even to despair under insuperable difficulties,
before they could recover holy confidence in God. We find David, that great
Champion of Israel, more then once or twice surpised with dreadful fear: I
said in my Haste, (...) from the root (...) f^stinare, praecipitare
obstupescere. Hicron. (...). Sept.
Psa. 31.22. and 116.11. The Hebrew signifies, in trepidatione mea, or in
festinatione mea, in my trembling, in my precipitancy; or as the Septuagint
translate it, in my ecstasy, when I was almost besides my self for fear: Well,
what did he say then? Why he said, I am cut off from before thine eyes; that
is, God has cast me out of his care, he looks no more after me, I am a lost
man. And again, I said in my haste, in my passion, all men are Liars; even
Samuel himself, that told me I should be King; he has seen but a false Vision,
and a lying divination; God never said so to him; no, I shall one day fall by
the hand of Saul.

And thus the Prophet Jeremiah, Chap. 3.57. Thou drewest near in the day that I
called upon thee; thou said, Fear not: I, but before God spoke a Fear not to
his Soul, he was afraid to purpose: hear what he says, verse. 53, 54. They have
cut off my life in the Dungeon, and cast a stone upon me; waters flowed over
mine head, then I said, I am cut off. Mark ye, with Paul, he had received the
sentence of death in himself, he looks upon himself as a dead man, yea as
already in his grave, and his gravestone laid upon it; they have cut off my
life in the Dungeon, and cast a stone upon me, dead and buried, and a stone
rouled to the mouth of the sepulcher. And thus you may hear Jonah crying in the
Whales belly, Jonah 2.4.
I am cast out of thy sight. And Sion, in the dust, tuning her Lamentations,
Isai. 49.14
The Lord has forsaken me, and my Lord has forgotten me. Hezekiah reporting
the sad discourses he had in his own bosom upon the sight of death, Isai. 38.9,
10, etc. It were easy to multiply instances.

Why now this is continually our case, and this is still Gods design: We are
proud creatures, full of self-confidence; and therefore God by strange and
unexpected Providence, does hedge up our way with thorns, and wall up our path
with hewn stones, brings to despair even of life, bereaveth us of counsel, outs
us of all our own shifts and policies, brings us under the very sentence of
death; that we might not trust in our selves, but in God which raises the
dead, he unbottoms us by despair, convinces us of our impotence and folly,
shows us what babes and fools we are in our selves, that in all our future
hazards and fears we might know nothing but a God; go in the strength of the
Lord, and make mention of his righteousness, and of his only. And thus you see
Peter, who before was so confident, that he thought all the world might forsake
Christ sooner then himself, after he was convinced of his own infirmity and
instability, when Christ, to put him in mind of his threefold denial, put him
upon that threefold Interrogatory, Simon Peter, love thou me more then
these? i.e. then the rest of thy fellow-disciples, durst make no other answer
but this, Lord, thou know: he pleads nothing but his sincerity; and for that
also, he casts himself rather upon Christ's trial, then his own; Lord, thou
know.

In the next place, 14 Lesson, God makes himself known.
By affliction God makes himself known unto his people. How long do we hear of
God before we know him? We get more by one practical discovery of God, then by
many Sermons: I have heard of thee often by the hearing of the ear, Job 42.5, 6
but now mine eye sees thee, therefore I abhor my self in dust and ashes,
cries Job upon the dunghill. In the Word we do but hear of God, in affliction
we see him. Prosperity is the nurse of Atheism; the understanding being clouded
with the steams and vapors of those lusts which are incident to a prosperous
estate, men grow brutish, and the reverence and sense of God is by little and
little defaced: But now by affliction the Soul being taken off from
sense-pleasing objects, has a greater disposition and liberty to retire into
it self: and being freed from the attractive force of worldly allurements,
Maturant aspera men tem.
the apprehensions are wont to be more serious and pregnant, and so more
capable of divine illumination. The clearer the glass is, the more fully does
it receive in the beams of the Sun. When the warm breath of the the world has
blown upon us, we are not so capable of the Visions of God. Job 21.14
The wicked through the pride of his heart will not know God; they say to the
Almighty, Depart from us, for we desire not the knowledge of thy ways. Who is
the Lord? says Pharaoh. And truly the very godly themselves are exceeding dark
and low in their apprehensions of God; our ignorance of God being never
perfectly cured till we come to Heaven, where we shall see him face to face,
and know him as we are known. In the mean time, as by the strokes of divine
vengeance God makes the wicked know him to their cost; so by the rod of
correction he makes his people to know him to their comfort. As God brought all
his plagues upon Pharaohs heart, that he might know who the Lord was in a way
of wrath; so he lays affliction upon the loins of his people, that they may
know him in a way of love; Israel shall cry unto me, My God, we know thee.
Moses never saw God so clearly, as when he descended in a Cloud. Exodus 34.5
And truly that dispensation was but a type of the method which God uses in
making himself known unto his Saints: He puts them into the clefts of the Rock,
Exodus 33.21, 22, 23. and 34.5, 6, 7.
covers them with his hand while he passes by, and then proclaims his Name
before them, The Lord, the Lord God, merciful and gracious, By affliction God
makes known his Attributes.
etc. The people of God have the most sensible experience of his Attributes in
their sufferings; his Holiness, Justice, Faithfulness, Mercy, Alsufficiency,
etc.

His Holiness: Holiness.
Affliction shows what a sin-hating God, God is: For though his chastisements
on his Church be in love to their persons, they are in hatred to their
corruptions; while he saves the sinner, he destroys the sin. By this shall
the iniquity of Jacob be purged, Isai. 27.9.
and this is all the fruit to take away his sin: If the Soul live, sin must dye.

His Justice: Justice.
Afflictions are correction to the godly, punishment to the wicked; in both God
is righteous: Thus Israel knew God, Neh. 9.33. Howbeit thou art just in all
that is come upon us, for thou have done right, but we have done wickedly: In
the severest dispensations they judge themselves, and justify God; Thou art
just, etc. Yea when they cannot discern his meaning, they adore his
Righteousness; Righteous art thou, O Lord, Ier. 12.1.
when I plead with thee; yet let me talk with thee of thy Judgments; wherefore
does the way of the wicked prosper? etc. When the Soul is unsatisfied, God is
not unjustified; Righteous art thou, O Lord, etc.

His Faithfulness. Faithfulness in the affliction it self. Psa. 119.7^.
Faithfulness in the very affliction it self. I know, Lord, that thy Judgments
are right, and that thou in faithfulness have afflicted me: Faithfulness to his
Covenant; for affliction is so much threatened as promised to Believers; as
Psalm. 89.30, 31, 32. of which more hereafter. The more David was afflicted, the
more Gods faithfulness appeared. Oh says the holy man, I could not have wanted
a blow of all that discipline wherewith my Father has chastised me.

Faithfulness in hearing Prayer: In hearing Prayer.
This poor man cried, and the Lord heard him, Psalm. 34.6.
and saved him out of all his troubles; I never lost a prayer by God: Even when
David wanted faith, God wanted not faithfulness. I said in my haste, I am cut
off from before thine eyes; nevertheless thou heardest the voice of my
supplications when I cried unto thee. God was faithful with a non-obstante to
David's unbelief: I said in my Haste, and he that believes will not make haste;
nevertheless thou heardest. Unbelief it self cannot make the faithfulness of
God of none effect. I conceive that of the Apostle 2 Timothy 2.13. to bear this
sense, If we believe not, yet he abides faithful, he cannot deny himself: It
is not to be understood of a state of unbelief, but of an act of unbelief; not
of a want of faith, but a want in faith; neither of which can render God
unfaithful; who is engaged not so much to our faith, as to his own
faithfulness, to himself, to hear the prayer of his troubled servants; Call
upon me in the day of trouble, I will deliver thee, and thou shall glorify me.
Psa. 50.15


This faithfulness of God, Believers do best experience in their sufferings:
Partly because then they are most powerful. When our elder brother Esau is upon
us, we can wrestle with our elder brother Jesus, and not let him go till he
bless us. And partly because then they are most vigilant to observe the returns
of prayers: My voice shall thou hear in the morning, in the morning will I
direct my prayer unto thee, Psalm. 5.3
and will look up. In adversity we are early with God in prayer; In the morning
shall thou hear my voice, in the morning will I direct my prayer; it implies
double earliness, and double earnestness in prayer; In their affliction they
will seek me early: And when we have done praying, we will begin harkening; I
will look up: In prosperity we put up many a prayer that we never look after;
God may deny or grant, and we hardly take notice of it: But in affliction we
can press God for the returns of prayer; Hear me speedily, O Lord, my spirit
fails, hide not thy face from me, lest I be like to them that go down into
the pit; not only denyals, but delays kill us: Then we can harken for the echo
of our voice from Heaven; Psalm. 85.8
I will harken what God the Lord will say, for he will speak peace to his
people. As God cannot easily deny the prayer of an afflicted Soul, so if he
grant, we can take notice of it, and know our prayers when we see them again;
This wretch cried, and the Lord heard him; and this endears the heart to God
and to prayer: I love the Lord, because he heard my voice and my supplications;
Ps. 116.1, 2
because he has inclined his ear unto me, therefore will I call upon him as
long as I live.

As faithfulness in hearing prayer, In accomplishing the promise.
so also in making good the promise; The afflicted Soul can witness unto God,
as we have heard, so have we seen, Psalm. 48.8. What we have heard in the
promise, we have seen in the accomplishment: God was never worse then his Word.
Affliction is a furnace, as to try the Faith of Gods people, so to try the
faithfulness of God in his promises: and upon the trial the Church brings in
her experience; Psa. 12.6
The Words of the Lord are pure words, as silver tried in a furnace of earth,
purified seven times: Let a man cast in the Promise a thousand times into the
furnace, it will still come out full weight: As for God, Psa. 18.30
his way is perfect, the Word of the Lord is tried: It is to be understood in
both places of the Word of the Promise: A man may see Heaven and Earth upon a
promise, and it will bear them up.

As affliction gives out the experience of Gods faithfulness, Mercies in
moderating the affliction.
so also of his mercy: mercy in the moderating of the chastisements: In measure
thou will debate with it, etc. Isai. 27.8. In the midst of judgment he
remembers mercy, Habak. 3.2. Even when God in his compassions says of his
afflicted Church, Isai. 40.2
She has received double of the Lord for all her sins; in the sense of her own
merits and his mercy she can reply, Ezra 3.13
Thou have punished us less then our iniquities deserve: too much says God, too
little says the Church. Oh blessed sight, thus to see God and the Soul
contending together! It is of the Lords mercies that we are not consumed,
because his compassions fail not, cries the Church in Babylon; q. d. it is
banishment, it might have been destruction; we are in Babylon, we might have
been in Hell; and it is the Lords mercies, and his mercies alone, that we are
not there. So faith the afflicted Soul; If my burning fever had been the
burning lake, if my prison had been the bottomless pit; if my banishment from
society with friends had been expulsion (with Cain) from the presence of God,
and that for ever; God had been righteous. It is never so bad with the people
of God, but it might have been worse: any thing on this side Hell is pure
mercy. In supporting under affliction. Psa. 94.18


And as Mercy in moderating, so Mercy in supporting: when I said, my foot
slippeth: now I sink, I shall never be able to stand under this affliction, I
cannot bear it: Thy mercy, O Lord, held me up: when David was sinking, God put
underneath him his everlasting arms, and held him up. Even when Gods suffering
people are not sensible of any great ravishments, yet then they find sweet
supports; His left hand was under me, his right hand embraced me. In giving in
comfort in affliction.
And yet it is not supporting mercy only which they experience in their
sufferings, but not seldom his refreshing his rejoicing mercy; so it follows,
In the multitude of my thoughts within me, thy Comforts delight my Soul: My
thoughts were dark and doleful, and full of despair, and not a few of them;
multitudes brake in upon me, and even swallowed me up; but thy comforts were
light and life, and delight to my Soul: my thoughts did not sink me so deep,
but thy comforts raised me up as high: my thoughts were an hell, but thy
comforts were an heaven within me: The Soul hears of Gods mercy in prosperity,
but it tastes of Gods mercy in affliction, and, as it were ^pprest with
delights, can call to others, O taste and see how good the Lord is. Hence it
is, that of all the days of the year the Apostle would choose as it were a
Good Friday, a passion day, to rejoice in; God forbid I should rejoice in any
thing but in the Cross of Jesus Christ: Christ's sufferings for him, and his
sufferings for Christ.

The Al sufficiency of God is the last Attribute I mentioned, Alsufficiency in
delivering out of affliction.
which God proclaims before his suffering people: Now thou shall see, says God
to Moses, what I will do to Pharaoh, Exodus 6.1. Hitherto thou have seen what
Pharaoh has done to Israel, now thou shall see what I do to Pharaoh; and so
they did: The doubling of their burdens was the dissolving of their bondage;
the extinguishing of their line was the multiplying of their seed: The same
waters which were Isreal's rocks were the Egyptians grave; Exodus 15 9
I will pursue, I will overtake, I will divide the spoil; my lust shall be
satisfied upon them: I will draw my sword, my hand shall destroy: so boasts the
proud Tyrant; I will, I will, I will etc. nay, not so fast Pharaoh; let God
speak the next word: Verse 10
Thou did blow with thy wind, the sea covered them, they sank as lead in the
mighty waters: Oh sudden turn! there lies Pharaoh and his six [I will's] and
[I shall's] drowned in the Sea: Thus did God appear to his oppressed Israel in
the very nick of their extremities; In the thing wherein they dealt proudly,
Exo. 18, 11
God was above them: And Israel SAVV that great work which the Lord did upon
the Egyptians; and the people feared the Lord, and his servant Moses, Exodus
14.31. Israel SAVV; in prosperity God works, but we see him not: affliction
opens our eyes; when we see our dangers, then we can see God in our
deliverances. God could have brought Israel to the Land of Promise a shorter
cut, in forty days; but he leads them about in an howling wilderness forty
years; not a like place in all the world to have starved them and their flocks:
Deuteronomy. 8.3
and why? but to proclaim to Israel, and all succeeding generations, that man
lives not by bread alone, but by every word that proceeds out of the mouth
of the Lord, etc. Israel learned more of Gods Alsufficiency in a Land of
drought, then she could have learned in the Land flowing with milk and honey;
namely, that God can feed without bread, and satisfi^ thirst without streams of
waters: that he can make the clouds rain bread, and the rock give out rivers:
that the creature can do nothing without God, but God can do what he please
without the creature.

Instances are endless: In a word, the suffering time is the time wherein God
makes his Attributes visible: The Lord will be a refuge to his people, a refuge
in time of trouble, Psalm. 9.9. and what follows? And they that know thy Name,
will put their trust in thee, Verse. 10. In the School of Affliction God reads
Lectures upon his Attributes, visible Lectures; and expounds himself unto his
people: so that many times they come to know more of God, or more
experimentally by half a years sufferings, then by many years Sermons.

A fifteenth Lesson: 15 Lesson.
God teaches them in a suffering condition to mind the duties of a suffering
condition; to study duty more then deliverance; seriously to enquire what it is
which God calls for under the present Dispensation. The Soul cries out with
Paul, Acts 9.6
when laid for dead at Christ's feet, Lord, what will thou have me to do? There
is no condition or trial in the world, but it gives a man opportunity for the
exercise of some special grace, and the doing of some special duty: and that is
the work of a Christian, in every new state, and in every new trial, to mind
what new duty God expects, what new grace he is to exert and exercise.

To mind deliverance only, is self-love; which is natural to man: The captive
exile hasteneth that he may be loosed, and that he should not dye in the pit,
etc. Man in affliction would fain be delivered, have the burden taken off, the
yoke broken; men make more haste to get their afflictions removed then
sanctified: but this is not the work God looks for; No, nor to think only what
a man would do if he were delivered. Oh, thinks a man, if God would deliver me
out of this sickness, out of this distress, I would walk more close with God, I
would be more abundant in family duties, I would be more fruitful in my
converse; I would do thus and thus, etc. Why now I say, though men should sit
down in their afflictions, consider their ways, and make new resolutions for
better things, if God shall give better times; yet if this be all, it may be
nothing else but a wile of the deceitful heart, a temptation and snare of the
Devil, to gain the time as it were of God; a mere diversion to turn aside the
heart from the present duty which God expects. And therefore when God, intends
good and happiness to the Soul by the present chastisement, he pitcheth the
Soul upon the present duty, which is, to a Mica. 6.9
hear the rod, and who has appointed it; to discern Gods aim, and to find out
the meaning of the present Dispensation: to say to God, Job 34, 31 32
I have born chastisement, I will not offend any more: that which I see not
teach thou me, and if I have done iniquity, I will do no more: To reflect upon
our ways and spirits, to complain of sin, and not of punishment; Lam. 3.39
Wherefore does a living man complain? a man for the punishment of his sin? Let
us search and try our ways, and turn again to the Lord. To think the present
condition the best: Phil. 4 11
I have learned in what ever state I am, therewith to be content: In our
patience to possess our Souls; Luke 21.19 To. 5.2, 3
to rejoice in God; yea to rejoice in tribulation. To mind the public
calamities of the Church more, and our private sufferings less: to pray for the
welfare of Sion; In thy good pleasure do good unto Sion. Psa. 51.18
To lift up Jesus Christ, and to make him glorious by our afflictions; That
Christ may be magnified in our bodies, Phil. 1.20
whether it be by life, or by death. Paul studied more how to adorn the Cross,
then to avoid it; how to render persecution amiable; and if he must suffer for
Christ, yet that Christ might not suffer by him; that Christ might be exalted,
and the Church edified. Col. 1.24 2 Timothy 1, 10 1 Pet. 4 19
This God taught him; I have learned, etc. And lastly, to commit the keeping of
our Souls to God in well-doing, as unto a faithful Creator.

The sixteenth Lesson is like unto it; and that is, The privilege of a
suffering condition: In the School of Affliction, one Lecture which the Holy
Ghost reads is the fruits and advantages of a suffering condition. There is
in every state of life a snare and a privilege; and it is the folly and misery
of man left to himself, that he willingly runs into the snare, and misseth of
the privilege: he is only able to add to his own misery, and to make his
condition worse then he finds it. Those whom God loves, he teaches; he
teaches them to study, as the duty of their present state, so the advantage.
When God takes away creaturecomforts, he does not only necessitate, but by the
secret impressions of love upon the heart, he emboldens the Soul to look out
for reparations, and to urge God for a recruit in some richer accommodations:
Lord, says Abraham, What will thou give me, Genesis 15.2
seeing I go childless? God had denied Abraham a child, and He must make
Abraham amends for it. In like manner, Lord, what will thou give me, says a
suffering Saint, since I go wifeless, and friendless, and landless, and
houseless? etc. yea Lord, what will thou give me, since I go Ordinance-less,
Sermon-less, Sacrament-less? etc. So the Disciples, Mat. 10.28
Lord, we have forsaken all and followed thee, what shall we have therefore?
Faith may be a loser for Christ, but it will not be a loser by Christ; and
accordingly Christ makes an answer of faithfulness to this demand of Faith:
Verily I say unto you, ver. 29, 30
there is no man that has left house, or brethren, or sistors, or father, or
mother, or children, or lands, for my sake, and the Gospels, but he shall
receive an hundred fold now in this time, etc. Advantage enough; an hundred for
one was the best year that ever Isaac had, Genesis 26.12. I, but how shall this be
made good? why with persecution; Houses, and brethren, and sisters, and
mothers, and children, and lands, WITH PERSECUTION: Persecution must make up
the account. It is very observable, That year wherein Isaac received his
hundred fold was Isaac's suffering year; the year wherein famine had banished
him from his own Country to sojourn with Abimelech in Gerer. Genesis 26.1. Isaacks
best harvest, was in a year of famine: and this was Typical to all the Children
of promise; they must receive Isaacks increase upon Isaacks account, an
hundredfold with persecution. And I conceive our Savior may allude to this
Type, in this promise: In persecution the people of God find their hundredfold;
when they make a Scripture inquiry, they find, sufferings especially those for
Christ's sake to be their letters testimonial for Heaven, Luke 21.13.

The pledge of Adoption, Heb. 12.6.7.

A purge for corruption, Isa. 27.9.

The improvement of Holiness, Heb. 12.10.

A fining pot to faith, 2 Pet. 1.7.

Communion with Christ. 1 Pet. 4.13.14.

The presence of the spirit of God and of Glory. 1 Pet. 4.13.14.

The Churches Treasury, Colos. 1.24.

Weak Christians strength. Phil. 1.13, 14. In both, the Gospels advantage.

Strong Christians confidence. Phil. 1.13, 14. In both, the Gospels advantage.

And lastly, The inhancement of glory, 2 Cor. 4.17, 18. here is the hundred fold
with advantage.

In a word, what ever the affliction be, that it shall be the souls gain, Romans
8.28. all things work together for good to them that love God, This God
teaches his people, it is the very design of the eight to the Romans, and of
the twelve first verses of the twelfth to the Hebrews, to show that Gods Rod
and Gods Love go both together. And this is a sweet and blessed Lessen indeed;
for this quiets the heart, and supports the soul under its burden for this
cause we faint not; why? because though our outward man perishes, yet the
inward man is renewed day by day, 2 Cor. 4.16. q. d. what we lose in our bodies
we gain in our souls: what we lose in our estates we get in grace; thus they
bear up and comfort themselves in their deepest sorrows, while they that lie
poring upon their afflictions, and are witty only to aggravate every
circumstance of a suffering condition, sink their own spirits, vex their
souls, dishonor God by slandering his dispensations; and bring up an evil
report upon the Cross of Jesus Christ. The spiritual privileges of Gods
suffering people, are therefore called the peaceable fruits of righteousness,
Heb. 12.11. because the taste of this fruit brings in such peace and comfort,
into the soul, as it makes it rejoice not in God only, but in tribulation, and
in all these things to account it self more then Conqueror through him that
has loved us, Romans 8.37. This is the sixteenth Lesson.

A seventeenth Lesson which God teaches by his chastisements, 17 Lesson The
one thing necessary, Luke 10, 42.
is that which Christ taught Martha: sc. what is the one thing necessary;
affliction discovers how much we are mistaken about our must bee's, our
necessaries. In our health and strength and liberty; we think this thing must
be done, and that thing must be done: we think Riches necessary, Honors
necessary, and a Name in the World necessary; we must get Estates, Psalm. 49.11.
and we must lay up large portions for our Children, and we must raise our
Families, and call our Lands after our own names, and the like; But in the day
of adversity, when death looks us in the face, when God causes the horror of
the Grave, the dread of the last judgment, and the terrors of eternity to pass
before us, then we can put our mouths in the dust, smite upon our thigh, and
sigh with the breaking of our loins, oh how have I been mistaken? how have I
fed upon ashes, and a deceived heart turned me aside, Isa. 44.20.
so that I could not deliver my soul, nor say is there not a lie in my right
hand? Fool, how have I been deceived, and made the By the main, and the main
the By. Then we can see that pardon of sin, interest in Christ: evidence of
that interest, sense of Gods love, a life of Grace, and assurance of glory,
etc. are the only indispensibles. In a word, that Christ alone, is the Vnum
necessarium the one thing necessary, and that all other things, at the best,
are but may-bees: yea, but loss and dung in comparison of the excellency of
the knowledge of Christ Jesus the Lord, Phil. 3.8.9.
and of interest in him, and in his righteousness: without which the soul is
undon to all eternity. And therefore oh that Christians would be wise, that
they would not spend their money for that which is not bread, Isa. 55.2.
nor their labor for that which satisfies not; Heb. 11.1. Faith is (...) and
(...), etc.
but labor for Faith which might realize and substantiate unseen and spiritual
things, and give them a being unto the soul. They that will not learn this
lesson in the school of the Word, shall learn it in the School of affliction,
if they belong to God, and therefore set your heart to it.

In the eighteenth place, 18 Lesson. Time-redemption.
Time-redemption is another lesson which God teaches whom he corrects. In
our tranquillity, how many golden do we throw down the stream, which we are like
never to see again; for one whereof the time may come, when we would give
Rivers of Oil, the wealth of both the Indies, Mountains of precious stones, if
they were our own, and yet neither would they be found a sufficient price for
the redemption of any one lost moment. It was the complaint of the very
Heathen, and may be much more our complaint, Quis est qui diem estimat. qui se
Cum cogitat se quotidie mori. Sen. Ep.
who is there amongst us, that knows how to value time, and prize a day at a
due rate? most men do rather pass away their time, then redeem it, prodigal of
their precious hours, as if they had more then they could tell what to do
withal: our season is short, and we make it shorter. How sad a thing is it to
hear men complain, O what shall we do to drive away the time?

Alas even Sabbath-time, the purest the most refined part of time, a Creation
out of a Creation, time consecrated by divine sanction, how cheap and common is
it in most men's eyes, while many do sin away, and the most, do idle away, those
hallowed hours? Seneca was wont to jeer the Jews for their ill husbandry, in
that they lost one day in seven, meaning their Sabbath: truly it is too true of
the most of Christians, they lose one day in seven, what ever else; the Sabbath
for the most part is but a lost day; while some spend it totally upon their
lust, and the most, I had almost said, the best, do fill up the void spaces and
intervales of the Sabbath from public worship, with idleness and vanity! But
oh when trouble comes, and danger comes, and death comes; when the Sword is at
the Bowels the Pistol at the breast, the knife at the throat, Death at the door,
how precious would one of those despised hours be? evil days cry with a loud
voice in our ears. Redeem the time: That caution was written from the Tower in
Rome. Ephesians. 5.16
Redeem the time because the days are evil. In life threatening dangers, Rev.
10.6
when God threatens as it were, that time shall be no more, then we can think
of redeeming time for prayer, for reading, for meditation, for studying and
clearing out our evidences for Heaven, for doing and receiving good, according
to opportunities presented; yea then we can gather up the very broken fragments
of time, that nothing may be lost. Then God teaches the soul what a choice
piece of wisdom it is, for Christians, (if it were possible) to be before hand
with time; for usually it comes to pass through our unskilfulness and
improvidence, In hoc n. fallimur quod mortem prospitimus. Sen. in ep.
that we are surprised by Death; and we that reckoned upon years, many years
yet to come, have not, possibly, so many hours, to make ready our accounts: It
may be, this night is the Summons, and then if our time be done, and our work
to be begun, in what a case are we! The soul must needs be in perplexity at the
hour of death, that sees the day spent, and its work yet to do. A Traveller
that sees the Sun setting, when he is but entering on his journey, cannot but
be aghast: the evening of our day, and the morning of our task, do not well
agree together, that time which remains is too short for lamenting the loss
of bypast time. By such hazards God does come upon the soul as the Angel upon
Peter in prison, Act. 12 7
and smites upon our sides, bids us rise up quickly and gird up our selves, and
binds on our Sandalls, etc. 1 Cor. 7.29.
that we may reedeem lost opportunities, and do much work in a little time; It
is pity to lose any thing of that which is so precious and so short. 10 Lesson.
To value Christ's sufferings. Lam. 1.12.


A ninteenth Lesson is how to estimate, at least to make some remote and
imperfect guess at, the sufferings of Jesus Christ. In our prosperity we pass
by the Cross, i. e. carlesly and regardlesly: at the best we do but shake our
Heads a little; the reading of the story of Christ's passion stirrs up some
compassion toward Him, and passion against his persecutors; but it is quickly
gone: we forget as soon as we get into the world again: but now let God pinch
our flesh with some sore affliction; let him fill our bones with pain, and set
us on fire with a burning Fever let our feet be hurt in the stocks, and the
Irons enter into our souls; let our souls be exceedingly filled with the
scorning of those that are at ease, and with the contempt of the proud; let us
be destitute, afflicted, tormented, etc. then happily we will sit down and look
upon him whom we have peirced, and begin to say within our selves, And are the
Chips of the Cross so heavy, what then was the Cross it self, which first my
Redeemer did bear, and then it did bear him? Are a few bodily pains so bitter,
what then were those agonies which the Lord of glory suffered in his soul? Is
the wrath of man so piercing, what was the wrath of God, which scorcht his
righteous soul, and sweltred his very heart blood through his flesh in a cold
winters day, so that his sweat was as great drops of blood, trickling down to
the ground? are the buffetings of men so grievous, what were the buffetings of
Satan, which our Lord sustained, when all the brood of the Serpent lay nibling
at the heel of his passion? Is a burning Fever so hot, Christ felt paenas
infernales though not inferni.
how then did the flames, even of Hell scald my Saviors spirit? Is it such an
heart-piersing affliction to be deserted of friends, what was it then for him,
that was the Son of Gods love, the darling of his bosom, to be deserted of his
Father, which made him cry out to the astonishment of Heaven and Earth, my God,
my God, why have thou forsaken me? Is a chain so heavy, a prison so loathsome,
the sentence and execution of death so dreadful? oh what was it for him that
made Heaven and Earth to be bound with a chain, hurried up and down from one
unrighteous judge to another, mocked, abused, spit upon, buffeted, reviled, cast
into prison, arraigned, condemned, executed in a most shameful and an accursed
manner? oh what was it for him to endure all this contradiction of sinners,
rage of the Devil, and wrath of God, in comparison of whom the most righteous
person that ever was may say with the good Theif on the cross. And we indeed
justly, Isa 53.9.
but He, what evil has he done, He made his Grave with the wicked, and with
the rich in his death, because he had done no violence, neither was any deceit
in his mouth. Blessed be God, my prison is not Tophet, my burnings are not
unquenchable flames, my cup is not filled with wrath: in a word, this is not
Hell. Blessed be God for Jesus Christ, 1 These. 1.10.
by whom I am delivered from wrath to come. And thus, as the Lord Jesus by the
sensible experience of his own passion came perfectly, to understand what his
poor members suffer while they are in the body, so we by the (...) the
remainders of his cross, which he has bequeathed us as a Legacy come in some
measure to understand the sufferings of Christ, or at least by comparing things
of such vast disproportion, to guess at what we cannot understand.

The twentieth and the last Lesson which God teaches by affliction, 20 Lesson.
is How to prize and long for Heaven. In our prosperity, when the Candle of God
shines in our Tabernacles, when we wash our steps in butter, and the Rock
powers us out Rivers of Oil, Job. 29.6.
we could set down with the present World, and even say, with the Disciples,
Eccles. 41.1.
though not upon so good an account, It is good for us to be here; let us here
build us Tabernacles, while life is sweet, death is bitter; and Heaven it self
is no temptation, while the World gives us her friendly entertainments: But
when poverty, and imprisonment, reproach, and persecution, sickness, and sore
Diseases, do not only pinch but vex our hearts with verietie of aggravations;
we are not so fond of the Creature, but we can be content to entertain a partly
with death, and take Heaven into our considerations. Not that merely to defire
to be in Heaven, because we are weary of the World, is an Argument of grace, or
a Lesson that needs divine teaching, self-love will prompt as much as that
comes to. But because like foolish Travelers, we love our way though it be
troublesome, rather then our Country, God by this Discipline takes off our
hearts by degrees from this present World, and makes us look homeward: being
burdened we groan, 2 Cor. 5.4. and with the Dove, we return to the Ark when the
World floats round about us; when David was driven from his Palace, then woe is
me that my Pilgrimage is prolonged: (...).
so the Septuagint renders it. We should be contented like the Israelites with
the Garlic and fleshpots of Egypt, if God did not set cruel Taskmasters over
us to double our Burdens: and when God has thus lessened our esteem of the
World, he discovers to us the excellency of heavenly comforts, and draws out
the desires of the soul to a full fruition: when shall I come and appear in thy
presence? EVEN SO come Lord Jesus. Affliction puts Heaven into all those
notions which make it Heaven indeed.

To the weary it is rest, Isa 57.2. Revel. 14.13. To the banished it is Home, 2
Cor. 5.6. To the scorned and reproached it is glory, Romans 5.2. To the Captive
it is liberty, Romans 8.21. To the conflicting soul it is Conquest, Romans 8.37.
And to the Conqueror it is a Crown of Life, Rev. 2.10. Righteousness, 2 Timothy
4.8. Glory, 1 Pet. 5.4.
To the Hungry, it is hidden Manna, Rev. 2.17. To the thirty it is the fountain
and waters of life, and Rivers of pleasure. Rev. 22.17. Psalm. 36.8, 9. To the
grieved soul, whither with sin or sorrow, it is fulness of joy, and to the
mourner it is pleasures for evermore. Psalm. 16.12. In a word, to them that have
lain upon the Dunghill, and kept their integrity, it is a Throne, on which they
shall sit and reign with Christ for ever and ever. Rev. 3.31. and 22.5.
Surely beloved, Heaven thus proportioned to every state of the afflicted soul
cannot choose but be very precious; and will make the soul with a stronger or
weaker impulse, desire to be dissolved and to be with Christ, Phil. ^.23
which is best of all. A Christian indeed is comforted by Faith, but not
satisfied; or if satisfied, it is in point of security, not of desire: because
here we are absent from the Lord, and walk by Faith not by sight. 2 Cor. 5, 6,
7.
Hope, though it keep life in the soul, yet it is not able to fill it: he longs
and thinks every day a year till he be at home in his Fathers Arms, and sit
down on his Fathers Throne, crowned with his Fathers Honor and glory. They
that walk by Faith cannot be quiet till they be in the sight of those things
which they believe. Jacob when he heard that Joseph was alive, though he did
believe it, yet could not be satisfied with hearing of it; but says he, I will
go and see him before I die: so the beleiving soul, He, whom my soul loves,
was dead, but is alive, and behold he lives for evermore, Rev. 1.18. I will
die that I may go and see him: as Augustine, upon that answer of God to Moses,
thou cast not see any face and live, Exodus 33.20. makes this quick, and sweet
reply, then Lord let me die that I may see thy face.

Thus I have presented you with those 20 several Lessons which Jesus Christ the
great Prophet of his Church teaches his afflicted ones to take out in the
school of affliction. And now as I told you in my entrance upon this subject,
all these 20. Lessons, may be reduced to three great summary, comprehensive,
Instructions. etc.

1. The sinfulness of sin. 2. The emptiness of the Creature. 3. The fullness of
Jesus Christ. 1 Summary Lesson. The sinfulness of sin.

The first summary comprehensive Lesson, is the sinfulness of sin: sin is
always very sinful; but in our prosperity we are not so sensible of it: the
dust of the World does so fill our eyes, that we cannot make a clear and
distinct discovery of the evil that is in sin: but now by the sharp and bitter
waters of affliction, God does wash out that dust, and clears the Organ to make
a perfect discovery, and to discern sin, as it is, and not as usually it does
appear: sin becomes exceeding sinful. Romans 7 13.
God has four Classes, wherein he discovers to the soul the evil that is in
sin; 1. The Glass of the Law, Jam. 1.23.24. 2. The blood of Christ, Rev. 1.6.
3. Afflictions and chastisements in this present World. 4. The torments of
Hell, Mat. 25.41.


Indeed of all these Glasses, the blood of Christ is the clearest, and does
most fully and perfectly represent the exceeding sinfulness that is in sin, the
stain and spot whereof could be washed out with no other element but the blood
of the Son of God; for as it was purchasing blood, so it was expiating blood.
He has loved us and washed us with his own blood. Rev. 1 6.
But though this be the purest glass, yet God does make frequent and great use
of the third glass also: sc. afflictions and chastisements for sin to discover
to the Children of promise, the greatness of that evil which is in sin. It is
very notable how God brings the Israelites this glass in their affliction, and
bids them as it were see their face in it. Jer. 2. Know therefore and see that
it is an evil and bitter thing that thou have forsaken the Lord thy God, and
that my fear is not in thee, says the Lord God of Hosts. verse 19. In this
glass he discovers to them a fourfold evil in sin.

1. As it is cause of all other evils of punishment, verse 17. Have thou not
procured this unto thy self in that thou have forsaken me, etc. he bids them
read all their sins in their punishments, he bids them look upon sin as a
Mother-evil, that has all other evils in the womb of it; q. d. Thank thy self
for all the affliction that is upon thee: thou have procured this unto thy
self; art thou in captivity, in prison, in distress, etc. Thank thy Idolatry,
and thy Adulteries whereby thou have forsaken the Lord thy God. Thank thy self
for all the misery that is upon thee, every man's heart may say to him as
Apollodorus his heart cried to him out of the boiling Chaldron: (...). Plut: I
have bin the cause of all this. As Lust when it has conceived, brings forth
sin, so sin when it is finished, when it is perfected, James 1.15.
will bring forth death: sin is the Child of Lust, and the Mother of Death.

2. In this glass God represents sin to their view, as an evil in it self: know
therefore and see that it is an evil thing and a bitter; that sin does not only
bring evil, but is evil; it is an evil thing: not only that it works
bitterness, but is bitterness, it is a bitter thing: it has a bitter root, as
well as it brings forth bitter fruits: God leads the sinner by affliction to
take notice not only what sin does; but what sin is. It is evil. Yea,

3. That it is a pure unmixt evil: It is an evil thing, the whole being of sin
is evil: In the evil of affliction there is some good, for it has God for the
Author. Is there an evil in the City and the Lord has not done it? Amos 3 6
Romans 8 28. Psalm. 119.71.
And it has good for its end: all things shall work together for good, to them
that love God. It is good for me says David, that I have been afflicted: But
now sin is a simple uncompounded evil, 1 John 3.8 Romans 6.23:
for it has the Devil for the Author, he that commits sin is of the Devil:
and death for its end, the wages of sin is death: death in its vastest
comprehension, sin is evil all over.

4. The glass represents it yet worse, and that is, as it is an evil against
God. It is a departure from God, thou have forsaken the Lord thy God, verse 17.
and so again v. 19. Sin is, averst^a deo and conversio ad creaturam. Ier. 2.13
thou have forsaken the Lord thy God, my fear is not in thee. Sin as the
Schools define it is an aversion from God, and a conversion or turning to the
Creature. My people have committed two evils, they have forsaken me the
fountain of living waters, and showed them out Cisterns, broken Cisterns that
can hold no water. Sin is not only an unmixt evil, but a twisted multiplied
evil: It is a departure from the fountain of life and glory, and a turning to a
scanty, and a broken Vessel, which leaks out as fast as it is poured in. Now
here is the exceeding sinfulness of sin, that it is an evil against God;
punishment is but an evil against the Creature: thou have procured this unto
thy self, affliction is but a contradiction to the will of the Creature; but
sin is a contradiction to the will of God; whence we may safely conclude, that
there is more evil in the least sin, then there is in the greatest punishment,
even Hell it self, the Hell that is in sin, is worse then the Hell that is
prepared for sin. Yea and behold one evil more in this glass the aggravation of
all the rest, and that is, 5ly. that sin is a causless evil, a causless
departure, thou have forsaken the Lord thy God, when he led thee by the way, v.
17. when he led thee as a Guide, to direct thee, lead thee as a stay to support
thee; he put underneath thee his everlasting arms: he led thee as a Convoy to
guard thee, and led thee as a Father to provide for thee. Thou wantedst
nothing, and yet thou have forsaken the Lord thy God. This is the aggravation,
verse 31. O generation, [Generation of what? why of what you will, God leaves a
space, as it were, that they may write down what they please; Generation of
Vipers, Generation of Monsters, any thing, rather then the Generation of his
children:] O Generation, see the word of the Lord, still he holds the Glass
before their eyes, and what are they to behold there? why their causeless
Apostasy and rebellions; for so it follows, have I been a barren Wilderness, a
Land of darkness? have ye wanted any thing? wherefore then say my people, we
will come no more unto thee? oh this departure is causeless and wilful: God
says to the sinner, as Pharaoh said to Jeroboam, when he would be gone from
him, 1 Kings 11.22. But what have thou lacked with me, that behold thou seek
to be gone from me? and the sinner: seems to answer God as Jeroboam there
answered Pharaoh: nothing, howbeit let me go in any wise. Jeroboam could come
to Pharaoh when he was in distress; but when the storm was over, at home, he
will be gone again, though he cannot tell why: and so deals the treacherous
heart with God; and this causeless departure from God is an high aggravation of
sin: God is often upon it, as Isa 1.2. and Amos 6.3, 4, 5, etc. The soul
sins only because it will sin. In a word: Affliction is one of Gods
tribunals where the sinner is arraigned, evicted, and condemned; As many as I
love, I rebuke and chasten; the Greek words signify to convince and correct,
Rev. 3 19 (...).
i. e. by correction to convince of sin: truly in affliction, sin is laid open
before a man's eyes in such sort as he is enforced to plead guilty: God sits as
Judge, Conscience is witness, a thousand witnesses; sin the indictment;
affliction both evidence and execution. Hence it is, that sooner, or later the
convinced soul sees sin a greater evil, then affliction, whatever it be; and
now as it were forgetting the affliction, begins to mourn only for sin, Job.
7.20
crying out with holy Job in the dust, I have sinned, what shall I do unto
thee, O thou preserver of men? he says, not my substance is spoiled, my
Children destroyed, my body is become a Spittle of loathsome Diseases, and my
self a terror to my self and standers by, what will thou do unto me, O thou
preserver of men? but I have sinned, what shall I do unto thee etc. Affliction
led him to sin; Correction was made conviction, and sin now lies heavier upon
him then all his sufferings. This is the first comprehensive Lesson.

The second follows, sc. 2. Comprehensive Lesson.

The emptiness of the Creature.
In our prosperity we stick in the Creature, The emptiness of the world.
and dote upon the Creature, the things and persons in this present world, as
if there our happiness and comfort were bound up: but in the day of adversity,
God convinces us of our mistakes, by causing us to see the emptiness and
vanity of all sublunary contentments: we begin to find the world to be but
gilded emptiness, a mere nothing. Then ask the soul what it thinks of the
World and all the elements thereof, the lusts of the flesh, the lusts of the
eyes, and the pride of life, as the Apostle sorts them, which formerly did so
glitter in its eyes, Isa 40.6.
and the answer will be with the Prophet, all flesh is grass, and all the
goodliness thereof as the flower of the field: vanity of vanities, all is
vanity. The afflicts soul says of all Creature-excellency, It is not; it
looks upon them as so many non-entities: Prove. 23 5
so many Nots: Not that which it seems: Not that which is promises: Not that
which we expect, and flatter our selves with. Riches profit not in the day of
wrath. Prove. 11 4
Whatsoever it is that a man makes his riches, whether friend, or wealth, or
parts, or Creature-interest whatsoever, they profit not, i. e. they cannot
deliver out of the hands, either of death or judgment. And besides, the soul
finds by experience the unsutableness and dissatisfaction that is in all these
seen things; that there is no proportion between an invisible soul and visible
comforts, Fulgentins triumphos Romanos cum spectarit, appellavit vanitem.
Author vitae apud Sur. procop. l. 2. de bello Vand.
between an immortal soul and perishing contentments, between a spiritual
being, and an earthly portion; that the wind which a man takes in by gaping,
will as soon fill an hungry belly, as Creature Comforts will satisfy the
Spirit: In the hour of temptation the soul says, miserable comforters are ye
all, Physicians of no value, upon which a man may bestow all that he has in
expectation of a cure, and find himself no whit better, but rather worse;
surely the world in all its bravery is to the afflicted soul no better then the
Cities which Solomon gave to Hiram, which he called Cabul, that is to say,
displeasing or dirty: 1 King 9.13.
the day of affliction is one of those days, wherein men cast away their Idols
of silver and their Idols of Gold, Isa 2.20
which they made each one for himself to worship, Abite hinc, Abite Ion ge.
Phil, Morn.
to the Moles and to the Bats, and says unto them with indignation, Get ye
hence.

3. 3 Summary Lesson. Fullness of Christ.
And lastly, in the day of affliction, God discovers to the soul, the fullness
of Jesus Christ. There is an infinite fullness in Jesus Christ. It pleased the
Father that in him should all fullness dwell: Colos. 1.19.
The Covenant of grace is suited to all the exigencies and indigencies of a poor
undone convinced sinner; 2 Samuel 23.5.
it is ordered in all things: In opposition to the power of corruption in the
heart, I will put (says God) my Law in their inward parts, Ier. 31 33, 34.
etc. In opposition to error and ignorance in the understanding, they shall all
know me, etc. In opposition to Guilt, I will forgive their iniquity, and I will
remember their sin no more. And the Offices of Jesus Christ are suited to all
the branches of the Covenant. In order to the first branch, I will write my Law
in their hearts, etc. Behold Jesus Christ is a King: In order to the second,
they shall all know me, etc. behold Jesus Christ is a Prophet: and in order to
the third, I will forgive their iniquities; behold Jesus Christ is a Priest:
The Offices of Christ, fill and execute the Covenant of grace; and the fulness
of God fills and acts the Offices of Jesus Christ; the Power of God, and the
fullness of Power, his Kingly Office. The wisdom of God, and the fullness of
wisdom, his prophetical Office. The Righteousness of God, and the fullness of
Righteousness, Psalm. 45.7
his priestly Office: this is that which the Psalmist celebrateth in that Song
of Loves God has anointed thee with the Oil of gladness ABOVE THE FELLOWS:
never King was anointed with such power; never Prophet with such wisdom, never
Priest with such Grace and Righteousness, they had their stinted proportions;
but God gave not the spirit by measure unto HIM. Ioh. 3 34. Colos. 2 9
In him dwelt all the fullness of the Godhead bodily. It is not less then an
infinite fullness which fills Jesus Christ as Mediator, that we of his fullness
might receive grace for grace: But we are not always in a capacity either to
receive or to see that fullness: And the reason is, because in our prosperity we
fill our selves so with the World, Intus eaistens prohibet ^lienum.

covenda sunt isla^b lectamenta tanquam laquei et plagae, etc. Lactan. divin.
Inst. l. 6. c. 21. Isa 53 2.


with the pleasures and profits of the World, that it fares with Christ now as
it did when he was born, there is no room for him in the Inn: while the World
glitters in our eyes with her painted gaudery, he has no form nor COMLINES,
and when we see him, there is no beauty that we should desire him: we are very
prone to love the World for the World, terminate our affections in the
Creature, and do not use terrene comforts in that way, Minus te amat Domine qui
at liquid amat quod non preter te amat. In licitis perimus engies.
and to that end, that we might thereby be the more fitted to walk with God;
and when our desires are such, the more they are, the lefs are our delights in
Jesus Christ: this is our sin and folly, that we do not fear the unlawful use
of unlawful things; nor see where the snare lies to inveagle those affections
to the Creature which are only due to God himself: and a great reproach it is
to Jesus Christ. But now when God spreads sackclothe upon all the beauty and
bravery of the Creature, and so hides pride from man, when God by some flashes
of Lightning strikes us blind to the World, then we can discover beauty and
excellency in Christ, infinitely transcending all the beauty and excellency in
the World, Thou art fairer then the Children of men, grace is poured into thy
lips: when under the stairs, Psalm. 45.2. Cant. 5.10.
and in the Clifts of the Rocks, then the soul can sing, my beloved is white
and ruddy, the chicfest among ten thousand. When the God of Heaven has famisht
all our Gods on earth, when he has hungerstarved us, as to Creature comforts,
in any way whatsoever, then we can hunger after and taste the sweetness, the
fullness, which is in Jesus Christ; O then, Christ a King to govern, a Prophet
to teach, a Priest to save! how precious! then none but Christ, none but
Christ; give me a Christ or else I die. In a word my Beloved, when once it is
come, (by what exigencies and surprises soever) to an, Oh wretch that I am, who
shall deliver me? Romans 7.24
then, I thank God through Jesus Christ our Lord. Truly God is forced to
exercise us with a severe Discipline, that he may endear Jesus Christ to our
hearts; and secludes us from the World, that we may study and improve his
fullness: As the Law is our Schoolmaster, Gal. 3.24
so affliction is an Usher to the Law: affliction brings us to the Law, and the
Law brings us to Christ.

And thus I have dispatched the first thing I undertook, for the opening of the
Doctrine, sc. The Lessons which God teaches those whom he chasteneth: both in
their twenty particulars, and in their three summary comprehensive heads, to
which all the rest may be reduced.

I come to the second thing; namely, The Nature or properties of divine
teaching. The nature and propetries of divine teaching,

For my Breth^en, it is not every teaching that will make or evidence a man to
be a blessed man under affliction. There is hardly any man that is under
affliction, but he learns somewhat by it; and yet few are blessed: the reason
is, because it matters not so much what a man is taught, as who is the Teacher,
whither he be taught of God or no: yea that is not all neither; for we are not
to enquire only, whether we be taught of God, but how? There is a twofold
teaching of God. There is a common teaching, which even Heathen, men out of the
Church, Hypocrites and Reprobates within the Church, may have; the very
Philosophers have read excellent Lectures upon affliction, Seneca and others;
and there is a special teaching proper and peculiar only to the Children of
promise. A Covenant-teaching; Isa. 54.13.
All thy Children shall be taught of God; it is the Covenant of God with the
Redeemer, Isa 54 13. A teaching without which no man can come to Christ, John
6.45. Every man that has heard and learned of the Father comes unto me.

Now this teaching has a sixfold property.
The first property is, 6. properties of Covenantreaching.
It is an inward teaching. Inward in respect of the Object, and inward in
respect of the Subject.

Inward in respect of the Object; 1. Property, it is inward.
so our Savior concerning the saving teaching of the Holy Ghost: when the
spirit of truth is come, he will guide you into all truth. Ioh. 16 13
Man may lead you UNTO truth; but it is the spirit of God that only can lead
you INTO truth; he only that has the Key of David, that opens and no man
shuts, and shuts and no man opens, can open to you the door of truth,
and show you the inside of truth. And great is the difference between these two
teachings. He that comes to a stately house or place sees only the outward
fabric and structure; and even that may take much: but he that comes into it,
sees all the inward contrivances and conveyances; he sees all the rich
furniture and adornings of the several rooms and Offices of the house, which
are not only for use, but for delight and ornament: Surely, the very outside
of truth is goodly; but, like the Kings Daughter, it is all glorious within;
not pleasing only, but ravishing; this they see who are led into truth: Psalm.
119.18.
by ver^ue whereof David saw wonderful things in the Law; Objects which filld
his soul with wonder and delight. And as the teachings of the Covenant are
inward in respect of the Object, so inward also in respect of the Subject: In
the HIDDEN PART thou have made me know wisdom, Psalm. 51.6. and again I thank
the Lord that gave me counsel, MY REINS also instruct me in the night seasons:
Psalm. 16.7
the Reins are the most inward part of the Body; and the night-season the most
retired and private time; both express the intimacy of divine teaching; man may
teach the Brains, but God only teaches the Reins; the knowledge which man
teaches is a swimming knowledge, but the knowledge which Christ teaches is a
soaking knowledge; God who commanded light to shine out of d^rkness, 2 Cor. 4 6
has shined into our HEARTS, to give the light of the knowledge of the glory of
God in the face of Jesus Christ: it is a laden expression, and holds forth the
inward teachings of God on both sides; both in reference to the Subject, and in
reference to the Object. In reference to the Subject, He that commanded the
light to shine out of darkness, has shined into our hearts; Man's light may
shine into the Head, but Gods light does shine into the Heart. God has his
Throne in Heaven; Cathedram habet inCaelis, quicorda do^et A^g.
but his Chair, his Pulpit, is in the heart: he has shined into our hearts.
And then you have the inwardness of divine teaching in respect of the Object:
he has given us the light of the knowledge of the glory of God in the face of
Jesus Christ. Man may give knowledge, confused general knowledge, but God gives
the light of knowledge in the luster and brightness of it. In thy light we shall
see light: Psalm. 36.9.
the soul sees by the same light whereby God himself sees, thy light: and not
only so; here is not only knowledge and light of knowledge, but the glory of that
light; the light which God brings in to the sanctified understanding, is a
glorious light, a marvelous light, 1 Pet. 2.9. the soul that the spirit takes
by the hand, and leads into truth, stands wondering at the glory and
excellency of that light which shines round about it: And then lastly, all
this, in the face of Jesus Christ: The face is the full discovery of a person.
Moses could not see Gods face, but only his back-parts he might see; Exodus 33.
last. But now by the flesh of Josus Christ God has put a vail upon his face:
the vail of his flesh, Heb. 10.20. through which we may see the face of God; 1 Timothy 3.6
for now in Christ it is God manifest in the flesh; the humane nature of Jesus
Christ has made God visible. In this face now of Jesus Christ do they whom God
teaches by a saving Gospel-teaching see divine truth, i. e. they see it now
not only by borrowed representations and natural resemblances, Ephesians. 4.21.
but in its own native beauty and luster, as the truth is in Jesus: He has
shined into our hearts to give us the light of the knowledge of the glory of God
in the face of Jesus Christ. 2 property clear convincing. (...). Arist.

A Syllogism whereby the respondent is forced to contradict himself, either
concessa negando, or per negata concedendo.


This is the first property of Divine Teaching. It is inward, and that both in
respect of Subject, Object.


2. Divine Covenant-teaching is a clear convincing teaching; so our Savior of
the spirit; when He is come, he shall CONVINCE the world, etc. (...), the word
signifies a clear demonstrative conviction: so the Apostle defines faith to be
(...): the evidence, or demonstration, the evident demonstration of things not
seen. The Holy Ghost in his teachings, brings in divine Truths with such a
clear and convincing light that the soul sits down under it fully satisfied: it
is not only convinced to silence, but to assurance; it does sweetly and freely
acquiesce in the present truths: Now I know, says Moses Father-law, that the
Lord is greater then all Gods: He had heard of God before, Exodus 13.11.
but that bred but opinion only; but now, he is thoroughly convinced: I know
that the Lord is greater then all Gods. So David concerning his afflictions,
Psalm. 119.75.
I know Lord that thy judgments are right, and that of faithfulness thou have
afflicted me. He was fully satisfied both of the equity and fidelity of Gods
chastisements: right in respect of the merit, and faithful in respect of the
end. And thus in all the Lessons before presented to your view, and in all
other, what God teaches, he teaches with such a clear evidence of truth, that
the soul is set beyond all peradventure: 1 These. 1.5
Our Gospel came unto you, not in word only, but in power and in the Holy
Ghost, and in much full assurance: (...).
the word has a double and a treble emphasis; assurance, full assurance, and
much full assurance: such are the teachings of the Holy Ghost. Common teaching
may convince to silence, but the understanding may remain doubtful still:
Formido oppositi.
there is that which the Schools call suspense or hesitancy in the
understanding; there is not a full and clear assent in the understanding to the
truths propounded: but a man remains, in the Apostles Language, a double minded
man: or as the word signifies, (...).
a double-sould man; duplex amino, a man of a double, or doubtful, or divided
spirit, floating between different opinions; one soul (as it were) believes
this way, and another soul believes that way; one while he believes there is
a God, and anon the fool says in his heart, there is no God: sometimes he
calls sin evil; and anon again he thinks it good. He believes, and he
believes not; sometimes what he hears from the word is truth; sometimes he
thinks again it is but an invention of man, there may be some mistake in it:
But now the teachings of God set a man beyond all those fluctuations and
unsetledness in judgment: there is that which the Apostle calls the riches of
the full assurance of understanding to the acknowledgment of the Mystery of
God: Assurance of principles, Col. 2.2
even when the soul may possibly want the assurance of application.

A third property of divine teaching, It is an experimental teaching. 3d
property experimental.
The soul can speak experimentally of the truths it knows, it is good for me,
says David, Psalm. 119.71
that I have been afflicted; why, but may not any man say as much as that? yes,
few men there are but have the Notion in their heads, and in their lips: I but
mark I pray, the Psalmist speaks experimentally to the point, and does instance
the good which he had gained by affliction; I have learned thy statutes. He had
learned more acquaintance with the word, more delight in the word, more
conformity to the word. He knew it more, and loved it better, and was more
transformed into the nature of it, then ever, etc. So Psalm. 116.6. The Lord
proserveth the simple, i. e. God stands by his upright hearted ones to secure
them from violence: a good notion; but any man may have it in the proposition;
I but David has it in the experience, I was brought low and he helped me; my
faith was brought low, and my comfort was brought low, and my resolutions were
brought low, my feet had welnigh slipped. Psalm. 73.2. but God helped my faith,
revived my comfort, strengthened my resolutions, and stablisht my feet: thou
have holden me by my right hand, 2 Timothy 1.22.
verse 23. Thus St. Paul, I know whom I have believed, etc. I have experienced
his faithfulness and his All Sufficiency: I dare trust my All with him. I am
sure, he will keep it safe to that day. And thus they that are taught of God in
affliction can speak experimentally, in one degree or other, of the gains and
privileges of a suffering condition: they can speak experimentally of
Communion with God, though I walk through the valley of the shadow of death,
Psalm. 23 4
I will fear no evil; why? for thou art with me: I have had comfortable
experience of thy upholding, councelling, comforting presence with me in my
deepest desertions: so of other fruits of affliction, this I had, Psalm. 119.56.
this I have got by my sufferings, I bless God I have learned more patience,
humility, self-denial, etc. to be more sensible of my Brethrens sufferings, to
sit looser to the World, to mind duty, and to trust safely with God, to
prepare for death, and to provide for eternity, one way or other it is good for
me; I could not have been without this affliction, etc.

Common knowledge rests in generals, and lies more in propositions then in
application; but they that are taught of God can say, as we have heard, so have
we SEEN; they can go along with every truth, and say, It is so, I have
experienced this Word upon mine own heart, John 3.33
they can set to their seal, that God is true.

4. 4 Property. Powerful.
Divine Covenant teaching is a powerful teaching: After a man has got many
truths into the understanding, the main work is yet to do, and that is to bring
down holy truths to action, to draw forth divine principles into practice: a
natural man may know much, he may have an heap of truths in his understanding;
but they all lie strengthless in the brain, he has no power to live the truths
he knows. Covenant-teachings convey strength as well as light, and do what they
teach. Isa 8.11.12
The Lord spoke to me with a strong hand, and instructed me that I should not
walk in the way of this people, saying, say ye not a confederacy to them who
say a confederacy, neither fear ye their fear, nor be afraid; sanctify the
Lord of Hosts himself, etc. It is a most sweet and comfortable Scripture, and
that in two respects. 1. In respect of what it implies. 2. In respect of what
it expresses. First, it implies thus much, sc. that even the Holy Prophet
himself had no small combat and conflict within himself what to do in such a
juncture of time as that was, when it was told the house of David, Chap 7.8
saying, Syria is confederate with Ephraim: that is, that both those Kingdoms
had made a League together, and were now upon their march with their combined
forces, to make War against the House of David: it was sad news, and the Text
says, The heart of Ahaz, and the heart of the people was moved, as the Trees
of the Wood are moved with the Wind, i. e. They were terribly afraid, even
ready to die for fear, and in that fear abundance of the people fell off to the
enemy, and engaged with them; as it is intimated, Chap. 86.
They refuse the waters of Shiloh that go softly, i. e. they looked upon the
forces of Jerusalem, as poor and inconsiderable, C^m su^n pa^citatem and
tenuitatem i^tu^bantar trepidaba^t etc. and putabant se tutis^im^s sore si tam
poten^ ipsis R^x contigiss^t, quam Isralitis. e Calv. in loc.
no ways able to oppose and engage so potent an adversary as came against them;
and so deserted their own party, and rejoiced in Rezin and Remaliah's Son: they
rejoiced in them, i.e. to cover their defection from their true Sovereign, they
cried up the invaders as their best friends, who came to rescue them from the
tyranny and oppression of Ahaz. And it seems the Prophet Isaiah himself was
surprised with fear too, for a time, and began to dispute the matter within
himself, whither it were not best for him, to strike in with the stronger side,
and to engage in the confederacy with those two Princes as the multitude did;
there wanting not, probably, fair and specious pretenses to justify that
defection: It seems I say that the Prophet had a sore temptation upon his
spirit about this matter, and was even ready to determine the question on the
affirmative, till God came in and instructed him, etc. And that is the second
thing; the comfort expressed in these words: while the Prophet was thus
conflicting and fluctuating in his own thoughts, God came in, and by strength
of hand rebuked his Fears, silenced his Objections, quieted his spirit,
determined the dispute, and instructed him what course to take, which was not
to comply, but to believe, to study duty, and leave safety with God; fear not
their fear, nor be afraid, sanctify the Lord of Hosts himself, etc. Power went
forth with instruction, taught him what to do, and enabled him to do what it
taught. Blessed be God, who has an Hand to teach his people with, as well as a
mouth; an Hand of power, as well as a mouth of instruction: had it not been for
this, the Prophet himself had been certainly carried down the torrent of that
apostasy, as well as others.

And there is caution in this instance as well as comfort in reference to our
selves and our Brethren; and that is, in case of surprise by some sudden gusts
of fear and temptation, not rashly to judge our selves, or our Brethren; but
wisely and calmly to consider, 1 Cor. 10.13.
it is no other temptation then what is common to man, yea to the best of men:
Job and David, and Jeremiah, and Habbakkuk and Peter, and here Isaiah, were all
nonplust, and staggerd for a time, and recovered only by a powerful word from
Heaven; and therefore in such cases, it becoms Christians to pity, rather then
to insult, and to study to heal rather then to reject: Gal. 6.1.
considering themselves lest they also be tempted. This is the privilege of the
Children of promise, strength goes out from the Covenant with instruction, the
Lord who commands light to shine out of darkness, has shined into our
hearts: q. d. God has taught us by such a word, as that whereby he made the
World, a creating word, a word that gives strength as well as Council. And
this teaching it is which the Prophet David so frequently importuneth in his
prayers, Psalm. 119.33. cum 35. Teach me O Lord the way of thy Statutes, make me
to Go in the paths of thy Commandments; Psalm. 143.10. Teach me to do thy will:
mark that, not only teach me the way, but teach me to go; not only teach me thy
will, but teach me to do thy will. Common teaching may teach an Hypocrite the
way, but saving teaching only teaches the soul to go in that way: an
unregenerate man may know the Will of God; Nehem. 8 10.
but he knows not, how to do that Will. The joy of the Lord is our strength.
This is the fifth property.

A fifth property; 5 Property, Sweet.
The Teachings of God are sweet and pleasant teachings. Psalm. 119.102. Psalm.
119 102
Thou have taught me; what follows? How sweet are thy words unto my taste?
sweeter then honey unto my mouth: He rolled the Word and Promises as Sugar under
his tongue, and sucked from thence more sweetness then Samson did from his
honeycomb. Luther said, Cum verbo etiam in inferno facile est vivere, Luth.
Tom. 4. oper. lat.
he would not live in Paradise, if he must live without the Word; but with the
Word, says he, I could live in Hell it self. When Christ puts in his
teaching-hand by the hole of the door to teach the heart, Cant. 5.5
his fingers drop sweet smelling myrrh upon the handles of the Lock: The
Teachings of Christ leave a sweet remembrance of himself behind them; Cant. 1.4
We will remember thy Love more then wine: As people, when they are drunk with
wine, wherein is excess, are apt to sing and hollow; so those that are filled
with the Spirit, cannot but insult and triumph in the wonderful things which
they taste and see in the Word. There cannot be but much spiritual joy in
divine Teaching, because the Spirit does accompany the Truths, and so irradiate
them with his own beauty and glory, the light of the knowledge of the glory of
God in the face of Christ, that they do not only affect, but ravish the heart:
Psalm. 119 140 Sunt Scripturae tuae Deliciae meae. Aug.
Thy Word is pure, therefore thy servant loves it. The Prophet saw a beam of
divine excellency sitting upon the Word, and that did ensnare his Soul. Truth
is burdensome to unsound spirits, because convincing; and they labor to
extinguish that light which distrubeth their quiet: Romans 1 18 (...), it
signifies forcibly and unjustly to withhold.
They hold the truth in unrighteousness; Gr: they imprison the Truth, and will
not suffer it to do its office: But saving Teaching is sweet and delightful,
because it is suitable to the renewed part; to which it comes in with fresh
succors, to relieve and fortify it against the assaults of opposite
corruption: I say, it is always sweet in that respect, but never more sweet
then in affliction; the bitterness of adversity giving a more delicate relish
unto the Word, by healing the distempers of the spiritual palate: and then the
Soul cries out with Jeremy in the prison, Thy Words were sound, and I did eat
them, and thy Word was unto me the joy and the rejoicing of my heart, Jerem.
15.16.

6. And lastly, 6 Property, Abiding.
Divine Teaching is an abiding Teaching: The anointing which ye have received
of him abides in you: 1 John 2.27. Notional knowledge, where it is no more, is
flitting and inconsistent, and leaves the Soul dubious and uncertain. Observe
how the Apostle S. James expresses it, speaking of the mere notional hearer,
Jam. 1.24
He beholds himself, and goes his way, and straightway forgets what man
he was: Observe, he does not only forget what he heard, but he forgets what he
was: The glass, whether Word or Affliction, discovered to him his spots, showed
him his pride, his covetousness, the impurity of heart and life etc. but he
goes away and forgets what manner he was; he forgets the Word, he forgets
the Rod, and what both Word and Rod discovered to him, together with the
resolutions and promises made to God in both. A godly man may forget the Word
(a gracious heart may have a bad memory) but he will not so easily forget
himself, he does not forget his spots, and that keeps him in continual work, to
wash and PURGE himself from all filthiness of flesh and spirit: Remembering
mine affliction and my misery, Lam. 3.20
the wormwood and the gall: My Soul has them STILL IN REMEMBRANCE, and is
humbled in me. The double-minded man is unstable in all his ways. Iam. 1.8
Humane Teaching beget at best, but opinion, not faith; the Word implies one
that is distracted and divided in his thoughts, floating betwixt two contrary
Opinions: There be notions contradicting notions, and principles fighting
against principles; and such knowledge is not abiding knowledge: this unfixedness
in principles produces instability in practice; if a man be double-minded in
his principles, he will be unstable in all his ways: none are so constant in
the profession of any truth, as they that are fully convinced and assured of
it: none so stable in their conversation, as they that are rooted and
stablished in the present Truth: This is the effect of Gods Teaching, it keeps
the judgment steady, and the heart stable.

Teach me, O Lord, Ps. 119.33
the way of thy Statutes, and I will keep it unto the end: He dares promise
Perseverance, if God will undertake Instruction: and accordingly he made good
his promise, upon this very account; I have not departed from thy Judgments,
for thou have taught me: Observe it; He does not say, I will keep thy Statutes;
but he can say, and that many years after, I have kept thy Statutes. Many will
say in their affliction, I will keep thy Statutes; promise fair, if God will
but deliver them: but how few can say with David, I have kept, I have not
departed from thy Judgments! Of old time, says God, I have broken thy yoke,
and burst thy bonds, and thou said, I WILL NOT transgress; Jer. 2.20
when upon every high hill, and under every green tree thou wanderest, playing
the harlot. Good words in trouble, but poor performance out of trouble: no
sooner out of affliction, but they fall again to their old trade of spiritual
Adultery against God: no sooner their old hearts and their old temptations
meet, but they close, and embrace one another; they started aside like a broken
bow: I, but David was taught of God, and therefore he is as careful to make good
his vows, as to make good vows; I will pay thee my vows, which my lips have
uttered, Psalm. 66
and my mouth has spoken, when I was in trouble. The after part of David's life
was much more severe and exact then the former: I have not departed from thy
Judgments, for thou have taught me.

These are the properties of Divine Teachings: but lest I should lay a snare
before the blind, and make the heart sad which God would not have made sad; I
must of necessity lay in a few brief Cantions.

When we say God teaches 1. Inwardly. 2. Clearly. 3. Experimentally. 4.
Powerfully. 5. Sweetly. 6. Abidingly.
It is not so to be understood: Cantions.


First, 1. God teaches not all at first.
As if God taught All at first, viz. either All Truths, or All of any truth:
God does not teach all his Lessons at the first entrance into the School of
Affliction; at least not usually, (for we dare not limit God:) The fruit of
Affliction is not gathered presently: No chastening for the present seems to
be joyous, but grievous, Heb. 12.11
nevertheless afterward it yields the peaceable fruits of righteousness unto
them which are exercised thereby. Teaching is the fruit of affliction, and
fruit is not gathered presently; it must have a ripening time: And therefore O
thou discouraged Soul, say not God does not teach thee at all, if he do not
teach thee all at once: The entrance of thy Word gives light: God lets in
light by degrees: Usually God teaches his children, as we teach ours, now a
little and then a little; Isa. 28.10
somewhat this week, and more next week; somewhat by this affliction, and more
by the next affliction, and more by a third, etc. It is not to be despised if
God discover to the Soul the need of divine Teaching, and engage the heart in
holy desires, and longings after it; so that the afflicted Soul can say in
sincerity, My Soul breaks for the longing that it has unto thy judgments at
all times. Ps. 119.20


Secondly, 2 Caution, nor all Alike.
When we say, that God teaches whom he chasteneth, and teaches them thus and
thus; it is not to be understood as if he taught All alike: God has several
Forms in the School of Affliction, as well as in the School of the Word: There
be fathers for experience, 1 Ioh. 2.12
young men for strength, and babes for the truth and being of Grace. And
therefore if God have not taught thee so much as another, say not (here again)
he has not taught me at all: As one Star differs from another in glory, so
also is the School of Christ; it is free grace thou art a star, though thou art
not a star of the first or second magnitude; that God has let in some divine
light, though not so much light as another may possibly have. In point of holy
emulation we should look at degrees of Grace; but in point of thankfulness and
comfort we should look at the truth and being of Grace.

Thirdly, When we say, 3 Caution, Divine Teaching does put the Soul into an
unchangeable estate.
that God teaches powerfully and abidingly, it is not to be understood as if
these teachings did put the Soul into an immutable evenness of spirit, or freed
it from all insurrections and disturbances from opposite corruption; such a
frame of Soul is only the privilege of the glorified estate, wherein we shall
see God face to face, and dwell in immutability it self to all eternity: Here
the Church has its fulls and its wains. David had his sinkings, and Job his
impatient fits; We have heard of the patience of Job, yea and of his impatience
too: moved the taught of God may be, but not removed; fall they may, but not
fall away; fearfully, but not finally; terribly, but not totally.

But these things are unseparable to Covenant-Teaching. What is unseparable to
divine teaching. 1. Sense of corruption. Romans 7.23


First, The Soul is thereby made sensible of the least stirrings and
whisperings of corruption: I find a law in my members warring against the law
of my mind: Others have it, but they do not find it, they are not sensible of
the law in their members, etc.

Secondly, 2. They are displeased with themselves.
They are exceedingly displeased with the opposition they find in their
natures against the Teachings of God; and do rise up in indignation against all
that contradiction which is in the unregenerate part, in what kind soever: Why
art thou cast down, O my Soul? and why art thou so disquiet within me? Is there
cause for this despondency? is this done like a David, like a man after Gods
own heart? Is this the fruit of all the experiences of Gods Faithfulness and
All Sufficiency? And so in other cases does the Soul chide down distempers, and
uncomely workings of spirit: the Soul is full of displicency against it self;
so foolish was I, and ignorant, Psa. 73.22.
as a beast before thee: it cannot find words bad enough to give it self.

Thirdly, And if that will not do, 3. They pray down temptation. Psalm. 46 6
then they go to God in prayer, and spread their temptations before the Lord; O
my God, my Soul is cast down within me: When they cannot lay the storm, and
still the tempests by their own word, then (with the Disciples in the ship)
they go and awaken Christ, and desire him by his powerful Word to rebuke them,
that there may be a calm: They go and pray out their distempers, Vir iste
potuit quid voluit.
and pray their hearts into a better frame: as once it was said of Luther, that
when he found distempers upon his spirit, he would never give over praying,
till he had prayed his heart into that frame he prayed for.

Fourthly, 4. Maintain opposition against opposition. Gal. 5.17.
By virtue of the Teachings of God they are enabled to maintain opposition
against all that opposition which they find in their own spirits: As the flesh
lusts against the spirit, so the spirit lusts against the flesh; Ca^o
concu. piscit adversus spiritum si non and spiritus adversus carnem faciunt
adulterium. Aug.
i. e. the spiritual regenerate part does as naturally rise up and make war
against the flesh, and fleshly motions, as the flesh does against the Teachings
of God in the spiritual part: Opposition is not maintained only by precept and
rules, and an extrinsecal policy, but natually, and by virtue of an inward
antipathy; the spirit lusts: The spritual opposition is as suitable and
agreeable to the new Nature, as the sinful opposition is to the old nature.
Hence is the life of a Believer called a wrestling, a warfare, Ephesians. 6.12.

And fifthly, Not only so, but by the help of Divine Teaching the soul gets
ground of that fleshly opposition, wherewith it is molested by degrees. In the
day when I cried, Psa. 138.2
thou answeredst me; and strengthenedst me with strength in my Soul: Prayer
brought in God, and God brought in strength, whereby he got ground of his
distempers; and though all was not done at first, yet his comfort was, all
should be done in Gods time, Verse. 8. The Lord will perfect that which
concerns me: I am not perfect, but I shall be perfected: He that has begun a
good work, will perform it till the day of Jesus Christ. Phil. 1.6.


Sixthly, Though the Soul be not always the same for temper and acting, yet it
is always the same for purpose and design: Then shall I not be ashamed, when I
have respect to all thy Commandments: Though he could not keep all, he could
respect all the Commandments of God: My Soul presses hard after God: Psalm. 63.8
Crowds of opposition intercepted and disturbed his sweet and constant
communion with God: sometimes he brake through that crowd by main strength to
recover Gods presence again; My Soul presses bard after thee: Phil 3.12 13
and Paul is pressing after perfection when he could not overtake it.

Seventhly and lastly, The Soul has not always (possibly) the same relish and
taste of divine Truths and Ordinances, but it has the same estimat: it keeps
up high appreciating thoughts of spiritual things; and when it cannot relish
them, yet even then it does hunger after them.

My Soul breaks for the longings it has unto thy Judgments AT ALL TIMES.
Psalm. 119 20


And yet even in reference to these dispositions, which I call inseparable
concomitants to Saving Teaching, I must add this one Caution in close of all;
namely,

That allowance be made in case of Desertion: A child of God, for causes which
here we cannot stand to mention, may be cast into so deep a state of desertion
(for a time) that he may (as the Apostle speaks) forget that he was purged from
his old sins: 2 Pet. 1.9 Isa. 50.10
A child of Light may walk in Darkness. And though there be no such deliquium
gratiae, no such swoon in the new-man, wherein both habits and acts do cease,
yet they may be so stupefied by the impressions of the present Temptation, as
the poor Soul shall be sensible of neither, but reduced as it were into such a
state, as when grace was but an embrie in the womb; that spiritual life shall
be tantum non extinguit; there may be life, Vivit and est vitae, nescius ipse
suae.
but no sense of that life.

More might be added, but I am sensible how this Discourse swells beyond the
proportion I intended, and therefore I must hasten. Thus much therefore for the
second thing propounded in the Doctrinal part; the nature and properties of
Divine Teaching. I come now to

The third thing propounded, viz. 3 Thing, How affliction lies in order to
divine teaching.
to enquire How Affliction lies in order to Instruction? what tendency
Chastisement has to promote the Teachings of God in the Soul? what use God
makes of Correction to this end?

For it may possibly be demanded, by sin, as by affliction?

He might, does: whence that gloss of Augustine upon Romans 8.28. [All things work
together for good to them that love God, Aug. etiam peccatum ipsum.
] even sin it self; and in as much as he says, All things, it is evident he
excepteth nothing, that does not cooperate for good to the Called according to
Gods purpose: All things do work, but all things do not work alike: Sin works
for good, but it is by absolute Omnipotence, by pure Prerogative; for sin is
properly the Devils creature, and in its own natural tendency works merely to
destruction: Melius judicavit Deus, de malis been facerequam nulla mala
permittere. Aug.
no thank to sin that any good comes of it; God beats Satan with his own
weapons. But Affliction is an Evil of Gods making, as Amos 3.6. and he has so
tempered the nature of it, and does so ingredient it by his divine skill, that
there is some fitness and disposition in it to serve and promote his own
gracious designs in the children of promise. It is true, there is need of an
arm of Omnipotence to make Chastisement to have a saving influence upon the
heart; and so there does also even in the Word it self, and divine Ordinances:
they do not save ex opere operato, by any intrinsecal virtue, or power of their
own; but yet there is a passive fitness in them to serve Omnipotence for divine
and saving ends; Heb. 4.12 The Word of God is quick and powerful, sharper then
a two-edged sword.
a fitness of instrumentality: as there is in a Saw to cut, and in a wedg to
cleave, etc. The instrument can do nothing alone, but there is a fitness in it
to serve the hand of the workman. And thus it is, in a proportion, with
Affliction; It is true, there is not so immediate and direct a tendency in the
Rod, as there is in the Word, to teach and instruct the children of God; yet
there is in Chastisement a subserviency to prepare the heart of man, and to put
it into a better disposition to close with divine Teaching, then naturally it
is capable of. The hot furnace is Christ's workhouse, the most excellent vessels
of honor are formed therein: Manasseh, Paul, the Jailer, were all chosen in
this fire; as God says, I have chosen thee in the furnace of affliction, Isai.
48.10. Grace works in a powerful, yet in a moral way. God speaks when we are
most apt to hear; congruously, yet forcibly, by a fit accommodation of
circumstances: The fruit of Correction in order to divine teaching. 1. It
takes down pride of heart.
which you may discover in these four particulars.

First, By Correction God takes down the pride of man's heart: there is not a
greater obstruction to saving knowledge then pride and self-opinion, whereby man
either thinks he knows enough, or, that not worth the learning which God
teaches: therefore it is proclaimed before the Word, Hear and give ear, BE not
proud; for the Lord has spoken, Jer. 13.15. In divine matters, as well as
humane, Prove. 13.10
only by pride comes contention: It is pride which raises Objections against
the Word, and disputes the Commands when it should obey them. Ier. 43.2
The proud men in Jeremiah, when they could clude the message of God by his
Prophet no longer, do at length stiffen into downright Rebellion: first they
shift, Thou speak falsely, etc. Verse 2
and then they resolve, As for the Word that thou have spoken to us in the Name
of the Lord, Cap. 44.16
we will not harken unto thee, etc. q. d. be it Baruch, or be it God, we will
have none of it; but we will certainly do whatsoever goes forth out of our own
mouth, etc. Such a masterpiece of obduration is the heart of man, that it
stands like a mountain before the Word, and cannot be moved, till God come with
his instruments of affliction, and digging down those mountains (as it is
proclaimed before the Gospel, Luke 3.5.) casts them into a level; and then
God may stand, as it were, upon even ground, and talk with man. This pride of
heart speaks loud in the wicked, and whispereth even in the godly; it is a
folly bound up even in the hearts of Gods children, till the Rod of Correction
drives it out; and the stomach broken, the poor bleeding wretch cry out Lord,
what will thou have me to do?

Secondly, 2. It softeneth the heart.
Affliction is Gods forge wherein he softens the iron heart: There is no
dealing with the Iron while it remains in its own native coldness and
hardness; put it into the fire, make it red-hot there, and you may stamp upon
it any figure or impression you please: Job 65.10
God makes my heart soft, says Job: melted vessels are impressive to any
form. So it is with the heart of man; naturally it is colder and harder then
the northern iron; and that native induration is much increased by prosperity,
and the patience of God toward sinners: the iron sinew will rather break then
bend: It is the hot furnace only which can make it operable and impressive to
Gods Counsels: which course therefore God resolves on; I will melt them and
try them, Jer. 9.7. and sometimes God is forced to make the furnace seven times
hotter, to work out that dross which renders men so unformable to the Ministry
of the Word, while God sends his prophets, rising up early, and sending them;
and yet they will not incline their ear, but harder their necks against divine
Instruction.

When the earthly heart of man is so dried and hardened by a long sunshine of
prosperity, that the plough of the spiritual Husbandman cannot enter, Psa. 65.10
God does soften it with showers of adversity, makes it capable of the
immortal seed, and blesses the springing thereof: The seed falls upon stony
ground, till God turn the stone into an heart of flesh.

Thirdly, 3 It makes man attentive to God.
By Chastisement man is made more attentive unto God: In prosperity the world
makes such a noise in a man's ears, that God cannot be heard; Job 33.14
He speaks indeed once and twice, again and again, very often; yet man
perceives it not: he is so busy in the crowd of worldly affairs, that God is
not heeded. In the godly themselves there is much unsetledness and giddiness of
mind; naturally our thoughts are vain and scattered, the spirit sl^ppery and
inconsistent, which is a great impediment to our clear and full comprehensions
of spiritual things: And therefore God is forced to deal with man as a father
with his child playing in the marketplace, and will not hear or mind his
fathers call, he comes and takes him out of the noise of the tumult, carries
him into his Counting House, lays him upon his knee with the rod in his hand,
and then the father can be heard: So does God, I say, He opens their ears,
Hebr. He uncovereth their ears, which the Worlds vanity had stopped, and then
instruction will enter. When Joab would not come to Absalom, he sets his field
on fire, 2 Samuel 14.30. And thus after neglects God brings us to treat with him
by affliction: God says as it were, Come, let us reason together; and the Soul
eccho's back again, Speak Lord, for thy servant hears: and when the Soul is
thus silent unto God, He comes and seals Instruction by his Spirit.

Fourthly and lastly, 4. Affliction is an Eye Salve.
Affliction is an Eye Salve, whereby God opens the eye of the Soul to see the
need of divine Teaching, by the discovery of its own brutish ignorance of God,
and of his ways, under all divine Administrations; as Ephraim once bemoaned
himself to the Lord, I have been as a bullock unaccustomed to the yoke: the
Prophet David will English it, So foolish was I, and ignorant, Psa. 73.22
and like a beast before thee: And by means of this discovery God draws out the
heart into humble and holy supplication for Divine Teaching; Job 34.32
That which I see not, teach thou me; and if I have done iniquity, I will do no
more: When or how comes the Sinner thus to put in for Instruction? why, Verse.
31. I have born chastisement: Correction discovered the need of Instruction;
That which I see not, teach thou me: And thus Ephraim, Thou have chastised me,
and I was chastised; but blows alone will not do it: therefore it follows, Turn
thou me, and I shall be turned: though Chastisement could not turn Ephraim, yet
it made him see an absolute necessity of divine power to his conversion; less
then Omnipotence would not serve the turn.

And when God has brought the heart once into this frame, sc. to see, and be
affected with the sense of its own ignorance and impotency, and to lie in the
dust at Gods feet, humbly importuning an effectual Teaching from Heaven; if God
should withhold it, he should fail not his promise only, but his own counsel
and project: in reference to which God cannot lie; but when he has prepared
the heart to pray, Psa. 10 17
He will cause his ear to hear: When God has engaged the heart in holy desires
of saving Instruction, it is not mercy only in God, but faithfulness, to
satisfy the desire of his own Creation: Psalm. 25 8
Good and UPRIGHT is the Lord, and therefore he will teach sinners in the way.

Thus much for the third particular thing propounded for the opening of the
Doctrine: I come now to

The fourth and last, etc. Grounds or Demonstrations of the point.
The Grounds and Demonstrations of the Point. Of which in a few words, and then
I shall come to the Use and Application.

It must needs be a blessed thing when Correction and Instruction meet, if we
consider: 1. The L^ssons which God (...) cheth are so many Blessednesses.


First, The Lessons themselves which God teaches his Ephraim's in the School
of Affliction: ex^gra. Is it not a blessed thing to be taught how to
compassionate them that are in a suffering condition? yea, ^aith the Psalmist,
Blessed is he that considers the poor, the Lord will deliver him in time of
trouble, the Lord will preserve him, Psa. 41.1, 2
and keep him alive, and he shall be blessed upon earth, etc. he is blessed, and
he shall be blessed, not in heaven only, but upon earth also; and that with a
multiplied blessing: see a troop follows: Thou will not deliver him unto the
will of his enemies; the Lord will strengthen him upon the bed of his
languishing; make all his bed in his sickness: oh the blessedness of a
compassionate heart toward afflicted ones! how easy must that bed be which
God makes? And, 2ly, is it not a blessed thing to know how to value our
earthly comforts without doting upon them? to be thankful and yet not to
surfeit? blessed is he that fears always, i. e. that fears a snare in all
his earthly contentments: And, 3ly, if it be a blessedness to be conformed to
Jesus Christ, then surely self-denial is a lesson which will make one blessed;
If any man will be my disciple, let him deny himself and follow me, says our
Savior Matthew. 16.24. And, 4ly, Blessed are the poor in Spirit, for theirs is
the Kingdom of heaven, Mat. 5 3, 5
and blessed are the meek for they shall inherit the earth: if heaven and earth,
can make one blessed, then Humility is a blessed Lesson. And so it is, 5ly, To
have our hearts discovered to our selves; corruption is matter of humiliation,
but sight and sense of corruption is matter of comfort and rejoicing: it is a
miserable thing indeed to be poor and not to see ones poverty, Thou say thou
art rich, Rev. 3.17
but know not that thou art poor and miserable; but happy is that man to
whom the Lord first discovers the hidden corruption of his heart, and then
teaches him to mourn over it; Mat. 5.4
blessed are they that mourn for they shall be comforted. 6ly, A man is never in
a happier condition, then when his heart is in a praying frame: It is a mercy
with a note of observation; Acts 9.11
Behold he prays: a man is never miserable but when he cannot pray. And, 7ly,
what think ye of the Word? surely he is a blessed man that by affliction is
brought acquainted with his Bible which is nothing else but a treasury and
Magazeen of blessings: blessed is the man whom thou chastisest, O Lord, and
teach him out of thy Law: it is your text, and the first Psalm is your
comment, His delight is in the Law of the Lord, and in his Law does he meditate
day and night, v. 2. And 8ly, blessed are they whom the Lord teaches to clear
out their evidences for heaven, to give all diligence to make their calling and
election sure, 2 Pet. 1.10 11
for so an abundant entrance shall be administered unto them into the everlasting
Kingdom of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ; when others shall but creep to
heaven as it were upon all four, they shall ride as in a triumphant charet into
the gates of the New Jerusalem. 9ly, Blessed are they, who weep over their
grievings of Gods Spirit, for God shall wipe off those tears from their eyes;
and He will comfort them whom they have grieved. And, 10ly, what is the
blessedness of heaven it self, but Communion with God! 11ly, The exercise of
Grace. 12ly. The Life of Faith. 13ly. Trust in God that raises the dead, and
calls things which are not as though they were: 14. a clearer discovery of Gods
Excellencies; what are these but heaven begun on this side heaven, glory
antidated! John 17.3
This is life eternal to know thee: our Savior says not, it shall be life
eternal, but it is; eternal life is begun already where these things be. In
the fiftteenth, and sixteenth place, to be taught the Duties and Privileges of
a suffering condition, is a blessed Teaching, for hereby the soul is enabled to
taste and see what is good and sweet in every affliction, and is set above all
that which is grievous and intolerable to Nature; for this cause we faint not,
etc. 17ly, The unum necessarium, the one only thing necessary, must
necessarily be a blessed thing: It is, says our Savior, Luke 10 42
the better part which shall not be taken away. 18ly, The Art of
Time-Redemption, is a blessing, not less then an evidence of Soul-Redemption;
if ye compare the first Epistle of Peter, Chap. 1. verse. 17, and 18. together.
19ly, Ask S. Paul, and he will tell you, that the knowledge of the sufferings of
Jesus Christ is an excellent knowledge, in comparison of which all other things
are loss and dung, Phil. 3.8, 9, 10. And lastly, To long for Heaven, is the
very first fruits of Heaven; the evidence and seal of our conjugal CONTRACT
with Jesus Christ; The Spirit and the BRIDE say, Rev. 22.17
Come Lord Jesus. Eruditur ad b^atitudinem. Greg. Moral.
Behold Christians, to be taught of God when chastised by him, is a Blessedness
compounded of twenty several precious ingredients: At least if ye will take in

The Nature and Properties of divine Teaching; 2 Demonst. The Properties of
Divine Teaching make up real blessedness.
which may make a second Demonstration; that is to say, to be taught all these;
1. Inwardly. 2. Clearly. 3. Experimentally. 4. Powerfully. 5. Sweetly. 6.
Abidingly.


This must needs be a blessed teaching; It being a Teaching which does possess
the Soul of the excellencies which it discovers. Doctrinal and notional
knowledge is a blessing: Blessed (says Christ to his Hearers) are your eyes,
Mat. 13.16
for they see, and your ears, for they hear: I, but it is but an occasional,
preparatory blessedness, blessedness in the offer and opportunity; Oh but to be
taught these Lessons with these qualifications; to be taught as the truth is in
Jesus; 2 Cor, 3. last
to be taught into the nature and image of the truth; to be taught into the
possession of divine excellencies; this is blessedness indeed; blessedness in
Being; full, perfect, fruitional blessedness.

A third Demonstration, 3 Demonst. They are fruits of Gods distinguishing love.


A Teaching Chastisement is the fruit of Gods distinguishing Love.
Chastisements (simply considered in themselves) lie in common to all the sons
and daughters of Adam since the Fall; the fruit of that first apostasy, as well
as of actual and personal departures from God: yea and deliverance also, lies
in common: Providence dispenses Deliverance to the worst of men: The 106 Psalm
is a Psalm of Promises, made to the Church; but the next Psalm, the 107, is a
Psalm of Providential Dispensations to the World; and there, as you find
affliction, so you may find deliverance also out of those afflictions, to be
the portion of wicked men; Rebels, Verse. 11. and Fools, Verse. 19, 20. ( i. e.
wicked fools, Solomon's fools all along the Proverbs,) Seamen, Verse. 23. (for
the most part, not the most religious order in the world;) all these are
delivered out of their troubles: The worst of men, I say, share in this fruit
of Gods Providential Goodness, Deliverance; but a teaching sanctified
affliction is the privy seal of special love, Psa. 89.33
My LOVING KINDNESS will I not take from him: whom the Lord LOVES he chasteneth;
Heb. 12.6
that is to say, with a teaching chastisement: when Word and Rod meet together,
when Correction and Instruction kiss each other, they are the fruit of paternal
affection, and therefore must needs have a blessing bound up in them. Deuteronomy. 8.5
As a man chasteneth his son, so the Lord chasteneth thee.

Fourthly, 4 Demonst. It is a branch of the Covenant of Grace. Isai 54.13 Ier.
31.33
A Teaching-Correction is a branch of the Covenant of Grace, which God has
made in Christ for the Children of Promise; All thy children shall be taught of
God: They shall all know me from the least of them to the greatest. by virtue
of Divine Teaching Affliction is adopted to be a clause in the Covenant of
Grace. That 89 Psalm is a Song of the New Covenant; I will sing of the mercies
of the Lord, Verse. 1. what mercies? not providence mercies only, but promise
mercies, Covenant mercies; verse. 3. I have made a Covenant with my my chosen:
And amongst the rest of the branches of the Covenant you shall find the rod and
the whip have their place, Ver. 30, 31, 32. If his children forsake my Law, and
walk not in my judgments, etc. Then will I visit their Transgression with the
rod, and their iniquity with stripes: Behold rod and stripes standing here, not
upon Mount Ebal, the Mount of curses, as branches of a Covenant of Works, but
upon Mount Geriz^m, the Mount of Blessings, Deuteronomy. 11
as branches of the Covenant of Grace. Affliction is not so much threatened as
promisd to Christ's seed: My Cov^nant will I not break, ver. 34. When God seems
even to break the bones and hearts of his people by sore and heavy strokes of
correction, yet he does not break his Covenant, My Covenant will I not break:
it is in order to the Covenant when God chastises his children, and instructs
them by his chastisements. Affliction separated from instruction is pure wrath,
a blast from Mount Ebal, Deuteronomy. 28. but by a matrimonial Covenant those two
Scriptures [ Psalm. 89.32. I will visit, etc. and Isai. 54.13. I will teach,]
are married together, and made one spirit (as in my Text,) and then they are
pure grace. The Covenant is the Magna Charta of Heaven, and contains a list of
what ever God the Father has purposed, God the Son has purchased, and God the
Holy Ghost does apply to the Heirs of promise. The breasts of the Covenant run
nothing but the milk of spiritual blessing to the children of God.

Fifthly, 5 Demonst. The purchase of Christ's Death.
A Teaching-affliction is the purchase of Christ's death and bloodshed: Christ
dyed not to exempt his redeemed from suffering, but to sanctify their
sufferings with his own blood: I pray not that thou should take them out of
the world, Ioh. 17.15
but that thou should keep them from the evil: whatsoever Christ purchased,
he prayed for; and this was one main privilege, not freedom from the evil of
affliction, but from the evil of sin; Sanctify them with thy Truth, Verse. 17.
Gods Teachings are sanctifying Teachings, Sanctify them with thy Truth, thy
Word is Truth: Christ's blood purchased nothing but blessings.

Sixthly, and lastly, 6 Demonst. It is the result of all Christ's Offices.
A Teaching-affliction is the result of all the Offices of Jesus Christ: As a
King he chastens; as a Prophet he teaches; and as a Priest he has purchased
this grace of his Father, that the Rod might blossom; that Correction might be
consecrated for Instruction unto the redeemed: Behold, a sanctified affliction
is a cup whereinto Jesus Christ has wrung and pressed the juice and virtue of
all his Mediatory Offices; surely that must be a cup of generous and royal
wine, like that in the Supper, a Cup of blessing to the people of God.

And thus I have finished the fourth particular propounded for the clearing and
confirming of the Doctrine, sc. the Grounds and Demonstrations of the point;
and with it the whole Doctrinal part of this great and blessed Truth, namely,
That it is a blessed thing when CORRECTION and INSTRUCTION, WORD and ROD go
together.

I come now to the Use, for the improvement of the point. And it may serve for
Information, Exhortation.


First, For Information, and that in these particulars.

First, Affliction alone cannot evidence a man to be blessed.
If they only be blessed whom God chasteneth and teaches; then Affliction
alone is not enough to evidence a man to be an happy man: no man is therefore
blessed because he is chastened: blows alone are not enough, Ier 31.18
either to evince or to effect a state of blessedness: Thou have chastised me,
and I was chastised, cries repenting Ephraim; q. d. I have had blows enough,
if blows would have done me good: nay, but under all the strokes and smitings
of thy displeasure, I have been as a bullock unaccustomed to the yoke;
unteachable and untractable; thou have drawn one way, and I have drawn another;
thou have pulled forward, and I have pulled backward; all thy chastisements
have left me as they found me, brutish and rebellious: Surely blows only may
break the neck sooner then the heart: They are in themselves the fruit of
divine wrath, a branch of the curse, and therefore cannot possibly of
themselves make the least argument of Gods love to the Soul. Bastards have
blows as well as Children, and Fools because of their transgression are
afflicted. Ps. 107.17
And yet it is very sad to consider that this is the best evidence that the
most of men have for Heaven; because they suffer in this world, they think they
shall be freed from sufferings in the World to come; and because they have an
hell here, they hope they shall escape Hell hereafter, they hope they shall not
have two hells: yes poor deluded Soul, thou may have two Hells, and must have
two Hells without better evidence for Heaven: Cain had two Hells, and Judas had
two Hells, and millions of reprobate men and women have two Hells; one of this
life, in torments of body, and horror of conscience; and another of the life to
come, in unquenchable fire: and so I say shall thou, unless thou get better
evidence for Heaven, then the present misery which is upon thee: the plagues
and evils which are upon thee may be but the beginnings of sorrows: pain now in
the body may be but a forerunner of torments hereafter in thy Soul: thou may
have a prison on Earth, and a dungeon in Hell; thou may now want a crum of
bread, and hereafter a drop of water; thou may now be the reproach of men,
Isai. 66.24 Prove. 1.24
and hereafter the scorn of men and Angels, and of God himself; And therefore
be wise to Salvation, by working it out with fear and trembling, Phil. 2.12 2
Pet. 1.10
and giving all diligence, make your Calling and Election sure. God forbid that
a man should take that for his security from Hell, which may be but the
prelibations of Hell, the pledge and aggravation of endless misery.

Why, but does not the Scripture say, Whom the Lord loves he chasteneth, and
scourges every son whom he receives? And again, Heb. 12.6
As many as I love, I rebuke and chasten? Rev. 3.19


Yes: but mark I beseech you; though the Scripture says, Whom the Lord loves
he chasteneth, chasteneth he loves: Though it says, He scourges every son
whom he receives, it does not say, whomsoever he scourges he receives him as
a son: Christ says, As many as I love, I rebuke and chasten; but he says not,
As many as I rebuke and chasten, I love. These Scriptures include children, but
they do not exclude bastards: they tie chastening to sonship, but not sonship
to chastening: the sons are chastened; but all the chastened are not,
therefore, sons: the beloved are rebuked, but all that are rebuked are not,
consequently, beloved.

But that place in Job 5.17. seems to say as much, Behold, happy is the man
whom God corrects.

It is true; but one Scripture must interpret another; David must expound
Eliphaz: Happy is the man whom God corrects, i. e. when instruction goes
along with correction, when chastisement and teaching accompany one another:
Blessed is the man whom thou chastenest, O Lord, and teach him out of thy
Law. The Scripture does not usually give things their names, but when they are
made up of all their integrals: Who so fendeth a wife, finds a good thing,
Pro. 18.22
and obtains favor of the Lord; i. e. a wife made up of Scripture
qualifications: otherwise a man may, and many men do, find a plague in a wife,
and has her from the Lord in wrath, and not in love: Every married woman is
not a wife; a bad woman is but the shadow of a wife: And so here in this case,
etc.

Indeed chastening and affliction is an opportunity of mercy, a may-be to
happiness, but not (singly) an evidence of happiness: lay no more upon it then
it will bear; it is an opportunity, improve it; it is no more, do not trust it.

Secondly, 2 Branch of Informat. Afflictions conclude not a man miserable.
This Doctrine informs us thus much, sc. that as affliction simply considered,
is not enough to make or evidence a man to be happy, so neither is it
sufficient to conclude a man to be miserable: No man is therefore miserable
because afflicted. It may prove a teaching affliction, and then he is happy:
And yet this is another mistake among men: And that 1. In reference to others.
2. In reference to our selves.


1. In reference to others: People are very prone to judge them wretched whom
they see afflicted: it was the miserable mistake of Jobs friends to conclude
HIM miserable because smitten, cursed because chastened.

2. In reference to our selves; it is a merciless mistake, sometimes even of
Gods own children, to sit down under affliction, especially if sore and of long
continuance, and conclude, God does not love them, because he does correct
them. It seems to be the very case of the believing Hebrews; they judged
themselves out of Gods favor, Heb. 12
because under Gods frowns: not at all beloved, because so greatly afflicted;
under many and sore persecutions, as you may see, Chap. 10.32, 33, 34. And
therefore it is that upon which the Apostle (after he presented them with a
large catalogue and list of the primitive Martyrs before Christ, in the
eleventh Chapter) bestows the twelve first verses of the twelfth Chapter, sc.
to prove by reasons drawn from nature, etc. instances taken out of Scripture;
the first whereof is that unparalleld and astonishing instance of Je^us Christ,
the firstborn, the Unum habuit Deus filium sine flagitio, nullum sine flagello.
Son of Gods loves and delights: I say, to establish this as a Conclusion of
unquestionable verity, namely, That Gods LOVE and Gods ROD may stand together.
The truth is, my Brethren, there is nothing can make a man miserable but sin:
It is sin that poisons our afflictions: The sting of death is sin: 1 Cor. 15 56
and so we may say of all other evils, which militate under Death as Soldiers
under their General; The sting of sickness is sin; and the sting of poverty is
sin; and the sting of imprisonment and banishment is sin: and sic in caet. Take
the sting out, which is purchased by the blood of Christ, and evidenced by
Divine Teaching, and they cannot hurt nor destroy in all Gods holy mountain,
Isai. 11.4. And therefore let no children of God be rash to conclude hard
things against themselves, and take heed of making evidences of Wrath where God
has made none. Let Christians on both sides look further then the affliction
it self; the Holy Ghost having long since determined this controversy by a
peremptory decision: Eccles. 9.1
No man knows either love or hatred by all that is before them; i.e. no man
can make a judgment, either of Gods love or hatred toward him, by any of these
outward Dispensations. He causes his Sun to shine upon the evil, Mat. 5.45
Bonis brevibus mala aeterna, and malis brevibus bona aeterna succedunt.
Lactant. Div. Inst.
and upon the good; and sends rain on the just, and on the unjust: The sun of
prosperity shines upon the dunghill as well as upon the bed of spices; and the
rain of adversity falls upon the fruitful garden as well as upon the barren
wilderness: he judges truly of his estate, that judges by the Word, and not
by Providence: Evidences of Grace consist in inward impressions, not in outward
dispensations.

Thirdly, 3 Branch Informat. Deliverance not enough to argue a man happy.
That Deliverance out of trouble is not enough to evidence or make a man happy:
It is not said, Blessed is the man whom thou chastenest, O Lord, AND DELIVEREST
HIM out of trouble; but, Blessed is the man whom thou chastenest and teach:
A man may get rid of the affliction, and yet miss of the blessing. All the
bread which men may eat without the sweat of their brows is not therefore
hallowed; abundance may flow in without labor, and yet not without a curse. A
woman may be delivered from the pain of child bearing, and yet lie under the
curse of childbearing: an easy travel is not an infallible symptom of a
state of reconciliation: 1 Timothy 2.15
If there be not faith in Christ, who has born, and born away, the Curse; a
speedy and easy deliverance is no more then God indulgeth the bruit creatures;
for by him the Hindes do calve, and the wild Asses bring forth their young:
Hos. 9.14 Calvin understands it as a prayer for them, not an imprecation
against them; hic coram Deo, se off^rt (...) quasi deprecatorem. In Loc.
A miscarrying womb may be a mercy, when a mature and facile birth may be in
judgment. A man may leave his chains and his blessing behind him in prison;
and the fire of a Fever may be extinguished, when the fire of Hell is
preparing for the sinner. It is good to be thankful for, but extremely
dangerous to be contented with, a bare deliverance. I shall conclude this
branch with this note, which alone might have stood for a distinct observaetion
or corollary, That those prayers in troubles are not best heard which are
answered with deliverance; but those prayers are best heard which are answered
with instruction. Even of our blessed Savior it is said, In the days of his
flesh he offered up prayers and supplications with strong crying. and tears,
unto him that was able ta^ save him from death, and WAS HEARD, Sancti ad
salutem per omnia ex audiuntur, sed non ad voluntatem. Aug. in Epist. Johan.
tract. 6.
in that he feared, Hebr. 5.7. How was he heard? not in that, save me from this
hour, Joh. 12.27. but in that, Father glorify thy name, Verse. 28. not in
deliverance, but in instruction; for, for that he gives thanks, Psalm. 16.7.
(...) will bless the Lord who has GIVEN ME COUNSEL; My REINS ALSO INSTRUCT ME
in the night season. His Father taught him and strengthened him (verse. 8.9, 10,
11.) in his passion, and this was the hearing of his supplications. That is the
best return of prayers which works our good, when not our wills; and when God
does not answer in the Letter, if he answer in the Better, we are no losers by
our prayers: even Etiam daemones exaudi^isunt, and ad porcos quos petiveranti
remissi sunt Idem.
Devils themselves are heard to the letter, when his own son is not: yet heard,
in that be feared; and therefore when we have prayed, let us refer it unto God
to determine the answer.

Fourthly, 4 Branch Informat. How to judge of our afflictions and deliverances.
Hence we may learn ^ow to judge of our afflictions, and of ^ur deliverances
from them: and it may serve in stead of an Use of Ex^mination: by this, I say,
we may know, when our sufferings come in wrath, and when in love. You need not
(as the Scripture speaks in another case) say, Who shall ascend up into Heaven,
to look into Gods book of Life and Death? or who shall descend into the deep,
the deep of Gods secret Counsels, to make report hereof unto us? But what says
the Scripture? the Word is nigh thee: the word of resolution, to this enquiry,
it is nigh thee, even in thy mouth, and in thy heart; that ^s to say, if thou
can evidence this to thine own soul. That Instruction ^ath accompanied
Correction, That God has taught thee as well as cha^tened thee, thou art a
blessed man, thou shall be saved: thou have the Word of him who is the Author
of blessedness, and BLESSEDNESS IT SELF; Blessed is the man whom the Lord
chasteneth, and teaches him out of his Law.

And therefore peruse, I beseech you, that model of divine Instructions or
Lessons, presented to you in the Doctrinal part of this Discourse, either at
large, in those twenty particulars; or in the abridgment, the three great
heads, to which they were reduced. And then, withal, set before your eyes
those six Preperties of Divine Covenant-Teaching, and compare your hearts and
those Lessons together: Ask your own Souls, Has God taught you those Lessons,
or any of them? 1. Inwardly, 2. Convincingly, 3. Experimentally, 4. Powerfully,
5. Sweetly, 6. Abidingly, (for even an hypocritical Ahab can humble himself for
a time, walk in sackloth, and go softly; a bulrush can hold down its head for a
day.) And if the Spirit of God can bear witness to thy spirit, that thou art
thus taught, happy art thou; bless the Lord, for the Lord has blessed thee;
thou may sing David's song, I will bless the Lord who has given me Counsel;
my Reins also instruct me in the night season: Psalm. 16.7
And again, I know Lord thy Judgments are right, and that of faithfulness thou
have afflicted me. If I had been less afflicted, I had been less blessed.

But now on the other side, when there is no Interpreter to accompany
affliction, to show unto man the meaning of the Almighty in his chastisements;
when there is not a divine sentence in the lips of Correction; when the rod is
dumb, A dumb rod is a great judgment.
or the creature deaf, and cannot hear the Rod, and who has appointed it; it
is much to be feared, the stroke is not the stroke of Gods children. O my
Brethren, it is sad when men come out of affliction the same they went in; when
affliction leaves them as it found them; as ignorant as unhumbled, as
unsensible of sin as bowelless toward their suffering Brethren, as worldly as
proud, as impatient as unsavory, as much strangers to Christ and their own
hearts, as regardless of Eternity: In a word, as fit for sin as they were
before: This, I say, is exceeding sad. And yet it is much sadder, when it may
be said of a man, as once it was said of Ahaz, In the time of his distress he
did trespass yet more against the Lord: 2 Chro. 28 22
It was an aggravation of wickedness, concerning which we may say, as our
Savior of the Alabaster box poured on his head; Where ever the Scripture shall
be preached in the whole world, there shall also this which this man did be
published; THIS IS THAT KING AHAZ. Surely it is a standing monument of reproach
and infamy unto him to all generations. Christians, it is sad and dangerous
beyond all expression when affliction serves but as a gage to give vent to the
pride and murmur, the atheism and enmity, which is in men's spirits, against the
Lord; when afflictions are but as oil to irritate corruption, and make it blaze
more fiercely; to continue in wonted sins, against such insensible and real
proclamations to desist, is professed rebellion against God: an heavy
indictment which the Prophet brings against Jerusalem; Ier. 5.3.
Thou have stricken them, but they have not grieved; thou have consumed them,
but they have refused to receive correction: they have made their faces harder
then a rock, they have not refused to return. In such cases it is to be feared,
the cup of affliction is a vial of wrath, and the plagues of this life nothing
else but some previous drops of that storm of fire and brimstone wherein
impertinent sinners shall be scorched and tormented for ever.

That Scripture speaks dreadfully to this purpose, Jer. 6.28.

They are all grievous revolters, walking with slanders; they are all
corrupters: The bellows are burnt, the lead is consumed of the fire; the
Founder melts in vain; for the wicked are not plucked away: Reprobate silver
shall men call them, because the Lord has rejected them. They are all grievous
revolters,] i. e. as the Prophet Isaiah expounds it, Isai. 1 5 (...) additis
defectionem.
ye revolt more and more; Heb. They increase revolt, walking with slanders;
they do not only revolt, but slander those that reprove their revolting; They
hate him that reproves in the gate: Amos 5 10
they slander the Prophets, and their words; nay, God himself does not escape
the lash of their tongues: they say, Ezekiel. 18
The way of the Lord is not equal; when they should condemn their own ways,
they censure Gods, The way of the Lord is not equal. They are brass and iron,]
They would pass for silver and gold, a sincere and holy people, while they are
a degenerate and hypocritical generation. They are all corrupters, Micah 9.9
] They have deeply corrupted themselves; they have corrupted all their doings;
Z^ph 3.7 Mal. 2.8.
they have corrupted the Covenant of Levi, sc. the worship, the ordinances, the
truths of God. The bellows are burnt in the fire, i. e. The Lungs of the
Prophets, which have preached unto them in the name of the Lord, rising up
early, and lifting up their voices like trumpets, to tell Israel their
transgressions, and the house of Jacob their sins, and stretching forth their
hands unto them all the day long, they are spent. The Lead is consumed,] i. e.
All the melting judgments and chastisements, which (as Lead is cast into the
furnace to make it the hotter) God added to the Ministry of the Prophets, to
make the Word more operative, they will do no good. All this while, The Founder
melts in vain] whether God the Master-Founder, or the Prophets, Gods
Co-founders, or fellow-workmen, as the Apostle calls them; they all melt in
vain: 2 Cor. 6.1
all their labor is lost; neither word, nor rod, neither judgments nor
ordinances, can stir them; they refuse to receive correction, they will not be
taught Men will god the hearing, but are resolved on their own courses.
. The wicked are not plucked away: They are the same that ever they were; the
swearer is a swearer still, and the drunkard is a drunkard still, and the
unclean person is unclean still; Isai. 32.6
The vile person will speak villainy, and his heart will work iniquity, to
practice hypocrisy, and to utter error against the Lord: the unjust are unjust
still, and the ignorant are ignorant still; nothing will better them, wicked
they are, and wicked they will be. What follows? a formidable sentence;
Reprobate silver shall men call them] They would be counted silver, but it is
reprobate silver, refuse silver, dross rather then pure metal: and their
hypocrisy shall be made known to all men; Reprobate silver shall MEN call
them; and happy they, if it were but the censure of mistaking men only; nay,
but the Searcher of hearts has no better thoughts of them: men do but call
them so, because God called them so first; Reprobate silver shall men call them,
because the LORD has Rejected them: God has cast them out as the Founder
casts out his dross to the dunghill, and they shall never stand among the
vessels of honor, in whom the Lord will be glorified. A fearful sentence! the
sum whereof is this, That when Teaching goes not along with Correction, when
men come out of the furnace, and lose nothing of their dross, it is a sad
indicium of a reprobate spirit, without timely and serious reflection, nigh
unto cursing. O consider this, you that forget God and his chastisements, lest
he tear you in pieces, Psa. 50.22
and there be none to deliver.

A fifth branch of Information may be to teach us thus much, sc. 5 Branch
Informat. They may be blessed whom the world judges miserable.
That they may be blessed whom the world accounts miserabl: The World judges
merely by outward appearances, and therefore may easily be mistaken: They see
the chastisement which is upon the flesh, and thence conclude a man miserable;
but they cannot discover that divine teaching which is upon the spirit, which
truly rendereth him incomparably blessed. The men of the world are incompetent
judges of the estate and condition of Gods Children: The godly man's happiness
or misery is not to be judged by the worlds sense and feeling, Nemo aliorum
sensu mis^r est s^a suo. Salv. de gub. Dei, lib. 1.
but by his own; it lies inward (save only so far as by the fruits it is
discernable) and the worlds faculty of judging is only outward, made up of
sense and reason: therefore, said the Apostle, The spiritual man judges all
things, yet he himself is judged of no man: that is, he is able to judge of the
condition of the men of the world, but the men of the world are not able to
judge of his condition, because it is above their faculty: the natural man
thinks the spiritual man, under affliction, to be miserable; but the spiritual
man knows the natural man, in the midst of his greatest abundance and bravery,
to be miserable indeed. Therefore may the Saints in their troubles think it,
with Saint Paul, 1 Cor. 4 3
a very small thing to be judged of man's judgment: This is but (...), of man's
day.
man's day of judging; so the word signifies: Gods day is coming when things
and persons shall be valued by another census, or rate. Christ in his day shall
judge not after the sight of the eyes, i.e. not as things appear to sense and
reason; nor after the hearing of the ears; i. e. according to the report of the
world: but with righteousness shall he judge; i. e. He shall judge of things and
persons as they are, and not as they appear. Interim, this is also another
comfort: We have the mind of Christ, 1 Cor. 2. last. (...)
the judgment of Christ, by virtue whereof we are enabled (in our measure) to
judge of things and persons, as Christ himself judges.

A sixth branch of Information: 6 Branch Inso^m. To show the wisdom, power, and
goodness of God.
Is Chastisement a blessing when accompanied with Instruction? See then, and
admire, the Wisdom, Power and Goodness of God, who can make his people better
by their sufferings! Who knows how to ferch oil out of the scorpion, to extract
gold out of clay? to draw the ^ichest wine out of gall and wormwood? that can
turn the greatest evil of the body to the greatest good of the Soul? the Curse
it self into a Blessing? that can make the withered rod of affliction to bad,
Isai. 27.9
yea to bring forth the peaceable fruits of righteousness to them that are
exercised thereby? Behold I show you a mystery: Sin brought Affliction INTO the
world, and God makes By this shall the iniquity of Jacob be purged, and this is
all the fruit to take away his sin.
Affliction to carry sin OUT of the world. Persecution is but the pruning
Christ's Vine, etc. The Almond tree is made fruitful by driving nails into it,
Just. Martyr. in Apol.
letting out a noxious gum that hinders the fruitfulness thereof. God never
intends more good to his children then when he seems to deal most severely
with them. Patrium habet Deus adversus bonos viros animum and illos fortiter
amat. Sen. Our tonis viris mala accidant.
The very Heathen has observed it to us: God does not love his children with a
weak womanish affection, but with a strong masculine love, and had rather they
suffer hardship then perish: Whom the Lord loves, he chasteneth, and scourges
every son whom he receives. God will rather fetch blood, then lose a Soul;
break Ephraims bones, then suffer him to go on in the frowardness of his heart.
Destroy the flesh, that the spirit may be saved in the day of the Lord Jesus. 1
Cor. 11 32 V^ribus res disposita est; lugea. mus itaque dum Ethnici gaudent; ut
cumlagere caeperint. gaudeamus etc. Terr. l. de spectic. c. 28 7 Branch Inform.
Sufferings not dreadful, as Nature apprehends.
We are chastened of the Lord, that we should not be condemned with the world:
His Discipline is made up of severity and love; he does chastise, but he will
teach also, that so his children may inherit the blessing: the discipline is
sharp, but the end is sweet. Bless the Lord O my Soul, and all that is within
me bless his holy Name: Bless the Lord O my Soul, and forget not all his
benefits.

Seventhly, It shows us, That a suffering condition is not so formidable a
thing as flesh and blood does represent it: It is ignorance and unbelief which
slandereth the Dispensations of God, and casts reproach upon the Cross of
Christ. He that heard the words of God, which saw the vision of the Almighty,
having his eyes opened, could by way of holy triumph ask this qu^stion, Why
should I fear in the days of evil? Psalm. 49.5.
q. d. what is there in an afflicted estate so much to be dreaded? let any man
show me a reason, and I will give way to fear and despondency. And that is more
observable which follows; When the iniquity of my heels shall compass me about?
This is an addition of the greatest weight and wonder imaginable: the meaning
is, when my transgressions pursue me so close, that they even tread upon my
heels as it were; when sin it self has brought me into the snare, when God is
correcting me for my iniquities: why truly (Christians) that is the thing which
a child of God does most of all tremble at, to consider that he has sinned
himself into a suffering condition. In sufferings purely Evangelical, viz.
persecution for righteousness sake, a gracious heart can see (many times) more
cause of rejoicing then of perplexity, 1 Pet. 4.13 16 Phil. 1.29
and look upon them as a gift rather then an imposition: but afflictions and
miseries, which sin brings upon a man, seem to be judicial and penal, and carry
a face of wrath rather then of love: I, but observe it, even in these the
Psalm^st can see no just cause of fear; Wherefore should I fear in the days of
evil, when the iniquity of my heels shall compass me about? See, when sin and
sorrows besiege him on every side he is fearless, and knows no reason to the
contrary, unless any one can tell him what it is: How so? surely upon the same
account in my Text, because David had a God that could teach as well as
chastise; and therefore, though sin were as poison in his cup of affliction,
yet divine teaching could antidote that poison, and turn it into a cup of
blessing unto him: Thy rod and thy staff comfort me. Psa. 23 4.


O that the children of God in affliction, or entering upon sufferings, would
sit down and dwell upon this Consideration, The fruit and advantage which God
knows how to bring out of all their sorrows, even the peaceable fruits of
righteousness: This would keep them from uncomely despondencies, and dejections
of spirit: For this cause we faint not (says the Apostle;) for what cause? 2
Cor. 4.16.18
while we look not at the things which are seen, but at the things which are
not seen; that is to say, not at the visible sufferings, but at the invisible
fruit and advantage of our sufferings: This holds up head, and keeps up heart;
and makes the Soul not only to be patient, but to glory in tribulation;
Knowing that tribulation works patience, Romans 5 3, 4, 5 Pericula non respicit
Mar. yr, coronas respicit. Basil ad 40 Martyr.
and patience experience, and experience hope; and hope makes not ashamed,
because the love of God is shed abroad in our hearts by the Holy Ghost which
dwells in us. This is the way to counterpoise the temptation; and in the
conflict between the flesh and the spirit, to come in to the succor of the
better part.

Eighthly, 8 Branch Inform. Why we stay so long under affliction.
It shows us the reason why God does keep some of his people so long under the
Discipline of the Rod. Truly God does not only bring his children into the
School of affliction, but many times keeps them long there: Psa. 125.3
The rod of the wicked indeed shall not (ALWAYS) rest on the back of the
righteous: I, but it may lie long, for months, for years, for many years
together; seventy years were the Jews in the house of Correction at Babylon;
four hundred years in the brick-kils of Egypt: Story and experience will serve
in instances without number. Hence you have the people of God so often at their
How-longs in Scripture: Psalm. 6.3. But thou O Lord, HOW LONG? Psalm. 13.1, 2.
HOW LONG will thou forget me O Lord for ever? HOW LONG will thou hide thy
face from me? HOW LONG shall I take counsel in my Soul? HOW LONG shall mine
Enemy be exalted over me? In this Psalm where my Text is, HOW LONG shall the
wicked, HOW LONG shall the wicked triumph? twice How long, before he can vent
his complaint; and yet again the third time, HOW LONG shall they utter and
speak hard things? HOW LONG, cries Jeremiah, Ier. 4.21
shall I see the standard, and hear the sound of the trumpet? and Zechariah,
Zech. 1.12
O Lord of Hoasts, HOW LONG will thou not have mercy on Jerusalem, and on the
Cities of Judah? The Souls under the Altar, Revel. 6.10. cry with a loud voice,
i. e. in much anguish and agony, HOW LONG O Lord, holy and true, do thou not
avenge our blood on them that dwell on the Earth? Verily God does keep his
people (sometimes) so long under their pressures, that they begin at length
even to give themselves up to despair, and to conclude they shall never see
deliverance. Thus you find not only the common multitude of the Jews in the
Babylonian captivity, concluding desperately, Our bones are dried, Lam. 3.53
our hope is lost, we are cut off for our parts; dry bones may as well live, as
our captitivity have an end: but even the Prophet Jeremiah himself (whether in
his own person, or in the name of the whole Church I know not) possibly both,)
They have cut off my life in the dungeon, and cast a stone upon me: He seems to
himself to be in the condition of a man that is dead and buried, and the
gravestone rould to the mouth of the Sepulcher: a Metaphor expressing an
hopeless and desperate condition: yea hence it is, that when deliverance is
nigh, they cannot believe it, though a Prophet of God, or an Angel from Heaven,
should report it: Thou shall arise, and have mercy upon Zion; for the time to
favor her, yea the set-time is come, sings the Prophet Daniel, or some other
that lived near the expiration of the seventy years captivity; and yet in the
mean time the Jews reply as before, Our bones are dried, our hope is lost, we
are cut off for our parts; q. d. tell not us of Gods arising, etc. we shall
never see Sion again, we are but dead men: Observe it by the way, They that
would not believe the captivity while it was in the threatening, Hab. 1.5.
would not believe deliverance when it was in the promise; A just judgment upon
them, that that they that would not believe God threatening, should not believe
God promising. But that is not all; Deliverance was so incredible after so long
a captivity, that they could not bleeve it when they saw it: When the Lord
turned again the captivity of Zion, Psa. 126.1
we were like them that dream: They knew not (as it fared with Peter, half
awake, and half asleep, Acts 12.9.) whether it was true, or whether they saw a
vision only: Is this a real deliverance? or are we in a dream only? Our
Savior tells us, that when the Son of man shall come, Luke 18.8
( i. e. with particular deliverances to his Church) he shall not find faith on
the earth: there will not be faith enough in the people of God to believe it,
by reason of the long pressures and persecutions that have been upon them.

Now I say, what is the reason that God suffers affliction to lie so long upon
the backs of his children? Truly one Reason is, because they have lived long in
sin; they have been long a sinning, and therefore God is long a correcting: God
puts them to THEIR How-longs, because they have put God to HIS How-longs. Exodus
6.28. HOW LONG refuse ye to keep my Commandments, and my Laws? HOW LONG will
this people provoke me? and HOW LONG will it be ere they believe? Jerem. 4.14.
HOW LONG shall thy vain thoughts lodge within thee? Hosea 8.5. HOW LONG will
it be ere they attain to innocence? etc. And truly if they have made God
complain of THEIR How-longs, no wonder if God make them complain of HIS
How-longs. But then again, another and the main reason is, because the work is
not yet done; they do not receive Instruction by their Correction, else
affliction would quickly cease. God gives not a blow, he draws not a drop of
blood, more then needs, For a season, 1 Pet. 1.6
if NEED be, ye are in heaviness: if there be heaviness, there is need of it;
and if heaviness continue long, there is need of it. It is not to gratify
their Enemies that God keeps them so long under their lash, but to teach them;
not that God afflicts willingly, Lam. 3.33
etc. but that he may do them good in their latter end; that by the rod of
Correction he may drive out that folly which is in their hearts: And when that
is done, then they shall stay no longer for their deliverance; then God opens
the prison doors, and throws the rod into the fire; and infinite mercy it is,
that they are not delivered till they are bettered; that God will not cease
chastening till they are willing to cease sinning; saying, I have born
affliction, I will offend no more: that which I see not, teach thou me; and if
I have done wickedly, I will do so no more.

Ninthly, 9 Branch Inform. How unteachable we are by nature.
Take notice from hence, what unteachable creatures we are by nature, who will
not set our hearts to receive Instruction till we be whipped to it by the rod of
correction, and hardly then neither: unless God multiply stripes, it is not
multiplying of precepts that will do us good; there must be stripe upon stripe,
and affliction upon affliction, as well as line upon line, and precept upon
precept, or else it is in vain: we are so brutish, with Ephraim, that we make
God spends his rods upon us; and when all is done, God must turn us by main
strength, or else our folly will not depart from us. This is a lamentation, and
should be for a lamentation: We would say, that were a very bad child that will
be taught no longer then the rod is upon his back! such are we; we are so
indocible that we put God to it, as it were to study what methods and courses
to take with us. How shall I do for the Daughter of my people? Ier. 9 7
I will melt them and try them, etc. Well, let us judge our selves, and justify
God.

Tenthly, and lastly, 10 Branch Inform. How much good hearts love Instruction.
It shows us on the contrary, How much gracious hearts are in love with the
Word, for the improvement of their spiritual knowledge wherein, they can put
such an estimate upon their sufferings; and account that their blessing which
other men call their misery: BLESSED is the man whom thou chastenest and
teach. The Psalmist in another place speaks very warmly to this purpose;
It is good for me that I have been afflicted: Ps. 119 71
why? that I might learn thy Statutes: He loves the Word so dearly, that for
the Words sake, he is in love with affliction: The whip, the rod, the prison,
the wilderness, any thing, is precious that brings Instruction with it. Carnal
people can be content to dye in their ignorance, so they might dye in their
nest; whereas gracious hearts think not much to go to School to a Bridewell;
and even while the blood is running down the back, can say, it is good, because
they are taught by it. O the different account that Grace and Nature make of
the same Dispensation! It is proud disdain to scorn to be taught by the lowest
of Gods Ushers: The treasure is precious, Vilis saepe cadus nobile nectar habet.
though in an earthen vessel: There is none too old, none too wise, none too
high, to be put into the meanest School on this side Heaven.

I have done with the use of Information: I come now in the second place to the
Use of Exhortation.

And it is to four sorts of People. 1. Such as are yet free from sufferings.
Use Exhor.
2. Such as are under sufferings. 3. Such as are come out of a suffering
condition. 4. Parents, in reference to their children.


The first branch of Exhortation is to such as through the patience and
forbearance of God are yet free from chastisement and affliction; 1 Branch
Exhort. To them that are free from sufferings.
The Candle of the Almighty does shine in their Tabernacle, and they wash their
steps in butter, etc. Why now, would ye prevent chastisement and keep off the
strokes of divine displeasure from your selves or families? Let me commend unto
you

A twofold Caution from this Doctrine:
1. Study these Lessons well while ye are in the School of the Word.

2. Labor to be instructed by the chastisements and afflictions which you see
upon other men.

First, 1 Caution, To prevent affliction, labor to profit by the Word.
If you would prevent chastisement, study these and the like Lessons well,
while ye are under the Teachings of the Word: Therefore does God send us into
the School of affliction, because we have been non-proficients in the School of
the Gospel: because we will not hear the Word, we force God to turn us over to
a severer Discipline, and to have our ears bored with affliction, and then
says God, now hear the rod, and who has appointed it. O my beloved, labor, I
beseech you, to profit much by the Teachings of Jesus Christ in the Gospel: set
your hearts to all the truths and counsels of God revealed to you therein.
(...). 2 I am. 1.13
The Gospel is the model or platform of sound words, able to make you sound
Christians, wise to Salvation: O let your profiting be made known to all men.
In special, set your hearts to those Instructions or Lessons propounded in the
Doctrinal part of this subject; for the neglect whereof God is fain to send his
people into captivity, that there he may teach them with the briars and thorns
of the wilderness. In particular,

1. Learn, in the time of your peace and tranquillity, to lay to heart the
sufferings of the rest of your brethren that are in the world. Remember them
that are in bonds, as bound with them: Heb. 3.13
Think of them that are in prison, whose feet are hurt in the stocks, and the
irons do enter into their soul, with the very same affection and affliction of
spirit, as if you your selves lay bound in chains by them in the same dungeon;
put your Souls in their Souls steads: and content not your selves with those
loose, and fruitless, and transient glances, which those that are at ease in
Sion do usually cast upon men in misery; Be thou warmed and filled. Iam. 2.16
a cold Lord have mercy on them, and there is an end: Remember them that are in
bonds, as bound with them; and that you may know you are not to confine your
compassion to prisoners only, it follows, And them that suffer adversity, etc.
Learn to sympathize with all the people of God under any adversity whatsoever;
hide not your eyes, and shut not up your bowels of compassion, from any that
are in a suffering condition; and that upon this account, As being your selves
in the body: If the duty respect thy brother, the motive respects thy self;
thou art yet in the body: and while you remain in the flesh, you cannot promise
your selves one hours exemption from troubles; but are exposed to the same
common calamities which attend a state of mortality; as it is an argument of
comfort to them that are in affliction, 1 Cor. 10 13
that their temptations and trials are common to men. God does not single them
out to encounter with unparalleld affliction: so on the other side it is an
incentive to compassion to them that are free, to consider that they are liable
to the same temptations, and therefore should measure out the same compassions
to their suffering brethren, that they would expect in the same trials: not
knowing how soon the cup of trembling may be put into their own hand: to be
sure, insensibleness of other men's miseries will hasten it: They put far away
the evil day; Amos 6.3, 4, 5, 6
they lie upon beds of Ivory, etc. eat Lambs out of he flock, and Calves out of
the stall, etc. drink wine in bowls, etc. i. e. they give themselves up to all
maoner of sensuality, and thereby drown the sense of their brethrens miseries;
they are not grieved for the afflictions of Joseph: they lay not the affliction
of the Church to heart, it never cost them an hours sleep, they abated nothing
of all their sensual excesses; they never turn aside to shed one tear over
bleeding Sion in secret: what follows? why, says God, therefore now shall they
go captive with the first that go captive, Verse 7.
and the banquet of them that stretched themselves shall be removed: as if God
should have said; As I live, because you have not pityed your brethren in
captivity, you your selves shall be led away captive, and the next turn shall
be yours; and there you shall learn by experience, what it is to be plundered,
and what it is to lie in chains; what it is to have cruel Taskmasters set over
you, what it is to want bread; you shall banquet it no more: you shall feel by
sense what you would not feel by sympathy. And therefore, Christians, set your
hearts to the afflictions of the Church and people of God; it is the great duty
which the times call for; and I am afraid God is now visiting England and
London for the neglect of this duty: We are verily guilty concerning our
brethren, in Germany, in Ireland, in England, and Scotland, etc. in that we saw
the anguish of their souls, when they besought us, and we would not hear;
therefore is this distress come upon us: We have not grieved their sorrows, nor
wept their tears, nor sighed their groans, nor bled their blood; and therefore
may fear, lest God should say unto us also, even unto us, With the next that go
into captivity, they shall go into captivity: with the next that are plundered
and spoiled, London shall be plundered and spoiled; with the next that shall be
imprisoned, you shall be taken prisoners; with the next that shall be slain
with the sword, you shall be slain with the sword; you wives shall be made
widows, and your children shall be made fatherless, and your dwellings shall
cast you out, and be left desolate: And therefore let us look to it, and know
in this our day the things of our peace, before they be hid from our eyes: Show
compassion, that you may not need compassion, or, if you need it, you may find
it.

In like manner set your hearts to the other Lessons which God teaches by his
chastisements.

Prize Creature Comforts more, and surfeit upon them less: be more thankful,
and less sensual: especially prize a Gospel while ye have a Gospel; prize it by
its worth, Amos 8.^.
that you may not prize it by the want; prize it that you may keep it, lest you
prize it one day when you cannot recover it: that is a dreadful word, They shall
go with their flocks and with their herds to seek the Lord, Hosea 5.6
but they shall not FIND Him: Amos 8.11
And I will send a famine, not of bread, nor a thirst of water, but of hearing
the Word of the Lord, etc. and they shall run to and fro, Verse 12
to seek the Word of the Lord, and Shall not FIND IT.

Study self-denial, meekness of spirit; labor to discover the hidden
corruptions of your own hearts; be still digging in that dunghill, you will
find it a bottomless pit: The heart is deceitful above all things, Jer. 17.9
and desperately wicked, who can know it? I the Lord search the heart. Oh,
entreat the Lord to discover your hearts to you.

Study Scripture-evidence for your interest in Christ: rest not in any
evidence, which you will not venture your souls upon, if you were to dye this
moment.

Labor to maintain sweet communion with God; to be able to say with the
Apostle, and to say truly, Our communion is with the Father, 1 John 1.3
and with his Son Jesus Christ: Make God your choice, and not your necessity;
and labor to maintain such constant converse with him, that when you dye, you
may change your place only, but not your company.

Live up in the exercise of your grace: add to your faith virtue, to virtue
knowledge, and to knowledge temperance, 2 Pet. 1.5, 6
and to temperance godliness, and to godliness brotherly kindness, and to
brotherly kindness charity: Be adding one grace to another, and one degree of
grace to another, and one exercise of grace to another exercise of grace, that
you may not put God to add affliction to affliction, and sorrow to sorrow:
while others are adding sin to sin, drunkenness to thirst, do you add grace to
grace: Be steadfast and unmovable, always abounding in the work of the Lord, etc.

Acquaint your selves with God, Job 22.21
and good shall come thereby. Study to know God more, and love him better: This
is Life eternal, etc. Joh. 17.3. Then shall we know, if we follow on to know
the Lord. Hosea 6.3


Mind, I beseech you, while you are in your strength and peace, that one thing
necessary: there is but one thing necessary; Hoc age.
there be many may-be's, but one must-be: O take heed of industrious folly, and
disspirit not your selves in the pursuit of trifles; mind your work.

Redeem the time, the days are evil: O that Christians would study the worth of
time; value a day; say of every HOUR, yea of every moment, This is TIME: Redeem
time while you have it: redeem time while time may do you good: Evil days are
coming, wherein you will say, I have no pleasure in them. Yea, the days are
evil; evil with sin, evil with sorrow: redeem the time to do good, to receive
good, that neither you may be the worse for the times, nor the times for you:
Happy shall that man be called, who contributeth not to the heap of the
God-provoking abominations, nor receives impressions from the hypocrisy and
prevarication of the present generation.

Study the sufferings of Jesus Christ: Resolve, with Paul, to know nothing but
Jesus Christ, and him crucified: A due contemplation of the Cross will heighten
Christ's Love, and lessen your own sufferings.

And labor to get your conversation in Heaven: Looking for, and hastening to,
or as the word signifies, 2 Pet. 3 12 (...), etc.
hasting, the coming of Christ: Say, Come Lord Jesus, come quickly.

In a word, brethren, study, and study thoroughly, the Sinfulness of Sin.
Emptiness of the Creature. Fullness of Christ.


And in all these, and the like Lessons, labor for an Inward Convincing
Experimental Powerful Sweet Abiding
Teaching.

Content not your selves, Christians, with a general, slight, superficial,
unsavory, powerless, flitting Knowledge: rest not in notions; be not satisfied
with expressions without impressions; nor with impressions, that are not
abiding impressions; that are like figures written in the sand: this is the
ruin of professors. Those professors, their names shall be written in the
dust, who write divine instructions in the dust: at least, if God have a mind
to do you good, expect that he should send you into the house of Correction,
and there teach you with scourges, and write his Instructions in your blood.

And therefore if you would prevent so severe a Discipline, oh improve your
time well in the School of the Word; while you have the light, John 3.35
walk in the light, lest darkness come upon you: while you sit under the
Teachings of the Gospel, labor to get knowledge answerable to the means, and
grace answerable to your knowledge. Thus much for the first Caution.

I come now to the second Caution. 2 Caution, Labor to profit by other men's
sufferings.


If you would prevent affliction, labor to be instructed by the chastisements
which you see upon other men. God deals with his children as Tutors do with the
children of Princes, whip them upon strangers backs. Thus God scourged Israel
upon the back of the Nations round about: Zeph. 3.6. Zeph. 3.6
I have cut off the Nations, their towers are desolate, I made their streets
waste that none passes by, their Cities are destroyed, so that there is no
man, that there is none inhabitant: SHORT WORK! But their punishment, was
Isreal's Caution; I said, Surely thou will fear me, thou will receive
instruction: The Worlds judgments are the Churches instructions, and God looked
that his people should have made that use of this practical doctrine; I said,
Surely thou will fear me, thou will receive instructions: God had gracious ends
in this dispensation; his severity to strangers, was his tender mercies toward
Israel; he spared not the Nations, that he might have spared them, Verse 7.
so their dwellings should not be cut off: God cut off the Nations, verse. 6.
that he might not cut off Israel; Behold (as the Apostle says in another case,
Romans 11.22.) the goodness and severity of God; severity to the Nations, but
goodness toward Israel; had they continued in his goodness, had they received
instruction by their neighbors destruction. And as God punished Israel upon the
Nations backs, so God punished Judah upon Isreal's back: Ier. 7.12.
Go ye now to my place in Shiloh, and see what I did to it, for the wickedness
of my people Israel: Isreal's chastisements should have b^n Jerusalems
teachings, and by their stripes she should have been healed; for the neglect
whereof God is highly displeased, and speaks concerning this in a very angry
dialect; And I saw when for all the causes whereby backsliding Israel had
committed adultery, I had put her away, and given her a bill of divorce; yet
her treacherous sister Judah feared not, Ier. 3.8.
but went and played the Harlot also. God took it ill, that Jerusalem should
slight the kindness of such a Caution, and despise the counsel which was
written to her in her sisters blood, q. d. I would have made Jerusalem wise by
Samaria's harms, and taught her by a rod which she only saw: but she feared
not; she hardened her heart through unbelief, and either would not understand
the Caution, or dared me to my face to do my worst, while by her shameless
whoredoms she went on to provoke me to jealousy. This hasteneth that judgment
upon her self which she despised on others: Judah must feel Isreal's rod,
because she would not hear it: As Israel must suffer those judgments on the
Nations which she would not improve; by those very Nations by whom she would
not be instructed, she must be destroyed, Zeph. 3.8. So Judah must feel what
she feared not at a distance; she that would not tremble at her sisters
divorce, must suffer divorce her self, and be judged as women that break
wedlock, etc. Ezekiel. 16.38. And bear her own shame for her sins that she had
committed more abominable then they, verse. 52.

Beloved Christians, if we would prevent the like severity, let us take heed of
the like security: God has been a long time scourging England upon Germanies
back, and upon Irelands back, and upon Scotlands back; God has for these many
years scourged London on the back of all the Cities and Counties round about;
and God does daily scourge every one of us in particular upon the back of our
suffering brethren, in diverse kinds; his design is, that we should fear him,
that we should receive instruction: If we altogether fail his expectation, we
may fear that the same rods are preparing for our backs wherewith they have
bled, yea that their rods shall be turned into scorpions to us; we sin worse
then others, when we sin those very sins for which others have been punished
before our faces, and ^^d contempt to their transgressions; and how just will
it be with God, if as we aggravate their sins, so He aggravate upon us their
plagues; we that would not be bettered by Gods warning pieces, should be
destroyed by Gods murdering pieces; that we that would not see and learn,
should feel and perish; Nocumentae documenta.
even particular judgments should be our documents: Remember Lots wife; her
pillar of salt should season our hearts, that when the judgments of God are
abroad in the Earth, we that are the inhabitants, not of the Earth only, but of
Sion also, may learn Righteousness. Even those judgments which the Magistrate
does execute by Gods appointment, are chiefly for caution to standers by, Deu.
13.11
that others may hear and fear, and do no more any such wickedness, etc. How
much more those judgments which the Lord himself does execute? vid. Psalm. 64.7,
8, 9. 2 Pet. 2.6. When the father is correcting one child, the whole family
should fear and tremble. Ier. 7.12.
Go to my place in Shiloh, says God to the Jews, and see what I did to it for
the wickedness of my people Israel. If we would learn by other men's sufferings,
we should prevent our own: This is the way to prevent sufferings.

The Lord make us wise to Salvation.

I come to the second branch of Exhortation. 2 Branch of Exhort. to such as are
under affliction.
sc.

To such as yet lie under affliction, and the chastisements of the Almighty.

Take notice, Take notice of Gods design.
O thou afflicted Soul, what Gods design is in afflicting of thee, and make it
thy design, namely, that thou may be taught, that correction may be turned
into instruction; hear the rod, and who has appointed it. It is the great
mistake and folly of men, that they make more haste to get their afflictions
removed then sanctified: The captive exile hasteneth that he may be loosed, and
that he should not dye in the pit, etc. q. d. men would fain break prison, or
leap (...) the window, before God open (...) But this their way is their folly:
so the following words imply; But I am the Lord thy God that divided the Sea,
whose waves roared, Verse 15.
the Lord of Hosts is his Name; q. d. Men would fain be delivered, but they
take not the right course: Deliverance belongs unto me, I am the Lord thy God
that divided the Sea, and made it a way for my ransomed to pass over, and that
when it was most tempestuous, when the waves thereof roared: When I will
deliver, no obstruction can stand in the way; and yet Israel now in captivity
will not look to me: I am the Lord of Hosts, that have all the Armies in Heaven
and Earth at command; and yet when they are besieged with troubles and dangers,
I cannot hear from them, they run to the creature, and neglect God; or if they
cry to me in their distresses, it is for deliverance only, but not for
teaching, though I have put my words in thy mouth, verse. 16. that is I have
given them my Laws and Statutes, wherein I have made known my design in
affliction, why I send them into captivity, namely, that there I might TEACH
THEM; that I might humble them, and prove them, and make them know what is in
their heart. This is the shortest way to deliverance, and in this path if they
had trod, I would have planted the Heavens, and laid the foundations of the
Earth, verse. 16. even the NEW HEAVENS and the NEW EARTH of Ierusalems
Restoration, and say to Sion, Thou art my people, in the same verse. This is
Cods method wherein he will own his people, and wherein if they meet him, they
shall not stay long for their deliverance.

And therefore be wise, O thou afflicted, tossed with tempest, and not
comforted; Isai. 54.11
be instructed, lest Gods Soul depart from thee; make more haste to be taught,
then to be delivered; and choose rather to have thy affliction sanctified, then
removed.

Consider,
1. That this is Gods design, 1. If we cross Gods project, God will cross ours.
that he might teach thee by his chastisements; and if thou crossest Gods
design, God will cross thy design; if thou will not let God have his end in
instruction, he will not let thee have thy end in enlargement: The only way to
retard deliverance, is to make too much haste to be delivered; and he that
believes will not make haste.

2. Consider, 2. Deliverance is not the Blessing.
That bare deliverance is not the Blessing: I told you before, that deliverance
alone is but the fruit of common bounty; I Will tell you more now: Deliverance
alone may be the fruit of the Curse; a man may be delivered in wrath, and not
in love; Deliverance from one affliction may but make way for another, for a
greater; Affliction may return, like the unclean spirit, with seven more worse
then it self: So God threatens an unteachable people; If by these things ye
will not be reformed, but will walk contrary to me, cross my design in my
chastisements, then will I walk contrary to you, Levit. 26.23, 24.
I will cross your design, and in stead of deliverance, I will punish you yet
seven times more for your sins. The blessing of correction is instruction: O
let not God go till he bless thee. It is a sad thing to have affliction, but
not the blessing of affliction; to feel the wood of the Cross, but not the good
of the Cross; to taste the bitter root, but not the sweet fruit of a suffering
condition; the Curse, but not the Cordial. Truly in such a case one affliction
may not only make way for another, for more, for greater; but affliction here
may make way for damnation hereafter; and as one says wittily, -- by all the
fire of affliction in this world, a man may be but perboild for Hell. And
therefore mind instruction, study the Lessons of a suffering condition, ut sup:
and be importunate for nothing so much as to be taught of God; and to be taught
not with a common teaching, but that special, Covenant, saving teaching, which
changes the Soul into the nature of the Truth, and makes it holy as it is
holy, and pure as it is pure, and heavenly as it is heavenly: He for our
profit, Heb. 12.10
that we might be partakers of his holiness.

Third Branch of Exhortation, 3 Branch of Exhort. to such as are come forth of
affliction.
To them that are come out of affliction and fiery trials: Sit down, Christian,
and reflect upon thy self, turn in upon thine own heart, examine thy self; Have
teachings accompanied chastisements? has the rod budded? cast up thy accounts:
What have thou learned in the School of Affliction? Not to go over the larger
Catechism of those twenty Lessons again, view the abbreviate; Has God
discovered to thee the sinfulness of sin, the emptiness of the creature, the
fullness of Christ? Is no evil like to the evil of sin? Fornicatur anima quae
avertitur abs te and quaerit extra te ea quae pura and liquida non invenit nisi
cum redit ad te. Aug. Confess l. 2. c. 5.
no good like to Jesus Christ? Is the world become an empty vanity, a mockery,
a nothing in thine eyes? Can thou say, it is good I have been afflicted? and
can thou point out that good, and say, This I had, this I have got by my
sufferings; I know divine Truth more inwardly, more clearly, more
experimentally, more powerfully, more sweetly, then ever; it has a more
abiding impression upon my heart? I would speak a word, 1. To them that can
evidence these teachings to their own Souls. 2. To them that cannot.


First, To those who through grace do find the fruit of affliction in the
savory and saving teachings of God upon their hearts; let me by way of
Exhortation commend a threefold duty to you.

1. Three duties.
Study to be thankful. 2. Labor to preserve the teachings of God upon thy
spirit. 3. 1 Duty, Thankfulness. The privileges of being taught as well as
corrected.
Learn to pray for them that are afflicted, and what to pray.
First, Study to be thankful: Has God taught thee as well as chastised thee? O
say with David, What shall I render to the Lord? For consider how great things
God has done for thy Soul.

1. 1. It is more better then deliverance.
God has done more for thee, then if he had never brought thee into affliction
and trouble, or then if he had brought thee out the same day on which he sent
thee in: if he had delivered thee upon the first prayer that ever thou made
in thine affliction, it had not been a comparable mercy to his teachings of
thee by affliction: Prevention and deliverance may be in wrath, ut sup: but God
never teaches the Soul but i^ is in love.

2. 2. It is a double, a multiplied mercy.
God has doubled his mercy and loving kindness to thee, he has commanded
deliverance and instruction too: a twisted mercy; yea, as Deliverance and
Instruction were the return of Prayer, a treble, a multiplied mercy: which
should greatly endear the heart to God, and make it sing with David, I will love
the Lord, Psa. 116.1
because he has heard the voice of my Supplication, upon the return of prayer
in a single deliverance, God expects the return of praise, Call upon me in the
day of trouble, Psa. 50.15
I will deliver thee, and thou shall glorify me; how much more when he wreaths
and twists his mercies one in another? double and treble and multiplied mercy,
calls for double and treble and multiplied thankfulness; when God loads us with
mercy we should load him with our praises.

3. 3 A seal of Adoption.
Instruction is the Seal of God, which set upon Correction does Seal up
Adoption and Sonship, to them that are exercised thereby: the children of
affliction are, by Divine Teaching, sealed up the children of promise: If his
children forsake my Law, speaking of Christ's spiritual Seed, Psa. 89.31 32, 33.
I will visit their transgression with a rod, etc. but my loving kindness will I
not take away: I will visit them with the rod, that is, I will teach them with
the rod, it shall be a rod of Instruction to them, that is the childrens
portion; Heb 12.7.
If his children forsake me, etc. God deals with you as with Sons. Behold oh
thou Christian soul, God has done that for thee in thy sufferings, which
possibly he denied thee in thy prosperity, given thee an Evidence of thy
Sonship; he has made thy suffering time thy sealing time; and has allured
thee and brought thee into the wilderness, Hos. 2.14.
and there has spoken comfortably to thy heart. Thy Patmos has been thy
Paradise wherein he has given thee his loves.

4. 4. Sufferings are consecrated.
God has consecrated thy sufferings by his Teachings: Afflictions have taken
Orders, as it were, and stand no longer in the rank of Ordinary Providence,
but serve now in the Order of Gospel Ordinances, officiating in the holy
garment of Divine Promises, and to the same Uses. What is the great end and
design of the Promises? the Apostle tells us, 2 Pet. 1.4. There are given to us
exceeding great and precious Promises, that by them we should be pertakers of
the divine nature, i.e. of gracious dispositions and qualities, which make the
soul resemble God, holy as he is holy, etc. this is the end of Divine Promises
and Ordinances; and mark, what the Apostle Peter affirms of the Promises, the
very same does the Apostle Paul affirm of Gods chastisments, Heb. 12.10
He for our profit, that we might be PARTAKERS Of His HOLINESS: See, by virtue
of divine teaching afflictions advancd to the same degree and office with
Gospel Ordinances and Promises; so that what hinders, why we may not give those
titles of honor to Afflictions, which the Apostle here gives to the Promises,
and say, To you it is GIVEN not only to believe, but to suffer. Phil. 1.29.
There are given unto us exceeding great and precious Afflictions, that by them
we might be partakers of the divine nature, that is, made partakers of his
holiness. See, O thou afflicted Soul, by teaching God has changed the very
nature of affliction; He has turned thy water into wine; a prison, a bed of
sickness, into a school, into a temple, wherein he has taught thee into his
own likeness.

5. 5. The sufferer is consecrated.
As God has consecrated thy sufferings, so he has consecrated thee also by
thy sufferings. As it is said of Christ, Heb. 2.10.
He made the Captain of our Salvation perfect through sufferings: (...) he
consummated, or perfected; Christ became a perfect Mediator by his passion; the
Cross was the complement and absolution of his Mediatory-office; Ioh. 19.30
Transacta sunt omnia.
hence you hear him cry upon the Cross, (...), It is finished. And thus also
may it be said of the members of Christ, they are perfected by sufferings:
Chastisement being coupled with teaching, is the Consecration and Consummation
of the Saints: I fill up, says Paul, Col. 1.24. (...).
that which is Behind of the afflictions of Christ in my flesh; the
after-sufferings of Christ. As Christ as a Mediator, so Christ as one Body,
with his members, is completed by sufferings: I fill up that which is behind:
Christ is not full till all his members have had their measure of sufferings;
You have need of patience, Heb. 10.36
that when you have done the will of God, you may inherit the Promises. When we
have done Gods will, all is not done; there is somewhat to be suffered, without
which the Christian is not in a capacity to receive his inheritance; you have
need of patience, sc. to carry you through the suffering part of your work, as
well as the doing, that so being perfect, you may inherit the Promises.

Lastly, 6. Crowned with the Blessing. He is blessed, quia eruditur ad
beatudinem. Greg. Moral. in Job 5.17.
By adding instruction to correction, God has crowned thee with the blessing:
* Blessed is the man whom thou chastenest and teach: God has turned the
Crown of thorns into a Crown of gold, and set it on thy head, and now brings
thee forth wearing this Crown, and shows thee, as it were, to the world as a
monument of free grace, proclaiming before thee, Thus shall it be done to the
man whom God will honor.

Well then, Christian, take up thy quid retribuam? sit down and consult with
thine own Soul, what to render for so rich amercy? and behold, it is resolved
to thy hand: Psa. 50.15. I will deliver thee, and THOU SHALL GLORIFY ME:
Behold God has not only delivered, but taught thee, now therefore he expects
glory from thee. Glorify God, 1. Wi^h your lips.


Glorify God,
1. With thy lips; I cried to him with my lips, and he was GLORIFIED with my
TONGUE: Let the lip of prayer be turned into the tongue of praise; make your
tongues your glory, by proclaiming Gods glory; be telling what great things God
has done for you; say with David, Psa. 66.15
Come and hear all ye that fear God, and I will tell you what he has done for
my Soul: abundantly utter the memory of his great goodness, make his praise
glorious. Extol him in Psalms of Thanksgiving: Sing unto the Lord, Psalm. 30.4
O ye Saints of his, give thanks at the remembrance of his holiness: Psa. 50.23
He that offers me praise, GLORIFIETH ME.

2. Glorify God with thy life, 2. With your lives.
live his praise; has God taught thee? If thou would glorify God, go and
put all the Lessons which thou have learned into print; show forth the graces
of him that has called thee out of darkness into his marvelous light; 1 Pet.
2.9 (...) the excelencies.
print them in such a legible character, that who so runs may read: Lip-praise
is good, but life-praise is better; He that offers me praise glorifieth me, and
to him that ORDERS HIS CONVERSATION ARIGHT will I show the Salvation of God:
Psa. 50.23
It is good to speak so, Loquere ut te videam.
that men may see; that standers by may be Gods witnesses and yours, that you
are taught of God; and say, Lo what has God wrought? how holily, and humbly,
and fruitfully, and self-denyingly do these servants of God walk since they
came out of tribulation? Live so, that you may take off the scandal of the
Cross of Christ, and bring men into love with a suffering condition: Mat. 5.16
Let your light shine before men, that they may see your good works, and
glorify your Father which is in Heaven; Caelum quoddam luci dissimis virtutum
stellis exornatum.
that you may be a little Heaven-sparkling with bright stars of divine graces,
as it was said of Joseph.

3. Now God has taught thee, 3. Be ready to teach others.
be thou ready to teach others: It is a debt which thou owe to all thou
conversest with; When thou art converted, strengthen thy Brethren. Communicate
what God has taught thee to thy yoke fellow, children, servants, friends, upon
all seasonable opportunities. Sanctified knowledge is communicative; Freely thou
have received, freely give. Mark 4.21
God never lighttd this candle, that it should be put under the bed, or under
the bushel; the bed of pleasure, or the bushel of profit; but that it may be
put into the candlestick of thy conversation, and so shine before men, that
they may see, and glorify thy Father which is in Heaven. This is indeed to
glorify God. And thus much for the first Duty. I come to the second Duty; and
that is,

Labor to preserve the teachings of God upon thy Spirit. 2 Duty, To preserve a
good frame of spirit.
Study how to maintain that sweet gracious frame of heart into which God has
taught thee by affliction. It is the duty which Christians should practice, as
often as they come from the Word, or any other divine Ordinance: When we come out
of a Sabbath, we should sit down, and observe with what frame of spirit God
sends us away from the Ordinance; If the Ordinance has left no savory gracious
impression upon the heart, to lie in the dust, and mourn, and commune with our
own hearts, and lament after God: If there be an Ordinance-frame, we should
rejoice in it, bless God for it, and labor to keep up such a frame upon the
heart till the next solemn approach to God. Christians, how much more should
this be our care and study when we come out of Gods furnace, that solemn
Ordinance of affliction, to labor to maintain that melting frame of heart, that
warmth and heat, that life and vigor which we have brought with us out of
affliction. 2 John 3
Look to your selves, that ye lose not those things which God has wrought in
you. To that end take a few Means or Helps.

First, Means to preserve a good frame of heart. 1. Be often perusing your
Lessons.
Be often reading over the LESSONS which God has taught you; frequently revive
the remembrance of them in your heads, and work the impressions of them upon
your hearts: labor not only to say them without book, but indeed to get them
by heart. I tell you Christians, you had need to take much pains with your
selves, to keep the Teachings of God alive upon your spirits: For be sure of
this, that you will find a great difference between your hearts yet under
affliction, and when the affliction is taken off; and without infinite
watchfulness your hearts will be too hard for you: The heart is deceitful above
all things, and desperately wicked. Jer. 17.9
There is much of a Pharaoh-like disposition in every man, very prone to harden
when the storm is over. It is sad and wonderful to consider, how a corruption
will lie as if it were quite dead, while danger and death are before us, and
how suddenly and powerfully it will revive; and without special take-heed,
betray the Soul, when the danger is over. That Caution which God by Moses gave
the Israelites in the wilderness, may make every wise Christian to tremble:
Deuteronomy. 31 21
I know their imaginations, which they go about EVEN NOW, BEFORE I have
brought them into the Land, which I swear. Their hearts were secretly
projecting for their lusts, even while they were yet smarting under the rod:
and in the howling wilderness they are forecasting hwo to satisfy sense, and
serve their carnal interests, when they should come into the Land that flowed
with milk and honey. Possibly, these were not downright resolves; but says
the Lord, I know their imaginations: O my Brethren, we should harken to the
whisperings of Lust in our own bosoms, and labor to suppress them; to crush the
Serpent while it is in the shell; for if there be such floatings of sin in the
imagination, while yet in durance, what projecting and contrivements will there
be in the heart when liberty and enlargement shall present temptations and
opportunities? And therefore keep we our hearts with all diligence; Prove. 4 23
or as the Hebrew phraseth it, of all keepings keep our hearts, Hic sons bo^^,
and peccandi ^^igo. Hieron.
for out of them come the issues of life: and when the days of affliction and
trouble are gone, work Truths, and Counsels received, frequently and fixedly
upon your Consciences; that you may, like good Scribes, instructed to the
Kingdom of God, Mat. 13 52
bring out of your treasures things new and old; and have always in a readiness
wherewith to oppose and check temptation, and may practice every Lesson which
God has taught you, in the season thereof.

Secondly, Renew, also, 2 Help, Renew the remembrance of the affliction.
often upon your Souls, the remembrance of the sharpness and bitterness of the
affliction: it will be a notable corrective to sensuality, and give check to
sinful excesses. The flesh will quickly grow wanton when it finds ease;
Jesurun, when the neck was got from under the yoke, quickly, waxed fat, Deuteronomy.
32 15 Psalm. 106, 13
and kicked: They soon forgot his works, they waited not for his counsel, but
lusted exceedingly: WORKS and COUNSEL, CHASTISEMENTS and TEACHINGS were quickly
forgotten, when once the affliction was over: They quickly forgot a barren
wilderness, in a Land that flowed with milk and honey: They waited not for his
Counsel; they grew weary of Counsel, when once free from Correction; and chose
rather to walk by the dictate of their own lusts, then of Gods Laws, till at
length God grew as weary (if I may so say) of counselling, as they were of
being counseled: and gave them up to their own hearts lusts, Psa. 81.12
to walk in their own counsels: That they that would not live by Gods counsels,
should perish by their own. And therefore, you that are come out of the house
of bondage, remember the sorrows of a suffering condition; set not your heart
so much upon the pleasure of your present enlargement, as upon the bitterness
of your former captivity. The Church found great advantage in it, when returned
from Babylon: Remembering mine affliction and my misery, the wormwood and the
gall: Lam. 3.19
my Soul has them. CONTINUALLY in remembrance: and what was the fruit of it?
it follows, And is humbled in me: The meaning is this; The people of God among
the Jews (that desired to keep close to God after their great deliverance)
experienced a serious and constant remembrance of those seventy years
sufferings, to be an excellent preservative to that humble and gracious frame
of heart, which God wrought them into, in their captivity: And yet that is not
all; As remembrance of affliction preserved Humility, so Humility strengthened
Faith: This I recall to mind, therefore have I HOPE: Tribulation wrought
patience, and patience experience, Romans 5.3
and experience HOPE, etc. By the kindly operation of the remembrance of former
Dispensations, she began to conceive good HOPE through grace, that God had not
chastened Her in wrath, but in love; and that all her Tribulations were the
fruit of the Promise, not of the Threatening; a Blessing, not a Curse. Go you
and do likewise.

Thirdly, 3 Help, Remember all your uncomely carriage in affliction.
Call often to mind the sad discourses and reasonings, the fears and
tremblings, which you have had in your bosoms in the times of trouble and
distress: Thus the Church, Lam. 3.17. I forgot prosperity: She had been so long
in a suffering condition, that now she can scarce remember that ever she saw a
good day in all her life: and at length she sits down, and gives her self up
to despair; And I SAID, my strength and my hope is perished from the Lord: She
remembers what unbelieving conclusions she made in her affliction; I SAID,
etc. And so the Prophet Jeremiah, Verse. 54. Waters flowed over mine head; then
I SAID, I am cut off: when he began to sink in the mire, he remembers how his
heart began to sink with fear; he calls to mind, what faithless language his
heart spoke; I SAID, I am cut off.

Thus David, I SAID in my passion, etc. Psalm. 31.22. and 116.11. and Jonah 2.4.
THEN I SAID, I am cast out of thy sight. Hezekiah makes a large narrative of
what discourses he had in his own Soul, what time he had received the sentence
of death; and leaves it in writing to all posterity: Isai. 38.9. THE WRITING
of Hezekiah King of Judah, Isai. 38.9, 10
when he had been sick; I SAID in the cutting off of my days: what did he say?
truly he uttered very strange complaints for such an eminent Saint as he was: I
shall go to the gates of the grave; I am deprived of the residue of my years: I
shall behold man no more with the inhabitants of the world; mine age is
departed: and a great deal to that purpose: The sum whereof is this, I shall
dye, I shall dye; I must take my leave of this world, and worms must eat my
flesh in the grave, etc. Such uncomely words he uttered; but he remembereth
them afterward, and is contented to shame himself for them to all the world: he
puts his fleshly complaints in print, that he may humble himself, and caution,
yea and comfort, others.

And thus, Christians, should we do; we should call to mind our SAID: i. e.
we should sit down and recount the impatiencies and short-spiritednesses, the
murmur and unbelief, the love of a present world, the fear of death, the hard
thoughts of God; all the irregularities and distempers of our own spirits, in
the time of Tribulation; I said, I said, etc. Doubtless it would be of singular
use, as, to humble our Souls, and to check corruption; so, to endear and
proserve the Teachings of God upon your Souls; while you might tune David's
Thanksgiving (conceived upon some such like occasion,) Psalm. 25.8
Good and upright is the Lord, therefore will he TEACH SINNERS in the way: q.
d. I sinned against the Lord in my affliction, by my impatience, unbelief,
unhumbledness, etc. yet He was pleased, not altogether to leave me without the
Teachings of his Spirit; not because I was good but because He was good; not
because I pleased HIM, but because Mercy pleased HIM: not because I was upright
before Him, but because He was UPRIGHT, true and faithful to his own Promise,
has he done it: Good and upright is the Lord, and therefore HE has TAUGHT me,
though I was a sinner, in the way.

Fourthly, Remember your Vows. 4 Means, Remember your Vows.
When God, by the fire of affliction, showed you your folly, discovered to you
the hidden corruption of your hearts, and brought your ways and doings to
remembrance, which were not good; you were ashamed, yea, even confounded; and
said, as it is in Job, Lord, wherein I have done wickedly, I will do so no
more. But take heed it be not so with you, as it was with backsliding Israel,
of whom God thus complains; Of old time I have broken thy yoke, Ier. 2.20
and burst thy bands, and thou said, I WILL NOT TRANSGRESS: q. d. I brought
thee, hundreds of years since, out of the Land of Egypt, out of the house of
bondage, and then thou made me fair promises, I remember the kindness of thy
youth, the love of thine espousals, verse. 2. Thou said, I will do so no more:
Lord, I Will be covetous no more, and idolatrous no more, adulterous no more; I
will murmur no more, I will no more depart from thee, Thou art the Guide of my
youth. Good words, had she been as good as her word: but Oh read what
follows, and tremble; when upon every high hill, and under every green tree,
thou wandrest, playing the harlot: i. e. no sooner her old heart and her old
temptations met, but presently they fell into mutual embraces: And this is the
temper of out hearts, for all the world; Nuper me cujusdam amici lanquor
a^monuit ^p^imos esse nos dum infirmi sumus Plin. ep 26. l. 7 ad Max.
we are very good while we are in affliction, and promise fair; but no sooner
the trial over, but we forget Gods Teachings and our own Vows, and return into
the same course and fashion of conversation as before. Now therefore, if you
would preserve the Teachings of God upon your spirits, sit down, remember your
vows; and spreading them before the Lord, say with David, Psalm. 66 13, 14
I will pay thee my vows, which my lips have uttered, and my mouth has spoken,
when I was in trouble. Lord, through grace assisting, I will be as ready to pay
my vows, now I am well, as I was to make vows when I was sick, etc. Psa. 56.12
THY VOVVS are upon me, I will render praises unto thee. When you have made
good Vows, be as careful to make good your Vows unto the Lord: Vow, Psa. 76.11
and PAY unto the Lord your God.

In the fifth place, 5 Means, Attend upon the Word.
If you would preserve the teachings of God upon thy heart, attend constantly
and conscionably upon the Ministry of the Word. The truth is, the Word and the
Rod teach the same Lessons. The Rod many times is but the Words REMEMBRANCER:
And therefore as the Rod quickens the Word, so the Word back again will revive
and sanctify the teachings of the Rod: They mutually help to set one another
with deeper impressions. And therefore hear WISDOM, watching daily at her
gates, Prove. 8.34.
waiting at the posts of her doors, if thou would be blessed. It will be of a
twofold advantage.

1. It will help your memories: As the Rod repeateth the Word, so the Word will
repeat the instructions of the Rod; the Gospel will bring to remembrance what
you have learned in the School of Affliction.

2. It will quicken affection: To hear that repeated by the still sweet voice
of the Gospel, which before God taught you in the voice of thunder, this cannot
but affect, and make you bespeak the Gospel, as once the Israelites did Moses,
Deuteronomy. 5 25 26
Speak thou unto us all that the LORD our God shall speak unto thee, and we
will hear it and do it, but let us not hear the voice of God any more, that
terrible voice of Judgment, lest we dye. And certainly God will take it was
well at your hands as he did at Isreal's, and will answer in some such language,
I have heard the voice of this people, they have well said all that they have
spoken: O that there were such an heart in them, that they would fear me, Verse
29.
and keep my Commandments, that it might be well with them, and that I might
not bring upon them such evils as I have done, any more.

6. 6 Means, Feed a good frame of heart.
Be often feeding that frame of heart which God has taught thee into: do by
it, as thou daily beggest God would do by thee; Give it day by day its daily
bread; Meditations suitable to the nature of that grace which thou would
maintain; threatenings, promises, truths, Scripture-considerations, agreeable
to the Lesson: Take heed of feeding corruption with thoughts of the sweetness
that is in sin; Take heed of starving grace by withdrawing from it suitable
aliment. You will require the blood of your Infants that are starved at the
Nurses hands: Will not God be much more jealous over the births and issues of
his own Spirit? Meditate much upon the Sinfulness of Sin, the Emptiness of the
Creature, the Fullness of Christ, the exquisiteness of his Sufferings, the
severity of the last Judgment, the torments of Hell, the Joys of Heaven, the
infinite Perfections of the Divine Nature, Me litatio q. mentas dictatio.
and the horror of Eternity. Rich in Meditation, and rich in grace.

7. 7 Help.
And lastly, Be much in prayer. As it was not enough for God to make the first
Creation, but he must uphold it by the word of his power, Heb. 1.3
or else it would quickly have returned into its first Nothing: So it is with
the second Creation, Hebr. 12.3
Christ is the Finisher as well as the Author of grace; Phil. 1.
He that has begun a good work in you, must perfect it: Stability only comes
from the unchangeable God; and therefore pray, that God would put of his
unchangeableness upon you. Pray as Luther was wont to pray, Act. and Mon fol.
777.
Confirm O Lord in us what thou have wrought, and perfect the work thou have
begun in us to thy Glory, so be it; which he seems to have taken out of Psalm.
68.28. Strengthen, O God, that which thou have wrought in us. Pray that prayer
which David prayed over that liberal frame of heart which God had formed in his
people for the service of the Temple. O LORD God of Abraham, 1 Chronicles. 29 18.
and Isaac, and Jacob our Fathers, KEEP THIS FOR EVER in the imagination of the
thoughts of the heart of thy people, and PREPARE their heart unto thee; or (...)
STABLISH their heart. Oh be earnest with God for stability of heart, Hosea 6.4
that thy goodness may not be as a morning cloud, and as the early dew, but
that it may in some proportion resemble the Author of it, and be Yesterday,
Heb. 13.8
and to day, and the same for ever.

In a word, By all these means and helps, and what other God has sanctified
for this gracious end, labor, Christians, to be such out of your afflictions,
Possum ergo quod pluribus verbis pluribus eliam voluminibus philosophi docere
conantur ipse breviter tibi mihique precipere, ut tales esse sani perseveremus
quales nos futuros profitemur infirmi. Plin. ep. 26 l. 7. ad max
as you promised God and your selves to be when you were in; that neither God
nor your own Souls may have cause to repent of your sufferings; that the fruit
of chastening may be 2 Cor 7
Repentance never to be unrepented of, i.e. Marbury of Repent. 3 Duty, Pray for
the afflicted.
never to fall back again: Having in your troubles repented of your sins, take
heed when you are delivered, that you repent not of your repentance; and he
that does not repent of his repentance now, shall never have cause to repent
for his repentance hereafter.

And thus I have done with the second Duty of those who through grace do find
they have been taught by affliction.

I come now to the Third Duty.

Pray for the afflicted; and when you pray, say, Lord, teach them, as well as
correct them, that they may be blessed. O pray thus for ENGLAND, she has been
a long time sorely chastised of the Lord, and yet has been all this while like
a Bullock unaccustomed to the yoke. O pray, Turn us Lord, and we shall be
turned, thou art the Lord our God. Pray, that God would teach ENGLAND in this
day day of her visitation the things of her peace before they be hid from her
eyes. Luke 19.42
Ier. 6.8
O pray that we may be INSTRUCTED, lest Gods Soul depart from us: If Correction
go not forth into Instruction; if England be not at length reformed by all the
judgments of God upon her, she has seen her best days, and may expect to be
made desolate, a Land not inhabited; Ier. 6.8
there is no balm for our pain, neither any Physician that can heal our malady.

Pray thus for all your friends, who are or have been in the furnace of
affliction; pray that they may come forth as gold purified seven times in the
fire, that they may lose nothing there but their rust: Pray, Lord, what they
see not, teach them, and if they have done wickedly, let them do so no more.
One great use which Christians should make of reading the Scripture, is to
learn from thence the language of prayer. And oh that the professors of this
age would in this particular learn what to pray, and how to pray for their
brethren in tribulation: O that they would censure less, and pray more, and in
stead of speaking one of another, speak more one to another, and one for
another; that was the good old way; Mal. 3.16
THEN they that feared the Lord spoke often one To another: But oh the tender,
praying, healing, restoring SPIRIT, is departed; and if Christians stir not up
themselves to call it back again, it is a sad presage that God is departing
too; Hos. 9.12
and woe unto us when God departs from us: We are like water spilt upon the
ground, that cannot be gathered up again: We judge before we enquire, and reject
before we admonish: Our Brethren, upon vain surmises, are to us as Heathens and
Publicans, before we have been to them as Christians and fellow members: And
this we think becomes us, and we take a kind of pride and contentment in it.
But oh, to inform, to convince, Gal. 6.1 Mat. 18.15 16, 17.
to exhort, to pray, to put the bone (if out) in joint again, this were done
like the Disciples of Christ; Violentia Sancta, obtabilis rapina.
to show our selves Christians indeed, Professors not of the letter, but of the
Spirit, and would gain our Brethren in stead of blasting them. Consider what I
say, and the Lord give you a right understanding in all things.

And thus much for such as are come out of affliction, and find that it has
been through free grace a teaching affliction. But now secondly, Exhort. to
them that have been corrected, but not instructed.
To such as cannot evidence to their own Souls that chastening has been
accompanied with divine teaching in any Gospel-proportion, or at least are not
deeply sensible of the want of it; here is a word of Exhortation for them,
suffer it I beseech you; Roll your selves in the dust before the Lord; smite
upon your thigh; sigh with the breaking of your loins, and cry out with
Ephraim, Thou have chastised me, Reader, excuse the frequent use of this
Scripture, Ier. 31.18. Nunquam satis dicitur, quod nunquam satis discitur; that
cannot be too often spoken, which cannot be sufficiently learned. Sen. Epist.
Hosea 9.11 Psalm. 58.8
and I was chastised, as a Bullock unaccustomed to the yoke: I have felt the
blows of God, but that is all; I have received no more instruction by all my
correction, then a brute beast; or if I had, I have quickly lost it; it is fled
like a bird, from the birth, and from the womb, and from the conception: It is
like the untimely fruit of a woman that never saw the Sun. Truly thou have
cause to sit down, and even wish for thy affliction again: God had put himself
into thy hands (as it were,) and thou have let him go without THE Blessing, the
blessing of saving Instruction: how may thou even wish, I say, O that I were
in prison again, in my sick bed again, in banishment again, et sic in caet.
However humble thy self greatly before the Lord, and wrestle mightily for the
AFTER TEACHINGS of God upon thy heart; pray, Turn me Lord, and I shall be
turned, for thou art the Lord my God; what affliction has not done, Lord do
thou; set Omnipotency on work, and it shall be done; turn me, and I SHALL BE
turned; that so thy Soul may yet speak to the praise of free grace: AFTER that
I returned I repented, Ier. 31.19
and AFTER that I was instructed, I smote upon the thigh, I was ashamed, yea
even confounded, because I did bear the reproach of my youth. Urge the Lord, as
Sampson did after his victory, Judge. 15.18. Thou have given this great
deliverance into the hand of thy servant, and shall I now dye for thirst, and
fall into the hand of the uncircumcised? Say thou, Lord, thou have given thy
servant this great deliverance from danger and death, and shall I now perish
for want of teaching, and go down to Hell among the uncircumcised? TEACH me thy
way, Psalm. 86.11
O Lord, I will walk in thy truth: Unite my heart to fear thy Name. TEACH me to
do thy will, Psa. 143 10
for thou art my God, thy Spirit is good; lead me into the Land of uprightness.
In a word, desire the Lord that He would do all the work, and then take all the
glory: Say, Lord, teach me as well as deliver me, and I shall be blessed.

The four^h and last Branch of Exhortation is to Parents and Governors: To
exhort them in the Education of their Children to imitate God; Exhortat. to
Parents.
and that in two things. 1. In affording their children due correction. 2. To
Correction to add Instruction.
First, 1. Exhort. Withhold not due correction. Prove. 19.18
Afford your Children due correction. It is the counsel of the Holy Ghost,
CHASTEN thy son while there is hope, and let not thy Soul spare for his crying.
Behold, God counsels you that are Parents, or in stead of Parents, to do
with your children as He does with his; wisely to use the discipline of the
rod, before vicious dispositions grow into habits, and folly be so deeply
rooted, Pro. 22 15 Mr Trapp in his Comment on Prove. in locum.
that the Rod of Correction will not drive it out. Error and folly, says one
very well, be the knots of Satan, wherewith he ties children to the stake to be
burnt in Hell; and these knots are easiliest cut betimes; or if you should make
the child bleed in cutting of them, let it not cause you to withdraw your hand;
for so it follows, Chasten thy son, etc. and let not thy Soul spare for his
crying: It is not only foolish, but cruel pity to forbear correction for a few
childish tears; to suffer the child to howl in Hell for sin, father then to
sh^d a few tears for the preventing of it. Foolish fathers and mothers call
this love, but the Father of spirits calls it hatred: He that spares the rod,
Hates his son, Prove. 13.24 Surely there is nothing so ill spared, as that
whereby the child is spoiled; such sparing is hatred; and because you hate your
children in not correcting of them, they come afterward to hate you by not
correcting of them: But that is not all; Valde inutili^^er valdc perniciose
sentiet filius patris lenitatem, ut postea just sentiat Dei severitatem. Aug.
in Psa. 50. Ad interficiendum. Pagn. deriving the original word from the root
(...) which in Hiph. sig. to kill.
the parents lenity in this case makes way for Gods severity: Pity to the flesh
is cruelty to the soul; so the Hebrew may be rendered, Spare not to his
destruction, or to cause him to dye, that is, to occasion his destruction: The
foolish indulgence of the parent may be, and often is, the death of the child,
eternal death: Parents spare their children in their folly to the destruction
both of body and soul. And this may help us to expound that other parallel
text, Withhold not correction from the child, Pro 23.13
for if thou beat him with the rod he shall not dye: The meaning may be either,
that correction will not kill him; the rod will break no bones; so preventing
and reproving at once the silly tenderness of fond parents, who think if they
should correct their children, they would presently dye of it; they are as
afraid to use the rod, as if it were a sword: Antiqui patres ut Deo placerent
admortem filiis etiam non parcebant; nos autem cos quos secundum carnem
diligimus etiam tenui verborum aspiritate insequi non audemu^. Greg. in 1 Samuel
14.
Abraham feared not so much to sacrifice his son, as such parents fear to
chasten him. Nay, but faith the Holy Ghost, fear not correction, for behold,
the strokes of the rod are not the strokes of death: it is but a rod it is not
a serpent, take it into thy hand; it may smart, it will not sting: To take away
the fear of parents in this case, God himself gives them his word for it, He
shall not dye: This I say may be the meaning; by correcting thy child thou
shall not murder him. Or else (which I rather conceive) the words may be a
motive drawn from the fruit of correction; Withhold not correction from the
child; why? He shall not dye, i. e. it may be, and (through divine blessing
accompanying it) is often a means to prevent death: it may prevent the first
and second death to which the child is exposed by the finful indulgence of the
parent. The Greg. Nys. in Cant. Hom. 12.
word used in this place, says one, seems to note an immortality; so that He
shall not dye, is all one as if the Holy Ghost had said, There is a (...) in
the words, wherein more is understood then expressed. 1 Cor. 11.32
He shall live for ever; the rod on the flesh shall be a means to save the soul
in the day of the Lord Jesus: We are chastened, that we should not be condemned
with the world. Psa. 141.5
Such smitings, as David says in another case, shall be a kindness; and such
rebukes are so far from breaking the head, that they shall be an excellent oil
which shall cure, and give life. The very Philosopher could say, (...). Arist.
Eth. l. 2.
Correction is a kind of Physic or Medicine. Alas, our children are sick, and
cruel is that mercy which will suffer them to dy^, yea eternally, rather then
disgust their palates with a little bitter physic? Apish parents they be, who
hug their little ones to death; Peremptores potius quam parents.
Paricides rather then Parents; of whom we may say, as sometime the Cum
dudisset Augustus inter pueros quos in Syria Herodes Rex Iudaeorum, infea
bimatum jussit interfici, filium quoque ejus accisum, ait, melius est Herodis
porcum esse quam filium. Macrob. Sat. lib. 2. c. 4.
Roman Emperor said of Herod (when he heard that he had murdered his own son
among the rest of the infants when Christ was born, that so he might be sure
(as he supposed) to destroy the King of the Jews,) It were better to be such
peoples swine, then their sons. O hateful indulgence! merciless pity! to lose a
child for want of correction! such parents throw both the rod and the child
into the fire at once; the rod into the fire of the chimney, and the child into
the fire of Hell. This is not done like God, Heb 12.6
for whom the Lord loves he chasteneth, and scourges every son whom he
receives: And so does every wisely loving parent; He that spares the rod
hates his son, but he that Loves Him chasteneth him betimes. Pro. 13 24
As mo^hs are beaten out of a garment with a rod, so must vices out of
childrens hearts. And for want of this disciplinary love, how have some
children accused their parents at the Gallows? and how many do, and will curse
them in Hell, in some such language as Cyprian supposes infants to complain of
their parents who denied them Baptism; Perdit nos aliena perfidia, parenles
sensimus paricidas. Cyp. Scr. de lap.
The treacherous fondness of our parents has brought us into these torments,
our fathers and mothers have been our murderers; they that gave us our natural
life, have deprived us of a better; and they that would not correct us with the
rod, have occasioned us now to be tormented with scorpions. O it would grieve
the heart of the most unnatural parept in the world to hear the doleful
complain^s, and those hideous yellings of poor children in Hell fire, whom
their fondness has sent thither: and oh that they would listen to them, before
they themselves come into that place of torment, and there find no mercy,
because here they have showed their children so much. Filius patris sentit
lentiatem, ut postea sentiat Dei severitatem, and Hoc Non Solus Sed Cum
Dissoluto Patre. Aug. in Psa. 50.
The child goes to Hell for his wickedness, and the parent many times for his
mercy. Yea even in this life how do many godly Parents smart for their
fondness, because they will not make their Children smart for their folly. Vid.
Chrysostom. l. 3. ad veritus vitup. vitae Monasticae. 1 Samuel 3.13 Because Eli
restrained not his sons, their sins destroyed him and his whole family.
Chrysostom. ut sup.
Eli and David would not so much as rebuke their sons, and God gave them both
great rebukes in their sons: It is said of Eli, His sons made themselves vile,
and he RESTRAINED them not: the Hebr. signifies, He FROWNED not upon them. Oh
sad! for want of a frown to destroy a Soul! the Soul of a Child! to smile a
Child to Hell! Consider of it; I am much afraid, this unchristian, yea
unnatural indulgence of Parents, is the fountain of all that confusion, under
which England at this time reels and staggers like a drunken man: and for this
very sin, at least for this among others, yea, and for this above others, God
is Unde nos mala innumera perpetimur quotidie? nonne quod filios nostros malos
aspicimus and nos emendare negligimus?
visiting all the families of the Land, from the Throne to the poorest Cottage.
Parents have laid the foundation of their own forrows, their childrens ruin,
and the desolation of the Nation, in the looseness and delicacy of their
education; and yet are not sensible of it to this day: We have not corrected
our children, and therefore God is correcting us in our children: We God makes
our children our rods, because we have withheld the rod from them. We gave them
too much rest, and therefore they give us none. Pro. 29 17 Levit. 26
have not crossed them in their wills, and therefore God does cross us in our
wills: We have walked (even in this point, exceedingly) contrary to God, and to
his Discipline; and therefore God is walking contrary to us, and is punishing
us seven times more for this iniquity. And therefore, Oh that Parents would at
length awaken themselves, to follow both the pattern and precept of their
heavenly Father; who, as he corrects whom he loves, so he commands them to
correct, Melius est perire in virga patris, quam in blandimentis perire
praedonis.
if they love, their children. Withhold not correction from the child; for if
thou correct him with the Rod, he shall not dye: If the Rod draw blood (should
need be) it is ad salutem; it is as the Physician deals with them to prevent a
fever; a fever of boiling passions here, and of boiling fire and brimstone
hereafter: it is to cure, not to kill; yea, thou killest, if thou do not
wound: and therefore again I say, withhold it not: Give the rod unto thy child,
and he will one day give thee thanks for it. Yea, it is worth observation, that
the same word in the original, (...)
which is translated withhold, signifies also to forbid; meeting with another
distemper in Parents, who as they will not correct their children themselves,
so also they forbid others to correct them, under whose tuition they put them:
As if they were afraid their children would not have sin enough here, nor hell
enough hereafter, they lay in Caveats against the means which God has
sanctified for their reclaiming. What tears of blood are sufficient to bewail
this folly! You that are godly-wise, and wisely-loving, take heed of it; and
when you commit your children to others hands, do not in the mean while hold
their hands: if thou judge them not wise, why do thou choose them? if thou
choose them, why do thou not trust them? Well then, if the rod be in thine own
hand, withhold it not; if in thy friends hand, forbid it not. Certainly there
is great need of this duty, which the Spirit of God does frequently inculcate
all along the Proverbs. I will conclude this branch of the Exhortation with
inverting the Counsel of our Savior; In this sense be ye not merciful, that
you may be the children of your heavenly Father: Mat. 5.44 45
for whom he loves he corrects, and scourges every son whom he receives.
Go thou and do likewise; and this shall be your mercy and love to your
children: He that spares the rod, hates his son; Pro. 13.24
but he that loves him, chasteneth him betimes.

Secondly, 2 Exhort, Add Instruction to Correction.
You that are Parents, or in stead of Parents, If you would have your children
happy, Add Instruction to correction: imitate God in this part of patternal
Discipline also; let Chastisement and Instruction go together: It is that which
the Holy Ghost urges upon you; Bring them up in the NURTURE and ADMONITION of
the Lord: Ephesians. 6.4
There be two words relating to both these Parental duties; (...), in Qua Pater
erudit filium. Bez.
castigatione, in the Chastisement or Correction; and it is added, of the Lord:
that is, either in the Chastisement, wherewith the Lord exercises his
children; or in the Chastisement which the Lord commands earthly Parents to
exercise toward their children: this is the first duty, of which already. And
then there is another word, which holds forth the end and design of Parental
Correction, and that is, (...), Monitis ex verbo Dei petitis, sive sanctis and
Deo acceptis. Bez.
in the Admonition and Instruction of the Lord: i. e. in Counsels and
Instructions taken out of the Word of God, or such as are approved of by God:
The sum is this, That while we chasten the flesh, Proprie fignificat
admonitionem non simpliciter sed talem, qualem in mentem pueri ponas and
ingerasquae sunt illi ad salutem necessaria. Zanch. in loc.
we should labor to inform and form the mind and spirit, by infusing right
principles, pressing and urging upon their tender hearts counsel, reproof, and
instruction, as the matter requires. This is the duty of Parents, to imitate
God, to let Instruction expound Correction; and with a rod in the hand, and a
word in the mouth, to train up their children to life eternal. A dumb rod is
but a brutish Discipline, and will leave the child as brutish as it found him.
Chastisement without teaching may sooner break the bones then the heart; it may
mortify the flesh, but not corruption; extinguish nature, but never beget
grace: But the Rod and REPROOF give wisdom. Pro. 29.15.
Instruction added to Correction, as it makes excellent Christians, so it makes
good Children. There be Parents that are severe and cursed enough to their
children; they spare for no blows: in stead of breaking them of their wills, by
a wise and moderate correction, they are ready to break their bones, and their
necks too sometimes, in their moods and passions: But they never mind the
other branch of Paternal Discipline, sc. Instruction and Admonition: of such
Parents I suppose the Apostle speaks, Heb. 12.9, 10. We have had Fathers of
our flesh, who corrected and chastened us after THEIR OWN PLEASURE: He
speaks not of all Parents; but his meaning is, there be such men and women in
the world, who are most unlike to God; and in smiting their children, rather
please themselves, then profit their children: He for our profit, but they
after their own pleasure, to give vent to their passion, and satisfy their
vindictive rage and fury: and when is that? truly when the Rod and Reproof do
not go together; it is an argument there is more passion then judgment, more
lust then love, in such chastisements. Such Parents do rather betray their own
folly, then take a course to make their children wise: Schola Crucis, Schola
Lucis.
The Rod and Reproof give wisdom: neither alone will do it: the Rod without
Reproof will harden the heart, and teach the children sooner to hate the
Parent, then to hate sin; Absque afflictione nulli utilia discunt.
and Reproof without the Rod will leave no impression: Reproofs of instruction
are the way of life, Pro: 6.23
or Corrections of instruction: a lesson set on with a whiping is best
remembered. It is divine truth that must be the instrument of working saving
grace in the heart: Ioh. 17.17
Sanctify them with thy truth, thy Word is truth. It is the commendation of
Timothy his Mother, that from his very infancy she instructeed him in the
Scriptures, 2 Timothy 3.15. cum cap. 2.5 Hierom. Chrysostom. Theoph. docent ex hoc
loco, Parents etiam de Scripturis dehere instituere liberos suos; That Parents
ought to instruct their children in the holy Scriptures. 2. Tim. 4.3
which were able to make him wise to Salvation. When there is a divine sentence
in the mouth of the Rod, it brings wisdom and life with it.

And therefore, O that Parents would imitate the Father of spirits in this
blessed art of Paternal Discipline: join the Word of Instruction to the Rod of
Correction; teach as well as chastise: Reprove, rebuke, exhort with all
long-suffering and doctrine: It is true, it is enjoined Timothy as a Pastoral
duty; but it is as true, that every Parent is a King, a Prophet, and a Priest:
A King, to govern and chastise; a Prophet, to teach and instruct; and a Priest,
to offer up spiritual sacrifice to God, Prayer and Praise with and for the
Family. O that every child might have cause to give their Parents that
commendation, Illa magis satagebat ut tu mihi pater esses, -- quoniam
sempiternam salutem charius parturiebat Confess. l. 1. c. 11
which once Augustine gave his Mother, in reference to his Baptism: My mother,
says he, made it her business to make God my Father, -- because she traveled
with my everlasting salvation, with more tenderness and sorrow, then ever she
did with my first birth. O that natural Parents could bespeak the fruit of
their loins, as S. Paul bespeaks his Galatians, My little children, Gal. 4.19
of whom I travel in birth again, until Christ be formed in you: that so they
might rejoice in the second, more then ever they did in the first birth: Why,
this is done by the Word and the Rod. Pro. 29.17
Correct thy son, and he shall give thee rest, yea he shall give delight unto
thy Soul: Correct! how? the 15 verse answers; The Rod and Reproof give wisdom:
Thus give your Children correction, and they shall give you rest and delight.
Though correction for the present do not give them rest, for no chastening for
the present seems to be joyous, but grievous; yet it will make them give you
rest: and though correction does not delight them, yet it shall make them give
delight to you: 3 John 4
What greater delight then to see your children walking in the Truth! and to
think thus with your selves, Quot dedit familia^ juvenes, totred^idit curiae
consulares.
(not as Cassiodor expresses it, that, so many sons, so many Counselors to to
the State, but) that, so many children God has given you, so many children you
have brought up for God, and so many heirs for the Kingdom of Heaven. Well;
Chastise and teach them out of the Law of God, and thy Children shall be
Blessed.

Which that they may, indeed, take one short CAUTION more; and that is, Add
Prayer to Instruction. Last Cautios, Add Prayer to Instruction.
As Teaching should accompany Chastisement, so Prayer should accompany
Teaching: God need use only the Rod and the Word; because the blessing is in
his own hand, he can command a blessing: It is not so with us; As Paul may
plant, and Apollo may water, but God must give the increase; so the Father may
correct, the Mother may instruct, both may do both, but God must give the
Blessing: and therefore Christian Parents, while they add Instruction to
correction, should add Prayer to Instruction: Ora and labora. Pray and labor.
Means are ours, Success is Gods; and therefore let us put the Rod into the
hand of Instruction, Instruction into the hand of Prayer, and all into the hand
of God. Pray, and teach your Children to pray, that God would so bless
Correction and Instruction, that both may make you and your Children BLESSED.
Amen.

FINIS.

