THE SAINTS Thankful Acclamation AT CHRIST'S RESVMPTION OF HIS GREAT POWER AND
THE Initials of his Kingdom.

Delivered in a Sermon at Westminster, before the Honorable House of Commons,
upon the day of their solemn Thanksgiving unto God, for the great victory
given our Army, under the Command of the Noble Lord Fairfax, at Selby in
Yorke-shire and to other the Parliaments Forces in Pembrock-shire, April 23d,
1644.

By Joseph Caryl Preacher to the Honorable Society of Lincolnes-Inne.

Psalm. 68. 1. Let God arise and let his enemies be scattered. 1 Thessalonians. 5. 18.
In every thing give thanks: for this is the will of God in Christ Jesus
concerning you. LONDON, Printed by G. M. for Giles Calvert at the sign of the
black-spread-Eagle near the west end of Paul's, 1644.

Die Martis 23 April 1644.
IT is this day ordered by the Commons assembled in Parliament: That Mr Ash
and Sr Peter Went-worth do give thanks to Mr Pearne and Mr Caryll for the
great pains they took in the sermons they preached this day at St Margaret*
Westminster at the entreaty of the House, it being a day of Public
Thanksgiving for the great Victory God has given to the Lord Fairfax over his
Enemies at Selby in Yorkshire and to the Parliaments Forces in Pembrookeshire,
and to desire them to print their Sermons. And it is Ordered that no man shall
presume their or either of their Sermons to print without he have license under
their hand writing.

H. Elsyng. Cler. Parl. D. Com.

I Appoint Giles Calvert to print my Sermon.

JOSEPH CARYL.

Errata. Page 4. marg read (...) p. 42. l. ^8. dele the. p. 44. l 7. dele in.

TO THE HONORABLE HOUSE of COMMONS assembled in Parliament at Westminster.
MErcies are obligations to duty; Every Deliverance writes us Debtor, and
victory over our Enemies, servants to the living God. It is good to receive a
blessing, but it is better to use it well; And a thankful heart is a greater
Favor, then any outward Favor for which we give thanks. When the hand of
providence works gloriously with us, our Tongues should render the providence
of God glorious. Successes and Events cannot make a bad Cause just or good: But
they make a good Cause beautiful, and add luster to the Justice of it. Though
God should not go forth with our Armies (as sometimes he did not with the
Armies of his people) but should make them turn their back upon the enemy:
though he should make us a reproach Psalm 44.
to our neighbors, and a derision to them that are round about us, though he
should smite us into the place of Dragons, and cover us with the shadow of
death, yet we ought not to forget his name or deal falsely in his Covenant:
Yea, we ought to bless his Name, and give him thanks, that he has laid our
bones, and powered our blood into the Foundation of so honorable a work. It is
a sin and a shame not to honor Christ, when in his work, we are put to
shame: How shameful then would our sin be, if we should not honor him,
while he gives us honor, in carrying on his work? There is nothing more
undutifull then for a people to humble God, while God, is exalting them. Not to
acknowledge mercies, is at least an humbling, if it be not an Abasing of God.

Wherefore (Honored Senators) let your hearts be ever lifted up, in the ways
of God, and let God be lifted up, in all your hearts. Let your piety be as
zealous (in keeping days of praise and thanksgiving) to record blessings, as
it has bin (in keeping days of Prayer and Fasting) to procure them. God could
tell the sraclites in the Book of Judges, how often and from what enemies by
name, he had delivered them. Let your records be as exact in this point (to the
best of your observation) as Gods are. He knows still, when, and what
victories he gives; he knows by whom, and over whom Chap. 10.
he gives them. Let your registers be as counterpanes of those reserved in
heaven, yea, as the copies of all those volumes of love, and care which God
has transcribed from that original of his secret counsels, by the visible
hand and pen of providence, in the actions of these latter days. They that
retain the memory of mercies, seldom loose the fight of mercies: and God
never breaks off (for evil) from doing them good, who speak good of his name.
How many successes, what victories have been given you, since you paid this
debt of praise? You and we have had joy upon joy; then add Thankfulness to
Thankfulness, till yours and our joys be full. This filling up the Nation
joy, is, and (Christ assisting) shall be the great desire and earnest prayer of

Your Servant in the work of the Lord, Joseph Caryl.

A SERMON PREACHED Before the Honorable House of COMMONS at Westminster upon
the 23. of April, 1644. being a day appointed for solemn Thanksgiving unto God
for the late successes and victories attained by our Armies in Yorkshire and
Pembrock-shire.
REVEL 11. v. 16, 17. Ver. 16. And the four and twenty Elders which sat
before God on their seats, fell upon their faces and worshipped God,

17. Saying, we give thee thanks, O Lord God Almighty, which art, and wast, and
art to come; because thou have taken to thee thy great power, and have reigned.


THis Chapter may be well entitled the compendium or Breviat of all the
Prophecies contained in this book, concerning the state of the Church;
whether, sadly gro^ning under or gloriously triumphing over Antichristian
Tyranny. God has ever (even in times of thickest error and grossest
Apostasy) reserved a remnant to himself for the asserting of his Truth. These
are called (by way of excellency) his Witnesses. These being small in number;
are expressed by the smallest number, Two Witnesses; These, being thus few, are
yet enough, to give a complete Testimony, For in the mouth of Mat. 18. 16.
two or three Witnesses every word may be established.

The work of these Witnesses, in the nature of it, is very spiritual and
divine, therefore called prophesying, I will give power to my two Witnesses,
and they shall prophecy, v. 3.

The continuance of their work, is very long: so long, That it is shortened in
words by a figure, reducing a year to a day, A Thousand two hundred and
threescore days. Prophetical days, every year being as short in words, as a
day, and every day as long in sense as a year. A Ezekiel. 4. 6.
day for a year: So Ezekiel was taught to count; and so are we.

The outward condition wherein they prophesied was such as might have caused
them to reckon every day a year: and yet the inward comfort and assistance was
such, as might make them reckon every year, but as a day. To be clothed in
sackcloth is to be clothed with sorrow, to be wrapped about with affliction.
The habit of these Witnesses was an Emblem of actual mourning, They
prophesied clothed in sackcloth, v. 3.

And as sorrow attended them all the time of their witnessing, so death attends
the accomplishment of it. And when they shall have finished their Testimony,
the beast that ascends out of the bottomless pit, shall make war against
them and evercome them and kill them, v. 7.

As we have learned the length of their days from Ezekiels Calendar, so we may
learn the kind of their death from Ezekiels vision: his dry bones ( Chap. 37.)
can speak (as well as hear, v. 4.) and tell you that to die, is sometimes to
be in great distress, in captivity, and under the power of merciless men.
This is to die daily, to be in deaths often. As to live in sin, so to live in
sorrow, is to be dead while we live. Yet this death cannot swallow up these
dead, but shall it self be swallowed up in victory. The grave had no victory at
all over them, and death had but a short one. The people shall not suffer their
dead bodies to be put in graves, v. 9. And after three days and a half, the
spirit of life from God entered into them, and they stood upon their feet, v.
11, Christ arose the third day. His witnesses arise after three days and a
half; All the servants of Christ shall enter into their Masters joy, and these
eminent ones are admitted (in the letter) within half a degree of their
Masters privilege. As in Scripture language, imminent dangers are a death, so
eminent deliverances are a resurrection. What shall the receiving of them be,
but life from the dead? Romans 11. 15.

And because the justice and goodness of God will not be satisfied with the
bare reparation of his oppressed servants, for their wrongs, and a putting of
them in statu quo; But he will give them an addition of double honor, in every
land where they have been put to shame. Therefore these witnesses shall not
only arise, but they shall ascend: Christ will make them what they were, and
more; They ascended up to Heaven in a cloud, and their enemies beheld them, v.
12. Great changes, produce great effects, The blessing of God upon his people,
portends a curse to his enemies. That act of mercy which raises Sion, ruins
Babylon: Every advancement of the truth is the downfall of error. No sooner do
these witnesses ascend, But the same hour there was a great earthquake, and
the tenth part of the City fell, v. 13.

And so great is the fall thereof, that presently the seventh Angel sounds;
This sound produces (a second effect) great voices, v. 15. And there were great
voices in Heaven, saying, etc. These voices have a double sound in them; First,
The sound of faith and holy confidence in God. Secondly, The voice of joy and
thankfulness unto God. The voice of faith is so confident, as if it spoke from
the dictates of sense, and saw yea enjoyed all (in these beginnings) as already
done. The Kingdoms of this world are become the Kingdoms of our Lord and of
his Christ, and he shall reign for ever and ever, v. 15.

This heightn'd faith brings forth joy, as its immediate issue, joy is the
fruit of faith. This joy brings forth praise to God, praise is the Reuben of
joy, its firstborn, the beginning Prove. 27. 16.
of its strength, the excellency of its dignity. Joy cannot be silent; it is
the ointment in the Saints righthand, which bewrays it self, in perfuming
the Name of God, in making his Name like an ointment powered out. The Saints
were so full of holy joy that they could not keep their seats, And the four
and twenty Elders, which sat before God on their seats, fell upon their
faces, and worshipped God saying, We give thee thanks O Lord God Almighty, etc.

The studies of the learned both Ancient and Modern have been very great, and
their conceptions as various about the meaning of this prophecy. All that I
shall say, is, That I believe the providence of God is now about to open and
give the unerring interpretation of it. The actions of these times are now a
making, and will shortly make a full exposition of this Scripture. I am sure
the business of this day, will be as a Comment upon that part of it, read unto
you. For, though we should not now hit the very nick of time (about that I will
not strive) which the Spirit of God aims at in this solemn Hallelujah of
these Elders: Yet this duty becomes the Elders at all or any of those times,
wherein they behold the Lord God Almighty, taking to himself his great power
and reigning.

The general subject of these words is the praise of God, about which they
hold out four things distinctly Division of the text.
considerable.

First, the persons, who perform this duty of praise to God. 2ly, The manner
in which they praise God. 3ly, The notions under which they praise God. 4ly,
The grounds or reasons for which they praise God.

1, The persons are described in those words. And the four and twenty Elders
which sat upon their seats. This description of the persons has three things
observable. First, the number of the persons, Four and twenty. 2ly, Their State
or Quality, they were Elders. 3ly, Their posture or condition, They sat upon
seats before God.

2. In the manner of their praising God we may note two things. 1. Their
praises were very humble and devout, They fell upon their faces and worshipped.
2. Their praises were vocal and explicit, They spoke out, Saying, we give thee
thanks.

3. The Notions under which they praise God; are two, 1. His omnipotency, O
Lord God Almighty. 2ly, His eternity, Which art and wast, and art to come.

4. The grounds or reasons moving them to this duty of praising God are
likewise two. First, the assuming of his power; Thou have taken to thee thy
great power. 2ly, The settling of his kingdom, And have reigned.

And the four and twenty Elders. By these Elders we may Explication of the text.
understand all the faithful people of God, especially their chiefes and
leaders, godly Magistrates and godly Ministers going before, stirring them up,
and directing them to magnify the name of the Lord. Among the Saints some are
Elders by Office, many in regard of Age, all in regard of that real gravity
and dignity, which spiritual wisdom and (...). Prove. 16. ^1.
holiness casts upon them. Wisdom and holiness are the gray-haires of
young men. The hoary head is a crown of Glory when it is found in the way of
righteousness. And the ways of righteousness are a crown of glory upon the
greenest head.

These Elders are numbered four and twenty, either; first in allusion to that
distribution of the Levites, who attended the service of God; or, of the people
attending the service of the King, each being cast into twenty four divisions,
1 Chronicles. chapter 24. Chap. 25. Chap. 26. Chap. 27. From whence Mr Brightman
concludes thus; Seeing therefore the whole Bright in Apoc. c. 4. v. 4.
company of the children of Israel, were distinguished into 24 orders, These
Elders which are both Priests and Kings, and do stand in stead of all the
faithful that serve Christ, are worthily reckoned up in so many Orders and in
the same number. Or, 2ly. (Which is also the apprehension of the same Author.)
These Elders are numbered four and twenty, to show the Amplitude of the
Christian Church above the Jewish, That, having but twelve Patriarchs or
Elders, this, four and twenty; the doubling of the chief number, intimates a
mighty increase in the whole number.

These sat on their seats. To sit notes sometime the peaceblenesse of our
present condition and sometime the honor of it. Sitting is a posture both of
rest and of rule; the power of the Magistrate is expressed by sitting in the
gate, and the peace of the people by sitting every one under his vine, and
under his fig tree. These sat upon their seats before God, as being either
first under the eye of his inspection. Or, 2ly, Under the eye of his
protection. But here, rather, this sitting before God implies their address
and readiness in the Congregation, for public worship, which they act, as the
next Bold. de Ecclesia ante legem. l. 1. c. 3.
words import, by falling upon their faces. To fall upon the face is a
worship-gesture, so frequent in the old Testament, that the Patriarchs and
Prophets were called Nephilim (from Naphal to fall down) or cadentes, that is
prostrates or fallers, because in the duties of worship, they used to prostrate
themselves and fall upon their faces before (...)
God. Hence the Hebrews use the same word to signify (...) Est more catellorum
ad pedes domini totum sese prosternere subjectionis gratia Zanch.
worshipping and bowing down the body. And the Greek word here used in the Text
has the same propriety in it, alluding in the letter to the nature and manner
of little dogs, which out of fear creep and crouch at the feet of their
Masters for favor and acceptance with them. So then, falling upon the face
points out self-abasement, and humiliation in worship.

To worship God is to give him the honor due unto his name, that is the
Scripture definition, Psalm. 29. 2. Give unto the Lord the honor due unto his
name, then follows by way of explication, Worship the Lord in the beauty of
holiness. Worship is the giving of God his due honor; honor is due to God by
a double right: By the right of his Nature, as he has a being; and by the
right of his Will, as he has given a command. It is equally dangerous to deny
the former and to innovate the latter. God counts nothing worship, but honor
due to his name: and no honor due to his name, but what his will calls for and
appoints. All besides or beyond these is a dishonor to God, though we intend
him a worship. Further, the worship Deum colend^ violare.
of God which is due honor, is of two sorts. 1. Internal. 2. External, and
either of these may be an act, either of prayer for the receiving of mercies or
of praise for mercies received. The worship of the Text is praise, and that
external praise, They worshipped, saying, we give thee thanks O Lord God
Almighty. Blessings are the gifts of God to man, and thanks is the gift of man
to God. Every good gift descends from God, and here is a good gift that ascends
to God. He that gives all is willing sometimes to take, and he who enjoyes all
is willing sometimes to receive; God needs nothing, we are honored as much
that God will receive our Thanks, as we are relieved in receiving his mercies.
Thanks is mercies Echo, We thank thee O Lord God.

The words thus far opened yield many useful Instructions, I shall gather
the sum of all into one Conclusion, and touch all particulars in applying it.

It is the duty and has been the practice of all the faithful people of God,
especially of godly Magistrates and Ministers, humbly to worship God in giving
him thanks for the acts of his Almighty power and unchangeable goodness.

The Psalmist doubles this duty in the practice of the Psalm. 77. 1.
Saints, Unto thee O Lord, do we give thanks, do we give thanks: we do it,
we do it, as if none else did it but they, or as if they had done nothing
else, Praise waits for thee O God in Sion. Why in Sion? Sion was the
habitation of the Psalm. ^5. 1.
Saints, there they dwelt or thither they came to worship God in the beauty of
holiness. Praise waits there, because the people of God wait there. The Hebrew
says, Praise is silent for thee O God in Sion. Not that praise is dumb or
tongue-tied in Sion, if it speak any where it speaks there. But praise is
silent for God, if it speaks of any, it speaks of God, praise in Sion has not
a word for any creature in Heaven or Earth till God comes; Sions praise cannot
speak to any below God, and to God it cannot but speak. Thanksgiving is the
trade of Saints in Sion, there is the free-Mart of mercy, and there is the free
receipt of praise. There Is buying without money, and there is giving without need.
The Songs of Moses and Miriam, of Deborah and Barak, of David and others in the
holy Story, show that the stresse of this heavenly work, lies upon the Elders.

There are two grounds why it should lie there. First, the Elders are fittest
to perform this duty. 2ly, The Elders have most cause to perform this duty.

Psalm. 33. 1.
Psalm; Rejoice in the Lord O ye righteous. Why they? For praise is comely for
the upright. A godly man praising God, is the most comely and beautiful sight
in the world. Neither are there any in whom it is comely, but they; the garment
of praise fits the righteous only. The praise of God is dishonored in the
mouths of wicked men. The legs of the lame are not equal, so is a parable in
the mouth of Prove. 26. 7.
fools, says Solomon. A parable is a master-sentence, a sentence full of
wisdom and holiness, wherein the very spirits of Truth are so contracted that
it subdues the understanding to it; such a speech as this (and such are the due
praises of God) how unevenly do they go, how haltingly do they pass from
the mouths of foolish, ( scil.) wicked men. They who are darkness never
appear so ugly as when they draw near unto or deal about the light. How did
the confession of one of Luke 4. 34, 35.
the most glorious Truths that ever was revealed, offend and grate the ears of
Christ, when spoken by the father of lies. A profane man abuses God, everytime
he gives him thanks, at the best he does but bungle and make uncomely work of
it. The beautiful garment of praise put upon such, is as beauty upon a woman
without discretion, a jewel of gold in a Swines snout, Prove. 11. 22.

A second consideration importing the fitness of the Elders for this duty, is
their ability for the duty. They are most able, yea they only are able to
perform this duty. Without Christ we can do nothing. Beasts and stones can
praise God ( analogically) in a manner, Hypocrites and profane men can praise
God ( formally) after their manner: Elders and Saints only can praise God (
properly) after his manner. Praise is worship, and worship is the sole work of
Saints: yea praise is the most spiritual part of worship, it is the spirit of
worship, the highest and noblest act of worship; it is Heaven-worship,
Heaven-worke, all the work and worship that is reserved for Heaven. It
requires more then a state of regeneration, even a state of perfection; Grace
is not sufficient, it calls for the strength of glory to praise the Lord. Here
we can complain over our wants, and blubber over our sins, and sufficiently
cry over our troubles. But how short and low-hearted are we (at best) in
rejoicing over our mercies, in singing the loving kindness, and crying up the
glory of our God. God will be above our praises, when we are above, how much is
he then above them, while we are below; And if the Lord be above the praises of
the holiest, who are below in the state of grace; how infinitely is he above
their praises, who are below in the state of nature?

Thirdly, The Elders are fittest in respect of the Lords acceptance. Praise
does not please God, brought by every hand. The Sacrifice of the wicked is an
abomination to Prove. 15. ^.
the Lord; Prayer is sacrifice, and so is praise; this is so abominable, that
it is abomination when presented by the wicked. From them (though never so
curiously flourisht in words) it is but like the offering of Swines flesh, and
the Isa. 66. 3.
cutting off, of a dogs neck. Some great Princes have forbid all to draw
their pictures in colors, or cut their statues in stone, but some special
Artists of their own appointment; they would not accept this service from any
others. Grace only has art enough to limb out to the life, the excellencies
of God; no creature can do God right, but others do him wrong. His Saints
cannot reach him, yet they please him. Others do not only come short of, but
blot the name of God, with the pensil of their most studied praises. These
things laid together clear the first Reason, why praise is the Elders duty,
they are fittest for this service, it becomes them best, they are best enabled
for it and accepted in it.

Again, the Elders have most cause to praise the Lord. Second Reason
For first, their mercies are greater then the mercies of others. All creatures
have cause to praise the Lord, for their being (Psalm. 148.) All men have cause
to praise the Lord, for the excellency of their being: The worst of men have
cause to praise God, that they are no worse, and the most miserable men on
earth, because they are not more miserable, even arrested with the miseries of
hell; yea some affirm that the most miserable in hell, have reason to praise
God, because their hell is not more miserable. All these have cause to bless
God, but the Saints have more, they have right-handed mercies, full-handed
mercies, greater mercies and better mercies; both quality and quantity
commends them; they have choice mercies and a Benjamins mess. Now as where God
sows, there he looks to reap, so where he sows much, he looks to reap much; and
where he sows most, he looks to reap most. None receive so much mercy as the
Elders, and none bound to pay so much praise as they.

Secondly, the Elders have prayed and dealt with God most for the obtaining of
public mercies. They have often gone forth weeping (in days of humiliation)
bearing precious seed of prayer, and therefore they shall (as a privilege) and
they ought (as a duty) come again with rejoicing bringing their sheaves (of
praise) with them. Psalm. 126. 6. They that sow in tears shall reap in joy,
(that is the promise of God) and they ought to rejoice when they reap, that is
the duty of man. The Elders falling upon their faces in prayer, had wrestled
for and obtained these mercies, and now they fall upon their faces to praise
the Lord for these mercies.

Further, the Elders have bin active in their several stations to serve the
providence of God for the procuring of these mercies. Prayer makes them
industrious; They pray as if God were to do all, and they endeavor, as if
themselves were to do all. They pray as knowing they can do nothing without
God, and they labor as knowing that usually God will do nothing without them.
This engages them to praise God, when they see (through his concurrent
blessing) the fruits of their counsels and watchings, when they eat the
labors of their hands.

Lastly, none have such cause as they, for the vows of God are upon them:
Praise is the payment of vows. Thy Psalm. 56. 12.
vows are upon me O Lord (says David) I will render praises Psalm. 65. 1.
unto thee. And again, when he had said; Praise waits for thee O God in
Sion, presently follows, and unto thee shall the vow be performed. Praying
days are vowing-daies, and praising-daies are vow-performing-daies. Vows are
the dedication of our mercies to God before we receive them, and praise is the
dedication of our mercies to God after we have received them. When Hannah was
in bitterness Sem 1. 10, 11
of soul and prayed unto the Lord for a child, she vowed a vow and said, O
Lord of Hosts, if thou will indeed look upon the affliction of thy handmaid,
and remember me, and not forget thine handmaid, but wilt give unto thine
handmaid a man child, then I will give him unto the Lord all the days of his
life. Her prayer was heard, she has a son. In the same Chapter her
praise-offering is upon record, and the payment of her vow. She brings her
child to the High Priest 1 Samuel 1. 26, 27, 28.
and said, O my Lord as thy soul lives, my Lord, I am the woman that stood by
thee here prayeng unto the Lord: For this child I prayed and the Lord has
given me my Petition, which I asked of him, therefore also I have lent him to
the Lord as long as he lives. The holy Elders may name most of their mercies
Samuels, that is, asked of God; yea and vowed to God. This causes them to come
with praise-offerings and say in the great Congregation, for this mercy we
prayed unto the Lord, and the Lord has given us our petition, therefore also
we have lent this, and our selves to the Lord as long as we live. Whatsoever
good thing the Lord gives us by prayer we should lend it to the Lord by praise:
Every blessing received is best enjoyed by man, when it is lent unto the Lord.
How wonderful is the course of Gods love, and the recourse of man's duty. He
gives to us that we may lend to him; and this lending is the payment of our
vows to him.

Then blessed be God who has put into the hearts of Application.
our Elders to pay their vows this day and praise the Lord. It is a sweet
thing when duty and practice go together. When our obedience touches the
command, and when our will is in consort with the Will of God. This makes the
most pleasant harmony, such music as is the delight of God, the joy of
angels. You are met this day (Honorable and Beloved) to bring your Presents to
the Lord who ought to be feared, to dedicate your victories and your spoils
unto the Lord, who ought to be feared; to the Lord glorious in holiness,
fearful in praises, doing wonders. Ye are arisen from your seats of
judgment, on which you sit every day before the Lord: and are sitting upon
your seats of worship before the Lord, ready to fall upon your faces and
worship, saying, We give thee thanks O Lord God Almighty. Ye are as the
common center, from whom the lines of direction are carried for the managing of
all public affairs throughout the land; And therefore how suitable is it that
from your, both pious example and Authoritative Direction, Lines of praise
should be carried into all the land for the successes of those affairs. As the
work is specially yours, so also is the fruit of it, and so also are all the
duties which that fruit calls for. Your hands and tongues are chief in procuring
National blessings, your hearts and tongues ought to be chief in acknowledging
National blessings. And blessed be God that we are all here this day, to give
him Thanks for victories, which we see coming-in at the great and beautiful
gate of our National Council and public deliberations, not at the trap-door
of secret plots, or personal passions. Our victories are not the issues of a
war raised upon the distempered heat of green heads or upon the discontented
humors of an enraged multitude, but upon the coolest consultations of our
Elders, the saddest resolutions of a grave and steddie Senate.

Object. Yet some think rejoicing and praise unbecomming the successes of this
war. The light of nature taught Heathen Rome better, then to triumph in the
victories of a Civill-warre.

Answ. I confess ours is a sad war, because it is a Civill-warre, yet be not
offended. For first, in some cases where nature bids us agree, the Gospel bids
us divide: in some cases, where nature bids us grieve, the Gospel bids us
rejoice. Christ (the Prince of Peace) has told us that he came, (not that it
was intended but occasioned by his Man. 10. 34, 35 36.
coming) To set a man at variance against his father, and the daughter against
her mother, and the daughter in law against the mother in law and a man's
enemies shall be they (not only of his own kingdom, but) of his own house.
Though the opposition of Gospel truths and privileges are not held forth by
the enemy, as the appearing ground of this war, yet I believe they lie in
the bottom of it. And that our Civil laws and liberties were so much
infringed, chiefly as they were the fence of our spiritual. Oppressions upon
our temporal estates do sometime begin at the door of the Sanctuary, and
they are often intended to end there. National Religion usually follows the
State, and when the spirit of a people is subdued, their consciences seldom
stand out.

Secondly, all wars are either just or unjust: If a war be unjust, we have
reason to hide our trophies, and be ashamed of our victories, though attained
upon the most foreign and remotest enemy. He that thanks God when he prospers
in sin; makes God a patron, yea a partner in his sin. But if a war be (as
ours has bin prooved, and appeared over and over to unbyast consciences) a
just war; I know no reason but we may, yea we ought to rejoice in the
prosperous success of it, though against our nearest naturally or civilly
related Friends. The good success of a just war, is the highest sentence of
divine Justice. And it becomes us to glorify God, whenever he glorifies
himself and releeves us by the manifestations of his justice. The Saints are
Revel. 15. 3, 4.
described singing the Song of Moses, saying, who would not fear thee O Lord
and glorify thy Name, etc. for thy judgments are made manifest. We are not
this day rejoicing in the blood and ruin of men, but in the justice of God
upon them, and in his goodness to ourselves.

Lastly, our joy is not (I am sure it ought not to be, and was not intended to
be) a riotous loose joy, but a religious regulated, sober joy: Joy with a
temperament of holy fear: we are called to rejoice, not as men, much les as
vain men, but as Christians: we are not called to sacrifice to our nets, or
burn incense to our draggs, to boast in an arm of flesh, in the strength of
horses, or in the skill and courage of their riders; but in the Lord of Hosts
and in the power of his might. Only serious joy becomes Elders. Such was the
joy and praise of these Elders in the text, whose practice may be our pattern,
and teach us how to manage this important duty by a threefold direction. Three
Rules taken from the text to direct us in praising God.


First, the Elders in giving thanks to God fell upon their faces. The face is
the seat of beauty, the throne of dignity, the image of the mind, you may
read much of man in the lines of his countenance. He that falls upon his face,
hides his own glory. Then the Elders by this act teach you to give thanks
very humbly with much self-denial, yea with self-abasement. To do so, is to
fall upon your faces, while you sit upon your seats; and to be prostrate, while
you stand upon your feet. In this sense let all our Armies be, as fallen upon
their faces. Let our Parliament be as fallen upon their faces. Let us hide the
strength, the valor of the one, the wisdom and councels of the other. Let us
put all in the dust, let nothing be seen, nothing be heard of this day, but
the wisdom and strength of Christ. They that go forth in Christ's name will
make mention (in their returns) of his strength and righteousness only.
Praise is a self-emptying, and a God-exalting duty. When we are lowest in our
selves, we lift up God highest. Usually God exalts a people most when they are
lowest in a necessitated lowness, He does great things to set on Job 5. 11.
high those that be low: And when a people are lowest in a voluntary lowness,
they exalt God most. He that falls upon his face to the ground, will find the
ground his advantage, to lift up either a prayer or a praise.

We (besides this example of the Elders, and our own advantage) have yet a
further reason to fall upon our faces, while we give thanks for this victory.
Many of our valiant ones, men (as David's helpers are described) whose faces
were like Lions, Men, who with a due tempered courage, dared death and danger
to the face, fell upon their faces and died to gain this victory. Our mercies
cost us blood, therefore give thanks humbly, yea rejoice tremblingly. And be
not afraid to tremble in rejoicing, it will not weaken, much less destroy your
joys. To rejoice with trembling, makes the most steady joy.

Secondly, The praises of these Elders were explicit and vocal. They
worshipped, saying, we give thee thanks, etc. Loud speaking-mercies are ill
answered with silent, or whispering praises. Most of the solemn Thanksgivings,
recorded in Scripture are composed in Songs. We often read of singing praise,
sometime of loud-singing, and (which is more) of shouting-praises, we must at
the lowest say our praises, The Elders worshipped, saying, we thank thee.
Heart-praise is best, but tongue-praise is necessary; Internal worship pleases
God most, but external worship honors God most. For by this only God is
known* in the world, and his glory shines forth. Outward worship is Gods
name. Hence God is said to put his name in the Temple, because he was there
publicly worshipped. It is as dangerous to conceal the praise of God, as to
conceal our own sins. My son (says Joshua to Achan) Josh 7. 19.
give I pray thee glory to God, and make confession unto him, (he means not a
confession between God and his own soul in secret, therefore he adds) and
tell me now what thou have done, hide it not from me. If we also would give
glory to God, we must make open confession of his mercies, tell abroad what he
has done, and not hide it. Why should not we speak out audibly, when God
works out so visibly. When God does us good in the sight of all, shall not we
speak good of God, in the hearing of all. David makes a narrative of invisible
mercies, mercies which could not be seen, shall be heard; Come (says he) and
hear all ye that fear God, and I will declare what he has done for my soul,
Psalm. 66. 26. Shall not we make a narrative of visible mercies? Shall not those
mercies be heard, which cannot but be seen? Shall we not say, come and hear,
all ye that fear God, we will declare what God has done for our land, for
England. I may say to silent ones as those lepers did one to another, You do
not well, this is 2 Kin. 7. 9.
a day of good tidings, and you hold your peace. Some (I fear) hold their
peace about any prosperities of our war, least hereafter they should loose
their peace, as having been observed to own the war. Let me say to such as
Christ did to those in the Gospel, but in the sense last used. If these hold
their peace, the stones will speak. It will be as much a miracle for any to
hold (in this sense) their peace, by silencing the praise of God, as for stones
to speak. It is sinful and dangerous to silence others, but it is more sinful
and dangerous to silence our selves, and suspend our own abilities from
preaching or publishing with thankfulness our late temporal Salvations. We
can never with confidence look for the mercies of God, either spiritual or
corporal hereafter, if we wilfully hide them now. Such policy will yield us
little protection in an evil day. David bottomes his hope of future
deliverance upon his joyful publication of what was past. I have not Psalm. 40.
9, 10.
refrained my lips, O Lord thou know (He was not actively or politickly
silent) I have not hid thy righteousness within my heart (it lay there, but it
was not imprisoned or stifled there) I have declared thy faithfulness and thy
salvation: I have not concealed thy loving kindness and thy truth from the
great Congregation. Upon this he falls a praying (with a mighty spirit of
believing, that he shall have preservations from future evils) Withold not
thou thy tender mercies from verse. 11.
me O Lord, let thy loving kindness and thy truth continually preserve me, for
innumerable evils have compassed me about, etc. While we are praising God for
his goodness already showed us, we have need to be praying against evils and
enemies still encompassing us. And if any may be confident of preservation
against evils, still encompaising them; they may, who thankfully publish the
goodness of God already showed them; The Elders said, We give thee thanks, O
Lord God Almighty, which art and wast and art to come. Which words lead us to

A third Rule of Direction, from the practice of these Elders in our praising
God, which is this. In the duty of thankesgiving for any mercy, we are to
lift-up and magnify the name of God most, in those Attributes, which he
himself has most lifted-up and magnified in bestowing the mercy. As in
confessing sin we should chiefly weep over that Attribute which in
committing that sin we have chiefly wronged. So in confession of mercies, we
should cry up and glory over that Attribute chiefly, which God in giving the
mercy has chiefly honored. Why do these Elders praise God, under those
Notions of his Omnipotency and eternity? Surely, because God had made these
Attributes (in those acts) most glorious. Though the mercy of God be the
fountain, from whence all good things flow unto us, yet the power of God is
the hand which acts and executes good by every hand for us. Enemies are not
much troubled to hear that God is gracious and pitiful and compassionate;
They could carry it (they think) by fine force against all these Attributes.
But the report of his power and omnipotency makes the stoutest heart to
tremble. The love, and goodness, and mercy of God are Attributes written in
so spiritual a character, that nature can hardly read them, but the print of
his power is so plain, that they are forced to acknowledge, This is the finger
of God. The ruin of Babylon is prophesied and Revel. 18. 8.
described with this conclusion, For strong is the Lord God who judges her.
Babylon thinks her self impregnable, and her mountains too strong, for all
the batteries of earth or heaven: For she says in her heart, I sit a Queen,
and am no widow, and shall see no sorrow. Therefore when God shall pull her
down, and level all her Forts, the Attribute of his power shall be magnified,
Strong is the Lord who judges her. When the Church prays for deliverance
against potent enemies, she passionately stirs up the omnipotency of God,
Awake, awake, put on strength, O arm Isa. 51. 9.
of the Lord, awake as in the ancient days. Unless the love of God awake, and
he cloth himself with mercy, we cannot be delivered; yet because it is the
awakening of his power, and the putting-on of strength, which is most visible
in our deliverance, therefore in worshipping, let us say, We thank thee O Lord
God Almighty.

Here is yet another Attribute, in contemplation whereof these Elders praised
the Lord, and so must we this day, namely his eternity: Which art and wast and
is to come, is (...).
the Periphrasis of eternity. Time is the moveable Image of Eternity. Eternity
is a fixed instant, and time is a fluid instant. I am, is the proper name of
eternity: Which is and was and is to come, is a name borrowed from the image
of it, Time. He who is at once, and in one instant all the Exodus 3. 13, 14
Tradunt doctij. simi Haebraeorii, etc Verbum Ehejeh tria tempora complecti,
praesent, praeteritum and futurum: eoque perfectam and omnibus nume. ris
absolutam Dei stabilitate^ significari. Bez. Anno^ in 1. cap. Apoc. v 4.
Sciendum est Apostolum ita exprimere voluisse, quod scriptum est, Exodus 3. 14.
divisions of time, must needs be eternal. When Moses was sent by God to
deliver Israel, Moses desires to be instructed by what name he should make him
known to Israel. Tell them, says God, I am has sent me unto you. The Hebrew
is Ehejeh. Tell them that One Ehejeh has sent thee. The learned Jews and
Talmudists assure us, that this word Ehejeh contains those three times,
present, past and to come; and is the very same in sense, with this in the
Text, which art and wast and is to come. God is as much what he was, and what
he is to come, as what he is. I am in All: and therefore God is all stabilitie
and perfection. It is very observable, that the same Title in which he revealed
himself a deliverer to his Church, from literal Egypt, by the same he is
magnified as the deliverer of his people from mystical Egypt. The Elders Which
art and wast and art to come, is Moses his Ehejeh, I am, expounded. This
Attribute is most sweetly taken into our praising meditations. What is it that
carries the Lord thorough in all he has done, and does, and is to do? even
this, He was and is, and is to come. Eternity tryumphs over all; (...)
Hence the same word in Hebrew signifies, strength, victory and eternity. In
the first of Samuel (Chap. 15. 29.) The Text reads, The strength of Israel
will not lie nor repent, the Margin reads, the Eternity and victory of
Israel will not lie nor repent. So the Vulgar Triumphator Israel, etc.
Perpetual durance prevails over all. He that is eternal will certainly have
the last word and the last blow. Then certainly, Conqueror is his Name, He
must triumph over all.

It releeves some men to think, that though they cannot carry a business at
one time, yet they may at another. It is one of the grand principles of
Jesuiticall policy, Take time and you may do any thing. He that is, and was,
and is to come, may take what time he pleases; and upon this ground he has
done, and will do what he pleases. This is it which makes Sion rejoice and all
the Elders who dwell in Sion give thanks, Jesus Christ is and was and is to
come. He is the true semper Idem, his goodness and love to his Church, his
power and strength for his Church, the same for ever. He can never be
surpised, His preparations in regard of strength, and his resolutions in
regard of love, stand eternally at the same height, and upon the same bent. We
may be sure of him at all times; Man may be able to do much to day, and
nothing to morrow, Fuimus Troes, we were brave men, Time was; now the case is
altered. Man may be willing to do much to day, and nothing to morrow, Time
was! Now his mind is altered. Men one day are very zealous, hot and high (as if
they were all spirit) in the prosecution of a design, come to morrow, you may
find them cold and flat, as if they had no spirit at all. These were, but they
are not, and who can tell what they will be, in time to come. But herein lies
the strong consolation of the Elders, that the hand of Christ, never shortens,
that his mind never changes, that his zeal never cools, he can act over all
his works of power and love again and again, a thousand times again, and
will if his people stand in need of it. If Christ were not always the same,
his Church could not be at all the same. Let us therefore under this notion
rejoice in and praise the Lord. He was in our former mercies, He is in our
present mercies, He is to come, ready yet to give (as emergencies call for
them) future mercies. It had bin sad with us this day, if we had a God to
praise, of whom we could only say, He was Englands deliverer, Englands
protector in 88, in 1605. He was the Lord of our Hosts in former battles. But
in this we triumph, that we can say this day, the Lord is, he is our deliverer,
our protector, the Lord of our Hosts and the God of our battles. And with what
misgiving, if not bleeding hearts should we bless him this day, if we could
not (with as much assurance as we say, he is) say also, he is to come; surely
we have troubles yet to come, and dangers yet to come, and battles yet to come,
and if we had not a God to come; what would shortly become of us? What of our
Parliament? What of our Armies? We praise a God who is with us, when trouble is
present, and who will not be far off, when trouble is near at hand. Is not
this comfortable that our dangers can never come faster or sooner then our
deliverer can come? His coming is so unfailable, that his name is, That art to
come. He is what he was, and he will be what he is. Do not your hearts leap
for joy, while you give thanks to him, whose very name assures you, as much of
what you want, as of what you have, of what is behind in your hopes and
expectations, as of what is this day before you in your sight and gratulation?
So much of the duty contained in the three former branches of the Text. I now
pass to the ground of the duty, laid down in those latter words.

Because thou have taken to thee thy great power, and have The latter part of
the Text explained.
reigned.

He had horns coming out of his hand (says the Prophet) and there Habak. 3.
4.
was the hiding of his power. His people do not always see, nor enemies
feel, what he can do. None can cut the lock where the strength of our Sampson
lies. When he seems weak as other men, or weaker then other men, so that man
prevails, it is because he pleases, it should be so. His not acting his power,
is all his not having of power. His hand is omnipotent, only he keeps it in his
bosom. Hence the Church prays, Pluck thy hand out of thy bosom. His power
is hidden in his will. And as his Saints are said to lack or be without that
grace, which through negligence 2 Pet. 1 9.
they do not use; so Christ is said to be without that power, which through
providence he does not use. And therefore this phrase of Taking his great power,
imports no more, Accipere potestatem est excrere potestatem Deus conni^e^do ad
hostium surores, videbatur potentiam magnam (i e.) omni potentiam non habere
Par. in loc.
but the exerting and exercising of his power, or the raising up and awakening
of his power, which lying still, seemed to be a sleep. To which sense those
cries of his people, Awake Lord, why sleep thou (often used in Scripture)
do refer.

And for the reign of Christ, whether over his enemies to destroy them, or
over his Churches to direct them, whether as King of Nations, or King of
Saints: We may say as the Apostle John does of our Sonship. Beloved we are now
the sons of God, but it does not yet appear what we shall be, 1 Jo. 3. 2. we
have always the privilege of Sons, but not always the glory of Sons. So Christ
is always King, but it does not always appear how glorious a King he is, or
what he shall be. Christ has power, Kingdom, and glory, he retains the power
of his Kingdom, when he does not shine in the glory of his Kingdom, The Lord
reigns (says the Psalm) but clouds and Psalm. 97. 1^.
darkness are round about him. When he breaks through these Clouds and
scatters this Darkness, When not only Judgment and righteousness (which ever
are) but Majesty and glory (which ever do not) appear the habitation of his
Throne, then in the sense of the Text Christ reigns. He raigns rounded with
Clouds, when his enemies are upon his Throane; But he shall reign as
encompassed and clothed with light making all his enemies his Footstool.
Christ will recover nations and new Kingdoms out of the hand of Satan, from
Paganish and Turkish Tyranny. He will make such changes and alterations not
only in Antichristian but in Kingdoms truly called Christian, That even these
shall be, as if they had not bin Christ's, till then. He will make the place of
his feet so glorious in all Kingdoms, as if Isa. 60. 13.
he had had no Kingdom, till then. That which was glorious shall have no glory
in this respect, by reason of the glory which shall excel. This is the reign
of Christ, the beginnings whereof these Elders celebrate. We give the thanks O
Lord etc. Because thou have taken to thee thy great power and have reigned.
Hence Observe,

Power is Christ's peculiar. And that Christ has a peculiar power. Thy power,
All power is his, Mat. 2^. 1^.
and he has some power which none else can have. Christ is Pleni-potentiarius,
The proprietary of power and the distributer of power. Much of his power he
deposites in the hands of Men, and some of his power is usurpt by Men. This
latter he recovers back from all: and for the former all with whom it is
trusted must account.

Then, they who have power had need consider whether it be such as Christ has
given them, or such as they have taken from Christ. He will take back all his
peculiars, and vindicate the prerogatives of his Crown from all sacrilegious
Antichristian usurpations And they who have power by due commission from
Christ, had need consider what they do with it, and how they improve it. It is
almost as dangerous to misuse a power received from Christ, as to use a power
not received from Christ. May I not do what I will with mine own? said that
Master in the Parable ( Math. 20. 15.) yes that thou may, good reason too.
And by the same reason, no man may do what he will with power, for it is not
his own. If a man's tongue were his own (as they bragged, Psalm. 124.) he might
speak what he list, without control: But because his tongue is not his own,
therefore he must give an account of every idle word. So, if a man's power Mat.
12. 36.
were his own, he might do with it what he list, but because it is not his
own, but Christ's, therefore he must give an account to Christ of every unjust
act or administration of that power. Power is a Talent, they sin who hide it
in a Napkin, and will not use it for Christ: What then do they who use it
against Christ, And oppose heaven by that which originally comes from heaven?
He that acts a mere Politician with his power, is well compared to a man
standing upon his head (he trusts his wit) and kicking (as such do) at heaven
with their feet. His actions are heaven oppositions. Such abusers of power,
Christ will at last tread under his feet as mire in the streets, and break
Psalm. 2.
them to pieces as a Potters vessel with the iron rod of his angered power. Be
wise now therefore O ye Kings, be instructed ye that are Judges of the Earth.
Serve the Lord (in all your power) with fear.

The power of Christ is a great power. Thou have taken to thee thy great power.
His power is great ( extensive) being over All, All places, All persons, at all
times. And his power is great ( Intensive) being over all in all degrees, This
positive is superlative, Christ's great power is the greatest power.

Then Christ can do great things, yea he can do great Animo magno nihil
magmum.
things as easily, as small. A great mind counts nothing great, and it makes
every thing little, when it is armed with great power. The Lord in a holy
scorn bafl'd the great mountain of old Babel before great Zerubbabel, with,
Zech. 4. 8.
Who art thou O great Mountain, etc. yet, then the promise was, Not by might
nor by power, but by my Spirit, says the ver. 7.
Lord of Hosts. And shall not the Elders in a like scorn bafle the great
mountains of new Babel, and say, Who art thou O great Babylon, O Babylon the
great before Jesus Christ, Revel. 17. 5.
taking to himself his great power and reigning, thou shall surely fall.

Again, if Christ's be a great power, then let our's be a great faith. How
unsuitable is it that when we have a God who can easily do great things, we
should be a people that can hardly believe small things? How does it misbecome,
that Christ should be invested with great power, and Christians should give
cause to be rebuked with, O ye Mat. 8. 26.
of little faith.

Sometime Christ seems to put his power out of his own hand. Thou have taken
to thee thy great power. Christ calls it in: surely then it was abroad. Christ
goes (in the opinion of the world) for weak when his Church is weak, as he
takes himself for persecuted, when any member of his Church is smitten. Christ
gives power, not only into the hands of his friends, but into the hands of his
enemies; to try what Dic mibi tu fueris si leo qualis cris.
they will do with it, to see, what work they will make with it. Men know not
what they would be, nor what they would do, till they have opportunity. Much
wickedness lies hid in the heart, till there be strength in the hand to draw
it forth. Little did Hazael think that so much cruelty lodged in his breast,
till he had a throne to act upon. Nature vexed and Nature armed discovers it
self. 2 King. 8. 13.
And because Christ will have the thoughts of men's hearts discerned and their
spirits turned outward, therefore he lets men rule and carry it in the world,
while himself, as it were stands by and looks on.

Christ can resume his power when he pleases, and will resume it when his own
promise and the Churches profit call him to it. The appearing weakness of
Christ is voluntary and elected; He is weak only upon consultation and
design; and therefore upon consultation and design, at his own will and
election, he can be strong again. Men sometime are put to fear those, whom
they trust with their power. They trust out more power in the hands of others,
then they see is well-used, and yet they know not how to recall, or take it
back into their own hands. Christ can recall all his Commissions, and take to
himself his great power, without asking any man's leave, or fearing any man's
displeasure: He can recrew't his (as the world accounts them) broken Troops and
scattered Armies, without the counsel or contributions of any creature.

As soon as ever Christ takes his power he reigns presently, Thou have taken
to thee thy great power and have reigned. This was the very beginning and
commencement of Christ's kingdom, in the glory of it, and yet it is spoken of,
as if he had fully accomplished it. If he will work none can let him. Man may
quickly overweene Isa 43. 23. 1 Kin. 20. 11.
his own power, but Christ cannot. Let not him that girdeth on his harness,
boast himself as he that puts it off, says Ahab to Benhadad. But as soon
as Christ begins to gird on his harness, he may boast, as if he were putting
it off. There is nothing left to hazard, there is no fortune in his Deuteronomy. 32.
41.
war. He may sing victoria before the battle, If he does but whet his
glittering sword (whetting is but preparatory to smiting) and his hand take
hold on judgment, he will render vengeance 1 Samuel 3. 12.
to his enemies, and will reward them that hate him. When he begins he will
also make an end, whether in wrath upon his adversaries, or in loving kindness
to his people. Thou have reigned. I have but touched at these points, because
though they lie plainly in the words, as they are a Proposition, yet they are
not the scope of propounding them: which in this place is only to give a reason
or ground of the Elders joy and thankfulness, expressed in the former parts of
the Text. As taken strictly under this consideration, they teach us three
points.

First, That it is a ground of abundant praise and comfort to Three Doctrines
from the words, as they hold forth the reason why the Elders gave thanks.
all the Saints when Christ appears resuming his power and setting up his
kingdom. It is well for all the world that Christ reigns. How soon would the
frame of every kingdom dissolve or be out of course, if he did not bear up
their pillars, and overruled all their rulers. Men could not live by men, if
the world were left merely to the power of man. Hence the Psalmist calls all to
rejoice in Christ the King. The Lord reigns, let the earth rejoice, let the
multitude of Psalm. 97. 1.
Isles (many and great Isles) be glad thereof, yet the Saints who have an
interest in Christ above others are glad of the reign of Christ above others,
he is a King over others, but he is a King for them, therefore it follows, v.
8th, Sion heard thereof and was glad. The rest are called to rejoice, but Sion
does rejoice; her ear affects her heart. Sion heard thereof Isa. 52. 7.
and was glad. This is news enough to be told in Sion; how beautiful are his
feet that brings this good tidings, that says unto Sion thy God reigns. In
this one report, all her mercies are reported at once. And she reads the
history of all her hopes, in her first experiencies of that ancient prophecy.

Q. But what matter of joy or thankfulness is it for Saints, that Christ
reigns?

A. We use to say, A friend at Court is better then a penny in our purse; we
count it matter of joy, if we have a friend about the King. What is it then to
have the King our Friend, or to hear that Our Friend is King. But the
qualification of a King is better to us then his relation. All kingly
qualifications meet in the person of Christ. First, he is so wise, that he is
called Wisdom; so wise, that in him are hidden all the treasures of wisdom; so
wise, that he needs none to counsel him, he is the Counselor, and fears
none who counsel against him, for there is no counsel against the Lord. It
has been said, That Commonwealths should then be happy, when either
Philosophers were Kings, or Kings were Philosophers. How happy then must Sion
be in her King, who is not only a lover of wisdom, but wisdom.

Secondly he is a just King. The true Melchizedec, King of Justice. When Christ
takes his great power and reigns, we know power is then in a good hand, and
the Crown upon a righteous head. Christ never did, nor ever will do wrong to
any, (no not to the devil) with his power; Though his will be his law, and the
breast of this Commander, the reason of his commands; yet no man, no not the
worst of men, his greatest and most professed studied enemies, shall ever have
cause to complain of rigor or injustice. He will indeed punish all wicked
men, but he will not oppress or injure any one. Now if his power shall never
wrong his enemies; what right and relief may not his own people expect from
him? no gifts can blind his eyes from giving judgment, nor any greatness stop
his hand from executing it; No sons of Zerviah are to hard for him, 2 Samuel 3.
39.
he will reward the doer of evil according to his wickedness. Tribulation and
anguish upon every soul of man that does evil, but Romans 2. 9, 10.
glory, honor and peace to every man that works good.

Thirdly, he is meek and lowly; so the Prophet presents him as the object of
Sions joy, in the days of his humiliation, Zach. 9. 9.
When he came riding upon an Ass, and upon a colt the foale of an Ass. And so
we may present him to Sion still in all the times of his exaltation, reigning
upon his throne, or riding upon the chariot of his greatest glory. He keeps no
severe distance from his people, nor deterrs them from suing to him by a
clouded, angry brow; smiles and sweetness sits upon his face; he is ( Deliciae
Sanctorum) the delight of Saints, and tenderness it self to all his people.

Fourthly, he is a peaceable Prince, and more then that the very Prince of
Peace. He is not only disposed for Peace, but he has peace at his dispose.
Kings of the earth command war; but they Treat for peace. But if Christ say
Peace to the Sea; The winds will obey him And if Christ say peace to the sword,
the war will obey him. If he will give quietness, who then can make trouble,
whether Ioh. 34. 29.
it be for a Nation or for a man only.

Time would fail me to instance further, in those divine heart-reioycing
Characters of Sions King. That which compleates and eternizes our Joy in Christ
as King, is, that he is King eternal, who only has immortality. It clouds our
1 Timothy 1. 17.
light and kills the spirit of our joy, even while we enjoy excellent Princes,
to remember they must dye. For when that snow melts from the heads of such Aged
Princes (as it was said of our late famous Queen Elizabeth, from the fear of
her good subjects, and the hope of her enemies) then (I say) we may expect a
Flood. Change of Kings makes often great changes in a state. But in Sion there
is no succession of Princes, Christ is perpetual Dictator there. To have a
better then he, or to loose him are equally impossible. We cannot mend our
selves by any change, nor have we any ground to fear a change.

And that which sets the crown upon all our comforts yet faster, is, that as
his person is immortal, so also is his love toward his people; his love is
free, he has no designs upon any in loving them. His love is without respect
of persons, he makes all his Subjects Favorites. His love is everlasting, none
can out us of his favor. We know that a false whisper into a Princes ear,
has blasted all a man's hopes, and withred all the Interests he had in him
before. But no Ziba can accuse us out of the affection of our Heavenly King.

Then rejoice greatly O Daughter of Sion, Shout O Zach. 9. 9.
Daughter of Jerusalem, Behold thy King. That which 1 King. 10. 9.
the Queen of Sheba said of Solomon as the shadow is fully accomplished in
Christ, who is greater then Solomon. Because the Lord loved Israel, therefore
made he thee King to do Judgment and Justice. The thrones of some Princes
have Hos. 13. 11.
bin founded in the wrath of God against a people. I gave thee a King in anger.
But the throne of Christ is founded in the love of God, yea it is all composed
and built up of love. The whole frame is love, and such love, as will never be
out of frame.

or has he taken to him his great power and reigned?

Wicked men will not (cannot) behold Isa: 26. 10.
the Majesty of the Lord. Every eye cannot see this King in his beauty.
Therefore it is spoken as a special privilege of him, that walks uprightly
and shuts his eyes from seeing evil, Thine eyes shall see the King in his
beauty. The Isa: 33. 15. 17.
proper beauty and Majesty of Christ's kingdom is spiritual. When Christ came
in the flesh and conversed among the Jews every day, they knew him not, neither
do they believe on him to this day. As therefore Christ's appearance to save his
Church, was humility in a mystery, such as none of the Princes of this world
knew; For (as the Apostle argues) 1 Cor: 2. 7. 8.
had they known it, they would not have crucified the Lord of glory. So the
appearance of Christ to govern his Church, is Majesty in a mystery, such as
the Princes and men of the world know not, for did they know it (we may argue
from the Apostle) they would not oppose the Lord of glory. Antichrist has
usurped the great power of Christ, and has reigned many hundred years, yet
how many Nations, and in every Nation how many persons will not believe it to
this day? His kingdom is tottering and falling and ending, and yet many
contend, that it is not yet begun. The reign of Antichrist is a mystery too.
Neither the reign of Christ, nor Antichrist is visible to all. The reason why
so many see not Antichrist on his throne, is, because they are so near him.
And the reason why so many see not Christ on his throne, is, because they are
so far from him. They who are near Antichrist cannot see him, and they only
can see Christ, who are near unto him. A great part of the day of Christ's
reign shall neither be clear nor dark, but at evening time it shall be
light. Zach. 14 6. 7.
He will at last cast out such rays of glory in the administrations of his
Kingdom, as every eye shall either see it or be dazel'd with it.

And for the present, if we consult the things which we either hear or see, if
we leave ancient prophecies, and peruse but the history of these latter
years. What can we conclude less, then the Initials of Christ's Kingdom, or
at least the Prognostics of his Reign. When John the Math. 11. 3.
Baptist sent two of his Disciples unto Christ, And said unto him, art thou he
that should come, or do we look for another? John 10. 24* 25.
Christ answers from his actions, go and show John the things which ye do
hear and see; the blind receive their sight, and the lame walk, the lepers
are cleansed, and the deaf hear, the dead are raised up, and the poor have
the Gospel preached to them. At another time when the Jews came round about
him, and said unto him; how long do thou make us to doubt? If thou be the
Christ tell us plainly. Jesus answered, I told you, but ye believed not, the
works which I do in my Fathers name, they bear witness of me. We may thus
answer all Querists about the reign of Christ, consider of the things which ye
hear and see. The spiritually blind begin to have their eyes unscaled and
receive their sight, many lamed in prisons walk abroad at liberty, many who
were deaf at the voice of truth, now hear it: some who were civilly dead
under oppressions and persecutions are raised up, and thousands of poor souls
have the Gospel preached unto them. Proud ones are abased, they are scattered
in the imaginations of their own hearts; mighty ones are put from their seats,
and they of low degree are exalted* Errors are discountenanced, truth is
enquired after, ceremonies and superstitions are cast out, monuments of Popery
and Paganism are cast down; the beauty of Idols is stained, and the
coverings of the graven images are defiled. May we not argue from all these,
for this enthronization of Christ, as they did fo his incarnation, Ioh. 7. 31.
When Christ comes will he do more miracles (marvels I am sure they are) then
these which now are done? I believe he will do more and greater marvels then
these, but do ye not think these worthy the Annals of Christ's reign? Will it
not be an honorable record, for future ages, to enter these things as acted
Regnante Christo, Christo duce and auspice Christo?

Will not your late Victory memoriz'd this day become the history of Christ's
reign? While I remember how that noble Northerne-light was insulted over in
wanton-witted Extincta castro fax pulchra novo est. Post ea nec nautae nec
militi sic noto pharos etc. car: Oxon
rimes, as burnt down into the socket, yea as quite extinct: And so extinct
that he was prophesied or prayed incapable of ever being lighted up again, for
the direction either of Seamen or soldiers in the North. I cannot but
conceive that Christ has by more then ordinary Providence brought oil again
to that lamp, and caused him to shine brighter (out of those obscurities) then
ever he did before, even to rebuke the madness of those wild-headed Prophets,
or to make those Diviners yet more mad.

And because they tryumph'd, that they had beaten all enemies out of the field,
but prayer, and no prayer was left to oppose them (for the Letany was almost
every where on their side) but the prayers (as they call them) of addle heads
and sick brains. Therefore also, Jesus Christ to vindicate this despised
Ordinance, has let them fall in all places by that which they little thought
could stand before them; The prayers (as they count madness and distractions)
of a mad distracted people. And do not those successes look like the successes
of Christ's kingdom, which are given in to the prayer of faith, put up in the
Name of Christ?

For the close of this point, let me bespeake you as the Lord does the Jews by
the Prophet Micah, O my people Micha. 6. 5.
remember now what Balak King of Moab consulted, and what Balaam the son of
Beor answered him from Sittim unto Gilgal, that ye may know the righteousness
of the Lord. Remember O England what has been consulted and attempted against
thee, from the first step of thy travels in the way of Reformation, until this
hour, Remember how the counsels of all Balaks, with the answers of all Balams
against thee, have been blasted, and their joint attempts defeated, Remember
well (which we are this day remembering) what has been done from Yorkshire to
Pembroke-shire (of such extent is the stage of this days mercies) That ye Qui
prius quim descendat hoc signum dabit, cadet repent gladius e caelo, ut sciant
justi, ducem sanctae militiae descensurum. Lactant: l. 7. de Divino praem: c^
19.
may know the righteousness of the Lord, and see prints of the reign of
Christ. Lactantius speaking of the reign of Christ in another notion, then any
thoughts of mine can yet take in (for he maintains his personal coming) tells
us that before Christ comes, he shall give this sign. Suddenly a Sword (says
he) shall fall from heaven, whereby the righteous may know that the Captain of
the holy Militia is about to descend. As I assert not his opinion about the
personal reign of Christ, so neither can I agree to his sign, (if that be
his meaning) the visible falling of a material Sword. I know no warrant we
have to expect such tokens. But surely, in Allusion, I may safely make this use
of it, when we see a Sword falling from heaven, that is, a war begun and
carried on by extraordinary providence, far beyond the thoughts and designs
of men, we may more then probably conclude, that Christ is come to be Captain
of that Militia, that he has taken to him his great power and reigns.

Object. But if Christ be upon his throne, why are not Revel. 18. 7.
all his enemies under his footstool? If Christ be a King, why does Babylon
sit still as a Queen?

Answ. Babylons ruin is graduall; as Babylon was not built in a day, so
Babylon shall not fall in a day.

Obj. But the Text says, Her plagues shall come in one day, Rev. 18. 8.
death and mourning and famine, and she shall be utterly burnt with fire.

Answ. One day cannot here be taken strictly, for the duration of 24 hours.
Famine cannot begin and end, assault and kill in, one such day. Then, one day,
is a short time, or suddenly, unexpectedly, when Babylon shall sit fastest and
safest in her own thoughts, saying, I shall see no sorrow, then her plagues
and pangs shall come upon her, as pain upon a woman with child, and she shall
not escape.

Again, these plagues in one day, may be taken for the period and perfection
of her plagues. As a mighty tree which has stood many hundred strokes of the
axe, at the last falls at one blow: or as a strong City which has bin many
months, some years (perhaps) besieged, being at the last taken; all her
plagues, may be said to come upon her in one day. Such is the case of Babylon,
Axes have bin laid to her root a long time; long siedge has bin laid, many
batteries made against her walls and gates. She must fall at length by one
stroke, and be taken as in one day. Hence the fall of Antichrist is spoken of,
not as an instantaneous, but as a continued act, he goes into perdition. Rev.
17. 11.
Even while Christ reigns, Antichrist will play Rex in the world; and like a
wild beast rage, and do mischief after he is in the toyls, and has received
his deaths wound. Christ's is a gradually rising, ascending, and growing
Kingdom, Antichrists is a gradually falling descending and declining Kingdom.
Antichrist will have some show of a Kingdom, until Christ has a full and
complete kingdom. That it was the beginnings and first appearances of Christ
in his great power and reign, which caused the Elders to break forth into
these grateful Acclamations, appears in the words immediately following, And
the Nations were angry (he does not say they were all presently subdued) they
fret and fume and vex to see the beginnings and some increases of the Kingdom
of Christ. This anger quickly breaks out into opposition; so some understand
the last words of the 19th verse; And there were lightnings and voices and
thunderings, and an Earth quake, and great hail. As if the anger of these
Nations, did administer them Arms, to trouble the whole world and mingle
heaven and earth together, rather then Antichrists kingdom should go down.
All troubles were not ended, all enemies were not quel'd by the power of
Christ, when these Elders gave thanks to Christ for taking to him his great
power. Hence observe,

That the first acts and appearances of Christ taking to him his power and
reigning, call his people to this duty of thanksgiving. As soon as Christ
begins to work for us we should begin to praise him. We cannot bless God too
soon, it is seldom but we bless him too late: the very dawnings of
deliverance should awaken us to Thankfulness. Christ speaks of some events,
which are the beginnings of sorrow. All these are the beginnings of sorrows.
And then we should Math. 24. 8.
begin to be humbled. Some events are but the beginnings of joy, yet then we
should begin to be thankful. For,

First the love and care and faithfulness of Christ to and for his Church, are
stamped upon every such act. Little deliverances are full of love., and the love
of Christ in the least, is better then the greatest deliverance. 2dly we have
not deserved any mercy or deliverance at all; what we cannot deserve, we must
acknowledge: and where merit stops thankfulness must begin. 3dly to praise God
for the beginnings of mercy, is the readiest way to receive perfect mercies. To
give thanks for a benefit before we receive it, engages the promiser to bestow
it. 4thly the beginnings of mercy, are assurances of perfect mercy. If the
light of our deliverance be but like the dark cloud which 1 Kings. 18 44.
the servant of Eliah saw, only as big as a man's hand, we may thence conclude,
that it will shortly irradiate the whole Heavens, and that it will never cease
increasing till it come Isa. 30. 2^.
to a perfect day; til (as it is prophesied) the light of the moon be as the
light of the sun and the light of the sun sevenfold as the light of seven
days. If we see Christ lay but one stone in the foundation of a work, we may
rest confident of the topstone. For he is the wise builder, who intending to
build a Tower Luke. 14. 28, 29.
has sat down first and counted the cost. Christ knew the charge of the whole
work to a penny, the very first hour he undertook it. And he knows he has
enough in the treasury both of his wisdom and power, to carry it thorough. He
will not be mocked, with, This is He who began to build and was not able to
finish. Yea Christ is like that King (spoken of v. 31.) going to make war
against another King, who sits down and consulteth whether he be able with
ten thousand to meet him, that comes against him with twenty thousand. Christ
can if he pleases bring twenty to ten, yea a hundred to one, against his
enemies, and if he pleases he can cause ten to chase twenty, yea one to put a
hundred to flight. For it is all one with Christ, to save with few or more,
with many or with one.

Let this both warrant and encourage our practice in praising God this day. It
is fit for us to wait till God gives us in all our mercies, but it is most
unfit to let God wait for thanks, till we enjoy all our mercies. We must not
take particulars and parcels, and say, we will pay our praises and reckon with
God, about thanks, for all together.

What though all be not done? what though these be but the beginnings of our
deliverance? The Jews rejoiced in God who had done great things for them, and
yet they were in captivity still. The Lord does great things Psalm. 126. 3.
for a people, who yet may be in great straights, and have great troubles upon
them. Is all that we have received nothing, except we receive all? yea, what
though God in our days should do no more? is not what he has done worth our
thanks? A day of victory is worth a day of thanksgiving at any time. Let it
not repent you (it will not repent any who praise God uprightly) that you have
praised God for this victory, though you should have no more; and which is
more, though you should meet news at the Church door, that any of, or all our
armies have received an overthrow, yet you have no reason to repent of the
praises of this day. Ingratus est qui injuria^ vocat finem voluptatis, stultus
qui nullum fructum esse putat nisi honorum praesentium. Sen. ad Polyb. c. 29.
A heathen will teach better practical divinity, then to repent of thanks for
benefits received, when those benefits are not continued. The end of a benefit
must not be counted an injury, nor must we think that there is no present
benefit, but in benefits which are present.

In the last place, it is very considerable that in these grounds of the Elders
joy, their own interests are quite left out: Here is no mention of their own
safety, and settlement, of their own peace, or prosperity, of their victories
over or revenges upon their enemies; Their hearts run out upon the
advancement of Christ's honor, the thing which pleases and takes most upon
their spirits, is, that Christ took to him his great power and reigned. Hence
observe,

That which gives most content to the Saints in all victories and successes, is
to see Christ a gainer, in power and in honor. It is more joy to them that
Christ has glory, then that themselves have safety. As it is with the Saints
in their public sorrows, they can easily bear their own losses, but when
Christ looses, they cannot bear it. When Israel was in fight with the
Philistines, Old Eli sat upon a seat by the ways side watching, for his heart
trembled for the Arc 1 Samuel 4. 13.
of God. And when the sad Messenger reported, Israel is fled before the
Philistines, and there has been also a great slaughter among the people, and
thy two sons also Hophni and Phinehas, are dead, and the ark of God is
taken. At the ver. 17, 18.
fall of that word (says the Text) when he made mention of the ark of God,
Eli fell backward, etc. That word was as a dagger at his heart, for he knew the
reproach which Psalm. 42. 10.
would follow, where is now your God? So when the Israelites were worsted by,
and fled from the men of Ai, Joshua Josh. 7. 6, 7.
rent his clothes, and fell to the earth upon his face before the Ark of the Lord, and said, alas, Lord God, wherefore have thou brought this people at all
over Jordan, to deliver us into the hand of the Amorites to destroy us, etc.
But was it only the death of thirty six men, or the dishonor fallen upon his
Army, or the fear of cutting off the name of Israel, (as he speaks a little
after) which fetched these complaints from valiant Joshua? No, there was more
then all these: And that breaks forth in the last words of his prayer, ( v.
9.) And what will thou do unto thy great name? As if he had said, we came not
over Iordane to make our own names great, but to make thy name great. And if
by the blotting out of our name from under heaven, thy name might be advanced
among these Heathens, how willingly should we embrace our destruction, that
thou might raise up thy honor upon our ruin. But Lord these Amorites will
blaspheme and darken thine honor through our destruction. Therefore what will thou do to thy great Name.

Now as in all the overthrowes, the heart of a godly man trembles most for the
Ark of God: and mournes most, fearing reproach should be cast upon the name of
God: So in all victories his heart triumphs most for the Ark of God, and he
gives thanks chiefly for joy, that honor is brought to the name of God. The
righteous shall rejoice when he sees the vengeance (says holy David) he Psalm.
58. 10
shall wash his feet in the blood of the wicked, that is, either abundance of
that bad blood shall be spilt, and it shall be powered like water in the
streets, so that the righteous may go over shoes in it, if he will: or only
thus, he shall have comfort (in those hot Countries washing of the feet was
for the refreshment of the weary, to which custom the holy Ghost seems here
to allude) he (I say) shall have comfort and refreshing by the death of wicked
men, as weary travelers have by washing their feet. Yet not barely in their
death, or in the vengeance that falls upon them (these are objects too low, and
very unsuitable to the joy of Saints) but in this, that by their death the glory
of God is vindicated. Thus the next verse teaches us to expound it. So that a
man (one that has but the light ver. 11.
of common reason to guide his tongue) shall say, verily there is a reward for
the righteous, verily there is a God that judges the earth. While wicked men
flourish, righteous men are looked upon (by the men of the world) as if God had
forsaken them, or had nothing in all his treasures left to recompense them, and
God is looked on (by the same carnal eyes) as if he were violently driven from
his throne, or had voluntarily forsaken the earth. But when once his hand takes
hold on vengeance, and he makes his arrows drunk with the blood of the wicked:
then worldly men shall recant their erroneous conceits, both concerning
righteous men, and the most righteous God, and say, Verily there is a reward
for the righteous, verily there is a God that judges the Earth. We confess we
were mistaken, we see our confutation written in blood of these men, or the
blood of these wicked men speaks aloud (as the blood of righteous Abel did to
God for judgment) that God is a righteous Judge. Now this is the thing which
caused the righteous to rejoice in the vengeance, namely to see God repaired in
honor, and set right in the opinion of men.

The reason of all is: First, because the Saints make First reason.
Christ's honor the end of all their undertakings. Whether they eat or drink,
whether they consult or act, whether they make war or peace, whether they
fight or treat 1 Cor. 10. 31.
or whatsoever they do, they do all to the glory of God; and therefore when
God is glorified, they are satisfied and rest as in their end. They cannot take
content in any thing, wherein Christ is not All. They can rejoice in their own
weakness, so Christ may have power, they can triumph in their own slavery, so
Christ may reign. But they cannot rejoice in their own power or liberty without
the cross of Christ, whereby they are saved, and in the crown of Christ,
whereby they are ruled.

Secondly, they know that their own interests are Second reason.
wrapped up in Christ's; and if he gain, they cannot loose. God has inseparably
espoused his own glory with his peoples good. As Christ died not for himself,
so neither does he reign for himself. Whatsoever he does as Mediator, he
does for his Church. Hence they can look upon the power of Christ, as their
power, or power for them, and they look upon the kingdom of Christ, as their
kingdom, or as a kingdom set up for them, Because I live (says Christ to
believers) ye shall live also, and therein he says (in effect) to believers,
because I reign, (...). 14. ^.
ye shall reign also. While Christ is full, his people shall not want, and
while Christ has power, his people shall not fall. As then they would not, so
they need not look further then the advance of Christ, for the ground of their
joy, for in and with Christ they also are advanced. Christ is afflicted in all
their afflictions, and in all the exaltations of Christ they are exalted.

Then, be hence directed in what, and for what chiefly to rejoice and give
thanks this day. Say not, we give thee thanks o Lord God Almighty, because we
have got power and have prevailed, because we have got honor and are exalted,
because we have got a victory, and many of our enemies are subdued; this were
to give thanks for our selves while we give thanks unto God. It was a great
charge upon the people of the Jews, that they fasted to, or for themselves.
When ye fasted and mourned in the fifth and seventh Zach. 7. 5.
month, even those seventie years, did ye at all fast unto me, even to me?
It would be very sad, if we should give the Lord occasion to renew this charge
upon our feast this day; Have ye at all feasted unto me, even unto me? It is as
dangerous and unbecomming to feast to our selves, as to fast to our selves.
This were to give thanks like a Roman, not like a Christian State. Heathens
triumphed and gave thanks to their gods for victories, because their enemies
were conquered, because their peace and safety were ensur'd, because their
honor was increased and their Empire enlarged. But Christians must give
thanks for victories, because the power of Christ is magnified, and his
kingdom in a way of exaltation over All. It is observable that the four and
twenty Elders worshipping God (in the fourth of the Revelation) cast their
Crowns before the throne saying, Thou art worthy, O Lord, to receive glory
ver. 10, 11.
and honor and power; for thou have created all things, and for thy pleasure
they are and were created. Observe, they do not praise God for creating a
world, wherein they had received so much pleasure, so many conveniences, such
comforts and refreshings; but as if it had not been worth the while to reflect
upon themselves, or any concernement of theirs in the world, as if God had made
a world only for himself to dwell in; They bless him for creating all things,
purely and precisely under this notion, because for his pleasure they are and
were created. In this one point lies the very spirit, of all the spiritualnesse
of this great duty. When we can so praise God for blessings received as if not
we, but he himself had received them. It is the very heaven of heavenly
mindedness, when we can rejoice that all things are done for the pleasure of
God. Armies are created of God, war is created of God, victory is created of
God, as much and as truly as ever the world was created of God. Say therefore
(ye who have the honor of our civil Eldership, and all who are here
assembled to join in this great duty) say, Thou art worthy O Lord, to receive
glory and honor, and power, for thou have created al these things, and for thy
pleasure they are and were created. For thy pleasure our Armies are and were
raised; for thy pleasure our war is, and has bin continued; for thy pleasure
our enemies are and have bin opposed; for thy pleasure this victory is and was
obtained. We then feed most sweetly upon mercies, when the pleasure of God
swallows up all.

And from this principle we may abundantly answer that Objection, which some
seemingly-compassionate spirits raise against this duty. What! give thanks
when men are slain? What! Rejoice when so many, of our own blood and Nation,
lie weltring in their blood? Is not this not only not Christian, but inhumane?
Let such objectors know, we are (I am sure we ought to be, and we are now
taught to be) so far from rejoicing, because men (though our enemies) are
slain and their blood spilt, that we do not rejoice, because we our selves
are safe and our blood not spilt. We are not giving thanks, because men are
ruined, but because Christ reigns; Joy (in such a duty as this) below the
throne of Christ, is too low for the spirit of an Elder. And if Christ will set
up his Throne upon millions of carcasses of the slain, it well becomes an
Elder, all the Elders to rejoice and give thanks.

I shall now only leave some few brief counsels with you (Honorable and
Beloved) as results from all that has been spoken, and so conclude.

First, labor to walk worthy of this victory. It is good to give thanks with
our lips, but it is best to give thanks with our lives. Thanks acted is better
then thanks said. Let this mercy make you holy. They get little good by
victories, who are not better by victories.

Secondly, let this experience work hope. Hope is the most natural and proper
effect of experience. Your work Romans 5. 4.
is not all done, nor your dangers all blown over, get confidence of future
successes, from past successes. A daring Goliath should be looked upon as
vanquished, when we can remember a vanquished Lion and a Bear. Argue down all
unbelief, as the Apostle does, God who has delivered us from so great a
death, and does deliver: in him we 2 Cor. 1. 20.
trust that he will yet deliver us, Let there never be found in any History to
be written of your actions, such a record against you, as stands to this day
against the Israelites, who Exodus 15. 1. 23. 24.
sung a Psalm of praise for drowning Pharaoh and his host in the Sea, at the
beginning of the Chapter, and fell a murmuring, being but a little stress't for
sweet water, at the end of the Chapter.

Thirdly, gather strength in prayer from these praises. As prayer engages unto
praise, so praise encourages unto prayer. The joy of the Lord is our strength
to ask. And when God is giving, it is seasonable to ask more. The Jews in
Babylon had great things done for them, so great, that they thought themselves
in a dream, and the news too good to be true: so great, that yet it overcame
their unbelief, and their mouths were filled with Psalm. 126. 1, 2, 3 4.
laughter, and their tongues with singing; so great, that they among the
Heathen said, the Lord has done great things for them: and then it was time
for them to take up the ditty from the Heathens lips and say, The Lord has
done great things for us, whereof we are glad: yet (as it were) with the same
breath they fall a praying as hard, as if God had done nothing for them; Turn
again our captivity, O Lord, as the rivers in the South. The providence of
God has now made an immediate succession from your Thanksgiving-day, to your
Fasting-day; some have thought them too far distant in nature, to be so near
in time; but I believe the former will prove a very fit Parascue or day of
preparation for the latter. The higher we can get our hearts spiritually lifted
up, and the more joyfully affected in a day of praise, the deeper we may get
our hearts humbled, and the more beleevingly enlarged, in a day of prayer.

Fourthly, let these mercies raise your hearts yet to more activitie of
endeavors. When we see God working, shall we stand still? Should we not work
harder then before? When God goes forward, shall we go back-ward? Should we
not move faster then before? In the journey from Egypt to Canaan through the
wilderness, the Israelites were bound to follow the motions or stations of the
cloud, when that went forward, they were to go forward, and when that stood
still, they stood still. Divine providence is a leading Cloud to this day; it
is ill to outrun providence, and it is as bad not to follow it. Let not
successes flat upon your hands. It is better to use a victory, then to get it.

Lastly, seeing ye have given thanks to Christ for help against your enemies,
be ye a help to all the friends of Christ; Christ has made your hearts glad,
let it be your study (it will be your honor) to glad the hearts of those who
love Christ. Christ himself needs no favor from you, but some who are near
to him may; He will take it very kindly, if some of your debts to him, may be
paid over into their bosoms. Old Barzillai modestly refused the royal Favors
of King David, because age had disabled him to make use of them; But (says he)
behold 2 Samuel 19. 37.
thy servant Chimham, let him go over with my Lord the King, and do to him
what shall seem good unto thee: Should ye, as Kings offer to the King, our
Lord Jesus Christ, the greatest bounties imaginable, he must refuse them,
because his fullness sets him above the use of them: Or if he were hungry, he
would not tell it you, for the world is his, and Psalm. 50. 12.
the fullness thereof. But he has many Chimhams, Beloved sons and dear
children, take them and their condition into your counsels, and do to them as
shall seem good unto you. And all that you do for them, Christ will take upon
his own account, and as done unto himself. Yea in their enjoyment of their due
privileges, Christ reigns, and Rev. 11. 15.
the kingdom becomes the kingdom of the Lord, and of his Christ's, Then a
Kingdom is Christ's, when all who approve themselves members of Christ may have
free and in-offensive communion with him in all the Ordinances of his worship.
Which how to compass is the highest and noblest design of any council upon
the earth, and I believe has hitherto been, I am sure it ought to be the
utmost aim of all your counsels; especially considering how solemnly you have
witnessed your own and the Nations engagement unto Christ. How sad would it
be, (so sad that the remotest suspicion of it is more then enough to make any
heart sad) how sad would it be, if Christ should ever have the occasion offered
to expostulate with the great Council of England, Thus, Your days of
Thanksgiving to me for victories, testify that I have subdued your enemies by
my power, and shall not your authority protect my friends? your thanksgivings
to me for victories, testify that I have asserted your civil liberties,
through the blood of your opposers, and will not ye assert their spiritual
liberties, purchased by my blood? Your Thanksgivings to me for victories,
testify, that I have suffered no man to do you wrong, but have even reproved
a King (And O that such reproof may be as a precious ointment, which might not
break, but heal both his head and heart) for your sakes, and will ye suffer
any to do my servants wrong, will ye not reprove either high or low for their
sakes? Or shall I go on to gain the kingdom into a quiet habitation for you,
and shall any who are truly mine and faithfully yours, have ground to complain
in mine ears, that they cannot find a place in it, freely to set their feet,
and rest their heads? Honorable and Beloved, I know your goodness will bear
it, if I thus freely represent (what cannot be hid) that such fears are
scattered. And I doubt not but your great wisdom and tenderness (through the
help of Christ) will scatter them indeed, so that they shall never improve into
sorrows: and prevent, not only that terrible chiding of Christ (which you shall
never hear without infinite reason for it) but also the complaints of any of
his people, which sometime you may possible hear (yet vouchsafe to weigh them)
upon lighter reason. In this sense, to be weak with them that are weak, is,
(I humbly conceive) as suitable to a Parliamentary spirit, as it was to an
Apostolical. The desire and prayer of all that fear God, is, that every one of
you may show the same diligence, to the full assurance of this hope unto the
end.

FINIS.

