Die Mercurii 26 Maii 1647.
ORdered by the Commons Assembled in Parliament, That Sir William Brereton do
from this House give thanks unto Mr Thomas Case, for the great pains he took in
the Sermon he Preached on this day at Margarets Westminster, before the House
of Commons, (it being a day of public Humiliation) and that he do desire him
to Print his Sermon, wherein he is to have the like privilege of Printing
thereof as others in like kind usually have had.

H. Elsynge, Cler. Parl. D. Com.

I appoint LUKE FAVVNE and none other, to Print my Sermon.

Tho. Case.

Spiritual VVhordome DISCOVERED IN A SERMON Preached before the Honorable
House of Commons Assembled in PARLIAMENT, Upon the Solemn day of Humiliation,
May 26. 1647. By THO. CASE, Preacher in Milkstreet, London; and one of the
Assembly of DIVINES.

LONDON, Printed by J. Macock, for LUKE FAVVNE, and are to be sold at his shop,
at the sign of the Parrot in Pauls-Church-yard. 1647.

To the Honorable the House of Commons in Parliament assembled.
IT is a ponderous speech of the wise man, and worthy of all wise men's deepest
consideration; Eccles. 8.6.
Because to every purpose there is time and judgment; therefore the misery of
man is great upon him. Jerome tells us that the Septuagint and Theodotio did
read, in stead of [therefore the misery of man is great] because the knowledge
of man is great upon him: and he conjectures the difference to arise from the
likeness of the two Hebrew words (...) and (...) the one signifying knowledge,
the other evil or misery: but the truth is, the want of this knowledge, or
wisdom, to know and judge of times and seasons, is that which brings great
misery upon the sons of men: And so is the true sense of the words; because
there is time and judgment for every purpose, and but a time: And men have not
judgment to discern and take that time, therefore the misery of man is great
upon him; men bring upon themselves and others extreme trouble and misery;
because they do not wisely discern, Opportunity is time fitted and framed by
God for the accomplishment of his designs.
and lay hold on the time and opportunity (for so (...) signifies opportunum
tempus;) which God does give them for the bringing about of all lawful and
righteous purposes and designs: Therefore it was the wisdom of our blessed Lord
and Savior Jesus Christ, that when he came about that great design of saving
souls he took his fathers time; So you hear his father bespeaking of him, In an
acceptable time have I heard thee, Isa. 49.8. (...) In tempare opportuno
voluntatis vel placito.
and in the day of salvation have I helped thee; therefore it was a day of
salvation because it was an acceptable time; the time which his father set him
for the work: oh how acceptable a Redeemer was Christ to his father, because
his fathers time was acceptable to him! Noble Senators, how much you are
concerned in these texts I leave to your selves to judge; There is a complaint
made by God, Jer. 8.6. I hearkened and heard, but they spoke not aright; no man
repented him of his wickedness, saying, what have I done? I beseech you as you
love Christ, this poor Kingdom, and your own souls, let not this complaint be
verified of any one of you; Turn in upon your selves, and bring to remembrance;
commune with your own heart upon your bed, and every one ask your selves this
question, What have I done? Ask your selves what you have done as men? What you
have done as Parliament Men? what you have done in reference to the first
table, in reference to the second table? What you have done in reference to
Christ, his Truths, Worship, Government, Ministry, Ordinances, People? What you
have done in your Covenant with God, and your Declarations to the world? Yea,
oh that you would alter the question a little on the negative part, and ask
your selves what you have not done in reference to all these? Whether indeed
you have taken the accepted time which God has fashioned and prepared by his own
hand, for the accomplishing of the great work of Reformation, wherewith God
has entrusted and honored you? By the improvement whereof you might have been
so many Ioshuahs, Saviors and Redeemers, to have restored the preserved of
England? Whether you have gone about the work in Gods strength, in Gods
methods, and to Gods ends? Surely never had Parliament fairer opportunities,
better helps, greater encouragements to have set up Jesus Christ in his Throne
(the greatest honor and interest that States and Kingdoms are capable of) then
you have had; and I humbly hope we shall not have cause to say only, have had;
but that God will still entrust you with the work, and bless you in it; and renew
upon you all those glorious advantages, whereby you shall be encouraged, and
enabled, to carry it on against all oppositions of men and Devils. We cannot
but take notice, with much thankfulness to God, and you; rejoicing in the Lord
greatly, that now at last (to use the Apostles words) your care for the
Public good has flourished again, in those self-denying, (...). quod jam
tandem reviruistis Phil. 4.10.
and Kingdom-refreshing-votes, which have lately past, your Honorable House;
which we look upon as the fruit of your late Serious and extraordinary
humiliation, within your own walls, and an answer of Prayer, your own, and the
rest of Gods people's who lifted up their hands and voices to God with you, and
for you on the same day. Only I beseech you, Honorable, and much Honored
Patriots, give out now real, and lasting Demonstrations, that this motion of
yours, is not meetly ab extrinseco, but that it flows from inward principles,
and gracious impressions of God upon your Spirits. Go on, and do worthily in
the eyes of all the Kingdom and at home, the Churches abroad: and though you
are taught of God to be humbled for your failings, yet let no discouragements
enfeeble your hands in the work of God, and the Kingdom; but with David
encourage your selves in the Lord your God. 1 Samuel 30.6.
And though you know how to be vile before God; yet assert your Honor and glory
before men; by being zealous, and expeditious, steadfast, and unmovable, in the
work of the Lord; Genesis 49.24.
and the Blessing of Joseph be upon your heads, whereby your bow may abide in
strength, and the arms of your hands may be made strong by the hands of the
mighty God of Jacob, from whom you are the shepherd, and the stone of England.

And the Lord undeceive this poor people, and open their eyes, that they may
see, their peace to be bound up in your safety; and that the best way to
secure their own Rights and Liberties, is, to assert and vindicate your
Privileges. This I am confident of, when ever the Power and Authority of
Parliament is trodden under foot, the wall is broken down, the destroyer comes
in, and, without a rescuing arm of Omnipotence, the Kingdom undone. If the Lord
will give the Parliament an heart to be active for Christ, and the Kingdom an
heart to be active for the Parliament, I hope yet to see it a flourishing
Kingdom: and you a flourishing Parliament; The Lord Jesus ruling, and
triumphing in both: which is, and shall be, the hearty, and daily prayer, of

Your unworthy yet faithful Servant in the Gospel, THO: CASE.

Reader thou art desired page 22. the last line but one, in stead of
conferring, to write or read confessing of sin, other mistakes there are not
many, unless they be literal.

SPIRITUAL WHOREDOM Discovered in a Sermon ON HOSEA 9.1. Rejoice not, O Israel,
for joy, as other people; for thou have gone a whoring from thy God.
CALVIN conjectures that this Prophecy of Hosea, as we now have it (as the
rest of the Prophesies) was but the summary or brief heads of certain Sermons,
which at several times and upon several occasions were preached unto the people
of Israel and Judah, collected by himself, and registered for the use and
benefit of the Church of God.

This Sermon he conceives begins at my Text, but the distinct time when it was
preached, neither himself nor any other Expositor do hint; That it was before
the Babylonian Captivity, is clear from the date of the Prophecy, Chap. 1.
Verse. 1.

Certain it is, and that may content us (says he) that the Prophet does here
bitterly reprove the extreme obstinacy and desperate security of the people,
Calv. in locuen.
who by all the pains and unwearied labors of the Prophets could not be
brought to repentance, although their rebellions and apostasy were so visible
that all the world might take notice of it.

However their incorrigibleness must not cause the Prophet to desist his duty:
therefore upon all occasions (when called to preach before them) he cease not
to reprove, to convince, to exhort, if by any means, he might happily awaken
them to a timely discovery of their sin, and prevention of approaching ruin
and destruction.

Peoples obstinacy must not silence the Prophets fidelity; Observe.
passion and short-spiritedness, of all men in the world, does ill become them:
In meekness instructing those that oppose themselves, if God peradventure will
give them repentance, etc. 2 Timothy 2.25.26.
is the Apostles cannon to all the Ministers of the Gospel.

In the words therefore the Prophet does call them to serious and seasonable
humiliation and repentance; for though the words seem to speak only a bare
prohibition of joy and rejoicing; yet,

1. That was to convince them of, and reprove them for their unseasonable mirth
and jollity, that they should rejoice when their God was so highly displeased
with them for their manifold apostacies; and the repetition of the words
rejoice not for joy, or as the (...)
Hebrew, rejoice not to exultation, is for the greater Habet haec repetitio
emphasin quandam, i. e. majorem increpationem intempestive laetitiae Ribera in
locum.
aggravation of their sin and the Prophets reproof.

2. And again the words have a (...) in them, they mean and import more then
they speak out (as it is usual in Scripture Rhetoric); and so while they
forbid joy, i. e. carnal security and sensual rejoicing in creature comforts,
they enjoin the contrary; sc. mourning and weeping, girding with sackcloth, and
rolling themselves in dust and ashes; aversus es a deo, ergo tibi lugendum est
Jugiter, non exultandum. Corn. a Lap. in locum.
a constant and conscionable humiliation, and walking humbly before their God.

And this is pressed from a double Consideration Sin. Wrath.


Their sin against God.

Gods wrath against them.

The one expressed: The other employed.

Their sin expressed, thou have gone a whoring. And Gods wrath employed, if thou
have gone a whoring, God cannot choose but be highly displeased with your sin,
and yet more displeased with them for their security then for their sin.

And both these are yet further aggravated from the Relation which Israel had
to God, thy God; which relation is set forth

1. Positively. 2. Comparatively.
1. Positively, The relation of a spouse or wife; and that is employed in the
sin, which is called whoredom: Whoredom or adultery, you know, is properly the
sin against the marriage-relation. Marriage is honorable in all, and the bed
undefiled: but whoremongers and adulterers God will judge. Heb. 13.4.
Adultery is the defiling of the marriage bed; and therefore some do etymon
Adulterium, quasi ad alterum, the departure of the husband or wife into the bed
and bosom of a stranger: Here, I say, is the conjugal relation into which God
had taken Israel, employed, to the aggravation of her apostasy; whereby her sin
came to be Whoredom and Adultery against the Lord.

2. Comparatively, With other Nations; rejoice not as other people: Why?
Because though they have the relation of creatures unto God, and of men and
women, yet they have not the relation of a spouse or wife: Ye only have I known
of all the families of the earth, says God to Israel: Amos 3.2.
i. e. with a conjugal knowledge; other Nations may call God Baali, but they
cannot call him Ishi; i.e. they may call him my Lord and my Maker, but not my
Husband and my Redeemer; they are his by Creation and common providence, but
not by Covenant and conjugal relation.

So that now here is the aggravation: Other Nations may sin against God, but
they cannot commit adultery against God; other Nations may rebel against the
Lord, but they cannot go a whoring from him: This was Isreal's sin and the
aggravation of it.

And as it was the aggravation of her sin, so it was the aggravation of Gods
wrath too; that, as I say, is employed; for if Isreal's sin be the sin of
adultery, then Gods wrath must needs be the wrath of jealonsie; and jealousy
as it is the rage of a man, Prove. 6.34, 35
so it is the rage of a God; anger red-hot, wrath ad octo, in the highest
degree; Therefore he will not spare in the day of vengeance; he will not regard
any ransom, neither will he rest content though thou give many gifts.

Jealousy is as cruel as the grave, the coals thereof are coals of fire which
has a most vehement flame, etc. Cant. 8.6.
This therefore you see is the aggravation both of her sin and danger: By all
which the Prophet calls Israel now to sense of sin, and humiliation for sin; to
be affected with, and afflicted for her grievous departure from the Lord.

And now the words thus opened would afford many serious and seasonable
observations. I shall resolve all into 4 Doctrines.

1. A Nation or Kingdom in external Covenant with God stands in a conjugal
relation unto God. 2. A people thus related unto God may (possibly) go a
whoring from him, commit adultery against him. 3. Sometimes it comes to pass
that Gods Israel whilst she lies under the guilt of whorish departure from her
God, in stead of being affected with, and afflicted for her whoredom; in stead
of mourning, and judging her self before the Lord, does securely and sinfully
let out her heart to carnal comfort and rejoicing. 4. An Israel, under
adulterous departures from God, has least cause to rejoice; and more cause to
mourn and lament then any nation or people under heaven.
In these 4 Doctrinal Observations you have the sense and soul of this
Scripture.

I begin with the first, intending but a brief transition through the 3 former,
that I might sit down and enlarge my self upon the fourth and last. I begin
with the first.

A Nation or Kingdom in external Covenant with God, stands in a conjugal
relation unto God. Thy God;] There you have the Covenant, so it runs, I will
establish my Covenant between me and thee, and thy seed after thee, etc. To
what end? To be a God unto thee and to thy seed after thee. Genesis 17, 7.
And so again v. 8. I will be their God.

Where ever the Scripture says thy God, it implies a Covenant. Fallen man
having lost his God, can never come to say [my God] again, but it must be by
virtue of a Covenant.

Thou have gone a whoring] that implies, as I have showed you, the conjugal
relation unto God. Wheredom being the sin of wedlock, the violation of the
sacred bonds of marriage.

Into this near relation does God take a nation or people, when he brings them
into the bond of the Covenant. Ezekiel. 20.37.


So run the words of the Covenant.

I will betroth thee unto me for ever.

I will betroth thee unto me in righteousness.

I will betroth thee unto me in faithfulness. Desponsabo. Hos. 2 19, 20.
They are, I say, the words of the Covenant, which God speaks not only to Romans
9.26.
old Israel, when the vail shall be taken away from their hearts, but to the
Gospel-Israel also, even to whatsoever nation or people, God shall say, Hosea
2.23.
Thou art my people, and they shall answer thou art my God Witness the Apostle
S. Peter, who in his first Epistle. 2. Chap. 9.10, verses. applies it to the
Gentiles as well as the Jews.

1 Pet. 2, 9, 10
But ye are a chosen generation, a royal Priesthood, an holy nation, a peculiar
people, that ye should show forth the praises of him, who has called you out
of darkness into his marveilous light: Which in time past were not a people,
but are now the people of God; which had not obtained mercy, but now have
obtained mercy. Speaking to the Chap, 1, 1.
strangers, i. e. strangers by nature, though not by grace; by generation, (not
being of Abraham's seed) though not strangers by regeneration, (being of
Abraham's faith) for so it follows. Scattered through Pontus, Galatia,
Cappadocia, Asia, Bythinia.

I But there is no more national Churches, since Abraham's seed ceased to be a
Church; Say some. Object.


There is not indeed a national Church, in that sense that Israel was a
national Church. And truly if this were but well observed, Answ.
it would cut off a great deal of needless Controversy, whereof comes nothing
but strife and contention. I say there is not a national Church, as Israel was
a national Church; that is to say.

1. Qua, such a man's seed, they were a Church as coming out of Abraham's loins;
for if there were any Prosolites among them, they were reckoned unto Abraham
for a seed. So, we know no national Church in the times of the Gospel. 2. Nor
(which follows upon the former) qua such a nation, Israel was a Church qua
Israel; England is not a Church qua England, nor Scotland qua Scotland etc. 3.
Nor, thirdly, do we assert or know a national Church exclusive, as Israel was;
Israel was a Church, so that there was none else in all the world besides. In
Judah was God Known, Psa. 76.1, 2.
his name was great in Israel, In Salem was his Tabernacle, and his dwelling
place in Sion, i.e. So, as he had no dwelling place else, it is by way of
exclusion to all the world besides.
Thus I say, and in this sense, we own no National Church under the Gospel.

But now take a Nation or people as in external Covenant with God. h.e.

1. As God offering to them his Covenant of life and grace by Jesus Christ,
revealed in the Doctrine of the Gospel, and ratified by the Seals thereof
affixed.

2. And secondly, such a Nation or people as generally accepting of, and
closing with this Covenant thus revealed and Sealed, and professing faith in,
and obedience to this Covenant thus offered. And this offer on Gods part, and
acceptance on theirs, makes them a National Church in a Gospel-sence; yea,
notwithstanding ye should suppose, all in that Nation do not profess it, and
but very few do savingly embrace and believe it. For what if some do not
believe, shall their unbeleife make the faith of God. i.e. Fidei nomen hic
propria et omnibus scriptoribus usitata significatione accipitur pro dictorum
conventorumque constantia et veritate. Beza in loc.
The Doctrine of faith, or of the Covenant without effect? It is the Apostles
argument in a like dispute; it is general Reformation, not personal saving
conversion which makes a National Church. Romans 3.3.


If any man shall demand of me to show a National Church in the N.T.

1. Though I might as well demand of him, to show me such a thing as a Nation in
Adams family; (we cannot show things til time bring them forth.)

2. Yet whosoever will impartially consult these Scriptures, ( Psa, 22.27.
All the ends of the world shall remember and turn unto the Lord; and all the
kindreds of the nations shall worship before thee. Is, 19, 24, 25
In that day shall Israel be the third with Egypt and with Assyria, even a
blessing in the midst of the land. Whom the Lord of hosts shall bless, saying,
Blessed be Egypt my people, and Assyria the work of my hands, and Israel mine
inheritance. Isa. 52.15.
So shall he sprinkle many nations, etc. Isa. 55,5.
Behold, thou shall call a nation that thou know not, and nations that knew
not thee, shall run unto thee, because of the Lord thy God, and for the holy one
of Israel, for he has glorified thee. Rev. 11.15. And the seventh Angel
sounded, and there were great voices in heaven, saying, The kingdoms of this
world are become the kingdoms of our Lord, and of his Christ, and he shall
reign for ever and ever,) and the like, may find such a thing as a national
Church in the Prophesy. And if the history of the Gospel reach not far enough
to show the accomplishment, surely the progress of the Gospel does.

3. In the mean time, as it is no absurdity to say that Adams family was both a
family, and a nation, and a world, and all vertually: so neither is there any
false Doctrine in it, to say, that the first Gospel Church, was both
Congregational and national, and Catholic or Universal.

4. Surely, a national Church (in our sense) has bin a truth, about which
there has bin little dispute among the Reformed Churches; even among them that
have opposed Episcopacy, there are many that have not so much as questioned a
national Church. Mr. Cartwright not only dedicates part of his labors, against
the Hierarchy, to the Church of England, but in his Catech. Chapter 3. Which treats
of the Church, having spoken of the Universal Church, propounds this question.
What is the Church of one nation? and answers it thus. It is that which is
gathered under one politic or civil government.

Mr. He dedicates his whole book on the Rev. Sanctis, Reformatis, Britannicis,
Germanicis, Gallicis Ecclesiis.
Brightman in his exposition upon Revelations 3. in his application of the
Church of Laodiaea to the State of our Church, speaks of it as one, Ecclesia
nostra Anglicana.

But time will not suffer me to engage further in this controversy, nor need I
stand to make conjectures, why some of later times do so strenuously deny such
a thing as a national Church, the reasons begin to discover themselves every
day more apparently then other to all the world.

5. And lastly, This is plain enough to any that are not wilfully blind, that
where the parts constituentes of a thing do meet, there you have the thing it
self; where God holds forth his Covenant to a Nation or Kingdom and they
generally embrace, and profess it: there is a Church in a Gospel-sence: and a
Church thus covenanted, stands in conjugal relation unto God.

1. The greater is the honor which God does put upon such a Nation or People;
Use.
He has not done so with any Nation, Psa. 147, 20.
sang David once of Israel, before Christ; he has not done so with every
Nation, may England sing, and what ever other Nation God has, or shall cause to
approach so near unto himself, since Christ.

2. And secondly the more sacred and invincible obligation lies upon such a
people to maintain spouse-like affection, and to yield spouse-like obedience
unto God; to stir up and provoke themselves to be faithful in Covenant with the
Lord: to take heed lest there should be any root of bitterness springing up; an
evil heart of unbelief in departing from the living God; Deuteronomy, 29.
which was the sin here charged upon Israel: Heb, 3, 12.
She went a whoring from the Lord: And brings me to the second Doctrine.

A Kingdom or people thus related unto God may (possibly) go a whoring from
him, commit adultery against him. Witness the complaints of God concerning this
people (thus in Covenant with him) in this Prophecy. Chap. 4.12. Chap. 5.3, 4.
Chap. 7.4. with diverse other, per totum.

Yea all the Prophets bring in their inditements against this people under this
notion and metaphor of adultery and wheredom: There were no end of quotations.

Two things I would briefly speak to.

1. What this whoredom is, of which they stand indicted. 2. How it comes to pass
that a people so nearly related unto God, may become guilty of so great a
wickedness.
For the first.

1. All manner of sin is a kind of spiritual adultery against God: What whordom
against God in Scripture-sense is.
sin qua sin, has the nature of whoredom in it: sin being nothing else (as the
Schools define it) but a turning away from God, and a turning to the creature;
Peccatum est everflo a deo et conversso ad creaturam. Gen, 1. ult. Rom, 6. ult.
Heb, 3, 12.
a taking of that love and affection which is due to God, and bestowing it upon
the creature, yea the Devils creature: for sin is none of Gods creature: God
made neither sin nor death; (all that he made was very good:) but the Devil
brought in sin, and sin brought in death. Sin, I say, is a departing from God
to the the creature, to a base lust: Surely as a wife treacherously departs
from her husband, so have you dealt treacherously with we, Ier, 3, 20
O house of Israel, says the Lord. It is an indictment laid in, in reference
to their sin and apostasy in general. And thus corporal whoredom against the
Covenant of marriage, is also spiritual whoredom against the Covenant of God;
and pride is whoredom, and drunkenness whoredom, (indeed they seldom are
separated in the very letter) and Sabbath-breaking is whoredom, and all manner
of profaneness is whoredom against the Lord.

So it runs in this peoples charge by this Prophet;

Hosea 4.11.
Whoredom, and wine, and new wine take away the heart: The spirit of whoredoms
has caused them to err in the very next verse.

Chap, 5, 5.
The pride of Israel testifies to his face: that is branded with the infamy of
whoredom too, verse. 4. Verse 4.
The spirit of whoredoms is in the midst of them: All manner of profaneness are
but streams that flow from the poisoned fountain of an whorish heart, an heart
turned away from God, and refusing to turn unto him again. And therefore in
reference to all these and more, it is demanded with astonishment; Isa, 1, 21,
23.
How is the faithful City become an harlot? Wherein? It follows, it was full of
judgment, righteousness lodged in it, but now murderers: Thy Princes are
rebellious, and companions of thieves; every one loves gifts and follows
after rewards; they judge not the fatherless, neither does the cause of the
widow come unto them. See perverting of justice, rebellion, robbery,
covetousness, bribery, mercilesness, all these are Whoredom.

But there are some special sins, Special sins called whoredom in Scripture
which eminenter and above all other, are branded with this mark of whorish
departure from God.

First, 1 Idolatry. Ier 20, 20. Ezekiel, 16, per tetum.
Idolatry is all over the Prophets stigmatized with the infamy of Wheredom and
Adultery against the Lord; not only because (for the most part) they go
together, but especially as this is indeed a proper whoredom against the Lord,
in as much as it is the taking in of another lover into the bosom; the setting
up of a Rival God: those expressions have much of the metaphor in them; where
the Lord, speaking of their Idols, lays this to their charge, Thou have
discovered thy self to another then me, Isa, 57.8.
thou lovedst their bed; and thou have opened thy feet to every one that passed
by, Ezekiel. 16, 25.
and multiplied thy whoredoms: i. e. Committed Idolatry with all the false gods
of the heathen round about. Idolatry is the taking in of a strange god (as it
were) into the bed of loves: therefore has God set his name of jealousy upon
that Command which forbids Idolatry, 2 Command.
because it is the proper passion which is irritated by the adulterous
departures (or the suspicion of it) of the yoke fellow from the other party in
conjugal Covenant and relation.

The second sin branded with whoredom in Scripture is, 2 Sin; Refusing and
opposing of Reformation. Hosea 7.1.
the refusing and opposing of Reformation: When I would have healed Israel,
then the iniquity of Ephraim was discovered, and the wickedness of Samaria: i.
e. In a time of reformation they were worse then ever. What are they called for
this? See verse. 4. They are all adulterers, etc. Idolatry is whoredom, in as
much as it is a turning away from God: and opposition to reformation is
whoredom, because it is a refusing to return to God: They will not frame their
doings, or (as the Hebrew may be rendered) their doings will not suffer them to
return to their God: (...) Non sinent opera little ut revertantur. Hosea 5.4.
i. e. Reformation was not consistent with the designs they drove, it was not
compatible with their lusts and private interests: What follows? The spirit of
whoredoms is in the midst of them.

Opposition of Reformation is spiritual adultery.

So are false doctrines and heretical opinions taken up and maintained by a
people or person; 2 Sin; False doctrine
they are spiritual wickedness and whoredom against God: The false Prophers
prophesied lies in Jeremiah's time, Ier. 23.26, 31 32.
they are censured as Adulterers for it, Verse. 14. I have seen also in the
Prophets of Jerusalem an horrible thing, they commit adultery and walk in lies:
And so in this Prophecy. Hosea 7.3, 4.
They make the King glad with their wickedness, and the Princes with their
lies: i. e. They found our false doctrine to palliate and justify Jeroboams
and his Princes false worship (of which you may read 1 King. 12.26. --) it
follows verse. 4. They are all adulterers etc.

The truth is, indeed, false doctrine is the pander to all manner of
profaneness; it is the cover-sin in the world: Antichrist himself had never been
a man of so many errors and blasphemies, had he not been first the man of sin.

Vain man would fain sin by Authority, and therefore finds out falsehoods and
lies, and then fathers them upon the Word, that he may sin by Scripture.

And that would make Error to be whoredom if there were no more (in a people
that have known and embraced the truth as it is in Jesus) in as much as it is
the Cord to keep a people down in the bed of Whoredoms, of all manner of
wickedness; for so it is added in the indictment of the false Prophets: They
walk in lies; they strengthen also the hands of evil doers, Ier, 23, 14.
that none does return from his wickedness: for this, they commit adultery.

But that is not all: It is not only whoredom by consequence, but perse, in its
own nature: God is the God of Truth, and Scripture is the Truth of God: They
therefore that depart from God and his Truth, to embrace and believe lies,
stand guilty of whoredom in words at length, and not in figures only.

Inordinat love of the world, 4 Sin.
is specially pointed at by the finger of Gods spirit, as an Adultery. James
4.4.
Ye Adulterers and Adulteresses know ye not that the freindship of this world
is enmity against God etc. This is so apparent an whoredom, that the Spirit of
God makes it matter of shame and astonishment, that any man should be ignorant
of it: know ye not?

Therefore is the covetous man said to be an Idolater, because he adores every
Cross of his corn: i. e. Ephesians, 5, 5.
He lays out that love, and zeal, and confidence, and trust which is due to
God, upon his Cash, he says to Job 31, 24.
Gold thou art my hope, and to his fine gold, thou art my confidence.

That is the last sin, (the last I shall name) which Scripture makes Adultery
against God: 5 Sin.
Gornal confidence, trusting in the Creature. It is the sin immediately going
before my text. Isreal builds Temples, so in Dan and Bathel, Hosea 8, (...).
for the worship of the Calves: And Calv, in loc. Non quod per se hoc coram deo
sit damnabile sed quia videbat propheta tranferri in illas urbes populi
fiduciam, Ier, 17, 5.
Judah has multiplied fenced Cities; both for the securing of themselves
against danger: it is called a forgetting God, Israel has forgotten his maker
in the beginning of the verse. When a people trust in man and make flesh their
arm, their heart is departed from God, they are gone a whoring from him.

And thus you see what whoredom against God is. First all sin in general, lived
in and allowed: but more especially; 1. Idolatry. 2. Opposing of Reformation.
3. Heresy. 4. Inordinate love of the world. 5. Carnal confidence, all these
are whordome (...), Adultery of the first magnitude.

Briefly now, 2 Quest.
How comes the faithful City to be an Harlot? how comes it to pass that a
people so nearly related to God, may become guilty of so great a wickedness?

For is there indeed such a thing in Scripture as falling away from grace, and
the Divines of England would never let us know of it?

Is there indeed such a thing as the dissolution of the marriage knot between
God and his people?

Surely no.

But 1. Answ.
we are speaking here but of a visible Church, a people or kingdom in external
Communion with God, a mixed multitude of professors, the major part whereof for
want of root in themselves, (with the stony ground) may make a total and final
Apostasy from the worship, truths, and commands of the living God, to Idolatry,
Heresy, and Profaneness; and go a whoring from God, so as never to return to
him again.

Formal and ungrounded profession is the road to final defection and Apostasy.

2. Yea secondly, even of them who are living members of the invisible Church,
who are betrothed unto Jesus Christ in an everlasting Covenant, even among
these may be some, who for want of a discerning eye, of Spiritual
watchfulness, may for a time, and in some degree, be carried away with the
error of the wicked, Ephesians, 4.14, (...)
and by the cunning craftiness, (the sleight of hand or cheatry) of them that
lie in wait to deceive, be carried down the stream and torrent of error and the
Apostasy of the times. Oh, Christians had need of good eyes, and critical
inspection and circumspection, to discern the fallacies and frauds of seducers,
for want whereof they may be I say greatly, not unsettled only and troubled, but
even ensnared and misled into dangerous principles and ways; but there is a
Spirit of truth and love that acts and animates them (at the bottom) which shall
preserve them from total and final Apostasy, and recover them to the
acknowledgment of the truth, and into the chaste and spouse-like embraces and
obedience of their first Husband. Hose 2.8.

Use.However the Contemplation of both these may be.

1. A Startling and an awakening Consideration to all Christian Magistrates and
governors, to look about them that they do not suffer Churches and states
under their hand to turn Apostate, and go a whoring from their God, as much as
in them lies. 2. A Caution to all, in the words of the Apostle, 1 Cor, 10, 12.
He that thinks he stands, let him take heed lest he fall.
But I shall have more full occasion to speak to both these in the fourth Doct.
And therefore I shall leave this, and hasten in a word to the third Doctrine.

Many times it comes to pass that Gods Israel lying under the deep guilt of
whorish departures from her God, in stead of being affected with, and afflicted
for her whoredoms, does securely and sinfully let out her heart to carnal
jollity and contentments. It was the condition of Israel here which the Prophet
does severely reprove and condemn; and this was not the first time they did so,
was it not the complaint of the Prophets, Isa, 22, 12, 13.
Isaiah, and Amos 6, 3, 4, 5, 6.
Amos?

And last of all, Luk, 17, 26, Reasons.
the complaint of the Lord of the Prophets, Jesus Christ himself?

What might the Reason be?

1. Surely, first there is desperate security at the bottom of it, people in
this case do wilfully shut their eyes against the discoveries, and convictions
of sin and wrath. They lie in a deep sleep of security, and take no notice how
the things of their peace are passing by them. Luke 19, 42.


2. There is a mixture likewise of desperate unbeleif. Behold I work a work in
your days which you will not believe, though it be told you: Hab, 1, 5.
people do harden their hearts against all the predictions and intimations of
approaching ruin.

3. People do flatter themselves extremely, with their present prosperity and
deliverances. It was the Lullabie of this people here, as Interpreters observe;
because garners were full, and wine-fatts ran over; because they had great
peace, and rich plenty, therefore they thought all was well, As long as people
hear not from God in thundering and lightning, they reckon themselves safe
enough. Will ye steal, murder, and commit adultery, Ier, 7, 9, 10.
and swear falsely, and burn incense to Baal, and walk after other Gods whom ye
know not, and come and stand before me in this house which is called by my
name, and say, we are delivered to do all these abominations?

Behold, theft, and murder, and adultery, and perjury, and Idolatry, all put
upon the score of deliverances. Thou have found the life of thy hand, Isa, 57,
10.
therefore thou wast not greived. As long as people can live of themselves,
they will lay neither sin nor wrath to heart. Carnal minds take Gods silence for
Gods consent, his patience for his approbation. these things have thou done,
Psa, 50, 21.
and I kept silence, thou thoughtest that I was altogether such a one as thy
self.

4. A fourth ground or cause of it, may be, trusting to outward
Church Priviledges; placing confidence in the very being in external Covenant
with God. Behold ye trust in lying words that cannot profit; Ier, 7, 10, verse,
4.
what were they? why, The Temple of the Lord, the Temple of the Lord, the
Temple of the Lord are these.

Foolish people content themselves to hang on the outside of the Ark, and think
that shall save them from wrath both present and to come. There is a dreadful
Catalogue of sins brought in by the Prophet Micah, against the Rulers and
Teachers of this people. They build Zion with blood, and Jerusalem with
iniquity. The heads thereof judge for reward, and the Priests thereof teach for
here, Mic, 3, 10, 11,
and the Prophets thereof divine for money: horrid Apostasy! And could they
hold up their heads under all these abominations? yes, as high as ever, and
overlook and scorn all the threatenings of the true Prophets, no evil can come
upon us; they may tell us strange tales to make us afraid if they could, but we
are safe enough, evil will not, evil cannot come upon us; why? they lean upon
the Lord, and say is not the Lord among us? Mark I beseech you, because they
had yet the presence of the ordinances of God, they concluded they had also the
presence of the God of the ordinances, and thus they deceived and cousen'd
themselves.

Use.Is not here more soul-humbling work for us? Lord what is man left to
himself? But of this also in the next Doctrine, which is the fourth and last
Doctrine.

Gods Israel under adulterous departures from him, have less cause to rejoice,
and more cause to morn and lament, then any people or nation under heaven.
Rejoice not O Israel for joy as other nations for etc.

There is a twofold ground of it.

1. In reference to their sin, 2. In reference to their danger.
There is no people under heaven that can sin as Israel sins; no people under
heaven that can smart so for sin as Israel may smart.

first for their sin.

Isreal's sin has more aggravation upon it then the sin of all the world
besides.

There is a twofold aggravation upon Isreal's sin, of which the sin of other
nations is not capable.

1. An aggravation of light. 2. An aggravation of love.
Gods Israel sins against more light, and Gods Israel sins against more love,
then all the earth besides.

First, Israel sins against more light, they know more then all the world knows.

1. Of God. God reveals more of himself unto his Church, Israel knows more God.
then he does to all the nations upon the earth. In Judah is God known etc.
Psa, 76, 1, 2. His attributes.
They know more of his names and attributes then the rest of the world do, his
name is great in Israel: his holiness, his justice, his mercy, his
faithfulness, his omnipotence, his omnipresence, his omniscience etc. These he
makes known to and in his Church, more then to any of, or all the nations in
the world. God mentions it as an high favor unto Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob; I
appeared unto them, by the name of God Almighty: an higher favor, that he made
himself known to his seed by the name Jehovah: Exodus, 6, 3.
God shines forth in his Church in the brightness and deerness of all his
glorious attributes: and this is an high aggravation of Isreal's sin and
Apostasy. Howbeit then when ye knew not God, ye did service to them which by
nature are no Gods. Gal, 4, 9.
But now after that ye have known God, how turn ye again? etc. This was a
defection for which there could be no Apology made: for if the knowledge of God
by the book of the creature, where Gods name is to be spel'd out but by dark
and broken Characters, be sufficient to leave the Gentiles (...) without
Apology or excuse, Rom, 1, 20,
how much more will that knowledge of God held forth so distinctly and fully in
the Church, leave Israel without a word to speak for it self in the day of her
Apostasy and revoltings from the Lord her God?

2. Israel has more knowledge of Gods will: His will, Rom, 12, 2,
Israel knows or may know what that good and acceptable and perfect will of God
is; Israel is the servant that knows his masters will, if he do it not, this
aggravates deeply.

3. Israel knows more of the evil of sin, The evil of sin Rom, 3, 20. Rom, 7.
by the law is the knowledge of sin: yea the law makes sin appear exceeding
sinful; the Gentiles scarce know what sin is, but in some very obscure and
confused notions; and yet sin is sin in them, surely where it appears exceeding
sinful, there it must needs be exceeding sin.

4. Israel knows more of Gods hatred of sin, Gods hatred of sin. Ier, 44, 4.
how much his soul loathes it: oh! do not this abominable thing (says God to
Israel) which I hate. And therefore if Idolatry be a sin in the Gentiles, who
think it to be a worship which God loves, what is it in Israel to whom God has
expressly said, my soul hates it? If any man draw back, draw back from my
truths, draw back from my worship, draw back from my Commands, etc. my soul
shall have no pleasure in him. Heb. 10, 38.


Now Israel to the attaining of this knowledge of God has a threefold
advantage. Israel has the book of the Word Psalm, 19, 1. Verse 7, Ps, 147, 19,
20 Psalm, 19, 7, 8.


1. Whereas other nations have but what knowledge the book of * works can
dictate to them, Israel has the book of the * word; He shows his word unto
Jacob, his statutes and judgments unto Israel. And the testimony of the Lord is
sure, making wise the simple, the Commandment of the Lord is pure enlightening
the eyes. The word does not only give light, but gives eyes too. He has not
dealt so with any nation. And if God has not dealt so with any nation as with
his Israel, in dispensing light, then can no nation deal so with God as Israel
in sining against it.

2. A second advantage that Israel has above nations to know God, is his
works, his works of special Providence. The book of special Providence.
In Judah is God known, etc. how? by what mediums? Why, there brake he the
arrows of the how, the shield, the sword and the battle. All the power, Psalm,
76, 3.
and artillery of the enemies that came against his Church, though upon mighty
advantage. There is more of God manifested in the goings forth of his power and
wisdom, for the preservation of his Church, and the ruin and destruction of the
enemies thereof, then in all the world besides. So that in reference to this,
the Psalmist sings, Psalm, 31, 19.
oh how great is thy goodness which thou have laid up for them that fear thee,
which thou have wrought for them that trust in thee, before the sons of men!
what goodness? why his preserving goodness to his Church and people, Verse 20.
thou shall hide them in the secret of thy presence from the pride of man, thou
shall keep them secretly in a pavilion etc. Oh the ways of God in preserving
and hiding his Church from the pride and power of men, are secret mysterious
ways, which the world cannot discover.

3. And then the third and last Advantage is. The Spirit as an Interpreter.
Israel has an Interpreter (greater then one of a thousand) to expound both
these books unto her, even the Spirit of God which the world knows not. We have
received, 1 Cor, 2, 12.
not the Spirit of the world, but the Spirit that is of God, that we may know
the things that are freely given unto us of God. And again eye has not seen
etc. i.e. the natural eye, Verse 9, 10.
the natural ear etc. But God has revealed them to us by the Spirit.

Indeed, the word expounds the works; and the works of God do interpret the
word: it is a fine skill to make works and word face one another, and answer
over one to another; but this cannot be done without an Interpreter, that is a
secretioribus dei, Gods privy-Counceller; and that is the Spirit which the
world knows not, and receives not; and therefore is both the book of the
word, some fragments whereof the Gentiles light upon sometimes) and the book of
the works a sealed book, which they cannot open, or not read, if they could
open.

Now therefore the Church and people of God, having this threefold advantage
to a more clear and full discovery of God, and his will, of sin and his hatred
thereof, then all the world besides; Isreal's sin has hereby an aggravation
upon it, of which theirs is incapable, an aggravation of light. If ye were
blind ye should have no sin, John 9.41.
no sin Comparative: but now ye say, we see: therefore your sin remains, i.e.
it remains inexcusable, it remains aggravated. And this is the first
aggravation.

The second aggravation that Isreal's sin is Capable of, is

An aggravation of love, a manifold love.

First, Israel sins against Gods distinguishing, his separating love. Members
of the Visible Church, they sin against that love of God, which distinguished
them from the rest of the Deuteronomy. 32, 7, 8
world, members of the invisible Church, they sin against that love which
distinguished them from the rest of the Church; his electing-love, his
Adopting-love, his effectually-calling-love: Oh this must needs go deep in sin:
You only have I known of all the families of the earth. Amos 3, 2.
i. e. Known with a Conjugal distinguishing knowledge: I have known you of all
the families of the earth; to distinguish you from all the families of the
earth: this makes their sin become exceeding sinful; it is the other branch of
the Apostles argument, Gal, 4, 9.
or rather are known of God: Know God, there is their light; known of God,
there is Gods love; his distinguishing love; sins against distinguishing love,
are distinguishing sins.

2. Israel sins against his correcting love, which is allways managed with the
wisdom and moderation of a father; In measure etc. And for profit, Isa, 27, 8.
Heb, 12, 10.
that we might be partakers of his holiness. The thought of sinning against
this love melts down holy Ezra to the very bottom. And after all this is come
upon us for our evil deeds, and for our great trespass; Ezra 9, 13, 14
seeing thou our God have punished us, less then our iniquities deserve, should
we again break thy Commandments? etc. And so it should do with every ingenuous
heart.

3. Israel sins against Gods repenting-love. Psa. 106.45. He remembered for them
his Covenant, and repented etc. Amos 7.3, 6. The Lord repented for the plague
of grasshoppers: And the Lord repented for the fire: Yea, how often is it
repeated Ezekiel. 20. I lifted up my hand; i. e. as if he were fetching his blow
to smite them, and to smite but once; or as if he had sworn their destruction;
(lifting up of the hand signifies both;) But I wrought for my name, Ver. 14.
Mine eye spared them from destroying them, Verse. 17. I withdrew my hand, Verse.
22. etc. Now brethren to see a God repenting over a people, and to see a people
not repenting before their God; to see God repenting of the evil of punishment,
and a people not repenting of the evil of sin; Gods repentings are Isreal's
revivings, Ezra 9.8, and when he revives comforts to their spirits, for them to
revive grief to his spirit, oh who can take the demensions of this aggravation?

4. Israel sins against Gods pardoning love; Mich, 7,18.
He pardons the mixed multitude in the Church with a passing-by-pardon, a pardon
of forbearance: he pardons his own in Covenant of grace with a
blotting-out-pardon, a pardon of forgetfulness, I will be merciful to their
sins, and remember their iniquities no more: Ier, 31, 34. Psa, 78, 38.
But he being full of mercy forgave their iniquity: Oh now to sin against this
love; while God is full of mercy, for Israel to be full of sin; God pardons and
they sin, they sin and God pardons, and again pardons, and they again sin:
(...) Multiplicabit ad parcendum. Isa, 55, 7.
For God to add to multiply pardons, and they to add to multiply sin; for this
indeed, rejoice not, Oh Israel with joy as other nations, They, sin not against
Gods pardoning love.

5. Israel sins against Gods parental love: Ier, 31, 20.
Is Ephraim my dear son? is he a pleasant child? Therest of the world sin but
in the capacity of bastards, slaves, creatures at best: Ephraim sins in the
capacity of a child, a son, a dear son, a pleasant child; the child has more
cause to mourn and lament then the stranger: this is an aggravation that heaven
and earth must hear of: Esa, 1, 2,
Hear, O heavens; and give ear, O earth: for the Lord has spoken; I have
nourished and brought up children, and they have rebelled against me.

6. Yea Israel all this while sins against Gods conjugal love: Turn, Ier, 3, 14,
O backsliding children, for I am married to you, says the Lord. Behold a
Father married to his Children; behold God stands to his Church in relation of
both Father and Husband, and yet she rebels; has any Nation such cause to
mourn?

I could tell you moreover of

7. Gods protecting love:

8. His providing love, he provides like a Father, like an Husband for his
Church and people, etc.

Against all which Israel sins: But I must hasten.

Consult in the second place the Danger, The danger of Isreal's sin.
and that also will tell you Israel has more cause to mourn for her adulterous
departures from God, then any nation upon the earth.

What Danger?

Why Brethren, Israel playing the Harlot is in danger of God: jealousy. 2
Command.
I the Lord thy God am a jealous God: other nations sinning are in danger of
Gods anger, but Israel of Gods jealousy: And jealousy is the rage of a man,
and. vt supra. Is it nothing, my Brethren, to have a God angry, yea even to
Jealousy? Consider I beseech you:

Gods Jealousy is,

1. A stripping-jealousie; Ezekiel, 16, 38,
I will, judge thee as women that break wedlock, (says God to adulterous Israel)
how is that? Verse. 37. I will discover thy nakedness to thy lovers, and they
shall strip thee of thy clothes, and take away all thy jewels; all her
Church-ornaments, all her Bride-glory and bravery, not only her silver and
gold, peace and plenty, but Word and Sacraments etc. Alas! the Nations have
none of these to lose.

2. It is a withdrawing-jealousie; the husband withdraws from the wife when he
is jealous of her; and woe unto thee, says God, when I depart from thee. Hose,
9, 12,


3. It is a divorcing-jealousie; a discovenanting-jealousie: God said here to
this whorish people, Lo-ammi and Loruhamah, Hosea 1, 6, 9,
not my people, not having obtained mercy: they discovenanted God, and God
discovenanted them: they cast off God, and God, and God discovenanted them:
they cast off God, and God cast off them.

Many more particulars might be added, but these must suffice.

And now tell me, I beseech you, has not Israel, think ye, under whorish
departures, more cause to mourn and lament then any people under heaven? Do any
of the Nations sin against so much light? Do any of the Nations sin against so
much love? Has any Nation under heaven so much to forfeit by their sin as
Israel has? They may feel his wrath, but they are not liable to his jealousy.
The Nations may lose their flax and their wool, their silver and their gold,
but they have no Ordinances to lose, they have no Gospel to lose, no Word, no
Sacrament to forfeit. The Nations have no God to lose, at least no
God-a-father, no God-an-husband to lose: they may be unpeopled, but they cannot
be unchurched: They may know what sword and famine is, but they cannot know
what it is to be divorced. Rejoice not, O Israel, for joy, etc.

I but Gentiles are capable of hell, are they not, and is there any state worse
then that? Object.


1. We speak of Israel especially in reference to her Church State and
condition of which she is capable in this life. Answ.


2. If we speak of hell, Israel, that is the generality of the visible Church
are in as much danger of that as the Gentiles: yea more; tribulation and
anguish, Rom, 2, 8, 9.
indignation and wrath to the Jew first, and also to the Gentile. Yea certainly
a deeper place in Tophet is reserved for apostate Israel, then for the poor
pur-blind Gentiles: when the Gentiles shall but swim upon the surface of that
burning lake, Israel shall be sunk into the midst of those devouring flames: It
shall be easier for Sodom and Gomorrah in the day of Judgment, then for
Capernaum.

3. And lastly, Even the very Elect of God, Israel according to the spirit and
promise, if they be defiled with the pollutions and whoredoms of the rest, and
carried down the stream of apostasy, whether in Doctrine or Conversation, it
may cost them dear; God may put such a cup into their hand to drink; a cup of
trembling and spiritual desertion, which, for a time, may be worse then all the
plagues of Egypt, and as it were the very skimmings of the bottomless pit.

USE.First, It may inform us what an horrid and hateful sin Adultery is before
God, in as much as of all sins, the wisdom of God has made choice of that sin
for a type and metaphor of the great sin of apostasy from God, the greatest of
sins next the sin against the Holy Ghost; and is not only a degree to it, but a
spice of it: In all the bed-roll of sins there is none found vile enough to
make a shadow or representation of departing from God, but this sin of
whoredom, the fittest emblem for that purpose, in as much as it is a base and
treacherous apostasy from the marriage bed and the Covenant of God: for so is
the adulteress described: Prove, 2, 17.
She forsakes the guide of her youth, and forgets the Covenant of God. Oh,
that as God has set such a brand of abomination in the forehead of this sin,
this peccatum non nominandum, this sin that should not be so much as named
among Christians ( i. e. with complacency or delight, Ephesians, 5, 3,
there should not be so much as word-obscenity among Christians:) I say, oh
that as God has set his brand upon it, so Authority would set their brand upon
it too, and make it as odious and formidable in the punishment, as it is and
should be to us in its own nature! When the government was immediately in Gods
hands, he punished it with death; and why it should not be so in our polity, I
know not: I am confident that law, as it has been often propounded, so it had
been long since established in this Kingdom, had not guilt and love of that
abominable filthiness stood in the way.

But 2. Hence we have to confute that lewd opinion, that the Saints (according
to the new style, which all new opinions do write) need not mourn for sin, need
not be humbled for, nor troubled with any sin, (if at lest they can sin) which
is improved to that height, that conferring of sin and mourning for sin, is the
greatest sin a Saint can be guilty of. When alas, the Spirit of God tells us
here, that no people in the world have so much cause to mourn and lament for
sin, as they have; and you have seen the Doctrine made good by Scripture
grounds and demonstrations.

As for those that can wipe off all this with the jeer and blasphemy of an old
Testament Spirit, I dare be bold to say, and fear not the breach of charity in
it, let them be who they will, whether Teachers or Taught, Doctors, or
Disciples, they be of the number of the Apostles Separatists Jude 18.
mockers, walking after their own lusts, sensual, having not the Spirit; they
have not the Spirit, neither old-Testament-Spirit, nor new-Testament-Spirit;
for it was but one and the same Spirit of God that dictated both Testaments to
the penmen thereof: all Scripture is (...) given by inspiration, 2 Timothy, 3, 16,
the breathing of God, even the old as well as the new. For Prophecy came not
of old time by the will of man, but holy men of God spoke as they were inspired
by the holy Ghost. As for them that can wipe out an whole Testament of divine
truth, 2 Pet, 1, 21,
with a wet finger (without which the other may well suffer a deleatur also) the
punishment of their blasphemy, is Prophesied before hand (without repentance)
God shall blot out their name out of the book of life. Rev, 22, 19,


I should talk more with these men, who thus boldly and blasphemously deny
humiliation for sin, but that it would keep us too long from the work it self,
(which is the work of the day) and the

Third Use.An use for humiliation. 3. Use. Hunuliation,


Have not the Prophets of England as much cause to cry in the ears, not of
this Congregation only, Englands Whoredoms. 1. All sin, and the improvements
thereof, whoredom, drunkenness, swearing, Sabbath profanation.
but of the whole nation: Rejoice not oh England for joy as other people, for
thou have gone a whoring from thy God? Surely they have: witness first, not only
the continuance but the monstrous improvement of all manner of sin among us;
whoredom and drunkeness, and swearing, and Sabbath breaking, and all kinds of
profaneness is broken in upon us like another deluge; and a worse deluge then
that of water: for better it is a thousand times better to see a people lie
drowned in waters, then to see a people lie drowned in sin; yea better to see a
people lie weltring in their blood, then to behold them lie wallowing in their
lusts.

Did the pride of Israel testify to his face, and does not the pride of
England testify to its face? Pride of Men
Surely it testifies to the faces of men in that gallantry and bravery,
sumptuousness and gaudiness of apparel, that scurrility of hair, (I may truly
call it) loftiness and wantonness of gesture, and that in these sad times of
Jacob-troubles, that England never equaled in her most peaceable and
prosperous days: I say it testifies to the faces of men: Women.
And it testifies in the faces of our women, the Gentry and Ladies of our
times. I cannot say they are Black-Mores or Ethiopians, Ier, 13, 23.
for they can change their skins, they can change their skins by painting; but
I may justifiably call them Leopards, for they will not change their Spotts:
Spotted beasts they are, and are not afraid to come with their Spotts into the
Congregations of God: yea to bring them to these days of solemn humiliation,
wherein they should rather come Sprinkled with ashes, and girded with
Sackcloth; Surely as an ancient Divine was wont to say, they cannot expect that
God should know them, they do so un-make themselves from what he made them: and
if God shall say to them hereafter, depart from me I know ye not, (these are not
the faces which I made) they are undone for ever; Interim, God may in a just
judgment smite them with a Spot that cannot indeed be changed, or healed with
all the art of the Physician; and rend their faces and skins with an incureable
scab, as they now rend their faces with painting. It is threatened by a God able
to make his Word good, for this sin of pride, Isa. 3.17. Therefore the Lord will
smite with a scab, the crown of the head of the daughters of Zion, and the Lord
will discover their secret parts. And what shall we say for other sins, does not
robbery and oppression, cruelty and injustice cry in the ears of the Lord of
Sabbath! James 5, 4.


Surely there is such an increase of all manner of sin and profaneness as if the
windows of hell were opened, and the floodgates of the bottomless pit were
pulled up; hell it self broke loose. But alas! if we look upon those sins which
more properly and peculiarly are branded in the shoulder with the mark of
whoredom: How may we take up the Prophet Isaiah's lamentation, and wonder, How
is the faithful City, the faithful Kingdom, become an harlot? Isa. 1.21.


She that was accounted the chastest among the Churches, for fidelity to the
worship and doctrine of the Lord Jesus, how is she degenerated into an
Adulteress!

For 1. is there not Idolatry found among us? Ye have pulled down Idols in the
Churches, Idolatry.
(and ye have done well) but oh, Idols are multiplied in the Land; every man's
opinion is become his idol which he adores and worships with highest
veneration: we have cause to be humbled for our old Popery, and our old Popish
Ceremonies; (You our Honorable Senators told us so once in an Ordinance of
Parliament, and ye did well) but Popery was but one way of false worship: There
be a generation of men in the Land that stand up for all kinds of false
worship; that every man may worship God after his own conscience; or if they
will not own it in words at length, they will have it in figures: And if they may
not, are ready, not only to cry, but to act persecution, and that to purpose:
for while they cry persecution, gladio oris, they are ready to act persecution,
ore gladij: I pray God it may never be Englished.

In the second place, Is there any thing refused and opposed so much as
Reformation? Opposing of Reformation.
Oh that Popery were so much opposed as Reformation! Oh that Blasphemies were
so much opposed as Reformation! Oh that Antichristianism and Atheism were so
much opposed as Reformation! Happy we then. Would ye know when all these
abominations are broke out in England? Oh it is in a time of Reformation! In a
time of the breaking out of Gospel Light and liberty; such as the world never
saw since it was Christian. In a time when we had sworn our selves to God by
Covenant to extirpate Popery, Prelacy, Superstition, Heresy, Schism,
Profaneness, and whatsoever shall be found to be contrary to sound doctrine and
the power of godliness. Alas we run in such a contrary motion that a man might
almost think there was a word in the Covenant mis-printed, and the next errata
should bid the Reader read establish in stead of extirpate. Oh! God may say of
us, when I would have healed England, then the iniquity thereof was discovered!
England was never so bad as in a time of a Reformation.

Witness thirdly, Heresies.
the numerous and numberless increase of errors and heterodox opinions even to
blasphemy among us.

Heresies even ^o blasphemy.
The world once wondered to see it self turned Arrian: England may wonder to see
it self turned Anabaptist, Antinomian, Arminian, Socinian, Arrian,
Anti-trinitarian, Anti-scripturist, what not! Alas! what were Ceremonies to
these things, but (as Calvin once called them tollerabiles ineptia, childrens
sport in comparison, how much less an evil was it (think ye) to bow at the Name
of Jesus, then to deny, to blaspheme the Name of Jesus? 2 Pet. 2.1.

If any man shall demand a proof of these things, I shall say nothing else but
this, that is to be feared that man himself is a proof, Hereticorum est omnia
dubitare, Arnobius.
It is the trick of Heretics to believe nothing, no not that there is such a
thing as Heresy. Oh England! Is this of thy whoredoms a small thing! that thou
should sell the precious truths of Jesus Christ so cheap which our fathers
and we our selves, yea the Lord Jesus Christ bought so dear, even at the price
of blood!

As for covetousness and worldliness, Coveteousness.
alas it is death to consider after a little suspension of trading and
straitning of our estates, a little blood-let in our superfluous abundance,
whereby God would have taught us that lesson, that riches have wings and fly
away; Prove. 23.5.
and thereby would have weaned our hearts from the world, and have winged our
affections for an higher flight, even the pursuit of more excellent treasures,
the things above: I say it is death to see and consider on the contrary how
people do with the Israelites (after they had fasted an whole day) fly upon the
spoil, and eat with the very blood running about their lips, the blood of the
widow, the fatherless and oppressed! What feathering of nests, what heaping of
preferments and places: What scraping for the world, as if the dust thereof
would not serve every man for an handful! What enriching of menselves upon the
poverty of the Kingdom? What building (as of old) houses with blood, and
raising of families with oppression?

And can all this go without creature-trust and carnal confidence? Carnal
confidence.
Woe unto us for surely we make flesh our arm, and our heart is departed from
the living God; we have made any thing our God but God. Alas Fathers and
Brethren, my spirit does fail me in relating these things! Did I ever think I
should have had occasion to have made such sad complaints in England of
England? Who could have believed that England could so soon have made an
Apostasy from her God! Who could have believed that England could have so soon
forgotten her Bridegroom the Lord Jesus Christ? Especially having so lately
re-espoused her self unto him by Solemn Covenant! Jer. 2.12, 13. Be astonished,
O ye heavens, at this, Jer. 2.12, 13.
and be ye horribly afraid, be ye very desolate, says the Lord: For England,
Gods people, the spouse of Jesus Christ, has committed two evils; they have
forsaken me, the fountain of living water, and hewed them out cisterns, broken
cisterns that can hold no water. Verse 10.
Verse. 10. Pass over the Isles of Chittim, and see; and send unto Kedar and
consider diligently, and see if there be such a thing. So may I say, go over to
Spain and France and Rome: Yea pass ye over to Constantinople and Egypt, etc.
Have any of these Nations changed their religion which was no religion; and
forsaken their gods which were no gods? But England has changed her glory for
that which does not profit. These are some of the whoredoms that are found in
England, but what are the aggravations?

Aggravations of Englands Whordomes.
Are Isreal's whoredoms ours, and are not Isreal's aggravations ours too? Yes,
Isreal's aggravations are aggravated among us.

Did Israel sin against more light then the Nations? England sins against more
light then Israel: Light exceeding Isreal's light.
Gospel Light does as much exceed that of the Law as the light of the Sun does
the light of the Moon, as the light of seven days exceeds the light of one.
They saw in types, and vails, and curtains; Isa 30.26. 2 Cor. 3.13. Heb. 10.1.
2 Cor. 3, 18.
so that they could not see things for shadows: We see with open face the glory
of the Lord. It is eminently observable, look with what expressions the Apostle
does commend and celebrate the vision of glory above the vision of the Gospel,
1 Cor. 13.12. In the very same language does he commend the vision of the
Gospel above the vision of the Law, in this 2 Cor. 3.18. Does not this
aggravate their aggravation of light? I am sure above all this we have one book
which they had not, the Book of the Revelations, wherein specially the
whoredoms and plagues of the Antichristian state are clearly discovered; that
so Gods people might come out of her, Rev. 18.4. and the spirit of God, the
Interpreter of al Gods works and Gods Word, Joel 2, 28.
poured out in greater abundance to expound his riddles. Again, did Israel sin
against greater love then other Nations, and does not England sin against
greater love then Israel? Love exceeding Isreal's love.


Surely there be two kinds of love which Israel had not, at lest not in such a
revelation of them as we have: And they are, 1. Gods- Christ-giving-love. 2.
His- glory, his Heaven-giving-love.

Alas Christ and Heaven were but obscure notions, dark riddles among them,
hardly understood of one of ten thousand among them, unless it were their
Heroes, the Patriarchs and Prophets: and yet even of them, says our Lord Jesus,
He that is least in the Kingdom of heaven, i. e. in the Gospel, Mat. 11, 11.
is greater then He that was greater then the greatest of them, then John the
Baptist, sc. in regard of the full and clear discovery of Christ and glory.
Alas, an earthly Canaan and a temporal Messiah, one that should king it over
them in terrene state and greatness, was the top of their ambition (witness the
very Disciples themselves, Acts 1.6.
even when Christ was ascending to take possession of his heavenly Kingdom): As
for a savior of souls and a Kingdom of eternal glory, these were things which
few of them could hardly spell out; but clearly and with open face revealed to
us in the Gospel. Life and immortality are brought to light in the Gospel. 2 Timothy, 1, 10. Englands danger for her adulteries
And to be guilty of all these treacherous departures from God and Christ under
such a glorious revelation of Light and Love, what may we expect; But even that
the jealousy of the Lord should break forth like a devouring fire (and I pray
God it be not already kindled) which shall burn down to the very foundations of
the Land: Even,

1. A stripping-jealousie that shall strip us not only of our corn and wine, but
of Word and Sacraments, even of all our Gospel Ordinances, and turn our garden
of Eden into a desolate wilderness.

2. His withdrawing-jealousie; that God shall say of England as once of Israel,
Ier. 12.7. I have forsaken mine house: I have left mine heritage: I have given
the dearly beloved of my soul into the hand of her enemies.

3. His divorcing-discovenanting-jealousie; that God should call England, as
once he did Israel, Lo-ammi and Loruhamah: and cast us out of his house and out
of his presence for ever. 1 These, 2, 16.
You see the wrath which he threatened upon Israel and Judah, he has poured it
out to the uttermost: What he spoke with his mouth, he has fulfilled it with
his hand, as at this day.

But let me tell you this, when ever the Lord shall enter into controversy with
England for her whoredoms, the furnace will be heated seven times hotter then
it was for Israel: the judgment will be much more intolerable on us then it was
on them: By how much our light and our love has been more transcendent then
Isreal's, by so much will our condemnation be greater. Oh for an England, a
people that have been clothed with scarlet, and adorned with jewels to be
stripped naked as in the day wherein she was born! For a people that have known
the joyful sound and have walked in the light of Gods countenance all the day
along, that have sat (as it were) in the bosom and embraces of the Lord
Jesus, for God now to be a stranger in their land, and as a wayfaring man that
turns in but for a night: For a people that have sat at the top of heaven in
Gospel-vision, to be cast down to hell into a kind of utter darkness! For a
people that have been in the bed of divine loves; feasted at Gods table, sat
as a Queen in the Palaces of Ivory, to come to be divorced, kicked out of
doors, and a Cains mark (as it were) set upon them to wander up and down, to be
a shame and a Curse and a Proverb among the Nations, as it is with Israel at
this day: The tongue of man is not able to express, the heart of man is not
able to conceive the misery and anguish of such a condition. Prognostics of
dicovenanting wrath.
Gentiles and Pagans are not capable of such a judgment as this is.

Truly there be many sad forerunners and Prognostics of this approaching
jealousy amongst us: scil. 1. Taking off of our wheels Exo, 14, 24, 25


1. God begins to trouble us; our wheels seem to be taken off; we drive
heavily: In all our motions we drive heavily, and ye know when it was so with
the Egyptians, wrath was near. 2. Contempt.


2. God has poured out contempt upon us; the Lord make us sensible of it:
unspeakable contempt upon the Parliament: Contempt upon the faithful Ministry
of the Land: Contempt upon the City: Contempt upon the whole Kingdom: England
once not only a terror among the Nations, but the glory of all the Churches;
now the shame of Christendom and the scorn of all the world: Ier, 2, 16.
It was one of the fore runners of old Isreal's rejection and divorce.

3. A Spirit of division and confusion let loose upon as, Councels divided, 3.
Division. Divide and impera, An house divided cannot stand.
and Ministers divided, City divided, and Kingdom divided: not one limb hardly
hanging to another, the envious man has done this; through the wrath of the
Lord the Jesuit and the Devil have almost attained their design so that without
infinite mercy we are like water spilt upon the ground that cannot be gathered
up again, we are broken all to pieces.

4. All the four great plagues and judgments threaten us, 4. Gods four sore
judgments. Ezekiel, 14, 21.
sword, plague, famine, and evil beasts.

5. Yea that which is a thousand times worse, God seen to be departed from the
ordinances: the converting presence of God is gone from the word, It was the sad
emblem and symptom of Gods departure from Israel. 5 God departed from the
ordinances. Ezekiel, 10, 4. Chap, 11, 23.
Ezekiel. 10.4. The glory of God filled the house, but God was upon the threshold;
And the next news we hear of him, he was upon the Mountains: It is sad and
ominous when God begins to recede by degrees from a people or person.

6. The power of godliness is departed from the generality of professors. 6. The
power of godliness is gone.
Alas that savor and sweetness, that life and activity, which was wont to be
in the people of God and in their Christian meetings, wherein they did
admonish, and comfort, and exhort, and strengthen one another in the Lord their
God, comparing their evidences, and communicating their experiences, praying
with, and praying for one another; alas where are these things to be found? is
not this a sad fore-boding of Gods jealousy.

7. Spiritual plagues.
7. And then in the last place: Spiritual plagues begin to succeed and overtake
temporal judgments. Unbeleif hardness of heart, contempt of the word and
ordinances, mocking of the messengers of God etc. When so it was in Israel, the
text tells us, there was no remedy: a Spirit of delusions to believe lies; and
that which is the perfection of all, 2 Chronicles, 36, 16 2 These, 2, 10,
a Spirit of slumber, a deep sleep of security does possess us: who is there
that fears and trembles? who is there that takes notice of these things to lay
them to heart: the whole nation is a sleep with the kingdom on sire about their
ears. Well Honorable, Is, 42, 1.
and Beloved Christians, this is our estate; I may say to you as Josiah did
once to Isaiah: Enquire of the Lord for us, for great is the wrath of the Lord
that is gone out against us. What is to be done?

1. Why rejoice not O England i. e. Weep and mourn, it is the work we are about
this day, O that we would do it to purpose. O that this day we could do as
Israel did, 1 Samuel, 7, 6.
draw water and power it out before the Lord. O that we could make the place
where we are a Bachim: And oh that the Lord would power out upon us a Spirit of
grace and supplication, that we might look upon him whom we have pierced and
mourn for him, as one mourns for his only son, Zech, 12, 10,
and be in bitterness for him, as one that is in bitterness for his first born.
We have trflied with God in these days of public Humiliation, so that we may
fear he takes them us more with good will at our hands. Mal, 2, 13,
Truly we may fear lest our solemn humiliations be not become solemn
provocations, and our very prayers turned into sin. Our fasts have not bin
altogether so good as Isreal's bulrush humiliations: Isa. 58.5. We are impatient
of bowing down our heads for a day. O let us cry mightily to God, and with
Iacob-like importunity, resolve not to let him go, til be bless us

2. Yea secondly, let us mourn in secret as Jeremiah did. I sat not in the
assembly of the mockers, nor rejoiced; I sat alone because of thy hand, for
thou have filledme with indignation. O that God would teach us to make good
that Prophesy, surely it has an eye to Gospel Times. Zech. 12.11, 12 13, 14.
In that day shall there be a great mourning in Jerusalem, as the mourning of
Hadadrimmon in the valley of Megiddon. And the land shall mourn, every family
apart, the family of the house of David apart, and their wives apart; the
family of of the house of Nathan apart, and their wives apars: The family of
the house of Levi apart, and their wives apart; the family of Shimei apart, and
their wives apart: All the families that remain, every family apart, and their
wives apart. The family of the house of David: i. e. the royal family, the
house of the Prince. The family of the house of Nathan: i. e. the Prophets
families. The family of the house of Levi, i. e. the Priests families: the
family of the house of Shimei, i. e. the families of private men in their
several callings. O that God would indeed pour out from on high such a Spirit
upon England; that the King and Queen, might humble themselves, sit down, Ier,
13, 18.
and lie in the dust before the Lord; that the Princes and Nobles, Magistrates
and Ministers, with the whole people of the land, from the highest to the
lowest, would humble themselves greatly before the Lord, and cry mightily to
him; every family apart, and their wives apart; who knows whether the Lord
might not repent of the fiereness of his wrath, Joel 2, 14.
and return and leave a blessing behind him?

3. Labor to possess a mourning frame of Spirit, take heed of letting out your
hearts to take your fill of creature comforts: take heed how you give up your
selves to carnal mirth and rejoicing: It was Isreal's sin here in the text, and
a posture ill becoming a people that have gone a whoring from their God.

It is a sin at any time to feed our selves without fear, much more when God is
angry. Jude 12.
It was a seasonable and severe check God by the Prophet Ezekiel gave unto the
unseasonable mirth of that besotted people. Ezekiel. 21.9, 10. Thus says the
Lord, say a sword, a sword is sharpened and also fourbished, it is sharp to make
a sore slaughter, it is fourbished that it may glitter: should we then make
mirth? And I could wish that (as Jerome said of his surgite mortui etc. so)
this voice might sound continually in our ears; to check and restrain our vain
and unseasonable rejoycings in the creature, yea in our sins: for what does the
Lord require at our hands but to do justly and love mercy, Mich, 6, 8.
and walk humbly with our God? Else wicked 1 King 21, 27.
Ahab and heathen Jonah 3, 5, to the end.
Nineveh shall rise up in judgment with this generation and shall condemn it. The
Lord awaken us, and teach us to behave our selves as a people whose God is
angry, angry even to jealousy, and to know in this our day the things which
belong to our peace before they be hid from our eyes.

2. Use, Exhortation. Use, Exhortation.
There is a word of Exhortation behind, and I beseech you suffer it.

First. to you Honorable and Noble Patriots, 1. Branch. to the Honorable
Parliament.
who are called to be the Reformers, and Healers of a poor broken kingdom, I
would humbly move these 2. things.

First, that you would exert that power and authority which God has given you,
to the punishing and suppressing of the Adulteries and whoredoms of the land,
which do stare heaven and earth in the face, and do provoke the jealousy of
God, even to give England a bil of divorce and put us away: arise I say, oh ye
Rulers and Governors of England, Psa, 45, 4,
gird your sword upon your thigh, and ride on prosperously because of truth and
righteousness, and let your right hand teach you terrible things. You know what
Phineas did in the case of Corporal whoredom, committed in the face of God and
the Congregation. Psa, 106, 30,
Then stood up Phineas and executed vengeance or judgment; and you remember how
well the Lord took it at his hands: The plague was stayed, and it was imputed to
him for righteousness; 31,
Oh that the Spirit of Phineas may come upon you; that you may sheath your
sword in the bowels of these monstrous whoredoms of all sorts, Corporal and
Spiritual, which are committed in the sight of all Israel, yea in the sight of
all the Churches round about us: that the blessing of Phineas may come upon
you, and the plague may be stayed.

Does not indeed the punishing and suppressing of Spiritual whoredoms against
God, Idolatry, Heresy, Blasphemy, and the rest: does it not belong unto you,
as welas the punishing of bodily whoredoms, theft, murder etc.? Does it indeed
belong to you only to look to the Civil peace, and to let Religion, and truth,
and the worship of God, stand or fall to their own master? fight God, fight
Devil, fight Christ, fight Antichrist; catch that catch can; you have nothing
to do but to stand by, and look on! Say so then; speak out, publish it in your
declarations to the world, and let the people of England know, that it is the
right and liberty, to which the subjects of England are born, that every man
hold what he please, and publish and preach what he holds: that it is the
birthright (as some would have it) of the freeborn people of England, every
man to worship God according to his own Conscience; and to be of what religion
his own Conscience shall dictate: do so, and see (fathers and brethren) how long
your Civil peace will secure you, when religion is destroyed; how long it will be
ere your Civil peace, be turned into Civil war! for no doubt if this once be
granted them, but they may in good time come to know also (there be them that
are instructing them, even in these principles too) that it is their
birthright to be freed from the power of Parliaments, and from the power of
Kings; and to take up arms against both, when they shall not vote and act
according to their humors: Liberty of Conscience (falsely so called) may in
good time, improve it self into liberty of estates, and liberty of houses, and
liberty of wives, and in a word, liberty of perdition, of souls and bodies.

Right Honorable, and worthy Gentlemen: I cannot stand to dispute, this only
would I know of you; are Idolaters and Heretics, and Blasphemers and
Seducers, are they evil doers? if so, then look to your Charge. Romans 13.3, 4.
Rulers must be a terror to evil doers, unless ye mean to bear the Sword in
vain. verse 4.
And if you will, God will not; and if God take the Sword into his own hand once
(as he seems to be a doing of it) he will smite to purpose; he will execute
vengeance thoroughly: both upon the evil doers, and upon you that have not bin a
terror to them. Oh therefore up and be doing, that you may deliver the kingdom
out of the hand of the Lord; for it is a fearful thing to fall into the hands
of the living God. Heb, 10, 31.
O let not your patience (I hope it is no more all this while) be interpreted a
Connivence, and your Connivence be taken for a tolleration, it may be the
kingdoms ruin, but it will be your sin.

2. As you should punish the whoredoms of the land, so I humbly call upon you
in the name of the Lord this day, that you would awaken and stir up your
selves, to prevent the further whorish departures of this our Israel from the
Lord.

And that first, by setting up your government, do it, I beseech you, and do it
to purpose; do it, and do it so, as it may be able to answer the ends for which
you set it up. That it may not be mocked out, by profane persons on one hand,
nor by Sectaries on the other, (as it is at this day) fill your government (if
you are in good earnest) with a life and soul, power and strength: whereby it
shall be able to act, as well as to speak.

And Secondly, prevent the further departure of the land from God, by keeping
out Seducers: those Seducing, Malignant, Popish, Prelatical Priests, whom you
have cast out: who have bin one great cause of the Apostasy of England. The
sins of the teachers, have bin the teachers of sin; they are the men who (with
Hananiah and Zedekeah) have taught rebellion against the Lord.

Certainly, if ye did well in putting of them out, ye will do extremely ill in
taking of them in again. Has the Kings army bettered them? has Oxford changed
their principles? I call heaven and earth to witness this day, that if ye
suffer them to recover their stations again, or who ever of you shall for favor,
reward, relation, or any other respects whatsoever, use your interest to
re-invest them again into their places, Gal, 2, 18.
you destroy what ye have builded, and will be found transgressors: and
translate the blood of poor souls upon your own heads.

Well, strengthen your hands (Honorable and much Honored Patriots) strengthen
your hands in God, thus to suppress and prevent the Adulteries and whoredoms of
the land.

If you shall not; give me leave to tell you ye will bring a six-fold aggravation
upon your neglect. Aggravations.


First, All the Sermons which have bin preached before you, and by your command,
have bin published to all the world, 1. Sermons.
will rise up in judgment against you: for they will testify to the present and
to after ages, to the coming of Christ, and in that day, that you have had
Prophets among you, who have not seen false visions and causes of banishment:
Lam, 2, 14.
but have dealt faithfully with you, Acts 20.27.
in declaring unto you the whole Council of God.

2. All the blessed and glorious opportunities lost: when the poor kingdom near
giving up the Ghost, 2. Opportunities
shall groan out her last complaints thus; the harvest is past, Iet, 8, 10.
the summer is ended, and we are not saved. What opportunities?

Why, 1. rare abilities and parts, both of learning, and grace among your
selves. I dare say a riper harvest was never gathered into those walls.

2. Strange and excellent impressions many times upon your Spirits.

3. Victorious armies subduing and conquering the kingdom before you.

4. A Ministry, neither ignorant, nor unfaithful, nor driving their own
interests, to serve you; to bring in the hearts of the people to you, which
(till some taught them otherwise) they did, with such success, that;

5. Your interest in the affections of the Subjects was such, that you
commanded their purses and their persons, their lively-hoods and their lives,
with as much freedom as ye did the wives of your bosoms, or your hired
servants. Oh that is were with you as in the days of old!

6. The prayers of all the faithful at home, and of all the Churches abroad;
which were round about you as an army of banners. Oh, to have all these come in
against you, will be an Aggravation indeed.

3. So will (in the next place) the deep obligations which God has laid upon
you: 3. Obligations from God.
your plenty, peace, preservations, even miraculous, both Public and
personal; I hope you have not forgot them. Admirable successes in your own
kingdom: seasonable and honorable assistance from the neighboring kingdom of
Scotland, in a brotherly league and Covenant with you. Your malignant
neighbors abroad, God has found them Work of their own, that they have not
bin able to disturb you: nor has he suffered the Plague at home in seven
Summers together to scatter you. There has not an hair of your heads fallen to
the ground. Are these small things in your eyes? 4. Self engagements.
Surely they cannot.

4. What say ye to the Engagements which you have laid upon your own souls, by
your enquiry at Gods oracles; Declarations, Sacraments, vows, the Solemn league
and Covenant! Oh wilnot these speak loud in Gods ears? I, and in your ears
one day, in case of neglect.

5. Justice executed on delinquents.
5. The judgment of God executed by you upon offenders, for their delinquencies
against the state, against religion: I should be sorry, their blood should ever
cry against you. Yet I must tell you, Jehu carried the matter so in destroying
the house of Ahab, (though God commanded it) that while Jehu writes Justice,
God writes down murder. I will avenge the blood of Jezreel upon the house of
Jehu. Hosea 1, 4.
Jeroboam rescues ten tribes and an half out of the Tyranny of Rehoboam, and
then betrays them to Idolatry: he sins, and makes Israel to sin. Amaziah
destroys the Edomites for their Idolatry, and then worships their Idols. 2
Chro, 25, 14.
In all these you shall find, it was not love of justice, that did edg their
sword, but self-interests: Reformation was not indeed their end, but the
setting up of themselves upon the ruin of an opposite party: so dangerous a
thing is it to dally with God.

6. And lastly, What say ye to your prayers, 6. Prayers.
and in special to your late day of Humiliation for the spreading of Heresies
and Blasphemies, in Print now to all the world? Will ye fast for Heresies and
spare them when ye have done? Will ye humble your selves for Blasphemies against
God and Christ and the whole blessed Trinity, and suffer men to blaspheme on?
What will this be when it is interpreted? Surely though fear may make men mince
it at home, the Churches abroad will not be afraid to call it hypocrisy and
mocking of God.

And be not deceived, says the Apostle, God is not mocked: Not mocked? What is
that? That is, 1. Not undiscovered: Gal, 6, 7.
There is neither clouds nor darkness wherein treachery or prevarication can
hide it self from the piercing eye of God: There is no imposing upon the
Almighty.

And 2. God is not mocked impune: No man shall mock God and escape scot-free:
What a man sows that shall he reap; it is the Apostles own exposition of the
place.

Fathers and Brethren, let me not be mistaken; I come not this day as your
Accuser, but as your humble remembrancer: I am jealous over you with a godly
jealousy; the Lord knows you are dearer to me then that blood which runs next
my heart; and might it do Christ and you any service, I could (I hope) as
freely sacrifice it, as eat my bread when I am hungry.

I know you have had many obstructions and hindrances; But now I beseech ye,
gird up the loins of your mind; set your selves, with all your counsel and
strength, to the staying and stoping of the grievous apostasy and whorish
departure from God in the Kingdom, and to reducing of it back again to the
Commands, Worship, Truths and Government of the Lord Jesus: Conclude this with
your selves, there is no work lies upon your hands of such concemment as this:
And for your encouragement know, that though your troubles and distractions be
great; yet you have a mighty God to stand by you, who has promised that
Jerusalem shall be built, and the wall shall be raised, Dan. 9 25.
even in troublous times. It relates as well to Gospel-Reformation, as to the
full and final return of the Jews: and the Lord make it good to you, and by you.

2 Branch of Exbortation to Ministers.
I would speak a word in the second place to the faithful Ministry of England.

Do you set your selves (with the Prophets of old) to the bringing back of this
poor Kingdom so fearfully gone a whoring from God: To that end,

1. Take heed of healing the hurt of the daughter of this people slightly, by
crying peace, peace, where there is no peace: Take heed of daubing with
untempered mortar: Take heed of false visions and causes of banishment: but be
faithful in discovering the iniquities and whoredoms of the Land. If they had
stood in my counsel, and had caused my people to hear my words, Ior, 23, 22.
then they should have turned my people from their evil way, and from the evil
of their doings. Behold this is the way to save the Land, speak while ye may
speak; and I pray God it be not ultimus singultus morientis libertatis.

2. Stand in the gap with Moses, plead with Elijah, pray and cry with Jeremy:
God has not yet said to us, pray not for this people, if he had; surely (with
reverence be it spoken) we should not believe him: Jeremy would not; but even
after the Lord had enjoined him silence, Ier, 14, 11.
pray not for this people, he is at his intercessions again and again, in the
13.19, 20, 21, 22. Verses, and all over his Prophecy. Oh therefore, Ye that
make mention of the Lord, ye that are the Lords remembrancers (by special
office and designement) give him no rest till he establish and make this our
Jerusalem a praise in the earth.

Thirdly and lastly, 3 Branch of Exhortat. to all
Here is a word of Exhortation to all the people of the Land; and that in the
language of the Apostle: Take heed, brethren, lest there be in any of you an
evil heart of unbelief, Heb, 3, 12,
in departing from the living God.

In departing from the living God, in his Truths. Worship. Commands. Promises.


But in all these respects let us say with repenting, returning Israel: I will
go and return to my first husband, for then it was better with me then it is
now.

And for the encouragement of Parliament. Ministers. People.
let me remember you of that gracious invitation and promise: They say, if a
man put away his wife, and she go from him, Ier, 3, 1.
and become another man's, shall not that land be greatly polluted? but thou have
played the harlot with many lovers, yet return unto me, says the Lord. There
is much treasure in the place, but the summa totalis is this; God will accept of
a returning people or person upon those terms that the dearest husband in the
world will not. It is very observable that when Christ was withdrawn from the
spouse, Cant. 2.17. she cries but once to him, Turn my beloved; but when she
was gone from him, he cries four times return to her, Chap. 6.13. Return,
return, O Shulamite, return, return: Christ is four times as desirous and glad
of our return to him, as we are or can be of his return to us: The Lord speak
effectually to us, that we may know, and all the Churches may know that he is
the Lord God, 2 Kings 18, 37
and that he has turned our heart back again. Amen.

FINIS.

