ELIAH'S ABATEMENT: Or, CORRUPTION IN THE SAINTS. Discovered and distinguished
in a Sermon, Preached at Chatham in KENT, At the Funeral of that Faithful
Minister of the Gospel, Mr. GUALTER ROSWELL, M. A. Late Preacher there. By THO.
CASE, M. A. and Rector of Giles in the Fields.

LONDON, Printed by E. T. for Luke Fawn, and are to be sold at his shop at the
sign of the Parrat in Paul's Churchyard, 1658.

To his much honored FRIENDS, CHARLES BOWLS Esquire. High Sheriff of Kent; PETER
PETT Esquire. one of the Commissioners of the Navy; RICH. ISACKSON Esquire. Capt.
PHINEAS PETT, His Loving and Respected NEPHEW; Capt. JOHN PILGRIM, With the
rest of the Inhabitants of Chatham in Kent.

Worthy and well-beloved Friends,
THE death of a faithful Minister the Gospel is no small loss unto a people,
especially when the spirit of error and seduction is gone out into the world:
It is like the taking off a Shepherd from his Flock, when the Wolves are
abroad; or, the Hen from her Chickens, when the birds of prey are upon the
wing: It is like the removing of a Watchman from his Watchtower, when the
enemy is upon his march; a skilful Pilot from the Helm, or, the Helm from the
Ship, in the midst of a tempestuous and a fluctuating Sea; like the slaughter
of a General in the head of his Army, when the Enemy is ready to Charge. Surely
none of these are of more fatal influence in the affairs of the worldly state,
then the other of the Evangelical.

In such a juncture of time has God taken away from your head that Precious
and Worthy Servant of His, your late Reverend and Faithful Pastor, Mr. GUALTER
ROSWELL; whose eminent abilities, unwearied labors, in public, and in
private; impartial fidelity, and compassionate spirit over perishing sinners;
and, in a word, his great integrity in all his ministerial outgoings before
you; I humbly conceive there are none among you but will thankfully
acknowledge, unless such (possibly) whom either erroneous principles, or loose
practices, occasioned to look upon him, as their Gal. 4.16. An expectas ut
Quintilianus ametur?
Enemy.

That this Lot may not be of so fatal consequence unto you, accept I beseech
you a few Advices from him that loves you.

In the first place, Be deeply sensible of your Loss. Truly your Loss is great;
and unsensibleness, will be the aggravation of it: while your loss is but your
affliction, unsensiblenesse will be your sin. A sin which God severely
animadverts, though it do but relate to Saints of a more private station; The
righteous perishes, and no man lays it to heart, and merciful men are taken
away, none considering that the righteous is taken away from the evil to come.
Isa. 57.1.


This, Jer. 22.15, 16. 2 Chronicles. 34.3.35.23, 24.
some restrain to the person of JOSIAS, That righteous and merciful Prince:
but, the words seem more general; being taken collectively, as Ps. 11.5. And,
without question, MANY godly ones, of that age, were taken away by a premature
death, and that, in a judicial severity to the surviving generation of the
profane and hypocritical Israelites: who in the mean time gave themselves to
security, letting themselves loose to all sensual excesses, And that, as it
were under the protection of divine patience; taking Gods silence for Gods
consent, and his long-suffering toward them, as an infallible evidence of his
approbation of their wickednesses.

Now, if it were such a sin to overlook Providence in the death of righteous
and merciful men, what an aggravation of guilt is it, to be blind to the
severer dispensations of justice, in the untimely death, of righteous and
merciful Ministers, whose lives are of a more public and Universal influence!
Surely to shut our eyes against such signal indiciums of divine displeasure, is
highly provoking to God; and may justly bring a people, or a person, within the
verge of that tremendous curse. Because they regard not the works of the Lord,
Psalm. 28.5.
nor the operation of his hands, he will destroy them and not build them up.

Secondly, Lay to heart your great unthankfulness and unfruitfulness under such
precious influences. I am afraid, while some did despise his excellent labors,
few did value them at a due rate. While some were fruitful only in the works
of the flesh, not many did answer Gods expectations, Gal 5 2.
in the fruits of the spirit.

I accuse none, I caution all; that while (possibly) you enquire into the cause
of such an unexpected stroke, every one may 1 King. 8.47. (...) If they return
to their heart.
bethink themselves, and cry with the Disciples, Lord, is it I? Ah! Lord, was
my murmuring, my unthankfulness, my unanswerable conversation, my unrighteous
opposition, etc. the cause of this sore displeasure? That which I see not, Job
34.3.
show thou me; and, if I have done wickedly, I will do so no more.

Thirdly, Seek the face of God in fasting and prayer, TOGETHER and APART, Zech.
12 12.
for the attoning of his favor, and the recruiting of your loss. Numb. 2.14.
Had but her Father spit in her face; should she not be ashamed seven days?
Said God to Moses concerning his murmuring Sister. Dear Christians, God has
done more then spit in your face, Hos. 6.13. Bern. told his brother, A rough
hewn soldier, slighting his reproves, pointing to his side, One day a Spear
shall make way to thine heart, for counsel to enter.
in this sad dispensation; he has smitten you, and made him sick in smiting
you; God, by this wound make way for his word to enter into your hearts. You
have cause to lie in the dust, and shame your selves in Gods presence; as to
deprecate (with tenderhearted Josiah,) the wrath of God; so to get your breach
repaired. And surely the recruit of such a loss is worth many days of
humiliation: and the Lord accept of your faces in Christ.

I would faign have the name of Him, that shall be your Minister, 1 Samuel 1.20.
(...) q. (...) Asked, or Lent of Cod.
be SAMUEL. Holy Hannah will expound to you the mystery; She called her son
Samuel; and why? Because, said she, I asked him of the Lord. This will be your
comfort and your honor; That, when you see a faithful Minister in your
Pulpit, you may be able to say, This is He, whom we have begged of God: A mercy
got by prayer, is a double mercy: a blessing and the return of prayer too;
which, whatever the blessing be, is twice so much.

Fourthly, to forget all your own private opinions and differences; Divisions
have been the sad obstructions of Englands Reformation and Settlement: I am
confident had it not been for our unhappy dissents, and more unhappy
dissentions, England had been the most glorious people upon the face of the
earth, since Christ and his Apostles left the world: For the divisions of
Reuben are great searchings of heart. Of which we may say as it was said once
of the contentions between the Reformed Churches in Luthers time; Dissensus
condonart potest, modo adsit fides in Christo; Dissensiones vero, neque
sisanguinem fundamus, expiabimus. Melanct. to Luther.
Our DISSENTS had been pardonable (I speak in order to matters of Discipline,)
through faith in Christ; but, as for our DISSENTIONS, all the blood in our
veins will never wash off the guilt.

It is time for Christians to close, and to make up their breaches. Is not
Religion, tantum non, destroyed by our divisions? Ah! that all such as love
Jesus Christ in CHATHAM would here in be exemplary; that you would lay by all
your differences, and animosities, and unite, as one man, in this work, wherein
the glory of God, the honor of the Gospel, your good, and the good of your
posterity is so highly concerned; the choice of a Minister. And, for the
guiding of your choice, propound to your selves, I beseech you, some such
Scripture-qualifications; as follow.

1. Let him be a learned man: I am confident it is one of the policies of
Antichrist amongst us, To cry down learning, as knowing that an ignorant and
illiterate Ministry would easily betray the Protestant Religion into his hands;
Who should not be able to discover their impostures, nor evade their Sophistry.
I do verily believe none are enemies to learning, Latrones prius lampadem
extinguunt and tunc latrocinantur.
but such as are friends to that design. Moses was skilled in all the learning
of the Egyptians; Saint Paul brought up at the feet of Gamaliel, and, verst in
Heathen learning; he was able to confute them out of their own Aratus. Act.
17.28. Anacrcon. 1 Cor. 15.32. Menader. verse. 33. Epimenides Tit 1.12 Whom the
Cretians called a Prophet.
Poets. The Pontificians have felt the dint of your Learned-Protestant
Adversaries sword; and, therefore, now would act the Philistines plot upon us,
1 Samuel 13.19.
that there should be no Smith found in all these three Nations; lest they
should make themselves swords and spears, weapons of defense, and offense, to
stand up against their Babylonian forces. At least, it is ignorance that loves
ignorance, and error that shuns the light.

Secondly, a sound judgment, and well verst in the Controversies of the times,
that so he may not only, be able to preach truth; but, to confute error, Tit.
1.9.
and convince the gain-sayer: One that may be able to stop the mouth of
seducers; (...).
to Tit. 1.11.
muzzle them (as the word signifies) that they may not, boldly, The Devils
words to Him were these; What stand I talking with thee? All men know thou art
bold Rothwell, and fear no body, nor carest for words; therefore I will talk
with thee no more. See the life of Mr. Rothwell, set forth by M. S. Clerk.
and blasphemously, bark against the truth. Such an one was your late, and
worthy, ROSWELL; the hammer of the Heretics, of this generation: The Heretics
were as much afraid of his name, as the Devil in poor possessed JOHN FOX of
Nottingham-shire was lately of a man of a like name, and Spirit; famous
ROTHWELL.

Thirdly, holy man; a man whose life may be a Continual Sermon; that may teach
by his conversation as well as by his doctrine. He has no life in his doctrine
that has not doctrine, in his life: Nay, there is not a readier way to make
men turn Atheists, then for a Minister to preach strictly, and live loosely:
Men will believe their eyes, rather then their ears; Vivitur exemplo.
and are lead by example rather then by precept; whereby it comes to pass that
the sins of the teachers are the teachers of sin.

Fourthly, healing Spirit; to which is required much prudence and integrity.
Prudence; every fool can make divisions; it is only the wise man that can make
them up. And there must be integrity too, least, instead of healing divisions,
he comply with men's lusts, and serve the interest of the Devil, rather then of
Jesus Christ: as too many of our times do, who would have the repute of
sweet-spirited men.

Fifthly, A man therefore of gravity and experience would be much desired among
you. Quickness of fancy, is rarely joined (especially in young men) with
soundness of judgment: He that will do good in CHATHAM must carry some
authority in his very person.

Whether my advice to you in these particulars may not come too late, I know
not; if you have prevented me herein, I shall count it labor well lost: if
not, I pray God, it may be a labor well bestowed. And, The God of the Spirits
of all flesh set SUCH A MAN over your Congregation, Numb. 27.16, 17.
that may go in and out before you: that the Congregation of the Lord (even
while you may have a preacher) may not be as sheep without a shepherd.

Fifthly, For his better encouragement, raise a competent provision for his
comfortable subsistence: that while he should be studying for your Souls, he
may not be distracted with cares for his own Family.

It is the divinity of our times, That the Ministers of the Gospel must live
upon the Contributions of the people; the people may indent with him for his
work, but he must not indent with them for his wages; he must be bound, but
they be free: and I would they were free indeed. An expedient, which these
times have found out, to tie up the Ministers tongue under their girdles:
flatterers by this means may, probably, scrape out a livelihood; but, faithful
ones (without special providence) are likely to be sterved; They hate him that
reproves in the gate.

It is in the power of your hand to prevent this mischief. I know not any
Congregation, of that quality, in England, wherein it is a matter of more
facility, and less charge, to raise up a liberal subsistence for a faithful
Minister, then your CHATHAM is. (I know what I say;) Worthy Friends, make not
your Minister an Almesman, that the poor man dare not to reprove sin lest one
of my Masters withdraw his contribution. In this sense I would have him be an
Independent; that he may speak the truth of God without fear.

Sixthly, labor of love, and the work of faith, of Him that now is at rest
with God: His dear and precious Relicts are yet with you; what He is not
capable of in person, pay unto his posterity: It is but a small matter, when
you have reapt of the Fathers Spirituals, that his Orphan-Family partake of
your temporals: He was content to leave them poor, that he might make you rich;
in the midst of your riches, let not his precious relations remain poor.

Lastly, my request to you is, That you will own this vindication of his great
faithfulness and integrity among you; and give it a room in your houses, and in
your hearts. Surely, you have the most right to this dedication, of any people
in the world; in the service of whose faith he spent his Estate, and Himself to
boot. Accept it, as a Testimony of my dear and deserved respect to the Dead,
and of my tender affection to the living; And the Lord add his own blessing:
That the fruit of these poor labors may be abundant, by many Thanks-givings,
to the glory of God. So Prays

Your very faithful, and affectionate friend and servant in the Gospel THO.
CASE.

ELIAH'S ABATEMENT: Or, CORRUPTION In the SAINTS.
James 5.17. Elias was a man subject to like passions as we are; and he prayed
earnestly that it might not rain, and it rained not upon the earth, etc. And he
prayed again, and the Heaven gave rain.
THe words are a demonstration or evidence of the power and efficacy of prayer;
That prayer rightly managed cannot want success. The instance is taken from
Elias; of what prevalency his prayers were with God; the influences of the
Heavens were bound up in his prayers, It raineth not, and raineth, as Elias
will. He prayed earnestly, Vir iste potuit quod voluit.
and it rained not, etc. And he prayed again, and the Heavens gave rain.

Elias, might some one say: Yea, He, indeed, might do much with God; a mighty
Prophet, a man of eminent holiness, and of high acquaintance with God; a
Favorite of Heaven, a Secretioribus, one of Gods privy Counselors (as it
were:) no wonder if his prayers were of such potency with the Almighty: But I
am no Elias, but a poor sinful creature, pressed down with a double weight, a
body of flesh, and a body of sin: and shall the prayers of such a weak sinful
wretch as I am, find access to, or acceptance with, the Holy God?

To obviate this objection, and to remove this discouragement out of the minds
of poor sinners, sensible of their own unworthiness, the Holy Ghost adds a
clause, or note of minoration, or abatement to Elias his Name: whereby he gives
us to understand, that Elias was not heard so much for his Sanctity, as for his
Sincerity; not for his own merit, but for the gracious respect which God
bears to the prayers of his people. He was indeed full of grace, highly
favored with the Lord: but he was neither God, nor Angel; he was (...), but a
man, Elias was a man. And a man he was, not exempt from the Common Law of
humane frailty. He had his infirmities, as well as other of the Saints of God,
he was (...), of like passions with us; like unto us in all things, sin it self
not excepted. Hereupon inferring, that infirmities in the meanest of Gods
Saints, shall no more prejudice the acceptance and success of their prayers with
God then they did in Elias himself. Elias was a man subject to like passions as
we are, and he prayed earnestly that it might not rain, and it rained not, etc.
And he prayed again, and the Heavens gave showers.

-- Subject to like passions as we are.] The word passion does sometimes
signify only the affections and motions of the mind, implanted in natures
which in themselves are neither morally good or evil; but as they are set upon
their objects and are acted upon them in a regular or irregular manner.

Sometime Passions signify sinful infirmities; sinful perturbations of the mind.

And sometime passion is taken more strictly for the special affection of anger
and wrath.

In this place it may very well be extended to all: in my discourse I shall
manage it specially in the two latter references, and in the doctrinal part,
more largely, as importing sinful perturbations; in the application to our
present occasion, to the particular passion of anger.

First, I shall handle it in the larger signification of sinful perturbations;
which, without injury to this holy Prophet, we may understand are ascribed to
him, by the Holy Ghost in this place: and that first, because Elias is here
called a Man; and secondly, because levelled with the rest of the sons and
daughters of men, (...); of like passions with us. The same minoration and
abatement which Saint Paul uses to restrain the superstitious Lystrians, Act.
14. from verse. 11. to verse. 16. (...).
from giving himself and Barnabas divine worship, saying, Sirs, why do ye these
things? we also are men of like passions with you.

And so this instance in the Text, joined with this parallel of the Apostles,
men of eminent holiness; will warrant this general Observation;

The best of Gods Saints and Servants, have not only their natural, but their
sinful infirmities and perturbations.

This sad truth is of that universal experience, that it would be as impossible
as it is needless to make an induction of particulars. I shall only therefore
add this Aggravation to make the observation more impressive; sc. that, The
greatest passions and infirmities which the Saints have discovered, have been
in those very things wherein they have been most celebrated for the eminence of
their graces.

Abraham his eminence above other Saints, was in the grace of Faith. Whence he
is called the father of the faithful; as much above other believers in faith,
as the father is above the rest of the Family, in dignity and honor. He is set
forth as the standard and exemplar to all the Children of promise; and yet his
eminent infirmity was infidelity; he stumbled twice upon the threshold of
unbelief, notwithstanding God had privileged him with a promise of his special
presence and protection; Say, I pray thee, ( Genesis 12.13. and 20.2.) Thou art my
sister.

And Isaac, the son, not of his loins more then of his infirmities, halt's upon
the same foot in the like temptation, Genesis 26.7.

Moses, the Man of God, Numb. 12.7, 8.
honored above all other mortals with the beatifical vision on this side
glory: yet even Him we find miscarrying through unbelief, when upon the
promise of God to give flesh to the people, his faith was so low, that it could
rise no higher then second causes: 2 King. 7.1, 2.
Shall the flocks and herds be slain for them? not much better under that
temptation, then sometime Ahabs Nobleman, who because he could not see
provision enough on earth to accomplish the prophecy of plenty in Samaria,
(under such an extreme exigence as it was then reduced unto) thought there was
not enough in Heaven; If the Lord should open windows in Heaven, might this
thing be?

David to whom God gave once this honorable testimony, A man after mine own
heart: Yet afterward left a double blot upon his name, Adultery and Murder;
first he polluted Vriahs bed, and afterward stained his hands in Vriahs blood.

Ye have heard, Jam. 5.11.
says the Apostle, of the patience of Job; Yea, and we have heard of his
impatience too; how, in the anguish of his spirit, he cursed the day of his
birth, Job. 3.1.
with a bitter curse. And so did another famous Prophet of God after him,
Jeremiah Chap. 20.14.

Into what an excess of passion did Jonas (an holy Prophet of God without
question) chafe himself, when, contesting with his Maker, he is not afraid to
answer that meek question, do thou well to be angry? with that tremendous
insolence; Yea, I do well to be angry, even unto death? Jonah 4.9
Jonah was angry because God was patient; but it was well for Jonah, that he
had to do with so patient a God, or else God had destroyed Jonas instead of
Nineveh.

Peter, who thought his love to Christ as strong as death, and his zeal as
cruel as the grave, under a surprise of fear, not only forsakes his Lord, but
forswears him also. And what shall I say more? for the time would fail me to
tell you of Gedeon, and of Barak, and of Sampson, and of Jephtah, of Samuel
also, and of the Prophets; All who, though emiment Servants and Favorites of
God, yet, have left the vestigia's, and prints of their eminent infirmities
behind them, all witnessing to this sad truth that they were (...), men subject
to like passions as we are.

Elias, here, a seraphical Prophet, of whom glorious things are spoken in
Scripture, He raised the dead, 2 Kings 4.34. etc. obtains fire from heaven
against the Priests of Baal. 1 Kings 18.18. 1 Kings 19.8. 1 Kings 1.10.
He could live forty days and forty nights without food; snatched fire from
heaven, on the Captains of two fifties, and their companies; was fed by Ravens;
carried up to heaven in a fiery Chariot. He was of that prevalency with God,
that his prayers could shut and open heaven at his pleasure, as in the Text,
etc. Even this Elijah was not without his natural and his sinful infirmities;
He was an hungry, 1 Kings 17.11. yea he was surprised with the fear of death,
and under that fear flies from the face of Jezabel: he that feared not a
potent King, surrounded with 450 idolatrous Priests, and a numerous multitude
of Apostate subjects; Flictus seipso imbecilior.
Yet now, as if it had not been the same Elijah, flies from the face of a
woman. He that had faith enough to cause 450. idolatrous Priests to be put to
death, begins now to sink under the fear of death himself; yea, through
impatience of spirit, requests to die; and, as if it had been but a strein of
humility, makes this his apology, 1 King. 19.4.
For I am not better then my Fathers. In a word, all kind of infirmities
incident unto man, are here ascribed to Him by the spirit of God.

More instances might be called in; but these are sufficient to witness this
sad truth, that, The best of men, are but men at the best; Saints have their
infirmities, the thing it self being so universal an experience.

What may be the Grounds or Reasons of the point?
1. The first is, Saints and sinners are all one man's Sons; we are all tainted
in our Original, and deeply poisoned with the venom of Adams first
transgression: The Nature which we have traduced from his loins, is a
Dunghill full of Vermin; Omnis sanguis concolor. Petr.
a Sea full of Monsters; an hell full of unclean spirits: a very bottomless
pit of corruption. Petr.
All blood is of a color. And though in Regeneration, the new creature is made
partaker of the divine nature: 2 Pet. 1.4
yet it is not with the utter abolition of the Old man. In Conversion,
Corruption is mortified, but not annihilated: the Covenant of Grace has taken
order for the conquering of Corruption, not for the extinction of it; Sin shall
not reign. Romans 6.12.
Blessed be God for that, till more comes. And blessed be God, the time is
coming when it shall not be; sin shall not be cast down only, but cast out; not
lose its dominion only, but its entity and existence. In the mean time, the
best of Saints carry about them a body of death; Romans 7.24. Romans 8.7.
the remains of a cursed enmity against God, which makes them weary of
themselves, and willing to groan their very lives out with their complaints.
Romans 7.14.
Oh wretch that I am, who shall deliver me!

It is true, They that are Christ's, Gal. 5.24.
have crucified the flesh with its affections, and lusts; yet, so
notwithstanding, as that sin presently gives not up the Ghost: Corruption and
nature in the Saints breathe out their last together, and are not buried, but
in one and the same grave.

2. Reason. God will have it so, to keep the Saints in continual exercise. The
infirmities of the Saints find them work: weeping work, groaning work, sighing
work: hence is their life called a warfare in Scripture.

3. Ground or Reason. More particularly, grace sometimes meets with an ill
nature: I mean, the Second nature, Constitution. All the sons and daughters of
Adam are equally depraved and corrupted by their first common nature, drawn
from his loins: but that vitiosity is differently determined and acted by
their second nature, which is nothing else but their complexion and temper
derived from their next immediate parents: whereby one is inclined to this sin,
and another to that sin; one to Covetousness, another to passion; a third to
uncleanness, etc. more to one then to another, according to the predominancie
of the humor in their individual constiturtions.

Nor is this hereditary vitiosity altogether abolished, though much corrected
by superveniency of Grace: And with such an evil bent and disposition does God
also leave his own children to conflict many times, in them to make experiments
to the world of the efficacy of Grace, what excellent vessels Jesus Christ can
make of knotty and worm-eaten materials: according to his answer to the
Apostle, 2 Cor. 12.9
My grace shall be sufficient for thee.

Use.
First for Caution.

In the first place, of abusing these instances of the Saints infirmities to
lewd and wicked purposes, encouragements to sin. Say not in thine heart, why
may not I be overtaken with wine as well as Noah? impatient as well as Job?
commit adultery as well as David? be passionate as well as Elias and Jonah,
Prophets of God?

Nay, but, oh man, who ever thou art, these failings and infirmities of the
Saints were not left out in Scripture for encouragement, but for Caution: they
are not our Landmarks, but our Sea-marks, our Fire-lights in this dark world,
crying to us afar off (as it were) Take heed, here is a Quick-sand, there is a
Rock; and, here David was like to suffer shipwreck, Job ran a ground, and Jonas
was like to be cast away, and sic in coeteris. The Apostle tells us as much.

Now these things are our Examples or Types: 1 Cor. 10.6.11. (...).
Examples, but not for our imitation, but for our admonition, upon whom the
ends of the world are come; to the intent that we should not be surprised with
temptation, as Noah and David were surprised, neither be impatient as Job and
Jeremy were impatient, nor passionate, as Moses and Elias were passionate.

He that, upon these accounts, should take liberty for the flesh, and indulge
sinful dispositions, perverteth the gracious purposes of Scripture, and makes
God the patron of sin, by interpretation. And therefore take heed to your own
spirits.

If the best of Saints have their infirmities and sinful perturbations.
Censuring them for their failings. The world condemns the generation of Gods
children for censuring others, while there are no such censorious persons upon
the face of the earth, as themselves.

If a professor of Religion do but slip, it is a fall; and if he fall, it is a
fall of hypocrisy, not of infirmity: while they themselves do live, and lie,
and wallow in sin, and allow themselves in all manner of brutish excesses,
they do most uncharitably judge and condemn the Saints, for their failings and
infirmities.

Their own gross sins must pass for infirmities, but the Saints infirmities
must be censured as gross sins: yea, not only the person, but the whole
Profession, must suffer for it; I, these are your professors, these be your
Puritans, your Precisians, they are all hypocrites, never a barrel better
herring. God shall smite such whited walls, who under the pretense of Law,
judge their brethren contrary to Law; Contrary to the Law of ecuity, Contrary
to the Law of Charity, Contrary to that royal Law, Mat. 7.12.
Whatsoever ye would that men should do unto you, do ye even so to them; for
this is the Law and the Prophets.

Christians, remember the children of God (whilst in the flesh) they are (...)
of like passions, with other men; when they put on the Saint, they do not put
off the Man; and when they begin to be Spirit, they do not cease to be flesh.
The best of men are but men at the best. Remember they carry about them the
remainders of original corruption; and many times their next Parents bequeath
them a wretched Legacy of an ill Constitution; a passionate nature, a timorous
nature, a close tenacious nature, etc. upon which accounts, every piece is to
be allowed his grains: which if we deny, we sin against God; and wrong the
generation of his children, Psalm. 73.15.

It is a most unrighteous partiality, in the men of the world to justify
themselves in habitual reigning sins, and to judge the children of light, for
their dwelling, and but rare infirmities.

Christians at large do insult over a few strict ones for their failings, quasi
de ipsa justitia, (as one says) as if they were sitting in judgment upon
holiness it self; and so every day Christ has many Martyrs.

Quest. But how may a man know whether sinful distempers, be but dwelling
infirmities; or indeed reigning sins? or how may they be distinguished?

Answ. The Answer to this question, will lead us to a second Use.

An Use of Examination.
First, 1. Evidence of Infirmities.
sinful perturbations are then but infirmities, when accompanied with
converting grace.

Corruption in the men of the world springs from an unmortified, root, Deuteronomy.
29.28. Rosh, signifies properly an head, improperly, a poisonous leaf.
a root of bitterness, as the Scripture calls it; or a root bringing forth a
poysonful leaf: original sin is whole in every unregenerate person, whereby it
erecteth a full power and dominion; further then as it is restrained by an
external power. Sin is in every unconverted man and woman, as Rex in regno; as
a King in his throne; upon which account no sin that an unregenerate person
commits, (though never so small,) is to be reputed as a sin of infirmity;
but a reigning sin; sin in the full force and vigor of it; so far as the act
extends.

But the strength of that cursed principle is crushed and broken in
regeneration; though Original sin gives not up the Ghost, at the instant of
the forming of the new creature, yet it has received that fatal blow, of which
it shall never recover its pristine strength and activity.

The failings of Gods people proceed not from a want of Grace, but only from a
want in Grace and that is properly called infirmity; Some weakness and
debility in the resisting faculty, whereby sometimes grace it self is
surprised, and temptation gets the better, in the present assault. Make out
therefore a work of grace, and the controversy is determined; thy corruptions
are but infirmities, and not presumptions; slaves, not Lords and Kings; if thy
nature be changed.

And this strongly evinceth, that the sins of the generality of those that are
called Christians, are reigning sins, thrones and principalities in the soul,
not only because they cannot evidence a work of grace in their heart upon any
Scriptural account, (so possibly may not the New Convert by reason of the many
fears and mistakes, which darken his understanding.) Therefore not only (I say)
because they cannot, but much more because they do not so much as go about such
work; they take up their interest in Christ upon trust; and swim down the
stream of security, thinking it enough to hope well, and to believe that they
do believe: Whereas the new creature works out his Salvation with fear and
trembling, Phil. 2.12.
and gives all diligence to make his calling and Election sure; 2 Pet. 1.10.
never giving God or his Soul rest, till God give rest to his Soul; in some
Gospel evidence and assurance of Christ in him, the hope of glory: And this
very restlesness in the Soul is an evidence, Colos. 1.27.
in the absence or dimness of other evidences.

A second Difference,

Sinful distempers are then our infirmities, when they are our afflictions. Men
account themselves miserable, because of their infirmities in the natural life;
(...). Romans 7.24.
and so do the Saints in the spiritual: Oh! wretched man that I am: the word
signifies, a man beset with, or crushed under affliction and miseries: ex
(...) suffero, and (...), luctus.
the corruptions of the Saints are matter of continual sorrow and sighing,
causing them to go up and down as mourners in the world.

Unregenerate people think never the worse of themselves for their sinful
distempers: their pride, their passion, their sinful fears, their inordinate
affections, their evil concupiscences, etc. they make them not to hold down
their heads, or to look upon themselves as miserable. Gross and scandalous sins
may trouble their consciences sometimes; but sinful dispositions, vicious
habits, evil inclinations do not at all affect or afflict their Souls: They
have learned to put all upon the score of infirmity; even their most brutish
affections, and foulest turpitudes; they are their infirmities; and no man is
without his infirmities this is their Apology, and herein they acquiesce, and
are no more troubled.

But gracions Souls go bowed down under their infirmities; they spread them
before the Lord, and judge themselves for them daily at Gods tribunal.

And this is a good sign, they are but infirmities, and no more, they cannot
bear them patiently: woe is me for my wound is grievous: my wounds stinck and
are corrupt.

Carnal people plead for their lusts, and make Apologies for their corruptions;
did ever any godly man do so? This is a sign, it is more then infirmity.

Third Evidence: Corruption is then infirmity when we labor to have them
cured: gracious Souls carry their spiritual distempers to the great Physician,
with the Prophet Jeremiah his petition, Jer. 17.14.
Heal me O Lord, and I shall be healed. Unregenerate persons under a pang of
conviction may go to God for pardon, but not for healing; they can live without
a cure, though they cannot die without a pardon; Yea, let but the tempest be a
little alaid in the conscience, they will quickly forget pardon also. This is
that which I say; Quiet will satisfy a natural conscience, nothing but cure
will satisfy a renewed conscience; and for this it striveth, and this it
pursues to the very death: suffering any thing, and doing any thing, and
denying it self any thing, so it may have spiritual infirmity healed. It is a
good sign -- passions are but infirmities, when Christians are much in the
duties of mortification: prayer, and fasting, meditation, and mourning; drawing
power and influence from Jesus Christ his Resurrection and Sufferings, by vital
acts of faith: with the holy Apostle, Phil. 3.10. and Gal. 6.14.

Fourthly, Evidential diff, Infirmities in the Saints, if no more, are
medicinal; God makes use of their passions for the mortifying of corruption.
The Diamond is cut by a Diamond; Corruption is curative to Corruption: God
makes oil of scorpions: and turns poysoninto an antidote. As,

First, God makes use of the infirmities of the Saints to cure them of their
Pride. Pride cured by Passion.
The infirmities of the Children of promise, serve to keep them humble; whether
they be the Ministers of the Gospel or private Christians: I am confident all
the afflictions in the world are not so influential to the mortifying of their
pride as their Corruptions: Whence an holy Minister of great eminence, both for
grace and parts, answered a friend that demanded of him, what he did to keep
his heart humble under such emiuent abilities? I will warrant you, said he, I
have corruptions enough to keep me humble. It was upon the same account that
the great Apostle of the Gentiles, was exercised with a thorn in his flesh;
(which some conceive to have been some inward extimulations of concupiscence,)
2 Cor. 7.12. A Corruption edged with Temptation. Trap. in locum.
lest through the abundance of revelation, he should have been exalted above
measure.

It is not so with the ungodly, they can swear and be proud too, be unclean and
proud too; passionate and proud, worldly and proud, basely fearful, and yet be
proud, and sic in coeteris.

This shows these distempers are reigning mortal diseases; not infirmities in
them.

2. Gal. 6.1. (...). circumspicio
God by the sense of such distempers, does cure the Saints of Censoriousness
toward their brethren: Considering themselves; or reflecting on themselves,
looking into themselves; looking through and through themselves; round about,
as the word signifies: And have not I my blemishes, my spots, my sinful
encumbrances? and shall I judge my brother, and condemn my brother? God forbid;
how can I judge him and not condemn my self? who art thou that judge?

Yea, the infirmities of the children of God, make them tender and
compassionate, even toward wicked men, more ready to pray for them then to
insult over them: so runs the Apostles advice, Tit. 2.2, 3.
Speak evil of no man, but be gentle, showing all meekness unto all men: a
great latitude and condescension! all meekness unto all men. And why? For we
our selves were sometimes foolish, disobedient, deceivers, serving diverse lusts
and pleasures. Aut fuimus, aut sumus, aut possnmus; esse quod hic est.
Ah! says a gracious Soul, I am such, or I have been such, or I might have
been such as this drunkard, or this adulterer is, etc. I have the seeds of all
these depraved affections in my nature: Luke 18.11.
The voice of a proud Pharisee, is, God I thank thee I am not as other men are;
extortioners, unjust, adulterers, or even as this Publicane: he seems to
ascribe the difference to God, but indeed he arrogates it to himself: his God I
thank thee, is but a stirrup, whereby he mounts himself into the saddle of vain
glory: and when he has done, rides over his poor brother, and tramples him
under feet with contempt and scorn, this Publicane; this argues, his heart was
elated not with thankfulness, but with pride.

A child of God pitieth and prays for those that are worse then himself.
Lord, pity this poor drunkard; Lord, convince and humble this proud opposer,
and sic in coeteris.

And all this upon the account of Self; He considers what he was, what he is,
what he might be, left unto himself. (...), curi^sus hospes alienae domus,
alienarum rerum inspector. 1 Pet. 4.15.


The thing is this: he has enough to do at home; Judgingwork enough to do
there, and Condemning-work enough to do there; and therefore he dares not play
the Bishop in another man's diocese.

It is a pretty criticism, (...) otior, arguo. 1 Timothy 5.13. fust, (...), and
then (...). First they do not what they should at home, and then they do more
then they should abroad.
that the same word in the Greek, which signifies to censure, signifies also
to be idle, implying this much to us, that he that is so busy abroad, is first
idle at home: and that is the reason why true Saints are so sparing in their
censures, because God suffers their own infirmities to find them so much work
at home, that they have little mind or leisure to spend their severities upon
other men.

They that cannot bear with infirmities in their brethren, say their prayers,
with more pride then faith: surely we are to allow our fellow servants for
their infirmities, though we are not to allow them in their infirmities; God
permits them a being in the choicest of his servants, upon that very account.

Thirdly. By this means also, God weans his people from the love of the world.
Look what extraordinary sore-pressing afflictions do upon men, made up only of
Sense and Reason; that the sense of Corruption does upon the godly; it makes
them weary of the world, and forces from them David's complaint, Psalm. 20.5.
(...). Haec sunt quae homines faciunt invitos mori. 2 Cor. 5.2, 3, 4.
Woe is me that I sojourn in Mesech, and have my habitation in the tents of
Keder: the Septuagint render it, Woe is me, that my pilgrimage is prolonged.
Wicked men their lusts are so far from making weary of the world, that there is
nothing makes them so unwilling to die. They would fain live for ever here,
that they might sin for ever. But under the burden of Corruption it is, that
the Saints groan; die they would, that they might sin no more.

Other advantages there are which God makes of the remainders of Corruption in
the godly; but these may serve for a taste, You may enlarge in your own
meditations: by all which God expounds and fulfills Sampsons riddle to them,
Out of the Eater comes meat, and out of the strong comes sweetness. God makes
oil of these scorpions and antidotes of poison. The Lord keep us from turning
these antidotes into poison, Jude 4.
this grace of God into lasciviousness, this Doctrine of free grace into
occasions and snares for the flesh: this were to imitate the Devil, not to
imitate God; God brings good out of evil, the Devil brings evil out of
good. So it is with wicked men; that which they call infirmity, exposes them
to temptation, 2 Timothy 3.13.
and is an encouragement to them to sin; evil men and seducers grow worse and
worse, deceiving,

A fifth evidential difference is this, the Prophets and servants of God,
notwithstanding their sinful distempers, are very serviceable in their
generations.

Moses notwithstanding his Anger, of what a choice influence amongst the
people? How often did he stand in the gap, to turn away the wrath of God?

Job, notwithstanding his fits of jmpatience, of what use? He was eyes to the
blind, feet to the lame. The poor man's Advocate in the gate to plead his cause.

David, for all his slips and surprises, what a Reformer? what an admirable
Ruler in his Kingdom? In his Family: Psalm. 101. per totum, and sic in
^aeteris. Thus Elias, a man subject to passion, and yet what service did he do
for God? for his generation? wicked men, while full of lusts, are an useless
generation, good for nothing, Mat 5.13.
(as our Lord says of unsavory salt,) but to be cast out, and trodden under
foot of men. They are serviceable neither to God nor man: like the withered
vine, of which you cannot make a pin to hang a vessel on: they are of no
support or service, mere Cumber-grounds they are, and the place where they live
longs for a vomit, to spew them out. Their sins are reigning sins: and they are
mere slaves to their corruptions, Tit. 3.2, 3.
serving diverse lusts and pleasures: Gods children, though they have their
decays and feeble times; yet are like the living vine, which brings forth
fruit to make glad the heart of God and man. This speaks nothing in them but
humane frailty.

A sixth and last differentiall note, 6. Signal Difference.
Gods dear and precious servants, though full of infirmities, yet they are a
praying people: full of weaknesses, but full of prayer too. Of Saul it is said,
As soon as ever converting grace took hold of his heart, Acts 9.11.
Behold he prays.

This is the eminent instance in the Text.

Elias had his passions, but Elias was a mighty man in prayer; he could shut
and open heaven at his pleasure. He could do what he would with God, (...): in
praying, Romans 12.
he prayed: the righteous pray, and are fervent in prayer: their very
infirmities set them a praying; to pray down their passions, and to pray out
their sinful distempers.

Carnal persons are full of passions, but empty of prayers; they can swear, but
they cannot pray, they can curse, but they cannot pray; say prayers possibly
they may (as they call it) but they cannot make prayers; they may say Our
Father, etc. but they have not the spirit of adoption, to cry Abba Father: to
pour out their souls to God in childlike supplications and importunities.

Yea some there be, that instead of making prayers, are more ready to Curse
prayer, and tantum non, to blaspheme the spirit of prayer in the children of
adoption. This evidences them to be under the power and command of sin.

And now to apply our selves and the Text, The Application to the particular
occasion.
to the sad occasion before us, the death of our dear and Reverend brother; Mr.
Walter Roswel.

I told you in the entrance, that besides the two former acceptations of the
word passions, sc. natural affections and sinful perturbations; there was a
third acception of the word, namely, as it denotes more specially the
affection of wrath; sudden and irregular Anger.

And this the best of Gods Saints and servants have not been without. Numb.
20.11.
Moses, whom before you saw defective in faith, at another time you may behold
excessive in his passion. He smites the rock, when he was but to speak to it:
and his anger makes him double his stroke. He smote the rock twice. He
revileth the people, when he should have convinced them; hear ye Rebels. And,
offended (as it seems) at his Commission, he hardly forbeareth to murmur, must
we bring water out of this rock? MVST WE? And thus while he smites water out
of the rock, he strikes fire out of his own heart.

Behold and tremble, Numb. 12.3.
The meekest man upon the face of the earth is transported into passion, and
his passion hurrieth him into such indecencies, Numb 20.12.
that hereupon God denies him entrance into the land of Promise; The
Israelites whom he brought out of Egypt, could not enter in because of their
unbelief, and Moses himself must not enter because of his Anger? Romans 11.3^.
How swift and severe was God in this Censure? how unsearchable are his
judgments, and his ways past finding out?

David was under a very sinful passion, 2 Samuel g 4.
when he would have the people numbered: all the rational and religious
dissuasives which Joab (the then General of his army) did use, could not allay
the storm, nor divert him from his sinful purpose. Nothing can stand before the
flame of his passion; Psalm. 4.
The Kings word prevailed against Joab, though that flame consumed seventy
thousand of his Subjects. verse. 16. Nor was that the only instance of David's
distempered anger, there was a time when the same fire had devoured and burnt
down an whole innocent family to the ground, 1 Samuel 25.22. cum 18.
for the unnaturalness of a Churlish Master, had not the wisdom of a prudent
Governesse timely intervened.

The Disciples of our Lord, because the Samaritans; did not entertain Christ
according to their expectations, Luke 9.53. Ver. 54.
(although the Holy Ghost seems to make some apology for the refusal; his face
was as if he would go to Jerusalem) they break out into Passion, and fire
presently must be fetched from heaven to consume them.

For which, though they pretend the Example of Elijah, yet their Lord observed
the distemper, and rebukes it; Ye know not what manner of spirit ye are of: q.
d. Alas, you are mistaken in the frame of your own hearts; this impression is
not zeal but anger. It was another kind of spirit which acted Elijah, when he
called for fire from heaven upon the two Captains and their fifties: an
invisible flame of just zeal first fell from heaven upon his heart, before he
satcht those visible flames from heaven upon their heads. There was cause
enough to justify so severe an execution.

The wicked King Abaziah, which sent those Pursevants for Elijah, (with his
Grandfather Saul) had forsaken the Oracle of God to consult with the Devil. 2
Kings 1.6.


The Servants (of the same spirit with their Master) come in a proud imperious
way; The King says come down; with the Kings mandamus, they think to command
heaven it self. Yea, while they seem to give him his title, thou man of God,
they do at once deride his function, and blaspheme his God. q. d, we will see
what a man-God you are, and whether your God can deliver you out of our
hand,will ye obey the King? or will ye not? Come down or we will fetch you
down: and now there is nothing to determine the controversy, but a signal
testimony from God himself.

And therefore, to vindicate Gods glory, and his own Commission, Elijah
imprecates fire from heaven, and God, by this flaming answer, bears witness to
the just frame of his spirit, in so direful a revenge.

This our Savior found wanting in his disciples, and therefore rebukes their
passion, rather then commends their zeal: Ye know not what spirit ye are of.

It were easy to multiply instances: but much work is yet behind. I would
speak somewhat, I say, concerning our deceased brother; and there is need of
it; for many there be (I have too much cause to fear) who, themselves
transported with passion and prejudice, while they study parties more then
truth, and having men's persons in admiration, because of advantage, would make
others and themselves believe that there was no other parallel to be found
between these venerable servants and Saints of God, and our deceased brother,
save only in their sinful infirmities, and especially that of passion. It
cannot be denied, but that as he was (in the general (...), a man of like
passions with other men; so (in special) that that black adust humor of
choler, held the predominacy in his individual Constitution, which many times
gave a tincture to his discourse and action: and which standers-by, more
censorious then candid, interpreted to his unjust prejudice. But there is two
things I shall without blushing take the liberty to speak by way of just
vindication both to his person, and the doctrine before us. sc.

1. That, blessed be God, there is another, and more honorable parallel to be
held out to the world between these Saints of God, and our beloved brother.

2. That the affection of Anger rightly qualified and managed, is of singular
use in the life and work of a Christian; especially of a Minister of the Gospel.

First, The Parallel.
I shall now for the just and necessary vindication of his Name, and Ministry
hold out to the world a Parallel between Elias and our Reverend Brother.

A Parallel, not of Equality, but Conformity; not of Rivalry, but of Reality;
to which my conscience does subscribe as in the presence of God; and to which
(I am confident) the consciences also of all judicious and impartial Christians
that knew him, will bear witness.

And why should any man, conceive it a presumption in me, and a boldness
(almost to sacrilege) to mention a parallel between Elijah, and this servant
of Jesus Christ? Considering,

1. They were both but Men. The Text says Elias was (...), A man of like
passions with us. It is no in jury to persons of the highest sanctity, to look
upon them as men like our selves: since the Holy Ghost himself is here our
president.

2. It is the same Grace of God which we eye, and honor in both? One star
differs from another in glory, yet it is the same light which fills the stars,
though of different magnitude.

3. Sic parvis componere magna solebam.
Such comparisons do not level them in full and just proportions, but compares
them in a gradual and Evangelical Analogy and likeness.

4. Especially (above all) in as much as the Children of God, even in their
state of mortality: are not only exhorted to, but celebrated for, Conformity
and likeness to their Heavenly Father? Be you perfect as your Father which is
in Heaven is perfect; Matthew. 5. ult. 1 Pet. 1.15.
And, be ye Holy as he that has called you his Holy; there is the exhortation.

And, 2 Cor. 3. ult.
We all with open face beholding as in a glass the glory of the Lord are
changed into the same image from glory to glory; there is their commendation.

Warranted by these and the like scriptural considerations, I address my self
to the Parallel. A Parallel.


1. Elias was a man of Extraordinary sanctity and holiness: Enoch-like he
walked with God: a man of much acquaintance and converse in Heaven, even while
he was on earth.

Such (in his degree) was our Reverend Brother, He was a man of singular piety;
he could say with as much simplicity, as most of his brethren in the flesh (I
believe) truly our fellowship is with the Father and with his Son Jesus Christ.
1 John 1.3.


I am not afraid on his behalf to appeal to his Adversaries, as once Christ did
to his hearers, (setting aside humane frailties,) John 8.46.
which of you could convince him of sin?

I am confident he is gone to Heaven with as unsteined an holiness, as most of
the servants of Christ ever did, within our knowledge.

Secondly, Elias was an eminent Prophet of God, to whom God did in a special
manner reveal and communicate his counsels and secrets.

This faithful servant of Christ, was a Minister of the Gospel; de Arcanis Dei:
a Minister, I say, by Scriptural ordination; no intruder, or up-start of the
times, who, like the false Prophets of old, run before they are sent, Jer. 23.16
and speak a vision of their own heart, and not out of the mouth of the Lord.
This servant of God was not so, but as his Call was from God, both inward and
outward, so the secret of the Lord was with him; God was pleased to reveal much
of himself, and of the mysteries of the Kingdom of our Lord Jesus Christ unto
him; which he did faithfully communicate to the flock, over which the Holy
Ghost had made him overseer; Act. 20.20.
and kept back nothing that was profitable unto them, but showed them, and
taught them publicly, and from house to house: a man he was of more then
ordinary abilities both of gifts and graces, for the work of his Ministry.

Thirdly, Elias was a father and Chief Governor of the College wherein the
children of the Prophet were trained up. 2 King. 2.


Our dear Brother was, though not a father, yet, a son of the Prophets, though
not the Governor, yet, an Alumnus in the Scools of the Prophets; where he
improved his time and studies to a great maturity; to give him his due, he was
an excellent Scholar, both in the Arts and in the Tongues, and generally verst
in other kinds of learning; as those that were intimately acquainted with him
can bear witness. He had a notable faculty in Poetry, though his intention and
attendance upon the Queen of all sciences and professions, the study of
Divinity, allowed him no leisure to indulge his fancy that way: as thinking it
excentrick to his heavenly motion. He was singularly verst, as generally, in
the Controversies between the Papists and Reformed Churches, so specially in
the Controversies of the times, which rendered him very able, quick and potent
to convince gainsayers, who in all their congresses with him, Act. 6.10.
were not able (as it was said of Steven) to resist the wisdom and the Spirit
whereby he spoke: The Jesuits.
save that their Masters have taught them this piece of their Mystery; that
what they cannot clear by argument, Non persuadebis etiamsi persuaseris.
they will darken by clamor; that whatsoever the premises be, they will keep
the conclusion, and whoever have the better, yet they will cry victory.

In the next place, Elijah was a powerful Prophet; His very name imports it,
Eli-jah; which signifies, (...) quasi (...)
My strong God Jehovah, or the Lord: in the 1 King. 17.1. it is Elijahu: that
is, the Lord, He is my strong God. God indeed was strong in Elijah; God
manifested and magnified his mighty power in Elijahs person; mighty in DEED
working Miracles. He called down fire from Heaven, 2 King. 1.12 14. 1 King.
17.14.15, 16.
once and again; He multiplieth the widows oil in the cruse, and the meal in
the barrel; as Elijahs Lord afterward multiplied the loaves and the fishes.

He divides the waters of Jordan with his Mantle. 2 King. 2.8.
The mighty power of God indeed rested on him, for even the fire and water,
obeyed him.

He was mighty in WORD; mighty Evidence whereof you have, 1 King. 18.39.
whereas by one Sermon he brought back many thousands of the Idolatrous
Israelites to the acknowledgement and worship of the true God: a like instance
of Divine power afterward was that in the Apostle in the day of Pentecost, who
by one Sermon, Act. 2.
converted 3000 Souls.

Such a monument of Divine power was this holy Prophet Elijah.

Hence John the Baptist (after him) inherits his name; Our Lord himself
baptiseth him with it, (as it were;) This is Elias which was for to come,
Matthew. 11.14.
the exposition of which riddle (so it was to the Jews, with their very
Rabbis, also) you have from the mouth of the Angel, Luke 1.17. verse. 13.
He shall go before Him, in the Spirit and power of Elias.

That promise of God to the Jews, Matthew. 4.5.
Behold I will send you Elijah the Prophet, before the coming of the great and
dreadful day of the Lord, was not to be literally understood, as the Scribes
doted, Matthew. 17.10. as if Elias had been personally to rise again from the
dead, before the Revelation of the Messiah: but foretold of John the Baptist,
that he should stand up in the Spirit and power of Elijah, as the Harbenger of
Jesus Christ; and wherein was this power to be exerted? Mark that, for it is
very observable, Luke Luke 16.17. verse. 17.
1.16. Many of the children of Israel shall he turn to the Lord their God; and,
to turn the hearts of the fathers to the children, and the disobedient to the
wisdom of the just; therein the Baptist was another Elias, for, as Elias turned
back the Idolatrous Israelites to the true worship of the Lord their God, so
did John the Baptist, Matthew. 3.1.
by preaching the doctrine of repentance, thereby preparing them for the
Ministry of Jesus Christ; turn many to the Lord, so it is applied in the third
verse of that third Chapter of St. Matthew, This is he that was spoken of by
Isaias the Prophet, etc.

Thus John the Baptist was the Successor of Elias, not so much in doing
miracles, as in his powerful Preaching; his Ministry was a powerful Ministry;
how did he thunder against the Pharisees and Sadduces who came to his Baptism?
Matthew 3.7.
O generation Vipers who has warned you to flee from the wrath to come? etc. A
terrible Exordium, and the whole Sermon is of the same strein, startling and
convincing, full of terror: I have not time to read it, much less to run a
Paraphrase upon it.

This gracious servant of the Lord, (whom we have this day followed to the
Sepulcher) was Successor (as I may so say) both to Elias and John the Baptist;
not (as I said) in working Miracles; but in a powerful Ministry; He was a
Boanerges; (...).
his Ministry was a thundering Ministry; And I would to God, we had more of
them; there is need of them; Thunder, they say, purges the air; and if so; we
have need of more such sons of thunder amongst us, and not such as will preach
placentia unto people, sow pillows under their elbows, and sing men to hell
with sweet Lullabies of peace, peace, when there is no peace. Our air is
pestilentially infectious, not only in the Physicians sense, who tell us that
the cause of the late mortality among us (yet not universally healed, though,
blessed be the God that hears prayers, wonderfully abated) was the infection
of the air; but in the Divines sense; our spiritual Physicions, who tell us our
climate is mortally infected with the Pests of Heresies and Blasphemies; and
with the putrid stinch of all manner of poisonous lusts: and this is the fatal
source of all our plagues both in Church and State.

This our precious brother was deeply sensible of; and hence it was that his
spirit was warmed within him to a more than ordinary degree of zeal, in his
Ministry: that so he might be an healer in the land of his nativity, and in the
places where he lived.

His Ministry was a startling an awakning convincing warming clear,
instructive, edifying Ministry: And it wanted not success (through grace;) God
set a seal to his Ministry, and he saw of the travel of his soul, in all the
places whither Providence sent him.

I hope in this place, there be many living monuments of the power of God, in
his Ministry. As his preaching bare witness to God, so God bare witness to his
preaching, in raising up a spiritual seed thereby, to his elder Brother, the
Lord Jesus.

I am confident there be many here, as in other places, to whom he might say, 1
Cor. 9.2.
The seal of my Apostleship are ye in the Lord: and that may say again of him,
2 Cor. 9.15.
My Father, my Father; who drew their first spiritual breath under his
Ministry. Thanks be unto God for his unspeakable gift.

Fifthly, Elias was faithful in standing up for the Lord even when he thought
himself alone; against the tide and torrent of the Apostasy of that generation:
which might justly wonder to see it self turned Baalist.

But the holy Prophet wanted neither zeal nor courage to appear, 1 King 19.14.
Ingemuit terrarum orbis se Arrianum invenisse. As it was in Athanasius his
time. 1 Kings 8.22.
and protest against them and their Idolatry to their very faces; I say, alone;
The prophets of Baal are four hundred and fifty men, but I, even I ALONE, am a
Prophet of the Lord; let them therefore give us two bullocks, etc. His zealous
spirit could not bear their halting between two opinions, and therefore
provokes them to the dispute, before all the people; the God that answeareth by
fire, let him be God.

And his courage was rival with his fidelity, and zeal. verse. 21.
He feared not the face of Ahab, verse. 24.
though a potent, and a cruel King; He spares not to tell him; verse. 18.
I have not troubled Israel, but thou and thy fathers house.

He feared not all the false prophets of Jezabel; though they had the people to
back them; Take the prophets of Baal, verse. 40.
let not one of them escape. What a mighty spirit of God was that upon him,
that he a single unarmed man, should not be afraid to command and see execution
to be done, upon four hundred and fifty Idolatrous prophets, under the wing of
an Idolatrous Queen, and before the very face of a wicked King? Thousands of
their subjects standing by, who but now, were so cowed with fear, that they had
not a word to say for the true and living God! here was courage to a Miracle!

Our reverend brother had his proportion of this fidelity, zeal, and courage.
He was faithful to Jesus Christ, his truths and ordinances. In all the Changes
that went over his head, in all the Controversies of the times, wherein he
exercised his Ministry, he he was a most strenuous Assertor of the truth, and
amost courageous opposer of Error and Innovation; and that even while some
higher then other by head shoulders, (in their own eyes) did basely and
unworthily betray their Cause. He feared not the face of man, in the Cause of
Jesus Christ. He durst tell the greatest person he had to do with of their
faults, Malleus haereticerum. Anabaptists and Antinomians, Arrians, Quakers,
Antiscripturists, etc.
upon just occasion, in the worst of times. He was an hammer to beat down error
and blasphemy, where ever it met him; he could not bear with them that preach
down Poedo-baptisme; the Christian Sabbath, Universities, Schools of Learning;
ordination, and other ordinances and institutions of Jesus Christ. The Apostle
prophesies to us of some, and in the latter times, that will not endure sound
doctrine; it was the zeal and fidelity of our brother, that he could not endure
unsound doctrine, 2 Timothy 4.3.
no not the lispings, or likeness of it, knowing the dangerous tendency
thereof.

False opinions do insinuate themselves by the use of dark and dubious
expressions; and it is the policy of seducers and men of corrupt principles,
when they dare not speak out to shun the form of plain and wholesome words,
(...). 2 Timothy, 1.13. (...). Plaistred coined words. 2 Pet. 2.3. Rev. 2.2.
and hide themselves under the masks of suspicious and doubtful phrases; or
feigned words, as Saint Peter calls them; and so by new lights, and new
language, they do insensibly undermine the truth, and introduce their loose and
rotten opinions.

This he could not bear with seducers, nor they with him; so that by this means
he became a man of contention, 2 Pet. 2.8.
his righteous soul was vexed from day to day, in seeing and hearing.

Sixthly, Elias was a man of a very tender spirit: tender of the glory of God.
I have been very jealous for the Lord of Hosts. Tender of his Saints and
servants, and ordinances; so he continues his complaint. The children of
Israel have forsaken thy Covenant, 1 King. 19.10.14.
destroyed thine altars, and slain thy Prophets with the sword: his soul bled
within him, over the precious things and servants of God; though he had his own
life for a prey, I only am left; this could not satisfy his zealous spirit.

Our honored Friend (now with God) was a man (in his degree) of such another
spirit: He was jealous for God, and for the interests of Jesus Christ: they lay
upon his heart with a great weight, and made deep bleeding impressions: His
word was often with Joshua, And what will thou for thy great name? Josh. 7.9,


Very tender toward the people of God, his bowels wrought and melted within
him toward poor perishing souls. Chattam in Kent.
The Inhabitants of this place, are his witnesses, before God and man; For your
sakes, that fear God here

What offers has he refused?

What affronts has he sususteined?

What temptations has he endured?

What opposition and reproach has he born?

With what difficulties and straits has he conflicted, for many years
together, Phil. 2.30.
not regarding his own life, or the concernments of a numerous and necessitous
family, to supply your spiritual necessities; He did spend and was spent, he
even offered up himself upon the sacrifice, and service of your faith: Verse 17.
truly he was not only your Minister; but even a Martyr, among you.

What love, and honor, and mercy, and liberality, you owe unto his Name, and
poor Orphanfamilie, left with you, judge ye? Surely if he sowed unto you
spiritual things, it is no great matter if his poor family reap your carnal
things, through his poverty you were made rich; in the midst of your riches let
not his Relicts remain poor. But to proceed.

Elias, mortified man. He was so far from living to the world, that he hardly
lived in the world: like his successor and anty-type, John the Baptist he lived
separated from the world while he was in it, Matthew. 3.4.
choosing rather to live among bruit beasts, then among brutish men; 2 King.
1.8.
his fare hard, and his raiment course, both suitable to a wilderness, not to
Court or City.

This man of God, now with God, was a man dead to the world, while he lived in
it. He was not a man of the mode, his habit and diet spoke a mortified frame of
heart. He was not given to juncating, and feasting, and ranting, with vain and
wanton persons, as the manner of some is, to the infinite scandal of the Gospel.

He sought not great things for himself, nor laid about him to fether his nest,
as some do that would be counted Saints of the first, magnitude. (Verily
covetousness never so invaded the professing party, as in this hypocritical
generation wherein we live;) no, our brother was crucified to the world, Gal. 6
14. 2 Cor. 4.18.
and the world to him; He looked not upon the things that are seen, but upon the
things that are not seen.

He coveted no man's silver or gold, never any man passed under harder
pressures, with greater silence and contendednesse: He had but little, yet when
demanded how it was with him? he would always reply (with much cheerfulness,
he had enough, and wanted nothing.

Yea, in the midst of all his straits, he was not only unquerulous, but
liberal, liberal even to profuseness: He never cared how little was given him,
nor how much he gave to others, that were due objects of charity: Covetous he
was, only in laying out for Christ, not in laying up for himself: and surely
his compassionate spirit had undone him long since, had not that promise
recruited him. Isa 32.8.
The liberal man devises liberal things, and by liberal things he shall stand:
and Psalm. 37.26. he is ever merciful, and lends, and his seed is blessed.
The Lord make good this his promise to this surviving Orphans.

In the next place, Elijah was a man much and mighty in prayer: the Text
represents so much unto us, Elijah was a man subject to like passions as we
are, yet he prayed earnestly, etc. and (in another place) the Scripture calls
him the Intercessor of Israel. Wot ye not how Elijah mirketh intercession to
God for Israel: Romans 11 2.
Elijah by his prayers was a Mediator between God and his people.

And surely our Brother was a man of prayer, much in prayer, both with the
people of God, and for them: in public, in private, in their houses, and in
his own house and closet, he poured out his soul to God night and day. Surely
England has lost one of her Intercessors, one of the Lords remembrancers, a
Moses, a Samuel, a Jacob, a wrestler with God, who stood in the gap, and helped
to turn away the wrath of God from a sinful nation.

Elijah was much in fasting, 1 King. 19.8.
he fasted forty days and forty nights, at one time. This holy man was
frequent in this duty, he joined fasting with prayer not seldom; so that he
might well, with the Apostle, put it into his Catalogue, 2 Cor. 11.27.
I cannot call it, the Catalogue of sufferings, because he counted such days
as his feasting days, in fastings often. It was his meat and drink, thus to do
the will of his heavenly Father.

Elias was a persecuted Prophet, Mar. 5.12. 1 Kings 10.18. Chapter 19.1, 2, 3.
in his Beatitudes: so persecuted they the Prophets that were before you:
persecuted by Ahab, and persecuted by Jezabel, put to fly for his life; and
often driven by the severer dispensations of providence from place to place: he
was one of those holy wanderers, the Holy Ghost makes mention of Heb. 11.37.
they wandered about in Sheepskins, and Goat Skins, being destitute, afflicted,
tormented.

This faithful Minister of the Gospel he had his share in the persecution of
the times wherein he lived, from his very first entrance upon his Ministry:
according to the prophecy of our Savior; Matthew. 5.11, 12. and truly it had
been a wonder if he should have escaped it; For as our Lord subjoyns the reason
to his prediction of the Apostles sufferings, verse 13. His Ministry was salt,
he was salt in his life, and salt in his doctrine; not only savoury, but quick
and corroding, smart and searching, which corrupt times and ulcered
consciences, could not bear, 2 Timothy 4.3.

This enraged and enflamed the spirits of unsound men; and raised much trouble
and persecution against him, wheresoever he came; which gave him occasion often
to flit from one place to another, to avoid the fury of unreasonable men: Psalm.
56.8.
And this David put among his sufferings: Thou tellest my wanderings, put thou
my tears into thy bottle: And others of the faithful Ministers of Jesus
Christ, have had their share with him in this kind of persecution. Math. 10.23.
The world cannot bear the plain dealing of Gospell-Ministers: there is none so
hated as the Reprover in the gate. Amos 5.10.


Elias was miraculously fed and preserved in the midst of all those hardships
and persecutions by immediate Providence. widow ready to perish, 1 King. 17.5,
6. Verse 9.12, 15, 17.
is his Suckler, and a bird of prey, his Caterer, etc.

The providence of God toward our Reverend Brother, were highly observable;
surely in the eyes of many standers by, it was little less then a miracle, how
he and his numerous family have subsisted, for diverse years last elapsed; his
visible revenue not having exceeded 30 l. per annum. But he lived by Faith, and
not by Sense; that promise was his best salary, Psalm. 37.3.
Trust in the Lord, and do good, and verily thou shall be fed. He was not a man
that would take Gods work out of his hand, and neglect his own, as many do; he
looked to the condition, and trusted God to make good the promise.

Elias appeared with Christ in the Mount of transfiguration. Mat. 17 3.


This servant of Christ had his tranfigurations also, Though he acknowledged
with Bern. Rara hara, brevis mora. 1 Pet. 1.8.
Jesus Christ did sometimes call him up into the mountain, where he showed him
his glory; he had in his proportion his visions, and revelations sometimes full
of joy unspeakable and glorious.

Elijah when he was to leave the world, 2 King. 2.8.
his way lay through Jordan, Psa. 130.1.
and our Brother had his Jordan also, to pass through, deep waters of
desertion, which threatened to go over his soul, and out of these depths he
cried to the Lord. But it was his happiness and honor that he found Elijah's
mantle as well as his Jordane, his faith I mean. For surely, it was the faith
of Elijah that divided Jordan, and not his garment. And by the virtue of this
faith, did this precious man go through his Jordan, so that the waters did not
drown him; God hid his face from him for a season, and he was troubled: Psalm.
30.7.
But he was pleased to dispell the cloud, and caused his face to shine upon him
again: which caused his departing soul to break forth into this triumphant
(...), a little before his last breath. VICTORY, VICTORY, VICTORY.

The Devil was a Coward, and durst not set upon this holy man, till he thought
Faith and Reason, and (almost) Sense were exhausted, and could make no
refistance. But the Lord Jesus having loved this his Disciple, loved him to the
end: and was strong in his weak servant to overcome the Devil, in this last
encounter, so that he breathed out his soul and his doxologie together, THANKS
BE TO GOD FOR JESUS CHRIST.

And yet let us follow Elias a step or two further with Elishah his servant: 2
Reg. 1.6.
Elias went up to heaven in a fiery Chariot: our Brother was carried up in a
burning fever, or rather he ascended up into glory in the triumphant Chariot of
victorious assurance of the love of God in Jesus Christ. Romans 8.37.

Lastly, Elijah let fall his mantle upon his servant Elishah, who followed him
in his ascension, both with his eye and voice. My Father, my Father, 2 Rings
2.12.
the Chariot of Israel, and the horsemen thereof. This good man let fall the
mantle of blessings and prayers, upon his dear Friends and Relations; that
stood crying about him, in some such kind of phrase. My Father, my Father, etc.
a blessing suitable to the state and condition of every stander-ly: And thus
this servant of Christ made his LAST Will and Testament, and (if I be not
mistaken) his ONLY Will and Testament of Praise and Prayer, praising God, and
blessing men. And thus much for the Parallel between Elijah and our Reverend
Brother.

I come now to the second thing, propounded for the just vindication of our
Brother, and of the truth it self, and that is to show you.

That the affection of Anger rightly qualified, and managed, is of singular use
and advantage in the life and work of a Christian, especially of a Minister of
the Gospel, which ought in no wise to be branded with the usual scandal of
choler and passion.

I make no question, the false prophets, and their seduced proselytes, stuck
not to blast the holy Prophet in my Text, with the same reproach, a furious
man, a man of an intemperate and unbridled spirit, that valued not men's lives,
but in his anger would not stick to call down fire from Heaven to destroy an
hundred men at a time, etc.

The very meek Spirit of God records it here, in my Text; that he was (...), of
like passions with us; and yet without any disparagement to his memorial in the
land of the living.

To which end let me, 1. in general, put you in mind of this, viz. That the
passion of anger, with other affections in nature, at what time the person in
whom they are is regenerate; they do change their nature, and become regenerate
too: and being baptized with the blood and spirit of Jesus Christ, they receive
Divine impressions, and so pass into the catalogue of gracious affections and
dispositions, and become instruments of exceeding honor and service in the
hand of Jesus Christ, Jam. 3.17.
who is pleased to make use of them in his own work: ex gr.

WIT, regenerate, becomes Heavenly wisdom. LOVE, sanctified, Gal. 5.6. Faith
working by Love.
becomes an active principle in the hand of Faith. FEAR, besprinkled with the
blood of Christ, becomes a notable Andidote and prefervative against sin. Hate
I not them that hate thee, etc. Psalm. 139.21.
HATRED, spiritualized, an holy Antipaethy with any thing or person contrary to
God. COVRAGE, sanctified by the Holy Ghost, Zach. He that is as David shall be
like an Angel of God.
is turned into a kind of Angelical fortitude. And thus to be short. PASSION,
born again of water and the spirit, becomes the grace of Zeal; and holy
jealousy for God, and for the interest of Jesus Christ.
Anger sanctified is that to the affections, which edge is to the instrument,
which varnish is to colors, which wind is to the sails of a ship; judgment is
the ballast, but zeal is the full gale, it is as mettle to the horse; it is the
activity of every grace; every affection red hot for Jesus Christ; Cant. 8.7.
which much water cannot quench, neither can the floods drown it.

In a word passion refined and spiritualized, is every faculty of the Soul,
acting to its height, for the glory of God: The zeal of thy house has eaten me
up. Psalm. 69 9.
To be short; Sanctified anger in the Saints of God is not that which the world
takes it to be; a short madness, Psalm. 31. Furor ira brevis.
but a grace of the Spirit of God; yea, it is a compound and temperament of all
graces, acting in summo gradu in the height of intention, for the promoting of
the concernments of Christ's Kingdom.

I told before, that Elijah was an useful man, though he was subject to
passion; I shall tell you more now; He was therefore so useful, BECAUSE he was
subject to passion; his anger and passion being sanctified, made him so
abundantly active for God and the reformation of the public worship, doctrine,
and ordinances, in his generation; had he wanted his passion, he had wanted
some of his zeal, for God.

And so it was with our worthy brother deceased. That which an idle wanton,
loose lukewarm generation, of professors, as well as profane persons (for the
palliating of their own hypocrisy and Gallio-like-indifferency in matters of
religion) called passion and choler in him, was in deed and in truth nothing
but his zeal, and courage and activity for Jesus Christ, which truly did even
consume him.

Alas! in this apostate generation, all things have lost their proper names;
the Devil appears in Samuels mantle. Satan in the form of an Angel of light:
and sin puts on the habit of virtue: that it may deceive the more safely.

Thus Luke-warmness and cursed neutrality in religion, passes abroad for
meekness and sweetness of Spirit.

Carnal Policy for Christian Prudence.

Cursed Compliance with the lusts of men for moderation and command of a man's
spirit, and sic in coeteris.

While zeal and fidelity, to the truth, ordinances and government of Jesus
Christ hear ill, in the world; and suffer all the odium and scandal that a
reviling world, and the venomous wit of malice can heap upon it. Truly, the
earth is not able to bear their words.

And therefore, Jam. 2.14. (...).
you that fear God, be instructed, and take heed, how ye became Judges of evil
thoughts; that ye do not judge perversely, according to your own corrupt
thoughts, or according to the corrupt thoughts of the men of the world, whose
judgment is totally perverted by carnal interest, and vile affections. Take
heed, Isa. 5.
ye do not call good evil and evil good, put light for daokness and darkness
for light; and so condemn the generation of Gods Children, and bless the proud
whom the Lord abhors.

And thus having premised thus much in general, concerning anger and passion in
the Saints;

Because indeed, even where this affection is sanctified, it is not sanctified
quite through; but may have even in the best of Saints, and without question in
this servant of Christ, had some mixtures of the old corrupt nature, troubling
and distempering it sometimes, which makes the Saints go mourning and sighing
within themselves, and wishing to be dissolved, and to be with Christ; Let me
come now in the second place.

To a more distinct and particular resolution of the question;

Quest. When, and in what Cases, Anger and passion in the Saints is to be
adjudged as sanctified zeal, a pure flame of divine love?

Answ. For Resolution of this query, I shall give you four or five Notes or
Rules, (and very briefly) for to guide your judgments in this particular.

First, I must tell you, First Rule
thus much, that every warm and keen expression, whether by way of reproof or
Caution, is not to be accounted anger and passion.

A man may speak earnestly and vehemently in the calmest temper of his spirit:
some matter requires a greater Emphasis to set it on then other: it is the
skill and wisdom of an Orator, to edge and accent his discourse with a due
pondus. He should be but a dull speaker, that should deliver matter of weight
in the same key, and tone as if he were but dictating to his Scholars, or
reading a lecture. And yet this is the common mistake of the injudicious
multitude, to interpret every impetuous and pathetical posture of the preacher
(especially when the matter lies cross to corrupt nature) for anger and
intemperancy of spirit. Observe it, and you will find that (...) express a
great deal of rancor and venom in a sly and calm phrase; Meekness and passion
may dwell in the same, though a man may be passional and yet of a meek spirit.
So was Moses.
so on the other side sincerity may be accompanied, with much meekness and love
in a keener and sharper style.

But, secondly; When the vehemence of a man's spirit is acted against sin, then
it is not to be accounted passion so much as zeal. It is the Apostles rule.

Be ye angry and sin not; q. d. If ye would not sin in your anger; Second Rule.
Ephesians. 4 26.
be angry only against sin. It is sin which teaches men to call it anger,
when it self is reproved; for this is the deceit; do but call the reproof
passion and malice, and then men think they need not regard it: the guilt is
translated upon the reprover, and the delinquent is justified. What judgment
would the tame spirits of our times have passed upon that act of Phineas, in
that severe execution done, upon those impudent adulterers, Nemb. 25.7, 8.
Zimri and (...) in that generation? How would they have sentenced it to the
pit of hell, as an act of furious cruelty. What? to execute before trial! To
make himself, both witness, judge and executioner? An that in the very act of
sin? thereby cutting them off from the hope or possibility of repentance, (in
humane probability) he destroyed both body and Soul at once, passion above all
hyperbolie! I, but the Searcher of hearts, the Righteous Judge of Heaven and
earth; He calls it zeal: Numb. 25.11, 12, 13.
an act of justice whereby Phineas prevented the execution of divine justice,
upon the whole Congregation; and for a reward whereof, God entails upon Phineis
and his seed the Covenant of an everlasting Priesthood.

Thirdly, When anger is sharpened against error and blasphemy; it is not to be
reputed choler and passion! Brethren, what think ye, can a man indeed be guilty
of passion against the horrid opinions and heresies which subvert the very
foundation? or can there be an Excess in that passion? can a man be bitter
against drunkenness and whoredom? or can a man be guilty of railing against
damnable Doctrines, Scepticisme, 2 Pet. 2.1.
Arianisme, (denying the Lord that Bought them in sensu Ecclesiastico, or
bought them, in their own persuasion.
bought them) Antiscripturisme, Quakerisme, Atheism? what not.

Did ye never read the Epistles of Saint Paul: Saint Peter, Saint Jude? oh how
do they sharpen their style against false Teachers, and seducers, branding
them, wih the highest ignominies that can drop from an inspired pen, Dogs,
Phil. 3.2.
Wolves, Evill-workers, Wells without water; Clouds carried about with a
tempest, 2 Pet. 2. per tot. Jude per tot. (...). Full of the whore.
to whom is reserved the mist of darkness for ever, presumptuous railers,
bruit beasts; having eyes full of adultery; covetous, cursed children, raging
waves, wandering stars, to whom is reserved the blackness of darkness for
ever. Cains Balaams, Cores filthy dreamers, murmurers, Complainers, sensual
Separatists, who pretend to the spirit, but have it not.

These and many like, are the Marks which the meek spirit of God sets upon
these Cains: which if a Minister of the Gospel should but so much as repeat, in
reference to the disseminators of the very self-same cursed principles and
practices in our times they should be reviled, and well nigh Cursed, and stoned
to death, as men of bitter and virulent spirits; the multitude of Sectaries,
would tear off their clothes, and cast dust into the air; and lift up their
voices; and cry out as the enraged Jews against Panl.

Away with such a fellow, Acts 22.22, 23. 1 Cor. 4.3.
it is not fit he should live.

But brethren, it is a small thing for us to be judged by man's judgment. The
Meek Apostle, by the meek Spirit of God, Tit. 1 13. (...)
has commanded us, to rebuke them sharply, cuttingly; a metaphor borrowed from
Chirurgions who cut, and search, and lance, and apply corrasives, Ne pars
sinceratrahatur.
that they may eat out the dead and putrified flesh, that the whole body may
not perish. This is not to kill, but to save, not to wound, but to Cure; that
they may be sound in the faith. The meekness, the love, the mercy, the
gentleness lies in the tendency of such bitter Corrosives. In this case
tenderness in the Mediums would be cruelty in the End, Levit. 19.17. Fourth
Rule.
hatred, and not love.

Fourthly, Anger is no longer Anger, but zeal, when it is in the cause of God,
and for his glory: this rule differs not from the former in substance, but in
notion only, as somewhat more general. Gal. 4.18. (...). etc.
It is good to be zealously affected in a good thing always: the word signifies
to be red hot, to be boiling over; this is a temper becoming the servants, and
the work of a jealous God. It is good when every passion is made to serve the
interest of Christ. We should be cold in our own Cause, but hot in Gods. Zeal
in our own concerns, is passion, passion in Gods affairs is zeal; The temper
of meek Moses; Number. 12.1.
who was silent in his own reproach, though by a Brother and a Sister, (and
therefore less portable. Psalm. 55.12.) or if he spoke, it was in prayer for
them, verse 13. not in passion against them.

And this was the temper of our dear brother. I dare appeal even to his
Adversaries, was not his anger against sin, Against error and false doctrine,
of which he met with too much, in every place? Was it not (whether in public
or private) in the Cause of God, and of Religion, the concernments of Jesus
Christ, and of men's immortal souls?

Indignities and affronts offered to himself, did not tempt out the fervor and
acrimony of his spirit, as those which were put upon Christ and his precious
Truths.

If so, and your consciences cannot gainsay it, call him no more, an angry,
passionate, cholsrick man; but call him a faithful, plain-dealing, zealous
Minister of Jesus Christ: lest otherwise God hear and be angry, and judge you
for your passion and partialty.

And lastly, When the warmth and keenness of a man's spirit is acted not so
much against the persons, as against the wickedness of men, who hold the truth
of God in unrighteousness. Call it not anger and passion, bat zeal for God,
and compassion on men's souls. Passion lets fly its arrows against the persons
of men, zeal only against their sins: Indeed sins and persons are so near, that
a man can hardly distinguish sometimes between the person and the sin. to avoid
the danger therefore, let men stand furtther off from their sins, that he that
strikes at their sins, may not with the same blow be judged to strike at their
persons also. But this is that which I say, the heat of anger must be against
the crime, rather then against the person; and when it is mixed with grief,
which sets pity and prayer on work for the offending party, as it is said of
Christ, Mark 3.5. then it is pure zeal, and not distempered anger.

I have done both with the Sermon, and with the occasion.

Only in as much as the Passions of the Regenerate (as I hinted before) are
not all over regenerate; nor have I made this Apology for the Saints in
general, or this our brother (for whose loss we mourn this day) in particular,
as if I conceived there were no sin in their Anger, no strange fire in their
passion, yea, because the Saints of God, discover much distemper in their
affections, and passions sometimes, even when they act for God, (for which they
judge themselves bitterly in the presence of God;) for the preventing of
mistakes on the right hand, or on the left, give leave to add a word or two of
Direction now in the close, for your better improvement of the doctrine.

It is twfold. sc. 1. A word of Caution. 2. A word of Comfort,


Caution 1. To all in general. 2. To the Saints in particular.


To all in general.
First, 1. Caution general.
take heed of mistaking your infirmities: take heed of putting a softer name
upon your Corruptions, then God does, and the Scripture does; this is the
general deceit amongst Christians; Sin takes sanctuary under infirmity. Every
wicked man calls his Iusts his gross sins, his infirmities. The Drunkard says,
it is my infirmity, the Swearer says, it is my infirmity, the Adulterer, alas!
what would you have him do? it is his infirmity, and sic in caeteris.

Every profane wretched miscreant has taken hold of the horns of the Altar,
and there he cries, alas, this is my infirmity.

Brethren, take heed, say not infirmity, when it is more then infirmity.

Quest. When is that?

When sin is more then infirmity?

Answ.

1. When men are more sollicitous for pardon then for Cure; they are more then
infirmities: if pardon alone would quiet thy spirit without healing, thou art
under a mortal disease. The Saints cry, heal me O Lord, and I shall be healed:
and this is an argument of their sincerity; desire of pardon only argues
Self-Love, desire of Cure argues love to Jesus Christ: desire of pardon,
argues men fear hell only, but desire of healing argues men fear God; defire
of pardon only shows men would be content to live in sin if they durst;
desire of Cure shows men would not live in sin, if they might.

Secondly, much more, when men study the satisfaction of their lusts, In
exordio adolescentrae petieram a te castitatem and continentiam, etc.
more then the mortification of them; they are more then infirmities: Augustine
confesses of himself before Coversion, he prayed (sometimes) for the gift of
chastity; but there was something within that secretly whispered, Timebam si
ne^cito exaudires and sanares me a morbo boncupis^entiae, quam expleri malebam
quam extingui.
not yet Lord; for says he, I was afraid, lest God should hear me too soon,
and cure in me that distemper which I had rather should have been saisfied,
then mortified. This is the temper of every unregenerate person: Conviction may
make them pray against their lusts sometime, but love of sin makes them indulge
them: they cannot find in their hearts to lay violent hands upon them, they be
yet as their own flesh, and no man ever yet hated his own flesh, but
nourishes, and cherishes it, when men are so tenderly affected, to their
Corruptions, they are more then infirmities; sin reigns, when men dare not
displease it, nor rise up in opposition against it.

Thirdly, Third note of reigning sin.
sin is more then infirmity, when men are impatient of Conviction; when men are
so tender of their corruptions, that a man must not touch them; He that
touches them, touches the apple of their eyes. Gracious hearts are glad of
conviction; let the righteous smite me, Psalm. 141.
it shall be a precious oil, etc.

When reproof is a wound which men cannot bear, it is a sign sin is alive, and
whole within them. Sin is then King ^wor^ the soul, Eccles. 8.4.
when a man must not say unto it, what do thou? Prove. 3.31.
and against which there is no rising up. The more any corruption is indulged,
the less infirmity is in it.

Fourthly, Fourth note.
when a man or a woman is never troubled with their corruptions, but when wrath
is upon them, then they are more then infirmities. The godly go mourning under
their secret corruptions, when the Sun shines upon their Tabernacles with the
warmest influences, yea when God is pleased to shine into their hearts, with
the clearest beams of love; the more sensible the Saints are of Gods love, the
more they hate their own corruptions, because they make them unlike to God.

They that are never troubled with corruption, but when wrath is upon them, it
is wrath that troubles them, and not corruption. this is not infirmity. Carnal
people are never good but when they are under the rod: and then, not because
their sins displease God, but because Gods judgments displease them.

Fifthly, when Infirmities serve men only for apologies, they are more then
infirmities, when a man can say of any corruption, it is my infirmity, and
acquiesce there, it is very dangerous. This is certain, men (in nature) do not
sit down patient under infirmities, because infirmities, Corruption is all wed
where infirmity is the apology, and allowed corruption is more then infirmity:
The Saints infirmites are their afflictions, their burdens, not their
apologies. Oh wretch that I am, Rom 7.24.
who shall deliver me? etc.

Sixthly, Sixth note.
when the heart is more offended at the Law, because it crosses corruption,
then at corruption, because it crosses the Law, it is more then infirmity.
Gracious souls justify the Law, but condemn their lusts; Romans 7.12. Verse 14.
the Law is holy, and the Commandment is holy, and just, and good: all the
fault they find, is with themselves; I am carnal sold under sin: they have good
thoughts of the law; it is good, it is spiritual, but they cannot find any word
bad enough for themselves. I am a wretch, etc. this is infirmity indeed. It is
good when men study to bring up their hearts to the Rule, and not labor to
bring down the Rule to their hearts: Gods children would feign have their lives
as strait as the Law. Psa. 119.5.
Oh that my ways were directed to keep thy Satutes, carnal people would
willingly have the Law as crooked as their lives: Ezekiel. 18.
The ways of the Lord are not equal.

This is an hard saying, Joh. 6.
who can bear it?

Lastly, Seventh note.
when Corruption gets ground, and grows more impetuous and headstrong from
time to time; it is then more then infirmity: when sin fortifieth it self, and
can make resistance against whatsoever does oppose it, it is Reigning sin, sin
then in the foul, is as Rex in Regno; as a King in his Kingdom; strengthening
and securing its throne against all opposition. Corruption in the Saints is
upon the losing-hand; infirmities will grow more and more infirm: as distempers
in the body, when a man is upon recovery.

Object. Then are not my corruptions infirmities, will some poor soul be
ready to object; for they grow stronger and stronger, and not weaker and
weaker; my sinful passions, and distempers, get ground of me, I do not get
ground of my passions.

Answ. To this I answer.

I. It is not usual for them that lie under the power and command of their
lusts, to make such complaints; they of whom lust and corruption gets ground,
seldom say so; they study apologies, (ut supra) not aggravations. Such poor
Christians therefore that thus object against themselves, are not easily to be
believed.

2. It is true, Satan may roar most, when he is cast out; the last pangs of
dying beasts are strongest, and so it may be with a dying lust.

But, observe a few things.

1. Many times, the poor believer says, his corruptions grow, when only
indeed he grows more sensible of his corruptions: when light grows, and
grace grows, and corruption grows more burdensome: this doubting Souls, call
the grows of corruption: the new Convert, complains he has more corruption,
then ever; when only he sees corruption more then ever, and is more sensible
of corruption then ever. Witness this, that the poor Soul is more impatient now
of the least corruption, then formerly it was of the grossest acts: this is
certain, the more burdensome corruption grows, the more ground it loses.

2. Does thy displacency against corruption grow? Do thou hate thy
corruptions more then ever, and thy self for them? Whilst thou say,
corruption grows, do thou dislike thy corruptions more then ever? Christian,
thou gettest ground of corruption, corruption does not get ground of thee. A
Tyrant may grow more oppressive and more impetuous, but he grows more
burdensome and more intolerable. Why all this while he is upon the losing hand;
he loses ground in the hearts of the people: Let him think himself never so
secure, he is upon the declining hand; he is afalling. So it is with sin; the
more it is hated, the weaker it grows.

Thirdly, Does thy watchfulness grow? Thou grow more vigilant, more jealous of
thine own heart? More afraid of thy self? Do stand at a greater distance from
temptation, shunning the appearances and occasions of sin? Corruption gets no
ground of thee, but thou of Corruption?

Fourthly, Does thy opposition grow? As corruption and temptation grows
stronger (in thy apprehension) do thou make stronger resistances, do thou
fortify more against temptation? Do pray more and more fervently? Art thou
more and more active in the duty of mortification? Corruption i^ a looser.

Fifthly, Does Christ grow more precious to thee? Do thou see more need of
Christ? More beauty and excellency in Christ; not only for pardon of sin, but
for power against sin? Not only for justification, but for sanctification? Not
only as a fountain of happiness, but as a fountain of holiness? And do thou
go out in his strength against (thy corruptions; laboring with the Apostle) to
know the power of his Resurrection, (...). 3.10.
and the fellowship of his sufferings, that thou may be conformable to him?

Fear not, Christian, thy God and the God of thy fathers, has given thee
treasure in thy ack. Care concupiscit adversus spiritum, si non and spiritus
adersus carnem faciunt adul^^e ium. ^ug. ^ Gal. 1.5, 7.


It is a blessed thing when corruption draws out grace; when, as the flesh
lusts against the spirit, the spirit lusts against the flesh.

Behold, whilst thou mournest and complainest that corruption gets ground; the
truth is, Grace gets ground, of Corruption: Sense of corruption is a grace, and
displicency against corruption is a grace, and watchfulness is a grace, and
opposition against sin is a grace, and precious thoughts of Christ a grace. Now
if corruption be an occasion to exert these graces, it is grace that gets
ground of corruption, and not corruption of grace.

A second general Caution. A second general Caution.

Take heed of making the Saints infirmities, your encouragements in sin.

For first, They are not for our imitation, but our admonition, Ut sup. use. 1.
make not the infirmities of the godly, Cur non ego? Salvian.
patrons of your wickedness. Say not in your hearts, why not I? Why may not I
be drunk as well as Noah? And commit adultery as well as David?

2. There is no such folly in nature; was there ever any so sottish as to
imitate other men's deformities in nature, or misfortunes in the world? Did ye
ever hear of any man so mad, as to put out his eyes, because another man was
blind? Or to throw away his riches, because other men are poor?

Was ever any man yet heard to say, And why may not I sit upon the dungh-hil as
well as Job? Or lie at the rich man's door begging, as well as Lazarus? Why may
not I dwell in the wilderness as well as John the Baptist? And not have whereon
to lay my head as well as our Savior?

Alas, Alas! that this folly should only befall the sons of men only in
spirituals, in soul-concernments! This is a lamentation, and shall be for a
lamentation.

3. There be in the Saints of God things more worthy of imitation then their
infirmities.

There was meekness in Moses, patience in Job, holiness in David; zeal for God
in Elijah; etc. In a word, there are Graces in Gods children as well as
corruptions: Oh! how much more noble and excellent is it to imitate the Saints
in their graces then in their infirmities? This were wisdom, to pick out that
which is praise worthy, 1 Cor. 11.1
and be followers of them as they are followers of Christ! Every fool and base
spirit can imitate the worst part in men; what a sordid criticism was it in
him, that read over Homer, only to find out his faults? A wise generous spirit
will observe what is honorable and excellent, Phil. 4.8.
and set up that for his standard, and exemplar. You take notice of the Saints
falls; but why do ye not take notice also of their rising again? You see their
sins; but why are ye blind to their repentance, their tears, their broken
bones, their self-judging, their restless inquietude of spirit, till God be
reconciled to them?

Their infirmities were but few, their graces many; their infirmities rare,
their graces habitual: Here Is work, Christian, for your imitation.

Your would have Abraham's riches: oh! labor to get Abraham's faith: you would
be like David in honor, be like him in holiness: you would have Elijah's
power, to call down fire from Heaven; labor to possess Elijah his zeal, his
courage, his prayerfulness. This is excellent! study the graces you see in
other men, not their infirmities.

4. Lastly, Consider, your sins will be never the less, because other men's
infirmities are great: He that makes light of sin because the Saints have
their infirmities; to be sure is no Saint himself; and his corruptions are no
longer infirmities, but allowed presumptions.

Take a third Caution.
Insult not over the Saints of God, A third general Caution.
because of their infirmities. For consider,

1. Thou see their infirmities; their failings; thou see not what they cost
them. Little do thou know what broken bones, what sharp corrections, what
bleeding Souls, what buckets of tears they pour out before the Lord, Ps. 73.22.
because of their corruptions. Oh! wretch that I am! etc. How do they shame
themselves before the Lord for their failings? So foolish was, I and so
ignorant, and like a beast before thee; they cannot find language bad enough to
revile themselves withal in Gods presence.

Surely if thou did know what the Saints infirmities cost them, thou would
reflect upon thy self, and be ashamed; and smiting upon thy breast cry out with
self-abhorrency, oh! wretch that I am; I have sinned as these servants of God
have done, but I have never mourned as they have done: I have sinned as David,
but I have not repented as David: I have denied Jesus Christ with Peter, but I
have not with Peter wept bitterly;; my heart has been a fountain of sin, but
my head has not been a fountain of tears: I have been viler in Gods eyes then
ever they were, but I was never so vile in mine own eyes as they have been; The
Saints infirmities are their afflictions, but my corruptions have been my
delight: God be merciful to me a sinner: What cause have I to mourn, rather
then to insult, and censure.

Secondly, Turn in upon thy self, and thou shall find more cause of judging thy
self then thy brother. He has his weaknesses, thou have thy wilfulnesses. He
his failings, sometimes, thou thy gross falls (possibly) every day; He is
surprised by a temptation; thou go forth to meet temptation: Yea, to tempt
temptation, to tempt the devil, to tempt thee; Yea, thou thy self art a tempter
to others, sinning and causing others to sin: and so do the devils work,
etc. and do thou judge thy brother? Thou hypocrite, Matthew. 7.5.
cast first the beam out of thine eye, and then shall thou see clearly to cast
out the mote out of thy brothers eye. Vtimur perspicillis magis quam speculis.
Sen.
What is the mote of infirmity, to the beam of Presumption? Be more in thy
looking glass, and thou will have less use of thy spectacles.

Thirdly, Know this, oh man! who ever thou art; that in the very act of judging
thy brother, thou condemnest thy self: Thy censures of thy brothers infirmities
are so many aggravations of thine own wickednesses.

If his mote sinck him so deep in thy judgment, Matthew. 7 2
how deep will thy beam sinck thee in Gods? With what measure thou metest, it
shall be measured to thee again.

Take heed and prepare not stripes for thine own back. God will not judge his
people for their infirmities, but God will judge thee for thy presumptuous
sins: yea, Romans 2.1, 2.
God will judge thee for judging thy brother, and woe unto thee when God comes
to judge thee; Luke 19.22.
Do not thou fear God, seeing thou art in the same condemnation? Ex ore tuo,
etc. out of thine own mouth, thou shall be judged, thou wicked servant.

Fourthly, It is much more honorable to mourn with the Saints, and to mourn
for them, then to judge and censure them. Their infirmities are their burden; a
burden (the Lord knows) which they are not able to bear: by sympathy and
compassion thou might help to bear their burden, by reproach and censure
thou addest to it; a cruelty which in a lesser model God does severely
threaten, Zech. 11.15. And thus much for the Cautions in general.

In particular this doctrine may administer Caution to the Saints themselves.
Cautions to the Saints. 1. Caution


First, Although corruptions in the Saints be but infirmities, yet let even the
best of Gods Saints, learn To Mourn for their Infirmities. To Watch over their
Infirmities. To Pray against their Infirmities.


There is a secret deceit in our hearts, and Satan sets on the temptation;
Considerations against security under infirmities.
What need I be troubled and sollicitous about my corruptions? They are but
infirmities, and the best of Gods Saints have their infirmities, and many,
greater then mine be: upon this very account many grow secure, and are at ease
in Zion.

Nay but consider,

1. no good-signs; when sin takes sanctuary under infirmity, it is to be
suspected of more then infirmity, I know Satan is busy, and the heart
deceitful, ut sup. but such discourses, yielded to and rested in, may justly
cause a man to fear his heart is not sound with God.

Secondly, same nature with the lusts of wicked men. It is sin, though it be
not reigning sin: and this is enough to break a gracious heart to consider thus
with it self; my corruption is my infirmity indeed: I, but not such an
infirmity, as a dim eye, or a palsy hand, or a lame foot, etc. They are but
natural defects: my pride, my passion, my love of the world, these are sinful
distempers: they, do but prejudice the body, these defile my Soul; And look
what ever may be said of sin in general, as that it is a transgression of Gods
Law, a contrariety unto Gods Nature, a contradiction to Gods Will; A practical
blasphemy against his Name, and Attributes, the rape of his mercies, the date
of his justice; the challenge of his power, the blind of his omscience; It
gives the lie to Gods truth, and the fool to his wisdom; This, and all this,
and much more may be affirmed of the sinful distempers of my heart: the least
corruption in my cursed nature, would ungod God; if my sin could help it, God
should be God no longer. A man cannot give sin a worse name then it self; and
as a man cannot give the greatest sin, a worse name then sin; so he cannot give
the least sin a better.

There is no difference in the nature of sin in the godly and in the wicked:
all the difference is in their persons; the one is regenerate, the other is
not; but sin remains sin still, in the one as well as in the other. Is not this
matter of deep humiliation, to the Saints?

Thirdly, nature, so they are of the same merit with sin in the wicked. All sin
is damning. And thus should the children of God, Smiting upon their thighs, say
in Gods presence, It were just with God to damn me for my infirmities. And that
he does not, is not from the smalness of my sin, but from the greatness of his
mercy; not from the nature of my sin, but from the goodness of his nature: 2 Samuel 23.5.
not BECAUSE they are but infirmities, but BECAUSE He has made with me an
everlasting Covenant, ordered in all things and sure. Is not this an humbling
consideration?

Fourthly, this, sc. that the Saints infirmities grieve the Spirit of God.
Indeed they are infirmities which properly may be said to grieve Gods Spirit:
the gross sins of wicked men, they are said to quench the Spirit, and vex the
Spirit, and despite the Spirit of God. The distempers that remain in the godly
do grieve the Spirit; Ephesians. 4.30. Res delicata est Spiritus Sanctus. Tert.
even of those who are by that Spirit sealed up to the day of redemption: Gods
Spirit is a tender, sweet, delicate thing. A tender dear friend is properly
grieved by unkindnesses: the injuries of enemies do provoke, the displeasures
of friends do grieve and disquiet. This should touch a Saint to the quick, to
grieve his If he grieve his Cemforter, who shall comfort him!
Comforter. The Holy Ghost delights to take up his habitation in a Sedate
loving spirit.

Fifthly, abatements of their Excellencies; oh what glorious creatures would
the Saints be, were it not for their pride, and for their passion, for their
love of the world, and for their impatience! Et sic in caeteris.

They would be more then men, Angels incarnate, and glorious Saints, before,
glorified. It is their distempers which do so disguise them many times, that
they are hardly known from other men. The Saints infirmities, are the dead fly
in the Apothecaries ointment; the unsavory But, Eccl. 10.4.
in their commendations; a good man, but choleric; an holy woman, but
high-spirited, etc. thus infirmities are a veyle to a Chrystians beauty, and
the flye-blow to their reputation.

Let your light shine as bright as the Sun in the Firmament, your infirmities
will eclipse them, and darken their glory.

Sixthly, darken their Evidences: sinful affections especially, if indulged,
may hinder assurance, and keep the soul under jealousies and doubtings: a
Barly-corn laid upon the ball of the eye, will hinder the sight of the Sun, as
well as a Mountain, and the least hair will cast its shadow. They are believers
infirmities, which keep them so low in comfort; and make them so often call their
estate into question; crying out with that good woeman: Genesis 24.22.
If it be so, why am I thus?

Had they not need to watch over their infirmities?

Is this a small evil in the smallest sin, that it hinders our assurance, and
intercepts between the soul and the light of Gods countenance, which is better
then life it self?

Seventhly, obstruct their influences; and, not seldom, render their endeavors
of doing good ineffectual: while the sense of their infirmities, quickens their
endeavors, the notice which standers-by take of them, hinders their success.
It is enough to the proud world to reject and scorn the meekest and counsels of
the godly, if they can observe but the least failing in them: The Saints
infirmities are wicked men's shields, whereby they fence themselves against
their holy admonitions, as if they were so many poisoned darts and arrows;
they need not reprove me, they are as bad themselves; they can do thus and
thus: as if the Saints weaknesses would justify their own wickednesses. Yea,
not only so, but to aggravate their own guilt: wicked men look upon the Saints
failings with the multiplying end of the glass which represents them in a
bigger character, then they are in themselves; and, not seldom, retort a tender
reproof with a cruel reproach; Mat 7.6.
wounding those that intend their Cure; and like swine, trampling the pearl
under foot, turn again and rent them.

As thus in general, so more particularly, Passion in the Reprover is a great
prejudice to the reproof; a man seldom does good in anger, Jam.
the wrath of man works not the righteousness of God: man's anger seldom
attains Gods righteous ends; the worst ingredient we can put into good
counsel, is wrath; partly, because passion does blind the judgment, and
discompose reason; a man in anger sees not where his advantage lies.

Partly, because anger acted beyond Scripture-limits, is not a suitable
instrument for the meek spirit of God, to use: The God of peace delights to
honor quiet and composed spirits.

Partly and especially, because the proud world will not bear it: behold they
will hardly suffer the touch of the softest and tenderest hand, (do but touch
these mountains and they will smoke;) how much less will they bear it, if ye
smite them with a rod of reproof, as Moses did the Rock, with an hear ye
Rebels? they will not endure oil to be dropped into their wounds; how will they
endure the bitter Corrasive?

In all these respects the Saints of God had need to watch over their passions;
anger is not always so just and righteous as it seems to be; we know not of
what spirit we are: As the world is ready to call zeal passion; so we are very
prone to call our passion zeal too often: and therefore it is not to be trusted
without much holy care and jealousy over our spirits, lest our goud be evil
spoken of.

Eighthly, render their Converses less acceptable to their brethren; by giving
way to their own distempers, they often become burdens to others, and to
themselves too; Jer. 20.3, 4.
very MAGOR MISSABIBS, a terror to themselves and their friends.

This should make them ride their passions with a very strict rein; lest they
transport them out into indecent excesses, and commotions of spirit; to the
dishonor of the Gospel, and the grief of the godly.

Ninthly, more infirmity, the less grace.

Tenthly, sense of infirmity, the more grace. To be sensible of the least
corruption, and to mourn over it, argues a tender conscience, and strength of
grace. A sound eye cannot endure the least mote in it, nor a tender conscience,
the least defilement: Psalm. 19.12.
Oh purge me from my secret sins.

Eleventhly, Infirmities neglected may grow to dangerous diseases; as we see in
nature, a cold neglected may grow to a burning fever; a distillation from the
head upon the lungs, if slighted, may turn to a consumption, etc. and so in the
spiritual constitution, a lesser corruption not timely resisted and mortified,
may grow to be an headstrong lust, which in the very godly shall keep grace at
an under, and make the Christian go halting to his grave. It is good to deal
with our infirmities betimes. Obsta principiis.


Twelfthly, And lastly, infirmities may bring temporal judgments upon the
Saints. Moses his passion, Number. 20.12.
made him fall short of the promised land.

David's surprise into murder and adultery, entails the sword upon him and his
family to all generations. 1 Samuel 12.10. Luke 1.20.


Zechariah his unbelief strikes him dumb for a season.

Eli his indulgence to his Sons, 1 Samuel 3.13. Cum ch 4.18.
betrays the Ark into the enemies hand, and then breaks his own neck.

David's pride in a numerous people, 2 Samuel 24.15.
costs him the lives of 70 thousand subjects. And Hezekiah his unthankfulness
brought wrath upon himself, and all Israel. 2 Chr. 32.25.

This is a startling consideration, 1 These. 1.10. Strong infirmities may bring
strong afflictions.
that though the Lord Jesus has delivered his Redeemed from wrath to come: yet
their very infirmities may lay them, and their families, under the bitter
fruits of Gods righteous displeasure in this life; God THEREBY vindicating his
own impartiality, his hatred against sin, and his unchangeable love to his
people, in chastening them here, that they may not be condemned with the world.

And thus much for the first Caution. I shall add a few more, very briefly.
Secondly, tender to your brethrens infirmities, to the Saints.
but severe to your own; this argues an excellent spirit, when a Christian
aggravateth his own failings, but extenuates other men's; when he makes
complaints against himself, but apologies for his brethren: Rom 7.24
I am a wretch sold under sin; says the Apostle of himself, But as to other
believers, Gal. 5.17.
The flesh lusts against the spirit, and the spirit against the flesh, and
these are contrary the one to the other, so that ye cannot do the things that
ye would: It is the very same apology, which our Lord Jesus made for his sleepy
disciples in the garden; the spirit is willing, but the flesh is weak. True
Saints have apologies for others, when they have none for themselves; they can
justify others while they judge themselves: the greatest fault they find is
with their own hearts. A true child of God is made up of Passion and
Compassion; passion against himself, and Compassion toward his brethren; they
condemn that in themselves, which they can excuse in another, yet not so as to
suffer sin upon their brethren. Consciousnesse to our own Corruptions, Gal. 6.1.
should make us tender of our brethren; but our love to the souls of our
brethren, should make us faithful to them. A careless passing by an offending
brother, Levit. 19.17.
is our sin, not our love; and hatred, not compassion: we should bear with one
another infirmities: yet so as to be healers and physicians, to their soul
distempers, not accessories. It is a sin, to speak of our brethren, but it is
our duty to speak unto them; Heb. 3.13. It is a blessed thing to be of an
healing, and a restoring spirit.
Exhort one another daily, while it is called to day, lest any of you be
hardened, through the deceitfulness of sin. The Lord restore this spirit to his
people in England, or else we are like water spilt on the ground, that can
never be gathered up again.

Thirdly, begin to be proud, mind your infirmities: when your parts or graces
lift up your spirits, think of your Corruptions; and say thus to your selves,
What, have I within me an hard heart, and shall I be proud? an earthly heart,
and shall I be elated? a lustful heart, and shall I be puffed up? what, shall
I be covetous and proud? passionate and proud? poor (in respect of grace) and
proud? unable to mortify any corruption, to stand before any temptation, to
perform any holy duty, and shall I be proud? especially, this consideration
added, nothing is mine own but my corruptions, my parts and graces are Gods;
concerning which I may say, as the young Prophet of his Axes head; alas, for
they are but borrowed. What have I that I have not received? and if received,
why do I glory? To be proud of that which is none of our own, is folly; but to
be proud of that which is Gods, is sacrilege. If therefore the sense of Grace
at any time lift you up; let the sense of corruption pull you down. There is
infinitely more in corruption to humble, then there is in grace to elate and
lift up the spirit.

Fourthly, Strive against your infirmities to the very death.

Object. It may be, a poor dejected soul may reply, I have striven, but I
cannot prevail; corruption rather gets ground of me, then I of corruption.

Answ. To this complaint, (besides, what I said before) I reply two things.

1. Strive still; for consider, if corruption lose no ground, notwithstanding
all thy wrestlings and conflicts, what will it do if thou give over striving?
if a man that rows against the tide, get no ground, with plying his Oars, how
will he be carried down the stream, if he strike not a stroke? This thou must
resolve on, either to overcome thy infirmities, or to be overcome by them.

Oh do not throw away thy weapons, die not like a fool with thy hands bound: It
is a kind of victory on this fide the grave, not to be driven out of the field;
De gemi pugnare.
to die fighting.

2. If thy infirmities be too strong for thee, Carry them to the cross of
Christ; remember, Victory must be fetched out of Christ's blood. This Crown is
reserved for the head of Christ, the King of Saints.

Victory is purchased, and Christ has overcome already, in his own person:
there is Phil. 3.10. Gal. 6.14. Ephesians. 1.2.
power in the death of Christ, as well as merit. And he that has overcome for
thee, on the Cross; will overcome in thee by his spirit: because greater is he
that is in you, than he that is in the world. 1 John 4.4. And therefore,
Christian, act faith upon the merit, and upon the power of Christ's Cross, and
believe down thy pride, and believe out thy passion, believe thy corruptions to
death: Faithful is he that has promised, who alse will do it. Let it not be
the reproach of the Cross of Christ, that any corruption or lust should be too
hard for it: no, there is enough, and a redundancie in Christ: only the Well is
deep, and therefore thou must bring the bucket of faith to it; and then, with
joy, thou may draw water out of this Well of salvation.

Fifthly, Be thankful, O ye Saints, and servants of God, if, upon those
scriptural discoveries already laid down, you can evidence it to your own
souls, that the remainders of corruption in your natures, are but infirmities:
that sin, of a Lord, is become a slave, and of an obeyed Sovereign, is become
a resisted Tyrant. Oh! it is matter of great thankfulness, that the dominion of
sin is broken; Although the Saints have cause to be humbled, that they have
infirmities, cause to go mourning to the very death; yet they have infinite,
cause to be thankful that they are but infirmities; no longer domineering
lusts, but base underlings, and vassals. And therefore, while the sense of
Corruption makes them complain, with the holy Apostle, Oh wretch that I am,
etc. the consideration that sin is dethroned, and remains now but as a blasted
infirmity in the soul, may cause them to triumph.

I thank God for Jesus Christ. It was the merit of his Cross, that purchased
this grace; Romans 8.3.
Christ died that sin might not live; He conlemned sin in the flesh. He
adjudged sin to death on his Cross, in his redeemed: And, by the power of his
Cross he puts the sentence into execution: Gal. 5.24.
they that are Christ's have crucified the flesh with the affections and lusts.

Hence, that security given, Romans 6.14.
sin shall not reign in your mortal bodies; it is an Exhortation, verse ^2. let
not sin reign: to show it is our duty, to bring sin to the Cross, to do
execution upon every lust; but it is a promise in the fourteenth verse, sin
shall not reign, to assure the believer, that what Christ has purchased with
his blood, he will accomplish by his Spirit: sc. the final and total
destruction of the body of sin, whereof this is the pledge and first fruits,
the dethroning of sin in the soul, so that though it be, yet it shall not be as
a Lord: sin shall not reign in your mortal bodies: for ye are not under the Law
but under Grace.

When the Lord turned again the Captivity of Zion, Psalm. 126.1, 2.
our mouth was filled with laughter, and our tongue with singing.

The redeemed soul has not less cause to rejoice, whose spiritual captivity
the Lord has turned, and made them to lead Captivity captive; 2 Timothy 2.26.
to lead captive those lusts, which led them captive before, take captive by
the devil at his pleasure.

So much for the Cautions.

I come now in the last place to close with the Comforts. Comforts to the
Saints ever their infirmities. 1. Comfort.
Amongst many take these:

1. Thy infirmities shall not prejudice thy acceptance with God. This is a
Christians comfort, Though the world either through blindness cannot, or
through malice will not distinguish between infirmities, and allowed
wickedness in the godly; yet, God both can, and will: He will distinguish
between the Gold and the dross, between the chafe and the wheat. He will not
cast away the gold, because there is some dross mixed with it: nor throw the
heap into the fire, because there is much chafe in it, if there be but some
grains of good seed. God does not cast off his people, for their infirmities,
when he finds any precions grains of sincerity and grace in them. It is highly
observable, concerning Sarah, David, Asa, Jehosaphat, etc. when the spirit of
God comes in Scripture to give us their characters, he puts a veil upon their
infirmities, and takes notice only of their graces. Genesis 17.12.
Sarah laughed through unbelief; yet, when the Holy Ghost makes mention of her
in the New Testament, he takes notice only of her obedience and reverence to
her husband: Sarah obeyed Abraham, 1 Pet. 3.6.
and called him Lord. David had two terrible falls, able to make every one that
reads to tremble: but, in his character, God only takes notice of his
integrity, 1 King 9.4.11.4, 6 14.8.
his perfection, the Universality of his obedience: He did ONLY that which was
right in mine eyes.

Asa had his failings, He was wroth with the Seer: 2 Chronicles. 16.10.
and again, In his sickness he sought not to the Lord, but to the Physicians,
ver. 12. yet in the account of his reign, you find nothing, 2 Chronicles. 14.17. 2 Chronicles. 20.35, 36.
but this high eulogie, The heart of Asa was perfect all his days: And his son
Jehosaphat contracted a wicked affinity, he left reformation imperfect, verse
33. yet, in the summa totalis, he inherits the testimony of his Fathers
sincerity. He walked in the way of Asa his Father, 2 Chronicles. 20.32.
and departed not from it, doing that which was right in the sight of the Lord.
Oh what a Cordial is this for the fainting hearts of Gods dear children,
sinking under the sense of their corruptions? When God comes to weigh them in
the balance of the Sanctuary, he leaves out their infirmities; and puts
nothing into the scales but their graces; He overlooks what is theirs, and
takes notice, only of what is his own; and so holds them forth to the world
as models of perfection.

God will not only pardon, pity the infirmities of his people. When their
infirmities are their afflictions, they be the objects of Gods Compassion. Of
all the children in the Family, the Father pitieth the weak child, the lame
child, and the sick child; when the poor child cries, Father take me, Father
help me, Father hold me, Father carry me; the Fathers bowels melt within him,
and his compassions are rolled together; Like as a Father pitieth his children,
Ps. 103.13
so the Lord pitieth them that fear him. Isa. 63 9.
In all their affliction he is afflicted, and the Angel of his presence saves
them.

When God sees a poor believer striving, and wrestling, and conflicting with
his corruptions; weeping and mourning over them, like a dove of the valley;
sighing, with the breaking of his loins, and crying, Lord help, Lord rebuke my
temptations, Lord, subdue my corruptions; pleading, and pressing the promise,
Lord, thou have said, sin shall not have dominion over me; Romans 6.14.
thou have said, I will heal their backsliding, Hos. 14.4.
I will love them freely, etc. Why now Lord, Psalm. 119.49.
Remember the word unto thy servant upon which thou have caused me to hope;
and, pressing it again and again, Behold the servant of the Lord, oh! be it
unto me according to thy word.

When God (I say) hears his poor Ephraims thus bemaoning themselves, Jer.
31.19, 20.
and smiting upon their thigh, with holy shame and confusion, reproach
themselves, thus: Thou have chastised me and I was chastised; Lord, if blows
would have made me good, I had been good long ago; I have had affliction upon
affliction, stroke upon stroke; but all this while I have been as a bullock
unaccustomed to the yoke, unteachable and untractable: thou have drawn forward,
and I have drawn backward; thou have stricken me, and I have kicked, I have
lifted up the heel against thee; and hereupon, in an holy agony, turning
Confession into Prayer, Turn thou me and I shall be turned, heal me and I shall
be bealed, for thou art the Lord my God; While thus (I say) the soul weeps, God
weeps also; Ephraim weeps before God tears of contrition, and God weeps over
Ephraim, tears of compassion. In all this affliction of the soul, Gods Soul is
afflicted, his bowels are troubled, his compassions are kindled; and, as not
able longer to refrain himself, (as Joseph once toward his brethren) he breaks
out into this passionate condolency; Is Ephraim my dear Son? Is he a pleasant
child? Is this the voice of my repenting child, pouring out his Soul and his
sorrows over his sinful in firmities? I do earnestly remember him, I will
surely have mercy upon him, says the Lord.

Thirdly, corruptions be but your infirmities, they shall be no obstruction to
your prayers. David his unbelief did not prejudice the speeding of his prayers;
I said I am cast out of thy sight, nevertheless, thou heardest the voice of my
supplication, Psalm. 31.32. Who would have thought that a prayer mixed with so
much infidelity should have the way to Heaven? But the instance in the text is
full to this purpose; it is the very design of the H. Ghost; he proves the
general Proposition, verse. 16. The effectual fervent prayer of a righteous man
avails much; by a particular instance, (it being in materia necessaria,
prayer being a duty of universal necessity) the special example of Elijah: And
it was not for his sake that it is written only, but for our sakes also, the
drift being a general encouragement, to strengthen the hands of Gods Saints in
prayer against the sense of their infirmities: That, if Elijahs prayers were of
such prevalencie with God, his passions notwithstanding, our prayers shall not
return altogether fruitless into our bosom, though we likewise be encumbered
with manifold corruptions; it was not so much the dignity of Elijah his person,
as the integrity and uprightness of his heart, which rendered his prayers
acceptable with God. He was an eminent Prophet indeed, but he was (...) of like
passions with us. The infirmities of our nature, shall not prejudice, the
fervency of prayers. Prayer is still of as much potency with God as ever. There
may be less of miracle in our answers, then there was in Elijah's; but there
will be as much of love: surely, returns of prayer are not the fruit of our
merit but of Gods free grace; they do not depend upon the worth of the
supplicant, but upon the merit and intercession of our surety: Numb. 14.12.
And if Moses, a servant prevailed by his intercession for an whole Nation
notwithstanding their rebellions; how shall Christ the Son prevail with his
Father for his dear Children notwithstanding their infirmities? Ephesians. 1.6.
He has made us accepted in the Beloved.

Lastly, Fourth and last Com.
The time is coming (and it hastens apace) when infirmities in the Saints,
whether natural or sinful, shall be perfectly cured: death will be an absolute
cure, death will be the death of all your corruptions. Now they do not reign,
blessed be God, then they shall not live: now they be but slaves, Hewers of
wood, and drawers of water; (the infirmities of the Saints find them hewing
work, and weeping work;) the time is coming when they shall not be; the time is
coming when the Saints shall rest from their labors, and all tears shall be
wiped from their eyes. Here is good news for the conflicting servants of God.

They shall not always pray in vain, nor strive in vain, nor wrestle in vain;
God will not always be wanting to their faithful endeavors; And, truly, now
he is not wanting, but they are not always so sensible of his presence and
assisting grace with them in their conflicts, but the time is hastening when
they shall weep no more, and sign no more; when they shall have no more cause
to complain. Oh! my pride; Oh! my passion, and, Oh! my love of the world; and,
Oh! my hypocrisy; and, Oh! my unbelief, etc. But, when they shall stand upon
the shore, and see all these Egyptians lie drowned and choked in the red Sea of
Christ's blood; singing the song of Moses and of the Lumb. Unto him that loved
us, Rev. 15.6.
and washed us from our sins in his own blood and has made us KINGS and
Priests, unto our God and his Father; to him be Glory and Dominion for ever and
ever, Amen.

In the mean time, let the sense of corruption, set the Saints alonging for
that day; Corruption will never be totally destroyed till this mortal put on
immortality. This cursed leprosy of sin is so soaked and penetrated into our
natures, that it will never be got out till the walls of the house, be pulled
down; Washing and rubbing and scraping will not serve the turn, but the whole
structure of nature must be demolished: the body of sin and the body of flest
must be buried in one grave.

And therefore, Let the Redeemed of the Lord rejoice in expectation of this
day; Rev. 22.20
let them lift up their heads with joy, Phil. 3.20.
because their redemption draws nigh; and having their conversation in
Heaven, let them look for the Savior, (...).
the Lord Jesus Christ, who shall change THESE BODIES OF VILENESS, these
vessels of rottneness and impurity, to be like to his glorious body. Surely, I
come quickly, (says the Bridegroom,) let the Spirit and the Bride say, Come;
even so, Come Lord Jesus.

To God only Wise, be Honor and Glory for ever and ever, Amen.

FINIS.

