Gods Rising, HIS Enemies Scattering; Delivered in a SERMON Before the
Honorable House of Commons, At their Solemn Fast, 26. October. 1642. But,
through many occasions and hindrances, not Printed till this 25. of May 1644.
By Thomas Case, Preacher, at Milk-street, London, And one of the Assembly of
Divines.

ISAIAH. 33.10. Now will I rise, says the Lord: Now will I be exalted, Now
will I lift up my self.

LONDON: Printed by J. R. for Luke Fawn, and are to be sold at his Shop in
Paul's Churchyard, at the sign of the Parrot. 1644.

Die Mercurii. 26. Octobris.
IT is this day Ordered, by the House of Commons, That Sir William Brereton, do
return thanks from this House, to Mr. Thomas Case, for the great pains he
took in the Sermon he preached at the entreaty of the said House; at St.
Margarets in the City of Westminster, this present day of public Humiliation;
And that he be desired to Print his Sermon. And it is Ordered, that no man
shall presume to Print it, but he who shall be authorized under the said Mr.
Tho: Case, his handwriting.

H. Elsyng, Cler. Parl. D. Com.

I Authorize Luke Fawn, to Print my Sermon.

Tho: Case.

TO THE HONORABLE and truly Noble, his worthy Friend, Sir William Brereton,
Barronet Commander in Chief, of the Parliaments Forces in Cheshire.
SIR,
IT was by your hand I received the commands of that Honorable House, whereof
your self are a Member, to Preach and Print these poor labors, long since;
and therefore I hope I am so much the more capable of your pardon, if by the
same hand, I crave the adva^tage to present the^ to their favorable
acceptatio: together with my humble Apology, that I come so extremely late
with the tender of this service: occasio'nd partly by the conscienciousnes of
mine own weakness; and partly by the crowdes of intervening distractions;
through which at length I have forced my way, that I might no longer lie under
the suspicion of neglect to their Commands. To this, divine providence has
added a new encouragement and and advantage, and that in reference to your
self; while in the interim of this necessitated suspension, some of these
notions (lying by me) served to celebrate In a day of thanksgiving kept at
Laurence Church London, for that purpose. Feb. 5. 1643.
that great Victory and Deliverance (amongst many others) which God gave into
the hands of your fidelity and Zeal, against that formidable Army of Rebels,
at Namptwitch in Cheshire: so that now at length they come forth not as the
Work only, but as the blessed return and fruit of a day of prayer; then the
travel, now the birth (or celebration) of a great, yea of many great,
Deliverances, and Victories. So that concerning this Text and Sbject you may
sing with the Church, Psalm. 48. As we have heard, so have we seen: What you
heard from this Text, and Sermon while you were here, that you have seen since
your undertaking of this eminent Service for God and the Kingdom; Namely, that
Gods Rising time is his Enemies Scattering time, his haters stying time; while
in 22. Conflicts with the Enemy, you have bin Honored with 18. Victories: all
which, notwithstanding, that you got not by your own Sword, neither did your
own arm save you, Psalm. 44.2.3.
but Gods right hand, and Gods arm, and the light of his countenance, because
he had a favor to you, and to those poor bleeding Counties; this may a
bundantly evidence, that in all these blessed successes, you have had no other
Artilery, but what you have wrested by main strength of that Arm, out of the
hands of those proud daring Rebels; and so David-like have you cut off Goliah's
head with his own Sword: and the surviving Enemy may complain Heu patior telis
vulnera factameis. Certainly Sir, among all those Worthies who have been
engaged in these Battles of the Lord of Hoasts now in these latter days, there
is none that have seen more of God, then your self have done; and without
flattery I speak it, I verily believe none have observed God more in the
passages of his providence then your self. This, as it has been your wisdom,
and a Perspective glass to discover the love of God to you, for whosoever is wise,
Psalm. 107. last.
and will observe these things even they shall understand the loving kindness
of the Lord, So Sir, let it be both an encouragement, and engagement, to carry
you on in this Service, with invincible courage, and resolution.

It may be, after all the hazzards you have run, and the exhausting of so fair
a livelihood, as Providence had bequeathed you, in your Country and Kingdoms
service; and a long attendance here, you shall not return so accomplished, as
might answer your merits, or the just expectation of those gallant spirits
which have accompanied, and served you in this Design.

But let it not dishearten you, you return not without the amplest expression
of the Parliaments affection, and Cities esteem, that these draining times, can
possibly reach to: And let me tell you this; your second Expedition, cannot be
so unballa'st of second causes, as your first was; which yet you may Christen,
1 Samuel 17.12.
as Samuel did his Victory over the Philistines; EBEN-EZER, hitherto has God
helped.

I must confess Sir, your adventure seems somewhat like that, of that Regulus.
gallant Roman, who taken prisoner by the Athenians, and trusted upon his
honor to go to Rome, and procure a peace, between the Romans and them, or
else to return to his imprisonment; upon the failing of that design, scorned
life and liberty, in respect of his honor, resolving to return to death and
torture at Athens, rather then to outlive his honor at Rome.

But Sir, the more your hazard is, the greater is your honor. When poverty,
and obscurity, exposes it self to a doubtful danger, for public safety, it
is no great matter; miscariage it self, to a desperate condition is the cure of
it is misery; what is it for lepers, hunger-starved lepers, to adventure on the
enemies? If they kill us, 2 King. 7.4.
we shall but die, if we sit here, we shall die, if we enter into the City, we
shall die by famine; This is not resolution but necessity: but for one without
the verge of danger, to interest and hazard himself, in a public reseue of
Religion, and Country, is a character of true Fortitude.

Me thinks, I hear those bleeding Counties, cry unto you, Josh. 10.6.
as once the Gibeonites to Joshua; Slack not thy hand, come down quickly and
save us: and I know there is a Joshuahlike spirit, both of compassion, and
valor beating in your veins.

It was a life-breathing Motto, which the Israelites gave to God in their Wars.

(...) " Who among the gods is like unto thee, Psalm. 86.8.
Jehovah! While their Soldiery, before their joining battle with the enemy,
encouraged one another thus, Trust in him, who is the Savior of Israel in
affliction: And this day thou fightest, Judge. 6.14.
pro confessione unitatis divinae; Therefore thou may carry thy life in thy
hand securely: Words worthy to be engraven upon the palms of the hands, of all
those, whither Commanders, or Soldiers, that fight the Lords battles.

But what shall I need to multiply words? Sir, you have expressed too much faith
and resolution, to be out-dared by any difficulty in the cause of God, and
your Country.

Go, therefore, in this thy might, thou mighty man; have not I sent thee, says
God? And let the sword of the Lord, and of Brereton, be as dreadful, as once
the sword of the Lord, and of Gideon, that you may smite your enemies as one
man.

Sir, while you are fighting abroad, this shall be the prayer of him, (among
thousands) at home, who humbly craves leave to let the World know he is,

Your humble servant, in all Gospel-Offices: Tho: Case.

Gods Rising, HIS Enemies Scattering.
PSALM. 68.1, 2. Let God arise, and let his enemies be scattered, let them that
hate him, flee before him.


THis Psalm is a Song of triumph, composed by David; that is clear from the
Title, To the chief Musician, or the Master of Music, a Psalm, or Song of
David, composed and sung upon their day of Thanksgiving, for the bringing home
of the Ark, (that Sacrament of Gods presence) from the house of Obcd-Edom, and
the settling, and fixing of it in its own place, in the midst of the Tabernacle
which David had pitched for it; of which you may read; 2 Samuel 6.17, this is the
most probable conjecture of the best Interpreters.

In this Psalm, as he does Historically celebrate the many famous victories and
spoils, wherewith God had graciously and even miraculously crowned his
Government (and so the Argument of this Psalm is the same with the 60. Psalm)
So also Prophetically he does celebrate the happiness and glory of the
Evangelicall Church, under the government of the Lord Jesus Christ, rising from
the dead, spoiling the Kingdom of sin and Satan, and leading captivity captive;
for upon that triumph does the Apostle expound some passages of this Psalm, in
Ephesians. 4.8.

The Psalmist begins his Song with the words which Moses used, Verse. 35.
when the Ark set forward, Numb, 10.35, 36. And it came to pass when the Ark
set forward, that Moses said; Rise up, Lord, and let thine enemies be
scattered, and let them that hate thee, Verse. 36,
flee before thee. And when it rested, he said, Return, O Lord, unto the many
thousands of Israel: Which words Moses leaving as a model of prayer, and a
prop of faith to all succeeding generations, were most proper for David's
purpose, in bringing home the same Ark into its resting place.

And he uses these words by way of prayer and triumph, petition and
thanksgiving;

Wherein is contained such choice provision, had I skill to dish it out unto
you, as though it be a fasting day, would present you with a spiritual feast
for soul repast.

I must not stand to Analyze the Psalm, that which entertains us at the very
threshold, being of such fullness, and variety, as the straits into which the
distractions of this day does cast us, will hardly suffer to take a taste of
every particular.

There offer themselves to our view, Observations from the words.

First, The Church of God ever had, and will have enemies and haters: For
against these, does the Psalmist arm himself and the Church, with this Prayer.

Secondly, The Churches enemies are Gods enemies; they that hate the Church,
hate God. Thine enemies, them that hate thee.

Thirdly, God sometime seems to sleep, or lie still, and let these enemies and
haters do what they will for a season: this also is implied; He to whom we say,
Arise, is either asleep, or lies still.

Fourthly, There is a time when God will arise.

Fifthly, Gods rising time, is the enemies scattering time, his haters flying
time.

Sixthly, It is the duty of Gods people, to pray him up, For these words are
both a prayer and a triumph, as they are used both by Moses and David.

You see, I have prepared more work, then I shall be able to finish, in the
time allotted me for this service.

Give me leave therefore to preface but a little upon the three former; And I
will sit down upon the three latter in the main body of my discourse.

The Church of God has Enemies, Haters. When she was in her Infancy, and in so
narrow a compass, two first Parents of the world, had yet but two sons, (of
whom the Scripture takes notice) one was the Church, the other an enemy; the
one a Saint, the other a malignant; 1 John 3.13:
an hater, that hated him even to fratricide.

As the Church multiplied, her enemies multiplied also; yea so over-multiplied
her, that in the 74. Psalm, ver. 19. it is but one poor Turtle-dove, against a
multitude of wicked; enemies, haters.

Lo, yonder you may see heaps of them gathered together, Psalm. 83.6, 7, 8. The
Tabernacles of Edom, and Ishmaelites, of Moab, and the Hagarens, Gebal, and
Ammon, and Amaleck, the Philistines, with the Inhabitants of Tire, Assure, and
the children of Lot. Evil Beasts enough, one would think, to have devoured one
poor Turtle-dove.

In our Saviors time they were grown into a world-full of enemies, Joh. 15.19.
The world hates you.

If any should demand with Pilate, Why, the Church done? She may answer with
David; Psalm. 69.4,
They hate me without a cause, It is a causeless enmity and hatred, the Lord
knows.

But if you will have a cause, Christ himself: Joh. 15.19.
Because you are not of the world, but I have chosen you out of the world,
therefore the world hates you. There is a secret malignancie in the men of the
world (as there was in Cain) to see others chosen, and beloved of Christ, and
themselves rejected.

If you would dig to the root of this venomous hateful weed, Gal. 3.16.
you shall find it to be the same seed, which the old Serpent has spawned
into the children of disobedience: The true Church and the Malignant, are
begotten and born of a contrary seed, the seed of the Serpent who is the
Devil; and the Seed of the Woman, which is Christ; and these hate one another
with the purest hatred, because their principles be most contrary and most
active: The one of God, who is sum activus as the Schools speak, a pure
simple act, most vigorous and operative; and the other of Satan who in the
highest sphere of created beings, is a most subtle and active Spirit.

The principles of hatred in all other creatures, are of a far lower and duller
mould and motion; and their Antipathy and hatred is nothing so immortally
mortal; these hating, and hated of one another, not only to death, but in
death, and beyond death to all Eternity.

Use.
I would commend from this obeservation, Cavtion. There is no time then for
Gods people to be secure, since they live among Enemies and Haters: and the
nearer they meet in their Relations, the more is the enmity and hatred intended.

So you shall observe there is no such enmity between man and the Bruit
Creatures, as there is between man and man; Among men, there is no such enmity
and hatred between Heathens and Christians, as there is between Christians and
Christians; among Christians, no such antipathy between Papists and
Protestants: as there is between Protestants and Protestants: At this day no
hatred so mortal, no Enemies, so Irreconcilable as the Malignant Protestants,
and those whom they scorn by that New-name, Rowndhead, that poor despised
party that stand up for Reformation; The Protestant indeed.

The reason is because the nearer men meet in aliquo tertio, in their
relations, or Profession, and yet differ, as in the Principles of their Natures
(as before) so in the Nature of their Principles or opinions, the more reproach
and odium they conceive, that difrence reflects one upon another: and so the
more impatient and implacable are they rendered: Contraries the nearer they
come together, the more eminent is their difference, and the greater their
conflict and contention.

This puts the people of God into a dangerous posture, the malignant party
always having made the major part in the World, in the Christian World, and
yet it is wonderful to consider, how hardly Gods people are brought to
entertain real and seasonable thoughts of the worlds desperate and devilish
intentions toward them. Is it not with them as it was once with Gedaliah, when
Intelligenct by Jonathan the son of Kareah of a bloody Massacre contrived
against him, and the poor Jews under his command; he would not believe it, but
for his pains gives him the lie.

Thou speak falsely of Ishmael. Ier. 40.13.16.
Were it not a strange folly in a people, to let Lions, and Bears, and Wolves,
and Leopards, run up and down in the streets, and highways, unchain'd, and
unmuzled, and say, Ier. 5.6.
they will do no harm? And has not God branded Malignant Spirits with these
names in Scripture? What a strange security has seized upon us? Surely the
children of the world are wiser in their generations then the children of
light; would they have dealt so beleevingly with us, had they had us at that
advantage that we have had them? Did they when they had it? Innocence you know
is credulous, but credulity is not always innocent; It is a noxious weed
though it grow upon a good soil: I wish it may not be suffered to grow too
rank.

We do somewhat, but it is not till our Enemies force us to it, when we must
either kill, or be killed.

We do somewhat, but it is by halfes and peece-meals, what they do they do in
earnest; we do as if we were in jest; Do we bestir our selves to save, as the
Enemies do to destroy? It is well we have a God, or else our security and
slenderness of spirit would certainly undo us; and had undone us long before
this time. Be instructed Oh England lest Gods Soul depart from thee; Ier. 6.8.
for if while we trust and spare them, we be found to tempt and weary God, we
way expect to hear that sad News from heaven that Ahab did:

Because you have let go out of your hands a people whom I have appointed to
destruction; 1 Kings 20.24.
Your Kingdom shall go for their Kingdom, and your lives for their lives: Now
the Lord awaken our Spirits to a timely prevention of such a doom, and divert
it from us.

I come to the second Doctrine.
The Churches Enemies are Gods Enemies, they that hate Gods people, hate God
himself.

There is hardly any language more frequent in Scripture, Psalm. Psalm. 21.8.
21.8. thine hand shall find out all thine Enemies, thy right hand shall find
out those that hate thee.

Psalm. 83.2. Lo thine Enemies make a tumult, and those that hate thee have
lift up the head; Why, wherein did they show themselves the Enemies and haters
of God? It follows, ver. the third: They have taken crafty counsel against
thy people, and consulted against thy Hidden ones, and said, Come let us cut
them off from being a Nation, etc. Their Malignant Counsels against Gods
people, was nothing else but a paraphrase of their malice against God himself,
for so yet it follows more expressly, verse. the fifth: They consult together
with one consent, they are confederate against thee: thee and thine, them and
thee go hand in hand.

The Grounds of this may be,

First, mutual interest that God and his people have one in another, Master,
and Scrvant, Father and Children, Husband and Wife, Head and Members, these are
the usual titles by which this mutual relation is expressed in Scripture, (and
among all the members of the body the tenderest is chosen to express the
interest that Gods people have in his compassion and love, The Eye, Zech. 2.8.
He that touches you, touches the apple of mine eye: The least violence will
offend that member; what is done to the Eye, presently is at the Heart: wicked
men cannot hate gods people, but God must needs be very sensible of it; they
cannot be Enemies to them, but they must be Enemies to God himself: Especially
since they are found by our Savior not only to hate them in these relations,
but for these relations, not only being the Servants and Children and Spouse,
and Members of Jesus Christ, but because they are so; because ye are not of
this world, but I have chosen you out of the world, John 15.19.
therefore the world hates you: Because, that is crime enough, that they
belong to Jesus Christ.

Secondly, The Quarrel: Thou have given a banner to them that fear thee, that
it may be displayed because of the Truth, Psalm. 60.4.

A Banner is the Emblem of Victory, Victory implies Battle, but what was the
Quarrel? The truth; The truth of Doctrine; The truth of Religion; The truth of
Discipline, The truth of Government, in all these God is as much or more
concerned then his people; Truth is, the Truth of God, and God is the God of
Truth; and thefore they that are Enemies to Gods people for the truths sake,
are Enemies to God himself; they that hate them for the truths sake hate God
also whose truth it is, look into all the Battles of the Church since Christ's
time to this day, and you shall find the Quarrel to have been somewhat about
Christ himself: While Christ was yet upon the Earth, the Quarrel was about the
Birth of Christ: in the next ages the Quarrel was about the Person of Christ,
in the succeeding Age, concerning the Natures of Christ, then about the Offices
of Christ, And now in our days about the life and Government of Christ.

In a word, the first battle that ever was fought, was in heaven, Between
Michael and his Angels, and the Dragon and his Angels. And look what the
Quarrel was there, the same you shall find it ever since; though fought in a
lower ground, and that is, Who shall be God?

I will be God said the proud Angel, my throne shall be above the Throne of
God; And so says Antichrist unto this day, I will be God, it is his very
Character, in 2 These. 2.4. He opposes and exalts himself above all that is
called God, or that is worshipped, so that he as God sits in the Temple of
God, showing himself that he is God. And this is the language of every wicked
man; he that says I will not, when God says do, he that says I will, when
God says do not; (Oh do not this abominable thing that I hate) he says by
interpretation I will be God: Oh did you but understand the blasphemous
language of sin, you would not suffer it to harbor one hour longer in your
bosoms: the truth is, the Enemies of Gods truth and people would not only have
the Sword off from Christ his thigh, the Scepter out of his Hand, the Crown off
from his Head, but his very life out of his heart; not un-scepter him only, but
un-essence him, If sin and sinners could help it, God should be God no longer.

And now Christians, they that are Enemies to Gods people upon these terms,
are they not Enemies to God himself? They that thus hate the Saints, do they
not hate also the God of the Saints?

Use.
If this be an invincible truth, then

First, The more have they to answer for, that show mercy to these Enemies of
the Church and people of God, since God is concerned in the Quarrel more then
they; If the sons of Belial, that are risen up against the peace and safety of
the Kingdom, were our Enemies only, we might use our discretion, and make
what accommodation we please; 1 Kings 20.41.
but if these be Sheba's the sons of Bichri who are risen up against David, yea
against him who is the Son and Lord of David, in that obstinate and implacable
rebellion; crying, Nolumus hunc regnare, come what will on it, This man shall
not reign over us, then surely we cannot compound the matter as we please,
without wrong to Christ's Crown and danger to our own Heads.

Secondly, Then the more hopes we have, Job. 9.4.
they shall not stand long: who has hardened himself against God and prospered?
As Jezebel said, when Jehu came in at the gates: 2 Kings 9.31.
Had Zimri peace who slew his master? So may I say, Had Cain peace who slew his
Brother? Did Pharaoh prosper who hardened himself against God? Had Saul peace
who persecuted righteous David? Did Judas prosper who betrayed his Master? Did
Julian prosper who blasphemed Jesus Christ? Have the Enemies of the Church
prospered? No surely, Why? because they be Gods Enemies as well as the
Churches. Enemies to Christ his Kingdom, as well as the Churches peace; whose
doom is long since past and shall be in due time executed.

And those mine Enemies that would not have me reign over them, Luke 19.^^.
bring them hither and slay them before me. Surely this day of vengeance is in
Christ's heart, and their judgment slumbreth not, is not the sound of its feet
at the very doors?

They think they are wise and trust in their help. Isa. 31.2.
But he also is wise and will bring evil, and will not call back his word, but
will arise against the house of the evil doers and against the help of them
that work iniquity.

Thirdly, The more warrant and encouragement have we to set upon God for their
destruction; a mighty advantage in prayer. There is a question, Whether we may
pray for the destruction of our Enemies or no? This Doctrine will resolve it.
When they are our Enemies only, and sin Ignorantly, seducedly, then, Father
forgive them they know not what they do: Luke 23.34. Act. 7.60. 2 Kings. 6.17.


And, Lord lay not this sin to their charge.

Then, Lord open the eyes of these men, with the prophet, that is, Lord
convince them, Lord convert them, is becoming langvage for Christians:

But when they discover their sins as Sodom, when they make it apparent to all
the world, that if there be a God, in heaven, they hate him, if a Christ and a
Gospel, they are sworn irreconcilable Enemies to both, and that they sin
Seducingly, and out of malicious wickedness; Then,

O Lord God of hosts the God Israel awake to visit all the Heathen, be not
merciful to them, Psalm. 59.5.
to them that sin of malicious wickedness, make their Nobles like Oreb and
Zeeb, Psalm. 83.11, 12.
yea all their Princes as Zeba and Zalmunna, who said, let us take to our
selves the houses of God in possession.

O my God make them like a wheel, 13.
and as the stubble before the wind;

As the fire burns the wood, 14.
and as the flame sets the mountains on fire.

So persecute them with thy tempest, 15.
and make them afraid with thy storm.

Fill their face with shame, 16.
that they may seek thy Name O Lord.

Let them be confounded and troubled for ever, 17.
yea let them be put to shame and perish.

Pull them out like sheep for the slaughter, Ier. 12.4.
and prepare them for the day of slaughter.

Set thou a wicked man over him, Psalm. 109.6,
and let Satan stand at his right hand.

Where he shall be be Judged, (though truly our Enemies will save us this
labor; for they pray not at all, they deride and geere at prayer, blaspheme
the Spirit of prayer, yea they themselves have turned their prayers into sin,
prayers into curses, and forgive us our trespasses into fearful and desperate
invocations of Damnation: in which case the Prophet fears not to follow them
home with Curses: 17.
As he loved cursing, so let it come unto him; as he delighted not in blessing,
so let it be far from him. 18.
As he clothed himself with cursing like as with his Garment, so let it come
into his bowels like water, and like oil into his bones, etc.) I say, when
they be Gods Enemies, and profess themselves so to all the world, then, such
expressions as these will be no breaches to the law of charity, nor blemishes
in the prayers of Gods people.

Provided that we look to our hearts, that we be upright in this matter, and
that the enmity that these men bear, and the blaspemy they belch out against
God, affect us more then the slaughter and persecution they breath out against
our selves. Peradventure ( said Jacob) my father will feel me, and if I seem to
him as one that mock, I shall bring a Curse upon me instead of a blessing.

If God see us pretending his wrongs, but intending our own, cursing them as
his Enemis, but hating them only as our own, we shall translate their curse
upon our own heads.

Otherwise, if God see our hearts deeply affected with, and bitterly afflicted
for the Insolences and Violences done to his Name and Glory; as we need not be
afraid to pour out such vials of wrath upon them (for the vials of wrath are
nothing else but the prayers of the Saints, showred down in storms of
vengeance upon the head of the wicked) so, there cannot, Revel. 8.4, 5.
be an argument of greater advantage to prevail with God for their destruction,
then when a people, or person can demonstrate this to God in their prayers,
that whom they pray against are Gods Eenemies, as well as their own, that their
hatred is not so much against them as against God, Psalm. 44 22.
and that for his Names sake they are killed all the day long. Truly, make
this appear, and we may be silent in our own Cause; God is concernd in it more
then our selves.

And truly our Enemies themselves will teach us this wisdom; It is, and has
been from Ancient times, the cursed policy of desperate Malignant Courtiers,
and Counselors, when they would Arm Princes and Potentates against the poor
people of God, to possess their ears and hearts with this prejudice, That they
are Enemies to Monarchy, Traitors and Rebels to the Crown and Dignity of Kings
and Princes.

So did of old, Rehum the Chancellor, and Shimshie the Scribe, (a couple of
Arch Malignants) labor to bring the Jews into disfavour and odium with
Attaxerxes, as you may read in that Scandalous Libell, or letter, Ezra. 4.8.
they writ to Babylon.

Be it known unto the King (said they) that the Jews which came up from thee to
us, are come to Jerusalem, 12.
building the rebellious and bad City, etc. Be it known now to the King that if
this City be builded, 13.
and the wall set up again, then will they not pay toll tribute and Custom, and
so thou shall endamage the Revenue of the King. And so again. Let search be
made in the book of the Records of thy fathers, Verse. 15."
so shall thou find in the book of the Records, and know that this is a
rebellious city, and hurtful to Kings and Provinces, and that they have moved
Sedition within the same of old time, for which cause was this city destroyed.
We certify the King that if this city be built again, etc. 16.
by this means, thou shall have no portion on this side the River.
With such jealousies did the Enemies of God, and his people in the neighbor
nation of Scotland labourd to possess his Majesty toward those his loyal
Subjects there. They were represented to his Majesty as Traitors, and Rebels,
that intended nothing else but to un-crown, and un-King him, when power should
be in their own hand.

And is not the same Design practiced upon his faithful Parliament, and
Subjects here in England? Do not these Rehums, and Shimshies fill his Royal
ears with this odium, That the Parliament, and the Puritans are enemies to
Monarchy, and intend nothing but to bring all into a Parity, and after they
have pulled down Bishops, then down with King too; with a world of such
calumnies, invented by the father of lies. Truly the land is not able to bear
their words.

This is their policy; for these mediums they know are most proper to render
themselves gracious to Sovereignty, and the people whom they would trample
under feet, odious and unsufferable, Kings being jealous enough, of what ever
may endanger their Crowns, limit their Power, or eclypse their Glory.

But as it is the policy of malignants, so it is their wickedness too; they
lie when they use these Arguments to Kings and Princes. The God of truth knows
they lie: And the Father of lights open the eyes of the Kings and Princes of
the Earth, in his good time, to see how much they are abused, as well as their
subjects, that that prophecy and promise may once be made good: The Governors
of Judah shall say in their heart, Zach. 12.5.
the Inhabitants of Jerusalem shall be my strength, in the Lord of Hoasts
their God.

Those that I had once thought, had been my worst enemies, and traitors, I see
now are my best friends and subjects. The Lord hasten this in his time.

But Brethren, in the mean time, though the enemies of Gods people, lie when
they use this argument to Kings and Princes; Gods people shall not need to fear
the lie, when they use this argument against their enemies to God; for they be
Gods encmies as well as the Churches, and they hate God as much, and more then
they hate his people, Enemies to the Crown and dignity of the Lord Jesus, King
of the Church; (himself being witness) they strike at God through his peoples
sides; And therefore if you shall plead this Argument, with suitable affections,
you may with an humble considence, expect that God will take it well at your
hands, and take such order with your enemies, as shall make for your security,
and the advancement of his own Sovereignty; God being more jealous, and more
righteously, of his crown and dignity, then any of the Monarchs of the Earth
can be of theirs, who are but his Deputies; hear him else; I am the Lord, that
is my Name, Isa. 42.8.
and my glory will I not give to another. God cannot endure a Rival in his
Kingdom. But I have staid too long upon this, I must hasten forward, to the
third Doctrine.

God for a season, seems sometimes to liE still, and sleep.
This is the occasion of all those awakening cries, which Gods people make in
his ears.

Awake, why steepest thou? arise cast us not off for over. Psalm. 44.23. Arise,
O Lord, let not man prevail. Psalm. 9.19. Arise, O Lord, save me, O my God:
Psalm. 3.7. And arise, O Lord, plead thine own cause. Psalm. 74.22. So here, Let
God arise, etc.

These expressions be so frequent in the Psalms, and else where, that they
need no Quotation.

The Church comes to God, as the Disciples once came to Christ, when he was
asleep in the ship.

Awake Master, why sleep thou, Mark 4.38.
carest thou not that we porish? God has his Ends in it, and these may be
some of them, briefly.

First, That he may see what his enemies will do. (we speak after the manner
of men) The Master sometimes makes as if he slept, to see what the servant will
do, when such and such advantages lie before him. If God were always up, and
discovering himself in the world, the thousandth part of that rage, and enmity,
that is in the seed of the Serpent, against the seed of the Woman, Christ and
his members, would not show it self; they would certainly bite it in.

But let God hold his peace, and make as if he did not see; let him suspend the
execution of his righteous and dreadful judgments for a time in the world,
then the cursed malignity, and venom that is in the spirits of wicked men, will
discover it self to purpose: They will rage and storm, plunder and imprison,
deflowre virgins, ravish women, murder, burn, destroy, and exercise all the
cruelty, and villainy that the wit of malice can invent; lie, swear, and
forswear, curse, blaspheme, and even dare the God of heaven to do his worst. In
a word, then the Atheism and villainy that is in their spirits will break out
like a stream of wildfire, devouring all that stands before it. Like a Wolf,
when the Shepherd is out of the way, or laid down to sleep, then falls a
worrying, and tearing the poor sheep, and tender lambs.

The encouragement to all this villainy is, Gods lying still;

They break in pieces thy people, O Lord, and afflict thine heritage. They slay
the widow and the stranger, and murder the fatherless.

What is it that emboldens them to all this villainy? It follows: They say, The
Lord shall not see, neither shall the God of Jacob regard it.

The enemies of God, that are up in arms against him, and his people in this
Kingdom, have put such blasphemous Glossee upon this Text, that if David were
alive, he would be afraid to read his own Text in Paraphrase. Surely, because
sentence against evil doers, Eccles. 8.11.
is not spcedily executed, therefore the heart of these sons of men (or
rather these sons of Belial) is fully set in them to do evil.

They take Gods silence, for Gods consent; because he holds his peace, Psalm.
50.21.
they think he is altogether like themselves. But he will reprove them, and
set their sins in order before their eyes: And surely in that order, there
will be nothing else but confusion: And this may be the meaning of those words
of Simeon to Mary; Luke 2.35.
A sword shall pass through thine own soul, that the thoughts of many bearts
may he revealed; that is, God would leave his own dear Son, in the power of
men, and make as if he were asleep, and did not see, that so the secret
hypocrisy, and atheism, and villainy that was in men's spirits, might fully
discover it self; That Is the first Reason.

Secondly, Hos. 5.15.
God does this, that he may see what his people will do.

I will go and return to my place, till they acknowledge their offenses, etc.

I will see whether they will confess, and mourn, and repent, and humble
themselves, and pray, and wait, and keep close to God, and stand for him, and
venture their Liberties, Estates, and Lives for Jesus Christ and his Gospel;
Whether they love father and mother, son or daughter, or any thing in the
world more then me:

Yea Brethren, God seems to sleep, that they may not sleep; he seems to sleep,
that he may awaken them out of the sleep of security; he seems to lie still,
that he may raise them up; he lets the cradle of his Providence stand still a
while, till the children cry, and then he bestirs himself with the tender
hearted mother.

Thirdly, he does this, that so we may see what he will do. Stand still and
see the salvation of God. God seems to sleep, that so his enemies may go on,
and gather themselves together, and so he may bring them all into an Ambush,
and destroy them together. Gods sleeping time, is nothing else but his enemies
Ambushing-time.

There are two famous places for this, Josh. 11.19, 20. speaking there of the
Nations, the Text says; Josh. 11 19, 20.
There was not a Nation that made peace with the children of Israel, save the
Gibeonites, why? For it was of the Lord, to harden their hearts, that they
might go against Isracl in Battle, that they might be destroyed, and find no
mercy. God suffered them to gather together, that so they might be destroyed
together, and save Israel a labor in pursuing and slaughtering them in too
many places. There is a prophecy of the like Providence in the fourth of Micha
11, 12, 13. verses where you shall find God using the same Stratagem; It shall
come to pass, that many Nations shall gather together against Sion, (one poor
little Sion) that in all natural probability, was not able to have raised
strength enough to have waged war with one Nation; behold many Nations
associate against her, armed with fury; as well as with power; For so you hear
them insulting and threatening: (...) Insultabimus, or per metathesin, (...)
adultera est, punietur.
Let her be defiled, and let our eye look upon Sion. Let her be defiled, or
lapidetur, let her be stoned; which was the proper punishment of Adulteresses,
and so some read it; She is an adulteress, or unclean, defiled, and therefore
let her be stoned, put to death; so they palliat their cruelty with the
garment of Justice, as if they came but to execute Gods Commission, so
Rabsheka, Isa. 36.10. Am I now come up without the Lord, against this land to
destroy it? The Lord said to me, go up against this land and destroy it. They
pretend Justice I say, but they betray malice and hatred in the very next
words; Let our eye look upon Sion; (i. e.) let us delight and sport our selves
in the desolation of Sion; they promise to satisfy both their lust and cruelty
at once upon Sion: and what should hinder them? God seems to be asleep all this
while, and there is but one Sion to many Nations; one would surely give Sion
for lost, that should see her beset with such multitudes of Armies, and her God
stand by and say nothing all this while. Oh but says the Prophet, let them
alone, fear them not, let them come when they will; They know not the thoughts
of the Lord, they know what they mean, they know not what God means. They
little know what a design God has upon them: stand still and see the
Salvation of God, for says he, God all this while is but laying an ambush for
them, and when he has them at the advantage you shall see what work the Lord
will make with them: Verse. 13.
for he shall gather them as the sheaves into the floor: Arisc and thresh, O
daughter of Zion: For I will make thine horn iron, and I will make thy hoofs
brass, and thou shall beat in pieces many people: They had thought to have
thrasht Sion, but Sion shall thrash them. They had thought to have destroyed
Sion, but Sion must destroy them; God arises and bids Sion thrash them: Lay on
Sion; spare them not; till thou have beat them to dust; I will stand by thee,
and strengthen thee to do execution to purpose upon these Enemies, and haters
of God and Sion: I will make thine horn iron, and thy hoofs brass, thou shall
hold out till thou have utterly consumed them. The sum of all you have, Isa.
1.28. The destruction of transgressors, and of sinners shall be together. God
lets them go, and gather themselves together, and then when they think they are
ripe for their Designs, God finds them ripe for his; and destroys them at
once.

All the use I shall make of this, O you that are the Lords remembrancers, Isa.
62.6, 7.
give him no rest till he arise, etc. For that very purpose has God set you
upon the wall, that when he seems to sleep, you should come and awaken him, and
give him notice of the approach of the Enemy, and cry him up to the rescue of
his Church and people; Arise, O Lord, least man prevail, etc. This is your very
calling, you that are the Ministers of the Gospel, and people of the Lord; Give
him therefore no rest until you have raised him out of his holy habitation,
and till he has made Sion the praise of the whole earth, It is our sin and
folly that if God seem to be a sleep, we go to sleep too, if God be down, we
are down also, either in security, or despair; What mean you oh sleepers?
arise and call upon your God, etc. and awaken him with your importunate cries,
Let God arise, etc. But so much for that point, I come now to the fourth
Doctrine, which is this;

God has a time wherein he will awake and arise, promise from Gods own mouth;
Isa. 33.10.
Now will I arise, and often in Scripture elsewhere, etc. And the servants of the
Lord dare believe him upon his word, Psalm. 102.12. Thou will arise and have
mercy upon Zion, God promises it, and they believe it, and dare not do
otherwise.

Now that which I shall endeavor to do, in the managing of this precious truth
shall be these four things, viz.

First, to open to you the meaning of the phrase, what it does import, and show
you, what it is for God to arise.

Secondly, I shall show you what these Nows or times are when God will arise,
and when his people may expect that he will exalt himself in their behalf.

Thirdly, The Grounds of it, why God will arise.

Fourthly, I shall improve it according to the seasonablenesse thereof.

First, What it is for God to arise, I will arise, etc. does like himself, but
he speaks like man, for the infirmity of our flesh; this I shall desire you to
carry along with you, while I open this expression to you, for which purpose
take this in General; look whatsoever this phrase does import amongst men, you
shall find in Scripture the same things are attributed unto God, and God does
assume them to himsef when he does arise for the deliverance of his people; Now
this expression amongst men (namely) to arise, That is, to arise to the
undertaking of some work, as the Encountering with, and the Conquering of an
Enemy, as here it does imply six or seven gradations, and you shall find them
all in Scripture to be attributed unto God.

First, arise amongst men, in the first degree of it does implie an opening of
the eyes, a man cannot arise till he be awaked: and this very thing you shall
find attributed to God, God himself uses the expression, Exodus 3.7, 8.
I have surely seen the affliction of my people, etc. God has seemed for some
hundreds of years together, to have been asleep, and all that while to have
taken no care what became of his people, in Egypt, therefore the first news of
Deliverance comes to them in this language, God is awaked and has seen your
affliction, etc.

Secondly, a taking of counsel: Counsel is nothing else, but the awaking and
raising of the Intellectualls to any undertaking, and this also God does assume
to himself: You may hear him calling all his Enemies to take notice of the
counsel which he took against them. Ier. 49.20. Therefore hear the Counsel
of the Lord, that he has taken against Edom, Ier. 49.20.
and his purpose that he has purposed against the Inhabitants of Teman; Surely
the least of the flock shall draw them out: Surely he shall make their
habitation desolate with them, and so Chap. 51.11. there God speaks thus; My
devise is against Babylon, to destroy it: this is the second step of Gods
vengeance, God had opened his eyes to see the opressions of his people in
Babylon, (as formerly in Egypt) and now God calls (as it were) a Council of
War, how he may execute his vengeance upon Babylon; The vengeance of the Lord,
the vengeance of his Temple.

Thirdly, resolution, a man is up when his spirit and resolutions are up; Isa.
14.24, 25, 26.
and this is attributed unto God also; as I have thought, (says God) so it
shall stand: God had a long time lain still, and then they began to trample God
and his people under foot, and God is resolved to bear it no longer, therefore
faith he, This is my purpose, I am determined what to do, I will cast the
Assyrians out of the Land.

Fourthly, Rising amongst men, preparing and making ready for war; preparing
men, moneys, Ammunition, and all other manner of warlike Artilleries, 2 Samuel
3.21.
says Abner to David; I will arise, and go and gather all Israel together,
that is, I will prepare them for war, and thus God is expressed; Psalm. 7.12,
13.
If a man will not turn, he will whet his sword, he has bent his bow, and
made it ready, he has also prepared his instruments of death, etc. Hear, and
tremble, and desire the people of God to pray for you, (if there be any of the
enemies of God, and his people here this day) you are all dead men, God has
whet his sword, and bent his bow, and made it ready against all that are up in
Arms against him and his people, how can you escape?

Fifthly, Another step or gradation, in man's, rising, in the sense mentioned
is, The putting on of the Armor, the harnessing of himself for the Battle:
Then is a man up, when he has put on his clothes; and then is a Soldier up,
when he has put on his Armor: and this also is spoken of God by the Prophet,
in Elegant language (as he was taught by the holy Ghost) And he looked, and
there was no man, Isaiah 59.17.
and he wondered there was no Intercessour, therefore his own Arm brought
salvation, etc. He put on the garments of vengeance for clothing, and was clad
with zeal, as with a cloak. Thus you see God armed, from head to foot, then woe
be to his enemies, for it follows; Verse 18.
According to their deeds, accordingly will he repay fury to his adversaries,
recompense to his enemies, to the Islands he will repay recompense.

Sixthly, It does imply a Marching toward the enemy: David spoke unto the
General, Arise and pursue him, lest he get him walled Cities; and escape us,
etc. 2 Samuel 20.6.
And this is the word that is proclaimed before the Lord of Hoasts: Be silent,
O all ye Nations, for God is raised up, Zach. 2. ult.
out of his holy habitation, etc. It is not said, God is risen up in his holy
habitation (he had done this before) but the Lord is raised up, out, etc. He
is gone forth, he is upon the March, going toward the Enemy; Thou did march
through the Land in indignation, and then is he risen indeed. Hab. 3.12.
There is but one gradation more to perfect it:

Seventhly, And that is, a Joining with, the Enemy in Battle; and this is
attributed unto God also. He will arise against the house of the wicked: Isaiah
31.2.
And if God and the enemy be once at it, you may easily know who will have the
best. What David sung of Jonathans Bow, and Saul's sword, may much more be
celebrated of God, 2 Samuel 1.22. From the blood of the slain, and the fat of the
mighty, the Bow of Jonathan turned not back, and the sword of Saul returned not
empty. When once God has drawn his sword, he will not put it up, before he
has drawn the blood of his Enemies. Isaiah 27.1.
In that day the Lord with his sore, and great, and strong sword, shall punish
Leviathan, etc. When God has drawn this Sword, and closes, and fights with
his enemies, then there is nothing to be expected but the execution of that
vengeance threatened. Therefore thus says the Lord, Ezekiel. 25.13.
I will stretch out my hand against Edom, and will cut off man and beast from
it, and make it desolate, etc. Thou did march through the Land in
indignation, Hab. 3.12.
thou did thresh the heathen in anger.

This is the highest, and last step in Gods rising; when he has made all
preparations, and marches toward them, and not only faceth them, but joins
battle with them. Now all these things, God does two ways.

First, second causes, as in the place last quoted; I will execute all my
vengeance by the hand of Israel, etc. and when God does a waken his people, and
furnish them with weapons of war, for their own defense, and for the executing
of his vengeance upon their enemies; what they do, God himself is said to do,
because it is, both by his Commission, and in his strength.

Secondly, immediately himself, by his own Arm. Isaiah 59.17.
I looked, and behold there was no man, so mine own Arm brought salvation, and
my righteousness that sustained me, etc. So did God arise, and go forth for
the deliverance of his people; when by one Angel he slew a hundred fourscore
and four thousand, Isaiah 37.36.
in one night, of his enemies.

Thus you see (in part) what it is for God to arise, and what it does import,
namely: The opening of the eyes. The taking of counsel. The putting on of
resolution. The preparing of Artillery, and weapons of death. The putting on of
Armor. The marching toward the Enemy, and The closing with them in Battle.


All which God does, either by his people, when he fills them with resolution,
and strength; or when he does it by his own more immediate Arm.

Now for the second Quaere, sc. what those nows be, those times, when God will
thus arise, and exalt himself, in the scattering of his enemies.

I find in Scripture, ten special nows, or seasons, when God will thus arise.

First, When God hears his people sigh and groan, Awake, why sleep thou?
arise O Lord, Psalm. 44.23.
cast us not off for ever: Wherefore hidest thou thy face, etc. ut sup. So, God
has engaged himself by promise to arise for their rescue, Psalm. 12.5.
For the oppression of the poor, and sighing of the needy, Now will I arise,
says the Lord, and set him in safety, from him that puffs at him. The people
of God sigh, and cry under their insupportable burdens; in the mean time their
oppressors puff at them, and laugh them to scorn, and think to swallow them
up with open mouth, says God. Now will I arise, and set them in safety, etc.
Isa. 52.5, 6.
And again, Now therefore what have I here, says the Lord, that my people is
taken away for naught, and they that rule over them make them to howl, says
the Lord, etc. Therefore my people shall know my Name. I Will bear it no longer.

Secondly, Another now, when God will arise is, When the enemy does arise in
his pride, and begins in his own conceit to be more then man: When Pharaoh
asked, Who is the Lord, that I should let Israel go, then God arose and made
him know to his cost, who he was. Pharaoh knew no God but himself; but says
God, I will make him know another God above him, before he and I have done. For
this very purpose, God is said to be terrible to the Kings of the earth, and
cuts off the spirits of Princes. The Kings of the earth and Princes of the
world, if God let them go on and prosper in their desperate designs for a
time, they will not acknowledge him to be God, but think to carry out with an
arm of omnipotence, till God comes upon them, Dan. 4.31.
in a terrible manner, and cuts off their spirits, and lays them for dead at
his feet; that they may know that the most high God rules in the Kingdom of
men. The Church was glad of such an opportunity to awaken God up to her aid
Psalm. 9. vlt.
Arise O Lord, that the Heathen may know themselves to be but men, as if he
should have said, Lord, these proud Heathenish Tyrants think they are so many
gods; they know no God, but their own strength, and their own wisdom, etc, But
Lord do thou arise, and make them know that they are but dying men, and that
thou only art the living God. And so elsewere, God in this case (sensible of
this affront) how emphatically and angerly he speaks to that proud Prince of
Tyrus; Eze. 28.6.9.
When his heart began to swell above the thoughts of a man, thus says the Lord
God, because thou have set thy heart as the heart of God, behold therefore, I
will bring strangers upon thee, and they shall draw the sword against thee, v.
9.
thy beauty and thy wisdom shall depart, etc. And in verse. 9. God jeers the
Tyrant thus, will thou yet say before him that slays thee, v. 10.
I am God? but thou shall be a man, and no God in the hand of him that slays
thee; When the sword of the Executioners of my vengeance is in thy bowels, will thou say I am God? I will make thee change thy voice before I have done; I will
make thee know I am God, and thou but man, when thou shall die a base and
ignominious, death, the death of the uncircumcised.

A third Now is, when the people of God are persecuted for Gods sake, when God
and truth and Religion is the only quarrel; Psalm. 44.22.
and this Argument does the Church plead for her self, For thy sake are we
killed all the day long, we are counted as sheep for the slaughter, as if they
should have said, it is true Lord, we are not so good as we should be, but
truly the Enemies do not persecute us because we are so bad, but because we are
no worse: The quarrel is, That we are thine, and desire to stand for thy
Cause, v. 23. v. 26.
and for thy truth; And therefore upon this consideration she bottoms her
petition, and doubles it, verses 23, 26. Awake, why sleep thou, O Lord?
arise, cast us not off for ever, ver. 26. Arise for our help and redeem us for
thy mercies sake: And as upon this ground the Church beggs, Isaiah 66.5.
so upon the same God promises her Deliverane; Hear the Word of the Lord, ye
that tremble at his Word: your brethren that hated you, that cast you out for
my Names sake, said, let the Lord be glorified, but he shall appear to your
joy, and they shall be ashamed, because they were excommunicated and exiled;
and reproachfully used, for no other reason but because Gods Name was called
upon them, God promises to stir up himself and appear for their Redemption;
Psalm. 60.4.
And this promise you find made good, Thou have given a banner to them that
fear thee, that it may be displayed, because of thy truth: Because the people
of God stood up for the Truth of Doctrine, and Discipline, for the truth of
Worship and pure Ordinances, therefore God gave them a banner, that is, for
deliverances and victories, over their Enemies, fresh and frequent occasions of
triumph and joy: Because the truth of God was precious in their eyes, therefore
their lives were precious in Gods eyes.

A fourth Now of Gods rising is, when the Enemies grow outrageous and
unsatisfiable in cruelty, See that place, Isa. 33.8. Isa. 33.8.
The high ways lie waste; the wayfaring man cease: he has broken the
covenant, he has despised the Cities, he regards no man. See there how the
enemy in his pride and cruelty had laid all waste, the land before him was a
Garden of Eden, Behind him a desolate wilderness there was no pity nor
humanity left in him; says God it is time for me to arise, If I sit still,
they will not leave me one that fears my Name alive to praise me; I will hold
no longer. I will arise: and that you may know God is in good earnest, he
trebles it. Now will I arise, Now will I be exalted, Now will I lift up my
self. Esther 7.8.
God seems to ask that angry question, that Ahashuerus did concerning Haman.
What will he force the Queen before my face? So says God, What will they
plunder and burn and tear up women with child, and dash the childrens brains
against the stones and devour all before my face, and shall I let them alone?
Nay, I will arise, and cut them off in the midst of their rage and madness
against my people.

Fifthly, Psalm. 74.22.
God usually suffers it not long at their hands, therefore the Church takes
that hint of calling out God to her succor, Psalm. 74.22.
arise Lord, remember how the wicked men blaspheme thee daily, three times this
Argument is used in that Psalm. q. d. Lord if our peace, and lives, and
comforts were only concerned in this matter, we would have held our peace; but
lord thy Glory lies at stake, wicked men take occasion from thy Patience and
long-sufferance to blaspheme thee to thy face; v. 18.
do thou not hear how the foolish men rail upon thy name, and reproach thee
daily? And what will thou do for thy great Name? Oh forget it not Lord, Forget
not the voice of thine Enemies: v. 23.
the tumult of those that rise up against thee, increases continually.

Sixthly, in a helpless condition, and if he do not rise, they must of
necessity fall, and if he do not appear they must perish: Deuteronomy. 36.32.
when he sees their power is gone; and there is none left, and when he sees
they are like to be swallowed up by the devouring Enemy, then he will arise:
Then the Lord shall Judge his people, and repent himself concerning his
servants.

Seventhly, When God sees his people deeply affected with, and afflicted for,
the sufferings of the Saints, when they lay to heart the sorrows and
sufferings of Zion, This is an hour when God will arise: Psalm. 102.17.
Thou will arise and have mercy upon Zion, Why? Oh says she the set time is
come, I but how knew she that? She will tell you, For thy Servants take
pleasure in her stones, and favor the dust thereof: The prophet observed how
the people of God behaved themselves, when the Churches were in misery, he
could see them every where wringing their hands, and mourning for Zion, crying
out; alas for Zion, this is Gods bebeloved Zion, whose stones ly in the dust,
and she in her blood, etc. says God, I can forbear no longer. If I hold my
peace and do not arise and deliver them, these poor children will cry their
eyes out of their head, and themselves to death.

Now I will arise, etc. But, Eighthly, accept of their punishments: that is,
Levit. 26.41.
when under the afflictions that lie upon them, they are sensible of divine
displeasure; 1 King. 8.47.
turn in upon themselves, labor to find out the Josh. 17.17.
accursed thing, the Achan that troubles Israel; acknowledge the equity of Gods
dealings; Nehe. 9.33.
justifying God and judging themselves. Yea not the Equity only, but the Ezra.
9.13.
moderation and indulgence of Gods proceedings, in laying the affliction far
beneath the provocation: and in conscience of offended justice, labor to Mich.
7.9.
submit and ly down at Gods feet; study Gods meaning, and labor to answer his
expectation; to Mich. 6.9.
hear the rod and him that smites: when I say God sees his people in such a
posture, God has them where he would, and then says God; I will remember my
Covenant with Jacob, Levit. 26.42.
and also my Covenant with Israel, and also my Covenant with Abraham will I
remember: and I will remember the land. Gods remembrance is a part, a degree of
Gods Rising, when God says he remembers and sees the affliction of his people,
it will not be long before he march forth for their Salvation; as you saw
before.

Ninthly, cordially and conficentiously engaging themselves unto him in a sure
covenant to reform their ways, and walk closely and humbly with their God;
When they are like the Doves in the valleys, weeping and mourning over their
backslidings and apostacies from God, and then come to join themselves with
God in a perpetual Covenant, Isa. 63.8.
that shall not be forgotten, Now will I arise says God, etc.

Surely these be my people, children that will not lie. etc.

I see these people coming to join themselves in Covenant unto me in good
earnest; they are my people, and now I will be their God: They are my people
that will not lie to me, and I will be their Savior that will not fail them; I
will deliver them. I will be their Savior.

Tenthly, A tenth time of Gods rising is; When his people are preparing a place
for him to rest in: Arise, O Lord, cries David, Psalm. 132.8.
into thy resting place both thou and the Ark of thy strength.

When the house and worship of God is filled with pollutions and abominations,
such as his soul hates; God withdrawes himself; You may see a sad Emblem of it
in Ezekiels vision, Eze. 20.4.
where God first removes himself from between the Cherubims, to the threshold
of the house; and from thence unto the Mountains, etc. Chap. 11.24.
(by such steps and degrees does God depart from a people;) and the reason of
this departure is given, Chap. 8. where you shall find with what hidden
Idolatries they had filled the Temple. Thus when there is no place for the soles
of Gods feet to tread upon by reason of defilements, and pollutions in every
place, Ier. 12.7.
says God, I have forsaken my house, I have left mine Heritage.

But now when the people of God arise, and bestirre themselves to cleanse the
House of God with Hezekiah; 2 Chro. 29.16.
and to carry out all the uncleanness, and to sanctify it according to the
Laws and Ordinances thereof; when they have made it a fit resting place, for
so holy a Majesty, Yea while they are doing of it with their whole heart; while
they are yet upon the resolution, as verse. 3.4, 5.

Verse. 3. Surely I will not come into the tabernacle of my house: nor go up
into my bed.

Verse. 4. I will not give sleep to mine eyes: or slumber to mine eyelids. V.
5. Until I find out a place for the Lord: an habitation for the mighty God of
Jacob; I say while they are thus resolving for God, they may comfortably
invite, and expect Gods presence; arise, O Lord, into thy resting place, and
God will make his way through the midst of his Enemies, Verse. 18.
to come and take possession, and say; This is my rest for ever, here will I
dwell, for have desired it.

And thus you have the second thing undertaken in this Doctrine. sc: the Nowes,
or Times, when God will Arise.

The third thing propounded are the Reasons.

Which I will but touch upon and proceed.

I could give you diverse in reference to 1. The Enemy. 2. The Church and people
of God. 3. God himself.


But that I may not be burdensome; because I have hinted something already to
this purpose on the third Doctrine; I will but point at two that respects God
himself, and given by God himself, in that, Isa. 33.10. Now will I rise says
the Lord, Now will I be exalted, Now will I lift up my self. There you have a
twofold reason, given in a twofold cause. The moving cause and the final
cause; The moving cause, I will; and the final cause, I will be exalted; I
will lift up my self. Gods will, there is the ground; Gods glory, there is the
end; God will do it because he will do it: The same good will and pleasure of
God that moved God to Ephesians. 1.5.
Elect them; the same good will and pleasure of his, moves him to do all his
works in them and for them. God will not let his people lie under the Tyranny
and Cruelty of his Enemies for ever; Psalm. 125.3.
The rod of the wicked shall not rest upon the Lot of the righteous: It may be
upon them, and it may lie upon them; but it shall not rest upon them. God will
not suffer wicked men to reproach his people and blaspheme his Name for ever:
Ezekiel. 20.
I will rise, says God, I will work for my Names sake; There I say is the
moving Cause. And then,

I will be exalted; I will lift up my self; All the while that God seems to be
still, he is not known in the world, the wicked they begin to insult and
trample upon him, and dare him to his face, as it were, to do his worst: Where
is their God? 2 Pet. 3.4.
And where is the promise of his coming? And let him make speed and hasten his
work that we may see it; and let the Counsel of the Holy One of Israel draw
nigh and come, that we may know it. Isa. 5.19.
Thus the Enemies do tempt and provoke God to their own destruction.

And truly his own people do notknow him nor magnify him, nor set him up, as
they ought, by sanctifying him in their hearts, by trusting in him, and waiting
for him; Isa. 8. Hosea. 8.2.
so much is employed in that promise: Israel shall cry unto me, My God I know
thee. Israel had thought she had known God before, but she did not; Israel
shall cry, My God I know thee.

Thus that God may be known in the world, both by friends and foes; that the
Enemies may know him, to their Confusion, and Israel may know him, to their
Consolation; That God may be Somebody in the world; God has times to Arise for
the rescue and deliverance of his people:

Now will I Arise, Now will I be Exalted, Now will I lift up my self. God will
be known to be himself, and all the world shall acknowledge it. Number. 14, 21.
All the earth shall be filled with the glory of God.

This shall suffice to have pointed at for the Reasons.

I should come now in the fourth place, to make some Use of this; But to
expedite my work, I shall step on to the fifth Doctrine, and then we will
improve them both together.

The fifth Doctrine therefore is;

Gods rising time, Let God arise, and let his enemies be scattered, let them
that hate him, fly before him.

Let us fly from the face of Israel, Exodus 14.25.
cried the Egyptians, for the Lord fights for them, against the Egyptians.

It must needs be so;

For God and wicked men cannot endure one another, as you see in the Text, and
God Psalm. 11.5.
hates them; As God once said of the three wicked shepherds.

My. Zach. 11.8.
soul loathed them, and their soul loathed me. As the proud Angel turned
Devil, got as far from God as he could go, so do wicked men: There is that
Antipathy between them, that cannot bear one another presence; Therefore say
they to the Almighty, Job 21.15.
depart from us, for we desire not the knowledge of thy ways: And if they
cannot endure Gods presence, as a Teacher, how will they endure his presence as
a Judge? If they cannot abide his presence, as a sin-reproving God, how will
they abide it as a sin-revenging God? Surely that presence of God is so
unsupportable, that you may hear them willing to exchange it for the burden of
rocks and mountains, Revel. 6.16. They said to the Mountains and Rocks, Revel.
6.16.
fall on us, and hide us from the face of him that sits on the throne, and
from the wrath of the Lamb. And as they cry to God, Depart from us, so God,
when he arises, he answers them in their own language, and speaks to them in
his wrath; Depart from me: and this is their misery, they have the first word,
but God will have the last: Matthew. 7.23.
Depart from me ye workers of iniquity. Unhappy caitive that ever he was born,
unto whom that shall be the last word God will say, Depart from me.

You will say perhaps, that is in the day of Judgment, when Christ comes to
reveal himself in flaming fire, 2 Thessalonians. 1.7, 8.
rendering vengeance on them that do not know him, etc.

Truly, these Rising times of God, are Gods Petty-Sessions; days of
Judgment, Psalm. 9.7.
wherein the Thrones being prepared for Judgment, he will make inquisition
for blood; for the blood of his people, causelessly, Verse. 12.
and cruelly spilt by the enemies; and surely even of these lesser days of
Judgment, the Psalmist speaks as well as of that last and great day:

The ungodly shall not stand in judgment, Psalm. 1.7.
nor sinners in the congregation of the righteous.

Gods rising time, is their scattering, their flying time.

But how do the enemies of God know when God arises, He being the invisible
God?

God makes them to perceive his rising and approach toward them, sometimes in
a secret, sensible and terrible manner.

And that partly by some Inward impressions upon their spirits and consciences.
Outward demonstrations, apparent to their senses.


First, Sometime by some inward and secret impressions, convictions, and
self-condemnations seizing upon their consciences.

This being the unhappiness of all wicked men, and haters of God, that though
they have murdered their consciences, in respect of the instigative, and
directive Office of conscience, they cannot kill it in respect of the accusing,
condemning, and executing office of conscience. Though they have killed
conscience as a Preacher, they cannot kill conscience as a Judge and
executioner; or if they have wounded, and seared conscience so, that it seems
to lie dead for a time, yet this is their misery, when God awakes, conscience
will awake too, when God arises, conscience revives, to take Gods part against
them, and that in a double reference.

First, In reference to their persons; conscience will arise, when God arises
to tell them that they are none of Gods, as you see in Cain; conscience began
to misgive, sad and ominous forebodings there lay upon his spirit, that God had
chosen his brother, and rejected him; conscience began to tell him, that God
hated him, and that was the ground of his malice against his brother, and
against God too: And so it is with wicked men, the haters of God, when God
arises against them: As God gives his children some praelibations, and
praegustations of his love, and of that glory to which he has ordained them,
sealing them up to the day of redemption; so God gives his enemies some
prae-apprehensions, and fore-tastings, some secret earnests, and impressions of
his wrath, and final rejection, sealing them as it were up to eternal
perdition. Oh says their consciences, God hates me; Oh that I were above God,
etc.

Secondly, In reference to their cause; they that have shut their eyes against
the light, and would not be convinced by the Ministers of God, of the
wickedness, and hellishnesse of the cause they undertook, when God awakes, and
conscience awakes, then they begin to confess it: Oh says Judas, I have
sinned in betraying innocent blood; and so will wicked men; yea, so have some
of the enemies of God been heard to confess, when they have lien gasping of
the wounds they have received in the Battle; Oh we have a damned cause; Oh
said a poor dying wretch in the West to our Soldiers, As soon as we saw you,
our hearts failed us, for we know our cause is damned. There is an hand of
divine truth, and justice in it, making good that threatening, Isaiah 26.11.
Lord, when thine hand is lifted up, they will not see, but they shall see, and
be ashamed. They that will not see to timely repentance, shall see to final
shame and confusion. In a word, this is the thing I say, The enemies and haters
of God, may, and do, sin away a sin-preventing conscience, but they cannot sin
away a sin-condemning, a self-executing conscience; when the command cannot
find a conscience, wrath will find a conscience, the curse will find a
conscience, and this will be the worm that never dies. I have heard of a poor
wretch, that lived an Atheist all his life, and when he came to die, conscience
began to revive, and he to cry out, Oh what will become of me, if there be a
God? Unhappy man is he, that ever he was born, who concludes himself undon, if
there be a God.

And thus God makes his enemies, perceive his approach, by some inward
impressions upon their spirits.

Secondly, he makes them perceive it, by some outward demonstrations, liable to
their very senses:

As 1. By the stupendous acts of his power and providence, which God puts
forth for his people, before their eyes; as the dividing of the Red Sea, and
cutting off the waters of Jordan, etc. See what tremblings and shaking terrors,
this caused in the hearts of the Canaanites, Josh. 2.9, 10.

2. By some ominous forerunners of wrath upon the enemies, sometimes making
them to hear the noise of multitudes of horses and chariots, as he did the
Syrians, 2 Kings 7.6. Sometimes taking off their wheels, and troubling their
host, as he dealt with the Egyptians in the Red Sea; At other times, smiting
the enemies with blindness and madness, as the Sodomites, and threatened,
Zach. 12.4.

3. Sometimes, by putting a majesty and dreadfulnesse on his people, Cant.
6.10. Who is she that looks forth as the morning, fair as the Moon, clear as
the Sun, and terrible as an army with banners. If she be so, Psalm. 14.5.
when she is in her nuptial habit, her brides attire; what, when in her
Martial accoutrements. There were they in great fear, because God is in the
generation of the righteous. God let out some beam of glory upon his people,
and presently the enemy fell a trembling.

4. By arming the very inanimate creatures against them; Sun, Moon, and Stars,
fire, hail, storms, tempest, earth, water, the whole Creation, all pressed to
fight the battles of the Lord of Hoasts.

5. By raising the spirits and courage of people above themselves, to
Lion-like, Angel-like prowess, and unconquerablenesse of spirit; so that he
that is weak among them, is as David, who slew the Lion, and the Bear; and he
that is as David, becomes like the Angel of God, who went out and slew an
hundred fourscore and five thousand in one night. Surely, when the Spirit of
God comes upon his people, Armies, and legions of Armies are not able to stand
before them, as you may see in Jephtah, Gideon, Samson, David, and other the
Worthies of the Lord of Hoasts they cry; Let us flee, for the Lord fights for
Israel against Egypt. They perceive God filling the spirits of his people with
invincible courage, and taking their part, and betook themselves to their heels.

Objection. But is this all the effect of Gods Rising, that the Enemies shall
be scattered only, and his haters put to flight? shall they escape by flying?

Answer. No sure; This expression implies more then a bare flight; For you know
in war the Routing of the Enemy is the first degree of their ruin; when they
begin to fly they begin to fall; Psalm. 18.37, 42.
when once they turn the back, and break their ranks, they can make no
resistance, and then the Armies of God, and the God of Armies pursues them,
slaying and beating them down with a great destruction, as David describes it.
I have pursued mine Enemies, and overtaken them: neither did I turn again till
they were consumed.

Verse. 42. Then did I beat them as small as dust before the wind: I did cast
them out, as the dirt in the streets. And therefore David desires, no more but
to see his enemies retreat and loose ground, and begin to fly; he is then
confident of the victory, Psalm. Psalm. 9.3.
9.3. When mine enemies are turned back, they shall fall and perish at thy
presence. Do they fly? Nay then I am confident, they shall fall and never rise
again.

So that in a word, Hab. 3.8.
flying is but put Synechdochically, for their total and final perishing and
destruction, it must needs be so; for sure they must fly fast, whom God, when
he rides upon his Horses and Chariots of Salvation, cannot overtake.

I come now to the Use, 1. Consolation, or, Encouragement. 2. Exhortation, or,
Engagement.


The first use shall be for Comfort or Encouragement, for are these Gods Rising
times? and is Gods Rising time the Enemies flying time? Then hence for our
Encouragement, we may take notice what time of day it is, though as yet we
cannot see the Sun of Righteousness fully risen in our horizon with healing in
his wings, yet we may make some hopeful conjecture and gvesse, that it is
about Sunrising: Our God is Rising, yea already upon his March.

Look over else all those ten Nowes, or Times wherein God has engaged himself
to rise for his peoples Deliverance, and tell me which of them do you find
wanting upon our Times?

1. Do not the people of God in diverse places of the Kingdom (as in other
parts of the Christian world) sigh and groan under their unsupportable burdens
and oppressions?

Surely the cry of the poor and needy, that are plundered and stripped naked of
their subsistence, the cry of the poor captives, that are made to serve the
lusts and cruelty of the Enemies of God in their own houses; the cry of the
fatherless children and widows, Lam. 5.9.
who are wandering up and down in peril of their lives to seek, bread to
relieve their souls, because of the sword of the wilderness; the cry of
violence and oppression, but above all, the cry of Blood is gone up to heaven,
James 5.4. Genesis 4.10.
and cries in the ears of the Lord of Sabbath: For if of one righteous Abels
blood God said unto Cain, The voice of thy brothers blood (bloods in the
Hebrew) cries unto me from the ground; If every drop of Abels blood had a
tongue to cry to God for vengeance, then how much louder does the blood of more
innocent persons then Abel had drops of blood in his body, powered out in
England and Ireland, like water upon the ground, cry in the ears of a
righteous God against the Fratricidious, yea and Parricidious Caines of our
times; Vengeance, vengeance?

From heaven has the Lord beheld the earth, Psa. 102.19.20. Our prisoners at
Oxford.
even to hear the groaning of the prisoners, etc. his poor hunger-starved
prisoners; many of whom have given up the ghost for want of bread; and others
that surviue, forced for hunger to rake the gutters and sinkes of their
merciless enemies for a little stinking food to relieve their dying souls.

Surely all these sighs and groans have forced their way into Gods presence
long before this time, Though men do not hear, friends cannot, and Enemies will
not; yet God does and will hear from the height of his Sanctuary.

Secondly, In the mean time does not the Enemy carry himself, as if he were
more then man? Surely, They are corrupt and speak wickedly concerning
oppression; they speak loftily, they set their mouth against the heaven, and
their tongue walks through the earth. Psalm. 73.9, 10.
They will do this, and they will do that; and they will make the proudest of
them stoop; Yea, have not some of them lately, as if they had been God, taken
upon them to threaten the poor besieged people of God with Eternal fire? Who
yet within few hours after, as the Psalmist speaks, died like a man; slain, as
it is conjectured by the hand of a child.

Thirdly, But thirdly, are not these enemy and haters of God grown to a
strange and unheard of height of cruelty! Surly, the very merceis of these
wicked men ar cruel. Plunderings and firings, and downright murders, are
mercies with this Generation (of men shall I say? or incarnate Devils?) Oh when
the stories of these Wars in Ireland and England shall be reported to the
world, posterity shall read and look pale, and be astonished and ready to give
up the Ghost for anguish of spirit; Yea Turks and Infidels shall hear and be
ashamed to see themselves so out-bid in cruelty, by them that call themselves
Christians, and that one upon another. The land before them is as the Garden of
God, and behind them like a desolate Wilderness.

Fourthly, And weat is the Quarrel all this while, is it not Religion and the
Truth of God? The truth of Doctrine, the truth of Discipline, the truth of
Worship? May not the Parliament, and the Parliaments friends cry to God; For
thy names sake, O Lord, are we killed all the day long? Surely had not the
Gospel, and the Government of Jesus Christ been precious in their eyes, they
might have compounded for their civil Liberties upon infinitely cheaper terms
then it has cost them already, and yet the Lord knows what it may cost them
more! but whatever it is, or may be, Happy England and happy they in England;
that can say, For thy sake, O Lord are we killed all the day long. Woe to them
to whom God will say, when they ly gasping of their wounds, Ier. 2.17.
Have thou not procured these things unto thy self? and stand and laugh at your
calamity and mock when your fear comes. Prove. 1.26.


Fifthly, But in the next place, are not these Enemies, and haters of God as
Blasphemous against God, as they are outrageous against his people? You have
heard of their blaspemies, I dare not repeat them, I tremble to think of them:
Their blasphemous imprecations of Damnation upon themselves, are grown now to
be their hope, their oath now with many of them is, as they hope to be damned;
and it is nothing now with them to drink healths, to the confusion of the
Roundheads Parliament: unless they may now also (I know not how to utter it)
drink healths to the confusion of the Roundheads God, many other blasphemies I
could tell you of, which the Devil may happily invent, but I dare say, he
dares not vent, for he believes and trembles, neither of which these Belials
do. Rabshecah was a punie, and might have gone to chool to Oxford, to have
learned to blaspheme, of these monsters who have there taken many degrees in
this black hellish art: but I could wish they might be cast into the pit from
whence they came, that the ears of posterity might never be defiled nor
offended with the report of such unheardof cursednesses.

Sixthly, In the midst of all these blasphemies against God and violences
against Gods people, are not, or at lest, were not the true Protestant party
that cleaves to God and the Parliament brought very low? Oh how low before the
beginning of this Parliament? When the proud imperious Enemy had all the power
both of Common and Martial Law in their own hands, and not a man found that
durst open his mouth against them, but were presently clapped up close prisoners,
or sent into banishment, etc. How low have we been brought, and that more then
once, since the Parliament sat, and since providence has put defensive Arms
into our hands? How often have I seen men with their hands upon their Loins, and
pains take hold of them, as upon a woman in travel? How often have many even of
our most discerning Christians, given all for lost, meditating, and preparing
for flight! How often have we concluded of our selves, (in fits of unbelief) as
those captives in Babylon, Ezekiel. 37.11.
Our bones are dried, and our hope is lost, we are cut off for our parts? The
Lord pardon and help our unbelief for Christ's sake.

Seventhly, However yet Sion and her stones, Jerusalem and her afflictions,
(wherewith the Lord has afflicted her in the day of his fierce anger) finds
compassion in the eyes and hearts of gods people; while they are ready to bring
forth, not only their silver and gold, but have been contented to spend and to
be spent, to engage state, blood, lives, and whatever is dear unto them for the
recovery of Zion out of the dust; witness the Well-affected of this City, who
have bled themselves almost into a consumption, to fill Sions veins; and
witness our Dear Brethren of Scotland, who have put their lives in their hands
to come forth to the help of the Lord, to the help of the Lord against the
mighty. What means all those frequent days of humiliation, both in public
and private, that are kept in this City, and other parts of the Kingdom,
where the Wild bore rages not? Doubtless either they are bestowed upon the
breaches and wounds of Sion, and Gods dishonours, or else we are guilty of the
deepest hypocrisy that ever people were; in which case woe, woe unto us.

Eighthly, In these also, do they not profess to accept of the punishment of
their Iniquities: Justifying God, judging themselves; enquiring into the cause
of that fierce wrath, that smoakes against us; and laboring to quench it with
their tears, wrestling with God for grace to answer his expectation.

Ninthly, And have not both Nations joined themselves to the Lord in an
everlasting covenant, never to be forgotten?

Tenthly, And is not one main design in that Covenant David's vow and Oath to
the Lord, Psalm. 132.2.
that they will not go into the tabernacle of their house, nor go up into their
bed, that they will not give sleep to their eyes, nor slumber to their eyelids
till they have found out a place for the Lord, an habitation for the mighty God
of Jacob.

Surely beloved Christians, if the people of God be but as cordial in what
they do, as the Enemies of God and his Christ are in their designs; if the
people of God be but as sincere as they are busy and active, there is not one
of all these Nowes marked out in Scripture for Gods Rising to the help and
salvation of his Church, but it is to be found upon us and our times, in a fair
and Legible character.

And now Noble Senators, and beloved friends, if one of these postures and
conditions of the Church, or her Enemies, have been enough in former times to
Raise God out of his holy habitation, to come forth for the rescue of his
bleeding languishing people, how much more (I pray observe it) how much more I
say, when all these Ten seem as it were by an happy conspiracy, to meet
together, and kiss each other in this hour of Englands Temptation? may we with
an awful and humble confidence, conjecture, if not conclude, that; God is
Risen, God is Risen: at least God is Rising, God is Rising, for the help of his
poor oppressed people in England.


And if so then, as here is a word of Terror to Enemies, scattering, their
flying time, Terror to the Enemies.
so also here is a word of Exhortation to all you that are his friends, and I
beseech you suffer it.

It is the third and last use, an use of Exhortation.

In general it is but this one word. If God be Risen, or Rising;
Then all you that are his friends
Do you Rise too.


It was the salutation of the Ancient Christians upon the Lords days in the
morning; The Lord is Risen, and they ananswered one another; The Lord is Risen
indeed, So may we salute and answer one another, The Lord is Risen, The Lord is
risen indeed; and let us withal stir up and awaken one another; Let us Rise
too: by our prayers we say, Let God Arise. Now in this word of Exhortation, let
me call upon you, and do you call one upon another, Let all Gods people arise,
etc.

This is the Use in general: But that I may not speak confusedly, nor give an
uncertain sound, (for then who shall prepare himself to battle) it craves
leave to divide it self into these Ten distinct Branches; whereof the two last,
shall be the two Branches of the Doctrine that yet remains untoucht, and we
shall briefly wind up all in ten words.

First then, If God be Risen, then let us Rise in our Observations, take notice
what God is doing in the World, and take notice what God is doing here in
England: For shame Sirs, let not God arise, and we lie sleeping in the bed of
security, and supine inadvertency. Awake Barak, awake thou son of Abinoam;
Awake Christians, and observe diligently what God is doing, either with us, or
for us.

It is that word which God himself causes to be proclaimed before him, when
he stirs up himself for the help of his Church. Zach. 2.13.
Be silent all flesh before the Lord, for the Lord is raised up, out of his
holy habitation. Silence is the note, or posture, of exact and diligent
attention; And this God expects from all the World, Be silent, oh all flesh;
much more from his own people, when he is risen out of his Sanctuary, and gone
forth for their Redemption; as if he should say, Peace, be quiet, stand still,
and behold the salvation of the Lord; Observe diligently what God is doing.

How else shall we be able to pray? As one says of Preachers, they should
take their Text from Gods works, observe what God is doing, and Preach upon
that; So I may say to Christians, You should make Gods works abroad in the
World, the subject of your Prayers, and Praises at home; observe what God is
doing, and pray upon it.

An Inadvertent Christian, is an unpraying Christian.

How else shall you be able to know the Lord, if you observe him not? Isal.
9.16.
The Lord is known by the judgments which he executes: An unobservant
Christian, is an ignorant Christian. Who so is wise, Psalm. 107.1.
and will observe these things, they shall understand the loving kindness of
the Lord. The Prophet had been discoursing of the works of Providence all the
Psalm through, and builds two Conclusions upon the Premises.

First, That it is a point of special wisdom, to observe what God does in the
various and wonderful dispensations of his providence: Who so is wise, will
observe, etc. An unobserving man, or woman is a fool. Secondly, That this
observation. is the next way to grow into the acquaintance with God, and the
knowledge of his loving kindness: For,
By this means, you may come to see all the Attributes of God; his Wisdom,
Power, Goodness, Justice, Unchangeablenesse shining forth in the wonderful,
and miraculous deliverances of his Church, and the stupendous destructions of
the Enemies thereof.

By this means, you may come to be acquainted with the faithfulness of God,
in making good the promises.

And by this means, you may come to be acquainted with Gods love to you, in
the answers and returns of your prayers. Wherefore, since so much of Gods
glory, and your comfort, is bound up in this duty, let it be a mighty awakening
call to your spirits, to arise in your observations.

Secondly, O ye people of God, rise in your faith; Is God up, faith be down? Is
God risen out of his holy habitation, and shall our faith lie in bed? What a
shame is it for Christians, not to believe God further then we see him! What a
sad thing, that after so many clear discoveries of God, in his word, and works,
we should not to this day, have faith enough to carry us from one miracle to
another; to be tossed up and down in our hopes, as if God were one day upon
his Throne, and the other day upon the threshold. Christians, let not the
shield of faith hang by the walls any longer. Behold, the plots and
conspiracies of your Enemies shall be given up to the hands of your faith,
there shall all your enemies be imprisoned, more then in strongholds, and
fenced Cities. Let your faith be fetters, and prisons to your adversaries. Do
but study and observe what faith has done, and what Victories it has been
crowned withal in all Ages; and your hands shall be strong: God crowns faith,
because faith crowns God. God loves faith above all other Graces, because if
God put a crown upon it, Psalm. 115.1.
the modesty of faith will come and lay it down at Gods feet; Not unto us, O
Lord, not unto us, but to thy Name give the praise. Why should your hearts fail
you: It is an awakening word, and remember it, I beseech you: As for God his
way is perfect, Psalm. 18.30.
he is a buckler to all that trust in him: q. d. Follow God in the way of his
promises, and providence, and you shall find no crooked turning in it from one
end to another; you shall not find God stepping one foot awry; The word of the
Lord is tried; there be millions of Saints that have tried it in all ages, and
will be ready to bring in their letters-testimoniall for the truth of it; He
is a buckler to all those that put their trust in him; He has been Armor of
proof to all those that have trusted in his protection, which has rendered them
invulnerable, invincible, against all the Gunshot and Artillery of men and
devils. There is not a man to be found that can say, I have trusted in God and
he deceived me; no says David, Thou never failest them that seek thee. Psalm.
9.10.
The sum is thus much; You may trug God if you will and be safe; if not,
secure your selves better where you can.

Sirs, I beseech you, after so much experience of God, both others, and our
own, let not God have cause to complain of us, as once of that people in the
Wilderness; Numb. 14.11.
How long will this people provoke me, and how long will it be ere they
believe me, for all the signs which I have showed among them? If after all
this, England should perish, which God forbid, this shall be our Epitaph.

Matthew. 13. ult.
He could not do many mighty works there, because of their unbelief.
Rise therefore in your faith.
Thirdly, Rise in your courage, and resolution, for behold, God is risen, and
seems to encourage us, as once his Israel; Fear not thou worm Jacob, Isaiah
41.14.
etc. What can be more inconsiderable then a worm? and yet fear not thou worm
Jacob; fear not thou worm England: A Worm, and a God shall be hard enough for
all the World. Thou shall thresh the mountains, and beat them small, and shall
make the hills as chafe. It is strange work that a Worm shall make with the
Mountains, when God stands by it.

It is the charge that God gives to all his Worthies, and Commanders, when they
go out to Battle; this is the Word (FEAR NOT) And indeed Brethren, what is
there in the Enemy, that we should fear? Why should we fear them, that fear not
God? Their cause is damned, there consciences are damned; Do you not hear how
they rave for their own damnation; their power, and policy, their
combinations, and all their preparations cannot stand before you: See them all
sufficiently jeered, by the people of God: Isaiah 8.9.
Associate your selves, O ye people, and ye shall be broken in pieces, and give
ear all ye of far Countries, gird your selves, and ye shall be broken in
pieces; gird your selves, and ye shall be broken in pieces, why? how comes it
to pass that they are so contemptible? the reason is given verse 10. Immanuel,
for God is with us, God is Risen, fear them not: Truly all the counsels, and
conspiracies, and tumult, and rage, of the enemies, are no more, then if you
should see a mad man stand upon his head, and shake his heels against the Sun.

Courage, courage, Noble Senators, Worthy Commanders, courage Christians, God
is risen, and Gods rising time, shall be their scattering, Psalm. 2.
their flying time; Then shall he speak to them in his wrath, and vex them in
his sore displeasure, and make the proudest of them know that he has set his
Christ King upon his Holy Hill:

Alas what is the Chasse and the smoke when the wind rises, what the clouds
when the Sun rises? What wax and stubble, When the fire rises? Behold, as
smoke is driven away, Psalm. 68.2.
so the haters of God shall be driven away; as the wax melts before the fire,
so the wicked shall perish at the presence of God. Arise in your courage, and
the Lord shall make good that prophecy, Behold, the people shall rise up as a
great Lion, Numb. 23.24.
and lift up himself as a young Lion; he shall not lie down till he eat of the
prey, and drink of the blood of the slain.

Fourthly, If God be Risen, Rise in your zeal, rise in your zeal. A patcht
pie'ct reformation will not answer Gods expectation; Moses resolution was
worthy your Imitation, we will not leave an Hoof behind us. Exodus 10.25.
In the building of the Temple there was not a board or a pin or a nail of the
old Tabernacle used.

The Churches Reformation is called the New-heaven, and the New-earth, as for
difficulty, so for beauty and perfection: Worthy Senators, remember that
caution of the Apostle; Gal. 4.18.
It is good to be zealously affected always in a good thing: if ever any work
was worth your zeal, the work you have in hand is; Rise in your zeal; zeal is
good in a good cause.

Fifthly, Rise in your bounty, you have done much, do more; you have gone high,
go higher still; Say as David, I will be more vile, etc. So you, I will be yet
more liberal, I will be yet more for God, Away with those shifts and carnal
pretenses (what shall I leave for my wife and children) I have so much owing
me, and cannot get in my debts: trading is not as it has been; I am out thus
much already; They are (for the most part) but the Churles Instruments of which
the Holy Ghost speaks. Isa. 32.2.
The Instruments of the Churl are cruel, he devises wicked devises to
destroy the poor with lying words. Hear this Oh ye covetous Mammonists, who
withold your money and estates, when it is in the power of your hands to help,
to help the Lord and the Kingdom, against the mighty; The holy Ghost puts you
amongst Thieves and Murderers; you are listed among the Antichristian Enemies
of Jesus Christ who destroy his poor people: he that does not save life when
he may, destroics it: While in the mean time, of the willing people hear what
God speaks: But the liberal man devises liberal things: he devises how he
may serve the Cause, he studies which way he may do most good: You would think
that were the next way to be undone, but mark what follows, by liberal things
he shall stand, etc. Christians be of good cheer, you that have been liberal
to the Cause, even not only to your power, 2. Cor. 8.3.
but beyond your power; This is not the way to undo your families, but to
preserve them, by liberal things shall England stand, by liberal things shall
London stand, be of good cheer, who ever thou art that have spent thy self for
God and his Cause, you have not only the public faith of the Kingdom but the
public faith of Heaven also, for repaiment with advantage (by liberal things
he shall stand) time may come, when what thou have lent to Christ and his
Cause, may be all the livelihood for thee and thy family to subsist on: when
the rest may be plundered or burnt or taken away by violence, this may be thy
stock; and behold then it shall not repent thee of thy Liberality. If the
Parliament should never pay us a farthing, yet if all that God is worth in
heaven or earth, be able to make thee satisfaction, thou shall not be a looser
by thy bounty, And truly if God by this Parliament will give us but a
Reformation, a through and settled Reformation, these Worthies will not die in
our debts; yea though we should not live to see it, yet if our little ones, may
be brought into that good land, we shall have no cause to repent of our
bargain: I pray God, while the poor well-affected inherit the Praise with the
poor Widow, some rich covetous Mammonists do not carry away the curse with
Meroz; If you would not, Rise in your bounty.

Sixthly, Let us Rise in our Patience; we think perhaps we have waited long,
and yet our deliverance comes not; but if God will have us wait longer, and
longer yet, let us remember, we wait not so long on God, as God has waited on
us: and if we have put God to his How-longs? It is but a just and easy censure
if God put us to our How-longs? And yet believe it Cristians, Ier. 30.18.
this present time we do not so much wait for God, as God waits for us. The
Lord waits to be gracious. The Lord does but wait for our faith, and our
humiliation, and our real Reformation; were we fit for it, Deliverance should
not tarry an hour longer. Let us not make more haste out of our troubles, then
good speed; but remember who has said, Lam. 3.26.
It is good that a man should both hope, and quietly wait for the salvation of
the Lord, It is good for a man, and it is good for a Nation, it is for a people
to wait quietly for the salvation of the Lord; so did Jacob till his very dying
day, on his deathbed he could say, Gene. 49.18.
I have waited for thy salvation, O Lord, we say it is good to be delivered, it
is good to have peace; it were good to have our trading again, I but what says
God? It is good to wait, it is good to bear the yoke, it is good to put ones
mouth in the dust, if so be there may be hope:

It is so indeed, and a good reason is given of it, Verse. 25.

The Lord is good to them that wait for him, to the soul that seeks him, That
is, The Lord is better to such a people then victory; The Lord is better then
peace; The Lord is better then trading, etc. The Lord is better to such a soul
then a cure, if they be sick; Then enlargement, if in prison; then a Ransom,
if in the Enemies hand; better then a Deliverance, be they under what
affliction soever. Oh friends, that you would study this Text! that you knew
experimentally this truth! Yea, Oh if you would but study to know it! truly
well may the Lord himself be better, for even a waiting frame of heart it self
is better then any of these; for all these are but gifts, a waiting frame of
spirit is a grace; a people or person may have all these deliverances and
perish, never see Gods face; but there is none that possesses such a frame of
Spirit, but he has God to be his portion: it sprang from the fountain of Gods
special love in Christ, and it will carry the soul back thither again.

And therefore remember that counsel of the Apostle, Iam. 1.4.
Let patience have her perfect work. There is a work of patience; and there is
a perfect work: for to stay and wait a year or two for a deliverance, is a
work of patience, to bear small trialls, and great trials is a work of
patience, but to bear the greatest trials, and to bear them as long as God will
have them lie; Chap. 5.7, 8.
to wait patiently till the coming of the Lord, (i. e.) till he come, and
bring with him the mercy and Salvation, prayed for, and waited for, this is a
work and a perfect work of patience. The Lord give us this, and it will be the
greatest kindness that God can do for us.

Well, study it, pray for it; that as the trialls shall arise, so our patience
may arise also: Psalm. 27. vlt.
Let us be often renewing David's charge upon our souls. Wait thou on the Lord,
be of good courage and he shall strengthen thy heart, wait I say on the Lord.

Rise in your patience.
Seventhly, Rise in your mutual love one toward another; God is Risen up
against our Enemies, shall we rise up one against another? God forbid: Hear the
Apostle;

If ye bite and devour one another, Gal. 5.15.
take beed ye not consumed one of another. Truly friends, it were better the
Cavaleeres should destroy us, then ever it should be reported abroad in the
world, that praying Christians did destroy and devour one another: it would be
less scandal and reproach to Christ and his Gospel.

For the divisions of Reuben there are great thoughts of heart; for the
divisions of London, and the Ministers and professors in London, and elsewhere,
are great searchings of heart; I profess to you Sirs, I fear them more, then I
do all the power and policy of the blasphemous Enemy; Yea, I know they
promise themselves more from our divisions; then they do from all their own
combinations. Let us study I beseech you to disappoint and baffle their
expectations. To that end hear the Apostle most pathetically wooing of you,
Phil. 2.1, 2.
If there be any consolation in Christ, if any comfort of love; if any
fellowship of the spirit, if any bowels, and mercies; Fulfill ye my joy, that
ye be like minded, having the same love, being of one accord, of one mind. If
you cannot hit it to be of one mind, yet I beseech you labor to be of one
heart: why should we not?

One body, one Spirit, one Hope, one Faith, one Lord, one Baptism, Ephesians 4.4,
5, 6.
one God, one Father of all, who is above all, through all, in all; yea (at
this present) One common Antichristian Enemy; One Cause, one end, are not
here Ones enough to make us one too? I remember a sad complaint of Augustine,
of the Christians of his time; and we are so unhappy as to revive it: The
Heathen (says he) have many gods, and false Gods, and yet they can agree, but
Christians have but one God, and the trve. God, and they fall together by the
ears. This was his Lamentation, and this may be our Lamentation. Christians,
you that love the peace and welfare of Sion, labor to be healers of these
breaches; while too too many make it their design to cast on ayle, (and I know
from whence they are set on work, even from Hell and Oxford) make it your
business to cast water on these coals, least at length they break out into
devouring-flames and there be none to quench them. At least, if the multitude
should be so mad as to foment their own ruin, yet let the leaders of the
people study to preserve the unity of the spirit, in the bond of peace: Oh
that those Caelestiall Luminaries, that shine upon inferior bodies, with so
sweet and enlivening influence, should look upon one another sometime with a
Malignant aspect. I could be contented with all my soul, to give the best blood
that runs next my heart, for the reconciling of these uncomely, unnatural, (I
had almost said unnecessary differences among Brethren, were it not to widen
that distance, I would compose) But there is better blood paid for this
purchase already, infinitely better blood, and my prayer and hope shall be that
that blood which has been effectual to the Reconciling of us, to God the
Father, may be efficacious also to reconcile us one to another, till we come
into the unity of Faith, and of the knowledge of the Son of God, unto the
perfect man, unto the measure of the stature of the fullness of Christ.

Well. Arise in Love.

Eighthly, Arise in Holiness: Our Holy God is Risen let us arise in Holiness;
let us labor to be holy as he is holy; 1 Pet. 1.15.
that an Holy God may find us an holy people and take delight to walk in the
midst of us: and may not be ashamed to be called our God; Heb. 11.16.
we have contented our selves long enough with Forms, Forms of prayer, and
forms of duties, and Romans 2.20.
forms of knowledge, and a 2 Timothy 1.5.
form of Godliness: Let us now labor for the power of Godliness; To be
Christians in good earnest, not in word only but in the purity and the power of
the Gospel of Jesus Christ.

Add to your faith, virtue, and to your virtue knowledge, and to your
knowledge, temperance; 2 Pet. 1.5, 6, 7.
and to your temperance patience, and to patience, godliness; and to
godliness, brotherly kindness, and to brotherly kindness, charity.
Christians, study your additions, be still adding duty, to duty; one grace to
another; one degree of grace to another, and the exercise of one grace to
another.

Content not your selves with your former stints in profession, and with your
wonted forms of godliness; get Paul's ambition; Psalm. 3.13.
I forget the things that are behind, and I press forward toward the mark of
the high calling of God in Christ Jesus. Verse 11.
If by any means I might attain to the resurrection of the dead. He knew there
would be perfection in the Resurrection, and if it were possible he would
fain have attained to it on this side the grave; he knew there was still more
to be attained unto then he had attained, and therefore he pressed forward
still, striving to be as holy as the condition of mortality was capable of. O
let the same mind be in you, as was in Paul: I tell you, our grace is not
sufficient for the the times we live in already; we are not godly enough, for
the deliverances we have had already; nor for the Ordinances which we now
enjoy. You call for purer Ordinances, and more refined Congregations, when as
alas, your holiness is not high enough for the present; and how then will you
hold out with a pure and perfect reformation: I tell you, if you have purer
Ordinances; and more powerful Preaching, and if you do not labor for
holiness proportionable, your condition will be far worse then ever it was; if
God give you new heavens, and a new earth, and you get not new hearts, you are
undone.

Ninthly, Let us Rise in prayer; Our God is risen, and has done great things
for us, whereof we are glad. Let us follow him with Jacob-like importunity,
and resolve not to let him go, till he bless us; till he bless us with the
perfecting of the work he has begun in us, and for us: We have prayed, let us
pray yet oftener, longer, louder; let us besiege heaven with our prayers, and
take it by violence. Let us carry our selves so (with holy reverence be it
spoken) that God may never look to have an hours rest, till he give rest to
Sion: Vis ista non ingrata est Deo, sed vehementer accepta. Berh.
With such violence, God is well pleased.

I have certainly observed a fault among Christians; and that is, when they
observe a mercy coming, they begin to withdraw prayer, and cool in their
fervencie and importunity. I wish from my soul, this may not be the fruit of
the Victories which God has lately given us in Cheshire, in the North, in the
West, etc. whereas Christians should then double their importunity, and with
their Savior, pray yet more fervently. The behavior of the Saints in this
Kind is very observeable, toward the end of the 70. years Captivity in
Babylon, when one would have thought that the strength of the Spirit of
prophecy that began then to stir in those times would have delivered the Jews
alone out of those throws and panges, without the help of prayer, yet even
then does Daniel give himself up to fasting and prayer: And about that time,
Interpreters do conceive, Dan. 9.1, 2.
either Daniel himself, or some other of the Prophets, did in the behalf of the
Church pen the 102. Psalm, as a model upon which the people of God in
captivity should form their prayers, that God would arise and have mercy upon
Sion; The whole Psalm is nothing else but a Bedroll of Arguments wherewith
those children of Jacob should wrestle with God for the accomplishment of that
great expiring promise; and so the Spouse in the Revelations, the nearer her
Bridegroom was, Revel. 22.20.
the more pathetically she importunes his coming, I come quickly says the
Bridegroom; yea and to put it out of doubt, he sets his seal to it, surely I
come quickly: Yet not content with this, the Spouse ecchoe's this promise back
again with the voice of an holy restless impatience of any delay, Verse. 21.
Even so come Lord Jesus. And it is no more then is commanded all believers;
Looking for, and hastening to the coming of the day of God, 2 Pet. 3.12. (...),
etc. properantes adventum. Isa 62.8, 9.
the Greek reads it, hastening the coming, etc. Let us learn this holy
impatience and importunity, in hastening the coming of this day of God, for
Englands full, and perfect Deliverance and Reformation; You that are the Lords
remembrances, arise and give the Lord no rest till he establish and make this
our Jerusalem a praise in the midst of the earth.

This should have been the first branch of the Sixth Doctrine. Let God Arise.

Let us make it our daily use. The Text gives you; Motives. sc:

First, That Generation against which we pray, are not only our Enemies, but
Gods too, His Enemies, Them that hate him. Secondly, They are already Doomed
and Damned to destruction; They shall be scattered; They shall fly, They shall
be driven away; They shall melt, They shall perish. Thirdly, All this may be
easily done; it is but God Rising, there needs no more but Gods, appearance,
let God but show himself in the field, and they are all but dead men.
With these arguments strengthen your weak hands and feeble knees, to wrestle
with God, as Mariners, the nearer the Ancor comes into the ship the harder
they pull, the louder they cry; So do ye with the Anchor of Hope, now drawing
near, etc.

There is certainly a spirit of Prophesic, stirring in these times, and
laboring to the birth; Oh now if the Spirit of prayer come in to the Travel
and bestir it self mightily, I am humbly confident it will not be long ere the
Church of God in these Kingdoms, be delivered of a Man-child, the birth
whereof, will make us forget all our labor and sorrow.

Tenthly, Interim let us Rise in our Praise and thanks-givings.

God is Risen, and has done great things for us already, whereof were glad;
and for which we have great cause to Rise in our Thankfulness.

This also is a duty in the Text, the words being spoken by way of praise as
well as of prayer. The whole psalm is nothing else but a Triumph for the
bringing home of the Arc and the setting of it up in his place, as also for
the celebration of those many victories and Salvations which God had vouchsafed
the Church under David's Government: And so this should have been a second
branch, in the Seventh Doctrine, in the Text, but let us make it up into an
Use; and the Lord make us yet more cordial and skillful in this heavenly
Angelical duty. He has exalted us, let us exalt him, it was David's
resolution, I will extol thee O God for thou have lifted me up, etc.

Let us cloth our selves with the same resolution; And, Let us exalt God. And
that, First, In our thoughts; Get great, and good, and high thoughts of God,
let us be taken up in the admiration of his Wisdom, Power, Faithfulness, and
All Sufficiency, etc. God is awak't out of sleep, like a mighty man refresh't
with wine; Psa. 103.1. vlt.
Let us awaken and call up all within us to praise the Lord; our memoris to
recount the worthy acts of the Lord; our understa-dings to consider them; Let
us do with Deliverances as you do with your Watches, take them in pieces, and
view the several materials and contrivances of them: Let us call up our wills
to praise God; I will praise thee, O my God; our affections to solace them in
the contemplation of the wonders of mercy done for us: Oh that we could Work
our hearts so into the thoughts of God and his Works, that we could say with
David. How precious are thy thoughts to me, O God? Psalm 139.17, 19
How great is the sum of them, they are more in number then the sand, when I
awake I am still with thee.

Secondly, Let us exalt him in our mouths; Psalm. 66.17.
I cried to him with my mouth and he was extolled with my tongue; If we have
cried to him with our mouths, and he has heard, and answered, it is but our
duty we should extol him with our tongve: and we may say so; We have called,
and he has answered; We have cried, and he has said, here I am. Yea behold,
while this day we have been presenting our supplications unto him he has sent
in a speedy and a rich return of prayer, in vouchsafing a wonderful and
stupendous Deliverance and Victory, to our Noble Gencrall, and the Forces
with him yonder at Edgehill, the certainty and some prticulars whereof at this
instant God has sent me hither, by an At this moment the Lord Wharton, sent up
to me in the pulpit the first relation of the victory at Edge Hill which then I
read, to the great satisfaction and admiration of the whole Congregation;
abundance of tears being shed for joy. Psalm. 65.5.
Honorable hand: God herein having done himself, and us that honor that he
did to Danicl, Dan. 9.23. At the beginning of thy supplication the command came
forth. Yea before we were preparing our prayers, God has been preparing an
answer, full of wonder and mercy. By terrible things in Righteousness have
thou answered us, O God of our salvation.

Christians, God you see is Risen he has stirred up his glory, let us awake
our Glory, our tongus to trumpet forth his praises. Awake my glory, awake
Psalterie and Harp, I my self will awake right early; Behold God has turned our
day of Hmiliation, into a day of Thanksgiving, and so has fulfilled that
promise, Psalm. 125.6.
They that sow in tears, shall reap in joy, etc. We that sowed in tears, in the
morning, do reap in joy in this our evening; A quick return: Shall not we for
this, go on with the Psalmists resolution; Psalm. 57.9, 10, 11.
I will praise thee, O Lord, among the people, I will sing to thee among the
nations: For thy mercy is great unto the heavens, and thy truth unto the
clouds: Be thou exalted, O God, above the heavens, and thy glory above all
the earth.

O that the fathers would be telling their children, and one Christian be
making over the report unto another, of the righteous Acts of the Lord; Oh that
to the perpetuating of the memory of Gods loving kindness, we would all put
our selves under the Prophet Isaiahs Engagement; Isa. 63.7.
I will mention the loving kindness of the Lord, and the praises of the Lord,
according to all that the Lord has bestowed on us, and the great goodness
toward the house of Israel, which he has bestowed on them, according to his
mercies, and according to the multitude of his loving kindnesses.

And again, Psalm. 71.15.
that of the Psalmist; My mouth shall show forth thy righteousness, and holy
salvation all the day, for I know not the numbers thereof.

Rejoice in the Lord, Psalm. 33.1.
O ye righteous, for praise is comely for the upright, etc. Thirdly, and
lastly, Let us exalt God in our lives. Take heed, I beseech you, of honoring
God in our duties, and dishonouring of him in our conversations, of exalting of
him with our tongues, and casting him down in our lives: This were to imitate
those wretched Jews, who carried up our Savior to the top of the Mountain,
that they might throw him down the pracipice, and break his neck: Let not our
lives give the lie to our duties. Walk becommingly to your mercies, and
becommingly to your duties. Let an holy, sweet, gracious, conversation be the
Paraphrase of our duties, and a Comment upon our days of Humiliation, and
Thanksgiving: I will conclude with that earnest obsecration, and obtestation of
the Apostle.

I beseech you therefore brethren, Romans 12.1.
by the mercies of God, that you present your bodies a living sacrifice, holy,
acceptable unto God, which is your reasonable service. It is unreasonable, as
well as irreligious, to give God our mouths, and sin our lives; to give the
dead sacrifice to God, and the living sacrifice to the devil.

God has done all, let him have all; Our Hearts, Mouths, Lives.


When God does great things for us, he expects great things from us, and if
we labor not to answer his expectations we are undone. Consider what I say,
2 Timothy 2.7.
and the Lord give you a right understanding in all things. Amen.

FINIS.
November 17. 1640 Doctor Burgess, Jer. 50.5. November 17. 1640 Master
Marshall, 2 Chronicles. 15.2.
Before the recieving of the Sacrament.
November. 29. -- Mr. Gauden, Zach. 8.19.
At the thanksgiving of the Union, betwixt England and Scotland.
September 7. 1641 Mr. Marshall, Psalm. 124.6, 7, 8. September 7. 1641 Mr.
Buroughs, Isai. 66.10. November. 5. Dr. Burgess, Psalm. 76.10. December. 22.
1641 Mr. Calamy, Jerem. 18.7, 8. December. 22. 1641 Mr. Marshall, 2 Kings 23.25,
26. February 23. 1641 Mr. Calamy, Ezekiel, 36.32. February 23. 1641 Mr. Marshall
Judge. 5.23. March 30. 1642 Dr. Burgess, not Printed, Jerem. 4.14. March 30.
1642 Mr. Ash, Psalm 9.9. April 27. 1642 Mr. Thomas Goodwyn, Zach. 4.6, 7, 8.
April 27. 1642 Mr. Carryll, Revel. 2.2, 3. May 25. 1642 Mr. Harris, Luke 18.6,
7, 8. May 25. 1642 Mr. Ob. Sedgwich, Jerem. 4.3. June 29. 1642 Dr. Gouge,
Nehem. 5.19. June 29. 1642 Mr. William Sedgwich. Isaiah 62.7. July 27. 1642.
Mr. Reynolds, Hosea 14.8. July 27. 1642. Mr. Hill, Proverbs 23.23. August 31.
1642 Dr. Downing, not Printed, 2 These. 3.2. August 31. 1642 Mr. Carter, Judges
20.26, 27, 28. September. 28. 1642. Mr. Hodges, Psalm 113.5, 6. September. 28.
1642. Mr. Wilson, Hebrews 11.30. October 26. 1642. Dr. Temple, Psalm 2.6.
October 26. 1642. Mr. Case, Psalm 68.1. November. 5. M. Newcomen, Nehem. 4.11.
November. 28. 1642 Mr. Herle, Zachary 8.19. November. 28. 1642 Mr. Vines, Numb.
14.24. December. 28. 1642 Mr. Valentine, Zepha. 3.8. December. 28. 1642 Mr. Corbet,
1. Corinthians 1.27. January 25. 1642. Mr. Arrowsmith, Leviticus 26.25. January
25. 1642. Mr. Whittaker, Haggai 2.7. February 22. 1642. Mr. Bridges, 2 Samuel 19
5, 6, 7, 8. February 22. 1642. Mr. Ellis, Micah 5.5. March 29. 1643 Mr. Gibons,
not Printed, March 29. 1643 Mr. Lightfoot, Luke 1.14. April 26. 1643 Mr. Ley,
Jeremy 4.21.22. April 26. 1643 Mr. Greenhill, Matthew 3.10. May 31. 1643 Mr.
Perne, Micah. 4.5. May 31. 1643 Mr. Cheinell, Zachary 2.7.
Thanksgiving Sermons, for the discovery of a dangerous, and bloody Design,
tending to the utter subversion of the Parliament and the Famous City of London.

Before the Lords.
June 15. 1643 Mr. Calamy, Joshua 24.15. June 15. 1643 Mr. Herle, Psalm. 95.1.
Before the Commons.
June 15. 1643 Mr. Marshall, Revelation 15.2, 3, 4. June 15. 1643 Mr. Obadiah
Sedgwick, Ester 9.1. June 28. 1643 Mr. Carter, Exodus 32.9, 10. June 28. 1643
Mr. Palmer, Esther. 4.13, 14.
At a Fast before both Houses, and the Assembly of Divines.
July 7. 1644 Mr. Bowls, John. 2.7. July 7. 1644 Mr. Newcomen, Isaiah 62.67.
At an extraordinary Fast.
July 21. 1643 Mr. Hill, Revelation 12.11. July 21. 1643 Mr. Spurstow, 1 Samuel
7.6. July 21. 1643 Mr. Vines not Printed. July 26. 1643 Mr. Conant, Jer. 30.7.
July 26. 1643 Mr. Sympson, Isaiah 4.5. August 30 1643 Mr. Tuckney, Jerem. 8.22.
August 30 1643 Mr. Coleman, Jerem. 8.20. September 27 1643 Mr. Chambers, Zach.
7.5, 6. September 27 1643 Mr. Anthony Burges, Mark 1.2, 3.
At the taking of the Covenant of the three Kingdoms.
September, 29. Mr. Coleman, Jer. 30.21. October, 6. Mr. Carill, Nehem. 9.38.
October 25. 1643 Mr. Wilkinson, Zach. 1.18, 19, 20, 21. October 25. 1643 Mr.
Salwey, 1 King. 18.21. November. 29. 1643 Mr. Mew, Isaiah 42.24, 25. November. 29.
1643 Mr. Bridge, Zach. 1.18, 19, 30, 21. and Chap. 2.1.
At the Funeral of Mr. Pym.
December, 15. Mr. Marshall, Mich. 7.1, 2. December. 27, 1643 Mr. Henderson, Ezra
7.23. December. 27, 1643 Mr. Strickland, Isaiah 10.12. January 31, 1643 Mr.
Cawdrey, Prove. 29.8. January 31, 1643 Mr. Rutherfurd, Dan. 6.26. February 28.
1643 Mr. Baylie, Zach. 3.1, 2. February 28. 1643 Mr. Young, Psalm. 31.24. March
27, 1644 Mr. Gillespie, Ezekiel. 43.11. March 27, 1644 Mr. Bond, Isaiah 45.15.
At the Thanksgiving, for the Victory given to our Forces, under Sir William
Waller, and Sir William Balfore, over Sir Ralph Hoptons Army.
April. 9. 1644 Mr. Sedgwick, Psalm. 3.8. April. 9. 1644 Mr. Case Daniel. 11
32.
At the thanksgiving, for the Victory given to the forces under the Command of
the Noble Lord Fairfax at Selby in York Shire.
April 23. 1644 Mr. Perne, Exodus. 34.6. April 23. 1644 Mr. Carryl,
Revelations 11.16, 17. April. 24. 1644. Dr. Staunton, Deuteronomy. 32.31. April. 24.
1644. Mr. Green, Nehemiah. 1.3, 4.
FINIS.

