A Discourse CONCERNING CHRIST HIS INCARNATION, AND EXINANITION.

As also, concerning THE PRINCIPLES OF CHRISTIANITY: By way of Introduction.

By MERIC CASAVBON. D. D.

LONDON, Printed by M. F. for R. Mynne, and are to be sold at his shop at the
Sign of Saint Paul in Little Britain. 1646.

To the READER.
COurteous Reader, what is here offered unto thee under the title of a
Discourse, is the substance of some Sermons preached upon this solemn sacred
argument some years ago, where my dwelling and calling then was. The first
part, which I call the Introduction, is, for the most part of it, newly added.
Why now added, or thought necessary, will easily be understood by them that
know (as who knows it not?) what opposition the most fundamental points of our
Religion have met with of late, both at home and abroad. In the rest, there is
more alteration of the form, then addition of matter and substance. The
Incarnation of Christ is a subject which no true Christian can think
unseasonable at any time. I confess, as it is necessary, so is it an argument
of that sublimity, as would not be handled by every body, illotis manibus. I
had not adventured upon this publication in this form, had I not had good
encouragement from some, whose judgment I thought I might trust to, that it
might do good. To that end it is here presented unto thee: and if thou shall
propose to thy self that end only in the reading, there will be the more hopes
of the success. Farewell.

Martinus Lutherus in Enchiridio Piarum Precationum De tribus Symbolis, etc.
IPsa recomperi, and in omnibus Historiis universi Christianismi hoc
animadverti, quod quicunque principalem illum Christianae fidei Articulum de
IESV CHRISTO, vere and incorrupte tum crediderunt tum docuerunt, hi postea in
vera Christiana fide tuto ac firmiter perstiterunt; Et licet suos quosdam
errores and sua peccata habuerint, sunt illi tamen ad extremum servati. The
same in English.

WHat by mine own experience, and what by Church Histories of all Ages and
Nations, I have certainly found and observed that as many as truly and
syncerely have both believed and taught this main Article of the Christian
faith concerning JESUS CHRIST, those have continued safe and sound in the
Christian faith; and though perchance for a while they have had their errors
and their infirmities, yet at the last they have dyed good Christians. Mr Hugo
Grotius his opinion and testimony concerning the satisfaction of Christ: taken
out of his later writings.

Ephesians. 1.6. (...). Hugo Grotius ibi: Sicut in veteri lege non obtinebatur
venia eorum quae in eo statu veniam accipere poterant, nisi cruenta morte
victimae; ita in novo foedere remittit Deus peccata credentibus in Christum,
ideo quia Christus id sua morte cruenta, quippe sacrificio perfectissimo,
Deoque gratissimo, pleno obedientiae, demissionis, dilectionis and patientiae,
ab ipso nobis impetravit. (...), est plenissima liberatio, a reatuscilicet.
quanqua^ autem vox (...) tralatione quadam (quod vulgo excipiunt and objiciunt
Sociniani, scilicet) ad liberationem quamvis referri interdum solet; in hoc
tamen argumento talem intelligi liberationem quae non sine magno impendio fiat,
ostendit locus Matthew. 20, 28. ubi Christi vita nobis impensa (...), redemptio,
dicitur.

(...) I Have perused this learned Discourse of Christ his Incarnation and
Exinanition, and finding it both solid and Orthodox, and also adorned with such
variety of matter, as may bring to the Reader much profit w^^h delight, I allow
it to be printed and published.

JOHN DOWNHAM.

ERRATA.
Page 3. l. 25. read are ready. P. 13. l. 4. according to in Ital. letter. P.
23. l. 7. know not what we. P. 40. l. 22, 23. (as it is written) in Ital.
letter. P. 49. l. 30. margin, Tractatu qui. P. 63. l. 3. meannesse.
OF THE PRINCIPLES OF DIVINITY; BY WAY OF INTRODUCTION to the ensuing Subject.
ALL Arts and Sciences are grounded upon some common notions and principles,
which as they cannot be well proved, (some of them at least) so they are
presupposed to carry so much evidence with them, as that no rational man, be
he learned or unlearned, as soon as he hears them, will stick to yield assent
unto them: so that, be particular propositions never so strange and incredible
of themselves, or at the first hearing; yet if after many turnings and windings
they be reduced to some common principle, there is no further doubt. Neither is
a rational man bound to embrace, for truth, that which is not, either
implicitly or explicitly, by nearer or remoter consequences, reducible to
such principles.

Theology or Divinity, whether it may properly be called a Science or no, it is
disputed amongst the Learned: I shall not dispute it here, but only say, that
Divinity also has her common principles; which though perchance they be not
of that degree of evidence as the principles of some other Sciences are, yet
they are evident enough to satisfy any rational man.

This Doctrine though sound of it self, and of excellent use against all
Heathens, Turks, Infidels, frantic or fanatic Enthusiasts, and Anabaptists;
yet because it is very apt to be mistaken, and therefore liable to many
exceptions, I think it necessary, before I come to make that use of it, which
by way of Introduction I aim at in this present Discourse, to say somewhat of
it, to make it more clear and passable, then otherwise amongst the vulgar of
men it would be.

First, then it must be observed, that to believe a thing upon grounds of
reason, and to comprehend the reason, or nature, or possibility of that which
is believed, are things in themselves far different: which will be made plainer
by examples. What reasonable man can doubt of his soul, as of a distinct and
different nature from the body, being so known by the daily effects and
operations of it? yet neither is the nature of the soul perfectly
comprehensible to any man: and even those effects and operations of it which
are most visible and ordinary, the most understanding Physicians and
Philosophers, when they come to sift them, and to render reasons, acknowledge
themselves to be at a stand. Nay, the generation of man, that visible and
material part of him only considered, (setting the soul aside, as of another
origin,) even that has posed the wisest and wittiest of men. That the
loadstone has such and such properties, whereof some have been known of old,
and some have been lately discovered, who can question, there being such daily
experience of it? But the the natural reasons of such properties, though much
has been said and written of it of late years, yet I think there be but few
that will take upon them to know, or to render.

There is great use of this distinction in debate and disputes about the
Scripture: which by Ancients is said sometimes to be very plain and
perspicuous: and sometimes obscure and full of incomprehensible mysteries: both
true, if rightly understood. Clear and perspicuous in the delivery of such and
such Doctrines, or Articles necessary to be known, believed, or practiced to
attain salvation: but full of obscurity, or altogether incomprehensible in
their own natures to humane understanding. To instance in one example: What
point of Doctrine can be proposed to our belief with more clearness and
perspicuity, then the Resurrection of the dead? and what more obscure for the
manner and possibility of it?

That nothing therefore is to be believed, for which there is not ground in
reason and humane common sense, is that which we have said, and are really to
maintain in a right sense: but that Nihil credendum quod ratione capi nequeat;
Nothing is to be believed, which may not be comprehended by humane reason, (as
the Photinians and some other Heretics maintain) is an assertion, I know not
whether more ridiculous and absurd in point of reason; or more blasphemous and
impious in Divinity. Philosophers are allowed their occulta qualitates, and
Physicians, even they who knew little of God otherwise, did acknowledge (...),
so^ewhat above their capacity and the ordinary course of nature in things of
nature. There be I know that laugh at these occultae qualitates: and in some
cases they may justly: neither would I contend about words if another word will
give better content. But as for them who think they can give a reason for all
which by others is admired as hidden and abstruse, sooner may they bring
themselves into a suspicion that they never knew how to distinguish between
reason and fancy, then persuade them that are rational, that no work of
nature is above the reach of humane reason.

Our second Observation (which follows upon the former, and is a further
confirmation of it) shall be concerning the ambiguity or different acception of
this word faith, or belief. Faith then we say may be taken either in opposition
to sight, or sense: or in opposition to knowledge and comprehension: or thirdly
and lastly, to reason, in general. In opposition to sight or sense; so things
invisible, whether in their nature so, because spiritual; or invisible,
because not present, but future; are the proper object of faith. In the Epistle
to the Hebrews faith is thus defined; Faith is the substance ((...)) of things
hoped for; the evidence ((...)) of things not seen. In opposition to knowledge
and comprehension; so we are said to believe those things which we do not
understand or comprehend. Lastly, in opposition to reason; so we are said to
believe those things for which, or for the belief of which we have no ground or
foundation at all in humane reason and ratiocination. Those that shall read
the Ancients upon this argument, will find great use of these distinctions, to
reconcile their several expressions, which otherwise might seem to import ^
contrariety of opinions. For example; whereas it was commonly objected by
ancient Heathens to the Christians of those times, that they grounded all their
Doctrine upon mere belief; that their simple faith was all they had to trust
to: Some not so aware perchance neither of the ambiguity of the word, nor what
advantage Heathens would make of it; made no scruple simply to avow what was
objected unto them: but others again did utterly disclaim it, complained of the
objection as a gross and impudent calumny; appealed to reason themselves for
proof of their belief; and offered themselves to join issue with them upon that
title. Certain it is that most of them in this question did take faith not as
opposed to reason properly; but either to knowledge and comprehension; or to
sight and sense. Or if they did use the word reason in opposition to faith, by
reason they did understand knowledge and comprehension; not as the word was
used by others. In this sense Saint Augustine does often oppose Divine
authority, to reason; August. de Vera Rel. Authoritas fidem flagitat, and
rationi praeparat hominem; ratio ad intellectum per cognitionem perducit:
quanquam nec au^horitatem penitus ratio deserit, cum consideratur cu^ credendum
sit, etc.
not as though it were against humane reason to believe those things that are
commended unto us by divine revelation or authority, (whereof we shall say more
afterward) but because most of the mysteries of our faith commended unto us by
divine authority are such, as are above the reach of humane capacity to
comprehend. Though herein too they did distinguish between the Tyrones, or
beginners in Christianity; such as were lately converted to the Christian
faith, whom they would have wholly to rely upon authority; and those whom the
Apostle, Heb. 5.14. speaks of, who by reason of use have their senses
exercised to discern both good and evil. Of the use of humane reason in this
kind for the unfolding or understanding of particular points (which is a
different consideration from that of the Principles) much has been written of
late by learned Vedelius, in a Book of this argument, entitled Rationale
Theologicum; to which the Reader, if he please, may have recourse. I shall
conclude this Observation with the words of Saint Peter, 1 Pet. 3.15.
Be ready to give an answer to every man that asks you a reason of the hope
that is in you, with meekness and fear.

Thirdly, we would have it observed, that notwithstanding this opinion of faith
and religion so grounded as we have said, we maintain nevertheless that no man
can attain to that (...), that degree, or fullness of faith required or
availeable to salvation, but by supernatural means, viz. by the immediate
operation of Gods holy Spirit. To which purpose Origin in his answer to Celsus
the Heathen says well: Orig. contra Celsum l. 6.
We are taught by the divine Word that what is preached by men (be it of it
self never so true and rational (or, well grounded) cannot sufficiently
penetrate into the soul of man, except both supernatural power from God be
given to the speaker, and divine grace accompany those things that are spoken,
etc. which is by him inferred upon the words of the Apostle, 1 Cor. 2.4. And my
speech and my preaching was not with enticing words of man's wisdom, but in
demonstration of the Spirit and of power; that your faith should not stand in
the wisdom of men, but in the power of God. The necessity of this infused
faith is acknowledged by Papists, as well as by Protestants: no sober man that
believes the Scriptures can make any question of it.

Fourthly, and lastly we say, though faith be reducible to principles of
reason, and in that respect become knowledge as well as faith, yet we do not
maintain a necessity of this knowledge in all Christians. Without infused faith
no man is a true Christian; but a man may be a true Christian, though he
understand not upon what grounds of humane reason his faith is grounded; which
innumerable Christians for want either of education, or through natural
indocility, or prevented by death never attain unto.

If then in Divinity as well as in other Sciences, to proceed with more
solidity, the consideration of the first principles be sometimes requisite; it
is in these points especially and principally, which of themselves seem most
contrary to reason and common sense: such as this is, Christ his Incarnation. I
know it has been the opinion of some (of Saint Chrysostom by name) that the
Incarnation of Christ the Son of God, might of it self sufficiently be
demonstrated and maintained by arguments of reason. And somewhat of that kind
I have seen endeavored by some, but never yet any thing which did much
satisfy me; or whereby I could hope to satisfy any other. And I account it a
matter of no little danger for men to be too great undertakers in this kind.
Wit and subtilty may do well perchance in some other things; but not so well in
articles of such weight and consequence.

To go on therefore in our intended method, before we come to particulars, of
Christian principles in general we shall first say, That whatsoever among men
professing to hearken to reason, and endowed with competent judgment and
discoursive faculties, either without any arguing at all will currantly pass;
or upon very little arguing may be justified and approved for right or
reasonable, we reckon that in the number of common principles: of which kind we
take these three ensuing particulars (to us here most considerable) to be,

I.
First, that there is a God.

II.
Secondly, that the ways and counsels of God, there being such disproportion
between God and man, must in all probability be different, in most things, from
the thoughts, counsels, and apprehensions of the wisest of men.

III.
Thirdly, that whatsoever has been revealed by God himself unto man, ought to
be believed and embraced by men, with as much fullness of assent and belief, as
what is most certain and undoubted amongst men, as either grounded upon the
senses, or upon certain experience.

To these, of which (as we shall show) there can be little question amongst
rational men, being all avouched and averred by principal authors of several
ages and religions, whose writings remain to this day; because we have not to
do here with Heathens or Infidels properly, but with such as make no question
of the truth of the Scriptures, but stumble most, for want of due
consideration, as shall appear, at some of the former; we shall add a fourth,
which is,

IV.
That those books of the Old and New Testament generally received by all
Christians for Canonical, were written by men inspired of God, and justly
accounted, The Word of God.

Let us now consider of these principles severally, for it will much concern us
that some of them that have not been so thoroughly sifted and considered of by
others, be well cleared.

The first is, that there is a God. I.


We need not add; by whom the world, and all that is in it, man particularly,
was made: since it is the view and consideration of the world especially, and
all that is in it, and man particularly, that brings a natural man to the
knowledge of God. Psalm. 19.1, 2.
The heavens declare the glory of God, and the firmament shows his handy
work. Day unto day utters speech, and night unto night utters knowledge. So
the Psalmist, inspired by God, speaks of that knowledge of God, common to all
men, (even them that know not God otherwise) by the bare evidence and testimony
of nature. And thereby we may the better know, that David was inspired to say
so, because we find others that were not inspired, so generally and
unanimously concurring in this acknowledgement. Let those Heathens be looked
upon that have written (...), or (...), that is, of the first apprehension, or
discovery made by men of a Deity; as either Cleanthes, or Aristotle of old,
whose names and arguments are recorded by Tully, and by Sixtus Empiricus: or
later writers, as Tully himself, Plutarch, Dio Chrysostomus, and others; they
all pitch upon this, as a principal evidence, aequabilitatem motus,
conversione^ coeli; solis, lunae, syderumque distinctionem, varietatem,
pulchritudinem, ordinem; that is in a word, The beauty, order, constancy of the
Heavens, and Firmament, Sun and Moon, etc. Even those who most wickedly did set
themselves to argue against a Providence, could not but acknowledge this a
strong argument for Providence: as Lucretius, an excellent Poet, but a
professed Epicure, (in his opinions at least) as when he says; Sol and luna
suo lustrantes lumine circum,
Perdocuere homines annorum tempora verti:
Et certa ratione geri rem atque ordine certo.


And again where he says, Nam cum suspicimus magni coelestia mundi
Templa super, stellisque micantibus aetherae fixum,
Et venit inmentem solis lunaeque viarum:
Tunc aliis oppressa malis in pectore cura
Illa quoque expergefactum caput erigere infit,
Ecquae forte Deum nobis immensa potestas
Sit, vario motu quae candida sydera verset.


But whilst we make the Heavens the chiefest and clearest evidence of a Deity,
it must not be conceived, that they are the only. For in very truth, there is
not any thing so mean in show and common estimation, which being thoroughly
considered, does not set out the power and wisdom of God to a discerning eye:
as by ancient Philosophers, and others that have handled this argument is
copiously showed. Whence proceeded that (...), or Presumption of all people and
nations of the Universe, in acknowledging and worshipping some Deity. Which
consideration above all others (this general consent and conspiration of all
men I mean) so far moved Epicurus, that he was constrained thereby (as
himself professed) to acknowledge a Deity, though the use and consequent of
this acknowledgement he did elude and frustrate by denying a Providence. Solus
vidit Epicurus esse Deos, quod in omnium animis eorum notionem impressisset
ipsa natura: says one of that sect in Tully; that is, that Epicurus did first
avouch the being of a Deity upon that ground of mankinds general consent;
though even so it be not altogether true: but true it is, that Epicurus did
much enlarge himself upon that one proof and argument, and was the first that
applied the word (...) to that purpose.

But how, and how far God may be found by the light of nature, is largely
disputed by the Schoolmen; and by those that have written Metaphysics. Though
all agree in the main, yet they are not all of one mind, neither concerning
the extent, nor the clearness of natural light. But to let them and their
differences pass, the Apostle clearly determines it, and we with him, Romans
1.20.
That the invisible things of God from the Creation of the world are clearly
seen, being understood by the things that are made, even his eternal power and
Godhead, so that they are without excuse. And certainly whoever shall weigh the
arguments on both sides, as in good order and with exactness they are
marshalled by Sixtus Empiricus, a very learned man, and a Sceptique, that is,
one that professed himself to embrace no particular opinion, but to suspend his
judgment (and therefore to be hoped the more impartial) in all things; will,
or I am much deceived, even by evidence of reason (not to insist upon his
authority) think himself bound to be of Saint Paul's opinion. I think therefore
I may conclude this point with Saint Augustines words, with little alteration:
Quisquis prodigia (said he of the Christian faith) adhuc ut credat inquirit,
magnum est ipse prodigium, Aug. de Civ. Dei l. 22. c. 8. Initio.
qui mundo credente non credit: I say, Qui argumenta adhuc ut Deum credat,
quaerit, etc. To require proofs and arguments that there is a God, which all
parts of this visible world do so clearly declare, and all men of the world so
freely acknowledge, must needs be an argument of as monstrous stupor of mind,
as it is of prodigious infidelity.

As for the distinction of Persons in the Deity, there be that affirm this
mystery not to have been unknown to some ancient Philosophers. Diverse plausible
passages and arguments they bring to that purpose, I confess; and yet conceive
nevertheless, that by others it is more probably denied. But however, this is
quite another case, and will not prove to our purpose here. That there is a
God, with those ordinary Attributes of Goodness, and Omnipotency, by ancient
Heathens as commonly acknowledged, is all we desire to be granted in the
notion of a common notion and principle. And so much of the first.

II.
The second is, That the ways and counsels of God, etc. as before.

It was the first sin of man, that not contented with that similitude of God,
to which he was created by God, he aspired to be like unto God in a higher and
incommunicable degree of likeness. From which being shamefully and deservedly
disappointed, it has been his sin and his infirmity ever since, that he has
endeavored as much as in him lay to make God like himself. From hence sprang
the making of Idols and Idolatry. Aristotle in his Politics briefly notes it
in these words; That the gods do reign (or, are governed by a King) is
commonly said and believed amongst men, because amongst men are yet at this
present, and have been of old, Kingdoms; for as the shapes, so the lives of
the gods, men are wont to liken unto their own. But Clemens Alexandrinus in his
Stromata, partly out of Xenophanes an ancient Philosopher, (miscalled a Poet by
some, because he wrote in verse) partly of himself, more largely, thus: The
Grecians (or Gentiles, says he) as they do represent the gods like unto
themselves in outward shape, so in passions and affections also. And as every
nation (according to Xenophanes) make the gods to resemble them in outward
shape; (The Aethiopians, for example, form them black and flat nosed; the
Thracians, flaxen haired [or, yellow haired] and sky color eyed) so, their
souls and dispositions also. The Barbarians make them cruel and terrible; the
Grecians more meek and gentle, but yet not free from all perturbations of mind.
So Clemens. The same observation is in Theodoret also, and in him, diverse of
Xenophanes own words and verses. To this purpose Pliny also has a notable
passage in his Natural History, of a famous Painter in Rome about, or a little
before Augustus his time; one Arellius: but his own words will do best: Fuit
(says he) and Arellius Romae celeber paulo ante Divum Augustum, nisi flagitio
insigni corrupisset artem; semper alicujus foeminae amore flagrans, and ob id
Deas pingens, sed dilectarum imagine. Itaque in pictura ejus scorta
numerabantur.

It has ever been so, and is so to this day: and from this very fountain do
flow most of the grossest opinions and sects in Religion, by which both the
minds of men are distracted, and the public peace of Common-weals disturbed.
Every man is apt to think well of himself, of his own wit, reason, and
judgment; and as he is, so must his god be, or he shall hardly be his god.
His own reason must be the rule of his gods reason, and his wisdom the rule of
his gods wisdom. I appeal to them that are versed in controversies, how often
they shall meet with such speeches as these: It would not have stood with the
wisdom of God: with the goodness of God: (yea and discretion too, some have
said) to have done this, says one; not to have done it, says another. In such
contradictions that both should be in the right, every man knows is a thing
impossible: so that the credit of God (if I may so speak without blasphemy) is
put to the stake, and must needs suffer on the one side. Yea even in matters of
no controversy, but of mere curiosity, there be that stick not at these
expressions. So one, (and he a man of good account otherwise) except he may
know all the particulars of Adams Paradise (about which how much controversy
and little certainty there is, S. Eug. In Genesin p. 23. b. Neque adeo
inhumanus fuerit Deus ut voluerit hujus rei ignoratione per omnes aetates
homines torqueri* etc.
is not unknown to them that have taken pains to enquire into it) he charges
God with unkindnesse and inhumanity. I must confess of my self that I never
read such speeches without some horror; nor ever made any other account of them
then of speeches approaching to blasphemy: neither can I persuade my self they
ever had any very right apprehension of the Majesty of God, that make their own
wisdom, goodness, or ratiocination the model of his. The Prophet Isaiah, I
am sure has taught us to think better of God then so. But why say I the
Prophet Isaiah? they are Gods own words concerning himself: Esaias 55.89.
For my thoughts are not your thoughts, neither are your ways my ways, says
the Lord. For as the heavens are higher then the earth, so are my ways higher
then your ways, and my thoughts, then your thoughts. To this purpose also are
the words of the Psalmist, Ps. 77.19.
as they are expounded by many: Thy way is in the Sea, and thy path in the
great waters, and thy footsteps are not known.

But it is not Scripture that we have here to do with, but common notions, and
principles of humane reason. To humane reason therefore, and to common sense I
appeal; If God be acknowledged infinite, omnipotent, (as by the Creation of the
world he may be inferred) will not as much difference between God and man be
granted, as is between man and brutes? Or at least (because I know what may be
objected) between a man and a child? The same man when he is come to maturity
of years and discretion; and when he was but a child, or a boy? Or as much as
is between an extraordinary wise, learned and experienced man; and an ordinary,
plain, rustic capacity? How many things seem strange, unreasonable,
incredible, impossible to the one, which to the others are well known to be
nothing so? Of Heraclitus the Philosopher his writings somebody once said, as
I remember, What he understood he liked very well; what he did not, he verily
believed was as good. And can it be that any man should owe less civility to
God? To this very purpose Plotinus the Philosopher, if my memory deceive me
not, has a pregnant passage. The testimonies also of diverse Heathens,
Philosophers and others, concerning the weakness and imbecility of man's
understanding to comprehend things divine, we could produce. But because
Aristotle is generally acknowledged to have been as a Favorite, so a great
Patron of nature, we will content our selves here with his ingenuous
acknowledgement. In his Metaphysics, (by him called sometimes Theology)
speaking in a place of the difficulty of that Science, he has these words:
Arist. Metaph. l. 2. c. 1. Ed. in fol. p. 856.
It being so that the difficulty of a thing may be taken two ways, it may be
that the cause of it is not in the things themselves, but in us. For as the
eyes of Bats are to the light of the Sun when it is day ((...)) so is the
intellect of our souls to the knowledge of those things, which of themselves
are most clear and perspicuous.

How unreasonable it is to judge of the ways or works of God, by humane either
faculties or affections, by what has been said, may appear: how dangerous it
is, though that also in part has appeared, yet because it is a point that I
would have well cleared, I shall instance in one particular more. We say
commonly, one good turn deserves another: and so indeed it is, for the most
part. There be but few whose goodness is not in some respect or other, if not
merely mercenary, yet mixed with a by-respect to themselves, and their own
interest. Among men, it is so: whereupon Epicurus inferred, that it must be so
in God too. And because he could not conceive, (right enough in that, according
to the Psalmist; Psalm. 16.2.
My goodness extends not to thee: but to the Saints that are in the earth)
how man could merit at the hands of God; another gross conceit of his, (and
that too grounded upon the similitude of man's weakness) concurring, that God
could not take care of man, or of the world in general, without much trouble
and distraction to himself; it made him to deny a Providence. Of this latter,
the writings of the Epicureans are full: it was their chiefest Theme. As for
the former, I appeal to Lucretius, one of Epicurus his greatest Champions; --
Quid enim immortalibus atque beatis,
Gratia nostra queat largirier emolumenti;
Vt tantum nostra causa gerere aggrediantur?


I shall not need to say more concerning this second principle. I had not said
so much of it, but that I conceived it of great importance to us, as will
appear in the progress of this Discourse.

The third is, That whatsoever has been revealed, III.
etc.

The matter is thus stated by Gregory Nazianz. in his Invectives against
Julian, who scoffed at the Christians for their usual Motto, Believe; saying,
that all their wit and wisdom was included in that one word: After diverse other
things by him alleged and retorted upon Julian, he thus proceeds: By that
word, says he, we profess to believe, that it is not lawful for us to
distrust, or discredit any thing that is averred by men divinely inspired: and
that the credit of such, with us is such that we account their bare word a
sufficient demonstration, far beyond all arguments and evidences of humane
ratiocination. So he there; and so others, whom I shall not need to name. Now
this principle of belief grounded upon divine revelation, as in one respect I
grant it may be accounted the proper principle of Christianity, because no
Religion or Science can justly pretend to such a foundation but Christianity;
so, generally considered, why it should, as by many it is made, be more proper
to Christians, then to other men, I see no sufficient reason. For how can it
be conceived, that any man or people in the world that really believe a Deity
or divine nature, should make any question of the truth of those things which
issue from such a nature? (...); Who can be so simple, or so phrentick rather?
says Theodoret.

But if any man apprehend it otherwise, yet approved experience will convince
him. In what esteem Oracles were anciently amongst all Nations, no man can be
ignorant that is not a stranger to all Histories: whence proceeded the Proverb,
Tanquam ex tripode, of those things which are of unquestionable credit or
certainty. From the same Origin as the Oracles, issued also their aruspicina,
auspicia, omina, and other such superstitions, in some sort or other received
and practiced amongst all Nations: professing by that how desirous and ready
they were to be guided and directed in their ways, at least in their most
important affairs, by them who could see into things future with better then
mortal eyes.

Upon this ground, politic wise men, as Numa Pompilius, Lycurgus, and diverse
others mentioned in ancient Histories, to make the people the more pliable to
their laws and institutions, devised means how to possess them with an
opinion, that they entertained some commerce with some Deity or other, by which
they were prompted to such and such things. Whether the Romans did not make
such a use of their Sibylles verses, or whether they really believed of them
themselves, what they persuaded others to believe, I will not enquire, because
either way it shows how ready men have been generally to yield assent and
obedience to divine revelation. Hence is that observation of Historians, Quiat.
Curt. l. 4. Ed. Paris. p. 74.
which many more largely insist upon, by Quint. Curtius, thus briefly
contracted: Nullares efficatius multitudinem regit, quam superstitio. Alioquin
impotens, Java, murabilis, ubi vana religione eapta est, melius vatibus quam
ducibus suis parent; that is, There is not any thing more powerful to rule the
people then superstition, (or an opinion of religion) which otherwise of it
self being unruly, wild, and mutable, when it is possessed with an opinion of
religion, it will sooner be commanded by their Prophets, then by their Captains.

This may be further confirmed by the doctrine of the ancient Masters of
Rhetoric, who where they treat of authorities, (as they call them) that are
brought by Orators and Advocates for the confirmation of any cause, give the
first place to those testimonies which they call divina testimonia. Ponitur a
quibusdam (says Quintilian) and quidem in part prima Deorum auctoritas, quae
est ex responsis, ut Socratem esse sapientissimum. And a little after, Quae cum
propria causae sunt, divina testimonia vocantur: cum aliunde accersuntur,
argumenta. True it is that these divina testimonia, (as the same Author
shows elsewhere) were not generally received among the Heathens. But the
reason was, partly because there were then many of Epicurus his sect, who
denied a Providence, and that the gods entermedled with humane affairs, and so
eluded all such authorities as false and counterfeit; and partly because most
were so in very truth, either merely forged and pretended; or so obscure and
ambiguous, as that nothing could certainly be concluded from them.

From what has been said, does sufficiently appear what has been the common
opinion of men concerning divine revelation. Though this may suffice, yet I
will add one passage or two of ancient Philosophers, which go further yet,
and may give further content to them who are not altogether unacquainted with
the writings of such.

Plato in his second Aleibiades, (a Dialogue of his so called) the subject
whereof is altogether (...), Of Prayer, having disputed at large how hard a
thing it is to to pray well, and insisted upon some particular forms, concludes
(in the person of Socrates) that they must be content and wait, until some
other teach them ((...) doccat, here, not discat) how they must be affected,
(or, how they ought to carry themselves) both toward God and men. Yea, but
when shall that time be (replyeth Alcibiades) and who is he that shall teach us?
for gladly would I see that man. And upon Socrates his return, that it is one
that will take care of him, and take away that mist from his eyes, that
hinders him from the knowledge of that, which is truly good or evil:
Alcibiades concludes, that he is fully resolved, to submit unto that man,
whatsoever he shall enjoin him, whereby he may be bettered.

This passage of Plato is much made of not by allegorizing Platonicks only,
who often give scope to their phansies upon very little ground of reason or
probability; but by more sober unpartiall men also. Among others, a learned
man, who has taken great pains upon Aristotle, and out of his affection to
Aristotle may be thought by some to have passed but a harsh censure upon Plato,
notwithstanding this his general judgment, instances in diverse particulars,
wherein he acknowledges him to deserve more then ordinary commendation: among
others, in this very particular which we have spoken of; in these very words:
Quod docuerit, etc. Denique quod omnino mirum est, etc. that is in English, As
for other things, so particularly (which is to be admired in him) that he did
teach the ineffable Incarnation, and coming of our Lord Christ, and did in a
manner presage (or, foresee) the Doctrine of the Gospel, when he said, that men
must acquiesce for a while to his instructions and admonitions, until a more
venerable (or majestic) man, and more sacred, who would open all sacraries and
fountains of truth, should appear upon Earth: whom, as one that could not err,
all men should be bound to follow. For who else by this more majestic, more
sacred man, can be meant, etc.

So he of that place: which though he does not quote, yet by what others say of
it to the same purpose, and because I know no other in all Plato that comes
nearer, I am confident is the place he so much commends. Yet there be that
make a question whether Socrates himself were not the man intended by Plato:
which some of the words would bear well enough; but the greater part, not; as I
conceive. However if any question be made of this place, there be others in
Plato no less admirable, and less questionable. Such a one is to be found in
his Phaedon: where having discoursed of some opinions (ridiculous enough, at
the best, but made worse by mistake) concerning the state of the soul after
death, he concludes, that to know the certainty (they are his very words) of
those things in this life, is either altogether impossible, or very difficult:
that nevertheless it is the part of a generous man, not to give over
searching, until he have met with the truth; or so much of it at least, as by
indefatigable industry is to be attained: That so, (says he) venturing our
selves in the Cockboat, as it were, of the safest and most exact discovery that
can be made by man, we may wade through this mortal life, and think our selves
happy in this condition, until a more firm bottom of divine Word (or, Oracle)
happen unto us, wherein with more safety and security we may be carried over.

In those words (...), by some translated, divine Oracle, does properly
signify, divine Word: which title to whom it is appropriated by sacred
Authors, no Christian, I hope, needs to be told.

The same Plato, in that so much admired piece, which Tully of old translated
into Latin, his Timeus, in a place, where he speaks of demons, or spirits; or
rather excuses himself that he does not speak of them, referring himself to
ancient tradition; he says there, as Tully has rendered him, Credendum est
nimirum veteribus and priscis, ut aiunt, viris, qui se progeniem Deorum esse
dicebant. And few words after, Ac difficillimum factu ((...), in Plato) a Diis
ortis fidem non habere, quanquam nec argumentis nec rationibus certis eorum
oration confirmetur: sed quia de suis rebus notis videntur loqui, Plato (...) v.
Co^ser cu^ Arist. 1. Metaphys. (...), etc.
veteri legi morique parendum est: that is, It is very hard (or, unreasonable)
not to believe them who are descended from the gods, though their speech (or,
doctrine) be not confirmed by any arguments or certain proofs. But forasmuch as
they spoke of their own things best known unto them, we must submit to the old
law, and rule. There will be found in these words not much less then in those
of Nazianzene, which at the beginning of this third Observation we spoke of, if
they be compared.

And again in another place of the same Timeus, having spoken of the first
principles of things, But as for these, says he, what was their original from
the very first beginning, God knows, and among men, such as are beloved of
him; (or, dear unto him) (...). I take notice of the words (besides the sense)
because of Christ his words, John 15.14, 15. (...), etc. Ye are my friends, if
ye do whatsoever I command you. Henceforth I call you not servants, for the
servant knows not what his Lord does: but I have called you friends: for all
things that I have heard of my Father, I have made known unto you.

If all these places being put together contain not a prophecy concerning
Christ, The Word of God, the Son of God, who was made flesh, and came into the
world, as to redeem the world by the oblation of his own body, so also to
reveal the truth of God unto men; if all these places, I say, being put
together do not amount to a prophecy, I know not we may call a prophecy.
Sure we are there is nothing forged or supposititious in all this; which of the
Sibyls (that collection of verses I mean, which now goes under that name) and
of Mercurius Trismegistus has been proved.

For a close of this third point or principle, I shall add a passage of Dio
Chrysostomus, a famous Orator and Philosopher, who lived in Trajanus the
Emperor his days, and was in great account with him; whose words also, because
he was a great Platonist, may be some light to those of Plato's.

All the discourses, and all the devices of men are nothing to divine
inspiration, and revelation, (or, authority.) For what traditions (or,
doctrines) soever concerning the gods and this Universe, that are not void of
wisdom and truth, have been among men, all such were begotten in the souls of
men by divine will, and by a special lot, (or, luck, Gr. (...)) as may be
known by them that were the first Prophets and Professors of Divinity; such as
Orpheus, son to one of the Muses, is reported to have been in Thracia; and
another certain Shepherd in Boecria, taught by the Muses. And whosoever they
be that take upon them to vent any doctrine of their own abroad for true,
without divine rapture, or inspiration, their doctrine is certainly both absurd
and wicked.

The fourth is, IV.
That those books of the Old and New Testament, etc.

I said before, I presupposed I had to do here with Christians, who were
already satisfied concerning the truth of those books. It is well known that
such have been of old, and are at this day, too many, who though they profess
to admit and allow for divine the same Scriptures that we do, and pretend to
the faith and doctrine therein contained, as much as we; yet do not believe of
Christ as we do. I have no direct aim at them in this Discourse, intended only
for the further satisfaction and confirmation of Orthodoxe Christians in this
main point: no direct aim, I say, but as the handling of this argument upon
Scripture grounds, may prove a conviction of their impiety and infidelity. As
for them that profess against this ground of either Old or New Testament,
which we build upon, they will not, neither directly or indirectly, come within
our reach.

But how then, (may some object perchance) can we, as we first maintained, give
a rational account of our faith, and stop the mouths of Atheists and Infidels,
if we cannot prove the Scriptures to be the Word of God, upon common grounds of
humane reason, and ratiocination? To which we answer, that although we do not
apprehend those grounds so evident and so uncontrollable, as to oblige every
rational man, to a present and ready assent, and therefore not to be reckoned
among those common notions (though reducible to them) and principles we have
spoken of: yet that the Scriptures by them that are learned may be maintained
upon grounds of reason sufficient to convince and to convert an Infidel who
with simplicity of heart, without strong prejudice or worldly engagements to
the contrary, does seek the truth, we do profess to believe, and should be
sorry (were it our aim, or argument) if we could not make it good.

One argument only I shall insist upon here, which by ancient Christians, as
being both popular (proper I mean for vulgar capacities) and solid, was much
pressed, and whereof they found good use. The testimony of a known professed
enemy, or adversary, has always among all men been accounted a very pregnant
evidence. And what relation there is between the Old and New Testament, is well
known to all Christians, and may soon be demonstrated to them that are not. Now
then what greater evidence of the truth of the Old Testament can any man
require, then the Jews, our greatest and most malicious adversaries? Then the
Jews, I say, who by a special Providence, though scattered and dispersed
through the whole world continue to this day a distinct Nation from all other
Nations of the world, and to this day so zealous for Moses and all other
Scriptures of the Old Testament, that in all places, for testimony of the truth
of those Scriptures, they are ready, if they be put to it, to lay down their
lives, and to forgo whatsoever is dearest unto them. Whose predecessors also
(that too, by a special admirable Providence) have been of old so curious and
so provident for the preservation of those Scriptures which they acknowledged,
that they devised an art (of which art either for invention or accuratnesse
there is no parallel in all the ancient learning of the Heathens how to prevent
not the loss of it only, but the corruption also, by any either addition, or
diminution, or alteration; in words, or syllables, yea letters, and tittles.

How much this argument of the Jews testimony was made of by the ancients, and
of what consequence it then proved, may appear by Saint Augustine, who speaks
of it in sundry places of his Works. In the twelfth of his books against the
Manicheans, he says; Quid enim est aliud hodieque gens ipsa Judaeorum, nisi
quaedam scriniaria Christianorum, basulans leges and prophetas ad testimonium
assertionis Ecclesiae? that is: For what to this day are the Jews, but as it
were the registers (or, record-keepers) of the Christians, bearing up and down
the Law and the Prophets with them for a testimony to the Church? Saint
Augustine in these words does allude to the custom of the Jews, who then in
every Synagogue were wont (and use it in most places, I believe to this day) to
have sacred chests, or desks, wherein to keep their holy Bible, not only for
its safety, but in reverence to it also. What Saint Augustine calls Scrinium,
Tertullian inditeth, armarium, in his De Habitumuliebri, chapter 3. And Epiphanius
in his Treatise, De Ponderibus and mensuris, where he treats of the
difference of Canonicalll books from others, he uses the word (...): Such
books (says he speaking of that which is called Wisdom, and others of like
nature) are accounted by them useful and profitable, but are not in the number
((...)) of the Canonical: for which cause also they are not laid up (with the
Canonical) in the aron, that is, ((...)) in the chest or capse of the
Testament.

Lamp. Alardi, Epiphyll. Phiolog.
I wonder that any man could so mistake Epiphanius, as though he had believed
that the whole Jews Bible, or Old Testament, had been kept in the Ark where the
two Tables containing the ten Commandments, were appointed to be laid; which
Ark, before the said Testament was complete, ever since the Babylonian
Captivity had been wanting. Petavius himself, a learned Jesuit that has set
out Epiphanius, except he may be allowed to expunge those words as spurious,
(the last refuge of venturous Critics, when they are plunged, and cannot get
out) does plainly profess to suspect this to have been the opinion of
Epiphanius: whereas we have more occasion to suspect of him, that he did not
understand him, or had any thought of those passages of Tertullian, and
Augustine, which would have made Epiphanius his meaning clear enough, and as we
conceive, unquestionable.

I have now done with those grounds of common notions, and principles of humane
reason, the consideration whereof I conceived would be proper and pertinent to
the subject we are to treat of: a subject of it self so sublime and so far
above the reach of humane understanding, that whoever takes upon him to meddle
with it, had need to lay well his grounds beforehand, and carefully to
circumscribe himself, lest he fall into extravagances, before he be aware. Qui
scrutatur Majestatem, opprimetur a gloria, whether that were Solomon's meaning,
Prove. 25.27. or no, may be controverted; but a true sentence it is however, and
they shall be sure to find it true, that proceed not, in such arguments, with
much wariness.

This method of proceeding by certain hypotheses laid for a foundation, though
it be most proper to Mathematicians, yet it is not unusual to other Artists
and Writers. It is the very method used by Plato in his Timeus, the subject
whereof is the Creation of the world, of man particularly: our subject is the
restoration, or regeneration of mankind, in Christ: which of the two, is
generally accounted the greater work.

OF THE INCARNATION of CHRIST.
ANcient Philosophers that have written concerning the nature of this Universe,
observe this as a great mystery of nature, and a singular evidence of the power
and wisdom of God (the author of nature) that whatsoever is commonly said to
dye, or to perish, is by this death, or corruption (which they more properly
call alteration) the cause of the production and generation of something else:
whereby the course of this worlds generation in general, is continued and
maintained.

It may be applied (in some kind) to this sacred subject and mystery of Christ
his Incarnation. The fall and miscarrying of the first Adam, was the cause or
occasion at the least, of the second Adam. Had not the first Adam, (the first
fruits of mankind, in whom the whole lump was either to be sanctified or
polluted) sinned, and by his sin undone all that should come from him; the
second Adam, Christ Jesus, according to the flesh, as the Scripture speaks,
had never been born; for there had been no need of him. For as for the conceits
of some either ancient Heretics, or later Schoolmen, who have maintained a
contrary opinion, as neither grounded upon Scripture, nor any probability of
reason, and generally rejected by the more sober of all sides, I willingly
pass by.

But on the other side, though the Incarnation of the Son of God, of all the
works of God has eminently the preeminence, yet we may not say or think, that
therefore the first man sinned, or was ordained to sin, that the Son of God
might be incarnated. For so we should make God the author of sin, then which,
nothing either in it self can be more detestable, or more contrary to true
piety. God indeed to whom all things past, present and future are equally
present, as he foresaw from all eternity the fall of Adam, and in him of all
mankind; so did he from all eternity decree the Incarnation of his Son for the
restauratio^ of man. Whence are those phrases of Scripture, that Christ (as a
Redeemer) 1 Pet. 1.20.
was foreordained before the foundation of the world: that we were Ephesians. 1.4.
chosen, or 2 Timothy 1.9.
saved, (in Christ) before the foundation of the world; or, before the world
began: and again, that Christ is the Apoc. 13.8.
Lamb slain from the foundation of the world: though as for this last passage,
I rather embrace their interpretation, (such hyperbaton's, as they call them,
being very frequent in the Scriptures) who refer this from the beginning of
the world, to the book of life (as Apocal. 17.18.) rather then to the Lamb
slain: though I must profess against the reason that is given by some (as
Ribera the Jesuit, upon the place) as though there were any absurdity or
incongruity in the speech, being so justifiable by other parallel places of
Scripture. But this foresight of God did no ways occasion, much less
necessitate the disobedience of Adam, who as he was created with perfect
freedom of will, so he might (had not he been wanting to himself) have
resisted the temptation of the Devil, and have continued in that innocence, to
which, his happiness and immortality was annexed. But it so fell out, that
Adam used his freewill to his own, and all that should be after him, being
descended from him, their ruin, and eternal confusion. Better it had been for
him certainly, and better for all that had any dependence of him, never to have
been, (for I am not of their opinion that think any being better then no
being) then to see himself at once stripped of his happiness and innocence: of
the son of God, become the slave of the Devil: and besides his own personal
misery, the occasion of so much evil unto others. Seneca De Clem. l. 1.
Quanto autem non nasci melius, quam numerari inter publico malo natos? how
much more then quam unum omnis omnibus mali causam extitisse?

Here a question offers it self; though we would be very cautelous of moving
questions of this nature, where the Scripture it self is silent, too much
curiosity in this kind having been the occasion of sundry blasphemies and
heresies; yet because there is some ground for it in the Scripture, we may not
altogether pass it by. The question is, Why God would permit Adam to sin,
which he might many ways have prevented, if he had thought fit.

The first answer is, because it became God well, (if this be not too bold a
speech) to make good his own order, and to maintain his own work. It had
pleased God to endow Adam with a perfect free will. He was furnished with
sufficient grace to continue innocent, and to withstand sin; but that grace was
conditional; as be used it, as he liked it, he might either improve it, or
lose it. If therefore we must make a question of it, it is more proper to ask
why God created Adam with free will, then why God did not hinder the sin of
Adam, being so created. This very question much troubled ancient Philosophers,
who had the bare light of reason and nature for their guide; Why God being so
perfectly good, as they did acknowledge him, would suffer sin and wickedness
in men and among men either at all, or so far to prevail. They commonly
distinguish of several degrees, or kinds of creatures with relation to
goodness, by God created: the last kind whereof ((...), is their word) are
those, whose condition is to be mutable; to fall, and to rise again; sometimes
to look upwards unto the fountain of good; sometimes to be swayed downwards by
the contagion of the body, and deceitfulness of the world: and their
determination upon the matter is, that neither the power nor the wisdom of
Almighty God would, or could so much have appeared, if this kind also (this
(...)) had not been. What they say, being grounded upon no better authority,
then humane ratiocination, will not much concern us, but to check our impiety,
if neither reason, (commended unto us with the advantage of such precedents)
nor religion, (grounded upon certain revelation) can do that in us, which bare
and naked reason could in them; to make us, if not to plead for our Creator by
strength of arguments; yet to acknowledge him good and wise in all his ways,
even beyond our understandings, and where our reason is at a stand.

Another reason is given, because God having in himself predetermined the
redemption of collapsed mankind by the Incarnation of his Son, he therefore
left Adam to the liberty of his will, and the Devil of his malice, because no
other way can be conceived how he might more effectually have demonstrated and
revealed at once, unto men and Angels the infiniteness both of his goodness
and of his justice: as we shall have occasion afterward to show more at large.

Adam then (and in him humana natura, or mankind in general) being so created
by God, and through the temptation of the Devil, and his own wretchedness
((...), the Greek Fathers usually call it, that is, looseness and remissness
of the mind, accompanied with carelessness and security) so lapsed; it pleased
Almighty God in the depth of his goodness and wisdom, to appoint his
restoration by the Incarnation of his Son, that eternal Word, by whom he had
made, as all other things, so man particularly: that is, That his Son,
coeternall with him, and from all eternity (by an incomprehensible mystery)
begotten by him, should in the fullness of time be made flesh: that is, assume
the nature of man unto himself, into a perfect Union (but without mixture or
confusion) of two natures in one person: that so united, and so incarnated, he
might offer himself, by his Passion, (Christ, as God and Man, though not in his
Deity, suffering) unto God, his Father, as a sufficient ransom, in his
strictest justice, for the sins of all men: to the end, that whosoever should
believe in him so incarnated, and by a lively faith lay hold on the merits of
his death, might not perish, but as a true member of his mystical body, might
have in him everlasting life.

How Christ, the eternal Son of God, came to be the son of a woman, as it does
deeply concern us not to be ignorant of what the Scriptures have revealed unto
us about it, so to go beyond that, I conceive no less dangerous. The
Scriptures say, as we have it in our Creed, that he was conceived of the holy
Ghost, and born of the Virgyn Mary: and the words of the Angel to the blessed
Virgin are known, Luke 1.35.
The Holy Ghost shall come upon thee, and the power of the Highest shall
overshadow thee; therefore also that Holy thing that shall be born of thee,
shall be called the Son of God. If any man venture beyond this in discoursing
the manner, how; I dare not follow him. It is observed, (and observable indeed)
that in this mystery Christ is not so properly said to be (...), or (...), that
is, begotten; (though that word also be used sometimes (as (...), made: as not
begotten of the substance or essence of the Holy Ghost, (as ordinarily children
are of the substance of their fathers) but made by the power of the Holy Ghost,
of the substance of the Virgin Mary only. Whereupon ancient Fathers were wont
to say, that as Christ in regard of his eternal generation is (...), that is,
without a Mother; so in regard of his temporal, (...), that is, without a
Father. There is good use of this observation against those heretics of old,
and the Anabaptists of later times, who though they could not agree among
themselves, how Christ came to have a body, whether true, or imaginary, and the
like; yet agreed in this, to deny that he was made of the substance of a woman.

This is the mystery of which we may truly say, that it is The chiefest of the
ways of God. That the justification of any one sinner, is a greater work then
the Creation of the world in general, is by many maintained, and diverse
reasons are given for it. I durst not undertake for the solidity of all those
reasons (those excepted, that are drawn from this very particular of Christ his
Incarnation) that are given: but certainly this mystery of the Son of God his
Incarnation, is so transcendent a miracle above all other miracles of the
world, whether Creation, or any other, as that we may justly doubt, whether he
truly believe it, or ever took it into serious consideration, who in comparison
of this, does admire any thing else. For as for those things that are commonly
most admired, and for the wonderfulnesse by diverse thought incredible, if a man
shall rationally consider of them, they will not so appear in very deed. It is
the saying of an ancient Father, (one of the most learned and rational of
those times) that there is but one true miracle in the world, and that is, an
Omnipotent God. Having instanced in some one particular, which among the many
strange sights of this world, he thought might seem as strange as any; (...),
says he; Theodor Therapeut. l. 3. Sed ibi Latinus interpres mentem verborum
non assecutus est: non expressit certe.
a miracle above a miracle: and presently, (upon better consideration, as it
were) he does correct himself. And yet I dare say ((...)) that the miracle, is
no miracle: For God, to whom al things, that he can think convenient, are
easy, being the author, (or, workman) we have much reason to glorify the
author, but no reason at all to wonder at the matter. He gives the reason in
another place: That any thing should be, (whether by generation, or creation)
whereof a cause (God, that is, the supreme cause) can be given, right reason
will easily allow of. But that any thing should be without a cause (as God
only is) no reason can comprehend.

Vos enim ipsi dicere soletis, nihil esse quod Deus efficere non possit, and
quidem sine labor ullo; ut enim hominum membra nulla conten^ione, mente ipsa
ac v luntate moveantur, sic numine Deorum omnia fingi, moveri, mutarique posse:
neque id dicitis superstitiose atque aniliter, sed physica constantique
ratione. Materiam enim rerum, in qua and ex qua omnia sint, totam esse
flexib^lem and commutabilem, ut nihil sit quod non ex ea quamvis subito singi
convertique possit: ejus autem universae fict^icem and moderatricem divinam
esse providentiam. Cic. de Not. Deorum.
And indeed this Omnipotency of God some Heathen Philosophers have acknowledged,
and expressed it very well, likening it to the power of the soul over the
members of the body, which members upon the least intention, or intimation of
the mind turn and move with all readiness and facility. Now God, said they,
is the soul, or mind of this Universe, all parts and parcels whereof are at his
beck, and disposal, to be turned into any shape or form at his pleasure, with
as much ease and facility, as the members of our bodies are swayed by the
motions and commands of our minds. This therefore granted, that there is a God,
and he (as in reason it will be supposed) omnipotent, all things that imply not
contradiction (for such rather argue weakness, then power) to such a one must
needs be of equal facility. It is the fashion of men to wonder at those things
only that are not usual: that is, (as I intend it here) that are not, or
happen not according to that order or course of nature, which Omnipotent God in
his wisdom thought fit at the beginning of the world to establish. And indeed
as God did not establish that order at the first for nothing; that is, to break
it without some extraordinary cause: so there is no reason that those things
should easily be believed, which are contrary to the ordinary course of nature;
until certain evidence, or divine revelation (the best evidence) enforce our
faith. But if those things be considered in themselves with relation to the
power of God, no solid reason can be given; why, for example, it should be more
strange or incredible, that men (as by ancient Heathens, as well Philosophers,
as others, they were generally conceived to have begun at the first) should
spring out of the earth, as plants and trees; then to be propagated, as they
are, by way of generation; in the right and rational consideration whereof so
many particulars, so wonderful and so incomprehensible to humane reason, offer
themselves, that the ablest Naturalists the world has had, as well Heathens,
as others, have freely acknowledged their ignorance, and weakness of
understanding, and have been excited (some of them) to praise and glorify God
for his wonderful works, as Galen does in diverse of his writings, upon this
occasion. And certainly had it been so, that another way of propagation (as it
is conceived by diverse Ancients, that another way would have been, if man had
not sinned) had been established by God; I am of Justin Martyr his opinion,
that this way, ((...), etc.) if then proposed to any man's consideration, would
have seemed as incredible and impossible, as whatever, in that kind, is
proposed to our belief as Christians Hence it is that the Apostle where he
discourses of the resurrection of the dead, (at the possibility of which so
many stumbled) he appeals to approved experience of things natural, Thou
fool, says he, 1 Cor. 15.36, 37, 38.
that which thou sowest is not quickened except it die. And that which thou
sowest, thou sowest not that body that shall be, but bare grain, it may be of
wheat, or of some other grain. But God gives it a body, as it has pleased
him, and to every seed his own body.

But this mystery of Christ, the Eternal Son of God, his Incarnation, is quite
of another nature. That which in other things does, or may satisfy a rational
man, here it increases the wonder, and makes it more incredible. Ye do err,
says Christ to some that could not believe the resurrection of the dead, Man.
22.29.
not knowing the Scriptures, nor the power of God. But here the more we know
the power of God, the fuller and perfecter apprehension we have of his
Greatness, and Omnipotency, the more incredible may this mystery seem unto us.
Holy David in the 143. Psalm, but upon occasion of a temporal deliverance, the
hurtful sword, in the 9. verse) with admiration falls into this consideration,
Lord what is man that thou take knowledge of him, or the son of man, that
thou make account of him? And in another place, the consideration of the
world, and works of God, expressed this sweet and devout ejaculation from him,
Psalm. 8. taken in the literal sense: for in the mystical sense, these very
words are applied to this mystery, Heb. 11.6.
When I consider the Heavens, the Moon and the Stars which thou have ordained:
What is man that thou art mindful of him; and the son of man that thou
visitest him? But Lord, may we say, Thou, Who coverest thy self with light as
with a garment: who stretchest out the Heavens like a Curtain: Who laidst the
beams of thy chambers in the waters; who make the clouds thy charet; who
walk upon the wings of the wind. Who have measured the waters in the hollow
of thy hand; and meted out Heaven with thy span; Before whom all nations are as
nothing; yea, less then nothing and vanity: Thou, who said, Let there be
light, and there was light: Let the Firmament appear, and it did appear; the
waters flow, and they did flow: Who as thou did at the first make Heaven and
Earth, and all that in them is, with a word of thy mouth; so can with the
least blast reduce them all to their first Chaos and nothing: What is man, that
for his sake thou would be made man: that ever, for man's sake, it should be
said of thee, He has no form nor comeliness: He is despised and rejected of
men: Esaias 53.3, etc.
a man of sorrows, and acquainted with grief: or ever Thou should have
occasion to say of thy self; Mat. 8.20.
The Foxes have holes, and the birds of the air have nests: but the Son of man
has not where to lay his head?

I wonder not if the Prophet say, Who has believed our report? never had
infidelity (were it not for divine revelation) a more plausible color.
Hereupon some infer wittily, that the incredibility of this mystery should
(if rightly considered) make it the more credible. For, say they, Theod.
Therap. l. 6. (...) etc. Salv. De Gubern. Dei lib. 4. Vtique hoc magis
maestimabilis pietas, etc. Sed omnium acutissime Tertul. De Bapt. c. 2. Alqui
eo magis credendum, si quia mirandu^ est, idcirco non credendum. Qualia enim
decet esse opera divina, nisi supra omnem admirationem? 1 John 4.8, 9.
such goodness does best become an infinite Omnipotent God, so great and so
excessive, as for the very greatness, it should not seem credible. But to this
must be added, (to make the Observation more solid) that as God is infinite in
all that he is; so more particularly and peculiarly, in love and goodness:
because love and goodness, (if there be any impropriety in the speech, it must
be excused, because we cannot otherwise speak of God, but improperly) are his
very nature and essence. As ratiocination, (say the Schoolmen) is the proper
nature of man, sic ipsa natura Dei est essentia bonitatis. For which they refer
us, to their supposed Dionysius Areopagita: But why not rather to Saint John?
Does not Saint John upon this very occasion of Christ his Incarnation
positively say, that ((...)) God is love? He that loves not, (says he)
knows not God; For God is love. In this was manifested the love of God
toward us, because that God sent his only begotten Son into the world, that
we might live through him.

Of the love of men toward their own children, what admirable effects and
operations upon extraordinary emergent occasions it has had in diverse, much
might be said out of ancient and later stories: much more, and more wonderful,
(because grounded upon nature only; whereas that of man, upon reason and piety
also) of the love of dumb creatures toward their young ones; whereof Poets,
and Naturalists that have written of their nature, treat at large, and give
many instances. Now upon this, Salvian (an ancient Father, Presbyter
Massiliensis, by his title; but styled by Gennadius, Episcoporum Magister)
infers thus: (it is upon another occasion, Gods Providence; but it is
applied by himself to this subject of Christ his Incarnation) Deus ergo qui
etiam minimis animantibus, etc. that is, God therefore who even in the least
creatures, (as Ants and Bees, spoken of before) has planted this affection
toward their own, how can it be that he should bereave himself of it?
Especially, when all love of good things in us, proceeds from his good love.
For he is the source and fountain of all things: and because in him (as it is
written) we live, move, and have our being; from him therefore we have derived
this affection, whereby we embrace those that are our own. For all the world,
and all mankind, Pignus est creatoris sui.
are resemblances, (or evidences) of their Creator. And therefore by this
affection wherewith we embrace (pignora nostra) those that are our own; he
would have us to know how much he loves (pignora sua) those that proceed from
him.

In a mystery therefore of this nature, so far exceeding the capacity of man,
as that the weakest and wisest of men, beyond what is revealed by God himself,
are as the tallest and lowest statures to the height of the highest heavens;
and again, a mystery of so much importance to us, so much partly by professed
Infidels openly contradicted and opposed; and partly by cunning Heretics
sophisticated and depraved; it does much concern every sincere Christian to be
well furnished and provided of such principal clear texts of Scripture, as the
wisdom of God has provided unto us to that end; not so much to satisfy our
understandings, as to settle our faith and our belief. Three special branches
of this great mystery there be, about which the curiosity and infidelity of men
has especially stumbled, and wherein it does mainly concern all true
Christians to be well grounded: which are, 1. The Deity; 2. The Humanity (two
natures in one Person) of Christ; and 3. The Merit and Propitiation of his
blood. Concerning these, taking them severally in the order by us proposed, we
conceive these places of Scripture, taken in themselves with that light only
which being thus joined and put together, they do afford and hold forth to one
another, without any further gloss or comment, to be very full, pregnant, and
satisfactory.

First, concerning the Deity of Christ, these places: Behold, a Virgin shall be
with child, Matthew. 1.23.
and shall bring forth a Son, and they shall call his name Emmanuel, which
being interpreted is, God with us.

In the beginning was the Word, Joh. 1.1, 2, 3, 4.
and the Word was with God, and the Word was God. The same was in the beginning
with God. All things were made by him, and without him was not any thing made
that was made. In him was life, and the life was the light of man.

John 5.18.
Therefore the Jews sought the more to kill him, not only because he had broken
the Sabbath, but said also that God was his Father, making himself equal with
God.

Romans 9.5.
Whose are the Fathers, and of whom as concerning the flesh, Christ came, who is
over all, God blessed for ever. Amen.

Philip. 2.6.
Who being in the form of God, thought it no robbery to be equal with God.

1 Timothy 3.16.
And without controversy, great is the mystery of godliness: God manifest in
the flesh, etc. Looking for the blessed hope, and the glorious appearing of the
great God and our Savior Jesus Christ: Who gave himself for us, etc.



Secondly, concerning his humanity, or humane nature, these: John 1.14.
And the Word was made flesh, and dwelt among us, (and we beheld his glory, the
glory as of the only begotten of the Father) full of grace and truth.

Romans 1.3.
Concerning his Son Jesus Christ our Lord, which was made of the seed of David
according to the flesh.

Gal. 4.4.
But when the fullness of the time was come, God sent forth his Son, made of a
woman, made under the Law.

1 Timothy 2.5.
For there is one God, and one Mediator between God and man, the Man Christ
Jesus.

Heb. 2.14.
For as much then as the children are partakers of flesh and blood, he also
himself likewise took part of the same, that through death he might destroy him
that had the power of death; that is, the Devil.

Heb. 2.16, 17.
For verily he took not on him the nature of Angels, but he took on him the
seed of Abraham. Wherefore in all things it behoved him to be made like unto
his brethren, etc.

Hereby know ye the Spirit of God: 1 John 2.2, 3.
Every spirit that confesses that Jesus Christ is come in the flesh, is of
God. And every spirit that confesses not, etc.



Thirdly, that Christ offered himself as a Propitiation for our sins, these:

Even as the Son of man came not to be ministered unto, Matthew. 20.28.
but to minister, and to give his life a ransom for many.

The next day John sees Jesus coming unto him, John 1.29.
and says, Behold the Lamb of God, which takes away the sin of the world.

For God so loved the world, 3.16.
that he gave his only begotten Son, that whosoever believes in him should
not perish, but have everlasting life.

Take heed therefore unto your selves, and to all the flock, Acts 20.28.
over the which the holy Ghost has made you overseers, to feed the Church of
God, which he has purchased with his own blood.

Being justified freely by his grace, Romans 3.24.5.
through the redemption that is in Jesus Christ: Whom God has set forth to be
a propitiation, through faith in his blood, to declare his righteousness, for
the remissi^n of sins that are past, through the forbearanc^ of God.

But of him are ye in Christ Jesus, 1 Cor. 1.30.
who of God is made unto us Wisdom, and Righteousness, and Sanctification,
and Redemption.

But Christ being come an high Priest of good things to come, etc neither by
the blood of goats and calves; Heb. 9.11, 12, 13, 14.
but by his own blood he entered in once into the holy place, having obtained
eternal redemption for us. For if the blood of bulls and goats, and the ashes
of an heifer sprinkling the unclean, sanctifies to the purifying of the flesh:
How much more shall the blood of Christ, who through the eternal Spirit
offered himsel without spot to God, purge your conscience from dead works, to
serve the living God?

Heb. 9.26.
For then, etc. but now once in the end of the world has he appeared to put
away sin by the sacrifice of himself.

1 Pet. 2.24.
Who his own self bare our sins in his own body on the tre^, that we beeng dead
to sins, should live unto righteousness; by whose stripes ye were healed.

I said before, my purpose was not to encounter adversaries here, but to
comfort and confirm them who stood unshaken in the same precious faith, (to use
Saint Peter's words) upon which precious faith the Church was first founded, and
which by the succession of so many ages has been continued and derived unto
us. Otherwise we might and must have taken notice of many more places; and not
content our selves with passages and testimonies of the New Testament only, but
ground especially upon prophesies of the Old: as also have taken notice of many
false glosses and interpretations, whereby the adversaries have endeavored to
elude the clearest testimonies of either; whether Old or New Testament: all
which could not be without much more discourse, then I can allow my self at
this time. Of prophesies, there is not any that has either more troubled the
obstinate Jews; (as appears by their writings) or converted more of the more
candid and ingenuous among them, then the fifty third Chapter of the Prophet
Esaias: which whole Chapter both as a precious cordial to them that are wounded
in spirit; and an excellent antidote against the danger of all spreading
infection of unsound doctrine in this main fundamental, deserves to be
committed to memory; or at least often to be read and pondered by all prudent
and wary Christians.

There be some texts of Scripture concerning this high and sublime mystery,
which by them that are not well grounded, without some precaution, may easily
be mistaken. We are taught by the Scriptures and true analogy of faith, that
the Word is so united unto our flesh, the nature of God unto the nature of man,
as that both make but one person: though but one person, yet so nevertheless,
that as the natures themselves, so the properties of both, remain, distinct,
unpermixed, unconfused. But this though in the truth and reality of the thing
it be perpetual and immutable, yet in verbal expressions it is not so
precisely observed. There is a (...). (as they commonly call it) that is, a
communication of idioms and properties, in words and speeches, sometimes used.
Ancient Fathers call it (...), (or (...), or (...), or (...)) a communication
not (...), of properties; but (...), of names or words. S. Cyrill uses the
word (...), appropriation; and Damascen (besides other words, as (...), and the
like) (...), about the right interpretation of which word there is some
controversy amongst the Learned. These kind of expressions, however called,
have bred great disputes and occasioned (as much as any thing) that doleful
division between us, and those Protestants commonly called Lutherans, they
contending, that this communication of properties is not verbal only, but
real: whereupon they infer strange conclusions. The truth is, as some
moderate learned men (of this side especially) state the business, the
controversy it self may seem rather verbal, then real: not such at least, as
should disturb the peace of the Church, so much as it has done. But we will
not meddle with controversies. For the better understanding of the Scriptures
in this sacred subject, I find five rules, or propositions collected out of
them: or rather the several expressions, and modos loquendi there used upon
this argument, digested and reduced into five heads, or rules. They are such as
every body needs not, I know; but such as every body is very well capable of,
and therefore I shall the more willingly insert them here.

I.
The first is, some things are spoken of Christ in the Scriptures, which must be
understood of his divine nature only; as, Romans 9.5. Christ, who is over us
all, God blessed for ever. John 8.58. Before Abraham was, I am. Heb. 1.2, 3. By
whom also he made the worlds. Who being the brightness of his glory, and the
express image of his Person, and upholding all things by the word of his
power: and other like places.

II.
The second is, Some things are spoken of Christ, which must be understood of
his humane nature only; as, Luke 1.31. Thou shall conceive in thy womb, and
bring forth a Son, and shall call his Name Jesus. Luke 2.52. And Jesus
increased in wisdom and stature, and in favor with God and man. Matthew. 26 39.
Nevertheless, not as I will, but as thou will; and the like.

Some, at first hearing, may think that those speeches, Matthew. 20.23. (But to
sit on my right hand and on my left, is not mine to give; but it shall be given
to them, for whom it is prepared of my Father) and Mark 13.32. (But of that day
and that hour knows no man, no not the Angels which are in heaven, neither
the Son, but the Father) should be referred to this head or rule. Certain
enough it is that of the Ancients not a few did so understand them as spoken by
Christ of himself, not as God, but Man. But most Interpreters expound them
otherwise, and show reasons why that exposition, as contrary to other places of
Scripture, cannot stand. The truth is, they are difficult pl^ces, as may appear
by the diversity of expositions. But I will not make it my business here. This
caveat I thought would not be amiss, which is all I intended.

The third is, some things are spoken of Christ, III.
which must be understood of his Person only, not of either of his natures
particularly; as, Matthew. 17.5. This is my beloved Son, in whom I am well
pleased; hear ye him. Ephesians. 5.23. Christ is the head of the Church, and he is
the Savior of the body. 1 Timothy 2.5, 6. One Mediator between God and man, the
Man Christ Jesus. Who gave himself a ransom for all, to be testified in due
time: and the like. To this head are referred all such as concern Christ his
Office. For Christ is not our Mediator, but as he is both God and Man. It were
gross blasphemy to say, (in property of speech) that the divine nature of
Christ did suffer; but that he suffered as God and Man, we must believe; the
consideration of his divinity concurring with the sufferings of his humane
nature, to make them available.

The fourth is, IV.
Some things are spoken of Christ as God, which must be understood of his
humane nature only; as, 1 Cor. 11.8. For had they known it, they would not
have crucified the Lord of Glory. Acts 20.28. Feed the Church of God, which he
has purchased with his own blood.

V.
The fifth is, Some things are spoken of Christ as Man, which must be understood
of his divine nature; as, John 3.13. No man has ascended up to Heaven, but he
that came down from Heaven: even the Son of Man which is in Heaven. Matthew.
9.6. But that ye may know that the Son of Man has power on earth to forgive
sins, etc. Joh. 6.62 What and if ye shall see the Son of Man ascend up where he
was before?

There is some difference between us and the Lutherans whether in these
passages of the two last rules, (the 4. and the 5.) the idiomata, or properties
of one nature should be said to be communicated to the other nature; or rather
(as we maintain) to the Person. The consequence of this difference, if nearly
sifted, may be somewhat; but otherwise (we acknowledging the reality of this
communication of idiomes, in the Person; and they so bounding and expounding
that communication which they maintain, as that the properties of both natures
may still continue really distinct) there appears to me but little necessity of
such quarrelling about it.

To these rules of distinctions, the Scripture it self in direct terms, or by
formal precedents does sometime lead us: as S. Peter in those words, (speaking
of Christ) being put to death in the flesh (1 Pet. 3.18.) and suffered for us
in the flesh: (Ibid. 4.1.) and the same Peter, Chapter 2.23. Who his own self
bare our sins in his body (not, in corpore proprio, or, suo ipsius; but, in
corpore suo, as both Beza, and the Vulgar; which I conceive more proper, though
it be in the Original, (...)) on the tree. So S. Paul, Which was made of the
seeed of David, according to the flesh, Romans 1.3. and Chap. 9.3. to the same
purpose, Of whom, as concerning the flesh, Christ came.

I find that most who have written of this subject, both Schoolmen and others,
take into consideration the necessity of Christ his Incarnation, or as some
propose it, of his satisfaction, for the reparation of mankind: Some also
insist much upon it, as a main circumstance. This puts a necessity upon me, of
saying somewhat of it, who otherwise could have rested well satisfied in the
simple knowledge of that way of salvation, which the wisdom of God has
pitched upon, with those considerations which himself in his holy Word, has
recommended it unto us with, without going so high, as the consideration of the
possibility of another way.

But since I may not altogether omit it, my first care shall be rightly to
state the question; which is not, Whether the reparation of mankind, and
thereupon the Incarnation of Christ was absolutely necessary: that Christ would
have been incarnated, though man had not sinned, has been, I know, the opinion
of some; but that the reparation of man being fallen, was absolutely necessary,
not of any, that I remember: Neither is this the question, Whether upon a
supposition, that satisfaction must be had, any other true and proper
satifaction could be found, but in, and by Christ; which is a point handled by
Vide Chrysostom. Theodoret etc. in 1 Timothy 2.5. Sed praecipue Athan. Orat. 2.
cont. Arr. and Cyrill. Alexan. De recta fide, ad Theodos. and R ginas.
diverse of the Ancients, who give sundry reasons grounded upon the Scripture,
that it could not; and has Vid. Reverendiss. Archiep. Armachanu^, in Tr^ctatum
qui inscribitur Immanuel* vel, De mysterio Incarn.
lately by some of eminent worth and rank, more accurately been discussed and
proved: but, this supposed, that God after the fall of Adam having a purpose to
restore mankind to its former, or a better state both of innocence and
felicity, whether he might not have brought it about any other way then by the
Incarnation of his Son: or thus, (for it comes all to one, and so it is
proposed by some) Whether God can forgive sins without a proportionable
satisfaction; this is the question intended hereby us.

This speculation was first occasioned by the objections and scruples of
ancient Heathens, who as they liked well to hear of Gods mercy in general, so
they could not (many of them) digest, that the Almighty should be put to such
shifts, and stoop so low, (as they interpreted it) for the execution of it.
Most ancient Fathers and Writers, that I have observed, resolve the question
affirmatively, that it was very possible to God, either some other way; or
without any at all, by his bare will and pleasure. So, not Athanasius, and
Augustine only, who are cited by learned Hugo Grotius in his Treatise De
Satisfactione; but S. Cyprian also, (or whoever is the Author of that excellent
piece De cardinalibus operibus Christi) Origin, Theodoret; Leo, and Gregory,
two Popes, for their singular worth and piety, surnamed Great.

Theod. Therap. l. 6.
Theodoret having first showed how many things God had made for man's sake, and
thereupon inferred how well it became him to restore them being fallen, for whom
such store and plenty, in Heaven and in Earth, was appointed and provided; and
so proceeded in his discourse to the Incarnation of Christ, goes on thus: It
was very easy for him without this veyling of himself with our flesh to have
wrought this salvation of mankind, and by his bare will not only to have
destroyed the power of death; but sin also, ((...)) the mother of death; and
the begetter of sin, that mischievous spirit; the one to have altogether
abolished; and the other, to have driven from the earth, and confined to his
after a short season appointed habitation, [eternall] darkness. Pariter and
Leo, 2. De Nativit. Misericordia Dei, cum ad recuperandu^ genus humanu^
ineffabiliter ei multa suppeterent, hanc potissimum consulendi viam elegit, qua
ad destruendum opus Diaboli, non virtute uteretur potentiae, sed ratione
justitiae.
But it was not the will of God in this to manifest his absolute power; but the
justice and equity of his providence, (or, wisdom.)

Origin, (whom I mention for his antiquity, though not always to be followed in
his opinions) upon this argument, because the question proposed by Celsus the
Heathen was not, whether any other way in general; but particularly, why not
such a way rather; he contents himself to show the impertinency of the
question; and that the way by Celsus proposed, was not either to the Providence
of God, or to the nature of man, so suitable and convenient: but of the
possibility in general, as he does not deny it, so neither does he
peremptorily affirm it. He does not; (not there at least) but others do; and
their determination of the matter is embraced by the Schoolmen, Peter Lombard,
and Thomas Aquinas, and others: by Protestants also, Zanchius, Polanus, Peter
Martyr, Paraeus: and many more, I believe. Gerardus, and most of the Lutheran
party, hold the contrary opinion; and not they only, but of our side also some
not of the obscurest.

For my part, in reverence to God and his truth freely to deliver my mind,
leaving others to the liberty of their own judgments, I must profess that I
cannot satisfy my self, how it can stand with the duty and humility of mortal
men, who can give so little account of our selves, (either of our souls or
bodies) to attempt the sounding of such an abyssus, such a bottomless Ocean,
as either the Power or the Mercy of Almighty God and out of physical Vide
Testardum De Natura and Gratia: and nuperas (ut alios praeterea^) Joh.
Hoornbeck Disputationes Antijudaicas.
or metaphysicall speculations (for such I account all in this kind, that are
not apparently grounded upon divine authority) so peremptorily and positively
to determine how far either can go. I tremble to think what happened to the
Bethshemites, for offering to pry into the Ark, the Mercy-seat of God. Of all
things in the world, I would not abridge the Power of God in point of Mercy,
whereof there is so much need in the world. If God himself does limit, I adore
his judgments, and submit with all humility. Where he does not, I will not
certainly: no authority of mortal man, no subtilty of humane wit shall
persuade me to do it. Earthly Kings and Princes will not endure their
Prerogative should be scanned by every Subject; not by any perchance, if they
could help it: and good Kings will esteem mercy the best part of their
Prerogative. Owe we not then so much respect to the King of Kings, the
Omnipotent Creator of all things, who from his highest Throne beholds the
Inhabitants of the earth (Kings and Monarchs, as well as others) as so many
worms or grasshoppers, as to leave him the power and Prerogative of his Mercy
indisputed; free and unbounded? That any who was not a God, should take upon
him to forgive sins, was once we know thought blasphemy: ( Mark 2.7.) how shall
it not be some spice of blasphemy, to bereave God of this power, except God
himself in his revealed Word does expressly disclaim it?

We see in the Gospel, when the Disciples upon the words of their Master, that
it is easier for a camel to go through the eye of a needle, then for a rich
man to enter into the Kingdom of God, began to infer (as probably enough they
might) that none therefore, or very few, (for so must their words, not
pertinent otherwise, be understood: most men being either rich, or covetously
seeking after riches; which comes all to one) could be saved; Christ himself
teaches them in such cases, not to judge rashly, but to remember the power of
God: With men, says he, this is unpossible; but with God all things are
possible. By which words Christ seems in some manner to justify their
inference in point of humane ratiocination; (for that men cannot save
themselves or be saved by other men, whereof no question was made, is not it
that Christ acknowledges here impossible with men) but to disallow of humane
ratiocination in things of this nature.

But now on the other side, if any pretend Scripture (as most do) for their
opinion, I answer; If clear Scripture, (as in such points would be requisite)
how come so many, both ancient and late, so well versed in them, so able to
judge of them, to be of another opinion? If doubtful and disputable, then in
such a case that comes so near to blasphemy, (without good warrant from God
himself) I hold the affirmative, as more plausible, so safer every way.

To pass by therefore their arguments which are drawn, as was said before,
most of them from metaphysicall speculations, which I desire not to meddle
with; I will only take notice of some considerations insisted upon by some of
them to make their opinion more plausible, if not necessary.

The first is, that to believe the possibility of man's restoration, either
without any satisfaction at all, (by free pardon) or any other way of
satisfaction, (if any other way can be, which as we said before, we do not
conceive) is to undervalue the benefit and high price of this holy
Dispensation. It is certain, the apprehensions of men, though their end, to
glorify God, be the same, may be different; and a difference of apprehensions
may make a difference of opinions, though tending to one end. I join with them
therefore in their main drift; but I do not conceive that any man who really
believes an impossibility (grounded upon Gods revealed Word) of any man's
salvation without Christ, needs any other motive to induce him to set a right
price upon this miraculous work, then the consideration of his own, and every
man's happiness thereon depending.

It is, secondly, further objected, that this opinion may seem to savor, or at
least, to favor Socinisme; who eagerly plead against the necessity, and make
it an argument against the truth of Christ his satisfaction. But surely, the
way to deal with Socinians, is not by such reasoning. God be praised, we have a
more sure way, and that is the way of divine authority. If that do it not, it
is to be feared, weaker proofs, which not without much probability may be
contradicted, will rather confirm them, then convert them. What Saint Augustine
says in a place upon another occasion, would be considered upon this, Metus
est ne cum saepe subruuntur, August. De Magistro. quod totidem sere verbis
etiam Plato non un^ loco.
quae firmissime statura et mansura praesumimus, in tantum odium vel timorem
rationis incidamus, ut ne ipsi quidem perspicuae veritati fides habenda
videatur; that is, It is to be feared, that when men shall see those reasons,
which they once grounded upon as firm and stable, easily and familiarly
overthrown, they fall at last into such a hatred or suspicion of reason, that
even the most undoubted truths shall not be believed.

I am therefore much pleased with Balth. Meisnerus (a Lutheran) his prudent
moderation in this point, who in his Disputations against the Socinians, upon
such grounds of reason as are ordinarily insisted upon by others, having said
as much as can with any color be said for this necessity, Balth. Meisnerus, A
(...) Dec. 3. Disp. 26.90.
concludes his Disputation in these words: [ Hitherto, why God could not
without some prejudice to his Omnipotency pardon sinners without some
satisfaction, has been showed. But that we should enter into this dispute with
our adversaries, is not so absolutely necessary; because thereby we are forced
to enquire into the reasons of the divine counsel, which ought not to be. Gods
revelation of his divine will by his Word ought to suffice us, whereby he
declares, that without the price and merit of his Son, as a Mediator, he will
not forgive sin, because he hates it, and for it, is angry with sinners. That
it is so, therefore let us believe, and that [by this kind of satisfaction] the
divine Omnipotency is no ways impaired, because both those are affirmed by the
Scriptures, though we cannot render a reason of all the counsels of God. These
things ought rather to be admired, and with thankful hearts extolled, then
with niceness and curiosity sifted and discussed.] He repeates the same,
though in other words, as fully in the 105. Paragraph of the same Disputation.
And in the 89. commends this Canon: Quid Deus circa salutem nostram faciat, non
ex rationibus de possibili colligendum, sed ex solis Scripturis addiscendum est.

But does not the Scripture plainly fay, (I take notice of this objection,
because the phrase does often occur, and may trouble them that are not so
expert) that (...), oportebat: Christ ought to suffer such and such things? Are
not Christ his own words, John 3.14. As Moses lifted up the Serpent in the
Wilderness, even so must the Son of man be lifted up; Must? yes, it is the
Scripture phrase, but more full in other places; as Luke 24.44. These are the
words which I spoke to you, while I was yet with you, that all things must be
fulfilled which were written in the Law of Moses, and in the Prophets, and in
the Psalms concerning me. And again in the next words, Then opened he their
understanding, that they might understand the Scriptures, And said unto them,
Thus it is written, and thus it behoved ((...), the same word as before) Christ
to suffer, and to rise the third day from the dead. By which and other like
places it does clearly appear, that this must, has relation merely to the
predictions of the Old Testament concerning Christ, whether by words; or, (as
that of the Serpent lifted up in the Wilderness) by types. God therefore
having long before not only preordained, but also by several Prophets
foretold the sufferings of Christ, it was not only expedient, but (in this
respect) absolutely necessary, that all things should fall out accordingly; For
It is easier that heaven and earth should pass, then one tittle of the Law to
fail, Luk 16.17. Now that which made Christ so often to press the Scripture to
the Jews, was to convince them by their own principles, that whereas they
professed much zeal for the Scriptures, they might know that those very
Scriptures, which they were so zealous for, were the very ground (in some
sense) both of his doctrine, and of all that happened unto him. For otherwise, to
consider the things in the order of their nature, those things did not (so
properly) happen to Christ, because they were foretold; but because they were
so determined by God from all eternity, therefore they were first foretold, and
afterward happened accordingly, Act. 4.28.

Laying therefore aside this absolute necessity, as not grounded (for ought we
could ever find) upon any Scriptures, and as we conceive of dangerous
consequence; we may with less danger, and no less edification, we hope, take
notice of such reasons or considerations, as the wit of man can reach unto, by
which this counsel of God ( Dispensation or Economy the Ancients usually call
it) in a rational trial, if need be, may be maintained convenient or
plausible; though indeed most of these considerations be grounded upon
Scripture, as will appear. But they must first be forewarned that are not so
thoroughly acquainted with the terms belonging to this subject, that in this
particucular consideration of the necessity or expedience of Christ's
Incarnation; in the word Incarnation (as often besides) is presupposed to be
included the Passion also, as the principal end of it: according to that of
Christ, John 12.27. Father, save me from this hour: but for this cause came I,
unto this hour. For so I conceive the words should be distinguished, and
interpreted, But for this cause came I; (into the world, that is, according to
that of the Apostle, This is a faithful saying and worthy of all acceptance,
that Christ came into the world to save sinners, 1 Timothy 1.15.) unto this hour;
that is, that I might suffer for sinners.

The first and chiefest reason will be, that God chose this way, as the most
convenient to manifest his love to mankind: according to that of Christ in S.
John, So God loved the world, that he gave his only begotten Son, that
whosoever believes in him should not perish, but have everlasting life. This
consideration is not only mentioned often in the Scripture, but also set forth
and commended unto us by several circumstances, all very considerable to make
us the more apprehensive of it. See John 15.13. Romans 5.6, 7, 8. 1 John 4 9, 10.
Now of this manifestation of his love in such an extraordinary way one main end
was, the more powerfully to draw ours to himself, and to withdraw it from the
love of the world: which two are inconsistent. See 2 Cor. 5.14, 15. Jam. 4.4.
John 1. Ep. 2.15, 16, 17. This is the main consideration that has made so many
Martyrs.

A second consideration might be, the better to manifest his justice, and his
extreme antipathy (if we may so speak) to sin: thereby also (from the
consideration of this antipathy in God) the more powerfully to draw us to the
love of goodness and virtue; and to a true hearty detestation of wickedness.
Whence, as I take it, especially it is, that according to the Scripture phrase,
all impenitent sinners, who profess godliness, but show not the power of it
in their lives and conversations, are styled Infidels, or unbeleevers, as being
altogether impossible, that they that truly believe, or have a true
apprehension of this great mystery of godliness, should continue in
ungodliness.

A third consideration was certainly, that Christ might by his example work
upon us the more effectually to imitate him, as in other things, so especially
in his humility, the most proper virtue of Christianity, and without which all
profession of Christianity is but delusion and imposture. But of this more in
its proper place afterward, in the consideration of his Exinanition.

To these, diverse others might be added, but either not so pertinent, or such
as might be reduced to these. Even of these that we have set down, if a man be
disposed to multiply questions, it may be asked, whether by some other cause,
or way, such ends and such effects might not have been contrived and compassed.
There is no end of such curiosity; but as no end, so as little fruit.

There is nothing among men so generally received or approved in the ways and
works of God, but such as are bold, and self-conceited, may easily except
against, and think they might have mended it, if they had had the ordering of
it. So that in the conclusion, we must either sink our selves into Atheism
(then which in other respects and considerations, nothing can be more contrary
to sense and reason) or be forced to acknowledge that it is against reason to
discredit the revealed will of God, because we see not sufficient reason for
his will. It was an excellent resolution of Socrates, who when he had learned
from Anaxagoras, (who therefore was surnamed (...)) that (...) (that is,
Reason, or Understanding) was the cause of all things, Plato, in Phaedone.
resolved he would trouble himself no longer to seek the natural cause or
reason of every thing, but rest in this fully satisfied, that since Reason was
the supreme cause, all things must of necessity, both in respect of the
general, and of every particular thing, be for the best. He was in the right
certainly, and till we come to that, our scruples will never be at an end.

Yet one reason or consideration more I find expressed in the Scripture, which
must not be omitted; which is, that by this mystery so contrived and brought to
pass ((...)) the manifold wisdom of God might be made known both to Angels
and to men. Unto me (says Saint Paul, Ephesians. 3.8, 9, 10, 11.
his words are full of weight and holy vigor) who am less then the least of
all Saints is this grace given, that I should preach among the Gentiles the
unsearchable riches of Christ: And to make all men see what is the fellowship
of the mystery, which from the beginning of the world had been hid in God, who
created all things in Jesus Christ: To the intent that now unto the
Principalities and Powers in heavenly places might be known by the Church the
manifold wisdom of God.

This manifold wisdom of God, though it be observable in all the particulars
of this great mystery from the first Conception to the Ascension; yet it is
most eminently discernible in the circumstances of his Passion, as the main
part of the story. Should a man collect into one the several observations of
ancient Fathers and other Writers in this kind, it would arise to a
considerable bulk: and though it cannot be denied that in so many, some may be
found which may savor more of wit, then weight; yet those ought not to be any
prejudice to the solidity of the rest: of which kind there will be enough found
to fill the most stupid, if not extremely dulled with profaneness and
infidelity, both with delight and with admiration. I have not proposed to my
self so large a scope, neither am I at this time furnished for that purpose.
Somewhat of this kind to the Incarnation more particularly, or at least, to the
mystery in general, relating, we have here collected and set down.

First, that as all things were at the first created ((...)) by the Word,
(called in the Greek Logos) so by the fame Word, the restoration of mankind
also, ((...), the logical creatures, as Philosophers call them) should be.

Secondly, that as by the transgression of one man, all were made guilty; so by
the righteousness of one, all might be acquitted.

Thirdly, that as pride and infidelity were the two principal causes of Adams
sin, and by it, of the ruin of mankind; so faith and humility should be the
means of his restoration. Once man in the pride of his heart attempted to be
like unto God: and God by a mystery of humility became like unto man, that he
might exalt man to a nearer degree of likeness unto God.

Fourthly, a woman was the Devils unhappy instrument to draw Adam to sin; and
of a woman came the Savior of the world. Eve believed a wicked Angel (in the
form of a Serpent) and transgressed: Mary (that blessed Virgin) believed a
blessed Angel, and conceived.

Fifthly, that after that in the wisdom of God (that is, 1 Cor. 1.21.
in the Book of nature; the sight and contemplation of this Universe, which
does so manifestly set forth the infinite power and wisdom of the Creator) the
world by wisdom knew not God; (that he is a Spirit; but one, and only to be
worshipped) it pleased God by the foolishness of preaching (not grounded upon
humane ratiocination, philosophy, or eloquency of words) to confound the wise,
(ver. 27.) and to save them that believe: which by the Gentiles was generally
much scorned and derided, who accounted belief, the character and property of
an Idiot.

We meddle not here with his Nativity, the circumstances and considerations
whereof are many, and distinct from those of his Incarnation, and from the
general consideration of this mystery. In which kind besides those we have
insisted upon, many more may be collected, that have already by diverse been
made; and some made perchance, that have not yet been observed. Maximus an
ancient learned Writer and Martyr, in his Meditations, called (...), says very
well; The great mystery of the divine Incarnation still continues a mystery,
not only for that being proportionably to the strength of them that are saved
by it, manifested, that which is not manifested of it is much more then that
which is: but also because even that which is manifested, may be said still
hidden (or, concealed) as not, in the truth of it, utterable by any words: (or,
not comprehensible to the understanding of man.) So he; and he goes on, and
insists in this and the next Chapter, in sundry particulars, which I forbear to
translate. Neither his language nor his conceptions are ordinary. They that can
read him in his own language, may understand him; not they, I doubt, that shall
read him translated.

It is Plato in Phaed. (...).
Plato's observation, that in belief there may be a kind of unbeleef; when a
man by satisfactory proofs or evidences being fully convicted in his
understanding, that the thing is so indeed; is nevertheless not only by the
greatness and sublimity of the things themselves that are proposed; but also
by the consideration of the means and vileness of man so confounded and
amazed, as that at the same time he neither knows how to believe, nor yet can
tell how to contradict. In joy also, if excessive, there is a kind of unbeleef,
whereof we read, Luke 24.41. And whilst they yet believed not for joy, Ita and
apud Comicum quidam suam in re praesenti and certa excusat incredulitatem;
Nescio, nisi quia tam misere hoc esse cupio verum, co vereor magis.
and wondered. Whilst the text says, they believed not for joy, it says also
that they believed; for else, whence was their joy? He who in the consideration
of this mystery never had any experience of this kind of unbeleef, it may be
doubted whether he ever did much fix his thoughts upon the consideration of it.

Saint Paul himself, (as a man may gather from his words) found it no very
easy business, and therefore with such zeal and fervency addressed himself to
God for others; as where he prays for the Ephesians, Ephesians. 3.16, 17, 18, 19.
That God would grant them according to the riches of his glory, to be
strengthened with might in the inner man: That Christ might dwell in their
hearts, that being rooted and grounded in love, They might be able to
comprehend with all Saints what is the breadth, and length, and depth, and
height: And to know the love of God which passes knowledge, that they might be
filled with all the fullness of God.

By which words and others to the same purpose, Chapter 1.v.16, 17, 18 19. does
appear that although he thought the mattter, incomprehensible; yet the frequent
meditation and contemplation of it, necessary. It is indeed of sigular good use
to wean us from the world: to purge us altogether from the grossest; and to
moderate and allay in us the best of earthly affections: and we may certainly
conclude, that whosoever by a settled and constant arbitration of his mind or
judgment, does propose to himself the things of this world (wealth, honor, or
life) as much considerable, either never seriously believed, or does not
actually believe this sacred mystery of Christ the Son of God his Incarnation
for the redemption of mankind.

Of Christ his EXINANITION.
BEing to treat of Christ his Exinanition by its self as distinct from his
Incarnation, we must of necessity begin with the word it self, and the
different uses and notions of it in this sacred argument.

This word then Exinanition applied to Christ, is taken (the word we say; for
the matter of it is found elsewhere also) from the words of the Apostle, to the
Philippians, where, (in the second chap. and third verse) exhorting them to
meekness and humility, Let nothing be done through strife and vainglory, etc.
in the sixth and following verses he proposes unto them the example of Christ
in these words: Let this mind be in you, Phil. 2.5, 6, 7, 8.
which was also in Christ Jesus: Who being in the form of God, thought it not
robbery to be equal with God. But made himself of no reputation, and took upon
him the form of a servant, and was made in the likeness of men: And being
found in fashion as a man, he humbled himself, and became obedient unto death,
even the death of the Cross. Where we render it, but made himself of no
reputation; it is in the Original, (...); translated by the Vulgar, sed
seipsum exinanivit, and by Beza, sed ipse se exinanivit.

As, concerning those words in the sixth verse, Who being in the form of God;
with Arrians and Socinians, who deny the Deity and eternity of Christ, there is
not little contestation about the true meaning; so concerning these, the form
of a servant, in the seventh, with those (called commonly Lutherans) who
maintain a real communion, or communication of proprieties; whereof we have
treated before. There is also no small controversy concerning the right sense
of those words, (...), which we translate, thought it not robbery; In Diatriba,
De Verb usu, etc.
of which I have had occasion to treat elsewhere at large; where, upon good
grounds (as I conceive) it is showed, that the words import, he made it not a
matter of triumph, or ostentation: by which interpretation the Orthodox sense
of the former words, (who being in the form of God) is much confirmed, and the
most plausible objections against it, taken away. But this will not concern us
here.

The Exinanition then of Christ is here in these words of the Apostle grounded
(in the first place) in that he took upon him the form of a servant: which
words both in opposition to the former, the form of God; and as they are
further expounded by the Apostle himself in the words following, in the
likeness of men; and, in the fashion like a man; must needs imply the very
essence and nature of man, as principally intended; yet with an aggravation, as
if he had said, not the essence and nature of man only, but of an abject,
contemptible, miserable man: which is included in the word servant. Hence it is
that the ancient Fathers use the words Exinanitio, and forma fervi, very
frequently, in a double sense: understanding by it oftentimes, the Incarnation
of Christ; or, his assuming of the humane nature, barely: and sometimes, the
low condition; the personal reproaches and sufferings of that humane nature
which he assumed. Certainly, in Christ his Incarnation, was his greatest
abasement, that the Almighty, the Creator of men and Angels, would stoop so
low, as to be made man; a creature: in which word, though it should not be
added, so vile a creature as man, or so despicable a man; the lowest fall of
abasement, may be thought comprehended. Homo sum; humani a me nihil alienum
puto: there is no kind of suffering, but may be conceived incidentall and in
some sort natural unto man. But that the Infinite, Eternal, Omnipotent, would
be man, that he might suffer, is above all that can be said, or conceived, or
indeed believed by natural man.

But on the other side, because the same Christ, as true man by his
Incarnation; and as man considered, subject to sufferings; so he continued
nevertheless as truly and entirely what he was before, Infinite, Eternal,
Omnipotent; that he should, though in his humane nature only, suffer, can as
little be conceived, had not the Deity, so far for a time, (though not by any
separation) withdrawn or withheld its influence, as to leave the humane nature
obnoxious to whatsoever bare humanity (sin always excepted) was capable of. So
that here is Exinanition upon Exinanition: And so may Christ rightly enough,
and agreeably to antiquity (though there is much contesting between some
Protestants of the Lutheran Confession, and some others about it) be said to
have been abased, or exinanited according to both natures; this always
presupposed and understood, that the divine nature in Christ, did not by this
abasement or Exinanition (which cannot be conceived without blasphemy) suffer
any manner of change or alteration.

Exinanition (as by learned men has been observed) is also taken sometimes by
some Ancients in a more general sense, (grounded perchance upon the words of
the Psalmist, Psalm. 113.6. Who humbles himself, etc.) for that affection of
mercy and compassion, which moved God to take notice of man's misery through
Adams fall, and thereupon to order his redemption and restoration by his Son.

Of Christ his Exinanition in the first and chiefest sense we have treated
hitherto under the notion of his Incarnation. Our purpose here in the remainder
of our Discourse is, to consider his Exinanition in the temporal estate and
condition of his assumed flesh; in those things that Christ suffered in the
course of his life before his Passion, not so much in the person or relation of
a Mediator, or Redeemer, (his chiefest Office) as of a Master or Teacher, to be
an example of patience, humility, perfect obedience and mortification, or
contempt of the world, unto us. That Christ in all his sufferings, even the
greatest, his death and passion, had a further end (besides our redemption) to
be an example unto us, is directly affirmed by Saint Peter: and that the same
Christ in his more ordinary sufferings, (though we acknowledge his merits, or
meriting to us too in all that he did or suffered) as his poverty, and the
like, his chief end and aim was to be an example unto us, if it be not directly
affirmed by the Scriptures, may with much probability grounded upon the
Scriptures, be supposed and inferred. Why Christ, for example, though he might
(as some Ancients observe) after a more apparently miraculous way have been
made true man, must be born of a woman, many good reasons may be given: but why
he should choose an obscure Village, or a common Inn, or a Manger in the Inn,
to be places (in several respects) of his Nativity, the most probable reason
can be given, is, that he might be an example of humility unto us.

In this sense then it is, and with this particular relation that I shall now
speak of Christ his Exinanition; wherein the first thing will be, to consider
how it is proposed to us in the Scripture. I will not amplify matters, but
content my self with the bare relation of the Gospel. It is a subject, I
confess, fit for the best rhetoric of the world; wherein ancient Fathers and
Writers have not been deficient. I like well of such amplifications, as tend to
make a deeper impression in us, (such is our dullness) of what we can never be
too sensible. But some men have not contained themselves within those bounds.
As though they would rather supply the defect of the Scriptures, then of our
devotions, they tell us of many things, devised by themselves which the
Scriptures do not; and of a sacred history, by this mixture, make (as far as
in them lies) a kind of Legend. Papias of old was taxed for this; and many
since him, have been guilty of the same fault. But to leave them:

The Scriptures tell us that the blessed Mother of Christ, about the very time
that he was to be born, was forced to travel: that she was delivered in a
common Inn, and the born child Christ Jesus, for want of other room in the
Inn, (taken up in all likelihood by greater guests) was laid in a Manger. That
as soon as he was born, he was persecuted; and thereupon his true mother and
reputed father (with him, their charge and care) put to the troubles and toils
of a long Journey into a strange Country, for refuge. That Christ did ever work
with his own hands, is not so clearly expressed in the sacred story; but that
he was subject to his parents, (his reputed father being a Carpenter by his
trade) is clearly expressed: and because Christ himself, Mark 6.3. by some, to
whom his life and conversation was well known, is called a Carpenter, Justin
Martyr his opinion is approved by many; who peremptorily does determine it,
that Christ himself did work. And besides, though no other Scripture should
induce us to believe it, yet because we are taught that Christ was made a curse
for us, Gal. 3.13. and that he was sent in the likeness of sinful flesh, Romans
8.3. it stands with great probability, to say no more, that he should in the
course of his life find and feel the effect of that curse, by God himself so
solemnly pronounced, In the sweat of thy face shall thou eat bread, Genesis 3.9.

Again, that after he had openly and solemnly entered upon his Ministry, he
subsisted, in part at least, by alms and contributions, is particularly
recorded. That he went up and down, doing good, yet almost every where
suffering evil: evil words, evil reports, affronts, reproaches: frequent
attempts, upon his life and innocence: persecuted in his own person; and
persecuted in them that adhered unto him, or spoke well of him; we find in the
same Scriptures. Briefly, his own words of himself, Matthew. 8.20. The Foxes have
holes, and the Birds of the air have nests: but the Son of man has not where
to lay his head: are above all amplifications, and all rhetoric that the wit
or eloquence of man can reach unto. If this be not enough to set out this
Exinanition of Christ, we might have recourse to the Prophet Esaias, who also is
very pregnant and patheticall in the description of it: Esa. the 52. and 53.
Chap. but it shall suffice to have named him: the Reader himself, if he
please, may have recourse unto him.

Now because not the Jews only, who mistaking the Prophets, expected an
earthly King for their Messiah; but diverse others also in all ages,
worldly-minded men, or weak men, have been much scandalized at this manner of
the Son of God his appearing in the form of a servant: before we speak of it in
relation to us, (the main end of it) we will consider of it by it self, a
while, what from best humane reason may be said for such a condition of life.
For if it shall appear, not only that the contempt of all worldly pomp and
magnificence, upon grounds of reason in the judgment of the most rational and
judicious Heathens, Philosophers and others, has been accounted a more
generous thing, then the prosecution of it; but also more blessedness, with
patience and calmnesse of mind to undergo all manner of crosses and
adversities in this life, then to enjoy pleasure and to live at ease; I hope
all exceptions and prejudices in this kind, which humane wit can with any
color suggest to the prejudice of our faith concerning the Author of our
salvation, will sufficiently be removed.

To the first then: The most ordinary both, and compendious definition or
character of one that is truly magnanimous or generous, occurrent in the
writings of ancient Heathens, is, (...) to whom nothing (in this life, nor life
it self) seems a great matter: that is, greatly considerable. But more
particularly, this (...), or nothing, (...). Arist. De virtut.
is thus expressed by Aristotle in a place: (...), says he, etc. It is also
the part and property of true magnanimity, not to admire neither pleasure, nor
greatness, nor power, nor victories obtained at the solemn games and prizes.

They that are not acquainted with the state of the world as it was in those
days (when certainly it was, in many respects, at a far greater height of
glory and outward splendour, then now it is) will not understand the pertinency
(though most proper of it self) of that instance, of victories obtained at
solemn games and prizes. His intention was certainly to go to the highest of
humane glory, that his expression could reach, or his fancy pitch upon: and
such was the glory of those solemn victories he speaks of. For first, (to help
them a little that are not acquainted with Antiquity) what was done there, was
not done in the sight of one Nation or Kingdom only, but in the sight, and
concourse (...), of the whole earth, as ancient Authors testify. And such was
the honor of the Conquerors, and such their privileges; that they were, not
after their lives only, some of them, worshipped as Gods; but even in their
life time accounted most of them almost every where, (to use their own word)
(...), as gods; or equal unto the gods. And it is further observable, that the
most famous Epoch, or computation of times that ever was among Heathens (the
Olympiades) was taken from these sports and victories, as if they had been the
thing, wherein the world was most interessed, or which to take notice of, it
most concerned it.

As Aristotle, so others, al, or most that I have seen, make this the proper
character of true magnanimity, not to admire; that is, Dionys. Longinus in
praestantissimo (...) libello, elegantissime, (...) Et paulo post, (...).
(as by others it is expressed) to despise all those things which by ordinary
men are highly prized and esteemed. Now the considerations upon which they
grounded this contempt of the world, were these especially:

First, the short continuance, if not of the objects themselves of glory, which
this world presented unto us; yet of that fruition of them this our mortal
life does afford; being compared to eternity. Quae vero aetas longa est? says
one of them. What age of man is long? Or what is it indeed, that to mortal man
can truly be deemed and termed long? But a very little while ago we were
boys; then young men; and behold how old age, whilst we were in our race,
suddenly, even before we could think or suspect, has overtaken us. And this we
call long, because old age to us is our utmost bounds. For so it is, that
according to the measure of continuance allotted by nature unto every thing, so
is age generally accounted either short or long. Aristotle writes of certain
little creatures about the River Hypanis, (which from some part of Europe does
flow into the Pontus) which live but one day; Of these little creatures
therefore such as live till about the third or fourth hour after noon past,
dies in good age: but those that live to the going down of the Sun, decrepit;
especially if it be a Summers day, when the days are at longest. Let us
compare our longest age with eternity, and we shall find their lives and ours
to come much to one reckoning. Despise we therefore such fopperies (for what
else to call, or how more gently to term things that are so light and vain, I
know not) and let us account true courage and magnanimity, despising all humane
things, and wholly set upon the pursuit of virtue, the sole happiness of man.

So another; and he might speak with more authority as being then in actual
possession of as much greatness and splendour as the whole earth could well
afford, (or ever did afford) unto one man: a puissant Prince and Monarch:
Marcus Aur. Antoninus, Imperator, (...), lib. 5. C 19.
Often meditate, (says he) how swiftly all things that subsist, and all things
that are done in the world, are carried away, and as it were conveyed out of
sight. For both the substances themselves (we see) as a flood, are in a
continual flux: and all actions, in a perpetual change: and the causes
themselves subject to a thousand alterations: neither is there any thing
almost, that may be said to be now settled, and constant (or at a stand.) Next
unto this, and which follows upon it, consider both the infiniteness of the
time already passed (this is spoken by him as a Heathen, who did not know the
beginning of the world, nor believe perchance that it ever had a beginning) and
the immense vastness of that which is to come, wherein all things are to be
resolved and annihilated. Art not thou then a very fool, who for these things
art either puffed up with pride, or distracted with cares; or, as for a thing
that would trouble thee for any space of time, (to speak of) can find in thy
heart to make such moanes?

Another main consideration that induced them to this contempt, is the
smalnesse, or pettinesse (if I may so speak) of the earth (the principal
object of mortal men's cares and affections) in respect of the whole world or
Universe. A consideration, not grounded (as some might happily surmise) upon
the mere subtilty of Astronomicall speculations; or extravagant boldness of
rhetorical amplifications; but upon such evidences of common sense and reason,
as any rational man (with very little search and study) is capable of. Yea and
to this very end God and Nature (in the language of ancient Heathens) have made
man capable of such knowledge and contemplation, that he might not set his
mind upon the earth or earthly things, it being very improbable, if not
impossible, that he that has a right apprehension of this Universe, and uses
himself (as becomes him) now and then to elevate his thoughts to such
contemplations, should be much taken or affected with things so vile and
contemptible, as all sublunary things will be found, compared to the Universe;
and so much inferior to the divine temper and constitution of man's soul and
understanding. Quid enim videatur ei magnum in rebus humanis, cui aeternitas
omnis, totiusque mundi nota sit magnitudo? So Tully; and the same in another
place, Idemque cum coelum, terras, maria, omniumque rerum naturam perspexerit,
-- in hac ille magnificentia rerum, atque in hoc conspectu and cognitione
naturae, Dii immortales, quam ipse se noscet, (quod Apollo praecepit Pythius)
quam contemnet, quam despiciet, quam pro nihilo putabit ea, quae vulgo dicuntur
amplissima? that is, The same man when he shall understand the nature of the
Heavens, of the Earth, the Sea, and all that belongs unto them -- in this
magnificence of things, in this sight and survay of nature, good God! how will
he (as the Oracle commands) begin to know himself; how will he contemn, and
despise, and account as nothing those things, which among men ordinarily, are
in greatest account and esteem? and the writings of ancient Grecians, that
write of Philosophy, are full of such passages.

It is so certainly: And if there be not among men now adays (as certainly
there are not) such examples of heroic spirits and of true magnanimity, as
have been in former times, among the Grecians especially; it may very probably
be conceived, that one maine reason of it is, because the Mathematics
(Astronomy and Astrology were so called anciently) are not so generally
studied, as they were formerly, among the Grecians especially. For it is one
thing to hear in ordinary talk (as it is commonly talked) that the Earth to the
whole Universe is but as one point, which many may conceive to be but an
hyperbolicall speech, as if we called a little man, an atome, in comparison of
a great mountain: another thing, upon certain grounds of sense and reason,
Ptol. M^^. (...) l. 1. (...).
as by Ptolomy, and other Mathematicians it is demonstrated, to know it and
apprehend it clearly; as clearly, as every ordinary capacity does apprehend,
that one single fa^thing, is no very considerable thing, (little more then
nothing) in comparison of such a sum; as for example, of one hundred thousand
English pounds.

These things therefore whoever shall rightly consider and understand, as he
looks upon a Commonwealth of Ants or Bees, (...), and. Anton. De Scipso, l 7.
3. Formi^aru^ iste discursus est in angusto laberantium. Quid illis and nobis
interest, etc. Sen. Not. Qu. l. 1. in Praef.
(it is the similitude used by diverse upon this occasion) where he sees great
stirring and pains taking; much carrying and running to and fro: so will he
look upon the ordinary cares and distractions, frights and fears, hopes and
joys of such among the sons of men, whose minds are wholly set upon the world,
and have no further aim.

A third consideration that induced them to this contempt, is, because this
world (in the ordinary course of the world) affords nothing so great and
glorious, but the basest and vilest of men are as capable of, as the most
generous and deserving. Wise Solomon observed it, and he made a good use of it,
it made him think the less of his own greatness. Eccles. 9.11.
I returned (says he) and saw under the Sun, that the race is not to the
swift, nor the battle to the strong; neither yet bread to the wise, nor yet
riches to men of understanding, nor yet favor to men of skill; but time and
chance happens to them all, Eccles. 9.11. These worldly goods, (...), how base,
(...) (says the Solomon of the Heathens; Quae turpissimo cuique ac
contemptissimo, lenoni ac lanistae, possunt contingere; says Seneca) which may
be in the power and possession of some abominable loose liver, some common
strumpet, or some ravenous and bloody Tyrant.

It once troubled Pliny the later, (a man of great learning, and great place in
the Roman Commonwealth) very much, (when he observed what honorable titles
the Senate of Rome (whereof himself had the honor to be a member) had conferred
upon such a slave, ( furciferum, as he calls him) as Pallas was: what honorable
Edicts and Declarations they had made in his behalf; such indeed (they are to
be seen in Pliny) as scarce any, the most renowned for valor, or wisdom, or
noble descent, whom former times had known, had ever obtained. It did put him
upon this contemplation, (the best use indeed that can be made of such objects)
quam mimica and inepta essent, quae interdum in hoc coenum, in has sordes
abjicerentur, how vile and contemptible such things must needs be, which were
cast sometimes upon such dunghils. Tacitus writes of this Pallas, that he had
an estate of ter millies: which does amount to such a vast sum of money, as
might now suffice to be a ransom for many great Kings.

By this appears what account wise Heathens made of the greatness of this
world: and if this contempt of the world became them well, and was esteemed in
them an effect of truest magnanimity, whose hopes nevertheless (for the most
of them) went not beyond this world: how much more (upon their own grounds)
must it become him, who both as he was the Eternal Son of God, from all
eternity had in himself all fullness of infinite content and blessedness and
in the beginning of times, had created Heaven and Earth, the Heaven to be his
throne, and the Earth his footstool: (Esaias 66.1.) and as he was made flesh in
the fullness of times, yet even then was so united to eternal Majesty, that
even then he was the Lord ^f glory; and so much the more the Lord of glory,
because he had it in himself and from himself wholly, not from any outward
adventitious luster. That infinite disproportion between the least glimpse of
Eternal Majesty, and the greatest glory this earth does afford, how could it
better appear upon earth, then in contempt of the earth? He that had the
substance in himself, should he seek after the shadow? Cui nihil ad augendum
fastigium superest, Plia. Sec. in Panegyr. ad Trajanum.
hic uno mode crescere potest, si se ipse submittat, securus magnitudinis suae.
He that is at the height of Majesty and Greatness, if he will yet be greater
and higher, he must abase himself, showing his Greatness in that more then in
any thing, that he can abase himself with security. This was counsel once given
to a great Prince and Emperor, by a great Orator: Heathens, both: and this we
may say was the case of Christ: It was most proper to him, above all men, to
magnify himself in his humility, who was so far above all men; as being both
God and man.

Were there no other argument to persuade men against the opinion of the
Millenaries, this would much move me: An earthly Kingdom of a thousand years?
They must think better of the Earth, then I do; and a thousand years, a longer
time, then I can conceive it, who propose such a Kingdom as a great thing to
him, who is Lord of Heaven and Earth; to whom a thousand years are as
yesterday, when it is past; and as a watch of the night, Psalm. 90.4.

There is not any thing that more enhaunceth the credit of men in the world,
then the reputation of valor, and the fame of Conquests and Victories. The
Scriptures themselves seem to go this way too: Gird thy sword upon thy thigh,
O most mighty, etc Thine arrows are sharp, etc. Psalm. 45.3.5 etc. which
speeches, and diverse others of the same kind, were intended of Christ. And the
Jews grounding partly upon such places of Scrip ure, and partly upon their own
fond thoughts and imaginations, did promise themselves such a Messiah that
should not only be a King, but a Warrior also and a great Conqueror. Of this,
because approved histories of al ages and nations are sufficient to inform us
what to think of it; and because it is a case that concerns the Jews
particularly; I shall say no more then what I find in a learned Jew, of later
times, but of great esteem, Manasse ben srael; in his treatise De
Resurrectione, where preferring the resurrection of the dead (in point of
glory) to the coming of the Messiah, he has these words: Although it be
certain that at the coming of the Messiah, the glorious Name of God shall be
exalted; yet as certain it is, that it will not be with such glory and
magnificence, as it will be at the resurrection of the dead. For neither is it
indeed so great a miracle, if the Messiah shall subdue many Kingdoms and
Nations; when as it is well known that some of very mean quality, and from
obscure beginnings have attained to Kingdoms and Empires, and have been Lords
of diverse Countries. Whereas at the Resurrection, etc. So much of Christ his
humility, in relation to the opinions of ancient Heathens, and what may be said
of it in point of humane reason.

As for Christ's sufferings, our next particular, were we to speak of his death
and crucifixion particularly, we could not but take notice of a notable passage
of Plato's (a prediction we might call it) much insisted upon, and deservedly,
by some Ancients, as Theodoret, Eusebius, and some others. The passage, is that
in the second of his Commonweal, where proposing the character of a perfect
just man, among other things that such a one must undergo, that his
righteousness may be approved to God and men to the utmost, he does mention
Crucifixion. But having to do here with sufferings in general only, it shall
be sufficient in general to say, that as to despise pleasures and worldly
greatness; (whereof we have spoken) so patiently to endure, and if occasion
be, willingly and readily to undergo what ordinary men most dread and fly,
has always, among the wisest of men, been deemed an argument of truest
generosity and nobleness of spirit: and not only so, but by many also, an
argument of Gods love and favor.

As for the first part of my assertion, that patiently to endure, and readily
to undergo all manner of crosses and calamities, belongs to true magnanimity;
because no man that has read any thing in ancient Authors, will make any
question of it, I shall not need any proofs to make it good. But that crosses
and calamities should be an argument of Gods love and favor, may not without
some reason seem either a mere paradox of the Stoic, or a secret of the
Christian philosophy. There be indeed in the writings of those Philosophers,
that were called Stoics, diverse expressions to be found to this purpose, that
go beyond all that I have read in the most rigid and resolute Christian
Authors. Might I take the advantage of such, I should not need to seek any
further at all. But because the Philosophers of that sect, were charged by many
to hold things contrary to nature and common sense, though themselves did
extremely disclaim it, and as confidently boasted of the contrary, that their
doctrine was altogether founded upon nature; and which is more, drew after them
a great part of the world; yet I will not altogether rely upon them, but
farther add, which I conceive to be very observable, that some whom from all
Antiquity the Heathens generally honored as greatest Favorites of their most
honored Deities, were set out unto them as greatest sufferers in the whole
course of their lives. Such were, Hercules, the son (as they feigned) of
Juppiter: of whose labors, who has not heard? and Ulysses; of whom Maximus
Tyrius (conformably to what others have written of him more at large)
records, that God forced him (...), etc. to wander and to beg, and to wear
rags; to be kicked and reviled; (...); for the love that he did bear unto him:
which puts me in mind of Epictetus his famous Distick concerning himself:
(...).
Epictetus, a slave; in my body maimed:
No man ever poorer: of the Gods beloved.


This Epictetus, (a poor man indeed, whilst he lived) when he dyed, of all
worldly goods left after him but one poor Lamp; but such a name and such a
reputation with it, as made his memory sacred to the greatest of the earth; so
that this very Lamp for his sake became very precious, and proved a competent
patrimony to them that sold it.

Hitherto we have spoken of Christ his Exinanition, in relation to Christ
himself, as he was the Son of God; what in point of humane reason might be said
of it, or for it, against the scoffs and exceptions of men pretending to reason
and common sense; as also, for the further satisfaction of some weaker
Christians. We are now to treat of it in relation to us; and first, as it might
tend to our instruction, or confirmation of faith.

There is not any point of doctrine more necessary to be known, believed and
pressed among men, then the doctrine of the immortality of the soul, and of a
judgment after this life. It is the main fundamental of all piety and
godliness. If the dead rise not, Let us eat and drink, for to morrow we die:
was Saint Paul's inference; though perchance not so much his own sense and
inference properly, as the sense and inference of the generality of men,
transferred upon himself. Nonne melius multo fuisset; Cicero De Senect.
How much better were it for us to pass our lives in ease and quietness,
without either labor or strife; if so be that the soul be not immortal
indeed? It was the speech of one, but the sense of most ancient Heathens, as
partly from their lives, and partly from other speeches and expressions tending
to the same purpose, might be collected. Now one main argument used by ancient
Heathens to persuade themselves and others that it was so indeed; that the soul
was immortal, and that there was a judgment, or somewhat answerable to a
judgment, after this life, was, as the prosperity of wicked men, so the
troubles and miseries of the virtuous and godly, in all ages of the world,
(even among the Jews, when the condition of temporal rewards was more
absolute, then since the light of the Gospel it has been) by all sorts of men
noted and observed. For, said they, the Sun, the Moon, the seasons of the
year, and other works of God, sufficiently teach us, that there is a God, who
has created and appointed these things: and as it would be against common
sense to doubt of the being of a God, so is it as much against sense, that is,
those common notions of humane reason, whereby men are naturally guided to
discern between that which is morally good and evil, just and unjust, to doubt
whether God himself from whom we have received these notions, be good and just.
Now then since we see plainly, that in this world there be many just men,
Eccles. 8.14.
unto whom (to use the words of Solomon in stead of theirs) it happens
according to the work of the wicked; and again, many wicked men, unto whom it
happens according to the work of the righteous; it must needs be, that after
this there is another world, when both good and evil shall be rewarded
according to their works.

This argument though used by Heathens of old, who were guided by the light of
nature only, yet ought it not therefore to be in less esteem with Christians.
Mel. de Anima cap. ult. de imimmortalit. Haec consideratio in bonis mentibus,
etc. Vide and viru^ incomparab. Hug. Grot. in Matthew. 22.32. Inter omnia
argumenta, quae ad probandam a^imi immortalitatem, etc.
Philip Melanchthon, as brave a man both for piety and learning as ever Germany
had, acknowledges of himself, that he found very good use of it, and that his
faith was not a little strengthened by it. It may very well be that Saint Paul
himself aimed at the same thing, where he says, that the sufferings of the
righteous in this world are (...); that is, a clear evidence or demonstration
of Gods judgment: future, that is; or, that shall be. The words will bear this
sense and interpretation very well: and there be, (as may appear by the Italian
Notes upon the place) who so interpret those words of Christ in Saint Luke,
(...), And it shall turn to you for a testimony, Luke 21.13.

Now if the consideration of godly men's sufferings in this world be of moment
to such an inference; how much more the sufferings of Christ, (consider him but
as a man) so good and so innocent, beyond all example: and not his sufferings
only, but also his contempt of the good things of this world, (as they are
called, Luke 16.2.) who did so much good, instructing the souls, and curing the
bodies of so many men, whilst he lived in the world?

Of the ancient Druides, as I remember, it is recorded somewhere, that humana
despectantes, animam immortalem esse pronunciarunt; that is, despising the
things of this world they did pronounce, or declare the soul of man to be
immortal. And whereas of Pope John the 22. of that name it is affirmed by
some, that he denied the resurrection of the dead, Bellarmine says no; but
that by reason of his lewd life, men did generally conceive that he did not
believe another life after this, though he did not positively maintain any such
thing. Whether Bellarmine be in the right, Bell. De Romans Pontif. l. 4. c. 14.
Itaque.
or no, concerning this particular instance; I shall not here enquire; nor yet
enquire more generally, what dependence these two, opinions, and actions, have
the one upon the other; and whether a man may certainly and infallibly from the
one, judge of the other: certain it is that men ordinarily judge of the
opinions of men by what they see in their lives and conversations. Christ
therefore, (to conclude this point) as he taught men by his doctrine, so by his
Exinanition, (the humility of his life, and the multiplicity of his sufferings)
that the soul of man is immortal, and that after this life there is a
judgment to be expected.

But lastly, Christ did of purpose undergo this estate of humiliation and
Exinanition, that he might by his example not only teach us, as before we have
said, what to think of this present world, but also the more powerfully draw us
to the contempt of it: being a lesson of such consequence to us, as the saving
of our souls, and eternity of either happiness, or misery: God having so
provided and appointed it, that Heavens should be opened unto such only, who
by abstinence, mortification, and the like, should make their way. Not that by
these we can merit Heaven, (which were to void the satisfaction of Christ, the
main foundation of all Christianity) but because these are the necessary
consequents of a true faith, without which we cannot apply to our selves the
merits of Christ's satisfaction. Love not the world, neither the things that
are in the world. 1 John 2.15, 16, 17.
If any man love the world, the love of the Father is not in him. For all that
is in the world, the lust of the flesh, the lust of the eyes, and the pride of
life, is not of the Father, but is of the world. And the world passes away,
and the lust thereof: but he that does the will of God, abides for ever. A
heavenly doctrine indeed; but the more heavenly, the more hard of digestion to
natural man.

It cannot be denied, but Christ (take him but as a man) used so much solid
reason, so many excellent arguments, some drawn from the nature of God, others
from the generality of his providence, and the like; and that these reasons,
these arguments (if of divine Oracles we may be allowed so to speak) were set
out with that rhetoric, or vigor of expression, (which the Grecians properly
call (...)) as could not but affect much any sober rational man, as would take
them into serious consideration. Yet so it is, (as by many upon several
occasions has been well observed) the example of the Orator, is above all
reasons and arguments. Seneca has said as much for poverty and contempt of the
world, as ever I think, was said by man, that was mere man, But whilst he
spoke against riches, what by favors from his Prince and pupil; and what by
his private negotiations, he heaped them (himself does acknowledge it) beyond
all measure. His life was not very vicious; but it was very vain and sumptuous:
witness those famous tables, so highly valued, that he left after him among
other household stuff. No wonder therefore if he did so little good while he
lived. Epictetus, with less wit and rhetoric, did much more. As he wrote, so
he lived.

Some men have been of opinion that this Epictetus was a Christian. There be
indeed in those Remains of his doctrine and speeches preserved to posterity by
Arrianus, and others, some passages for the substance of the matter, so
Evangelical, that a man might suspect them to have been borrowed from the
writings of the Apostles: some again so particularly appliable to Christ, as
might not improbably, by those that look no further into the matter, be
surmised to have been intended of him. But certain it is, that he was not a
Christian; all that can be gathered from such passages, is, that Christianity
is not so much repugnant to humane sense and reason, (by good literature well
refined and improved) as it has been by many conceived. In this very
particular we are now upon, treating of the office, parts and duties of one
that would take upon himself to be a public teacher; or, as himself styles
him, Gods Messenger, to reclaim mankind from their vain courses, he presses
very much the necessity of his example in the contempt of all worldly things,
as of pains, so of pleasures, honor, and the like. Among other things to this
purpose, he has these words: (...) etc. For it behooves the true Cynick (the
same whom in that very Chapter he also calls, the Messenger, the Watchman;
the Preacher, or Herald; the Minister; yea and the Apostle of God) to have such
measure of patience, Epictet. Arriani, l. 3. c. 21.
as to be accounted by most men a very stock or stone. Himself indeed (that is,
his soul) to be above the stroke, or contumely of men: but as for his body to
yield that readily to whomsoever, to be used at his pleasure. And again in
another Chapter of the same Book, For these things God sends me hither and
thither. He makes me a spectacle unto men of poverty, of contempt; of
crazinesse of body; here banished; there a prisoner: not out of any hatred to
me; (God forbid) how should he hate the best of his servants? nor out of
neglect, (for even the least things are cared for by him) but to exercise me,
and to use me as his witness unto others.

Fit then and expedient (in point of humane reason, at least) it was, that he
that came to teach us the way to Heaven by contempt of the world, should
himself lead us the way by his example. This end of Christ his Exinanition,
and this his example is pressed in diverse places of Scripture. Let this mind
be in you, (says S. Paul to the Philippians, Phil. 2.5, 6, etc.
as we saw before) which was also in Christ Jesus; Who being in the form of
God, etc. And Saint Peter, 1 Pet. 2.21.
to the same purpose, For even hereunto were ye called: because Christ also
suffered for us, leaving us an example, that ye should follow his steps. To
this head also may be referred such places, where Christ is set out unto us, as
if for his own sake and interest he had undergone what he did, and submitted
himself to this kind of Exinanition. So Heb. 12.2. Looking upon Jesus the
Author and finisher of our faith, who for the joy that was set before him,
endured the cross, despising the shame, and is set down at the right hand of
the throne of God. And in the same Epistle, Chapter 5.7, 8. Who in the days of his
flesh, etc. Though he were a Son, yet learned he obedience by the things which
he suffered: And being made perfect, he became the Author of eternal salvation
unto all them that obey him. Though he were a Son, that is, as I take it, that
although Christ was in an extraordinary manner the Son of God, born without any
stain of original sin, etc. yet having undertaken such a charge and such an
office as he had, it was convenient he should under go (...), troubles and
adversities in this life, not only that by diverse degrees of sufferings in the
course of his life he might the better be prepared (as some here do
paraphrase) for his great and last suffering, the principal end of his
Incarnation; nor as bearing that (...), or likeness of sinful flesh, (Romans
8.3.) but also by his example the more effectually to teach and satisfy us,
that even they that are dearest unto God among the sons of men, must by trials
and crosses in this world, be fitted for God and another world.

And indeed as the example (apprehended with a right and lively faith) was
incomparable, so did there ensue effects answerable; that is, admirable beyond
all example. Of Alexander the Great (not to instance in others) by Historians
that have written his life, or of him, it is noted that by his example
especially, he did atchieve most of his greatest exploits in the Conquest of
the world. When ever he was much put to it, as either hardly beset (himself and
his Army, as he was often) with inextricable difficulties; or would put his
soldiers upon some desperate action, beyond the compass of ordinary humane
strength and courage; his example was his ordinary refuge, and constant
stratagem, which seldom or never failed him. Among other things which he did
in this kind, this seems to me as memorable as any. His Army which was wont to
be light and expedit, laden with the spoils of many rich Countries, marched but
heavily. Neither could their heads be free, when their hands were so full.
Being thus, what with care, what with loadage much encumbred, Alexander
apprehending the consequence of this alteration, and knowing well enough that
with words (for sooner would they have parted with their lives, then with that
for which they had all hazarded; and many of them lost their lives, say the
Historians) he should do but little good, he commanded all his own Carriages,
not sparing any; and all theirs, to be brought into one place. Then he
commanded fire to be set, not to theirs, but to his: but the fire spreading,
soon consumed all that was there, as well of theirs, as his own. And how could
they mourn or murmr for their mites, (in comparison) that saw their King so
freely to devote his own rich treasures?

It were strange that Alexander his example should have more influence upon his
soldiers, then the example of Christ upon those that are called by his name;
the disproportion both of the persons, and of the obligations on both sides
being considered. Christ indeed was not himself always present in person; and
when present in the days of his flesh, (as the Apostle speaks) yet not
visible to bodily eyes, in his Majesty, as Alexander was. But where the eyes of
faith have been opened, effects of Christ's example have ensued, beyond all
comparison. In the time of the Primitive Church, when the memory of Christ his
conversation upon earth, and of his miracles, was yet fresh, Christians were
generally known by nothing more then for their contempt of the world, and of
death particularly. It was objected unto them by Heathens who were not
acquainted with the mysteries of their faith, as a frenzy, or desperate
obstinacy. Antoninus the Roman Emperor, in his Meditations; and Epictetus (the
same of whom we have spoken before) in his Discourses set out by Arrianus, take
notice of it with some admiration. Tertullian in his Apologetick, and in his
Treatise De spectaculis, treats of it largely. Sulpitius Severus speaking of
those times, says that tunc Martyria, etc. suffering of martyrdom was then
sought after with as much earnestnes, as Bishoprics were (he lived about 400.
years after Christ) in his days. That he spoke it not hyperbolically, may
appear (were there no other proofs) by those many laws and constitutions of the
Church against wilful martyrdom, or such as offered themselves to death for
their faith, which by men, women, and even children, of all ranks and
qualities, was frequently done in those times. And by this contempt of death
and of the world, as much and more then by miracles or any thing else, did
Christians conquer the world, and in despite of all opposition, (as great as
can be imagined) subdued it to the Christian faith. Such was the faith of those
times.

If the same effects of Christ his example have not appeared in all ages, it is
not because the example it self has less efficacy then it had then, but
because Christ is not apprehended with the same faith, as he was then. Christ
himself did foretell of the little faith of the latter times. It is not all, to
be called a Christian. The Apostle denied them (we know) to be true Jews, all,
which were Jews outwardly; or to be the children of Abraham, all, that were of
the seed of Abraham; but had not his faith.

What the violence of some present sufferings, (be they sufferings of the body,
or sufferings of the mind) or the violent apprehension of future, in either
kind, may do for a while; how far it may prevail upon some, sound and solid
otherwise; especially if the temper of a naturally soft or passionate
disposition does concur, I shall not here enquire. Though grace and nature go
not always by the same principles, yet there may be, where true grace is, so
much of nature remaining sometimes, as to verify that of Aristotle's, (that
incomparable Naturalist) that (...), etc. those that are in any passion, can
not judge of the truth. But if any professed Christian in his more sober,
retired, and free thoughts can settle himself to such an opinion as either to
wonder at the miseries and calamities of others, (good and godly men) or to
bemoan himself in the same case as miserable indeed and hardly dealt with; that
man by such an opinion does renounce the faith he professes, and what show
soever he make to the world, yet cannot but be conscious to himself of his own
infidelity.

All Christians are not Paul's, I grant; though his zeal to God, and his charity
to men, Act. 26.29
did once prompt him to such a wish. God forbid, heaven should be opened to
none but such. As of glory, so of faith, of zeal, though true and sincere, and
perfect in its kind, there may be many degrees. We are allowed, if we may be
free, rather to be free; if rich and honorable in the world, by good and
lawful means, rather to be so, then poor and contemptible. That common soldier
is not commended, who to show his valor, runs into dangers, wilfully; or sets
upon the enemy without a command. In this our Christian warfare some are
Captains and Generals, that must lead and command: the greatest part, are
common soldiers, who if they readily follow, and execute, when called, it is as
much as needs. S. Paul himself could say, I know how to be abased; and I know
how to abound. Phil. 4.12.
If there be a firm resolution, and answerable due preparation, if God shall
call us to it, to say with S. Paul, I account all things but dung, etc. such a
resolution, and such a preparation may in the eyes of God (who as he only can
see, so most observes the heart) stand for the deed it self.

And so may those general expressions, as, Whosoever does not bear his cross,
etc. and, Whosoever will live godlily, etc. and that through many tribulations,
etc. and the like, be qualified and understood: of the resolution and
preparation, (if true and real) as well as of the deed and event it self. And
certainly some religious men, who actually and personally never tasted, either
not at all, (if such may be found) or very little, of the troubles and miseries
of this life, by this kind of preparation, as also by their fellow-feeling (as
in hearty compassion, so in readiness to assist and relieve to their power) in
the sufferings of others, might be as great sufferers before God, as some
others, who suffer much more, but happily not so patiently, nor with so much
reflection upon others, as they should. But where neither actual patient
enduring, nor this hearty preparation is found, there we may certainly from
this doctrine of Christ his Exinanition conclude, that there is no real
communion with Christ, nor true sense of Christianity.

FINIS.

