Die Mercurij 28o. January, 1645.
ORdered by the Commons assembled in PARLIAMENT, that M. Long and M. Holland do
from this House give thanks to M. Caryl for the great pains he took in the
Sermon he preached this day, at the entreaty of this House, at St Margarets
Westminster, (it being the day of Public Humiliation) and to desire him to
Print his Sermon. And it is Ordered, that none shall Print his Sermon, but who
shall be licensed under his handwriting.

H. Elsynge, Cler. Parl. D. Com.

I Appoint George Harloth, and Giles Calvert to print this Sermon.

Joseph Caryl.

TO THE HONORABLE HOUSE OF COMMONS Assembled in PARLIAMENT.
LAte providence speak the approach of God to you in mercy, if you approach to
God in duty: how happy that meeting will be, is more then I can tell: This I
can tell, it will be a happy meeting, By such a people God is highly honored,
and such a people shall be greatly blessed by their God. All blessings
concenter in this one, God is with us. All places are full of God, but he fills
not all alike. Few know when God is nigh, or when he is a far off, what his
goings away mean, or what his commings. They who know these things count his
presence their greatest gain, and his absence their greatest loss. The
punishment of loss in hell is cast up for a sorer punishment then that of
pain: And the loss of God in hell is worse then the loss of heaven. It Is so in
it is proportion here on earth. Gods withdrawing makes a hell above ground. If
ever any people needed the presence of God, we do. We have reason to cry out
with the Psalmist, Be not far from us, O Lord, for trouble is near. Though out
ward peace come to a land, yet, woe unto it when God departs; how woeful then
is the condition of a land, when God departs and trouble comes? When the
Prophet Ezekiel had described the Reformation of the Gospel-Temple and City
under Jewish notions, he adds this as the accomplishment of all, And the name
of the City from that day shall be called (Jehovah Shammah) the Lord is there.
Honorable Senators, That by your suffrage and assistance, Truth and holiness
(according to the exactest pattern) may beautify our Temples, That judgment
and righteousness may flourish in our Cities, and that both may be really
baptized with this name, The Lord is there, is the prayer, and (in his sphere)
the endeavor of

Sirs, February 18. 1645. Your servant humbly devoted in the work of Christ,
JOSEPH CARYL.

A SERMON PREACHED before the Honorable House of COMMONS, upon the day of the
Monethly-Fast, January 28. 1645.
JAM. 4. 8. The former part of the verse. Draw nigh to God, and he will draw
nigh to you.

The whole verse runs thus,

Draw nigh to God, and he will draw nigh to you: Cleanse your hands, ye
sinners, and purify your hearts, ye doubleminded.


THis Text has three things in it,

1 A Duty charged upon us 2 A Mercy promised us 3 A Direction given us


The duty charged upon us, is, To draw nigh to God.

The mercy promised, is, He will draw nigh to us.

The direction given lies in the later part, teaching us so to perform the
duty, that we may obtain the mercy, Cleanse your hands, ye sinners, and
purify your hearts, ye double-minded.

My business lies in the two former points, The duty, and the mercy, Draw
nigh to God, and he will draw nigh to you.

The Text supposes not any local distance between God and us, and so not our
local drawing nigh to God, or Gods to us. In that sense we cannot be nearer to
God then we are, for he is wheresoever we are* He is not far from every one
of us (Act. 17. 28.) for in him we live, and move, and have our being; There is
one God and Father of all, who is above all, and in you all, and through all
(Ephesians. 4. 6.) Over all (men) by his power; in all (the Saints) by his Spirit,
and through all (the world) by his providence. We are invited to come into his
presence, from whose presence (with all our strength and activitie) we cannot
go, Psalm. 139. 7. Whither shall I flee from thy presence? If I ascend up into
Heaven, thou art there; if I make my bed in hell, thou art there; If I take the
wings of the morning, and dwell in the uttermost parts of the sea, even there
shall thy hand lead me; and thy right hand shall hold me. Here then we have
nothing Quod cavillantur, ^ecundaria^ and quasi pedisse ^uam esse Dei grat^em
nostrae praepara^ioni, quia Deum approptuquare posteriore lo^o di^^t Iacobus,
fr^vo^um est. C^lv. Perperam ex hoc lo^o Pelagiani colligunt conversionem a
^obu incipere. Lez.
to do with corporal distances or drawings nigh. The sense is spiritual.

The Pelagians of old, with their successors, Papists and Arminians, corrupt
this Text, and those of like importance, with such glosses as these. We are bid
to draw nigh to God; surely then, we have power in our selves to do it. We are
bid to draw nigh to God, before he draws nigh to us; surely then, we prepare
our selves and grace follows.

But this and the like Scriptures show us our duty, not our ability: what we
ought to do, not what we can: They assure us what God will do, when we draw
nigh to him, not what he is bound to do, Grace is free. And though we are
invited to come to God, yet till God come to us, we cannot come to him. We are
spoken to, under the tenor, and in the language of the Covenant of grace,
which gives the strength for every duty it calls us to: and with that voice,
Draw nigh to God, conveighs a power to draw us nigh to God; our motions are not
toward him, till he moves toward us, The Lord looked down from Heaven to
behold all the children of men (Psalm. 14.) And what saw he? The report is made
thus, Romans 3. 12. They are all gone out of the way, there is none seeks after
God; Not a face looking heavenward, not a foot stepping toward God. The
wicked are estranged from the womb, as soon as they are born, they go astray,
speaking lies (Psalm. 58. 3.) Such also is the language and the way of the
righteous, at their natural birth. The whole earth (in this sense) is but of
one speech, They speak lies before they can speak; and of one way, and that is
out of the way, they go astray, before they can go, As Soon as they are born
they go astray, speaking lies, They are estranged from the womb. No man ever
came to the Lord, till the Lord brought him. Man must have preventing grace,
concurring grace, and perfecting grace. Grace does all; though they to whom
God has begun in grace, have a power to move, yet without him they cannot
move actually, Draw me (says the Church, Cant. 1. 4.) we will run after
thee. No man (says Christ) can come unto me, except the Father which sent me
draw him (Joh. 6. 44.) A mere natural man has no life, a godly man cannot use
his life alone. The former has no power to act; the later cannot act, much
less complete his power without Christ. Without me, ye (my Disciples) can do
nothing, Joh. 15. Conversion does not begin at us, nor is it ended by us. They
who have a stock of grace, cannot trade with it, or improve it without
Christ's co-partnership. Our drawing nigh to God, is not only a spiritual act,
but a supernatural.

There are two ways whereby we draw nigh to God.

1. By conversion, and in all the actings of repentance. 2. In prayer, and in
the use of every holy Ordinance.
Only a touch upon the former: I intend not to run the compass of that point.

Man is born afar off from God. He is afar off by a double distance.

1. By a natural distance, as he is a creature; and thus, not only man, but
the very Angels in heaven are afar off from God. Who is able to measure the
distance between Creator and creature, between finite and infinite?

2. Man is afar off from God by a moral distance, as he is a sinner, and this
(if a greater distance then infinite can be imagined) is greater then the
former. Who can reckon or cast up how far it is, between holy and unholy,
between pure and unclean? The natural distance can never be reduced; The
moral may.

God made man near himself, but when Adam fell; God and man parted. And man,
in that condition, is so far from God, that he is, without God in the world,
(Ephesians. 2. 12.) that is, without the true knowledge of him, without
dependence upon him, without delight in him, without obedience to him.
Conversion is our approach to God, in that we draw near to him, and live near
him by the blood of Christ.

In this Glass we see how sad they look, or have reason to look, who lie in a
state of unconversion, They are afar off from God. We pity those who live
far from the Sun, in cold Countries and climates, where for many months
darkness covers them. How are they to be pitied, who live far off from God,
frozen with the cold, and vvrapt up in the darkness of their natural
condition?

And this shows us, what a noble undertaking it is to promote that which
brings man nigh to God, which gathers scattered souls, and binds them up in
the bundle of life, which is in Christ. It is a noble and a glorious
undertaking, well becoming the greatest Council, and highest Magistracy in the
world, to take care that Nations and Kingdoms may be brought near to God. Some
have told us of Englands three conversions; O that it may be the honor of this
present Parliament, yet to advance a fourth conversion of England, that England
may be converted beyond all former conversions, that it might be brought yet
nearer to God, that implicit faith, and blind obedience ( two Popish relics)
may no where go for conversion. The planting, protecting and encouraging of
an able, faithful, painful, soul-quickning Ministry, is the way, and the
only ordinary way to effect this. Thus a Nation may be born at once; and if
once thus born, it is made for ever. The Apostle tells us in the story of his
own conversion, Act. 26. that God drew nigh to him, that he might draw others
nigh to God; I (says the Lord) have appeared to thee for this purpose, to make
thee a Minister, and a witness, delivering thee from the Gentiles, unto whom
now I send thee. To the Gentiles, who were they? A people far off from God,
for that was the difference between Jew and Gentile; the Jews were nigh, and
the Gentiles afar off. I send thee to the Gentiles; for what? To open their
eyes, and to turn them from darkness to light, and from the power of Satan unto
God. The tide and the wind of the Apostles Ministry was to meet with the
stream of the corrupted Gentiles, and to turn it back. For thus it is in
conversion, we all by nature like a stream run away from God our fountain: but
when the tide and vvinde, the Spirit and the Word meet with this vvandring
stream, it runs back to the fountain, and the waters draw again to the
springhead. Hence many stand vvondering at the conversion of sinners, as they
at Jordan, and at the sea; What ailed thee, O thou sea, that thou fleddest?
Thou Jordan, that thou wast driven back? What ails the sea of man's corruption,
and the overflowing streams of lust, which issue from the heart of man, that
they are driven back? Even this, the Word meets them, and turns them. That
there may be such a turn, improve (I beseech you) the utmost of your power and
opportunities in sending powerful Preachers into all the dark corners of this
Land, as Paul was to the Gentiles, who were afar off, To turn them from
darkness to light, and from the power of Satan unto God.

But besides this first conversion, there is a second. The former is a
conversion from a sinful state; this is a conversion from sinful acts. The
former is that, whereby they who lie in a state of nature, receiving grace,
Draw nigh to God. And the later is that, wherein they who have grace, receiving
more, draw nearer to God. A Christian is often converted, his whole life upon
earth is a continued conversion. Every act of sin is an aversion from God; and
every act of grace is a conversion to him. A great deal of a Christians
progress is to go backward; and much of his work, the undoing of what he
has done. And this the Apostle aims at, specially in this place, for he
writes to the twelve Tribes scattered abroad; who were such as professed
Christ, embraced and practiced Gospel Truths. These he invites to draw nigh to
God, that he might draw nigh to them. They who are nearest God in this life,
may yet be nearer him. And many are not so near God, as they have been. For as
hypocrites apostatize quite from God: so they who are sincere do often
backslide from God: unto such the Apostle says, Draw nigh, let your
backslidings be healed, and your breaches repaired. How often do the Prophets
call after such wanderers and out-liers? (Jer. 3. 12.) Return, thou backsliding
Israel. Israel was a people in Covenant with God, yet they withdrew from him
(Chap. 8. 4.) Shall he turn away, and not return? What? Have ye drawn off from
God by your sinnings, and will you not draw on again by your repentings? Why
then is this people of Jerusalem slidden back, by a perpetual backsliding?
What, nothing but backsliding? ( Mal. 3. 7.) Ye are gone away from mine
ordinances (they who forsake the pure worship of God, go away from God) Return
unto me, and I will return unto you, says the Lord. Thus the Lord indents and
engages with his departing people. The Apostles caution implies as much, ( Heb.
3. 12.) Take heed, lest there be in any of you (in any of you, Saints,
believers) an evil heart of unbelief, in departing from the living God.

This is an important duty, and of perpetual use. Suppose a man has drawn
nigh to God in that first conversion, even he must draw nigh in daily
conversion, and get nearer God, till he enjoy God fully. Besides, who is it
that slips not, falls not sometimes in his way, and that sometimes does not
decline and fall back, though he cannot (being ever upheld by Christ) fall away.

Let me remember such to draw nigh to God, turning from those special sins, by
which they have departed from him. Consider in what you have most declined from
God, since you draw nigh to him, and let your return answer your departure. He
that has departed by pride, let him return by humility: he that has departed
by unbelief, let him return by faith: he that has departed by intemperance,
let him return by sobriety: he that has departed by malice or envy, let him
return by love and charity: he that has departed by injustice, let him return
by doing right to all, by restoring where he has wronged, and by showing
mercy to the poor: And he that has departed by self-seeking, let him return
by laying out himself for God, his cause and people in all the concernments
wherein he is engaged. The Lord looks that upon such a day as this, we should
consider our selves in our with-drawings from him, and so draw nigh unto him.
He is this day waiting for our coming home.

And as he waits for our personal, so for our public returnings. Consider
wherein the Nation has withdrawn from God, and let the Nation return. Samael
bespeaks all the house of Israel (1 Samuel 7. 3.) saying, If ye do return unto
the Lord with all your hearts, then put away the strange gods: and there is one
in special of which I warn you, Put away the strange gods, and Ashtaroth. Why
does he say, Put away the strange gods, and Ashtaroth? Was not Ashtaroth a
strange god? And might not that Idol have been wrapped up under the general name
of strange gods? Yes, Ashtaroth had been involved under that notion; but
because Ashtaroth was a notorious, a famous Idol, after which that people had
gone a whoring from God, therefore that Idol is named. Put away your strange
gods, and be sure you put away Ashtaroth. It is a like phrase with that, 2 Samuel
22. 1. David spoke unto the Lord the words of this Song, in the day that the
Lord had delivered him out of the hand of all his enemies, and out of the hand
of Saul: Why, was not Saul one of his enemies? Yes, Saul was his chief enemy,
and therefore he gives praise, not only for his deliverance from all his
enemies, but from such an enemy by name. Saul was too bigg an enemy to go
under the general name of his enemies. Thus in the day of our humbling for
national sins, we must draw nigh to God from every sin, but especially from
our Ashtaroth, from that evil wherein we have most dishonored God.

Honorable and Beloved, You have been pleased sometimes to send out your
discovering Ordinances, and in them to lay your hands (as it were) upon some
special sins of the Nation, charging us to confess and bewail them before the
Lord. You have instanced in the superstition and idolatries of the former
times, now draw the Land nearer God in holy worship; you have instanced in the
blood of the Saints, shed in the Marian and other persecutions; draw nigh unto
God, in giving all countenance and support to the Saints; be so far from
letting their blood be shed, or their bodies be wounded, that if their names
and reputations be wounded (do as that repenting Jaylour did the corporal)
wash those wounds, and heal the bruises which the scourge of tongues has made
upon them. We have heretofore been sensible that the Nation has departed from
God, by laying heavy burdens upon the consciences of his people; let it be your
care we may return, by withdrawing those, and all other burdens. This is the
great duty of a Fast, Isa. 58. 6. This (says God) is the Fast I have chosen,
to undo the heavy burden, to let the oppressed go free, and to break every
yoke. Among all oppressions the oppression of conscience is the greatest. Other
great sins, profaning of the Lord's Day, swearing, drunkenness, have been
called out by name, and arraigned, as our National departures from God. Let
all draw nigh to God by an eminent practice of the contrary duties and graces.

Our drawing nigh to God in both these conversions, namely, from a sinful
state, and from all sinful acts, are necessarily antecedaneous to our drawing
nigh unto God in prayer and fasting; for, The prayer of the wicked is an
abomination unto the Lord. How can such draw nigh to God in prayer? The person
must be accepted before the service can. And if a godly man (which is possible
for a time, and under a temptation) regard iniquity in his heart (David says
it of himself, Psalm. 66. 18.) the Lord will not hear his prayer. So that, there
must be a drawing nigh to God by a double conversion, a conversion from a
sinful state, and a conversion from sinful acts, before we are fit to draw
nigh to God in any holy duty, especially in extraordinary humblings of our
souls before him.

And that such a drawing nigh to God is the proper intendment and scope of the
Apostle in this place, is clear from the words following, which seem to
interpret this; For as soon as he had said, Draw nigh to God, he adds, verse. 9.
Be afflicted, and mourn, and weep, etc. Humble your selves in the sight of the
Lord, and he shall lift you up, v. 10. Here Is the business of the text, and the
business of the day. The Point is,

That prayer and humbling of the soul, is a drawing nigh to God.

Every ordinance brings us near to God; Levit. 10. 7. I will be sanctified in
them that come nigh me, or, in (...) In propinqui^ meis
my neighbors. The Priests under the Ceremonial worship, had the special
honor of that Title to be called, Gods nigh ones; He caused them to come near
unto him in holy services, Numb. 16. 9. Now all the Saints are, A holy
Priesthood, to offer up spiritual sacrifices, (^ Pet. 2. 5.) they dwell so
near to God, that they are all his neighbors. But though they always dwell
near God, yet they do not always come near to God; to do so is a special
work of grace, as to be so is their state of grace. Heb. 11. 6. He that comes
to God, must believe that God is; that is, he that prays, must believe. Prayer
is a coming to, and a meeting with God, Amos 4. ^2. I will do thus unto thee,
and because I will do thus, prepare to meet thy God, O Israel. This meeting
may have a double sense; it may have the sense of a challenge; and the sense of
a supplication. Of a challenge, and so the Prophet does (as it were) dare those
people to whom he speaks in the Name of the Lord. The Lord will do thus unto
thee, and seeing he will do so, prepare to meet thy God; muster thy forces,
and gather all thy strength; harden thy heart, and set thy face against God,
see how thou can make thy part good against him. In that sense the word is
used ( Luke 14. 31.) What King going to make war against another King,
sits not down first, and consideret^, whether he be able with ten thousand
to meet him that comes against him with twenty thousand? To meet him, is, to
fight with him, to undertake him in the field: So says the Prophet, God has
gathered his Army, he is coming against you, see now if you be able to fight a
battle with him. Dare you meet him in the field? Thus it speaks a challenge.
It is likewise the language of an humble supplication (so most interpret that
place) seeing the Lord will do thus, O Israel, Prepare to meet thy God; put on
thy mourning weeds, take up a lamentation, get thy petition ready, go forth
upon thy knee, and beseech him to spare thee. So Abigail met David, when he
marched with a resolution to destroy Nabal and his Family; the noble spirited
woman came forth and met David; what to do? Not to contend with him, but to
supplicate him, 1 Samuel 25. 23, 24. Praying is such a meeting with God. When
Saul prevailed in battle against the Philistin^s, he had thoughts to prosecute
his victory, and attempt them a second time; Let us go down (says he) after
the Philistines by night, and spoil them, and let us not leave a man of them;
Let us rally again and rout them quite: the people answer, Do whatsoever seems
good unto thee, renew the battle, if thou please: Stay, says the Priest, be
not too hasty, it is good to ask counsel and a blessing of God, before we
venture: Then said the Priest, let us draw near hither unto God; that is, let
us pray, and by Vrim and Thummim enquire of the Lord what his mind is in this
thing; he expresses that duty of advising with God under this notion of
drawing near unto God. Hence it is that ordinances of worship are called, the
face, or presence of God. Cursed Cain complains in such a language, Genesis 4. 14.
Behold, thou have driven me out this day from the face of the earth (that is,
from the society of men) and from thy face shall I be hid; that is, I shall not
be admitted to offer sacrifice with hope of acceptance any more. Hence it is
said at the 16. verse, that Cain went out from the presence of the Lord; that
is, he went like a man excommunicated and banished from the Church of God, and
the meetings of his public worship. The worship of the Jews is called an
appearing before God, Exodus 23. 17. David breathes out his desires in the same
expression, When shall I come and appear before God, Psalm. 42. 2. And in his
song of thanksgiving, his spirit rises to this strain, 1 Chronicles. 16. 29. Give
unto the Lord the glory due unto his Name: Bring an offering, and come before
him, worship the Lord in the beauty of holiness.

And if so, we see, first, that is a privilege which most account a burden.
Holy duties are lifted at as burdens, and the carnal heart cries out, What a
weariness? (Mal. 1. 13.) They are burdens indeed, but upon no other true
account, then as honor is a burden. When we pray we draw nigh to God. Is it no
honor to draw nigh to great Princes, and to be admitted into the presence of a
King? Will any reckon this a weariness? Were our hearts spiritualized, every
time we pray we would look upon our selves as admitted into the presence
chamber of the King of Heaven, and we should say (as Jacob at Bethel) of every
place we pray in, This is no other (neither better nor worse) then the house of
God; this is the gate of heaven, Genesis 28. 17. Prayer is the true Jacobs ladder
set upon the earth, and the top of it reaching Heaven, by which we ascend to
God, and God descends to us. The Queen of Sheba counted it a high favor to
stand before Solomon, and she envied his servants, whose attendance gave them
that privilege. When the Apostle had said, that circumcision, which is outward
in the flesh, was nothing, a Question is started in the next words, What then
is the advantage of the Jew? And what is the profit of circumcision? He
answers, Much every way, chiefly, Because to them were committed the Oracles of
God. The Jews kept the records, they were Masters of those Rolls, which God
sent from heaven; these occasioned their frequent recourses to God, and
advisings with him; this made them a people nigh to God; this was the chief
advantage of the Jew, and the profit of circumcision. Christ says ( Mat. 11.
27.) that Capernaum was a City exalted upto heaven. Why lifted up to heaven?
The Gospel was preached there, which might have drawn them nigh to God; this
was their exaltation to heaven; to be exalted to heaven, is the greatest
exaltation. When that ambitions Monarch, ( Isa. 14. 13.) would let out his
spirit of pride to the utmost, and show the very head of that monster,
heresolves thus, I will ascend to heaven, I will exalt my throne above the
stars of God. Mortal man could not imagine higher then heaven. Capernaum was
exalted up to heaven; she had more then any worldly honor by the enjoyment of
that ordinance, the preaching of the Gospel. While God vouchsafes any people
such meetings as these, he exalts them to heaven. O take heed your hearts be
not found grovelling upon the earth; take heed you do not think it a hell, a
pain, a vexation to be in Godapproaching, and man-exalting duties. I know
wearinesses will be upon the flesh, there are weaknesses and distempers there,
but chide them away, entertain them not; number it among your choicest
privileges to converse with God.

Secondly, Learn whence it is that the Saints so highly prize and delight in
these duties: The world wonders what they find in them, where the sweetness,
what the comfort is, what secret golden mines they find in these diggings,
when themselves find nothing but burdensome stones and clay.

The reason is, because the Saints draw nigh to God in these duties, and they
that draw nigh to God, cannot but find great treasures; they that meet with
God, meet with all delights. David's soul was a thirst for God, for the living
God (not for a Kingdom) Psalm. 42. 2.) And the one thing which he desired of
the Lord, was, that he might dwell in the house of the Lord all the days of
his life. It was good being there. Why? What, because of any incomes from the
world? No, this is it, That I may behold the beauty of the Lord. If a soul gets
a sight of God in prayer, it has enough in prayer. Communion with God is
better then all things, for which we have communion with him. Prayer is better
then any worldly thing we pray for. This means is better then the end: and God
to whom we pray is better then any spiritual thing we pray for. This object is
better then any end. It is the highest reward, the very wages which the Saints
look for in these duties, to find God in them ( Psalm. 65. 4.) Blessed is the
man whom thou chusest, and causest to approach unto thee. Where were these
approaches made? The next words show us where, That he may dwell in thy Courts,
we shall be satisfied with the goodness of thy house, even of thy holy Temple.
We shall be satisfied. Is it any wonder to see a man delight in satisfying
goodness? What is it that any man desires but satisfaction? What is heaven but
satisfaction? The reason why the world is so much desired, is, because it gives
so little satisfaction. (Men still hope for further satisfaction.) And the
reason why holy things are desired, is, because they give so much satisfaction:
The Saints never think they have enough of them, because they ever find enough
in them. In heaven and heavenly things satisfaction and appetite are
perpetually interchangeable, We shall be satisfied with the goodness of thy
house, even of thy holy Temple. Unless carnal men find satisfaction in their
own houses, they find none in Gods. Temple-comforts please them not, unless
they may have their fill of Kitchin-comforts. And here is the reason why carnal
men and hypocrites, who formally approach unto God in these duties, are so soon
weary of them: for unles they receive some outward sensible, it may be sensual
advantage, some present pay, unles they thrive in worldly things, they think
their labor lost, and their time too. To what purpose is this waste? They know
not what you mean, by the goodness of Gods House, they understand not this
language. Hence that cry ( Isa. 58. 2.) Wherefore have we fasted, and thou
see not? What was it that troubled them? What, that God was not near them?
No, but because creature comforts and successes were not near them. Prayer
brought no money into their purses, nor peace into their State. Now, the Saints
are never weary of prayer and fasting, though they pine and starve at them,
because they find God in them, in whom they are feasted with sweet wine, and
various dishes of delight, when the world yields them not a cup of cold water,
or a bit of bread. God alone is enough, and all, him they find when they
find nothing. These heavenly Epicures feed fat and full on Christ, and drink
large draughts of the wine of his consolation, when they have no more in the
creature, then Dives had in hell, not a drop of water to cool their tongues.

Thirdly, If these duties be a drawing nigh to God, I beseech you, consider
whether you intend them so or no. Do you draw nigh to God when you pray and
hear? Have you been nigh to God this day? We are in the exercise of the point
we are speaking of. It would be sad, if any soul should be far from God in
that duty, where the whole business is to draw nigh to God. It is ill to be
absent from God at any time; but then worst, when we seem to come into his
presence. It is possible to have God in our mouths, and not at all in our
thoughts: to have God at our tongues end, and our hearts at the worlds end. A
man may be as far from God at a prayer, as at a play: As far from God at a
holy fast, as at a drunken feast. Thus the Lord charged his ancient people (
Isa. 29. 13.) This people draw near me with their mouth, and with their lips
they do honor me, but have removed their heart far from me: So the Prophet (
Jer. 12. 2.) Lord, thou art nigh in their mouth, but thou art far from their
reins. O that such might be awakened out of this sinful sleep, as Jacob out of
his natural, and forced to cry out (as he) Surely God is in this place, and we
knew it not, Genesis 28. 16.

If it shall be asked, How may we draw nigh to God?

I would answer these three things about it.

1. We must have a right way. 2. We must have a right staff of strength. 3. We
must have the right steps to draw near to God. Your way, your staff, your
steps, must be considered.
First, If you would draw nigh to God, look to your way, and exercise faith
about it. The way is Jesus Christ. I (says he) am the way, the truth and the
life, no man comes unto the Father, but by me, Joh. 14. 6. There is no choice
of ways to God: if we miss one, we have missed all. The Law made nothing
perfect, but the bringing in of a better hope did, by the which we draw nigh
unto God, Heb. 7. 19. What is that better hope? Christ the object hoped for, is
this hope; our hope depends so much on him for the best things, that he is our
better hope, by which (with assurance) we may draw* nigh unto God. That Is the
Apostles encouragement, Heb. 10. 19. Having therefore, brethren, boldness, to
enter into the holiest by the blood of Jesus, by a new and living way, which he
has consecrated for us through the vail, that is to say, his flesh; Let us draw
near with true hearts.

Secondly, The staff of ^^rength, by which we draw nigh to God, is the holy
Ghost. Edify your selves in your most holy faith (Jude v. 20.) Praying in the
holy Ghost; so we translate: others thus, Praying by the holy Ghost, that is,
by the power of the holy Ghost: For, Romans 8. We know not what to pray as we
ought, but the Spirit it self makes interces^ion for us with groans that
cannot be uttered. As it is the office of Christ to intercede with God for us:
So it is the office of the holy Ghost to make those intercessions in us, which
we put (...) Particula (...) ad nos laborantes resertur, quorum tamen vis
omnis ab e^ spiritu proficiscitur, qui ficut nos penitus collapsos erexit, ita
etiam erectos regit. ideoque dici^ur ipse vicissim on^^ attollere ex altera
part, ne sub eo satiscamus. Beza.
up to God. All the prayers which prevail with God, are formed, wrought and
fashioned in our hearts by the Spirit of God: There are no prayers in our
hearts. The prayers which go to God come from him. The burden of prayer (as
well as that of sin) is too heavy for us to bear. Therefore it is said in the
beginning of the verse, The Spirit also helps our infirmities. The Greek word
signifies to help, as a nurse helps the little child, upholding it by the
arm; or, as a weak decrepid old man is upholden by his staff. Or rather, The
Spirit helps together, for so much the composition of the word implies. And
then it is a Metaphor taken from one who is to lift a weight too heavy for
him, and therefore calls another to lend him his hand. Thus the holy Ghost lends
us his hand, or is as a staff in our hand to uphold and strengthen us in this
weighty work, in this heavenly walk of our souls toward God.

Thirdly, Look to the steps. There are seven steps (and you shall have them
almost in so many words) by which we draw near to God.

1. The sense of our own wants. We never come near the fullness of God till we
know our own emptiness. He that is full l^atheth a honeycomb; and he who
thinks he is full (though none are so empty as he) shall never have his
emptiness filled, He fills the hungry with good things, and sends the rich
empty away. The whole have no need of a Physician; and though none have so
much need, as they who say they are whole, yet these shall not be healed.

The second step is a sense of our own utter inability to supply our wants,
yea, and of the inability of all the creatures under heaven, and in heaven too,
without God, Psalm. 73. 25, 26. Whom have I in heaven but thee? And there is
none upon earth that I desire besides thee; My flesh and my heart fails, but
God is the strength of my heart, and my portion for ever. David having thus
protested against the expectation of help from any creature in heaven or earth,
without or within himself, and laid all his help upon him that is mighty,
finds his soul in a fit frame to approach to God, v. 28. It is good for me to
draw near to God.

The third step is a sense of our unworthiness, that God should supply our
wants, or give us any help. When Jacob was so nigh God, that he had him by
the shoulders and wrestling with him, held him so fast that he would not let
go his hold, till he had a blessing, yet he had quite let go any hold, yea,
or opinion of his own worthiness to receive a blessing, I am not worthy of the
least of all the mercies, and of all the truth which thou have showed unto thy
servant (Genesis 32. 10.) or, Iam less then the least of all thy mercies. Then we
are fit to receive great things from God, when we are little in our own eyes.
We cannot come near the high God, but with low thoughts of our selves, The
proud he beholds afar off, and they are afar off.

The fourth step is an acknowledgement of the power and alsufficiency of God to
help us. We cannot draw nigh to God, without such actings of faith toward God
( Heb. 11. 6.) He that comes to God must believe that God is: What Is that? Is
it only this, that God has a being? No, it is this, That God has his being in
himself, That God is God; that is, that God can do what he pleases, that God
has an all sufficiency in himself for himself, and an all sufficiency for us.
He needs no creature, and he is enough for every creature.

The fifth step is, That the Lord is willing and ready to help us. God cannot
bear it, that any should come before him with doubtful thoughts of him, either
in regard of his power, or of his willingness. We honor him most when we
expect most from him. He that comes to God must believe that God is; and what
else? That he is a rewarder of those that diligently seek him; He has not said
to the seed of Jacob, seek ye me in vain.

The sixth step is to believe not only that there is a willingness in God to
help his people, but that he is willing to help in that particular case we
petition him about. That Is the Apostles meaning ( Heb. 10. 27.) Let us draw
near to God with a true heart, and full assurance of faith. In what assurance?
Even in this, That we shall be answered in what we ask. As faith must mingle
with every word of command or promise, which God speaks to us, else it will not
profit us: So faith must mingle with every word of prayer, which we speak to
God, or else it will not profit us. The Apostle James puts a particular
instance ( Chap. 1. 5, 6.) If any of you lack wisdom, let him ask of God, etc.
and it shall be given him; but let him ask in faith, nothing wavering.

The seventh step is, Boldness or freedom of speech with God. Holy boldness
is the highest act of faith, and the highest step of the soul. When we are come
to this step, we are at Gods side (as I may speak with reverence) and we stand,
as it were, at his elbow, The Favorites place; then we speak with God, as God
spoke with Moses (Exodus 23. 11.) Face to face, as a man speaks to his friend.
This the Apostle invites us to do, Heb. 4. 16. Let us come boldly to the
throne of grace. Boldness would not suit well, at any throne, but a throne of
grace. And when we are come thither, and come boldly thither, grace can step no
higher; our next step is into glory.

Thus I have briefly opened, who the way is, what the staff, and which be the
steps, by which we draw nigh to God. Give me leave now to show you what the
effects of such drawing nigh to God will be. It cannot be, we should draw nigh
to God by Christ the way; by the holy Ghost, our staff; by such steps as these,
the sense of our wants, of our weakness, of our unworthiness, the sight of
the power of God, and of his vvillingnes to give, with faith that he will
give, and boldness to ask, but great effects will be wrought in us, and
appear upon us. I shall give you an account of four.

1. If any draw thus nigh to God, their neernesse to him will cause their
likeness to him. A soul cannot stand so nigh a holy God, without receiving
stamps and tinctures of holiness. Till we have somewhat of the image of God
upon us, we cannot come at all to him; and when we come we receive more of
that image. In every ordinance we may have a vision of God by faith. Vision
here assimulates, as well as in heaven. The Apostle treating of
Gospelordinances concludes this, 2 Cor. 3. 18. We all, as in a glass with open
face, beholding the glory of the Lord, are changed into the same image from
glory to glory, even as by the Spirit of the Lord. It is impossible to look on
God, and not be like him. Jacobs sheep conceived according to the color of the
Rods that lay in the troughs; our conceptions will be like our visions. So
then, if in these duties you see God, and know who God is with whom you have
to do in them, you will be holy as God is holy, pure as he is pure, and just
as he is just in all manner of conversation. This is a proof to purpose that
you have prayed and fasted. Moses was nigh God forty days in the Mount: And
had he nothing of God upon him when he came down? Yes, his face did shine. And
his story tells us, that his whole life, as a godly man, and all his
administrations to the people, as a wise Magistrate, did shine brighter then
his face. If you draw nigh to God, as these duties import you do, rays of
heavenly light will shine, and shed themselves upon your counsels and
resolves: Every act will speak prayer and fasting. Who can dwell near a holy
God, and be unholy? A just God, and be unjust? A pure God, and be an unclean
Adulterer? A merciful God, and he a hardhearted oppressor? A faithful God,
and be a falsehearted dissembler. Do these things look like the engravings of
heaven? Or do these persons act as if they had acquaintance with God? They
that pray near God, work near God. Consider what your projectings are, what
your devisings, what your actings, and by that you may find what your
prayings have been, what your fastings, what your humblings. Where we read
God in the one, we may be assured there has been a dravving nigh to God in
the other. Many men do but converse with man in prayer, and therefore they
are so like to man, proud, froward, vain, earthly, carnal, self-seeking. O that
it might once be testified in our lives that we are a people who have prayed
nigh the living God.

Secondly, They who dravv nigh to God in these duties, usually find their
hearts sweetly refreshed both in and after these duties. Can a man who is
cold come nigh the fire, and not be vvarmed? Can he that is in the dark come
into the open Sun, and not be enlightened? God is the spring of comfort; Surely
your hearts will be comforted, if you get nigh to him. Can we come to a God
whose name is the God of all comfort? (2 Cor. 1. 3.) God has ingrost all that
commodity into his own hands, it is not in the power of any creature, high or
low, to give out comfort: they can give riches, honors and pleasures, but they
cannot give comfort, you must trade to heaven for that commodity, or else your
vessel will return empty, though you should trade at all the ports on earth.) I
say then, Can we come near this God of all comfort, and yet find no comfort?
to come with, and carry away a dead spirit, a dead look, to be encompast with
fear and dismaidnes, after we have encompassed his throne with prayers or with
praises? That woman (1 Samuel 1. 18.) who was in bitterness of spirit, and in
great anguish of soul under her affliction, falls a praying, and we may see she
prayed, and drew nigh to God in prayer, for she went away, and did eat, and her
countenance was no more sad. She found so much refreshing in God, that she
could not be sorrowful. No sorrow can stand before the God of all consolation.
What is heaven, but the presence of God? And what we shall find in the
presence of God there, the Psalmist tells us: At thy right hand, there are
joys, and in thy presence there are pleasures for evermore. As we shall have
nothing but pleasures and joys in heaven, because we are in the presence of
God: so in a proportion as we get nearer and nearer God on earth, we shall have
more and more pleasures; yea, though we dwell in a land of sorrows, and though
fears encamp round about us: drawing nigh to God will turn our water into wine,
our sorrows into joys, our fears into confidences and assurances for ever. He
will take off our sackcloth, and gird us with gladness, or make us glad while
dressed in sackcloth. He will give us beauty for ashes, or make us beautiful in
our ashes. I grant many a soul has drawn nigh to God indeed in prayer,
hearing, etc. and yet comfort has been far off. But we must not argue
against a general truth, from a particular temptation. The position will
stand, though every experiment comes not up to it. God is a free agent, and
works electively: He is not like the Sun, which cannot suspend or diversifie
its own operation.

Thirdly, They who draw nigh to God in these duties, will draw off from their
duties. There is a double conversion needful for a Christian; there is a
conversion from sin; and there is a conversion from duty; not from the practice
of it, but from relying and trusting upon it. A man may pray much, and fast
much, and in stead of drawing nigh to God, draw nigh to prayer: his thoughts
may be more upon his prayer, then upon God to whom he prays: And he may live
more upon his cushion then upon Christ. But when a man indeed draws nigh to God
in prayer, he forgets prayer, and remembers God. He loves to pray, but is not
in love with his prayers, He goes forth in the strength of God, and makes
mention of his righteousness only. He will not with the Pharisee make mention
of his duties also, or bring God a reckoning of his prayers, and of his
fastings, I fast twice in the week, etc. He will not tell the Lord, I fast once
a month, I keep extraordinary fasts too; he forgets all this: Fasts go for
nothing, and prayers go for nothing, and tears go for nothing: Christ is all:
he counts upon nothing but God himself.

Fourthly, They who draw nigh to God in these duties, draw off from their
selves. And they who are nearest God are furthest from self. Self-love is the
first and most potent lust: Self-denial is the first and most ^otent grace. It
is an argument that men know little of God, and taste less of him, when they
know and taste themselves so much in all they do. When we are asking God we
should be denying our selves. For he grants nothing to us (in mercy) till we
deny our selves. When man first departed from God, he went into himself: and as
often as he comes to God, he goes out of himself. No man can be a self-seeker,
and a God-seeker too. Hence it is that the Apostle spends the former part of
the Chapter upon this argument, even to draw the scattered Jews (to whom he
wrote) off from themselves; closing with the duty of this Text, as the only
expedient to effect it: Draw nigh to God. As if he had said, one touch upon God
will cure you of your selves. For the clearing of which I shall a little open
the context, which with an eye to this place, I forbear to speak of at the
beginning.

The Apostle puts a Question at the first verse, From whence come wars and
fightings among you? He asks the Question, not that he was unresolved, but that
they might be ashamed. But what wars means he? Were those twelve Tribes
scattered abroad by persecution (as we read in the dedication of the Epistle)
rallying themselves into regiments, and gathering into armies to fight one with
another, rather then into Churches to worship God together? No, the war he
means was metaphorical. The Roman Eagles kept these Doves low enough, yet
their gall (Sunnatural!) appears in contentions with, divisions from, envyings
and heart-burnings against one another: brother is up against brother, and
Church against Church, while all were over-busie, seeking themselves. For,
are these things from the Gospel, or from faith in it? Are they from prayer, or
from drawing nigh to God in it? Does the seed of prayers, and tears, of faith
and the Gospel bring forth such an harvest as this? Are they procreative of
wars and fightings? No surely: The next words show the root whence these
spring, Come they not hence, even of your lusts that war in your members? The
Greek (...).
is, Come they not of the pleasures which are in your members? is not that
their pedigree? Lusts are called pleasures by a Metonymie of the adjunct, or of
the effect, because a kind of pleasure goes with them, or flows from them.
From these pleasures (says he) your wars and fightings come; your pleasures
bring forth unpleasant fruit; because these lusts please your selves: you care
not whom you displease, so you may satisfy them. He presses and upbraids them
further, verse. 2. Ye lust and have not, ye kill and desire to haves and cannot
obtain* These killings were suitable to the wars and fightings of the first
verse, yet (the Greek words to kill and to envy, being very near in sound)
Some to (...). Occiditis. (...), invidecis.
mollify the sense conceive it should be read, Ye envy and desire to have:
not, ye kill and desire to have. But we may well keep to the letter of our
translation. For the Apostle speaks as high language of those unbloody wars
(Gal. 5. 15.) If ye bite and devour one another. Such contentions are called
there, man-eating, therefore they may be called here, man-slaying. But what
got they by these victories? What were the trophies of this war? The text
says, Ye kill and desire to have, and cannot obtain. Ye oppress and vex
others, but ye cannot help your selves, and obtain your own desires; or (as the
original (...). Est ob^^nere quod volum^s.
emphasis bears) get your wills. The Apostle beats it upon them again, Ye fight
and war, yet ye have not, because ye ask not. These men were dealing so much
for themselves, that is, for their lusts, that they little regarded God: they
were thin in prayer while their corruptions were thus thick, Ye have not,
because ye ask not; Not ask? sure we do, What, do not we pray? he answers (
verse. 3.) home to the point. I Will grant ye pray, Ye ask, but ye receive not,
because ye ask amiss, and so your prayers are ciphers, they stand for
nothing, how many soever you may number them. Sinful prayers are no prayers. I
tell you, your asking is no asking. Why? We hope we pray for things lawful,
we pray to God, not to an Idol, and we pray in the Name of Christ? Let it be
that ye do so, though ye ask not amiss in your prayers in regard of matter,
object or medium, yet ye ask amiss. Where Is the fault? Here it lies, ye are
not right in your ends and aims. Ye seek your selves in your prayers, Ye ask
that ye may consume it upon your lusts; you would have the blessings of God to
bestow them upon your pleasures, not to do his pleasure. Your lusts pray rather
then your graces: ye are suckling your lusts, while ye are praying; ye make
provision for the flesh, while ye are in spiritual duties. Look to this (I
beseech you) for I am afraid most prayers miscarry upon this point. How many
ask that they may consume, what they would receive, upon their lusts, upon
pride and ambition, upon vainglory, and the love of preeminence? How many
would thus lavish out the mercies of God? It is possible for a man to pray, not
only for the things of this world, to bestow them upon his lusts, but he may
pray even for the things of heaven, to bestow them upon his lusts: He may pray
for the ordinances of God, and bestow them upon his lusts: He may pray for pure
ordinances, and bestow them upon filthy lusts: yea, I think it is possible for
a man to pray for grace, and bestow that upon his lusts; not that grace it self
can be turned into lust, but there is a depth of sinfulness in the heart of
man, which would put the best things to the worst uses. However the Apostle is
clear, that good things may be put to very bad uses, while he says, Ye ask,
that ye may consume it on your lusts. He gives them a title fully significant
of this in the 4th verse, Ye adulterers and adulteresses; he means not carnal
adulterers and adulteresses, but spiritual. As if he had said, while your
hearts cleave to your worldly interests, you commit adultery with the world,
and go a whoring from Christ. For as an adulterer, and an adulteress are made
one flesh: So a spirit prostituted to worldly concernments, is made one with
the world. Such would make heaven bow to earth, and God serve the designs of
Satan. So he must, if he grant their askings, who would consume what they ask
upon their lusts.

Take heed of this (says the Apostle) consider what ye do, know ye not that
the friendship of the world is enmity with God? yes, we know this very well; but
we do not believe our own hearts can deceive us thus grossly, that we who pray
so often, so earnestly, so zealously for good things, should yet be thought to
pray all the while, only to get in fuel and provision for our lusts; or, to
keep Fasts that we might have somewhat to feast and fatten our corruptions.
Some possibly might say, as Hazael to Elisha (when that Prophet fore told what
bloody work he would make, when he had the power) What, are we dogs that we
should do such a thing? What, we pray for our lusts? God forbid. The Apostles
next words seem to imply such thoughts ( v. 5.) Do ye think that the
Scripture says in vain, the Spirit that dwells in us lusts to envy? As if
he had said, you think I charge you too deeply, and may perhaps call what I
have said an aspersion, at least a needless jealousy. But alas, can any man
tell what he would do with mercies, with riches, with power, if he had
these? Friends, you know not your own hearts, nor of what spirit ye are. But
do ye think God does not know your hearts? Or that he has not the true
measure of your spirits? Does the Scripture speak in vain (that is, without
cause) that the Spirit that dwells in us lusts to envy. Where does the
Scripture speak this? the Scripture speaks it no where, syllabically in so many
words, Sound and clear collections and consequences from Scripture, are the
voice of Scripture; Some think the Apostle alludes to that complaint, Genesis 6.
5. God saw that the wickedness of man was great upon the earth, and that every
imagination of the thoughts of his heart was only evil continually. Others
refer it to the answer of Moses, when his servant Jashua brought him a
complaint against Eldad and Medad for prophesying in the Camp, desiring his
Lord Moses to forbid them, Enviest thou for my sake? Numb. 11. 29. Whether this
or that was the special text, is doubtful; of this we are sure, the
Scripture yields us this position, The spirit that dwells in us lusts to
envy. What spirit is this? And how does it lust? Some take it for the corrupt
spirit of man: and so the sense is. Has not the Scripture cause to say, that
the sinful spirit of man lusts to envy, or is envious at the power and
greatness of others? and is desirous to grasp all to it self; Has the
Scripture spoken this without cause? Do you not find such a spirit acting and
striving in you? Does not the experience you have of your own hearts (unless
you be strangers at home) justify this charge? The spirit that dwells in you
lusts to envy. Others take the spirit for the Spirit of God. Do ye think
that the Scripture says in vain? that the Spirit of God (dwelling in the
Saints, or that spiritual principle given in regeneration) lusts to envy?
And then the sense is this. Ye are such as profess ye have received the Spirit
of God: ye are a people scattered by persecution for the profession of the
Gospel, and bearing the fruits of the Spirit. Do ye think the Scripture says
in vain, the spirit that dwells in you lusts to envy? That is, that (the
best, having yet the seed, and remains of every sin in them, and so of envy)
the spiritual part in you, or the spirit dwelling in you is put to continual
work and war by strivings and lustings to keep in the motions of your hearts
from these sins? For as there is a sinful lusting of the flesh against the
Spirit: So there is a gracious lusting of the Spirit against the flesh ( Gal.
5. 17.) one work whereof (there named by the Apostle) is envying (verse. 21.)
with all it is attendants. According to this interpretation, (...), to envy,
has the sense of (...), Against envy, which is an allowed signification of the
Greek preposition. And so to lust notes that hostile (...), pug^are contra
aliquem
opposition, which the holy Ghost raises in the Saints against envy,
implying, that even they are subject to envy as well as others.

M. Calvin renders the text interrogatively, Does the spirit that dwells in
us lust to envy? Ye speak of the Spirit of God, and ye say ye have the Spirit,
is this a work that looks like the vvorking of the Spirit? What is the Spirit
of God that dwells in you, or which you pretend dwells in you, a spirit of envy?
Nothing less, the Spirit of God breaths other thoughts, and teaches other
lessons. That Spirit which is truly liberal, cannot be envious. He that gives
freely to all, would not have us envy those to whom he gives more freely, then
to our selves. Or, he that gives us more, does not envy us for what we have,
v. 7. But he gives more grace. If any receive not more from him, it is because
they are unfit to receive, not because he is unwilling to give. God (indeed)
resists the proud, but gives grace to the humble; A proud man would have all
to himself, he thinks the whole world must serve his ends, and therefore God
opposes him in his way, Submit your selves therefore to God; be sure you pray
under God, and not above him. Many a man when his body lies low before God,
has his spirit above God. He that seeks himself in prayer to God, sets himself
above God to whom he prays: A thought of which was the devils first
entertainment. His first suggestion was, Ye shall be as gods. Nothing makes us
so unlike creatures, especially so unlike new creatures, as a desire of such
likeness unto God. And while we would be nigh him in making our own way, or
in being our own end, we depart furthest from him. Be careful then to resist
this devil of selfseeking, and resist him most, when ye are seeking unto God.
Resist this devil by fleeing from your selves, and he will flee from you.
Having thus put the devil to flight, you may draw nigh to God, with this
confidence, that he will draw nigh to you.

That Is the second point proposed, the promise of mercy, or the fruit of our
drawing nigh to God, Draw nigh to God, and he will draw nigh to you. I will not
handle this later part doctrinally, but only as an argument to provoke your
spirits to draw nigh to God, upon his gracious condiscention to draw nigh to
you. There is much oratory in this promise: who can express how drawing and
attractive it is to hear, that God will draw nigh unto us?

God will draw nigh: What Is that? We may interpret it by what he spoke before,
Ye ask and receive not: If God draw nigh, you shall ask and receive, you shall
have your petition. So it is expounded, Deuteronomy. 4. 7. What Nation is there so
great, that has God so nigh to them, as the Lord our God is, in all things we
call upon him for? That is, he readily gives us all things we call upon him
for. On the contrary, The not hearing of prayer is the departure of God. So the
complaint of Saul teaches us (1 Samuel 28. 15.) God is departed from me, and
answers me no more, neither by Prophets, nor by dreams. When God puts out and
acts mercy or power for us, he draws nigh unto us, Ps. 75. 1. For that thy
Name is near thy wondrous works declare: Gods works speak where he is: when we
see some wickedness acted, we may say, It is a sign who has been here; we may
see such have been here by the spoil they have made; we may read the Agents
names upon their actions. So when we see great, noble and glorious works
(though all men should be silent, yet) such works have a voice to proclaim
their Author, The finger of God is here. I might show you how every topic
yields us a persuasive argument to desire this presence of God with us.

First, ( A necessario) from the necessity of it. We have no need of many
creatures, they are but conveniences to us. We have no absolute need of any
creature: God can be now, as he will be hereafter, All in all unto us. God is
enough to us without any creature; but no creature can be any thing to us
without God. God, and all that he has made, is not more then God without any
thing which he has made.

Secondly, ( Ab utili) All our profit comes in with God. He that has the
fountain, has the stream. He that has the Sun cannot want light. He that ows
the silver and golden mines, cannot want treasure. God is fountain, sun and
mine of all good things. Each creature (in it is best estate) is but a
particular good: All creatures are not an universal good, The One-most God, is
all good.

Thirdly, ( Ab honesto) nothing so honorable to man, as his relation to God.
It is an honor to a mean man when a great Prince (who is but a man in a
greater letter) will be pleased to visit and draw nigh to him. Is it a small
matter that the Prince of the Kings of the earth visits us, and will dwell with
us in our smoaky cottages?

Fourthly, ( A jucundo) It is joy and delight unspeakable to have God near us.
The joy of heaven (as was touched before) is this, the presence of God: look how
much you have of the drawings nigh of God upon earth, so much you have of
heaven upon earth. The grace of glory is this, We shall ever be with the Lord;
The glory of grace is this, that God will ever be with us: that is the promise,
I will never leave thee, nor forsake thee; I will stick as close to thee as
thy clothes to thy back, or, as thy skin to thy flesh.

Take the weight and blessing of this privilege, a little more distinctly and
enlargedly.

1. Consider who draws nigh to you, when God draws nigh to you. His
descriptions (to help faith) are made to our senses. He is a sun, and a shield,
a strong tower, and a deliverer. Then comfort and protection draw nigh us, when
God draws nigh us. He is the God of battle for our Armies in the field; and he
is the God of wisdom for our counsels at home. Whatsoever the creature is or
wants, God is, and has eminently. All the world will be nothing to us, or
against us, if we have, and know we have God nigh us: For as when God looks
into himself, he speaks of the whole world (though the work of his own hands)
as vanity, or as nothing. All Nations before him are as nothing, and they are
counted to him less then nothing and vanity, Isa. 40. 17. What, was the Lord
six days about nothing? or did he make a piece of vanity? Emptiness and
vanity was the state of the Chaos before God fashioned and molded it up into
this beautiful fabric wherein we breathe. How unlike is this account to that
first account, which God made of the world, who casting up the several
parcels, makes this total sum, Genesis 1. 3^. And God saw every thing which he
had made; and behold, it was very good? True, so it was as it came out of his
hands; and so it is still, excepting only those cracks and flaws made by the
sin of man; but yet when the Lord looks upon his own infinite perfections, then
he says of all his works, They are nothing, and less then nothing, vanity;
The greatest works of God are nothing to the great God. Now as God himself, in
the contemplation of, and reflection upon his own greatness, nothings the
whole world; So when our souls are raised up to contemplate who God is, and
can get into the treasures of that glory and excellency which are in God,
the world is nothing in our eyes; and though we have to do in tansacting the
greatest affairs, and be advanced to the greatest dignities of the world, yet
after our thoughts have been a while with God, we think we have been but
pedling all the while about vanities and nothings. When the great God is near
us, the greatest things are little to us. When those unbelieving Israelites,
who were sent to espy and search the land of Canaan, saw the sons of Anak
those mighty Giants, they looked on themselves but as Grasshoppers in their
sight. What Grasshoppers will the highest of believing mankind think
themselves, when the mighty God stands by them? And the true reason why the
world is great in our eyes, is, because God is so little: we usually frame up
mean notions of God, we make God a poor God; and we frame high notions of the
world, we make the world a rich world. Labor to know who God is, and the
world will be to you as it is, and be esteemed by you (as it deserves) a
vanity, a nothing.

Secondly, When God draws nigh to you, all good draws nigh to you: Good cannot
stay behind, if God come; his presence is the grant of all your holy
petitions: You have as much in God, as your thoughts can grasp, and there is
infinitely more in him, then your thoughts can grasp. Further, unless God draw
nigh to you, what ever good draws nigh to, or clings about you, will prove an
evil to you. Though all creatures hang about you, and offer you their service,
they can do you no good, except God be with you in the enjoyment of them. The
cleaving and clinging of creatures to you, will be but as the clinging and
cleaving of the Ivy to the Oak to draw out your sap and strength: it can be no
otherwise, though they hug and embrace you heartily. Armies cannot help you
without God; your own armies cannot, no, nor the armies of your Brethren and
Confederates: Not only shall not Armies of Egyptian help you without God, but
Armies of Israelites shall not: Yea, though they be armies of the best strain
of Israelites, every one a Nathanael, an Israelite indeed, in whom there is no
guile. Your own Counsels cannot help without God, no, nor your fasts and
prayers. The Covenant cannot help you without God; no, nor the very Gospel.
What is it to have the Gospel preached, and God not in the Gospel? Can words
alone convert you? Can words comfort you? The mere letter of the Gospel kills,
as well as of the Law. The Spirit quickens in both. If then God draw not nigh
to you, go, weep over all creature-helps, vveep over your Armies, over your
confederacies, over your counsels: yea, vveep over your fasts, your prayers,
your Covenant, your Gospel; if God should not draw nigh, miserable comforts,
helpless helpers are they all.

Thirdly, If God do not draw nigh to you, all manner of evils will, you will
be encompast with snares and fears round about. It is said of Saul (1 Samuel
16.) that when the Spirit of God departed from him, an evil spirit from the
Lord troubled him. When the good God, and his good Spirit depart from us, evil
spirits will rush in, and throng upon us; the spirit of envy and of malice,
the spirit of division and distraction, the spirit of jealousy and suspicion,
the spirit of profaneness and contempt of holy things. Such spirits will put
all out of order, and trouble all. It was most sad to Saul when God left him;
we read him going to consult with a vvitch, when God was gone (1 Samuel 28.)
(Man must have somewhat beyond himself; man cannot rest upon his own center;
when God is departed, he will to the devil, because he thinks the devil above
himself in wisdom and in power) therefore Saul will hear what a vvitch, an
oracle of hell can say; and how woeful a complaint does he make? The
Philistines make war against me; why? so they had done many times before:
Saul, I hope, was not a man unused to the wars, he was a valiant and brave
soldier as any in the world, The bow of Jonathan turned not back, and the
sword of Saul returned not empty from the blood of the slain, from the fat of
the mighty, 2 Samuel 1. 22. and what? now afraid of a Philistine! hear what
dreadful words follow, words which show he had reason to fear, not only an
armed Philistine, but an unarmed child, or a man of straw, The Philistines
make war against me, and God is departed from me. Some might say, what if
God be departed from thee, can thou not get thy people to thee? go, muster
thy armies, double thy numbers, fortify thy cities, will not all this make up
the absence of a God? It may be thou may find somewhat to supply his room: o
no, Saul could not do it, for he had done all that, as the text says at the
4th ver. of the Chapter, The Philistines gathered themselves together, and came
and pitched in S^^nem; and Saul also gathered all Israel together, and pitched
in Gilboa; He had an Army, but he had not a God; and therefore he dares not
engage with the Philistines. Nothing can supply the steed of God. When you
open your chests, and see treasure there; yet, if God be not there, how poor
are ye? When you muster your armies, and see number and valor there; yet if
God be not there, how weak are ye? When ye look upon your counsels, and see
wisdom and vvell-grounded policies there; yet if God be not there, how
successelesse must all be?

Fourthly, Though you have done great things, yet if God withdraw, you shall do
no more. Man cannot act the same things without the same assistance. We must
have our daily strength, as well as our daily bread from God. And the reason
why man cannot alvvaies parallel his own actions, is, because God does not
alvvaies parallel his own assistances. After Joshua and the people of Israel
had conquered Jericho, they fled and fell before the men of Ai, a small City, a
petty Garrison: The reason was, God was not with them, as the text clearly
implies, Josh. 7. 12. Samson had done wonders, he had destroyed the
Philistines, heaps upon heaps, he had carried away the gates of a City upon
his shoulders, yet at last when his locks were cut, and his Dalilah said, The
Philistines are upon thee, Samson, he awoke out of his sleep, and said, I will
go out as at other times before, and shake my self; but he wist not that the
Lord was departed from him; then strong Samson was weak, bound presently by the
Philistines and thrust to grind in a mill. I assure you, Honorable Senators,
though your Armies like mighty Samsons have done great things, and have carried
the gates of strong Cities, yet in their next services, they will be but like
other men, weak and useless, if the Lord should depart from them.

Fifthly, If the Lord draw nigh to you, He will make all creatures draw nigh to
you, and stick to you, or submit to you; Creatures shall be glad of their
company who enjoy communion with God. We may apply to our selves that
privilege specializ'd to the Jews, Zech. 8. 23. It shall come to pass that ten
men shall take hold of the skirt of him that is a Jew, saying, we will go with
you, for we have heard that God is with you. O let us come in, let us be your
associates: what was the matter? where lay the argument? It was not in this,
you have gold, and silver, and power; no, but you have God: Let us go with you,
for we have heard that God is with you. Thus shall that nation be courted by
the nations round about, with whom the Lord is. If the Lord be with us, we also
shall have ten men of the nations about us take hold of the skirt of an
Englishman and of a Scotch-man with whom we are so nearly joined, and say, Let
us dwell with you, for we have heard that God is with you. However we may rest
in this assurance, that if God draw near to us, men shall, or we shall not need
them near us: If God draw nigh to us, either none shall, or we need not fear
who shall withdraw from us. The Apostle found it so* (2. Tim. 4. 16.) At my
first answer no man stood with me, but all men forsook me; notwithstanding the
Lord stood with me and strengthened me; though the world withdraw, though
nearest friends, though godly friends and brethren (such were the Romans to
Paul) withdraw, yet if God stand with us, we shall be able to withstand all
gainsayers, and when we have done all, to stand: if God be with us, who can be
against us? Though many should attempt to be, yet none can, their very
withdrawings and oppositions shall advantge us.

To close all, take I beseech you two general deductions from all that I have
spoken. You see persons converted from a state of sin are nigh to God, and
converted persons daily turning from the acts of sin are nigher to God, such
know how to draw nigh to God in every duty: And God honors them with this
style, his Nighones, his Neighbors; that is their privilege ( Psalm. 148. 14.
(He also exalts the horn of his people, the praise of all his Saints, even
of the children of Israel, a people near unto him. And David of himself (Psalm.
139.) When I awake I am still with thee: he was at Gods elbow before out of his
bed: when sleep had over-powred him, he was not master of his own understanding
and reason, and therefore could not make it out: But (says he) when I awake,
when my senses are unlockt, and my reason at liberty to serve my graces, then I
am still with thee. As soon as I awake, my first flight is to God; before I am
up or ready, I make a step to Heaven, and there I stay all the day long; when I
am once there I cannot out again quickly, I am still with thee. Now, if such be
nigh to God, and still with him, let them also be nigh to you; let not Gods
near neighbors be wronged, if you can help it: it is dangerous to wrong a man
that is nigh the great men of the earth, Kings and Princes, he can soon go into
the Kings bedchamber, and tell him of the wrong: It is dangerous to injure
Gods nigh ones, they have an advantage of the world, they have but a step to
Heaven: All the Saints on earth live within the verge of the Court of Heaven,
they are nigh to God, and God is nigh to them. If the world spit in the face of
a Saint, he can but turn about and have a kiss from Jesus Christ. It is best
to be a friend and a good neighbor to those, of whom God says, These are my
friends and neighbors.

Secondly, See upon what terms this union is made, how God and man embrace.
Draw nigh to God, and he will draw nigh to you. Man in drawing nigh to God,
must draw off from himself and from his sin; but God in drawing nigh to man,
does not draw off from himself or from his holiness. When cause and cause,
party and party are at difference, there needs a drawing nigh on both sides; if
both have erred in parting, both ought to part with and bewail their errors,
that there may be uniting: but on which side soever truth and justice stands,
that side must stand. The union must be made by the repentance of the one, and
by the acceptance of the other: In such a case the Prophet is charged (Ier. 16.
19.) Let them return unto thee, but return not thou to them: Let them return
to thee from their filthiness and iniquity, but return not thou unto them, by
receding from, or giving up the rule of holiness and purity. Prophet stand thy
ground, for thou stand upon Gods ground, while thou art taking forth the
precious from the vile; That Is the duty laid upon him in the former words, and
to that he must stand.

Our present divisions are great: parties are, I know not how far from one
another, it is high time (so it is meet for us to judge) to joint in and draw
near together: Only remember to do it, as God and man do it; where right and
justice are, part not with them, though that rich and desirable commodity,
Peace, be offered as the price of them. Your affairs being thus stated, let
them return to you, return not to them; To draw nigh upon other terms, is to
lay the foundation of an everlasting disunion; if you put a new piece to an old
garment, the rent will be made worse; the new wine will quickly break the
old bottles, and all will he lost. Very lasting agreements have been made
between wickedness and wickedness, between error and error: but I never
read of a lasting agreement between wickedness and justice, truth and error,
such Heterogeneals will not incorporate: God draws nigh to none, but those
whom he finds holy, or makes them so.

O that we were taught of God this holy skill and heavenly art, to draw nigh
among our selves as he draws nigh to us. Heaven touches earth, not dirty, but
refined earth: God takes man by the hand, but his hand, yea his heart must be
vvashed, that is the Law of this blessed interview, as we learn from the later
part of the verse, Wash your hands, ye sinners, and purify your hearts, ye
double-minded.

FINIS.
Erratum. Page 8. line 16 for draw read drew.


