The CASE of Daniel Hoar Merchant, Alderman of (and one of His Majesty's
Justices of the Peace for) the Town of Kingston upon Hull.
HOAR was Elected Alderman, (...) 8th. 1671.
and ordered to be sworn the then next Court-day.

He took the Oaths of Supremacy and Allegiance, (...) 22, 1671.
and that of an Alderman, and Justice of Peace, as also the Oaths appointed by
Act of Parliament for regulating of Corporations; and subscribed the
Declaration therein directed, and took the Sacrament, as by Law required,
within a year before he was so sworn.

He served the Office of Mayor of the said Town, 1674.
and took the Sacrament and all the Oaths, and subscribed all the Declarations
by Law required.

He took the said Oaths, 1675.
subscribed the said Declaration, and served the said Town in the Office of
Coroner, and has every year since taken the Sacrament in his Parish Church, as
by Law required, when the same has been Administered there.

A Letter from His Majesty and His Most Honorable Privy Council came to Hull,
^^^il 1680.
wherein was set down the Purport of the Act for regulating Corporations, made
in the Thirteenth year of His Majesty's Reign; The Letter required the Mayor
and Aldermen, to examine whether all the Magistrates of that Town had taken the
Sacrament, the Oaths, and subscribed the Declaration, as by the said Act was
required, and to remove such as had failed therein, and certify their names to
that most Honorable Board.

A Certificate was drawn up, (...) 4, 1680.
wherein it was humbly certified, That all persons in Office did duly take the
Sacrament within one year before their being elected into their respective
Offices, according to the Rites of the Church of England, except Alderman Hoare
chosen 8. Feb. 1671, who though he had not taken the Sacrament within a year
before his Election, yet he took it before he was sworn Alderman, and every
year since.

The Certificate above mentioned was agreed upon by the Mayor, (...) 7, 1680.
and the majority of the Aldermen, (...) There was pre^^ Mayor, Re^^, and Ten
Al^^^
to be sent to His Majesty and Council, viz. Six against Five, and it was
accordingly signed by George Crawle Mayor, Christopher Richardson, Richard
Frank, Thomas Johnson, John Rogers, and William Shiers. And the same day a
Letter was writ and signed by the same persons, directed to the Right
Honorable the Earl of Sunderland; in which the Certificate aforesaid, was
ordered to be enclosed and sent away.

The Mayor and Eight Aldermen met (when Alderman Hoare and most of his Friends
were absent); (...) 13, 1680,
where by Five against Three it was carried, That the Certificate aforesaid
should not be sent forward to the King, but that a new one should be drawn, and
made to bear date the Seventh of May as the former did, which accordingly was
done, and thereby they certified, That Daniel Hoare had not made it appear to
them, that he had taken the Sacrament within a year before his being Elected
Alderman; and that thereupon they had Voted his place void, which Vote they
made that very day (and not before): And yet a Certificate thereof was signed
by George Crawle Mayor, William Foxley, Richard Frank, Anthony Lambert, Humphry
Duncalfe, and Henry Masters, dated the Seventh of May; and the last Five signed
also the aforesaid Letter dated the Seventh of May directed to the Earl of
Sunderland; and therein they enclosed this new Certificate, and sent the same
immediately to the said Earl, before it was confirmed by a succeeding Court,
which was contrary to the constant methods of the proceedings of the said Mayor
and Aldermen, in all Cases of the like nature; and was a trick played to affront
the said Hoare.

Hoare finding himself thus surprised, (...) 17, 1680.
made application to the Mayor, and those Aldermen who had subscribed the first
Certificate, for relief; who, though not able to retreive the Certificate
obtained by a trick as aforesaid, yet they did give a new Certificate under
their hands, purporting that the said Hoar had taken the Sacrament as required
by Act of Parliament, with all the Oaths, before his being sworn Alderman; and
made the several Subscriptions and Declarations required by the Act for
Regulating Corporations, that he had duly taken the Sacrament every year, since
his entering upon that Office, and took the said Oaths, and Sacrament, and
subscribed the said Declarations, and abjured the Covenant in the year 1674,
when he served the Office of Mayor, (at his very great charge) to the abundant
satisfaction and honor of the whole Corporation.

(...) 21, 1680. ^e Minister has ^ere Four years. ^urch-Wardens ^ertifie for
their ^ears. The Pa^k for the whole ^rs.
The Minister, and the several Churchwardens, and Parish Clerk of St. Marys, in
Kingstone upon Hull, did humbly certify, That the said Daniel Hoar had duly
taken the Sacrament according to the Rites of the Church of England, when
Administered within the said Parish Church, every year since his living therein;
which he had done ever since the year 1672.

a The Mayor and Aldermen then Assembled, and ordered Mr. Charles Vaux, their
Town Clerk, to give Mr. Hoar notice of their Vote of the Thirteenth of May, ^ne
9, 1680 shows Hoar was ^^ed out till May That Hoar was ^^ent when voted ^s is
falsely al^^ 3. That the ^e bears date before the thing ^^e
whereby they had declared his Office of Alderman Void.

b Hereupon the said Hoare humbly Petitioned His Majesty in Council for relief,
praying to be continued in his Office, and annexed the Certificates of the
17th, and 21st of May, aforesaid, to the said Petition; on which day, the Right
Honorable Earl of Sunderland, by His Majesty's Command Writ to the Mayor and
Aldermen, signifying His Majesty's pleasure to be, That they should not proceed
any further, nor choose any Alderman in Mr. Hoar's room, till His Majesty should
have examined the matter by His Privy Council; ^^^e 28, 1680.
and thereupon signified His further directions to them therein.

His Majesty in Council was pleased, (...) 29. 1680.
upon Reading the said Hoar's Petition, and Certificates annexed, to swear him,
and Alderman Thomas Johnson, to the truth thereof; and thereupon ordered that
the said Hoar should be continued the said Office of Alderman, and enjoy all
the Rites and Privileges thereunto belonging, as fully, as if the said Office
had never been declared void; Requiring the Mayor and Aldermen of the said Town
to take notice thereof, and govern themselves accordingly.

Hoar moved the Court of Kings Bench for a Mandamus to restore him to the said
Office, ^^y term, 1680.
and obtained the same, but never made any use thereof.

The Mayor and Aldermen, when they were just proceeding to a new Election of an
Alderman, ^^y 15. 1680.
were attended with the Letter of the Earl of Sunderland's, and Order of
Council aforesaid, whereupon they desisted from such Election, and readmitted
Hoare into his place, in which he has ever since continued. At which time the
Court was moved to join in a Petition to his Majesty, to revoke the said Order,
which was refused: Nevertheless,

A Petition in the name of William Foxly, August 4th. 1680.
William Ramsden, William Skinner, Anthony Lambert, Humphry Duncalfe, and Henry
Masters, Aldermen of Hull, was presented to his Majesty and Council on behalf
(as is alleged) of themselves and the chief Burgesses of that Town, wherein
they set forth, That Alderman Hoare had not made appear to them that he took
the Sacrament within twelve Months before his Election, and therefore they had
voted his place void, and were advised it would be of dangerous consequences to
the Petitioners and other the Justices and Officers of that Town, to join in
any Act of administration of Justice with one whose place was void: Prayed
therefore the Discharge of the Order of Council for Hoare's continuing
Alderman, that the matter might be heard in Council, and Mr. Hoare left to his
remedy at Law for being restored to the said Office.

His Majesty upon reading the said Petition was pleased to order a Hearing of
this Matter at Council Board within ten days after notice to Mr. Alderman
Hoare; which Hearing falls out to be the 15. Sept. 1680.

Mr. Hoare obtained an Order for summoning Witnesses, August 31. 1680.
which being to be sent to Hull, and they summoned and to come up by the 15th.
of Sept. was almost impossible, especially it falling out that most of them
were then to be at Holden-Fair. Wherefore he by two humble Petitions two
several Council-days, prayed a further time; but the more important Affairs of
State prevented the making any Order upon those Petitions, so that he will want
much of the Evidence upon his Hearing, which otherwise he might have had.

He humbly prays favor therefore, that Cognizance be taken of a Certificate
returned to his Majesty in Council, Signed by the Mayor and five Aldermen, the
Sheriff and Chamberlain of Hull, and about 120 of the Chief Burgesses of that
Town. The Contents whereof is as follows.

To the KINGS Most Excellent Majesty, and to the Right Honorable the Lords of
his Majesty's most Honorable Privy Council.
WE the Mayor, Aldermen, Sheriffs, and other Burgesses of the Town of Kingston
upon Hull, do humbly certify all whom it may concern, that we have known Mr.
Dan. Hoar of this Town many years to be an able Merchant both for Parts and
Estate; that we have not been privy to the drawing or presenting any Petition
(or know any cause for the same) to the King and Council against him, That he
has been an Alderman and Justice of the Peace for the Town and County this
eight or nine years, and so demeaned himself in those Offices, as that we have
not known or heard of any complaint against him; That he has carried on the
Chargeable Office of Mayor, to the Satisfaction and Credit of the Corporation:
That he has appeared as a Loyal Subject on all occasions both in Church and
State.

Given under our Hands 11. Aug. 1680. Geo. Crowle, Mayor, etc.


UPon the whole matter the said Hoare most humbly offers to Consideration, That
there is no Objection made against him in the Petition, or otherwise, save only
that he had not made it appear that he took the Sacrament according to the
Rites of the Church of England within one year before his Election; but the
Petition does not say that Hoare had not taken it within that time.

In Answer to which Objection he prays that it may be observed:

I. The Act of 13th of the King for Regulating Corporations, does not require
any man after he has been in an Office 9 or 10 years, to prove he took the
Sacrament within twelve Months before his being Elected into the same; if it
did, and if all men in Office were to be turned out that could not make such
proof, it is more than probable that half the Officers in England would be
removed.

II. It is positively proved he took the Sacrament and Oaths, abjured the
Covenant, signed the Declaration by Law required, before he was Sworn Alderman,
and did the like in 1674, when he was chosen and served Mayor, and has duly
taken the Sacrament every year since, and is now a Justice of Peace, and
therefore after having served Mayor, and spent near 800 l. in Fines, and
defraying the charge of that Office, it would seem very hard to put him out of
his Office of Alderman, only because he cannot prove he took the Sacrament
within twelve Months before he was chosen to that Office, especially since that
choice did not make him Alderman till he was Sworn, and before he was Sworn he
had done all that the Law required, to capacitate him for Alderman.

III. He being chosen 8. Feb. 1671, and Sworn the 22th. of that Month, if he
had not taken the Sacrament before his Election, and by reason thereof his
Office of Alderman had been void according to the strict letter of the Law; yet
by his Majesty's Gracious Act of free Pardon past in 1672 that omission is
forgiven, and it is not in the least pretended that he has done any Act since
whereby to forfeit his said Office, which he has many times freely offered to
have laid down, and does not now contest the same for any benefit or profit
that arises thereby, but merely to defend his Loyalty and Integrity, and
prevent the affront designed to be given him, by some few of the present
Aldermen.

IV. The Intent of the Act of 13th of the King was to prevent disloyal persons,
or persons dissenting from the Church of England, from being chosen into
Offices; but was never designed to turn Loyal Subjects and true Sons of the
Church out of Offices, because they had not the spirit of Divination, to know
beforehand when they should be chosen into Offices, and so take the Sacrament
purposely to qualify them for such Elections.

September 15th. 1680.
THis Cause upon the Petition of Alderman Skinner, Foxlye, Ramsden, etc.
against Alderman Hoare of Hull, being fully heard by his Majesty in Council,
where reflections were made by the Petitioners Council, as if the Subscriptions
to the Certificate of the Mayor, Aldermen, Sheriff, Chamberlain, and chief
Burgesses of Hull were only the Subscriptions of Tailors, Carpenters, Cobblers,
and Apprentices, etc. and obtained by Threats and menaces, at the several
Subscribers houses: His Majesty in Council was pleased upon hearing of Col.
Gibbyes Evidence concerning Mr. Alderman Hoare' Loyalty, and his prudent
demeanor in his several Capacities, as Alderman, Mayor, Corroner, and Justice
of the Peace of the said Town, to make no other Order, or give any other
direction than that the matter should be referred to the Common Law.


London, Printed by A. Maxwell, and R. Roberts, 1680.


