The Root of Apostasy, AND Fountain of true Fortitude. Delivered in a SERMON
Before the Honorable House of Commons, On their late Day of Thanksgiving for
the Great victory given to Sir William Waller and the Forces with him, against
the Army of Sir Ralph Hopton. By Thomas Case, Preacher, at Milk-street, London,
And one of the Assembly of Divines.

Psalm. 9.10. They that know thy Name will put their trust in thee, for thou
Lord never failest them that seek thee. London, Printed by J. R. for Luke
Fawn, and are to be sold at his Shop in Paul's Churchyard, at the sign of the
Parrot. 1644.

Die Martis, 9. April, 1644.
IT is this day Ordered, by the Commons Assembled in Parliament, that Sir
William Brereton, do give thanks from the House, to Mr. Thomas Case, for the
great pains he took in the Sermon he preached this day, at St. Margarets
Westminster, at the entreaty of the House; It being a day of public
Thanksgiving, for the great Victory the Forces under the Command of Sir William
Waller, and Sir William Balfore had, against the Forces under the Command of
Sir Ralph Hopton; And he is to desire him from this House, to Print his
Sermon. And it is Ordered, that no man shall presume to Print his Sermon,
without being authorized under his handwriting.

H. Elsynge, Cler. Parl. D. Com.

I. Authorize Luke Fawn, to Print my Sermon.

Tho: Case.

TO THE HONORABLE and his highly Honored Friend, Sir William Waller Knight,
Commander in Chief, of the Parliaments Forces in the West.
Noble Sir,
TO whom more properly (under that Grand Council of the Kingdom, whereof you
are a Member) does the Dedication of these sudden thoughts belong, then to your
Worthy self, who wrought with God on that day, the Salvation whereof, these
poor labors, together with a more skillful hand, were called in to celebrate
in the great Congregation?

Sir, I may truly say, you made a great part of my Sermon, and the better part
too; for while thousands there are of all sizes, whose treacherous dealing in
the Covenant of God, comes in to bear sad witness to the former part of my
Text and Sermon; Free Grace has so looked upon you, that you stand in the first
division of those Worthies, to whose fidelity GOD has given ample testimony,
what exploits a people can do, that know their God: for certainly, either you
know God, or else we know not you.

Darius once opening a pomgranate, and being asked by a standerby, of what he
would desire to have so many, as there were kernels in the pomgranate,
answered, So many Zopyrusses. Zopyrus was that valiant Knight and Commander,
who to get the City of Babylon, possessed by the Assyrians, and besieged by his
Mr. Darius, caused his own nose, ears, and lips, to be cut off, and his whole
face and body so wounded, and mangled all over, that running to the enemies,
and making them believe he was so used by Darius, for persuading him to raise
his Siege, and remove his Army. They easily giving credit to a relation, that
seemed to speak truth with so many mouths, as they saw wounds, admitted him
into the City, and made him their Governor, by means whereof, he got
opportunity to deliver it and them, up to his Master.

Sir, If in the behalf of this poor bleeding Kingdom, I might have my wish, I
would turn Darius his choice, into so many Wallers: You having run many, as
desperate, though more innocent hazzards, for the rescue of the Safety and
Liberties thereof, now captived by vile persons: And this has been your Honor,
God has been with you, and with those gallant Noble Sir William Balfore,
worthy Collonell Brown, etc.
Commanders, and Soldiers that have accompanied you in this Service; to whose
Fidelity and Resolutions, Parliament and Kingdom stand much indebted. The Lord
be with you still, and make you prosperous whithersoever you turn; and cause
his dread to fall upon his and your enemies, that they may not be able to stand
before you: And when you have done your share in this great Service of God, and
the Kingdom, He bring you back into the embraces of your Friends, crowned with
Honor and Victory. Interim, if your grand employments allow you not time, to
read a period or two of this poor Sermon, sometime, do but cast your eyes, I
beseech you, upon the Text, and when you go forth, to encounter the enemy, lay
it next your heart, I dare say, (through the power of that Lord of Hoasts, in
whose Army you serve) it will, beyond all the witchcrafts, and enchantments
which some of your enemies, are said to use, render you invulnerable,
invincible, in the day of battle; which therefore, as the richest present I
can send you, I humbly desire you would please to accept, from him, Sir, whom
your merits, and love, have made Yours,

Obliged to honor, and serve you in all Gospel Offices, THO: CASE.

The Root of Apostasy, AND Fountain of true Fortitude.
DAMIEL. 11.32. And such as do wickedly against the Covenant shall be corrupt
by flatteries, but the people that know their God, shall be strong and do
exploits.


THe words hold forth a plot or practice, wherein these particulars are
considerable.

1. The person practizing, He, he shall corrupt.

2. The persons that are practiced upon, and they were of two sorts: 1. Some
profane or rotten, whose Character is, They do wickedly against the Covenant,
2. Others sincere and truly Godly, and their Character is, They are a people
that know their God.

3. The Engine used in this practice, that is, Flatteries.

4. The success of this practice; and that is different, according to the
disposition of the parties charactred before; The profane or rotten hearted
party, they were wrought upon, and corrupted by these subtle Artifices to
betray their Religion and their Country.

The Well-affected and Godly party that are described to us by the knowledge of
their God, they remained not only unconquerable, but conquerors, they were
strong and did exploits.

Give me leave, the Text thus resolved into its parts, to open them unto you as
they lie in this Analysis, and I shall then close with those doctrinall
observations that do naturally offer themselves to us out of the words; I will
be brief in the opening of them.

First then, here you have the person practizing, He; And this, take him
literally, or Historically, was Antiochus Epiphanes younger son to Antiochus
Magnus that vile person, verse 21. where you have the first mention of him;
There shall stand up a vile person to whom, etc. Whom for his vile and
brutish, turbulent and treacherous disposition, (...) infanus furiosus, Athen:
lib. 2.
Polybius with the change of a letter or two wittily nicknames Antiochus
Epimanes; Antiochus the Furious or mad. This vile person as he obtained the
Kingdom of Syria (which by right belonged to his Nephew Demetrius, Verse. 21.
then but young) by flatteries and treacherous insinuations; pretending that he
designed nothing but the care and protection of his young Nephew; so he
labored to propagate and enlarge it, by the same operations and Artifices.

And by these he wrought so with diverse of the Nobility and other Statesmen of
Egypt (Ptolemeus Philometer being then a child) that he wound himself into
that Kingdom also: Verse. 26.
which when he could not absolutely conquer, (though he added Force to his
Fraud, no not after a second or third attempt, as you may see, verse. 24.25. and
29.) Notwithstanding, that he had pillaged and plundered the richest of the
Towns and Cities of Egypt; mightily enraged at such a disappointment of his
expectations, verse. 30. He returns, and with the same Engines of Fraud and
Force, verse. 30, 31. He attemps his entrance into and conquest of Iudaea which
is the second thing in the Text, sc:

The persons operated upon: Namely, the Jews, as verse. 28, 30. That people
whom God had taken to himself by Covenant, and that had over and over again
devoted themselves to God, by mutual astipulation and Them. 26.17, 18, 19.
avouchments.

Amongst these you see, he finds two sorts, as I said before, 1. Some (...)
signifies both to prevaricate, and to rebel.
Profane or Hipocriticall, that had nothing of a Jew but the Name or face
only; Their Character is, They did wickedly against the Covenant: By Covenant
is meant the whole Religion and worship of God among the Jews: which is
therefore called the Covenant because it was ratified and sanciated between God
and Abraham, by mutual Solemn Covenant, Genesis 17.9. etc. And afterward
confirmed between God and Abraham's seed, many and many a time, after their
Apostacies and Captivities upon their true repentance and turning unto God,
with like Renewals of their Covenant.

Against which Religion and Worship there were not a few that did wickedly,
allowing themselves either in open profaneness, or in secret Abominations (as
Ezekiel. 8.) contrary to all their Sacred and solemn Protestations, and Covenants
and Oaths, under which they had so often bound their own souls, as you may
see in Nehemiah, Ezra, and diverse other places of Scripture; They did wickedly
against the Covenant: They made a Covenant to day, and brake it to morrow,
Psalm. 78.57.
starting aside like a broken Bow.

Others there were of a more noble and Heavenly birth, a people, as their
Character tells you, that knew their God: That knew him, not in a Notionall
Historical way only, but knew him in a saving experimental manner, which
what it is you shall after hear.

And these are the people, the people of Gods Covenant, the Jews upon whom
this vile Person, Antiochus does operate.

3. The Engine whereby he operates and practices upon them, is, Flatteries:
which in all probability were of two sorts.

1. General; Such as respected the Religion of the Jews, and their Civil
Rights and Privileges; to which in all his Declarations and writings, he was
no small pretender; promising and protesting that he was so far from the least
thought of offering any violence, either to their Religion, or Civil
Liberties, as that he had no higher design in his breast, then to be a
faithful protector and constant Defender to both; they should be to him as his
own soul.

2. Or else personal, promising and swearing not only all Freedom that any
tender Conscience could desire, but the greatest and richest rewards, and
Preferments, due to the merits of such as should fall off to him, and be active
for him: as you may read, verse. 30. and my Text.

4. The success, is the fourth and last thing in the division and that was you
see answerable to the persons he dealt withal, sc:

With profane and Rotten spirits who had no principle of Grace, and therefore
made no conscience of Religion, nor of the solemn Covenants, whereby they had
again and again bound themselves to the maintenance and observation thereof;
These Artifices took; they fall off like leaves in Autumn;

He did corrupt them, or bribe them by Flatteries; Such were Simon, Jason,
Menclaus, Alcimus, etc.

But another sort there were of another Temper, that were as far above these
poor and base Artifices, as the Sun is above the Witchcraft of the Sub-lunary
creatures; they were fixed in an higher Orb, where they beheld the face of
God; were acquainted with him, and converst with him, who therefore (while
others fell like false, wandering Stars) remained as unbiast as the Sun in his
course: As it was said of Judah at another time, Hosea 11.12.
Ephraim compasses me about with lies, and the house of Israel with deceits,
but Judah yet rules with God, and is faithful with the Saints. The people
that knew their God were strong to resist and scorn these Flatteries, and to
do exploits: Exploits is not in the Hebrew Text, (...) The same word is used 1.
Sam. 12.6. The Lord advanced, or, magnified Moses R: David Targkum, reads it
qui fecit fortitudinem permanum Moseh.
but is put in to make up the sense, which would not else be so full and
Emphaticall in our Mother Tongue, as in the Hebrew: The word signifying
sometime not only to do but to do wonderfully. The Faithful party were
strengthened to do gallant and famous things: as the Maccabees, etc. This is
the division and meaning of the words in their literal sense.

In their typical sense, the practice and success be the same, but the person
practizing, is, Antichrist, or any of his Factors and Agents; and the persons
whom he practices upon, are Christians; upon whom as they are either Rotten or
Sincere, the success of the temptation is various, ut. sup.

The words thus divided and opened, I come to raise such observations, as do
naturally offer themselves to us:

These are visible to every eye.

Doctrines.
First. A religious Covenant is so proper for those that profess themselves
Gods people, that Religion it self is called by the Name of a Covenant. Against
the Covenant.

Secondly. No bonds or cords of Oaths, and Covenants,be they never so Religious
and Sacred, are strong enough to bind a people, or person, whose heart is not
upright with God, to walk up with their Engagements; They will do wickedly
against the Covenant.

Thirdly. It is the policy of Tyrants and Oppressors,that what they cannot
accomplish by force, they labor to compass by fraud and flatteries, Or,

Flatteries are one great Engine which Tyrants use, to bring about their own
designs. He shall corrupt by Flatteries.

Fourthly, There be in all states and Societies,even in the Church it self,
some that will be caught and corruped by these Frauds and Flatteries. He shall
corrupt.

Fifthly. They that are unfound in their profession,and unfaithful to their
Covenants made with God in that profession, these be the persons who will be
easily fetched off and corrupted by Flatteries. Such as do wickedly against the
Covenant.

Sixthly. God has a people,in all ages and successions of the Church, that are
above all the Flatteries and Enchantments of wily Seducers. There is a people
that are strong to do Eploites.

Seventhly. It is the true saving Knowledge of God,that keeps Christians true
and faithful to God and his cause. The people that know their God.

You see all these flow naturally from the words: but I must not follow them
all, I shall contract what I have to say, into these two main Doctrines, which
ly in the face of the Text, leaving you to improve the other in your own
private thoughts.

Doct. 1. That a people or person, who ever they be that live and allow
themselves in any known wickedness against their Solemn Covenants made with
God, will easily be seduced and corrupted by Flatteries, to desert and betray
both Church and and state.

Or thus more briefly:

Wickedness against the Covenant, will upon suitable temptations, end in
Apostacy from the Covenant:

Or yet shorter.

Covenant breach, is the root of Apostasy.

Doct. 2. The true saving knowledge of God, is the fountain and spring of all
true gallantnesse of spirit and honorable Achievements.

For the first, (wherein I shall be the briefer, that I may have the more time
to enlarge my self in the latter.) The Epitome whereof is: Covenant-wickednesse
is the root of Apostacy.

You remember what treachery, or cowardice (I know not whether) there was in a
Battle or two, or more, what laying down of weapons, what running away, what a
dishonorable Composition, and Articles; I remember not the day of the Month
it was, nor year of our Lord, but I can show you upon Record, Psalm. 78.9.
Psalm. 78.9. The children of Ephraim being armed, and carrying Bows, turned
their back in the day of Battle: What was the matter? Truly you cannot miss
of it, it stands on both sides the Text: They were a generation that set not
their heart aright, and whose spirit was not steadfast with God, so verse 8.
that were enough, but the 10. verse is more express; They kept not the
Covenant of God, and refused to walk in his Statutes.

See, Covenant-wickednesse was at the bottom of this base desertion and
Apostasy.

I must not stand to multiply Instances; you can tell where to furnish your
selves with enough; How can it be otherwise?

faithful with men, that are not faithful with God? Will not he break with
men, that first took the boldness to break with God? Will he think you, value
other men's bodies, and estates, that puts no price upon his own soul? I know in
point of honor, A Roman spirit may go far, and do gallant service, But I must
tell you this withal, I do verily think such a spirit was easier found in
Rome, then in Christendom; my reason is, because the principles of
Christianity being purer, and more active, they will either build, or blast:
what therefore such spirits do, that love not, and live not up with these
principles, (for the most part) it is but so long as their own ends, and the
service may stand together: But bring them to a turning, where they must part;
or bait such an one with a suitable temptation: To which purpose, seducers have
learned of their father the Devil, that great seducer, to observe the
complexions, and dispositions of men, and to suit the flattery, to the
affection. Be it Lust, bait it with Beauty. Be it Covetousness, with Gold.
Ambition, with Preferments. Timorousness, with Threatenings, Pride, with
Praise, etc.
And boil up the temptation high enough: put ingredients enough into the
golden Cup of Flattery; let it sparkle in the glass, let it be as vigorous and
rich, as the man's spirit is, and it is not one of ten thousand, but (with
skillful solicitation; observing of opportunities, and a little patience,
especially if there appear advantage on the enemies side, and fair
probabilities of possessing the golden apple of temptation) will be wrought
off to base and treacherous compliances with the enemies of Religion, and
civil Liberties. All the while the man is higher then the Temptation, he
stands, and does you, it may be, as good service, as the man after Gods own
heart; but let the Temptation be above him, flatter him high enough, and upon a
deliberate act of Judgment, he shall betray all the trust that Church or State
has committed to him. I say, for the most part, you shall find it so.

secondly, How should he be able to stand at such a time,since he wants a
bottom. Our Savior has expressed it under a double Metaphor; of a Root, Matthew.
13.6. of a Foundation, Matthew. 7.25, 26. He is not well earth't, he must needs
wither, when the beams of temptation do scorch; he is built upon the sand of
his own Resolutions, or Imitation of others, or Self Ends, when storms beat,
and winds blow, when all these out-bid this man's principles, he must needs
come down with a vengeance.

vengeance indeed; for, for the most part, there is divine vengeance in it:
there is a poenall hand of divine Justice in it, 2 Thessalonians. 12.11.
punishing sin with sin; want of love to the truth, with giving up to believe
lies; unsoundnesse in profession, with apostasy from profession; wickedness
against the Covenant, with rejection of, and defection from the Covenant.

The saddest judgment of all, the dregs of the cup, an infallible forerunner
of final rejection, without speedy and mighty repentance.

Would you know how to improve this truth.


First then it may serve to discover the cause of so much Apostasy, and
treachery, as may be beheld in the world. Mark Apostates, observe them whom you
see fall like lightning from heaven, or like the Angels, that kept not their
first estates, for the most part, ye shall find them a wicked profane
generation, that did wickedly against the Covenant: whom no oaths, nor
protestations, nor covenants, could bind to their good behavior, they lived in
a continual contradiction to their Vows and Covenants: Psalm. 50.16.
They took the Covenant of God into their mouths, but they hated to be
reformed. 2 Pet. 2.17.
Or if they seemed to be Cedars, they wanted root; if they appeared as stars,
they were not fixed, but wandering stars, Jude 13.
blazing Comets, that make a blaze for a time, but go out in a smoke, yea
without repentance in utter darkness.

The more wary had you need be in your elections, who are trusted to make
choice of those persons, that are to be employed in places of Public trust
and employment, whether for Church, or State.

They that in such Elections, Martial, Magisteriall, Ministesteriall, or what
else you can think on; Choose for honor, greatness, relations, or any other
private interests, and advantages, and lay Religion aside, they choose not as
God chooses; who in his choice of a Governor over his people, chose for
nothing in the world but for fidelity. 1 Samuel 13.14.
He sought him a man after his own heart, that should perform all his
counsel.

It is a thousand pities, that the hearts of men (I would not of Christians)
are not Biast another way in their choice. Israel would needs have a King over
them, 1 Samuel 8.9.
though for no other reason, but that they might be like other Nations, etc.
And hereby the people of God do not a little trouble and plague themselves, and
cross their own designs, by committing the managing of their affairs into the
hands of such, it may be sometimes, that think it no point of valor to
scruple at so small a matter as breaking of a Covenant with God: And no wonder
if God cross them, since in such Elections they cross God, who, in his
designs, singles out the called, and faithful, and chosen, Revel. 17.14. yea
they cross his great design, which is, Revel. 17.14.
That no flesh shall glory in his sight: Therefore does he choose the foolish
things of the world, to confound the wise: and God has chosen the weak things
of the world, 1 Cor. 1.27, 28.
to confound the things which are mighty: And base things of the world, and
things which are despised, has God chosen, etc.

Honored Senators, let me ask you one question, I bless God, I can do it
without flattery. If God had not stirred up the hearts of people, in the most
parts of the Kingdom, at what time you were singled out of thousands of
England, for this great and blessed Service, in which you have sat now above
these three years, blessed be God, to make a better choice then they did in
many places of the Land, What had become of poor England before this time?
Surely had not the Spirit of God gone forth, and wrought to a wonder of wisdom
and power, in bespeaking the Votes of the people, for a major part of men,
whose spirits were above fears, and above flatteries, etc. We might have sat
down long before this time, and made our wills, and bequeathed our poor
children, every one of them, Popery, and Slavery, for their sorrowful
patrimony.

And, now Honored Senators, and Honorable Commanders, let it be your honor,
and piety, to recompense this care and prudence, into the bosom of this now
poor bleeding Kingdom, with answerable vigilance, even to a Criticisme, in
your Elections of those, in whose hands you trust the managing of so great and
important concernments, as have wrapped up in them the honor of Christ, and the
safety, and the very being of the Kingdom.

Will you give me leave, to speak a word in plain English, I know you will; If
you do not purge your Armies, as well as recrute them, you may recrute them, to
your own and the Kingdoms confusion.

reforming Armies, let it be your care to make them reformed Armies, and you
may humbly expect that God will go out with them, to enable them to do Exploits.

But thirdly, to come a little nearer:

Is Covenant treachery the root of Apostasy?

Then Christians look to your Covenants, so solemnly made, and so often
renewed: What conscienciousnesse can plead before God, in the Civil, and
Politic reference of thy Covenants? What command have these solemn Covenants
had over your Estates, Interests, Persons, in all these several and successive
Emergencies, which have called upon thee to come forth, to the help of the Lord
against the mighty? What vigilance, and circumspection in the religious part?
What power have your Covenants had over your conversation, in adorning that
according to the rule? Sit down, I beseech you, and set up a Tribunal in your
own Consciences, and let Christ sit as Judge.

And let me tell thee this; That according to the account thou can bring in,
concerning this matter, thou art like to stand or fall in the hour of
temptation. I arraigne thee not for thy slips and failings. Every trespass
against the Covenant, is not a breach of the Covenant; provided, thou do
bewail thy failings, watch against temptations, and own thy Covenant. I speak
of the habitual, and general frame of thy heart, and stream, and course of
thy Conversation, wherein if thy care be to say with David, Thy vows are upon
me, I will render praise unto thee, Psalm. Psalm. 119.106.
56.12. And, I have sworn, and I will perform it, that I will keep thy
righteous Judgments. If thou can answer old temptations, as He did, with Ego
non sum ego, I am not the man I was; If thou can approve thy self to God, for
a conscientious respect to all his Commandments, Psalm. 119.6.
and thy Engagements, fear not thy standing, thou shall not be ashamed; David
assures thee so much in his own person, Then shall I not be ashamed, when I
have respect to all thy Commandments.

But if thou be one of Solomon's fools, Prove. 14.9.
who make a mock of sin, If thou allowest thy self in known, habitual
wickedness against the Covenant, if thou can sin in the face of the
Covenant, and not shrink at it; Pval. 50.
Have taken the Covenant of God into thy mouth, and yet hate to be reformed;
Fear and tremble, I will not limit God, but this I dare say, it is a thousand
to one, but that when God and the Kingdom should have most need of thee, thou will then turn Apostate. My reason is, because, If Religion, and a Covenant
upon it, cannot prevail with thee, to forsake thy lust; It is a mighty odds, if
thy lust do not prevail with thee, to forsake thy Religion, and the Covenant.
If thou art not true to God and thine own soul, how can thou think to be true
to Church and State: He that will sell his soul for a lust, will sell a
Kingdom, if need be, for a morsel of bread.

He that thinks he stands, let him take heed lest he fall. 1 Cor. 10.12.


Fourthly,I should in the fourth place lay in Cautions to all to take heed of
Flatteries, Religion Flatteries, State Flatteries, Personal Flatteries; since
these be the Baits wherewith politic Seducers beguile unstable and unwary
souls: Prove. 14.15. 1 Cor. 10.15.
that would be thought of, Prove. 14.15. The simple believes every word, but
the prudent looks well to his going: And I may say with the Apostle. I speak
unto wise men, you are prudent, be not deceived with a parcel of fair words
but look well to your goings; Had I an Enemy whom I might lawfully curse, I
would wish him no greater plagve then to be given up to believe the flatteries
and witchcrafts of men that lie in wait to deceive and destroy; doubtless
those, who by such Artifices and Engines, for their own private Interest, shall
be corrupted and wrought off, to betray their public Trusts and Depositums,
may speed as well as many of those in the Text did, Alcimus, Simon, Jason,
Menelaus, etc.
who for their service they did to the Tyrant, were preferred, some to
Banishment, others to Butchery.

Nec lex est Justior ulla, etc. There is nothing more just, and proper, then
that Treachery should be rewarded with Treachery. And indeed the hand of Divine
Justice does so order the matter (even here) that it is the portion of base
Apostats, that while they betray their trusts, they do more betray themselves;
That principle being written upon the breast of Tyrants: though they love the
Treason, Amo proditionem, odi proditorem.
they hate the Traitor, while they cannot expect fidelity to their new Lords,
from them, who came off with perfidiousnesse to their Old.

But I shall not need to press this Caution: Remember the former, and this
will be ueselesse. Fidelity in Covenant is the best Antidote against the
Enchantments of Flatterers: The Antithesis in the Text holds out so much to
you, which is the second main thing in the Text, and comes now to be handled.
But the people that know their God shall be strong and do exploits: from whence;

The second Doctrine is,
The right knowledge of God, is the spring and fountain of all true Greatness,
and honorable worthy achievements.

God himself has sealed this truth with his own mouth, while he has made this
knowledge of himself, the ground work, or foundation of all Glorying and
rejoicing; Thus says the Lord, Let not the wise man glory in his wisdom,
Jer. 9.23.24.
neither let the mighty man glory in his might, Let not the rich man glory in
his riches, but let him that glories, glory in this, that he understands and
knows me, that I am the Lord, which exercise loving kindness, judgment, and
righteousness in the earth: for in these things I delight, says the Lord:
Joshua and Gideon, Barack, Sampson, Jeptah and David also, Samuel and all the
Prophets, with all the worthies of God, before, and since Christ, will come in
like a cloud of witnesses to give in testimony to this Truth, who by their
knowledge of God, Subdued Kingdoms, wrought Righteousness, obtained promises,
Heb. 11.32, 33, 34.
stopped the mouths of Lions, quenched the violence of fire, escaped the edge
of the sword, out of weakness were made strong, waxed valiant in fight, Put to
flight the Armies of the Aliens.

But before I can demonstrate this truth unto you, in the reasons of it; I must
of necessity clear my way by satisfying these two Quaeres:

1. How God may be known? since he is said to dwell in an inaccessable light?

2. What knowledge it is that will heighten a people to such achievements?

Moses his importunate desire, that God would show him his Glory: Namely this,
Thou can not see my face, Exodus 33.18.
for there shall no man see me and live, Thou can not see my face: What is
that? Why the face, you know, Verse. 20.
is the clearest discovery we can take of a man's person, the face is the full
prospect of a man; The seat of beauty, his Glory: And thus likewise, by the
face of God is understood the full and clear discovery of God in his Nature,
Essence, and Glory; Now no man can thus see God, or know God, on this side
Heaven; it is an Omne vehemens sensibile destruit sensum
object of such transendent Majesty and Glory, that the feeble eye of
mortality is not able to bear it, and therefore this faciall vision, or
knowledge of God, is reserved for that time, when mortality shall be swallowed
up of immortality; When the Organ shall be made strong and spiritual, suitable
(in its proportion) to such an excellent object, then shall we see face to
face, then shall we know, 1 Cor. 13.12.
even as also we are known: Aug.
whereupon I remember Augustine has this sweet rapture; Ah Lord I can no man
see thy face and live, then Lord let me dye that I may see thy face. In the
mean time observe further what God tells Moses, Thou shall see my back-parts,
what are the back-parts of Jehovah? Why you know, Verse. 23.
that as the face is the full and clear prospect of a man, so his back-parts
are but the dark and indistinct representation of him. If I see but the back
of a man, I take but the confused and imperfect discovery of his stature, and
proportion: And such indeed is the best and cleerest knowledge of God that is
attainable on this side Heaven; we see but his back-parts; as Divines say, our
knowledge of God here is rather Negative then Affirmative, we know him rather
by what he is not, then by what he is. This knowledge of God in his back-parts
consists in these three things.

First, In his Names; Jehovah,which implies as much as a Being consisting in it
self, and giving Being to every thing that has a being: Lord, God, etc. which
express his Greatness and Sovereignty, and Supremacy over all the world.

Secondly, In his Attributes, whether, 1. Incommunicable,2. Communicable, as
Almighty, Omniscient, Omnipresent, immutable, Wise, Holy, Faithful, Just,
Righteous, Good, Gracious, etc.

Thirdly, In his Relations, as Creator, Master, Friend, Father,Husband, etc.
All which I could show you in Scripture, but I must but touch these things in
transitu.

Now this knowledge of God in his Names. Attributes. Relations:


Is threefold.

Notionall, or Historical only, which consists only in a bare intellectual
notion of a God, whereby a man is able to discourse of such a Being as God is,
even no otherwise then of any other Being in the world, although perhaps it
have no existence in rerum natura; as a Golden mountain, or Elysium Fields, etc.

Secondly,There is a credentiall knowledge; (pardon the word, James 2.9.
I use it because a fitter offers not it self) a believing knowledge, and so
the Devils believe and tremble.

Thirdly,There is an Experimental knowledge of God, such as you saw described,
Jer. 9.23. When a man, as he has heard, so (in a proportion) he has seen;
Psalm. 48.8.
what he has heard and believed of God, that he has found by sweet and
blessed experience to be in God, namely, that god is that glorious being, and
Sovereign Lord, unspeakably full of Power, Wisdom, Holiness, Justice,
Faithfulness, Goodness, etc. A Faithful Creator, an unfailing Friend, a
tenderhearted Father, a never dying Husband, this is scientia affectiva, as
the Schools call it an heart-affecting knowledge.

Quaere:

It must be a knowledge that has all these heights and Gradations in it that
must strengthen a people to do exploits, Historical or Notionall knowledge
only will not do it, it is but a painted fire, it has no warmth or life in it.

Credentiall knowledge if it be but merely an Historical belief, will indeed
do somewhat, it will dare a man much, such an one will be afraid of doing
against God.

But it is the Experimental knowledge, that will make a man a daring man, to
do great things for God; and this is the knowledge in the Text, The people that
know their God, know him, and know him in his Relations: know him, and know him
to be their God in Christ. They shall be strong, and do exploits.

Not that a man cannot attain such an Heroicknesse of spirit without a
pleriphorie, or full assurance of Gods love: Such a knowledge indeed is
omnipotent: but that even where the soul has tasted and seen how good the Lord
is in such a degree, 1 Pet. v, 3.
that it has chosen God, and has taken God for its portion, as the Church
says; The Lord is my portion, says my soul: Lam. 3.24.
He sees such things in God as will raise him above the flatteries and
witchcrafts of a lying world and carry it out not only to Attempt but to
Attchieve great things for God (when it sees its call) beyond it self.

See David going out against Goliath.

Asah with a small inconsiderable party, against Zerah the Ethiopian, and his
army consisting of a Million of men, a thousand thousand, 2 Chronicles. 14.10 11.

Abijah against a double proportion of Jeroboam, Chap. 13. Jehoshaphat against
a vast innumerable host of Moabites, and Ammonites, and others, Chap. 20.1,
2.12. And all of them returning with the Crown of Victory upon their heads by
virtue of this knowledge of their God.

The reasons of this blessed truth are briefly these.

Reasons.
First,This knowledge of God gives a man a bottom to stand upon; a Rock, a Rock
that will stand when the earth is removed, Psalm. 46.1, 2. Isa. 26.4.
and the mountains be carried into the midst of the Sea: when the foundations
of Heaven and earth do sink, under the weight. The Rock of ages. Ages pass
away, one after another; but the Rock remains, and therefore David desires no
more but this, in the greatest inundations of fears and dangers, Psalm. 61.2.
when his heart was overwhelmed, Lead me to the Rock that is higher then I: I
said he desires no more, and yet I must recall my self; when he comes to the
rock, he has another petition, and he is very confident of speeding; he shall
set me upon the rock. Psalm. 27.


First, Lord lead me to the Rock; I cannot find the way my self; and then, set
me up; my neighbor cannot set me up: Psalm. 49.7.
no man can redeem his brother; I cannot set up my self, if Reason or Sense
give me their hand, they will pull me down; God must, and God shall take me by
main strength, and set me upon the Rock that is higher then I.

Secondly,This knowledge sees enough in God to answer all objections; you
cannot fancy that objection, which the knowledge of God cannot answer. The
enemies mighty, but God Almighty; they subtle and politic, yet he also is
wise, and will bring evil upon them, Isa. 31.2.
and will not call back his words, but will arise against the house of the
evil doers, and against the help of them that work iniquity; they cannot
out-wit God; they treacherous, but he faithful, and sic in caet.

Brethren, (in a word) you cannot dare a man that knows God, with any
objection, when he sees his call, because he feet enough in God to back him; He
will say, as once Luther to Melanchton (when he began to create objections) If
the work be of God, what should we fear? if not, let us lay it down.

Thirdly,This knowledge begets trust: They that know thy Name, Psalm. 9.10.
will put their trust in thee, for thou never forsakest them that seek thee.
There were many that said of David's soul, or to David's soul (for that is the
malicious plot of wicked men and devils to drive the people of God to despair
of Gods help) they said to his soul (when he was flying before Absalom) there
is no help for him in God: Psalm. 3.2.
But David would not say so himself; he knew God, Ver. 3.
and therefore he would trust him; But thou, O Lord, art a shield for me; my
glory and the lifter up of my head.

Fourthly,It may well beget trust, for it begets strength; Oh it is a joyous
knowledge, and the joy of the Lord is your strength, said holy Nehemiah, Nehem.
8.10.
and so says my Text; The people that know their God, shall be strong; Oh it
is a strength-communicating knowledge.

Joy is to the spirit, that which marrow is to the bones: bones full of marrow,
cannot easily be broken; and a spirit full of joy, cannot easily be conquered:
the joy of the spirit works over strength into the body.

They got not the Land in possession by their own sword, neither did their own
arm save them; Psalm. 44.3.
What then? why, thy right hand and thine arm, and the light of thy
countenance, The light of Gods countenance, is the right hand, and arm of the
most High; and the right hand of the Lord (must needs) do valiantly; the right
hand of the Lord brings mighty things to pass. Psalm. 118.16.


Truly, the least glimpse of Gods favor in Christ, will make a man (as one
once gave the Character of a gallant Soldier, whom the most of you know) to
live like a Saint, and pray like an Angel, and fight like a Devil; Zech. 12.8.
or to use that better language of Scripture, He that is weak, to be as David,
and he that is as David, to be like an Angel of God.

Fifthly, yea in the fifth place; It gives not only strength,but life; A life
above mortality, This is life eternal, Joh. 17.3.
to know thee the only true God, and Jesus Christ whom thou have sent.

There is indeed, no knowing of God (after this manner in the Text) but in
Jesus Christ; and this knowledge is eternal life; That man has begun his
Heaven upon earth, that thus knows God.

And this knowledge of God, must needs heighten a people, or person to do great
things: for it is all that the glorified Saints, and holy Angels have to live
upon in Heaven, and it is enough; for so far as any one knows God, so far he
lives in God, yea (in some sense I may say) so far, he lives the life which God
himself lives. He is clothed with the Sun, and has the Moon under his feet,
the Churches Hieroglyphick, Revel. 12.1. He is clothed with Christ, and
tramples upon the World; above fears, and above hopes; above threatenings, and
above flatteries; above death, and above life; I had almost said, above hell,
and above heaven: therefore Habakkuk will not fear, Hab. 3.17, 18.
though the fig tree do not blossom, neither fruit be in the vine, the labor
of the Olive fail, and the fields yield no meat, the flock be cut off from the
fold, and there be no herd in the stall; Why? He knew though there should be
a famine in earth, there was none in heaven; he knew God, and had learned to
live in God, and therefore will rejoice in the Lord, and joy in the God of his
salvation, etc. He lives an unchangeable life, who lives in the unchangeable
God. He that lives in the dying creature, dies a thousand deaths; as often as
the creature dies, or changes, he dies, his hope dies, his heart dies within
him, like the heart of Nabal.

Sixthly, Give me leave but to add one reason more,to support this blessed
truth; and that is this, This knowledge of God has the promise of Gods
presence, and Gods assistance: This is a promise in the Text, The people that
know their God, shall be strong, they shall do Exploits.

And there is a gracious promise in the Psalms, that will both second, and
Paraphrase it.

Because he has set his love upon me, therefore I will deliver him, I will set
him on high, Psalm. 91.14, 15.
because he has known my Name: He shall call upon me, and I will answer him,
I will be with him in trouble, I will deliver him, and honor him.

No wonder, the knowledge of God does enable a people to do wonders, since by
virtue of promise (upon which a man may set heaven and earth, and it will bear
them up) I say, since by virtue of promise, it brings in the wonder-working God
to the business. The knowledge of God, brings in God into the Counsel: It
brings in God into the Field, and then what shall be impossible, or difficult?

Thus I have shown you the Pillars, upon which this blessed truth is supported.

on both sides, before we can freely proceed to improve this truth; It is this:

may not a people, or person; yea, have not some done gallantly, that never had
this knowledge of God?

many that have known God, come off with shame and loss, and done no exploits?

amongst and by the bad, and as well as the good. What wicked men do, that know
not God, they do by Providence; what they do, that know God, they do by
Promise; and let me tell you thus much, They that know God, would not fell this
distinction, for a thousand worlds.

lay obstructions in their own way.

The Lords hand is not shortened, Isaiah 49.1, 2.
but your iniquities have separated between you, and your God: Some accursed
thing in the camp; some Achans; and if Joshuah should have refused to have cast
him out, this must needs have estranged God from the Army.

not Act their knowledge, their knowledge is out of the way; they may know God
habitually, but not acknowledge him actually, to live upon him, and act in him,
but go out (it may be) in their own strength, and in their own wisdom, etc.
and then no wonder if God do shrink up their sinews, and they go halting.

tempt them, and try them, that they may know him better, and that He may know
them better, or rather that they may know themselves better, and the world may
know them better, that God and man may see, they are a people that will pray,
and wait, and trust in their God (with Job) although he kill them.

Use that I will make of this precious truth,I will reduce to these two Heads
in one word of Exhortation.

knowledge of God the fountain of all true fidelity,gallantnesse of spirit, and
heroic achievements?

Labor to know God.

carry your selves as a people that do know their God. Lend me a little of your
patience to speak somewhat to either of these.

Labor to know God; study God more, and the second Causes less; believe it,
you will find life and strength in it: And here, I beseech you, fellow me with
your patience, and yet truly I shall not need (do not misconstrue this
confidence of mine, if I say I shall not need) to beg your patience, I shall
lead you a long way indeed, but it will be through green pastures, by the
rivers of living waters; I shall lead you, as it were, through the milkie way
of heaven, where you shall behold visions of life as you go, and look into the
storehouses of heaven, where are laid up the treasures of strength, and of all
holy courage and resolution, while I shall invite you to study God, In his 1.
Works. 2. Word. 3. Names, and Attributes. 4. Relations.


in his Works,which divide themselves, and your contemplation, into his Works
of Creation. Providence. Redemption.


First, Therefore study God in his works of Creation, and there you shall find
him bringing light out of darkness; this beautiful structure of heaven and
earth, 2 Cor. 4.6.
out of a confused Chaos, and that Chaos out of nothing. Christians when you
see second causes at a dead-low-water, and your Creature-hopes ready to give up
the Ghost, if you would but remember the Creation, it would put life into you,
hark how God chides because you do not; Isa. 51.12, 13.
Who art thou, that art afraid of a man that shall die, and forgettest the Lord
thy Maker, Who art thou? Art thou a son of Abraham? Can thou call Jacob
Father? They would have scorned to have dealt so with me; to be afraid of a
dying man, and forget that I am the the living God, thy Maker, and the worlds
Maker, who stretched out the heavens, and laid the foundations of the earth,
and have feared continually, etc. See Christians, the very remembrance and
contemplation of God in the works of Creation, would have cured them of their
fears, while they might have reasoned themselves thus into an holy security; He
that made the world, is not he able to conquer an Army? He that made his
Enemies of nothing, is not he able as easily to reduce them into their first
nothing again? and sic in calt.

Study God in his works of providence, Ordinary, Extraoxdinary.


Study God in his ordinary works of Providence, in the Government of the whole
world, and there contemplate some such things as these. What an House God
keeps; how many Psalm. 145.15.
mouths God has to feed every day! How many Psalm. 147.4.
Stars in the Heaven, and yet he calls them all by their Names! how many men in
the world, and infinitely how many more hairs upon every one of their heads,
and yet Matthew. 10.30.
all these men, yea all these hairs numbered.

What antipathy and fightings between the Creatures of all rancks and classes,
from Angels, down to worms, and yet the world kept in Order.

What Combat between the Elements, and yet the Creation not set all into a
Combustion! What Contrariety in the Seasons and Complexions of the year;
Summer, Winter, Hot, Cold, Wet, Dry, etc. and yet all these, sweetly and
harmoniously Coordinated to the service of man, and producing the same harvest:
In a word, If you would in your greatest dangers, but get so much leave and
time, of your Fears and Distractions, as to read over these Psalms, the 104.
the 146.147. and hear what stories of providence are told there, to wonder and
delight, and then sit down and work the consideration of them upon your hearts;
Surely, in spite of all the ods and disadvantages you meet with in the world,
and in your work and way, whether public, or personal; you might be able to
come off with the Gallant Psalmist (pardon the Epethite) The glory of the Lord
shall endure for ever, Psalm. 104.31.
the Lord shall rejoice in his works, and not only, God will rejoice; but, I
will sing unto the Lord, as long as I live, I will sing praise to my God while
I have my being. Verse. 33. Psalm. 146.10.
My meditation of him shall be sweet; I will be glad in the Lord, etc. And
again, The Lord shall reign for ever, even thy God O Sion unto all generations,
praise ye the Lord. It is a very taking consideration, to observe, how in the
midst of straits, wherein the Church, or the Psalmist himself was, at the times
of penning these Psalms; He does discourse himself into Faith, from the very
mysteries of providence.

2. But then contemplate God in his extraordinary works of providence toward
his Church and people, and from thence you might collect these six Observations.

First,That the Churches despairing times have been Gods helping times.

Secondly,That God carries on his designs not only against but by the
opposition and conspiracies of his cursed Enemies.

Thirdly, That the Enemies have been nearest their downfall,when they have held
up their heads highest.

Fourthly, That you never heard God complaining of too few,you have heard him
sometimes complainig of too many. Judges 7.2.


Fifthly,That every turne-back in a deliverance, is not the loss of the
Design; Israel had many a turn-back in Egypt, and in the Wilderness, and yet
their deliverance was carried on.

Sixthly, That even in these passages of Providence, wherein God seems to fight
against his people, he is fighting for them; Psalm. 31.22.
and while he seems to reject their prayers he is answering them;

Honored Worthies, and beloved Christians, what strength would these (and the
like) considerations, well wrought in, by meditation, contribute to your weak
hands and feeble knees? But above all:

Thirdly,If you would study to know God in the glorious work and mystery of
Redemption by Jesus Christ, there you shall find these Heart-strengthening,
Soul-raysing wonders.

The greatest enemies that ever the Church had conquered. As, 1. A Malignant
World. 2. An Enraged Devil. 3. A violate Law. 4. The violenced Justice of God,
and


Lastly, man himself; afraid of nothing so much as of his own Salvation: All
these taken off and conquered.

The hardest difficulties that ever were heard of, reconciled; sc: how Justice
and Mercy might be both satisfied in man's recovery, how the curse might be both
removed and executed. A Mother and yet a Virgin, God and yet die.

God at the greatest charges that ever was heard of to bring this about, it
cost him the thoughts of his heart from all Eternity, before time, and the
beloved Son out of his bosom, and Him the dearest blood out of his heart in
the fullness of time, all these were laid out upon this purchase.

Christians consider, Has the Church yet such Enemies to conquer? has God yet
such difficulties to reconcile? will it cost God so much now to redeem his
Church and people from death and the wrath of men, as did from Hell, and the
wrath of God? And yet if it should, I am persuaded God would not stick at it,
to do it the second time, rather then his Church and people should perish: But
it needs not, the price of all the Churches deliverances was paid in at the
first purchase, then it cost him the blood of his beloved Son; Now it will but
cost him the blood of his cursed Enemies: upon whom the sentence is already
past, Those mine enemies that would not have me reign over them, Luke 19.27.
bring them hither and slay them before me. The consideration of this work of
God is of such a cordial Influence, that God stopped the mouths, and quieted
the hearts of his people with the mention of it, even when their hearts have
been moved (with fear) as the trees of the wood are moved with the wind, even
with this word, Verse. 14.
Behold a Virgin shall conceive and bare a Son, and so again, Isa. 7.2. Mich.
5.5.
This man shall be peace, when the Assyrian come into the land, etc. And all
this while this word was but yet in the promise a far off, a Mystery, a Riddle;
Oh what life and strength would it put into a languishing Spirit well chafed in
by meditation, Now we see it in the full accomplishment. Romans 8.32. Isa. 43.34.
whereby the Soul come to it self again, might resolve with the Apostle, he
that spared not his own Son but gave him up for us, how shall he not with him
also freely give us all things? Surely, he that Spared not his Son for the
Churches Redemption, will not now stick to say. I will give men for thy life,
and people for thy ransom, for certainly all other deliverances are not worthy
to be mentioned on the same day with this Deliverance of Deliverances.

Secondly, As you should study God, in his works, so study him in his Word; His
Word of 1. Truth. 2. Command. 3. Threatening. 4. Promise.


First, The word of Truth; Isa. 40.15.
and there you shall find all Nations as the drop of the Bucket and the dust
of the Balance.

Alas, what is less considerable then a drop of a Bucket? for what is the
Bucket to the Well, and what is the drop to the Bucket? behold, the Well is
neither fuller nor emptier for the bucket, nor the Bucket for the drop; Or what
of less moment then the dust? the small dust of the Balance: which turns the
balance, neither this way nor that way; which is blown off, with the least
breath? Now if all Nations be no more, Then what is one Nation? What is a
wretched party, or a Faction in a Nation, in an house? Surely, not a drop of a
drop, not the least imaginable part of a small dust.

Secondly, Know God in the word of Command;the sum whereof is, be thou
faithful to the death; Sirs, Revel. 2.16.
God desires no more of you, but fidelity, look to duty, and leave success to
God.

Thirdly, Else hear the word of Threatening,and behold it is set on with a
Curse, hear it, Oh ye people, a Curse not from the mouth of a passionate
Preacher, but an Angel from heaven, the Angel of the Covenant. Curse ye Meroz,
Judges. 5.23.
said the Angel of the Lord, Curse him bitterly, because he came not forth to
the help of the Lord against the mighty; And hear it Oh ye Nobles, and
Senators, and Commanders, and Soldiers, Cursed be he that does the work of
the Lord deceitfully, That pretends one thing, and intends another; That
pretends for Christ, and intends for Antichrist; That pretends for GOD and his
people, but intends for their enemies; or that does the work of the (...) Sig.
fraudare and proijcere.
Lord negligently; that does it by halfes, and piece-meals, that turns it off,
as if he cared not which end went forward: And cursed be he that withholdeth
his sword from blood; 1 King. 20.40.
that spares when God says, strike; that suffers those to escape, whom God
has appointed to utter destruction. Behold, this may startle.

But then on the other side.

study GOD in the word of Promise, the sum of all which you shall find in
that word God spoke to Joshuah: Fear not, Josh. 1.5. Heb. 13.5.
I will never leave thee, nor forsake thee: And be thou faithful to the
death, Revel. 2.10.
and I will give thee the crown of life. There is your promise for this life, I
will be with thee; and your promise for the life to come, I will give thee the
Crown, etc. God with you here, and you with God hereafter: Christians, what
would you have more? Fidelity shall wear the Crown. This may strengthen.

Names, and in his Attributes, and there, if you be weak, you shall find
strength; If Nonplust, Wisdom; If beset with Treachery, Faithfulness; If
Wronged, Justice; If under oppression, goodness, loving-kindnesse, tender
mercies.


In a word, if you have nothing, be nothing, there you shall find all things.

I am God Alsufficient, walk before me, and be thou perfect, Genesis 17.1. You
shall find all in God, and all this, yours; Especially if you will study God.

Relations, look upon him as Master, Friend, Father, Husband, etc. You know of
what obligation and influence these are among men (can a woman forget her
sucking child?) of how much infinitely more, with God! Oh study your
Evidences, Isai. 49.15.
for interest in these Relations, I tell you noble Patriots, and honored
Christians, the time is coming, and now is, when one Evidence well cleared,
will be a better security to you, then a Million of Armed men, then an whole
Navy; such as shall enable you to dare all the powers of the enemy, I will not
be afraid of ten thousands of people, Psalm. 3.
that have set themselves against me round about; Odds enough, one would think,
ten thousand to one, and to that one, no way left for an escape; beset round
about with Hoasts, and Myriades of enemies. Why will he not fear? hear him,
he will tell you; Arise O Lord, Save me, oh my God: I there it is. Psalm. 61.
He that can say (and say it upon good grounds) my God, may say, Psalm. 68.1, 2.
Arise O Lord; and if God arise, His enemies shall be scattered, they that hate
him, shall fly before him, let them be never so many thousands; One believer,
and his God, is good enough for all the world: If God be thine, his Wisdom is
thine, his Power is thine, his faithfulness thine, his mercy, and
loving-kindnesse thine; All he has, and all he is, is thine, Oh study God in
his Relations, and study his Relations in Evidences: You have taken up God upon
trust, too long already, and that's the reason, 2 Pet. 1.12.
you dare not trust him; now study interest, study evidences, Give all
diligence to make your calling and election sure. The studying of Evidences, is
an Evidence.
And let me tell you thus much for your comfort, Not only Evidences, but the
very studying of your Evidences, will minister an holy sweet boldness in the
day of trouble, and hour of temptation; Isai. 26.9.
when the soul shall be able to say; With my soul have I sought thee in the
night, yea with my spirit within me, will I seek thee early. Verse. 12.
You may say also as it there follows, Lord, thou will ordain peace for us,
etc. See Honorable and beloved, in all these here is both engagement, and
encouragement; Engagement, to do for God whatsoever is in the power of
creatures; Encouragement, Psalm. 144.15.
to expect from God, whatsoever is within the power of a God you may be sure of
it; Blessed are the people, that are in such a case, yea blessed are the people
that thus know and have the Lord for their God. And thus much for the first
branch of the Use:

I come now to the second.

In all the honorable and worthy exploits that are done, Second Branch of
Exhortation
or may be done, let us study to carry our selves as a people that know their
God.

And indeed (Honorable and Beloved) Exploits have been done, both in Scotland,
and in England, in these later days, if ever any since the beginning of the
world. Thou shall remember, said God to Israel, Deuteronomy. 8.2.
all the way wherein I have led thee these forty years. Alas, I have not time
to remember to you the way wherein the Lord has led us these five or six
years; At your leisure peruse your Journalls, and you shall find the way full
of wonders, almost miraculous, which God has done for and by a poor people
that have known their God. In Scotland, The casting out of that Popish
Service Book, and Prelacy.


Their first and second unbloudy victories, over those formidable preparations
for war, which were brought to their very borders, to have forced the yoke of
both upon their necks, That yoke which neither they nor their fathers were able
to bear. Oh what exploits were these?

They will tell you more.

In England, for I must touch but one of ten, of an hundred.

That little Parliaments great fidelity, to God and their brethren of Scotland,
in refusing to contribute a farthing to that unnatural war, notwithstanding
all the threats, and flatteries used to have corrupted them: truly it was an
exploit, full of so much power and goodness of God, as that it turned that
dissolution, which formerly had been a plague, into one of the greatest mercies
that ever England received; The sense whereof, while others were mourning for
that untimely breach, filled me with so much joy, as that (I profess) I felt
not (that day) the ground I went on, while I could bless God, and bless that
Parliament, with the words of Phineas, the son of Eleazar the Priest, Josh.
22.31.
to the two Tribes and an half; This day we perceive that the Lord is amongst
us, because you have not committed this trespass against the Lord: now ye have
delivered the children of Israel out of the hand of the Lord. Ireland we may
fear is even almost destroyed for that sin amongst others.
Certainly (Brethren) had they contributed but sixpence to that war eo
nomine, they had envolved the Land in guilt, the guilt of blood, and brought
God as an enemy upon us; I could tell you more of this, but I must proceed.

The calling of this Parliamont, which like another Phoenix, sprang out of the
others ashes,

Your pulling down of the Star-Chansber, and high-Inquisition; that Mizpah, and
Tabor, those Mountains of prey, Hosea 5.1.
and Dens of Thieves.

Your casting out of the Prelacie, first out of the House of Lords, and now (we
hope) out of the Lords House.

The unburthening of the back of the State, and neck of the Church, of
unsupportable Monopolies, Slavery, and Superstition.


The dispossessing of many Places, and Offices, both in Church and State, of
enemies to both, and placing faithful men in their rooms, especially in this
City.

The famous achievements in your Martial affairs at Edgehill, Gloucester,
Newbery, Near Stafford
Salt-heath, Cheshire, Lancashire, Yorkshire, and now of late in
Pembrokeshire, and other places thereabouts, with this late victory in the
West, for which we are met together this day to praise God: These and many
more (for, as I said, I can touch but one of ten, of an hundred) Oh what
exploits have they been! of all which we may truly say, as that our Noble, and
worthily honored General spoke of that one at Edgehill; Never was there
less seen of man, nor more of God. Surely our salvation has been of the Lord,
his blessing has been upon his people: The Wonder-working God, has done all
these works of wonder and mercy for us;

Witness these five Demonstrations.

we never came off with more loss and shame,then when our expectations soared
highest, upon the wings of our own strength and preparations.

ever had greater deliverances, and enlargements,then when in our
apprehensions, and in the probability of second Causes, we gave all for lost.
God has fashioned all our deliverances, and victories, upon the Model he
showed to Abraham, what time he made a Covenant with him; Genesis 15.17.
The smoking furnace has ushered in the burning lamp; that is, dark, and sad,
and gloomy dispensations of providence, have let in the bright and cheerful,
heart-raising, and soul-ravishing goings forth of our God, for the redemption,
and deliverance of a poor languishing people.

Thirdly, That all our deliverances and victories, have been the birth of
prayer; Never did any design of the Church, ride more visibly and
triumphantly, upon the wheels of prayer; we may sing of prayer, and the sword,
in this day of our rejoicing, as they did of Saul and David in their triumphs:
The sword has slain its Thousands, but prayer its Ten thousands.

Fourthly,That in all that has been done, both in your Parliamentary and
Martial exploits, there has been no less then a miraculous raising up of the
spirits of men above their own natural proportion, so that as it was with the
worthies, whose Monuments stand in Scripture unto this day; The Spirit of the
Lord came upon Samson, and the Spirit of the Lord came upon Jephta, and David,
etc. So has it been in our conflicts, the Spirit of the Lord has come upon
our Noble General, Commanders, The Spirit of the Lord has come upon our
Gallant Gentlemen, Young men faithful Country men, Renowned Citizens, so that
he that was weak among them is as David, and he that was as David, has been as
the Angel of the Lord. Even then when our Armies have been weary and tired,
feeble, and faint, as once David himself was; Some have retreated, others it
may be, fled, and the state of the Battle very doubtful and dangerous; yet
even then has the Spirit of God come upon them; Zach. 4.6.
In all which that word has been made good: Not by might nor power but by my
Spirit says the Lord.

Fifthly,That whereas the counsels of the Enemy run all in one channel, with
one free and unanimous Vote, against Christ, and his people; You have strugled
(and I wish I might say only you have) not only against a torrent of
opposition from the open professed Enemy; but, with the secret tides and
streams of cross Malignant Counsels, and projects among your selves, almost,
in all your Motions and Preparations throughout the Kingdom, which when I
seriously consider in my private thoughts I wonder not (as some do) that more
is not don; but am filled rather with wonder and astonishment, that so much is
done, as is done; and must needs break out with the Churches admiration and
acknowledgment, It is the Lords mercies we are not consumed because his
compassions fail-not: Lam. 3.22, 23.
They are renewed every morning, great is thy faithfulness!

Had I not named this last, of cross Counsels, I could have showed you all
these impressions of God, upon the Deliverance, and victory, which we this day
celebrate.

first, was it not in our despairing time,when our hands were weak, and our
knees feeble?

Oh, the opportunity of this mercy, how seasonably it came in to refresh and
revive our drooping spirits; after that sad blow in the North, wherein the hand
of our God was stretched out against us! how seasonably I say, to stop the
mouth of reproach and blasphemy, in our insulting adversaries; whom if God had
suffered to have seconded their former success, with this days Victory also,
surely the earth had not been able to have borne their words. As with a sword
in our Bowels, Psalm. 42.10.
they would have doubled and heightened their reproaches, what is become of your
fastings and prayers, yea, where is your God?

Yea, Oh the patience and free grace of our God, which has triumphed in this
deliverance! who when he saw us in our despondencies and despairings, and might
have destroyed us for our murmr and infidelity (as he did, the Israelites)
has not only looked upon our affliction, but pitied and helped our unbelief by
so wonderful and unexpected a reviving!

Secondly,Look upon it under another advantage of the season, namely, as
treading upon the heels of our humiliations, and so you may behold it a double
mercy, A victory; and the return of prayer; which we may celebrate in David's
rapture. Psalm. 31.22.
I said in my haste, I am cut off from before thine eyes, nevertheless thou
heardest the voice of my supplication, when I cried unto thee. Verse. 23.
Oh let us follow it on with his, O love the Lord all you his saints, and I
love the Lord because he has heard my voice and my supplication, Psalm. 116 1.
The hearing of prayer should marveilously endear our hearts to God.

And thirdly, was there not a miraculous effusion of Gods Spirit seen in this
Critical day, wherein the Enemies came in like a flood, began to cry
victory; our hands began to hang down, our hearts to faint within us, the day
was well nigh lost, Isa. 59.19.
and even then did the Spirit of the Lord lift up a standard against them, by
raising up the spirits of some that day to work with God, for the turning of
the state of the Battle; whereby their brethren also were strengthened to
return and resist the rage and fury of the Enemy, and to pursue it to a great
slaughter, and a total routing and discomfiture of that proud daring Army?
Well we may conclude, That God was in that days work of a certain, and
wrought wonderfully, and immediately for the salvation of his people.

Surely so great a victory with so cheap a loss, was more then Gods finger,
it was his Arm, his right hand that turned the question of that day, and the
fears of his people into inconquerable courage, and their mourning into
triumph and rejoycings.

All that I have to do now, is to bespeak you, Honorable and Beloved, that,
under this and other Deliverances and Victories we have, and hope for, as they
were wrought by the knowledge of God, so we would behave our selves as a people
that know our God; let us wear our deliverances as a people that are acquainted
with God. In the first place therefore, 2 Samuel 12.27, 28, 29, 30.
let us carry it thankefully; let us do with Christ, as sometime Joab did with
David, who, when he had taken Rabbah, sent for David, lest the City should have
been called after Joabs Name; and set the Kings Crown (very weighty and rich
with precious stones) upon the head of David; Let us us this day bring in our
Lord Jesus Christ, and let not victory be called after our name, but let His
Name beset upon it, The Lord our Righteousness, and strength; and the Crown
upon his head.

I have read of a King going by water, who looking over the bardge, his Crown
fell into the water; one of the Watermen leapes in, dives, takes up the Crown,
and when he comes up above water, puts the Crown upon his head, that he might
use both hands to expedite his return to the Boat. The King proportions his
reward thus; for saving his Crown, he allows him a Talent, but because be put
it on, he takes off his head (thinking that head not fit to stand upon its
shoulders, that presumed to wear that Crown, which was made only for the head
of a King) my Politiques, are not sufficient to Critic upon the Justice of
such a censure: Sure I am, it will be the highest act of Treason in Us, if we
shall put this Crown of victory upon our own head, upon the head of our own
strength or wisdom, etc. Which as it was wrought only by the hand, so it was
made only for the head of him who is the King of Saints, and Lord of Hosts;
And the highest act of Justice in him, if he take away, not the Crown only
from our head (in refusing to give us any more victories) but our heads too
from our shoulders, by leaving us to their Execution, whose mercies are
cruelties: Let us therefore with the Elders in the Revelation fall down before
him that sits upon the Throne, and worship him that lives for ever and ever,
Reve. 4.10, 11.
and cast our Crowns down before him, saying, Thou art worthy, O Lord, to
receive Glory, and honor and power, etc. And therefore, Not unto us, O Lord,
not unto us, but unto thy Name give the praise: if we stay till God come to
demand his Crown, woe unto us.

Secondly, Let us carry it obediently: Whosoever offers me praise, Psalm. 50. last.
Glorifieth me, It is some glory indeed to God, and you have done well Noble
Senators, that you have set apart a day to praise God for this victory,
wherein your resolutions have bin like that of David, I will not offer to God
that which cost me nothing: 2 Samuel 24.24.
You have not turned God off with a day that was his own before; (though it be
a Sabbath days work to celebrate his praise for any Mercy or Deliverance,
being all the fruits of that grand Redemption which that day does remember. But
you have sequestered a special day for a special Mercy, and you have done well
in it, the Lord be blessed, and the Lord bless you for it: but yet let me tell
you from this Text, This is not all, nay this is the least part of that which
God expects at your hands, and at all our hands; the main piece of praise, is
the Ordering of your conversations aright; there is so much thankfulness in
our hearts, as there is holiness and selfdeniall in our Conversations. Without
this, Isa. 58.5. Quasi sua offerent Deo, seipsos. Diabolo. Bern. Infidelis
disputat contra fidem Improbus Christianus vivit contra fidem, etc.
as our Fastings are but the holding down of the head like a bulrush for a day,
so our thanksgivings are but the holding up of the head like a Reed for a day
and we are found guilty of that mockery Bennard speaks of, to give our
Sacrifices to God, but Our selves to the Devil. I remember, Augustine,
comparing the profane Heathen, and vile Christian together, makes only this
difference between them; The Heatthen talks against the faith, but the Iewd
Christian lives against the faith, etc. A poor difference, wherein if either
have the better, it is the Heathen without doubt: Let me invert it a little
thus; The wretched Cavalieres, they swear against Christ; The unholy
Parliament-Protestant lives against Christ; they blaspheme Christ in their
mouths, these blaspheme Christ in their lives: And tell me Christians, which
dishonours God most, their verbal, or our real blasphemies? and what do you
think? were it not better God should be dishonored by a people that profess
open enmity and war against Christ and his Government, then by a people that
makes such profession of love to both? Amos 3.2.
You only have I known of all the Nations of the earth. therefore will I
punish you for all your iniquities. Surely, our secret abominations, are more
hateful to God then their open wickednesses, which they commit in the face of
the Sun: And better truly were it for us to perish by the lusts of our
enemies, then to perish by our own lusts; The lusts of our enemies can kill us
but once; our own lusts, will kill us to the second death.

Christians, our God does not only speak peace, and speak mercies, Psalm.
119.68.
but he gives peace, and does good, Thou art good, and thou do good.

In our returns of praise, let us be like our God, and not content our selves
to speak our thankfulness, and sing our thankfulness, but let us live our
thankfulness, and do our thankfulness, and be our thankfulness; Let us take
all from sin, and self, and give all to Jesus Christ.

If this be our thankfulness, I dare promise you in the Name of my God, this
shall not be the last Victory God will give us, for so the Psalmist has yet to
tell you; To him that orders his Conversation aright, I will show the salvation
of God: You shall have yet more salvations, Psalm. 50. ult.
even on this side everlasting salvation. Brethren, look to your Conversations,
it is both your thankfulness and your salvation.

Thirdly, Prayerfully. This Victory has been the return of prayer, let prayer
be the return of this Victory: So David resolves, Psalm. 116.13, 17. I will take
of the cup of salvation, and call upon the Name of the Lord: and verse 17. I
will offer to the the sacrifice of thanksgiving, and will call upon the Name of
the Lord,

You that never prayed in all your lives, now learn to pray, and so help to
fulfill that Prophecy Psalm. 65.2. Oh thou that hear prayers, to thee shall
all flesh come. God has showed himself willing to hear, do you show your
selves willing to pray; and you that have prayed, double your prayers, and with
your Master Jesus Christ, pray yet more earnestly: Oh it is a sweet and a
glorious thing, when prayer begets deliverances, and deliverances again beget
prayer.

Fourthly and lastly, Believingly. Brethren, let us lay up this fresh
experience by us, and learn to live by faith in the next trial. Shall we yet
distrust our God? Shall we yet make flesh our Arm? The Lord forbid. Surely,
the least that God expects and merits at our hands, for this and all other
miraculous Deliverances, is this, that we should resolve with returning,
repenting Ephraim. Ashur shall not save us, Hos. 14.3.
we will not ride upon horses, neither will we say any more to the work of our
hands, Ye are our gods, for in thee the fatherless find mercy.

Christians, let us remember this Deliverance, and trust God as long as we
live. God has done these things of purpose to bribe and support our faith,
Psalm. 78 46, 7.

Brethren, this will be honor to our God, when the Enemies shall see, in our
greatest disadvantages and dangers, we serve a God whom we dare trust. And
thus Brethren, in carrying our Victories Thank fully, Obedientially,
Prayerfully, Beleevingly, we shall behave our selves as a people that know
their God, and for whom God has done so wonderful things. I could have been
larger, but that I was choicely prevented in the forenoon.

There is a gracious Promise made to Israel, the Lord make it good upon
England; Israel shall cry unto me, My God, Hos. 8.2.
I know thee. It is an harder matter (it seems) then ever Israel thought of, or
then we think of, to know God.

And you have done well, noble Senators, that you have engaged your wisdom and
zeal, for the promoting of this blessed, and blessing-knowledge of God in this
Westminster, where is a Lecture every morning at six of the clock, maintained
by 7 godly able Divines.
place, in the neighboring City, and in other places of the Kingdom, so far
as your power and opportunity have served you, by removing those vile persons,
whose lives and preaching, have tavght nothing but rebellion in Israel, and
putting such in their rooms, that both in life and doctrine, should teach
people the good knowledge of the Lord. You have done well, I say, for you know
him that has said, Wisdom and knowledge shall be the stability of thy times,
and strength of Salvation: Isai. 33.6.
And the good Lord so accompany his own Word, and his own Works, (by both which
he now is teaching England) with his own Spirit, and presence, that at length,
not only these places, but the whole Kingdom, even all England, may say, My
God, I know thee. Amen.

FINIS.

