JOY OUT-JOYED: OR, Joy in overcoming evil spirits and evil men, Overcome by
better Joy: SET FORTH IN A SERMON at Martins in the fields, to the Right
Honorable the Lords Assembled in Parliament, upon the day of their Solemn
Rejoicing and praising God, for reducing the City of Chester by the Forces of
the Parliament, under the Command of St WILLIAM BR^RETON, February 19. 1645.

By Joseph Caryl Minister of the Gospel at Magnus near London Bridge.

LONDON, Printed by G. M. for John Rothwel at the Sign of the Sun and Fountain
in Paul's Churchyard, and Giles Calvert at the Sign of the Black-spread-Eagle
at the West end of Paul's. 1646.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE The House of PEERS Assembled in Parliament.
My Lords,
THE world is too narrow for our passions (we may soon over-joy or over-sorrow
the best or the worst estate which earth affords or can inflict) What an Atome
then is it to our understandings? The world is too little and too low-prized
for the mind of the least, of the poorest man, who has the understanding of a
man: what A nothing then is it to (such as yours are) Great and noble minds?
And yet (as inconsiderable as it is) they who have only the world to rejoice
in, shall not (shortly) have a world to rejoice in. The fashion of it passes
away daily, and the matter of it is of no long continuance. The beauty of it
was stained in its infancy, and the frame of it must be consumed when it is a
few (who knows how few) years elder. This should call off our thoughts from
eager earthly pursuits, and pitch them upon a higher and more enduring
substance. This should provoke us to put the moon (all changeable excellencies)
under our feet, and make us restless till we are clothed with the Sun, an
eternal excellency? 'Twas the design of the ensuing Sermon, to befriend souls
with such a change of clothing: and to entice them into the joys of a name
written in Heaven, that they might not too much read or rejoice in any, (no not
their own) on earth. I know the victories and successes of a just war, endebt
us not only to Thankfulness, but to Joy. Such victories are the exactest pieces
both of the wisdom and power of God; God is called a man of war, but nothing
shows him more a God then war. And among all wars, a war with spirits,
(though but with the spirits of men) shows most of God. The great promise of
restoring Jerusalem is thus prefac'd. Thus says the Lord, which stretches out
the Heavens, and lays the foundation of the earth, and forms the spirit of
man within him, (Zech. 12. 1.) All reforming about spiritualls, begins at the
forming of spirits. Whether God forms spirits, or breaks spirits (which will
not receive his form) his work is admirable. God has begun a war with, and a
work upon spirits in our days: Some spirits are beautifully formed, others are
justly broken. It Is a duty to rejoice in both, chiefly in the former. We must
rejoice (for the Angels in heaven do) when we hear the spirits of other men are
formed, but the best cause of joy is when we find our own are. How much soever
the public is reformed without, or how many soever are formed within, yet if
any heart lie ruined, or life unshap't, he may (in the midst of all these joys
and triumphs, for he shall) lie down in sorrow. That your Lordships may have
many rejoicing days, and a rejoicing eternity* That your Names may be written
in the fairest and greatest letter which Honor can make on earth, and that
they may be written in the fair-est and greatest letter, which Glory Shall make
in Heaven, is the prayer of

Your Honors humbly devoted Joseph Caryl.

A SERMON PREACHED to the Right Honorable the House of PEERS assembled in
Parliament, Upon the Day of their solemn Thanksgiving for the reducing of the
City of CHESTER
LUKE 10. 20. Notwithstanding in this rejoice not, that the spirits are subject
unto you: but rather rejoice because your names are written in Heaven.
THE King of Saints, and Captain General of our salvation Jesus Christ, having
called, commissioned and sent out twelve Apostles as great Commanders to subdue
his native Kingdom of Israel to himself, at the sixth Chapter of this Gospel:
He at the first verse of this, prepares and sends forth a band of seventy
Auxiliaries, to prosecute and advance the same design. After these things, the
Lord appointed other seventy also, and sent them two and two before his face,
into every City and place, whither he himse^f would come.

And to show that the weapons of their warfare were not carnal, but mighty
through God, these seventy returning victors, report the success of their
expedition, and show Christ the Trophies of their conquest, at the 17 verse;
And the seventy returned again with joy saying, Lord, even the devils are
subject unto us through thy Name.

Yea, says Christ, I know it to be so; this is not a vain boast of valor,
(like theirs, who will vaunt they have killed the Devil; and run strange
adventures, when they scarce dare look an enemy in the face,) I my self can
bear you witness, that you have faithfully and effectually acted your
commission: the issues of your service have been glorious in mine eye. And he
said unto them, I beheld Satan like lightning fall from Heaven, verse. 18. The
powers of darkness cannot stand before the Gospel of light: The Devil, the
prince of the air is no match for Christ; no nor for the meanest of the
servants of Christ, who go forth armed with his name and power.

And because Christ found that these servants of his had managed their former
commission so well; therefore he is so far from calling it in, that he
inlargeth it at the 19 verse; Behold, I give you power to tread on serpents and
scorpions, and over all the power of the enemy, and nothing shall by any means
hurt you. Go forth again in this armor of power with which I have girt you,
and I warrant you sword-free, and shot-free, nothing (either on earth or in
hell) shall by any means (strength or stratagem) hurt you; all the world will
be against you, but I am with you, take courage, nothing shall hurt you:
therefore on again in this warfare, you shall (as my self) go forth conquering
and to conquer.

Now, who was able to bear such a burden of honor from these past and promised
victories with moderation? How many by hearing a report of their own conquests
over other men, have been overcome with their own pride! It is an easier matter
to gain successes then to bear them well. Christ (who knows the measure of
every spirit) seems to suggest, that even the good spirits of his Disciples
began to over-act upon these victories over evil spirits. Hence he gives them
an allay by counsel and caution, not to raise their joy too high upon this
point. And more, he diverts their joy (which he saw ready to overslow the banks
of that channel wherein it was) into another channel, wide and capacious enough
to hold all the inundations of it: Notwithstanding, in this rejoice not, that
the spirits are subject unto you; but rather rejoice in this, that your names
are written in Heaven.

I shall not stay upon any anxious division of the text; There are two clear
parts in it: The one Corrective; The other Directive.

The Corrective part lies in the first words, wherein Christ checks and stops
the suspected excesses of their joy, for victories gained over evil spirits:
Notwithstanding, in this rejoice not, that the spirits are subject unto you.

The Directive part lies in the later words, showing them a joy wherein there
could be no excess; but rather rejoice in this, because your names are written
in Heaven.

Notwithstanding, in this rejoice not.] Joy is the opening and dilatation of
the heart upon the receiving of some present good thing; as sorrow is the
coarctation, the shutting or locking up of the heart, upon the pressure of some
present evil. Rejoice not, that is, let not your hearts open too much in
receiving this object. The negation is not absolute, but only comparative; so
it is expounded in the next clause, Rejoice not, but rather. He does not
forbid, but qualify and moderate their joy.

That the spirits are made subject to you] Angels are spirits, and they are
either good or bad. That these spirits were bad Angels, we have warrant at the
17 verse, The Devils are subject unto us. These were once good Angels, Now they
are fallen; and by their fall they have lost their condition, but not their
constitution; their honor, but not their nature, they are spirits still. The
spirits are made subject to you.

Subjection is twofold: Either compulsory, or voluntary. The subjection here
meant, is a compulsive subjection: They are not subject to you as the Saints
are to Christ, by a professed subjection of their wills, but they are subject
(as a slave to his Lord) whether they will or no, by an imposed subjection.
Good Angels faithfully serve the Saints; and evil Angels are made subject to
them. The former are ministering spirits, sent out for the^ good of those who
are the heirs of salvation: The later are kept by the power of Christ, and the
ministry of his servants, from doing hurt to the heirs of salvation. To be
enabled for this is a great privilege, yet the Disciples must not rejoice
greatly in this: In what then? Christ shows them a better and a nobler object
of joy; But rather rejoice that your names are written in Heaven.

There are no literal records in the Court of Heaven, there is no pen or ink,
no paper or parchment there* To be written in Heaven is only this, to be
elected unto eternal life, and adopted sons of God, to an inheritance among
the Saints in light. Moses of old spoke this language, Exodus 3^. 23. Blot me
out of thy book which thou have written. David, in allusion to this, phrases a
prayer against his enemies; Let them be blotted out of the book of the living,
and not be written among the righteous, Psalm. 69. 28. And Christ promises the
Sardian victor, That he will not blot his name out of the book of life, Rev. 3.
5.

God is said to have two books in Heaven. First, He has a book of those things
which we have done, or the book of conscience, Rev. 20. 12. I saw the dead,
small and great stand before God: and the books were opened, and the dead were
judged out of those things which were written in the books according to their
works. Secondly, He has a book of what himself has done, or the book of
election, called often in Scripture the book of life, Phil. 4. 3 Rev. 13. 8. c.
^7. 8. c. 20. 15. c. 21. 27. c. 22. 19.

Further, God may be said to have in Heaven a black book, wherein every word is
a blot, a blot fallen from the lives of wicked men here upon the earth. And he
has (as I may so speak) a white book, a book written with the fair letters of
all the holy acts which his Saints have done upon the earth.

Again, God has a book of death, wherein all the names of reprobates are
written, with the gall and wormwood of his everlasting wrath: And he has a
book of life in Heaven, written with the golden rays and beams of his own
eternal love. Our being written in this book of life, is the matter of that
exceeding joy, to which Christ calls his Disciples in the text; But rather
rejoice in this, that your names are written in Heaven.

The words thus opened, yield plenty of seasonable and profitable instructions.
First this. Evil spirits are subject to the power of Christ working in his
Saints and servants. The Devil is subject not only to the immediate and
personal power of Christ, but to his mediate and ministerial power. The
subduing of the Devil was not a business confined to that age wherein Christ
sojourned on earth such victories are obtained every day. Such conquests as the
Disciples obtained are very rare; And I intend not a discourse about the
possession, or dissposession of evil spirits: but there is an ordinary way of
subduing the power of the Devil, in the ministration of the Gospel. The Gospel
is the ministration of the holy Spirit, and therefore it must needs be victory
over the evil spirit. Thus the unclean spirit is made to dislodge. The Devil is
seldom permitted to possess the body of any man; but he possesses the souls of
all wicked men. And though the Devil be cast out of the souls of all believers,
yet he never ceases to oppose their souls. Every time a sinner is converted, an
evil spirit is subdued; and every time a temptation is resisted by the Saints,
an evil spirit is foiled. The Devil is a great prince, and he has more then
half the world his subjects; Many millions, and among them many Kings of the
earth do him homage, and stoop to his commands. But how great soever he is,
and how many soever follow him, yet he is made to stoop to the least of the
Saints: That roaring Lion couches to them, and they tread upon this serpent.
The God of peace bruises Satan under their feet, Romans 16. 20. Besides, as evil
spirits are subdued, which work in, or against the souls of men; So evil
spirits are kept from hurting and afflicting the bodies and outward estates of
men. For as good Angels incamp about the godly to guard and protect them: so
evil Angels incamp against the godly to anoy and vex them* If the power of
Christ, to this day, did not master and subdue the power of those evil spirits,
they would make strange confusions in the world quickly.

The Devils are under a twofold chain; First, under a chain of justice: So the
Apostle Jude at the sixth verse of his Epistle, They are reserved in
everlasting chains, (they can never wear them out, or file them off) under
darkness to the judgment of the great day. Secondly, they are under a chain of
providence, God lets them go abroad, but never without this chain; He gives
them scope, and checks them as himself pleases. Wicked men are led captive by
Satan at his will, 2 Timothy 2. 26. and Satan is led captive at the will of Jesus
Christ. He cannot act either by himself or by his instruments, but as
permitted; and if Christ oppose, both his power and the power of his
instruments is stopped and broken. John the Apocalypt (Rev. 20. 1, 2.) Saw an
Angel (Christ) come down from Heaven, having the key of the bottomless pit,
and a great chain in his hand, and he laid hold on the dragon that old Serpent,
which is the Devil and Satan, and bound him a thousand years, and cast him into
the bottomless pit, and shut him up, and set a seal upon him, that he should
deceive the nations no more, till the thousand years should be fulfilled* and
after that he must be loosed for a little season. Opinions and dispute^ are
very various, about the precise time of Satan's binding and loosing; But we may
hence conclude an illustrious proof for this point in general, That Satan is
subject to the power of Christ. He binds him from deceiving the nations, and
he can bind him from troubling either persons or nations.

This magnifies the power of Christ, he makes evil spirits subject. This is a
conquest beyond all those of the Roman Consuls or Caesar's; there was never any
of them that brought the Devil home in chains. Evil spirits were never dragged
at their chariots of triumph. Those conquerours were themselves captives to
these spirits. And while they procured liberty for the commonwealth, they
themselves were the servants of corruption, and slaves to Satan; for of whom
(or by what) any may is overcome, of the same is he brought in bondage, 2 Pet.
2. 19.

Secondly, This may encourage us in the greatest difficulties. If spirits are
subject to the power of Christ acted in the Saints; then, what is there in the
world but may be subjected by this power, There is no power greater then the
power of spirits. One spirit destroyed a mighty army in one night, 2 King. 19.
35. Can flesh and blood, can gates of brass and walls of stone stand out, when
spirits themselves must yield? Every creature has its strength in its spirits;
There are corporal spirits, as well as spiritual spirits. There are spirits
of the body, produced out of the matter, being the finer, purer and more
sublimate parts of it: spirits animal in the brain, vital in the heart, and
natural in the liver, these are the strength of our bodies. And there are
spirits in things without life, These spirits are their strength also; the
spirit of wine is the strength of the wine, so of any other liquour. Spirits
extracted are the strength of any substance contracted into a narrow room.
There is a spirit of a spirit. The spirit of the mind, Ephesians. 4. 23. Be
renewed in the spirit of your mind; This spirit of the mind is the strength
of the mind. To spend spirits is to spend strength, and to get spirits is to
get strength, both of body and mind. When the Prophet would show that the
horses of the Egyptians were weak, he says, Their horses are flesh and not
spirit, (Isa. 31. 3.) and the Apostle to show how strong. Devils are, Ephesians. 6.
12. says, We wrestle not against (gross things) flesh and blood, but against
principalities and powers, against the rulers of the darkness of this world,
against spiritual wickedness in high places. Spiritual wickedness is wicked
spirits: and because they are spirits, therefore they are powers. In evil
spirits there is power, much more in good spirits, and most of all in the best
spirit the Holy Ghost ye shall receive power, after the Holy Ghost is come upon
you, Act. 1. 8. wheresoever spirit is, there is power. The spirit of a man is
of such strength that it is able to bear his infirmity; our infirmities are
our heaviest part. Nothing calls for more strength then the bearing of our own
infirmities, or the infirmities of other men. Yet while a man can hold up his
spirit and maintain that, he may bear (and rejoice in) the heaviest burden of
his own outward infirmities. A strong spirit strengthens the weakest, and a
weak spirit weakens the strongest body or mind.

The sum of all is this, spirits are strong, and evil spirits are stronger then
all flesh, yet these are subject to the power of Christ; then never fear flesh
and blood, fire and sword, when you hear spirits must submit. When Christ
would assure the Church that it should stand against all opposition, he
promises the gates of hell shall not prevail against it, Matthew 16. 18. that is,
the power of evil spirits shall not; and if the gates of hell cannot, surely
gates of earth shall never prevail. We may be confident if spirits cannot,
flesh and blood shall not do us any hurt, while Christ is with us. This leads
us to the second Observation.

It is matter of joy to bring spirits, evil spirits into subjection. The
Disciples passion was not without reason, when they rejoiced to see spirits
stoop: it is no small privilege to make evil spirits stoop, whether they be
evil spirits tempting and troubling without, or moving within us.

It is matter of joy to subdue any real enemy, but chiefly those, First, who
are most for number: Secondly those, who are mightiest in strength; Thirdly
those, who are highest in place; Fourthly those, who are subtillest in
projecting; Fifthly those, who are most malicious, and bloody in executing. All
these meet in evil spirits. They are many, mighty, high, subtle* and
malicious. The Devil is a legion by name, a Prince by his place; A Goliath, an
Achit^phel, A Doeg, all joined in one.

It is a glorious victory to overcome a temptation to sin. Every time we do
so, we overcome a Devil: The Apostle James encourages us, Resist the Devil, and
he will flee from you: that is, he will be subject to you. You drive away the
Devil every time you stand it out in a temptation and stand fast.

It is a great victory to overcome the sinful corruptions that are in our
own hearts; To overcome passion and corruption within, is like the overcoming
of a temptation from without: The evil spirit is vanquished in both. The
Sadduces denied all spirits ( Act. 23. 8.) and others have affirmed, that good
and evil spirits are only good or evil motions within us. I abominate the
error, and yet there is a truth somewhat like it. Good or evil motions within
us, are (in a sense) good or evil spirits; For as that which is borne of the
good spirit is spirit ( Joh. 3.) So that which is borne of the evil spirit is
spirit too. Every evil motion in us is borne of the Devil; who though he be not
the immediate parent of all such motions, yet he was the immediate parent of
that corruption from whence such motions are derived. So that though these
sinful passions are not those spirits; yet they have the strength and life of
evil spirits in them. Hence Solomon puts the glory of a conquest over them,
beyond the glory of earthly conquests; Pro. 16. 32. He that is slow to anger,
is better then the mighty; and he that rules his spirit, (that is, who
overcomes his sinful spirit, and makes it subject to him) is better then he
that takes a City. We are called to bless God for taking a City this day: if
we overcome our selves, and rule our own spirits, this is a more honorable
conquest, then that we bless God for this day, the taking of a City, He that
rules his spirit, is better then he that takes a City. I beseech you, says
the Apostle Peter, 1 Ephesians. 2. 11. As pilgrims and strangers abstain from
fleshly lusts, which war against the soul. Fleshly lusts are spiritual
enemies; Abstaining from these, is victory over these; we kill them by fleeing
from them. This is the greatest war, and the issues of it are of greatest
consequence. It is more noble to subdue lusts within us, then Armies without
us; And it is more advantage to us to conquer lusts then to conquer the world.
Better be a Paul, then an Alexander.

Further, It is matter of great joy when the evil spirits of men are overcome;
This is the hardest part of our war with men, and the best. Battles are but
half won when only the bodies of men are won; then it is a through victory
when we are victours over their spirits. The counsel which that Indian
Gymno-sophist Calanus Plutarch.
gave Alexander about managing of his war, was this; Get into the heart of
your enemies Country, which he taught him by the embleam of a great Oxe-hide
spread upon the ground: He advised Alexander to get into the heart of the
Enemies Country. My humble advice to you, Right Honorable, is, to get into
the heart of your Enemies; While nothing is conquered but the bodies of men and
Cities, you are but upon the borders of victory.

There is a double conquest over spirits, one is the chaining of spirits: the
other, is the changing of spirits: this later is a blessed conquest, not only
to those who conquer, but to those who are overcome. The Parliament has cause
this day to bless God for subjecting evil spirits to them; but I may say,
(without a figure or the least strain to truth) most of those spirits are
subject to them but as the Devils were subject to the Disciples; it is but a
forced and a constrained subjection, a chain is put upon their spirits, their
spirits are not changed: they are subject, because they cannot longer prevail
and have their wills. We have cause (I say) to bless God for this. The Prophet
foretells what subjection shall be made at last to the Church, ( Isa. 60. 14)
The sons also of them that afflicted thee, shall come bending unto thee, and
all that despised thee, shall bow themselves down at the soles of thy feet,
etc. It is a mercy when men are made to bow; but it will be our glory, when all
shall willingly bow to the throne of truth and holiness, to the Scepter of
judgment and righteousness. It is well for us when fire and sword makes enemies
submit; but it will be best with all, when repentance and sorrow for sin,
when honesty and grace makes men submit. When men submit from a change of their
principles, not from a change only of providence: from a change wrought in
their hearts, not from a change wrought in their states. God has fulfilled
that prayer of the Psalmist, ( Psalm. 68. 30.) in our days. He has rebuked the
company of Spear-men, or (as the letter of the Hebrew gives it) the beasts of
the reeds, of which spears were anciently made, and to which they are (in
fashion) like. These beasts of the reeds God has rebuked, as also the
multitude of the Bulls (boisterous, men) and the calves of the people (simple
men) till many of them have submitted themselves with pieces of silver (to make
their compositions and has scattered the people who delighted in war ^ that
is, such as would not submit. This the Lord has done already.

Now let this be a word to you, Right Honorable, who are so highly interested
in the public affairs, let your design be especially to make spirits
subject to you by a willing subjection. Endeavor that in the day of your power
as it is in the day of Christ's power ( Psalm. 110.) the people may be not only
subject, but willing; That their subjection to the Parliament may be (in its
sphere) like that of the Corinthians to the Gospel, (2 Cor. 9. 13.) a professed
subjection, not a forced subjection. The greatest part of your war is with
the spirits of men; it is said of Saul, (1 Samuel 16. 14.) That the spirit of the
Lord departed from him, and an evil spirit from the Lord troubled him, that
evil spirit was it which increased his envy, and continued the war against
David. The Pharisees said of Christ, ( Joh. 10. 20. He has a Devil, and is
mad: every man (as the learned Mr Mede observes in one of his Diatribes) was
thought to have a Devil in those times, who did things furiously and madly.
Many such furious ones are amongst us, of whom we may well say, they have a
Devil, for they are mad; they would never run such mad courses, did not an evil
spirit enrage and hurry them.

I might describe many of these evil spirits; I will name a few.

First, the evil spirits of pride and contention. These are the cause of wars
and troubles in all nations. Because of pride comes contention. Natural
spirits do not generate, but these spirits do. The spirit of pride procreates
the spirit of contention. Were we more humble, we might he more quiet; and the
reason why so few have their desires, is, because so many resolve to have their
wills.

Secondly, the evil spirits of envy and malice. Many are sick of other men's
health, and poor with other men's riches, and disappointed by their neighbors
success: impotent envy thus rotting the bones, breeds rancorous malice in the
heart, and both break out to the danger of the whole body. Could we bear the
good of others, it would be better for our selves.

Thirdly, the evil spirits of error and falsehood unquiet our times. What a
calmnes would follow if these were cast out of every heart. A spirit of error
deserves every man's abhorrence: though a person erring may challenge our
patience. This spirit of error is extreme bad: but a spirit of false-hood is
far worse. All agree, they may be somewhat borne with, who err
conscienciously, (which is very possible) But they are insufferable, who act
unconscionably, which is very usual.

Fourthly, the evil spirits of jealousy and self-love. I put these together,
because ungrounded jealousy of others is commonly accompanied with inordinate
love of our selves.

The spirit of jealousy (so it is called) Numb. 5. 14. is the disturber of
Kingdoms as well as of families. And selflove is set in the head of that black
Army, which is prophesied to make perilous times in the last days, 2 Timothy 3.
1, 2.

Above all, there is an evil spirit which I may call the Beelzebub of this
generation, or the Prince of Devils, that is a spirit of division. This works
in all places almost in all hearts. Division seems to be the great design
against us; That while we act simply, we may be universally overcome. This
spirit is grown so cunning, that it can work distances by a motion, or an
endeavor for union. While many are ready to say and pray, Let us not divide,
though we cannot agree; yet are most ready to divide upon every disagreement.
And while it is almost in every man's mouth, Let us be one in affection, though
we cannot be one in opinion, yet every man almost acts, as if neither one earth
nor one heaven could hold those who hold not one opinion.

These spirits and such as these are the troublers of our peace: and unless
these spirits are changed, or at least chained all flesh is in danger to perish
among us. The chaining of them may make our times peaceable; but the change of
them will make our times glorious. How happy should we be, if a spirit of
humility and meeknes, of charity and brotherly kindness; of truth and
uprightnes, of self-denial and ardent desires of maintaining the unity of the
spirit in the bond of peace, possessed all our hearts?

Right Honorable, if once you had received letters of credit and good
assurance, that evil spirits were foiled, and had received a blow, either in
the east or west, north or south, and that a better spirit were acting in this
Nation, you would have cause to keep such a day of Thanksgiving and praise to
God, as you never kept to this day. Till a conquest be gained over the spirits
of men, our conquests over men will not give us rest. And though I would not
lessen the mercies of God, especially at this time when we come to bless him
for so great a mercy, as we this day commemorate: yet I say, what heart almost
can we have to bless God, or be enlarged in his Praises for subduing bodies,
Towns and Cities, while legions of evil spirits in camp in so many places, and
quarter in so many hearts. A conquest over spirits, is the glory of all our
other conquests.

Therefore (Right Honorable) I say it again, let the stresse of your counsels
and designs be laid against these spirits. The sword may work an unwilling
subjection; God only can work a subjection of the will. Yet two things done by
men, by men (as your Selves are) in Dignity and Authority, will contribute much
toward this subjection. First, justice done, and done impartially, for, and
upon all. Secondly, countenance and encouragement given to all that are good,
and do good. When spirits are overcome upon these terms, I know not who shall
have greater cause to rejoice, they who are subject, or they who have made them
so.

But though this would be matter of great joy, yet this must not be either the
total or the chief matter of our rejoicing. The next words of the Text lead us
to this modification of our joy.

Notwithstanding in this rejoice not, but rather rejoice that your names are
written in Heaven.

The connection tells us, we are very apt to overact outward comforts, and
overjoy our worldly joy. The whole world is too narrow for the heart of man;
Our joys may quickly exceed it, and we be more taken with it, then it is worth.
Christ saw his Disciples in danger of taking in too much of the world. The
creature gets quickly into our hearts, and our hearts may quickly get beyond
the creature. Only God is an object which we cannot overjoy, or stretch our
affections too far toward. It is seldom that we can rejoice at all (we can
never rejoice enough while we are in the flesh) in spiritual mercies, and it
is seldom but we rejoice too much in temporal. The world is so much of kin to
us, and is so like us: worldly comforts suit us so well, and are so near us
that while we deal about them, we need a bridle, not a spur.

It is one of the greatest privileges which we wait for in Heaven, that our
affections may be ever kept in a due temper. There we shall love and rejoice
in nothing but God, or for God. And as we cannot love and rejoice in God too
much, so there we shall not love or rejoice in him too little. But while we
converse with creatures, we are apt to feed too heartily upon them, and to
drink larger draughts of the wine of their consolation then becomes us. The way
to lessen earthly joy, is to stir up heavenly. As when love is divided upon
many objects of the same worth, it cannot run so strongly to any one: so much
more, when it is carried to a more worthy object, will it abate toward those
which are less worthy. The Text is clear for it, teaching us;

That our receipts of temporal and outward mercies, should be but as an
occasion to raise our hearts higher in rejoicing for spiritual and eternal
mercies.

Notwithstanding rejoice not in this, that spirits are subject to you, but
rather rejoice, etc.

All creatures and comforts on earth, should be but as foils to set off the
glory of Heaven. How good is grace and glory, if there be so much good in
nature? It was Christ's art to do thus, when he came to the well, Joh. 4. and
was thirsty, he rises from that water and the thirst he had to it, to tell the
woman of another water, which if she could once drink, she should never thirst.
And Joh. 6. 27. when he saw his followers so hungry after loaves of bread,
which is perishing meat, He took an occasion to exhort them to labor for the
meat that perishes not, but endures to everlasting life. It is safest for us
(as well as our duty) to bestow the strength of our sorrows upon our sins,
and the strength of our joys upon Christ.

There is a double ground or reason, why we should thus in our receipts of
temporal mercies, get our hearts off, or get our hearts above them.

First, spiritual mercies are the best mercies. They are best in their nature,
and they are best in their enjoyment; they are lasting mercies. The joy of the
hypocrite, all his joy is but for a moment: and the worldly joy of the sincere
is but for a moment. That cannot last long whose bottom and foundation cannot
last long; the world passes away, and the fashion of it; therefore the joy
that arises out of the world and the goodly fashions of it, must needs pass
away too. When one of the Ancients stood by Caesar's tomb, who had the honor
(while he lived) of so many victories and triumphs; he cries out, O Caesar,
where is now thy magnificence? where are thy Armies? where are thy Trophies?
where are the Towns and Cities which thou have overcome? They are all past
away. We may say as much of all our victories and deliverances, of beating the
enemy in the field, of beating him out of strong holds; in a few years what
will become of all these things, and of the worldly issues of them? Time will
eat ou^ the remembrance of this glory. Solomon does not so much question, as
chide, ( Prove. 23. 5.) will thou set thine heart upon that which is not? Can a
man be in danger of setting his heart upon that, which has not a being?
Creatures have so little being, that they are said to have no being, and so
have all creature comforts: will thou set thine heart upon that which is not?
How long will the comfort of conquests and victories last, that we should
rejoice only, or much in them?

Secondly, if we confine our joys to these, we are in a double danger. In a
danger, First of growing proud of, and confident upon our victories; nothing
keeps the heart low but joy in the highest things. Joy in low things makes the
heart sinfully) high, and joy in high things makes the heart (graciously low.
That Is the reason why the men of the world boast themselves in their riches,
honors, etc. the reason I say, why they grow proud of these things, is because
they have nothing else to rejoice in.

Secondly by joying much in the creature, we are in danger to surfeit upon the
creature, or to grow wanton with it. When the mind is steeped in our senses,
we can hardly get the taste off again. We follow the world so much, because it
gives us so little: we are uncessant in pursuing earthly contents, because we
still hope for more, and are unsatisfied with what we have. But when the heart
once tastes of spiritual dainties, it finds satisfaction; and being
satisfied, desires to taste them still: fulness and hunger, satisfaction and
appetite being perpetually interchangeable. The taste of heavenly things is so
high and quick, that all besides tastes flat and dreggish. No man (says
Christ) desires new wine, having drunk the old, for he says the old is
better. Earthly comforts will not hold so fair a proportion to heavenly, as new
wine does to old. They differ not in degree only, but in kind. The creature
has always an unsatisfyingnesse in it, and at the last it will have a
bitterness. Prove. 25. 27. To eat much honey is not good, (if a man eat honey
long or often, it will not be honey to him) so for men to search their own
glory is not glory, thus we translate it; but the text is well rendered, and
closer to the Original thus, To multiply to eat honey, or to eat much honey is
not good, but the last of glory is glory. The Saints shall feed to eternity
upon glory, and that will be always glory: but honey, the best of worldly
comforts will be gall, if you feed much upon them. Therefore correct your
appetites after the creature; make your joy in worldly things an occasion and a
step to spiritual; doing so, three effects will flow from such joy.

First, such joys will make us very holy. Joy in worldly things alone, leaves
us as worldly as it finds us: but if we mix it with spiritual, holiness will
mingle with our spirits. The Lord promises to give his people beauty for ashes,
the oil of joy for mourning, the garment of praise for the spirit of
heaviness, (Isa. 61. 3.) here is the Lords joy: we have the effect of this in
the next words: That they may be called, trees of righteousness, the planting of
the Lord, that he may be glorified. If we rejoice in the Lord, we shall rejoice
to the glory of the Lord; Trees of righteousness have their fruit in holiness. It
is a sad thing to see what fruit the joy of most brings forth, intemperance,
drunkenness, sensuality, security, injustice, fruits of unrighteousnes all.

Secondly, Joy thus tempered makes us strong to serve the Lord; joy in the Lord
carries us to the Lord, Neh. 8. 10.) The joy of the Lord is our strength. Joy
in the world weakens and flats our spirits: joy in the Lord, strengthens as
well as purifies, and makes us at once holy and active.

Thirdly, Such joy makes us more then strong, exceeding zealous for the Lord.
After the people in Hezekiahs time had feasted seven days, the story says (2 Chronicles. 30. 23.) The whole assembly took counsel to keep other seven days, and
they kept other seven days with gladness. Here were seven and seven days of
feasting: it seems they loved feasting well; but the effect assures us, they
did more then eat, drink and make merry at their feast. Their joy and gladness,
was not in corn, and wine and good cheer: No, it was joy in the Lord, and in
his goodness; for they presently act like those that had rejoiced in the Lord.
Many in one days feast lose the memory of the Lord, and of their own duty: but
these in fourteendayes feasting forgot neither. The first verse of the next
chapt. is clear for it; Now when all this was finished, (a feast of fourteen
days continuance) what did they then? some might think them furnished for any
kind of wickedness: That they had eat and drunk out, not only their graces, but
their wits, that now they were fit only to throw the house out at the windows
(as we say) no, they threw sin out at the windows, so says the story, for when
all this was finished, all Israel that were present, went out to the Cities of
Judah, and brake the images in pieces, and cut down the groves, and threw down
the high places and the altars out of all Judah and Benjamin, in Ephraim also
and Manasseh, until they had utterly destroyed them all, etc. They made a
perfect work of casting out whatsoever was displeasing unto God. Had they only
taken pleasure in creatures, they had never done what was so pleasing unto God.
Every thing we rejoice most in, we are most zealous for. We should rejoice more
in the God of our mercies, then in the mercies of God; and while we do so, we
shall also rejoice more in our duties, then in our mercies.

We are this day called to rejoice in an outward mercy, the reducing of a
strong City. In this victory spirits are made subject: in overco^ming evil men,
we overcome evil spirits. I delight not to be a censurer at any time, least of
all at this; yet we know what a strain, what a generation of men these were. If
evil spirits have been made subject in any part of the Kingdom, some were in
this. That place is dispossessed of many untoward spirits who possessed it
long, and cast much of it into the fire: These are now cast out by sword and
fire; But chiefly by those better weapons of prayer and fasting. Christ said of
the Pharisees, You are of your father the Devil, (Joh. 8. 44.) And Polycarp in
the Church story, called Marcion, the firstborne of the Devil. All ungodly men
are of the same line and race. There is very little difference between the
Devil and a wicked man, but flesh and bones; Hence in common speech we call
very wicked men Devils incarnate; I may say (without breach of charity) Devils
incarnate are made subject at this day, and their subjection is the subject of
this days rejoicing.

Notwithstanding in this rejoice not, that these spirits are subject to you;
rejoice not much in this. Christ ( Mat. 7. 23.) speaks of some who had the
power and privilege, to make Devils in kind subject to them, many (says he)
shall come to me in that day, and say, Lord, Lord, we have prophesied in thy
name, and in thy name we have cast out Devils, and we have done many wonderful
works; yet these wonderworkers had little cause to rejoice. It is possible for
a man not only to subdue the evil spirits of men, but to subdue evil spirits
themselves, (take them in their natural notion) and yet to have no cause of
rejoicing; I am sure they had not; because while they had power over Devils,
themselves were under the power of the Devil. The Devils were subject to them,
yet they were the Devils servants. Christ discards them under that relation,
ver. 24. Depart from me, ye that work iniquity; and whose work is that? I know
none who put men to that employment, or drudgery rather, but only Satan, his
service is the work of iniquity; some may cast out Devils who take in the work
of the Devil. Hence, they who have cast out Devils, may be cast to the Devil.
Had we this power to cast out Devils in kind, our joy would quickly overjoy
it, unless we have learned to out-joy it. To further which design upon these
worldly joys, I would speak a few words.

First, to those who have more to rejoice in then victories over men and
cities. Secondly, to those who, upon a true account, have no more to rejoice in.

To the former my motion is. Make the mercies of this day an occasion to act
your joy upon eternal mercies. It is possible for a godly man to suffer the
stream of his joy to run more then is meet in a worldly channel. The best have
reason enough to be jealous over their own hearts.

You are called to rejoice, and I am not a forbidder, I would be a helper of
your joy. Joy is comely, and the garments of praise in fashion this day.
Therefore say to your souls, Let us rejoice, and let all that is within us
bless the holy name of God for the great things he has done for us; when you
have done this, speak again to your souls in the language of the text; O our
souls, rejoice in better things then these, Let us rejoice that our names are
written in Heaven. Drink not too large draughts of those worldly comforts, go
to that which is better and richer wine, take your fill in the consolations of
God.

To quicken this, I might show you many most desirable objects. I will only
hint a few: rejoice that Jesus Christ has made a perfect conquest for you over
spiritual enemies, rejoice that Christ has spoiled principalities and powers,
and dragged the Devil at his chariot of triumph, when he ascended up to heaven:
rejoice that Christ has overcome death and subdued the grave: rejoice that
Christ died to free you from death, and has brought life and immortality to
light through the Gospel: rejoice that Christ has strengthened you to withstand
temptations, and given you power to conquer passion: rejoice that Christ by
accomplishing the work of redemption, has purchased the pardon of sin, peace
with God, and an inheritance which sadeth not away; rejoice that he has
provided a City for you, which no Armies shall lay siege unto, or shoot an
arrow against: rejoice that he has provided an estate for you that shall never
be spent, and a Kingdom which shall never be shaken. When you hear men are made
subject to men, rejoice that Christ has made you subject to himself: when you
hear strong holds are taken, rejoice that the strong holds of sin are battered
down and taken: that there is not an evil imagination in you, but if it stir,
you have a weapon in readiness, to revenge that disobedience. When you hear how
they who have fought against Christ are brought low, rejoice that you are not
fighting against Christ, that you are not trampling his precious blood under
your feet, that you delight not in that, by which the holy spirit is grieved.
Let loose your affections upon these better, higher and more noble objects:
rejoice here as much as you can. It is altogether below the state of a Saint to
rejoice only in things that are below.

Secondly, I would offer a word to those who have none of these mercies to
rejoice in, who have nothing but a world to rejoice in. Poor souls! what do you
rejoicing? what do you keeping days of thanksgiving for victories obtained
against men and Cities? can you rejoice on these terms? can you rejoice in
hopes of peace upon earth, when war is proclaimed against you in Heaven? Can
you rejoice that Cities are subdued, when your hearts are unsubdued? Can you
give thanks this day that the City of Chester is taken in, after five or six
Months siege, when as your own hearts have stood out seven and seven years
siege against the continual batteries of the Word? Can you rejoice that strong
holds are demolished, when you fortify and garrison strong holds with legions of
lusts, with covetousnes, pride, self-love, etc. When you victual them, and lay
in provision, to make them hold out as long as you live against Jesus Christ,
Can you rejoice? Rather go home and weep over these mercies; weep over
victories and successes. Let your laughter be turned into mourning, and your
song of joy into a lamentation. Leave joy to others. Will you keep a day of
rejoicing, who are likely to mourn and weep for ever? rest not in restless
things, live not in an estate wherein you are unfit to die. All the world is not
worth the rejoicing in, unless ye have somewhat else to rejoice in. God forbid
(says the Apostle, Gal 6. 14.) That I should rejoice in any thing, save in the
cross of our Lord Jesus Christ. If you have not Christ to rejoice in, God
forbids all your other joys: and your sorrows will be the more bitter to you
hereafter, by how much your joys have been now more sweet. Weep, (if any such
now offer at this duty) weep proud hearts, covetous hearts, envious spirits,
etc. weep till you bring Christ the spoil of your lusts, till you show him the
ruins of your corruptions: weep till you bring him broken hearts, till you
bring him wills stooping to his word, and spirits made subject to his spirit:
weep till you find such matter of joy as the text speaks of, an evidence that
your names are written in heaven.

But rather rejoice that your names are written in Heaven.
The names of the Saints are written in Heaven.
If so, Then, first they are safe, their estate is settled, their names are
taken into the list of blessedness.

2. They are honorable. A man under disgrace has his name written in the
dust: but to have a name enrolled in Heaven, is an expression of the highest
honor.

3. They shall be had in everlasting remembrance, nothing shall be able to
obliterate or raze out a name that is written in Heaven. Eusebius reports of
Herod, that he burnt all the genealogies of the Jews, that himself might be
mistaken for a Jew. But no Herod, with his power and pride, shall ever burn or
deface the roll of election: Names written in that shall not be blotted out:
The land of forgetfullnes lies all on this side heaven.

Is not this a ground of great joy, and strong consolation to the Saints?
Possibly their names are blotted here upon the earth, but there is no blot upon
them in heaven. God does not delight to take notice of the failings and
miscarriages of his servants, much less will he deface their names, when they
miscarry. In Scripture, some miscarriages of the Saints are recorded (which in
themselves are blots) but the end why they are recorded is for our warning, not
for their shame: which yet is the intendment of most on earth, who
industriously write books of the Saints ^ rata's, whether in opinion or in
practice. It it very dangerous to blot names which are written in heaven.
Christ would not have any sin flattered in any man, but, Christ would not have
all sins discovered in all men; therefore he has provided a covering, not that
which is the ordinary covering, self-flattery, or the flattery of others. The
covering he has provided is, charity, charity covers a multitude of sins, (1
Pet. 4. 8.) Surely their charity is very narrow, or if it be not narrow, I
wonder what use they put it to, who will hardly cover one infirmity of an
offending brother. Yea, some are so greedy after offenses, that though they are
covered, yet they uncover them, and are so far from casting a garment over what
appears, that they pull off the very seals of secrecy to make all appear.

It does not become men to do so, much less Saints. But as to suffer these
blots is the patience of the Saints on earth, so it is their joy to hear that
there are no blots upon their names in heaven. Be of good comfortt, though men
blot, God will not. For as he speaks to Moses; desiring not a blot upon his
name, but the blotting out of his name, Exodus 32. 32. Blot me, I pray thee, out
of thy book which thou have written. Blot thee, Moses, says God? No, I will
never blot thee, I will put no blots upon such names as thine; much less blot
such names out. There was a failing in that speech of Moses, and some interpret
that desire of his to be his blot: yet God does not put it as a blot upon
Moses, but says, Whosoever has sinned against me, him will I blot out of my
book. God is so far from desiring to blot the names of his people, that he will
not blot them, though they themselves should desire it. He will neither blot
them out of his book; nor blot them in his book; He will do neither, he keeps
the names of his Saints fair written for ever.

Then (which is the last point) It is matter of great joy to have our names
written in Heaven. This is a privilege worth the having, To be in Gods books.
Here Is honor indeed, To be of the Church of the firstborn, whose names are
written in Heaven, Heb. 12. 23. They who have their names written highest in
the earth, should be most desirous to have their names written thus high. They
that are honorable and great, they that are men of name in the world, as the
giants are entitled, ( Genesis 6. 4. at that time there were men of name, men of
renown) such should be most ambitious of being men of name above.

My Lords, your names are written very high here below. And it is my prayer
that your names may be written higher, that even your earthly honors and
dignities may increase, and that your Fame may be as an ointment poured out,
perfuming not only this Kingdom, but the world, with your just and heroical
actions. Yet let it not suffice You (such ambition is a virtue) I say let it
not satisfy You, who have so great a name upon the earth, to have a name upon
the earth; I would not have it content the meanest man upon earth, much less
should it content your Lordships who have Great estates, Great dignities, Great
titles, Great families, Great Ancestors, Great spirits, to have names narrowed
up to this earth, this little molehill of earth. It is a duty for the greatest
persons, (if God call them to it) to be contented with a little of the earth:
but it is a sin for the meanest person to be content with all the earth.

Luther spoke himself a Protestant indeed, while he protested, I will never be
satisfied with the creature. The great world is not big enough for the epitome
of it, The little world.

My Lords, there are not very many names (if we speak comparatively) written in
heaven at all; the roll is not large which contains those inscriptions. And the
Scripture speaks of the Noble and Honorable (which it does but of one sort of
men more) with a diminution, (1 Cor. 1. 26.) Not many wise men after the flesh,
not many mighty, not many noble are called. There are not very many in all
called, and of those there are not many mighty, nor many noble; This should not
be a discouragement, but a spur to your Honors. Do not think that this
Scripture necessitates any of You to be left out: many will not be called,
though all your Lordships be. There are Nobles enough in the world, in whom this
text will be verified and made good, though it be not in any of your Honorable
number. Let it fill all your hearts with holy jealousies concerning your
selves, not with despondencies, much less despairs concerning any of your
selves.

When Christ said to his twelve Disciples, One of you shall betray me, it put
them all upon this suspicion, who it should be, and one said, Master, is it I?
another, Master, is it I? When the Holy Ghost in this Scripture says, Not many
noble are called, it should put all that are Noble upon this Inquisition, Lord,
am I called? Lord, am I? Is my name written in Heaven? is mine?

It may be asked: but with what spectacles shall we read at such a distance?
How shall we discern whether our names are written in heaven or no?

I intend not to enter upon a discourse of signs and tokens; but as the
Apostle answers them, ( Romans 10. 6.) who were making Quaeries about Christ, Say
not in thine heart, Who shall ascend up to heaven? they made great
difficulties, how to get near Christ, how to know him: say not in thine heart
(says he) have not these reasonings, Who shall ascend up to heaven? With what
ladders shall we scale the clouds? or with what wings shall we soar up thither?
Trouble not thy self (says the Apostle) with these thoughts, thou shall not be
put to so long a journey, for the word is nigh thee, even in thy mouth, and in
thy heart the word of faith which we preach. I say likewise to these Quaerists,
Say not in your hearts, who shall ascend up to heaven to see, whether his name
be written there, or how shall we send a messenger thither to search the
records? You may save that journey, the word is near you, the word is before
you, even the word of faith and of obedience which we preach.

If the name of God be written in your hearts, your names are written in Heaven.

If you in your actions daily write out a copy of this book, assure your selves
the hand of God has written you in his book. The lives of the Saints should be
a continued copying out of the book of God. He that writes out the book of God
in his life, may rest assured his name is written in the book of life.

FINIS.

