THE NATURE, SOLEMNITY, GROUNDS, PROPERTY, AND BENEFITS, Of a Sacred Covenant.
TOGETHER WITH The duties of those who enter into such a COVENANT. Delivered in
a Sermon at Westminster, at that public Convention, (ordered by the
Honorable House of Commons) for the taking of the Covenant, by all such, of
all degrees, as willingly presented themselves, upon Friday, October. 6. 1643. By
JOSEPH CARYL, Preacher to the Honorable Society of Lincolnes-Inne.

Psalm. 2. 2, 3 4. The Kings of the earth set themselves, and the Rulers take
counsel together against the Lord and against his anointed, saying;

Let us break their bands asunder, and cast away their coards from us.

He that sits in the Heavens shall laugh, the Lord shall have them in
derision.

LONDON, Printed by E. G. for John Rothwell, and Giles Calvert, and are to be
sold at the Sun in Paul's Churchyard. 1643.

Die Sabbathi, 7 October. 1643.
IT is this day Ordered by the Commons house of Parliament, that Mr. Caryl be
desired to print his Sermon which he preached on Friday last at St. Margarets
Church at Westminster, upon the taking of the Covenant: And that Master Brown
do return him thanks from this House for his great pains therein. And
further ordered, that none do reprint his Sermon without his consent.

Hen. Elsynge, Cler. Parl. D. Com.

I Appoint John Rothwell and Giles Calvert to print my Sermon, October. 12. 1643.

JOSEPH CARYL.

ERRATA.
PAge 1. l. 1. for in, read is, p. 29. l. 33. for glosses, r. glossers, p, 36,
l. 32. dele or.

TO ALL THOSE WHO LOVE THE LORD JESUS CHRIST IN SINCERITY, AND Sincerely
associated themselves in the bond of this holy COVENANT when this Sermon was
preached; THE AUTHOR, Their unworthy, yet willing servant, in this or any other
work of the Lord, Humbly presents this Sermon Printed:
Heartily beseeching God, our God, the great, the mighty, and the terrible GOD,
who keeps Covenant for ever, TO Strengthen us all, in performing all the
duties, which we have promised in this Covenant.

TO Fill us and these Kingdoms, with all the blessings, which this Covenant
promises, To the glory of his own most holy name, the advancement of the
Gospel, in Peace and Truth, as the gracious return of our present labors,
and prayers, and the portion of our posterity; that the children which are yet
unborne may bless us, and bless God for us.

A SERMON preached at the late Solemn Assembly, for the taking of the
COVENANT, upon Friday the sixth of this instant October. 1643.
NEHEM. chapter 9. v. 38. And because of all this we make a sure Covenant, and
write it, and our Princes, our Levites, and our Priests seal unto it.
THe general subject of this verse in the special business of this day. A
solemn engagement to the Lord, and among our selves, in a sure Covenant.
Wherein we may consider these five things.

First, the nature of a Covenant; from the whole.

Secondly, the grounds of a Covenant, from those words, Because of all this.

Thirdly, the property of a Covenant, in that Epithete, Sure, we make a sure
Covenant.

Fourthly, the parties entering into, and engaging themselves in a Covenant,
expressed by their several degrees and Functions. Princes, Levites, Priests. And
were these all? All whom this Verse specifies, and enough to bring in all the
rest. Where the Governors and the Teachers go before in an holy example, what
honest heart will not follow? And the next Chapter shows us, all who were
honest-hearted, following this holy example, v. 28. And the rest of the people,
the Priests, the Levites, the Porters, the Singers, the Nethinims, and all they
that had separated themselves from the people of the Lands unto the Law of God
their Wives their sons, and their daughters, every one having knowledge and
having understanding. V. 29. They clave unto their brethren their Nobles, and
entered into, etc.

Fifthly, The outward acts by which they testified their inward sincere consent,
and engaged themselves to continue faithful in that Covenant: First, writing
it. Secondly, sealing to it. Thirdly, (in the tenth Chapter, Verse 29.) They
entered into a curse. Fourthly, into an Oath, to walk in Gods Law, which was
given by Moses the servant of God, and to observe to do all the Commandments
of the Lord their God with the Statutes and Judgments. And that they would not
give their daughters to the people of the Land, etc. With diverse other articles
of that Covenant, tending both to their Ecclesiastical and Civil reformation.

I begin with the first point, the nature of a Covenant. Concerning which, we
may receive some light from the Notation of the original words; 1. For a
Covenant. 2. For the making of a Covenant. The Hebrew Berith (...) Elegit, quia
eliguntur personae inter quas and res ac conditiones propter quas foedus
t^^tur. Buxtorf,
(a Covenant) comes from Barah, which signifies two things: First, to choose
exactly, and judiciously. Secondly, to eat moderately or sparingly. And both
these significations of the root Barah have an influence upon this derivative
Berith, a Covenant; The former of these intimating, if not enforcing, that a
Covenant is a work of sad and serious deliberation, for such are elective
acts. Election is or ought to be made, upon the rational turn of judgment,
not upon a catch of fancy, or the hurry of our passions.

Now in a Covenant there is a double work of election: First, an election of
the persons, between whom. Secondly, an election of the conditions or terms
upon which the Covenant is entered. As Gods Vovenant People are his chosen
people, so must ours. Some persons will not enter into covenant, though
invited; and others, though they offer themselves, are not to be admitted. They
who are not fit to build with us, are not fit to swear with us. Some offered
their help to the Jews in the repair of the Temple, (Ezr. 4. 2.) Let us
build with you, for we seek your God. But this tender of their service was
refused, Verse. 3. Ye have nothing to do with us, to build an house unto our
God: but we our selves together will build, etc. What should we do with their
hands in the work, whose hearts, we know, are not in the work? The intendment
of such in-joyning, must be either to build their Hay and Stubble with our Gold
and Silver, and precious Stones, (1 Cor. 3. 12.) or else to pull down by
night, what they build by day, and secretly to undermine that Noble Fabric,
which seemingly they endeavored to set up. We find in this book of Nehemiah,
that the persons combining in that Covenant were choice persons. The Text of
the tenth Chapter sets two marks of distinction upon them. Verse. 28. First,
all they that separated themselves from the people of the Lands, unto the Law
of God. Secondly, all having knowledge, and having understanding. Here are two
qualifications, whereof one is spiritual, and the other is natural. The
plain English of both may be this. That Fools and Malignants, such as (in
some measure) know not the cause, and such as have no love at all to the cause
should be outcasts from thu Covenant. Such saplesse and rotten stuff will but
weaken, if not corrupt this sacred band.

The Tenor of the covenant now tendered, speaks thus respecting the persons.
We Noblemen, Barons, Knights, Gentlemen, Citizens, Burgesses, Ministers of the
Gospel, and Commons, of all sorts, in the Kingdom of England, Scotland, and
Ireland etc. And does not this indistinctly admit all, and all, of all sorts? I
answer, No. For the words following in the Preface show expressly, that only
they are called to it, who are of one reformed Religion; which shuts out all
Papists, till they return. And the Articles pass them through a finer Sieve,
admitting only such as promise, yea and swear that through the grace of God,
they will sincerely, really, and constantly endeavor the preservation of the
reformed religion, against the common enemy in the one Kingdom, the
reformation and extirpation of what is amiss in the other two; as also in
their own persons, families and relations. They who do thus are choice
persons indeed, and they who swear to do thus are (in charity and justice) to
be reputed so, till their own acts and omissions falsify their oaths. Thus
our Covenant makes an equivalent, though not a formal or nominall election of
the persons.

Secondly, there must be a choice of conditions in a Covenant; As the persons
obliged, so the matter of the obligation must be distinct. This is so eminent
in the Covenant offered, that I may spare my pains in the clearing of it;
every man's pains in reading of it, cannot but satisfy him that there are six
National conditions about which we make solemn oath, and one personal, about
which we make a most solemn profession and declaration before God and the
world. And all these are choice conditions: such as may well be held forth to
be (as indeed they are) the results and issues of many prayers, and serious
consultations, in both the Kingdoms of England and Scotland. Conditions they
are, in which Holiness and Wisdom, Piety and Policy, Zeal for God in
purging his Church, and Care for man in settling the Commonwealth, appear to
have had (in a due subordination) their equal hand and share.

Thus much of a Covenant from the force of the word in the first sense, leading
us to the choice both of persons and conditions.

Secondly, the root signifies to eat moderately, or so much as breaks our Fast.
And this refers also to the nature of a Covenant, which is to draw men into a
friendly and holy communion, and converse one with another. David describes a
familiar friend, in whom he trusted, to be one, That did eat of his bread,
Psalm. 41. 9. And the Apostle Paul, when he would have a scandalous brother
denied all fellowship in Church Covenant, he charges it thus, With such a one,
no not to eat, 1 Cor. 5. 11. Hence it was a custom upon the making up of
Covenants, for the parties covenanting soberly to feast together; when Isaac
and Abimilech swear one to another, and made a Covenant: The sacred Story tells
us, that Isaac made them a feast, and they did eat and drink, Genesis 26. 29, 30.
A Covenant is a binder of affection, to assure it, but it is a loosner of
affection, to express it. And their hearts are most free to one another, which
are most bound to one another. How unbecomming is it that they who swear
together, should be so strange as scarce to speak together? That which unites,
ought also to multiply our affections.

Further, the word hints, so to converse together as not to sin together, for
it signifies, Moderation in eating. As if it would teach us, That at a
Covenant-Feast, or when Covenanters feast, they should have more grace then
meat at their Tables: or if (through the blessing of God) their meat be much,
their temperance should be more. The Covenant yields us much business, and
calls to action; Excess soyles our gifts and damps our spirits, fitting us for
sleep, not for work. In and by this Covenant we (who were almost carried into
spiritual and corporal slavery) are called to strive for the mastery. Let us
therefore (as this word and the Apostles rule instruct us) Be temperate in all
things, 1 Cor. 9. 25. Intemperate excessive eaters will be but moderate
workers, especially in Covenant work. A little will satisfy their
Consciences, who are given up to satisfy their carnal appetites. And he who
makes his belly his God, will not make much of the glory of God.

So much concerning the nature of a Covenant from the original word, for a
Covenant, signifying both to choose and to eat. We may take in some further
light to discover the things from the orginall word, which we translate (make)
Let us make a Covenant.

That word signifies properly to cut, to strike, or to slay. (...)
The reason hereof is given, because at the making of solemn Covenants, beasts
were killed and divided asunder, and the Covenant-makers went between the
parts. When God made that first grand Covenant with Abraham, he said unto him,
Take an heifer of three years old, and a she goat of three years old, etc. And
he took unto him all these, and divided them in the midst, and laid those
pieces one against another, etc. Genesis 15. 9, 10. At the seventeenth verse,
Behold a smoking furnace and a burning lamp (which latter was the token of
Gods presence for the deliverance of his people) passed between those pieces.
In the 34. of Jeremy, verse. 18. we have the like ceremony in making a Covenant,
They cut the calfe in twain, and passed between the parts thereof. Upon this
usage the phrase is grounded of cutting or striking a Covenant, Psalm. 50. 5.
Psalm. 89. 3. which Ceremony had this signification in it, That when they passed
between those divided parts of the slain beast, the action spoke this curse
or imprecation, Foedus facientes primo furabant, postea transibant inter parts
pecudis; quasi dicerent, discindatur, dividantur ejus membra, fiat sicut pocus
istud, qui furamentam violaverit.
Let him be cut asunder, let his members be divided, let him be made as this
beast, who violates the Oath of this Covenant.

From these observations about the words, we may be directed about the nature
of the thing: and thence collect this description of a Covenant. A Covenant is
a solemn compact or agreement between two chosen parties or more, whereby
with mutual, free, and full consent they bind themselves upon select
conditions, tending to the glory of God and their common good.

A Covenant strictly considered is more then a promise, and less than a Oath;
unless an Oath be joined with it, as was with that in the Text, and is with
this we have now before us. A Covenant differs from a promise gradually and in
the formalities of it, not naturally or in the substance of it. God made
promises to Abraham; Genesis 12. and Genesis 13. but he made no Covenant with him
till Chap. 15. verse. 18. In that day the Lord made a Covenant with Abraham. And
the work of the Lord in that day with Abraham had not only truth and mercy in
it, but state and majesty in it. A Covenant day is a solemn day. As the
collection of many Stars makes a Constellation so the collection of many
promises makes a Covenant. Or as in the first of Genesis, verse. 10. The
gathering together of the waters, was by the Lord called Seas. So we may call
the gathering together of promises or conditions a Covenant. The Lord does (as
it were r'ally all the promises of mercy made to us, which lie scattered up and
down through the whole volume of the Scriptures, and puts them together into a
Covenant: And we do (as it were) r'ally all the promises of duty which we owe
unto God and to one another, and put them together in a Covenant. Such a bundle
of duty is tied up in this present Covenant; what duty is there which we owe to
God, to his Churches, or these Commonwealths whereof we make not promise
either expressly or by consequence in the compass of this Covenant? And how
great an obligation to duty does this contain, wherein there is an obligation
to every duty?

Seeing then this Covenant being taken carries in it so great an obligation, it
calls for great preparation before we take it. A sleightnesse of spirit in
taking this Covenant, must needs cause a sleightnesse of spirit in keeping it.
All solemn duties ought to have solemn preparations, and this I think as
solemn, as any. A Christian ought to set his heart (as far as he can through
the strength of Christ) into a praying frame, before he kneels down to prayer.
And we ought to set our hearts in a promising frame, before we stand up to make
such mighty promises. Take heed how ye hear, is our Saviors admonition in the
Gospel; Surely then we had need take heed how we swear. Let a man examine
himself (says the Apostle Paul) and so let him eat of that bread and drink
of that cup; let him come examined to the Sacrament: so I may say, Let a man
examine himself before he lift up his hand or write down his name; let him
come examined to the Covenant.

I shall briefly propose three heads of preparatory examination respecting our
entrance into this Covenant:

First, examine your hearts and your lives, whether or no you are not
preingaged in any Covenant contrary to the tenor and conditions of this
Covenant. If any such upon enquiry be found, be sure you void it, before you
engage your selves in this; A super-institution in this kind is very
dangerous. Every man must look to it, that he takes this Covenant (sede
vacant, or rather cord vacant) with a heart emptied of all Covenants which
are inconsistent with this. For a man to covenant with Christ and his people
for Reformation, etc. while he has either taken a Covenant with others, or
made a Covenant in his own breast against it, is desperate wickedness. Or if
upon a selfe-search you find your selves clear of any such engagements, yet
search further. Every man by nature is a Covenanter with Hell, and with every
sin he is at Agreement: be sure you revoke and cancel that Covenant before
you subscribe this. If I regard iniquity in my heart, the Lord will not hear
me praying, that is, he will not regard my prayers (says David) Psalm. 66. 18.
And if we regard iniquity in our hearts, the Lord will not hear us
covenanting, that is, he will not regard our Covenant. Woe be unto those who
make this league with God and his people, while they resolve to continue their
league with sin: which is (upon the matter) a league with Satan. God and Satan
will never meet in one Covenant. For what communion has light with darkness?
and what concord has Christ with Belial?

Secondly, before you enter into this Covenant with God, consider of, and
repent for this special sin, your former breaches and failings in Gods
Covenant. We who were sometimes a far off, Aliens from the Commonwealth of
Israel, and strangers from the Covenant of promise, are made nigh by the blood
of Jesus, even so nigh as to be in Covenant with God. Some who pretend to this
privilege, will be found such as have counted the blood of the Covenant to be
an unholy thing, Heb. 10. 29. And where is the man that walks so holily in
this Covenant as becoms him, and as it requires? Labor therefore to have those
breaches healed by a fresh sprinkling of the blood of Christ upon your
consciences, before you enter this Covenant: If you put this new piece to an
old garment, the rent will be made worse: If you put this new wine into old
bottles, the bottles will break, and all your expected comforts will run out
and be lost. If you should not feel and search your own hearts, without doubt
the Lord will, And if you be found as deceivers, you will bring a curse upon
your selves, and not a blessing (as Jacob spoke in another case, Genesis 27. 12.)
This is a Covenant of amity with God: reconciliation must go before
friendship, you can never make friendship till you have made peace, nor settle
love where hostility is unremoved.

Thirdly, enquire diligently at your own hearts, whether they come up indeed
to the terms of this Covenant. You must bid high for the honor of a
Covenanter, for a part in this privilege. Which of you (says our Lord Christ
to his hearers, Luke 14. 28. intending to build a Tower, sits not down
first, and counts the cost, whether he have sufficient to finish it? lest
happily after he has laid the foundation, and is not able to finish it, all that
behold it, begin to mock him, saying, This man began to build, and was not
able to finish. We are met this day to lay the foundation of one Tower, and to
pull up the foundation of another; we are pulling up the foundation of Babels
Tower, and we are laying a foundation for Sions Tower. We have seen some who
have heretofore done as much, but they have done no more, when they had laid a
foundation for those noble works in taking a solemn Oath and Covenant, they
have never moved a hand after either to build or to pull down, unless it were
quite cross to their own engagements, for the pulling down of Sions Tower,
and the building of Babylone.

And what was the reason of this stand, or contrary motion? This surely was
one, they did not gage their own hearts before hand, neither did they sit down
to count the cost of such an undertaking. And therefore when they perceived the
charge to arise so high, they neither could finish, nor would they endeavor
it, but left the work before it looked above the ground; and are justly become
a mock, and a scorn, and a reproach in Israel, These they are the men that
began (in a solemn Covenant) to build, but could not finish; They had not
stock enough either of true honor or honesty (though their stock of parts
and opportunities was sufficient) to finish this work.

Let us therefore sit down seriously and count the cost; yea, and consider
whether we be willing to be at the cost. To lead you on in this, my humble
advice is, That you would catechize your hearts upon the Articles of this
Covenant. Put the question to your hearts, and let every one say thus unto
himself:

Am I indeed resolved sincerely, really and constantly, through the grace of
God, in my place and calling, to endeavor the preservation of the reformed
Religion in the Church of Scotland? etc. The reformation of Religion in the
Kingdoms of England and Ireland? etc.

Am I indeed resolved in like manner, without respect of persons, to endeavor
the extirpation of Popery, Prelacy? etc.

Am I indeed resolved never to be withdrawn or divided by whatsover terror or
persuasion from this blessed union and conjunction, whether to make defection
to the contrary part, or to give my self to a detestable indifferency or
neutrality, in this cause of God? etc.

Am I indeed resolved to humble my self for my own sins and the sins of the
Kingdom? etc. to amend my self and all in my power, and to go before others
in the example of a real reformation? etc.

According to these hints, propose the question upon every clause of this
Covenant. And then consider what the cost of performing all these may amount
to, and whether you are willing to go to that cost.

But it may be, some will say, What is this cost? I answer, The express letter
of the Covenant tells you of one cost which you must be constantly at, and that
is sincere, real, and constant endeavor. Pains is a price, I am sure real
pains is. The Heathens said, That their gods sold them all good things for
labor. The good things of this Covenant are sold at that rate; yea, this is
the price which the true God puts upon those things which he freely gives. To
consent to this Covenant, to wish well to this Covenant, to speak well of this
Covenant, come not up to the price; you must do these and you must do more,
you must be doing, so the promise of every man for himself runs, I will
through the grace of God endeavor. Yet every endeavor is not current money,
payable, as the price of this Covenant, there must be a threefold stamp upon
it, unless it bear the image and superscription of sincerity, reality, and
constancy, it will not be accepted. For so the promise runs, I will sincerely,
really, and constantly endeavor.

Neither yet is this all, such endeavors are vertually money, but this
covenant calls also for money formally as the price of it; He that really
endeavors after such ends, as here are proposed, must not only be at the cost
of his pains, but also at the cost of his purse for the attainement of them.
He must open his hand to give and to lend, as well as to work and labor;
unless a man be free of his Purse, as well as of his pains, he bids not up to
the demands of this Covenant, nor pays up to his own promise, when he entered
it. Can that man be said really to endeavor the maintenance of a cause, while
he lets it starve? or to strengthen it, whiles he keeps the sinews of it
close shut up? Would he have the Chariot move swiftly who only draws, but
will not Oil the Wheels? Know then, and consider it, that the cost you must
be at, is both in your labors, and in your estates. The engagement runs to
both these.

And to more then both these, This Covenant engages us, not only to do, but
to suffer; not only to endeavor, but to endure. Such is the tenor of the
sixth Article, where every man promises for himself; That he will not suffer
himself to be withdrawn from this blessed union, by any terrors. If not by
any terror, then not by losses, imprisonments, torments, no nor by death, that
King of Terror. You see then that the price of this Covenant, may be the price
of blood, of liberty and of life. Sit down and consider, are you willing to be
at this cost to build the Tower? Through the goodness of God in ordering these
great affairs, you may never come actually to pay down so much: happily, not
half so much; but except you resolve (if called and put to it by the real
exigencies of this cause) to pay down the utmost Farthing, your Spirits are
too narrow, and your hearts too low for the honor and tenor of this Covenant.

If any shall say these demands are very high, and the charge very great; but
is a part in this Covenant worth it? will it quit cost to be at so great a
charge? wise men love to see and have somewhat for their money; and when they
see they will not stick at any cost, so the considerations be valuable.

For the answering and clearing of this I shall pass to the second point,
which holds forth the grounds of a Covenant, from those words of the text, And
because of all this. If any one shall be troubled at the All this, in the
price, I doubt not but the All this in the grounds will satisfy him. Because
of All this we make a sure Covenant. Here observe.

First, A Covenant must be grounded on reason; We must show cause why. God
often descends, but man is bound to give a reason of what he does. Some of Gods
actions are above reason, but none without reason. All our actions ought to be
level with reason, and this with common reason, for it is a common act, That
which men of all capacities are called to do, should lie in the reach of every
man's capacity. Observe

Secondly, A Covenant must be grounded on weighty reason; There must be much
light in the reason (as was showed before) but no lightness. Because of all
this, says the Text, there were many things in it, and much weight in every
one of them.

And the reasons in their proportion, must at least be as weighty as the
conditions. Weighty conditions will never be balanced with light reasons. If a
man ask a thousand pounds for a Jewel, he is bound to demonstrate that his
Jewel is intrinsecally worth so much, else no wise man will come up to his
demands. So when great things are demanded to be paid down by all who take part
in this Covenant, we are obliged to demonstrate and hold forth an equivalence
of worth in the grounds and nature of it. Hence Observe

Thirdly, That the reasons of a Covenant must be express, Because of all this.
This, is demonstrative. Here Is the matter laid before you, consider of it,
examine it thoroughly. This is fair dealing, when a man sees why he
undertakes, and what he may expect, before he is engaged. And so may say,
because of this, and this, because of all this, I have entered into Covenant.

But what were the particulars that made up the gross sum of all this? I
answer, those particulars lie scattered throughout the Chapter, the attentive
Reader will easily find them out; I shall in brief reduce them unto two heads.

First, the defection and corruptions that were crept in, or openly brought in
among them.

Secondly, the afflictions, troubles, and judgments that either were already
fallen, or were feared would further fall upon them.

The former of these causes is laid down in the 34. and 35. verses of this
Chapter. Neither have our Kings, our Princes, our Priests, nor our fathers kept
thy Law, nor hearkened to thy Commandments, and thy Testimonies, wherewith thou
did testify against them. For they have not served thee in their Kingdom,
and in thy great goodness, etc.

The latter of these reasons is contained in the 36 and 37 verses. Behold we
are servants this day; and for the Land which thou gave unto our fathers, to
eat the fruit thereof, and the good thereof, behold we are servants in it,
etc. The close of all is, We are in great distress. From this narratiue of the
grounds, the making of a Covenant is inferred as a conclusion, in the immediate
subsequent words of the Text, Because of all this. As if he had said, Because
we are a people who have so departed from the Laws and Statutes of our God,
and are so corrupted both in worship and in practice; Because we are a people
so oppressed in our estates, and liberties, and so distressed by judgments and
afflictions: Therefore, Because of all this we make a sure Covenant.

And if we peruse the records of holy Scripture, we shall find, that either
both these grounds conjoined, or one of them, are expressed as the reasons at any
time inducing the people of God, to enter into the Bond of a Covenant. This is
evident in Asa's Covenant, 2 Chro. 15. 12, 13. In Hezekiahs, 2 Chronicles. 29. 10.
In Josias, 2 Chro. 34. 30, 31. In Ezra's, c. 10. v. 3. of that Book. To all
which I refer the reader for satisfaction. And from all consenting with this
in the Text, I Observe:

That when a people are corrupted or declined in doctrine, worship, and
manners; when they are distressed in their liberties, livelihoods, or lives;
Then, and at such a time they have warrantable and sufficient Grounds to make
and engage themselves (as their last and highest resort for redress) in the
bonds of a sacred solemn Covenant.

What engagement can be upon us, which these reasons do not reach and answer?
The liberty of our persons and of our estates is worth much, but the liberty
of the Gospel, the purity of Doctrine and Ordinances, are worth much more.
Peace is a precious Jewel, but who can value truth? The wise Merchant will
sell all that he has with joy to buy this, and blesses God for the bargain,
Matthew. 13. 44.

And beeause of all this, we are called to make a Covenant this day. Truth of
doctrine and purity of worship were going, and much of them both were gone. The
liberty of our persons, and property of our estates, were going, and much of
them both were gone; we were at once growing popish and slavish, superstitious
and servile; We were in these great distresses, and because of all this, we
make a Covenant thu day.

That these are the grounds of our Covenant, is clear in the tenor of the
Covenant. The preamble whereof speaks thus:

WE calling to mind the treacherous and bloody plots, conspiracies, attempts
and practices of the enemies of God, against the true Religion and Professors
thereof, in all places, especially in these three Kingdoms ever since the
reformation of Religion; And how much their rage, power, and presumption, are
of late and at this time increased and exercised, whereof the deplorable estate
of the Church and Kingdom of Ireland, the distressed estate of the Church and
Kingdom of England, and the dangerous estate of the Church and Kingdom of
Scotland, are present and public testimonies. We have now at the last, for
the preservation of our selves and our Religion from utter ruin and
destruction, etc. after mature deliberation resolved and determined to enter
into a mutual and solemn League and Covenant, etc. So then if we be asked a
reason of our Covenant, here are reasons, clear reasons, easy to the weakest
understanding, yea open to every man's sense; who amongst us has not felt these
reasons? and how many have smarted their proof unto us? And as these reasons
are so plain, that the most illiterate and vulgar understandings may conceive
them; so they are so weighty and cogent that the most subtle and sublime
understandings cannot but be subdued to them; unless, because they are such
masters of reason, they have resolved to obey none. And yet where conscience is
indeed unsatisfied, we should rather pity then impose, and labor to persuade,
rather then violently to obtrude. Now seeing we have all this for the ground of
a Covenant, let us cheerfully and reverently make a sure Covenant. Which is
the third point in the Text, The property of this Covenant, we make a sure
Covenant.

In the Hebrew, the word Covenant is not expressed. The (...)
Text runs only thus, We make a sure one, or a sure thing. Covenants are in
their own nature and constitution, things of so much certainty and assurance,
that by way of excellence a Covenant is called, a sure one, or an assurance.
When a sure one is but named, a Covenant must be understood. As, the Holy One
is God, and the Holy One and the just, is Christ, Acts 3. 14. You may know whom
the Holy Ghost means, when he says, the holy One, and the just. So the sure
one is a Covenant, you may know what they made when the Holy Ghost says, they
made a sure one. Hence observe, that

A well-grounded Covenant is a sure, a firm, and an irrevocable Act. When you
have such an all this, (and such you have) as is here concentered in the Text,
to lay into or for the foundation of a Covenant, the superstruction (is
aeternitati sacrum, and) must stand for ever.

A weak ground is but a weak obligation; and a sinful ground is no
obligation. There is much sin in making a Covenant upon sinful grounds, and
there is more sin in keeping of it. But when the preservation of true
Religion, and the vindication of just Liberties meet in the groundwork, ye
may swear and not repent; yea, if ye swear, ye must not repent. For because
of all such things as these, we ought (if we make any, and that we ought) to
make a sure Covenant.

The Covenant which God makes with man is a sure Covenant. Hence called a
Covenant of Salt, Numb. 18. 19. Because Salt preserves from perishing and
putrefaction. The Covenant of God with man about temporal things is called a
Covenant of Salt, and a Covenant for ever, 2 Chronicles. 15. 3. For though his
Covenant about temporal things (as all temporals must) has an end of
termination, yet it has no end of corruption; time will conclude it, but time
cannot violate it. But as for his Covenant about eternal things, that, like
eternity knows not only no end of corruption, but none of termination.
Although my House (says gasping David) be not so with God, yet be has made
with me an everlasting Covenant, ordered in all things and sure: for this is
all my salvation and all my desire, although he make it not to grow, 2 Samuel 23.
5. And what is it that makes the Covenant of God with man thus sure? Sure not
only in it self, but (as the Apostle speaks) to all the seed, Rom 5. 16. Is
it not this, because it has a strong foundation, a double, impregnable
foundation? First, his own free grace. Secondly, the blood of Cbrist; which is
therefore also called, the blood of the Covenant, Heb. 10. 29. Because of all
this, this All, which has an infinity in it, The Lord God has made with us a
sure Covenant.

Now as the stability and everlastingnesse of Gods Covenant with his elect,
lies in the strength of the foundation, His own love, and the blood of his
Son. So the stability and firmness of our Covenant with God, lies in the
strength of this foundation. The securing of the Gospel, and the asserting of
Gospell-purity in worship and privileges in Government: the securing of our
lives, and the asserting of our common liberties. When at any time ye can
question, and (from the Oracles of truth) be resolved, that these are
insufficient grounds of making a Covenant, or that these are not ours, ye may
go, and un-assure the Covenant which ye make this day.

Let me therefore invite you in the words of the Prophet Application.
Jeremy, chap. 50. 5. Come let us join our selves to the Lord in a perpetual
Covenant, that shall never be forgotten. And do not these look like the days
wherein the Prophet calls to the doing of this? In those days, and at that
time, says the Lord, verse. 4. What time and what days were those? The
beginning of the Chapter answers it. The word that the Lord spoke against
Babylon, etc. declare ye among the Nations, and publish and set up a Standard,
publish and conceal not: say, Babylon is taken, Bell is confounded, Merodach is
broken in pieces; her Idols are confounded, her Images are broken in pieces:
For out of the North there comes up a Nation against her, which shall make
her Land desolate, etc. Then follows, in those days and at that time, says
the Lord, the children of Israel shall come, etc. And they shall ask the way
to Zion, with their faces thitherward, saying, Come and let us join our selves
to the Lord in a perpetual Covenant, that shall not be forgotten.

Are not these the days, and this the time (I speak not of time to a day, but
of time and days) wherein the Lord speaks against Babylon, and against the
Land of the Chaldeans? Wherein he says, declare among the Nations, and
publish, and set up the Standard; Are not these the days, and this the time
when out of the North there comes up a Nation against her? As face answers
face in the water, so do the events of these days answer, if not the Letter,
yet much of the mystery of this prophecy. There seems wanting only the work
which this day is bringing forth, and a few days more (I hope) will bring unto
perfection, the joining of our selves in a perpetual Covenant never to be
forgotten. It is very observable how the Prophet as it were with one breath
says, Babylon is taken (verse. 2.) and come let us join our selves in
Covenant, verse. 5. as if there were no more in it but this, Take the Covenant,
and ye take Babylon. Or, as if the taking of a Covenant were the ready way, the
readiest way to take Babylon. Surely at the report of the taking of this sure
Covenant, we in our prayer-visions (as the Prophet Habakkuc in his c. 3. v. 7.)
may see the tents of Cushan in affliction, and the curtains of the Land of
Midian tremble. Or as Moses in his triumphant song, Exodus 15. 14. The people
shall hear and be afraid sorrow shall take hold of the inhabitants of
Palestina. The Dukes of Edom shall be amazed, the mighty men of Moab trembling
shall take hold upon them, the inhabitants of Canaan (who are now the
inhabitants of Babylon) shall melt away. The Towers of Babylon will quake and
her seven hills will move. The great mountain before our Zerubbabels will
become a plain, and we shall bring forth the head Stone (of our Reformation)
with shouting, crying grace, grace unto it. Zach. 4. 7. why may we not promise
to our selves such glorious effects (and not build these Castles in the air)
when we have laid so promising a foundation, this sure Covenant, and have made
a perpetual Covenant, never to be forgotten?

Three things I shall propose, which this Covenant will bring in, as
facilitating contributions to so great a work:

First, this Covenant will distinguish men, and separate the precious from the
vile. In the twentieth Chapter of Ezekiel, the Lord promises his people, after
this manner, I will cause you to pass under the rod, and I will bring you into
the bond of the Covenant, verse. 37. That phrase of causing to pass under the
rod is an allusion to shepherds, or the keepers of Cattle, who when they
would take special notice of their Sheep or Cattle, either in their number
to tithe them, or in their goodness to try them, they brought them into a
Fold, or some other enclosed place, where letting them pass out at a narrow
door one by one, they held a rod over them to count or consider more
distinctly of them. This action was called a passing of them under the rod, as
Moses teaches us, Levit. 27. 32. And concerning the tithe of the heard, or of
the flock, even of whatsoever passes under the rod, the tenth shall be holy
unto the Lord. The learned Iunius Totum populum Israelis, ita probabo and
recognoscam, ut pastor gregem; ad recipiendos in faedus and in caulam meam
bonos, improbosque abdicandos. Jun. in in Loc.
expounds that Text in Ezekiel by this in Leviticus, giving the sense thus, as
if the Lord had said, I will prove and try the whole people of Israel, as a
shepeheard does his flock, that I may take the good and sound into the Fold of
my Covenant, and cast out the wicked and unsound; which interpretation is not
only favored but fully approved, in the words immediately following, verse.
38. I will bring you into the bond of the Covenant, and I will purge out from
among you the rebels and them that transgress against me.

A Covenant is to a Nation as a Fan to the Floor, which purges away the
Chafe, and purifies the Wheat. It is like the Furnace to the Metal, which
takes away the dross, and shows you a refined lump. It is a Shibboleth to
distinguish Ephraimites from Gileadites, Judge. 12. 6. And who knows not how
great an advantage it is for the successful carrying on of any honorable
design, to know friends from enemies, and the faithful from false brethren?
some have thought it unpoliticall to set a foot this Covenant, lest it should
discover more enemies then friends, and so holding out to the view, more then
otherwise can be seen, the weakness of a party may render them, not only
more obnoxious, but more inconsiderable.

To this I answer in a word, Invisible enemies will ever do us more hurt then
visible; and if we cannot deliver our selves from them when they are seen and
known, doubtless unseene and unknown they will more easily, though more
insensibly devour us. And I verily believe, we have already received more
damage and deeper wounds from pretended friends, then from professed and open
enemies. The sad stories of Abner and Amasa inform us, That there is no sense
against his stroke who comes too near us, who stabs while he takes us aside to
speak kindly to us, who draws his sword while he has a kiss at his lips,
and art thou in health my brother, at his tongue. Let us never think our
selves stronger because we do not know our weakness, or safer because we are
ignorant of our danger. Or that our real enemies and false friends will do us
less hurt, because they are less discovered. I do not think that a flock
ever fared the better, because the Wolves that were amongst them went in sheeps
clothing. Rather will our knowledge be our security, and the discovery which
this Covenant makes, help on both our deliverance and our business. For as
(possibly) this Covenant may discover those who are faithful to be fewer then
was supposed before this strict distinction from others, so it will certainly
make them stronger then they were before, by a stricter union among themselves.
And this is

The second benefit of this Covenant, which I shall next insist upon. As it
does separate those who are heterogeneall, so likewise it will congregate and
embody those who are homogeneall. And therefore it cannot but add strength
unto a people; for whatsoever unites, strengthens. A few united are stronger
then a scattered multitude. Though they who subscribe this Covenant should be
(comparatively) so few (as the Prophet speaks, Isai. 10. 19. that a child may
write them; yet this few thus united are stronger then so many scattered ones
(as exceed all Arithmeticke) whom (as John speaks, Revel. 7. 9. no man can
number. Cloven tongues were sent (Acts 2. 3.) to publish the Gospel, but not
divided tongues, much less divided hearts: The former mer hindered the building
of Babel, Genesis 11. 7.) and the latter (though tongues should agree) will hinder
the building of Jerusalem. Then a work goes on amain when the undertakers
(whether they be few or many) speak all and think the same thing. A people
are more considerable in any work, because they are One, then because they are
Many. But when many and one meet, nothing can stand before them. So the Lord
God observed, when he came down to see the City and the Tower which the
children of men builded, Genesis 11. 5. And the Lord said (at the sixth verse)
behold the people is One, and they have all One language: And this they begin
to do; and now nothing will be restrained from them, which they have imagined
to do. Men may do as much as they can think, while they All think and do
as one; and not only can such do great things, if let alone; but none can let
them in doing what they intend; so says the Lord in Genesis, They have begun
to do, and nothing will be restrained from them which they have imagined.
Nothing could restrain or let them from their work, but his power who will
work and none can let it, Isa. 43. 13.

Thus it is apparent that union is our strength, and it is as apparent, That
this Covenant (through the blessing of God upon it) will be our union. To unite
is the very nature of a Covenant. Hence Ezekiel. 20. 37. It is called the bond of
the Covenant, I will bring you into the bond of the Covenant, (...) Masoreth
and Masora, traditie, dectrina per menus a majoribus tradita, and sine literis
ad posteras transmissa Schind.
says the Lord. Iunius and some others render it, I will bring you (ad
exhibitionem faederis) to the giving or tendering of the Covenant: Deriving the
word from Masar, signifying, to exhibit or deliver. Whence (to note that in
passage) the Traditionary doctrine among the Jews, is called Masora or
Masoreth. Others (whom our Translators follow, and put the former sense,
delivering, in the Margin.) Others (I say) deriving the word from Asar to bind,
render it the bond of the Covenant.

And this Covenant is the bond of a twofold union. First, it unites us of this
Kingdom among our selves, and this Kingdom with the other two. Secondly, it
makes a special union of all those, who shall take it holily and sincerely
throughout the three Kingdoms, with the One-most God. Weak things bound
together are strong, much more then, when strong are bound up with strong; most
of all, when strong are bound up with Almighty. If in this Covenant we should
only join weak to weak, we might be strong. But (blessed be God) we join
strong (as creatures may be accounted strong) with strong. The strong Kingdoms
of England and Ireland, with the strong Kingdom of Scotland. A threefold coard
twisted of three such strong Coards will not easily, if at all, be broken. They
which single (blessed be God) have yet such strength, how strong may they be
when conjoined? As the Apostle writes to his Romans (c. 6. 19.) I speak after
the manner of men, because of the infirmity of our flesh: So I speak now after
the manner of men, concerning the strength of our flesh (outward means) in
these Kingdoms. For as the Apostle Peter speaks in like phrase, though to
another occasion, (2 Pet. 3. 9. the Lord is not slack concerning his promise,
as some men count slacknesse. So I may say, no man, no Kingdoms are strong to
any purpose, as the Lord counts strength.

And therefore I reckon this the least part of our strength, that these three
strong Kingdoms will be united by this Covenant; nay, if this were all the
strength which this union were like to make, I should reckon this no strength
at all; wherefore know that this covenant undoubtedly is and will be a bond of
union between strong and Almighty: between three strong Nations, and an
Almighty God. This Covenant engages more then Man, God also is engaged; engaged
(through his free grace) in his power, wisdom faithfulness, to do as good and
much good, though in and of our selves unworthy of the least, unworthy of my
good.

All this considered, this Covenant will be our strength, our brethren of
Scotland, have (in a plentiful experience) found it so already. This Covenant
(through the blessing of God upon their counsels and endeavors) has been
their Sampsons Lock, the thing (in fight) wherein their strength lies. And
why should not we hope, that it will be ours; if we can be wise, as they, to
prevent or overcome the flattering enticements of those Dalilahs, who would
lull us asleep in their laps, only for an opportunity to cut or shave it off?
Then indeed (which God forbid) we should be but weak, like other men, yea
weaker then our selves were before this Lock was grown, having but the
strength of man; God utterly departing from us, for our falsenesse and
unfaithfulness in this Covenant.

Thirdly, this Covenant observed, will make us an holy people, and then, we
cannot be an unhappy people. That which promotes personal holiness, must
needs promote National holiness. The consideration that we are in the bonds
of a Covenant, is both a bridle to stop us from sin, and a spur to duty.
When we provoke God to bring evil upon us, he stays his hand by considering
his Covenant. I will remember my Covenant (says the Lord, Genesis 9. 15.) which
is between me and you, and every living creature of all flesh; and the waters
shall no more become a flood to destroy all flesh. As if the Lord had said, It
is more then probable that I shall quickly see as much cause (all flesh
corrupting all their ways before me) to drown the world with a second deluge,
as I did for the first: the foulness of the world will quickly call for
another washing. But I am resolved never to destroy it by water again, for, I
will remember my Covenant. Hence also in the second book of the Chronicles,
chap. 21. where the reign and sins of Jehoram are recorded, such sins as
might justly put a sword into the hand of God to cut him off root and branch,
Howbeit (says the Text, verse. 7.) the Lord would not destroy the house of
David, because of the Covenant that he had made with David, and as he promised
to give a light to him, and to his sons for ever. Now as the remembrance of the
Covenant on his part stays the hand of God from smiting, so the remembrance of
the Covenant on our part, will be very effectual to stay our hands, and
tongues, and hearts from sinning. A thought of that will dampe and silence our
lusts and passions, when they begin to move or quest within us, it will also
break the blow of Satan's temptations when he assaults us. The soul in such
cases will answer, True! I am now as strongly tempted to sin as ever, I have
now as fair an opportunity to commit this sin as ever, I could now be false
to, and desert this cause with as much advantage, upon as fair hopes, and
promises as ever: O but I am in Covenant, I remember my Covenant, I will not, I
cannot do it; and so he falls a praying against the temptation; yea, he begs
prayers of others, that he may be strengthened against and overcome it. I read
you an instance of this effect before the Sermon, a paper is sent to this
congregation containing this request: One who through much passion oftentimes
grievously offends the Majesty of God by cursing and swearing, and that since
his late taking the Covenant, desires the prayers of this Congregation that his
offense may be pardoned, and that he may be enabled to overcome that temptation
from hence forwards. This is the tenor of that request to a letter and a
tittle, and therein you see, how the remembrance of the Covenant wrought.
Probably this party (whosoever he was) took little notice of, or was little
troubled at the notice of these distempers in himself before, least of all
sought out for help against them. And I have the rather inserted this to
confute that scorn which I hear) some have since put upon that conscientious
desire. As if one had complained, that since his swearing to the Covenant, he
could not forbear swearing, and that this sacred Oath had taught him profane
ones. But what holy thing is there, which swine will not make mire of, for
themselves to wallow in? I return, and I nothing doubt but that this Covenant
(wherein all is undertaken through the grace of Christ) will make many more
gracious who had grace before, and turn others who were running on amain in
the broad way, from the evil and error of their ways, into the way which is
called Holy, or into the ways of Holiness. Every Act wherein we converse with
an holy God, has an influence upon our spirits to make us holy. The soul is
made more holy in prayer, though holiness be not the particular matter of the
prayer; A man gets much of Heaven into his heart, in praying for earthly
things, if he pray in a spiritual manner; And the reason is, because in prayer
he has converse with, and draws nigh to God, whatsoever lawful thing he
prays about. And the same reason caries it in covenanting, though it were only
about the maintenance of our outward Estates and liberties, forasmuch as
therein we have to do with God. How much more then will holiness be increased
through this Covenant, which in many branches of it, is a direct Covenant for
and about holiness? And if we improve it home to this purpose for the subduing
of those mystical Canaanites, those worst and (indeed) most formidable
enemies, our sinful lusts, if we improve it for the obtaining of more grace,
and the making of us more holy: though our visible Caananites should not only
continue unsubdued by us, but subdue us, Though our Estates and Liberties
should continue, not only unrecovered, but quite lost, though we should neither
be a rich, nor a free, nor a victorious people, yet if we are an holy people,
we have more then All these, we have all, he is ours, who is All in All.

So much of the first general part of the application.

The second is for Admonition and Caution in three or four particulars.

First, take heed of profaning this Covenant, Mal. 2. 8. by an unholy life.
Remember you have made a Covenant with Heaven; then do not live as if you had
made a Covenant with Hell, or were come to an agreement with Death, as the
Prophet Isaiah characters those monsters of profaneness, c. 28. 15. Take heed
also of corrupting this Covenant, Mal. 2. 10. by an unholy gloss. Woe be unto
those glosses that corrupt the Text, pervert the meaning of these words: Who
attempt to expound the Covenant by their own practice, and will not regulate
their practice by the Covenant. The Apostle Peter speaks of Paul's writings,
that in them some things are hard to be understood, which they that are
unlearned and unstable, wrest, as they do also the other Scriptures to their
own destruction. 2 Epist. c. 3. v. 16. We may fear that though the Text of
this Covenant be easy to be understood, yet some (who, at least think
themselves) learned, And whom we have found not only stable but stiffened in
their own erroneous principles and opinions, will be trying their skill (if
not their malice) to wrest, or (as the Greek imports) to torture and set this
Covenant upon (...).
the Rack, to make it speak and confess a sense never intended by the
composers, or proposers of it: and whereof (if but common ingenuity be the
Judge) it never will, nor can be found guilty. All that I shall say to such, is
that in close of the verse quoted from the Apostle Peter, let them take heed
such wrestings be not (worst to themselves, even) to their own destruction.

Secondly, take heed of delaying to perform the duties of this Covenant; some
(I fear) who have made haste to take the Covenant, will take leisure to act
it. It is possible, that a man may make too much haste (when he swears,
before he considers what it is) to take an Oath; But having taken, it (upon due
consideration) he cannot make too much haste to perform it, Benot rash with
thy mouth (Says the Preacher, Eccl. 5. 2.) That is, do not vow rashly, but (v
4) when thou vowest a vow unto God, defer not to pay it, for he has no
pleasure in fools (Slow performance is folly) pay that which thou have vowed.
Speedy paying (like speedy giving) is double payment; whereas slow payment is
no payment, or as bad as none, for it is foolish payment. A bond (if I mistake
not) is presently due in Law, if no day be specifyed in the Bond, It is so I am
sure in this Covenant, here is no day set down, and therefore all is due the
same day you take it; God and man may sue this Bond presently for non payment;
The Covenant gives no day, and therefore requires the next day, every day. It
is not safe to take day for payment, when (the obligation is interminis de
praesenti, and) none is given.

Thirdly, take heed of dallying with this Covenant; It is more then serious, a
sacred Covenant: it is very dangerous jesting with edge tools; this Covenant
is as keen as it is strong. Do not play fast and loose with it, be not in and
out with it, God is an avenger of all such, he is a jealous God, and will not
hold them guiltless who thus take his name in vain. They who swear by or to
the Lord, and swear by Malcham are threatened to be cut off. Zeph. 1. 5. To be
on both sides, and to be on no side; neutrality and indifferency differ little,
either in their sin or danger.

Fourthly, above all take heed of Apostatizing from, or an utter desertion of
this Covenant. To be deserted of God is the greatest punishment, and to desert
God is the greatest sin. When you have set your hands to the plough, do not
look back, Remember Lots Wife. Besides the sin, this is, first, extremely
base and dishonorable; It is one of the brands set upon those Gentiles, whom
God had given up to a reprobate mind, and to vile affections (Romans 1. 26. 28.)
That they were Covenant breakers. And how base is that issue which is begotten
between and borne from vile affections and a reprobate mind? Where the parents
are such, it is easy to judge what the child must be. Secondly, besides the
sin and the dishonor this is extremely dangerous and destructive. We are
said in the native speaking to cut a Covenant or to strike a Covenant, when we
make it; And if we break the Covenant when we have made it, it will both
strike and cut us, it will kill and slay us. If the cords of this Covenant do
not bind us, the coards of this Covenant will whip us: and whip us, not as with
Coards but as with Scorpions. The Covenant will have a quarrel with, and sends
out a challenge unto such breakers of it, for reparation. And (if I may so
speak) the great God will be its second. As God revenges the quarrel of his
own Covenant, so likewise the quarrel of ours. He has already sent a Sword
to revenge the quarrel of his Covenant, Levit. 26. 25. He will send another to
revenge the quarrel of this upon the wilful violatours of it. Yea every
lawful Covenant has a curse always waiting upon it, like a Marshall or a
Sergeant to attach such high contemners of it. It was noted before, from the
ceremony of killing, dividing and passing between the divided parts of a
beast, when Covenants were made, that the imprecation of a curse upon the
Covenanters was employed, in case they wilfully transgressed or revolted from
it. Let the Transgressors of and Revolters from this Covenant fear and tremble
at the same curse, even the curse of a dreadful division. That God will divide
them and their posterity in Jacob and scatter them in our Jsrael, yea, let them
fear. That God, will rebuke them, and they shall flee far off, and shall be
chased as the chafe of the mountains before the wind, and like a rolling
thing before the whirlewind, This is (their portion and) the portion of them
that spoil us, and the Lot of them that rob us (Isa. 17. 13, 14. And if so, is
not their lot fallen in an unpleasant place have they not a dreadful heritage?
To be under any curse is misery enough, but to be under a Covenant curse is the
greatest, is all misery. For as the blessings we receive are most sweet when
they pass to us through the hands of a Covenant (a mercy from a promise is far
better then a mercy from bare providence because then it is sprinkled with the
blood of Christ) so on the other side, the curse which falls upon anyone is far
more bitter, when it comes through a Covenant, especially an abused a broken
Covenant. When the fiery beams of Gods wrath are contracted into this burning
Glass, it will burn as low as Hell, and none can quench it; That alone which
quenches the fire of Gods wrath, is the Blood of Christ. And the Blood of
Christ is the foundation of this Covenant; Not only is that Covenant which God
has made with us, founded in the Blood of Christ, but that also which we make
with God. Were it not by the blood of Christ, we could not possibly be admitted
to so high a privilege. Seeing then the blood of Christ only quenches the
wrath of God, and this blood is the foundation of our Covenant, how shall the
wrath of God (except they repent, return and renew their Covenant) be quenched
toward such violators of it? And as our Savior speaks (Mat. 6.) upon another
occasion, if the light, which is in us, be darkness, how great is that
darkness? So, I say, if that which is our friend turn upon us as an Enemy,
how great is that enmity, and if that which is our mercy be turned into wrath,
how great is that wrath, and who can quench it? It is said of good King Josiah
2 Chronicles. 34. 32. That when he had made a Covenant before the Lord, he caused
all that were present in Jerusalem and in Benjamin to stand to it. How far he
interposed his regal authority, I stay nor to dispute. But he caused them to
stand to it, that is, openly to attest and to maintain it. Meethinkes the
consideration of these things, should reign over the hearts of men and command
in their spirits, more then any Prince can over the tongues or bodies of men,
to cause them to stand to this Covenant. Ye, that have taken this Covenant,
unless ye stand to it, ye will fall by it. I shall shut up this point with
that of the Apostle, take unto you the whole Armor of God, that you may be
able to withstand in the evil day, and, when ye have done all, to stand. Ephesians.
6. 13. Stand, and withstand. Are the watchword of this Covenant, or the
impresse of every heart which has or shall sincerely swear unto it.

For the helping of you to stand to this Covenant I shall cast in a few advices
about your walking in this Covenant, or your carriage in it, which if followed,
I dare say (through the mercy of the most high) your persons, these Kingdoms,
and this cause shall not miscarry.

First, walk in holiness and uprightness. When God renewed his Covenant with
Abraham, he makes this the preamble of it, I am the Almighty God, walk before
me and be thou perfect, And I will make my Covenant between me and thee. Genesis
17. 1. 2. As this must be a Covenant of Salt, in regard of faithfulness, so
there must be salt in this Covenant, even the salt of holiness and
uprightness. The Jews were commanded in all their offerings to use salt; and
that is called the salt of the Covenant (Levit. 2. 13.) Every oblation of thy
meat offering shall thou season with Salt, neither shall thou suffer the Salt
of the Covenant of thy God to be lacking, etc. What is meant by Salt on our
parts, is taught us by Christ himself, Mark 9. 50. Have Salt in your selves
and have peace one with another. Which I take to be parallel in sense with that
of the Apostle (Heb. 12. 14.) follow peace with all men and holiness, etc. As
Salt, the shadow of holiness, was called for, in all those Jewish services, so
holiness, the true substantial Salt, is called for in all ours. As then it
was charged, Let not the Salt of the Covenant of thy God be lacking: so now it
is charged, suffer not the Salt of thy Covenant with God and his people to be
lacking. Seeing we have made a Covenant of salt, that is, a sure Covenant let
us remember to keep salt in our Covenant. Let us add salt to salt, our salt
to the Lords Salt, our salt of holiness to his Salt of faithfulness, and we
shall not miscarry.

Secondly, walk steddily or steadfastly in this Covenant. Where the heart is
upright and holy, the feet will be steady. Unstedfastnesse is a sure argument
of unsoundnesse, as well as a fruit of it. Their heart was not right with him,
neither were they steadfast in his Covenant, Psalm. 78. 37. As if he had said,
would you know the reason why this people were so unstedfast? it was, because
they were so unsound. Their heart was not right with him, We often see the
Diseases of men's hearts breaking forth at their lips, and at their fingers
ends, in all they say, or do.

Then, be hearty, and be steady. God will be steady to us, why should not we
resolve to be so to him? And this Covenant will be steadfast and uniforme unto
us, why should not we resolve to be so, to, and in this Covenant. The Covenant
will not be our friend to day and our Enemy to morrow, do us good to day and
hurt to morrow, it will not be fruitful this year and barren the next; But it
is our friend, to do us good to day and ever. It is fruitful and will be so
for ever. We need not let it ly fallow, we cannot take out the we need not
let it ly fallow, we cannot take out the heart of it, though we should have
occasion to plough it and sow it every year. Much less will this Covenant be
so unstedfast to its own principles, as to yield us Wheat to day and cockle to
morrow, an Egg to day and to morrow a Scorpion, now Bread and anon a stone,
now give us an embrace, and anon a wound, Now help on our peace, and anonne
embroyle us; Now prosper our Reformation, and anon oppose, or hinder it;
strengthen us this year, and weaken us the next. No, as it will never be
barren, so it will ever bring forth the same fruit, and that good fruit, and
the more and the longer we use it; the better fruit; like the faithful Wife
Prove. 31. 12. It will do us good and not evil, all the days of its life. It
is therefore not only sinful, but most unsuitable and un-ingenuous, for us to
be up and down, forward and backward, likeing and disliking, like that
Double-minded man (Jam. 1. 8.) unstable in all our ways, respecting the duties
of this Covenant.

Thirdly, walk believingly, live much in the exercise of Faith. As we have no
more good out of the Covenant of God, then we have Faith in it, so no more good
out of our own, then (in a due sense) we have faith in it. There is as much
need of Faith, to improve this Covenant, as there is of faithfulness. We live
no more in the Sphere of a Covenant, then we believe. And we can make no living
out of it but by believing. All our earnings come in (here also) more by our
Faith, then by our works. Let not the heart of God be straightened, and his hand
shortened by our unbelief. Where Christ marveyled at the unbelief of a people,
consider what a mervaile followed, omnipotence was as one week he could do no
mighty works among them for them (Mar. 6. 5. 6.) works less then mighty, will
not reach our deliverances or procure our mercies. The ancient worthies made
more use of their Faith then to be saved and get to Heaven by it. By Faith the
walls of an opposing Jericho fell down (Heb 11. 30.) By Faith they subdued
Exercurrunt Justitiam, Beza.
Kingdoms wrought righteousness, (or exercised Justice) stopped the mouths
of Lions v. 33. By Faith they quenched the violence of fire, escaped the edge
of the Sword, out of weakness they were made strong, waxed valiant in fight,
turned to fight the Armies of the Aliens v. 34. We have Jericho's to reduce,
and Kingdoms to subdue, under the Scepter and government of Jesus Christ, we
have Justice to execute, and the mouths of Lions to stop, we have a violent
fire to quench, A sharpe-edged Sword to escape, popish alien-Armies to fight
with, and we (comparatively to these mighty works) are but weak; How then
shall we out of our weakness become strong, strong enough to carry us
thorough these mighty works, strong enough to escape these visible dangers, if
we walk and work by sense and not by Faith? And if we could get through all
these works and dangers without Faith, we should work but like men, not at
all like Christians, but like men in a politic combination, not in a holy
Covenant. There Is not a stroke of Covenant-worke (purely so called) can be done
without Faith. As fire is to the Chymicke; so is Faith to a Vovenant People, in
that capacity they can do nothing for themselves without it, and they have,
they can have no assurance, that God will. Seeing then we are in Covenant, we
must go to counsel by Faith, and to war by Faith, we must pull down by
Faith, and build by Faith, we must reform by Faith and settle our peace by
Faith. Besides, to do a work so solemn and sacred, and then to believe and
expect no fruit, yea then not to believe and expect answerable fruit, is a
direct taking of Gods Name in vain, and a mock to Jesus Christ. And if we mock
Christ by calling him to a Covenant, which we our selves slight, as a thing we
expect little or nothing from: he will laugh at our calamity and mock when our
fear comes, Prove. 1. 26. Wherefore to close, If ye will not believe, surely
ye shall not be established, (Is. 7. 9.) no, not by this sure Covenant. But,
believe in the Lord your God (in Covenant) so shall you be established, believe
his Prophets, so shall you prosper, 2 Chronicles. 20. 20.

Fourthly, walk cheerfully So it becomes those that have God so near them.
Such, even in their sorrows should be (like Paul 2 Cor. 6. 10) as sorrowful,
yet always rejoicing. The (as) notes not a counterfeiting of sorrow, but the
overcomming of sorrow; on this ground David resolves against the fear of
evil, though he should see nothing but evil; Though I walk in the valley of
the shadow of Death, I will fear no evil: for thou art with me, Psalm. 23. 3.
In a Covenant God and man meet, He is with us, who is more then all that are
against us: And when he is with us, who can be against us? Romans 8. 3^. for then
all things and all things and all persons, even while (to the utmost of their
skill and power) they set themselves against us, work for us; And should we
not rejoice? If we knew that every loss were our gain, every wound our
healing, every disappoyntment our success, every defeat our victory, would we
not rejoice? Do but know what it is to be in Covenant with God; and be sad, be
hopeless if you can. It is to have the strength and counsels of Heaven engaged
for you; it is to have him for you, whose foolishness is wiser then men, and
whose weakness is stronger then men, 1 Cor. 1. 25. It is to have him with
you, who does according to his will in the Army of Heaven, and amongst the
Inhabitants of the Earth and none can stay his Hand, or say unto him, what
do thou? Daniel 4. 34. It is to have him with you, who frustrateth the
tokens of the Liars, and makes the Diviners mad, who turns wise men backward
and makes their knowledge foolish, Isaiah 44. 25. It is to have him with you,
before whom the Nations are as the drop of a Bucket, and as the dust of the
balance, who takes up the Isles as a very little thing (Isaiah 40. 15.) In a
word it is to have him with you, Who faints not neither is weary, there is no
searching of his understanding, he gives power to the faint, and to them that
have no might, he increases strength, Verse 28. 29. This God is our God, our
God in Covenant, This is our Beloved, and this is our friend, O Daughters of
Jerusalem. And shall we not rejoice? Shall we not walk cheerfully? Though
there be nothing but trouble before our Eyes, yet our hearts should live in
those upper Regions, which are above Storms and Tempests, above Rain and
Winds, above the noise and confusions of the World. Why should sorrow sit
clouded in our Faces, or any darkness be in our hearts, while we are in the
shine and light of Gods Countenance.? It is said (2 Chro. 15. 15.) That all
Judah rejoiced at the Oath. For they had sworn with all their Heart; If we
have sworn heartily, we shall rejoice heartily. And for ever banish base
fears, and killing sorrows from our hearts, and wipe them from our faces.
They, who have unworthy fears in their hearts, give too fair an evidence,
that they did not swear with their hearts.

Fifthly, walk humbly and dependantly; rejoice, but be not secure. Trust to
God in Covenant, not to your Covenant. Make not your Covenant, your Christ; no,
not for this Temporal Salvation. As a Horse trusted to, is a vain thing to
save a man, Psalm. 32. so likewise is a Covenant trusted to; neither can it
deliver a Nation by its great strength: though indeed the strength of it be
greater, then the strength of many Horses. In vain is salvation hoped for from
this Hill, or from a multiude of Mountains heaped up and joined in one by the
bond of this Covenant. Surely in the Lord our God, our God, in Covenant, is the
Salvation of ENGLAND. We cannot trust too much in GOD, nor too little in the
Creature; There is nothing breaks the staff of our help but our leaning upon
it. If we trust in our Covenant, we have not made it with God, but we have
made it a God; And every God of man's making, is an Idol, and so nothing in the
World: you see, pride in, or trust to this Covenant will, make it an Idol, and
then in doing all this, we have done nothing, For an Idol is nothing in the
World. 1 Cor. 8. 4.) And of nothing comes nothing. By over-looking to the
means, we lose all; And by all our travayle shall bring forth nothing but
wind It will not work any deliverance in the Land. Wherefore, rest not in the
thing Done, but yet, up and be doing which is the last point, and my last
motion about your walking in Covenant.

Sixthly, walk industriously and diligently in this Covenant. You were
counseled before to stand to the Covenant, but take heed of standing in it;
stand, as that is opposed to defection, but if you stand as that is opposed to
action, you are at the next door to falling. A Total neglect is little better
then total Apostasy.

We have made a perpetual Covenant, never to be forgotten, as was showed out
of the Prophet. It is a rule, that words in Scripture which express only an
Act of memory, include action and endeavors; When the young man is warned to
remember his Creator in the days of his youth (Eccles. 12. 1.) He is also
charged to love, and to obey him. And while we say, this Covenant is never to
be forgotten, we mean, the duties of it are ever to be pursued, and (to the
utmost of our power) fullfilled. As soon as it is said that Josiah made all
the people stand to the Covenant, the very next words are, And the Inhabitants
of Jerusalem did according to the Covenant of GOD, the GOD of their Fathers. 2
Chronicles 34. 32. They stood to it, but they did not (like those Matthew 20.
6.) Stand all the day idle; they fell to work presently. And so let us. Having
laid this foundation, a sure Covenant, now let us arise and build, and let our
hands be strong. Do not think that all is done, when this solemnity is done.
It is a sad thing to observe, how some, when they have lifted up their hands
and written down their names, think presently their work is over. They
think, now surely they have satisfied God and man, for they have subscribed
the Covenant.

I tell you nay, for when you have done taking the Covenant, then your work
begins. When you have done taking the Covenant, then you must proceed to
acting the Covenant. When an apprentice has subscribed his name, and sealed
his Indentures, does he then think his service is ended? No, then he knows
his service does begin. It is so here. We are all sealing the Indentures of a
sacred and noble Apprentiship to God, to these Churches and Commonwealths; let
us then go to our work, as bound, yet free. Free to our work, not from it;
free in our work, working from a principle of holy ingenuity, not of servility
or constraint. The Lord threatens them with bondage and captivity, who will not
be servants in their Covenant, with readiness and activity. I (says the
LORD) will give the men that have transgressed my Covenant, which have not
performed the Words of the Covenant, which they had made before me, when they
cut the Calfe in twain and passed between the parts thereof, The Princes of
Judah, and the Princes of Jerusalem, the Eunuchs and the Priests, and all the
people of the Land, which passed between the parts of the Calfe, I will even
give them into the hand, of their Enemies, and into the hand of them that seek
their Life, and their dead Bodies shall be meat to the Fowls of the Air,
and to the Beasts of the Earth. Words that need no Rhetoric to press them,
nor any comment to explain them: they are so plain, that every one, may
understand them, and so severe, that every one who either transgresses, or
performs not, who does any thing against, or nothing for the words of this
Covenant, has just cause to tremble at the reading of them, I am sure, to
feel them, will make him tremble. Seeing then our Princes, our Magistrates,
our Ministers, and our people, have freely consented to, written, and sworn
this Covenant; let us all in our several places, up and be doing, that the
Lord may be with us, not sit still and do nothing, and so cause the Lord to
turn against us.

You that are for Consultation, go to Counsel, you that are for Execution go
on to Acting, You that are for Exhorting the People in this Work, attend to
Exhortation, You that are Soldiers, draw your Swords, You that have Estates
draw your Purses, You that have strength of body, lend your hands, and all you
that have honest hearts, lend your Prayers, your Cries, your Tears, for the
prosperous success of this great Work, And the Lord prosper the Works of all
our hands, the Lord prosper all our handyworks, Amen.

FINIS.

