The CASE of John Lord Lovelace Baron of Hurley.
RICHARD late Lord Lovelace his Grandfather was seized in Fee of the Manor of
Hurley in the County of Berks, and diverse other Lands in Berks and Wilts; and
of the Manor of Water-Eaton in Com. Oxon. and sells the same to John late Lord
Lovelace his Father for life, with

Remainder to his 1st. 2d. 3d. and every other Son successively entail, which
Son the now Lord Lovelace is. John his Son the late Lord Lovelace deceased, to
make a Jointure of Water-Eaton, which he did accordingly execute; and Anne Lady
Dowager Lovelace his Widow now enjoys it.

And also left a power in him to charge the same Manor of Water-Eaton, and some
Farms in Hurley, with Portions for younger children; which he accordingly did:
but these Portions are all paid, but only part of the Portion of Dorothy now
wife of Henry Drax Esquire

John now Lord Lovelace Marries with Martha the eldest Daughter and one of the
Coheirs of Sir Edmund Pie Knight and Baronet deceased; And before Marriage by
Articles, his Father agrees to settle the Manors of Hurley, and Water-Eaton on
his issue Male entail, and in Michaelmas Term 1663 his Father levied a Fine,
and in Hillary Term following 1663 John now Lord Lovelace Levied a Fine, and
suffered a common Recovery, and so barred all the Estates tail and Remainder
before that time.

And by Indenture dated 1st. of February 1663 between the now Lord Lovelace,
and his wife of the 1st. part, John late Lord Lovelace his Father of the 2d.
part, Sir Edmund Pie and Sir William Walter of the 3d. part, and Christopher
Cratford and George Shipwey Gent. of the 4th. part, declare the use of the said
Fines and Recovery to be as to part of Hurley, to the use of John now Lord
Lovelace for life.

Remainder to Sir Edmund Pie and Sir William Walter and their Heirs, during the
life of John now Lord Lovelace to support contingent uses.

Remainder to Martha his wife for Jointure.

Remainder to his 1st. 2d. 3d. and every other Son by Martha his wife
successively entail.

Remainder to the right Heirs of John now Lord Lovelace in Fee, chargeable with
10000 l. for (...)aughters Portions, in case of failer of issue Males; And as
to the residue of (...) and all Water-Eaton, to John late Lord Lovelace for
life.

Remaind^^ (...) John now Lord Lovelace for life.

Remaind^^ (...) Edmumd Pie and Sir Walter and their Heirs, during the life
(...)ow Lord Lovelace to support contingent uses.

Remainder to ^ is 1st. 2d. 3d. and every other Son by Martha his wife
successively (...).

Remainder to the Heirs of John now Lord Lovelace in Fee.

John late Lord Lovelace his Father, in the late Rebellion being only Tenant
for life, was under sequestratien, and contracted very many great Debts to the
value of 20000 l. and upwards by his sufferings for his Loyalty.

John now Lord Lovelace joins with his Father in the Sale of Bluntsdon in Wilts
of the value of 800 l. per annum, and diverse other Lands in Berks, to the value
of 20000 l. and upwards, in the whole, and joined with his Father in other
real securities of the Land settled upon him entail.

The Manor of Water-Eaton above 1200 l. per annum almost a Moiety of his
paternal Estate, (...) now in Jointure to his Mother.

The Manor of Bradenham the greatest part of his Wives Fortune, is in Jointure
to the Lady Pie her Mother.

John now Lord Lovelace made an absolute agreement by Indenture with Henry Drax
Esquire for the Remainder of his Sisters Portion unpaid, to accept 3000 l. by 500
l. per annum after his Mothers death, to be paid out of Water-Eaton in six
years, that his Mother might enjoy his Jointure peaceably.

John now Lord Lovelace has no Son living; but only three Daughters, and has
had no child in seven years last past, and having contracted several Debts to
the value of 5000 l. prays an Act.

To confirm the Deed of the 1st. of February 1663 for his Wives Jointure, and
to charge the Lands charged with 10000 l. for his Daughters Portions, with 5000
l. more for advance of his Daughters Portions, in case of failer of issue Male
by his now wife.

To ^^^ble him to raise 5000 l. for payment of his just Debts contracted, out
of those Lands not in jointure to his wife; nor chargeable with his Daughters
Portions in Hurley, and out of the reversion of Water-Eaton expectant after his
Mothers Death, nevertheless subject to the payment of his Sisters Portions by
annual payments as aforesaid, and that the same security given for the same
Portion to Mr. Drax, may be confirmed according to his agreement mentioned in
the Indenture of the 12th. of October 1671.


