(...) A MODEL OF True Spiritual Thankfulness.

Delivered in a SERMON Before the Honorable House of COMMONS, Upon their day
of THANKSGIVING, being Thursday, Feb. 19. 1645, for the great Mercy of God, in
the Surrender of the City of Chester into the hands of the Parliaments Forces
in CHESHIRS, under the Command of Sir WILLIAM BRERETON.

By THO. CASE, Preacher in Milkstreet London, and one of the Assembly of
Divines.

ISA 1.25.3. The strong people shall glorify thee, the city of the terrible
Nations shall fear thee.

ISA 1.26.2. Open ye the gates, that the righteous Nation which keeps the
Truth, may enter in.

London, Printed by Ruth Raworth, for Luke Fawn, at the sign of the Parrot in
Paul's Churchyard. 1646.

Die Lunae, 23 Februarii, 1645.
ORdered, by the Commons assembled in Parliament, That Master Rous do give
Thanks to Master Case and Master Woodcock for the great pains they took in the
Sermons they preached at the entreaty of this House on Thursday last (being a
day set apart for a day of public Thanksgiving for the taking of Chester) and
to desire them to print their Sermons. And it is ordered, that none shall print
their Sermons without license under their hands writing.

H. Elsynge, Cler. Parl. D. Com.

I appoint Luke Fawn to print my Sermon.

THO. CASE.

To the Honorable House of Commons in Parliament now assembled.
NOBLE SENATORS,
TO serve Your and the Kingdoms Thankfulness for the late mercy of God, in
putting Chester into your possession; give me leave from the Press to present
unto your view what might have been burdensome from the Pulpit; a short List or
Catalogue of some eminent Providence, wherewith the mercy of the day being
clothed, will appear very rich and glorious.

1. And first, you may please to observe, that the very lengthning of the
Siege, was the advance of the Design, while in the issue it appears to have
been nothing else but an ambushment of Providence laid of purpose to draw on
the enemy to their own destruction: Surely their pride and power have not met
with a more burdensome stone in all their bold and confident Adventures, then
the Siege of Chester; upon which God bath broken them with breach upon breach,
and blessed you with victory upon victory worth many Chesters; and when he had
done, cast that also in for an advantage. Thus many times do we look upon
disappointments of our hopes, as frowns of displeasure, which afterward we
find to be Plots of Mercy. Who would not wait upon that God; who if be
withhold a mercy for a while, pays interest for the forbearance, of more worth
many times then the principal it self.

2. That in three Storms of the greatest disadvantage that height of walls,
depth of trenches, impregnablenesse of Forts, and multitudes of enemies (as
many in the City as yours in the Siege) could render, the Forces were confessed
by the enemy to have done more execution then they received, either in their
assault or retreat: wherein one particular providence must not be silenced:
Lieut. Col. Ven^bles.
an active Commander who was four times upon the walls; and though through the
unexpected disadvantages of the design, not seconded according to expectation,
yet was brought off harmless, save only a slight wound on his arm, to mind
him what arm it was that made his rescue.

3. That in all the Sallies which the enemy has made upon the Parliaments
Quarters, they had more cause at their returns into their strong Hold, to wring
their hands then to ting their bells, being always sent home with more blows
then they give.

4. That our Engines during the Siege have constantly done more execution upon
the enemy within, then theirs have done upon our men without, though the odds
of all offensive and defensive advantages were on their side; whereby God would
manifest the difference, between having walls and bulwarks for Salvation, I^a.
26.1.
and having Salvation for walls and bulwarks.

5. It was only an unexpected Help to our side, that a Blind of Providence
caused them to leave the Prospect of a Steeple so near the City-walls
undemolished from whence our men did perform daily justice upon the Rebels,
slaying one of their steruest, and diverse others. So God oftentimes beats the
enemy with their own weapons.

6. The patience and constancy of your Soldiery, was eminently remarkable,
which was such, as though there were temptations enough to storm it, as
extremity of weather, want of pay, clothes, food, unparalled hard duty all
the time of the siege, being forced many times to fetch their water from ^ Sam.
^^.15.
the gate of Bethlem, and that not for wantonness, but for necessity; their
bread from the enemies Quarters* the stores of the languishing Country being
drained, and expected supplies from neighboring Counties failing, to the
extreme harassing and hazarding of their Forces both abroad and at home: I say
such notwithstanding was their constancy and patience, that none of all these
could conquer it; Providence always stepping in with timely Supplies and
admirable Resenes in their deepest discouragements and desertions. In the mount
the Lord has been seen. Genesis 22.14.


7. The nature of your Forces which performed this service, renders it the more
observable; they being not an united Brigade culled and formed for such a
design, but a collective Body out of some few adjacent Counties, the more
capable of discontent, and incapable of Commands, had not God put a singular
Spirit of Wisdom and Activity into the Commanders, and of willingness or awe
into the Soldiers: So that here you have that word made good again: Zech. 46.
Not by might nor power, but by my Spirit, says the Lord of Hosts.

8. The enemy were not so high all the time of the Siege in their demands, but
your terms were as honorable in the Surrender; which received this addition,
Magmon est testimohium pro ^o qui judicium ad ^^sario comminit. Abulens.
that the enemies themselves confess Conditions were never better kept since
the wars began. A testimony out of the mouth of an adversary, is double honor.

9. Of what Consequence the Success is, let Chesters expectation from Ireland,
and the preparations of the Irish Cutthroats for Chester the Key of this
Kingdom, the Rest of that poor fainting County; the trembling of all the
malignant neighboring Strong Holds in Wales; and the securing of your Northern
Leagur from the approach of an enemy: the opening of the way of Trade between
London and these parts; the dashing in pieces of the Enemies Designs, who lo,
were hastening now to the Infallible relief of their Garrisons in Cheshire and
Lancashire; the reducing of the North, the absolute Conquest of Scotland, and
then back again to the sharing of England: for all this, and more too (
Sisera-like) they had not only designed, but dispatched in their vain
Confidences: The strengthening the hands of our Friends through the whole
Kingdom, who shall hear and rejoice; the weakening of the Enemy, who shall hear,
and their heart shall melt for fear. Let these, I say, and many other
Improvements (too many for an Epistle, but not too many for our Thankfulness
to enquire into) let these Speak.

10. And all this, whether it have not been the cheapest Purchase the
Parliament has made, since it was constrained to redeem this poor sold Nation
with Money and Blood, I appeal to your Selves, and to that exhausted County,
which in the pursuit of this Service has, to their exceeding Honors, issued
not much less (if I be not misinformed,) then 40000 l. the very last vital
blood that was left in their veins. Psalm. 110.^^.
Surely the Lord made them a willing people in this day of his power. There is
yet a passage or two wherein you shall behold Mercy and truth meeting together,
Righteusnesse and peace kissing each other.

11. Upon the same day that the enemy began to fortify the City of Chester,
and make their Outworks, that very day three years, the Parliaments Forces
entered the same:

Feb. 3. 1642. Feb. 3. 1645
12. The King mustered the Cheshire Forces, summoned, disarmed the Trainbands
upon Holt-Heath, Sept. 24 1642. and upon the same day three years, the Kings
Army was routed upon Routon-we may rightly call it Routing-Heath: and another
Brigade which was intended for a Reserve, commanded by the Earl of Lichfield
and the Lord Gerard, defeared upon Holt-Heath (as I take it so it is called)
where the Earl of Lichsield was slain; and all this in the Kings view, He then
standing in Phoenix-Tower in Chestr. Lord, when thy hand is lifted up, they
will not see; but they shall see; I pray God to Repentance, and not to Shame.

Vide Passages and Treaties of the Siege and taking of Chester.
Honou^able Parriots, these sew passages to which you have already further
discoveries, and may sinde more, hold forth much of God; His Wisdom, his
Strength, his Justice, his Mercy, beaming forth in the Light of this day. And
this you may observe, as the result of all; It is Fidelity God prospers and
Crowns in his Service. Now that God who has made your Armies faithful to you,
make you every day more and more faithful to himself; that what was Moses
Honor, and His too who is Moses and your Lord* the Lord Jesus, may be the
Parliament of England 's renown to all Generations, They were faithful to him
that appointed them in all his House, in doing all things according to the
pattern: Which as it was the travel of this Cautionary, Heb. 3.2.
not Accusatory Sermon (now the second time waiting upon your Commands) so it
shall be the daily prayer of.

Your Honors, not more desirous to live, then to serve Christ in you, THO.
CASE.

To the truly Noble Sir William Brereton, Baronet, Commander in Chief of the
Parliaments Forces in Cheshire; and to all those worthy Commanders and
Gentlemen, whom God has honored with the beginning, managing, and now happily
finishing of the Work in Cheshire.
Honorable and ever to be honored Gent.
WHat Encomium the Apostle gave the beloved Disciple, I hope the world will give
me leave to bestow upon you, without the the least suspicion of Flattery; You
do faithfully whatsoever you do in the Public Trust committed to you: 1. Joh.
v. 5.
and I beseech you look upon it as Gods honoring of you, more then your
honoring of God: a heart to be faithful, and happiness to be successeful in
Gods designs, is a double engagement: which I heartily desire may not lift up
your hearts, unless it be in the ways of God, in whose Name you have gone out
and prospered. So that you may go and bear a part in his Barak. Judge. 5.13.
Excellencies Song: Then he made him that remains to have dominion over the
Nobles, among the people the Lord made me have dominion over the mighty. As an
acknowledgement of which honor God has done you, give me leave humbly to
suggest a few Returns of Thankfulness that will no less become you, then
crown and perfect your work.

1. Make it, I beseech you, your prime design to surrender up that City to
God which God has surrendered up to you, by engaging your best abilities and
interests for the bringing in and encouragement of a learned, godly, Orthodox
Ministry into the City, the Spiritual Militia that must secure the peace
thereof. If Heresy and Schism break in, I shall set down and cry, Chester is
lost the second time; and in which more miserable, it will not be easy to
determine.

Agrippins to Nero.
2. Study oneness in your affections, and oneness in your Counsels: Unity
and you are unconquerable. Remember whose suggest it was, Divide and impera.

3. Let your distinguishing favors run counter-motion to the enemies: let
Malignants have no more encouragement then may demonstrate you more studious of
their Reformation then their Ruin: Let them have no more cause to call the
proud happy, Hagg. 3.15. Verse. 18.
nor to say, They that work wickedness are set up: but let them return, and
discern between the righteous and the wicked, between him that serves God and
him that serves him not.

4. Be tender (O be tender, I say, as of your own lives) of the willing
faithful party who in City or Country have served you in this Cause of Christ
and the Parliament, to the very last drop of livelihood and blood: O to study
now the Rest, Refreshing, Recruiting of that languishing people more then your
own interests and advantage, will render you more truly honorable then all
your Victories, and bring the blessing of perishing families upon you and your
posterity. To that end, imitate the true gallantry of Nehemiah: read his 5
Chapter, especially from the 14 verse to the end; and the Lord grant you may
get it by heart. Then shall they that are delivered from the noise of the
archers in the places of drawing water, rehearse the righteous acts of the
Lord, Judge. 5.11.
even the righteous acts toward the inhabitants of the Villages in Cheshire;
then shall the people of the Lord go down to the gates.

5. Study Self-conquests, Sin-victory. He that is slow to anger is better
then the mighty, and he that rules his spirit, then he that takes a City.
Prove. 16.32. Fortior est qui sequam qui fortissima vincit moenia.
If after ye have conquered the Lusts of men, you are conquered by your own
Lusts; if after you have led your enemies captive, Satan can take you captive
at his will; you are undone for ever. The Lord make you, every way, more then
Conquerors, etc. 2 Timothy 2.26. Romans 8.37.


6. Lastly, remember what General Joab did when he had taken Rabbah of the
Ammonites, and do ye likewise now ye have taken this Cheshire-R^bbah; send for
King David; yea, send for that King who is David's son and David's Lord, King
JESUS; give him possession, and set the Crown of glory upon his Head, bowing
your beads before him, and casting down your Crowns, saying, Not unto us, O
Lord, not unto us, but to thy Name give the praise. Ezekiel. 48.35.
O let not the City be called by your Name; but let the Name of the City be
from this day, Jehovah-shammah, The Lord is there.

Worthy Sirs, what is now my faithful advice to you, shall be always the humble
request for you at the Throne of Grace, of Psalm. 115.1.


Your Honors to serve you in all Gospel offices, THO. CASE.

To the Mayor, Aldermen, and the rest of the Citizens and Inhabitants of the
City of Chester, Grace with Peace be multiplied.
Right Worshipful and Beloved,
I Desire to rejoice with you and for you; in this great mercy of God, in
restoring you to your Habitations, from which some of you have been so long
divorced; or to your Liberties, in the surprise whereof you have been no better
then prisoners in your own Houses: Which that it may be a mercy indeed, give me
leave, as one that loves you, to commend unto you a few Cautions.

1. Take heed, I beseech you, now that you are returned to your old Houses, you
do not return to your old sins; now you are restored to your Civil Liberties,
you do not backslide to your former sinful Liberties: What they were, you best
know: give me leave to mind you what your Christian friends in the Kingdom
have taken notice of and bewailed in you: Pride in your apparel, sumptuousness
in your houses, excessive delicacie on your Tables; (whose sins these were,
Ezekiel. 16.49 will tell you) profanation of Sabbaths, contempt of the faithful
Ministry of the Word, compliance with Episcopal Superstition formality in
Religion, almost scorn of the godly, and of the power of Godliness, and the
like. Gal. 4.16.
I speak not these things to shame you, but as a Minister of Christ and a
friend to admonish you; and I hope I shall not become your enemy because I tell
you the truth. I Will assure you, Friends, you have as much cause to keep days of
Humiliation in Chester for your old sins, as days of Thanksgiving for your new
Mercies. A voice was heard upon the high places, Jer. 3.21.
weeping and supplication of the children of Israel; for they have perverted
their way, and have forgotten the Lord their God. This was the posture of
Israel returning out of Captivity, and I wish from my soul it may be Yours.

2. Enquire the way to Sion with your faces thitherward; and to that end,
purchase to you^selves an inward, spiritual, Jer. 50.5.
powerful Ministry, whatever it cost you. Say not you are poor; or if you do,
know that this is the next way to recruit your estates: the Gospel never comes
empty-handed to a people; it bears its own charges with advantage: Prove. 23.23.
O then, buy the truth and sell it not; buy it at any price, sell it at no
price. Prove God herewith, I beseech you, and see if he do not open the windows
of heaven and pour out a blessing upon you, and make your later end (with Job)
more prosperous then your beginning. Mal. 3.10. Job. 42.12. 2 Timothy 3 5.


3. Labor to be Christians in good earnest: A form of godliness will not
serve the turn (it is a moth that will insensibly eat out the beauty and
strength of a Church or people) Study the power of it. You have now made an
Experiment, whose service is better, Deuteronomy. 28.47, 48.
Gods or your Enemies. If God be God (with you now) serve him, and serve him
like Himself; Be perfect as your heavenly Father is perfect: Matthew. 5. ult.
if after all this you dally with God, and settle upon your lees again, I must
prophecy to you in the Name of the Lord; The troubles you have suffered have
been but the beginnings of your sorrow.

4. From henceforth know your friends from your foes; learn to distinguish
between Complements and Realities: The Bramble said to the trees, Come and put
your trust under my shadow. Trust Brambles no more.

5. Study Thankfulness for this blessed turn of Providence in returning your
Captivity. They say abroad in the Kingdom, The Lord has done great things for
you: Judge. 9.15.
Will not you echo back again, Yea, the Lord has done great things for us,
whereof we rejoice? The Lord teach you to pr^ze your naked walls more then you
have done formerly your sumptuous surnisht houses; to improve your Freedoms to
better purpose then ever heretofore. How you may be thankful, this ensuing
Sermon, preached for the Celebration of your Deliverance, will direct. You bear
the greatest share in the mercy, I wish you may bear the greatest share in the
duty.

6. Finally, Brethren, farewell: Be perfect, be of good omfort, be of one mind,
live in peace, and the God of Love and Peace shall be with you. So prays

Your real friend and servant in the Lord, Tho. Case.

A Model of true SPIRITUAL THANKFULNESS.
Delivered in a Sermon before the Honorable House of COMMONS, Upon their day
of Thansgiving (being Thursday the 19 of Febr. 1645.) for the great Mercy of
God in the Surrender of the City of CHESTER into the hands of the Parliaments
Forces in Cheshire under the Command of Sir William Brereton.
PSALM. 107.30, 31. Then are they glad because they be quiet: So he brings
them into the desired haven.

O that men would praise the Lord for his goodness, and for his wonderful
works to the children of men!


IN the two former Psalms, the holy Psalmist does celebrate the mighty Acts of
God in the deliverance and preservation of his Church. In this Psalm he
contemplates the wonders of Providence toward all Mankind: For after he had
in the beginning of the Psalm finished the mention of his mercy and loving
kindness to his Red^emed, in the eight first Verses, he descends to take
notice what God does.

For the Hungry, Verse. 9.

For the disconsolate and afflicted, Verse. 10, 11, 12 13, 14.

For the sick and languishing, Verse. 17, 18 19, 20.

F^r Seamen and such as travel upon the waters; from the 23 to my Text.

He takes notice what he does in the great turns of Providence, turning plenty
into famine wherein his Justice is magnified, V^rs. 33, 34.

And (back again) famine into plenty, wherein his Mercy is advanced, Verse
35.36, 37 38.

What he does in breaking the power of mighty Princes turned Oppressors and
Tyrants, in making them contemptible, and ^ain like, Vagabonds to wander up and
down in desert and hungry places, Verse. 40.

And in lifting up the heads and restoring the habitations of their poor
oppressed Subjects and People, Verse. 41.

Upon each of these admirable Turns of Providence the Psalmist sets a Crown of
glory, breathing out his enlarged and repeated desires, that when men have the
comfort, God might have the praise of all his wonders of Providence. Oh that
men would praise the Lord for his goodness etc. It is the burden of the Song;
Oh that men would praise the Lord!

My Text is the fourth repetition of this gracious breathing, poured out over
the fourth work and wonder of Providence; namely. The admirable and even
stupendous deliverances which God vouchsafes Mariners and Seamen in many a
black, dreadful, furious, death-threatnin^ storm and tempest, expressed to the
life in the 23, 24, 25, 26 27, 28, 29 Verses.

I shall not meddle with the D^liverance it self, though, if I should, it would
be neither impertinent nor improper for the work of this day: for certainly a
man might easily run a parallel between the state of the Mariner in the storm,
and the condition of this poor and yet bleeding Church and State.

In Ireland and England.
We that have gone down into the Sea, this Red Sea of Blood, and have had our
business now for these four or five years in these great waters of Civil war;
surely we have seen the works of the works of the Lord, and his wonders in the
deep: Verse 24
If ever people saw the works, the wonders of the workings of Jehovah, we have.

We have lived (I think I may safely speak it) in the greatest Age of wonders
that ever the Church knew.

We use to say Miracles are ceast; but truly, if men have ceased to do
Miracles, God has not; and yet he has done them by men too, in this Deep of
Englands, and Scotlands, and Irelands troubles and ^fflictions.

For he commands and ^^^seth up the stormy wind, Verse 25.
which lifts up the waves thereof. Surely all the storms and tempests that
have beaten upon these three Kingdoms, have not come by chance and fortune;
this af^^iction has not risen out of the dust: but as it was with Sol^mon,
after his heart began to depart from God, it is sa^d, 1 Kings 11.14.
The Lord stirred up an Adversary unto Solomon, Had^d the Ed^mite, etc. And
(Verse. 23.) God stirred him up another Adversary; Rezin the son of Eliadah.
Adversary after Adversary, and all stirred up by God. So has it been and is
yet with us; Storm after Storm, Tempest after Tempest; one cloud of blood and
wrath after another, Eccles. 12.2.
(The clouds have returned after rain) and all raised up by God, in his
righteous Judgment upon these sinful backsliding Nations: We have (as it
follows) been mounted up to heaven, and then hurled down again into the
depths.

Oh the various changes that have been upon us I Sometimes up, and sometimes
down; sometimes raised up as high as heaven, by wonderful Deliverances and
glorious Victories, anon cast down even as l^we as hell, As in the West, etc.
by sad breakings of our Armies and loss of our Strongholds.

Surely our souls have been melted because of trouble. Our hopes have been
melted, and our hearts have been melted. Oh how often have I seen palenesse in
men's faces, the very shadow of death upon men's countenances I how often have I
seen men with their hands upon their loins, while fear has taken hold upon
them, and sorrow, a^ pain upon a woman in travel? Have we not been in the day
of sad tidings from the West, and other places in the Kingdom, Verse. 27.
like drunken men full of the fury of the Lord, and rebukes of our God, reeling
to and fro in our spirits, and staggering in our Councels; at our wits end:
Parliament at their wits end, and City at their wits end, and Armies at their
wits end; (...)
All their wisdom swallowed up, as the Hebrew signifies; nonplust and lost, not
knowing what to do next; unless it were, with the Mariners in my Text (for the
most part the profanest of men) to go and cry to God in our trouble; Verse 28.
betake our selves to our fasting and prayers; when God has showed himself
easy to be entreated, 2 King. 20.12.
very gracious at the voice of our cry, and has brought us out of these
distresses and straits wherein were, calming the storms, and stilling the
waves, the pride and rage, Verse 30.
the power and policy of our devouring Adversaries.

Thus has the Lord done, as often heretofore, so now wonderfully of late at
Dartmouth and Plymouth, at Hereford, at Belvoyre, and at Chester, the Wonder of
mercy which we this day celebrate.

Thus you see if I should pitch upon the Deliverance it self, here would be a
foundation upon which we might build a Discourse not unseasonable, or unsuitable
to the work of the day.

But it is not the Deliverance it self, but the Return, which has called out
my thoughts, and now humbly calls for your attention.

And this Return is Twofold:

1. What they do: Then are they glad, etc. 2. What they should do: O that men
would praise the Lord, etc.
And to hold you in the porch no longer, though many Observations might be
raised from the words, I shall only from the comparing of these two together,
sc. What men do when mercies and deliverances come in, They are glad; with what
they should do; O that men would praise the Lord for his goodness, etc. hold
forth to you this Point of

Doctrine:

Every man in the world can be glad of mercies and deliverances: but the duty
that God expects, is, that men should praise him for his mercies.

Then are they glad: I, but that will not serve the turn; it is a Return of an
high nature which God looks for: Oh that men would praise the Lord for his
goodness, etc.

Or thus, if you please.

There is a great difference between Gladness and Thankfulness.

It is one thing to be glad of a mercy or deliverance; it is another thing to
be thankful for it.

What that difference is, and wherein it does consist, is all I intend to do
upon the Doctrinal part of this Truth.

They differ in these four things* sc. in respect of their

1. Nature. The difference between Gladness and Thankfulness
2. Rise or ground. 3. Duration. 4. Operation.
1. In their Nature.
First, Gladness and Thankfulness differ in their Nature. Gladness or Joy is
but a natural affection. Some of the Stoic Philosophers have defined or
described it to be (...), Chrysippus and other Stoics.
Elatio animi propter aliquid quod optandum esse videatur; it is the lifting
up, or widening, or enlargement of the heart upon the coming in of any suitable
and desirable good. And it is found not only in Psalm. 105.38. Lam. 1.21.
natural men, but even in the bruit creatures; even these, you see, do express
in their way, a great deal of gladness and contentment when they meet with
that which is suitable to their natures and dispositions.

But now Thankfulness, which is here commended, is a divine grace wrought in
the soul by the Spirit of God, whereby the heart is drawn out toward God in
gracious and holy desires and endeavors to praise and exalt the Lord, who is
the Author and Donor of the Mercy, as here it is expressed by this chiefest
and highest act of Thankfulness: Oh that men would praise the Lord, etc. Let
them exalt him, etc.

And therefore this is to be found only in the Saints: Psalm. 33.1.
Rejoice in the Lord, ye righteous; for praise is comely for the upright.

Let the Saints be joyful in glory; Psalm. 149.5, 6.
let them sing aloud upon their beds: let the high praises of God be in their
mouths, etc. they be the Righteous only, the upright, the Saints, in whose
bosoms this grace dwells, and who can manage this Spiritual service and duty of
rejoicing and praising the Lord in a right manner.

Indeed the holy Psalmist does often express the workings of his heart upon
the receipt of great deliverances and mercies, under the notion of gladness,
all over the Psalms: but you are to take it as a Synonymon, or the other
expression of thankfulness; not a mere stirring of natural joy and complacency
in and for deliverances and mercies; but the Spiritual movings and sparkling of
his aff^^ction toward God; in witness whereof, you shall never sinde that
notion stand single, but (like the 1 Cor. 6.17.
Spirit of the holy man himself) joined unto the Lord, either as the Author or
as the Object of his Gladness.

I will be glad and rejoice in thee. Psalm. 9.2.
And

Be glad in the Lord, Psalm. 32.11.
ye righteous. And

Thou Lord have made me glad through thy work, Psalm. 92.4.
etc. to show that his gladness was sanctified and spiritualized into the
grace of Thankfulness.

And indeed Grace is nothing else but the natural affection baptized (as I may
so say) and regenerated by the holy Ghost and the Blood of Christ, faced and
pointed upon God as its proper and highest object. Set your affection on things
above, not on things on the earth. Coloss. 3.2.
Set, and Set not: the affection is not changed in the matter of it, but in the
object.

So natural sorrow and grief, spiritualized and set upon the right object, sc.
upon an Mich. 7.9.
offended God, is the grace of ^ Cor. 7.9.
Repentance. And Anger sanct fied and faced upon Gods dishonor, is Zeal. And
Love fired with a flame from Christ, and carried up in that flame to Christ, is
no longer the affection, but the grace of Love; and sic in caet. And thus
natural joy and gladness heavenlized and set upon God, 2 John 4.19.
is the grace of Thankfulness.

And this is the first difference: Gladness or Joy is but a natural affection
Common to good and bad, to man and beast; but Thankfulness is that affection
sprinkled with the Blood of Christ, proper only to the Saints, because (like
the Saint himself) it is made partaker of the divine Nature. 2 Pet. 1.4.


Secondly, they differ in their Rise or Ground.

Second difference, Rise or Ground.
The Rise or Ground of Gladness (as it is a mere natural affection) is merely
the poss ssion of some suitable desirable Good which comes in, whether National,
or Domestic, or Personal; together with those natural fruits and improvements
which arise and grow upon it. As here in the Text, Then are they glad; what is
the Rise? Because they b^ quiet^^ they are now out of those fears and dangers
which made their hearts work as tempestuoussy as the Sea it self. Safety and
rest are the ground of their joy: glad, the storm is over and they safe in the
Haven.

And so you may proportion it in your thoughts in other deliverances and
mercies National or Private.

Gladness rises not higher then the bulk and body of the Good it self; as the
rich fool in the Gospel looked upon his heap of wealth, and glads his soul in
it, and in the advantages he promises himself from it:

Soul, here are goods l^id up for many years; Luke 12.19.
he shall need to take no more care or thought as long as he lives; take thine
ease, eat, drink and be merry.

The Grounds of Thankfulness.
But now the Grounds and Rise of Thankfulness they are of a more generous and
divine Nature; such as these:

1. A Spiritual Title.
First, a Spiritual and Divine Right to mercies; a Scripturetitle. What is that?
Why the Saints have

Fi st, a Right of Sonship. The wicked have a Right to what they have, not
only a civil right before men, but a divine right before God; but it is but a
Right of Creation; they have a right To the Creatures, but it is but a right Of
the Creatures: But now the S^ints have a right of Sonship; If children, Romans
8.17.
then heirs of God, and joint heirs with Christ. Whatever mercy or deliverance
they have, it is part of their childs portion: though they are not
joynt-purchasers, yet they are joynt-heirs with Jesus Christ: they have all by
inheritance: Heb. 1.2.
as Christ is Heir of all things; so they in him;

All is you^s, and you are Christ's; and Christ is Gods. 1 Cor. 3.22, 23.


And thus ^eing Children and Heirs, they have a

Second Right, and that is a Right of Promise or Covenant; and therefore
Believers are called The children of promise, Romans 9.8.
because they be both 2 Pet. 1.4.
begotten and 1 Timothy 4.8.
m^int^in'd by promise: whatever they have, they have by promise: Godliness is
profitable for all things, having the promise of the life that now is, and that
which is to come. Others are fed out of the Common basket of Providence; they
are fed out of the Ark of the Covenant, which is the great List of the
promises. Every child of God, be he never so poor, is served in Plate: The
words of the Lord are pure words, as Silver tried in a furnace of earth. He
speaks of the word of promise. Psalm. 12.6.
So that if it be but bread and water, yet it is served in to a child of God
in the silver and golden vessels of the Promises: And this affects them more
then all the bulk and heap of mercies and comforts which they do possess, or
that worldlings do possess.

Thou have put more gladness into my heart then in the time that their corn
and their wine increased. Psalm. 4.7.
How? Why, by the shines of his face and favor, as Verse. 7.

This is the Rise of a gracious Joy and Thankfulness, That what he has, he
has not only by Gods leave, but with Gods love; not by Creatureship only,
but by Sonship; not by providence only, but by promise. With the men of the
world, the Principal is more then the Interest: but every child of God
accounts his Interest more then the Principal. Therefore you shall find the
Church glorying in this, That all her deliverances and mercies are
Covenant-mercies. If God destroy her enemies, she looks upon it as a fruit of
the Covenant.

He is the Lord our God; his judgments are in all the world.

She triumphs in the execution of Gods righteous judgments upon the enemies of
the Church; Psalm. 105.7.
but upon what ground? It follows,

He has remembered his Covenant for ever, etc. It was a deliverance of Promise
as well as of Providence; a Covenant-mercie; in that she rejoices: Verse. 8.
yea, if it be but bread and water, as I said before, she looks in what it is
served.

He has given meat to them that fear him: Why?

He will be ever mindful of his Covenant. Psalm. 111.5.


Her meat (how course soever) was served in in the great silver Cha^ger of the
Covenant. And this was the rise of Thankfulness in the Churches Grace; q. d.
Blessed be God that has fed me with bread of promise, that has commanded his
Covenant to bring me in provision.

And so for her deliverances and redemption from enemies temporal and eternal.
He sent Redemption to his people, Verse 9.
he has commanded his Covenant for ever: holy and reverend is his Name. It was
a Covenant-victorie and Redemption, and for this she bows her head, and adores
the Name of the Lord.

Now carnal people never look after these things, they be dry and empty notions
to them; give them meat, so it be fat and dainty; give them Deliverances and
Victories, so they be full and gallant; be it by promise or providence, come
they in by sonship or creatureship; be it the Covenant that helps them, or
Fortune, it is all one, they know no difference; and therefore rise no higher
in their joy and gladness then the possession of their desirable good things.
This is the first Rise.

Second Ground, Return of Prayer.
A Second Rise of Thankfulness is, The Return of Prayer.

The children of God, when they have prayed, do not forget their prayers, as
carnal people do: but when they have prayed, they look after their Prayers.
Psalm. 85.8.
I will hearken what God the Lord will speak, etc. when he had done praying, he
begins harkening. And so again, In the morning will I direct my prayer unto
thee, Psalm. 5.3.
and I will look up. A child of God looks after his prayers, and he knows them
when he sees them again, and says, Oh here comes the answer of such a prayer,
the return of such a day of Humiliation: and this affects his heart, and this
raises up his soul in the love and praises of God. Psalm. 116.1.
I love the Lord, because he has heard my voice and my supplication. Yea, and
for this he calls in help to this great work of praising God (as the disciples
beckoned to their fellows to come and help them when they had taken such a
great draught of fishes, that their ship began to sink again: so I say the
Psalmist upon a great draught of mercles, which even sinks him again with the
weight of them, calls in the Saints to his help: Come near, all ye that fear
God, Psalm. 66.16.
and I will tell you what he has done for my soul. Why, what was it? He tells
you: I cried unto him with my mouth, Verse. 17.
and he was extolled with my tongue. A speedy return of Prayer; q.d. I kept a
day of prayer, wherein I sought him for such ahd such mercies and desiverances,
and anon after he gave me occasion to keep a day of Thanksgiving for being
found of me: and this endears his heart to God more then the mercy it self,
whatever it was.

Blessed be God that has not turned away my prayer, Verse. 20.
nor his mercy from me.

This is the second Rise.

A third Rise or Ground of Thankfulness, whereby it differs from mere natural
Gladness, A third Ground, Spiritual advantages.
is

Spiritual Advantages.

If National and Public Mercies and Deliverances, the Saints eye the Spiritual
part of them.

Surely salvation is nigh unto them that fear him. Psalm. 85.9.
When we were nigh to perishing, our God was nigh to save; to save us in such a
Battle and in such a danger; to give up such and such a strong-hold out of
which the enemies did vex and plague us, because he had a people among us that
feared his Name. I, but now there was a Spiritual part in this Deliverance, and
that follows:

That glory may dwell in our Land: What is the glory of a people, but the
Ordinances of God? The glory is departed from Israel, cried that dying Saint
when the Ark of God was taken: 1 Samuel 4.12.
why so now, the Church looks upon the socuritie and improvement of the
Ordinances of God, as the fruit of this deliverance, and that is the ground of
her triumph.

And so if they be personal mercies and deliverances, the people of. God
enquire what portion will fall to the souls share, what improvement for grace
they can find in their mercies. The living, the living shall praise thee, as I
do this day; so sings Hezekiah.

Have mercy upon me, Isa. 38.19.
O Lord, consider my trouble which I suffer, Psalm. 9.13,
etc.

That I may show forth all thy praise in the gates of the daughter of Sion; so
prays David: both, single out the Spiritual part of the Deliverance: in the
mouth of it, they find food for the grace of Thankfulness to feed on: That I
may show forth thy praises; and that they make the ground or rise of their
rejoicing. Yea, the Prophet David is so intent upon the matter, that whereas
with carnal hearts the lean kine eat up the fat, the earthly part of a mercy
devours the heavenly and spiritual; with this man after Gods own heart (and if
ever he was so, it was in this) the spiritual part devours and swallows up the
earthly, where he does encourage his soul: Psalm. 42.1.
Hope thou in God; for I shall yet praise him, etc. He was waiting for a
Deliverance from the persecutions of bloody Saul, and he has forgot and lost
both it and himself in the heavenly-soul-part of the mercy: he saw it would be
fuel for the grace of love and thank fullness, and that so takes up all his
thoughts, that he can speak nothing else but praise, praise: not, I shall yet
be delivered: but, I shall yet praise him, etc. Oh happy Loss indeed I to
lose Earth in Heaven I to lose the Creature in God I lose the mercy of God in
the God of mercy I Surely he that so loses a mercy, finds it with infinite
advantage.

I might instance in more particular graces; but I must leave much to your own
enlargement.

But there is yet an higher Rise then all these of the Saints

Thankfulness for Mercies and Deliverances; and that

Fourthly, is, that God is exalted. The fourth Rise, Gods exaltation. Exodus 15.


Thus if you will peruse that song of Moses, Exodus 15, from the first Verse and
so forward, you shall find that which most affects him and the children of
Israel, in the drowning of Pharroh and the Egyptians in the Red Sea, was not so
much their being freed from the fear of the Egyptians pursuit, as that thereby
God was exalted: I will sing unto the Lord; Verse. 1.
for He has triumphed gloriously.

The Lord is my strength and my song, my fathers God; Verse. 2.
and I will praise him. Pharaoh's chariots and his host has He cast into the
Sea: not so much that it was done, as that God did it.

Thy right hand, O Lord, is become glorious in power: Verse. 6.
thy right hand, O Lord, has dashed the enemies in pieces.

And in the greatness of thine excellency thou have overthrown them that rose
up against thee. Verse. 7.


The blast of thy nostrils, etc. Verse. 8.


Thou did blow with thy wind, etc. Verse. 10.


Who is like unto thee, O Lord, among the gods! And The Lord shall reign for
ever and ever. Verse. 18.


Thus they lift up God, because he has lifted up himself. And so the Saints in
the Revelation, when they repeat this Song (for it is said, Rev. 15.3.
They sang the song of Moses the Servant of the Lord) they harp upon this
string, Great and mavelous are thy works, Verse. 4.
Lord God Almighty: who shall not fear thee, O Lord, and glorifio thy Name?

In a word, you have three Psalms almost together; Psalm 93, 97, and 99: what
the Victories and Deliverances were, I cannot tell you; but this is the triumph
in all, The Lord reigns.

This is the last and the highest Rise of pure Thankfulness and Praise, That
God sets himself up above his enemies: That the Lord gets glory and greatness
to his own Name:

Be thou exalted, O Lord, in thine own strength; so will we sing and praise thy
power. Psalm. 21.13.


I come now to the third difference between Gladness and Thankfulness, which
is this;

They differ in their Duration. Third Difference, Duration.


Gladness for the most part is but a present impetus of spirit, a sudden
impression upon the first arrival of un-expected, or long-^xpected desires,
overspreads the heart; but stays no longer then the sense of the good rejoiced
in is fresh upon the spirit.

As on the contrary, Nullum violentum est perpetuum.
you see there be some sudden gusts and irruptions of grief which like a
land-flood lays all under water, but are quickly gone.

Mercies and Deliverances to a carnal heart are like flowers that upon their
first cutting smell very sweet, and they are put then in the bosom: or like
Tulips, which upon the first gathering are very betutiful and delightful to the
eye, and serve a day or two to discourse on; but anon after, they grow stale,
and out they go to the dunghill.

The holy Ghost has compared this kind of Gladness to the crackling of
thorns: As the crackling of thorns under a pot, Eccles. 7.6.
so is the laughter of a fool. I think I do carnal people no wrong in
expounding this Text over their joy; for in Scripture-sense, all natural men
are fools, and their gladness and joy shows them to be so; there is no
solidnesse nor duration in it; it is like the crackling of thorns, is makes a
great noise, but is quickly out.

But now Thankfulness or Spiritual rejoicing is longer lived by far; and
therefore you shall find God charging the memories of his people with the
keeping of all the passages of his love and providence; Deuteronomy. 8.2.
Thou shall remember all the way wherein the Lord thy God led thee these forty
years in the wilderness, a great work certainly, we see it is no easy matter
to remember all the way wherein the Lord has led us these four years; what is
it to remember the mercies of forty years! yet as great as it is, as God does
charge it upon his people, so David charge himself with it:

Bless the Lord, O my soul, and forget not all his benefits.

One ingredient into Thankfulness, is a good memory, Psalm. 103.2.
which like the Ark must preserve the rod, and the pot of manna, and the Law;
the Fatherly Corrections, the Miraculous Provisions, and the glorious
Ordinances where with God blesses his people.

And it seems David studied his charge so well, that in answer thereunto he
undertakes with God: I will sing praise unto my God while I have my being.
Psalm. 104.33.
his Thankfulness is as long lived as himself, it knew no other termination
then life it self: yea, life must not bound his praise; I will praise thee for
ever; Psalm. 52.9.
that is his engagement to God; and if that be too narrow, he will put an ever
at the top of that ever; Psalm. 145.1.
I will bless thy Name for ever and ever; nothing short of eternity shall
terminate his Thankfulness: the Reason is, because (as you have seen)
Thankfulness takes its Rise from durable and unchangeable grounds; the
Covenant of God, and his glory, which like himself are eternal, and immutable:
He has commanded his Covenant for ever: holy and reverend is his Name, and
therefore it self is unchangeable and eternal.

This shall suffice for the third; I come to the fourth Difference.

They differ in their Operations or Returns.

Truly as the Rise, Fourth Difference, Operations.
so the Operations of mere carnal joy and gladness are low, earthly, sensual;
like culinary fire or smoke, which seems to aspire and ascend up to heaven, or,
the element of fire; but gets not above the first region of the air: or like a
lazy thick fogg, which if it move upward a little, it falls presently down
again with its own weight to the earth, from whence it arose: So it is with
natural joy and gladness: For,

First, either it is bounded and terminated within it self, Carnal joy sets up
1. Self.
whilst upon the coming in of some desired or desirable good, it does hugg it
self, Hab. 1.16.
and bless it self: It sacrifices to its own net, and burns incense to its
own dragg; i.e. ascribes to its own power, and policy, and wisdom, what is
done, like the Babylonian Tyrant; By the multitude of my Charets am I come up
to the height of the mountains, and the sides of his Carmel, etc. and I have
dug and drunk water, and with the soles of my feet have I dried up all the
Rivers of the besieged places. Here is nothing to be heard but I, and mine; and
so all the Returns are dedicated to self: put on fine apparel, dress as brave
as the Sun, eat the fat, drink wine in bowls, dance to the instruments of
Music, set open the Cellar-doors, drink so many hogs-heads empty, and their
own full; this is an Oxford-day of Thanksgiving, and I would such days were
only kept there; I would this were only the Thanksgiving of Cavaliers.

But secondly, 2. Instruments
if a carnal heart go out of it self, it is not upward; it is but forward to
the Creature: it looks no higher then the second causes; it eyes the
Instruments, and cries up Commanders and Soldiers, and puts the bays and
garland upon their heads; Saul has slain his thousands, and David his ten
thousands. God has little or no share in the triumph.

Or thirdly, 3. Rests in duties.
if carnal Joy keep a day or Thanksgiving as the very Philistines did so much,
when that strong Garrison, Samson, was surrendered up into their hands, and
offered a great Sacrifice to Dagon their god, Judge. 16.23.
etc. I say, If Carnal joy go into the Temple, hear Sermons, sing Psalms, lift
up the voice in Thanksgiving, in all these it gets no higher then the duty.
The duty looks upon God, the heart does not: or if God be propounded, God is
not exalted: When ye fasted, etc. did ye at all fast unto me, Zech. 7.5.
even unto me? And when ye did eat, and when ye did drink, did ye not eat to
your selves, and drink to your selves? In fasting and feasting, that is, in
days of Humiliation and in days of Thanksgiving, they rested the in duty: self
was uppermost in both: God was the object of the duty indeed, but self was the
end: Ye did eat and drink to your selves.

And when the duty is done, all is done: the Fasting of carnal people is but
the holding downn the head like a bulrush for a day, and their Thanksgivings
are but the holdi^g up the head like a reed for a day.

Nothing outlives the day or the duty. Public Duties are are the end of the
carnal man's rejoicing: they are but the Medium of the holy man's rejoicing, that
serves to advance him for further and higher Returns.

Springs, we say, will rise as high as they fall; and so does the Saints
Thankfulness: as it is a grace which comes down from heaven; so it is a grace
that ascends up back again to heaven, True Thankfulness works it self out,
and carries up the soul with it thither: and that

1. In exalting God.
1. In high admirations and exaltations of God. I will extol thee, O Lord; for
thou have lifted me up: thou have lifted me up, and therefore I will lift thee
up; Psalm. 30.1.
and he calls in others to help him in this great work; O magnify the Lord
with me, Psalm. 34.3.
and let us exalt his Name together. And this is the duty the Psalmist here
commends to the sons of men; O that men would praise the Lord: Let them exalt
him also in the Congregation of the people, and praise him in the Assembly of
the Elders.

He would have God more exalted, and man less.

Secondly, it works heavenward and Godward in holy prayer: David got safe to
the Crown through all his wars, 2. In Prayer.
and troubles, and persecutions, resolves by way of Render, Psalm. 116.13.
I will call upon the Name of the Lord: and, to bind the Sacrifice with Cords
to the horns of the Altar, he doubles the engagement upon his own soul, Verse.
17. I will offer to thee the Sacrifice of Thanksgiving, and call upon the Name
of the Lord. One would have thought he might now have given over praying; God
had put an end to his troubles, and he might put an end to his prayers: nay,
but that is the note of an Hypocrite, to cease praying when troubles cease.
What is the hope of the hypocrite? etc. Will he always call upon God? No, Job
27.10.
there be two times when the Hypocrite will not call upon God: First, when
troubles are too heavy: Secondly, when troubles are removed; despair will not
suffer him to pray then, and laziness will not let him pray now. With the
truely-thankful it is other wise: as prayer begets deliverance; so deliverance
begets prayer; and so he shows that it is not necessity makes him pray only,
but love. Love to prayer, and love to the God of prayer.

That is a third thing wherein his Thankfulness operates, 3. In love.
sc. Love; it carries out the heart in exceeding love to God. I will love thee,
Psalm. 18.1. Title.
O Lord my strength, etc. so sings David, in the day that the Lord had
delivered him from the hands of all his enemies, and from the hand of Saul. And
this Love the Saints express in these three ways especially:

1. In laboring to know more of God: after God had done so many miracles and
wonders for Israel, Moses presents God with this Petition:

I beseech thee show me thy glory. Exodus 33.18.


He had seen much of the wonders of God; now his love is fired with desires of
seeing the God of these wonders. He would fain be acquainted with that God
which did all those wonders.

2. In laboring to enjoy more of God, to have him for their God. Thou art
great, and do wondrous things: I, but that will not serve the turn: Psalm.
86.10.
Teach me thy way, O Lord, unite my heart to thee to fear thy Name: Verse. 11.
he would know the way to God, that he might enjoy more communion with God.
Unite my heart, etc. not the things of God, but God himself, will content a
thankful heart; as Luther professed to God when the Princes and States of
Germany sent him a whole Table full of Plate; Lord, says he, thou shall not
turn me off with these things. A gracious heart could take little comfort in
Victories and Deliverances, and other comforts, unless the God of those
Victories and Comforts were his too.

And therefore thirdly, this love does express it self in glorying in God: So
the Church in that Psalm of Thanksgiving, Psalm. 48, Psalm. 48.3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 12,
13.
when she had told all the world the great Victories God had given by Land and
Sea; how he had routed mighty Kings and Princes, and made them glad to betake
themselves to their heels; they came, and so went home again: after she had led
the Spectator round about the Line of Communication, and invited him to behold
the beauty and strength of her Towers and Fortifications; she concludes the
Psalm with this triumph, as that which infinitely transcended all the rest:
This God is our God for ever and ever; Verse 14.


The God that has done all these wonders, is my God. She glories not so much
in the Victories God had given her, as in interest in the God of those
Victories.

Well, that is the third thing wherein Thankfulness acts, Love to God. The

Fourthly, Self-denial.
Fourth is, Self-denial for Gods sake: And after all this is come upon us, since
our God has punished us less then our iniquities deserve, and has given us
such deliverance as this; Exra 9.13.14.
should we again break thy Commandments? so argued thankful Ezra. I tell you,
Sirs, there is more Thankfulness in one act of Self-denial, then in twenty
days of Thanksgiving.

Fifthly, in Payment of Vows
Fifthly, true Thankfulness works Godward, in payment of vows: What shall I
render, says David? I will pay my vows. And again, verse. 18, I will pay my
vows; to show he would be much, and watchful, Psalm. 116.14.
and exact in that Return of Thankfulness: And doubtless it is as proper a
return as any; for all the mercies of God to his people, whether National or
Personal, whether Victories or Supplies, they are all the making good of his
Covenant to them, as I have showed Vide page 8.
before: He will ever be mindful of his Covenant; and therefore the sutablest
Return that we can make, is the making good our Covenant to God; the payment of
our Vows to him: Thy vows are upon me, Psalm. 56.12.
I will render praises eo thee.

Sixthly, in Believing.
Sixthly, in believing: Let God deliver a thankful heart, and it will trust him
another time: And Israel saw that great work which the Lord did upon the
Egyptians, Exodus 14.31.
and the people believed the Lord, and his servant Moses: that was a thankful
Return indeed: a people or person cannot more honor God, then by believing on
him. Abrabam was strong in faith, Romans 4.20.
giving glory to God. God did this great work upon the Egyptians, on purpose
that they might believe him ever after. The Psalmist observe it; Thou breakest
the heads of the Dragons in the Waters; Psalm. 74.14.
Thou brakest the head of the Leviathan in pieces. Who was that Leviathan? who
were these Dragons? Surely none other but Pharaoh and his Army, as huge as the
Leviathan, as fierce as Dragons: Oh they had stings in their heads; I, but God
brake their heads, and quenched their stings in the waters: To what end? Thou
gave him to be meat to the people inhabiting in the wilderness. What, did
the Israelites powder up the carcases of these Leviathans and Dragons, the
Egyptians, to serve them for Victuals while they kept Lent in the Wilderness?
No, he gave them to be meat; not food for their bodies, but food for their
faith; that as long as they should travel in the wilderness, where they should
meet with innumerable multitudes of nonplussing oppositions and dangers, they
might remember the Dragons and the Leviathan (as David after did the Lion and
the Bear) and their faith might be strengthened when it had fed well on the
remembrance of that wonder of salvation. And so it was for the present; Israel
saw that great work which the Lord did upon the Egyptians; and they believed
the Lord and his servant Moses: a blessed frame of heart and fruit of
Thankfulness, would it have held: but there was their folly and
unthankfulness; they would not feed upon this experience, and it became their
sin and their ruin in the wilderness. How long will this people provoke me?
Numb. 14.11.
how long will it be ere they believe me for all the signs which I have showed
them in the wilderness?

In this Wilderness they shall wander, Verse 33.
and there they shall die.

But to proceed.

Seventhly, in ordering the conversation. Psalm. 50. ult.
A Seventh operation of Thankfulness is, A well-ordering of the Conversation:
He that offers me praise, glorifieth me: but to him that orders his
conversation aright, etc. It is a kind of honor done to God, to keep a day of
Thanksgiving, to hear two Sermons, to sing Psalms, to pray and praise, etc. but
the main work is the ordering of the Conversation, or, as the Hebrew signifies,
disposing of ones way aright. Thankful lips do well, but thankful lives do
better. A day of thanksgiving is somewhat, but a life of thanksgiving is all.

Eighthly, in desires that others would praise God.
Eighthy a thankful heart is filled with enlarged desires that others, that all
would be thankful. The holy Psalmist here cries out to all that receive
mercies, that they would return praise^, etc. He observes how much men take in
from God, and how little men lay out for God, and is troubled at it. He cries
out as a man in pain and grief of spirit, Oh that men would praise the Lord! He
would not willingly have God be a loser by any of the wonders he does for the
children of men: and surely this an high expression of Thankfulness, when the
heart travels with holy desires that all the world might come in and be
tributary to the glory of God: it is the design of the 148 Psalm thorowout,
the thankful Psalmist engages heaven and earth, Angels and men, the whole
Creation to come in and help him keep a day of Thanksgiving. A gracious heart
does not think it enough to praise God alone; though it would be praising God,
were there none in heaven or earth to bear it company.

To that end,

Ninthly, Ninthly, in talking of Gods works. sal P. 145. 10, 11, 12.
a thankful heart delights to be talking of the wonderful works of God. Thy
Saints shall bless thee, they shall speak of the glory of thy kingdom, and
talk of thy power, to make known to the sons of men thy mighty acts. And the
Psalmist does not intend to bind this burden upon others, that he might might
withdraw his own shoulders; no, he looks upon it as a privilege as well as a
duty, and therefore engages himself: I will speak of the glorious honor of
thy majesty, Verse 5.
and of thy wondrous works. A gracious heart delights to be spreading and
publishing of the wonderful works of God, repeating and reckoning up all his
loving kindnesses: I will mention the loving kindnesses of the Lord, and the
praises of the Lord, Isa. 63.7.
according to all that the Lord has bestowed on me, and the great goodness
rewards the house of Israel which he has bestowed on them, according to his
mercies, and according to the multitude of his loving kindnesses: so sings the
Church, Isa. 63.7. And this the Saints do, to the end that they may not only
provoke one another to set forth his praises, but that they may render their
God glorious to all the world, and propagate and perpetuate the memory of his
wonderful works to all generations: One generation shall praise thy works to
another, and shall declare thy mighty acts: that is, one generation shall make
over the report and memorial of the glorious cts of God unto another; that so
he may have the glory of what he does in one age, in all the succeeding ages
and generations of the Church to the end of the world: Psalm. 78.5.
This was the testimony which the Lord established in Jacob, and the Law which
he appointed in Israel; That they should make known to their children the
strength and the wonderful works which God has done; to what end? That the
generation to come might know them, Verse 6.
even the children which should be born, who should arise and declare them to
their children, etc. according to this Law your may find them acting, Verse. 2,
3, 4.

Verse 2.
I will open my mouth, I will utter darksayings of old,

Verse 3.
Which we have heard and known, and our fathers have told us.

Verse 4.
We will not hide them from their children, showing to the generation to come
the praises of the Lord, and his strength, and his wonderful works that he has
done.

They had received the memorial of the wonders of God from their fathers, and
they will hand it down to their children, that the wonders of God might be as
eternal as the God of those wonders. And to that end,

Tenthly, in longing to praise God in heaven.
Tenthly and lastly, gracious spirits, in laid and enameled with Thankfulness,
because they can live but a while to praise God on earth, and their generations
too shall not continue after them for ever, to do this work, therefore they
breathe after heaven, where in the presence of God their praises shall be
perfected and perpetuated here, they are weak, weary, full of natural and
sinful mixtures and defilements; there, they shall be vigorous, active, pure,
perfect, as unchangeable, as interminable as eternity it self.

They rest not day and night, Revel. 8.4.
saying, Holy, holy, holy Lord God Almighty, which was, and is, and is to
come.

Thankfulness is a pure flame of a restless motion, ever mounting upward till
it come to its element, the Quire of Saints and Angels in heaven, where it
shall sing everlasting Hallelujahs to him that sits upon the throne, and to
the Lamb; where it shall keep a day of Thanksgiving that shall never know an
evening.

And thus have I done with the fourth and last difference between Gladness and
Thankfulness, sc. their operations, and so with the whole Doctrinal part of my
Discourse.

I should now come to improve it to Use and Application; two ways especially:

1. By way of an Examination, 2. By way of Direction.
But truly the very opening of the Doctrine unto you, has done both these
already to your hands, or at least furnished you with materials upon which you
may do both your selves.

Take this Model or Platform of true Thankfulness, lay it before you, operate
upon it in your serious and impartial thoughts; and if you would know whether
you are a thankful people or no, you may easily resolve into an Use of
Examination, while every branch under all these four heads of differences will
serve you as Note of Trial, whereby you may make some Judgment upon the
question Whether you do more then others of the world, in this great work of
Thankfulness. And if you would know how you might be thankful, set this Model
in your eye, and it will serve you as Directory, wherein every branch (again)
will be a Rule whereby you may form and proportion your Thankfulness according
to the Word, and the example of those Saints who have excelled in this grace
and duty of Thankfulness.

Truly, Honorable and Beloved, you had need to do it, and to do it with your
best and purest intentions: for I profess to you, the most, not most of men
only, but of Christians, do woefully mistake both this duty and themselves too.

The world, yea, the greatest part of the Gospel-world, is extremely out in
this great business of Thankfulness. It is sad and fearful to observe, with
what skins, and shadows, and (almost) mockeries God is turned off, in stead of
this pure, holy, spiritual, active grace and duty of Thankfulness: God looks
for praise, and we turn him off with a natural, lazy, selfish Gladness. Some
happily go not so far, but like the elder Brother in the Gospel stand murmuring
and quarrelling without, whilst in our Fathers house there is feasting and
music. Many malignant spirits there be who fret, and repine, and gnash their
teeth at the glorious Successes wherewith God has been pleased to crown the
outgoings of his servants and people in these later days.

But truly that sads not my spirit so much, as to see a people whom God has
strived to endear unto himself by so many miracles of preservation,
Deliverances and Victories, to mock God out of his praise, and themselves (at
length) out of their mercies. Surely we may weep over our Deliverances, and
turn our days of Thanksgiving into days of mourning and lamentation, to
consider how we dally with God, and put him off with a few empty, formal
Complements, in stead of that real, and spiritual, and vital duty which he
expects and deserves at our hands.

And therefore I said, when I heard I was designed to the service of this day I
will not stand to analyze this mercy, nor take in pieces this work of God, the
surrender of that strong impregnable Hold of Chester, though very great, and
worthy to be sought out by all them that take pleasure in the works of the
Lord; but I will tell the Parliament, and tell the Kingdom, what it is to be
thankful, that they may see how much they are mistaken, and what wrath hangs
over our heads for the carnality, rottenness, hypocrisy of our rejoycings
over all the wonders which God has done for England.

And therefore, Noble Senators, and all you that stand before God this day, or
to whom the words of this day may come, sit down I beseech you, seriously
examine your selves by, and compare your selves with this Model of
Thankfulness held forth to you this day, and see whether indeed you do come up
to the Law of that Service, which all the wonders that God has done for you,
does call for at your hands; and what course you are to take for the preventing
and averting of that wrath which I am afraid is gone forth against us for this
thing.

I cannot stand to convince you by each particular in this Model.

Give me leave to single out but one branch, and to deal faithfully with you in
that particular; it is a main one, and such as will include many other.

It is the fifth branch of the fourth head of Difference between Gladness and
Thankfulness: namely.

Paying of Vows, or keeping of Covenant with God.

Noble Patriots, and all you that come hither to keep a day of Thanksgiving to
God this day; come on, set up tribunals, and place Conscience thereon as an
impartial Judge, to keep a little day of Judgment in your bosoms this day: We
must all appear before the Judgemedt-seat of Christ one day; 2 Cor. 5.10.
and how soon, the Lord only knows: Come, start not back; better judge our
selves then be judged of the Lord: If we cannot stand before our own
Consciences, how shall we be able to stand before that Judge who is greater
then our heart, and knows all things; 1 John 3.20.
the great-heart-maker, and the great-heart-searcher.

Come on then, I say, and see whether in this one branch of Thankfulness we
can approve our selves to God to be a thankful people.

I will not ravel into your bosoms to enquire with what dispositions of spirit,
upon what grounds and interests; to what ends and references you entered into
the Solemn League and Covenant; though I wish with all my heart that you would;
perhaps you would find a pad in the straw; in your entrance into this
Covenant, possibly you may discover rashness in opposition to judgment;
hypocrisy, in opposition to truth and sincerity; it may be, base, low, carnal
ends and aims, in opposition to Righteousness, which are the Qualifications of
a religious Covenanter; Jer. 4.2.
perhaps such workings of heart as sometimes brought the Sichemites into
Covenant with the sons of Jacob; Genesis 34.23.
Shall not their cattle, and their substance, and every beast of theirs be
ours? etc. perhaps the gaining of such an office, securing the estate, the
keeping of such a Living, was in the eye, etc. Oh let the Kingdoms enquire into
this, and let every man look into his own heart: for if it were so, know of a
certin, that this was first source and fountain of all that sin and mischief
which has broken in upon us since the day of our Covenanting with God and with
one another. But this I leave: the thing that I would close upon with your
Consciences, is this: How have you kept your Covenant with God?

Men and Brethren, have ye paid your vows unto the Lord, the Vows which ye
uttered in this place in the day wherein you lifted up your hands to the most
high God?

If you shall say, Yea, we have paid our Vows, and (with Saul) We have obeyed
the voice of the Lord; let me demand, with Samuel, What means then the lowing
of the oxen, and the bleating of the sheep in mine ears? What means that
brutish, and beastly noise of Heresy, and Schism, and Profaneness in mine
ears?

Did ye not indeed Covenant with God the preservation of Religion in the Church
of Scotland, etc. and the Reformation of Religion in the Kingdoms of England
and Ireland, in Doctrine, Worship, Discipline and Government, according to the
Word of God, and the example of the best Reformed Churches? Oh what is the
reason then that to this day, the House of God lies waste? in some places
there being no Ministry for want of Ordination; in others, indeed in all
places, there being no Discipline or Government for want of a Rule according to
the Word: no Discipline, I say, unless it be amongst those whose impatient
zeal suffers them not to wait for your civil Sanction. Will ye say The time is
not come; Hagg. 1.2.
the time for building the Lords House is not come? I cannot give you the
Prophets answer; I must confess you have not spent your time in building your
own houses, and ceiling them; nay, some of your houses have been pulled down to
the ground, and the ceiling destroyed with axes and hammers, in the Psalmists
language: But this I pray with all my soul, that you have not said so, long;
The time is not come, the time is not come, we are not yet in a fitting
posture, (Oh, my soul trembles to speak it) till God say The time is past, The
time is past: Because I would have purged, and thou wast not purged; Ezekiel.
241.3.
thou shall not be purged; thou shall not be purged from thy silthinesse any
more, till I have caused my fury to rest upon thee. Oh, if the Lord should
speak such a word against us, England is undone for ever. I am much afraid, if
you time it out sse any more, till I have caused my fury to rest upon thee. Oh,
if the Lord should speak such a word against us, England is undone for ever. I
am much afraid, if you time it out a little longer, you will have no materials
to build the Lords house withal, unless you will build it with the shrubs and
thorns of the wilderness.

But further, how comes it to pass, I beseech you, since you are under the
Covenant of God, to reform according to the Word, and example of the best
Reformed Churches, that some are so startled at the very mention of such a
Clause, According to the Word of God, and example of the best Reformed
Churches, as if they saw a monster, some hideous apparition which had in it the
face of Treason and Blasphemy?

But I must proceed. Have you not Covenanted to extirpate Superstition,
Heresy, Schism, Profaneness, and whatsoever shall be found contrary to sound
Doctrine and the power of Godliness etc.? How comes it to pass then that
these abound more then ever they did, and that under your Noses? while there is
such a numerous increase of Errors and Heresies, as I blush to repeat what
some have affirmed; namely, that there be no Isse then One hundred and eighty
several Heresies propagated and spread in this neighboring City, which
hitherto has been so famous for soundness of Doctrine and the power of
godliness: and many of them also of such a nature, as that I may say, in
Galvin's language, The Errors and Innovations under which we so much groaned
of later years, were but tolerabiles ineptiae, tolerable trisles, childrens
play, compared with these damnable Doctrines, Doctrines of devils as the
Apostle calls them: Polygamy, Arbitrary Divorce, Mortality of the Soul, No
Ministry, no Churches, No Ordinances, No Scripture; yea, the very Divinity of
Christ and the holy Ghost questioned by some, denied by others: And the very
foundation of all these laid in such a Schism of boundless liberty of
Conscience, viz. Believe what you will, and preach what you believe, and such
lawless Separation of Churches; and all these not only whispered in corners,
but preached on the house top, yea, published in Print before your faces with so
much virulency and impudence, that I verily believe no Age since the Apostles
times could ever parallel.

Fathers and Brethren, Acts 18.17.
how will you call this Keeping of Covenant with God? Had we a Parliament of
Apostate Julians, August. Epist 166.
of whom it is reported, that at what time he opened the Temples of the
Heathenish gods, he set open the Christian Churches; called home all the
Christians whom he had banished, both Orthodox and Heretic, and gave them, as
we call it, Liberty of conscience; but as Austin more truly phraseth it,
Libertatem perditionis, Liberty to destroy themselves; Eo modo putans
Christianum nemen posse perire de terris, etc.
for that was his policy and end, namely, by liberty of all Religions to
destroy the true, and the professors thereof too: or had we a Parliament of
careless Gallio's, we should not wonder: but for a Parliament of Christians,
Protestants, Professors, the choicest, the most active that could be culled out
of a Christian State, the like not under heaven; that these things should be
done, and you hold your peace, and be able to keep your places, and not to put
on righteousness as a brestplate, Isa. 59.17.
and the garments of vengeance for your clothing, as it is said of God; this
makes the Churches abroad to wonder what England's Parliament is a doing; and
all at home that love the Lord Jesus Christ more then their own interests and
notions, to be filled with unspeakable trembling and astoshnishment, to wit,
what God means to do with this poor bleeding Church and State. But further:

Have we not lifted up our hands to the most high God, to amend our lives, and
each one to go before another in the example of a real Reformation? Ah God,
where is it to be found? Is not the drunkard a drunkard still; and the swearer
a swearer still; and the adulterer an adulterer still? etc. and Oh that I could
but say with the Apostle, Such were some of you. Yea, what an improvement of
wickedness is there in the Kingdom? as if the Covenant had blasted men's
consciences, not their corruptions.

But, that which is yet worse then all this, is, that this holy Covenant is
become amongst many, a brand of infamy, a Cain's mark almost: Would ye
stigmatize a man (in some places) to purpose? call him a Covenanter: He, he
will take the Covenant. Ah Lord! it is able to make ones hair stand upright, to
see what dirt and mire is cast into the face of this holy Covenant: Surely
never was Covenant so abused, scorned, and trampled under foot as this is: and
happy were we, if it were by the wicked and profane malignant party only. Ah
how many have dealt with the Covenant, as the Scribes and Pharisees of old did,
and the Antinomians of this age do with the Law of God, make it void, through
their distinctions and glosses which they have put upon it? How many deal with
it as the Papists do with the Scriptures, make it a nose of Wax and ^ Leaden
rule; a two-faced picture, an Any thing to serve their own turns? Do we thus
requite God, Oh foolish people and unwise!

Well, Sirs, we pray for the King's conversion, and talk of his coming home;
but there is a place of Scripture sounds dreadfully in mine ears: For now shall
they say, We have no king. When should Israel say so? Hos. 10.3.
Surely when Zed^kiah was carried Captive into Babylon; of which you may read,
2 King. 24 15, 16, 17. and Chap. 25 7. They slow the sons of Zedekiah before
his eyes, and put out the eyes of Zedekiah, and bound him in fetters of brass,
and carried him to Babylon. Then did Israel cry We have no King: Alas, alas,
they have put out the eyes of his Majesty, and carried him away captive: our
King is in Babylon, among Idolaters and Murderers: We have no King, and it is
just with God it should be so, because we feared not the Lord; we first cast
off God, before our King did cast off us: we would not have God to be our King,
and therefore he would not suffer our King to be our god: We have no King,
because we feared not the Lord. And wherein did this fearlesness of God appear?
It fellows, Verse. 4. They have spoken words swearing falsely in making a
Covenant. What Covenant was that? Verse. 4.
Some refer it to the Prophecies of the false Prophets, who though they
prophesied lies to the people, a vision of their own head, yet they were so
sacrilegiously impudent as to father their lies upon God, by setting his seal
to their Prophecies, the form of oath which God himself did use, As I live,
says the Lord.

Others refer these words to the Covenant which God threatens to disannul, The
Covenant they made with death and hell. Isa. 28.18.


But I conceive with others, the words do relate either to the Covenant which
Zedekiah and the people made with the King of Babylon to serve him, and become
his Vassals, of which you may read, Ezekiel. 17.12, 13, 14. The King of Babylon is
come to Jerusalem, and has taken the King thereof, Ezekiel. 17.12, 13, 13.
etc. and made a Covenant with him, and has taken an Oath of him, that the
Kingdom might be base, i. e. be in subjection to the King of Babylon. This
Covenant Zedekiah, and the Princes, and the people had solemnly confirmed both
by Oath, and by lifting up or striking hand, verse. 18.

Or else the words may relate to that other Covenant which Zedekiah, the
Princes, the Priests, and the People of Judah had made with God, while this
Captivity was yet threatened, Jer. 34.2, 3, 14, 15, 19.
concerning the letting of their servants go free at the end of Seven years,
according to the Law: Exodus 21.2.
And ye were now turned, and had done right in my sight, in proclaiming liberty
every man to his neighbor; and ye had made a Covenant before me in the house
which is called by my Name. I say, To either or both of these Covenants, may
the words refer; for in both these they swear falsely, not in regard of the
matter of the Covenant^ for it was lawful and good: but in respect of their
managing of it: Thoy have spoken words swearing falsely: there was nothing but
words to be found in their covenanting; they were not real and substantial with
God in this solemn Service; they brake their Covenant as soon as they had made
it; that was their swearing falsely: so you may find it laid to their charge in
the former places: Jer. 34.16.
Ye were now turned, and had done right in my sight, etc. but ye turned and
polluted my Name, and caused every man his servant and every man his handmaid
to return, and brought them into subjection. Ye were turned, but ye turned:
here is one turn too much: In the first turn, they made a Covenant with God;
Verse 18.
in the second, they brake it: I will give the men that have transgressed my
Covenant, which have not performed the words of the Covenant which they had
made before me.

And no better dealt they in the Covenant they made with the King of Babylon,
Ezekiel. 17.15, 16.
to become his servants: He rebelled against him, etc. He brake the Covenant;
He despised the Oath, and he brake the Covenant. And so again, verse. 18.

And the breach of both these Covenants is aggravated from the Author of this
Service; Deuteronomy 6.13.
it is a part of Divine Worship: Thou shall fear the Lord thy God, and serve
him, and shall swear by his Name; and by the object or witness of the
Covenant: as God is the Author, so he is witness; thou shall swear by his
Name: God is called in, as a righteous Judge to take vengeance on the party
that shall prevaricate, Verse. 19.
in both which respects God calls it his Oath: Surely mine Oath which he has
despised, and my Covenant which he has broken. Jer. 34.18.


As also, it is aggravated in both places, from the solemnity of the making of
the Covenant; as in that place in Jeremiah: They have not performed the words
of the Covenant which they had made before me, when they out the calf in twain,
and passed between the parts thereof. And so again, verse. 19. The people of the
land which passed between the parts of the calf: which kind of Ceremony or
Sanction, was taken from Gods own command to Abraham when he made a Covenant
with him, Diodorus Tarsensis. Stabani and caesa formaban^ foedera porca.
Genesis 15. from whence also even the Caldeans and Romans borrowed it, as they
had other parts and parcels of Religion; by which Ceremony they did as it were
silently imprecate this Judgment upon themselves, that they might be so
divided as those beasts were, if they did violate their Covenant: from this
solemnity, as from the other in Ez^kiel, etc. giving the hand, Ezekiel. 17.18.
or as with us, lifting up the hand to the most high God, does God aggravate
their Covenant-violation; when lo, he had given his hand! God speaks with
indignation, as of an eminent and remarkable treachery and persidiousnesse:
When lo! he had given his hand.

And for this indeed now they begin to judge themselves: We have no King
because we feared not the Lord; that is, because we have not feared the Oath of
the Lord, but have dealt falsely and treacherously in the Covenant: it is just
with God we should have no King, that our King should break Covenant with us,
that have broken Covenant with our God: yea, they judge themselves not only
for what is past, but unworthy to sinde mercy for the time to come: not only
We have no King, but, What then shall a King do to us? q. d. We deserve never
to see the face of our King any more, but to be left to per^sh in our
Confusions and Divisions, while every man does what is good in his own eye: or
if our King should come back out of Captivity, What should he do to us? Can we
expect a King should do us any good, while our God is angry with us for our
Covenant-wickednesse? No; if he should come out of Babylon again, God might
make him a curse in stead of a blessing, a plague and a snare to our
destruction.

Men and Brethren, this I take to be the sense of the place; and I need say no
more. Surely every one of you here before God, have with trembling hearts
prevented me in the Application: only let me add this: If God were so angry,
and threatens so furiously the breach of a Covenant made with an Heathenish
Tyrant, an Infidel (with whom the other Babylon, Mystical Babylon, teaches no
faith is to be k^pt) because it was made before God, and by the Name of God;
shall he prosper? shall he escape that does such things? Jer. 17.19.
or shall he break the Covenant and be delivered? As I live, mine Oath that he
has despised, and my Covenant that he has broken, even it will I recompense
upon his own head, etc. Oh how shall she escape? yea, of how much sorer
punishment shall we be thought worthy, if we be found guilty of so high a
perjury in breaking and despising a Covenant made not only before God, in the
Name of God, but with God himself. In so solemn and sacred a manner, with
Fasting, and Prayer, and Sermons, and lifting up our hands to the most high God.

Oh that as we have sinned with this people, and beyond, insinitely beyond the
line and measure of their transgressi^ns; so we would judge our selves with
them, in the bitterness of our spirits; We have no King, because we feared not
the Lord; speaking words, swearing falsely in making a Covenant; and what then
should a King do to us?

We hope an end shall be put shortly to these bloody desolating wars; and we
cry to the Sword, Oh thou Sword of the Lord, Jer. 47.6.
how long will it be ere thou be quiet? put up thy self into thy scabbard, rest
and be still: but the Sword will not obey our voice; and no wonder; for we have
not obeyed the voice of the Sword; we have not heard the Sword, and who had
appointed it: and therefore meth^nks I hear the Sword replying, How can I be
quiet, since the Lord has given me a charge against England? Verse. 7.
Yea, methinks I hear God renewing the Commission of the Sword in the words of
that threatening: I will bring a sword upon yo^ that shall avenge the quarrel of
my Covenant. We keep now a day of Thank^giving for the surrender of a strong
Hold in the Kingdom, Levit. 26.25.
and God has sent us in the glad tiding of a great Victory in the West, to
fill up our joy, and to bespeak more days of Rejoicing and Thankfulness; but
for my part, I fear that for these things the Sword has yet a Commission to
come up to London, to pass through the Kingdom; and that we shall hear ere
long, as fast of Losing Cities, and Castles, and the strong Garrisons of the
Kingdom, as now of gaining them; and read our Catalogue of Deliverances and
Victories backward with sad hearts: Chester lost, Hereford lost, Dartmonth
lost, and sic in caet.

If you would prevent so sad a turn of things, give me leave humbly to commend
to you these two short Advices.

1. Proclaim, I beseech you, a solemn Fast, wherein we may professedly humble
and afflict our souls for our Covenant-violations, whereby God is so deeply
provoked; and wherein (if it might seem good to your wisdoms) the Covenant
might be renewed in a more solemn and serious manner with our God: that as
Samuel called the people to Gilgal to renew the Kingdom upon Saul; so you that
are England's Samuels, 1 Samuel 11.14.
might call the people together to this Galgal (where the Lord first rolled
away our reproa^h, by bringing us into the bond of the Covenant) to renew the
Kingdom upon our Lord Jesus, whom God has appointed to be King in his holy
Hill of Sion. Psalm. 2.6.


For think not, Brethren, I beseech you, that because we have broken our
Covenant with God, therefore we are disobliged from our Covenant: that were an
easy way to get loose indeed, if when we are weary of our Vows, it were but to
go and sin against them, and then we are disengaged: But it is with the
Covenant as it is with the Law; there is a twofold obligation; the one to duty,
the other to a curse; and if we break the one, the other will hold us fast
enough. Did not my words take hold upon your fathers? How? Zech. 1 6.
Surely not in the commanding power of them, but in the executionary power;
they took hold on them with a vengeance: And therefore our way is to bring our
selves again under the commanding power, that we may not lie under the
condemning cursing power of the Covenant. Indeed the Covenant is then broken,
and not fully till then, when a people will not own their Covenant with God:
and therefore Oh that the Lord would help us in this our day to consider the
things that belong unto our peace, before they be hid from our eyes.

2. To that end, study real Thankfulness: To you that sit at the Stern,
guiding the Ship of this Church and State in this troublesome Sea; let me
commend unto you but this piece of Thankfulness: Set up God; Verse. 23.
Exalt him in the congregation of the people, by setting up the Ministry of
the Word: Let this be your wisdom and honor, that when God has given up the
strong Holds of the Kingdom to you, you would render them up back again to God,
by placing able and faithful Ministers in those eminent places of the Kingdom,
that may undeceive the poor mifled people, and to season them with Principles
of Religion and Loyalty, to which they have been so long strangers. To that
end, hasten I beseech you your Ordinance for Ordination: it were a sad thing
that the strong Holds of the Kingdom should be taken for God, and kept for the
Devil; for want of Pastors according ^o Gods own heart, and that may feed them
with knowledge and understanding.

Verse 32.
Secondly, Pra^se him in the Assembly of the Elders, by setting up
Church Government according to your Covenant. What it is, I need not tell you;
enough has been said about this matt^r; and you are wise.

I will not, I need not ask you, Whether you intend really and cordially to go
about this Work, this greatest work wherewith God and the Kingdom have
entrusted you: I know you do intend it; and if you do, Why not now? when the
Lord has so miraculously broken the power of the enemy, and (in so great a
measure) subdued the Kingdom before you, as if God of purpose had created you
an opportunity to give demonstration to the world, that you are in good
earnest. Only let me say thus much to you, in that plainness you give the
Ministers of the Gospel leave to use:

Jesus Christ will not always wait upon States and Kingdoms; he will not always
come a begging, as it were, to Parliament-doors. He that bids his Servants
shake off the dust of their feet, Matthew. 10.14.
in case of refusal of their message, knows how to do it himself, Psalm. 2.12.
should he be angered out of his patience. Time is coming when Kings and
Kingdoms would be as glad of Christ, as he would be now of them: When in their
fears and dangers, when enemies be upon them, and ruin and desolation at their
gates, then, Isaiah, lift up a prayer; then, send the Lamb to the Ruler, with
supplications, Lord Jesus, come thou and rule over us: But as the Scotch-man
said of the English-mans Will, "Imprimis, I bequeath my soul to God, etc. I
but, said he, Will he tak it man, will he tak it? so may I question concerning
such tenders of Thrones and Kingdoms, Will Christ take them, will he accept of
them? when happily they shall be surrendered upon no better terms then a desperate
King would deliver up his Crown to any of his Neighbors, Vortinger, etc.
even to a Stranger that would come and help him against his prevailing
enemies; what Christ would do in such a case, jude you. And therefore Oh kiss
the Son lest he be angry, Psalm. 2.12.
and ye perish from the way: when his wrath is kindled but a little, blessed
are all they that put their trust in him. Happy Parliament, happy State,
happy People, happy Person, that makes Christ their choice, and not their
necessity.

I have done: Only suffer me one word more.

Take heed, I humbly beseech you, of setting your selves down at the upper end
of Christ's House and Table, and of suffering Him to be thrust down to serve as
an underling at the lower and, to have no more then the lusts of some, and the
humors and fancies of others, can spare him. But you have not so learned
Christ: and therefore, to all you that stand before God this day* and to as
many as desire to be a thankful people; let me add a word to close up all.
Here is a Model, let it be your wisdom and honor to mould and form your
Thankfulness for this days, and for all your mercies, upon it.

1. Give all diligence to possess your selves of the grace of Thankfulness,
as well as of the affection of Joy and Gladness: to that end, ply the Throne
of Grace, and plead the accomplishment of that promise: A new heart will I give
you, Ezekiel. 36.26.
and a new spirit will I put into you: That is done, when all the natural
affections have a divine, spiritual impresse stamped upon them; when as they
have born the image of the earthly, so now they bear the image of the heavenly.

2. Study, I beseech you, Spiritual Grounds and Rises from which your
Thankfulness may take flight heaven ward; as,

First, Scripture interest; study rather a good Title, then great Possessions;
namely, to enjoy what you have, by Sonship as well as Creatureship; by
co-inheritance with Jesus Christ; by promise as well as providence; with Gods
love, as well as by Gods leave. Study the Covenant well; and then count thy
interest better then the principal. I tell thee for thy comfort, if thou can
do so; if Scripture-interest can bring in more content and satisfaction to thy
soul, then all earthly possessions; if Covenant-title can draw out and endear
thy heart to G^d, more then all the deliverances and provisions cast in by
providence; fear not, thou art a child of promise.

Secondly, observe the Returns of Prayer: if thou have been a praying Christian
all this time of Englands trouble, and art such a one as look after thine
own prayers, know them when thou see them again; if the hearing of thy
prayer can endear thy heart to God, more then the bulk of thy mercy, whatever
it is (of these visible treasures) I pronounce the a man or woman that have
more cause to rejoice then if God had given thee this days surrender, the City
of Chester, solely and entirely to thine own share.

Thirdly, be critical to spy out soul-advantages, the Spiritual part of every
mercy; and wear them as the richest piece of all thy possessions.

Fourthly, eye the Exaltations and liftings up of God in all his works,
especially such as this day brings in to us, and let them lie nearest thy
heart; they will keep it warm with an heavenly influence.

3. Be careful to maintain a faithful Remembrance of the mercies of God in your
heads, and a settled constant frame of Thankfulness upon your hearts: for know
this, The mercies of God cannot perish alone, but thou shall perish with them:
if thou forget them (that is, with a careless graceless forgetfulness) God
will forget thee: if thou cast the mercies of God out to the dunghill, God
will throw thee after them. O be often charging thy soul, Psalm. 103, 2.
with David; Bless the Lord, O my soul, and forget not all his benefits.

4. Design out for God the choicest and most spiritual Returns; such as you
have beheld.

First, set up God in your thoughts, exalt him in your admiring faculty: Psalm.
66.3.
Say unto God, How terrible art thou in thy works! through the greatness of
thy power shall thine enemies submit themselves unto thee.

Secondly, engage your selves and others in Prayer to God: say, Psalm. 63.2.
O thou that hear Prayer, to thee shall all flesh come: Be steadfast and
unmovable, always abounding in this work of the Lord, 1 Cor. 15. ult.
forasmuch as you see your labor shall not be in vain in the Lord: He never
said to the seed of Jacob, Seek ye me in vain. Isa. 45.19.


Thirdly, let your Thankfulness work it self into pure flames of Love to God,
and express it by laboring

To Know more of God. Enjoy more Communion with God. Boast and glory more in
God.


Fourthly, study Self-denial; let there be but one will between God and thee,
and let that will be Gods. He is a thankful man indeed, that in doing and
suffering can say, Father, not my will, but thine be done.

Fifthly, pay your Vows: If ever England, or thou prosper, it must be by
ke^ping of Covenant, Ezekiel. 17.14. Be often rolling, that in thy soul: Psalm.
56.12.
I will render praises unto thee.

Sixthly, Give glory to God by believing: by all the wonders that God has
done, learn to trust him in the n^xt strait; if faith have not produced these
Deliverances, let these Deliverances produce faith: If happy they that have
not seen, and yet believed; what shall become of them that have seen, and yet
believe not?

Seventhly, look to the ordering of your conversation, the dispesing of your
way aright: The thankfulness of the life, is the very life of Thankfulness.

Eighthly, widen your hearts in enlarged desires that others may praise God: go
a begging from door to door through the whole Creation for praises for thy God.

Ninthly, to that end, declare among the people his doings: Psalm. 9.11. Psalm.
66.2.
Sing forth the honor of his Name, make his praise glorious. It were a good
becoming Solemnity on these days of Thanksgiving, if Christians in their
private meetings together to feast and rejoice before the Lord, would make it a
Law, that every one in their turn should remember and repeat some special
eminent Victory or Deliverance wrought by God either for the Nation in general,
especially since the coming together of this happy Parliament, and the
beginning of these unhappie Wars; or for themselves in particular. Such
conference as this would keep out vain and unprofitable discourse, preserve the
memorial of Gods Loving kindnesses, exceedingly honor God, and adorn your
Christian meetings together: surely such praise were comely for the upright.
Christians, take all the ways you can, that Gods praise may live when you are
dead.

Tenthly, be continually breathing after heaven, where the praises as well as
the spirits of just men, are made perfect (...) use Austins Contemplation with
a little variation: O Lord, says he, can no man see thy face and live? then
let me die, that I may thy face: Say thou, O Lord, can no man praise thee and
live? then let me die that I may live to praise thee for ever.

And let me speak this one word to the comfort of all you who can spread, or
(as the Hebrew signifies) measure your Thankfulness upon this Model, as Elijah
spread himself upon the Shunemites dead son, 2 Kings 4.34.
mouth to mouth, eyes upon eyes, and hand upon hand; limb upon limb, and part
upon part; yea, that do make it a business so to do: you have begun your
heaven on earth; die when you will* you may change your company, but not your
work: you have begun an everlasting day of Thanksgiving: you have the Word of
God for it;

Who so offers praise; Psalm. 50. ult.
glorifieth me; and to him that orders his conversation aright, will I show
the salvation of God.

AMEN.

FINIS.

