A Case for Nol Cromwells Nose, AND The Cure of TOM FAIRFAX's Gout.

Both which Rebels are dead, and their deaths kept close, by the policy of our
new States.

-- Ridentem'dicere verum
Quid vetat! --
Ask Lilly, that seditious Quack,
And Booker, that same froth,
Why neither in his Almanac
Foretold Nol Cromwells death.
Or that Tom Fairfax and his Rout
Should be so banged by Kent;
He forced by his pockey Gout
From life and Parliament.
Poor Saints; how do your hopes decay!
How do your Champions fall!
Warner and Atkins whine, and say,
We Saints must perish all.
Skippon does claw his scabbey breech,
And Rolls roules up his eyes:
Lenthalls feet to be gone do itch;
O there were Clavells prize.
Printed in the Year 1648.

A Case for Noll Cromwells Nose; with the cure of Tom Fairfax his Gout.
OYes! OYes! OYes!
IF any Man, Angel or Devil can tell where the bodies of Oliver Cromwell and
Tom Fairfax are now resident, you may know the one by his refulgent copper
nose, which he ever kept well burnisht, that so he might not be constrained to
trouble the devil to light him, or grope out his way to hell, you may know the
other by his smoakie countenance, his mouth is drawn awry, and he looks like
the picture of Doomsday, when the Planets be darkened; if any as aforesaid can
bring tale or tyding, where the two Archtraytors aforesaid now are, let him
bring word to the crier, and he shall be well rewarded.

God save the King and -- the Parliament.

The Saints have lost their way to their promised Jerusalem, and they are like
to reign but bare seven of those thousand years of tranquillity, which they
proposed to themselves, the conceit of which, some years since so tickled their
fancies, that some of them openly averred, that God by their hands would root
out the wicked and ungodly ones out of the Land, and that none should survive
but those elected, with whom Christ should converse in person a thousand
years: and this error even the chiefest of their Rabbis have this many years
confirmed unto them, and within this two months they sat upon the pinnacle of
their hopes, and imagined without doubt it should be so.

But see how these foolish Saints were frustrated of their expectation, and
that worthily; for could they imagine that the foundation of that peace can
stand, which is laid with dead bodies for brick, and Blood for mortar, or that
their imprisoning of Christ's beloved, and his fathers Anointed our most dear
and dread Sovereign, could hasten the sun of Righteousness amongst them? or
that while they upheld in open Rebellion, and supported in all lust, luxury,
murders and outrages, a knot of cursed Atheists (who are not ashamed to call
themselves a Parliament) they should have the mountains levelled, the valleys
levelled, and all things reduced to a paritie? the madness of these
Hypocrites, who were so besotted as to persuade themselves, of happiness in
Hell, or dream of pleasures in a dungeon! they find now that blood will have
vengeance, and that Rebellion must not pass unpunisht: and let all the Nations
of the world be warned by their example, and beware how they rise in arms for
trifles: for what have these men done for the glory of God, save quite taken
away all order and decency in his worship? have given life to, and revived all
the pestilent and pernicious Sects of old; So that it may be said of England as
of Amsterdam, if any man have lost his Religion, let him but go thither and he
shall be sure to find it: what ease have they purchased to the people, unless
it may be ease, to be overburthen'd and pressed even to the earth with Taxes,
innumerable Assessements, so that the poor dry out for bread and nothing but
lamentation is heard in the Streets: what glory have they purchased for their
King, unless it be for his glory to be turned out of all he has, his lands and
revenues seized on, and the majesty thereof employed to maintain war against
him, to be clapped up close prisoner in a remote angle of the world, to have none
about him but Rogues, who would as willingly kill him as feed themselves; and
make no more scruple to give him poison, then to crack a nut: where he is
utterly destitute of all comforts, save those which his pious soul
administers, where he has been abused, scoffed, yea beaten and trod upon by a
damnd villain his jailor Hammond, where he may sy murdered (for ought we may
know) even at this present time; what have these villains gained to
themselves, but even sure and certain destruction, the whole Kingdom whom
they have so long and strangely abused, being every day like to rise upon them
and cut their throats, as Kent, Surrey, Essex, Cornwall, Sussex, Hampshire and
even the whole Nations, are now arming themselves to take strickt vengeance on
them: this their resolution put Oliver the Red Saint into such a fear, that he
could not endure to think of living any longer, the grief which that great
nosed Champion took to see things so strangely turn on the sudden, struck to
his heart, which together with a wound that he received, fighting against
Loyal Poyer, sent him to an another world, and has given me occasion to write
this his Elegy, and to prefix the ensuing Epitaph.

An Elegy on the most incomparable Rebel Oliver Cromwell.
Am I awake or dream? can it be sed,
Englands Arch Traitor thus to hell is fled?
With Strange Dilemmas, is my soul perplexed;
On this fide murder, Treason on the next:
My blood strives too, passion does seize my heart,
These both encounter, and again they part.
Is Cromwell Dead, durst Death his eyes to close,
Did he not tremble, to behold his nose,
Whose raidiant splendor, (if Fame) does not lie,
Shone brighter, than a Comet in the Sky.
Great cause has Say, Martin, and Manchester,
Fouke, Roll, Ash, Scot, Weaver, and Challoner;
To, wring their hands, and ashes for to spread,
And like to mourners, sit down with the dead.
Howl Warner, Gibbs, Chambers, and Renardson,
Bide, Viner, Hall, Gaze, Kendall, Waterson,
And all the Rabble of the Saints, whose worth
My pen so often, and amply has set forth.
Let your loud Echoes thunder in the sky,
And curse those Fates, who caused your Nol to die.
Who now shall rob the Church, pull windows down,
Who now shall dare to trample on a Crown?
Who now shall lead the Saints, by springs and fountains,
Ore hills, through dales, by craggy rocks and mountains,
Against fierce Poyer? who the first did dare
Refund Rebellion to a second war.
What Tray tor ere like Nol, that mischief sought,
So often, and so valliantly has fought:
Spartacus, was a Punie, unto him.
He acted Cataline in every limme:
He hated God, and Charles, with all his heart,
And to unking him used his utmost art:
The Destinies sent him upon the earth,
To ruin Truth, and give all errors birth:
And yet this monster, here does lie entombed,
Smitten with death by God, by Fates inhum'd.
HIS EPITAPH.
STumble not here, lest that his Ghost arise
That here lies wrapped in lead, and do surprise
Your senses with amazement, here lies one,
Whom Fame does style PRINCE OF REBELLION,
Heaven, forbid he should unmentioned die
Without an Epitaph, or obsequie.
His gift must not anticipate his doom,
While I have pen and ink, and paper room:
This man, as the Ephesian Priest Erostratus
At one act graspt at being gloriuos,
Which was for ever to extirpate Kings,
As useless; not to be regarded things,
From out his native Clime, and to create
Some hundred Kings, most falsely termed a State.
Upon his back, continually did ride,
As on the City Ass, Treason, and pride.
This son of Anak, would persuade his Nation,
That cursed Rebellion, was blessed Reformation.
He di'd a Rebel, and a Rebel fell,
So great, we want one him to parallel.
Farewell Olliver Cromwell a name that has been ever omminous to the Church:
for in Henry the eights days, (you may remember) that a Cromwell was the
hammer that beat down the monasteries, and religious Houses, and in the reign
of our most pious Sovereign Lord, unfortunate King CHARLES, this Cromwell has
been chiefly active in defacing, demollishing, and levelling Churches, in
persecuting, robbing and imprisoning all learned and knowing men: but enough of
him whose infamy will ever last; Fairfax a perjurd Rebel, who obliged
himself to his Majesty at Newmarket, and afterward took his oath in the
presence of God and his King, that he would use his utmost endeavors to
reinthrone him; and for that purpose would put his Army into a condition of
war, in case those at Westminister should gainsay; yet afterward by fair
promises, and at the instigation of the Kings known enemies, broke his oath,
and permitted his Sovereign to be carried close Prisoner to the I Will of Wight,
and has since in person fought against his friends, both in Kent and other
parts of the Kingdom, but by the just judgment of God he was lately shot in
the groine, of which he is since dead; so may they all perish that hate their
King, which accident happy without doubt to the Kingdom, has given me
occasion to write this his Elegy, and to annex his Epitaph.

An Elegy on the Arch-traytor Thomas Fairfax.
IS Fairfax dead? he whose ambitious soul
Still prompted him his Sovereign to control,
And in the face of heaven dirt to sting,
To be the Rebels General against his King?
Was Fate so courteous to dismiss him hence,
Before his head paid for his insolence?
Was he grown great in ills, ripe for his doom,
And must he go in peace unto his Tomb?
This shows, the Almighty sometimes does permit
Traitors till death, for to persist in it:
Most noble villain, Essex shed his horns,
And then he di'd, thy Father cut his corns
And crept into his Tomb, a boy shot thee,
Thus by weak means, you went to hell all three:
England behold with Rogue thou need'st not vie,
Hold, hold thy hands, they of themselves will die.
His Epitaph.
HEre lies Fairfax, Marble show it,
It Is fit that all the world should know it,
Arch-Traytor against his Sovereign Lord,
By him, as by his God abhorred
Prince and head of all the rout,
Who honored Cromwell and his Snout.
Famous for plunders and for rapes,
For Battles, but more for escapes;
The peoples plague, this Nations curse,
The head of all their woes, the sowrse
Of all their mischiefs, let him lie
And stink unto eternity.
Barkestead the thimble-maker also is dead, his whole company were cut almost
all off at the late fight in Kent by the just judgment of God, for their
murdering and pillaging those innocent men that came out of Surrey only to
petition for a redress of grievances, let us but wait a while, I mean we that
are aged and not fit to oppose the Rebels, and we shall see them all drop into
the grave one after another, we have Gods own Word, yea his Oath, that he will
confound them.

We see then God has taken our cause in hand,
If he say no the Rebels cannot stand.

FINIS.

